THE SOVEREIGNS PREROGATIVE, AND THE SUBJECTS PRIVILEGE; Discussed betwixt
Courtiers and Patriots in Parliament, the third and fourth years of the reign
OF KING CHARLES Together With the Grand Mysteries of State then in Agitation.

LONDON, Printed for Marth^a Harrison, and are to be sold at the Lamb, in St.
Paul's Churchyard. ANNO 1657.

THE PREFACE.
ONe of the most lawful ways whereby man in some sort may be said to revenge
himself of the shortness of his life, and extend the measure thereof to a
larger proportion then nature allows him, is by the study of History. For
History is the remembrancer of the time past, it is the monument general
erected over actions long since dead and interred, acquainting such as read the
Epitaph thereon with the most remarkable passages of the ages past: so that a
Dwarf by the advantage of the ascent of History, may suddenly start up (if not
a Giant) one of competent stature to oversee all transactions long before him.

But of all Histories none more pleasant or profitable then those of our Native
Country, which, as it is an Island, and so a little entire world in it self,
has in all ages afforded as many signal observables as any content of ground
of the same proportion, neither Greece nor Italy it self excepted, which
indeed overmatch us not in Histories, but Historians. Otherwise if workmen
might be had, as fair an Edifice might be erected of English affairs, such the
plenty, variety, and curiosity of materials concurring thereunto.

And truly I cannot but accuse the blameworthy negligence of many able men,
who under the pretended plea of modesty, and humble distrust of their own
sufficiency, prefer rather to moulder away in obscurity, then industriously
to preserve both their own memory and the honor of their nation. And those
also seem to me equally worthy of reproof, who sharp-sighted abroad, are little
better then blinded at home; know the way from Paris to Lions better then from
London to York; can give a better account from Pharamond to the last French
Lewis, then from our Lucius to King Charles. A very preposterous knowledge,
seeing History (like unto good men's charity) is though not to end, yet to
begin at home, and thence to make its methodicall progress into Foreign parts.

Now of all English History, the greatest shame is to be ignorant in the
Accidents of our own Age of nearest concernment unto our selves. Those stars
which are lowest seem lightest unto us; yea a candle at hand illuminates more
then a torch at distance. A man is most (as I may say) morally edified by
reading such men and matters as are his own contemporaries. Chiefly, because
therein not so subject to be deceived by partiallity of reports, because not
taking up so much upon trust, as conducted to his belief by his own eyes and
ears witnesses of all transactions.

The consideration of the premises has principally moved me to the setting
forth of this work: wherein I confess rather fidelity then industry, yet
rather industry then any wit or learning has been required. Some works resent
too much of their Author, frequently infusing his own judgment and affections
clean through the contexture of his writings, to the great prejudicing of the
truth and misguiding of his Reader. And this is likely to be the Epidemicall
disease of the books in our Age, wherein all are so engaged in parties, that
their writings will rather appear pleadings then reports. What by general
error is falsely told of the Jews, that they are always crook-backed, will be
found most true of Authors of this age, that they are crook-sided, warped and
bowed to the right or to the left; so hard it will be to find a straight,
upright, and unbiassed Historian.

For mine own part, I can profess integrity herein, the only thing I can
assume to my self in this work. And indeed I have had no occasion nor
opportunity to express my own inclinations, who have no commission to be an
Author, but a Transcriber.

There is an Officer in the Exchequer, who though sitting with the Barons on
the Bench, has no power to vote with them, nor interposeth his judgment as
decisive in any cause, but observing silence in pleading, speaks sometimes as
to the regulation of the time how it passes away. Such and no other my
employment in this Book, being a true tell-time (and no more) to marshall the
speeches in due order, and to acquaint the Reader with the day of the month
when they were spoken; which done, my task is performed.

The Book contains the transactions of the Parliament tertio and quarto
Caroli. A distance of time of fit proportion for the Press, not too late nor
too soon: not so far off as that the footsteps of truth are worn out, as in
some ancient stories, where the most cunning Hunters are at a loss; nor yet so
near that the heels of truth ought to be feared; though he has but a servile
soul who overvalueth his own safety in such cases to the poisoning of posterity
with a falsehood.

Here may one behold the several traverses of State betwixt the upholders of
the Royal Prerogative and the Asserters of the Subjects Liberties. The former
endeavored to support (and perchance to enlarge) the Kings Prerogative, how in
some cases it is too high to come under the roof of the Law; and the discretion
of the Scepter as Guardian for the general good of the Commonwealth, must be
entrusted on some emergencies with the managing of its own might. And seeing
Crowns commonly keep what they once catch, loath to abate a whit of that power
invested in them, at leastwise exercised by them; no wonder if the Courtiers
stickled for their Master his right, and as the appurtenances, were zealous for
that Power and Honor on whom they depended.

On the other side the Asserters of the Subjects Liberties, Trustees for the
Countries good, engage earnestly to retrench the Prerogative within the known
limits of Law, that so Subjects may be at a certainty how to square their
loyalty and obedience. For Allegiance is willingly and cheerfully paid, where
there is a sure and standing Rule whereto Sovereigns commands and Subjects duty
is to be conformed. Otherwise their loyalty flatteth and deadeth by degrees,
when exposed to an unbounded Arbitrary power, so that they never know an end of
their own obeying, but are in daily fear of new pressures from a lawless
power, whose pleasure is all the reason of imposing them. Besides, unlimited
power in a Prince carries in it self a strong temptation to Tyranny, and
mortal man his corruption is scarce to be trusted with so great a command for
fear of abusing thereof.

Now although in this Parliament these two Parties are plainly to be
discovered, yet the judicious reader will observe that there was as yet less
eagerness and more moderation in either party, matters not being then
heightened with such mutual animosities as since we have beheld. Yea it seems
that the sins of our Nation began even then to cry so loud, that the two
Parties in Parliament could not distinctly hear each other so as effectually to
understand one another, disturbed by the clamorous and obstreperous noise of
English wickedness, which began to cry aloud for vengeance on a wanton nation,
even to the abrupt breaking off of the Parliament.

We have had no other design in the edition hereof then the general good,
hoping that Readers of all sorts may gain benefit thereby. Yea such young folk
whose short capacities as yet are unable to reach the policy and State part in
these pieces, may better themselves by the very language and expressions
therein. Here may they observe the variety of eloquence in several persons,
some large, copious and exuberant; yet not flashy, empty and dilute: some
concise, piccant and sententious; yet not involved, dark and obscure: some
participating of both, which in my apprehension is the best kind of Orations.

However, let not any think that all the Gentlemen of able parts assembled in
the Parliament are registered in this book by their particular service to their
Country, seeing only such are entered herein, who made set, studied, and
premeditated Orations. Many Worthies there were in that place who only were
dexterous at short and quick returns, and which retrieved long debates with
some short and compendious answer very effectual to the purpose. For sometimes
a Stilletto blow may give a more deep and deadly wound then the point and edge
of the sharpest Sword, which requires more time and room for the managing
thereof. Yea many a discreet gentleman, who, after long traversing of matters,
judiciously bestowed his Yea or Nay in the right scale thereof to weigh the
balance down when in AEquilibrio of matters of high importance (though
otherwise not haranguing it in large discourses) might return to his country
with satisfaction to his conscience that he had well deserved thereof.

We are confident also that the Students of the Law may advantage themselves
by several Cases here largely reported. And here all care has been used in
comparing Records herein cited with the Originalls; though we dare not avouch
it clear from all mistakes, the greatest industry and exactness being subject
to fallibilitie herein. We have seen the Reports of late Judges in print, and
could point at Erratas therein: which we speak not to accuse them, but excuse
our selves if some faults be found in our quotations.

As for the Gentlemen whose speeches are herein related, they are either dead
or still surviving. For the former we hope we have no cause to ask pardon of
their memories, and fear not their ghosts disquieting us for offering any
injury unto them, or that we shall fall into the disfavour of their Heirs for
misrepresenting any thing for their fathers disadvantage.

As for such who are still alive, we appeal unto them, making them the Judges
of our integrity herein. True it is that the dragge-net of no diligence can be
of that capacity, nor can it be so advantagiously cast, as to catch and hold
all particulars uttered in a long speech; Minums will get through the holes
thereof: and there be those minutiae in a speech which will escape the
attention of the quickest ear, and transcription of the speediest hand. But
such things are lost without any loss as to the essentials of the matter: and
here all things of concernment are faithfully represented.

And may the Reader be pleased to take notice that this Book is no Monochord,
or Instrument of a single string, no nor is it a single Instrument; but the
exact result of many collections. We have compared varias lectiones, or rather
varias auditiones, the copies as they have been taken by several Auditors.
Sometimes one copy charitably relieved another, nor was it long before the
defects of the same copy were supplied out of that other transcription. Thus
neither is there being for Books, nor living for men in this world, without
being mutually beholding one to another; and he who lends to day, may be glad
to borrow to morrow.

One thing let me mind the Reader, that it may move him to a public and
communicative Spirit, not enviously to engrosse to himself what may do good to
others. Some Gentlemen, Speakers in this Parliament, imparted their Speeches to
their intimate Friends; the transcripts whereof were multiplied amongst others
(the pen being very procreative of issue in this nature:) and since it has
happened that the Gentlemen's Originalls have in these troublesome times
miscarried, yet so that the fountain (as I may say) being dried up, has
fetched this water from the channel, and they have again supplied their losses
from those to whom they civilly communicated a copy of their pains. Thus none
are loosers in fine, by making others sharers in their endeavors.

And now give me leave to say, that the History of the Parliament represented
in this Book is fundamental to the History of our Times, and what valiant
pen soever dare undertake the writing thereof, it must lay its groundwork,
and take its rise from this Parliament. Herein were vertually contained the
seeds of all those troubles which since the heat of anger has ripened to the
full height and breadth thereof. For what is said of Rebeckah, that Twins
were in her bowels, which made their Mothers womb the field of their fight,
wherein their unborn Infancy gave an Essay of that Antipathy which would be
continued betwixt them when arrived at riper years: the same was true here,
where the opposition betwixt two parties was begun with much violence and
impetuousnesse.

Yet let not the similitude be uncharitably improved beyond my intent, as
fixing the odious character of Esau on either of them, who hope and believe
that both of them might be Jacobs, at the first propounding plain, pious, and
peaceable ends unto themselves. Yea this may say to ensuing Parliaments, as
AEneas in the Poet to his son, Disce puer virtutem ex me verumque laborem,
Fortunam ex aliis --


Nor can any true Patriot ever desire that men more honorable, more knowing,
and able in all faculties of policy, law, and general learning, I may add
also more loving to, or beloved of their Countries, ever should meet in
Parliament; who hence may take their pattern of many worthy and excellent
virtues in Statists. But oh, let them far exceed this in happiness; the
abrupt end whereof was the beginning of all our miseries.

T. F.

A TABLE of the several Speeches, Cases, Arguments of Law, and other passages
contained in the first Session of the Parliament begun March 17. 1627.
THe Kings Speech that day, page first The Lord Keeper Coventryes speech the
same day, p. 3 The speaker Sir John Finches speech, March 19. page 7 The Lord
Keeper Coventryes reply, page 8 The Speaker Sir John Finches reply, page 9 The
Lord Keeper Coventryes second reply, page 14 Mr. Goodwins speech March 22. page
18 Sir Francis Seymour's speech, ibid. Sir Thomas Wentworth's speech page 20
The speech and Argument of Mr. Creswell of Lincolnes Inn concerning the
subjects grievance by the late Imprisonment of their persons, page 21 Sir
Benjam: Ruddier's speech, page 27 Sir Robert Phillips's speech, page 28 Sir
Thomas Edmonds, page 30 Sir John Elliot, ibid. Sir Hum: May, ibid. The Petition
for the fast, March 26. 1628. page 31 The Kings Propositions March 28. page 32
Three grand questions, ibid. Sir John Coke his speech at a Conference between
the Lords and Commons about the Petition to the King against Recusants, page 33
The Petition of both Houses to his Majesty concerning Recusants, March 31. page
34 The Kings Answer to the Petition against Recusants, page 37 The Answer to
the same Petition by the Lord Keeper Coventry, page 38 Sir Edward Cokes speech
March 25. upon a Question of law in point of Judgment given in the Kings Bench
Mich. 3. Caroli, viz. that a Prisoner detained by Commitment per special.
Mandat. Regis, without expressing a Cause, is not Bailable; wherein he held
negatively, page 39 The substance of the Kings speech upon the relating of the
proceedings of the Parliament to him by the Counselors of the Commons house of
Parliament, April 4. page 41 The Duke of Buckinghams speech to his Majesty the
4 of April, ibid. Sr John Elliot in Answer to Mr Secretary Coke's message of
thanks from the King and the Duke of Buckingham delivered in the Commons house
of Parliament, April 5, page 43 A message by Secretary Coke from the King to
the lower house, April the 7, page 44 Sr Benjamin Ruddier's speech upon the
Receipt of his Majesty's Answer to the petition against Recusants, page 45 The
Kings message to the House of Commons by Mr Speaker, April 12. page 46. The
petition concerning billetting of soldiers, April 14. page 47 Nine heads of
the House of Commons to the Speaker, page 49 The Speaker Sr John Finches speech
upon the nine heads, page 50 The Kings Answer to the petition concerning
billetting of soldiers, page 53 Sr Dudley Diggs his Introduction, page 54 The
Argument made by Mr Littleton at the Command of the House of Commons out of
Acts of Parliament and Authorities of Law expounding the same, at the first
Conference with the Lords touching the person of every Freeman, page 56 The
Objections of the Kings Council, with the Answers made thereto, at the two
Conferences touching the same matter, page 65 The true Copies of the Records
not printed, which were used on either side of that part of the debate, page 70
The Argument which by Command of the House of Commons was made at their first
Conference with the Lords, touching the liberty of the person of every Freeman,
out of presidents of Record and resolutions of Judges in former times, by Mr
Seldom, page 76 The whole copies of the presidents of Record mentioned in one
of the Arguments made at the first conference with the Lords touching the
liberty of the person of every Freeman, page 92 Sr Edward Coke, page 107 The
Arguments of Sergeant Bramston on the Habeas Corpus, page 111 The Argument of
Mr Noye upon the Habeas Corpus, page 117 The Argument of Mr Seldom upon the
Habeas Corpus, page 122 The Argument of Mr Calthrop upon the Habeas Corpus,
page 125 The substance of the Objections made by Mr Attorney general before a
Committee of both Houses, to the Argument that was made by the House of Commons
at the first Conference with the Lords out of presidents of Record, and
resolutions of Judges in former times, touching the liberty of the person of
every Freeman, and the Answer and replies presently then made by the House of
Commons to these Objections, page 121 The proceedings against the Earl of
Suffolk, April 14. p. 135 Several speeches made at the Debates concerning the
Kings propositions. page 138 Mr Alford, ibid. Sr Robert Maunsell ibid. Sr
Francis Seymour, ibid. Sr Peter Hayman, ibid. Mr Pimme, ibid. Secretary Coke,
ibid. Sr Dudley Diggs, page 139 Mr Spencer, ibid. Mr John Elliot ibid. Sr
Edward Coke, ibid. Sr Thomas Wentworth, page 146 Sr Henry Martin, ibid. Mr
Kirton, ibid. Sr Robert Phillips ibid. Sergeant Hoskins, ibid. Sergeant Ashleys
Argument, seconding Mr Attorney in the behalf of his Majesty, page 141 Mr Noyes
Argument April 16, page 144 Mr Glanvills Argument, page 145 The Answer of the
Judges for matter of fact upon the Habeas Corpus, April. 21, page 146 Judge
Whitlock's speech, page 147 Judge Jones, his speech, page 148 Judge Doderidges
speech, page 149 The Lord chief Justice his speech, ibid. The Earl of Warwick's
speech April 21, page 150 The Arch Bishop of Canterburies speech at the
Conference of both Houses April 25, page 153 The five propositions read by the
Lord Bishop of Norwich, April 25. 1628, ibid. Sr Dudley Diggs his speech in
behalf of the Commons, page 154 Sr Benjamin Ruddier's speech April 28, page 157
The Lord Keeper's speech April 28. page 157 The Bishop of Exceter's letter sent
to the House of Commons April 28. page 158 Mr Hackwell of Lincolnes Inn his
speech in the lower House May 1, page 159 The objections against Mr Hackwel's
speech, ibid. Secretary Coke's message May 1, page 161 Secretary Coke's speech
concerning himself and the nature of his place under his Majesty, page 162
Henry Tomson one of the Sheriffs, and Robert Henisworth Alderman of the city of
York their submission for their indirect choosing of Sr Thomas Savil Knight,
page 163 Propositions drawn for the defense of this Kingdom, and the annoyance
of the enemies of the same by sea, ibid. Judge Andersons speech page 165 The
Kings message May 2 by Secretary Coke page 167 Mr Masons speech May 2 ibid. The
Speakers speech to his Majesty in the banqueting house May 5 page 171 The
Kings Answer to the House of Commons delivered by the Lord Keeper, May 5 page
173 The Lord Cok's speech at the Conference in the painted Chamber, presenting
the petition of Right, May 8, page 174 The petition of Right, to the Kings most
excellent Majesty, page 175 Sr Benjamin Ruddier's speech, page 178 His
Majesty's letter to the Lords spiritual and temporal of the higher House of
Parliament, page 180 The Kings message by the Lord Keeper May 21, page 181 Mr
Masons speech concerning the addition propounded by the Lords to be added to
the petition of Right, page 182 The Reasons of the Commons House, delivered by
Mr Glanvil why they cannot admit of the propositions tendered unto them by the
Lords 186 Sr Henry Martin's speech, page 188 The Kings speech in the Higher
House at the meeting of both Houses, June 2. page 194 The Lord Keeper in
explanation of the same, page 195 The Kings Answer to the petition of Right
June 2. by the Lord Keeper, ibid. Sr John Elliot's speech June 3. ibid. A
Report from the Committee for trade June 4. page 201 His Majesty's message to
the House of Commons by the Speaker, June 6. page 203 The Kings Speeches June
7, and the Petition of Right read, and granted. page 204 The motions of the
lower House to the Higher, ibid. Sir Thomas Wentworths speech, page 205 The
Kings message to the lower House by Sir Humphry May, June 10. page 206 Eight
particulars voted in the House of commons, against the Duke of Buckingham, June
11, ibid. The first Remonstrance of the House of Commons, ibid. A Schedule of
the shipping of this Kingdom which have been taken by the Enemy, and lost at
sea, within the space of three years last past, page 215 The Kings Answer to
the Remonstrance June 17. p. 217 The Kings speech at the end of the Session,
June 26. ibid. The second Remonstrance, page 218 A Letter which was found
amongst some Jesuits that were lately taken at London and addressed to the
Father Rector at Bruxills, page 220 Motives to induce the Knights Citizens and
Burgesses of the Commons house of Parliament to petition his Majesty, for the
revoking and abolishing of the degrees of Baronets lately erected by his
Highnesses letters pattents, page 224 The examination of Andrew le Brun Captain
of the Mary of Rochell. page 226 Articles against Melvin, p. 227 A privy Seal
for the transporting of horses January 30 tertio Caroli, ibid. The Commission
to the Lords and others of the Privy Council concerning the present raising of
Money, page 228 Articles to be propounded to the Captains and Masters as well
English as French, touching the service in hand at Rochell, May 4. 1628. p. 230
The Answer to the Articles propounded by the Lord general and the rest of the
Council of war page 231.
A TABLE of the transactions of the second Session of the Parliament begun Ian.
20. 1628.
Mr Selden's report concerning the Petition of Right, January 21, page 235. Mr
Pymms motion, ibid. Sir John Elliots reply, ibid. Mr Seldens speech concerning
the Petition of Right, p. 236. Mr Norton the Kings Printer brought to the
bar. ibid. Sir John Elliot ibid. Sir Robert Phillips's speech, January 22.
ibid. Mr Littleton, page 237 Sir John Elliot, ibid. Mr Seldom concerning the
printing of the Petition of Right, ibid. His Majesty's message Ian. 23, 24.
page 238 Mr Walter, Ian. 26 ibid. Mr Secretary Coke, ibid. Sir Francis Beamor,
ibid. Mr Kirton, ibid. Mr Sh^rland, page 239 Sir Nath. Rich Ian. 27 ibid. The
Kings Message by Secretary Coke, ibid. Sir Walter Earl, page 240 Mr Corrington,
ibid. Mr Pymme, ibid. Another Message from his Majesty January 28, delivered by
Secretary Coke, ibid. Mr Long's Reply, page 241 Sir Thomas Edmonds; ibid. Mr
Corrington, ibid. Sir John Elliot, ibid. Secretary Coke's speech, Feb. 3, page
242 Sir John Elliot ibid. Mr Speaker, page 243 Secretary Coke, ibid. Sir Hum.
May, ibid. Sir John Elliot at the Committee for Religion. ibid. A Bill that no
Clergy man be in Commission for Peace, Feb. 4 ibid. Mr Seldom, page 244 A
Petition against Dr. Cosens, ibid. Sir Eubal Thelwall, ibid. Mr Shervile, ibid.
Mr Rouse, ibid. Mr Kirton, ibid. Sir Robert Phillips, page 245 Sir Edward
Giles, ibid. Sir James Perot, ibid. Mr Pymme, ibid. Sir Robert Phillips, ibid.
A Petition about an imposition upon malt, Febr. 5, p. 246 Mr Long, ibid. Mr
Ogle ibid. Secretary Coke, ibid. Sir Robert Phillips, ibid. A Petition against
Whittington a Papist, Febr. 6. ibid. Mr Shervile, page 247 Sr Nath. Rich, ibid.
Sr O. Roberts, upon an Affidavit against Dr Cosens, ibid. Sr John Elliot, ibid.
Mr Kirton, Febr. 7. ibid. Sr Walter Earl, ibid. Sr Robert Phillips, ibid. Mr
Seldom, page 249 Sr Robert Phillips, ibid. Mr Pymme, ibid. Mr Shervile, ibid.
Sr John Stanhope, ibid. Sr Nath. Rich, ibid. Sr John Elliot, ibid. Sr Daniel
Norton. page 250 Sr Robert Phillips, ibid. The Chancellor of the Duchy, ibid.
Sr Thomas Heal, ibid. Mr Valentine, ibid. Transactions concerning Cosens,
Bishop Mountague, etc. Febr. 9. ibid. Sr Robert Phillips, February 10, page 251
Mr Chancellor of the Duchy, page 252 Mr Seldom, ibid. Sr Francis Seymour,
ibid. Mr Seldom, page 253 Mr Kirton, ibid. Mr Littleton, ibid. Sr Benjamin
Ruddier, ibid. Mr Seldom Febr. 11, ibid. A Petition of the booksellers and
printers at the Committee for Religion, page 254 Mr Shervile's Report
concerning Dr Sibthorpe, Cosens and Manwaring, ibid. Sir Walter Earl, page 255
A Committee for tonnage and poundage Febr. 12 Shervile in the Chair, ibid. Sr
John Elliot ibid. A Petition against Burges a Priest, Febr. 13, page 257 Sr
John Elliot, ibid. Sir Will. Bawstrod, at a Committee for Religion, ibid. Sir
Richard Gravenor, page 258 Secretary Coke, ibid. A Complaint against the Lord
Lambert, Febr. 14, page 259 Mr Kirton. ibid. Sr Thomas Hobbie at a Committee
for Religion, page 260 Mr Stroud at a Committee for Religion Febr. 16, p. 261
Another petition preferred by Mr Chambers Febr. 17. p. 262 A public Fast Febr.
18, p. 263 Mr Dawes called in question for taking Mr Rolls his goods Febr. 19,
ibid. A petition of Complaint against the Lord deputy of Ireland, Febr. 20,
ibid. A petition by Mr Symons in complaint of the Customers, Febr. 21 page 264
The Committee for Merchants, ibid. The protestation of the Commons in
Parliament March 2, 1628, page 267 The Kings speech in the House of Parliament,
March 10. to dissolve it, page 268 His Majesty's letter and queres concerning
ship money and the answer thereunto.
Page 10. lin. 18. for euge, ingredi, read yet coge ingredi.

The KINGS Speech 17. March 1627.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
THese Times are for action, wherefore for examples sake I mean not to spend
much time in words, expecting accordingly that your (as I hope) good
resolutions will be speedy, not spending time unnecessarily, or (that I may
better say) dangerously; for tedious Consultations at this conjuncture of time
are as hurtful as ill Resolutions.

I am sure you now expect from me both to know the cause of your meeting, and
what to resolve on: yet I think there is none here but knows that common
Danger is the cause of this Parliament, and that Supply at this time is the
chief end of it; so that I need but point to you what to do. I will use but few
persuasions; for if to maintain your own advises, and as now the case stands,
by the following thereof the true Religion, Laws and Liberties of this State,
and the just defense of our true Friends and Allies, be not sufficient, then no
eloquence of Men or Angels will prevail.

Only let me remember you that my duty most of all, and every one of yours
according to his degree is, to seek the maintenance of this Church and
Commonwealth: and certainly there never was a time in which this duty was more
necessarily required then now.

I therefore judging of a Parliament to be the ancient, speediest and best way
in this time of common Danger, to give such supply as to secure our selves, and
to save our Friends from imminent ruin, have called you together. Every man
must do according to his conscience. Wherefore if you (which God forbid) should
not do your duties in contributing what the State at this time needs, I must
in discharge of my conscience use those other means which God has put into my
hands, to save that which the follies of particular men may hazard to loose.

Take not this as a threatening, for I scorn to threaten any but my equals; but
an admonition from him that, both out of nature and duty, have most care of
your preservations and prosperities: and (though I thus speak) I hope that your
endeavors at this time will be such, as shall not only make me approve your
former Counsels, but lay on me such obligations as shall bind me by way of
thankfulness to meet often; for be assured that nothing can be more pleasing to
me, then to keep a good correspondence with you.

I will only add one thing more, and then leave my Lord Keeper to make a
short paraphrase upon the Text I have delivered you; which is, to remember a
thing to the end we may forget it. You may imagine that I came here with a
doubt of success of what I desire, remembering the distractions at the last
meeting: but I assure you that I shall very easily and gladly forget and
forgive what is past, so that you will at this present time leave the former
ways of distractions, and follow the counsel late given you, to maintain the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace.

The Lord Keeper Coventry's Speech 17. March 1627.
My Lords, and you the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of
Commons,
IF I had been delighted in long speaking, yet the example and commandment of
his Majesty has been more then enough to refrain the superfluity of that
humor, but here is yet more; For that short and excellent compacted Speech
which you have heard from his Majesty, begins with a reason, It is a time for
action and not for speech. Examples and Command master the Will, and Reason
the Understanding: and therefore you may expect nothing from me but brevity.

You have heard the matter already, and I doubt not but with reverence, as the
weight and authority requires, you have imprinted it in your minds: and the
matter being known, long speeches from me were but babbling to beat the air.

Ye are here in Parliament by his Majesty's writ and royal command, to
consult and conclude of the weighty and urgent business of this Kingdom.
Weighty it is and great, as great as the honor, safety and protection of
Religion, King and Country; and what can be greater? Urgent it is: It is little
pleasure to tell or think how urgent, and to tell it with circumstances were a
long work; I will but touch the sum of it in few words.

The Pope and House of Austria have long affected, the one a Spiritual, the
other a Temporal Monarchy: and to effect their ends, to serve each others
turn, the House of Austria, besides the rich and vast Territories of both the
Indies and in Africa joined together, are become Masters of Spain and Italy,
and the great country of Germany. And although France be not under their
subjection, yet they have endeavored all about him: the very bowels of the
Kingdom swaied by the Popish faction, they have gotten such a part and such
interest in the Government, that under pretense of Religion, to root out the
Protestants and our Religion, they have drawn the King to their adherence so
far, that albeit upon his Majesty's interposition by his Ambassadors, and
his engagement of his royal word, there was between the King and his Subjects
Articles of agreement, and the Subjects were quiet, whereby his Majesty
interessed in that great Treaty, was bound to see a true accomplishment; yet
against that strict alliance, that Treaty has been broken, and those of the
Religion have been put to all extremity, and undoubtedly will be ruinated
without present help: so as that King is not only diverted from assisting the
common Cause, but has been misled to engage himself in hostile acts against
our King, or other Princes, making way thereby for the House of Austria, to the
ruin of his own and other Kingdoms.

Other Potentates that in former times did balance and interrupt the growing
greatness of the House of Austria, are now removed and diverted. The Turk has
made peace with the Emperor, and turned himself wholly into wars with Asia;
the King of Sweden is embroiled in a war with Poland, which is invented by
Spanish practices, to keep that King from succouring our part; the King of
Denmark is chased out of his Kingdom on this and on that side the Sound, so as
the house of Austria is on the point to command all the Seacoasts from
Dan^zick to Emden, and all the Rivers falling into the Sea in that great
extent, so as besides their power by Land, they begin to threaten our part by
Sea, to the subversion of all our State.

In the Baltique Sea they are providing and arming all the ships they can build
or hire, and have at this time their Ambassadors threatening at Lubeck to draw
into their service the Hans-Townes; whereby taking from us and our neighbors
the East-land trade, by which our Shipping is supplied, they expect without any
blow given to make themselves masters of the Sea. In those Western parts by the
Dunkerkers, and by the now French and Spanish Admiral, to the ruin of
Fishing, of infinite consequence both to us and the Low Countries, they infest
all our coast, so as we pass not safely from port to port. And that Fleet
which lately assisted the French at the Isle of Ree, is now preparing at St.
Andrea, with other ships built in the coast of Biscai to reinforce it, and a
greater Fleet is making ready at Lisbon, where besides their own, they do serve
themselves upon all strangers bottoms coming to that coast for trade. And these
great preparations are no doubt to assault us in England or Ireland, as they
shall find advantage, and a place fit for their turn.

Our friends of the Netherlands, besides the fear that justly troubles them
lest the whole force of the Emperor may fall down upon them, are distracted by
their Voyages into the East, which has carried both men and money into another
world, and almost divided them at home.

Thus are we even ready on all sides to be swallowed up; the Emperor, France,
and Spain being in open war against us, Germany overrun, the King of Denmark
distressed, the King of Sweden diverted, and the Low-Countrey-men disabled to
give us assistance. I speak not this to increase fear unworthy of English
courages, but to press to provision worthy the wisdom of a Parliament. And
for that cause his Majesty has called you hither, that by a timely provision
against those great imminent dangers, our selves may be strengthened at home,
our Friends and Allies encouraged abroad, and those great causes of fear
scattered and dispelled.

And because in all warlike preparations Treasure bears the name, and holds the
semblance of the nerves and finewes, and if a finew be too short or too weak,
if it be either shrunk or strained, the part becomes unusefull: it is needful
that you make a good and timely supply of treasure, without which all counsels
will prove fruitless. I might press many reasons to this end, I will but name
few.

First for his Majesty's sake, who requires it: great is the duty which we owe
him by the law of God, great by the law of Nature and our own Allegiance, great
for his own merit, and the memory of his ever blessed Father. I do but point at
them, but me thinks our thoughts cannot but recoyle on our consideration,
touched by his Majesty, which to me seems to sound like a Parliamentarie part
or Covenant.

A War was advised here, Assistance professed, yea and protested here; I do
but touch it, I know you will deeply think on it, and the more for the example
the King has set you, his Lands, his Plate, his Jewels he has not spared to
supply the War; what the People has protested, the King for his part has
willingly performed.

Secondly for the Cause sake: it concerns us in Christian Charity to tender
the distresses of our Friends abroad, it concerns us in honor not to abandon
them that have stood for us; and if this come not close enough, you shall find
our Interest so woven and involved with theirs, that the Cause is more ours
then theirs. If Religion be in peril, we have the most flourishing and
orthodoxe Church; if Honor be in question, the steps and monuments in former
ages will show that our Ancestors have left us as much as any Nation; if Trade
and Commerce be in danger, we are Islanders, it is our life: all these at once
lie at stake, and so does our safety and being.

Lastly, in respect of the manner of his Majesty's demand, which is in
Parliament, the way that has ever best pleased the subjects of England: and
good cause for it; for Aides granted in Parliament work good effects for the
People; they be commonly accompanied with wholesome Laws, gracious Pardons,
and the like: Besides, just and good Kings finding the love of their people,
and the readiness of their supplies, may the better forbear the use of their
Prerogatives, and moderate the rigor of the Laws toward their Subjects.

This way, as his Majesty has told you, he has chosen not as the only way,
but as the fittest; not as destitute of others, but as most agreeable to the
goodness of his own most gracious disposition, and to the desire and weal of
his people. If this be deferred, Necessity and the Sword of the Enemy make way
to the others. Remember his Majesty's admonition, I say, remember it. Let me
but add and observe Gods mercy toward this land above all others: the torrent
of War has overwhelmed other Churches and Countries, but God has hitherto
restrained it from us, and still gives us warning of every approaching danger
to save us from surprise. And our gracious Sovereign in a true sense of it
calls together his High Court of Parliament, the lively representation of the
wisdom, wealth, and power of the whole Kingdom, to join together to repel
those hostile attempts, which have distressed our Friends and Allies, and
threatened our selves.

And therefore it behooves all to apply their thoughts unto Counsel and
Consultations worthy the greatness and wisdom of this Assembly, to avoid
discontents which may either distemper or delay, and to attend that unum
necessarium, the common Cause, propounding for the scope and work of all the
debates, the general good of the King and Kingdom, whom God has joined
together with an indissoluble knot, which none must attempt to cut or untie.
And let all by unity and good accord, endeavor to pattern this Parliament by
the best that have been, that it may be a pattern to future Parliaments, and
may infuse into Parliaments a kind of multiplying power and faculty, whereby
they may be more frequent, and the King our Sovereign may delight to sit on
this Throne, and from hence to distribute his graces and favors amongst his
people.

His Majesty has given you cause to be confident of this you have heard from
his royal mouth, which nevertheless he has given me express command to
redouble; If this Parliament by their dutiful and wise proceedings shall but
give this occasion, his Majesty will be ready, not only to manifest his
gracious acceptance, but to put out all memory of those disasters that have
troubled former Parliaments.

I have but one thing to add, and that is, As your consultations be serious,
so let them be speedy. The Enemy is beforehand with us, and flies on the wings
of Succese: we may dally and play with the houre-glasse, that is in our
powers, but the hour will not stay for us, and an opportunity once lost cannot
be regained. And therefore resolve of your Supplies, that they may be timely
and sufficient, serving the occasion. Your Counsel, your Aid, all is but lost,
if your Aid be either too little or too late: And his Majesty is resolved that
his affairs cannot permit him to expect it overlong.

And now having delivered what his Majesty has commanded me concerning the
cause of this Assembly, his Majesty wills that you of the House of Commons
repair to your own House, to make choice of a Speaker, whom his Majesty will
expect to be presented unto him on Wednesday next at two of the clock.

The Speaker Sir John Finches Speech, March 19. 1627.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
YOur obedient and loyal Subjects, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses by your
royal Summons here assembled, in obedience to your gracious direction,
according to their ancient usage and privilege, have lately proceeded to the
choice of a Speaker, and, (whether sequestring their better Judgments for your
more weighty affairs, or to make it known that their honor and wisdom can
suffer neither increase nor diminution by the value or demerits of any one
particular Member, in what place soever serving them) omitting others of worth
and ability, they have fixed their eyes of favor and affection on Me.

Their long knowledge of my unfitness every way to undergo a charge of this
important weight and consequence, gave me some hope they would have admitted
my just excuse: yet for their further and clearer satisfaction, I drew the
curtains, and let in what light I could upon my own inmost thoughts, truly
and really discovering to them what my self best knew, and what I most humbly
beseech your royal Majesty to take now into consideration; that of so many
hundreds sitting amongst them, they could have found few or none whose
presentation, to your Majesty would have been of less repute, or advantage to
them: For, and impeditioris linguae sum, and the poor experience I have of
that royal Assembly is so ill balanced with true judgment, that every gust
and wave has power on me; whereby I shall not only suffer in my own
particular, but (which I apprehend with much more care and sorrow) prejudice
their common Interest.

Wherefore, dread and dear Sovereign, as low as the lowest step of your royal
throne I humbly bend, appealing to your great and sovereign judgment for my
discharge from this so unequal a burden imposed on me: most humbly and
earnestly beseeching your most excellent Majesty, for the honor of that great
Council, and the better digestion of public Services there, and withal to
avert so ill an Omen as the choice of Me in the beginning of a Parliament,
ordained (I hope) for the joy of our own, and the envy of other Nations, that
by your gracious Command the House may re-consult, and settle their better
thoughts on some more worthy their election, and your Majesty's approbation.

The Lord Keeper Coventry's Reply.
Mr. Speaker,
HIs Majesty with a most gracious care and princely attendance has heard your
humble excuse: he knows well the importance of your place, but your ability to
discharge it he approves, and commends the election of the House of Commons;
and therein receives the more content, because they have followed the light
taken from himself, who formerly made choice of you to serve in a place of
Trust both about himself, and his royal Consort.

The Omen cannot be ill, and the People so readily follow him whom God has
ordained to go in and out before them. And therefore knowing your tackling to
be strong, and finding your sail moderate, and not overborn, his Majesty
does doubt neither gust nor wave to endanger your passage. But since you are
duly chosen, his Majesty counsels and commands, that unto your humility you
add resolution and courage: they stand well together, and being well joined,
they will arm all your abilities to that great Employment of service to your
King and Country, which as the Commons by their uniforme voice have put upon
you, so his Majesty by his royal approbation does girt unto you, and settle
you Speaker.

The Speaker Sir John Finches Reply.
IT is now no time nor manners longer to dispute with my Lord the King, but
with all joy of heart and alacrity humbly and thankfully to meet so great a
favor from the best of Masters and the best of Men. Therefore first, I lift up
my heart to him that sits on the Throne of heaven, per quem Principes imperant
and Potentes decernunt justitiam, humbly begging at his hands, that made the
tongue, to give me speech, and that framed the heart of man, to give me
understanding; for I am but as Clay in the hands of the Potter, and he will
mould me for honor or dishonor as best seems good unto him. Next, I bow my
knees unto your most excellent Majesty in all humble and hearty
acknowledgement of this, and many other your great and gracious Favors.

The truth of mine heart, full of zeal and duty to your Majesty and the
public as any man's, quits me from all fear of running into wilful and
pregnant errors; and your Majesty's great goodness, of which I have been so
large a partaker, gives me strong assurance that, having by your gracious
beams drawn me up from earth and obscurity, you will so uphold me by a benign
and gracious interpretation of all my words and actions, that I fall not down
again like a crude and imperfect vapor, but consome the remainder of my days
in the zeal of your Majesty's service.

This great and glorious Assembly, made perfect by your royal presence, like a
curious Perspective, the more I behold it, with the more joy and comfort I
find a lively representation of that true happiness, which under your
Majesty's gracious government we all enjoy. A better tongue were fitter to
express it; but a rich Stone retains his value, though ill set.

Here in the fullness and height of your Glory (like the Sun in the exaltation
of his Orb) sits your most excellent Majesty, the sovereigne Monarch of this
famous Isle, in a Throne made glorious by a long succession of many and great
Princes. A meditation worthy our better thoughts, that we live neither
enthralled to the fury of the giddy-headed multitude, nor yet to the distracted
wills of many Masters, but under the command of a King, the stay and strength
of a People; one (as Homer says well of a King) (...), not to be laid in
common balance with other men: for Kings know no other Tenure but God's
service, and their value it is only tried at his Beam: whence the Poets said,
the Parents of the first Kings were Coelum and Terra, Divine institution and
Humane approbation.

Besides that it is a Sovereigntie also hereditarie, which makes the
Commonwealth the King's care, as that which is the King's own Patrimony, and
the inheritance of his Children; when elective Monarchies quickly run to
ruin, and are commonly made poor by the enriching of several Families.

On your right hand are the reverend, religious and learned Prelates, the
Lights of the Church, fit to be set in golden Candlesticks, and not made
contemptible by Paritie or Poverty: lively Idea's of that blessing above the
rest, which by God's great goodness and your Majesty's great piety this
Realm enjoyes, the liberty of the Gospel, and the free profession of God's
true Religion.

Your Majesty passed the fiery trial in Spain, and gave us then assurance
that your faith was built on that rock against which the gates of hell shall
never prevail. Since your coming to the Crown, by your royal Edict you have
banished those Incendiaries of Rome, the Priests and Jesuits, enemies to our
Church and State; so as now they are either gone, or lurk in corners like the
sons of darkness. You have given life to the Laws against Recusants, and by
your own exemplarie piety have drawn more then you have compelled to come to
Church. Euge, ingredi, ut impleatur domus mea, was his command that made the
great Feast, and is the duty of Magistrates.

And certainly, dread Sovereigne, true Religion will ever be a target to them
that are a buckler to it: No cement so strong to hold your Subjects hearts
together in their true obedience.

Our Religion never bred a Clement, or a Ravillack: and that execrable Villainy
never to be forgotten here, when all of us ( horresco referens) in an instant
should have been turned into ashes, and those scattered in the wind, was a
Monster could never have been engendered, but by the Devil or the Jesuits.

On your left hand sit your Nobles, the Lights of Honor, full of courage and
magnanimity, yet in right distance between Crown and People, neither
over-shadowing the one, or oppressing the other.

Before your Throne, like the twelve Lions under Solomon's Throne, sit the
Lights of Justice, your grave Judges and Sages of the Law, learned and just as
many Ages have known, and learning justice by your example.

Our Laws, as excellent as they are, (I am sure no humane Laws excel them,
nor could so well suite with the constitution of this People) were they in the
power of corrupt or ignorant men (I know not which were worse, for one will
perhaps oftener err then the other bribe) Justice could never keep her right
chanel, nor run clear, as in your Majesty's reign it ever has.

I must not forget the other Lights, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, the
Representative of their Estate, who although they move lower and at more
distance from your royal Person, yet (I am confident) will ever be found
constant to the Poles of Love and Loyalty.

It Is a gracious Favor of your Majesty and our former Kings I have often
thought on, that when both these Houses are humble suitors for any thing, they
are never denied; Le Roy s'avisera, The King will advise of it, is the greatest
denial. And I assure my self your Majesty shall find all your Subjects so
full of duty to your Crown, and of true and loyal affection to your royal
Person, that you shall never have cause to think your gracious Favors ill
bestowed on them.

The Union of Hearts, Sir, is a greatness beyond that of the Kingdom, to
which you are Heir. Et penitus toto divisos orb Britannos,
it is a Name of advantage to this Island, if the Division be not amongst our
selves: which the God of Unity for his mercies sake forbid, and so knit our
Hearts in love one to another, and all of us in duty and loyalty to your most
excellent Majesty, that this renowned Island perish not by our Distractions,
but may ever flourish, and be like Jerusalem the City of God, where his Name
may be for ever honored.

Great and glorious have been the Actions of your royal Predecessors, yet
greater remain for your Majesty, and most of theirs attend you for their
perfection.

The first Christian King of Europe, the first that abated the swelling pride
of Rome by banishing his usurped power, and God's true Vicegerent, the first
that established the true Religion now professed, were all Kings of England, and
the last a young one.

Queen Elizabeth was a woman, yet Spain has cause to remember her: the
Protestants of France and the Low Countries will never forget her. And were
Henry the Great alive, he would say, That in requital of the love of this
Kingdom showed him, he has sent us one of his own Loins, your royal
Consort, our most gracious Queen, to propagate these blessings to us and our
posterity for ever. Your royal Father (of ever blessed and famous memory)
had a Reign like Solomon's; for Religion, no man knew more a luster or
advantage to him, this Age shall deliver it to the next, and all Ages shall see
it in his Kingly Works.

But while under his glorious Reign we abode in peace and plenty, our hands
had forgot to war and our fingers to fight, till at last by your Princely
mediation, upon the humble suite of both these Houses, the two Treaties were
dissolved, and a foundation laid for your Majesty to restore us to our ancient
and Military honor; which I doubt not will quickly be.

Eritis sicut Dii, was the Serpent's Counsel, and ruined Mankind: nor is it
fit for private men (much less for me) to search into the Counsels or Actions
of Kings. Only, Sir, give me leave from an heart full of zeal to your glory
and greatness, to say to your Majesty, the Times require you, Religion calls
upon you to go on with that Kingly Courage you have begune, till the state of
Christendom be settled in the right Balance again.

We see how the Eagle spreads his wings in Germany, reaching with his talons as
far as the Sound and Baltic sea: Denmark and Sweden in danger of utter ruin
by seizing: the Electorates, the choice of the Empire, invested in a manner
solely in the House of Austria: Our Religion in France and every where never so
near a period. And we know who it is for whom all this works; he of whom the
boast is made, Alla qui Monarqui nasciendo d'el monendo, who by the ruin of us
and our Religion will make a new Zodiac, and draw an Ecliptic line through
the East and West Indies. But he that sits on high will in his good time laugh
them to scorn; and, as that wife Woman said to King David, God will make to my
Lord the King a sure house, if my Lord shall continue to fight the battles of
Jehovah: and let all England say, Amen.

I have presumed too far upon your royal Patience, and therefore I will
conclude with a few words for them that sent me, who are humble suitours to
your excellent Majesty,

First, for our better attending the public and important services, that our
selves and our necessary Attendants may be free, both in our persons and goods,
from all arrests and troubles, according to our ancient privilege and
immunities.

Next, that, since that in all great Counsels where difference of opinion is,
truth is best discovered by free debates, your Majesty, according to our like
ancient use and privilege, will be graciously pleased to allow us liberty and
freedom of speech, and I assure my self we shall not pass the latitude of
duty and discretion.

That upon all occurrences of moment, fit for resort to your own person, your
Majesty, upon humble suit, at your best leisure, will vouchsafe us access to
your royal person.

And lastly, that all our proceedings being lodged in your royal heart with
belief of our zeal and loyalty, we may reap the fruits of it* by your
Majesty's gracious and favorable interpretation.

One word more I humbly beg for myself, That though it be the beginning of a
Parliament, I may now and ever enjoy your Majesty's most gracious and general
free Pardon.

The Lord Keeper Coventry's second Reply.
Mr. Speaker,
HIs Majesty with no less content then attention has heard your learned
Discourse: he observes your beginning with his gracious encouragement and
advice, not forsaking your humble modesty, but adding to it thankfulness,
alacrity, and joy of heart; a just and right temper.

He observes you derive these aright, first, from the Throne in heaven: he
looks thither with you, and joins in prayer, that both you and all this
Assembly by that Divine hand and power be molded, and procured for the
honor, safety and good of the Church and Kingdom. Next, you apply your self
to the Throne on earth: his Majesty does graciously accept your protestations
of the truth of your heart, the fullness of your zeal and duty to his Majesty
and the Public: he believes it, and that not in you alone, but in all this
Assembly; so that you are secure not only from wilful and pregnant errors,
but from doubt of sinister interpretation.

My Lord the King is as an Angel of God, of a quick, of a noble and just
apprehension; he strains not at gnats, he will easily distinguish between a
vapor and a fogg, between a mist of error and a cloud of evil; right he
knows, if the heart be right, Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks.

You proceed to a survey of the luster of this great and glorious Assembly,
and in that, as in a curious Crystal, you observe the true happiness which we
all here enjoy. You have distributed and divided aright, and whosoever sees it
otherwise has an evil eye, or a false glass. We have enjoyed it long,
through the happy means of gracious and good Princes; and the way to enjoy it
still, is to know and heartily to acknowledge it, and that God has not done so
to any other Nation. It is a prime cause or means of this our happiness.

You mention the form of Government under which we live, a Monarchy, and the
best of Monarchies, where Sovereignty is hereditarie, no Inter-Regnum, nor
competition for a Crown; Descent and Succession are all one. The Spirit of God
by the mouth of the wisest of Kings long since proclaimed this happiness,
Blessed art thou, O Land, where thy King is the son of Nobles.

The frames of other States are subject some to inconstant Levitie, some to
Faction, some to Emulation and Ambition, and all to manifold Distempers, in
which the People go to wrack. The Monarchy is most natural, and in it, Unity
is the best cement of all government, principally in respect of the unity of
the Head, which commands the rest. And therefore other States, when they have
tried a while, do for the most part resolve into this, as into the best for
Peace, for Strength, and for Continuance. But forms of other governments,
though never so exact, move not of themselves, but are moved of their
governors. And therefore our Monarchy, (as you have truly said) this glorious
Assembly, the lively image and representation of our Monarchy, is made happy
and perfect by the Royal Presence that sits here in his highest Royal Throne,
the Throne of the Lawgiver, glorious in it self, glorious by those happy
Laws and Oracles which have issued from it, and most glorious by them that sit
on it, his Majesty and his Royal Progenitors, incomparable Kings, that with
so much honor have swayed the Scepter of this Kingdom so many successions of
Ages.

In the next place, after the Throne of Majesty, you look into the Chair of
Doctrine, the reverend Prelates, and upon the state of Religion, their proper
charge. This is the blessing of all blessings, the privilege and assurance
that secures us of all the rest, that as our Religion is most sincere and
orthodoxe, so our Clergy is eminent, both for purity of Doctrine and
integrity of Life; our Priests are clothed with righteousness, and their lips
preserve knowledge, and therefore God's Saints may and do sing with
joyfulnesse.

I must join with you in attributing this transcendent blessing to us, as in
the first place to God's goodness, so in the second to his Majesty's piety,
who, following the steps of his ever-blessed Father, is careful that all the
Lamps of the Church may be furnished with Oil, and especially those which are
set on golden Candle-sticks with the purest and best oil. The Schools also and
nurceries of Learning, never so replenished, especially with Divinity, as in
this last Age, as they all show his Majesty's Piety, so are they infallible
Arguments of his Constancy.

The trial, which you call the fiery trial, undergone by his Majesty in the
place of danger, and again the power and policy of Rome and Spain, has
approved his resolution inimitable: and his own remarkable example in his
closet, and his chamber, his strict oversight of and command to his Household
servants, and his charge to his Bishops and Judges, his Edicts, his
Proclamations and Commissions, and the like, for the execution of the Laws,
and his general care to preserve the fountain pure both from Schism and
Superstition, are fair fruits and effects of a pious and zealous resolution.

From the chair of Doctrine you turn to the state of Honor, unto the Nobles
and Barons of England. These are Rob^r belli, who for the service of the King
and Kingdom, are to make good with their Swords what the Churchmen must
hallow and bless by their Prayers. And therefore as the Prelates are the great
Lights of the Church, so the Nobility are the Stars of the State; and you
know that the stars have fought, and fought powerfully against the enemies of
God.

From the state of Honor, you come to the state of Justice, and to the twelve
Lions under Solomon's Throne, the Judges and Sages of the Law, and as their
peculiar charge entrusted to them by our Sovereigne, the Laws of the Kingdom:
Laws undoubtedly fitted to the constitution of this people, for Leges Angliae
and Consuetudines Angliae are Synonyma, and Consuetudo est altera natura; so as
besides the justness and rightnesse of the Laws, they are become natural to
our people, and that is one of the powerfullest means which begets
obedience: and such Laws in the mouths of learned and upright Judges, are
like waters in a pure chanel, which the fairer it runs, the clearer they run,
and produce that whereof Solomon speaks Prove. 29.2. When the righteous are in
authority, the People rejoice.

From the Law you pass to the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses, and the third
Estate, who represent the Commons of England, in whom the Scripture is
verified, In the multitude of People is the Kings honor: and therefore you may
be sure that distance of place and order breeds no distance in affection; for
wise Kings ever lay their honor next to their hearts. Kings are Pastores
populi; and the Shepherds care is nothing less to the furthest, then to the
next part of his Flock; and it is as much toward the least of his Lambs, as
toward the greatest Cattle. And as in the Natural body, no member is so
remote, but it is still within the care of the head: so in this great Politic
body of the Kingdom, no rank or order of People so low, is at such distance
from the Throne, but it daily feels the influence and benefit of the Kings
care and protection. And, to say the truth, in a well-governed Kingdom, the
superior rancks of Nobles, of Judges, and of Magistrates, are not ordained for
themselves, but as conduits for the Kings justice, protection and goodness to
the lower rancks of his People. And as the People are, so its just cause they
should be, constant to the Poles of Love and Loyalty.

And thus having perused both Houses by divided parts, join them together, and
in that juncture, you believe truly and materially that the greatest denial of
their joint requests is, The King will advise. A note very remarkable: It
shows the indulgence of Kings, it shows also the wisdom and judgment of the
Houses; the King not willing to deny his People, People not willing to press
their King to a denial; the one wise and modest in their requests, and the
other moderate and sweet in the answer. This is the ancient and right way of
union in Parliament. The God of unity keep it in this, and all ensuing
Parliaments.

This union you rightly call the union of Hearts, and a greatness beyond the
Kingdoms which the King inherits: so then its a present fit for a wise people
to offer to their gracious King. Wise and magnanimous Kings are a special gift
from God, having hearts capable of greatness: union of hearts is greatest, and
greatness was never unwelcome to Kings; and therefore present and offer it to
your King, you cannot doubt of acceptance.

Having spoken of union, you fall presently into a memorial of the great and
glorious actions of his Majesty's Predecessors, and into the height and
contemplation of greater that remain. If I mistake not your meaning, you would
have it understood that the union of Prince and people make way to those
remarkable acts of former times, and that we that wish the like success in our
time should look back upon our Forefathers. Wisdom requires it, Honor and the
Time requires it, that we should show our selves the sons of our Ancestors,
at least in holding that which they left us.

The pride of Rome abated (as you say) by England, now lifts up her horns
against Religion: Gods vine planted and deeply rooted here, overspread into our
neighbor Countries, has of late lost many of her goodly branches. The
Austrian Eagle, that wanted feathers till of late, now soars and preys at will
over all. Spain, so often foiled by us, has (by disguised treaties) dispoiled
of their patrimony those princely Branches of our royal Cedar, and posts
apace to his universal Monarchy, to the ruin of us, our Friends and Religion.

God has his time, and I trust a time to stop their course: I know not but we
may expect it as well now as ever. There is a resolution in our King, and there
is, I trust, (for I am sure there was) a resolution in our Parliament, for
great actions. Our king as he has a Solomon, so has he many David's in the
glorious catalogue of his royal Descent, and has linked himself in the House
of Henry the Great, and he bears a glorious and auspicious name suitable to his
thoughts and desires: and therefore since Honor and Religion call for it, and
since you have encouraged him to fight Iehovah's battles, let all put to their
hands, that our King and Nation may have the honor to set Christendom in her
right Balance.

And now to come to the petitions you have made for the House; his Majesty
most graciously and readily grants them all according to your true and ancient
Rights and Privileges of Parliament, which his Majesty trusts you will have
care not to exceed or transgress: and therefore you may go cheerfully
together, and speedily settle about the public affairs. And the almighty God
prosper the works of your hands, I say, the almighty God prosper your
handiwork.

Mr. Goodwin's Speech, March 22. 1627.
Mr. Speaker,
IT has pleased his Majesty in his last Speech to intimate unto us the cause
of our meeting, which is supply against the great and common dangers that
threaten the ruin of this Kingdom: and the time of our sitting cannot be
long, and therefore he wishes to avoid tedious resolutions. In conformity
whereunto I propound that, laying aside all other matters, we address our
selves to that for which we were called hither: wherein as in the first place
we have well begun, in our pious humiliation toward almighty God; so let us
now proceed to serve and to supply the king, yet so as we satisfy our Country
that sent us hither, and preserve our Rights and Privileges, which have as
surely been broken and infringed, as undoubtedly they belong to us.

Sr. Francis Seymour's Speech, March 22. 1627.
THis is the great Council of the Kingdom, and here, if not here alone, his
Majesty may see as in a true glass the state of the Kingdom. We are all
called hither by his Majesty's writs to give him faithful counsel, such as
may stand with his honor, but that we must do without flattery, and chosen by
the Commons to deliver up their just grievances, and this we must do without
fear. Let us not be like Cambyses Judges, who being demanded of him concerning
something unlawful, said, Though there were no written Law, the Persian Kings
might do what they list. This was base flattery, fitter for reproof then
imitation: and as flattery, so fear takes away the judgment. For mine own
part, I shall shun both these, and speak my conscience with as much duty to his
Majesty as any man, not neglecting the Public.

But how can we speak our affections, while we retein our fears, or speak of
giving, till we know whether we have any thing to give or not? For if his
Majesty shall be persuaded to take what he will, what need we to give?

That this has been done, appears by the billetting of Soldiers, a thing no
way advantageous to his service, and a burden to the Commonwealth* the
imprisonment of Gentlemen for the Loan, who if they had done the contrary for
fear, their faults had been as great as theirs, who were Projectours in it. To
countenance these proceedings, has it not been preached in the pulpit, or
rather prated, All we have is the Kings? But when they forsake their own
calling, and turn ignorant Statesmen, we see how willing they will be to
change a good conscience for a Bishopric.

It is too apparent the people suffer more now then ever: will you know the
true reason? we shall find those Princes have been in greatest wants and
necessities, that have exacted most from their Subjects. The reason is plain. A
Prince is strongest by faithful and wise Counsel: I would I could truly say
such had been employed abroad. I speak this to this end, to show the defect
proceeded not from this House.

I must confess he is no good Subject that would not willingly and freely lay
down his life, when the End may be the service of his Majesty, and the good of
the Commonwealth. But he is no good Subject, but a slave, that will have his
goods taken from him against his will, and his Liberty against the Laws of the
Kingdom. In doing this we shall but tread the steps of our Forefathers, who
still preferred the public interest before their own rights, nay before their
own lives. It will be a wrong to Us, to our Posterities, to our Consciences, if
we shall forgo this. This we shall do well to present to his Majesty.

I offer this in the general, thinking the particulars fitting for Committees.
What I may now say, or shall then, I submit to better Judgments.

Sr. Thomas VVentworth's Speech, March 22. 1627.
MAy this days resolution be as happy, as I conceive the Proposition (which
now moves me to rise) to be seasonable and necessary; for which we shall either
look upon the King or his people. It did never more behove this great Physician
the Parliament to affect a true consent amongst the parts, then now. This
debate carries with it a double aspect, toward the Sovereigne, toward the
Subject: though both be innocent, yet both are injured, both to be cured. In
the representation of Injuries I shall crave your attention; in the Cure I
shall beseech your equal cares and better judgments.

Surely, in the greatest humility I speak it, these illegal ways are
punishments and marks of indignation; the raising of Levies strengthened by
Commission with unheard of instructions, the billetting of Soldiers by the
Lieutenants and Deputy Lieutenants, have been as if they could have persuaded
Christian Princes, nay worlds, the right of Empire had been to take away by
strong hand, and they have endeavored (as far as was possible for them) to
do it.

This has not been done by the King, (under the pleasing shade of whose Crown
I hope we shall ever gather the fruits of Justice) but by Projectours: They
have pretended the Prerogative of the King beyond the just proportion, which
makes the sweet harmony of the whole; They have rent from us the light of our
eyes, enforced a company of guests worse then the Ordinaries of France,
vitiated our wives and daughters before our faces, brought the Crown to greater
want then ever by anticipating the revenew: and can the Shepherd be thus
smitten, and the Sheep no scattered? They have introduced a Privy Council,
ravishing at once the spears of all ancient government, imprisoning us without
bank or bond: They have taken from us -- what shall I say? (indeed what have
they left us?) all means of supplying the King, and ingratiating our selves
with him, taken up the roots of all Propriety, which if it be not seasonably
set into the ground by his Majesty's own hand, we shall have instead of
Beauty, Baldness.

To the making of them whole I shall apply my self, and propound a remedy to
all these diseases. By one and the same thing has King and people been hurt,
and by the same must they be cured; by vindicating -- what? new things? no, our
ancient, sober and vital Liberties by reinforcing the ancient Laws made by our
Ancestors; by setting such a Character on them, as no licencious spirit shall
dare to enter upon them. And shall we think this is a way to break a
Parliament? no, our desires are modest and just; I speak truly both for the
interest of King and people. If we enjoy not these, it will be impossible to
relieve him: therefore let us never fear that they shall not be accepted by his
Goodness.

Therefore I shall descend to my Motion consisting of four parts; two of which
have relation to our Persons, two to the propriety of our Goods. For our
Persons, the freedom of them, first from imprisonment, secondly from
employment abroad, contrary to the ancient Customs. For our Goods, that no
levies may be made but by Parliament: secondly, no billetting of soldiers.

It is most necessary that these be resolved, that the Subject may be secured
in both. For the manner, in the second place, it will be fit to determine it by
a grand Committee.

The Speech and Argument of Mr. Creswell of Lincolne's Inn, one of the Members
of the Commons House of Parliament, concerning the Subjects grievance by the
late Imprisonment of their persons without any declaration of the Cause.
I Stand up to speak somewhat concerning the point of the Subjects grievance by
imprisonment of their persons without any declaration of the cause, contrary
unto, and in derogation of the fundamental Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom.

I think I am one of the puisnes of our profession, which are of the Members of
this House; but howsoever sure I am that in respect of my own inabilities I am
the puisne of all the whole House: therefore according to the usual course of
Students in our profession, I (as the puisne) speak first in time, because I
can speak least in matter.

In pursuance of which course I shall rather put the case then argue it: and
therefore I shall humbly desire first of all, of this honorable House in
general, that the goodness of the cause may receive no prejudice by the
weakness of my Argument; and next of all, of my Masters here of the same
profession in particular, that they by their learned judgments will supply the
great defects I shall discover by declaring of my unlearned opinion.

Before I speak of the Question, give me leave, as an entrance thereunto, to
speak first of the Occasion.

You shall know Justice is the life and the heart blood of the Commonwealth;
and if the Commonwealth bleed in the Master-vein, all the Balm in Gilead is
but in vain to preserve this our body of Policy from ruin and destruction.
Justice is both Columna and Corona reipublicae, she is both Column and the
Pillar, the Crown and the glory of the Commonwealth. This is made good in
Scripture by the judgment of Solomon, the wisest King that ever reigned on
earth. For first, she is the Pillar; for the says that by Justice the Throne
shall be established: Secondly, she is the Crown; for the says that by Justice
a Nation is exalted.

Our Laws, which are the rules of this Justice, they are the ne plus ultra to
both the King and the Subject: and as they are the Hercules Pillar, so are they
the pillar to every Hercules, to every Prince, which he must not pass.

Give me leave to resemble her to Nebuchadnezzars tree: for she is so great,
that she does shade not only the Palace of the King, and the house of the
Nobles, but does also shelter the Cottage of the poorest beggar.

Wherefore if either now the blasts of indignation, or the unresistable
violatour of laws Necessity has so bruised any of the branches of this Tree,
that either our persons, or goods or prossessions have not the same shelter as
before; yet let us not therefore neglect the Root of this great Tree, but
rather with all our possible endeavor and unfeigned duty, both apply fresh
and fertile mould unto it, and also water it even with our own tears, that so
these bruised Branches may be recovered, and the whole Tree again prosper and
flourish. For this I have learned from an ancient Father of the Church, that
though preces Regum sunt armatae, yet arma subditorum are but only preces et
lachrymae.

I know well that Cor Regis inscrutabile; and that Kings, although they are but
men before God, yet are they Gods before men. And therefore to my gracious and
dread Sovereign, (whose virtues are true qualities ingenerate both in his
judgment and nature) let my arm be cut off, nay, let my soul not live that
day, that I shall dare to lift up my arm to touch that forbidden fruit, those
flowers of his princely Crown and Diadem.

But yet our Eden, in this garden of the Commonwealth, as there are the
flowers of the Sun, which are so glorious that they are to be handled only by
royal Majesty; so are there also some Daisies and wholesome herbs, which every
common hand that lives and labors in this garden may pick and gather up, and
take comfort and repose in them. Amongst all which this oculus diei, this bona
libertas is one, and the chief one.

Thus much in all humbleness I presume to speak for the occasion. I will now
descend to the Question: wherein I hold, (with all dutiful submission to
better Judgments) that these Acts of power in imprisoning and confining of his
Majesty's Subjects in such manner, without any declaration of the cause, are
against the fundamental Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom.

And for these reasons thus briefly drawn, I conclude.

1. The first from the great favor which the Law does give unto, and the great
care which it has ever taken of the liberty and safety of this Kingdom.

I should not need to take the question in pieces, nor handle it in parts
dividedly, but as one entire, because I hold no other difference between
imprisonment and confinement then only this, that one has a less and
streighter, the other a greater and larger Prison. And this word Confinement
not being to be found in any one case of our law, if therefore it is become the
language of State, it is too difficult for me to define.

To proceed therefore in maintenace of my first reason; I find our Law does so
much favor the Subjects liberty of his Person, that the body of a man was not
liable to be arrested or imprisoned for any other cause at the Common Law, but
for force, and things done against the peace. For the Common Law (being the
preserver of the land) so abhors force, that those that commit it she
accounts her capital enemies, and therefore did subject their bodies to
imprisonment. But by the statute of Marlebridge Cap. 24. which was made 35.
Hen. 3. who was the eighth King from the Conquest, because Bailiffs would not
render accounts to their Lords, it was enacted, that their bodies should be
attached: And afterward by the statute 23. Edw. 3.17 who was the 11 King after
the Conquest, because men made no Conscience to pay their debts, it was
enacted, that their bodies should likewise be attached. But before those
statutes no many body was subject to be taken or imprisoned otherwise then as
aforesaid. Whereby it is evident how much the Common Law favored the Liberty
of the Subject and protected his body form imprisonment.

I will enforce the reason futher by a Rule in law, and some cases in Law upon
that Rule.

The Rule is this, That Corporalis injuria non recipit aestimationem? fuluro:
So as if the question be not for a wrong done to the person, the Law will not
compel him to sustain it, and afterward except a remedy, for the Law holds no
damage a sufficient recompense for a wrong which is corporal.

The cases in Law to prove this rule shall be these.

If one menace me in my goods, or that he will burn the evidence of my land,
which he has in his custody, unless I make unto him a Bond, there I cannot
avoid the Bond by pleading of this menace. But if he restrains my person, or
threatens me with battery, or with burning my house, which is a protection for
my person, or with burning an instrument of manumission* which is an evidence
of my enfranchisement; upon these menaces these or dares I shall avoid the bond
by plea.

So if a Trespassour drives my beast over another Man's ground, and I pursue to
rescue it, there I am a Trespassour to him on whose ground I am. But if a man
assault my person, and I for my safety fly over into another man's ground,
there I am no Trespassour to him, for Quod quis in tuitione sui corporis
fecerit, jure id fecisse existimatur.

Nay, which is more, the Common Law did favor the Liberty not only of Freemen,
but even of the persons of Bondmen and Villains, who have no right of propriety
either in lands or goods as Freemen have: And therefore by the Law the Lord
could not maim his Villain nay, if the Lord commanded another to beat his
Villain, and he did it, the Villain should have his action of Battery against
him for it.

If the Lord made a Lease for years to his Villain, if he did plead with his
Villain, if he tendered his Villain to be Champion for him in a Writ of Right,
any of those acts, and many other, which I omit, were in Law infranchisements,
and made these Villains Freemen. Nay in a suite brought against one, if he by
Attorney will plead that he is a Villain, the Law is so careful of Freedom,
that it dissallowes this plea by Attorney, but he must do it propria persona,
because it binds his Posterity and blood to the Villains also. And thus much in
the general for my first reason.

2. My next reason is drawn by an Argument a majori ad minus: I frame it thus;
If the King have no absolute power over our Lands or Goods, then a fortiori not
over our Persons, to imprison them without declaring the cause, for our Persons
are much more worth then either Lands or Goods; which is proved by what I have
said already, and Christ himself makes it clear where he says, An non est
corpus supra vestimentum, Is not the Body more worth then Raiment? where the
Canonists say that Vestimentum comprehends all outward things which are not
in the same degree with that which is corporal. And our Law makes it also
plain; for if a Villain purchase Frank-land, this makes it Villain-land
according to the nature of his person; but it holds not e converso, Frank-land
shall not free the person. Now that the King has no absolute power either over
our Lands or Goods, I will only at this time but put a case or two: for
without proof of the Premises my Conclusion would not follow.

First for Land; The King cannot by his Letters pattents make the son of an
Alien heir to his father, nor to any other, for he cannot disinherit the right
heir, says the book, nor do no prejudice to the Lord of his Escheat. The King
by his Prerogative shall pay no toll for things bought in Fairs and Markets:
but a custom for paying toll to go over the soil and free-holds of another
shall bind the King, for this touches the inheritance of the Subject; and
therefore the King shall not have so much as a way over his lands without
paying; and if not a way, then certainly not the land it self.

Next for Goods; If a man has a Jewel in gage for ten pound, etc. and is
attainted for Treason, the King shall not have this Jewel, if he pays not the
ten pound. So if Cattle be distreined, and the owner of them afterward be
attainted, yet the King shall not have them until he have satisfied that for
which they were distreined. And if in these Cases, where the owners of the
goods are such capital offenders, the King cannot have them; much less shall
he have them when the owner is innocent, and no offendour.

Nay, I may well say that almost every leaf and page of all the volumes of our
Common Law prove this right of propriety, this distinction of meum and tuum
as well between King and Subject, as one Subject and another: and therefore my
Conclusion follows, that if the Prerogative extend not neither to Lands nor to
Goods, then a fortiori not to the Person, which is more worth then either lands
or goods, as I said. And yet I agree that by the very law of Nature service of
the Person of the Subject is due to his Sovereign; but this must be in such
things which are not against the law of Nature: but to have the body imprisoned
without any cause declared, and so to become in bondage, I am sure is contrary
unto and against the law of Nature, and therefore not to be enforced by the
Sovereign upon his Subjects.

3. My next reason is drawn ab inutili and incommodo. For the Statute de
frangentibus prisonam made 1 E. 2. is, quod nullus qui prisonam fregerit,
subeat judicium vitae vel membrorum pro fractione prisonae tantum, nisi causa
pro qua captus imprisonetur tale Iudicium requirat. Whence this Conclusion is
clearly gathered, That if a man be committed to prison without declaring what
cause, and then if either Malefactor do break the prison, or the Jailer suffer
him to escape, albeit the prisoner so escaping had committed Crimen laesae
majestatis, yet neither the Jailer nor any other that procured his escape, by
the Law suffer any corporal punishment for setting him at large; which, if
admitted, might prove in consequence a matter of great danger to the
Commonwealth.

4. My next reason is drawn ab Regis honor, from that great honor the Law
does attribute unto sovereign Majesty: and therefore the Rule of Law is, that
Solum Rex hoc non potest facere, quod non potest just agere. And therefore if
a Subject has the donation, and the King the presentation to a Church,
whereunto the King presents without the Subjects nomination, here the quare
impedit lies against the Incumbent, and the King is in Law no disturber.

And Hussy chief Justice in 1 H. 7. fol. 4. says that Sir John Markham told
King Edw. 4. he could not arrest a man either for treason or felony, as a
Subject might, because that if the King did wrong, the party could not have his
Action against him.

What is the reason that an Action of false imprisonment lies against the
Sheriff, if he does not return the Kings Writ, by which he has taken the body
of the Subject, but this, because the Writ does breviter enarrare causam
captionis, (which if it does not, it shall abate, and is void in Law) and being
returned, the party when he appears may know what to answer, and the Court upon
what to judge? And if the Kings Writ under his great Seal cannot imprison the
Subject, unless it contains the cause, shall then the Kings warrant otherwise
do it without containing the cause, that his Judges upon return thereof may
likewise judge of the same either to remain, or judge the party imprisoned?

I should argue this point more closely upon the statute of Magnae Charta 29.
quod nullus liber homo imprisonetur; the statute of West. 1. cap. 15. for
letting persons to bail; and the Judgments lately given in the Kings Bench:
but the later of these statutes referring having been by that honorable Gent.
(to whom the Professors of the Law both in this and all succeding ages, are,
and will be much bound) already expounded unto us, and that also fortified by
those many contemporary Expositions and Judgments by him learnedly cited, and
there being many learned Lawyers here, whose time I will not waste, who were
present, and some of them perhaps of council in the late Cause adjudged in the
Kings Bench, where you (to whose person I now speak) do well know I was absent,
being then of council in a cause in another Court, and my practice being in the
Country, far remote from the treasure of Antiquity, and Records conducing to
the clearing of this point; Therefore the narrowness of my understanding
commends unto me sober ignorance, rather then presumptuous knowledge, and also
commands me no further to trouble your Patience*

But I will conclude with that which I find reported of Sir John Davis, who was
the Kings Sergeant, and so, by the duty of his place, would no doubt maintain
to his uttermost the Prerogatives of the King his royal Master; and yet it was
by him thus said in those Reports of his upon the case of Tavistry Customs,
That the Kings of England always have had a Monarchy Royal and not a Monarchy
Seignorall: where under the first (says he) the Subjects are Freemen, and
have propriety in their goods, and freehold, and inheritance in their Lands;
but under the later they are as Villains and Slaves, and have propriety in
nothing. And therefore (says he) when a Royal Monarch makes a new Conquest,
yet if he receives any of his Nations ancient Inhabitants into his protection,
they and their heirs after them shall enjoy their Lands and Liberties according
to the Law. And there he voucheth this President and Judgment following given
before William the Conqueror himself, viz.

That one Sherborn, at the time of the Conquest being owner of a Castle and
lands in Norfolk, the Conqueror gave the same to one Warren a Norman; and
Sherborn dying, the Heir clayming the same by descent according to the Law, it
was before the Conqueror himself adjudged for the Heir, and that the gift
thereof by the Conqueror was void.

If then it were thus in the Conquerour's time, and by his own sentence and
judgment, and has so continued in all the successions of our Kings ever
since, what doubt need we have, but that his most excellent Majesty upon our
humble petition prostrated at his feet, (which, as was well said, is the best
passage to his heart) will vouchsafe unto us our ancient Liberties and
Birthrights, with a through reformation of this and other just grievances. And
so I humbly crave pardon of this honorable House, that I have made a short
Lesson long.

Sir Benjamin Ruddier's Speech, March 22. 1627.
Mr. Speaker,
OF the mischiefs that have lately fallen upon us by the late distractions,
here is every man sensible: and that may ensue the like (which God forbid) we
may easily see, and too late repent. The eyes of Christendom are upon us; and
as we speed here, so go the Fortunes of our selves, our Friends, and of our
Religion. That the Dangers were not real, but pretended, we all heartily wish,
but feel the contrary. That divisions have weakened our party, and our attempts;
united the two greatest Princes of Christendom against us, whom we have
provoked. That the State is desperately diseased, and this Parliament the way
that it may yet be recovered, if sovereign and proper remedies be speedily
applied: 1. To trust the King, whose Kingly nature is to yield: it prevails. 2.
To supply the King, and that without condition, which is fuel of Jealousy. 3.
To present our grievances to his Majesty, personal and real, humbly,
moderately, and briefly. 4. To do all this speedily and in order, whereby the
King may be strengthened, the Kingdom recovered, our Allies relieved, and the
Laws and Liberties of the Subject preserved in a legal propriety; for he that
is not master of his goods, dwells not at home.


Sir Robert Philips his Speech, March 22. 1627.
Mr. Speaker,
I Read of a custom amongst the old Romans, that once every year they had a
solemn Feast for their Slaves, at which they had liberty without exception to
speak what they would (thereby to ease their afflicted minds) which being
finished, they severally returned to their former Servitude.

This may, with some resemblance and distinction, well set forth our present
state, where now, after the revolution of some time, and grievous sufferance of
many violent oppressions, we have (as those Slaves had) a day of liberty of
speech, but shall not (I trust) be hereafter slaves, for we are free: yet what
new illegal proceedings our states and persons have suffered under, my heart
yearns to think, my tongue falters to utter. They have been well represented by
diverse worthy Gentlemen before me; yet one, and the maine (as I conceive) has
not been touched, which is our Religion: Religion, Mr. Speaker, made vendible
by Commission, and men for pecuniary annual rates dispensed withal, whereby
Papists may without fear of Law practice Idolatry.

For the Oppressions under which we groan, I draw them into two heads: Acts of
Power against Law, and Judgments of Law against our Liberty.

Of the first sort are, strange instructions, violent exactions of money
thereupon, imprisonment of the persons of such who (to deliver over to
posterity the liberty they have received from their Forefathers, and lawfully
were in possession of) refused so to lend; and this aggravated by reason of the
remediless continuance and length thereof: and chiefly the strange, vast, and
unlimited power of our Lieutenants and their Deputies, in billetting of
Soldiers, in making rates, in granting warrants for taxes as their discretions
shall guide them; and all against the Law.

These last are the most insupportable burdens that at this present afflict
our poor Country, and the most cruel oppression that ever yet the Kingdom of
England endured. These upstart Lieutenants (of whom perhaps in some cases and
times there may be good use, being regulated by Law) are the worst of
grievances, and the most forward and zealous executioners of those violent and
unlawful courses which have been commended unto them. Of whose proceedings,
and for the qualifying of whose unruly power, it is more then time to consult
and determine.

Judgments of Law against our Liberty have been three, each latter stepping
forwarder then the former upon the right of the Subject, aiming in the end to
tread and trample under foot our Law, and that in the form of Law.

The first was the Judgment of the Post-nati, whereby a Nation, which I
heartily love for their singular zeal in our Religion, and their spirit to
preserve our Liberties far beyond many of us, is made capable in any the like
favors, privileges and immunities as our selves enjoy; and this specially
argued in the Exchequer Chamber by all the Judges of England. The second was
the Judgment upon the impositions in the Exchequer Court by the Barons, which
has been the source and fountain of many bitter waters of affliction unto our
Merchants. The third was that fatal late Judgment against the Liberty of the
Subject imprisoned by the King, argued and pronounced but by one alone.

I can live although another without title be put to live with me; nay, I can
live although I pay excises and impositions more then I do: but to have my
Liberty, which is the soul of my life, taken from me by power, and to have my
body pent up in a jail without remedy by Law, and to be so adjudged, Oh
improvident Ancestors! Oh unwise Forefathers! to be so curious in providing
for the quiet possession of our Laws, and the Liberties of Parliament, and to
neglect our Persons and Bodies, and to let them ly in prison, and that durante
b^neplacito, remediless. If this be Law, what do we talk of Liberties? why do
we trouble our selves with the dispute of Law, franchises, propriety of goods,
and the like? What may any man call his, if not Liberty?

I am weary in treading these ways, and conclude to have a select Committee
deputed to frame a Petition to his Majesty for redress of these things; which
being read, examined and approved by the House, may be delivered to the King;
of whose gracious answer we have no cause to doubt, our desires being so
reasonable, our intentions so loyal, and the manner so humble. Neither need we
fear this to be the Critical Parliament (as was insinuated) or this a way to
distraction; but assure our selves of a happy issue. Then shall the King (as
he calls us his great Council) find us his true Council, and own us his good
Council. Which God grant, etc.

(...) The Kings Propositions, March 28, 1628.
1. TO furnish, man and victual 30. ships, to guard the Narrow seas and along
the Coasts. 2. To set out 10. other ships for the preservation of the Elve and
the Baltic sea. 3. To set out 10. other ships for the relief of the Town of
Rochel. 4. To leavy, arm, cloth, victual, pay and transport an army of 1000.
horse and 10000. foot for foreign service. 5. To pay and supply 6000. men for
the assistance of the King of Denmark. 6. To supply the stores of the Office of
the Ordinance. 7. To supply the stores of the Navy. 8. To build 20. ships
yearly for the increase of the Navy. 9. To repair the Forts within the Land.
10. To pay the Arriers of the Office of the Ordinance. 11. To pay the Arriers
of the Victuallers Office. 12. To pay the Arriers of the Treasurer of the Navy.
13. To pay the Arriers due for the freight of diverse Merchants ships employed
in his Majesty's service. 14. To provide a Magazine of Victuals for Land and
Sea-service.
Three grand Questions.
1. NO Freeman ought to be committed, or detained in prison, or otherwise
restrained, by the command of the King, of the Privy Council, or any else,
unless some cause of the commitment, detainment, or restraint be expressed,
for which by law he ought to be committed, detained, or restrained. 2. A Writ
of habeas corpus may not be denied, but ought to be granted to every man that
is committed, or detained in prison, or otherwise restrained, though it be by
the command of the King, Privy Council, or any other, he praying the same. 3.
If a Freeman be committed, or detained in prison, or otherwise restrained by
the command of the King, Privy Council, or any other, unless the cause of the
commitment, detainment, or restraint be expressed, for which by Law he ought to
be committed, detained or restrained, and the same be returned upon habeas
corpus granted for the said party, that then he ought to be delivered, or
bailed.
Sir John Coke his Speech at a Conference between the Lords and Commons about
the Petition to the King against Recusants.
My Lords,
WE are sent to attend this Conference from the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses
of the House of Commons. And first we acknowledge all due honor both unto the
reverend Fathers of the Church, and to you, noble Lords, in that ye have shined
before us as worthy lights in the encouragement and maintenance of true
Religion. It is the true support of all your dignities and honors. And this
forwardness of yours is the more remarkable, when that viperous generation (as
your Lordships justly style them) do at ease with tooth and nail assay to rend
the bowels of their Mother. For give me leave to tell you what I know, that
they now both vaunt at home, and write to their friends abroad, they hope all
will be well, and doubt not to prevail, and to win ground upon us.

And a little to awake the zeal and care of our learned and grave Fathers, it
is fit that they take notice of that Hierarchy which is already established in
competition with their Lordships: for they have a Bishop consecrated by the
Pope; this Bishop has his subalternate Officers of all kinds, as
Vicars-generall, Archdeacons, rural Deans, Apparatours, and such like.
Neither are those nominall or titular Officers alone, but they all execute
their Jurisdictions, and make their ordinary Visitations through the Kingdom,
keep Courts, and determine Ecclesiastical causes, and (which is an argument of
more consequence) they keep ordinary intelligence by their Agents in Rome, and
hold correspondence with the Nuntioes and Cardinals both at Bruxells and in
France.

Neither are the Seculars alone grown to this height, but the Regulars are more
active and dangerous, and have taken deep root; they have already planted their
Societies and Colleges of both Sexes, they have settled Revenues, Houses,
Libraries, Vestments, and all other necessary provisions to travel or stay at
home; nay, even at this time they intend to hold a concurrent Assembly with
this Parliament.

But now since his sacred Majesty has extended his royal arm, and since the
Lords of his Council have by their authority caused this nest of Wasps to be
dug out of the earth, and their Convocations to be scattered, and since your
Lordships join in courage and resolution, at least to reduce this People to
their lawful restraint, that they may do no more hurt; we conceive great hope
and comfort, that the almighty God will from henceforth prosper our endeavors
both at home and abroad.

But now, my Lords, to come to the chief errand of this our meeting, which is
to make known to you the approbation of our House of that Petition to his
Majesty, wherein you were pleased to request our concurrence.

The House has taken it into serious consideration, and from the beginning to
the end approve of every word, and much commend your happy pen: only we are
required to present unto you a few additions, whereby we conceive the Petition
may be made more agreeable to the Statutes, which are desired to be put in
execution, and to a former Petition granted by his Majesty, recorded in both
Houses, confirmed under the Broad Seal of England, and published in all the
Courts of our ordinary Justice. But these things we propound not as our
Resolutions, or as matters to raise debate or dispute, but commend them only as
our Advise and desire; being ready notwithstanding to join with your Lordships
in the Petition as now it is, if your Lordships shall not find this reason to
be of weight.

These additions were but few, and were approved of by the Lords, and inserted
in the Petition the 29. March 1628.

The Petition of both Houses to his Majesty concerning Recusants, March 31.
1628.
WE your Majesty's most loyal and obedient Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal and Commons in Parliament assembled, having to our singular comfort
obtained your Majesty's pious and gracious assent for a public Fast, to
appease the wrath of almighty God kindled against us, and to prevent those
grievous Judgments which do apparently press upon us; do in all humility
present unto your Sacred Majesty all possible thanks for the same.

And because the public and visible Sins of the Kingdom are the undoubted
Causes of those visible Evils that are fallen upon us, amongst which sins (as
is apparent by the Word of God) Idolatry and Superstition are the most heinous
and crying sins; to the end that we may constantly hope for the blessing of God
to descend upon this our public Humiliation, by abandoning those sins which
do make a wall of separation betwixt God and us, 1. We most humbly and
ardently beg at the hands of your Sacred Majesty, that your Majesty will be
pleased to give continual life and motion to all those Laws that stand in
force against Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and all that have taken Orders by
authority of the Sea of Rome, by exacting a more due and serious execution of
the same: amongst which number, those that have highly abused your Majesty's
Clemency, by returning into the Kingdom after their Banishment, contrary to
your Highness express Proclamation, we humbly desire may be left to the
severity of your Laws, without admitting any mediation or intercession for
them; and that such of your Majesty's unsound and ill-affected Subjects as do
receive, harbor or conceal any of that viperous generation, may without
delays suffer such penalties and punishments as the Laws most justly impose
upon them. 2. That your Majesty would be pleased to command a secure and
straight watch to be kept in and over your Majesty's Ports and Havens, and to
commit the care and charge of searching of ships for this discovery, and
apprehension as well of Jesuits and Seminary Priests brought in, as of children
and young Students sent over beyond the Seas, to suck in the poison of
Rebellion and Superstition, unto men of approved Fidelity and Religion; and
such as shall be convicted to have connived or combined in the bringing in of
the one, or conveying out of the other, that the Laws may pass upon them with
speedy execution. 3. That considering those dreadful dangers (never to be
forgotten) which did involve your Majesty's Sacred Person, and the whole
representative Body of your Majesty's Kingdom, plotted and framed by the free
and common access of Popish Recusants to the city of London, and to your
Majesty's Court, your Majesty would be graciously pleased to give speedy
command for the present putting in practice those Laws that prohibit all
Popish Recusants to come to the Court, or within ten miles of the City of
London, as also those Law that confine them to the distance of five miles from
their dwelling houses; and that such bypast licenses, not warranted by law, as
have been granted unto them for their repair to the city of London, may be
discharged and annulled. 4. That whereas it is more then probably conceived,
that infinite sums of money have within these two or three years last past
been exacted out of the Recusants within the Kingdom, by color of
Composition, and small proportion of the same returned into your Majesty's
Coffers, not only to the sudden enriching of private persons, but also to the
imboldning of the Romish Recusants to entertain Massing Priests into their
private houses, and to exercise all the mimick Rites of their gross
Superstition without fear of control, amounting (as by their daily practice
and ostentation we may conceive) to the nature of a concealed Toleration; your
Majesty would be graciously pleased to receive this particular more nearly into
your Princely wisdom and consideration, to dissolve this Mystery of Iniquity,
patch't up of colorable Licenses, Contracts or Preconveyances, being but masks
on the one part of fraud to deceive your Majesty, and stales on the other side
for private men to accomplish their corrupt ends. 5. That as the persons of
Ambassadors from foreign Princes and their houses be free for exercise of
their own Religion; so their houses may not be made free Chappells and
Sanctuaries for your Majesty's Subjects Popishly affected to hear Mass, and
to participate in all other Rites and Ceremonies of that Superstition, to the
great offense of almighty God, and scandal of your Majesty's people loyally
and religiously affected; That either the concourse of Recusants to such places
may be restrained, or at least such a vigilant watch set upon them at their
return from those places, as they may be apprehended, and severely proceeded
withal, ut qui pala^ in luce peccant, in luce puniantur. 6. That no place of
authority or command within any the Counties of this your Majesty's Kingdom,
or in any ships of your Majesty's, or which shall be employed in your service,
be committed to Popish Recusants, or to Non-communicants by the space of a year
past, or to any such persons as, according to direction of former Acts of
State, are justly to be suspected; as the place and authority of Lords
Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, Justices of Peace, of Captains, or other
Officers or Ministers mentioned in the Statute made in the third year of the
reign of your Father of blessed memory: and that such as by connivance have
crept into such places, may by your Majesty's royal Command be discharged of
the same. 7. That all your Majesty's Justices, Judges, and Ministers of
Justice, unto whose care and trust Execution, which is the life of your
Majesty's Laws, is committed, may by your Majesty's Proclamation not only be
commanded to put in speedy execution those Laws that stand in force against
Jesuits, Priests, Seminaries, and Popish Recusants; but that your Majesty would
be further pleased to command the said Judges and Justices of Assize, to give a
true and strict account of their proceedings at their return out of their
Circuits, to the Lord Keeper, and by the Lord Keeper to be presented to your
Majesty. 8 And for a fair and clear eradication of all Popery for the future,
and for the breeding and nursing up of an holy generation, and a peculiar
people sanctified to the true worship of almighty God, That until a
provisionall Law may be made, for the trayning and educating of the Children of
Popish Recusants in the grounds and principles of our holy Religion, (which we
conceive will be of more power and force to unite your people unto your Majesty
in fastness of Love, Religion, and loyal Obedience, then all pecuniary mulcts
and penalties that can possibly be devised) your Majesty will be pleased to
take it into your Princely care and consideration.


These our humble Petitions, proceeding from hearts and affections loyally and
religiously devoted to God, and your Majesty's service, and to the safety of
your Majesty's Sacred Person, we most zealously present to your Princely
Wisdom, craving your Majesty's cheerful and gracious approbation.

The King's Answer to the Petition against Recusants, March 31. 1628.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Do very well approve the method of your proceeding, a Jove principium,
hoping that the rest of your Consultations will succeed the happier. And I like
the preamble of my Lord Keeper, otherwise I should a little have suspected that
you thought me not so careful of Religion as I have been and ever shall be,
wherein I am as forward as you can desire.

As for the Petition, I answer, first in general, that I like it well, and
will use those, as well as all other means, for the maintenance and propagation
of that Religion wherein I have lived, and do resolve to die. But for the
particulars, you shall receive a more full answer hereafter.

And now I will only add this, that as we pray to God to help us, so we must
help our selves; for we can have no assurance of his assistance, if we do ly in
bed and only pray, without using other means. And therefore I must remember you
that if we do not make provision speedily, we shall not be able to put one Ship
to sea this year.

Verbum sapienti satis est.

The Answer to the same Petition by the Lord Keeper Coventrey.
TO the first point his Majesty answers, That he will accor^ding to your
desire give both life and motion to the Laws tha^ stand in force against
Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and all that have taken Orders by authority of the
Sea of Rome: and to that end his Ma^jesty will give strict order to all his
Ministers for the discovering and apprehending of them, and so leave them being
apprehended to the trial of the Law; and in case after trial there shall be
cause to respite the execution of any of them, yet they shall be committed,
according to the example of best times, to the Castle of Westbitch, and there
be safely kept from exercising their functions, or spreading their
Superstitious and dangerous Doctrine: and for the receivers and abettors they
shall be left to the Law.

To the second, His Majesty grants all that is desired in this Article, and
to this end will give order to the Lord Treasurer, Lord high Admiral, and Lord
Warden of the Cinque Ports, that in their several places they be careful to
see this Article fully executed, giving strict charge to all such as have place
or authority under them, to use all diligence herein: and his Majesty requires
them, and all other his Officers and Ministers, to have a vigilant eye upon
such as dwell in dangerous places of advantage or opportunity for receiving or
transporting any such as are here mentioned: and his Majesty will take it for
good service, if any will give knowledge of such as have connived or combined,
or shall connive or combine, as is mentioned in this Article, that Justice may
be strictly done upon them.

To the third, His Majesty will take order to restrain the recourse of
Recusants to the Court; and also for the other points of this Article, his
Majesty is well pleased that the Laws be duly executed, and that all unlawful
Licenses be annulled and discharged.

To the fourth, His Majesty is most willing to punish for the time past, and
prevent for the future any the deceits and abuses mentioned in this Article,
and will account it a good service in any that will inform himself, his Privy
Council, Officers of his Revenue, Judges, or Council learned, of any thing
that may reveal this Mystery of Iniquity: and his Majesty does strictly charge
and command every of them to whom such information is made, that they suffer
not the same to die, but do their utmost endeavor to effect a clear discovery,
and bring the Offenders to punishment: and to the intent that no concealed
toleration may be effected, his Majesty leaves the Laws to their course.

To the fifth, His Majesty is pleased to prohibit and restrain the coming and
resort to the house of Ambassadors, and will command a vigilant watch to be
set for their taking and punishing as is desired.

To the sixth, He is persuaded that this Article is already observed with good
care; nevertheless for the avoiding as much as may be errors and escapes in
that kind, his Majesty will give order to the Lord Keeper, that the next Term
he call unto him all the Judges, and take information from them of the state of
their several Circuits; if any such as are mentioned in this Article be in the
Commission for Peace, that reformation may be made thereof: and will likewise
give order to the Lord Admiral, and to such persons to whom it shall
appertain, to make diligent enquiry, and certify to his Majesty if any such be
in place of authority and command in his ships or service.

To the seventh, His Majesty does fully grant it.

To the eighth, His Majesty does well approve it as a matter of necessary
consideration; and the Parliament now sitting, he recommendeth to both Houses
the preparation of a fitting Law to that effect: and his Majesty does further
declare, that the mildness that has been used toward them of the Popish
Religion, has been upon hope that foreign Princes thereby might be induced to
use moderation toward their Subjects of the Reformed Religion; but not finding
that good effect which was expected, his Majesty resolves (unless he shall
very speedily see better fruit) to add a further degree of severity to that
which is in this Petition desired.

Sir Edward Coke's Speech, March 25. upon a Question of Law in point of the
Judgment given in the Kings Bench Mich. 3. Caroli, Viz. That a Prisoner
detained by Committment per special. mandat. Regis, without expressing a Cause,
is not bailable; wherein he held negatively, and spoke as follows.
IT is true that the Kings Prerogative is a part of the Law of this Kingdom,
and a supreme part, for the Prerogative is highly tendered and respected of the
Law; yet it has bounds set unto it by the Laws of England. But some worthy
Members of this House have spoken of foreign States, which I conceive to be a
foreign Speech, and not able to weaken the Side I shall maintain.

That Master Attorney may have something to answer unto, I will speak without
taking another day to the body of the Cause, yet keeping something in store for
another time. I have not my Vade mecum here, yet I will endeavor to recite my
Ancestors truly. I shall begin with old Authority, for Errorem ad sua
principia refer, est refellere.

The ground of this Error was the Statute of Westminster. 1 cap. 15. which says,
that those are not repleviable who are committed for the death of a man, or by
the commandment of the King or his Justices for the Forest (for so it was
cited;) and Stamford 72. expounding hereof, the commandment of the King to be
the commandment of the Kings mouth, or of his Council: But it is clear that by
praeceptum is understood the commandment of the Justices of the Kings Bench and
Common Pleas; and this is contemporanea expositio, quae est fortissima in lege.

To this purpose vide Westminster. 1. cap. 9. the book of 2. R. 2. item cap. 20. de
malefactoribus in parc. the book of 8 Hen. 4.5. item 25.26.29. cap. ejusdem
statuti. whereby it may appear that the commandment here spoken of to be the
commandment of the King, is his commandment by his Judges, Praeceptum Domini
Regis in Curia, non in Camera. So it is likewise taken 1. R. 2. cap. 12. in a
Statute made in the next Kings reign, and expressly in Dyer fol. 162.. 50. and
fol. 192.. 24. Shall I further prove it by matter of record? Fac hoc and vives.
it is 18. E. 3. Rot. 33. coram Rege, John Bilston's Case; who being committed
and detained in prison by commandment of the King, was discharged by Habeas
corpus, eo quod Breve Domini Regis non fuit sufficiens causa.

All the Acts of Parliament in title of accusation are direct to the point, and
also the 16. Hen. 6. Brook and Littleton, 2.1. monstrans de fait 182 per Cur.
The King cannot command a man to be arrested in his presence: the King can
arrest no man, because there is no remedy against him. 1. Hen. 7.4. likewise
praedict. stat. cap. 18. the Kings pleasure is not binding without the assent
of the Realm.

I never read any opinion against what I have said, but that of Stamford,
mistaken (as you see) in the ground: yet I say not that a man may not be
committed without precise showing the cause in particular; for it is sufficient
if the cause in general be showed, as for Treason, etc. 1. E. 2. stat. de
frangend. prison. nullus habeat judicium, etc. there the cause of imprisonment
must be known, else the Statute will be of little force; the words thereof do
plainly demonstrate the intent of the Statute to be accordingly.

I will conclude with the highest authority, that is, 25. chap. of the Acts of
the Apostles, the last verse, where Saint Paul says, It is against reason to
send a man to prison without showing a Cause.

Thus, Master Attorney, according to the rules of Physic, I have given you a
Preparative, which does precede a Purge. I have much more in store.

The substance of the King's Speech, upon the relating of the proceedings of
the Parliament to him by the Counselors of the Commons House of Parliament, 4.
April. 1628.
HIs Majesty upon the Report made expressed great contentment that it gave
him, not valuing the money given comparable to the hearts showed in the way of
the gift: for although his great Occasions of State did require more money then
at this time was given; yet now he made account he could not lack, since he had
their loves, and that this day he thought he had gained more reputation in
Christendom, then if he had won many battails: saying further (according to
his Speech the first day of the Parliament, that they might easily make him in
love with Parliaments) now he professed he was so, and that we should find the
fruits of it by his calling us often together. And to secure further fears,
and create future confidence, he assures us that we shall enjoy as great
immunity and freedom in his time, as ever we possessed or had under the reign
of any the best Kings of this Realm.

The Duke of Buckingham's Speech to his Majesty on Friday, being the 4. of
April. 1628.
Sir,
ME thinks I now behold you a great King; for love is greater then Majesty.
Opinion that your people loved you not, had almost lost you in the opinion of
the World: but this day makes you appear, as you are, a glorious King, loved at
home, and now to be feared abroad.

This falling out so happily, I beseech you give me leave to be an humble
Suitour unto your Majesty, First for my self, that I, who have had the honor
to be your Favorite, may now give up my title unto them, they to be your
Favorite, and I to be your Servant. My second suit is, that they having done
all so well, you will account of them all as one, a Body of many Members, but
all of one heart. Opinion might have made them differ, but Affection did move
them all to join with like love in this great gift. For proportion although it
be less then your occasions may ask, yet it is more then ever Subjects did
give in so short a time: nor am I persuaded it will rest there, for this is but
an earnest of their affections, to let you see, and the world know, what
Subjects you have, that when your Honor and the good of the State is engaged,
and aid asked in the ordinary way of Parliament, you cannot want. This is not
a gift of 5 Subsidies alone, but the opening of a Mine of Subsidies which lies
in their hearts.

This good beginning has wrought already these good effects; they have taken
your heart, drawn from you a declaration that you will love Parliaments, and
again this will meet (I make no question) with such respect, that their demands
will be just, dutiful and moderate; for they that know thus to give, know what
is fit to ask. Then cannot your Majesty do less then out-go their demands, or
else you do less then your self, or them: for your Message begat trust, their
trust and your promise must beget performance. This being done, then shall I
with a glad heart behold this work as well ended as now begun, and then shall I
hope that Parliaments shall be made hereafter so frequent by the effects and
good use of them, as they shall have this further benefit, to deter from
approaching your ears those Projectours and Inducers of Innovation, as
Disturbers both of Church and Commonwealth.

Now, Sir, to open my heart and to ease my grief, please you to pardon me a
word more. I must confess I have long lived in pain, sleep has given me no
rest, favors and fortunes no content, much have been my secret sorrows to be
thought the Man of Separation, and that divided the King from his People, and
them from him. But I hope it shall appear there were some mistaken minds,
that would have made me the Evil Spirit that walked between a good Master and a
loyal people for ill offices; whereas by your Majesty's favor I shall ever
endeavor to approve my self a good spirit, breathing nothing but the best of
service to them all. Therefore this day I account more blessed unto me then my
birth, to see my self able to serve them, to see you brought in love with
Parliaments, to see a Parliament express such love to you, and God so love me
and mine as I joy to see this day.

Sir John Elliot in answer to Mr Secretary Cokes Message of Thanks from the
King and the Duke of Buckingham delivered in the Commons House of Parliament 5.
April, 1628.
Mr. Speaker,
I Presume we have all received great satisfaction from his Majesty as at
other times, so now in his gracious answer and resolution for the business of
this House, his answer to our Petition for Religion so particularly made, his
resolution in that other consideration concerning the point already settled
here in Declaration of our Liberties; and for the Parliament in general, that
he has taken so good a liking to our manner of proceeding, as it has gained
his promise therein to meet often: where I am made confident as of his grace to
us, so of our Loyalties, that to thus good a Beginning we should add so happy
a Conclusion, as shall increase that liking and good opinion in his Majesty,
and from henceforth make him more and more in love with Parliaments.

As thus in general, so in my particular I receive excellent satisfaction
herein, so as I have not words enough sufficiently to utter it. And yet I
confess that extremity of joy is not without trouble, which must likewise be
declared, to disburden this affection which cannot otherwise so lively and so
faithfully express me in the service of the House as I have resolved.

I know not what fatality or infortunity crept in, but I observe in the close
of that Relation no mention of any other in addition to his Majesty, and that
which formerly has been a matter of complaint, here I find it still, the
mixture with his Majesty not only in his business but in name. Is it that any
man conceives the mention of others (of what quality soever) can add
encouragement or affection to us in our Duties and Loialties toward his
Majesty, or give them greater latitude or extent then naturally they have? Or
is it supposed that the power or interest of any man can add more readiness
to his Majesty in his gracious inclination to us, then his own goodness gives
him? I cannot believe it. And as the Sweetness and Piety of his Majesty,
which we have in admiration, makes me confident in this; so the expression of
our Duty so perspicuous and clear as already has been given, is my assurance
for the other.

But Sir, I am sorry there is this occasion that these things should be argued,
or this mixture, which was so meerlie condemned, should appear again. I beseech
you, Sir, let it not be hereafter, let no man take this boldness within these
walls, to introduce it: though (I confess) for my particular I shall readily
commend, nay, thank that man whose endeavors are applied to such offices as
may be advantageable for the public, yet in this manner, so contrary to the
customs of our Fathers, and the honor of our Times, as I cannot without
Scandal apprehend it, I cannot without some Character or exception pass it.
And therefore I desire that such interposition may be left, and that all other
**** respects and goodnesses of his Majesty, in the confidence of our own
loyalty and affections.

Now let us proceed to those services that concern him, which I doubt not in
the end will render us so real unto him, that we shall not need more help to
endear us to his favor.

A Message by Secretary Coke from the King to the Lower House, April 7. 1628.
HIs Majesty has again commanded me to put you in mind how the eyes and
interest of the Christian World are cast upon the good or ill success of this
Assembly. He also graciously takes notice of that which is in agitation
amongst us touching the freedom of our Persons and propriety of our Goods. And
that this particular care, which he in no way misliketh, may not retract our
resolution for the general good, he wills us cheerfully to proceed in both,
and to express our readiness to supply his great Occasions, upon assurance
that we shall enjoy all our Rights and Liberties with as much freedom and
security in his time, as in any age heretofore under the best of our Kings. And
whether you shall think fit to secure our selves herein by way of Bill, or
otherwise, so as it be provided for with due respect to his Honor and the
public good, whereof he doubts not but you will be careful; he promises
and assures you that he will give way unto it: and the more confidence you
shall show to his Grace and Goodness, the more you shall prevail to obtain
your desires.

Sir Benjamin Ruddier's Speech upon the receipt of his Majesty's Answer to the
Petition against Recusants.
Mr Speaker,
THe best thanks we can return his Majesty for his gracious and religious
answer he has given to our Petition, is to move toward that which will both
please him and secure our selves. The dangers and necessities of the present
state, Mr Speaker, are so obvious to every man's eye and understanding, and
therefore so well known, as to make a large and particular rehearsal of them
would rather astonish our judgments, then refresh our memory. Wherefore in
short and in gross, I will but only reflect upon the desperate condition of
the Kings Uncle, the King of Denmark, engaged from hence, even to the hazard
of his own Kingdom, in the quarrel of that royal and victorious Lady his
Majesty's Sister, for the recovery of her and her childrens patrimony, the
preservation and reestablishment of the Religion in those Countries: so that
the King is bound in nature, in policy, and in religion to relieve and assist
both the persons and the cause to the utmost of his power.

Believe it, Mr Speaker, the hindge of the many businesses moved in Germany
does not a little press us to look about us at this time; for if that great
body were once united under one head, it would crush all the rest with the
weight of it.

Next let us a little look over into France: there shall we find the poor men
of our Religion exposed to the fury of an enraged King, with a juster pretense
against them then has been at any time heretofore: besides, which is worse,
the Kings of Spain and France are united against them and us, and made better
friends then ever they meant to have been. So that not to succor and support
the Professors of our Religion, will not only be infidelity and cruelty, but
improvidence and folly; for their ill is ours.

If Rochel should be lost, which is now in loosing, and his Majesty not able to
set out one ship to help it, if it should be lost, it would hazard the total
extirpation of the Religion, besides it would be an extraordinary advantage to
the King of France for shipping, and as great a disadvantage to us in respect
of the neighborhood: and if the Sound should be lost too, whereby should we
escape from being swallowed up by a Spanish invasion? this Island would be more
like to a prison then a Kingdom, for we were not able to walk abroad.

These are dangers too many; yet have I willingly abridged them, for I had
rather come to the remedy, so should we all: which consists only in money
plentifully and speedily brought in, wisely and judiciously laid out. I doubt
not but we are all resolved to give: wherefore, Mr Speaker, let us prepare our
selves to give plentifully, to satisfy the public occasions, to heave his
Majesty out of necessity; for necessity is the worst Counselor, and I shall be
very sorry that we of all others should be guilty of placing ill Counsel
about the King: and now to think of sparing when all lies at the stake, were
the most undoing kind of prodigality.

Let us give speedily, for delaie is the greatest danger of all dangers, it
will not only loose that which we give, but that also which we would give. And
this I propound not as the Kings business, but our way wherein every man in
this house has particular interest, if his fortune, his life, his religion be
any thing unto him. Neither speak I this to divert the great business in hand,
but to hasten it; for I love as well, Mr Speaker, to tread upon English ground,
as any man here does.

The King's Message to the House of Commons by Mr Speaker, 12 April, 1628.
HIs Majesty having given timely notice to this House as well of the pressing
of the time, as of the necessity of supply, has long since expected some fruit
of that which was so happily begun; but finding an unexpected stop, almost
beyond all expectation, after so good a beginning, has commanded me to tell
you that without any further unnecessary delay you proceed with his businesses:
for however he has been willing and consenting his affairs and ours should
concur and proceed together; yet his meaning was not that one should give
interruption to another, nor the time to be spunne out upon any pretense, upon
which the common cause of Christendom does so much depend. He bids us
therefore to take heed, and force not him to make an unpleasing end of that
which has been so well begun.

The Petition concerning the billetting of Soldiers, 14 April, 1628.
To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
IN all humility complaining, show unto your most excellent Majesty your loyal
and dutiful Commons now in Parliament assembled,

That whereas by the fundamental Laws of this your Realm, every freeman
has, and of right ought to have a full and absolute propriety in his goods and
estate, and that therefore the billetting and placing of Soldiers in the
houses of any such freeman against his will is directly contrary to the said
Laws, under which we and our Ancestors have been so long and happily
governed: yet in apparent violation of the said ancient and undoubted right of
all your Majesty's most loyal Subjects of this your Kingdom in general, and
to the grievous and insupportable vexation and detriment of many Countries and
persons in particular, a new, and heretofore almost unheard of way has been
invented, and put in practice, to lay Soldiers upon them, scattered in
Companies here and there, even in the heart and bowels of this Kingdom, and to
compel many of your Majesty's Subjects to receive and lodge them in their own
houses, and both themselves and others to contribute toward the maintenance of
them, to the exceeding great disservice of your Majesty, to the general
terror of all, and utter undoing of many of your poor people. Insomuch that we
cannot sufficiently, nor in any sort proportionable to the lively sense that we
have of our misery herein, are we able to represent unto your Majesty the
innumerable mischiefs and continual vexations that by this means alone we do
now suffer, whereof we will not presume to trouble your sacred ears with
particular instances. Only (most gracious Sovereign) we beg leave to offer unto
your gracious view and compassionate Consideration a few of them in general.

First, The service of almighty God is hereby greatly hindered, the people in
many places not daring to repair to the Churches, least the Soldiers in the
mean time should rifle their houses. 2. The ancient and good government of the
Country is hereby neglected and contemned. 3. Your Officers of Justice in
performance of their duties have been resisted and endangered. 4. The rents and
revenues of your Gentry greatly and generally diminished; Farmers to secure
themselves from the Soldiers insolency, being by the clamours and
solicitation of their fearful and injured wives and children enforced to give
up their wonted dwellings, and to retire themselves into places of more secure
habitation. 5. Husbandmen, that are as it were the hands of the Country
corrupted by ill example of the Soldiers, and encouraged to idle life, give
over work, and rather seek to live idly at another man's charge, then by their
own labors. 6. Tradesmen and Artificers almost discouraged, being enforced to
leave their trades, and to employ their time in preserving themselves and their
families from violence and cruelty. 7. Markets unfrequented, and our ways
grown so dangerous, that your people dare not pass to and fro upon their
usual occasions. 8. Frequent robberies, assaults, batteries, burglaries,
rapes, rapines, murders, barbarous cruelties, and other most abominable vices
and outrages are generally complained of from all parts, where these Companies
have been and had their abode, few of which insolences have been so much as
questioned, and fewer according to their demerits punished.
These and many other lamentable effects, most dread and dear Sovereign, have
by this billetting of Soldiers fallen upon your loyal Subjects, tending no
less to the disservice of your Majesty, then to their own impoverishing and
destruction: so that they are thereby exceedingly disabled to yield your
Majesty those supplies for your urgent occasions which they heartily desire.
And yet they are further perplexed with apprehension of more approaching
dangers, one in regard of your Subjects at home, and the other from Enemies
abroad. In both which respects it seems to threaten no small Calamity.

For the first, the meaner sort of your people being exceeding poor (whereof in
many places be great multitudes) and therefore in times of most settled and
constant administration of Justice not easily ruled, are most apt upon this
occasion to cast off the reins of government, and by joining themselves with
these disordred Soldiers, are very likely to fall into mutiny and rebellion;
which in faithful discharge of our duties we cannot forbear most humbly to
present to your high and excellent Wisdom, being pressed with probable fears
that some such mischief will shortly ensue, if an effectual and speedy course
be not taken to remove out of the land, or else otherwise to disband those
unruly Companies.

For the second, we do most humbly beseech your Majesty to take into your
Princely consideration, that many of these Companies, besides their dissolute
dispositions and carriages, are such as do openly profess themselves to be
Papists, and therefore to be suspected, that if occasion serve they will rather
adhere to a foreign Enemy of that Religion, then to your Majesty their liege
Lord and Sovereign; especially some of their Captains and Commanders being as
Popishlie affected as themselves, and having served in the wars in the behalf
of the King of Spain and the Arch-Dutchesse against your Majesty's Allies:
which of what pernicious consequence it may prove, and how prejudicial to the
safety of all your Kingdom, we humbly leave to your Majesty's high and
Princely Wisdom.

And now upon this and many more (which might be alleged) most weighty and
important reasons, grounded upon the maintenance of the worship and service of
almighty God, the continuance and advancement of your Majesty's high honor
and profit, the preservation of the ancient and undoubted Liberties of your
people, and therein of Justice and Industry and Valor, which clearly
concerns the glory and happiness of your Majesty and all your Subjects, and
the preventing of imminent calamities and ruin both of Church and
Commonwealth; we your Majesty's most humble and loyal Subjects, the Knights,
Citizens and Burgesses of your House of Commons, in the name of all the
Commonaltie of the Kingdom, who are upon this occasion most miserable,
disconsolate and afflicted, prostrate at the throne of your Grace and Justice,
do most humbly and ardently beg a present remove of this insupportable burden,
and that your Majesty would be graciously pleased to secure us from the like
pressure for time to come.

The nine Heads of the House of Commons to the Speaker.
1. THat it is the ancient right of Parliament, to dispose of matters there
debated in their own method. 2. That it is their ancient custom, to consider
of Grievances before matters of Supply. 3. That yet nevertheless in this
Parliament, to express our affection to his Majesty, contrary to ordinary
proceedings, we have proceeded in the Supply as far as we could in that
Committee. 4. That we have been so far from delaying, that post-posing the
common and pressing grievances, we have given precedencie to the supply,
joining with it only the fundamental and vital Liberties of the Kingdom that
give substance to the Subjects. 5. Further to express the fullness of our
affections, we have exceeded our order in that particular concerning the
supply, which, though later in proposition, yet has been first made ready
for conclusion in the Committee. 6. No person or Council can be greater lovers
of, or more careful to maintain the sacred Rights and Prerogatives of the
Crown then we: and we do conceive that the maintaining of the fundamental
Rights and Liberties of the Subject is an especial means to establish the
glory of a Monarch, and that by it his Subjects are the better enabled to do
him service, which has been the cause of many glorious victories wone by this
Nation above other Kingdoms of larger territories and greater number of
people. 7. What information is given to his Majesty contrary to this, does
proceed from such persons as (to serve their own ends) under color of
advancing his Majesty's Prerogative, do weaken Royal power. 8. We trust to be
cleared in his Majesty's judgment, that there has been no unnecessary stop,
but a most cheerful proceeding in the matter of Supply; and therefore we do
humbly desire that his Majesty will take no information in this or any other
business from private relations, but to judge of our proceedings by the
resolution that shall be presented to his Majesty from the House. 9. Being
thus rightly and graciously understood, we assure our selves that the end of
this Parliament shall be more happy then the beginning.
The Speaker Sir John Finche's Speech, upon the 9 Heads, 14. April, 1628.
Most Gracious and dread Sovereign,
YOur dutiful and loyal Commons here assembled were lately humble Suitours
for access to your Royal presence. The occasion that moved their desires
herein was a particle of importance worthy your Princely Consideration, and
which (as it well deserves) should have been the only subject of my Speech at
this time. But since your gracious answer for this access obtained, by a
Message from your Majesty, they have had some cause to doubt that your
Majesty is not so well satisfied with the manner of their proceedings, as
their hearty desire is you should be; especially in that part which concerns
your Majesty's present Supply; as if in the prosecution thereof they had of
late used some slacknesse or delay.

And because no unhappiness of theirs can parallel with that which may
proceed from a misunderstanding in your Majesty of their clear and loyal
intentions, they have commanded me to attend your Majesty with an humble and
summarie declaration of their proceedings since this short time of their
sitting, which they hope will give your Majesty abundant satisfaction, that
never people did more truly desire to be endeared in the favor and gracious
opinion of their Sovereign. And withal to let your Majesty see, that as you
can no where have a more faithful Council, so your great designs and
occasions can no way be so speedily or heartily supported as in this old and
ancient way of Parliament.

For this purpose they humbly beseech your Majesty to take into your Royal
Consideration, that although by ancient right of Parliament, the matters there
debated are to be disposed in their true method and order, and that their
constant custom has been to take into their consideration the common
Grievances of the Kingdom before they enter upon matter of Supply; yet to
make a full expression of that zeal and affection which they bear to your
Royal Person, (equalling at least, if not exceeding the best affections of
their predecessors to the best of your Progenitors) they have in this
Assembly, contrary to ordinary proceeding in Parliament, given your Majesty's
supply precedence before the common Grievances of the Subject, how pressing
soever; joining only with it those fundamental and vital Liberties of the
Kingdom, which give subsistence and ability to your Subjects.

This was their original order and resolution, and was grounded upon a true
discerning that these two considerations could not be severed, but did both of
them entirely concern your Majesty's service, consisting no less in
encouraging and inabling your Subjects, then in proportioning a Present suting
to your Majesty's occasions and their own abilities.

Nay, so far have they been from using any unnecessary delays, as that
though of the two that of Supply were later in proposition amongst them, yet
the Grand Committee (to which both were referred) have made that of your
Majesty's Supply first ready for conclusion. And to be sure your Majesty's
Supply might receive no interruption, they (differing from custom and usage in
cases of this nature) sent up of those that concern the Subject by parcels,
some to your Majesty and some to the Lords, to the end your Majesty may
receive such speedy content, as suits with the largest and best extent of their
first order.

Sir, you are the breath of our nostrils and the light of our eyes; and besides
the many Comforts which under you and your Royal Progenitors in this frame of
Government this Nation has enjoyed, the Religion we profess has taught us
whose Image you are. And we do all most humbly declare to your Majesty that
nothing is or can be more dear unto us then the sacred Rights and Prerogatives
of your Crown, no Person or Council can be greater lovers of them, nor more
truly careful to maintain them.

And the fundamental Liberties which concern the freedom of our persons and
propriety of our goods and estates, are an essential means to establish the
true glory of a Monarch: for rich and free Subjects as they are best governed,
so they are most able to do your Majesty service, either in peace or war;
which under God has been the cause of the happy victories of this Nation
beyond other Kingdoms of larger Territories and greater numbers of people.

What information soever contrary to this shall be brought to your Majesty,
can come from no other then such as for their own ends, under color of
advancing the Prerogative, do in truth undermine and weaken Royal Power, and
by impoverishing the Subject, render this Monarchy less glorious, and the
people less able to serve your Majesty.

Having by this which has been said cleared our hearts and proceedings to your
Majesty, our trust is that in your Royal Judgment we shall be free from the
least opinion of giving any unnecessary shop to our proceeding in the matter of
Supply, and that your Majesty will be pleased to entertain belief of our
alacrity and cheerfulness in your service, and that hereafter no such
misfortune shall befall us to be misunderstood by your Majesty in any thing.
We all most humbly beseech your Majesty to receive no information, either in
this or any other business, from private relations, but to weigh and judge of
our proceedings by those resolutions of the House, which shall be presented
from our selves.

This rightly and graciously understood, we are confident from the knowledge of
your goodness and our own hearts, that the ending of this Parliament shall be
much more happy then the beginning, and that it shall be styled to all ages The
Blessed Parliament, which making perfect union betwixt the best people, your
Majesty may ever delight in calling us together, and we in the Comforts of
your Gracious Favor toward us.

In this hope I return to my first errand, which will best appear by that which
I shall humbly desire your Majesty to hear read, being an humble Petition from
the House of Commons, for redress of those many inconveniences and
distractions that have befallen your Subjects, by the billetting of Soldiers.

Your Royal Progenitors have ever held their Subjects hearts the best
Garrison of this Kingdom. And our humble suit to your Majesty is, that our
Faith and Loyalty may have such place in your Royal thoughts, as to rest
assured that all your Subjects will be ready to lay down their lives for the
defense of your Sacred Person and this Kingdom.

Not going our selves into our Countries this Easter, we should think it a
great happiness to us, and we know it would be a singular comfort and
encouragement to them that sent us hither, if we might but send them the news
of a gracious Answer from your Majesty in this particular; which the reasons of
the Petition, we hope, will move your most excellent Majesty graciously to
vouchsafe us.

The King's Answer to the Petition concerning billetting of Soldiers, 14
April, 1628.
Mr Speaker, and you Gentlemen,
WHen I sent you my last message, I did not expect any Reply, for I intended to
hasten you, not to find fault with you. I told you at your first meeting that
this time was not to be spent in words, and I am sure it is less fit for
disputes; which if I had a desire to entertain, Mr Speaker's Preamble might
give me ground enough.

The Question is not now what Liberty you have in disposing of matters handled
in your House, but rather what is fit to be done. Therefore I hope you will
follow my example in eschewing disputations, and fall to your important
business.

You make a protestation of your affections and zeal to my Prerogative,
grounded upon so good and just reasons, that I must believe you. But I look
that you use me with the like charity, to believe what I have delivered more
then once since your meeting, which is, That I am as forward as you for the
preservation of your true Liberties: yet let us not spend so much time in this,
that may hazard both my Prerogative and your Liberties to our Enemies.

To be short, go on speedily with your business, without fear or more
Apologies, for time calls fast on you, which will neither stay for me nor you.

Wherefore it is my duty to press you to hasten, as knowing the necessity of
it; and yours to give credit to what I say, as to him that sits at the Helm.

Sir Dudley Diggs his Introduction.
My Lords,
I Shall (I hope) auspiciously begin this Conference this day with an
Observation out of Holy Story. In the days of good King Josiah, when the Land
was purged of Idolatry, and the great men went about to repair the House of
God, while money was sought for, there was found a Book of the Law, which had
been neglected, and afterward being presented to the good King, procured the
blessing which your Lordships may read of in the Scriptures. 2 Chro. cap. 34. 2
Kings cap. 22.


My good Lords, I am confident your Lordships will as cheerfully join with the
Commons in acknowledgement of Gods great blessing in our good King Josiah, as
the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the Commons House by me (their unworthy
servant) do thankfully remember your most religious and truly honorable
invitation of them to the late Petition for clensing this Land from Popish
Abominations, which I may truly call a necessary and happy repairing of the
House of God. And to go on with the parallel, while we the Commons out of our
good affection were seeking for money, we found, I cannot say a book of the
Law, but many, and those fundamental, points thereof neglected and broken;
which has occasioned our desire of this Conference.

Wherein I am first commanded to show unto your Lordships in general, that the
Laws of England are grounded on reason ancienter then books, consisting much
in unwritten Customs; yet so full of Justice and true Equity, that your most
honorable Predecessors and Ancestors many times propugned them with a
Nolumus Mutare; and so ancient, that from the Saxons days, notwithstanding the
Injuries and Ruins of Time, they have continued in most parts the same; as may
appear in old remaining Monuments of the Laws of Ethelbert the first Christian
King of Kent, Ina King of the West-Saxones, Offa of the Mercians, In
Bibliotheca Cottoniana.
and of Alfred the great Monarch, who united the Saxon Heptarchie, whose Laws
are yet to be seen, published (as some think) by Parliament, as he says, to
that end, ut qui sub uno Rege, sub una Lege regerentur. [Liber Lichfield.]


And though the book of Lichfield, speaking of the troublesome times of the
Danes, says that then, Ius sopitum erat in Regno, Leges and consuetudines
sopitae sunt, and prava voluntas, vis and violentia magis regnabant quam
Iudicia vel Iustitia: yet by the blessing of God a good King Edward, commonly
called S. Edward, did awaken these Laws, Excitatas reparavit, reparatas
decoravit, decoratas confirmavit. Liber de Chartsey, sive Registrum de Chartsey.
which confirmavit shows that good King Edward did not give those Laws,
which William the Conqueror and all his Successors sithence that have sworn
unto.

And here, my Lords, by many Cases frequent in our Modern Laws, strongly
concurring with those of the ancient Saxon Kings, I might (if time were not
precious) demonstrate that our Laws and Customs were the same. I will only
entreat your Lordships leave to tell you, that as we have now, even in those
Saxon times they had their Courts Barons and Courts Leets and Sheriffs Courts,
by which (as Tacitus says of the Germans) their Ancestors Iura reddebant per
pagos and vicos. And I believe as we have now, they had their Parliaments,
where new Laws were made cum consensu Praelatorum, Magnatum and totius
Communitatis; or, as another writes, cum consilio Praelatorum, Nobilium and
sapientum Laicorum.

I will add nothing out of Glanvile, that wrote in the time of Henry the
second, or Bracton that writ in the time of Henry the third: only give me leave
to cite that of Fortescue the learned Chancellor to Hen. 6. who writing of
this Kingdom says, Regnum illud in omnibus Nationum and Regum temporibus, De
Dom. polit. et regal.
eisdem quibus nunc regitur legibus and consuetudinibus, regebatur.

But, my good Lords, as the Poet said of Fame, I may say of our Common Law,

Ingreditur solo, caput inter nubila condit. Wherefore the cloudy part being
mine, Virgil.
I will make haste to open way for your Lordships to hear more certain
Arguments, and such as go on surer grounds.

Be pleased then to know, that it is an undoubted and fundamental point of
this so ancient Common Law of England, that the Subject has a true Propriety
in his goods and possessions, which does preserve as sacred that meum and tuum
that is the Nurse of Industry, the Mother of Courage, and without which there
can be no Justice, of which meum and tuum is the proper object.

But this undoubted Birthright of free Subjects has lately not a little been
invaded and prejudiced by pressures, the more grievous because they have been
pursued by Imprisonments, contrary to the Franchise of this Land. And when
according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm redress has been sought for
in a legal way, by demanding Habeas Corpus from the Judges, and a discharge or
trial according to the Law of the Land, success has failed; which has now
enforced the Commons in this present Parliament assembled to examine by Acts of
Parliaments, Presidents and Reasons, the truth of English Subjects Liberties:
which I shall leave to learned Gentlemen, whose weighty Arguments I hope will
leave no place in your Lordships memories for the errors and infirmities of
your humblest Servant, that does thankfully acknowledge the great favor of
your most honorable and patient attention.

The Argument made by Mr Littleton at the command of the House of Commons, out
of Acts of Parliament and Authorities of Law expounding the same, at the first
Conference with the Lords concerning the Liberty of the Person of every
Freeman.
My Lords,
UPon the occasions delivered by the Gentleman that last spoke, your Lordships
have heard the Commons have taken into their serious Consideration the matter
of Personal Liberty; and after long debate thereof on diverse days, as well
by solemn Arguments as single propositions of doubts and answers, to the end no
scruple might remain in any man's breast unsatisfied, they have upon a full
search and clear understanding of all things pertinent to the Question,
unanimously declared That no Freeman ought to be committed or detained in
prison, or otherwise restrained by the command of the King, or the Privy
Council, or any other, unless some cause of the commitment, detainer or
restraint be expressed, for which by Law he ought to be committed, detained or
restrained. And they have sent me with some other of their Members to represent
unto your Lordships the true grounds of such their resolutions, and have
charged me particularly (leaving the reasons of Law and Presidents for others)
to give your Lordships satisfaction that this Liberty is established and
confirmed by the whole State, the King, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
the Commons, by several Acts of Parliament. The authority whereof is so great,
that it can receive no answer, save by interpretation or repeal by future
Statutes. And these that I shall mind your Lordships of are so direct to the
point, that they can bear no other exposition at all; and sure I am they are
still in force.

The first of them is the Grand Charter of the Liberties of England, first
granted in the 17 year of King John, and renewed in the 9 year of King Hen.
3. and since confirmed in Parliament above 30 times. Cap. 29. the words are
these. Nullus liber homo capiatur, vel imprisonetur, aut diseisietur de libero
tenemento suo, vel libertatibus, vel liberis consuetudinibus suis, aut
utlagetur, aut exuletur, aut aliquo modo destruatur; nec super eum ibimus, nec
super eum mittemus, nisi per legale judicium parium suorum, vel per legem
terrae. These words Nullus liber homo, etc. are express enough: yet it is
remarkable that Matthew Paris an Author of special credit, does observe fo.
432. that the Charter of the 9. H. 3. was the very same as that of the 17. of
King John, in nullo dissimiles, are his words; and that of King John he sets
down verbatim fol. 342. and there the words are directly Nec eum in carcerem
mittemus: and such a corruption as is now in the print might easily happen
'twixt 9. H. 3. and 28. E. 1. when this Charter was first exemplified.

But certainly there is sufficient left in that which is extant to decide this
question; for the words are, That no Freeman shall be taken or imprisoned but
by the lawful judgment of his Peers* which is by Jury, Peers for Pares,
ordinary Jurours for others who are their Peers; or by the Law of the Land.
Which words Law of the Land, must of necessity be understood in this Nation to
be by due process of Law, and not the Law of the Land generally; otherwise it
would comprehend Bondmen, whom we call Villains, which are excluded by the
word liber; for the general Law of the Land does allow their Lords to imprison
them at pleasure without cause, wherein they only differ from the Freemen, in
respect of their persons, who cannot be imprisoned without a cause. And that
this is the true understanding of those words per legem terrae, will more
plainly appear by diverse other Statutes that I shall use, which do expound the
same accordingly.

And although the words of this Grand Charter be spoken in the third person,
yet they are to be understood of Suites betwixt party and party, at least not
of them alone, but even of the Kings Suites against his Subjects; as will
appear by the occasion of the getting of that Charter, which was by reason of
the differences betwixt those Kings and their people: and therefore properly
to be applied to their power over them, and not to ordinary questions 'twixt
Subject and Subject.

The words per legale judicium parium suorum immediately precedeing the other
per legem terrae, are meant of trialls at the Kings Suit, and not at the
prosecution of a Subject. And therefore if a Peer of the Realm be arraigned at
the Suit of the King upon any Indictment of Murder, he shall be tried by his
Peers, that is Nobles: But if he be appealed of Murder by a Subject, his
trial shall be by an ordinary Jury of 12 Freeholders; as appears in 10.
Edw. 4. It is said such is the meaning of Magna Charta. By the same reason
therefore as per judicium parium suorum extends to the Kings Suit, so shall
these words per legem terrae.

And in 8. E. 2. Rot. Parliam. number. 7. there is a Petition, that a Writ made
under the Privy Seal went to the Guardians of the Great Seal to cause lands to
be seized into the Kings hands; by force of which there went a Writ out of the
Chauncery to the Exchequer to seize against the form of the Grand Charter,
That the King or his Ministers shall outlaw no man of Freehold without
reasonable Judgment: And the party was restored to his land. Which shows
the Statute did extend to the King.

There was no invasion upon this personal liberty, till the time of King Edw.
the 3. which was soon restrained by the Subject. For in the 5. E. 3. cap. 9. it
is ordained in these words; It is enacted that no man from henceforth shall be
attached by any accusation, nor forejudged of life or limb, nor his lands,
tenements, goods nor cattells seized into the Kings hands against the form of
the great Charter. And the Law of the Land 25. E. 3. cap. 4. is more full, and
does expound the words of the Grand Charter, and it is thus; Whereas it is
contained in the great Charter of the Franchises of England, That no Freeman
be imprisoned, or put out of his Freehold, nor of his Franchise nor Free
Custom, unless it be by the Law of the Land: it is accorded, assented and
established, that from henceforth none shall be taken by petition or suggestion
made unto our Lord the King, or to his Council, unless it be by indictment or
presentment of his good and lawful people of the same neighborhood where such
deeds be done, in due manner, or by process made by Writ original at the
Common Law; nor that none be out of his Franchises or of his Freehold, unless
he be duly brought into answer, and forejudged of the same by course of Law:
and if any thing be done against the same, it shall be redressed and held for
null.

Out of this Statute I observe that what in Magna Charta and the Preamble of
this Statute is termed by the Law of the Land, is in the body of this Act
expounded to be by process made by Writ original at the Common Law; which is
a plain interpretation of the words Law of the Land, in the grand Charter. And
I note that this Law was made upon the commitment of diverse to the Tower, no
man yet knows for what.

The 28. E. 3. is yet more direct, (this Liberty being followed with fresh
suite by the Subject;) where the words are not many but very full and
significant: That no man, of what estate or condition he be, shall be put out
of his lands or Tenement, nor taken nor imprisoned, nor disinherited, nor put
to death, without he be brought into answer by due process of the Law. Here
your Lordships see the usual words of the Law of the Land are rendered by due
process of the Law.

36. E. 3. Rot. Parliam. number. 9. amongst the Petitions of the Commons, one of
them being translated into English out of the French, is thus, First that the
great Charter, and the Charter of the Forest, and the other Statutes made in
his time and the time of his Progenitors, for the profit of him and his
Commonaltie, be well and firmly kept, and put in due execution, without putting
disturbance, or making arrest contrary to them by special command, or in any
other. The answer to the Petition, which makes it an Act of Parliament, is, Our
Lord the King by the assent of the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and the
Commonaltie, has ordained and established that the said Charters and Statutes
be held and put in execution according to the said Petition; which is, that no
arrest should be made contrary to the Statutes by special command.

This concludes the Question, and is of as great force as if it were printed.
For the Parliament Roll is the true warrant of an Act, and many are omitted out
of the books that are extant.

36. E. 3. Rot. Parliament. number. 20. explaineth it further: for there the
Petition is, Whereas it is contained in the Grand Charter and other Statutes,
that none be taken or imprisoned by special command without indictment, or
other due process to be made by the Law; yet oftentimes it has been and still
is, that many are hindered, taken and imprisoned without indictment, or other
process made by the Law upon them, as well of things done out of the Forest
of the King, as for other things; That it would therefore please our said Lord
to command those to be delivered which are so taken by special Command,
against the form of the Charters and Statutes aforesaid. The answer is, The
King is pleased, if any man find himself grieved, that he come and make his
complaint, and right shall be done unto him.

37. E. 3. cap. 18. agrees in substance, when it says, Though that it be
contained in the great Charter, that no man be imprisoned, nor put out of his
Freehold without process of the Law; nevertheless diverse people make false
suggestions to the King himself, as well for malice as otherwise, whereat the
King is often grieved, and diverse of the Realm put in damage, against the
form of the said Charter. Wherefore it is ordained that all they which make
such suggestions be sent with the suggestions before the Chancellor,
Treasurer, and the grand Council; and that they there find surety to pursue
their suggestions, and incur the same pain that the other should have had
(if he were attainted) in case that their suggestions be found evil; and that
then process of the Law be made against them, without being taken and
imprisoned against the form of the said Charter and other Statutes. Here the
Law of the Land in the grand Charter is explained, to be without process of
the Law.

42. E. 3. ca. 3. At the request of the Commons by their Petitions put forth in
this Parliament, to eschew mischiefs and damage done to diverse of his Commons
by false accusers, which oftentimes have made their accusation more for revenge
and singular benefit, then for the profit of the King, or of his people, which
accused persons some have been taken, and sometimes caused to come before the
Kings Council by writ and otherwise upon grievous pain against the Law; It is
assented and accorded, for the good governance of the Commons, that no man be
put to answer without presentment before Justices, or matter of Record, or by
due process, or writ original, according to the old Law of the Land. And if
any thing henceforth be done to the contrary, it shall be void in Law, and
holden for error.

But this is better in the Parliament Roll; where the Petition and Answer,
which make the Act, are set down at large, 42. E. 3. Rot. Parliament. number. 12.

The Petition.
Because that many of the Commons are hurt and destroyed by false accusers, who
make their accusations more for their revenge and particular gain, then for
the profit of the King or his people, and those that are accused by them some
have been taken, and others have been made to come before the Kings Council by
writ or other Commandment of the King upon grievous pains, contrary to the
Law; That it would please our Lord the King and his good Council, for the just
government of his people, to ordain that if hereafter any accuser propose any
matter for the profit of the King, that the same matter be sent to the Justices
of the one Bench or the other, or the affairs to be enquired and determined
according to the Law: And if it concern the accuser or party, that he take his
suit at the Common Law; and that no man be put to answer without presentment
before Justices, or matter of Record, and by due process and original writ
according to the ancient Law of the Land. And if any thing henceforward be done
to the contrary, that it be void in Law, and held for error.

Here by due process and original writ according to the Law of the Land, is
meant the same thing as per legem terrae in Magna Charta, and the abuse was
they were put to answer by the commandment of the King.

The Kings Answer is thus.
Because that this article is an article of the Grand Charter, the King wills
that this be done as the Petition does demand.

By this it appears that per legem terrae in Magna Charta, is meant by due
process of the Law.

Thus your Lordships have heard Acts of Parliament in the point. But the
Statute of Westminster. the 1. ca. 15. is urged to disprove this opinion, where it is
expressly said, That a man is not replevisable who is committed by the command
of the King, without any cause shown, which is therefore sufficient to commit a
man to prison. And because the strength of the Argument may appears and the
answer be better understood, I shall read the words of the Statute, which is
thus.

And for as much as Sheriffs and others have taken and kept in prison such as
were replevisable, and have let out by plevin such as were not replevisable,
because they would gain of the one party, and grieve the other; And forasmuch
as before this time it was not certainly determined what persons were
replevisable and what not, but only those that were taken for the death of a
man, or by Commandment of the King, or of his Justices, or for the Forest; It
is provided, and by the King commanded, that such prisoners as were before
outlawed, and they which have abjured the Realm, Provors, and such as be taken
with the manner, and those which have broken the Kings prison, Thieves openly
defamed and known, and such as be appealed by Provors so long as the Provor be
living, if they be not of good name, and such as be taken for burning of
houses, felloniously done, or for false money, or for counterfeiting the Kings
Seal, or persons excommunicated taken at the request of the Bishops, or for
manifest offenses, or for Treason touching the King himself, shall be in no
case replevisable by the common writ or without writ.

But such as be indicted of larceny by inquests taken before Sheriffs or
Bailiffs by their office, or for light suspicion, or for petty-larceny that
amounts not to above the value of 12 pence, if they were not guilty of some
other larceny aforetime, or guilty of receipt of fellons, or of commandment or
force or of aid in felony done, or guilty of some other trespass for which one
ought not to loose life or member, and a man appealed by a Provor after the
death of a Provor, if he be no common thief, or defamed; shall from henceforth
be let out by sufficient surety, whereof the Sheriff will be answerable, and
that without giving ought of their goods.

And if the Sheriff or any other let any go at large by surety that is not
replevisable, if he be Sheriff or Constable, or any Bailiffe of fee which has
keeping of prisoners, and thereof be attainted, he shall loose his fee and
office for ever.

And if the Undersheriff, Constable or Bailiffe, of such as have fee for
keeping of prisons do it contrary to the will of his Lord, or any other
Bailiffe being not of fee, they shall have three years imprisonment, and make
Fine at the Kings pleasure. And if any hold prisoners replevisable after they
have offered sufficient sureties, he shall pay a grievous amercement to the
King. And if he take any reward for the deliverance of such, he shall pay
double to the prisoner, and also shall pay a grievous amercement to the King.

The Answer.
It must be acknowledged that a man taken by the Commandment of the King is not
replevisable, for so are the express words of this Statute. But this makes
nothing against the Declaration of the House of Commons, for they say not that
the Sheriff may replevy such a man by sureties ( scilicet Manucaptores) but
that he is bailable by the Kings Court of Justice.

For the better understanding whereof, it is to be known that there is a
difference betwixt replevisable, which is always by the Sheriff upon pledges
or sureties given, and bailable, which is by Court of Record, where the
prisoner is delivered to his Bail, and they are his Gaolers, and may imprison
him, and shall suffer for him body for body, as appears 33. and 36.83. in
the title of Mainprize p. 12.13. where the difference betwixt Bail and
Mainprize is expressly taken.

And if the words of the Statutes themselves be observed, it will appear
plainly that it extends to the Sheriffs and other inferior Officers, and does
not bind the hands of the Judges.

The Preamble, which is the key which opens the entrance into the meaning of
the makers of the Law, is,

Forasmuch as Sheriffs and others which have taken and kept in prison persons
detected of felony. Out of these words I observe that it nominateth Sheriffs,
and then if the Justices should be included, they must be comprehended under
the general word other, which does not use to extend to those of a higher
rank, but to inferiors: for the best by all course is first to be named; And
therefore if a man bring a Writ of Customs and Services, and name Rents and
other things, the general shall not include Homage, which is a personal
service and of a higher nature; but it shall extend to ordinary annual
services, 31. E. 1. Droit. So the Statute of 13. Eliz. cap. 10. which begins
with Colleges, Deanes and Chapters, Parsons, Vicars, and concludes with these
words, and others having spiritual promotions; shall not comprehend Bishops,
that are of a higher degree; as appears in the Archbishop of Canterburies Case
reported by Sr Edw. Coke lib. 2. fo. 46.

And thus much is explained in this very Statute toward the end, when it does
enumerate those were meant by the word other, namely under-Sheriffs,
Constables, Bailiffs.

Again the words are Sheriffs and others which have taken and kept in prison:
now every man knows Judges do neither arrest nor keep men in prison, that is
the office of Sheriffs, and other inferior Ministers: therefore this Statute
meant such only, and not Judges.

The words are further, that they let out by replevine such as were not
replevisable; that is the proper language for a Sheriff. Nay more express
afterward in the body of the Statute, that such as are there mentioned shall
be in no case replevisable by the common writ (which is de homine replegiando,
and is directed to the Sheriff) nor without writ which is by the Sheriff ex
officio. But that which receives no answer is this;

That the command of the Justices who derive their authorities from the Crown,
is there equal as to this purpose with the command of the King. And therefore
by all reasonable construction it must needs relate to Officers subordinate to
both, as Sheriffs, under-Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables and the like. And it
were an harsh exposition to say that the Justices might not discharge their own
Command, and yet that reason would conclude as much. And that this was meant of
the Sheriffs and other Ministers of Justice, appears by the recital 27. E.
1. cap. 3.

And likewise by Fleta, a Manuscript so called because the Author lay in the
Fleet when he made the book: for he lib. 2. cap. 52. in his cap. of Turns and
the views of the Hundred Courts in the Country, sets down the Articles of the
Charges that are there to be enquired of; amongst which one of them is de
replegiabilibus injuste detentis, or irreplegiabilibus dimissis: which cannot
be meant of not bailing by the Justices; for what have the inferior Courts in
the Country to do with the Acts of the Justices?

And to make it more plain, he sets down in this Chapter (that concerns
Sheriffs only) the very Statute of Westminster. cap. 15. which he translates verbatim
out of the French into the Latin, save that he renders taken by the command of
the Justices thus, per Iudicium Iustitiariorum: and his Preface to the Statute
plainly shows, that he understood it of replevine by Sheriffs, for he says,
Qui debent per plegios dimitti, qui non, declarat hoc Statutum; and per plegios
is before the Sheriff.

But for direct authority, it is the opinion of Newton the Chief Justice in
22. H. 6.46. where his words are these, It cannot be intended that the Sheriff
did suffer him to go at large by mainprize, for where one is taken by the writ
of the King or the command of the King, he is irreplevisable; but in such case
his friends may come to the Justices for him, if he be arrested, and purchase a
supersedeas. So he declares the very Question, That the Sheriffs had no power,
but that the Justices had power to deliver him that is committed by the Kings
Command. And both the ancient and modern practice manifests as much; for he
that is taken for the death of a man, or for the Forest, is not replevisable
by the Sheriff, yet they are ordinarily bailed by the Justices, and were by the
Kings writs directed to the Sheriffs in the times of E. 1. and E. 2. as
appears in the Close Rolls, which could not be done if they were not bailable.
And it is every days experience that the Justices of the Kings Bench do bail
for murder, and for offenses done in the Forest, which they could not do if
the word irreplevisable in Westminster. 1. were meant of the Justices as well as of
the Sheriffs.

For the authorities which have been offered to prove the contrary, they are
in number 3. The first is 21. E. 1. Rot. 2. which also is in the book of the
Pleas in Parliament at the Tower fol. 44. It is not an Act of Parliament, but a
resolution in Parliament upon an action there brought, which was usual in
those times: and the Case is, That Stephen Rubar the Sheriff of the Counties of
Leicester and Warwick, was questioned for that he had let at large by sureties
one William the son of Walter le Parsons, against the will and command of the
King, when as the King had committed him by Letters under his Privy Seal, that
he should do no favor to any man that was committed by the command of the
Earl of Warwick, as that man was. Whereunto the Sheriff answered, that he did
it at the request of some of the Kings household upon their Letters: and because
the Sheriff did acknowledge the receipt of the Kings Letters, thereupon he was
committed to prison, according to the form of the Statute.

To this I answer, that he was justly punished, for that he is expressly bound
by the Statute Westminster. 1. which was agreed from the beginning. But this is no
proof that the Judges had not power to bail this man.

The next Argument is 33. H. 6. in the Court of Common Pleas fol. 28.29. where
Robert Poinings Esquire was brought unto the Bar upon a Capias, and it was
returned that he was committed per duos de Consilio (I believe it is misprinted
for Dnos de Consilio, i. e. Dominos de Consilio, which is stongest against that
which I maintain) pro diversis causis Regem tangentibus, and he made an
Attorney there in an accusation, whence is inferred that the return was good,
and the party could not be delivered.

To this the Answer is plain.

1. No opinion is delivered in that book whether he were delivered or bailed,
or not. 2. It appears expressly that he was brought thither to be charged in an
accusation of debt at another man's Suit, and no desire of his own to be
delivered or bailed; and then if he were remanded, it is no way material to
the question in hand.
But that which is most relied upon is, the opinion of Stamford in his book of
the Pleas of the Crown lib. 2. ca. 18. fol. 72.73. in his cap. of Mainprize,
where he recites the Statute of Westminster. 1. cap. 15. and then says thus, By
this Statute it appears that in 4 cases at the Common Law a man was not
replevisable, to wit, those that were taken for the death of a man, by command
of the King, or of his Justices, or for the Forest. Thus far he is most
right. Then he goes on and says, As to the Command of the King, that is
understood of the command of his own mouth, or his Council which is
incorporated unto him, and speak with his mouth, or otherwise every writ of
Capias to take a man, which is the Kings command, would be as much. And as to
the command of the Justices, that is meant their absolute command: for if it be
their ordinary commandment, he is replevisable by the Sheriff, if it be not in
some of the Cases prohibited by the Statute.

The answer that I give unto this is, That Stamford has said nothing whether a
man may be committed without cause by the Kings command, or whether the Judges
ought not to bail him in such case; but only that such a one is not
replevisable: which is agreed, for that belongs to the Sheriff. And because no
man should think he meant any such thing, he concludes his whole sentence
touching the command of the King and his Justices, That one committed by the
Justices ordinary command is replevisable by the Sheriff. So either he meant
all by the Sheriff, or at least it appears not that he meant that a man
committed by the King or the Privy Council without cause is not bailable by
the Justices, and then he has given no opinion in this case. What he would
have said if he had been asked the question, cannot be known; neither does it
appear by any thing he has said, that he meant any such thing as would be
inferred out of him.

And now, my Lords, I have performed the command of the Commons; and as I
conceive, shall leave their declaration of personal Liberty on ancient and
undoubted truth, fortified with 7 Acts of Parliament, and not opposed by any
Statute or authority of Law whatsoever.

The Objections of the King's Council, with the Answers made thereunto at the
two Conferences touching the same matter.
IT was agreed by Master Attorney general, that the seven Statutes urged by
the Commons were in force, and that Magna Charta did extend most properly to
the King. But he said,

First, that some of them are in general words, and therefore conclude
nothing, but are to be expounded by the Presidents; and others that be more
particular are applied to the suggestions of Subjects, and not to the Kings
Command simply of it self.

Hereunto was answered, That the Statutes were as direct as could be, which
appears by the reading of them: and that though some of them speak of
suggestions of the Subject, yet others do not; and those that do are as
effectual, for that they are in equal reason, a commitment by Command of the
King being of as great force when it moves by a suggestion from a Subject, as
when the King takes notice of the cause himself; the rather for that Kings
seldom intermeddle with matters of this nature, but by information from some
of their Subjects.

Secondly, Mr Attorney objected that per legem terrae in Magna Charta (which is
the foundation of this Question) cannot be understood for process of the Law
and original Writs: for that in all Criminal proceedings no original Writ is
used at all, but every Constable may arrest either for felony, or for breach
of the peace, or to prevent a breach of the peace, without process or
original Writ; and it were hard the King should not have the power of a
Constable: and the Statutes cited by the Commons make process of the Law and
Writ original to be all one.

The answer of the Commons to this Objection was, That they do not intend
original Writs only by the Law of the Land, but all other legal process,
which comprehends the whole proceedings of Law upon Cause, other then the
trial by Jurie, Iudicium parium, unto which it is opposed. Thus much is
imported ex vitermini, out of the word process, and by the true acceptance
thereof in the Statutes which have been urged by the Commons to maintain their
Declaration, and most especially in the Statute 25. E. 3. cap. 4. where it
appears that a man ought to be brought into answer by the course of the Law;
having former mention made of process made by original Writ.

And in 28. E. 3. cap. 3. by the course of the Law, is rendered by due process
of the Law. and 36. E. 3. Rot. Parl. number. 20. the Petition of the Commons
says, That no man ought to be imprisoned by special Command without
Indictment, or other due process to be made by the Law. 37. E. 3. cap. 18.
calls the same thing Process of the Law: 42. E. 3. cap. 3. styles it by due
process and Writ original; where the conjunctive must be taken for the
disjunctive: which change is ordinary in the exposition of the Statutes and
Deeds, to avoid inconvenience, to make it stand with the rest and with reason.
And it may be collected that by the Law of the Land in Magna Charta, by the
Course of the Law in 25. E. 3. by due process of the Law in 28. E. 3. other
due process to be made by the Law in 36. E. 3. process of the Law 37. E. 3.
and by due process and original Writ in 42. E. 3. are meant one and the same
thing, the latter of these Statutes referring always to the former, and that
all of them import any due and regular proceeding of Law upon a Cause, other
then the trial by Jury. And this does appear in Coke 10.74. in the case of
the Marshalsey; and Coke 11.99. James Bagg's case, where it is understood of
giving Jurisdiction by Charter or prescription, which is the ground of a
proceeding by course of Law: and in Selden's Notes on Fortescue fol. 29. where
it is expounded for Law wager, which is likewise a trial at Law by the oath of
the party, differing from that by Jurie. And it does truly comprehend these
and all other regular proceedings in Law upon Cause, which gives authority to
the Constable to arrest upon Cause.

And if this should not be the true exposition of these words per begem terrae,
the Kings Council were desired to declare their meaning: which they never
offered to do; and yet certainly these words were not put into the Statute
without some intention of consequence. Whereupon Mr Sergeant Ashley offered an
interpretation of them thus;

Namely, that there were diverse Laws of this Realm, as the Common Law, the
Law of the Chauncerie, the Ecclesiastical Law, the Law of the Admiraltie or
Marine Law, the Law of Merchants, the Martial Law, and the Law of State, and
that these words per legem terrae do extend to all those Laws.

The answer.

To this it was answered, that we read of no Law of State, and that none of
these Laws can be meant there save the Common Law, which is the principal and
general Law, and is always understood by way of excellency, when mention is
made of the Law of the Land generally: and that though each of the other Laws,
which are admitted into this Kingdom by Custom or Act of Parliament, may
justly be called a Law of the Land; yet none of them can have the preeminence
to be styled the Law of the Land. And no Statute, Law-book or other Authority,
printed or unprinted, could be shown to prove that the Law of the Land being
generally mentioned, was ever intended of any other Law then the Common Law;
and yet even by these other Laws a man may not be committed without a cause
expressed.

But it stands with the rule of other legal expositions, that per legem
terrae must be meant the Common Law, which is the general and universal Law
by which men hold their inheritances. And therefore if a man speak of Escuage
generally, it is understood (as Littleton observes) of the uncertain Escuage,
which is a Knights-Service Tenure for the defense of the Realm by the body of
the Tenant in time of war, and not of the certain Escuage, which gives only
a contribution in money, and no personal service.

And if a Statute speaks of the Kings Courts of Record, it is meant only of
the 4 at Westminster. by way of excellency, Coke 6.20. Gregorie's Case. So the
Canonists by the excommunication simply spoken, do intend the greater
excommunication and the Emperor in his Institutions says, that the Civil Law
being spoken generally, is meant of the Civil Law of Rome; though the Law of
every City is a Civil Law: as when a man names the Poet, the Grecians
understood Homer, the Latinists Virgil.

Secondly, admit that per legem terrae extends to all the Laws of the Realm,
yet a man must not be committed by any of them, but by the due proceedings that
are exercised by those Laws, and upon a Cause delivered.

Again it was urged, that the King was not bound to express the cause of
imprisonment, because there may be in it matter of State, not fit to be
revealed for a time, lest the Confederates thereupon make means to escape the
hands of Justice. And thereupon the Statutes cannot be intended to restrain all
commitments unless a cause be expressed, for that it would be very
inconvenient and dangerous to the State to publish the cause at the very first.

Answer.

Hereupon it was replied by the House of Commons, that all danger and
inconvenience may be avoided by declaring a general Cause, as for treason,
suspicion of treason, misprision of treason, or felony, without specifying the
particular, which can give no greater light to a Confederate then will be
conjectured by his very apprehension upon the imprisonment, if nothing at all
were expressed.

It was further alleged, that there was a kind of contradiction in the
position of the Commons, when they say the party committed without a cause
showed ought to be delivered or bailed: Bailing being a kind of imprisonment,
Delivery a total freeing.

To this it was answered, that it has always been the discretion of the
Judges to give so much respect to a Commitment by the Command of the King, or
the Privy Council, (which are ever intended to be done on just and weighty
Causes) that they will not presently set him free, but bail him to answer what
shall be objected against him on his Majesty's behalf. But if any other
inferior Officer commit a man without a cause showed, they do instantly
deliver him, as having no cause to expect their pleasure. So the Delivery is
applied to an imprisonment by the command of some mean minister of Justice,
Bailing when it is done by the Command of the King or his Council.

It was said by Mr Attorney, That Bailing was a grace and favor of a Court of
Justice, and that they may refuse to do it.

This was agreed to be true in diverse cases, as where the case does appear to
be for felony, or other crimes expressed; for that there is another way to
discharge them in some convenient time, by their trial: and yet in some of
these cases the constant practice has been anciently and modernly to bail
them. But where no cause of the imprisonment is returned but the Command of the
King, there is no way to deliver such persons by trial or otherwise, but that
of the habeas Corpus; and if they should be then remanded, they may be
perpetually imprisoned without any remedy at all, and consequently a man that
had committed no offense, be in worse case then a great Offender; for the
latter should have an ordinary trial to discharge him, the other should never
be delivered.

It was further said that though the Statute of Westminster. 1. cap. 15. as a Statute
by way of provision did extend only to the Sheriff, yet the recital of that
Statute touching the 4 cases wherein a man was not replevisable at the Common
Law, namely those that were committed for the death of a man, by the command of
the King, or the Justices, or for the Forest, did declare that the Justices
could not bail such a one, and that Replevisable and Bailable were Synonyma
and all one, and that Stamford a Judge of great authority does expound it
accordingly, and that neither the Statute, nor he says replevisable by the
Sheriff, but generally without restraint, and that if the Chief Justice commits
a man, he is not to be enlarged by another Court, as appears in the Register.

To this it was answered; First, that the recital and body of the Statute
relates only to the Sheriff, as appears by the very words. Secondly, that
replevisable is not restrained to the Sheriffs, for that the words import no
more that a man committed by the Chief Justice is bailable by the Court of
Kings Bench. Thirdly, that Stamford means all of the Sheriff, or at least he
has not sufficiently expressed that he intended the Justices. Fourthly, It was
denied that Replevisable and Bailable were the same; for they differ in respect
of the place where they are used, Bail being in the Kings Court of Record,
Replevisable before the Sheriff: and they are of several natures, Replevisable
being a letting at large upon Sureties, Bailing being when one Traditur in
ballium, and the Bail are his Gaolers, and may imprison him, and shall suffer
body for body, which is not true of replevying by sureties. And Bail
differs from Mainprize in this, that Mainprize is an undertaking in a sum
certain, Bailing is to answer the condemnation in Civil causes, and in
Criminal body for body.


The reasons and authorities used in the first Conference were then renewed,
and no exception taken to any, save in 22. H. 6. it does not appear that the
Command of the King was by his mouth, which must be intended; or by his
Council, which is all one, as is observed by Stamford, for the words are
these, That a man is not replevisable by the Sheriff, who is committed by the
Writ or Commandment of the King.

21. E. 1. rot. 2. dorso was cited by the Kings Counsel. But it was answered,
that it concerned the Sheriff of Leicester only, and not the power of the
Judges. 33. H. 6. the Kings Attorney confesses was nothing to the purpose: and
yet that Book has been usually cited by those that maintain the contrary to
the Declaration of the House of Commons. And therefore such sudden opinion as
has been given thereupon is not to be regarded, the foundation failing.

And where it was said, that the French of 36. E 3. Rot. Parliament. 9. which
can receive no answer, did not warrant what was inferred thence, but that these
words Sans disturbance mettre ou arrest fair et le contre par special
commandment ou en autre maniere, must be understood, that the Statutes should
be put in execution without putting disturbance, or making arrest to the
contrary by special command or in other manner: The Commons did utterly deny
the interpretation given by the Kings Counsel, and to justify their own did
appeal to all men that understood French, and upon the 7 Statutes did conclude,
That their Declaration remained in undoubted truth, not controlled by any thing
said to the contrary.

The true Copies of the Records not printed which were used on either side of
that part of the debate.
INter Recorda domini Regis Caroli in Thesauro Recepto Scacarii sui sub
custodia domini Thesaurarii et Camerarii ibidem remanentia, viz. placita coram
ipso Domino Rege and Concilio suo ad Parliament. suum post Pascham apud London,
in M^nerio Archipiscopi Ebor. Anno Regni Domini Regis Edw. vicessimo primo,
inter alia sie continetur, ut sequitur.

Rot. secundo in Dorso. Vic. Leic. sci.
Stephanus Rubaz Vic. Leic. and War. coram ipso Domino Rege and ejus concilio
arianatus and ad Levem positus de hoc quod cum Io. Botetourte, Edel Hatche, and
W. Hemelin. nuper in ballium ipsius vicecom. per Dominum Regem fuissent
assignati and Goalas Domini Regis celiberandum eidem vic. quendam W. de Petling
per quendam Appellatorem ante adventum eorundam Justic. ibidem appellatum and
captum vivente ipso appellatore usque diem deliberationis coram eis fact
demisit per plevinam contra formam statuti etc. Et etiam quendam Radulphum de
Cokehall qui de morte hominis indictatus fuit and per eundem vicecom. captus.
Idem vicecomes per plevinam dimisit contra formam statuti and etiam eundem
Radulphum sine ferris coram eisdem Justitiariis ad deliberationem predictam
produxit contra consuetudinem Regni and simile quendam Will. filium Walteri le
Person qui per preceptum Com. War. captus fuit dimisit per plevinam contra
voluntatem and preceptum Domini Regis. Cum idem Dominus Rex sub Litteras suas
sub privato figillo suo eidem vic. praecepit quod nulli per praeceptum
praedicti Com. War. capt. aliquam gratiam faciat, etc. Et super hoc praefatus
Johannes Botetourt qui presens est and qui fuit primus Justic. predicorum
premissa recordatur.

Et praedictus vicecomes dicit quo ad praedictum Will. de Petlings quod ipse
nunquam a tempore captionis ipsius Will. per praedictum appellatorem demissus
fuit per plevinam aliquam ante adventum praedictorum Justitiariorum, Imo dicit
quod per dimidium anni ante adventum eorum Justic. captus fuit, and semper
detentus in prisona absque plevina aliqua quousque coram eisdem damnatus fuit
and quo ad praedictum Radulphum been cognoscit quod ipse dimisit eum per
plevinam and hoc benefacere potuit ratione and authoritate officii sui eo quod
captus fuit pro quodam simplici transgressione and non pro aliqua felonia pro
qua replegiari non potuit and quo ad tertium viz. Will. filium Person been
cognoscit quod ipse captus fuit per praeceptum praedicti Com. War. and quod
dimisit eum per plevinam sed dicit quod hoc fecit, ad rogatum quorundam de
hospitio and curia Domini Regis etc. qui eum inde specialiter rogaverunt per
literas suas and super hoc idem Vic. quaesitus per Dominum Regem quis eum
rogavit and literas suas ei direxit and ubi litera ille sunt dicit quod
Walterius de langton eum per literas suas inde rogavit sed dicit quod breve
ille sunt in partibus suis Leic. and super hoc idem Vic. profert quoddam breve
Domini Regis de Privato Sigillo eidem vicecomiti directum quod restatur quod
dominus Rex ipsi vicecomiti praecepit quod omnes illos transgressiones contra
pacem and de quibus Com. War. ei scire facerit caperet and salvo custodierit
absque aliqua gratia eis faciend. and quia praedictus Justitiar. express
recordatur quod ipse and socii sui per bonu. and Legal. inquisitionem de
militibus and aliis hominibus coram eis fact. invenerunt quod predictus
Willielmus de Petlings demissus fuit per plevinam per magnum tempus ante
adventum eorundam and per vicecomite praedicto, and etiam quia predictus vic.
cognoscit quod praedictus Radulphus demissus fuit per plevinam per ipsum vic.
and hoc dicit quod benefacere potuit, eo quod captus fuit pro levi
Transgressione and per Record. ejusdem Justitiarium compertum est, quod captus
fuit pro morte hominis quod est contrarium dicto praedict. vic. and similiter
quod idem vic. cognovit quod recepit literam Domini Regis per quam, Rex ei
praecepit quod nullam gratiam fecerit, illis quae capti fuerunt per praeceptum
praedicti Comitatis and eidem vic. contra praeceptum illud dimissit praedictum
Will. filium Walteri per plevinam qui captus fuit per praeceptum praedicti
Comitatis prout idem vic. fatetur and sic tum ratione istius transgressione
quam aliorum praedictorum incidit in poenam statuti Constable. est quod praedictus
vic. committitur prisonae juxta formam statuti, etc.

Ex Rotulo Parliament. de Anno Regis Edw. Tertii tricessimo sexto Number. 9.
Primierent a la grand Chartre et la Chartre de Foreste et les autres estatuts
faits en son temps et des ses Progenitors pour profit de lui et de la
Commonalty bien et ferment guarder et mis en due execution sans disturbance
mettre ou arrest. fair len contre par special mandament on en auter manner.
Nostre seignieur le Roy per assent de Prelatts Countes Barons et la Commonalty
ad ordeine et establi et les dits Chartres et statutes soient tenurs et mis en
execution selon la dit petition.

Numero 20.
Item come il soit convenuts en la grand Chartre et autres estatuts and null
homine spoit pris ne imprison per special mandament sans enditement ou autre
due process affair per la loy et sonent faite ad este et uncore est et
pluseurs gentes sont empescher pris et imprisones sans enditement on autre,
process fait per la loi sur eux sibien de chose faite horse de la forest du Roy
cum pour autre cause que pliese Seigneur le Roy dit nostre etc. Commander et
deluier ceux et sont ausi pris per tiel especial mandament Contra le form des
Chartres avantdit dits.

Resp. It pleist au Roy et simul le seurs que qui viegne et fait le plaint te
droit lui seura fait.

Parliament. anno 42. E. 3. Number. 12.
Item purce que plusours de vestre Commonalty anients et destinite per faux
accusans queux fout lour accusaments plus per lour vengances et singlers
profits que purla profit du Roy ou de son people et la accusits per eux ascuns
on es pris et ascuns soit fait venire deuant le counsel le Roy per brief en
autre mandament du Roy sur grief Peme en contra la loir. Pleise a nostre le Roy
et son bon Council: pro droit government de son people ordeigne que se desors
ascuns accusore purpose asconet matre pur profit du Roy, et cille matire soit
menda a ses Justices det un Bancks ou del autre ou de assizes dent enquere et
terminere solon la lei et si touch accuser ou parle dit soit sent a le rome
les et null homine soit mis a respondere son presentment de naut Justices en
chose de Records en per due process et brief original solon lanciene Loyde
la Terre et si rien de sore euanant en soit fait a le contre soit void en lei
et ten pur error.

Resp. Purce que ceste article est Article de le grand Chartre le Roy voit que
loy soit fait come la petition demand.

Ex Rot. Clauss. de Anno Regni Regis E. 1. primo Number. 1. M. 1.
Thomas de Clear de Bletchwith captus and detentus in prisona Northampton pro
transgressionibus forrestae habet literas Rogero de Clifford Justic. Deponend.
per ballium.
forest. citra Trent quod ponatur per ballium dat. apud Sanctum Martinum
magnum London. vicessimo die Octobris.

M. 7.
Stephanus de Lyndley captus and detentus in prisona pro transgressione per
ipsum facta in homines Regis de Lyndley habet Literas Regis Galfrido de Nevill
Justic-ultra Trent, quod ponatur per ballium.

M. 9.
Thomas Spademan captus and detentus in prisona Oxon. pro morte Will. Win
unde rectatus est habet Literas Regis Vic. Oxon quod ponatur per ballium.

M. 9.
Willielmus de Deane, Mattheus Crust, Rogerus de Bedell, Willielmus Halfrench,
Robertus Wyall, Alexander Hareing, Harry le Shorn, Nicolas de Sindilond,
Turgesius de Hertfield, Robertus de Pole and Ricardus de Galeas, capti and
detenti in prisona hostra Cant. pro morte Galfridi de Cottillen, unde appellati
sunt, habent Literas Regis Vicecancellario quod ponantur per ballium dat. 23.
die Martii.

Clauss. Anno 2. Edw. 1. Number. 12.
Rex Rogero de Clifford Justic. forest. citra Trent, mandamus vobis quod si
Robertus Vmrin captus and detentus in prisona nostra de Aylsburie pro
transgressione forrestae nostrae invenit vobis 12 probos and legales homines de
balliva nostra qui manucapiant eum habere coram Justiciariis nostris ad placita
forest. cum in parts etc. ad stand. inde rect. tunc ipse Robertus si secundum
Ass. forest. fuerit Replegiabilis per dictos 12. interim tradatur in ballium
sicut praedictum est and habeatis nomina illorum 12. hominium and hoc breve
dat. 27. die Februarii.

Clauss. Number. 2. E. 1. M. 14.
Willielmus de Bryott, Galfridus de Wickerum, and Hugh de Stowe, detent. in
prisona regis de Aylsbury pro transgressione venat. breve direct. Deponend. in
ballium.
Rogero de Clifford Justic. forest quod si secundum ass. Forest. fuerint
repleg. usque advent. Justic. Regis ad placita Forest. cum in parts illas
venerunt dat. apud Coddington. 28. die Decembris.

M. 15.
Gilbertus Gourney de Kedington, and Hugo le Tailour de Kedington, capti and
detenti in prisona de Sancti Edmundi pro morte Edmundi Butting, unde rectati
sunt, habuerint Literas Regis Vic. Suff. quod ponantur per ballium.

Clauss. anno 3. E. 1. M. 11.
Galfridus de Haireton, capt. and detent. in prisona Regis Ebor. pro morte Adel
Clerk unde rectatus est habet Literas Regis Vicecomiti Ebor. quod ponatur per
ballium dat apud Westmonasterium vicessimo octavo die Iunii.

Membr. 20.
Robertus Belbarbe captus and detentus in prisona Regis de Newgate pro morte
Thomae Pollard, unde rectatus est, habeat Literas Regis Vic. Midd. quod ponatur
per ballium dat 28. die Februarii.

Clauss. Number. quarto. E. 1. M. 5.
Mandat est Radulpho de Sandwich quod si Willielmus de Pattare and Johannes
filius ejus, Walterius Home, Walterius Corneum, Henericus Patch, and Willielmus
Cardegan capt. and detent. in prisona Regis de Sancto Bryanello pro
transgressione forest. unde rectat. sunt, induunt sibi 12 probos and legales
homines de Balliva sua (viz.) quilibet eorum duodecim qui eos manucapierent
breve coram Justic. Regis ad placita forr: cum in parts illas venerunt ad
stand. inde rect. tunc ipsos Will. Ioh. Henr. and Will. praedict. duodecimo
secundum ass. forr. fuerint replegiand. traditur in Ballium ut praedict. est si
habeant nomina illorum duodecem hominum and hoe breve Test rege apud Bellum
locum Regis vicessimo nono die Augusti.

Clauss. anno 4. E. 1. M. 16.
Henricus filius Rogeri de Ken de Cotesbrook, capt and detent. in prisona
nostra Northampton pro morte Simonis le Charreter unde appellatus est habet
Literas Regis Vic. Northampton quod ponatur per ballium.

Clauss. anno quinto E. 1. M. 1.
Mandat est Galfrido de Nevill Justic. Forest. ultra Trent quod si Walter de
Le Greve capt and. detent. in prisona de Not. pro transgressione forest
invenerit sibi 12 probos and legales homines etc. qui eum manucapiunt etc. ad
stand. inde rect. secundum Ass. Forr. Regis tunc ipsum Walterum praedict. 12
traditur in ballium sicut praedict. est dat. 16. die Novembris.

Mem. 2.
Thomas de Vpwell and Iul. uxor ejus capti and detenti in prisona de
VVyn^otestan pro morte Stephano Southell unde rectati sunt, habent Litteras
Vicecom. Norff. quod ponatur per ballium, dat apud Rochelan vicesimo octavo die
Septembris.

Clauss. anno 6. E. 1. Number. 2.
Bitheries Peste captus and detentus in prisona Regis de Norwich pro morte
Julian quondam ux. suae unde rectatus est habet Literas Vicecomiti Norfolciae,
quod ponatur per ballium Test Rege apud Westmonasterium duodecimo die
Novembris.

M. 4.
Mandat est Vicecomiti Notting. scilicet quod Thomas de Cadurte rectat. de
transgressione forr. quam fecisse dicebatur in forresta de Sherwood, invenerit
sibi sex probos and legales homines de balliva sua qui eum manucapiunt habere
coram Rege ad mandat. Reg. ad stand. rect. coram Rege cum Rex inde cum eum
loqui voluerit tunc praedict. Thomas sex hominibus traditur in ballium juxta
manucapt. supra dict. dat decimo quinto die Decembris.

M. 4.
Thomas Burell captus and detentus in prisona Regis Exon pro morte Galfridi
Geffard unde rectatus est, habet Literas vicecomiti Devon. quod ponatur per
ballium.

Clauss. anno primo Edw. 2. Membr. 1.
Johannes Brun, de Rollenwrith captus and detentus in prisona Regis Oxon. pro
morte Iohannis de Sutton, unde rectatus est, habet Literas Regis Vicecomiti
Oxon. quod ponatur per ballium usque ad primam Ass. si ea occasion etc. Test
Rege apud Bristoll, 28 die Iunii.

M. 2.
Will. Spore Capellanus captus and detentus in prisona Regis Exon. pro morte
Iohannis Spore, unde indictatus est, habet Literas Regis Viceco^^ti Devon. quod
ponatur per ballium usque ad primam Assisam, si ea occasion, etc. Test Rege
apud Wynds. 28 die Maii.

Numero 10.
Gilbertus Fairchild, captus and detentus in Gaola Regis Dorcestr. pro morte
Henri^. de Langton molendinarii unde indictatus est habet Literas quod ponatur
per ballium usque ad primam Assisam, T. Rege apud Westminster. 28 die Februarii.

Clauss. anno 2. E. 2. M. 1.
Willielmus Sandre de Cobeham, captus and detentus in prisona Regis Cant. pro
morte Iohannis de sprincke Iohannis Ermond de Dunberke unde rectatus est, habet
Literas Vicecancellario quod ponatur per ballium usque ad primam Assisam si ea
occasion etc. Test Rege apud Cestr. vicessimo octavo die Iunii.

Radulphus Cosyn, captus and detentus in Gaola Regis Lanc. pro morte Will.
filius Simonis Le Porter, unde rectatus est habet Literas Regis Vic. Lanc. quod
ponatur per ballium usque ad primum Assisam si ea occasion, etc. Test Rege
apud Shene tertio die Iunii.

M. 7.
Johannes de Githerd captus and detentus in prisona Regis Eborac. pro morte
Matthew. Sampson de Eborac. unde rectatus est, habet Literas Regis vicecomiti
Ebor. quod traditur per ballium usque ad primam Assisam dat. apud Langele
quinto die Aprilis.

Clauss. anno tertio Edw. 2. M. 3.
Adam le Pepper captus and detentus in Gaola Regis Ebor. pro morte Henrici Le
Sumer de Estricke, Deponend. in ballium.
unde rectatus est, habet Literas Regis Vicecomiti Ebor. quod ponatur per
ballium usque ad primam Assisam Test Rege apud Westminster. septimo die Februarii.

N. 14.
Margaret uxor Willielmi Calbot capta and detenta in Gaola Regis Norwici pro
morte Agnet filiae Willielmi Calbot and Maltidae sororis ejusdem Agnetis, unde
rectata est, habet Literas Regis Vicecomiti Norfolciae, quod ponatur per
ballium T. Rege apud Shene 22. die Ianuarii.

N. 16.
Johannes Friar captus and detentus in Goala Regis Exon. pro morte Ade de
Egolegh, unde rectatus est, habet Literas Regis Vicecomiti Devon. quod ponatur
per ballium Test Rege apud Westminster. septimo die Decembris.

Clauss anno 4. E. 2. M. 7.
Robertus Sheren captus and detentus in Gaola Regis de Colchester pro morte
Roberti Le Maigne unde rectatus est, habet Literas Regis Vicecomiti Essex. quod
ponatur per ballium usque ad primam Assisam dat 22 die Maii.

M. 8.
Willielmus filius Roberti Le Fishere de Shirbourne, captus and detentus in
Goala Regis Ebor. pro morte Roberti Le Monnez de Norton, unde rectatus est,
habet Literas Regis Vicecomiti Ebor, quod ponatur per ballium usque ad primam
Assisam dat. 25 die Aprilis.

Clauss. anno 4. Edw. 2. N. 22.
Thomas Ellis de Stamford captus and detentus in prisona Regis Lincoln, pro
morte Mich. filii Willielmi de Foddering, unde rectatus est habet Literas Regis
Vicecomiti Lincoln, quod ponatur per ballium usque ad primam Assisam Test rege
apud novum Monasterium octavo die Septembris.

The Argument which by command of the House of Commons, was made at their first
conference with the Lords, touching the Liberty of the person of every
Freeman, out of Presidents of Record and Resolutions of Judges in former
times, by Mr Seldom.
My Lords,
YOur Lordships have heard from the Gentleman that last spoke a great part of
the grounds upon which the House of Commons, after mature deliberation,
proceeded to that clear resolution touching the right of Liberty of their
persons. The many Acts of Parliament (which are the written Laws of the Land,
and are expressly in the point) have been read and opened, and such objections
as have been by some made to them, and some other objections also made out of
other Acts of Parliament, have been clearly answered.

It may seem now perhaps, my Lords, that little remains needful to be further
added for the enforcement and maintenance of so fundamental and established a
right and liberty belonging to every Freeman of the Kingdom.

But in the examination of Questions of Law or Right, besides the Laws or Acts
of Parliament, that ought chiefly to regulate and direct every man's judgment,
whatsoever has been put in practice to the contrary; there are commonly also
used former Judgments or Presidents: and they indeed have been so used
sometimes, that the weight of Reason, of Law, and Acts of Parliament has been
laid by, and resolutions have been made, and that in this very point, only upon
the interpretation and apprehension of Presidents.

But Presidents, my Lords, are good media or proofs of illustration or
confirmation when they agree with the express Law; but they can never be proof
enough to overthrow any one Law, much less seven several Acts of Parliament,
as the number of them is for this point.

The House of Commons therefore taking into consideration, that in this
Question (being of so high a nature that never any exceeded it in any Court of
Justice whatsoever) all the several ways of just examination of the truth
should be used, have also most carefully informed themselves of all former
Judgments or Presidents concerning this great point either way, and have been
no less careful of the due preservation of his Majesty's just Prerogative,
then of their own Rights.

The Presidents here are of two kinds: either merely matter of Record, or else
the former resolutions of Judges after solemn debate in the point.

This part that concerns the Presidents the House of Commons have commanded me
to present to your Lordships, which I shall as briefly as I may; so I shall do
it also faithfully and perspicuously.

To that end, my Lords, before I come to the particulars of any of these
Presidents, I shall first remember to your Lordships that which serves as a
general key for the opening and true apprehension of all them of Record,
without which key no man (unless he be verst in the Entries and Court of the
King's Bench) can possibly understand them.

In all cases, my Lords, where any right or Liberty belongs to the Subject by
any positive Law, written or unwritten, if there were not also a remedy by Law
for the enjoying or regaining of this right or Liberty when it is violated or
taken from him, the positive Law were in vain; and to no purpose were it for
any man to have right in any land or other Inheritance, if there were not a
known remedy, that is an Action or Writ, by which in so me court of ordinary
Justice he might recover it. And in this case of right of Liberty of the
Person, if there were not a remedy in the Law for regaining it when it is
restrained, it were to no purpose to speak of Laws that ordain it should not
be restrained.

Therefore in this case also I shall first observe the remedy that every
Freeman is to use for the regaining of his Liberty when he is against Law
imprisoned, that so upon the legal course and form to be held in using that
remedy, the Presidents or Judgments upon it (for all Presidents of Record rise
out of this Remedy) may be easily understood.

There are in the the Law diverse remedies for enlargement of a Freeman
imprisoned, as the Writs of odio and atia, and of homine replegiando, besides
the common and most known Writ of habeas Corpus, or Corpus cum causa, as it is
called also.

The first two are Writs to be directed to the Sheriff of the County, and lie
only in some particular cases, with which it would be untimely for me to
trouble your Lordships, because they concern not that which is committed to my
charge.

But that Writ of habeas Corpus or Corpus cum causa, is the highest remedy in
Law for him that is imprisoned by the special command of the King, or of the
Lords of the Council, without showing cause of the commitment. Neither is
there any such thing in the Laws of this Land, as a Petition of Right to be
used in such cases for the Liberty of the person, nor is there any other legal
Course to be taken for enlargement in such cases, howsoever the contrary has
upon no ground or color of Law been pretended.

Now, my Lords, if any man be so imprisoned by any such command or otherwise,
in any prison whatsoever through England, and desire either by himself, or any
other in his behalf this Writ of habeas Corpus (for the purpose) in the Court
of King's Bench; the Writ is to be granted to him, and ought not to be denied
him, no otherwise then any ordinary original Writ in the Chauncery or other
common process of Law may be denied: Which, amongst other things, the House of
Commons has resolved also upon mature deliberation, and I was commanded to let
your Lordships know so much.

This Writ is to be directed to the Keeper of the Prison in whose custody the
Prisoner remains, commanding him that at a certain day he bring in the body of
the Prisoner, ad subjiciendum and recipiendum juxta quod Curia consideraverit,
and una cum causa captionis and detentionis; and oftentimes una cum causa
detentionis only, captionis being omitted.

The Keeper of the Prison thereupon returns by what Warrant he detaines the
Prisoner, and with his Return filed to his Writ brings the Prisoner to the
Bar at the time appointed.

When the Return is thus made, the Court judges of the sufficiency or
insufficiency of it only out of the body of it, without having respect to any
other thing whatsoever: that is, they are to suppose the Return to be true
whatsoever it be. For if it be false, the party may have his remedy by action
on the case against the Jailer that brings him.

Now, my Lords, when this Prisoner comes thus to the Bar, if he desires to be
bailed, and that the Court upon view of the Return think him in Law to be
bailed; then he is always first taken from the Keeper of the Prison that
brings him, and committed to the Marshall of the Kings Bench, and afterward
bailed; and the Entry perpetually is Committitur Mar. and postea traditur in
ballium. For the Court never bailes any man until he becomes their own
Prisoner, and be in custodia Marescalli of that Court.

But if upon return of the habeas Corpus it appears to the Court that the
Prisoner ought not to be bailed, nor discharged from the Prison whence he is
brought, then he is remanded or sent back again, there to remain until by
Course of Law he may be delivered. And the Entry in such case is Remittitur
quousque secundum legem deliberatus fuerit, or Remittitur quousque etc. which
is all one, and is the highest award or Judgment that ever was or can be given
upon a habeas Corpus.

But if the Judges doubt only whether in Law they ought to take him from the
prison whence he came, or give day to the Sheriff to amend his Return, (as
often they do) then they remand him only during the time of their debate, or
until the Sheriff has amended his Return; and the Entry upon it is
Remittitur only, or Remittitur prisonae predict. without any more. And so
remittitur generally is of far less moment in the award upon the habeas
Corpus, then remittitur quousque: howsoever vulgar opinions raised out of the
fame of the late Judgment be to the contrary.

All these things are of most known and constant use in the Court of Kings
Bench, as it cannot be doubted but your Lordships will easily know also from
the grave and learned, my Lords the Judges.

These two causes, the one of the Entry of Committitur Marescallo and postea
traditur in ballium, and the other Remittitur quousque, and Remittitur
generally, or Remittitur prisonae predict. together with the nature of the
habeas Corpus, being thus stated, it will be easier for me to open, and your
Lordships to observe whatsoever shall occur to this purpose in the Presidents
of Record; to which I shall come in particular.

But before I come to the Presidents, I am to let your Lordships know the
resolution of the House of Commons touching the enlargement of any man
committed by the command of the King, or of the Privy Council, or of any
other, without cause showed of such commitment. It is thus:

That if a Freeman be committed, or detained in prison, or otherwise
restrained by the Command of the King, the Privy Council, or any other, and
no cause of such commitment, detainer, or restraint be expressed, for which by
Law he ought to be committed, detained, or restrained, and the same be returned
upon a habeas Corpus granted for the party, that then he ought to be delivered
or bailed.

This resolution as it is grounded upon those Acts of Parliament already
showed, and the reason of the Law of the Land, which is committed to the charge
of another, and an one to be opened unto you; is strengthened also by many
Presidents of Record,

But the Presidents of Record that concern this point are of two kinds: for
the House of Commons has informed it self of such as concern it either way.

The first, such as show expressly that persons committed by the Command of the
King, or of the Privy Council, without any cause showed, have been enlarged
upon Bail when they prayed it. Whence it appears clearly that by Law they
were bailable, and so by habeas Corpus to be set at liberty. For although they
ought not to have been committed without cause shown of their commitment; yet
it is true that the reverend Judges of this Land in former Ages, did give such
a respect to such commitment by Command of the King or of the Lords of the
Council, (as also to the commitments sometimes of inferior persons) that upon
the habeas Corpus they rarely used absolutely to discharge the prisoners
instantly, but to enlarge them only upon Bail, which sufficiently secures and
preserves the Liberty of the Subject according to the Laws that your Lordships
have already heard. Nor in any of these cases is there any difference made
between any such commitments by the King, and commitments by the Lords of the
Council that are incorporated with him.

The second kind of Presidents of Record are such as have been pretended to
prove the Law to be contrary, and that persons so committed ought not to be
set at liberty upon Bail, and are in the nature of Objections out of Record.

I shall deliver them summarily to your Lordships with all faith, as also the
true Copies of them: Out of which it shall appear clearly to your Lordships,
that of those of the first kind there are no less then twelve most full and
directly in the point to prove that persons so committed are to be delivered
upon bail; and among those of the other kind there is not so much as one that
proves at all any thing to the contrary.

I shall first, my Lords, go through them of the first kind, and so observe
them to your Lordships, that such scruples as have been made upon them by some
that have excepted against them, shall be cleared also according as I shall
open them severally.

The first of this first kind is of Edw. 3. time. It is in Pasche 18. E. 3.
Rot. 33. Rex. The case was thus. King E. 3. had committed by Writ, and that
under his Great Seal (as most of the Kings Commands in that time were) one John
de Bidleston a Clergie-man to the prison of the Tower, without any cause showed
of the commitment. The Lieutenant of the Tower is commanded to bring him into
the Kings Bench, where he is committed to the Marshall. But the Court asked of
the Lieutenant if there were any cause to keep this Bidleston in prison,
besides that commitment of the King. He answered, No. Whereupon (as the Roll
says) Quia videtur Curiae breve predictum (that is the Kings Command)
sufficientem non esse causam predictum Johannem de Bidleston in prisona Mar.
Regis hic detinend* idem Johannes dimittitur per manucaptionem Will. de
Wakefield and some others. Where the Judgment of the Court is fully declared
in the very point.

The second of this first kind of Presidents of Record is in the time of H. the
8. One John Parker was committed to the Sheriffs of London pro securitate
pacis, at the Suit of one Brinton, ac pro suspicione fellonie committed by him
at Cowall in Glocestershire, ac per mandatum Dni. Regis: he is committed to the
Marshall of the Kings Bench, and postea isto eodem Termino traditur in Ballium.
There were other causes of the commitment, but plainly one was a Command of the
King signified to the Sheriff of London, of which they took notice.

But some have interpreted this as if the commitment here had been for
suspicion of felony by command of the King; in which case it is agreed of all
hands that the Prisoner is bailable.

But no man can think so of this President, that observes the Contents and
understands the Grammar of it, wherein most plainly, ac per mandatum Regis has
no reference to any other cause whatsoever, but is a single cause enumerated in
the Return by it self, as the Record clearly shows. It is in the 22. H. 8.
Rot. 37.

The third is of the same time. It is 35. H. 8. Rot. 33. John Bincks case. He
was committed by the Lords of the Council pro suspicione fellonie, ac pro
aliis causis illos moventibus. Qui committitur Marescallo, etc. et immediate ex
gratia curiae special. traditur in ballium.

They commit him for suspicion of felony, and other causes them thereunto
moving, wherein there might be matter of State, or whatsoever else can be
supposed, and plainly the cause of the commitment is not expressed; yet the
Court bailed him without having regard to those other unknown causes that moved
the Lords of the Council.

But it is indeed somewhat different from either of those other two that
precede, and from the other nine that follow; For it is agreed, That if a cause
be expressed in the return, insomuch as the Court can know why he is committed,
that then he may be bailed; but not if they know not the cause. Now when a man
is committed for a cause expressed, and pro aliis causis Dominos de Concilio
moventibus, certainly the Court can no more know in such a case what the cause
is, then in any other.

The fourth of these is in the time of Queen Mary. It is Pasche 2. and 3. Phil.
and Mar. Rot. 58. Overtons case. Richard Overton was returned, upon a habeas
Corpus directed to the Sheriffs of London, to have been committed to them and
detained per mandatum prenobilium virorum honorabilis Concilii Dominorum Regis
and Reginae. Qui committitur Marescallo etc. immediate traditur in ballium.

In answer to this President, or by way of objection against the force of it,
has been said that this Overton stood at that time indicted of Treason. It is
true, he was so indeed, but that appears in another Roll, that has no
reference to the Return, as the Return has no reference to that Roll.

Yet they that object this against the force of this President say, That
because he was indicted of Treason, therefore, though he was committed by the
command of the Lords of the Council without cause showed, yet he was bailable
for the Treason, and upon that was here bailed. Then which Objection nothing
can be or is more contrary to Law or common Reason.

It is most contrary to Law, for that clearly every Return is to be adjudged
by the Court out of the body of the Writ it self, and not by any other
collateral or foreign Record whatsoever. Therefore the matter of Indictment
here cannot in Law be cause of the bailing of the Prisoner.

And it is so adverse to all common Reason, that if the objection be admitted,
it must of necessity follow that whosoever shall be committed by the King or
the Privy Council, without cause showed, and be not indicted of Treason or
some other offense, may not be enlarged by reason of the supposition of matter
of State. But that whosoever is so committed, and withal stands so indicted,
though in another Record, may be enlarged, whatsoever the matter of State be
for which he was committed. The absurdity of which assertion needs not a word
for further confutation: as if any of the Gent. in the last Judgment ought to
have been the sooner delivered if he had been also indicted of Treason.
Certainly if so, Traitors and Fellons had the highest privileges of personal
Liberty, and that above all other Subjects of the Kingdom.

The first of this first kind is of Queen Marie's time also. It is Pasche 4.
and 5. P. and M. Rot. 45. the Case of Edward Newport. He was brought into the
Kings Bench by habeas Corpus out of the Tower of London cum causa, viz. Quod
commissus fuit per mandatum Conciliorum Dominae Reginae. Qui committitur Mar.
etc. et immediate traditur in ballium.

To this the like kind of answer has been made as in that other Case of
Overton next before cited. They say that in another Roll of another Term of
the same year, it appears he was in question for suspicion of Coining. And it
is true, he was so: But the Return and this Commitment mentioned in it have no
reference to any such offense, nor has the Bailment of him relation to any
thing, but to the absolute Commitment by the Privy Council. So that the
answer to the like objection made against Overton's Case satisfies this also.

The sixth of these is of Q. Elizabeth's days. It is Mich. 9. Eliz, Rot. 35.
the Case of Thomas Lawrence. This Lawrence came in by habeas Corpus, returned
by the Sheriffs of London to be detained in prison per mandatum Concilii
Dominae Reginae. Qui committitur Marescallo, etc. and super hoc traditur in
ballium.

An Objection has been invented against this also. It has been said that this
man was pardoned: and indeed it appears so in the margent of the Roll, where
the word pardonatur is entered. But clearly his enlargement by Bail was upon
the Body of the Return only, unto which that Note of Pardon in the Margent of
the Roll has no relation at all. And can any man think that a man pardoned
(for what offense soever it be) might not as well be committed for some Arcanum
or matter of State, as one that is pardoned?

The seventh of these is in the same year, and of Easter Term following. It
is Pasche 9. Eliz. Rot. 68. Robert Constable's Case. He was brought by habeas
Corpus out of the Tower, and in the Return it appeared he was committed per
mandatum privati Concilii dict. Dominae Regina. Qui committitur Mar. and
postea isto codem Termino traditur in ballium.

The like Objection has been made to this, as to that before of Lawrence: but
the self same Answer clearly satisfies for both of them.

The eighth is of the same Queens time, in Pasche 20. Eliz. Rot. 72. John
Browning's Case. This Browning came by habeas Corpus out of the Tower whether
he had been committed, and was returned to have been committed per privatum
Concilium Dominae Reginae. Qui committitur Maresc. Et postea isto codem Termino
traditur in ballium.

To this it has been said, That it was done at the chief Justice Wraye's
Chamber, and not in Court: and thus the authority of the President has been
lessened and slighted. If it had been at his Chamber, it would have proved at
least thus much, That Sr Christopher Wraye then chief Justice of the King's
Bench, being a grave, learned and upright Judge, knowing the Law to be so, did
bail this Browning, and so enlarge him. And even so far were the President
of value enough. But it is plain that though the habeas Corpus were returnable
indeed (as it appears in the Record it self) at his Chamber in Serjeant's
Inn, yet he only committed him to the Kings Bench presently, and referred the
consideration of enlarging him to the Court, who afterward did it. For the
Record says, Et postea isto eodem Termino traditur in ballium: which cannot be
intended of an enlargement at the chief Justice his Chamber.

The ninth of this first kind is in Hill. 40. Eliz. Rot. 62. Edward Harecourts
Case. He was imprisoned in the Gate House, and that per Dominos de privato
Concilio Dominae Reginae pro certis causis eos moventibus et ei ignotis, and
upon his habeas Corpus was returned to be therefore only detained. Qui
committitur Mar. etc. Et postea isto eodem Termino traditur in ballium.

To this never any color of answer has been yet offered.

The tenth is Catesbies Case in the Vacation after Hillary Term 43. E. Rot.
37. Robert Catesby was committed to the Fleet per warrant diversorum
prenobilium virorum de privato Concilio Dominae Reginae. He was brought before
Justice Fennor, one of the Judges of the Kings Bench, by habeas Corpus at
Winchester House in Southwark, and commissus fuit Mar. per praefat. Edw.
Fennor, and statim traditur in ballium.

The eleventh is Richard Beckwith's Case, which was in Hillary 12. of King
James, R. 153. He was returned upon his habeas Corpus to have been committed to
the Gate House by diverse Lords of the Privy Council, Qui committitur Mar. and
postea isto Termino traditur in ballium.

To this it has been said by some, that Beckwith was bailed upon a Letter
written by the Lords of the Council to that purpose to the Judges. But it
appears not that there was ever any letter written to them to that purpose;
which though it had been, would have proved nothing against the authority of
the Record. For it was never before heard of that Judges were to be directed in
point of Law by letters from the Lords of the Council; although it cannot be
doubted but that by such letters sometimes they have been moved to bail men
that would not, or did not ask their enlargement without such letters; as in
some examples that I shall show your Lordships among the Presidents of the
second kind.

The twelfth and last of these is that of Sr Thomas Mounson's. It is Mich. 14.
Iacobi Rot. 147. He was committed to the Tower per warrantum a diversis Dominis
de privato Concilio Domini Regis Locum-tenenti directum, and was returned by
the Lieutenant to be therefore detained in prison. Qui committitur Mar. and
super hoc traditur in ballium.

To this it has been answered, That every body knew by common fame that this
Gentleman was committed for suspicion of the death of Sr Thomas Overbury, and
that he was therefore bailable. A most strange interpretation, as if the Body
of the Return and the Warrant of the Privy Council should be understood and
adjudged out of fame only. Was there not as much a fame why the Gentlemen that
were remanded in the late Judgment were committed? and might not the selfsame
reason have served to enlarge them their offense (if any were) being I think
much less then that for which this Gentleman was suspected?

And thus I have faithfully opened the number of twelve Presidents most
express in the very point in question, and cleared the Objections that have
been made against them.

And of such Presidents of Record as are of the first kind, or prove plainly
the practice of former Ages, and Judgments of the Court of the Kings Bench in
the very point in behalf of the Subjects, my Lords, hitherto.

I come next those of the second kind, or such as have been pretended to prove
that persons so committed are not to be enlarged by the Judges upon the habeas
Corpus, but ought to remain in Prison still at the pl^asure of the King or of
the Privy Council.

These are of two natures. The first are those wherein some assent of the King
or the Privy Council appears upon the enlargement of a Prisoner so
committed; as if that because their assent appears, therefore the enlargement
could not have been without such assent.

The second of this kind are those which have been used as express Testimonies
of the Judges denying Bail. And in such cases I shall open this also to your
Lordships, which being done, it will most clearly appear that there is nothing
at all in any of these that make any thing against the Resolution of the House
of Commons touching this point. Nay, they are so far from making any thing
against it, that some of them add good weight also to the proof of that
Resolution.

For those of the first nature of this second kind of Presidents, they begin in
the time of H. 7. Thomas Brugge and diverse others were imprisoned in the Kings
Bench ad mandatum Domini Regis. They never sought remedy by habeas Corpus or
otherwise, for ought appears: but the Roll says, Dominus Rex relaxavit
mandatum, and so they were bailed. But can any man think that this is an
Argument either in Law or common Reason, that therefore they could not have
been bailed without such assent?

It is common in the Cases of common persons, that one being in Prison for
surety of the peace, or the like, at the Suit of another, is bailed upon the
release of the party plaintiff. Can it follow that therefore he could not have
been bailed without such a release? Nothing is more plain then the contrary. It
were the same thing to say that if it appear that a plantiffe be nonsuit,
therefore unless he had been nonsuit he could not have been barred in the
Suit. The Case last cited is M. 7. H. 7. Rot. 6.

The very like is in the same year, Hill. 7. H. 7. Rot. 13. the Case of William
Bartholmew, Williams Case, and diverse others. And the selfsame answer that is
given to the other cleeres this* So in the same year Pasche 7. H. 7. Rot. 18.
John Beaumond's Case is the same in substance with those other two; and the
self same answer also satisfies, that cleeres them.

The next is Mich. 12. H. 7. Rot. 18. Thomas Yewe's Case. He was committed ad
securitatem pacis, for surety of the Peace, at the suit of one Freeman, and
besides ad mandatum Domini Regis. And first Freeman relaxavit securitatem
pacis, and then Sr James Hubbard the then Kings Attorney general relaxavit
Domini Regis mandatum: and hereupon he is bailed. The release of the Kings
Attorney no more proves that he could not have been enlarged without such
release or assent, then that he could not have been bailed without the release
of surety of the Peace by Freeman.

The very like is in Hill. 9. H. 7. Rot. 14. the Case of Humphry Batch: which
proves no more here then the rest of this kind already cited.

Then for this part also Broome's Case of Queen Elizabeth's time has been
cited. The Case is thus, Ter. 39. Eliz. Rot. 118. Lawrence Broom was committed
to the Gate House per mandatum Dominorum Concilii Dominae Reginae, and being
returned so upon the habeas Corpus, is first committed to the Marshalsey, (as
the course is) and then bailed by the Court. Which indeed is an express
President that perhaps might well have been added to the first twelve, which so
plainly shows the practice of enlarging prisoners in this case by Judgment of
the Court upon the habeas Corpus. But it is true that in the Scrolls of that
year where the Bailes are entered, (but not the Record of the habeas Corpus)
there is a note that this Broom was bailed per mandatum privati Concilii super
habeas Corpus. But plainly this is no kind of Argument, that therefore in Law
he ought not to have been otherwise bailed.

The self same is to be said of another of this kind, in Mich. 40. Eliz. Rot.
37. Wenden's Case. Thomas Wenden was committed to the Gate House by the Queen
and Lords of the Council, pro certis causis generally: he is brought by habeas
Corpus into the Kings Bench, and bailed by the Court.

But it is said that in the Scrolls of that year it appears that this
enlargement was per consensum Dominorum privati Concilii. And it is true that
the Queene's Majesty's Attorney did tell the Court that the Lords of the
Council did assent to it. Follows in therefore that this might not have been
by Law done if the parties themselves had desired it?

So in Trinit. primo Iacobi Rot. 30. Sr John Brocket being committed to the
Gate House, is by habeas Corpus returned to stand committed per mandatum
privati Concilii. And he is enlarged virtute warranti a Concilio praedicto. But
the same answer that satisfies for the rest before cited, serves for this also.

The last of these is Reyner's Case in Mich. 12. Jacob. Rot. 119. He was
committed to the Gate House by the Lords of the Council: being brought into
the Kings Bench by habeas Corpus is enlarged upon Bail. But this they say was
upon a letter written by the Lords of the Council to the Judges. It is true
that such a letter was written; but the answer to the former Presidents of this
nature are sufficient to clear this also.

And in all these observe, First, That it appears not the party ever desired
to be enlarged by the Court, or was denied it. Secondly, Letters either of the
Council or from the King cannot alter the Law in any case.

So that hitherto nothing that has been brought for the contrary part has
any force or color of Reason in it.

We come now, my Lords, to those Presidents of the other nature cited against
this Liberty of the Subject, that is, such as have been used to justify that
persons so committed may not be enlarged by the Court.

They are in number eight; but there is not one of them all proves any such
thing, as your Lordships will plainly see upon the opening of them. The first
four of them are exactly in the same words, saving that the names of the
Persons and the Prisons differ. I shall therefore cite them all one after
another, and then clear them together.

The first is Richard Everard's Case, Hill. 7. H. 7. Rot. 18. He and others
were committed to the Marshalsey of the Household per mandatum Domini Regis, and
so returned upon an habeas Corpus in the Kings Bench. whereupon the Entry is
only Qui committitur Narescallo, etc.

The second is Hill. 8. H. 7. Rot. 12. Richard Cherrye's Case. He was committed
to the Major of Windsor per mandatum Domini Regis, and so returned upon an
habeas Corpus: and the Entry is only Qui committitur Maresc. etc.

The third is Hill. 9. H. 7. Rot. 14. Christopher Burton's Case; who was
committed to the Marshalsey of the Household per mandatum Domini Regis, and so
returned upon his habeas Corpus: and the Entry is likewise Qui committitur
Marescallo, etc.

The fourth is George Vrsmick's Case, Pasche 19. H. 7. Rot. 23. He was
committed to the Sheriffs of London per mandatum Domini Regis, and returned so
upon the habeas Corpus, Qui committitur Maresc.

These 4 have been used principally as express Presidents to prove that a
Prisoner so committed cannot be enlarged. And perhaps at the first fight by men
that know not or observe not the course and Entries of the Court of Kings
Bench, they may be apprehended to prove as much: But in truth they rather prove
the contrary; at least there is no such color in them of any such matter as
they have been used for.

To which purpose I beseech your Lordships to call to your memories that which
I first observed to you, touching the course of that Court where a Prisoner is
brought in by habeas Corpus. He is (if he be not to be remanded) first
committed to the Marshall of that Court, and then bailed as his Case requires,
that is so certain as it can never be otherwise. Now these men being thus
committed by the express Command of the King, are first you see taken from the
Prisons where first they were committed. Wherein you may observe by the way, my
Lords, that if a general supposition of matter of State were of force, in such
a case it might be as needful for point of State to have the Prisoners remain
in prison, where the King by such an absolute Command committed them, as to
have them at all committed.

When they have taken them from the Prisons where before they were, they commit
them to the Marshall of their own Court, which is but the first step to bailing
them. Now it appears not indeed that they were bailed, for then traditur in
ballium had followed: but nothing at all appears that they were denied it;
perhaps they never asked it, perhaps they could not find such as were
sufficient to bail them. And in truth whenever any man is but removed from
any Prison in England (though it be for debt or trespass only) into that
Court, the Entry is but in the self-same syllables as in these 4 Cases.

And in truth if these Presidents did prove that any of the Prisoners named in
them were not bailable, or had been thought by the Court to have been not
bailable, it will necessarily follow that no man living that is ordinarily
removed from any other Prison into the Kings Bench, or that is there upon an
ordinary action of debt or action of trespass, could be bailed. For every man
that is brought thither and not remanded, and every man that is but arrested
for debt or trespass, and not returned into that Court, is likewise committed
to the Marshall of that Court, and by the self-same Entry, and no otherwise.
Yet these 4 have been much stood on, and have strangely misled the judgment of
some that either did not, or would seem not to understand the course of the
Court.

The fifth of this nature is Edward Page's Case. It is Trinit. 7. H. 8. Rot.
23. This might have been well reckoned with the former 4. had not the
mis-entrie only of the Clark made it vary from them. Edw. Page was committed
to the Marshalsey of the Household, and that per mandatum Domini Regis, and
returned to be therefore detained: and the Entry is, Qui committitur Mar.
hospitii Domini Regis. And this word Mar. is written in the Margent of the
Roll.

This has been also used to prove that the Judges did remand this Prisoner. If
they had done so, the remanding had been only while they advised, and not any
such award which is given when they adjudge him not bailable. But in truth the
word Committitur shows that it was not any remanding of him: Nor does that
Court ever commit any man to the Marshalsey of the Household. And besides the
word Mar. for Marescallo in the margent, shows plainly that he was committed
to the Marshall of the Kings Bench, and not remanded to the Marshalsey of the
Household. For such Entry of that word in the Margent is perpetually in cases
of that nature, when they commit a man to their own prison, and so give him the
first step to bailment, which he may have if he ask it, and can find bail. And
doubtless those words of hospitii predict. were added by the error of the
Clark, for want perhaps of distinction in his understanding of the Marshall of
the Kings Bench, from the Marshall of the Household.

The sixth of these is Thomas Cesar's Case. It is in the 8. Iacobi Regis, Rot.
99. This Caesar was committed to the Marshalsey of the Household per mandatum
Domini Regis, and returned to be therefore detained; and indeed a remittitur is
in the Roll, but not a remittitur quousque, but only that kind of remittitur
which is used only whiles the Court advises.

And in truth this is so far from proving any thing against the Resolution of
the House of Commons, that it appears that the opinion of the reverend Judges
of that time was, That the Return was insufficient, and that if it were not
amended the Prisoner should be discharged. For in the Book of Rules of that
Court of Mich. Term, when Cesars Case was in question, they did expressly order
that if the Steward and Marshall did not amend their Return, the Prisoner
should be absolutely discharged. The words of the Rule are, Nisi Scenescallus
and Marescallus hospitii Domini Regis sufficienter returnaverint breve de
habeas Corpus Tho, Caesar, die Mercurit proxim. post quindenam sancti Martini
defendens exonerabitur.

And this is all the force of that President, but yet there has been an
interpretation used upon this Rule. It has been said that the Judges gave this
Rule because the truth was that the Return was false; and that it was well
known that the Prisoner was committed not by the immediate Command of the King,
but by the command of the Lord Chamberlain; and thence (as it was said) they
made this Rule. But this kind of interpretation is the first that ever supposed
that Judges should take any notice of the truth or falsehood of any Return,
otherwise then the body of the Return could inform them. And the rule it self
speaks plainly of the sufficiency only, and not of the truth or falsehood of it.

The seventh of these is the Case of James Demetrius, Edward Emerson and some
others, that were Brewers, and were committed to the Marshalsey of the Household
per mandatum Domini Regis, and so returned upon habeas Corpus. And it is true
that the Roll shows they were remanded; but the remanding was only upon
advisement. And indeed the grave and upright Judges of that time, were so
careful least upon the entering of the remanding any such mistake might be, as
might perhaps mislead posterity in so great a point, that they would have
expressly the word immediate added to remittitur, that so all men that should
meet with the Roll might see that it was done for the present only, and not
upon any debate of the question. And besides there is no quousque to it, which
is usually added when the highest award upon debate or resolution of this kind
is given by them.

The eighth of these is the Case of Sr Samuel Saltonstall. It is Hill. 12.
Jacob. He was committed to the Fleet per mandatum Domini Regis, and besides by
the Court of Chauncery, for disobeying an order of that Court; and is returned
upon his habeas Corpus to be therefore detained. And it is true that a
remittitur is entered in the Roll; but it is only a remittitur prisonae predict.
without quousque secundum legem deliberatus fuerit. And in truth it appears in
the Record that the Court gave the Warden of the Fleet 3 several days at
several times to amend his Return, and in the interim remittitur prisonae
predict. still. Certainly if the Court had thought that the Return had been
good, they would not have given so many several days to have amended it. For
if that mandatum Domini Regis had been sufficient in the Case, why needed it to
have been amended?

The ninth and last of these is Trinit. 13. Jacob. Rot. 71. the Case of the
said Sr Samuel Saltonstall. He is returned by the Warden of the Fleet as in the
Case before, and generally remittitur as in the Roll; which proves nothing at
all that therefore the Court thought he might not by Law be enlarged: and
besides, in both Cases he stood committed also for disobeying an order in
Chauncery.

These are all that have been pretended to the contrary in this great point:
and upon the view of them thus opened to your Lordships, it is plain that there
is not one, not so much as one at all that proves any such thing, as that
persons committed by the Command of the King, or of the Lords of the Council,
without cause showed, might not be enlarged; but indeed the most of them
expressly prove rather the contrary.

Now, my Lords, having thus gone through the Presidents of Record that concern
this point of either side, before I come to the other kind of Presidents which
are the solemn resolution of Judges in former times, I shall (as I am commanded
by the House of Commons) represent unto your Lordships somewhat else that they
have thought very considerable, with which they have met while they were in a
most careful inquiry of whatsoever concerned them in this great Question.

It is, my Lords, a draught of an Entry of a Judgment in that great Case
lately adjudged in the Court of Kings Bench, when diverse Gentlemen imprisoned
per speciale mandat. Domini Regis, were by the Award and Judgment of the
Court, after solemn debate, sent back to Prison, because it was expressly said,
that they could not in Justice deliver them, though they prayed to be bailed.

The case is famous and well known to your Lordships, therefore I need not
further mention it. And as yet indeed there is no Judgment entered upon the
Roll, but there is room enough for any kind of Judgment to be entered. But, my
Lords, there is a form of a Judgment, a most unusual one, such a one as never
was in any such Case before used, (for indeed there was never before any Case
so adjudged) and this drawn up by a chief Clark of that Court, by direction of
Mr Attorney General (as the House was informed by the Clark) in which the
reason of the Judgment, and the remanding of those Gentlemen is expressed in
such sort, as if it should be declared upon Record for ever, that the Law were
that no man could be enlarged from imprisonment that stood committed by any
such absolute command.

The draught is only in Sr John Henningham's Case, being one of the Gentlemen
that was remanded, and it was made for a form for all the rest. The words of it
are after the usual Entry of a Curia advisur: vult for a time, that visis
return. predict. nec non diversis antiquis Recordis in Curia hic remanent.
consimiles casus concernentibus, maturaque deliberatione inde prius habita, eo
quod nulla specialis causa captionis five detentionis predict. Johannis
exprimitur, sed generaliter quod detentus est in prisona predict. per speciale
mandatum Domini Regis; ideo predictus Johannes remittitur perfato Custodi Mar.
hospitii predict. salvo custodiend. quousque, etc. that is quousque secundum
legem deliberatus fuerit. And if that Court, which is the highest for ordinary
Justice, cannot deliver him secundum legem, what Law is there (I beseech you,
my Lords) that can be sought for in any other inferior Court to deliver him?

Now, my Lords, because this draught, if it were entered in the Roll, (as it was
prepared for no other purpose) would be a great declaration contrary to the
many Acts of Parliament already cited, contrary to all Presidents of former
times, and to all reason of Law, to the utter subversion of the chiefest
Liberty and Right belonging to every Freeman of the Kingdom, and for that
especially also it supposes that diverse ancient Records had been looked into
by the Court in like Cases, by which Records their Judgments were directed,
whereas in truth there is not one Record at all extant that with any color,
not so much indeed as with any color warrants the Judgment: therefore the
House of Commons thought fit also that I should with the rest that has been
said, show this draught also to your Lordships.

I come now to the other kind of Presidents, that is, solemn Resolutions of
Judges; which being not of Record, remain only in authentic Copies. But of
this kind there is but one in this Case, that is a resolution of all the Judges
in England in the time of Queen Elizabeth. It was in the four and thirtieth
year of her reign, when diverse persons had been committed by absolute command,
and delivered by the Justices of one Bench or the other; whereupon it was
desired that the Judges would declare in what Cases persons committed by such
Command were to be enlarged by them. The resolution has been variously cited,
and variously apprehended.

The House of Commons therefore desiring with all care to inform themselves as
fully of the truth of it as possibly they might, got into their hands from a
member of their House a book of selected Cases, collected by a learned and
reverend Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, that was one of them that gave the
Resolution, which is entered at large in that book, I mean the Lord Chief
Justice Anderson. It is written in that book in his own hand, as the rest of
the book is. And however it has been cited, and was cited in that great
Judgment given upon the habeas Corpus in the King's Bench, as if it had been
that upon such commitments the Judges might not bail the prisoners* yet it is
most plain that in the resolution it self no such thing is contained, but
rather expressly the contrary. I shall better represent it to your Lordships by
reading it, then by opening it.

Then it was read.

If this Resolution does resolve any thing, it does indeed upon the matter
resolve fully the contrary to that which has been pretended, and enough for
the maintenance of this ancient and fundamental point of Liberty of the Person
to be regained by habeas Corpus, when any man is imprisoned. And I the rather
thought fit now to read it to your Lordships, that it might be at large heard,
because in the great Judgment in the Kings Bench, though it were cited at the
Bar as against this point of personal Liberty, as also at the Bench, yet
though every thing else of Record that was used was at large read openly, this
was not read either at Bar or Bench. For indeed if it had, every hearer would
easily have known the force of it to have been indeed contrary to the Judgment.

My Lords, having thus gone through the Charge committed to me by the House of
Commons, and having thus mentioned to your Lordships and opened the many
Presidents of Record, and that draught of the Judgment in the like Case, as
also the Resolution; I shall now, as I had leave and direction given me, least
your Lordships should be put to too much trouble and expense of time in the
finding or getting Copies at large of these things which I have cited, offer
also to your Lordships authentic Copies of them all, and so leave them, and
whatsoever else I have said, to your Lordships further consideration.

The whole Copies of the Presidents of Record mentioned in one of the Arguments
made at the first Conference with the Lords touching the Liberty of the Person
of every Freeman.
INter Recorda Domini Regis Caroli, in The saurario Receptus Scacca^ii sui, sub
custodia Dom. The saurarii and Camerarii ibidem remanentia, viz. Placita coram
Domino Rege apud Westmonastexium de Termino Paschae anno Regis E. (3. post
conquestum) Angliae 15. inter alia sic continetur ut sequitur.

Adhuc de Termino Paschae, London sc.
Dominus Rex mandavit dilecto and fideli suo Roberto de Dalton Constabulatio
Turris suae London, vel ejus locum-tenenti, breve suum in haec verba: Edwardus
Dei gratia Angliae and Franciae Rex, and Dominus Hiberniae, dilecto and fideli
suo Roberto de Dalton Constabulario Turris suae London, vel ejus locum-tenenti
salutem. Mandamus vobis quod Iobarnem de Bildeston Cappellanum, quem
vicecomites nostri London ad mandatum nostrum apud praedictam Turrim vobis
liberabunt, ab eisdem ^ecipiatis, and in prisona nostra Turri praedicta
custodiri faciatis* quo usque aliud vobis super hoc duxerimus de mandato. Test
me ipso apud Turrim nostiam London, trigesimo die Martii, anno Regni nostri
Angliae sexto decimo, Regni vero nostri Franciae tertio.

Et modo scilice^ in Crast. Ascension. Dom. anno Reg. nunc 18. coram Domino
Rege apud Westminster. venit Johannes de Wyndwick locum-tenens praedicti
Constabularii, and adduxit coram Justiciarios hic in Curia praedicta Iohannem
de Bildeston, quem alias a praefatis vicecomitibus virtute brevis praedicti
recipit etc. Et dicit quod ipse a Domino Rege habuit in mandatis ducendi and
liberandi Corpus ipsius Iohannis de Bildeston praefat. Justic. hic, etc.

Et quaesitum est a praedicto Iohanne Wyndwick, si quam aliam detentionis
praefat. Iohannis de Bildeston habeat causam. Qui dicit quod non nisi breve
praedict. tantum. Et quia videtur Curiae breve praedict. sufficientem non esse
causam praedict. Iohannem de Bildeston in prisona Marescall. Reg. hic retinend.
etc. idem Johannes dimittitur per manucaptionem Willielmi de Wakefield Rectoris
Ecclesiae de Willingham, Iohannis de Wyndwick de com. Lancastr. Iohannis de
Lakenham, and Iohannis de Norton, de com. Norsolciae, Nicolai de Wandesford de
com. Midd. and Rogeri de Bromley de com. Staff. qui eum manuceperunt habendi
eum coram Domino Rege in Octabis sanctae Trinitatis ubicunque etc. viz. corpora
pro corpore. Ad quas Octab. sanct. Trinit. coram Domino Rege apud Westminster. venit
praedict. Johannes per mandatum praedict Et super hoc Dominus Rex mandavit
Justiciariis suis hic quoddam Breve suum Clausum in haec verba;

Edwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae, and Dominus Hiberniae, dilectis
and fidelibus suis Willielmo Scott and sociis suis Justiciariis ad Placita
coram nobis tenenda assignatis, salutem. Cum nuper mandaverimus dilecto and
fideli nostro Roberto de Dalton Constabulario Turris nostrae de London, vel
ejus locum-tenenti ibidem, quod Iohannem de Bildeston Capellanum and detentum
in prisona Turris praedict. praecept. nostro pro suspicione contrafact. magni
Sigilli nostri, cum attach. and aliis causis captionem and detentionem
praedict. tangentibus, salvo vel secure duc. facerent coram nobis in crastin.
Ascensionis Domini, ubicunque tunc fuissemus in Anglia, prisonae Maresc. nostri
ibid. liberandum, in eadem quousque per quendam Informatorem essemus before
informati, custodiendum, vel habita inde informat. praedict. ulter. super hoc
fieri facerimus quod fore videramus faciendum secundum legem and consuetudinem
Regni nostri Angliae; nos in casu quod dictus Informator non venit coram nobis
ad informandum nos before super premissis, nolentes eidem Iohanni eadem de
causa justiriam differi in hac part, vobis mandamus, quod si praedict.
Informator in quinden. Sanctae Trinitatis proxime futurum vel citra, non
venerit nos super praemissis before Informatur tunc adventum ejusdem
Informatoris minime expectato eidem Iohanni super hoc fieri faciatis justitiae
complementum, Johan. prout fore videritis faciendum secundum legem and
consuetudinem Regni nostri Angliae. Test me ipso apud Westmonast. 12 die Maii,
anno Regni nostri Angliae 18. vero nostri Francia 5.

Quo quidem Breve inspecto, facta est Proclamatio quod siquis Dominum Regem
super praemissis informare, vel erga ipsum Iohannem prosequi voluerit, quod
veniat, etc. Et super hoc ven. praedict. Will. de Wakefield, Nicol. de
Wandsworth, Johannes Brunwyn, Johannes Laggerham, Johannes de Norton, and Roger
de Bromeley, omnes de comitatu Middlesex. and manuceperunt praedict. Johan. de
Bildeston, habend. eum coram Domino Rege de die usque ad praefat. quindenam
Sanctae Trinitatis ubicunque, etc. Ad quem diem anno 18. coram Domino Rege apud
VVestmonasterium venit praedictus Iohann. de Bildeston, per mandatum praedict.
and iterata facta est proclamatio in forma qua superius, etc. Et nullus venit
ad Dominum Regem informandum, etc. per quod concess. est quod praedict. Iohann.
de Bildeston eat inde sine die salva causa semper action Domini Regis siquam,
etc.

De Termino sancti Hillarii anno 22. Hen. 8. and per Com. rot. ejusdem Rot. 37.
London cum Gloucest.
Johannes Parker per Richard. Coppin and Will. Dansey vicecomites London
virtute Brevis Domini Regis de latitat pro pace verse. ipsum Iohann. Parker ad
sectam Iohann. Bunton eis inde direct. et coram Rege duct. cum causa, viz.
Quodidem Johannes Parker captus fuit in Comitatu praedicto pro securitate pacis
praedict. ac pro suspicione felloniae per ipsum apud Curmall in comitatu
Gloucestriae, perpetrat. per nomen Iohannis Parker de Thornbury in comitatu
Gloucestriae Tonsor, alias dictus Johannes Charles de eodem comitatu Surgeon,
ac per mandatum Domini Regis nunciat. per Robertum Moore generosum de Cliffords
Inn. Qui committitur Marescallo, and isto Termino traditur in ballium, Thomae
Atkins de eisdem vill. and comitat. Weaver, usque a die Paschae in unum mensem
ubicunque etc. Et quod idem Johannes Parker citra eundem diem personaliter
compareret coram Justiciariis Domini Regis ad proximum general. Gaol.
deliberationem in comitatu Gloucestriae, proxime tenendam, ad subjiciendum and
recipiendum omnia and singula quae praefati Justiciarii de eo tunc ordinare
contigerint, etc. corpus pro corpore, etc.

Ad quem diem praefat. Johannes Parker licet ipse quarto die placiti ad
comparendum non venit, Ideo capierunt eum and pleg. octab. Trinitatis ad quem
diem exactum Trin. return. postea Trin. 28. H. 8. ex in 15 Pasche Ad quem diem
breve and vicecomes return. quod adhuc tent. apud London, die Lunae proxime
post festum Sanctae Scholasticae. Anno Regni H. 8.28. praedictus Johannes
Parker, Thomas Atkins, and VVillelmus Note, ulterius fuerunt, prout patet per
brevia Regis tertio Pasche anno 25. Regis praedict.

De Termino Sancti Mich. anno 35. H. 8. and per Com. to. ejusdem. Rot. 33.
Surr. cum Bucks.
Johannes Bincks per Robertum Dacres Armiger Senescallus Mar. and Radulphum
Hopton Mar. ejusdem curiae virtute brevis Domini Regis ad subjiciendum and
recipiendum, etc. et eis inde direct. and coram Domino Rege ductus cum causa,
viz. quod ante adventum brevis praedicti Johannes Bincks captus fuit per
mandatum privati Consilii Domini Regis pro suspitione felloniae and pro aliis
causis illos moventibus and ductus ad Gaolam Mar. and ibidem detent virtute
mandati praedicti, Qui committitur etc. Immediate ex gratia cur. special.
praedictus Johannes Bincks per nomen Iohannis Bincks de magna Marlow in
comitatu Bucks weaver traditur in ballium, Thomae Bignam de London generos. and
Johan. Woodward de Marlow praedict. Tailor, usque in crastinum sancti Martini
ubicunque etc, uterque pleg. corpus pro corpore etc. Ad quem diem comparuit et
Robertus Darcy Armig. et Johannes Bosse Generos. Domin. Justitiar. Dom. Regis
ad Pacem in Commit. Bucks virtute Brevis Dom. Regis eis direct. Dom. Regi
certificaverint quod Indictamenta de aliquibus Felon. et transgression. versus
praedict. Ioannem Bincks coram eis ad praesens resident. Et ulterius de gestu
and fama ipsius Ioannis Bincks per sacrament. proborum and legalium hominum
comitatu Bucks, diligenter inquirend. fecere, Et nihil aliud praeter bonum de
eo coram eis est compertum, Sine die por proclamationem.
ideo concessum est praedictus Johannes Bincks, de premissis eat inde sine die
deliberatur per proclamationem, prout mos est.

De Termino Pasche, etc. De Termino Pasche anno 2. et 3. Phil. et Mar. Regis et
Reginae rot. 58. London. sci.
Richardus Overton de London generosus, per Thomam Leigh and Iohannem Marshall
Vicecomites Londini virtute brevis Domini Regis and Reginae* de Habeas Corpus
ad stand. rect. eis inde direct. coram Willielmo Portman, mil. Capital.
Justiciar etc. ductus cum causa, viz. quod praedictus Richardus Overton nono
die Octobris, ult. praeterit. commissus fuit in prisona de Newgate, and ibidem
in eadem prisona sub custodia dictorum vicecom. detent. ad mandatum
praenobilium Dominorum honorabilis Consilii praedict. Domini Regs and Reginae,
Qui committitur Mar. etc. Et immediate traditur in ballium. Willielmo Overton
de Lond^n generos. and Iohanni Tailor, de parochia sancti Martini apud Ludgate
London, mercer, usque octab. Trinitatis, viz. uterque manucapt. praedict.
corpus pro corpore. Et postea Tri. secundo Elizabethae Reginae, cap. Overton
and pleg. suos Octab. Michaelis. Ad quem diem ex mense Pasche. Ad quem
Vicecomitem retorn. quod ad Husting suum tenent apud Guildhall civitati Londini
die lunae proxime post festum sancti Georgii Epi. praedictus Willielmus Overton
ulterius est per brevia pacis anno supra dicto.

De Termino sancti Michaelis anno 2. and 3. Phil and Mar. Regis and Reginae
Rot. 6.
Habet Cart. allocat. Trin. 2. and 3. Phil. and Mar. Regis and Reginae etc.
Midd. sci.
Richardus Overton nuper de London generos. captus octab. Hillarii pro
quibusdam altis proditionibus unde indictatus est, Ad quem diem capt. 15 Pasche
exon. crastina Animarum.

De Termino Pasche anno 4 and 5 Phil. and Mar. Regis and Reginae, Et per com.
to. ejusdem rot. 45. Turr. London.
Edwardus Newport generosus per Robertum Oxenbridge mil. Constabularium Turris
praedicti, virtute brevis Dom. Regis and Reginae de Habeas Corpus ad
subjiciendum, etc. Ei inde directum ad Bar. coram Domino Rege and Regina duct.
cum causa, viz. Quod ipse sibi commissus fuit per mandatum Consiliorum Dominae
Reginae, qui committitur Marrescallo, etc. et immediate traditur in ballium,
prout patet. Et postea sine die per parol. virtute brevis gestu and fama prout
patet rotul. 17. istius anni and etlam patet super ballium inter scruet istius
Termini affilat etc.

De Termino sancti Michaelis anno 4 and 5 Phil. and Mar. Regis and Reginae and
per scruet ejusdem rot. 17.
Memorandum, quod 14 die Octobris anno Regnorum Dominorum Phil and Mar. Regis
and Reginae nunc quarto and quinto, Edwardus Newport de Hamley in comitatu
Wigorn. fuerit suppositus and ea de causa per mandatum Consiliorum Dominorum
Regis and Reginae, ad Bar. hic ductus fuit, qui committitur Marescallo, etc.
Et super hoc idem Edwardus Newport in ballium Thomae Charr, de Laton in
comitatu Essex generosus Iohanni Baker Clerico ordinario London, Iohanni Gill
de Parochia sancti Thomae Apostoli London Clothworker and Richardo Parkes, de
Bromesgrove in comitatu Wigorn Yeoman, usque octab. Hillarii ubicunque, etc.
viz. Quilibet pleg. praedict. sub poena 100 l. Et praedictus Edwardus sub poena
200 l. Quas etc. Ad quem diem committitur Constabulario Turris London per
mandatum Consiliorum Dominorum Regis and Reginae ibidem salvo custodiri
quousque, etc. Et postea 4 and 5 Phil. and Mar. traditur in ballium, prout
patet per scruet finium ejusdem Termini. Et postea Michaelis 5 Phil. and Mar.
exoneratur per Cur. eo quod tam per sacrament. duodecim proborum legalium
hominum de praedict. com. Midd. coram Dom. Rege and Regina hic in curia in ea
part jurat and onerat quam per sacrament. duodecim proborum and legalium
hominum de corpore dicto comitatu Wigorn coram Edwardo Saunders, and Iohanne
Whiddon Mil. and Justiciar. Dominorum Regis and Reginae ad pacem ac diversis
feloniis transgressionibus and malefactionibus in eodem comitatu perpetrat
audiendum and terminandum assignat virtute brevis Dominorum Regis and Reginae
eis inde directis in ea part similiter jurat and onerat, ad inquirendum de
gestu and fama ipsius Edw. compert. existit quod idem Edw est de bonis gestu
and fama. Ideo proclamatio inde facta prout moris est secundum legem and
consuetudinem Regni Angliae, Deliberatur per paroll.
etc. Consideratum est, quod praedictus Edwardus eat inde sine die, etc.

De Termino Pasche anno 9. Eliz. Reginae, Rot 35. London sci.
Thomas Lawrence per Christopherum Draper Major Civitatis Londini ac Ambrosum
Nicholas and Richardum Lumbard, vicecomites ejusdem civitatis virtute brevis
Dominae Reginae de Habeas Corpus etc. ad prosequendum, etc. eis inde directum.
Et coram Domina Regina duct. cum causa, viz. quod septimo die Novembris anno
Regni Dominae Elizabethae, nunc Reginae Angliae octavo Thom. Lawrence in dicto
breve nominat captus fuit in civitate praedict. and in prisona dict. Dominae
Reginae sub custodia praedict. vic. deten. per mandatum Concilii Dominae
Reginae. Qui committitur Marrescallo, Et postea traditur in ballium prout patet
per scruet finium istius Termini. Bal. pardon.


De Termino Pasche anno 9. Eliz. Reginae, Rot. 68. Turr. London.
Robertus Constable, per Franciscum Iobson milit. Locum tenent. Turris London
virtute brevis Dominae Reginae de Habeas Corpus, ei inde direct. and coram
Domina Regina duct. cum causa, viz. Quod Robertus Constable praefat. pardon.
Francisc. Iobson commissus fuit per mandatum privati Concilii Dominae Reginae
salvo custodiri. Qui committitur Marrescallo, Et postea isto eodem Termino
traditur in ballium.

De Termino Pasche anno 20. Elizabethae Reginae et per scruet ejusdem, Rot. 72.
Turris London.
Johannes Browning per Owinum Hopton, mil. locum tenentem Turris Reginae
London, virtute brevis Dominae Reginae de Habeas Corpus ad subjiciendum and
recipiendum ei inde direct. Et coram dilectis and fidelibus Justiciariis
dominae Reginae ad placita coram nobis tenen. assign. apud hospitium suum in
Sergeants Inn Fleetstreet London, die Lunae, viz. Praedictus Johannes
Browning, commissus fuit eidem loco tenenti per Privatum Concilium Dominae
Reginae, salvo custodiend. etc. Qui committitur Mar. Mar. Ball.
Et postea isto eodem Termino traditur in ballium prout patet per scruet finium
istius Termini.

De Termino sancti Hillarii anno 40. Elizabethae Reginae, Et per com. roll.
ejusdem, rot. 62.
Edwardus Harecourt, per Hugonem Parlor Custod. prisonae Dominae Reginae de le
Gatehouse infra civitatem Westminster. in comitatu Midd. virtute brevis Dominae
Reginae de Habeas Corpus ad subjiciendum etc. ei inde directum* Et coram Domina
Regina apud Westmonasterium duct. cum causa viz. quod ante adventum brevis
praedict. scilicet 7. die Octobris anno Regni Dominae Reginae nunc 39. corpus
Edwardi Harecourt, per Dominos de privato Concilio ei commissus fuit salvo et
secure custodiend. certis de causis ipsos moventibus ac ei ignotis, Qui
committitur Marrescallo, Mar. bal.
and postea isto eodem Termino traditur in ballium prout patet per scruet
finium istius Termini.

De vacatione Hillarii anno 43. Eliz. Reginae. Fleet, sc.
Robertus Catesby per Iohannem Phillips Guardian de le Fleet virtute brevis
Dominae Reginae de habeas Corpus ad subjiciendum, etc. ei inde directum, and
coram Edwardo Fennor uno Justitiar. dominae Reginae ad pla-placita coram ipsa
Regina tenendum assignat. apud Winchester house in Burgo de Southwarke in
comitatu Surr. duct. cum causa, viz. quod praedictus Robertus commissus fuit
prisonae praedict. primo die Martii anno 43. Reginae per warrantum diversorum
praenobilium virorum de privato Concilio Dominae Reginae in haec verba.

To the warden of the Fleet or his deputy. These shall be to will and require
you to receive at the hands of the keeper of the Compter of VVoodstreet the
person of Robert Catesby Esquire, and him to retain and keep safely in that
prison under your charge until you shall have other direction to the contrary
wherein this shall be your warrant. Et praefatus Rob. commissus fuit
Marrescallo per praefatum Edw. Fennor, Et statim traditur in Ballium prout
patet, etc.

De Termino Sancti Hillarii anno 12. Iacobi Regis rot. 153.
Ricardus Beckwith generosus per Aquilam VVykes, Custod. prisonae praedict.
virtute brevis Domini Regis de habeas Corpus ad subjiciendum, etc. ei inde
direct. and coram Domino Rege apud VVestmonasterium duct. cum causa, viz. quod
ante adventum brevis praedicti, scilicet, decimo die Junii, Anno Regni Domini
Iacobi Regis Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, fidei defensor, etc.
11 and Scotiae 47 praedictus Richardus Beckwith sibi commissus fuit prisonae
praedictae sub custodia sua virtute brevis and cujusdam warranti sibi facti and
directi per Georgium Divina providentia Archiepiscopum Cant. totius Angliae
Primat and Metropolitanum. Hen. comitem Northampton, Dom. Gardianum quinque
portuum ac unum de Privato Consilio Regiae Majestatis, Thom. comitem
Suffolciae, Dominum Camerarium Regis Familiae ac e sacris Con^^^is Regiae
Majestatis. Edward. dominum Wotton Gubernator Regiae Familiae and Iohannem
dominum Stanhope, Vic. Camerar. Regiae Familiae cujus warranti tenor sequitur
in haec verba.

To Aquila VVykes keeper of the Gatehouse in Westminster, or his deputy.
Whereas it is thought meet, that Miles Raynard and Richard Beckwith be
restrained of their Liberty and committed to the prison of the Gatehouse, These
shall be to will and require you to receive the persons of the said Raynard and
Beckwith into your charge and safe keeping in that prison, there to remain
until you shall have further order from us in that behalf, for which this
shall be your warrant, dated at White Hall this tenth of July 1623. Et haec est
causa detentionis dicti Richard's Beckwith in prisona praedict. Qui committitur
Marrescallo. Et postea isto Termino traditur in ballium, prout patet per scruet
istius Termini.

De Termino Sancti Mic. anno 14 Iacobi Regis, Et per scruet ejusdem Rot. 147.
Thomas Monson miles per Georgium Moore mil. locum tenent. Turris Domini Regis
London, virtute brevis Domini Regis de habeas Corpus, ad subjiciendum, etc. ei
inde directi coram Domino Rege apud Westmonasterium ductus cum causa, viz. quod
ante adventum brevis praedicti Thomas Monson sibi commissus fuit per warrantum
a diversis Dominis de privato Concilio Domini Regis sibi direct. Qui
committitur Marescallo, and super hoc traditur in ballium prout patet per
scruet finium istius Termini.

De Termino Sancti Mic. anno 7, H. 7. per com rot. ejusdem.
Thomas Brugg junior nuper de Yonington in comitatu Hereford, Johannes Rawlings
de Hominstre in comitatu praedict. Robertus Sherman recuss. nuper de eadem in
comitatu praedict. Walber, Thomas Hosier nuper de eadem in eodem comitatu
Smith. Cadwallader ap Johan. dux nuper de Key in Marchia Wallie in comitatu
Salop adjacend-generos. Reginaldus Sherman and Thomas Tanner nuper de Kingston
in comitatu Hereford, sunt in custodia Mar. ad mandatum Domini Regis, ac pro
aliis certis causis prout patet alibi de Recordo, etc. per Record. istius
Termini, postea isto Termino Dominus Rex relaxavit mandatum suum, and pro
recuss. praedict. comparuer. Attorn. etc. Et quod ulterius versus praefatum
Thomam Brugg revocatur isto Termino and praedictus Johannes Rawlings traditur
in ballium prout patet alibi etc. Ideo hic Mar. de eis omnibus per cur.
exoneratur, etc.

De Termino sancti Hillarii anno 7. H. 7. and per com. to. ejusdem, rot. 13.
Willielmus Chase, Henricus Charr, Thom. Rollester, Thomas Street, Robertus
Feldace and Henricus Rand sunt in custodia Mar. ad mandatum Domini Regis etc.
ac corpus praedict. Willielmus Chase pro pace Radnor Ioselyn inveniend. etc.
Pasche sequen. pet. postea Termino sequen. praedict. Dominus Rex mandatum suum
praedict. quo ad praedict. Will. Chase relaxavit, per Reg. Attorn. and pro pace
and pro felony and murdr. traditur in ballium idem.

De Termino Pasche 7. H. 7* and per com. to. ejusdem rot. 18.
Johannes Wyddesbury in comitatu Staff. Arm. est in custodia Mar. ad mandatum
Domini Regis etc. per Record. istius Termini postea scilicet Trin 7. H. 7
sequen. praedictus Johannes Beamond demandat praedict. per cur. exonerat
existit. Ideo Mar. de eo per eandem cur. exoneratur, etc.

De Termino sancti Michaelis, anno 7. H. 7. rot. 8. London sci.
Thomas You nuper de Villa de Staff. in comitatu Staff. yeoman per Johan. Shaw
and Richardum Haddon vicecom. Londini, virtute brevis Domini Regis de Habeas
Corpus, ad sectam ipsius Regis eis inde direct. coram Rege duct. cum causa,
viz. quod idem Thomas You attach. fuit per Richard. Whittington Sergeant apud
Baynards Castle civitate praedict. and prison. Domini Regis infra eandem
civitatem praedictam salvo custodiendum, commissus pro suspicione feloniae apud
Coventry in comitatu War. perpetrat. ad suggestionem Willielmum King Inhoulder,
Ac in super idem Thomas You detinetur in prisona praedict. virtute cujusdam
alterius quaerelae versus ipsum ad sectam Iohannis Freeman Sergeant de eo quod
inveniat ei sufficient securitatem pacis in curia coram Iohannem Wynger nuper
Vic. Ac ulterius idem Thom. You detentus est in prisona praedict. pro 14 l.
debitum and 2 s. 8 d. Et etiam idem Thomas detinetur in eadem prisona ad
mandatum Domini Regis, Qui committitur Mar. etc. Postea scilicet Termino
sancti Trinitatis anno 19. Regis Henrici 7. praedictus Johannes Freeman
relaxavit securitatem pacis versus eundem Thomam You, dictusque Robertus
Carvell recognovit se fore satisfact. de debitis. Ac Johannes Hubbard General.
Attorn. Domini Regis, nomine ipsius Regis relaxavit mandatum Domini Regis. Et
pro suspicione feloniae praedict. traditur in ballium, Simon Little de London
Tailor, et Iohannem Ash de London Skinner, usque octab. Michaelis ubicunque
etc. ad quem diem comparuit, Et Robertus Throgmorton miles unius custod. pacis
praedict. committitur warrant. retorn. quod null. indicaverit de aliquibus
feloniis sive transgressionibus versus praefatum Thomam You coram eo and sociis
suis direct. per sacramentum 12 proborum and legalium hominum de visu de
Coventrey praedict. de gestu and fama praedict. Thom. diligent. inquisitione
fecerunt nihil de eo praeter bonum coram eo and sociis suis est compertum sed
est de bono gestu and fama. Ideo concessum quod praedictus Thomas You eat sine
die. Sine die.
etc.

Anno 9. H. 7. et per scruet ejusdem Rot. 13.
Humfridus Botche, nuper de Canterbrigg in comitatu Cantabrgiensis Scholar per
Robertum Willoughby Dom. Brook, mil. Senescal. hospitii Domini Regis, ac
Iohannem Digby, mil. Marescall. cur. Maresc. hospitii praedict. virtute brevis
Domini Regis de Habeas Corpus, ad sectam ipsius Regis ad standum recte etc. ad
sectam pacis ut legatur eis inde direct. coram Rege duct cum causa, viz. Quod
idem Humfridus Botche, commissus fuit gaol. Marrescalli hospitii praedict. per
mandatum Domini Regis, Et haec est causa and non alia, quod idem Humfridus in
prisona praedicta detinetur. Qui committitur and postea Pasche sequen. Dominus
Rex relaxavit mandatum suum Capital. Justitiar. per Thomam Lovell mil. ostensus
et pro ult. praed. tenetur praedict alibi etc. Mar. ball.


De Termino sancti Trinitatis anno 39. Elizabethae Reginae and per com. to.
ejusdem 118. le Gatehouse.
Lawrentius Broom per Hugonem Parlor custod. prisonae Dominae Reginae de le
Gatehouse virtute brevis Dominae Reginae de habeas Corpus ad subjiciendum ei
inde direct. etc. coram Domina Regina apud Westminster. duct. cum causa, viz. quod
praedictus Lawrentius Broom in arcta custodia sua remansit per mandatum
Dominorum de Concilio, Serenissimae Dominae Reginae pro certis causis eos
moventibus, Qui committitur Mar. and postea isto eodem Termino traditus fuit
in ballium prout patet per scruet finium istius Termini. Mar. Ball.


Per scruet finium Termini praedicti anno 39. Eliz. Reginae. Essex.
Lawrentius Broom de parva Bradowe in comitatu praedict. husbandman, Usque
octab. Michaelis.
traditur in ballium ad subjiciendum, etc. per mandatum privati Concilii
Dominae Reginae super habeas Corpus, Radulpho Mayall de Hatfield Penell
praedict. Henr. Vndall de eadem gener. Willielmo Ecclesden de Westminster.
Bricklayer, Richardo Morgan, de Westminster. Labourer, uterque pleg. sub poena 40 l.
and sub poena 100 l. Mar. pro suspitione proditionis cum Iohanne Smith mil.

De Termino sancti Michaelis anno 40 Elizabethae Reginae, et per com. to.
ejusdem rot. 37. Midd. sci.
Thomas Wenden per Hugonem Parlor generos. custod. prisonae Dominae Reginae de
le Gatehouse virtute brevis Dominae Reginae de habeas Corpus, ad subjiciendum,
etc. ei inde direct. and coram Domina Regina apud Westminster. duct. cum causa, viz.
Quod 18. die Junii anno Regni Dominae Elizabethae nunc Reginae Angliae 38.
Corpus infra nominati Tho. Wenden extra curia^ ejusdem Dominae Reginae Angliae
coram ipsa Dom. and Concilio suo in Camera stellata prisonae Dominae Reginae de
le Gatehouse, sub custodia sua pro certis causis eisdem Dominae Reginae, and
concilio suo moventibus and ei ignotis, commissus fuit salvo custodiend. donec
aliud inde habuerit praecept. Et haec est causa detentionis, praedict. Thomae
in prisona praedict. Mar. ball.
Qui committitur Mar. etc. Et postea isto eodem Termino traditur in ballium,
prout patet per scruet finium istius Termini.

Per scruet finium de Termino sancti Michaelis anno 39. and 40. Elizabethae
Reginae.
Thom. Wenden de Aldham in comitatu Essex, Mar.
Yeoman traditur in ballium super habeas Corpus ad subjiciendum, and
recipiendum.

Johannes Wenden de Colmewalke in comitatu praedict. yeoman, Usque octab.
Hillar.
Will. Beriffe de Aldham, praedict. in comitatu praedict. genesis Radulpho Northen
de Aldham in comitatu praedict. yeoman, quilibet praedict. sub poena 200.
Marcis, and pars sub poena 200 l.

Idem Thom Wenden traditus fuit in ballium per consens. Dominorum privati
Concilii per Relationem Attorn. Dominae Reginae general. sub R. capt. sub
Terminum post crastin. Martini.

De Termino Hillarii anno Eliz. Reginae Rot. 89.
Domina Regina mandavit praedilecto and fideli Conciliario suo Iohannem Popham
mil. capital. Justic. Dominae Reginae ad placita coram ipsa Regina tenend.
assignat. Ac dilectis and fidelibus suis Iohanni Clench Francisco Gaudy and
Edwardo Fennor Justiciar* ipsius Dominae Reginae ad placita praedict. aut eorum
alicui breve suum de privato Sigillo, manu sua propria quod sequitur in haec
verba.

By the Queen.
Trusty and welbeloved, we greet you well. Whereas William Constable late of
London Knight. Robert Vernon late of London Knight, Henry Lincey late of London
Knight. Ellis Jones late of London gent. Charles Ogle late of London gent.
Robert Pitchforke late of London gent. John Wright late of London gent.
Christopher Wright late of London gent. and Edmund Whitlocke late of London
gent. for the late treasonable attempt of the late Earl of Essex, have been
committed to sundry places and prisons, for their offenses committed, some in
one sort, some in another, and stand amongst others indicted of high Treason
for their several offenses. Forasmuch as of our princely disposition we are
graciously bent to extend our grace and favor unto them and that they shall be
bailed. We will and command you or any of you, to bail the above named persons,
or any of them to appear before us in our Court commonly called the Kings
Bench, at such time, and in such manner and form, as to you or any of you shall
seem meet. And this shall be your sufficient warrant and discharge in that
behalf.

To our trusty and welbeloved Counceller Sr John Popham Knight, Chief Justice
of our Pleas to be holden before us.

To our trusty and welbeloved John Clench, Francis Gaudy and Edward Fennor
Justices of the same Pleas or any of them.

De Vacatione Hillarii anno 43. Eliz. Reginae. Gatehouse.
Robertus Vernon nuper de London mil. Henricus Lincey nuper de London mil. and
Carolus Ogle nuper de London generos. per Willielmum Okey, custod. prisonae de
le Gatehouse virtute brevis Dominae Reginae de habeas Corpus ad subjiciendum,
etc. Ei inde direct. and coram Francisco Gaudy uno Justiciar. Dominae Reginae
ad placita coram ipsa Regina tenend. assignat apud hospitium suum in Chauncery
lane London duct. cum causa, viz. Quod praedictus Robertus, Henricus and
Carolus sibi commissi fuerint per mandatum privati Concilii Dominae Reginae pro
quibusdam altis proditionibus per ipsos fieri suppositi. Mar. Ball.
Qui traduntur in ballium praetextu brevis, etc.

De Vacatione Hillarii 43. Eliz. Reginae Fleet, sci.
Henricus Carew de London mil. per Iohannem Phillips Guardian de le Fleet,
virtute brevis Dominae Reginae de habeas Corpus ad subjiciendum etc. Ei inde
direct. and coram Francisco Gaudy uno Justiciar. Dominae Reginae de placita
coram ipsa Regina tenend. assign. apud hospitium suum in Sergeants Inn in
Chauncery lane London duct. cum causa, viz. qoud praedict. Henr. commissus fuit
prison. praedict. 11 die Februarii anno 43 Reginae virtute cujusdam warranti
diversorum praenobilium virorum de privato Concilio in haec verba.

These shall be to require you to receive into your charge and custody from the
hands of the Lord Major of London the person of Sr Henry Carew Knight, who was
in the late action of traiterous Rebellion, and to keep him safely close
prisoner until you shall receive order from us to the contrary. Qui traditur
in ballium praetextu brevis, etc.

De Termino sanctae Trinitatis primo Iacobi Regis rot. 30.
Johannes Brocket mil. per Willielmum Okey, custod. prisonae de le Gatehouse in
Westminster. in comitatu praedict. virtute brevis Domini Regis de habeas Corpus ad
subjiciendum, etc. Ei inde direct and coram Domino Rege apud Westminster. duct. cum
causa, viz. Quod ante adventum brevis praedict. scilicet, ultimo die Martii
anno Regni Domini Regis primo praedict. Johannes Brocket mil. praefat. custod.
de le Gatehouse commissus fuit per warrantum privati Concilii Domini Regis
cujus tenor sequitur in haec verba. To Will. Okey keeper of the prison of the
Gatehouse in Westminster.
These are to will and require you to receive into your charge and custody the
person of John Brocket Knight, and him to detain in safe keeping under your
charge until you shall have further order for his enlargement, whose
commitment being for some special matter concerning the service of our
Sovereign Lord the King, you may not fail to regard this our warrant
accordingly.

From the Kings Palace at Whitehall the last of March, 1605.



Eaque fuit causa detentionis praedict. Mar. Ball.
Iohannis in prisona praedict. quia committitur Mar. etc. Et postea traditus
fuit in ballium prout patet per scruet finium istius Termini.

De Termino sancti Michaelis anno 12 Iacobi Regis Rot. 119. prison de le
Gatehouse. sci.
Milo Raynor per Aquilam Wykes custod. prisonae praedict. virtute brevis Domini
Regis de habeas Corpus ad subjiciendum etc. coram Domino Rege duct. cum causa,
viz. Quod ante adventum brevis praedict. scilicet decimo die Junii anno Domini
1613. praedict Milo Raynor commissus fuit prisonae praedict. and huc usque
detent, virtute warranti cujusdam sibi facti and direct. per Georgium
Archiepiscopum Cantuariensis, Henr. comitem Northampton Thom. comitem Suff.
Will. Dominum Knollis Edwardum Dominum Wotton and Richardum Dominum Stanhope,
cujus warranti tenor sequitur in haec verba. To Aquila VVykes keeper of the
Gatehouse in Westminster, or his deputy.
Whereas it is thought meet, that Miles Raynor and Richard Beckwith be
restrained of their Liberty and committed to the prison of the Gatehouse, These
shall be to will and require you to receive the persons of the said Raynor and
Beckwith into your charge and safe keeping in that prison, there to remain
until you have further order in that behalf, for which this shall be your
sufficient warrant.

Dated at White Hall the tenth of July 1613.



Et haec est causa detentionis suae in prisona praedict. Qui committitur
Marrescallo. Mar. Ball.
Et postea isto eodem Termino traditur in ballium, prout patet per scruet
istius Termini.

De Termino sancti Hillarii anno 4 et 5 H. 7. and per scruet ejusdem Rot. 18.
de praedict.
Richardus Everard nuper de Colchester in comitatu Essex. Clericus, and
Robertus White nuper de Norwic. Smith, per Robertum Willoughby mil. Dominum de
Brook Senescal. hospitii praedict. virtute brevis Domini Regis de habeas Corpus
ad sectam ipsius Regis pro quibusdam proditionibus and feloniis unde in dicto
comitatu Essex. indictati sunt, ei inde direct. coram Domino Rege duct. cum
causa, viz. Quod iidem Richardus Everard and Richardus White, commissi fuerint
in custodia Mar. praedict. per mandatum Domini Regis. Mar.
Qui committitur Mar. etc.

De Termino sancti Hillarii anno 8. H. 7 and per scruet ejusdem Rot 12. Mort.
est in prisona prout per certificationem Coron. intr. Pasche 10. H. 7. affilat.
Surr.
Christopherus Burton nuper de Rochester in comitatu Kant. hackneyman, per
Robertum Willoughby Dominum Brook, militem Senescallum hospitii Domini Regis,
ad Johan. Digby mil. Marresc. cur. Marresc. hospitii praedict. virtute brevis
Domini Regis de habeas Corpus ad sectam ipsius Regis, ad subjiciend. etc. eis
inde direct. coram Domino Rege duct. cum causa, viz. Idem Christopherus
commissus fuit gaol. Marresc. hospitii praedict^ per mandatum Domini Regis, et
haec de causa and non alia, Qui committitur Marresc. Mar.
Ac super quendam abjurationem infra civitatem Rottenson. facta isto Termino
certificat ad salvo custodiend. sub poena 100 l. etc.

De Termino Pasche anno 19. H. 7. and per scruet ejusdem, rot. 23. London sci.
Georgius Vrswick de London Mercer, per Oliverum Wood, locum tenent. prisonae
Domini Regis de le Fleet virtute brevis Domini Regis de habeas Corpus ad sectam
ipsius Regis ad conservand. etc. ei inde direct. coram Rege duct. cum causa,
viz. Quod idem Georgius Vrswick tertio decimo die Maii anno 19 Regis commissus
fuit prison. de le Fleet praedict. per mandatum Domini Regis salvo custodiend.
sub poena 10 l. Qui committitur Mar. etc. Mar.


De Termino sanctae Trinitatis anno 7. H. 8. and per scruet ejusdem rot. 23.
Surr.
Edwardus Page nuper de London generosus per Georgium comitem Salopp.
Senescallum hospitii Domini Regis, and Henr. Sharnburr Mar. cur. Mar.
hospitii praedict. virtute breuis Domini Regis ad conservand. diem, etc, eis
direct and coram Rege duct. cum causa, viz. Quod idem Edwardus captus and
detentus fuit in prisona Mar. praedict. per mandatum Domini Regis ibid. salvo
custodiend. etc. Mar.
Qui committitur Mar. hospitii Domini Regis.

De Termino sancti Michaelis anno 8 Iacobi Regis and per Scr. ejusdem rot. 99.
Thomas Caesar per Thomam Vavasor mil. Mar. Marresc hospitii Domini Regis, ac
Mar and Marresc. hospitii virtute brevis Domini Regis de habeas Corpus ad
subjiciendum, ei direct. and coram Domino Rege apud Westminster. duct. cum causa,
viz. Quod ante adventum brevis praedict. scilicet, decimo octavo die Julii anno
Regni dict. Domini Regis nunc Angliae etc. septimo Tho. Caesar in breve praed.
nominatus captus fuit apud Whitehall in comitatu Midd. per speciale mandatum
Domini Regis and per eundem Dominum Regem ad tunc and ibidem salvo custodiend.
quousque etc. Et ea fuit causa captionis and detentionis ejusdem Thom Caesar.
Remitt.
Qui remittitur prison praedict.

De Termino sancti Michaelis, anno 8 Iacobi Regis die Martis proxime post
quindena Martini.
Nisi praedict Senescall. and Mar. hospitii Dom. Regis sufficienter return.
breve de habeas Corpus Thom. Caesar, die Martis proxime post quindena Martini
defend exonerabitur per curiam.

De Termino sancti Hillarii anno Regni Iacobi Regis 12. rot. 153.
Iacobus Demetrius, Edwardus Emerson, Georgius Brookshaw and Will. Stephens,
per Thomam Vavasor mil. Mar. Maresc. hospitii Domini Regis virtute brevis de
habeas Corpus ad subjiciendum and recipiendum, etc. ei inde direct. and coram
Domino Rege apud VVestmonast. duct. cum causa, viz. Quod ante adventum brevis
praedict. scilicet. 22. die Januarii anno Regni Domini nostri Iacobi Dei gratia
Angliae Franciae, and Hiberniae etc. 12 and Scotiae 48. praedictus Iacobus
Demetrius Edwardus Emerson, Georgius Brookshaw and Willielmus Stephens in breve
huic Schedul. annex. nominati fuerunt Commiss. Gaol. Marresc. hospitii Domini
Regis pro causis ipsum Regem and servitium suum tangentibus and concernentibus.
Et haec est causa captionis praedict. Iac. Emerson, Georg. and Will. and postea
immediate remittitur praefat. Mar. hospitii praedict. Remittitur.


De Termino sancti Hillarii anno 12 Iacobi Regis.
Samuel Saltonstall per Iohannem Wilkenson Ar. Guardian. prison. de le Fleet,
virtute brevis Domini Regis de habeas Corpus ad subjiciendum, etc. ei inde
direct. and coram Domino Rege apud Westminster. duct. cum causa, viz. Quod idem
Samuel commissus fuit prisonae praedict. virtute warrati a Dominis de Privato
Concilio Domini Regis undecimo die Martii 1608. and quod detentus fuit etiam
idem Samuel in prisona praedict. virtute cujusdam ordinis in curia Canc. Domini
Regis fact. cujus ordinis tenor patet per rot. record. istius Termini. Ad quem
diem praedict. Samuel remittitur prisonae praedict. et secund. dies proxim.
post Term. dat. est praefat. gardiano prisonae praedict. ad emend. return. suum
sufficient. super breve praedict. de habeas Corpus and return. quod praedict.
Samuel commissus fuit prisonae praedict. undecimo die Martii 1608. per warrant.
a Dominis de Privato Concilio dict. Domini Regis apud Whitehall tunc seden. Et
quod postea undecimo die Februarii anno 1610. commissus fuit extra cur. Council.
Domini Regis apud Westminster. pro contemptu suo, and quod tent. fuit etiam idem Sam.
in prisona praedict. per mandatum Dom. Concilii. iterum remittitur prisonae
praedict. and ulterius dies dat. est praefat. Guardian. ad emend. return. suum
super habeas Corpas, versus defend. prout stare voluer. usque diem Jovis
proxim. post mensem Pasche tunc ad habendum corpus, etc. Ad quem diem praefat.
Guardian. habuit corpus hic in curia, and return. super habeas Corpus quod
praedict. Samuel commissus fuit prisonae praedict. 11 Martii anno 1608. virtute
cujusdam warranti a Dominis de privato Concilio Domini Regis tunc seden. apud
Whitehall. Et quod etiam commissus fuit idem Samuel prisonae praedict. 11 die
Februarii anno 8 Iacobi Regis per cur. Canc. dict. Domini Regis apud Westminster.
tunc existen. pro quodam contemptu per eundem Samuel in cur. praedict. illat.
and perpetrat. ibidem proinde salvo custodiend. Remittitur.
Qui remittitur prisonae praedict.

De Termino sanctae Trinitatis anno 8 Iacobi Regis and per scr. ejusdem rot. 71.
Samuel Saltonstal mil. per Iohannem Wilkinson Ar. Guardian. prison. de le
Fleet, virtute brevis Domini Regis de habeas Corpus ad subjiciendum
recipiendum, etc. ei inde direct. and coram Domino Rege apud Westminster. duct. cum
causa, viz. Quod praedictus Samuel Saltonstall commissus fuit prisonae
praedict. 11 die Martii anno Domini 1608. anno Regni Domini Iacobi Regis
Angliae 6. virtute cujusdam war. a Dominis de Privato Concilio dict. Domini
Regis tunc seden. apud Whitehall commissus fuit etiam idem Samuel Saltonstall.
mil. prisonae praedict. 12. die Februarii anno 1610. and anno Regni Domini Iac.
nunc Regis Angliae etc. 8 per considerationem cur. Canc. dict. Domini Regis
apud Westminster. pro contemptu eidem Cur. ad tunc per praedict. Samuel illat.
ibidem prout inde salvo custodiend. Et haec sunt causae captionis and
detentionis praedict cujusdam tamen Corpus ad diem and locum infra content.
Remittitur.
parat. habeo prout mihi praecipitur.

Sr Edward Coke.
REsolved upon question, that no Freeman ought to be committed or detained in
prison or otherwise restrained by the command of the King, or the Privy
Council, or any other unless some cause of the commitment, detainer, or
restraint be expressed, for which by Law he ought to be committed, detained, or
restrained.

That the Writ of Habeas Corpus may not be denied but ought to be granted to
every Freeman that is committed, or detained in prison or otherwise
restrained, though it be by Command of the King, the Privy Counsel, or any
other he praying the same.

That if a Freeman be committed or detained in prison, or otherwise restrained
by the Command of the King, or the Privy Counsel, or any other, no cause of
such commitment, detainer or restraint being expressed, for which by Law he
ought to be committed detained or restrained, and the same returned upon a
Habeas Corpus granted for the same party, that then he ought to be delivered
or bailed. All this without one negative.

That these Acts of Parliament and these judicial Presidents in affirmance
thereof recited by Colleagues are but declarations of the fundamental Laws of
this Realm, I shall prove by manifest reasons, legal reasons which are the
grounds and Mothers of all Laws.

First general reason. The first general reason is drawn a re ipsa from
imprisonment, ex visceribus causae, be it close or other imprisonment, which is
divided into three parts, First, No man can be imprisoned at the will and
pleasure of any, but he that is bond, Vide the writ de ^ativo habendo.
and a villain, for that imprisonment at will Et Tailor lug haut et base are
propria quarto modo to villains. Second, 7. E. 3. fo. 50. in the new print and
348 in the old. 33 E. 3. tit. Dom. 253. infant inpris. Fitz. Herbert faeit ^^
note de Ceo.
But if Freemen of England might be imprisoned at the will and pleasure of the
King, by his Command, then were they in worse case then bondmen and villains,
for the Lord of a villain cannot command another to imprison his villain
without cause, as of disobedience or refusing to serve as is agreed in our
books. Third, Imprisonment is accounted in Law civil death, perdit domum
familiam vicinos patriam, his house, his family, his wife, his children, his
neighbors, his country, and to live among wretched and wicked men.

39. H. 1.65. etc.
If a man be threatened to be killed, he may avoid a Feoffment of lands gifts of
goods etc. so it is if he be threatened to be imprisoned he should do the like,
for that it is civil death.


Second general reason. The second general reason is a minore ad majus minima
poena corporalis est major qualibet pecuniaria But the King himself cannot
impose a fine upon any man but it must be done judicially by his Judges,
Bracton fol. 105. it is called duritiae imprisonment.
per Iusticiarios in Curia, non per Regem in Camera, and so it has been
resolved by all the Judges of England. 2 R. 3.11.
Third general reason. The third general reason is drawn from the number and
diversity of remedies which the Law gives against imprisonment. viz. breve de
homine replegiando, de odio and acia de habeas Corpus an appeal of
imprisonment, and breve de manucaptione. The latter two of these are
antiquated, but the writ de odio and acia is revived, for that was given by the
statute of Magna Charta, ca. 26. and therefore though it were repealed by the
statute of 28. E. 3. yet it is revived 42. E. 3. ca. 1. by which it is provided
that all statutes made against Magna Charta are void. Vide W. 2. ca. 29.
Now the law would never have given so many remedies if the Freemen of England
might be imprisoned at free will and pleasure. Fourth general reason. The
fourth general reason is drawn from the extent and universality of the
pretended power to imprison, for it should extend not only to the Commons of
the Realm and their posterity, but also to the Nobles, and their honorable
Progenies, to the Bishops and Clergy and their successors: to all persons of
what condition, or sex, or age soever, to all Judges Officers, etc. whose
attendance are necessary, etc. without exception of any person. Fifth general
reason. The fifth is drawn from the indefinitnesse of time, the pretended power
being limited to no time may be perpetual during life. Sixth general reason.
The sixth a damno and dedecore from the loss and dishonor of the English
Nation in 2 respects. First for their valor and prowess so famous through the
whole world. Secondly, for their industry, for who endeavors to apply himself
in any profession either of war, liberal science, or merchandise, etc. if he
be but Tennant at will of his Liberty. And no Tennant at will, will support or
improve any thing because he has no certain estate. And thus it should be both
dedecus and damnum to the English Nation, and it should be no honor to the
King to be King of slaves.
Seventh general reason. The seventh is drawn ab utili and inutili for that it
appears by the statute of 36. E. 3. That the execution of the statute of
Magna Charta 5. E. 3.25. E. 3. are adjudged in Parliament to be for the profit
of the King and of his people. Rot. Parl. 36. E. 3. number. 9. and 20.
And therefore this pretended power being against the profit of the King and of
his people can be no more part of this prerogative. Eighth general reason. The
eighth general reason is drawn a tuto for it is safe for the King to express
the cause of the commitment, 1. E. 2. de frang. prison. stat. unt. pasche 18.
E. 3. rot. 33. coram Rege Bildestons case, rot. Parl. 28 H. 6. nu. 16. Acts
Apost. cap. 25. v. the last.
and dangerous for him to omit it, for if any be committed without expressing
the cause, though he escape albeit the truth be it were for treason or felony,
yet the escape is neither felony nor treason. But if the cause be expressed to
be for suspicion of treason or felony then the escape albeit he be innocent is
treason or felony. Ninth general reason. The ninth general reason is drawn
from the authorities 16. H. 6. tit. Monstrans defaits, 182. by the whole Court,
the King in his presence cannot command one to be arrested, but an action of
false imprisonment lies against him that arresteth, 22. H. 6.46. Newton 1. H.
7.4. the opinion of Markham Chief Justice to E 4. and the reason because the
party has no remedy.
Fortescue cap. 18. proprio ore nullus Regum usus est etc. to commit any man,
etc. 4. Eliz. Plowd* Com. 236. the common Common Law has so admeasured the
Kings prerogative as he cannot prejudice any man in his inheritance, and the
greatest inheritance a man has, is the Liberty of his person for all other are
necessary to it. Major haereditas venit unicuique nostrum a jure and legibus
quam a parentibus 25. E. 1. ca. 2. Confirm. Cart. all judgments given against
Magna Charta are void.

Objections.
Upon Conference with the Lords the objections were made by the Kings Attorney.

First object. That these resolutions of the House were incompatible with a
Monarchy that must govern by the state.

Bracton Answ. Whereunto it was answered, that nihiltam proprium est imperii,
quam legibus vivere. And again, Attribuat Rex legi, quodlex attribuat, etc.
viz. dominationem and imperium quia sine lege non potest esse Rex. It can be no
more prejudice to the King by reason of matter of state, for if it be for
suspicion of treason misprision of treason or felony, it may be by general
words expressed, viz. pro suspitione proditionis.

2 object. To blind those that are committed, one cause must be pretended and
another intended, especially when it touches matter of state.

Answ. Whereunto it was answered that all dissimulation especially in the
course of Justice was to be avoided, and soundness of truth to take place, and
therefore David that was both a King and a Prophet prayed to Almighty God
against dissimulation in these words. Lord send me a sound heart in thy
statutes, that I be not ashamed, where sound in the original signifies
upright without dissimulation, and shame follows dissimulation, when the
truth is known.

Third object. If a Rebel be attainted in Ireland, and his children for safety
and for matter of state be kept in the Tower, what shall be returned upon the
Habeas Corpus?

Whereunto It was answered. First, that their imprisonment might be justified
if they could not find good sureties for their good behavior.

Secondly, It was charity to find them meat drink and apparel that by the
Attainder of their father had nothing.

Fourth object. Though his Majesty expresses no cause, yet it must be intended
that there was a just cause.

Answ. De non apparentibus and de non existentibus eadem ratio.

Fifth object. First, The King in stead of gold or silver may make money
current of any base metal.

Secondly, He may make wars at his pleasure.

Thirdly, He may pardon whom he will.

Fourthly, He may make denizens as many as he will, and these were said to be
greater privileges then this in question.

Answ. To the first it is denied, that the King may make money current of base
metal, but it ought to be gold or silver.

Secondly, It was answered admitting the King might do it, his loss and charge
was more then of his Subjects, both in the case of money and in the case of
war. The pardon was private out of grace, and no man had damage or loss by
it, and so of the making of denizens, the King was only the looser viz. to have
single custom where he had double.

Thirdly, it was a non sequitur The King may do these things, ergo he may
imprison at will.

Your Lordships are advised by them that cannot be daunted by fear, nor misled
by affection, reward, or hope of preferment, that is, of the dead.

By ancient and many Acts of Parliament in the point, besides, Magna Charta
which has been 30 times confirmed and commanded to be put in execution,
wherein the Kings of England have thirty times given their Royal assent.

Secondly, Judicial Presidents per vividas rations manifest and apparent
reasons, we in the house of Commons have upon great study and serious
consideration made a grand manifesto unanimously nullo contradicente concerning
this great Liberty of the subject, and have vindicated and recovered the body
of this fundamental Liberty both of your Lordships and of our selves from
shadows which some time of the day are long, sometimes short, and sometimes
long again, and therefore no Judges are to be led by them. Your Lordships are
involved in the same danger, and therefore ex congruo and condigno we desire a
conference to the end, your Lordships might make the like declaration as we
have done, Commune periculum commune requirit Auxilium, and thereupon take such
further course as may secure your Lordships and us, and all your and our
posterities in enjoying of our ancient undoubted and fundamental Liberties.

The Argument of Sergeant Bramston upon the Habeas corpus.
MAy it please your Lordship to hear the return read, or shall I open it?

Chief Justice Hide,

Let it be read.

Mr. Keeling read the return, being the same as that of Sir Thomas Darnell.

May it please your Lordship, I shall humbly move upon this return in the
behalf of Sir John Henningham with whom I am of Council; it is his petition
that he may be bailed from his imprisonment, it was but in vain for me to move
that to a Court of Law which by Law cannot be granted: and therefore in that
regard, that upon his return it will be questioned whether as this return is
made, the Gent. may be bailed or not; I shall humbly offer up to your Lordship
the case, and some reasons out of mine understanding, arising out of the return
it self, to satisfy your Lordship that these Prisoners may and as their case
is, ought to be bailed by your Lordship.

The exception that I take to this return, is as well to the matter and
substance of the return, as to the manner and legal form thereof; the
exceptions that I take to the matter is in several respects.

That the return is too general, there is no sufficient cause shown in
special or in general of the commitment of this Gentleman; and as it is
insufficient for the cause, so also in the time of the first imprisonment, for
howsoever here does appear a time upon the second warrant from the Lords of the
Council to detain him still in prison, yet by the return no time can appear
when he was first imprisoned, though it be necessary it should be shown, and
if that time appear not, there is no cause your Lordship should remand him, and
consequently he is to be delivered.

Touching the matter of the return, which is the cause of his imprisonment, It
is expressed to be Per speciale mandatum domini Regis: This is too general and
uncertain, for that it is not manifest what kind of command this was.

Touching the Legal form of the return, it is not as it ought to be fully and
positively the return of the Keeper himself only, but it comes with a
significavit or prout that he was committed Per speciale mandatum domini Regis,
as appears by warrant from the Lords of the Council, not of the King
himself, and that is not good in legal form.

For the matter and substance of the return it is not good, because there ought
to be a cause of that imprisonment.

This writ is the means, and the only means that the subject has in this and
such like case to obtain his liberty; there are other writs by which men are
delivered from restraint, as that de homine replegiando, but extends not to
this cause, for it is particularly excepted in the body of the writ de
manucaptione and de cantione admittenda, but they lie in other cases; but the
writ of Habeas corpus is the only means the subject has to obtain his
liberty, and the end of this writ is to return the cause of the imprisonment,
that it may be examined in this Court whether the parties ought to be
discharged or not, but that cannot be done upon this return, for the cause of
the imprisonment of this Gentleman at first is so far from appearing
particularly by it that their is no cause at all expressed in it.

This writ requires that the cause of the imprisonment should be returned, and
if the cause be not specially certified by it, yet should it at the last be
shown in general, that it may appear to the Judges of the Court, and it must
be expressed so far as that it may appear to be none of those causes for
which by the Law of the Kingdom the subject ought not to be imprisoned, and it
ought to be expressed that it was by presentment or indictment, and not upon
petition or suggestion made to the King and Lords, which is against the statute
made in the 25 Ed. 3. c. 4. 42 E. 3. c. 3.

By the Statute 25 Ed. 3. cap. 4. It is ordained and established, that no man
from henceforth shall be taken by petition or suggestion made to the King or
his Council, but by indictment or course of Law; and acordingly it was
enacted, 42 E. 3. c. 3. the title of which statute is, None shall be put to
answer an accusation made to the King without presentment. Then my Lord, it
being so, although the cause should not need to be expressed in such manner as
that it may appear to be none of these causes mentioned in the statute, or else
the Subject by this return loses the benefit and advantage of these Laws,
which be their birthright and inheritance; but in this return there is no cause
at all appearing of the first commitment, and therefore it is plain that there
is no cause for your Lordship to remand him: but there is no cause you should
deliver him, since the writ is to bring the body and the cause of the
imprisonment before your Lordship.

But it may be objected, that this writ of Habeas Corpus does not demand the
cause of the first commitment, but of the detaining only; and so the writ is
satisfied by the return, for though it show no cause of the first commitment,
but of detaining only, yet it declares a cause why the Gentleman is detained
in prison; this is no answer, nor can give any satisfaction for the reason why
the cause is to be returned is for the Subjects liberty, that if it shall
appear a good and sufficient cause to your Lordship, then to be remanded; if
your Lordship think and find it insufficient, he is to be enlarged.

This is the end of this writ, and this cannot appear to your Lordship, unless
the time of the first commitment be expressed in the return. I know that in
some cases the time is not material, as when the cause of the commitment is
(and that so especially) returned, as that the time is not material, it is
enough to show the cause without the time, as after a conviction or trial had
by Law; But when it is in this manner, that the time is the matter it self: for
intend what cause you will of the commitment, yea though for the highest cause
of treason, there is no doubt but that upon the return thereof the time of it
must appear; for it being before trial and conviction had by Law, it is but an
accusation, and he that is only accused, and the accusation ought by Law to be
let to bail.

But I beseech your Lordship to observe the consequence of this Cause. If the
Law be that upon this return this Gentleman should be remanded, I will not
dispute whether or no, a man may be imprisoned before he be convicted according
to the Law: but if this return shall be good, then his imprisonment shall not
continue on for a time, but for ever: and the Subjects of this Kingdom may be
restrained of their liberties perpetually, and by Law their can be no remedy
for the Subject; and therefore this return cannot stand with the Laws of the
Realm, or that of Magna Charta. Nor with the statute of 28 Ed. 3. ca. 3. for if
a man be not bailable upon this return, they cannot have the benefit of these
two Laws, which are the inheritance of the Subject.

If your Lordship shall think this to be a sufficient cause, then it goes to a
perpetual imprisonment of the subject: for in all those causes which may
concern the Kings Subjects, and are appliable to all times and cases, we are
not to reflect upon the present time and government, where justice and mercy
flows, but we are to look what may betide us in the time to come, hereafter.

It must be agreed on all sides, that the time of the first commitment does not
appear in this return; but by a latter warrant from the Lords of the Council,
there is a time indeed expressed for the continuing of him in prison, and that
appears; but if this shall be a good cause to remand these Gentlemen to
prison, they may lie there this seven years longer, and seven years after
them, nay all the days of their lives. And if they sue out a writ of Habeas
corpus, it is but making a new warrant, and they shall be remanded, and shall
never have the advantage of the Laws which are the best inheritance of every
Subject.

And in Ed. 6. fol. 36. the Laws are called the great inheritance of every
Subject, and the inheritance of inheritances, without which inheriritance we
have no inheritance.

These are the exceptions I desire to offer to your Lordship, touching the
return, for the insufficiency of the cause returned, and the defect of the time
of the first commitment, which should have been expressed.

I will not labor in objections till they be made against me, in regard the
sttatute of Westminster primo is so frequent in every man's mouth, that at the
Common Law those men that were committed in four cases were not replevisable (
viz.) those that were taken for the death of a man, or the commandment of the
King, or his Justices for the forest; I shall speak something to it, though I
intend not to spend much time about it, for it touches not this Case we have
in question.

For that is concerning a Case of the Common Law, when men are taken by the
Kings writs, and not by word of mouth, and it shall be so expounded, as Master
Stamford fol. 73. yet it is nothing to this Case, for if you will take the true
meaning of that statute, it extends not at all to this writ of Habeas corpus;
for the words are plain, they shall be replevisable by the Common writ, that
is, by the writ de homine replegiando, directed to the Sheriff to deliver them
if they were baileable, but the Case is above the Sheriff, and he is not to be
Judge in it, whether the cause of the commitment be sufficient or not, as it
appears in Fitz Herbert, de homine replegiando, and many other places, and not
of the very words of the statute, this is clear, for thereby many other causes
mentioned, as the death of a man, the commandment of the Justices, etc. In
which the statute says, men are not replevisable; but will a man conceive that
the meaning is, that they shall not be bailed at all, but live in perpetual
imprisonment? I think I shall not need to spend time, in that it is so plain,
let me but make one instance.

A man is taken de morte hominis, he is not baileable by writ, says this
statute, that is, by the common writ, there was a common writ for this Case,
and that was called de odio and acia, as appears. Bracton. Coron. 34. this is
the writ intended by the statute, which is a common writ, and not a special
writ; But my Lord as this writ de odio and acia was before this statute, so it
was afterward taken away by the statute of 28 Ed. 3. cap. 9. But before that
sttatute, this writ did lie in the special Case, as is shown in Brooks 9th.
Reports, Powlters Case, and the end of this writ was, that the Subject might
not be too long detained in prison, as till the Justices of Air discharged
them, so that the Law intended not that a man should suffer perpetual
imprisonment, for they were very careful that men should not be kept too long
in prison, which is also a Liberty of the Subject; and my Lord, that this Court
has bailed upon a suspicion of high treason, I will offer it to your Lordship,
when I shall show you presidents in these cases of a commitment by the Privy
Council, or by the King himself: But before I offer these presidents unto your
Lordship, of which there be many, I shall by your Lordships favor speak a
little to the next exception, and that is the matter of the return, which I
find to be per speciale mandatum domini Regis 8. and what is, that it is by
this writ there may be sundry commands by the King, we find a special command
often in our Books, as in the statute of Marlborough cap. 8. they were
imprisoned Rediss. shall not be delivered without the special command of our
Lord the King, and so in Bracton. De Actionibus, the last chapter, where it
appears that the Kings commandment for imprisonments is by special writ, so by
writ again men are to be delivered, for in the case of Rediss or Post Rediss,
if it shall be removed by a Certiorare, is by a special writ to deliver
parties; so that by this appears that by the Kings commandment to imprison, and
to deliver in those cases, is understood this writ, and so it may be in this
case which we have heard.

And this return here is a special Mandatum, it may be understood to be under
some of the Kings Seals, 42 Ass. and ought to be delivered, and will you make a
difference between the Kings command under his seal, and his command by word of
mouth; what difference there is, I leave it to your Lordships judgment, but if
there be any, it is the more material that it should be expressed what manner
of command it was, which does not here appear; and therefore it may be the
Kings command by writ, or his command under his Seal, or his command by word of
mouth alone.

And if of an higher nature, there is none of these commands, then the other,
doubtless, it is that by writ, or under seal, for they are of record, and in
these the person may be bailed, and why not in this? As to the legal form,
admitting there were substances in the return, yet there wants legal form, for
the writ of Habeas Corpus is the commandment of the King to the Keeper of the
prisons, and thereupon they are to make return both of the body, and of the
cause of the commitment, and that cause is to appear of them who are the
immediate Officers. And if he does it by signification from another, that
return is defective in Law, and therefore this return cannot be good, for it
must be from the Officer himself, and if the cause returned by him be good, it
binds the prisoners.

The warrant of the Lords was but a direction for him, he might have made his
return to have been expressly by the Kings commandment, there was a warrant for
it, I shall not need to put your cases of it, for it is not enough that he
returns that he was certified that the commitment was by the Kings command, but
he must of himself return this fact as it was done. And now my Lord I shall
offer to your Lordship presidents of diverse kinds, upon commitments by the
Lords of the Privy Council, upon commitments by the special command of the
King, and upon commitments both by the King and the Lords together. And
howsoever I conceive, which I submit to your Lordship, that our case will not
stand upon presidents, but upon the fundamental Laws and Statutes of this
Realm, and though the presidents look the one way or the other, they are to be
brought back unto the Laws by which the Kingdom is governed. In the first of
Henry the eighth, Rot. Parl. one Harison was committed to the Marshalsey by the
command of the King, and being removed by Habeas Corpus into the Court, the
cause returned was, that he was committed per mandatum Domini Regis, and he was
bailed.

In the fortieth of Elizabeth, Thomas Wendon was committed to the Gatehouse by
the commandment of the Queen, and Lords of the Council, and being removed by
an Habeas Corpus upon the general return, and he was bailed.

In 8 Iacobi, one Caesar was committed by the Kings commandment, and this being
returned upon his Habeas Corpus, upon the examination of this case it does
appear that it was over ruled that the return should be amended, or else the
prisoner should be delivered.

The presidents concerning the commitment by the Lords of the Council, are in
effect the same with these, where the commitment is, by the reason why the
cause of the commitment should not be shown, holds in both cases, and that is
the necessity of suit, and therefore Master Stamford makes the command of the
King, and that of the Lords of the Privy Council, to be both as one, and to
this purpose, if they speak, he speaks, and if he speaks, they speak.

The presidents that we can show you how the Subject has been delivered upon
commitment by the Lords of the Council, as in the time of Henry the eight, as
in the times of Queen Elizabeth, Queen Mary, are infinite: as in the ninth of
Elizabeth, Thomas Lawrence was committed to the Tower by the Lords of the
Council, and bailed upon an Habeas Corpus.

In the 43 of Elizabeth, Calvin's case.

In the third of Elizabeth, Vernons case.

These were committed for high treason, and yet bailed, for in all these cases
there must be a conviction in due time, or a deliverance by Law.

There be diverse other presidents that might be shown to your Lordship. In 12
Iacobi, M^les Renards. In 12 Iacobi, Rot. 155. Richard Beckwiths case. In 4
Iacobi, Sir Thomas Monson was committed for treason to the Tower of London, and
afterward was brought hither, and bailed, and since our case stands upon this
return, and yet there is no sufficient cause in Law expressed in the return of
the detaining this Gentleman; and since these presidents do warrant our
proceedings, my humble suit unto this Court is, that the Gentleman Sir John
Henningham, who has petitioned his Majesty, that he may have the benefit of
the Law, and his Majesty has signified it, it is his pleasure that justice
according to the Law should be administered at all times in general to all his
Subjects, and particularly to these Gentlemen which is their birthright: My
humble suit to your Lordship is, that these Gentlemen may have the benefit of
that Law, and be delivered from their imprisonment.

The Argument of Master Noye upon the Habeas corpus.
May it please your Lordship, I am of Council with Sir Walter Earl, one of the
prisoners at the Bar; the return of this writ is as those that have been
before, they are much of one tenor, and as you have heard the tenor of that,
so this Gentleman coming hither by an Habeas Corpus, I will by your Lordships
favor read the writ.

Carolus Dei Gratia and, Iohanni Lylo Milit Guardian Prison nostrae de le Fleet
Salut Praecipimus tibi quod corpus Walteri Earl Milit in prison nostra sub
custodia tua detent ut dicit una cum causa detentionis suae quocunque nomine
praedict Walter censeat in eadem Habeas Corpus ad subjiciendum and recipiendum
ea quae curia nostra de eo ad tunc and ibidem ordin conting in hac part and
haec nallatenus omit periculo incumbent and habeas tibi hoc breve, Test Hyde,
apud Westminster quarto die Novembris, Anno 8.

Executio istius brevis patet in quadam schedula huic brevi annexat.


Respons. Johan Liloe Guardian Prison de le Fleet.
Ego Johannes Lyloe Mil Guardian Prison domini Regis de le Fleet, Serenissimo
Domino Regi, apud Westminster 8. Post receptionem hujus brevis quod in hac
schedula est mentionat', Certifico quod Walter Earl miles, in eodem brevium
nominat detentus est in prisona de le Fleet sub custodia mea praedict per
speciale mandatum domini Regis mihi significatum per VVarrantum duorum and
aliorum de Privato Concilio per Honorabilissimi dicti Domini Regis, cujus
quidem tenor sequitur in haec verba.


Whereas Sir Walter Earl Knight, was heretofore committed to your custody,
these are to will and require you still to detain him, letting you know, that
both his first commitment, and this direction for the continuance of him in
prison, were and are by his Majesty's special commandment, from White Hall, 7
Novembris. 1627.

Thomas Coventree C. S. Henry Manchester. Thomas Suffolk. Bridgewater. Kellie.
R. Duneln'. Thomas Edmunds. John Cook. Marlborough. Pembrook. Salisbury.
Totnes. Grandisson. Guliel Bath and Wells. Robert Nanton. Richard Weston.
Humphrey Mayes.



To the Guardian of the Fleet or his Deputy.
Et haec est causa detentionis praedict Walteri Earl sub custodia mea in Prison
praedict. Attamen corpus ejusdem Walteri coram Domino Rege ad diem and locum
praedictum, post receptionem brevis praedict pa rat habeo prout istud breve in
se exiget and requiret.


Respon Johan Liloe milit Guardian Prison de le Fleet.
My Lord, the first Habeas corpus bears date the 4 of November, then there is
an Alias habeas bears Test after that, and the tenor thereof is a command to
the Warden of the Fleet, quod habeas corpus Walteri Earl coram nobis ad
subjiciendum and recipiendum ea quae curia nostra de eo etc. ordin conting. And
the Warden of the Fleet he certifies as your Lordship have heard; May it please
your Lordship, I desire as before was desired for the other Gentlemen, that Sir
Walter Earl may be also bailed, if there be no other cause of his imprisonment;
for if there were a cause certified, and that cause were not sufficient to
detain him still in prison, your Lordship would bail him, and if a man should
be in worse case, when there is no cause certified at all, that was very hard.


The writ is, that he should bring the prisoner coram nobis before the King,
the end of that is ad subjiciendum and recipiendum; now I conceive that though
there be a signification of the Kings pleasure to have this Gentleman
imprisoned, yet when the King grants this writ to bring the prisoner hither, ad
subjictendum and recipiendum, his pleasure likewise is to have the prisoner let
go, if by Law he be not chargeable, or otherwise to detain him still in prison,
if the case so require it.

I will put your Lordship in mind of a case, and it was Pasch. 9. Ed. 3. M. 3.
I will cite by the placita, because my Book is not paged as other Books are, it
is in the case of a Cessavit.

In that case there were two things considerable, the one that there was a
signification of the Kings pleasure past, and that determined with him: the
other, that though there was a signification of the Kings pleasure, before
which was, yet there comes after that a writ, and that was another
signification of the Kings pleasure, that the prisoner should be brought hither
ad subjiciendum, to submit himself to punishment, if he have deserved it, or ad
recipiendum, to receive his enlargement and be delivered, if there be no cause
of his imprisonmet.

And if upon an Habeas corpus a cause of commitment be certified, that cause is
to be tried here before your Lordship. But if no cause be shown, then the
proceedings must be ut curia nostra ad mar contigerit, the Court must do that
which stands with Law and Justice, and that is to deliver him.

My Lord, I shall be bold to move one word more touching this return: I
conceive that every Officer to a Court of Justice must make his return of his
own act, or of the act of another, and not what he is certified of by another.

But in this case the Warden of the Fleet does not certify himself, of
himself, that this Gentleman was commanded to him by the King, but that he was
certified by the Lords of the Council, that it was the Kings pleasure that he
should detain him. But in our case the Warden of the Fleet must certify the
immediate cause, and not the cause of the cause, as it does by this return,
Detentus est sub custodia mea per speciale mandatum Domini Regis mihi
significatum per Warrantum duorum de Privato Concilio; that is not the use in
Law, but he ought to return the primary cause, and not the subsequent cause, as
in 32 Edw. 3. return, Rex vicecom 87. in a writ De homine replegiando, against
an Abbot, the Sheriff returns, that he has sent to the Bayliffe of the Abbot,
and he answered him that the party was the Abbots villain, and so he cannot
deliver him, that is held an insufficient return, and a new Alias was granted,
but if the Sheriff had returned, that the Abbot did certify him so, it had
been good, but he must not return what is certified him by another.

In one of the presidents that has been noted, as that of Parker, 22 Hen. 8.
there the Guardian of the prison certifies that Parker detentus est sub
custodia mea per mandatum Domini Regis mihi nunciatum per Robertum Pecke; now
our case is by the Nunciation of many, but in Law majus and minus non variant
in spetione, the certification of one and of many is of the same effect,
although in moral understanding there may be a difference.

Trin. 2. Ed. 3. Rot. 46. in this Court in 21 Ed. 3. in the printed Book there
is a piece of it: The Abbot of Burey brings a prohibition out of this Court,
the Bishop of Norwich pleads in Bar of that Quod mihi testificatu^, quod
continetur in Archivis, that he is excommunicated; there were two exceptions
taken to this case in this president, and they are both in one case, the first
was, that no case appears, why he was excommunicated: there may be causes why
he should be excommunicated, and then he should be barred, and there may be
causes why the excommunication should not bar him: for it may be the
excomunication was for bringing the action, which was the Kings writ, and
therefore because there was no cause of the excommunication returned, it was
ruled that it was not good. The other reason is that upon the Roll, which is
mihi testificatum.

Now every man when he will make a certificate to the Court, Proprium factum
suum non alterius significare debet, he must inform the Court of the immediate
act done, and not that such things are told him, or that such things are
signified unto him, but that was not done in this case, and therefore it was
held insufficient: and so in this case of ours, I conceive the return is
insufficient in the form, there is another cause my Lord, for which I conceive
this return is not good.

But first I will be bold to inform your Lordship touching the Statute of Magna
Charta 29. Nullus liber homo capiatur vel imprisonetur etc. neo super eum
mittimus nisi per legale judicium parium suorum vel per legem terrae.

That in this Statute these words in Carcerem are omitted out of the printed
Books: for it should be nec eum in Carcerem mittimus. For these words per legem
terrae; what Lex terrae should be, I will not take upon me to expound,
otherwise then I find them to be expounded by Acts of Parliament; and this is
that they are understood to be the process of the Law, sometimes by writ,
sometimes by attachment of the person: but whether speciale mandatum Domini
Regis be intended by that or no, I leave it to your Lordships exposition upon
two petitions of the Commons, and answer of the King, in 36 Ed. 3. no 9. and no
20.

In the first of them the Commons complain that the great Charter, the Charter
of the Forest, and other Statutes were broken, and they desire that for the
good of himself and of his people, they might be kept and put in execution, and
that they might not be infringed by making an arrest by special command or
otherwise: and the answer was, that the assent of the Lords established and
ordained, that the said Charter and other Statutes should be put in execution
according to the petitition, and that is without any disturbance by arrest by
special command or otherwise, for it was granted, as it was petitioned.

In the same year, for they were very careful of this matter, and it was
necessary it should be so, for it was then an usual thing to take men by writs
quibusdam de causis, and many of these words caused many Acts of Parliament:
and it may be some of these writs may be shown, and I say in the same year they
complained that men were imprisoned by special command, and without indictment
or other legal course of Law, and they desired that thing may not be done upon
men by special command against the great Charter.

The King makes answer that he is well pleased therewith: that was the first
answer; and for the future he has added farther, if any man be grieved let him
complain, and right shall be done unto him. This my Lord is an explanation of
the great Charter, as also the Statute of 37 Ed. 3. ch, 18. is a commentary
upon it, that men should not be committed upon suggestion made to the King,
without due proofs of Law against them, and so it is enacted twice in one year.

We find more printed Books, as in Henry the sixth, Minus de facts, Fitz. 182.
which is a strong case: under favor in an action of Trespass for cutting down
trees: the defendant says, that the place where the trees are cut, is parcel
of the Manor of B, whereof the King is seized in fee, and that the King did
command him to cut them: and the opinion of the Court was, that this was no
good plea, without showing the specialty of the command, and they said, if the
King command me to arrest a man, and I arrest him, he shall have an action of
false imprisonment against me, altough it were done in the Kings presence.

In 1 Ioh. cap. 7. fol. 46. it is in print, and there we leave it.

Hussy Chief Justice says, that Sir John Markham told King Edward the fourth,
that he could not arrest a man upon suspicion of felony or treason, as any of
his Subjects might, because if he should wrong a man by such arrest, the
parties could have no remedy against him, if any man shall stand upon it; here
is a signification of the Kings pleasure, nor to have the cause of the
commitment examined, he has here another signification of his pleasure by
writ, whereby the party is brought hither ad subjiciendum and recipiendum, that
he has made your Lordship Judge of that, that should be objected against this
Gentleman, and either to punish him, or to deliver him, and if here be no cause
shown, it is to be intended that the party is to be delivered, and that it is
the Kings pleasure it should be so, and the writ is a sufficient warrant for
the doing of it, there being no cause shown of the imprisonment; and now my
Lord I will speak a word to the writ of de homine replegiando, and no other
writ, for that was the common writ, and the four causes expressed in that
Statue, to wit, the death of a man, the command of the King or his Justices, or
Forest, were excepted in that writ before that Statute made, as appears
Bracton 133. so that the writ was at the Common Law before that Statute.

And it appears by our Books, that if a man be brought hither by an Habeas
corpus, though he were imprisoned De morte hominis, as in the 21 of Edward the
fourth 7. Winkfield was bailed here, this Court bailed him, for he was brought
hither ad subjiciendum and recipiendum, and not to lie in prison God knows how
long; and if the Statute should be expounded otherwise, there were no bailing
men outlawed or breakers of prisons, for they are not within this Statute, and
yet this Court does it at pleasure.

But plainly by the Statute it self, it appears that it meant only to the
common writ, for the preamble recites, that the Sheriffs and other, have taken
and kept in prison persons detected of felony, and let out to plevin such as
were not reprisable to grieve the one party, and to the gain of the other; and
forasmuch as before this time it was not determined what prisoners were
reprisable, which not, but only in certain cases were expressed, therefore it
is ordained, etc.

Now this is no more but for direction of the keepers of the prisons, for it
leaves the matter to the discretion of the Judges, whether bailable or no, not
of the Judges, for when the Statute has declared who are repleviable, who are
not, as men outlawed have abjured the Realm: Proves such as be taken in the
manner, breakers of prisons, burners of houses, makers of false money,
counterfeiting of the Kings Seal, and the like, it is then ordained, that if
the Sheriff or any other, let any go at large by surety, that is not
reprisable, if he be Sheriff, Constable, or any other that has the keeping of
prisons, and thereof be attainted, he shall lose his office and fee for ever,
so that it extends to the common Goalers and keepers of prisons, to direct them
in what cases they shall let men to bail, and in what cases not: and that they
shall not be Judges to whom to let to replevin, and whom to keep in prison, but
it extends not to the Judges, for if the makers of the Statute had meant them
in it, they should have put a pain upon them also.

So then, I conclude upon these under your Lordships favor, that as this case
is, there should have been a cause of the commitment expressed, for these
Gentlemen are brought hither by writ ad subjiciendum, if they be charged, and
ad recipiendum, if they be not charged, and therefore in regard there is no
charge against them whereupon they should be detained in prison any longer; we
desire that they may be bailed or discharged by your Lordship.

The Argument of Master Seldom upon the Habeas corpus.
My Lords, I am of Council with Sir Edmond Hampden, his case is the same with
the other two Gentlemen, I cannot hope to say much after that that has been
said, yet if it shall please your Lordship, I shall remember you of so much as
is befallen my lot: Sir Edmond Hampden is brought hither by a writ of Habeas
corpus, and the keeper of the Gatehouse has returned upon the writ, that Sir
Edmond Hampden is detained in prison per speciale mandatum Domini Regis, mihi
significatum per Warrantum duorum Privati Concilii dicti domini Regis, and then
he recites the warrants of the Lords of the Council, which is, that they do
will and require him to detain this Gentleman still in prison, letting him know
that his first imprisonment, etc.

May it please your Lordship, I shall humbly move you that this Gentleman may
also be bailed, for under favor my Lord, there is no cause in the return, why
he should be any farther imprisoned and restrained of his liberty.

My Lord, I shall say something to the form of the writ, and of the return, but
very little to them both, because there is a very little left for me to say.

My Lord, to the form, I say it expresses nothing of the first caption, and
therefore it is insufficient, I will add one reason as has been said: the
Habeas Corpus has only these words, quod habeas corpus ejus una cum causa
detensionis and non captionis: But my Lord, because in all imprisonment there
is a cause of caption and detention, the caption is to be answered as well as
the detention.

I have seen many writs of this nature, and on them the caption is returned,
that they might see the time of the caption, and thereby know whether the party
should be delivered or no, and that in regard of the length of his imprisonment.

The next exception I took to the form is, that there is much incertainty in
it, so that no man can tell when the writ came to the keeper of the prison,
whether before the return or after, for it appears not when the Kings command
was, for the commitment or the signification of the Council came to him: It is
true, that it appears that the warant was dated the seventh of November, but
when it came to the keeper of the prison that appears not at all; and therefore
as for want of mentioning the same time of the caption, so for not expressing
the same time when this warrant came, I think the return is faulty in form and
void.

And for apparent contradiction also, the return is insufficient, for that part
of the return which is before the warrant, it is said quod detentus est per
speciale mandatum domini Regis, the warrant of the Lords of the Council; the
very syllables of that warrant are, that the Lords of the Council do will and
require him still to detain him, which is contrary to the first part of the
return.

Besides my Lord, the Lords themselves say in another place and passage of the
warrant, that the King commanded them to commit him, and so it is their
commitment, so that upon the whole matter there appears to be a clear
contradiction in the return, and there being a contradiction in the return, it
is void.

Now my Lord, I will speak a word or two to the matter of the return, and that
is touching the imprisonment, per speciale mandatum domini Regis, by the Lords
of the Council without any cause expressed, and admitting of any or either of
both of these to be the return: I think that by the constant and settled Laws
of this kingdom, without which we have nothing, no man can be justly
imprisoned be either of them, without a cause of the commitment expressed in
the return. My Lord, in both the last Arguments the statutes have been
mentioned and fully expressed, yet I will add a little to that which has been
said.

The statute of Magna Charta cap. 29. that statute if it were fully executed as
it ought to be, every man would enjoy his liberty better then he does.

The Law says expressly, no Freeman shall be imprisoned without due process
of the Law; out of the very body of this Act of Parliament, besides the
explanation of other statutes, it appears, Nullus liber homo capiatur vel
imprisonetur nisi per legem terrae. My Lord, I know these words legem terrae,
do leave the question where it was if the interpretation of the Statute were
not. But I think under your Lordships favor, there it must be intended by due
course of Law to be either by presentment or by indictment.

My Lords, if the meaning of these words Per legem terrae were but as we use to
say, according to the laws, which leaves the matter very uncertain: and per
speciale mandatum, etc. be within the meaning of these words, according to the
law, then this Act had done nothing. The Act is* No Freeman shall be
imprisoned but by the law of the land; if you will understand these words, per
legem terrae, in the first sense, this statute will extend to Villains as well
as to Freemen, for if I imprison another man, Villain, the Villain may have an
action of false imprisonment. But the Lords and the King (for then they both
had Villains) might imprison them* and the Villain could have no remedy; but
these words in the statute per legem terrae, were to the Freeman, which ought
not to be imprisoned, but by due process of law, and unless the
interpretation shall be this, the Freeman shall have no privilege above the
Villain.

So that I conceive my Lord, these words per legem terrae, must be here so
interpreted, as in 42 Eliz. the Bill is worth the observing, it recites that
diverse persons without any writ or presentment were cast into prison, etc that
it might be enacted that it should not be so done hereafter; the answer there
is, that this is an Article of the great Charter, this should be granted, so
that it seems the statute is not taken to be an explanation of that of Magna
Charta, but the very words of the statute of Magna Charta.

I will conclude with a little observation upon these words, nec super eum
mittimus, which words of themselves signify not so much, a man cannot find
any fit sense for them.

But my Lord, in the seventh year of King John, there was a great Charter by
which this statute in the ninth of Henry the third, whereby we are now
regulated, was framed, and there the words are, nec eum in Carcerem mittimus,
we will not commit him to prison; that is, the King himself will not: and to
justify this, there is a story of that time in Matthew Paris, and in that Book
this Charter of King John is set down at large, which Book is very authentic,
and there it is entered, and in the ninth of Henry the third, he says, that the
statute was renewed in the same words with the Charter of King John; and my
Lord, he might know it better then others, for he was the Kings Chronologer in
those times: and therefore my Lord, since there be so many reasons, and so many
presidents, and so many statutes, which declare that no Freeman whatsoever
ought to be imprisoned, but according to the laws of the land; and that the
liberty of the subject is the highest inheritance that he has; my humble
request is, that according to the ancient laws and privileges of this Realm,
this Gentleman my Client may be bailed.

The Argument of Master Calthrop upon the Habeas corpus.
Sir John Corbet being brought to the Kings Bench Bar with Sir Edmond Hampden,
Sir Walter Earl, and Sir John Henningham, who were also brought thither by
several writs of Habeas Corpus, with the same return, I being assigned by the
Court of Kings Bench, upon a petition delivered to be of Council with Sir John
Corbet, did move that Sir John Corbet might be discharged of his imprisonment,
and put in bail, for I did conceive that the return of this Habeas corpus was
insufficient, both in the matter of the return, and in the manner of the
return, and so there ought not to be a longer detaining of Sir John Corbet in
prison: for as unto the manner of the return it is not laid down precisely that
Sir John Corbet is detained in prison by the special commandment of the King,
signified by the warrant of the Lords of the Council, the which is not a
direct affirmation that he is detained by the special command of the King, but
that the Lords of the Council by their warrant have signified unto him that he
was committed and still detained by the special command of the King.

And howsoever the Lords of the Council had signified that he was detained by
the commandment of the King, yet it may be he was not detained by the
commandment of the King, for their signification of the same by warrant may be
untrue, and the warrant of the Lords of the Council that is returned in haec
verba, imports that the keeper of the Gatehouse rather took upon him to
return, that was signified unto him by the warrant of the Lords of the
Council, that Sir John Corbet was committed and detained by the special
commandment of the King, because if the keeper had taken upon him to affirm it
upon his return, then needed he not to have returned the warrants of the Lords
of the Council, and the warrant it self shows that he had only his
information from the Lords of the Council; for their warrant is to let the
keeper know, that both the first commitment, and this direction for the
continuing of him in prison, were and are by his Majesty's special
commandment, and I do not see as this return is made, that an accord upon the
case can lie upon the keeper of the Gatehouse, if Sr. John Corbet was not
committed nor detained by the special commandment of the King, so long as the
warrant of the Lords of the Council be returned as it was made, because he
does return the same as the significavit of the Lords by their warrant,
Register 65. the writ of Excommunication Capiend goes, Rex vicecom Lincoln S.
significavit nob venerabilis Pater Henricus Lincolniensis Episcopus per Literas
suas Patentes quod R. suus Parochial propter suam manifesta^ cotumac
authoritate ipsius Episc ordin excom est nec se vult per censuram
Ecclesiasticam justiciar etc. tibi praecipimus quod praedict R. per corpus suum
secundum consuetud Angliae justic etc. and yet no man will say that there is an
information of the King, that R. is excommunicated, but only that the Bishop
of Lincoln had signified unto him that R. was excommunicated: and in Fitz. Not.
Br* 663. and Register 65. it appears that the form of the writ of
Excommunication deliberand is, Rex Vice com London Salut. Cum Thom Iay allutar
London qui nuper ad denuntiat. venerabil Patris Archiep Eborum pro contumaciis
suis ratione contractus in civitate nostra Eborum habit ut dicebat, tanquam
excom and claves Ecclesiae contemnent per corp suum secundum consuetud Augliae
per te justic praecepimus, donec etc. esset satisfact eid Archiepiscopo, ad
satisfaciendum Deo and sanctae ecclesiae, sufficientem exposuit cautionem, per
quod eidem Archiepiscopus offic. Archdiac London. mutuae vicissitudin obtentu
scripsit ut ipsum absolvat ab excom senten memorata sicut idem Archiepiscopus
per Literas suas Patentes nob significavit, Tibi praecipimus quod praed. Thom
cum tibi constare poterit ipsum ab excom praedict per praedict Official absolvi
a Prison qua detinetur si ea occasion and non alia detineat in eadem sine
dilatione deliberari fac And yet it cannot be said, that although the King
recited in his writ that the Archbishop had signified unto him that he had
written unto the Official of the Archdeacon, that the King said that the
Archbishop had written, for he does not affirm so much precisely, but only
refers himself unto the Certificate of the Archbishop.

Plowden 122 Buckley and Rivers case, it is put that if a man will bring an
action of debt upon an obligation, and declare that it appears by the
obligation that the defendant stood bound to the plaintiff in twenty pounds,
the which he has not paid, this declaration is not good, insomuch as it is not
alleged by matter in fact, that he was bound unto him in twenty pound, but the
deed is alleged by recital only 21. Ed. 4.43.

Plowden Com 126. and 143. Browning and Beestons case.

The Abbot of Waltham being appointed collector of a Disme granted unto the
King in discharge of himself, in the Exchequer, pleads, Quo inter recordat
Ter Pasc. anno 25. domini Regis Edvardi 1. inter alia continetur quod R. 2. had
granted unto the predecessors of the said Abbot, that he nor any of his
successors should be any collectors of any dismes to be granted afterward,
and it was adjudged that this plea was ill.

For the saying [it was contained among the Records,] it is no precise
affirmation that the King had granted to his predecessors, that they should be
discharged of the collecting any dismes, but it is only an allegation by way
of recital, and not by precise affirmation, the plea may not be good.

2 and 3 Mar. Dier. 117. and 118. the plaintiffes reply in bar of all
pleads, that John Abbot of W. was seized of his lands in right of his Church,
and so seized by the assent of the tenant by indenture* 14 Hen. 4. testat quod
praedict Abbat and convent demiserunt and tradiderunt, unto the plaintiff, and
ruled, that this form of pleading was ill, insomuch as it was not alleged by
precise affirmation, quod demiserunt, sed indentura testatur, quod demiserunt,
which is not sufficient, insomuch as it is only an allegation by way of
recital, that the Indenture does witness, and the same Indenture may witness
so much, and yet not be a demise.

And if in pleading there must be direct affirmation of the matter alleged,
then a fortiore in a return, which must be more precise then in pleading, and
so by all the cases I have formerly touched, it appears that this return is
no express affirmation of the keeper of the Gatehouse, that Sir John Corbet is
detained in prison by the special commandment of the King, but only an
affirmation of the Lords of the Council, who had signified unto him that his
detainment in prison was by special command of the King.

The return which ought to be certain, and punctual, and affirmative, and not
by way of information out of another man's mouth, may not be good, as appears
by the several books of our law.

23 Ed. 3. Rex vic 181. upon a Homine replegiando, against the Abbot of C. the
Sheriff returns that he had sent to the Bailiffe of the Abbot that answered
him that he was the villain of the Abbot, by which he might not make
deliverance, and a Sicut alias was awarded, for this return was insufficient,
insomuch that he had returned the answer of the Bailiffe of the Abbot where he
ought to have returned the answer of the Abbot himself out of his own mouth.

Trin. 22. Ed. 2. Rot. 46. parent. vill and Burg. Evesque de Norwich, repl 68.
Not. Br. Case 34. Fitz. Not. Br. 65. and 34. Ed. 3. Excom 29. the case
appears to be such in a trespass, the defendant pleads, the plaintiff is
excommunicate, and shows forth the letter of the Bishop of Lincoln,
witnessing that for diverse contumacies, etc. and because he had certified no
excommunic done by himself, but by another, the letter of excommunication was
annulled, for the Bishop ought to have certified his own act, and not the act
of another.

Hillarii 22 Hen. 8. Rot. 37. it appears by the return of an Habeas corpus,
that John Parker was committed to prison for security of the peace, and for
suspicion of felony, as per mandatum Domini Regis nunciatum, per Robertum Peck
de Cliffords Inn, and upon his return John Parker was bailed, for the return
Commiss. fuit per speciale mandatum domini Regis, nunciatum per Robertum Peck
was not good, insomuch that it was not a direct return that he was committed
per mandatum Domini Regis.

And for the first point, I conclude that this return is insufficient in form,
insomuch that it does not make a precise and direct return, that he was
committed and detained by the special command of the King, but only as he was
signified by the warrant of the Lords of the Council, which will not serve the
turn; and upon the book of 9 Hen. 6.44. the return of the cause of a man's
imprisonment ought to be precise and direct upon the Habeas corpus, insomuch as
thereby to be able to judge of the cause, whether it be sufficient or not, for
there may not any doubt be taken to the return, be it true or false, but the
Court is to accept the same as true: and if it be false, the party must take
his remedy by action upon the case.

And as concerning the matter of the return, it will rest upon these parts

First, whether the return be that he is detained in prison by special
commandment of our Lord the King, be good or not, without showing the nature of
the commandment, or the cause whereupon the commitment is grounded in the
return.

The second is, whether the time of the first commitment by the commandment of
the King, not appearing to the Court, is sufficient to detain him in prison.

Thirdly, whether the imprisonment of the subjects without cause showed, but
only by the commandment of the King, be warantable by the laws and statutes of
this Realm.

As unto the first part, I find by the books of our law, that commandments of
the King are of several natures, by some of which the imprisonment of a man's
body is utterly unlawful: and by others of them, although the imprisonment may
be lawful, yet the continuance of him without bail or mainprise, will be
utterly unlawful.

There is a verbal command of the King which is by word of mouth of the Kings
only, and such commandment by the King, by the books of our law will not be
sufficient either to imprison a man or to continue him in prison, 16.6.
Monstrans de faict si, upon an action of trespass brought for cutting of
trees, the defendant pleads that the place where he cut them is parcel of
the Manor of D. whereof the King is seized in fee, and the King commanded him
to cut the trees, and the opinion of the Court there is, that the plea in bar
was ill, because he did not show any special commandment of the King, and
there it is agreed by the whole Court, that if the King commands one to
arrest another, and the party commanded did arrest the other, an action of
trespass or false imprisonment is maintainable against the party that arrested
him, although it were done in the presence of the King, 39 H. 6.17. where one
justifies the seizure of the goods of a person that is outlawed by the
commandment of the King, such a party being no Officer may not in an action
brought against him have any aid of the King; for such a commandment given to
one that is not an Officer, will not any ways avail him that is to justify
himself by the return of that commandment.

37 Hen. 6.10. If the king give me a thing and I take the same by his
commandment by word of mouth, it is not justified by law, nothing may pass
without matter of Record.

10 Hen. 7.7. and 17.18. it is agreed that Justices may command one to arrest
another that is in their view or presence, but not one that is out of their
view or presence.

And Keble 10 Hen. 7.13. said, that where one is arrested by a parroll command
in their view or presence, it is fitting that a record may be made of it,
insomuch that without such a record there can hardly be a justification in
another Term.

Secondly, there is a commandment of the King by his Commission, which
according unto Calvin's case in the seventh Report, it is called by him breve
mandatum non remediabile, and by virtue of such a commandment the King may
neither seize the goods of his subject, nor imprison his body, as it is
resolved in 42 Ass. pl. 5. where it is agreed by all the justices that a
Commission to take a man's goods, or imprison his body without indictment or
suit of the party, or other due process, is against the Law.

Thirdly, there is a commandment of the King which is grounded upon a
suggestion made to the King or to his Council; and if a man be committed to
prison by such a suggestion by commandment of the King, it is unlawful, and
not warranted by the Law of the Realm.

The 25 of Edward the third, cap. 4. de Provisoribus, whereas it is contained
in the great Charter of the Franchises of England, that none shall be
imprisoned or arrested of his Freehold or of his Franchises, nor of his free
customs, but by the Law of the land.

It is awarded, consented and established, that from henceforth none shall be
taken by petition or suggestion made to our Sovereign Lord the King, or to his
Council, until it be by indictment or presentment of his good and lawful
neighbors, where such deeds are done in due manner, or by process made by
writ original at the common law, nor of his freehold, unless he be duly
brought in, and answer, and forejudged of the same by way of Law, and if any
thing be done against the same, it shall be redressed and holden for naught.

37 Ed. 3. cap. 10. although it be contained in the great Charter, that no man
be taken or imprisoned, or put out of his freehold, without due process of the
law: nevertheless diverse persons make false suggestions to the King himself,
as well for malice as otherwise, whereof the King is often grieved, and diverse
of the Realm put in great damages contrary to the form of the same Statute.

Wherefore it is ordained, that all they that make such suggestions be sent
with their suggestions to the Chancellor or Treasurer, and they and every of
them find sureties to pursue their suggestions, and endure the same pain that
the other should have had; if in case that his suggestion be found untrue, and
that then process of the law be made against them without being taken or
imprisoned against the form of the same Charter, and other statutes.

So that it appears by these several statutes, that such commandments of the
King as are grounded upon suggestion, either made to himself or to his
Council, for the imprisonment of a man, are against the law.

Fourthly, I find that there is a commandment of the King which is made under
his hand, with his signet, for in the fourth and the fifth of Philip and Mary,
Dier. 162. where the statute of 1 Rich. 2. cap. 11. restrains the Warden of
the Fleet for letting any man at large that is in upon judgment at the suit of
any man, except it be by writ or other commandment of the King; It was doubted
whether the Queen by letter under her hand and privy signet, does give
commandment to the Warden of the Fleet to suffer a man that is there in
execution to go about his business, or the affairs of the Queen: whether this
be a warrantable command or not within the Statute: and the Law has always
been conceived upon that book, that such a commandment is not warrantable by
Law, and if such a command will not serve the turn, to give unto a man his
liberty which the Lord favors, and had the countenance of an Act of
Parliament for the doing of it, then I conceive it should be a more strong
case, the King should not have power by his commandment to imprison a man,
without due process of the Law, and restrain him of his liberty when there had
been so many Acts of Parliament made for the liberty of the subjects.

Fifthly, I do find that there is the commandment of the King which is by his
writ under the Great Seal, or the seal of the Court out of which it issues,
Regist. f. 69. and 70. in the writ de cautione admittenda, I find the words,
mandatum Regis expounded to be breve Regis, for the writ goes: Rex vic
Salutem. Cum nuper ad requisitionem S. de Isle Canonici Lincol. venerabilis
Patris H. Lincoln. Episcopi ipso in remotis agente Vicarii general. per Literas
suas patentes nobis significantis Nicho. B. dict. Lincoln. Dioc. propter
manifestam contumaciam Authoritate ipsius Episcopi Ordinar. excommunicat. esse
nec si velle etc. vobis praeceperimus quod praefat. etc. satisfactum ex part
ipsius N. qui virtute mandati nostri praedict. per vos Capt. and in Prison.
nostra de Newgate detent. existit, etc. nos nolentes quod praefat. N. per breve
nostrum praedict, via praecludatur etc. prosequi possit in forma Iuris maxim
etc. integer esse debeat, vobis praecipimus quod scire etc. quod sit etc. quare
praedict. N. a Prisona praedict. deliberari non debeat. Rex Iusticiar. suis de
Banco salut. Cum nos nuper ad significationem S. de Isle etc. usque ibi
excommunicat. extitisse nec se velle etc. esset satisfactum ex part ipsius N.
virtute mandati nostri praed. capt. and in Prisona nostra de Newgate tunc
detenti, etc. and nolentes eo praetextu praefato N. per breve nostrum praed.
via praecludat. quo minus appellac. suae negotium etc. processerat. and
appellant statut. etc. per breve nostrum praeceperimus praefat. vic. quod scire
facerent. etc. signific. and consult. and circumspect. in Placitis per breve
praedict. coram vobis pendentibus procedere valeatis secundum legem and
consuetudinem Regni nostri.

Stamf. 72.5 E. 3. c. 8. 1 E. c. 3.9. says, that every Capias in a personal
action is a Commandment of the King, for it is Praecipimus tibi quod capias
etc. and yet the defendant as there it is said is replevisable by the Common
Law, 7 R. 20. a. Calvin's case, says that there are two kind of writs, viz.
brevia mandatoria and remedialia, and brevia mandatoria and non remdeialia:
breuia mandatoria and remedialia, are writs of Right, Formedon, etc. debts,
trespasses, and shortly all writs real and personal whereby the party wronged
is to recover somewhat, and to be remedied for that wrong which is done unto
him.

Sixthly, I do find by our books of Law, and by the Register that this
special mandatum domini Regis, is expounded to be his writ, and that the Law
takes no notice of any other speciale mandatum then by this writ; the which
being so when the return is made, that he is imprisoned and detained in prison
by the special commandment of the King, how can the Court adjudge upon this
return, that Sir John Corbet ought to be kept in prison, and not to be bailed,
when the nature of the special commandment is not set forth in the return,
whereby it may appear unto the Court that he is not bailable. In Bracton. c.
12.112. you shall see a writ reciting. Praecipimus tibi quod non implacites nec
implacitari permittas talem de libero tenemento suo in tali villa sine speciali
praecepto nostro vel Capitalis Iusticiar nostri.

And the reason of it there is given, quia nemo de libero tenemento sine brevi
sive libello conventionali nisi gratis voluerit respondebit. So as the
exception of special commandment by the very book, appears to be breve sive
libellus conventionalis, Regist. 271. the writ of Manucaption goes in this
manner: Rex vic. Salut. Cum nuper assignaverimus dilectos and fideles nostros
A. B. and C. D. ad inquisitiones de forstallariis and transgressionibus contra
formam statuti dudum apud Winton. editi in com. tuo faciend. and ad illos quos
inde culpabiles invenirent. capiend. and in Prisona nostra salvo custod.
faciend. donec aliud inde praecepissemus quod C. D. and E. pro hujusmodi
forstallamentis and transgressionibus unde coram praefat. A. B. and C. indict.
fuerint, capt. and in Prisona de L. detent. exist. a qua delibera ri non
possunt, sine mandato nostro speciali, Nos volentes eisdem C. D. and E. graciam
in hac part facere specialem, tibi praecipimus quod si praedict. C. D. and E.
occasion praedict. and non alia in Prisona praedict. detineantur, and pro
transgressionibus illis secundum legem and consuetudinem Regni nostri Angliae
replegiabiles existunt etc. tunc impos C. D. and E. a Prisona praedict. si ea
occasion and non alia detineantur in eadem interim deliberari facias per
manucapt. supradict. and habeas ibi tunc coram praefat. Iusticiar. nomina
manncapt. illorum and hoc breve.

And the exposition of this speciale mandatum domini Regis, mentioned in the
writ, is expounded to be breue domini Regis, and thereupon is this writ
directed unto the Sheriff for the delivery of them.

And so for the branch of the first part: I conclude, that the special command
of the King without showing the nature of the commandment of the Kings, is too
general, and therefore insufficient: for he ought to have returned the nature
of the commandment of the King, whereby the Court might have adjudged upon it,
whether it were such a commandment that the imprisonment of Sir John Corbet be
lawful or not, and whether it were such a commandment of the King, that
although the imprisonment were lawful at the first, yet he might be bailed by
Law.

And as for the general return of speciale mandatum domini Regis, without
showing the cause of the imprisonment either special or general, I hold that
for that cause also the return is insufficient.

First, in regard of the Habeas corpus, which is the commandment of the King
only, made the 15 of November.

According to the Test of the writ commanding the keeper of the Gatehouse to
have the body of Sir. John Corbet, una cum causa detensionis. and ad
subjiciendum and recipiendum ea quae curia nostra de eo ad tunc ibid. ordinar.
contingat. So as the commandment of the writ being to show the cause of his
detaining in prison, the keeper of the gatehouse does not give a full answer
unto the writ, unless the cause of the detainment in prison be returned, and
the Court does not know how to give their judgment upon him, either for his
imprisonment, or for his discharge, according to the purport of the writ, when
there is not a cause returned, and forasmuch as upon an excommengement
certified, it has been adjudged oftentimes that Certificates were insufficient
where the cause of the commitment has not been certified, that the Court might
adjudge whether the Ecclesiastical Judges who pronounced the excommunication,
had power over the original cause according to the book of 14 Hen. 4.14.8. Rep.
68. Trollops case, and 20 Ed. 3. Excommengement 9.

So upon an Habeas corpus in this Court, where a man has been committed by the
Chancellor of England by the Council of England, Marches of Wales, Warden of
the Stanneries, High Commission, Admiralty, Duchy, Court of request,
Commission of Sewers or Bankrupts, it has several times been adjudged that
the return was insufficient where the particular cause of imprisonment has not
been shown, to the intent that it might appear that those that committed him
had jurisdiction over the cause, otherwise he ought to be discharged by the
Law, and I spare to recite particular causes in every kind of these, because
there are so many presidents of them in several ages of every King of this
Realm: and it is an infallible maxim of the Law, That as the Court of the
Kings Bench, and Judges ought not to deny an Habeas corpus unto any prisoner
that shall demand the same by whomsoever he be committed, so ought the cause of
his imprisonment to be shown upon the return, so that the Court may adjudge of
the cause whether the cause of the imprisonment be lawful or not: and because
I will not trouble the Court with so many presidents but such as shall suit
with the cause in question, I will only produce and vouch such presidents,
whereas the party was committed either by the commandment of the King, or
otherwise by the commandment of the Privy Council, which Stampford fol. 72.
terms the mouth of the King, such acts as are done by the Privy Council,
being as Acts done by the King himself.

And in all these causes you shall find that there is a cause returned as well
as a speciale mandatum domini Regis etc. or mandatum Privati Concilii domini
Regis, whereby the Court may adjudge of the cause, and bail them if they shall
see cause.

In the eighth of Henry the seventh, upon return of an Habeas corpus awarded
for the body of one Roger Sherry, it appears that he was committed by the
Mayor of Windsor for suspicion of felony, and ad sectam ipsius Regis pro
quibusdam feloniis and transgressionibus ac per mandatum domini Regis; 21 Hen.
the seventh upon the return of an Habeas corpus sent for the body of Hugh Pain,
it appeared that he was committed to prison, per mandatum dominorum Privati
Concilii domini Regis pro suspicione feloniae.

Primo Henrici Octavi, Rot. 9. upon the return of an Habeas corpus sent for the
body of one Thomas Harrison and others, it appears that they were committed to
the Earl of Shrewsbury being Marshall of the household, Per mandatum Domini
Regis, and pro suspicione feloniae, and pro homicidio facto super Mare.

3 and 4 Philip. and Mariae, upon a return of an Habeas corpus sent for the
body of one Peter Man, it appears that he was committed pro suspicione
feloniae, ac per mandatum Domini Regis and Reginae.

4 and 5 Philippi and Mariae, upon the return of an Habeas corpus sent for the
body of one Thomas Newport, it appeared that he was committed to the Tower, pro
suspicione contrafact. monetae per privatum Concilium domini Regis and Reginae.

33 Elizabethae upon the return of an Habeas corpus for the body of one
Lawrence Brown; it appears that he was committed per mandatum Privati
Concilii dominae Reginae pro diversis causis ipsam Reginam tangen* ac etiam pro
suspicione proditionis.

So as by all these presidents it appears where the return is either Per
mandatum domini Regis, or Per mandatum dominorum Privati Concilii domini Regis;
there is also a cause over and besides the mandatum returned, as unto that
which may be objected, that per mandatum domini Regis, or Privati Concilii
domini Regis is a good return of his imprisonment, I answer.

First, that there is a cause, for it is not to be presumed that the King or
Council would commit one to prison without some offense, and therefore this
mandatum being occasioned by the offense or fault, the offense or fault must be
the cause, and not the command of the King or Council which is occasioned by
the cause. Secondly, it apeares that the jurisdiction of the Privy Council is
a limited jurisdiction, for they have no power in all causes, their power being
restrained in certain causes by several Acts of Parliament, as it appears by
the statute of 20 Edward the third, c. 11. 25 Ed. the third c. 1. stat. 4. the
private petition in Parliament permitted in the 1 of R. 2. where the Commons
petition that the Privy Council might not make any Ordinance against the
Common Law, Customs or Statutes of the Realm; the fourth of Henry the fourth,
ca. 3. 13 Hen. the fourth, 7. 31 Henry the sixth, and their jurisdictions being
a limited jurisdiction, the cause and grounds of their commmitment ought to
appear, whereby it may appear if the Lords of the Council did commit him for
such a cause as was within their jurisdiction: for if they did command me to be
committed to prison for a cause whereof they had not jurisdiction, the Court
ought to discharge me of this imprisonment, and howsoever the King is Vicarius
Dei in terra, yet Bracton. cap. 8. fol. 107. says, quod nihil aliud potest Rex
in terris cum sit Minister Dei and Vicarius, quam solum quod de jure potest.
nec obstat, quod dicitur quod Principi placet, legis habet vigorem, quia
sequitur in fine legis cum lege Regia quae de ejus imperio lata est, id est non
quicquid de voluntate Regis temere praesumptum est, sed animo condendi Iura,
sed quod consilio Magistratuum suorum, Rege author. praestant and habita super
hoc deliberatione and tract. rect. fuer. definit. Potestat. itaque sua juris
est, and non injuriae. The which being so, then also it ought to appear upon
what cause the King commits one to prison, whereby the Judges which are
indifferent between the King and his Subjects, may judge whether his commitment
be against the Laws and Statutes of this Realm or not. Thirdly, it is to be
observed, that the Kings command by his Writ of Habeas corpus is since the
commandment of the King for his commitment, and this being the latter
commandment, ought to be obeyed; wherefore that commanding a return of the body
cum causa detentionis, there must be a return of some other cause then Per
mandatum domini Regis, the same commandment being before the return of the
Writ.
Pasch. 9. E. 3. pl. 30. fol. 56. upon a Writ of Cessavit brought in the County
of Northumberland, the Defendants plead, That by reason the Country being
destroyed by Wars with the Scots, King Edward the second gave command that no
Writ of Cessavit should be brought during the Wars with Scotland, and that
the King had sent his Writ to surcease the Plea, and he averreth that the
Wars with Scotland did continue.

Hearle that gives the Rule says, That we have command by the King that now
is, to hold this Plea, wherefore we will not surcease for any writ of the King
that is dead; and so upon all these reasons and presidents formerly alleged, I
conclude, that the return that Sir John Corbet was committed and detained in
prison* Per speciale mandatum domini Regis, without showing the nature of the
commandment by which the Court may judge whether the commandment be of such a
nature as he ought to be detained in prison, and that without showing the cause
upon which the commandment of the King is grounded, is not good. As unto the
second part, which is, Whether the time of the commitment by the return of the
Writ, not appearing unto the Court, the Court ought to detain him in prison or
no?

I conceive that he ought not to be continued in prison, admitting that the
first commitment by the command of the King were lawful, yet when he has
continued in prison by such reasonable time as may be thought fit for that
offense for which he is committed, he ought to be brought to answer, and not to
continue still in prison without being brought to answer.

For it appears by the Books of our Laws, that liberty is a thing so favored
by the Law, that the Law will not suffer the continuance of a man in prison for
any longer time then of necessity it must; and therefore the Law will neither
suffer the party, Sheriffs or judges to continue a man in prison by their power
and their pleasure, but does speed the delivery of a man out of prison, with as
reasonable expedition as may be.

And upon this reason it is resolved in 1 and 2 El. Dyer 175. and 8 Ed. 4.13.
That howsoever the Law allows that there may be no term between the rest of
an original Writ and the return of the same, where there is only a summons,
and no imprisonment of the body, yet it will not allow that there shall be a
term between the rest of a Writ of Capias, and the return of the same, where
the body of a man is to be imprisoned, insomuch that it will give no way that
the party shall have no power to continue the body of a man imprisoned any
longer time then needs must. 39 E. 3.7. 10 H. 7.11. 6 E. 4.69. 11 E. 4.9. 48 E.
3.1. 17 E. 3.1 and 2 Hen. 7.

Kellawaies Reports do all agree, that if a Capias shall be awarded against a
man for the apprehending of his body, and the Sheriff will return the Capias,
that is awarded against the party, a non est inventus, or that languidus est in
prisona, yet the Law will allow the party against whom it is awarded for the
avoiding of his corporal penance and dures of imprisonment, to appear gratis,
and for to answer.

For the Law will not allow the Sheriff by his false return to keep one in
prison longer then needs must, 38 Ass. pl. 22. Brooks imprisonment 100. says.
That it was determined in Parliament that a man is not to be detained in prison
after he has made tender of his fine for his imprisonment, therefore I desire
your Lordship that Sir John Corbet may not be kept longer in durance, but be
discharged according to the Law.

The substance of the Objections made by Mr. Attorney, General before a
Committee of both Houses, to the Argument that was made by the House of
Commons, at the first conference with the Lords out of Presidents of Record,
and Resolutions of Judges in former times, touching the Liberty of the person
of every Freeman, and the Answers and Replies then presently made by the House
of Commons to these Objections.
AFter the first conference which was desired by the Lords, and had by a
Committee of both houses in the painted Chamber, touching the Reasons, Laws,
Acts of Parliament and Presidents concerning the Liberty of the person of every
Freeman, Mr Attorney General being heard before the Committee of both houses as
it was assented by the house of Commons, that he might be, before they went up
to the conference, after some preamble made, wherein he declined the answering
all Reasons of Law, and Acts of Parliament, came only to the Presidents used
in the Argument before delivered, and so endeavored to weaken the strength of
them that had been brought in behalf of the subjects, and to show that some
other were directly contrary to the Law comprehended in the Resolutions of the
house of Commons, touching the bailing of Prisoners, returned upon the writ of
Habeas Corpus to be committed by the special command of the King, or the
Council, without any cause showed, for which by Law they ought to be committed.
And the course which was taken (it pleased the Committee of both houses to
allow of) was that Mr. Attorney should make his Objections to every particular
President, and that the Gentlemen appointed, and trusted herein by the house of
Commons by several Replies, should satisfy the Lords touching the Objections
made by him, against, or upon every particular, as the order of the Presidents
should lead them, he began with the first 12. Presidents that were used by the
house of Commons at the conference delivered by them, to prove that Prisoners
returned to stand so Committed, were delivered upon bail by the Court of Kings
Bench: The first was that of Bildstones case in the 18. Edw. 3. Rot. 33. Rex.

To this he Objected, First, that in the return of him into the Court, it did
not appear that this Bildstone was committed by the Kings command; and Secondly
that in the Record it did appear also that he had been committed for suspicion
of counterfaiting the great Seal, and so by consequence was bailable by the
Law, in regard there appeared a Cause why he was committed, in which case it
was granted by him (as indeed it was plain and agreed of all hands) that the
Prisoner is bailable though committed by Command of the King, and he said that
this part of the Record, by which it appeared he had been committed for
suspicion of treason was not observed to the Lords in the Argument before used,
and he said also to the Lords; that there were three several kinds of Records,
by which the full truth of every award, or bailing upon a Habeas Corpus is
known. First the remembrance Roll, wherein the award is given, Secondly the
file of the writ and the return, and Thirdly, the Scruect or Scruet finium
wherein the bail is entered, and that only the remembrance Roll of this Case
was to be found, and that if the other two of it were extant, he doubted not
but that it would appear also, that upon the return it self, the Cause of the
Commitment had been expressed, and so he concluded, that this proved not for
the house of Commons, touching the Matter of bail, where a Prisoner was
committed by the Kings special command without Cause showed.

To this Objection the reply was, First, that it was plain that Bildstone was
committed by the Kings express Command. For so the very words of the Writ are
to the Constable of the Tower, quod eum tenendum Custodiae facias, etc. then
which nothing can more fully express a Commitment by the Kings command.
Secondly, how ever it be true, that in the latter part of the Record it does
appear, that Bildstone had been Committed for suspicion of Treason, yet if the
times of the proceeding, expressed in the Record, were observed, it would be
plain that the Objection was of no force: for this one ground, both in this
Case and all the rest, is infallible, and never to be doubted of in the Law,
Nota.
That Justices of every Court adjudge of the force and strength of a return out
of the body of it self only, and as therein it appears. Now in Easter term in
the 18. Edward 3. he was returned and brought before them, as Committed only
by the Writ, wherein noe Cause is expressed, and the Leivetenant and the
Constable of the Tower that brought him into the Court says, that he had no
other warrant to detain him Nisi breve predictum, wherein there was no mention
of any Cause; and the Court thereupon adjudged, that breve predictum for that
special command, was not sufficient causa to detain him in prison, and
thereupon he is by judgment of the Court in Easter term let to Mainprize. But
that part of the Record wherein it appears, that he had indeed been committed
for suspicion of Treason, is of Trinity term following, when the King, after
the letting of him to Mainprize, sent to the Judges that they should discharge
his Mainprize, because no man prosecuted him. And at that time it appears (but
not before) that he had been in for suspicion of Treason; so that he was
returned to stand committed by the Kings special command only, without Cause
showed, in Easter term, And then by judgment of the Court let to Mainprize
(which to this purpose is but the same with bail, though otherwise it differ);
And in the term following upon another occasion the Court knew, that he had
been committed for suspicion of Treason, which has no relation at all to the
letting of him to Mainprize, nor to the judgment of the Court then given, when
they did not, nor could possible know any Cause, for which the King had
committed him. And it was said in behalf of the house of Commons, that they had
not indeed in the Argument expressly used this latter part of Bildstones Case,
because it being only of Trinity term following, could not concern the reason
of an Award given by the Court in Easter term next before; yet notwithstanding
that they had most faithfully, at the time of their Argument, delivered into
the Lords (as indeed they had a perfect copy at large of the whole Record of
this Case; as they had done also of all other presidents whatsoever cited by
them; in so much as in truth there was not one president of Record of either
side, the copy whereof they had not delivered in likewise, nor did Mr.
Attorney mention any one besides those that were so delivered in by them. And
as touching those 3. kinds of Records, the remembrance Roll, the return and
file of the Writ, and the Scruets; it, was answered by the gentlemen employed
by the house of Commons, that it was true, that the Scruect and return of this
Case of Bildstone was not to be found, but that did not lessen the weight of
the president, because always in the Award or Judgment drawn up in the
remembrance Roll, the Cause (whatsoever it be) when any is showed, upon the
return is always expressed, as it appears clearly by the constant Entries of
the King's Bench Court: so that if any Cause had appeared plainly in that part
of the Roll which belongs to Easter term, wherein the Judgment was given, but
the return of the commitment by the Kings command without Cause showed, and the
Judgment of the Court, that the Prisoner was to be let to Mainprize, appears
therein only, and so notwithstanding any Objection made by Mr. Attorney, the
Cause was maintained to be a clear proof among many others, touching the
resolution of the house of Commons.

To the second of these 12. which is Parkers Case in the 22. H. 8. Rot. 37. his
Objections were two, First, that it is true that he was returned to be
committed Per mandatum domini Regis; but it appeared that this command, was
certified to the Shreiffs of London by one Robert Peck gentleman, and that in
regard, that the command came no otherwise, the return was held insufficient,
and that therefore he was bailed. Secondly, that it appears also in the Record
that he was committed pro suspicione felloniae ac per mandatum domini Regis, so
that in regard that the command, that in the expression of the causes of his
commitment, suspicion of felony preceeds the command of the King, therefore it
must be intended that the Court took the Cause why the King committed him to
be of less moment then felony, and therefore bailed him, For he Objected, that
even the house of Commons themselves, in some Arguments used by them, touching
the interpretation of the statute of Westminster the first, cap. 15. about this
point had affirmed, that in enumeration of particulars, those of greatest
nature were first mentioned, and that it was supposed, that such as followed
were usually of less nature or moment.

But the reply was to the first Objection, that the addition of the certefying
of the Kings command by Robert Peck altered not the Case, First because the
Sheriffs in their Return took notice of the command as what they were assured
of; and then howsoever it came to them, it was of equal force as if it had been
mentioned without reference to Peck. Secondly, as diverse Patents pass the great
Seal; by writ of privy Seal, and are subscribed Per breve de privato sigillo;
so diverse per ipsum Regem, are so subscribed; and oftentimes in the Roll of
former times, to the words per ipsum Regem, are added nunciante A. B. So that
the Kings command generally, and the Kings command related or certified by such
a man, is to this purpose of like nature. Thirdly, in the late great Case of
Habeas Corpus, where the Return of the commitment was Per speciale mandatum
Domini Regis mihi significatum per Dominos de privato Confilio; the Court of
King's Bench did agree, that it was the same, and of like force as if mihi
significatum etc. had not followed, and that those words were void; According
whereunto here also, Per mandatum Dom. Regis nunciatum per Robert Peck, had
been wholly omitted and void likewise. And in truth in that late Case, this
Case of Parker was cited both at the Bar and Bench: and at the Bench it was
interpreted by the Judges no otherwise, then if it had been only per mandatum
Domini Regis in place of it: but the Objection there was made of another kind,
as was delivered in the first Argument, made out of presidents in the behalf of
the house of Commons. Therefore to the second Objection touching the course of
Enumeration of the Causes in the Return, it was said, that howsoever in some
Acts of Parliament, and else where in the solemn expressions used in the Law,
things of greater nature preceded and the less follow; yet in this Case the
contrary was most plain, for in the Return it appears that there were three
Causes for detaining the Prisoners: Surety of the peace, Suspicion of Pellony,
and the Kings command: and Surety of the peace is first mentioned, which is
plainly less then Felony. And therefore it is plain, if any force of Argument
be taken from this enumeration, that the contrary to that which Mr. Attorney
inferred is to be concluded; that is, that as Felony is a greater Cause then
Surety of the peace, so the matter whereupon the Kings command was grounded,
was greater then Felony. But in truth this kind of Argument holds neither way
here, and whatsoever the Cause were why the King committed him, it was
impossible for the Court to know it: and it also might be of very high moment
in matter of state, and yet of far less nature then Felony. All which shows,
that this president has his full force also, according as it was first used in
Argument by the house of Commons.

To the third of these, which is Binckes Case in the 35. H. 8. Rot. 33. the
Objection was, that there was a Cause expressed, pro suspicione felloniae: and
though pro aliis causis illos moventibus, were added in the Return; yet because
in the course of enumeration, the general name of aliis coming after
particulars, includes things of less nature then the particular does, therefore
in this Case suspicion of felony being the first, the other Causes afterward
generally mentioned must be intended of less nature, for which the Prisoner was
bailable, because he was bailable for the greater, which was suspicion of
felony. Hereunto it was replied, that the Argument of enumeration in these
Cases is of no moment, as is next before showed: and that although it were of
any moment, yet any Case, though less then felony, might be of very great
consequence in matter of state, which is pretended usually upon general Returns
of command without cause showed; and it is most plain, that the Court could not
possible know the reasons why the Prisoner here was committed, and yet they
bailed him, without looking further after any unknown thing under that title of
Matter of state, which might as well have been in this Case as in any other
whatsoever.

To the 4. of these, which is Overton's Case in 2. and 3. Phet. M. Rot. 58. and
to the 5. which is Newports Case P. and M. 4. and 5. Rot. 45. only these
Objections were said over again by Mr. Attorney, which are mentioned in the
Argument made out of presidents in behalf of the house of Commons at the first
conference, and in the same Argument are fully and clearly satisfied, as they
were in like manner now again.

To the 6. of these, which was Lawrence his Case M. 9. Eliz. Rot. 35. and the
7. which is Constables P. 9. Eliz. Rot. 68. the same Objections only were
likewise said over again by Mr. Attorney, that are mentioned, and clearly and
fully answered in the Argument made at the first conference out of presidents
in behalf of the house of Commons; the force of the Objection being only, that
it appeared in the Margent of the Roll, that the word Pardon was written: but
it is plain that the word there has no reference at all to the reason why they
were bailed, nor could it have reference to the Cause why they were committed,
in regard the Cause why they were committed is utterly unknown and was not
showed.

To the 8. of these Presidents which was Brownings Case P. 20. Eliz. Rot. 72.
It was said Mr. Attorney that he was bailed by a letter from the Lords of the
Council, directed to the Judges of the Court; but being asked for that letter,
or any Testimony of it, he could produce none at all; but he said he thought
the Testimony of it was burnt among many other things of the Councel-table at
the burning of the banqueting house.

To the 9. being Harecourts Case H. 40. Eliz. Rot. 62. the self same Objection
was made by him, but no warrant was showed to maintain his Objection.

To the 10. which is Catesbyes Case in vacatione Hill. 43. Eliz. he said that
it was by direction of a privy Seal from the Queen; and to that purpose he
showed the Seal of 43. Eliz. which is at large among the Transcripts of the
Records concerning bails taken in Cases where the King or the Lords assented.
But it was replied, that the privy seal made only for some particular
Gentlemen mentioned in it, and for none other, as indeed appears in it: and
then he said, that it was likely that Catesby here had a privy seal in his
behalf, because those other had so; which was all the force of his Objection.

To the 11. of these, which is Beckwiths Case in Hill. 12. Iacobi Rot. 153. he
said that the Lords of the council sent a letter to the Court of King's Bench to
bail him. And indeed he produced a letter, which could not by any means be
found when the Arguments were made at the first conference: and this letter,
and a copy of an obscure Report made by a young student (which was brought to
another purpose, as is hereafter showed) were the only things written of any
kind that Mr, Attorney produced, besides the particulars showed by the house
of Commons at the first conference. To this it was replied, that the letter was
of no moment, being only a direction to the Chief Justice, and no Matter of
record, nor any way concerning the rest of the Judges: And besides, either the
Prisoner was bailable by the Law, or not bailable: if bailable by the Law, then
was he to be bailed without any such letter; if not bailable by the Law, then
plainly the Judges could not have bailed him upon the letter, without breach of
their oath, which is, that they are to do Justice according to the Law, without
having respect to any command whatsoever: so that letter in this Case, or the
like in any other Case, is for point of Law to no purpose, nor has any weight
at all by way of Objection against what the Record and the Judgment of the
Court shows us.

To the 12. and last of these, which is Sir Thomas Monsons Case in the 14.
Iacobi. Rot. 147. the same Objection was said over by him, which was mentioned
and clearly answered in the Argument; and that one ground which is infallible,
That the Judgment upon a return is to be made only out of what appears in the
body of the return it self, was again insisted upon in this Case, as it was
also in most of the rest. And indeed that alone which is most clear Law, fully
satisfies almost all kinds of Objections, that have been made to any of these
presidents, which thus rightly understood, are many ample Testimonies of the
Judgments of the Court of King's Bench, touching this great point, in the
several ages and reigns of the several Princes under which they fell.

After his Objections to the 12. and the Replies and satisfactions given to
those Objections, he came next to those wherein the Assent of the King and
privy Council appears to have been upon the enlargment: but he made not to any
of those any other kind of Objections, then such as are mentioned and clearly
answered (as they were now again) in the Argument made at the first conference.
And for so much as concerns Letters of assent or direction, the same was here
said again by way of Reply to him, as is before said touching the letter in
Beckwithes case.

After these were dispatched, he came to urge the eight Presidents, which
seemed to make for the other side against the resolution of the House of
Commons: which eight were used, and Coppies of them also were given in to the
Lords at the first conference.

Of these eight the first 4. were urged by him, as being of one kind; the
difference of them only being such, that, save only in the names of Prisons
and of Persons, they are but the self same.

The force of these four he objected thus; that Richard Everard (for the
purpose) in the first of them, which is 5. H. 7. Rot. 18. Roger Cherry: in the
second of them, which is 8. H. 7. Rot. 12. Christofer Burton: in the third of
them, which is 9. H. 7. Rot. 14. and George Urswick in the fourth of them,
which is 19. H. 7. Rot. 33. were returned into the King's Bench upon several
Writs of Habeas corpus, to have been committed and detained in the several
Prisons whence they came per mandatum Domini Regis, and that upon that return
they were committed to the Marshall of the King's Bench; and that however it had
been objected against those Presidents, that this kind of commitment was by
the course of that Court, always done before the bayling of the Prisoner. Yet
that it did not appear that they were bayled.

The Reply to this Objection was, That by constant course of King's Bench,
whosoever came in upon Habeas Corpus, or otherwise upon any Writ in that Court,
cannot be bayled until he be first committed to the Marshall of that Court;
and that thence it was, that all those 4. were committed to the Marshall, as
appears by the entry Qui committitur Mareschallo, etc. which is the usual entry
in such a case, and that the Clerks of that Court acknowledge this course and
entry to be most constant. So that all the inference that can be made out of
these four, is, but, that four Prisoners being brought, from several Prisons by
Habeas Corpus into the King-bench, and returned to stand committed per mandatum
Domini Regis, were so far from being remaunded by the Law, that in all these
four cases, they were partly first taken from the several Prisons, wherein they
had been detained, by such a general command (which could not have been, if
they had not been adjudged in every one of the cases to have been baylable by
the Court) and that this commitment of them to the Marshall of the King's Bench
was the first step toward the bayling of them, as in all other cases. But that
it appears not, that either they ever demanded to be bayled, or that they were
able to find sufficient bayl: And if they did not the one, or could not do the
other, it may follow indeed that they were not bayled. But this commitment to
the King's Bench being the first step to the bayling of them, (as by the
constant course it is) shows most plainly that they were baylable by the Law,
which is the only thing in question. So that although these 4. Presidents were
rancked among them, that may seem to make against the resolution of the House
of Commons, which was done, both because they have this small color in them
for the other side, to any man that is acquainted with the nature and reasons
of the entries, and courses of the Court of King's Bench, and also all or some
of them had been used in the late great case in the King's Bench, as Presidents
that made against the Liberty claimed by the subject; yet in truth, all 4. of
them do fully prove their resolution, that is, they plainly show that the Court
of King's Bench in every of them resolved, that the Prisoners so committed were
baylable, otherwise they had been remaunded, and not committed to the Marshall
of the King's Bench. And this was the Answer to the Objection made by Mr.
Attorney upon those 4. Presidents, being all of the time of King Henry the
seventh.

The fifth of these 8. being Edward Pages case, in 7. H. 8. Rot. 23. Mr.
Attorney objected thus, He said that Edward Page was committed to the
Marshal-sea of the household, per mandatum Domini Regis ibidem salvo
custodiendum, etc. Qui Committitur Marescallo, etc. Hospitii Domini Regis: by
which it appears, as he said, that the Court remaunded him to the Prison of
the Marshal-sea of the household: and he said, that whereas it had been objected
at the first conference, that there was some mistaking in the entry; he
conceived indeed that there was a mistaking, but it was that the Clark had
entered Committitur for remittitur, and that it should have been Qui remittitur
Marescallo hospitii Domini Regis: for when ever they remaunded the Prisoner,
Remittitur, and not Committitur should be entered. And that mistaking being so
rectified and understood, he conceived it was a direct president against the
resolution of the House of Commons.

To this it was answered by the Gentlemen of the House of Commons, That there
was no doubt indeed, but that a mistaking was in the entry by the Clark, but
that the mistaking was quite of another nature. The addition of those words,
hospitii Domini Regis, was the mistaking, and the entry should have been, qui
committitur Marescallo, etc. only; that is, he was committed to the Marshall
of the King's Bench; and so indeed the force of this President should be but
just the same with the first four: But the ignorance of the Clerk that entered
it, and knew not to distinguish between the Marshall of the household and the
Marshall of the King's Bench, was the cause of the addition of these words
hospitii Domini Regis.

And to confirm fully this kind of interpretation of that president, and of
the mistaking of it, it was observed by the Gentlemen of the House of Commons,
that there is in the Margin of the Roll an infallible Character that justifies
as much. For by the course of that Court, whenever a Prisoner is committed to
the Marshall of the King's Bench and not remaunded, the word Marescallo is
written in the Margin by Mar. turned up; and that is never written there, but
when the meaning and sense of the Entry is, that the Prisoner is committed to
the Prison of the same Court. Now in this case Mar. in the Margin is likewise
written: which most clearly shows that the truth of the Case was, that this
Page was committed to the Marshall of the King's Bench and not remaunded, which
if it had been, neither could the entry have been Committitur, nor should the
Margin of the Roll have Marescallo written in it.

And thus they have answered Mr. Attorneys objection touching this President,
and concluded that now, besides the first four of the 8. they had another, and
so 5. to prove that a Prisoner committed per mandatum Domini Regis, generally
was baylable by the judgment of the Court, however it appears in these
particulers that they were not bayled; which perhaps they were not, either
because they prayed it not, or because they could not find sufficient bayl.

The 6. of these Presidents, being that case of Thomas Cesars in the 8. Iacobi
Regis. Rot. 99. Mr. Attorney objected it thus; That Caesar being committed per
mandatum Domini Regis to the Marshal-sea of the household, was returned upon
Habeas Corpus to be so committed, and therefore detained in Prison, and that
the entry is, Qui commitur prisonae Marescal. predict. by which it appears
clearly that he was remaunded to the same Prison from whence he came.

To this the Gentlemen of the House of Commons gave this answer: They said,
that the usual entire of a Remittitur, when it is to show that the Court by way
of judgment, or award upon resolution, or debate remaunds the Prisoner, is,
remittitur quousque, etc. which is, Remittitur quousque secundum legem
delibatus fuerit: but when they advise, or give way to the Keeper of the Prison
to amend his return, or the like, then the entry is only remittitur generally,
or remittitur prisonae predict. But it was indeed affirmed by Mr. Keeling, a
Clark of experience in that Court, that the entry of a remittitur generally, or
remittitur prisonae predictae was indifferently used for the same, that is,
remittitur quousque, etc. Yet it was expressly showed by the Gentlemen of the
House of Commons, that there was sometimes a difference, and that so it might
well be in this case. For in the last of these eight Presidents, which is
Saltonstalls case, they observed that remittitur prisonae predictae is often
used, and in that use it is plain that it is twice used only for a remaunding,
during the time that the Court gave leave to the Warden of the Fleet to amend
his return; which shows plainly, that though sometimes remittitur generally,
and remittitur quousque, etc. may mean the same, yet sometimes it does not. And
that in this case of Caesar it does not mean any other, but only so much as it
does twice in that of Saltonstalls case, was proved also by a rule of the
Court, which was cited out of the rule book of the Court of King's Bench, by
which rule the Court expressly ordered, that unless the Steward and Marshall of
the household did sufficiently return the Writ of Habeas Corpus for Caesar, that
he should be discharged. The words of the rule are, Nisi predicti senescallus
and Marescallus hospitii Domini Regis sufficienter returnaverint breve de
Habeas Corpus Tho. Caesar die Mercurij proximae post quindenam sancti Martini,
de prisona exonerabitur. And this was the opinion of the Court, that the Court
was so far from remaunding him upon the return, that they resolved, that
unless some better return were made, the Prisoner should be discharged of his
first imprisonment, though it appeared to them out of the body of the return
(upon which they were only to judge) that he was committed per mandatum Domini
Regis only: And the rule not only shows the opinion of the Court then to have
been agreeable with the resolution of the House of Commons, but also proves
that Remittitur generally, or Remittitur prisonae predictae does not always
imply or remaunding upon judgment or debate. And this answer was given to this
of Cesars Case, that is the sixth of this Number.

The seventh is the Case of James Demetrius. It was 12 Iacobi Rot. 153. Mr
Attorney objected that this Demetrius and diverse others being Brewers, were
committed per consilium Domini Regis to the Marshal-sea of the household, and
that upon the commitment so generally returned they were remaunded, and that
the Entry was immediate remittitur prefato Marescallo hospitii predicti; where
he observed that immediate shows that the Judges of that time were so resolved
of this Question, that they remaunded them partly, as men that well knew what
the Law was herein.

Here unto the Gentlemen of the House of Commons gave these answers. First,
that the Remittitur in this Case is but as the other in Cesars, and so proves
nothing against them. Secondly, that immediate being added to it, shows plainly
that it was done without debate, or any argument or consideration had of it,
which makes the authority of the presidents to be of no force in point of Law;
for Judgments and Awards given upon delibration only and debate, are Proofs
and Arguments of weight, and not any sudden Act of the Court without debate or
deliberation. And the Entry of immediate being proposed to Mr. Keeling, it was
confirmed by him, that by that Entry it appears by this course, that the
remaunding of him was the self same day he was brought, which as it was said by
the Gentlemen of the House of Commons, might be at the riseing of the Court, or
upon advisement, and the like. And this answer was given to this president of
the Brewers.

The last of the 8. which Mr. Attorney objected is Saltonstals Case in the 13.
Iacobi Regis. He was committed per mandatum Dominorum Regis de privato
Consilio: and being returned by the Warden of the Fleet to be so, remittitur
prisonae predictae, and in the 13. Iac in the same year remittitur generally in
the Roll: and these two make but one Case, and are as one president.

To this the Gentlemen of the House of Commons answered, that it is true, the
Rolls have such Entries of remittitur in them generally, but that proves
nothing upon the reason before used by them in Cesars Case. But also
Saltonstall was committed for another cause besides per mandatum Dominorum
Consilii, for a contempt against an order in Chauncery, and that was in the
return also. And besides, the Court as it appears in the Record, gave several
days to the Warden of the Fleet to mend his return; which they would not have
done, if they had conceived it sufficient, because that which is sufficient
needs no amendment.

To this Mr. Attorney replied, that they gave him a day to amend his return, in
respect of that part thereof that concerned the order in Chancery, and not in
respect of that which was per mandat. Concilij.

But the gentlemen of the house of Commons answered, That it appears not any
where, nor indeed is it likely at all, nor can be so reasonably understood,
because if the other return per mandatum Concilij had been sufficient by it
self, it appears fully that the Court conceived the return to be insufficient.

And so the gentlemen of the Commons house concluded, that they had a great
number of presidents besides the Acts of Parliament, and reasons of Common Law,
agreeable to their resolution, and that there was not one president at all that
made against them, but indeed, that almost all that were brought, as well
against them as for them (if rightly understood) made fully to the maintenance
of their resolution; and that there was not one example or president of a
Remittitur in any kind upon this point, before that of Cesars Case, which is
before cleared with the rest, and is but of late time, and of no moment against
the resolution of the house of Commons.

And thus for so much as concerned the presidents of Record, the first day of
the conference desired by the Lords ended.

The next day they desired another conference which the house of Commons; at
which it pleased the Committee of both houses to hear Mr Attorney again, to
make what Objection he would against other parts of the Arguments formerly
delivered by the house of Commons. He then Objected against the Acts of
Parliament and against the reasons of Law: and his Objections to these parts
were answered, as appears in the answers by order given into the house of
Commons by the gentlemen that made them. He Objected also upon the second day
against that second kind of presidents, which are resolutions of Judges in
former times, and not of Records, and brought also some other Testimonies of
opinions of Judges in former times touching this point.

First, for that resolution of all the Judges in England in 34. of Queen Eliz.
mentioned and read in the Arguments made at the first conference, he said, That
it was directly against the resolution of the House of Commons, and observed
the words of it to be in one place, that Persons so committed by the King or
the Council may not be delivered by any of the Courts, etc. and in another,
that if the Cause were expressed either in generality, or speciality, it was
sufficient: and he said that the expressing of a cause in generality, was to
show the Kings, or Councels Command. And to this purpose he read the whole
words of that resolution of the Judges. Then he Objected also that in a report
of one Ruswells Case in the King's Bench, in the 13. Iac. he found, that the
opinion of some Judges of that Court (Sr. Edward Coke being then Chief Justice
and one of them) was, that a Prisoner committed per mandatum Domini Regis, or
privati Consilii, without cause showed, and so returned, could not be bayled,
because it might be matter of State, or Arcanum Imperii, for which he stood
committed. And to this also he added an opinion that he found in a Journal of
the House of Commons of the 13. Iac. wherein Sr. Edward Coke speaking to a Bill
preferred for the explanation of Magna Charta touching imprisonment, said in
the House, That a Prisoner so committed could not be enlarged by the Law,
because it might be Matter of State for which he was committed. And among these
Objections of other nature also, he spoke of the confidence that was showed in
behalf of the House of Commons; and he said, that it was not confidence could
add any thing to the determination of the question; but if it could, that he
had as much reason for the other side against the resolution of the House,
grounding himself upon the force of his Objections, which (as he conceived) had
so weakened the Argument of the Commons House, that notwithstanding any thing
yet Objected, they were upon clear reason confident of the truth of their first
resolution, grounded upon so just examination and deliberation taken by them.
And it was observed to the Lords also, that their confidence herein was of
another nature, and far greater weight then any confidence that could be
expressed by Mr. Attorney, or whomsoever else, being of his Majesty's Council
learned.

To which purpose the Lords were desired to take into their Memory the
difference between the present quality of the Gentlemen that spoke in behalf of
the House of Commons, and of the Kings learned Council in their speaking there,
howsoever accidentally they were both men of the same profession. For the Kings
Council spoke as Council perpetually retained by Fee, and if they made glosses
and and what advantageous Interpretations soever, for their own part they did
but what belonged to their place and quality, as Mr. Attorney had done: But the
Gentlemen that spoke in behalf of the House of Commons, came there bound on the
one side by the trust reposed in them by their Country that sent them, and on
the other bound also by an Oath taken by every of them before they sit in the
House, to maintain and defend the rights and prerogatives of the Crown. So that
even in the point of confidence alone, that of them that spoke as retained
Council by perpetual Fee, and might by their place, being permitted to speak,
say what they would; and that of them that spoke as bound to nothing but truth,
but by such a trust and such an Oath, were no way to be so compared, or
Counterpoised, as if the one of them were of no more weight then the other.

And then the Objections before mentioned were also answered. For that of the
resolution of all the Judges of England in 34. Eliz. It was showed plainly, it
agreed with the resolution of the House of Commons. For although indeed it
might have been expressed with more perspicuity, yet the words of it, as they
are, sufficiently show that the meaning of it is no otherwise. To that purpose,
besides the words of the whole frame of this resolution of the Judges, as it is
in the Copy transcribed out of the Lord Chief Justice Andersons book, written
in his own hand (which book was there offered to be showed also in behalf of
the House of Commons.) It was observed that the Records of the first part of it
show plainly, that all the Judges of England then resolved that the Prisoners,
spoken of in the first part of their resolution, were only Prisoners committed
with cause showed, for they only said they might not be delivered by any of
the Courts, without due Trial by Law and Judgment of acquital had; which shows
plainly that they meant, that by trial and acquital they might be delivered:
but it is clear that no trial, or acquital can be had where is not some cause
laid to their charge, for which they ought to stand committed. Therefore in
that part of the resolution, such Prisoners are only meant, as are committed
without cause showed, which also the Judges in that resolution expressly thought
necessary, as appears in the second part of the resolution, wherein they have
these words, If upon Return of the Habeas Corpus the cause of their commitment
be certified to the Judges, as it ought to be, etc. by which words they show
plainly that every return of a commitment is insufficient that has not a cause
showed of it.

And to that which Mr. Attorney said, as if the cause were sufficiently
expressed in generality, if the Kings Command, or the Councels were expressed
in it; and as if that were meant in the resolution for a sufficient general
cause: it was answered, That it was never heard of in Law, that the power, or
Person that committed the Prisoner was understood for the Causa captionis, or
Causa detentionis, but only the reason why that Power, or Person committed the
Prisoner: as also in common speech, if a man ask why and for what cause a man
stands committed, the answer is not, that such a one committed him, but his
offense, or some other cause is understood in the question, and is to be showed
in the Answer. But to say that such an one committed the Prisoner, is an answer
to the question who committed him, and not why, or for what cause he stands
committed.

Then for that of the Copy of the Report of 13. Iac. showed forth by Mr.
Attorney, it was answered, That the Report it self, which had been before seen
and perused among many other things at a Committee made by the House, was of
slight, or no Authority; for that it was taken by one, that was at that time a
young Student only, and was a Reporter in the King's Bench; and there was not
any other Report to be found that agreed with it.

Secondly, although the Reports of young Students when they take the words of
Judges, as they fall from their mouth at the Bench, and in the Person and form
as they are spoken, may be of good credit; Yet in this Case there was not one
word so reported; but in truth, there being three Cases a time in the
King's Bench, one Ruswell, and one Allen, and one Saltonstall, every of which
had something of like nature in it; the Student having been present in the
Court, made up the form of one Report, or Case, out of all those three, in his
own words, and so put it into his book; so that there is not a word in the
Report but is framed according to the Students fancy, as it is written, and
nothing is expressed in it as it came from the mouth of the Judges, otherwise
then his fancy directed him.

Thirdly, there are in the Report plain falsehoods of Matter of Fact, which are
to be attributed either to the Judges, or to the Reporter. It is most likely by
all reason that they proceeded from the Reporters fault: but however those
Matters of falsehood show sufficiently, that the credit of the rest, is of
slight value for the purpose.

It is said in the Report that Harecourt being committed by the Council, was
bayled in 40. Eliz. upon a privy Seal or a Letter, where as there was no such
thing in truth. And it is said there, that no such kind of Letters are filed
there in any case whatsoever. That resolution of the Judges in 34. is miscited
there, and in 36. of Queen Eliz. and it is said there that by that resolution,
a Prisoner returned to be committed by the command of the Council, might not at
all be delivered by the Court: whereas no such thing is comprehended in in that
resolution.

But that which is of most moment is, that howsoever the truth of the report
were, yet the opinion of the Judges, being sudden without any debate, had of
the case, is of slight moment. For in difficult points especially, the gravest
and most learned men living may on the sudden let fall, and that without
disparragement to them, such opinions as they may well, and ought to change
upon further enquiry and examination, and full debate had before them, and
mature deliberation taken by them. Now plainly in that case of the 13. Jacob.
there is not so much as pretense of any debate at Bar, or Bench. All that is
reported to have been, is reported as spoken upon the sudden: and can any man
take such a sudden opinion to be of value, against solemn debates and mature
deliberation since had of the point, and all circumstances belonging to it?
which have within this half year been so fully examined and searched into, that
it may well be affirmed, that the learned man whatsoever, that has now
considered of it, has within that time, or might have, learned more reason of
satisfaction in it, then ever before he met with. Therefore the sudden opinions
of any Judge to the contrary, is of no value here. Which also is to be said of
that opinion obviously delivered in the Commons House, 18. Iac. as Mr. Attorney
objected out of the Journal book of the House.

But besides, neither was the truth of that report of that opinion in the
Journal any way acknowledged; For it was said in behalf of the House of
Commons, that their Journals were for matter of order and resolutions of the
House, of such Authority as that they were as their Records; but for any
particular Man's opinion noted in any of them, it was so far from being of any
Authority with them, that in truth no particular opinion is at all to be
entered in them: and that their Clerks offend when ever they do the contrary.
And to conclude, no such opinion whatsoever can be sufficient to weaken the
clear Law, comprehended in these resolutions of the House of Commons, grounded
upon so many Acts of Parliament, so much reason of Common Law, and so many
Presidents of Record, and the resolution of all the Judges of England, and
against which no Law written, not one President, not one reason has been
brought that makes any thing to the contrary.

And thus to this purpose ended the next day of the Conference desired by the
Lords, and had by a Committee of both Houses.

The Proceedings against the Earl of SUFFOLK. 14. April 1628.
MR. Kerton acquainted the House how that the Earl of Suffolk had said to some
Gentlemen, that Mr. Seldom had razed a Record, and deserved to be hanged for
going about to set division betwixt the King and his Subjects. And being
demanded to whom the words were spoken, he was unwilling to name any, till by
question it was resolved he should nominate him. He then named Sr. John
Strangwaies; who was unwilling to speak what he had heard from the Earl: but
being commanded by the House, and resolved by question, he confessed.

That upon Saturday last he being in the Committee Chamber of the Lords, the
Earl of Suffolk called him unto him, and said, Sir John, will you not hang
Seldom. To whom he said, for what? The Earl replied; By God he has razed a
Record, and deserves to be hanged.

This the House took as a great injury done to the whole House, Mr. Seldom
being employed by them in the conference with the Lords in the great cause
concerning the Liberty of the Persons of the Subjects.

The House presently sent Sr. Robert Philips with a message to the Lords to
this effect; He expressed the great care the Commons had upon all occasions to
maintain all mutual respect and correspondency betwixt both Houses: Then he
informed them of a great injury done by the Earl of Suffolk to the whole
house, and to Mr. Seldom a particular Member thereof, who by their Command had
been employed in the late conference with their Lordships: That the House was
very sensible thereof: and, according to former Presidents, made them truly
acquainted with it, and demanded Justice against the Earl of Suffolk: he read
the words, saying, they were spoken to Sir John Strangwayes, a Member of their
House.

After a short stay the Lords called for the Messenger, to whom the Lord Keeper
gave this Answer; He signified the great desire and care of their Lordships to
maintain and increase the correspondencies betwixt both Houses, and as a
Testimony thereof they had partly taken into consideration the charge: That the
Earl of Suffolk, being a Man of great place and Honor, had voluntarily
protested upon his Honor and Soul, that there passed no such words as those
from him to Sr. John Strangwayes: And the Lord Keeper wished that their
Lordships speedy proceedings in this business, might testify their love and
good will to the Commons House.

The next day, being the 15. of April, Sr. John Strangwayes made a Protestation
openly in the House, wherein he avowed that (notwithstanding the Earls denial)
he did speak those words positively unto him, and would maintain it any way
fitting a Member of that House, or a Gentleman of Honor.

They ordered that this Protestation should be entered into the Journal book,
and that a Committee should take into consideration what was fit for the House
to proceed to for the justification of Sr. John Strangwayes, and what was
fitting to be done in this Case, and to examine Witness of the proof of the
words.

Upon the 17. day Sr. John Elliot reported what the Committee had done. That
they had sent for and examined Sr. Christopher Nevill; who related, that upon
Saturday being in the Lords Committee Chamber, the Earl of Suffolk said thus
to him: Mr. Attorney has cleared the business, and has made the cause plain
on the Kings side; and further said, Mr. Seldom has razed a Record, and has
deserved to be hanged, and the Lower House should do well to join with the
Higher in a Petition to the King to hang him; and added as a reason: For Mr.
Seldom went about, and took a course to divide the King from his people: or
words to that effect. And being asked whether he conceived that those words of
dividing the King from his people, had relation to the whole and general action
of Mr. Seldom before the Lords, or to the particular of razing a Record; he
conceived they were referred to the general action.

They had examined one Mr. Littleton, who confessed he heard the Earl of
Suffolk speak to a Gentleman, whom he knew not, words to this affect, viz. That
he would not be in Mr. Seldens Coat for 10000 l. and that Mr. Seldom deserved
to be hanged.

The second part of this Report concerned the particular of Sr. John
Strangwayes, wherein though the Committee found no Witness to prove the words
spoken to Sr. John Srangwayes, yet there were many circumstances which
persuaded them of the truth thereof.

1. That the same words in the same syllables were spoken to Sr. Christopher
Nevill, and that the Earl as he called to him Sr. John Strangwayes, so he
called to him Sr. Christopher Nevill. 2. That the Earl of Suffolk called Sr.
John Strangwayes to him and spoke to him, was proved by Sr. George Fane, and
Sr. Alexander Sr. John, at which time the Earl seemed full of that which he
delivered. 3. That Sr. John Strangwayes instantly after his discourse with the
Earl of Suffolk went to the Earl of Hartford, and delivered him the passages
betwixt them, being the same related in the house. 4. From the unwillingness of
Sr. John Strangwayes, though called upon by the House, to testify against the
Earl, till it was resolved by question he should do it: from a probability,
that had not these words been spoken to himself, it is like he would have
produced Sr. Christopher Nevill, from whom he also heard the same. 5. From the
worth of the Gentleman, and his ingenious protestation in the House, That he
was ready to justify the truth of what he said in any course the House should
thinck meet, or was fit for a Gentleman of Honor.
Hereupon the House resolved by question.

1. That the Earl of Suffolk, notwithstanding his denial, had laid a most
unjust and scandalous imputation upon Mr. Seldom, a Member of the House, being
employed in the service of the House, and therein upon the whole House of
Commons. 2. That this House upon due examination is fully satisfied that Sr.
John Strangwayes, (notwithstanding the Earl of Suffolks denial) has affirmed
nothing but what is most true and certain. 3. That these particulers and
additions be again presented to the Lords, and the Earl of Suffolk newly
charged at the Bar, and the Lords desired to proceed in Justice against the
Earl, and to inflict such punishment upon him as an offense of so high a
nature, being against the House of Commons, does deserve.
Sr. John Elliot was partly sent with the Message to the Lords; who after a
while returned this answer, That they had taken the Message into consideration,
and would further take it into due consultation, and in convenient time would
return an answer by Messengers of their own.

Several Speeches made at the debates concerning the KINGS Propositions for
supply.
Mr. ALFORD.
THat to answer punctually to every Article, was but to discover the Kings
wants, which is neither safe nor fit, as the world now goes; nor is it good for
him to ask more then we can give, nor for us to offer disproportionably:
withal it might draw to a president for the Subjects to make and maintain Wars.

Sr. ROBERT MAUNSELL.
IT had been much better for us to have taken care for these provisions 3.
years since. His desire is not to have the Commons overburthened. That 7. of
these Propositions are not to be neglected, viz. The safe guarding of the
Coasts, The defense of the Elve, The defense of Rochell, The increasing of the
Navy, The repairing of the Forts, The discharge of the Arrears of Merchants
ships, and the defense of the King of Denmark: the other to be delayed to our
next meeting at Michalmas.

Sr. FRANCIS SEYMOUR.
THat as supply is desired, so are we met for that purpose; but if by those
late courses we be disabled, then he is not to expect it from us: our greatest
grievances being his Majesty's pressing wants; two subsedies formerly given,
and five forcibly and unadvisedly taken, are great motives not to be too
forward. That we have too hastily drawn two great Enemies upon us, and all this
done by men of small, or no judgment.

Sr. PETER HAYMAN.
THat vast Propositions are delivered to us in show, which he desires he may
give an Estimate of, that first brought them in.

Mr. PYMM.
THat in no Case it is fit to examine the Propositions, especially of the
Arrearages of the Merchant ships, and for preparation of the foreign Wars.

Secretary COKE.
THat three things especially are to be taken into consideration; the defense
of Rochell, the Elve, and the Forts. He persuades to give bountifully; and
though the people do not presently pay it, yet it gives the King credit abroad,
and much advances his affairs. We have already by our carriage and temper
taken the Kings heart, which he advises we make good use of.

Sr. DUDLY DIGGS.
FOr to try and examine faithfully the Propositions, he refers it to the
Judgment of the House, whether it be fit to handle the business in order, or
to give in gross, considering that the Bill of Tonnage and Poundage is now
brought into the House, which he thinks they conceive to be given for the
safe-guarding of the Seas.

Mr. SPENCER.
IN no Case to enter into particulars. That formerly has been given 5.
Subsedies for the repairing of the Forts, and no penny bestowed on them, but
the money wasted in dishonor.

Mr. JOHN ELLIOT.
THat our late disasters at Calis and Reez might discourage us from thinking of
foreign attempts. At Calis, when we neglected the taking of the Spanish Fleet
in the Harbor, nothing attempted at our landing but drincking and disorder, no
good account given at the return. Concerning service at S. Martins, the whole
account carried against the Judgment of the best Commanders, which makes all
the World despise and condemn us, besides the enriching of the Enemy with
kindenesses, and parling with the Forts with presents, which time will bring to
light.

Sr. EDWARD COKE.
THat when England stood alone without friends and addition of Kingdoms, as 42.
E. 3. the King (wholly guided by his Parliament-Councel) brought always home
Victories both against France and Scotland, his 4. reasons of it were, 1. Good
Council, 2. Valiant Leaders, 3. Timely provision, 4. Good employment and
forecast. And likewise in Ric. 2. Hen. 4. Hen. 5. He desires to give
plentifully, and that in gross, not to examine the particulers, alleging
Solomon's rule, qui repetit, separat: for (said he) if we rip them up, we sever
them for ever. And in that Proposition for setting forth 30. ships, shall we
both pay Tonnage and Subsedies for them? This will draw a dangerous President.
Likewise that other in setting forth (God knows whether) a 1000. Horse and
10000. Foot; being not able to set them forth, how shall we look to maintain
them abroad? That in an Island the defensive War is best and most proper. To
conclude, our gift in gross will serve best with these times, for by that
course we shall seem to allow all the Propositions, and except against none.

Sr. THOMAS WENTWORTH.
THat he will look after the Island of England and no further, except our
Fortunes were better. That as he is bound in duty to the King, so in faithful
love to his Country. That our freedom and Liberty being known and granted, we
then may proportion our gift. His conclusion was, that the final debate of
this question may be laid aside until Friday, and in the mean time go on with
our grievances.

Sr. HENRY MARTIN.
NOt to dash the Ship of the Commonwealth twice upon one Rock. The disease
that we are now sick of, is the Kings Evil, which none but himself can cure;
and Jacob's example is our best Predent, who wrestling with the Angel, would
not give over till he got the blessing. That our often repetition of grievances
breeds hate and dislike. And because we have not to give what is asked, Yet to
give freely what we intend to give; and so by this freeness we shall win the
Kings heart.

Mr. KERTON.
HE desires to know the Rock, to the end we may avoid it; and not to go back,
but forward in our conclusion.

Sr. ROBERT PHILIPS.
HIs good hopes are in his Majesty's royal care and wisdom. That the free and
great Council is the best: but time and hope of change is coming toward us;
Rome and Spain trench deeply into our Councels. That heretofore there has been
a fair progress on both parts, according to the saying of the late King, If the
Parliament did, or should give more then the Country could bear, they gave him
a purse with a knife in it.

Serjant HOSKINS.
THat knowing our own rights, we shall be better enabled to give. Two legs go
best together', our just grievances and our supply; which he desires may not be
separated, for by presenting them together, they shall be both taken, or both
refused.

Serjant ASHLEYS Argument, seconding Mr. ATTORNEY, in the behalf of his
MAJESTY.
I Hope it will be neither offensive nor tedious to your Lordships, if I said
somewhat to second Mr. Attorney: which I the rather desire, because yesterday
it was taken by the Gentlemen of, and argued on the behalf of the Commons, that
the cause was as good as gained by them, and yielded by us, in that we
acknowledged the Statute of Magna Charta, and the other subsequent Statutes to
be yet in force: for on this they enforced this general conclusion.

That therefore no man could be committed, or imprisoned, but by due process,
presentment or indictment.

Which we say is a non sequitur upon such our acknowledgement; for then it
would follow by necessary consequence, that no imprisonment could be justified
but by process of Law, which we utterly deny. For in the cause of the
Constable, cited by Mr. Attorney, it is most clear that by the ancient Law of
the Land a Constable might ex officio, without any Warrant, Arest and restrain
a man to prevent an affray, or to suppress it. And so is the Authority 38. Hen.
8. Brooks abstract. So may he, after the affray, apprehend and commit to Prison
the Person that has wounded a man that is in peril of death, and that without
Warrant, or Process; as it is in 38. E. 3. fol. 6.

Also any man that is no Officer may apprehend a Fellon without Writ, or
Warrant, or pursue him as a Wolf, and as a common enemy to the Commonwealth,
as the Book is 14. H. 8. fol. 16. So might any one arrest a Night-walker,
because it is for the common profit, as the reason is given 4. Hen. 7. fol. 7.

In like manner the Judges in these several Courts may commit a man, either for
contempt, or misdemeanour, without either Process or Warrant, other then take
him Shrief, or take him Marshall, or Warden of the Fleet. And the Adversaries
will not deny, but if the King will allege cause, he may commit a man per
mandatum as the Judges do, without Process, or Warrant.

And various are the cases that may be instanced, wherein there may be a
Lawful commitment without Process. Wherefore I do possitively and with
confidence affirm, that if the imprisonment be Lawful, whether it be by
Process, or without Process, it is not prohibited by the Law.

Which being granted, then the question will aptly be made, whether the King or
Council may commit to Prison per legem terrae were only that part of the
Municipal Law of this Realm, which we call the Common Law: for there are also
diverse Jurisdictions in this Kingdom which are also so reckoned the Law of the
Land.

As in Kendrick's Case in the report, fol. 8. the 1. Ecclesiastical Law is held
the Law of the Land, to punish Blasphemies, Schisms, Heresies, Simony, Incest,
and the like, for a good reason there rendered, viz. That otherwise the King
should not have power to do Justice to his Subjects in all Cases, nor to punish
all Crimes within his Kingdom.

The Admiral's Jurisdiction is also Lex terrae, for things done upon the Sea:
but if they exceed their Jurisdiction, a prohibition is awarded upon the
Statute of nullus liber homo; by which appears that the Statute is in force, as
we have acknowledged.

The Martial likewise, though not to be exercised in times of peace, when
recourse may be had to the Kings Courts, yet in times of invasion, or other
times of Hostility, when an Army Royal is in the field, and offenses are
committed, which require speedy reformation, and cannot expect the solemnity of
legal Trials; then such imprisonment, execution, or other Justice done by the
Law Martial is Warrantable, for it is then the Law of the Land, and is Ius
gentium, which ever serves for a supply in the defeat of the Common Law, when
ordinary proceeding cannot be had.

And so it is also in the case of the Law of the Merchant, which is mentioned
13. E. 4. fol. 9.10. where a Merchant stranger was wronged in his goods, which
he had committed to a Carrier to convey to Southampton, and the Carrier
imbezelled some of the goods; for remedy whereof the Merchant sued before the
Council in the Star Chamber for redress. It is there said thus, Merchant
strangers have by the King safe conduct for coming into this Realm: therefore
they shall not be compelled to attend the ordinary Trial of the Common Law,
but, for expedition, shall sue before the Kings Council, or in Chancery, de dic
in diem and de hora in horam: where the Case shall be determined by the Law of
Merchants.

In the like manner it is in the Law of State; when the necessity of State
requires it, they do and may proceed to natural equity; as in those other Cases
where the Law of the Land provides not, there the proceeding may be by the Law
of natural equity: and infinite are the Occurrences of State unto which the
Common Law extends not. And if these proceedings of State should not also be
accounted the Law of the Land, then we do fall into the same inconveniency
mentioned in Cawdries Case, that the King should not be able to do Justice in
all Cases within his own Dominions.

If then the King nor his Council may not Commit, it must needs follow, that
either the King must have no Council of State, or having such a Council, they
must have no power to make Orders, or Acts of State; Or if they may, they must
be without means to compel obedience to those Acts; and so we shall allow them
Jurisdiction, but not compel obedience to those Acts, but not correction, which
will be then as fruitless as the Command. Frustra potentia quae nunquam
redigitur in statutum. Where as the very Act of Westminster first, shows
plainly that the King may commit, and that his commitment is lawful, or else
that Act would never have declared a man to be irreprieveable when he is
committed by the Command of the King, if the Lawmakers had conceived that his
commitment had been unlawful. And Divine truth informs us, that the Kings have
their power from God, the Psalmist calling them the children of the most High;
which is in a more special manner understood then of other men, for all the
Sons of Adam are by election the Sons of God, and all the Sons of Abraham by
recreation, or regeneration, the Children of the most High, in respect of the
power which is committed unto them, who has also furnished them with ornaments
and arms fit for the exercising of that power, and has given them Scepters,
Swords, and Crowns: Scepters to vestitute and Swords to execute Laws, and
Crowns, as Ensigns of that power and dignity, with which they are invested:
shall we then conceive that our King has so far transmitted the power of his
Sword to inferior Magistrates, that he has not reserved so much Supreme
power, as to commit an Offender to prison? 10. H. 6. fol. 7. It appears that a
Steward of a Court Lect may commit a man to prison, and shall not the King from
whom all inferior power is deduced have power to commit? We call him the
fountain of Justice, yet when these streams and rivolets, which flow from that
Fountain come fresh and full, we would so far exhaust that Fountain, as to
leave it dry, but they that will admit him so much power do require the
expression of the cause: I demand whether they will have a general cause
alleged, or a special; if general as they have instances for Treason,
Felony, or for Contempt, for to leave fencing and to speak plainly as they
intend it, If loan of money should be required and refused, and thereupon a
commitment ensue, and the cause signified to be for a contempt, this being
unequal inconvenience from yielding the remedy is sought for the next
Parliament: would be required the expression of the particular cause of the
commitment: Then how unfit would it be for King or Council in Cases to express
the particular Cause, its easily to be adjudged when there is no State, or
policy of government, whether it be Monarchal, or of any other frame, which
have not some secrets of State, not communicable to every vulgar understanding.

I will instance but one, If a King employ an Ambassador to a Foreign
Country of States with instructions for his Negotiation, and he pursue not his
instructions, whereby dishonor and damage may ensue to the Kingdom, is not
this commitment?

And yet the particular of his instruction and the manner of his miscarrying is
not fit to be declared to his Keeper, or by him to be certified to the Judges,
where it is to be opened and debated in the presence of a great audience.

I therefore conclude for offenses against the State in Case of State
Government, the King and his Council have lawful power to punish by
imprisonment without showing particular cause, where it may tend to the
disclosing of State-Government. It is well known to many that know me, how much
I have labored in this Law of the Subjects Liberty very many years before I
was in the Kings service, and had no cause then to speak, but to speak ex
animo, yet did I then maintain and publish the same opinion which now I have
declared concerning the Kings Supreme power in matters of State, and therefore
can not justly be censured to speak at this present only to merit of my
Master, But if I may freely speak my own understanding, I conceive it to be a
question too high to be determined by any legal direction, for it must needs be
an hard case of contention, when the Conqueror must sit down with irreparable
losses, as in this Case: If the Subject prevails he gains Liberty, but loses
the benefit of that State-Government, by which a Monarchy may soon become an
Anarchie, or if the State prevails, it gives absolute Sovereignty but loses
Subjects: not their subjection, for obedience we must yield, though nothing be
left us but prayers and tears, but yet loses the best part of them which is
their affections whereby Sovereignty is established: and the Crown formerly
fixed on his Royal head, between two such extremes there is not way to moderate,
but to find a medium for the accommodation of the difference, which is not for
me to prescribe, but only to move your Lordships to whom I submit.

After Mr. Sergeant his speech ended, my Lord President said thus to the
Gentlemen of the House of Commons. That though at this free conference, Liberty
was given by the Lords to the Kings Council to speak what they thought fit for
his Majesty, Yet Mr. Sergeant Ashley had no Authority, or direction from them
to speak in that manner he has done.

Mr. NOYE his Argument the 16. of April 1628.
HE offered an answer to the inconveniences presented by Mr. Attorney, which
were 4. in Number.

First where it was objected that it was inconvenient to express the cause for
fear of divulging Arcana Imperii, for hereby all may be discovered and
abundance of Traitors never brought to Justice.

To this that Learned Man answered.

That the Judges by the intention of the Law are the Kings Council, and the
secrets may safely be committed to all, or some of them who might advise
whether they will bayl him, and here is no danger to King, or subjects, for
their Oath will not permit them to reveal the secrets of the King, nor yet to
detain the Subjects long, if by Law he be to be bayled.

Secondly, for that Objection of the Children of Odonell, he laid this for a
ground, that the King can do no wrong, but in Cases of extreme necessity, we
must yield sometimes for preservation of the whole State ubi unius damnum
utilitate publica rependitur, he said there was no trust in the Children of
Traitors, no wrong done if they did tabe facere, or marcesere in Carcere. It
is the same Case of necessity as when to avoid the burning of a Town, we are
forced to pull down an honnest man's House, or to compel a man to dwell by the
Seaside for defense, or fortitude. Yet the King cannot do wrong, for potentia
juris est non injura: Ergo the Act of the King though to the wrong of another
is by the Law made no wrong, as if he commanded to be kept in Prison, yet he is
responsal for his wrong, he quoted a book, 42.6. Ass. Port.

Thirdly, the instance made of Westminster. First he said there was a great
difference between those 3. Mainprize, Bail, and Replevin: The Statute says a
man cannot be repleiued: Ergo not bayled non sequitur, Maniprize under pain,
Bayl body for body, no pain ever in Court to be declared, Replevin neither by
surety nor bayl of Replevin never in Court, the Statute says a man cannot be
Repleiued: Ergo not bayled non sequitur.

Fourthly, where it is said that bayl is ex gratia, he answers, that if the
Prisoner comes to Habeas Corpus, then it is not ex gratia, Yet the Court may
advise, but mark the words ad subjiciendum and recipiendum prout Curia
consideraverit, now it is impossible the Judges should do so, if no cause be
expressed, for it they know no cause, he may bring the 1.2.3. and fourth Habeas
Corpus, and so infinite till he find himself a perpetual Prisoner, so that no
cause expressed is worse for a man, then the greatest cause or Villainy that can
be imagined, and thus far proceeded that learned Gentlemen.

Mr. GLANVILES Argument.
HE said that by favor of the House of Commons he had liberty to speak, if
opportunity were offered, he applies his answer to one particular of Mr.
Attorney who assigned to the King 4. great trusts, (1.) of War, (2.) Coins,
(3.) Denizens, (4.) Pardons; Is assented unto, that the King is trusted with
all these 4. legal Prerogatives, but the Argument follows not, the King is
trusted with many Prerogatives: Ergo in this non sequitur non est sufficiens
enumeratio partium, he said he could answer these particulars with 2. rules,
whereof the first should wipe of the first and the second, and the other, the
third and fourth.

The first rule is this, there is no fear of trusting the King with any thing,
but the fear of ill Council, the King may easily there be trusted where ill
Council does not engage both the King and Subjects, as it does in matter of War
and Coin, If he miscarry in the Wars, it is not always pecuum Achiro, but he
smarts equally with the people, If he abase his Coin, he loses more then any
of his people: Ergo he may safely be trusted with the flowers of the Crown,
War, and Coin.

The second rule he began was this, when the King is trusted to confer grace,
it is one thing, but when he is trusted to infer an injury it is another
matter: The former power cannot by miscouncelling be brought to prejudice
another, The latter may if the King pardons a guilty Man he punishes not a
good subject, if he denizen never so many strangers it is but damnum sine
injuria, we allow him a liberty to confer grace, but not without cause to infer
punishment; and indeed he cannot do injury, for if he command to do a Man wrong
the command is void and alter fit Author, and the Actor becomes the wrong doer.
Therefore the King may be safely trusted with War, Coin, Denizens, and Pardons,
but not with a power to imprison without expression of Cause, or limmitation of
time, because as the Poet tells us Libertas potius auro.

The Answer of the Judges for matter of Fact upon the HABEAS CORPUS, 21. April.
THe Chief Justice says, they are prepared to obey our Command, but they
desire to be advised by us, whether they being sworn upon penalty of forfeiting
Body, Lands, and Goods, into the Kings hands to give an account to him, may
without Warrant do this.

The Duke said he had acquainted the King with the business, and for ought he
knows he is well content therewith. But for better assurance he has sent his
brother of Anglesey to know his pleasure.

Devonshire says, if a complaint be made by a mean Man against the greatest
Officer in this place, he is to give an account of his doings to this House.

Bishop of Lincoln says, this motion proceeded from him, and so took it for
clear, that there was an appeal from the Chancery to a higher Court then the
King's Bench, and in that Court has ever given an account of their doings.

The Lord Say says, he wondered there should be any question made of this
business, because in his opinion this being the highest Court did admit of no
appeal. The President said the Judges did not do this by way of appeal, but as
the most common way for them, this being a matter concerning the Kings
prerogative: Lord Say says, if they will not declare themselves, we must take
into consideration the point of our privilege.

The Duke says, this was not done by the Judges as fearing to answer, but of
respect to the King. And now his brother was come with answer from the King,
that they might proceed.

Order was taken that this passage should not be entered into the Journal Book,
and so Judge WHITLOCK spoke.
MY Lords we are by your appointment here ready to clear any aspersion of the
House of Commons in their late presentment upon the King's Bench, that the
Subject was wounded in this Judgment there lately given. If such a thing were
my Lords, your Lordships, not they have the power to question and Judge the
same, But my Lords I say there was no Judgment given whereby either the
prerogative might be enlarged, or the eight of the subject trenched upon. It is
true my Lords, in Michaelmas Term last four Gentlemen petitioned for a Habeas
Corpus, which they obtained, and Council was assigned unto them, the return was
per spialem mandatum Domini Regis, which likewise was made known unto us under
the hands of eighteen privy Councillors. Now my Lords, if we had delivered
them presently, upon this, it must have been, because the King did not show
cause, wherein we should have judged the King had done wrong, and this is
beyond our knowledge, for he might have committed them for other matters then
we could have imagined. But they might say thus, they might have been kept in
Prison all their days, I answer no, but we did remit them, that we might
better advise of the matter, and they the next day might have had a new Writ,
if they had pleased, but they say, we ought not to have denied bayl, I answer,
if we had done so, it must needs have reflected upon the King that he had
unjustly imprisoned them, and it appears in Dyer. 2. Eliz. that diverse
Gentlemen being committed, and requireing Habeas Corpus, some were bayled,
others remitted, whereby it appears, much is left to the discretion of the
Judges.

For that which troubles so much remittitur quousque, this my Lords was only,
(as I said before) to take time what to do, and whereas they will have a
difference betwixt remittitur and remittitur quousque, my Lords I confess I can
find none, but these are new inventions to trouble old Records. And herein my
Lords we have dealt with knowledge and understanding, for had we given a
Judgment, the party must thereupon have rested, every Judgment must come to
an issue, in matter, in fact, or demur in point of Law, here is neither,
therefore no Judgment.

For endeavoring to have a Judgment entered, it is true, Mr. Attorney pressed
the same for his Masters service, but we being sworn to do right betwixt the
King and his subjects commanded the Clark to make no entry, but according to
the old form, and the rule was given by the Chief Justice alone. I have spent
my time in this Court, and I speak confidently, I did never see nor know by any
Record that upon such a Retorn as this, a man was bayled, the King not first
consulted with in such a Case as this.

The Commons House do not know what Letters and Commands we receive, for these
remain in our Court, and were not viewed by them, for the rest of the Matters
presented by the House of Commons they were not in agitation before us, whether
the King may commit and how long he may detain a man committed, therefore
having answered so much as concerns us, I desire your Lordships good
constructions of what has been said.

Judge JONES
SAid he was here to deliver before us what judgment was given before them
concerning the Habeas Corpus, he answered, no Judgment was given, and the
Matter of Fact was such as my brother delivered unto you yesterday. These 4.
Gentlemen were committed to the Fleet-Gate-House and Marshall of the Kings
Household. 4. Returns were made upon the Writs, and every one of them had a
Counselor appointed, who had Coppies of the Returns. A rule was granted,
their Council heard, and exception taken to the Return, because it did not show
cause of their caption.

These were of no force in the opinion of the Judges, the next exception was,
because no cause of their commitment was showed, which the Judges held to be
all one in point of Law. Then my Lords, they alleged many Presidents and
Statutes of themselves, which the Kings Attorney answered. That Persons
committed by the King, or Council were never bayled, but his pleasure was first
known.

We agreed at the Chamber of the Chief Justice that all the Statutes alleged
are in force, but whether we should bayl them or no, was the question,
therefore we remitted them quousque. After which Mr. Attorney required a
Judgment might be entered, I commanded the Clark he should not suffer any such
thing to be done, because we would be better advised.

But some will say our Act is otherwise, I answered no, for we have done no
more then we do upon ordinary Writ, when we purpose to be better advised, and
that was only an Interlocutorie order. But my Lords put the case a Habeas
Corpus should be granted for one that is committed by the House of Commons,
would they (thinck you) take it well he should be bayled at his first coming to
the Court? I thinck they would not, and I thinck the King would have done so in
this case, now my Lords, there is a Petition of Right, and a Petition of Grace,
to be bayled is a matter of Grace, therefore if a man be brought upon an Habeas
Corpus, and not bayled, he cannot say the Court has done him any wrong. I have
now served seven years Judge in this Court, and my conscience bears me
witness that I have not wronged the same, I have been thought sometimes too
forward for the Liberty of the Subject. I am my self Liber homo, my Ancestors
gave their voice with Magna Charta. I enjoy that House still, which they did, I
do not now mean to draw down Gods wrath upon my posterity, and therefore I will
neither advance the Kings prerogative, nor lessen the Liberty of the Subject to
the danger of either King, or People, this is my profession before God and your
Lordships.

Judge DODDERIDGE
Says it is no more fit for a Judge to decline to give an account of his
doings, then for a Christian of his Faith. God knows, I have endeavored
always to keep a good conscience, for a troubled one, who can bear, the
Kingdom holds of none but God, and Judgments do not pass privately in
Chambers, but public in Court, where every one may hear, which causes
Judgment to be given with maturity. Your Lordships have heard the particulers
delivered by my brethren, how that Council being assigned to those 4.
Gentlemen, in the latter end of Michaelmass Term their Cause received hearing,
and upon consideration of the Statutes and Records we found some of them to be
according to the good old Law of Magna Charta, but we thought that they did not
come so close to this Case, as that bayl should be thereupon presently granted.
My Lords, the Habeas Corpus consists of 3. parts, the Writ, the Return upon
the Writ, or schedule and the Entry, or rule reciting the Habeas Corpus, and
the Return together with the opinion of the Court, either a remittitur, or
traditur in ballium. In this Case a remittitur was granted, which we did that
we might take better advisement upon the Case, and upon the remittitur (my
Lords) they might have had a new Writ the next day, and I wish they had,
because it may be they had seen more, and we had been eased of a great labor.
And my Lords, when the Attorney upon the remittitur pressed an Entry, we all
straightly charged the Clark that he should make no other Entry then such as our
Predecessors had usually made in like Cases: for the difference (my Lords)
betwixt remittitur and remittitur quousque I could never yet find any, I have
now sat in this Court 15. years, and I should know something, surely if I had
gone in a Mill so long, dust would cleave to my clothes. I am old and have one
foot in the grave, therefore I will look to the better part as near as I can.
But omnia habere in memoria and in nullo errare divinum potius est quam humanum.

THE LORD CHIEF JUSTICE
Says, he shall not speak with confidence, unless he might stand right in the
opinion of the House, and protested what he spoke the day before, was not said
by him with any purpose to trench upon the Privileges of this House, but out
of that respect which by his place he thought he owed to the King, he said
concerning the point, he was to speak of, that he would not trouble the Lords
with things formerly repeated, wherein he concurred with his brethren. He said,
if it were true, the King might not commit, they had done wrong in not partly
delivering, for my Lords (says he) these Statutes and good Laws being all in
force, we meant not to trench upon any of them, most of them being Commentaries
upon Magna Charta: but I know not any Statute that goes so far, that the King
may not commit. Therefore justly we think, we delivered the interpretation
thereof to that purpose: for my Lords, Lex terrae is not to be found in this
Statute, they gave me no example, neither was there any Cause showed in the
Return. A President (my Lords) that has run in a storm does not much direct us
in point of Law, and Records are the best Testimonies. These Presidents they
brought, being read, we showed them wherein they were mistaken, if we have
erred erramus cum Patribus, and they can show no President, but that our
Predecessors have done as we have done, sometimes bayling, sometimes remitting,
sometimes discharging. Yet we do never bayl any committed by the King, or his
Council till his pleasure be first known. Thus did the Lord Chief Justice Coke
in Raynards Case. They say this would have been done if the King had not
written, but why then was the Letter read and published and kept, and why was
the Town Clark sent carefully to enquire (because the Letter so directed)
whether these men offered for bayl, were subsedy men? the Letter shows also
that Beckwith was committed for suspicion of being acquainted with the
Gun-Pouder-Treason, but no proof being produced the King left him to be bayled.

The Earl of WARVVICKS speech, 21. April 1628.
MY Lords I will observe something out of the Law wherein this liberty of the
Subjects Person is founded, and some things out of Presidents which have been
alleged. For the Law of Magna Charta, and the rest concerning these points,
they are acknowledged by all to be of force, and that they were to secure the
Subjects from wrongfnll imprisonment as well, or rather more concerning the
King then the Subject, why then besides the grand Charter and those 6. other
Acts of Parliament? in the very point we know that Magna Charta has been at
least 30. times confirmed, so that upon the matter we have 6. or 7. and thereby
Acts of Parliament to confirm this liberty, although it was made a matter of
derision the other day in this House.

One is that of 36. E. 3. No. 9. and another in the same year, No. 20. not
printed, but yet as good as those that are, and that of 42. E. 3. cap. 3. so
express in the point, especially the Petition of the Commons that year, which
was read by Mr. Littleton with the Kings answer so full, and free from all
exception, to which I refer your Lordships that I know not have any thing in
the World can be more plain, and therefore if in Parliament ye should make any
doubt of that which is so fully confirmed in Parliament, and in case so clear,
go about by new glosses to alter the old and good Law, we shall not only
forsake the steps of our Ancestors, who in Cases of small importance would
answer nolumus mutare leges Angliae, but we shall yield up and betray our right
in the greatest inheritance the Subjects of England has, and that is the Laws
of England, and truly I wonder how any man can admit of such a gloss upon the
plain Text, as should overthrow the force of the Law, for whereas the Law of
Magna Charta is, that no Freeman shall be imprisoned, but by lawful judgment
of his Peers, or the Law of the Land, the King has power to commit without
Cause, which is a sense not only expressly contrary to other Acts of
Parliament, and those especially formerly cited, but against Common sense. For
Mr. Attorney confesses this Law concerns the King, why then, where the Law
says the King shall not commit, but by the Law of the Land? the meaning must
be as Mr. Attorney would have it, that the King must not commit, but at his own
pleasure, and shall we think that our Ancestors were so foolish to hazard their
Persons and Estates, and labor so much to get a Law, and to have it 30. times
confirmed, that the King might not commit his Subjects, but at his own
pleasure, and if he did commit any of his Subjects without a Cause shown, then
he must lie during pleasure, then which nothing can be imagined more
ridiculous, and contrary to true reason.

For the Presidents I observe that there has been many shown, by which it
appears to me evidently that such as have been committed by the Kings Council,
they have been delivered upon Habeas Corpus, and that constantly. It is true
that some Presidents were brought on the Kings part, that when some of these
persons desired to be delivered by Habeas Corpus, the King, or his Council
signified his Majesty's pleasure that they should be delivered, or the Kings
Attorney has come into the Court and related the Kings Command, but this seems
to make for the Subject; For that being in his Majesty's power to deliver them,
who by his special Command were imprisoned. May not we well think that his
Majesty would rather at that time have stayed their deliverance by Law, then
furthered it with his Letters, and made the Prisoners rather beholding to him
for his grace and mercy then to the Judges for Justice, had not his Majesty
known that at that time they ought to have been delivered by Law? I think no
man would imagine a wise King would have suffered his Grace and Prerogative (if
any such Prerogative were) to be so continually questioned, and his Majesty and
his Council so far from commanding the Judges not to proceed to deliver the
Prisoner by them committed, without Cause shown, as that on the other side,
which is all the force of these Presidents, the King and the Council signified
to the Judges that they should proceed to deliver the parties, certainly if the
King had challenged any such Prerogative, that a Person committed without any
cause shown ought not to be delivered by the Judges without his consent, it
would have appeared by one President, or other amonst all that have been
produced, that his Majesty would have made some claim to such a Prerogative.
But it appears to the contrary that in many of these cases the King, or his
Council did never interpose, and where they did, it was always in affirmation
and encouragement to that Court to proceed. And besides the writing of Letters
from his Majesty to the Judges to do Justice to his Majesty's Subjects, may
with as good reason be interpreted that without those Letters they might not do
Justice, also the King signified his willingness* that such and such Persons
which were committed by him should be delivered, therefore they could not be
delivered without it, which is a strange reason. So that findeing the Laws so
full, so many, and so plain in the point, and findeing that when ever any were
committed without cause shown, brought their Habeas Corpus, they were
delivered, and no Command ever given to the contrary, or claim made on the
Kings part to any such Prerogative. I may safely conclude as the House of
Commons have done, and if any one President, or two of late can be shown that
the Judges have not delivered the Prisoners so committed, I think it is their
fault, and to be enquired of, but contrary, it seems to me to be an undoubted
Liberty of the Subject, that if he be committed without cause, or without cause
shown, yet he may have some speedy course to bring himself to Trial, either to
justify his own innocence, or to receive punishment according to his fault,
for God forbid that an innocent man by the Laws of England should be put in
worse case then the most grievous Malefactors are, which must needs be, if this
should be, that if a cause be showed, he may have his Trial, but if none, he
must lie and pine in Prison during pleasure. Mr. Sergeant Ashley, the other day
told your Lordships of the Emblem of a King, but by his leave made wrong use
of it. For a King bears in one hand the Globe, and in the other the golden
Scepter the tipes of Sovereignty and mercy, but the Sword of Justice is ever
carried before him by a Minister of Justice, which shows Subjects may have
their remedies for unjustice done, and appeals done to higher powers, for the
Laws of England are so favorable to their Princes, as they can do no unjustice.

Therefore I will conclude as all disputes I hold do, Magna est veritas and
praevalebit, so I make no doubt we living under so good a Prince as we do, when
this is represented unto him, he will answer us Magna est Carta and praevalebit.

The ARCHBISHOPS of CANTERBURIES Speech, at the Conference of both Houses, 25.
April 1628.
GEntlemen of the House of Commons, the service of the King and safety of the
Kingdom do call on us, my Lords, to give all convenient expedition to dispatch
some of those great and weighty businesses, for the better effecting whereof,
my Lords have thought fit to let you know that they do in general agree with
you, and doubt not, but you will agree with us to the best of your power to
maintain and support the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and the fundamental
Liberties of the Subject, for the particulers which may hereafter fall in
debate, they have given me in charge to let you know, that what has been
presented by you to their Lordships, they have laid nothing of it by, they are
not out of love with any thing you have tendered to them, they have voted
nothing, neither are they in love with any thing proceeding from themselves,
for that which we shall say and propose unto you is out of an intendment to
invite you to a mutual and free conference, that you with confidence may come
to us, and we with confidence may speak to you, so that we may come to a
conclusion of those things which we both unanimously desire, we have resolved
of nothing, defined, or determined nothing, but desire to take you with us,
praying help of you as you have done of us. My Lords have thought upon some
Propositions which they have ordered to be read here, and then left with you in
writing, that if it seem good to you, we may uniformly concur for the
substance, and if you differ, that you may be pleased to put out; or add, or
alter, or diminish as you shall think fit, that so we the better come to the
end, that we do both so desireously embrace.

Then the 5. Propositions were read by the Lord BISHOP of NORVVHICH.
The 5. Propositions, 25. April 1628.
1. THat his Majesty would be pleased graciously to declare, that the good old
Law, called Magna Charta, and the 6. Statutes conceived to be Declarations, or
Explanations of that Law, do stand still in Force to all intents and purposes.
2. That his Majesty would be pleased graciously to declare, that according to
Magna Charta and the Statutes aforesaid, as also according to the most ancient
Customs and Laws of this Land, every free Subject of this Realm has a
fundamental propriety in his goods, and a fundamental Liberty of his Person. 3.
That his Majesty would be pleased graciously to declare, that it is his Royal
pleasure to ratify and confirm unto all, and every his faithful and Loyal
Subjects all their ancient, several, just Liberties, Privileges and Rights, in
as ample and beneficial manner to all intents and purposes, as their Ancestors
did enjoy the same, under the Government of the best of his most Noble
Progenitors. 4. That his Majesty would be pleased graciously to declare, for
the good contentment of his Loyal Subjects, and for the secureing them from
future fears, that in all causes within the Cognizance of the Common Law, and
concerning the Liberty of his Subjects, his Majesty would proceed according to
the Laws established in the Kingdom, and in no other manner or wise. 5. And as
touching his Majesty's Royal Prerogative intrincical to his Sovereignty, and
entrusted him from God ad communem totius populi salutem and non ad
destructionem, his Majesty would resolve not to use or divert the same to the
prejudice of any his loyal People in the propriety of their goods and liberty
of their Persons. And in case for the security of his Majesty's Royal Person,
the Common safety of his People, or the peaceable Government of his Kingdom,
his Majesty shall find just cause of State to imprison, or restrain any man's
Person: his Majesty would graciously declare, that within a convenient time he
shall and will express the cause of his commitment, or restraint, either
general, or special, and upon a cause so expressed, will leave him immediately
to be tried according to the Common Justice of the Kingdom.
Then Sr. DUDLEY DIGGS in the behalf of the Commons, says.
MY Lords, it has pleased Almighty God many ways to bless the Knights,
Citizens, and Burgesses now assembled in Parliamen, with great comforts and
strong hopes, that this will prove as happy a Parliament as ever was in
England, and in their Consultations for the service of his Majesty, and the
safety of this Kingdom, one especial comfort and strong hope has risen from
the continued good respects, which your Lordships so nobly from time to time
have been pleased to show unto them particulerly at this present in your so
Honorable profession to agree with them in general, in desire to maintain and
support the fundamental Laws and Liberties of England. The Commons have
commanded me in like fort, they have been, are, and will be as ready to
propugne the just Prerogatives of his Majesty, of which in all their Arguments,
searches of Records and resolutions, they have been most careful according to
that which formerly was, and now again is protested by them.

Another Noble Argument of your Honorable disposition toward them is expressed
in this, that you are pleased to expect no present answer from them, who are
(as your Lordships in your general wisdoms they doubt not have considered) a
great body that must advise upon all new Propositions, and resolve upon them
before they can give answer according to the ancient usage of our House, but is
manifest in general (God be thanked for it) there is a great concurrence of
affection to the same end in both Houses, and such a good Harmony, that I
entreat your Lordships leave to borrow a comparison from nature, or natural
Philosophy, as two Lutes well strung and tuned brought together, if one be
played on little straws, or sticks will stir upon the other though it lie still,
so though we have no power to reply, yet these things said and proposed, cannot
but work in our hearts, and we will faithfully report these passages to our
House, from whence in due time we hope your Lordships shall receive a
contentfull Answer.

Sr. BENJAMIN RUDDIERDS Speech, 28. April 1628.
Mr. Speaker,
WE are now upon a great business, and the manner of handling it may be as
great as the business it self. I need not tell you that Liberty is a precious
thing, for every man may set his own price upon it, and he that does not value
it, deserves to be valued accordingly, for my own part I am clear without
scruple, that, what we have resolved it according to Law, and if any Judge in
England were of a contrary opinion, I am sure we should have heard of him
before now. Out of all question the very point, the scope and drift of Magna
Charta was to reduce the Regal to a Legal power in matters of imprisonment, or
else it had not been worth so much contending for.

But there have been Presidents brought to prove the practice and
interpretation of the Law. I confess I have heard many Presidents of utillity
and respect, but none at all of truth, or of Law: Certainly there is no Court
of Justice in England that will discharge a Prisoner committed by the King Rege
inconsulto, without acquainting the King; yet this good manners was never made,
or mentioned as a legal part of the delivery.

It is Objected, that the King ought to have a trust left and deposited in him,
God forbid, but he should: And I say that it is impossible to take it from him,
for it lies not in the wit of man, to devise such a Law as should be able to
comprehend all particulers, all accidents, but that extraordinary cases must
happen, which when they come, If they be disposed of for the Common good, there
will be no Law against them, yet must the Law be general, for otherwise
admissions and exceptions will fret, and eat out the Law to nothing. God
himself has constituted a general Law of nature to govern the ordinary course
of things, he has made no Laws for miracles. Yet there is this observation of
them, that they are rather praeter naturam then contra naturam, and always
propter bonos fines, for Kings Prerogatives are rather besides the Law then
against it, and when they are directed to right ends for the public good, they
are not only concurring Laws, but even Laws in singularity and excelling. But
to come nearer Mr. Speaker let us consider where we are now, what steps we have
gone and gained, the Kings learned Council have acknowledged all the Laws to
have been still in force, the Judges have disallowed any Judgment against
these Laws, the Lords also have confessed, that the Laws are in full strength;
they have further retained our resolution entire, and without prejudice: All
this hitherto is for our advantage, but above all his Majesty himself being
publicly present declared by the mouth of my Lord Keeper before both the
Houses, that Magna Charta, and the other six Statutes are in force, that he
will maintain his Subjects in the liberty of their Persons and the propriety of
their goods, that he will govern according to the Laws of the Kingdom, this is
a solemn and bindeing satisfaction expressing his gracious readiness to comply
with his People in all their reasonable and just desires. The King is a good
man, and it is no diminution to be called so, for whosoever is a good man shall
be greater then a King that is not so.

The King certainly is exceeding tender of his present Honor and of his same
hereafter* he will think it hard to have a worse mark set upon him and his
Government then any of his Ancestors by extraordinary restraints: his Majesty
has already intimated unto us by a message that he does willingly give way to
have the abuse of power reformed, by which I do verily believe that he does
very well understand what a miserable power it is, which has produced so much
weakness to himself and to the Kingdom, and it is our happiness that he is so
foreward to redress it. For my own part I shall be very glad to see that good
old decrepit Law of Magna Charta, which has so long kept in and lain as it
were bedrid, I should be glad, I say to see it walk abroad again with new
vigor and luster attended by the other six Statutes, questionless it will be a
general hartning to all the People. I doubt not but by a debating conference
with the Lords we shall happily fall upon a fair and fit accommodation
concerning the Liberty of our Persons and propriety of our goods. I hope we
have a Bill to agree in the point against imprisonment for Loanes, or privy
Seals, as for intrincical power and reason of State they are matters in the
clouds, where I desire we may leave them, and not meddle in them at all, least
by way of admittance we may loose somewhat of that which is our own already.
Yet this (by the way) I will say of reason of State, that in the latitude (as
it is used) it has eaten out almost not only all the Laws, but all the
Religion of Christendom. Now Mr. Speaker, I will only remember you of one
precept, and that of the wisest Man, Be not overwise, be not over just, and he
cited his reason for why will thou be desolate. Sir, if Justice and Wisdom may
be stretched to desolation, let us thereby learn, that moderation is the virtue
of virtues, and the wisdom of wisdoms.

Let it be our Masterpiece, so to carry our business as we may keep
Parliaments on foot, for as long as they are frequent there will be no
irregular power, which though it cannot be broken at once, yet in short time it
will fade and moulter away, there can be no total and final loss of Liberty,
but by loss of Parliaments as long as they last, what we cannot get at one time
we may have at another.

Let no man think that what I have said is the language of a private end, my
aim is upon the good success of the whole, for I thank God my mind stands
above any fortune that is to be gotten by base and unworthy means.

No man is bound to be rich, or great, no, nor to be wise, but every man is
bound to be honnest, out of which heart I have spoken.

The Lord KEEPERS speech, 28. April 1628.
MY Lords, Knights, and Burgesses of the House of Commons. I cannot but
remember the great and important affairs concerning the safety, both of State
and Religion, declared at first from his own mouth to be the cause of
assembling this Parliament, the fear whereof, as it does daily increase with
his Majesty so it ought to do, and his Majesty doubts not but it does so with
you, since the danger increases every day both by effluction of time, and
preparation of the enemy. Yet his Majesty does well weigh, that this expense of
time has been occasion by the debate that has risen in both Houses, touching
the Liberty of both Subjects, in which as his Majesty takes in good part the
purpose and intent of the Houses so clearly and frequently professed, that they
would not deminish nor blemish his Royal and just Prerogative, so he presumes
ye will all confess it a point of extraordinary grace and Justice in him to
suffer it to rest so long in dispute without interruption. But now his Majesty
considering the length of time which it has already taken, and fearing nothing
so much any future loss as that whereof every hour and minute is so precious,
and foreseeing that ordinary way of debate though never so careful, must in
regard of the forms of both Houses necessarily take up more time then the
affairs of Christendom can permit, his Majesty out of his great and Princely
care has thought it expedient to shorten the business by declaring the
clearness of his own heart and intention. And therefore he has commanded me to
let you know, that he holds the Statue of Magna Charta, and the other 6.
Statutes, insisted on for the Subjects Liberty, to be all in force, and
assures you that he will maintain all his Subjects in the just freedom of
their Persons and in safety of their estates, and that he will Govern according
to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, and that you shall find as much
security in his Majesty's Royal word and promise, as in the strength of any Law
you can make, so that hereafter you shall never have cause to complain. The
conclusion is this, that his Majesty prays that God (who has hitherto
blessed this Kingdom, and has put into his heart this day to come unto you)
will make the success hereof happy both to King and People. And therefore he
desires that no doubt, or mistrust may possess any man, but that you all will
proceed speedily and unanimously with the business.

The Bishop of EXCETERS Letter sent to the House of COMMONS, 28. April 1628.
Gentlemen,
FOr God sake be wise in your well meant Zeal, why do you argue away precious
time that can never be revoked, or repaired? Woe is me, while we dispute our
friends perish and we must follow them, where are we, if we break, (and I
tremble to think) we cannot but break if we hold so stiff. Our Liberties and
proprieties are sufficiently declared to be sure and legal, our remedies are
clear and irrefragable, what do we fear, every Subject sees the way now chalked
out, for future Justice, and who dares henceforth tread besides it? Certainly
whilst Parliaments live we need not misdoubt the violations of our Freedoms
and Rights: May we be but where the Law found us, we shall sufficiently enjoy
our selves and ours; It is no season to search for more! Oh let us not whilst
we over-rigedly plead for an higher strain of safety, put our selves into a
necessity of ruin and utter despair of redress: Let us not in the suspicion of
Evils that may be, cast our selves into a present confusion. If you love your
selves and your Country, remit some thing of your own terms, and since the
substance is yielded by your Noble Patriots, stand not too rigorously upon
points of circumstance: Fear not to trust a good King, who after the strict
Laws made, must be trusted with the execution. Think that your Country, nay
Christendom lies on the mercy of your present resolutions. Relent or farewell
welfare.

From him whose faithful heart bleeds in a vowed sacrifice for his King and
Country. EXCETER.

Mr. HACKVVELL of LINCOLNS-INNE his Speech in the Lower House, 1. May 1628.
SIR,
I Chose rather to discover my weakness by speaking, then to betray my
conscience by silence: My opinion is, that we shall do well totally to omit our
resolution out of this Bill, and rely only upon a confirmation of the Laws.

The Objections made against this Opinion are two.
THe first is, that we shall thereby recede from our own resolution.

The second, that by a bare confirmation of the Old Laws without the inserting
of our resolution, by way of explanation, we shall be but in the same case as
before.

For the first, that though we desire only a confirmation without adding of
our resolution, we do not thereby recede from our resolution, I reason thus:

Our resolution was drawn out of the sense of those Laws, which are now desired
to be confirmed, so that no question can be made by any of us that have thus
declared our selves, but that our resolution is virtually contained in those
Laws, if that be so, how can our acceptance of a confirmation of these Laws be
a departure from our resolution.

Nay, rather we think the contrary is true, he that doubts, that by
confirmation of these Laws our resolution is not hereby confirmed, doubts
whether we have justly deduced our resolutions out of those Laws, and so calls
our resolution into question.

This Argument alone is in my opinion a full answer to that first Objection,
that in desiring of a bare confirmation of those Laws we depart from our
resolutions. This Argument alone is in my opinion a full answer to that first
Objection: that in desiring of a bare confirmation of these Laws, we depart
from our resolution.

The second Objection is: that if we have nothing but a confirmation, we are in
no better case then we were before those late violations of the Law.

This I deny, and do confidently affirm, that although we have no more then a
confirmation of those Laws which are recited in the Bill that is now before us,
we shall depart hence in far better case then we came, and that in diverse
respects.

First, some of the Laws recited in this Bill, and desired to be confirmed are
not printed Laws, and are known to few Professors of the Law, and much less to
others, and yet they are Laws of as great consequence for the liberty of the
Subject, if not of greater then any that are printed, as namely 25. E. 3. No.
1. That loanes against the will of the lender are against reason and the
freedom of the Realm, 36. E. 3. No. 9. By which imprisonments by special
commandment without due Process are forbidden. These two are not printed.

The excellent Law de tollagio non Concedendo in print has in a public Court
been by a great Counselor said to be but a Charter, and no Law.

The Satute 1. Rich. 3. against benevolences is by some opinions in print an
absolute Law, if we can get all these goods Laws besides those 6. other, which
are expositions of Magna Charta in the point of the freedom, and our Persons to
be confirmed and put in one Law to the easy view of all men, is not our Case
far better then when we came hither?

Secondly, will not the occasion of the making of this Law of confirmation so
notoriously known be transmitted to all posterity, certainly it will never be
forgotten, that the occasion thereof was the imprisonment of those worthy
Gentlemen for not lending, and the resolution in the King's Bench in denying to
bayl them, and is not the occasion of the making of a Law a good rule to
expound it. If so, then by giving a confirmation upon this occasion we have
bettered our Case very much.

Thirdly, have not the Judges in the King's Bench in open Parliament upon our
complaint disclaimed to have given any Judgment in the point? which generally
before by the Parliament was otherwise conceived, for now they say, it was but
an Award and no Judgment, Will such a Notorious Act upon so important an
occasion in so public a place be quickly forgotten? Nay, will not the memory
of it for ever remain upon Records, is not our Case then much better then when
we came hither.

Fourthly, will not the resolution of this House, and all our Arguments and
reasons against imprisonment without a Cause expressed (which no doubt by the
course we have taken will be transferred to posterity) be a great means to stay
any Judge hereafter for declaring any Judgment to the contrary, especially if
there be likelihood of a Parliament, is not our Case in this very much amended?

Lastly, have we not received Propositions from the Lords, wherein (amongst
other things) they declared, that they are not out of love with our
proceedings, is not this a great strenghtning to it? but after so long debate
amongst them about it, they cannot take any just exception to it; and does not
this also much amend our Case?

From all these reasons, I conclude that the second Objection, that by a
confirmation we are in no better case then when we came together, is also a
weak Objection.

Now for reasons to move us to proceed in this course of accepting a
confirmation. First we have his Majesty's gracious promise to yield to a
confirmation of the old Laws, from which we may rest most assured he will not
depart, If we tender him with all our Proposition to be enacted, we have cause
to doubt that we shall loose both the one and the other.

Secondly, we are no less assured of the Lords joining with us, for in their
Propositions sent to us they have delivered themselves to that purpose: This is
then a secure way of getting somewhat of great advantage to us, as we have
great hopes, and in a manner assurance on this side: So on the other side we
have great doubts and fears, that by offering our resolution to be enacted, we
shall loose all.

For first we have had already experience of the Lords, that they are not very
foreward to join with us in a Declaration of our Proposition to be Law, If they
stumble at a Declaration, much more will they in yielding to make Law in the
same point.

And have we not much more cause to doubt that his Majesty will not yield unto
it, seeing it touches him so near, Is it not the notice of his pleasure that
has wrought thus with the Lords?

If we should clog our Bill with our Proposition, and it should be rejected by
the Lords, or by the King, is not our resolution much weakened by it? And are we
not then in far worse case then before we made it? Our resolution for the
rejecting of our Proposition, will tend to a Justification of all that has
been done against us in this great point of our Liberty.

Let us then like wisemen conform our desire to our hopes, and guide our hopes
by probabilities, other desires and other hopes are but vain. This is my poor
opinion in this weighty business.

Secretary COKES Message, 1. May 1628.
Mr. Speaker,
I Have a very short message to deliver from his Majesty, that shows both his
Royal care to be rightly understood of this House, and no less care to
understand us in the best part, and to show clearly it shall not be his fault
if this be not a happy Parliament: His Majesty has commanded me to desire this
House clearly to let him know, whether they will rest upon his Royal word and
promise, made at several times, and especially by my Lord Keepers Speech made
in his own presence, which if they do, he does assure you that it shall be
royally and really performed.

After speaking of himself, and the nature of his place under his Majesty, he
proceeded in these words.
GIve me leave freely to tell you that I know by experience, that by the place
I hold under his Majesty, if I will discharge the duty of my place and the Oath
I have taken to his Majesty, I must commit, and neither express the cause to
the Jailer, nor to the Judges, nor to any Counselor in England, but to the
King himself, yet do not think I go without ground of reason, or take this
power committed to me to be unlimmitted, Yea rather it is to me a charge,
burden, and danger, for if I by this power shall commit the poorest porter, if
I do it not upon a just cause, if it may appear, the burden will fall upon me
heavier then the Law can inflict, for I shall loose my credit with his Majesty
and my place. And I beseech you consider whether those that have been in the
same place have not committed freely, and not any doubt made of it, nor any
complaint made by the Subject.

Veneris, 2. May 1628.
A Report was this day made from the grand Committee, for grievances concerning
the cause of Nicholas Clegat Citizen, and Vintner of London, imprisoned by the
Lord Major and Aldermen of the said City, for refusing to lend a certain sum
of money assessed upon him by the Company of Vintners of London, whereof he is
free, toward the proportion of money imposed upon the Company, by an Act of
Common Counsel of the said City, in pursuance of a contract of Land with his
Majesty. By which report it appeared that the said grand Committee had
unanimously agreed that the said City might make Acts of Council, so as they
were consonant to Law and reason, and for regulating and deciphering of trade
agreeable to reason and the Law of the Realm, and might leavy money of the
Citizens by Act of Common Counsel for building, or repairing of their Walls,
Gates, or making or cleansing of Sewers, or other like causes tending to the
general and public good, and welfare of the City, or toward Triumphs, or
other like occasions tending to the Honor of the City in general, but could
not by such Act of Common Counsel tax, or leavy money toward the purchasing of
Lands, or other like occasions foreign to the government of the City.
Whereupon it is resolved by the House of Commons super totam materiam that the
said Commitment of the said Nicholas Clegat was unlawful, and that a Petition
should go from the House to his Majesty for the enlargement of the said
Nicholas Clegat his commitment by the Lord Major and Aldermen, being since
strengthened by special command.

Henry TOMPSON one of the Shrieffs, and Robert HENISVVORTH Alderman of the
City of YORK their submission for their indirect choosing of Sr. Thomas SAVIL
Knight.
I Henry Tompson one of the Shrieffs of the City of York, do hereby
acknowledge to have offended the Lord Major and all the Cominalty of the City,
by the undue pronouncing and return of Sr. Thomas Savil Knight, to be one of
the Citizens to serve in this Parliament for the said City, whereas I ought
of right to have pronounced, and returned in his place Mr. Thomas Royle,
Alderman of the said City, I am heartily sorry for my said offense and
misdemeanour, and crave pardon of my Lord Major and all the Cominalty, and in
particular of the said Alderman Hoyl for the same.

I Robert Henisworth Alderman of the City of York, do acknowledge that I have
offended the Lord Major and all the Cominalty of of the said City, by my undue
preparing and practicing the election of Sr. Thomas Savill Knight, to be chosen
one of the Citizens for the said City of York to serve in this present
Parliament, I am heartily sorry for my said offense, and do desire my Lord Major
and all the said Cominalty to pardon me for the same.

Propositions drawn for the defense of this Kingdom, and the annoyance of the
enemies of the same by Sea.
THat every Shire in England shall be enjoined on the charge of the Country,
to set forth one Ship well maned and victualled for 7. Months, and to be of
the burden of 500, 300, or 140. Tuns at the least, according to the ability of
the Shire in the opinion of the State.

That every Port, or Sea-Town according to their abillity, be enjoined, to do
the like. London may well furnish 10. Bristol 3. and the rest according to
their abillity. And such of the Sea-Towns as are not of abillity to set forth
Ships of the burden aforesaid, to furnish out Pinnaces of 60, or 80, Tuns, for
Light-Horsmen, or Intelligencers. Those Ships will amount to 80. Sail and
above, and these to be divided into 4. Squadrons: adjoining unto every Squadron
one of the Kings Ships for their Admiral.

The first Squadron to lie off, and on the Western Islands, and as high as the
Canaries for Brasile men, the Caracks and the Plate-Fleet, and all other
trading that way.

The second Squadron to lie of the Southern Cape, and so low as the Groyn, for
all such shipping as shall go in or out of Spain, or Portugal; and if occasion
require, to join with the former Squadron.

The third Squadron to lie of between the Groyn and the mouth of the Sleve or
Sylly, to stop such shipping as trade into those Coasts.

The fourth Squadron to keep the Narrow Seas, to awe the Dunkerkers, to take
all the French trade, and so Northward, and this Squadron to be still relieved
with fresh Ships, as the other shall grow foul, or come to any misfortune; so
as this Squadron may continually keep the Seas most part of the year.

That no Master of these Ships be owner, or have any part in her that he goes
in Master of, for they will be unwilling to bring their Ship in fight or
danger, and use many tricks and devices, especially if there be an ignorant
Captain. Therefore it is expedient likewise, that every Shire should nominate a
Captain for the Ship that they furnish out, for the avoiding of ignorant and
insufficient Captains.

That in London, Portsmouth, or elsewhere, where the State shall think fit,
there be Storehouses appointed for the receipt of such Prizes as shall be
taken by any of the 4. Squadrons.

That every County or Sea-Town, that furnishes the said shipping* may nominate
and have a Master of their own free election, that may have power in the behalf
of the Counties and Sea-Towns, as the other Officers that shall be appointed
for the King, for the opening of decks of the Prizes, receiving the goods into
the said Storehouses, and for the divideing and disposing them according.

That what Prizes any of the 4. Squadrons shall take, be brought into one of
the Port-Towns where those Storehouses are appointed, and the benefit of all
Prizes, what Squadron soever of the 4. sends them in, be divided (the Kings
part being deducted) to the several Counties and Sea-Towns of the Kingdom,
according to the burden of their shipping, and not particularly to such
Counties, or Sea-Towns, unto which the Squadron of Ships belongs that shall
send in the said Prizes.

That it shall not be Lawful for any in the said Ships, to break, take, or
open the deck of any Prizes they take, but nail them down fast, until they be
brought in at one of the Port-Towns aforesaid, and the Officers for the King
with the Commissioners for the Counties, to take and open them.

That after the Kings part is sequestered, with such allowance over and above as
shall be proportionable for the Kings ships, being Admirals, the rest to be
distributed as aforesaid to the use and benefit of all the Counties and
Sea-Towns in general, and not in particular to such Counties and Sea-Towns unto
which any of the said 4. Squadrons belongs that sends in the said Prizes,
the Pillage above deck only excepted, which do belong unto the Officers,
Saylors, and Soldiers of the Squadron that took the said Prize.

That for the speedy and present execution hereof, every County or Sea-Town
that is not furnished with shipping accordingly shall hire until they can
build, which to be limmited to perform within a certain and convenient time.

The charge that will fall on the Subjects yearly, will amount for the first
year 200000. l. which (God prospering them) within the year they will
re-inburse, and by the benefit of the Prizes afterward they will have stock
sufficient, with increase for new victualling forth the Ships the first year,
and so from time to time. The Kingdom will hereby increase their shipping,
breed, and make good store of good Seamen, and we shall hereby be Masters of
the Sea, so as our Merchants shall travel safely, and we shall much prejudice
the French and Spanish Nation, or any others that are Enemies, and not in
League.

Judge ANDERSON.
DIverse Persons fueront Committes a several temps a several Persons sur
pleasur sans bon cause, part de queux estiant amesnes en en banck le Roy, and
part en le Comune banck fueront accordant a le ley de la terre mise a large
and discharge de le inprisonment pur que aschunt grands fueront offendus and
procure un comandment a les Judges que ils ne ferra issent apres Ceo nient
meins les Judges ne surcease mes per advise enter eux ils fesoient certanie
Articles le tenor de queux ensue and deliver eux al seignieures Chauncellor
and Treasurer and eux subscribe one touts lour manies, les Articles sont coe
ensuont.

WE her Majesty's Justices of both Benches and Barons of the Exchequer, desire
your Lordships that by some good means some order may be taken, that her
Highness Subjects may not be committed, or detained in Prison by commandment of
any Noble Man, or Councellor against the Laws of the Realm, either help us to
have access to her Majesty to the end to become suitors to her for the same,
for diverse have been imprisoned for suing ordinary Actions and Statutes at the
Common Law, until they have been constrained to leave the same against their
wills, and put the same to order, albeit Judgment and Execution have been had
therein to their great losses and griefs, for the aid of which Persons, her
Majesty's Writs have sundry times been directed to diverse Persons, having the
custody of such Persons unlawfully imprisoned, upon which Writs no good, or
Lawful cause of imprisonment has been returned or certified, whereupon
according to the Laws they have been again committed to Prison in secret
places, and not to any common ordinary Prison, or Lawful Officer, as Shrieff,
or other lawfully authorized to have, or keep a Goal, so that upon Lawful
complaint made for their delivery, the Queens Courts cannot learn to whom to
direct her Majesty's Writs, and by this means Justice cannot be done, and
moreover, diverse Officers and Sergeants of London have been many times
committed to Prison for Lawful executing of her Majesty's Writ, sued forth of
her Majesty's Courts at West-minster, and thereby her Majesty's Subjects and
Officers are so terrified that they dare not sue, or execute her Majesty's
Laws, her Writs and Commandments. Diverse others have been sent for by
Pursevants, and brought to London from their dwellings by unlawful
imprisonment, have been constrained not only to withdraw their Lawful Suits,
but have also been compelled to pay the Pursevants for bringing such Persons
great sums of money. All which upon complaint the Judges are bound by Office
and Oath to relieve and help, by and according to her Majesty's Laws. And when
it pleases your Lordships to will diverse of us to set down in what cases a
Prisoner sent to custody by her Majesty, her Council, some one, or other, or
two, are to be detained in Prison, and not to be delivered by her Majesty's
Court or Judges, we thinck, that if any Person be committed by her Majesty's
Command from her Person, or by order from the Council board, or if any one, or
two of her Council commit one for high Treason, such Persons so in the cases
before committed may not be delivered by any of her Courts without due Trial
had: Nevertheless the Judges may Award the Queens Writ to bring the bodies of
such Persons before them, and if upon return thereof, the causes of their
commitment be certified to the Judges as it ought to be, then the Judges in the
cases before ought not to deliver him, but to remaund the Prisoner to the place
from whence he came.

Which cannot conveniently be done, unless notice of the cause in general, or
else special be known to the Keeper, or Jailer that shall have the custody of
such Prisoner. All the Judges and Barons did subscribe their names to these
Articles. Termino Pascha. 34. Eliz. and sent one to the Lord Chancellor, and
another to the Lord Treasurer, after which time there did follow more quietness
then before in the cause before mentioned.

The KINGS Message the 2. May, 1628. by Secretary COKE.
HIs Majesty has commanded me to make known to this House, that howsoever we
proceed with the business we have in hand, which he will not doubt, but to be
according to our constant professions, and so as he may have cause to give us
thanks, yet his resolution is, that both his royal care and his hearty and true
affection toward all his loving Subjects, shall appear to the whole Kingdom
and to all the World, that he will govern us according to the Laws and Customs
of the Realm, that he will maintain us in the Liberties of our Persons and
propriety of our goods, so as we may enjoy as much happiness as our Forefathers
in their best times, and that he will rectify what has been, or may be amiss
amongst us: so that there may be hereafter no just cause to complain, wherein
as his Majesty will rank himself amongst the best of our Kings, and show he
has no intention to invade, or impeach our Lawful Liberties or Rights, so he
will have us to match our selves with the best Subjects, by not incroaching
upon that Sovereignty and Prerogative which God has put into his hands for our
good, and by containing our selves within the bounds and Laws of our
Forefathers without streining, or enlarging them by new Explanations,
Interpretations, Expositions, or Additions in any sort, which he clearly
tells us he will not give way unto. That the weight of the affairs of
Christendom do press him more and more, and the time is now grown to that point
of maturity, that it cannot endure long debate, or delay, so as this Session of
Parliament must continue no longer then Tuesday come sevenight at the furthest,
within which time his Majesty for his part will be ready to perform what he
has promised to us, and if we be not as forward to do that is fit for us, it
shall be our own faults.

Lastly, upon the assurance of our good dispatch and correspondency, his
Majesty declares that his Royal intention is to have another Session at
Michalmass next, for the perfecting of such things as cannot now be done.

Mr. MASONS speech, 2. May 1628.
I Am of opinion with the Gentleman that spoke first, that in our proceedings
in the matter now in debate, we should have use of the Title of the Statute,
called circumspecte agatis, for it concerns the Liberty of our Persons, without
which we do not enjoy our lives.

The Question is:
WHether in this Bill for the explanation of Magna Charta, and the rest of the
Satutes, we shall provide that the cause of the commitment must be expressed
upon the commitment, or upon the Return of the Habeas Corpus.

Before I speak to the question it self, I shall propose some observations in
my conceit, necessarily conduceing to the debate of the Matter.

1. That we ought to take care, and to provide for posterity as our
Predecessors have done for us, and that this provident care, cannot be
expounded to be any distrust of the performance of his Majesty's gracious
Declaration, this Act providing for perpetuity, to which his Highness promise,
unless it were by Act of Parliament, cannot extend. 2. That we having long
debated and solemnly resolved our Rights and Privileges by virtue of these
Statutes, and if now we shall reduce those Declarations and those resolutions
into an Act, we must ever hereafter expect to be confined within the bounds of
that Act being made at our Suit, and to be the limmits of the Prerogative in in
that respect, and it being an Act of explanation, which shall receive no
further explanation then it self contains. 3. That by this Act we must provide
a remedy against the Persons which detain us in Prison, for as to the Commander
there can be no certain.
Concerning the Question it self.
IT has been solemnly and clearly resolved by the House, that the commitment
of a Freeman without expressing the cause at the time of the commitment, is
against the Law: If by this Act of explanation we shall provide only that the
cause ought to be expressed upon the return of the Habeas Corpus, then out of
the words of the Statute, it will necessarily be inferred, that before the
return of the Habeas Corpus the cause need not to be expressed, because the
Statute has appointed the time of the expression of the cause, And it will be
construed, that if the makers of the Statutes had intended that the cause
should have been soener shown, they would have provided for it by the Act, and
then the Act which we term an Act of explanation, will be an Act of the
abridging of Magna Charta, and the rest of the Statutes: Or if this Act do not
make the commitment without expressing the cause to be Lawful, yet it will
clearly amount to a tolleration of the commitment, without expressing the cause
until the Habeas Corpus, or to a general, or perpetual dispensation beginning
with, and continuing as long as the Law it self. And in my understanding the
words in this intended Law, that no Freeman can be committed without cause, can
no ways advantage us, or satisfy this Objection, for till the return of the
Habeas Corpus, he that commits is Judge of the cause, or at least has a
license by this Law till that time to conceal the cause, and the Jailer is not
subject to any action for the detaining of the Prisoner upon such command, for
if the Prisoner demanded the cause of his inprisonment of the Jailer, It will
be a safe answer for him to say that he detains the Prisoner by Warrant, and
that it belongs not unto him to desire those which commit the Prisoner to show
the cause until he returns the Habeas Corpus, and if the Prisoner be a Suitor
to know the cause from those that committed him, it will be a sufficient answer
for them to say they will express the cause at the Return of the Habeas Corpus.
In this cause there will be a wrong, because the commitment is without cause
expressed, and one that suffers that wrong, viz. the party imprisoned, and yet
no such wrong doer, but may excuse if not justify himself by this Law.

In making of Laws we must consider the inconveniences which may ensue, and
provide for the prevention of them lex caveat de futuris. I have taken into my
thoughts some inconveniences which I shall expose to your considerations, not
imagining that they can happen in the time of our gracious Sovereign, but in an
Act of Parliament, we must provide for the prevention of all inconveniences in
future times.

1. If a man be in danger to be imprisoned in the beginning of a long vacation
for refusing to pay some small sum of money, and knows that by this Act he
can have no enlargement till the Return of the Habeas Corpus in the Term, and
that the charge of his being in Prison, and of his enlargement by Habeas Corpus
will amount to more then the sum, he will depart with money to prevent his
imprisonment, or to redeem himself thence, because he cannot say any man does
him wrong, until the Return of the Habeas Corpus, and the Law resolves a man
will pay a Fine rather then be imprisoned, for the Judgment which is given
when one is fined, is Ideo Capiatur, and the highest execution for dept is a
Capias ad satisfaciendum, the Law presuming any man will depart with his money
to gain his Liberty, and if the Prisoner procure an Habeas Corpus, and be
brought into the King's Bench by virtue of it, yet the cause need not to be then
expressed: The provision of this Law, being that if no cause be then expressed
he shall be bayled, and no cause being shown upon the Return of the Habeas
Corpus, yet may be pretended that at the time of his Commitment, there were
strong presumptions of some great offense, But upon examination they are
cleared, or it may be said that the offense was of that nature, that the time
of his imprisonment before the Return was a sufficient punishment, and we may
be frequently imprisoned in this manner, and never understand the cause, and
have often such punishment, and have no means to justify our selves, and for
all these proceedings this Law will be the justification, or color. 2. If by
this Act there be a Tolleration of imprisonment without showing cause until
the Return of the Habeas Corpus, yet it is possible to accompany that
imprisonment, with such circumstances of close restraint, and others which I
forbear to express, as may make imprisonment for that short time as great a
punishment, as a perpetual imprisonment in our ordinary manner. 3. The party
may be imprisoned a long time before he shall come to be delivered by this Law,
The place of his imprisonment may be in the furthest parts of this Kingdom, The
Judges always makes the Return of the Habeas Corpus answerable to the distance
of the Prison from Westminster, The Jailer may neglect the Return of the first
Process, and then the party must procure an alias, and the Jailer may be then
in some other employment for the King, and excuse the not returning of the body
upon that Process, and this may make the imprisonment for a year, and in the
end no cause being returned, the party may be discharged, but in the mean time
he shall have imprisonment, he shall never know the cause, he shall have no
remedy for it, nor be able to question any for injustice, which have not a
justification, or excuse by this Law. 4. The party may be imprisoned during his
life, and yet there shall be no cause ever shown. I will instance in the
manner, a man may be committed to the furthest part of the Kingdom Westward, he
obtains an Habeas Corpus, Before the Jailer receives the Habeas Corpus or
before the returns it, the Prisoner by Warrant is removed from that Prison to
another, it may be the furthest Northern part of the Realm, the first Jailer
returns the special Matter which will be sufficient to free himself, and in
like manner the Prisoner may be translated from one Prison to another, and his
whole life shall be a preregrination, or wayfairing from one Goal to another,
and he shall never know the cause nor be able to complain of any who cannot
defend their actions by this Bill. 5. If the Prisoner be brought into the Court
by Habeas Corpus and no cause expressed, and thereupon he be enlarged, he may
be partly committed again, and then his enlargement shall only make way for
his commitment, and this may continue during his life, and he shall never know
the cause, and this not remedied, but rather permitted by this Act.
And there are also considerable in this Matter, the expense of the party in
Prison: His Fees to the Jailer, his costs in obtaining and prosecuting an
Habeas Corpus, and his charges in removing himself, attended with such as have
the charge of his conduct, and that the Prisoner must sustain all without
satisfaction, or knowing the cause.

The only reason given by those of the other opinion. That it is requisite,
the King and Council should have power to command the detainer of a man in
Prison for sometime without expressing the cause, is because it is supposed
that the manifestation of the cause at first may prevent the discovery of a
Treason. The reason is answered by the remedy proposed, by this Act it being
proposed that it shall be provided by this Bill, that upon our commitment we
may have instantly recourse to the Chancery for an Habeas Corpus retornable in
that Court, which is always open, that partly upon the receipt thereof, the
Writ must be returned and the cause thereupon expressed. If then this remedy be
really the cause of commitment, must partly appear, which contradicts the
former reason of State.

And in my own opinion we ought not only to take care that the Subject should
be delivered out of Prison, but to prevent his imprisonment, The Statute of
Magna Charta, and the rest of the Acts providing that no man should be
imprisoned, but by the Law of the Land. And although the King, or Council, as
it has been objected, by might may commit us without cause, notwithstanding
any Laws we can make. Yet I am sure without such an Act of Parliament, such
commitment can have no Legal color, and I would be loath we should make a Law
to endanger our selves, for which reasons I conceive that there being so many
ways to evade from this Act, we shall be in worse case by it then without it,
providing no remedy to prevent our imprisonment without expressing the cause to
be Lawful, and administers excuses for continuing us in Prison as I have
before declared, and thus for providing for one particular out of reason of
State, which possibly may fall out in an age or two, we shall spring a leak
which may sinck all our Liberties, and open a gap through which Magna Charta
and the rest of the Statutes may issue out and vanish. I therefore conclude
that in my poor understanding (which I submit to better Judgments,) I had
rather depend upon our former resolutions, and the Kings gracious Declarations
then to pass an Act in such manner as has been proposed.

The Speakers speech to his MAJESTY in the Bancketting-House, 5. May 1628.
Most gracious and dread Sovereign,
YOur Loyal and dutiful Subjects, the Commons assembled in Parliament (by
several Messages from your Majesty, especially by that your must Royal
Declaration delivered by the Lord Keeper before both Houses) have to their
exceeding joy and comfort received many ample expressions of your Princely care
and tender affection toward them, with a gracious promise and assurance, that
your Majesty will govern according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and
so maintain all your Subjects in the just freedom of their Persons, and safety
of their Estates, that all their Rights and Liberties may be by them enjoyed,
with as much freedom and security in your time, as in any age heretofore by
their Ancestors, under the best of your Royal Progenitors.

For this so great, and gracious a favor, enlarged by a continual intimation
of your Majesty's confidence in the proceeding of this House, they do by me
their Speaker make a full return of most humble thanks to your Majesty, withal
dutiful acknowledgement of your grace and goodness herein extended to them.

And whereas in one of these Messages delivered from your Majesty, there was an
expression of your desire to know whether this House would rest upon your Royal
word and promise, assuring them, if they would it should be Royally, and really
performed.

As they again present their humble thanks for this seconding, and strengthening
of your former Royal expressions, so in all humbleness they assure your Majesty
that their greatest confidence is, and ever must be in your gracious favor and
goodness, without which (they well know) nothing they can frame, or desire,
will be of safety and value to them, and therefore are all humble Suitors to
your Majesty, that your Royal heart would graciously accept and believe the
truth of theirs, which they humbly present (and full of truth and confidence in
your Royal word and promise) as ever House of Commons reposed in any of their
best Kings.

True it is, they cannot but remember the public trust, for which they are
accomptable to present and future times, and their desires are, that your
Majesty's goodness in fruit and memory, be the blessing and joy of posterity.

They find also that of late there has been public violation of your Laws
and the Subjects Liberties by some of your Majesty's Ministers, and thence
conceive, that no less then a public remedy will raise the dejected hearts of
your loving Subjects to a cheerful supply of your Majesty, or make them
receive content in the proceeding of this House. From these considerations they
must humbly beg your Majesty's leave to lay hold of that gracious offer of
yours, which gave them assurance, that if they thought fit to secure themselves
in their Rights and Liberties, by way of Bill or otherwise, so it might be
provided for, with due respect to his Honor and public good, he would
graciously be pleased to give way unto it.

Far from their intentions it is to incroach upon your Sovereignty, or
Prerogative, nor have they the least thought of straining, or enlarging the
former Laws in any sort, by any new interpretations or additions.

The bounds of their desire extend no further, then to some necessary
explanation of what is truly comprehended within the just sense and meaning of
those Laws, with some moderate provision for execution and performance, as in
times past upon like occasions have been used.

The way how to accomplish these their humble desires, is now in serious
consideration with them; wherein they humbly assure your Majesty, they will
neither loose time nor seek any thing of you Majesty, but what they hope may be
fit for dutiful and Loyal Subjects to ask, and for a gracious and a good King
to grant.

The KINGS Answer to the House of Commons delivered by the Lord Keeper, 5. May
1628.
MR. Speaker, and the Gentlemen of the House of Commons: his Majesty has
commanded me to tell you, that he expected an answer by your actions, and not
delay by discourse.

You acknowledge his trust and confidence in your proceedings, but his Majesty
sees not how ye requite him by your confidence of his word and actions, for
what need explanations if you doubt not performance of the true meaning? for
the explanation will hazard an incroachment upon his Prerogative, and it may
well be said, what needs a new Law upon any old, if you repose confidence in
the Declaration his Majesty lately made by me to both Houses, and your selves
acknowledge that the greatest trust and confidence must be in his Majesty's
grace and goodness, without which nothing that you can frame will be of safety,
or available to you; Yet to show clearly the sincerity of his Majesty's
intentions, he is content that a Bill be drawn for confirmation of Magna
Charta, and the 6. other Statutes insisted on for the Subjects Liberties, if
you shall choose that to be the best way, so that it be without Additions,
Paraphrase, or Explanations.

Thus if you please, you may be secured from your needless fears, and this
Parliament may have a happy (wished for) end: whereby the contrary, if you seek
to tie the King by new, and indeed impossible bonds, you must be accomptable to
God and your Country for the ill success of this meeting.

His Majesty having given his Royal word, that you shall have no cause to
complain hereafter; less then which has been enough to reconcile great
Princes, and therefore ought much more to prevail between King and Subject.

Lastly, I am commanded to tell you, that his Majesty's pleasure is, that
without further replies of Messages, or other unnecessary delays, you do what
you mean to do speedily, remembering the last Message which his Majesty sent you
by Secretary Coke for point of time, his Majesty always intending to perform
his promise to his people.

The Lord COKES speech at the conference in the Painted Chamber, presenting the
Petition of Right, 8. May 1628.
I Pray your Lordships to excuse us, for we have been till one of the Clock
about the great business, and (blessed be God) we have dispatched it in some
measure, and before this time we were not able to attend your Lordships, but I
hope that this will prove to be a great blessing to us. My Lords, I am
commanded from the House of Commons to express their singular care and
affection they have of concurrence with your Lordships in these urging affairs
and proceedings of this Parliament: both for the good of the Commonwealth, and
principally for his Majesty's, And this I may say in this particular, if we
have hundreds of tongues, we were not able to express this desire which we have
of that concurrence with your Lordships: but I will leave it without any
further expression.

My Lords, what necessity there is, both in respect of your selves and your
posterities in the good success of this business, we have acquainted your
Lordships with the reasons and the arguments, and also that we have had some
conference about it, we have received from your Lordships 5. Propositions, and
it behooves us to give your Lordships some reasons why you have not heard from
us before now, for in the mean time as we were consulting of this weighty
business, we have received diverse messages from our great Sovereign the King,
and they consisted upon 5. parts. First was, that his Majesty would maintain
all his Subjects in their just freedom, both of their Persons and Estates.
Secondly, That he will govern according to his Laws and Statutes. Thirdly, That
we shall find much confidence in his Royal word, (I pray observe that.)
Fourthly, That we shall enjoy all our Rights and Liberties, with as much
Freedom and Liberty as ever any Subjects have before times. Fifthly, That
whether we shall think it fit, either by way of Bill or otherwise, to go on in
this great business, his Majesty would be pleased to give way to it.

These gracious messages do so work upon our affections that we have taken them
into consideration. My Lords, when we had these messages, I deal plainly, for
so I am commanded by the House of Commons: We did consider in that way we may
go for our most secure way, (nay yours,) we do think that the safest way was to
go a Parliament course, for we have Maxim in the House of Commons, and written
on the walls of our House, that old ways are the safest and surest ways. And
at last we fell upon that which we did think (if that your Lordships shall
consent with us) as the most ancient way of all, and that is my Lords viam
faustam both to his Majesty and your Lordships, and to our selves, for my
Lords, this is the greatest bond that any Subject can have in Parliament verbum
Regis, that is an high point of Honor, but this shall be done by the Lords and
Commons and assented to by the King in Parliament. This is the greatest
obligation of all, and this is for the Kings Honor and our safety. And
therefore my Lords we have drawn a form of a Petition, desiring your Lordships
to concur with us herein, for we come with an unanimous consent of all the
House of Commons, for there is great reason your Lordships should do so because
that your Lordships be involved in the same condition commune periculum, and so
I have done with the first part. And now I shall be bold to read that which we
have so agreed on, I shall desire your Lordships that I may read it.

The Petition of Right, to the KINGS most Excellent Majesty,
HUmbly shows unto our Sovereign Lord the King, the Lords spiritual and
temporal, and Commons in this present Parliament assembled. That whereas it is
declared and enacted by a Statute made in the time of the Reign of King Edw. 1.
commonly called Statutum de tallagio non concedendo. That no Tollage, or aid
should be laid, or levied by the King, or his Heirs in this Realm, without the
good will and assent of the Archbishop, Earls, Barons, Knights, Burgesses and
others, the freemen of the Cominalty of this Realm.

And by Authority of Parliament holden in the 13. year of the Reign of King Ed.
3. it is declared and enacted that form thence-forth no Persons should be
compelled to make any loan to the King against his will, because such loans
were against reason, and the Franchises of the Land, And by other Laws of this
Realm, it is provided that none should be charged by any charge or imposition,
called a Benevolence nor by such like charge, by which the Statutes before
mentioned, and other the good Laws and Statutes of this Realm, your Subjects
have inherited this freedom that they should not be compelled to Contribute to
any Tax, Tollage, Aid, or other like charge, not set by common consent in
Parliament: Yet nevertheless of late diverse Commissions directed to sundry
Commissioners in several Countries with instructions have issued, by means
whereof your people have been in diverse parts assembled, and required to lend
certain sums of money to your Majesty. And many of them upon refusal so to
do, have had an unlawful Oath administered unto them not warrantable by the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm, and have been constrained to become bound to
make appearance, and give attendance before your privy Council and in other
places. And others of them have been therefore imprisoned, confined, and sundry
other ways molested and disquieted, and diverse other charges have been laid
and levied upon your people in several Countries (alleging some superior by
Lord Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, Commissioners for Musters, Justices of
Peace, and others by command, or direction against the Laws and free Customs
of the Realm from your Majesty, or your privy Council.

And where also by the Statute called the great Charter of the Liberties of
England. It is declared and enacted, That no Freeman may be taken nor
imprisoned, nor be disseised of his Freehold, nor Liberties, nor his free
Customs, nor be outlawed, or exiled, or in any manner destroyed, but by the
Lawful judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land.

And in the 28. year of the Reign of King Edw. 3. it was declared and enacted
by Authority of Parliament: that no man of what Estate, or condition he be,
shall put out of his Land, or Tenement, nor taken, nor imprisoned, nor
disinherited, nor put to death without being brought to answer by due process
of Law.

Nevertheless, against the Tenor of the said Statutes, and other the good
Laws, and Statutes of your Realm to that end provided, diverse of your Subjects
have of late been imprisoned without any cause showed, and when for their
deliverance they were brought before your Justices, by your Majesty's Writ of
Habeas Corpus, there to undergo and receive as the Court should order, and the
Keepers commanded to certefie the causes of their detainer, no cause was
certified, but that they were detained by your Majesty's special command,
signified by the Lords of your privy Council, and yet were returned back to
several Prisons, without being charged with any thing, the which they might
make answer to, and to Law.

And whereas of late great Companies of Soldiers and Mariners have been
dispersed into diverse Countries of the Realm, and the Inhabitants against their
wills have been compelled to receive them into their houses, and there to
suffer them to sojourn against the Laws and Customs of this Realm, and to the
great grievance and vexation of the people. And whereas also by Authority of
Parliament in the 25. E. 3. it is declared and enacted, that no man shall be
forejudged of Life, or Limb against the form of the great Charter, and the Law
of the Land, and by the said great Charter and other, the Laws and Statutes of
this your Realm no man ought to be adjudged to death, but by the Laws
established in this your Realm. Nevertheless of late times diverse Commissions
under your Majesty's great Seal have issued forth, by which certain Persons
have been assigned and appointed Commissioners with power and Authority to
proceed within the Land, according to the Justice of Martial Law against such
Soldiers, or Mariners, or other dissolute Persons joining with them as should
commit any Murder, Robbery, Felony, Mutiny, or other outrage, or misdemeanour
whatsoever, and by such summary course and order as is agreeable to Martial
Law, and is used in Armies in time of War to proceed to the trial and
condemnation of such offenders, and them to cause to be executed and put to
death according to the Law Martial. By pretext whereof some of your Majesty's
Subjects have been by some of the said Commissioners put to death, when and
where, if by the Laws and Statutes of the Land they had deserved death, by the
same Laws and Statutes also they might, and by none other ought to have been
adjudged and executed. And also sundry grievous offenders by color thereof
claiming and exemption, have escaped the punishment due to them by the Laws and
Statutes of this your Realm: By reason whereof diverse of your Officers and
Ministers of Justice have unjustly refused, or forbore to proceed against such
offenders according to the same Laws and Statutes, upon pretense that the said
offenders were punishable only by Martial Law, and by Authority of such
Commissions as aforesaid, which Commissions and all other of like nature are
directly contrary to the said Laws and Statutes of this your Realm.

They do therefore humbly pray your most Excellent Majesty, that no man
hereafter be compelled to make, or yield any Gift, Loan, Benevolence, Tax, or
such like charge, without common consent by Act of Parliament. And that none be
called to make answer, or to take such an Oath, or to give attendance, or to be
confined, or otherwise molested, or disquieted concerning the same, or for
refusal thereof. And that no Freeman may man such manner as is before mentioned
be imprisoned, or detained. And that your Majesty would be pleased to remove
the said Soldiers and Mariners, and that your people may not be so burdened
in time to come: And that the aforesaid Commissions for proceeding by Martial
Law may be revoked and annulled, and that hereafter no Commissions of like
nature may issue forth to any Person, or Persons whatsoever, to be executed as
aforesaid, least by color of them any your Majesty's Subjects be destroyed and
put to death, contrary to the Laws and Franchises of the Land.

All which they most humbly pray of your most Excellent Majesty as their
Rights, and Liberties according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm. And
that your Majesty would also vouchsafe to declare, that the Awards, doings and
proceedings to the prejudice of your people in any the premises, shall not be
drawn hereafter into consequence, or example. And that your Majesty would be
pleased graciously for the further comfort and safety of your people to declare
your Royal will and pleasure, that in the things aforesaid, all your Officers
and Ministers shall serve you according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm,
as they tender the Honor of your Majesty, and the prosperity of this Kingdom.

Sr. BENJAMIN RUDDIERDS Speech.
Mr. Pym
I Did not think to have spoken again to this Bill, because I was willing to
believe that the forwardness of this Committee would have prevented me, but now
I hold my self bound to speak, and to speak in earnest. In the first year of
the King, and the second convention I first moved for the increase and
enlarging of poor Ministers liings, I showed how necessary it was that it had
been neglected, this was also commended to the House by his Majesty, there
were as (now) many accusations on foot against scandalous Ministers, I was
bold to tell the House that there were scandalous livings, which were much the
cause of the other livings of 5. Marks, of 5. l. a year, that men of worth and
of parts would not be musled up to such pittances, that there were some places
in England which were scarce in Christendom, where God was little better known
then amongst the Indians. I exampled it in the utmost skirts of the North,
where the prayers of the common people are more like Spells and Charms then
devotions, the same blindeness and ignorance is in diverse parts of Wales, which
many of that Country does both know and lament.

I declared also, that to plant good Ministers was the strongest and surest
means to establish true Religion, that it would prevail more against Papistry,
then the making of new Laws, or executing of old, that it would counterwork
Court, Conivence, and Lukewarm accommodation, that though the calling of
Ministers be never so glorious within, the outward poverty will bring contempt
upon them, especially amongst those, who measure men by the ounce, and weigh
them by the pound, which indeed is the greatest part of men.

Mr. Pym, I cannot but testify how being in Germany I was exceedingly
scandalized to see the poor stipendarie Ministers of the Reformed Churches
there despised and neglected, by reason of their poverty, being otherwise very
grave and learned men. I am afraid this is a part of the burden of Germany,
which ought to be a warning to us.

I have heard many Objections and difficulties, even to impossibilities against
this Bill, to him that is unwilling to go, there is even a Bear, or Lion in the
way. First let us make our selves willing, then will the way be easy and safe
enough.

I have observed that we are always very eager and fierce against Papistry,
against scandalous Ministers, and against things which are not so much in our
power. I should be glad to see that we did delight as well in rewarding as in
punishing, and in undertaking matters within our own reach, as this is
absolutely within our power: Our own duties are next us, other men's further of.
I do not speak this, that I do mislike the destroying, or pulling down of that
which is ill, but then, let us be as earnest to plant and build up that which
is good in the room of it; for why should we be desolate? The best and the
greatest way to dispell darkness and the deeds thereof is to let in light, we
say that day breaks, but no man can ever hear the noise of it, God comes in the
still voice, let us quickly mend our Candlesticks, and we cannot want lights.

I am afraid this backwardness of ours will give the adversary occasion to say,
that we choose our Religion, because it is the cheaper of the two, that we would
willingly serve God with somewhat that cost us naught. Believe it Mr. Pym, he
that thinks to save any thing by his Religion but his Soul, will be a terrible
looser in the end, we sow so sparingly, and that is the reason we reap so
sparingly, and have no more fruit. Me thinks whosoever hates Papistry, should
by the same rule hate covetousness, for that is Idolatry too, I never liked hot
professions and cold actions, such a heat is rather the heat of a distemper and
disease then of life and saving health.

For scandalous Ministers, there is no man shall be more foreward to have them
sincerely punnished then I will be, when Salt has lost its savor, fit it is
to be cast on the unsavory place the dunghill. But Sr. let us deal with them as
God has dealt with us: God before he made man, he made the World, a handsome
place for him to dwell in, so let us provide them convenient livings, and then
punish them on Gods name, but till then, scandalous livings cannot but have
scandalous Ministers. It shall ever be a rule to me, that where the Church and
Commonwealth are both of one Religion, it is comely and decent that the
outward splendour of the Church should hold a proportion, and participate with
the prosperity of the temporal State, for why should we dwell in houses of
Cedar and suffer God to dwell in Tin? It was a Glorious and Religious work of
King James, and I speak it to his unspeakable Honor, and to the praise of that
Nation, who (though that Country be not so rich as ours, yet are they Richer
in their affections to Religion) within the space of one year, he caused to be
planted Churches through all Scotland, the Highlands and the Boarders, worth
30. l. a year a piece, with a house and some gleab belonging to them, which 30.
l. a year considering the cheapness of the Country, and the modest fashion of
Ministers living there, is worth double as much as any where within a 100.
miles of London, the printed Act and Commission whereby it may be executed, I
have here in my hand delivered unto me by a Noble Gentleman of that Nation, and
a worthy Member of this House Sir Francis Stuart.

To conclude, although Christianity and Religion be established generally
throughout this Kingdom, yet until it be planted more particularly I shall
scarce think this a Christian Commonwealth, seeing it has been moved and
stirred in Parliament, it will lie heavy upon Parliaments, until it be
effected. Let us do something for God here of our own, and no doubt God will
bless our proceedings in this place the better for ever hereafter. And for my
own part I will never give over soliciting this cause as long as Parliaments
and I shall live together.

CHARLES REX. To our trusty and well-beloved the Lords Spiritual and Temporal
of the Higher House of PARLIAMENT.
WE being desirous of nothing more then the advancement of the good peace, and
prosperity of our people, have given leave to free debates of highest points of
our Prerogative Royal, which in times of our Predecessors, Kings and Queens of
this Realm were ever restrained as Matters they would not have disputed, and in
other things we have been willing fairly to condescend to the desires of our
loving Subjects as might fully satisfy all moderate minds, and free them from
all just fears and jealousies, with those Messages which heretofore we have
sent to the Commons House, will well demonstrate to the World, and yet we find
it still insisted on, that in no case whatsoever, should it never so nearly
concern Matters of State and government, we nor our privy Council have power to
commit any man without the cause showed, whereas it often happens that should
the cause be showed the service thereby would be destroyed and defeated, and
the cause alleged must be such as may be determined by our Judges of our
Courts at Westminster in a Legal and Ordinary way of Justice, whereas the cause
may be such whereof the Judges have no capacity of Judicature, or rules of Law
to direct, or guide their Judgments in cases of that transcendent nature,
which happening so often, the very intermitting of the constant rules of
government (for many ages within this Kingdom practiced) would soon dissolve
the very frame and foundation of our Monarchy; wherefore as to our Commons we
have made propositions which might equally preserve the just Liberty of the
Subject. So my Lords, we have thought good to let you know that without
overthrow of our Sovereignty we cannot suffer this power to be impeached. But
notwithstanding to clear our conscience, and just intentions this we publish,
that it is not in our hearts, nor ever will we extend our royal power lent unto
us from God beyond the just rule of moderation in any thing which shall be
contrary to our Laws and Customs, where the safety of our people shall be our
only aim. And we do hereby declare our royal pleasure, and resolution to be
(which God willing we shall ever constantly continue and maintain) that neither
we nor our privy Council, shall or will at any time hereafter commit, or
command to Prison, or otherwise restrain the Person of any for not lending
money unto us, or for any other cause, which in our conscience does not concern
the State, the public good and safety of us and of our people, we will not be
drawn to pretend any cause which in our Judgments is not, or is not expressed;
which base thought we hope no man will imagine can fall into our royal breast,
that in all cases of this nature which shall hereafter happen, we shall upon
the humble Petition of the party, or access of our Judges to us readily and
really express the cause of their commitment, or restraint, so soon as with
convenience and safety the same is fit to be disclosed and expressed. That in
all causes Criminal of ordinary Jurisdiction our Judges shall proceed to the
deliverance and baylment of the Prisoner, according to the known and ordinary
rules of the Laws of this Land, and according to the Statutes of Magna Charta,
and those other six Statutes insisted upon, which we do take knowledge stand in
force, and which we intend not to abrogate against the true intention thereof.

Thus we have thought fit to signify unto you, the rather for shortning any
long delays of this question, the season of the year so far advance, and our
great occasions of State not lending us many days for long continuance of this
Session of Parliament.

Given under our Signet at our Palace of Westminster, the 12. of May, in the
fourth year of our Reign.
The KINGS Message by the Lord Keeper, 21. May 1628.
HIs Majesty commanded me to signify to your Lordships, that the business
concerning your part presented by the Commons to the Lords concerning the
Liberty of the Subject, wholly depends upon your Lordships, and because his
affairs are pressing, and that he is very suddenly to take a Journey to
Portsmouth. As also because his Majesty would have the business put in a good
forwardness before his going thither, his Majesty desires your Lordships this
day to proceed to a resolution, whether you will join with the House of Commons
in the Petition or not.

Mr. MASONS speech, concerning the Addition propounded by the Lords, to be
added to the Petition of Right.
IN our Petition of Right to the Kings Majesty we mentioned the Laws and
Statutes, by which it appeared, that no Tax, Loan, or the like ought to be
levied by the King, but by common assent in Parliament. That no Freeman ought
to be imprisoned but by the Law of the Land. That no Freeman ought to be
compelled to suffer Soldiers in his house. In the Petition we have expressed
the breach of these Laws, and desire that we may not suffer the like, all which
we pray as our Rights and Liberties. The Lords have proposed an addition to
this Petition in these words. (We humbly present this Petition to your
Majesty, not only with a care of our own Liberties, but with a due regard to
leave intyre that Sovereign power wherewith your Majesty is entrusted for the
protection, safety* and happiness of your people) and whether we shall consent
unto this addition is the Subject of this days discourse. And because my Lord
Keeper at the last conference declared their Lordships had taken the words of
the Petition apart. The word (leave) in a Petition is of the same nature, as
(saving) in a grant, or Act of Parliament, when a Man grants but part of a
thing, he saves the rest, when he Petitions to be restored but to part, he
leaves the rest, then in the end of our Petition the word (leave) will imply
that something is to be left of that, or at least with a Reverence to what we
desire.

The word (entyre) is very considerable, a Conqueror is bound by no Law but
has power dare leges, his will is a Law, and although William the Conqueror
at first to make his way to the Crown of England the more easy, and the
possession of it the more sure, claiming it by little, but afterward when
there were no powerful pretenders to the Crown. The little of Conquest to
introduce that absolute power of a Conqueror was claimed, and that Statute of
Magna Charta, and other Statutes mentioned in our Petition do principally
limmit that power I hope it is as Lawful for me to cite a Jesuit as it is for
Dr. Manwaring to falsify him, Suares, in his first book de legibus, cap. 17.
delivered his opinion in these words amplitudo and restrictio potestatis Regum
circa ea quae per se mala vel injusta non sunt, pendet ex arbitrio hominum and
ex ambigua convencione vel pacto inter Reges and Regnum. And the further
expresses his opinion that the King of Spain was so absolute a Monarch, that
he might Lawfully impose tribute without consent of his people, until about
200. years since, when it was concluded between him and his people, that
without consent of his people by proxies he should not impose any Tribute. And
Suares opinion is, that by that agreement the Kings of Spain are bound to
impose no Tribute without consent.

And this agreement that Author calls a restraining of that Sovereign power,
the Statutes then mentioned in our Petition restraining that absolute power of
a Conqueror, if we recite those Statutes, and say we have the Sovereign power
entire, we do not take away that restraint which is the virtue and strength of
those Statutes, and set at Liberty the claim of the Sovereign power of a
Conqueror, which is to be limited and restrained by no Laws, this may be the
danger of the word ( entyre.)

The next words delivered by the Lords as observable is the particle ( that)
because it was said that all Sovereign power is not mentioned to be left, but
only ( that) with which the King is trusted for our protection, safety, and
happiness: But I conceive this to be an exception of all Sovereign power, for
all Sovereign power in a King is for the protection, safety, and happiness of
his people: If all Sovereign power be excepted, you may easily Judge the
consequence, all Loans and Taxes being imposed by color of that Sovereign
power.

The next word is ( trusted) which is very ambiguous, whether it be meant
trusted by God only as a Conqueror, or by the people also as King, which are
to Govern also according to Laws ex pacto. In this point I will not presume to
adventure further, only I like it not by reason of the doubtful exposition it
admits. I have likewise considered the proposition it self, and therein I have
fallen upon the dilemma that this addition shall be construed, either to refer
unto the Petition or not: If it does refer unto the Petition, it is merely
useless and unnecessary, and unbefitting the Judgment of this grave and great
Assembly to add to a Petition of this weight; If it has reference: unto it,
then it destroys not only the virtue and strength of our Petition of Right,
but our rights themselves, for the addition being referred to each part of the
Petition, will necessarily receive this construction.

That none ought to be compelled to make any gift, loan, or such like charge
without common consent, or Act of Parliament, unless it be by the Sovereign
power with which the King is trusted for the protection, safety, and happiness
of his people.

That none ought to be compelled to sojourn, or billet Soldiers, unless by the
same Sovereign power, and so of the rest of the Rights contained in the
Petition. And then the most favorable construction will be that the King has
an ordinary Prerogative, and by that he cannot impose Taxes or Imprison. That
is, he cannot impose Taxes at his will to employ them as he pleases, and that
he has an extraordinary and transcendent Sovereign power for the protection
and happiness of his people, and for such purpose, he may impose Taxes, or
billet Soldiers as he pleases, and we may assure our selves that hereafter
all Loans, Taxes, and billeting of Soldiers will be said to be for the
protection, safety, and happiness of the people. Certainly hereafter it will be
conceived that an House of Parliament would not have made an unnecessary
addition to this Petition of Right, and therefore it will be resolved that the
addition has relation to the Petition, which will have such operation as I
have formerly declared, and I the rather fear it, because the late Loan and
Billeting have been declared to have been by Sovereign power for the good of
our selves, and if it be doubtful whether this proposition has reverence to
the Petition or not, I know not who shall Judge whether Loans, or Imprisonments
hereafter be by that Sovereign power or not.

A Parliament which is made a body of several wits, and may be dissolved by one
Commission cannot be certain to decide this question. We cannot resolve that,
that the Judges shall determine the words of the Kings Letter read in this
House, expressing the cause of Commitment, may be such, that the Judges have
not capacity of Judicature, no rules of Law to direct and guide their
Judgments in cases of that transcendent nature, the Judges then and the
Judgments are easily conjectured. It has been confessed by the Kings Council,
that the Statute of Magna Charta binds the King, and his Sovereign power
cannot be divided from himself. If then the Statute of Magna Charta binds the
King, it binds his Sovereign power, if to the Petition these words be added,
the exposition then must be, that the Statute of Magna Charta binds the Kings
Sovereign power. Saving the Kings Sovereign power, I shall endeavor to give
some answer to the reasons given by the Lords.

The first is, that it is the intention of both Houses to maintain the just
Liberty of the Subject, and not to diminish the just power of the King, and
therefore the expression of that intention in this Petition cannot prejudice
us; which I answer,

First that our intention was, and is as we then professed, and no man can
assign any particular in which we have done to the contrary. Neither have we
any way transgressed in that kind in this Petition, and if we make this
addition to the Petition, it would give some intimution, that we have given
cause or color of offense therein which we deny, and which if any man conceive
so, that he would assign the particular, that we may give an answer thereunto.

By our Petition we only desire our particular Rights and Liberties to be
confirmed to us, and therefore it is not proper for us in it to mention
Sovereign power in general, being altogether impertinent to the matter in the
Petition.

There is a great difference between the words of the addition, and the words
proposed therein, for reason, viz. between just power which may be conceived to
be limmitted by Laws, and Sovereign power, which is supposed to be transcendent
and boundless.

The second reason delivered by their Lordships was that the King is Sovereign.
That as he is Sovereign he has power, and that that Sovereign power is to
left, for my part I would leave it, so as not to mention it, but if it should
be expressed to be left in this Petition as it is proposed, it must admit
something to be left in the King of what we pray, or at least admit some
Sovereign power in his Majesty in these Privileges, which we claim to be our
Right which would frustrate our Petition and destroy our Right, as I have
formerly showed.

The third reason given from this addition was that in the statute Articuli
super Chartas, there is a saving of the right and seigniory of the Crown.

To which I give these answers: That Magna Charta was confirmed above 30 times,
and a general saving was in none of these Acts of confirmation but in this
only, and I see no cause we should follow one ill, and not 30 good Presidents,
and the rather because that saving produced ill effects that are well known.

That saving was by Acts of Parliament: The conclusion of which Act, is, that
in all those Cases the King did will, and all those that were at the making of
that Ordinance, did intend that the Right and Seigniory of the Crown should be
saved: By which it appears that the saving was not in the Petition of the
Commons, but added by the King, for in the Petition the Kings will is no
expressed.

In that Act the King did grant and depart with to his people diverse Rights
belonging to his prerogative, as in the first Chapter he granted that the
people might choose three Men which might have power to hear and determine
complaints made against those that offended in any point of Magna Charta,
though they were the Kings officers, and to fine and ransom them, and in the
8.12. and 19. Chapter of that Statute the King departed with other
prerogatives, and therefore there might be some reason of the adding of that
Sovereign by the Kings Council: But in this Petition we desire nothing of the
Kings Prerogative, but pray the enjoying of our propper and undoubted Rights
and Privileges, and therefore there is no cause to add any words which may
imply a saving of that which concerns not the matter in the Petition.

The 4. reason given by their Lordships was, that by the mouth of our Speaker,
we have this Parliament declared that it was far from our intention to incroach
upon his Majesty's Prerogative, and that therefore it could not prejudice us to
mention the same resolution in an addition to this Petition.

To which I answer that that declaration was a general answer to a Message from
his Majesty to us, by which his Majesty expressed that he would not have his
Prerogative streitned by any new explanation of Magna Charta, or the rest of
the Statutes, and therefore that expression of our Speakers was then propper to
make it have reference to this Petition; there being nothing therein contained,
but particular Rights of the Subject, and nothing at all concerning his
Majesty's Prerogative.

Secondly that answer was to give his Majectie satisfaction of all our
proceedings in general, and no man can assign any particular in which we have
broken it, and this Petition justifies it self, that in it we have not offended
against the protestation, and I know no reason but that this declaration should
be added to all our Laws we shall agree on this Parliament, as well as to this
Petition.

The last reason given, was, that we have varied in our Petition from the words
of Magna Charta, and therefore it was well necessary that a saving should be
added to the Petition.

I answer that in the Statute 5. E. 3. 25. E. 3. 28. E. 3. and other Statutes,
with which Magna Charta is confirmed, the words of the Statute of explanation
differ from the words of Magna Charta it self, the words of some of the
Statutes of explanation being, that no man ought to be apprehended, unless by
indictment, or due process of Law, and the other statutes differing from the
words of Magna Charta in many other particulars, and yet there is no (saving)
in those Statutes, much less should there be any in a Petition of Right, these
are the answers I have conceived to the reasons of their Lordships, and the
exposition I apprehend must be made of the proposed words, being added to our
Petition. And therefore I conclude that in my opinion we may not consent to
this addition, which I submit to better Judgments.

The Reasons of the Commons House delivered by Mr. GLANUILE, why they cannot
admit of the Propositions tendered unto them by the Lords.
May it please your Lordships,
I Am commanded by the House of Commons to deliver unto your Lordships their
reasons, why they cannot admit of the Proposition tendered unto them by you:
but for an introduction into the business, please you to remember that a
Petition of Right was showed to your Lordships, wherein we desired you would
join with us, a Petition my Lords fitting for these times, grounded upon Law,
and seeking no more then the Subjects just Liberty.

The Petition consisted of 4. parts. The first touching Loan, Aids, and Taxes.
The second touching imprisonment of men's Persons. The third touching Billeting
of Soldiers. The fourth touching Commissions issued for Martial Law, and put
in execution upon several Persons. Groaning under the burden of these, we
desired remedy, and wish your Lordships would join with us, which you having
taken into consideration, we must confess, have dealt nobly and freely with us,
not to conclude any thing till you hear our just reasons, for which we thank
your Lordships, and hope your Lordships will value those reasons which we shall
now offer unto your Lordships.

The work of this day will make a happy issue, if your Lordships please to
relinquish this, as we formerly upon conference with your Lordships have done
some other things. For the Proposition my Lords we have debated it thoroughly in
our House, and I am commanded to deliver unto you the reasons why we cannot
insert this clause, Neither your Lordships, nor we desire to debate Liberty
beyond the due bounds, or to incroach upon the Kings Prerogative and lessen the
bounds thereof. The first reason I am to lay down, is, touching Sovereign
power, which I beseech you not to accept as my own, being but a weak Member of
that strong body, but as the reasons of the whole House upon great and grave
considerations.

First my Lords, the words Sovereign power has either reference, or no
reference to the Petition, if no reference then superfluous, if a reference
then dangerous and operative upon the Petition, and we think your Lordships
purposes is not to offer unto us any thing that may be vain, or to the
hinderance of any thing wherein you have already joined with us. The Petition
declares the Right of the Subject, which yet may be broken by the word
Sovereign power, and so the virtue of the Petition taken away. The end of the
Petition is not to enlarge the bounds of Law, but their Liberties being
infringed, to reduce them to their ancient bounds, and shall we by admitting of
these words Sovereign power, instead of cureing the wound, launch it and cut it
deeper? The next point is, the word ( trust) a word of large latitude, and deep
sense, we know that there is a trust in the Crown and King, but regulated by
Law, we acknowledge in penal Statutes the King may grant another power to
dispense with the Law, but Magna Charta inflicting no penalty leaves no trust,
but claims his own right, therefore the word ( trust) would confound this
distinction.

Our next reason is, we think it absolutely repugnant to any course of
Parliament to put (saving) to the Petition. In former times the course of
petitioning the King was this: The Lords and the Speaker either by words, or
writing preferred their Petition to the King, this then was called the Bill of
the Commons, which being received by the King, part he received and part he put
out, part he retified, for as it came from him it was drawn into a Law, But
this course in 2. H. 5. was found prejudicial to the Subject, and since in no
such cases they have petitioned by Petition of Right, as we now do, who come to
declare what we demand of the King: For if we should tell him what we should
not demand, we should then proceed not in a Parliamentary course. Now for that
which is alleged by your Lordships de articulis sup. Chartas, that my Lords
is not like this, that is (saving) upon particulars; But this Petition
consisting consisting on particulers, would be destroyed by a general saving,
The saving de articulis sup. Chartas are of three aids, for Ransomming the
Kings Person, for Knighting the Kings eldest Son, and once for Marrying the
Kings eldest Daughter: These by the form of the Petition, show that they came
not in upon the Kings answer, but upon the Petition. First then followed the
(savings) which under favor, we think are no reasons to make us accept of this
( saving) being not pertinent to the Petition.

These 23. Statutes 34. E. 1. were made to confirm Magna Charta, so that there
are in all 30. Acts to set Magna Charta in its purity, and if some subsequent
Statute have laid some blemish upon it, shall we now then make the subject in
worse case, by laying more weight upon it (God forbid.) In the next place your
Lordships reason thus, that this which you wish we would admit of, is no more
then what we formerly did profess, when we sent the King word, we had no
purpose at all to trench upon his prerogatives. It is true my Lords we did so,
but this was not annexed to any Petition, for in that manner we should never
have done it. And here I am commanded (with your favors) to deliver unto you
what a Learned Member of the House delivered unto our House touching this
point. The King (says he) and the Subject has two liberties. Two Manors,
joining one upon another; the King is informed the Subject has intruded upon
him, but upon trial it appears not to be so, were it fitting, think you that
the Subject should give security that he should not incroach or intrude on that
Manor of his because the King had been informed he did so? I think you will be
of another mind, wherefore I am commanded seeing we cannot admit of this
addition, to desire your Lordships to join with us in the Petition, which being
granted and the hearts of the King and people knit together, I doubt not but
his Majesty will be safe at home, and feared abroad.

Sir HENRY MARTINS Speech.
MY Lords; the work of this day wherein the House of Commons has employed the
Gentleman that spoke last, and my self was to reply to the answer, which it
has pleased the Lord Keeper to make to those reasons, which we had offered to
your Lordships consideration, in justification of our refusal, not to admit
into our Petition the addition commended by your Lordships, which reasons of
ours since they have not given such satisfaction as we desired, and well hoped,
as by the Lord Keepers answer appeared. It was thought fit for our better order
and method in replying, to divide the Lord Keepers answer into two parts, a
Leagall, and a Rational: The reply to the leagall your Lordships have heard,
my self comes entrusted to reply to the rational, which also consisted of two
branches, the first deduced from the whole context of the additional clause,
the second enforced out of some part.

In the first were these reasons, that the same deserved our acceptance. First
as satisfactory to the King, Secondly to your Lordships, Thirdly, agreeable to
what our selves had often protested, and professed expressly by the mouth of our
Speaker.

I must confess these motives were weighty and of great force, and therefore to
avoid misunderstanding, and misconceit, which otherwise might be taken against
the House of Commons upon refusal of the propounded addition, It is necessary
to State the question rightly, and to set down the true difference between your
Lordships and us: Now indeed there is no difference or question between your
Lordships and us, concerning this additional clause in the nature and quality
of a proposition: For so considered we say it is most true, and to be received
and embraced by us; In toto and qualibet part and qualibet syllaba, yea and
were that the question we should add to this addition, and instead of (due
regard) say, we have had, have and ever will have a special and singular
regard: where to leave entire Sovereign power, were to intimate as if we had
first cropped it and then left it, but our regard was to acknowledge and confess
it sincerely and to maintain it constantly, even to the hazard of our goods and
lives if need be.

To which purpose your Lordships may be pleased to remember that strict oath
every Member of our House has taken this very session in these words I (A. B.)
do utterly testify and declare in my Conscience that the Kings highness is the
Supreme or Sovereign Governor of this Realm in all Causes etc. and to my
utmost power will assist and defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges
Preheminencies and Authorities granted or belonging to the Kings Highness or
united or annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm, etc.

So that your Lordships need not to borrow from our protestations any
exhortations to us, to entertain a writing in assistance of the Kings Sovereign
power, since we stand obliged by the most Sacred bond of a solemn Oath, to
assist and defend the same if cause or occasion so required; So that the only
question between your Lordships and us is, whether this clause should be added
to our Petition and received into it as part thereof? which to do your
Lordships reasons have not persuaded us, because so to admit it, were to
overthrow the fabric and substance of our Petition of Right and to annihilate
the Right pretended by us, and the Petition it felf in effect. For these words
being added to our Petition (viz) we humbly present this Petition etc. with due
regard to leave entire your Sovereign power etc. do include manifestly an
exception to our Petition, and an exception being of the nature of the thing
whereunto it is an exception, Exceptio est de regula, must of necessity destroy
the rule or Petition so far as to the Case excepted; Exceptio firmat regulam in
Casibus non exceptis, in Casibus exceptis distruit Regulam. Then this
construction follows upon our Petition thus enlarged, that after we have
Petitioned, That no Freeman should be compelled by imprisonment to lend or
contribute money to his Majesty without his assent in Parliament, nor receive
against his will Soldiers into his house, or undergo a commission of Martial
Law for life or Member in time of peace: We should add, except his Majesty be
pleased to require our moneys and imprison us for not lending, and send
Soldiers into our houses, and execute us by Martial Law in time of peace by
virtue of his Sovereign power.

Which construction as it follows necessarily upon this inlargment, so it
concludes against our Right in the premises, and utterly frustrateth all our
Petition, neither may it seem strange if this clause additionall (which of it
self in quallity of a proposition we confess) being added to our Petition
(which also is true) should overthrow the very frame and fabric of it, seeing
the Logicians take knowledge of such a Fallacy called by them, Fallacia a been
divisis ad male conjuncta. Horace the Poet gives an instance to this purpose
in a painter, who, when he had painted the head of a Man according to Art,
would then join to it the neck of a horse, and so mar the one and the other,
whereas each by it self might have been a piece of right good workmanship.

The second branch of my Lordkeepers rational part was enforced out of the
last words of this addition, by which his Lordship said, that they did not
leave entire all Sovereign power, but that wherewith his Majesty is trusted,
for the protection, safety, and happiness of the people, as if his Lordship
would infer that Sovereign power wherewith, etc. in this place, to be terminum
diminuentem ^ term of diminution or quallification, and in that consideration
might induce us to accept it, but under his Lordships correction we cannot so
interpret it. For first we are assured that there is no Sovereign power
wherewith his Majesty is trusted either by God or Man, but only that which is
for the protection, safety and happiness of his people, and therefore that
limitation can make no impression upon us, but we conceive it rather in this
place to have the force termini ada^gentis, to be a term of important advantage
against our Petition, a term of restriction, and that wheresoever his Majesty's
Sovereign power should be exercised upon us in all or any the particulars
mentioned in the Petition, we should without further inquiry submit thereunto
as assuming and taking it pro concesso it induced to our safety and happiness,
etc. Since therefore (as the Petition is now conceived) it carries the form
and face of a picture, which represents to the life the pressures and
grievances of the peoples, with the easy remedies. And therefore we hope that
his Majesty's casting upon it a gracious eye, will compassionate his poor
loyal Subjects, and afford a comfortable answer.

I do humbly pray your Lordships not to mar or blemish the grace and face of
this picture with this unnecessary addition, and unnecessary I prove it to be,
according to that Rule expressio ejus quod tacit inest nihil operatur. And
Sovereign power in Cases where it has place, and ought to be used, is always
necessarily understood, and though not expressed, yet supplied by reasonable
intendment, or by the opinion of all Learned men.

And therefore as it neither is, nor can be by us expressly included, especially
in this Petition, where the addition thereof would make such a confusion of the
whole sense and substance.

The Kings Sovereign power and Prerogative is always able to save it self, and
if it were not, we must without this addition save it to our utmost powers, if
we will save our Oath, and save our selves. The true state of the cause thus
standing between your Lordships and us, the House of Commons does not a little
marvel upon what grounds your Lordships are so earnest, to urge upon them this
addition to be inserted into their Petition, they nothing doubt, but that the
same proceeded out of a solicitude and fear which your Lordships have, least
otherwise the simple and absolute passage of this Petition might be construed
hereafter in prejudice of his Majesty's Sovereign power. And this your
Lordships solicitude and fear proceeds from your love, as the Poet says,
Res est solliciti plena Timoris Amor: But I humbly pray your Lordships to
examine with us the grounds of this your solicitude and fear, which grounds
needs must be laid either upon the words of the Petition, or the intention of
the Petitioners.

Upon the words there is no possibility to lay them, for therein is no mention
of the Sovereign power. And were the words doubtful as thus, we pray the like
things be not done hereafter, under pretext of your Majesty's Sovereign power,
yet in respect of the Protestations preceding concommitant and subsequent to
the Petition, such doubtful words ought reasonably to be interpreted only of
such Sovereign power as was not applyable to the cases wherein it was
exercised, and of such Sovereign power as should be justly practiced. But there
are no such doubtful words, and therefore it follows that your Lordships
fear and solicitude must be grounded upon the intention of the Petitioners.
Now your Lordships well know that the House of Commons is not ignorant, that in
a Session of Parliament, though it continue as many weeks, as this has done
days, yet there is nothing prius and posterius, but all things are held and
taken as done at one time, If so, what a strange collection was this, that at
the same time, the House of Commons should oblige themselves by a fearful
adjuration, to assist and defend all Privileges and Prerogatives belonging to
the King, and at the same time by a Petition (cautiously conveyed) endeavor,
or intend to divest and deprive the King of some Prerogatives belonging to his
Crown. If therefore such fear and solicitude can neither be grounded upon the
words of the Petition nor intention of the Petitioners, I humbly pray your
Lordships to lay them aside, as we do believe that the proposition of this
addition from your Lordships was not only excuseable, but commendable as
proceeding from your love, so now having heard our reasons your Lordships would
rest satisfied, that our refusal to admit them into our Petition proceeds
from the conscience of the integrity and uprightness of our own hearts, That we
in all this Petition have no such end to abate, or diminish the Kings just
Prerogative: And so much in reply to that rational part whereby my Lord Keeper
labored to persuade the entertainment of this addition.

This being done, it pleased the House of Commons to instruct and furnish me
with certain reasons, which I should use to your Lordships to procure your
absolute conjunction with us in presenting this Petition, which albeit I cannot
set forth according to their worth, and the instructions given me by the House,
yet I hope their own weight will so press down into your Lordships consciences
and judgments, that without further scruple you will cheerfully vouchsafe to
accompany this Petition with your right noble presence.

A Personis. The first argument wherewith I was commanded to move your
Lordships, was drawn from the consideration of the Persons which are
Petitioners: The House of Common, a House whose temper, mildness, and
moderation in this Parliament has been such, as we should be unthankful, and
injurious to Almighty God, if we should not acknowledge his good hand upon us,
upon our tongues, upon our hearts, procured (no doubt) by our late solemn and
public humiliation and prayers.

This moderation will the better appear, if in the first place we may be
remembered, in what passion and distemper many Members of this House arrived
thither, what bosoms, what pockets full of complaints, and lamentable
grievances the most part brought thither, and those every day renewed by
Letters and Packets from all parts and quarters. You know the old proverb ubi
dolor ibi digitus, ubi amor ibi oculus. It is hard to keep our fingers from
often handling the parts ill affected; but yet our moderation overcame our
passion, our discretion overcame our affection; This moderation also will the
better appear, if in the second place it be not forgotten, how our Ancestors
and Predecessors carried themselves in Parliaments, when upon lighter
provocations less could not serve their turns, but new severe Commissions to
hear, and determine offenses against their Liberties, public Ecclesiastical
curses, or excommunications against the Authors or Actors of such violations,
accusations, condemnations, executions, banishments. But what have we said all
this Parliament? we only look forward, not backward, we desire amendment
hereafter, no man's punishment for ought done heretofore: Nothing written by us
in blood; nay, not one word spoken against any man's Person in displeasure. The
conclusion of our Petition is, That we may be better entreated in time to come:
And does not this moderate Petition deserve your Lordships cheerful
conjunction ex congruo and condigno? If a Worm, being trodden upon, could speak,
a Worm would say, tread upon me no more I pray you, higher we rise, not lower
we cannot descend. And thus much we think in modesty may well be spoken in our
own commendation; thence to move your Lordships to vouchsafe us your noble
Company in this Petition without surcharging it with this addition.

A tempore. Our next argument is drawn a tempore from the unseasonableness of
the time. The wise man says, there is a time for all things under the Sun
tempus suum. And if in the wise man's Judgment a word spoken in its due time be
precious as Gold and Silver, then an unseasonable time detracts as much from
the thing, or word done, or spoken: We hold (under your favors) that the time
is not seasonable now for this addition. It is true, that of it self Sovereign
power is a thing always so sacred* that to handle it otherwise then tenderly,
is a kind of sacrilege, and to speak of it otherwise then reverently, is a
kind of blasphemy, but every vulgar capacity is not so affected, the most part
of men, nay almost all men judge and esteem, all things not according to their
own intrinsic virtue and quality, but according to their immediate effects,
and operations which the same things have upon them. Hence it is, that Religion
it self receives more, or less credit and approbation, as the Teachers and
Professors are worser, or better, Yea if God himself send a very wet Harvest,
or Seed-time, men are apt enough to censure Divine power. The Sovereign power
has not now for the present the ancient amiable aspect in respect of some late
sad influences, but by Gods grace it will soon recover.

To intermix with this Petition any mention of Sovereign power ( rebus sic
stantibus) when angry men say Sovereign power has been abused, and the most
moderate wish it had not been so used, we hold it not seasonable under your
Lordships correction.

A loco. Our next argument is drawn a loco, we think the place where your
Lordships would have this addition inserted, viz. in the Petition, no
convenient, or seasonable place; Your Lordships will easily believe that this
Petition will run through many hands, every man will be desirous to see, and to
read what their Knights, and their Burgesses have done in Parliament upon their
complaints, what they have brought home for their 5. Subsedies. If in perusing
of this Petition they fall upon the mention of Sovereign power, they presently
fall to arguing, and reasoning, and discanting what Sovereign power is, what is
the Latitude, whence the Original? and where the bounds? with many such curious
and captious questions, by which course Sovereign power is little advanced, or
advantaged: For I have ever been of opinion that it is then best with Sovereign
power, when it is had in tacit venerationem, not when it is profaned by
public hearings, or examinations.

Our last argument is drawn from our duty and Loyalty to his Majesty, in
consideration whereof we are fearful at this time to take this addition into
our Petition least we should do his Majesty herein some disservice. With your
Lordships, we make the great Council of the King and Kingdom: And though your
Lordships having the happiness to be near his Majesty, know other things
better, yet certainly the state and condition of the several parts, for which
we serve, their dispositions and inclinations, their apprehensions, their fears
and jealousies are best known unto us. And here I pray your Lordships to give
me leave to use the figure called Reticentia, that is, to insinuate, and
intimate more then I mean to speak. Our chief and principal end in this
Parliament is to make up all rents, or breaches between the King and his
Subjects, to draw them and knit them together from that distance whereof the
world abroad takes too much notice to work a perfect union and reconciliation,
how improperly and unapt at this time this addition would be in respect of this
end, we cannot but foresee, and therefore shun it, and do resolve that it is
neither agreeable to the Persons of such Counselors whom we are, nor
answerable to that love and duty which we owe to his Majesty to hazard an end
of such unspeakable consequence upon the admittance of this addition into our
Petition, whereof (as we have showed) the omission at this time can by no means
harm the Kings Prerogative, the expression may produce manifold inconveniences,
and therefore since the admittance of your Lordships addition into our Petition
is incoherent and incompatible with the body of the same, since there is no
necessary use of it, for the saving of the Kings rerogative, since the
moderation of our Petition deserves your Lordships cheerful conjunction with
us, since this addition is unseasonable for the time, and inconvenient in
respect of the place where your Lordships would have it inserted; and lastly
may prove a disservice to his Majesty.

I conclude with a most affectionate prayer to your Lordships to join with the
House of Commons in presenting this Petition unto his sacred Majesty as it is
without this addition.

The KINGS speech in the Higher House at the meeting of both Houses, 2. June
1628.
Gentlemen,
I Am come hither to perform my duty, and I think no man will think it long,
since I have not taken so many days in answering of the Petition as you have
spent weeks in framing it, and I am come hither to show you that as well in
formal things as in essential, I desire to give you as much content as in me
lies.

The Lord KEEPER in explanation of the same.
MY Lords, and you the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the House of
Commons, his Majesty has commanded me to say unto you, that he takes it in
good part, that in consideration how to settle your own Liberty, you have
generally professed in both Houses, that you have no intention for to lessen,
or diminish his Majesty's Prerogative, wherein as you have cleared your own
intentions, so his Majesty now comes to clear his, and to strike a firm league
with his people, which is ever decreed to be most constant and perpetual, when
the conditions are equal and known to be so: These cannot be in a more happy
estate, then when your Liberties shall be an ornament and strength to his
Majesty's Prerogative, and his Prerogative a defense to your Liberties. In this
his Majesty doubts not, but both you and he shall take a mutual comfort
hereafter, and for his part he is resolved to give an example in so using of
his power, as hereafter you shall have no cause to complain. This is the sum
of that which I am to say to you, Here read your own. Petition, and his
Majesty's gracious answer.

The KINGS answer to the Petition of Right, 2. June, by the Lord KEEPER.
THe King wills that Right be done, according to the Laws and Customs of the
Realm, and that the Statutes be put in due execution, that the Subject may have
no cause to complain of any wrong, or oppression contrary to their just Rights
and Liberties, to the preservation whereof, he holds himself in conscience as
well obliged, as of his Prerogative.

Sir JOHN ELLIOTS Speech 3. June.
Mr. Speaker,
WE sit here as the great Council of the King, and in that capacity, it is our
duty to take into consideration the State, and affairs of the Kingdom, and
where there is occasion to give them in a true representation by way of council
and advice, with what we conceive necessary or expedient for them.

In this consideration I confess many a sadd thought has affrighted me, and
that not only in respect of our dangers from abroad, which yet I know are
great, as they have been often in this place pressed and dilated to us, but in
respect of our disorders here at home we do enforce those dangers and by which
they are occasioned; For I believe I shall make clear unto you, that both at
first the cause of these dangers were disorders, and our disorders now are yet
our greatest dangers, and not so much the potency of our enemies, as the
weakness of our selves do threaten us, and that saying of the Father may be
assumed by us, Non tam potentia sua quam negligentia nostra. Our want of true
devotion to heaven, our insincerity and doubling in Religion, our want of
Councels, our precipitate actions, the sufficiency or unfaithfulness of our
Generals abroad, the corruptions of our Ministers at home, the impoverishing of
the Sovereign, the oppression and depression, the exhausting of our treasures,
waste of our provisions, Consumption of our Ships, destructon of Men, This
makes the advantage to our enemies, not the reputation of their Arms. And if in
these there be not reformation, we need no Foes abroad, time it self will ruin
us.

To show this more fully, as I believe you will all hold it necessary, that
there seem not an aspertion on the State, or imputation on the Government, as I
have known such mentions misinterpreted, which far it is from me to propose,
that have none but clear thoughts of the Excellency of his Majesty, nor can
have other ends but the advancement of his glory: I shall desire a little of
your patience extraordinarily to open the particulars, which I shall do with
what brevity I may, answerable to the importance of the cause and the necessity
now upon us, yet with such respect and observation to the time as I hope it
shall not be troublesome.

For the first then our insincerity and dubling in Religon, the greatest and
most dangerous disordor of all others, which has never been unpunished, and of
which we have so many strong examples of all States, and in all times to awe
us, What testimony does it want? will you have Authority of books? look on the
collection of the Committee for Religion, there is too clear an evidence; will
you have Recors? see then the Commission procured for composition with the
Papists in the North: Mark the proceedings thereupon: you will find them to
little less amounting then a tolleration in effect, thought upon some slight
payments and the easiness in them will likewise show the favor that's intended,
Will you have proofs of men, witness the hopes, witness the presumptions,
witness the reports of all the Papists generally, observe the dispositions of
Commanders, the trust of Officers, the confidence of secrecies of employments
in this Kingdom, in Ireland and elsewhere, they all will show it has too great
a certainty, and unto this add but the incontrolable evidence of that
all-powerfull hand which we have felt so sorely that gave it full assurance,
for as the Heavens oppose themselves to us for our impiety, so it is we that
first oppose the Heavens.

For the second, our want of Councels, that great disorder in State, with which
there cannot be stability, if effects may show their causes as they are, after
a perfect demonstration of them, our misfortunes, our disasters serve to prove
it, and the consequence they draw with them, If reason be allowed in this dark
age, the judgment of dependencies and foresight of contingencies in affairs
confirm it. For if we view our selves at home, are we in strength, are we in
reputation equal to our Ancestors? if we view our selves abroad, are our
Friends as many as our Enemies? Nay more, do our friends retain their safety
and possessions? do our Enemies enlarge themselves, and gain for them and us?
what Council to the loss of the Pallatinate, sacrificed we our honor and our
men sent thither, stopping those greater powers appointed for that service, by
which it might have been defencible, what Council gave direction to the late
action? whose wounds are yet a bleeding, I mean the expedition to Rhee, of
which there is yet so sadd a memory in all men, what design for us, or
advantage to our State could that import? you know the wisdom of our Ancestors,
the practice of their times, how they preserved their safeties we all know and
have as much cause to doubt as they had the greatness and ambition of that
Kingdom, which the Old world could not satisfy against this greatness and
ambition, we likewise know the proceedings of that Princess, that never to be
forgotten Excellency of Queen Elizabeth, whose name without admiration falls
not into mention with her Enemies, you know how she advanced her self, how she
advanced this Kingdom, how she advanced this Nation in glory and in state, how
she depressed her Enemies, how she upheld her Friends, how she enjoyed a full
security, and made them then our scorn, whom now are made our terror. Some of
the principals she built on, were these, and if I mistake let reason and our
Statesmen contradict me.

First to maintain (in what she might) a unity in France, that that Kingdom
being at peace within it self might be a Bulwark to keep back the power of
Spain by land.

Next to preserve an amity and league between the States and us, that so we
might come in aid of the low Countries, and by that means receive their Ships
and help by sea.

This treable-cord so working between France the States and us, might enable us
as occasion should require to give assistance unto others, and by this means
the experience of that time does tell us, that we were not only free from
those fears that now possess and trouble us, but then our Names were fearful
to our enemies. See now what correspondency or actions had with this, square it
by these rules, that it induce a necessary consequence of the division of
France between the Protestants and their King, of which there is too woeful and
lamentable experience. It has made an absolute breach between that State and
us, and so entertained us against France, France in preparation against us,
that we have nothing to promise our neighbors hardly for our selves. Nay but
observe the time, in which it was attempted, and you shall find it not only
varying from those principals, but directly contrary and opposite ex diametro
to those ends, and such as from the issue and success rather might be through a
conception of Spain, then begotten here with us.

Here there was an interruption made by Sr. HUMFRY MAY expressing a dislike,
but the House of Commons commanded him to go on: it thus follows:
Mr. Speaker,
I Am sorry for this interruption, but much more sorry if there has been
occasion, wherein as I shall submit my self wholly to your judgment to receive
what censure you should give me, if I have offended. So in the integrity of my
intentions and clearness of my thoughts, I must still retain this confidence,
that no greatness may deter me from the duties which I owe to the service of my
King and Country, but with a true English heart, that I shall discharge my
self as faithfully and as really, to the extent of my poor power, as any man's,
whose honors, or whose Offices most strictly have obliged him, you know the
dangers Denmark is in, how much they concerned us, what in respect of our
Alliance and the Country, what in the importance of the Sound, what an
advantage to our Enemies the gain thereof would be? what loss? what prejudice
to us by this division? we breaking upon France, France being enraged by us,
the Netherlands at amazement between both, neither could we intend to aid that
luckless King, whose loss is our disaster: Can those now that express their
troubles at the hearing of these things, and have been so often told us in this
place of their knowledge in the conjunctures and disjunctures of affairs, say,
they advised in this? Was this an Act of Council Mr. Speaker? I have more
charity then to think it, and unless they make a confession of themselves I
cannot believe it.

For the next, the insufficiency and unfaithfulness of our Generals, that great
disorders abroad, what shall I say, I wish there were not cause to mention it,
and but out of the apprehension of the dangers that is to come, if the like
chance hereafter be not prevented, I could willingly be silent. But my duty to
my Sovereign, and the service of this House, the safety and Honor of my
Country are above all respects: and what so nearly tends to the prejudice of
this may not be forborne.

At Calis then, in that first expedition we made, when we arrived and found a
Conquest ready, the Spanish ships I mean fit for the satisfaction of a Voyage,
and of which some of the chiefest then there themselves, have since assured me
the satisfaction would have been sufficient, either in point of Honor, or in
point of profit, why was it neglected? why was it not achieved, it being of
all hands granted, how sensible it was after, when with the destruction of some
men, and with the exposition of some others, who though their fortune since
have not been such, by chance came off: When I say with the loss of our
serviceable men, that unserviceable men were gained, and the whole Army landed,
why was there nothing done, why was there nothing attempted? if nothing were
intended, wherefore did they Land? if there were a service, why were they shipped
again?

Mr. Speaker, it satisfies me too much in this, when I think of their dry and
hungry march unto that drunken quarter, for so the Soldiers termed it, where
was the period of their Journey, that diverse of our men being left as a
sacrifice to the Enemy, that labor was at an end.

For the next undertaking at Reez I will not trouble you much, only this in
short, was not that whole action carried against the Judgment, and opinion of
the Officers those that were of Council? was not the first, was not the last,
was not all in the landing, in the intrenching, in the continuance there in the
assault, in the retreat? did any advice take place of such as were of Council.
If there should be made a particular inquisition thereof these things will be
manifest, and more I will not instance. Now the manifestation that was made for
the reason of these Arms, nor by them nor in what manner, nor on what grounds
it was published, nor what effects it has wrought, drawing as you know almost
the whole World in league against us, nor will I mention of the leaving of the
Wines, the leaving of the Salt which were in our possession, and of a value as
they said to answer much of our expense, nor that wonder which no Alexander or
Caesar ever did, the enriching of the Enemy by courtesies when the Soldiers
wanted help, nor the private intercourses and Parlies with the Fort which
continually were held, what they intended may be read in the success, and upon
due examination thereof they would not want their proofs.

For the last Voyage to Rochell, there needs no observations, it is so fresh in
memory, Nor will I make an inference or Corolory, and all your own knowledge
shall judge what truth, or what sufficiency they expressed. For the next, the
ignorance and corruption of our Ministers, where can you miss of instances? if
you survey the Court, if you survey the Country, if the Church, if the City
be examined, if you observe the Bar, if the Bench, if the Courts, if the
shipping, if the Land, if the Seas: All these will render you variety of
proofs, and in such measure and proportion as shows the greatness of our
sickness, that if it have not some speedy remedy, our case is most desperate.

Mr. Speaker, I fear I have been too long in these particulers that are past,
and am unwilling to offend you, therefore in the rest I shall be shorter, and
in that which concerns the impoverishing of the King, no other arguments will I
use, then such as all men grant.

The Exchequer you know is empty, the Reputation thereof gone, the ancient
Lands are sold, the Jewels pawned, the Plate engaged, the Debt still great,
almost all charges both ordinary and extraordinary born by Projects: What
poverty can be greater, what necessity so great, what perfect English heart is
not almost dissolved into sorrow for the truth, for the oppression of the
Subject? which as I remember is the next particular I proposed. It needs no
demonstration, the whole Kingdom is a proof, and for the exhausting of our
treasures that oppression speaks it, what waste of our provisions, what
consumption of our ships, what destruction of our men have been, witness that
Journey to Argiers.

Withness that with Mansfield. Witness that to Cales. Witness the next. Witness
that to Rees. Witness the last, I pray God we may never have more such
witnessess. Witness likewise the Pallatinate. Witness Denmark. Witness the
Turks. Witness the Dunkerkers. Witness all what losses we have sustained, how
we are impaired in Munition, in Ships in Men.
It has no contradiction we were never so much weakened, nor had less hope how
to be restored.

These Mr. Speaker are our dangers, these are they do threaten us, and those
are like that Troiane horse brought in cunningly to surprise us, in these do
lurk the strongest of our Enemies ready to issue on us, and if we do not now
the more speedily expel them, these are the sign, the invitation to others.

These will prepare their entrance that we shall have no means left of refuge
or defense, for if we have these Enemies at home, how can we strive with those
that are abroad? If we be free from these, no other can impeach us, our ancient
English virtue, that old Sparton valor cleared from these disorders being in
sincerity of Religion once made friends with Heaven, having maturity of
Councels, sufficency of Generals, Incorruption of Officers, opulency in the
King, Liberty in the People, repletion in Treasures, restitution of Provisions,
reparation of Ships, preservation of Men.

Our Ancient English virtue thus rectefied I say, will secure us, and unless
there be a speedy reformation in these: I know not what hopes or expectations
we may have.

These things Sir I shall desire to have taken into consideration, That as we
are the great Council of the Kingdom, and have the apprehension of these
dangers, we may truly represent them unto the King, wherein I conceive we are
bound by a treble Obligation of duty unto God, of duty to his Majesty, and of
duty to our Country.

And therefore I wish it may so stand with the wisdom and Judgment of the
House, that they may be drawn into the body of a Remonstrance, and therein all
humbly expressed with a prayer unto his Majesty for the safety of himself, and
for the safety of the Kingdom, and for the safety of Religion. That he will be
pleased to give us time to make perfect inquisition thereof, or to take them
into his own wisdom, and there give them such timely reformation as the
necessity of the cause, and his Justice does import.

And thus Sr. with a large affection and Loyalty to his Majesty, and with a
firm duty and service to my Country, I have suddenly, and it may be (with some
disorder) expressed the weak apprehension I have, wherein if I have erred I
humbly crave your Pardon, and so submit to the censure of the House.

A Report from the COMMITTEE for Trade, 4. June 1628.
IN all other parts of Christendom there is great care, with much cost to raise
Forts and walled Towns, only for defense in time of War, and great charge to
make Engines, and Weapons to offend the Enemy, of little or no use in time of
Peace.

Whereas in England the Rampires, the Bulwarks, and Ships, and those also for
offense of the Enemy, our best Weapons are Engines.

And this also in time of Peace best instruments of our Wealth, even as useful
as the Plough or Cart. But our shipping and our strength of Mariners within
these three years is much decayed in general. But the decay of Trade through
disturbance of the Merchant, by new Impositions and troubles, for want of a
certain and well established book of Rate and Bill of Tonnage and Poundage,
used heretofore to be given for guarding of the Seas.

By reason that the Seas are not guarded so, That our Coasts are infested, Our
Fishermen driven from their Trade, And all our Coasting smaller shipping so
disturbed, or taken, that in all parts of the Kingdom Seafaring men give over,
and the Seas are forsaken.

More particularly.
THat of our shipping of countenance of 100. Tuns or upwards, in the last three
years there have been decayed, cast away and taken by the Enemy, between Dover
and New Castle 248. great ships, and with them proportionable number of
Mariners, besides great and inestimable losses in less Vessels.

The causes whereof are diverse disorders in the late mannaging of Sea Affairs,
before the employment of Ships and Men in his Majesty's service.
FIrst, By pressing and taking up Merchants ships, laden and bound out upon
Voyages.

Secondly, By too frequent and general imbarques of shipping.

Thirdly, By taking out of ships unseasonably and and unreasonable numbers,
their best men, so forcing them ill Manned to Winter Voyages, etc.

Fourthly, By giving too little allowance of Wages, and 2. shill. per Tun for
Freight of ships so taken, being but half that which Merchants allow.

Fifthly, By faults of inferior Ministers, men, and ships discharged after
presses, or imbarques, are put to such charge that all decline not only the
service, but the Trade of fishing and Sea-fareing, Those that are really pressed
come far from the West, or the North to Chatham early in the year, and so with
few Clothes at the end of the Summer, nasty and weak, infect themselves and
others.

And in the employment.
FIrst, Are Commanders weak, young, ignorant Captains, etc.

Secondly, Are not provided of good Surgeons, and extraordinaries necessary
for sick men.

Thirdly, Both ships and men contrary to the wisdom of former times are set out
in Winter Voyages, long, and dark nights, and in our Northern Seas upon our
dangerous Coasts, which have consumed a World of our Mariners, and discouraged
others.

After the employment.
FIrst, If the Mariners come home sick, no Hospitals, or Guest-Houses (as in
other Countries) to relieve them.

Secondly, If after all their miseries they return well, they are forced to sue
for their due Wages till all they have is spent: Opportunity of new employment
is lost, and themselves so discouraged, or put out of heart, that they either
run away to the Enemy, or put themselves in foreign service, or betake
themselves to any thing rather then the Sea life.

And those whose ships have been taken up 36. Months, some 30. some 20. some
more, some less, still complain they are not paid the small freight of 2.
shill. per Tun, at first promised.

By this means they have neither Money nor will to repair their ships, and none
build new almost in any part, by reason of their discouragements, and those
that do build, take care to build them unserviceable to avoid pressing, or
taking up.

The Remedies proposed in general.
FIrst, That the State would be pleased to give all possible countenance and
comfort to all sorts of Merchants and Fishermen, both by better guarding of the
Seas, by settling of the Book of Rates and Customs and duties, and by orderly
regulating the many affairs according to the wisdom of former times employing
of skillful and experienced men, and more particulerly in allowing the old 5.
shill. per Tun, to all such as shall build new serviceable ships of 150. Tuns
or upwards, upon a Certificate made before the Judge of the Admiralty to be
duly paid by some Collectors of the Customs without further trouble.

Secondly, To increase the freight from 2. shill. to 3. shill. per Tun, and
Tonnage, to agree of the measure of Tonnage before the ships go into service,
that upon return speedy payment may be made by some settled and published
assignment.

Thirdly, That all arrearages due to owners of ships and Mariners that have
served, may be paid out of the subsedies, and that a certain course of payment
for the future may be established and published.

His Majesty's Message to the House of Commons by the SPEAKER, 6. June 1628.
WHereas his Majesty understanding that you did conceive his last Message to
restrain you in your just Privileges, These are to declare his intention that
he had no meaning of barring you from what has been your Right, but in the
manner to avoid all scandals on his Council and actions past, his Ministers
might not be, nor himself under their names taxed for their Councels, and that
no such particulers should be taken in hand as would ask a longer time of
consideration then what he has already prefixed, and still resolves to hold,
that so for this time Christendom might have notice of a sweet parting between
him and his people, which if it falls out his Majesty will not be long from
another meeting, when such grievances (if there be any) at their leisure and
convenience may be considered.

The KINGS speech, 7 June.
THe answer I have already given you was made with so good deliberation and
approved by the judgment of so many wise men, that I could not have imagined
but it should have given you full satisfaction. But to avoid all ambiguous
interpretations, and to show you that there is no doubleness in my meaning, I
am willing to please you in words as well as in substance. Read your Petition,
and you shall have an answer I am sure will please you.

Then the Petition of Right was read, and again the whole PARLIAMENT spoke.
MAy it please your most Excellent Majesty. The Lords spiritual and temporal,
and Commons in Parliament Assembled: taking into their considerations that the
good intelligence between your Majesty and your people does much depend upon
your Majesty's answer unto their Petition of Right, formerly presented with an
unanimous consent unto your Majesty. Do most humbly beseech your Majesty, that
you will be graciously pleased to give a satisfactory answer thereunto in full
Parliament.

Soit droit fait come est desire par le Petition.
Let right be done as is desired by the Petition.
The KING again.
THis I am sure is full, yet no more then I granted you in my first answer, for
the meaning of that, was to confirm all your Liberties, knowing according to
your own protestations, that you neither mean nor can hurt my Prerogative. And
I assure you, my Maxim is, that the peoples Liberties strengthen the Kings
Prerogative, and the Kings Prerogative is to defend the peoples Liberties.

You see now how ready I have shown my self to satisfy your demands so that I
have done my part; wherefore if this Parliament has not a happy conclusion,
the sin is yours, I am free of it.

The Motions of the Lower House to the Higher, 7. June 1628.
THat the new granted subsedies might be expended, especially upon three, or
four of the most necessary of those Propositions propounded by his Majesty.

That they thought the most necessary employments for the subsedies were, first
the repairing of our new impaired Navy Royal, and the decayed Sea munition.
Secondly, the re-edifying of the breaches made in our Forts and Haven Towns.
Thirdly, by a supply and speedy aid and assistance for Denmark.

And whether in these they have judged rightly, or not the eminent and
incroaching dangers of the present times might be a guide.

Also they made Declaration of the late Suits and Petitions of our Mariners,
having lately received from them a Bill of grievances against the Duke for
defect of payment, and that not of some few, but the whole Company. And that if
herein they had not sudden redress they must be forced to right themselves upon
him, as they shall find opportunity.

Herein the Commons did declare that they thought themselves bound in
Conscience (as helping the oppressed) and in policy in preventing all such
combustions to patronize and cherish them. Also they thought it expedient that
all such books as have been questioned in Parliament, and since tolerated
might after the dissolving thereof, by the virtue of the former Protection,
pass uncontrollable, and the Authors thereof without molestation.

In the interim, that this latter Proposition was debating upon just occasion
being offered.

Sr. THOMAS WENTVVORTH delivered himself thus:
RIght wise, Right worthy, how many instigations importune the sequel of my
words. 1. The equity of your proceedings. 2. The honnesty of my request, for I
behold all your intendments grounded upon discretion and goodness, and your
constitutions steered as well by charity as the extremity of Justice.

This order (I say) and method of your proceedings, together with the
opportunity offered of the subject in hand, have imboldned me to solicit for
an extention of the late granted Protections in general. The Lawfulness and
honnesty of the Proposition depends upon these particulers. 1. The present
troubles of the parties protected, having run themselves into further, and
almost irrecoverable hazard by presuming upon, and feeding themselves with the
hopes of a long continuing Parliament, let the second be this consequence. That
which is prejudicial to the most ought to administer matter of advantage to the
rest. Since then our interpellations and disturbations amongst our selves are
unpleasing to all most all, if any benefit may be collected, let it fall upon
these, for I think the breach of our Sessions can befriend none but such, nor
such neither, but by means of this grant before hand. And because it is
profitable that his Majesty may cause a remeeting the next Michalmass, let
thither also reach there prescribed time for Liberty, and that till then there
protections shall remain in as full virtue and Authority as if the Parliament
were actually sitting.

This Speech at the first bred some distaste, but afterward seriously weighing
the premises, they easily, and at last generally condiscended, and so it is
this day preferred to the Higher House.

The KINGS Message to the Lower House, by Sr. HUMFREY MAY 10. of June 1628.
HIs Majesty is well pleased that your return of Right and his answer, be not
only recorded in both Houses of Parliament, but also in all the Courts of
Westminster, And that his pleasure is it be put in print for his Honor and the
content, and satisfaction of his people, and that you proceed cheerfully to
settle businesses for the good and reformation of the Commonwealth.

Eeight particulars all voted in the House of Commons, 11. June 1628.
THe excessive power of the Duke of Buckingham, and the abuse thereof, is the
chief and principal Cause of all the mischiefs that have happened to the King
and Kingdom.

1. Innovation of Religion. 2. Innovation of Government. 3. Disasters of
designs abroad. 4. Not guarding of the Narrow Seas. 5. Not guarding the Forts.
6. The decay of Trade. 7. The decay of Shipping. 8. The want of Munition.
The first Remonstrance.
Most dread Sovereign,
AS with all Humble thankfulness, we your dutiful Commons now in Parliament
Assembled, do acknowledge the great comfort we have had in the assurance of
your Majesty's pious and gracious disposition, So we think it our most
necessary duty, being called by your Majesty to consult and advise of the great
and urgent affairs of this Church and Commonwealth. And findeing them at this
time in apparent danger of ruin and destruction, faithfully and dutifully to
enform your Majesty thereof; and with bleeding hearts and bended knees to
crave such speedy redress therein, as to your own wisdom (unto which we humbly
submit our selves and our desires) shall seem most meet and convenient, what
the multitude and potency of your Majesty's Enemies are abroad, what be their
malicious and ambitious ends, and how vigilant and constantly industrious they
are in pursuing the same, is well known to your Majesty. Together with the
dangers threatened thereby to your sacred Person and your Kingdoms, and the
calamity which has already fallen, and does daily increase upon your Friends
and Allies, of which we are all well assured your Majesty is most sensible, and
will accordingly in your own great wisdom, and with the gravest and most mature
Council, according to the exigency of the times and occasions, provide by all
means to prevent and help the same. To which end, we most humbly entreat your
Majesty first, and especially to cast your eyes upon the miserable condition of
this your own Kingdom of late so strangely weakened, impoverished, dishonored,
and dejected, That unless through your Majesty's most gracious wisdom,
goodness, and Justice it be speedily raised to a better condition, it is in no
little danger to become a sudden prey to the Enemies thereof. And of the most
happy and flourishing, to be the most miserable and contemptible Nation in the
World. In the discovery of which dangers, mischiefs, and inconveniences lying
upon us, we do freely protest that it is far from our thoughts to lay the least
aspercion upon your Majesty's sacred Person, or the least scandal upon your
Government, for we do in all sincerity, and with all joyfulness of heart, not
only for our selves, but in the name of the whole Commons of England, whom we
represent, ascribe as much honor to your Majesty, and acknowledge as much duty
as a most loyal and affectionate people can do unto the best King (for so you
are) and so you have been pleased abundantly to express your self this present
Parliament by your Majesty's clear and satisfactory answer to our Petition of
Right, for which, both we, our selves, and our posterities shall bless God for
you, and ever preserve a thankful memory of your great goodness and Justice
therein, and we do verily believe that all, or most of those things which we
shall now present unto your Majesty, are either unknown unto your Majesty, or
else by some of your Majesty's Ministers, offered under such specious
pretenses, as may hide their own bad intentions, and ill consequence of them
from your Majesty. But we assure our selves, that according to the good example
of your most noble Predecessors nothing can make your Majesty (being a Wise and
Judicious Prince, and above all things desirous of the welfare of your people)
more in love with Parliaments then this, which is one of the principal ends of
calling them, that therein you may be truly informed of the State of all the
several parts of your Kingdom, and how your Officers and Ministers do behave
themselves in discharge of the trust reposed in them by your Majesty, which is
scarce possible to be made known unto you, but in Parliament as was declared by
your blessed Father, when he was pleased to put the Commons, in Parliament
assembled, in mind, that it would be the greatest unfaithfulness and breach of
duty to his Majesty, and of the trust committed to them by their Country that
could be, if in setting forth the grievances of the people, and the condition
of all the parts of this Kingdom from whence they came, they did not deal
clearly with him, without sparing any, how near and deer soever they were unto
him, if they were hurtful or dangerous to the Commonwealth.

In confidence therefore of your Majesty's gracious acceptance in a matter of
so high importance, and in faithful discharge of our duties, we do first of
all most humbly beseech your Majesty, to take notice that howsoever we know
your Majesty does with your Soul abhor that any such thing should be imagined,
or attempted, yet there is a general fear conceived in your people of some
secret working and combination to introduce into this your Kingdom innovacion,
and change of our holy Religion, more precious to us then our lives, and what
ever this World can affoard. Our fears and jealousies herein are not merely
conjectural, but arising out of such certain and visible effects as may
demonstrate a true and real cause. For notwithstanding the many good, and
wholesome Laws, and provisions made to prevent the increase of Popery within this
Kingdom, and notwithstanding your Majesty's gracious and satisfactorie answer
to the Petition of both Houses in that behalf presented unto your Majesty at
Oxford, we find there has followed no good execution or effect, but on the
contrary (at which your Majesty out of the quick sense of your own Religious
heart cannot, but be in the highest measure displeased) those of that Religion
do find extraordinary favors and respects in Court from Persons of great
quality and power there, unto whom they continually resort, and in particular
to the Countess of Buckingham, who her self openly professing that Religion is
a known favourer and supporter of them that do the same, which we well hoped
upon your Majesty's answer to the aforesaid Petition of Oxford should not have
been permitted, nor that any of your Majesty's Subjects of that Religion, or
justly to be suspected, should be entertained in the service of your Majesty,
or of your Royal consort the Queen, some likewise of that Religion have had
Honors, Offices, and places of Command and Authority lately conferred upon
them. But that which strikes the greatest terror into the hearts of your
Loyal Subjects concerning this point, is, That Letters of stay of Legal
proceedings against them have been procured from your Majesty (by what indirect
means we know not) and Commissions under the great Seal granted and executed
for compositions to be made with Popish Recusants, with inhibitions and
restraints both to the Ecclesiastical and Temporal Courts and Officers, to
intermeddle with them, which is conceived to amount to no less then a
toleration, odious to God, full of dishonor and extreme disprofit to your
Majesty, of great scandal and grief to your good people, and of apparent
danger to the present estate of your Majesty and of this Kingdom, their
numbers, power and insolences daily increasing in all parts of your Kingdom,
and in special about London and the Suburbs thereof, where exceeding many
families of them do make their abode, and publicly frequent Mass at Denmark
House and other places, and by their often meetings and conferences have
opportunities of combining their counsels and strength together, to the hazard
of your Majesty's safety and the State, and especially in these doubtful and
calamitous times.

And as our fear concerning change or subversion of Religion is grounded upon
the daily increase of Papists, the open and professed enemies thereof, for the
reasons formerly mentioned, so are the hearts of your good Subjects no less
perplexed, when with sorrow they behold a daily growth and spreading of the
faction of the Arminians, that being (as your Majesty well knows) but a
cunning way to bring in Popery, and the professors of those opinions the common
disturbers of the Protestant Churches, and Incendiaries in those States wherein
they have gotten any head, being Protestants in show, but Jesuits in opinion
and practice, which caused your royal Father, with so much pious wisdom and
ardent zeal, to endeavor the suppressing of them, as well at home as in the
neighbor Countries. And your gracious Majesty imitating his most worthy
example, has openly and by your proclamation declared your mislike of those
persons, and of their opinions; who notwithstanding are much favored and
advanced, not wanting friends even of the Clergy near to your Majesty, namely
Doctor Neal Bishop of Winchester, and Doctor Lawd Bishop of Bath and Wells, who
are justly suspected to be unsound in their opinions that way. And it being now
generally held the way to preferment and promotion in the Church, many Scholars
do bend the course of their studies to maintain those Errors. Their books and
opinions are suffered to be printed and published, and on the otherside the
impression of such as are written against them, and in defense of the
Orthodoxall Religion, is hindered and prohibited. And (which is a boldness
almost incredible) this restraint of Orthodox books is made under color of
your Majesty's formerly mentioned proclamation, the intent and meaning whereof
we know was quite contrary. And further to increase our fears concerning
Innovation in Religion, we find that there has been no small laboring to
remove that which is the most powerful means to strengthen and increase our
own Religion, and to oppose both these, which is the diligent teaching and
instructing the people in the true knowledge and worship of Almighty God, and
therefore means have been sought out to depress and discountenance pious,
painful and Orthodox preachers, and how conformable soever and peaceful in
their disposition and carriage they be, yet the preferment of such is opposed,
and instead of being incourraged they are molested by vexatious courses and
pursuites and hardly permitted to lecture, even in those places where are no
constant preaching Ministers, whereby many of your good people (whose souls in
this case we beseech your Majesty to comiserate) are kept in ignorance and are
apt to be easily seduced to error and superstition.

It does not a little also increase our dangers and fears this way to
understand the miserable condition of your Kingdom of Ireland, where without
control the Popish Religion is openly professed and practiced in every part
thereof, Popish Jurisdiction being there generally exercised and avowed,
Monastries, Numeries, and other superstitious houses newly erected, redified
and replenished with men and women of several orders, and in a plentiful
manner maintained in Dublin, and most of the great Towns and diverse other
places of the Kingdom, which of what ill consequence it may prove if not
seasonably expressed we leave to your Majesty's wisdom to judge, But most
humbly beseech you (as we assure our selves you will) to lay the serious
consideration thereof to your royal and pious heart, and that some timely
course may be taked for redress therein.

And now if to all these your Majesty will be pleased to add the consideration
of the circumstance of time, wherein these courses tending to the destruction
of true Religion within these your Kingdoms have been taken here, even then
when the same is with open force and violence prosecuted in other countries,
and all the reformed Churches of Christendom either depressed or miserably
distressed, we humbly appeal unto your Majesty's Princely Judgment whether
there be not just ground of fear that there is some secret and strong
cooperating here with the enemies of our Religion abroad for the utter
extirpation thereof, And whether of these courses be not speedily redrest, and
the profession of true Religion more encouraged, we can expect any other then
misery and ruin speedily to fall upon us, especially if besides the visible
and apparent dangers wherewith we are compast round about, you would be pleased
piously to remember the dispeasure of Almighty God always bent against the
neglect of his holy Religion, the stroke of whose divine Justice we have
already felt and do still feel in great measure.

And besides this fear of Innovation in Religion, we do in like faithful
discharge of our duties most humbly declare to your Majesty, that the hearts
of your people are full of fear of Innovation and change of government, and
accordingly possessed with extreme grief and sorrow; yet in this point by your
Majesty's late answer to our Petition of right touching our liberty, much
comforted and raised again out of that sadness and discontent which they
generally had conceived throughout your whole Kingdom at the undue courses
which were the last year taken for raising of money by loans, then which (what
ever your Majesty has been informed to the contrary) there was never money
demanded or paid with greater grief and general dislike of all your faithful
Subjects, though many partly out of fear and partly out of other respects,
yet most unwillinglie were drawn to yield to what was then required.

The billiting of soldiers did much augment both their fears and griefs,
wherein likewise they find much comfort upon your late gracious Answer to our
Petition of right and to that we presented to your Majesty concerning this
particular, yet we humbly beseech your Majesty that we may inform you that
the still continuance and late re-enforcing of the numbers of those Soldiers,
the conditions of their Persons (many of them being not Natives of this
Kingdom, nor of the same but of an opposite Religion, the placing of them upon
the Sea coast, where making head among themseves, they may unite with a Popish
party at home if occasion serve or join with an envading Enemy to do extreme
mischief, and that they are not dismissed, does still minister cause of
jelousie to your loving Sujects, for that these Soldiers cannot be continued
without exceeding great danger of the peace and safety of your Kingdom.

The report of the strange and dangerous purpose of bringing in of Germain
horses and Riders would have turned our doubts into despair, and our fears into
a certainty of confusion, had not your Majesty's gracious Message (for which we
give you humble thanks) comforted us, by the assurance of your Royal word that
they neither are nor were intended by your Majesty for any service in England,
but that they were designed for some foreign employment, yet the sight of the
privy seal, by which seems they were to be levied for this place, the great
some of money, which upon examination we found had been made ever for that
purpose, That much about the same time there was a commission under the great
Seal granted to the Lords and others of your privy Council to consider (as of
other ways of raising of moneys) so particularly by imposition, gave us just
cause to suspect that what ever was your Majesty's own gracious intention, yet
there wanted not those that under some colorable pretense might secretly by
this (as by other ways) contrive to change the frame both of Religion and
Government, and thereby undermine the safety of your Majesty and your
Kingdoms, these men could not be ignorant that the bringing in of strangers for
aid has been pernicious to most States where they have been admitted, but to
England fatal. We do bless God that has given your Majesty a wise and
understanding heart, to discern of the mischief of such courses, and that such
power produces nothing but weakness and calamity. And we beseech your
Majesty to pardon the vehemency of our expressions, if in the loyal and
zealous affections we bear to your Majesty and your service, we are bold to
declare to your Majesty and the whole world, that we hold it far beneath the
heart of any free English man to think that this victorious Nation should now
stand in need of German Soldiers to defend their own King and Kingdom.

But when we consider the courses formerlie mentioned concerning the
undermining of Religion, and these things tending to an apparent change of
government, the often breach of Parliaments, where by your Majesty has been
deprived of the faithful Councels and free aids of your people, The taking of
tonnage and pondage, without any grant thereof by Act of Parliament ever since
the beginning of your Majesty's reign to this present, The standing commission
granted to the Duke of Buckingham to be General of an Army within the land in
the time of peace, The displaceing of faithful and sufficient Officers and
Ministers, some from Judicial places, and others from the Offices and
Authorities which formerly they held in the Commonwealth, we cannot but at the
sight of such an approaching desolation, as must necessarily follow these
courses, out of the depth of sorrow lift up our cries to Heaven for help, and
next under God humbly apply our selves to your sacred Majesty* and falling
down at your feet do beseech you to harken to the voice of all your people, who
if you could hear so many thousands speaking altogether, would all jointly
implore speedy help and reformation.

And if yet your Majesty will be pleased to take a further view of the present
estate of your Realm, we do humbly pray you to consider whether the miserable
disasters and ill success that has accompanied all your late designs and
actions, particularly those of Cales, the Isle of Rhee, and the last expedition
to Rochel, have not extremely wasted that stock of honor that was left unto
this Kingdom, sometimes terrible to all other Nations, and now declining to
contempt beneath the meanest, together with our honor we there lost, those,
and that not a few, (who had they lived) we might have had some better hope of
recovering it again, Our valiant Colonels, Captains and Commanders and many
thousand common Soldiers, and Mariners, though we have some cause to think
that your Majesty is not as yet rightly informed thereof, and that of six or
seven thousand of your Subjects lost at the Isle of Rhee, your Majesty
received information but of a few hundreds: And that all this dishonor and
loss has been purchased with the Consumption of above a million of Treasure;
many of your Forts are exceeding weak and decayed, and want both men and
munition. And here we cannot but with grief consider and complain of a strange
improvidence, (we think your Majesty will call it treachery,) That your store
of powder, which by order of your privy Council, dated the tenth day of
December, 1626. should be constantly three hundred last, besides a continual
supply of Twenty last a month for ordinary expenses, and were now fit (as
we conceive) to be double. That proportion is at this time in the Tower (the
present warrants being served) but nine last and forty pound in all, which we
tremble to think of. And that notwithdanding this extreme scarcity of powder,
great quatities have been permitted to be sold out of your Majesty's store to
particular persons for private gain, whereof we have seen a certificate of
forty six last sold since the fourteenth of January last, And your Majesty's
store being unfurnished of powder, which by a contract made with Mr. Evelin by
the advice of the Lords in Parliament, ought to be supplied monthly with
twenty last, at the rate of 3 l. 10. s. 10. d. the barrel, Your Majesty has
been forced to pay above 7. l. a barrel for powder to be brought from beyond
the Seas, for which purpose 12400. l. has been impressed to Mr. Burlamacho the
last year, and that powder not so good as that which by contract your Majesty
should have of your own by one third part, All which are most fearful and
dangerous abuses.

But what the poverty, weakness and misery your Kingdom is now grown unto by
decay of trade, by destruction and loss of ships and Mariners within these
three last years, we are almost afraid to declare. And could we have been
assured that your Majesty should any other way have had a true information
thereof, we should have been doubtful to have made our weakness and extremity
of misfortune in this kind to appear. But the importunate and most pitiful
complaints from all the parts of your Kingdom near adjoining to the sea in this
kind would rend (we think) the strongest heart in the world with sorrow: And
the sense we have of the miserable condition your Kingdoms is in by reason
thereof, especially for that we see no present possible means (being now
shortly to end this session) how to help the same, adds such a weight of grief
unto our sadd thoughts as we have no words to express it, But for your
Majesty's more exact reformation herein, we beseech you be pleased to peruse
the Kallandar of particulars, which with this our Remonstrance, we most humbly
present unto your Majesty.

One reason (amongst many others of this decay of trade and loss of ships and
Mariners) is the not guarding seas, the Regalitie whereof your Majesty has
now in a manner wholly lost, and that wherein a principal part of the honor
and safety of this Kingdom heretofore consisted (in having the absolute
command of the seas) is now so neglected, that the Town of Dunkerk does so
continually beat, robb, and spoil your Subjects, that we can assure your
Majesty if some present and effectual remedy be not forthwith provided, the
whole trade of this Kingdom, the shipping and Mariners belonging thereunto
will be utterly lost and consumed.

The principal cause of these Evils and Dangers we conceive to be the excessive
power of the Duke of Buckingham, and the abuse of that power. And we humbly
submit it to your Majesty's Excellent wisdom whether it can be either safe for
your self or your Kingdom that so great power as rests in him, both by sea and
land should be in the hands of any one Subject whatsoever. And as it is not
safe, so sure we are it cannot be for your service, it being impossible for any
one man to manage so many and so weighty affairs of the Kingdom as he has
undertaken, besides the ordinary duties of those great offices which he holds,
some of which well performed would require the time and industry of the ablest
man both for Council and action that your whole Kingdom could afford,
especially in these times of common danger.

And our humble desire further is, that your most Excellent Majesty would be
pleased to take it into your Princely consideration, whether in respect the
same Duke has so abused his power, it be safe for your Majesty and your
Kingdoms to continue him either in his great offices of trust, or in his place
of nearness and Council about your sacred person.

And thus in all humility aiming at nothing but the honor of Almighty God,
the maintenance of his true Religion, the safety and happiness of your most
Excellent Majesty, and the preservation and prosperity of this Church and
Commonwealth, we have endeavored with faithful hearts and intentions, and in
discharge of the duty we owe to your Majesty and our Country, to give your
Majesty a true representation of our present dangers and pressing calamities,
which we humbly beseech your Majesty graciously to accept, and to take the
same to heart, acccompting the safety and prosperity of your people your
greatest happiness, and their love your richest treasure. A rufull and
lamentable spectacle we confess it must needs be, to behold these ruins in so
fair a house, so many diseases (and almost every one of them deadly) in so
strong and well tempered a body as this Kingdom lately was, yet we will not
doubt but that God has reserved this honor for your Majesty, to restore the
safety and happiness thereof again as a work worthy so Excellent a Prince. For
whose long life and true felicity we daily pray, and that your fame and never
dying glory may be continued to all succeeding generations.

A Kallender or Schedule of the shipping of this Kingdom, which have been taken
by the enemy and lost at sea within the space of three years last past.
Taken by the Enemy.

Ships of the burden of 100. Tun, and upwards belonging to
London. The ships 77 and furniture vallued at 62000. l. Ipswich. The ships 77
and furniture vallued at 62000. l. Newcastle. The ships 77 and furniture
vallued at 62000. l. Hull. The ships 77 and furniture vallued at 62000. l.
Yarmouth* The ships 77 and furniture vallued at 62000. l. Aldborough. The ships
77 and furniture vallued at 62000. l.
Cast away Ships of the same burden belonging to the same places
133 The ships and furniture vallued at 100000. l.


Taken and cast away Ships of the like burden belonging to
Lynne. 50 The ships and furniture vallued at 35000. l. Bristol. 50 The ships
and furniture vallued at 35000. l. Dartmouth. 50 The ships and furniture
vallued at 35000. l. Portsmouth. 50 The ships and furniture vallued at 35000.
l. Southampton. 50 The ships and furniture vallued at 35000. l. Waymouth. 50
The ships and furniture vallued at 35000. l. Exceter. 50 The ships and
furniture vallued at 35000. l. Shoram. 50 The ships and furniture vallued at
35000. l. Harwich. 50 The ships and furniture vallued at 35000. l. Dover. 50
The ships and furniture vallued at 35000. l. Woodbridge. 50 The ships and
furniture vallued at 35000. l. Sandwich. 50 The ships and furniture vallued at
35000. l.


Some 260 ships vallued at -- 197000. l.

Taken by the Enemy Ships of 100 Tonne belonging to
London. 130 The vallued not certified Newcastle. 130 The vallued not certified
Hull. 130 The vallued not certified Boston. 130 The vallued not certified
Yarmouth. 130 The vallued not certified Lynne. 130 The vallued not certified
Aldborough. 130 The vallued not certified Dover. 130 The vallued not certified
The County of Sussex 130 The vallued not certified Pool. 130 The vallued not
certified Southampton. 130 The vallued not certified Weymouth. 130 The vallued
not certified Exceter. 130 The vallued not certified Dartmouth. 130 The vallued
not certified Bristol. 130 The vallued not certified Iersey. 130 The vallued
not certified Scarbrough. 130 The vallued not certified Soul and 130 The
vallued not certified Dunwich. 130 The vallued not certified


Touching the Ports and Towns of Portsmouth. great losses whereof no particular
is given Westchester. great losses whereof no particular is given Milfordhaven
great losses whereof no particular is given Bridgwater. great losses whereof no
particular is given Bastable. great losses whereof no particular is given
Faymouth. great losses whereof no particular is given Foy. great losses whereof
no particular is given Lynne Regis. great losses whereof no particular is given
Isle of Whight great losses whereof no particular is given Colchester. great
losses whereof no particular is given Iersey. great losses whereof no
particular is given Low. great losses whereof no particular is given Whitby.
great losses whereof no particular is given Bridlington. great losses whereof
no particular is given Blackney. great losses whereof no particular is given
Wels. great losses whereof no particular is given Orford. great losses whereof
no particular is given Brightling-sea great losses whereof no particular is
given Rochester. great losses whereof no particular is given and diverse other
small Ports. great losses whereof no particular is given


The goods and Merchandises lost in the shipping aforesaid, and in Flemish
bottoms fraighted by English Merchants to be imported into this Kingdom are of
exceeding great vallue, the certainty whereof cannot now be expressed.

Only one company of Merchants Trading to the Eastwards from London, Ipswich,
Hull, and New Castle in half this space of time have lost one hundred thousand
pounds taken by the Enemy.
A Great Number of Mariners, also proportionable to this loss of shipping,
have been taken and destroyed by the Enemy, and cast away through disorderly
pressing, and forcing upon Winter voyages, besides many more by reason of their
discouragements and want of pay have either run away to the Enemy or betaken
themselves to foreign service, or to any other Trade rather then to lead a
Sea-mans life to the inestimable loss and danger of the Kingdom.

The Kings Answer to the Remonstrance the 17 of June 1626.
Gentlemen.
UPon my Answer to your Petition of Right, I expected no such declaration from
you, which contains diverse points of State, touching the Church and
Commonwealth. And I do conceive you do believe that I understood them better
then your selves: but since the reading thereof, I perceive you understand
these things less then I imagined, notwithstanding I will take them into my
consideration as they deserve.

The Kings Speech at the end of the Session, June 26.
IT may seem strange that I came so suddenly to end this Session, therefore
before I give any assent to the Bills, I will tell you the cause, though I must
avow, that I owe an account of my actions to none, but to God alone.

It is known to every one that a while ago the House of Commons gave me a
Remonstrance, how acceptable every man may judge, and for the merit of it, I
will not call that in question, for I am sure no wise man can justify it. Now
since I am truly informed that a second Remonstrance is preparing for me, to
take away the profit of my Tonnage and Poundage, one of the chief maintenances
of the Crown, by alleging, that I have given away my right thereof by my
answer to your Petition, This is so prejudicial to me, that I am forced to end
this Session some few hours before I meant it, being not willing to receive any
more Remonstrances to which I must give an harsh answer.

And since I see to that end the House of Commons begins already to make
false constructions of what I granted in your Petition, least it be worse
interpreted in the Country, I will now make a Declaration concerning the true
intent thereof.

The profession of both Houses in the time of hammering, this Petition was no
was to trench upon my prerogative, saying they had neither intention, nor power
to hurt it. Therefore it must, needs be conceived, that I have granted no new,
but confirmed the ancient Liberties of my Subjects: yet to show the clearness
of my intentions, that I neither repent nor mean to recede from any thing I
have promised you. I do here declare that those things which have been done,
whereby many had some cause to suspect the liberty of the Subject to be
trenched upon, which indeed was the first and true ground of the Petition,
shall not hereafter be drawn in example for your prejudice and in time to come
(in the word of a King) you shall not have like cause to complain.

But as for Tonnage and Poundage it is a thing I cannot want, and was never
intended by you to ask, never meant I am sure by me to grant.

To conclude, I command you all that are here to take notice of what I have
spoken at this time to be the true intent and meaning of what I granted in your
Petition; but especially you my Lords, the Judges, for to you only under me
belongs the interpretation of Laws, for none of the Houses of Parliament either
joint or separate (what new doctrine soever may be raised) have any power
either to make or declare a Law without my consent.

The Second Remonstrance.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
YOur Majesty's most Loyal and Dutiful Subjects the Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, being in nothing more careful then of the Honor and
prosperity of your Majesty and the Kingdom, which they know does much depend
upon your happy Union and relation betwixt your Majesty and your people, do
with much sorrow apprehend, that by reason the incertainty of their
continuance, together the unexpected interruptions which have been cast upon
them, and the shortness of time in which your Majesty has determined to end
this Session, they cannot bring to maturity and perfection, diverse businesses
of weight which they have taken into consideration and resolution as most
important for the common good; Amongst diverse other things they have taken in
especial care for preparing a Bill for the granting to your Majesty such a
subsedy of Tonnage and Poundage, as might uphold your profit and revenew in as
ample manner as their just care, and respect of Trade, wherein not only the
prosperity, but even the life of the Kingdom would permit, but being a work
which will require much time and preparation by conference with your Majesty's
Officers and with the Merchants, not only of London, but also of other remote
parts, they find it not possible to be accomplished at this time, wherefore
considering it will be much more prejudicial to the right of the Subject, if
your Majesty should continue to receive the same without Authority of Law
after the determination of a Session, then if there had been a recess by
adjournment only, in which case that intended grant would have related to the
first day of the Parliament, and assuring themselves your Majesty is resolved
to observe that your Royal answer, which you have lately made to the Petition
of Right of both Houses of Parliament, Yet doubting lest your Majesty may be
misinformed concerning the particular case, as if you might continue to take
those subsedies of Tonnage and Poundage and other impositions upon Merchants,
without breaking that answer they are forced by that duty which they owe to
your Majesty and to those whom they represent; to declare, that there ought
not any imposition to be laid upon the goods of Merchants exported or imported
without common consent by Act of Parliament: which is the right and inheritance
of your Subjects, founded not only upon the most ancient and Original
constitution of this Kingdom, but often confirmed and declared in diverse
Statute Laws. And for the better manifestation thereof, may it please your
Majesty to understand, that although your Royal predecessors the Kings of
this Realm have often had such subsedies and impositions granted unto them upon
diverse occasions, especially for the guarding of the Seas, and safeguard of
Merchants; yet the Subjects have been ever careful to use such cautions and
limmitations in those grants, as might prevent any claim to be made, That such
subsedies do proceed from duty, and not of free gift of the Subject, and that
they have heretofore used to limmit a time in such grants, and for the most
part but short, as for a year or two, and if it were continued longer, they
have sometimes directed a certain space of cessation and intermission, that so
the right of the Subject might be more evident. At other times it has been
granted upon occasions of War for a certain number of years, with proviso, that
if the War were ended in the mean time, then the grant should cease; And of
course it has been sequestered into the hands of some Subjects to be employed
for the guarding of the coasts, and it is acknowledged by the ordinary answers
of your Majesty's predecessors in their assent to the Bills of subsedy of
Tonnage and Poundage, That it is of the nature of other subsedies proceeding
from the good will of the Subject, Very few of your predecessors had it for
life until the reign of Hen. 7. who was so far from conceiving he had any right
thereunto, that although he granted commissions for collecting certain duties
and customs due by Law, yet he made no commissions for receiving the subsedy
of Tonnage and Poundage, until the same was granted unto him in Parliament:
Since his time all the Kings and Queens of England have had the like grants for
life by the free love and good will of the Subject.

And whenever the people have been grieved by laying any imposition or other
charges upon their goods or Merchandises without Authority of Law, which has
been very seldom, yet upon complaint in Parliament they have been forthwith
relieved, saving in the time of your Royal Father, who having (through ill
Council,) raised the rates and charges of Merchandises to that height, at which
they now are, was yet pleased to yield so far to the complaint of his people,
as to offer, that if the vallue of those impositions which he had set might be
made good unto him, he would himself and his Heirs by act of Parliament be
bound never to lay any other, which offer the Commons at that time, in regard
of the great burden, did not yield unto. Nevertheless your Loyal Commons in
this Parliament out of their especial zeal to your service and special regard
to your pressing occasions, to take into their considerations so to frame a
grant of subsedy of Tonnage and Poundage to your Majesty, that both you might
have been the better enabled for the defense of your Realm and your Subjects,
from being secure from all undue charges, might be the more encouraged
cheerfully to proceed in their course of Trade (by the increase whereof your
Majesty's profit, and likewise the strength of the Kingdom would be very much
augmented, But not being now able to accomplish this their desire, there is no
course left unto them without manifest breach of their duty both to your
Majesty and the Country, save only to make this humble declaration, that the
receiving of Tonnage and Poundage and other impositions not granted by
Parliament, is a breach of the fundamental Liberties of this Kingdom, and
contrary to your Majesty's Royal Answer to the said Petition of Right. And
therefore they do most humbly beseech your Majesty to forbear any further to
receive the same, and not to take it in ill part from those of your Majesty's
loving Subjects who shall refuse to make payment of any such charges without
warrant of Law demanded. And as by this forbearance your most Excellent
Majesty shall manifest unto the world your Royal Justice in the observance of
your Laws; So they not doubting, but that hereafter at the time appointed for
their coming together again, they shall have occasion to express their great
desire to advance your Majesty's Honor and profit.

A Letter which was found among some Jesuits that were lately taken at London
and addressed to the Father RECTOR at BRUXILLS.
FAther Rector, let not the damp of astonishment seiz upon your most ardent and
zealous soul in apprehending the sudden and unexpected calling of the
Parliament: we have not opposed, but rather furthered it, so that we hope as
much in this Parliament as ever we feared in Queen Elizabeth's days, You must
know the Council is engaged to assist the King by the way of Prerogative in
case the Parliamentary way should fall, You shall see this Parliament will
resemble the Pellicane which takes a pleasure to dig out with her beak her own
bowels. The election of the Knights and Burgesses have been in such confusion
and by such apparent faction as that which we were wont to prove heretofore
with much art and industry, (when the Spanish match was in treaty) now it
breaks out naturally as a botch or boil, and spets and spews out his own
ranckor and venom, You may remmber how that most Famous and Immortal Statesman
the Count of Gondomar fed King James his fancy and rocked him asleep with the
soft and sweet sound of Peace to keep up the Spanish Treaty, Likewise we were
much bound to some eminent Statesmen of our own Country to gain time, in
procureing those advantageous Sessions of Arms in the Pallatinate, and in
admiring the worth and Honor of the Spanish Nation, and vilifying the
Hollanders, remonstrating to King James that State was most ungrateful both to
his predecessor Queen Elizabeth and his Sacred Majesty, that that State was
more obnoxious then the Turk, and perpetually injured his Majesty's Subjects in
the East Indies, and likewise they had usurped from him the regallitie of the
narrow seas in fishing upon the English coasts. Had the Spanish match taken
effect, which was broken by the heat and violence of your furious Enemy the
Duke of Buckingham, certainly if King James had diserted the Hollanders, Those
great Statesmen had but one means to further their great and good designs,
which was to seiz on King James, that none but the Puritans faction, that
plotted nothing but Annarchy and his confusion were advanced to this most
happy Union. We steered on the came course, and have made use of Annarchall
election, and have prejudicated and anticipated the great one the Duke of
Buckhingham, that none but the Kings Enemies and his are chosen of the
Parliament, and that the Parliament vows to begin where they have left, and
will never give over till they have exterpated him and his posterity. On the
other side the same parties, who are to be admired for their indefitigable
industry, incessantly foment revenge and jelousie in most of the Parliament
men, and especially they work upon the pride and vain glory of such as have
been imprisoned: acknowledging that they are the only Martires and Worthies of
the Country. London is as much distempered as ever Florence was, for the
companies are at great odds, and the common Council have opposed the
Magistrates against the old custom in the election of the Knights, which has
bred a great heart burning in the City, that twice a day we can divulge what we
list in Paul's, and upon the Exchange, and we have already rendered our
irreconciliable Enemy the Duke as odious as a Toad, so the people are apt to
believe any thing against him. We hope to be revenged on that Ball of
Wilde-fire the Duke shortly, and quench his fury: you shall see the same sword
that has wounded us, drawn upon the wound with an oil that we have anointed,
it shall make us whole, and this shall be done: the Parliament is a great ship
that has dashed twice against the same rock, and we have so wrought upon the
several complexions of Parliament Men in charging the most temporate and wiser
sort, that the best way to overthrow the Duke, is by humble Petition to his
Majesty. With the violent sort we have taken a contrary course, by working
upon their passions and entreating their fancies with probabilities and
presidents, which never were heard of; that favorites have but Parliament
proofs, they may wrestle for a time, but at last the Parliament has ever
overthrow them upon their backs, we incourrage them withal the wits we have to
fall upon the Duke, and persuade them now is the time or never, the King being
in such apparent necessity, insomuch that we assure our selves that God has so
forsaken and infatuated them, that they shall not only strike and dash upon
the same rock again; but split and wrack in the bottomless sea of destruction,
We have now many strings to our bow, and have strongly fortified our faction
and have added two Bulwracks more, for when King James lived, you know, he was
very vehement against Arminianisme (interrupted with his pestilent wit and deep
learning) our strong designs in Holland, and was a great Friend to that old
Rebel and Heretic the Prince of Orange, now we have planted that Sovereign
drug Arminianisme which we hope will purge the Protestans from their Heresy,
and it flourishes and bears fruit in due season, The materials which builds up
the other Bulwarks, are the projectors and beggerers of all ranks and
quallities whatsoever, both those factions copulated to destroy the Parliament,
and introduce a new species and form of government which is Oligarchal, Their
factions serve as direct medicines and instruments to our ends, which is the
universal Catholic Monarchy, our foundation is imitation, this Immitation
will cause a relaxation, as so many violent diseases in the body, as the Stone,
Gout, and to the speedy destruction or perpetual and insufferable anguish of
the body, which is worse then death it self. We proceed with counsel and mature
deliberation when and where to work upon the Dukes jealousy, and revenge, In
this we give the honor to those that merit it, which are the Church
Catholics. There is another matter of consequence which we take much into our
consideration and tender care, which is to stave the Puritans that they hang
not upon the Dukes ears, they are impudent subtle people, and it is to be
feared least they should negotiate a reconciliation betwixt the Duke and the
Parliament, It is certain the Duke would have reconciled himself to the
Parliament at Oxford and Westminster, but now we assure our selves we have so
handled the matter, that both the Duke and the Parliament are irreconciliable.
For the better preventing of the Puritans, the Arminians have already blockt up
the Dukes ears, and we have those of our own Religion, which stand continual
Sentinel at the Dukes Chamber door to see who goes in and out, we cannot be two
careful and circumspect in this regard. I cannot choose but laugh to see how
some of our coat have accooted themselves, you would scarce know them if you
saw them; and it is admirable how in speech and gesture they act the Puritans,
the Cambridge Scholars to their woeful experience shall see, how we can ect
the Puritans a little better then they have acted the Jesuits: they abused our
Patron S. Ignatius in jest, but we will make them smart for it in earnest. I
hope you will excuse my merry digression, for I confess unto you, I am at this
instant transported with joy to see how happily all instruments and means, as
well great as less, operate to our purposes. But to return to the maine
Fabric, our foundation is Arminianisme, Arminians and projectors, as it
appears in the premises affect mutation, this we see in force by all probable
Arguments, we can in the first place take into our consideration the Kings
Honor and his present necessity, and we show how the King may free himself of
his wardships as Lewis the 11. did, and for his great splender he may raise a
vast revenew, and not beholding to his Subjects, which is by way of imposition
and excise, we instance in the low Countries, and show what a mass of moneys
they raised to pay their Armies by Sea and Land, merely out of excise. Then our
Church Catholics showed the means of this excise, which must be by a mercinary
Army of Horse and Foot; For the Horse we have made it sure, they shall be
forraigners and Germans, who will eat up the Kings revenews and spoil the
Country wheresoever they come, though they should to be paid: what havoc will
they make then when they are not daily paid? surely they will do much more
mischief: Then the Catholic Army of 10000. Horse and 20000. Foot shall be
taken over, and in pay before the mercinary Army suffocate the Country, Then
the Soldiers and projectors shall be paid out of the confiscation of the
Country, to be had of the Soldiers, then they must consequently mutiny, which
is equal advantageous to our superlative design, which is to work the
Protestans as well as the Catholics to welcome a conquest, and this is by
this means we hope instantly to dissolve Trade, hinder the building of shipping
in propounding probable designs, and putting the stay upon expedition, as that
of Cales taking away the Merchants ships and feeding them with hope to take the
West Indies Fleet, which is to seek a needle in a bottle of hay: his Catholic
Majesty shall not want our best intelligence, besides he has so many
pistashawes and carvils which are spread abroad to discover, so you cannot be
surprised in any harbor when Trade is ruined and shipping decayed, What will
become of Noblemens and Gentlemen's revenews? the Yeamen and Formers, in which
consists the infantry of this Kingdom, they will turn Rogues and resemble the
object peasants in France, who are little better then slave. Trade and shipping
is so much decayed already, that London is as it were beseiged for want of
fuel, Sea coals are at 30 shillings the chaldren. When things are brought to
this perfection, which we hope will be by that time his Sacred Majesty has
settled his affairs in Germany; all the people in general will linger for a
conquest, missing their means and revenews, which should maintain and support
them, according to their several ranks and qualities; Then we assure our selves
that the Lands which were rent and torn from the Church by that ravenous
Monster Hen. 8. shall be restored by our mighty Protector his Catholic
Majesty, to the recalling of those that are exiled, and deliver thousand of
souls, which suffer persecution at home for the testimony of a good conscience.
Join your prayers with ours, importuning the blessed Virgin and all the host
of Angels and holy Martyers to intercede for us, and we doubt not God will make
have to help us. Thus hoping to see the Count Tillies and Marquess Spinola here
about July come twelve-moneth: I rest. In the mean time we pray for a happy
success in Germany and the Low Countries.

Your loving friends I. W. I. I.

From the County, etc.
TOUCHING BARRONETS. Motives to induce the KNIGHTS, CITIZENS and BURGESSES of
the Commons House of Parliament, to Petition his Majesty for the revokeing and
abollishing of the degree of BARRONETS, lately erected by his Highnesses
Letters patents.
FIrst because this new degree is offensive to the Nobility of the Realm, whose
descendants in all reason ought to have prime eminency amongst the Gentry of
this Kingdom, yet Barronets by these patents are to have precedence before the
descendants, from the younger children of Barronets, Earls, Dukes, etc.

And to the order of Knighthood, because that degree brings a personal dignity
and springing out of virtue and desert, ought to be rancken next and imediately
unto Barrony. Nevertheless the degree of Barronets is interposed between
Barrony and Knighthood.

And unto the Gentry of this Kingdom, because many of the Barronets and their
descendants, being meanly descended, must have precedence before Gentry of
Ancient Family, who by this Innovation will be much vilified, and of small
reckoning in the Commonwealth.

And unto the Magistrates of this Kingdom, who in respect of their offices, and
place wherein they serve, as also the gravity and wisdom of their Persons in
public services and assemblies, have used to have precedence before others:
but now they must give place unto Barronets and their descendants, albeit some
of them are, and many of them in time to come may be mean in birth, poor in
state and of small worth and desert.

And unto the whole Communalty, whose descendants by their virtues and good
fortunes may hereafter attain unto credit and reputation in the Commonwealth.

Inconveniences that will arise to his Majesty and the State by reason of this
new institution.
THere will be always dislike, envy and heart-burning between the Gentry of the
Kingdom and the Barronets.

The Honor of Knighthood, which was wont to encourage generous minds unto
high exploits, will now come int contempt, for be they of never so good prowess
and valor, they must by this institution be inferior unto Barronets of small
worth: Knighthood has been held a competent reward for foreign and home
employments, and now his Majesty must be driven to search new ways for the
recompense and satisfaction of such services. Gentlemen of Livelihood and
estimation will refrain his Majesty's service in public Assemblies for the
Administration of Justice and otherwise, because they scorn to give place unto
many of the Barronets whom they account their inferiors.

The reputation of Knighthood and antiquity of descent has in former times
much advanced the Gentry so quallified in preferment to marriage who are very
much prejudiced by this Hereditary Tittle: Great Noble men of this Kingdom have
been degraded from thein particular dignity, for want of means to support their
Honors, but these Barronets, albeit they shall happen to be of no worth either
in estate or desert, must have precedence before Knights of greater reputation.

Nothing is more commended then Honor springing out of virtue and desert, but
to purchase Honor with money, as Barronets have done, is a temporal symmony
and dishonorable to the States The Communalty of the Kingdom ever since the
first institution thereof has consisted of certain degrees known and legal
additions without change or alteration may by way of president alter the whole
strain of the Commonwealth. His Majesty by his prerogative Royal Creates,
Barrons, Viscounts, Earls, and many other degrees of Nobillity as other his
Ancestors and Predecessors have done, but the creation of this or any other in
Communalty is not warranted by any former president usage or custom.

The Examination of ANDREW Le BRUN a Frenchman, Captain of the MARY of ROCHEL,
taken before ABRAHAM CELMER Merchant, Major of the Borough of PLYMOUTH 16 May
1628.
THe examinate says, that one Sunday being the 17 of April last past, he
departed from Plymouth harbor in company with the English Fleet, whereof the
Earl of Denbigh is General: and one the first day of May then following, the
said Fleet arrived and came at Anchor at Charleboy in the rode of Rochell about
4 of the clock in the afternoon, where at the said arrival they found 20 sail
of the King of France his ships, whereof six were ships of about 300 Tuns, and
the rest were smaller ships, and forthwith the said French ships put themselves
to sail, and went in nearer to the Fortifications, where they also Anchored
within two cannon shot of the English Fleet, And says, that one of his
Majesty ships shot off one piece of Ordinance, and no more, and the said
French ships, as they returned from the English Fleet shot off oftentimes to
them, and that the same Fleet remained there until the 8 day of the same month
of May, in which time there was a Wherry sent from, the fleet into Rochell,
wherein there were two English and one French man to inquire the State of the
said Town, and that if they were there safe arrived, they should make a fire
upon one of the Towers of the Town to give notice thereof, which accordingly
they did, and also to make so many fires more one the Walls of the said Town as
they have months victuals there, but they made not any answer thereof. Whence
it was collected that they had but a small quantity of victuals, and said,
that the said English (as he has heard) promised to sink the said French ships
when the waters did increase, and the wind came at West North-West, it being
then neap tides, and about two days after the water did increase and the winds
came accordingly, and being then entreated to fight with them, yet did not, but
came away without fighting or releiving the Town, and says, that one the 8 day
of May the said English Fleet weighed Anchor, and set sail to depart, and 4 of
the French great ships weighed Anchor also, and came after them, and shot
diverse times at the said Fleet, and the said Fleet shot at them again, and the
said examinate came in company with the said Fleet as far as Bell Isle, where
he departed from them one the 10 of this instant, and lastly says, that during
all the time the English Fleet was there, the Town of Rochel shot to the King
of France his ships and Fort, but chiefly upon the arrival of the said Fleet
there.

Articles wherewith MELVINE is charged.
1. MR. Melvine said that the Dukes plot was, that the Parliament should be
dissolved, And that the Duke and the King with a great Army of Horse and Fott
would War against the cominalty, and that Scotland should assist him, so that
when War was amongst our selves the Enemy should come in, for this Kingdom is
already sold to the Enemy by the Duke.

2. That the Duke had a stronger Council then the King, of which were certain
Jesuits Scottish men, and that they did sit in Council every night from one of
the clock till three.

3. That when the King had a purpose to do any thing of what consequence
soever, the Duke could alter it.

4. That when the Ordinance were shipped at S. Martins, the Duke caused the
Soldiers to go one, that they might be destroyed.

5. That the Duke said, he had an Army of 16000. Foot and 1200. Horse.

6. That King James his blood and Marquess Hambletons with others cries out for
vengeance to Heaven.

7. That he could not expect any thing but ruin of this Kingdom.

8. That Prince Henry was poisoned by Sir Thomas Overbury and he himself served
with the same sauce, and that the Earl of Sommerset could say much to this.

9. That he himself had a Cardinal to his Uncle or near Kinsman, whereby he had
great intelligence.

A Privy Seal for the transporting of Horses 30 January 3. CAROLI.
CHarles by the grace of God King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland
defendor of the faith, etc. To the Treasurer and under Treasurer of our
Exchequer for the time being, greeting. We do hereby will and command you, out
of our Treasury remaining in the receipt of the said Exchequer, forthwith to
pay or cause to be paid unto Phillip Burlamachi of London Merchant, the sum of
30000 l. to be paid by him over by Bill of Exchange unto the Low Countries and
Germany unto our trusty and well be loved Sir William Balfoore Knight and John
Dalber Esquire or either of them, for levying and providing certain numbers of
Horse with Arms for Horse and Foot to be brought over into this Kingdom for our
service, viz. For the levying and transporting of a 1000 Horse; 15000 l. for
5000 Muskets, 5000 Corslets, 5000 Pikes, 10500 l. and for 1000 Curasiers
complete 200 Corslets and 200 Carbines 4500 l. Amounting in the whole to the
said sum of 30000 l. And this our Letter shall be your sufficient warrant and
discharge in this behalf. Given under our privy Seal at our Palace of
Westminster 30. of January, in the third year of our reign.

The Commission to the Lords and others of the privy Council concerning the
present raising of money.
CHARLES by the grace of God King of England Scotland France and Ireland,
defender of the faith, etc. To Sir Thomas Coventry Lord Keeper of the great
Seal of England. James Earl of Marlburgh Lord Treasurer. Henry Earl of
Manchester Lord President of the Council. Edward Earl of Worcester Lord Keeper
of the privy Seal. George Duke of Buckingham our high Admiral of England.
William Earl of Pembroke Lord Steward of our Household. Phillip Earl of
Mongommery Lord Chamberlain of our Household. Theophilus Earl of Suffolk.
Edward Earl of Dorcet. William Earl of Salisbury. Thomas Earl of Exceter. John
Earl of Bridgwater. James Earl of Carlisle. Henry Earl of Holland. William Earl
of D. George Earl of Totnes. Sir George Hay Knight Lord Chaunceller of
Scotland. William Earl of Morton. Thomas Earl of Kelly. Thomas Earl of Melros.
Edward Viscount Conway one of our principal Secritaries of State. Edward
Viscount Wimbleton. Oliver Viscount Grandison. Henry Viscount Falkland Lord
Deputy of Ireland. To the Lord Bishop of Winchester. William Lord Bishop of
Bath and Wells. Fulk Lord Brook. Dudly Lord Carleton vice Camberlain of our
Household. Sir Thomas Edmonds Treasurer of our Household. Sir John Savill
Comptroller of our Household. Sir Robert Nawton Master of our Court of Wards.
Sir John Cook one of the principal Secritaries of our State. Sir Richard
Weston Chancellor and under Treasurer of our Exchequer. Sir Julius Caesar
Master of the Roll. Sir Humfry May Knight Chancellor of our Duchy of
Lancaster; GREETING.
WHereas the present Conjuncture of the pressing affairs of Christendom and our
own particular interest in giving assistance to our oppressed Allies, and for
the providing for the defense and safety of our own dominions, And people do
call upon us to neglect nothing that may conduce to those good ends; And
because moneys, the principal sinews of War, and one of the first and chiefest
in all great preparations and actions, necessary to be provided in the first
place, and we are careful the same may be raised by such ways as may best
stand with the State of our Kingdoms and Subjects, and yet may answer the
pressing occasions of the present times. We therefore out of the experience we
have had, and for the trust we repose in your wisdoms fidelities and dutiful
care of your services, and for the experience you have of all great causes
concerning us and our State, both as they have relation to foreign parts
abroad, and as to our Commonwealth and People at home: Ye being Persons called
by us to be of our privy Council, have thought fit amongst those great and
important matters, which so much concern us in the first and chiefest place, to
recommend this to your special care and diligence, And we do hereby authorize
and appoint, and stricktly will and require you speedily and seriously to enter
into consideration of all the best and speediest ways and means ye* can for
raising of money for the most important occasions aforesaid, which without
extremest hazard to us, our dominions and people, and to our friends and
Allies, can admit of no long delay, The same to be done by imposition or
otherwise, as in your wisdom and best Judgments ye shall find to be most
convenient in a case of this inevitable necessity, wherein form and
circumstance must be dispensed with, rather then the substance be lost or
hazarded. And herein our will and pleasure is, that you, or as many of you as
from time to time can be spared from attendant upon our Person, or other our
necessary services, do use all diligence by your frequent meetings and serious
consultations, and when you have brought any thing to maturity, ye make report
thereof unto us, and advertise us of those things ye shall either resolve upon
or thinck fit to represent unto us, for the advancement of this great service,
which with the greatest affection we can, we recommend to your best care and
Judgment, Whereof you must not fail as you tender our honor, and the honor
and safety of our Dominions and People; and for the doing hereof, these
presents shall be to you and every of you a sufficient warrant. In witness
whereof, we have caused these our Letters to be made Letters Patents.

Witness our self at Westminster the last day of February in the third year of
our Reign.

Per ipsum Regem.

Articles to be propounded to the Captains and Masters as well English as
French, touching the service in hand at ROCHEL 4. May 1628. the ships rideing
before the Town.
1. WHether in your opnion and judgments, by the means and strength we have,
the Floates and Pallizadoes may be forced, and the entrance into the Town may
be thereby made for the victuallers.

2. If you shall think it fit, what in your opinions will be the best and
readiest way to open the same.

3. Whether you hold it fit to send in the victuallers at the same instant,
together with the fire ships and barks, considering that if it should not take
effect, instead of relieving the Town, we relieve the Enemy.

4. If in this attempt part shall get through, and the greater part be taken by
the Enemies, whether the service or dishonor will be greater.

5. If in case you think it fit to give the attempt, whether you hold it
likewise necessary that the Merchant ships should second, or follow them, and
how far you hold it safe for them to go.

6. Whether the more to countenance the service, you hold it fit for the Kings
ships, to put themselves under sail being they are to be exposed to shallow
water and a narrow Channel and to lie under command of many of the Enemies
Forts, where, by an unlucky accident many of them may be brought on ground and
miscarry.

7. You are here to deliver your opinions upon your allegiance, the rather
because the only service the Kings ships there can do, is to cause the Enemies
Fleet, which rides without, to retire further in, and whether it will be a
means to weaken the Pallizadoes or any way open the passage to your judgments.

The answer to the Articles propounded by the Lord General and the rest of the
Council of War.
1. TO the first, we answer that by reason of the shallowness of the water the
ships will not be able to come so near as the Pallizados, whereby to make any
breach through for the victuallers.

2. To the second, we answer that nothing can be done by our forces here to
gain any passage to the Town.

3. To the third, we answer that by reason our forces cannot come so near the
Pallizadoes to make any breach, then it is not for the victuallers to venture in
with their fireships; so no breach being made, the victualler will come into
the Enemies hands.

4. To the fourth, we answer that the dishonor will be greater if there be any
loss in that case.

5. To the fifth, we answer that in regard of their forces both by Sea and Land
that no breach can be made as above said, our opinion is, it will be to no
purpose to send any ships in.

We hold it not fitting to bring his Majesty's ships, in regard they shall be
exposed to shallow water and danger of our Enemies Forts, upon the Land; which
will be an hazard and loss of his Majesty's ships.

To the seventh, and the conclusion mentioned in your Lordships Articles, we
answer, that if we should force the ships that lie without the Pallizado on the
ground; It will rather make the Pallizado more strong than any way to gain any
passage through. If any man can show any better reasons than we here allege
to those Articles, we shall be ready and willing to embrace it, and will
endeavor our selves so far as our lives.

THE TRANSACTIONS Of the second SESSIONS IN PARLIAMENT, ANNO 1628.
THus having finished the first Session of this unhappy Parliament, where the
seeds were sown of those discontents, which afterward grew up, and lately
have been reaped almost to the ruin of our Nation;

Now follows the Breviary or abstract of the second Session, little different
from the former in sad success: But we must confess that those two Tracts
(though joined in one volume for the perfecting of the History) are not the
Sons of the same Father, proceed not from the observations and collections of
the same Author.

And as they differ in the Author, so also in the fashion and quantity
thereof: the former Session may be said to be done at length, this in figures,
the former had the maine Mass and Bulk, this the spirits and infusions of the
passages therein.

Yet as a low man is as much man, though not so great a man as one of a higher
stature, so may I say there is as certain truth in this as in the former
relation though there be not so much of it. I mean it is as faithfully though
not so fully reported. Indeed the conscientious Reader being a true Englishman
may here satisfy himself with the sadness of the transactions as shortly
summed up, who otherwise might surfeit with sorrow, if every particular were
related in its full dimensions.

Thus commending both this and the other to the careful perusing of the
judicious Reader, I fear not his departing from this Book with an unsatisfied,
who comes thereunto with an unprejudiced judgment.

A true RELATION Of every days proceedings since the beginning of this SESSION,
and what was spoken by every man.
Tuesday January 20.
UPon Tuesday being the first day of the Parliament, nothing was done, but the
setting of the Commitees.

Wensday 21.
UPon this day it was ordered that Mr. Seldom and others should see if the
Petition of Right and his Majesty's answer thereunto were enrolled in the
Parliament Rolls; and the Courts at Westminster, as his Majesty sent them
word the last Session they should be; and also in what manner they were
entered, which was done accordingly: and Mr. Seldom made report to the house,
that his Majesty's speech made the last day of the Session in the upper House,
is also entered by his Majesty's command.

Mr. Pym,
HEreupon Mr. Pym moved that the debate hereof should be deferred till Tuesday
next, by reason of the fewness of the House.

Sir John Elliot,
TO which Sir John Elliot answered, this, is now raised, concerns the honor of
the House and the liberty of the Kingdom, it is true; it deserves to be
deferred till there be a full House, but it is good to prepare things. I find
it is a great point; I desire a select Committee may enter into consideration
thereof, and also how other liberties of the Kingdom be invaded. I find in the
country the Petition of Right Printed indeed, but with an answer that never
gave any satisfaction: I desire a Committee may consider thereof, and present
it to the House, and that the Printer be sent for to give satisfaction to the
House, by what warrant it was printed. Which was ordered.

Mr. Shelden,
FOr this Petition of Right, It is known how lately it has been violated,
since our last meeting. The liberties for life, person, and freehold, how they
have been invaded; and have not some been committed contrary to that? Now we
knowing these invasions, must take notice of it. For liberties, for state, we
know of an order made in the Exchequer, that a Sheriff was commanded not to
execute a replevim, and men's goods are taken and must not be restored, whereas
no man ought to lose life, or limb but by the Law, has not one lately lost his
ears (meaning Savage) that was censured in the Star Chamber by an arbitrary
sentence and judgment? Next they will take away our Arms, and then our lives.
Let all see we are sencible of these customs creeping upon us: let us make a
just presentation hereof to his Majesty.

Norton the King's Printer was brought to the Bar, and asked by what warrant
the additions to the Petition were printed. He answered, that there was a
warrant (as he thought) from the King himself. And being asked whether there
were not some Copies printed without additions, he answered, there were some,
but they were suppressed by some warrant.

Sir. John Elliot,
DEsired some clearer satisfaction might be made, and that he might answer
directly by what warrant. Whereupon he was called in again: who said, he did
not remember the particular, but sure he was there was a warrant.

Tuesday 22.
ONe Mr. Roules a Merchant, and a Member of the House, informed the House that
his goods were seized by the Customers for refusing to pay Custom by them
demanded, although he told them he would pay what was adjudged by Law.
Whereupon, Sir Robert Phillips spoke as follows.

Sir Robert Phillips.
BY this information you see the unfortunateness of the times, and how full
time it was that this Assembly should meet to serve his Majesty, and to
preserve our selves, and I am confident we come hither with fullness of both,
and all shall conduce to a happy conclusion, and to the King's honor and our
own safety: Great and weighty things wound deep. Cast your eyes which way you
please, and you shall see violations on all sides: look at the liberty of the
subject, look on the privilege of this House, let any say if ever he saw the
like violation by inferior Ministers, that over-do their command, nay they
say, if all the Parliament were in you, this would we do and justify. If we
suffer the liberty of this House to wither, out of fear, or complement, we give
a wound to the happiness of this Kingdom: Here the course of justice was
interrupted, and order in the Exchequer was made for stay of the goods; since
here is a seizure (upon the approach of Parliament) of goods amounting to 5000.
l. for a pretended duty of 200 l. In the sight of King James, by reason of the
sickness that then was, the Parliament was prorogued, and then there was some
boldness to take this Tonnage and Poundage, for there was no right to demand
it. Let us proceed with affection of duty to make up breaches: let a Committee
consider of these proceedings.

Mr. Littleton,
HEre Mr. Littleton made a short speech to second him, and all to the same
purpose: but for brevity sake I omit it.

M. Littleton, we have had good admonitions, and have followed them, we have
moderation preached unto us in Parliament, and we follow, I would others did
the like out of Parliament. Let the parties be sent for that violated the
liberties of the Parliament, and have their doom.

This Speech was occasioned by Setretary Cook, who in his Speech desired
moderation might be used.

Sir John Elliot,
I See by this Relation what cause we have to be tender of the liberty of the
Kingdom, and this House, and yet withal to return that moderation, as to give
satisfaction to the world, that our hearts are fixed to serve his Majesty, and
to free us from ofter of jealousy, 3 Things are involved in this complaint.
First, the Right of particular Gentlemen. Secondly, the Right of the Subject.
Thirdly, the Right and privilege of this House. Let the Committee consider of
the 2 former, but for the violation of the liberty of this House, let us not do
less than our fathers. Was ever the information of a Member committed to a
Committee? Let us send for the parties. Is there here a bare denial of the
restistution of the goods? was it not also said, that if all the Parliament
were contained in him they would do as they did? Let them be sent for* It was
ordered that the Officers of the Custom House should be sent for.


Mr. Seldom,
REported from the Committee concerning the printing of the Petition of Right,
that there were printed 1500 without any addition at all, which were published
in the time of the last Parliament: but since the Parliament other Copies have
been printed, and these suppressed and made waste paper, which the Printer did,
as he said, by command from Mr. Attorney, which he received from his Majesty:
and the Printer further said, that the Attorney was with the Lord Privy Seal at
White Hall, and there delivered unto the Printer sundry papers, with diverse
hands to them, and on the backside was endorsed thus, We will and command you
that these copies be printed.

Friday 23.
HIs Majesty sent the House a Message to this effect, That he willed them to
cease from the former debate of Tonnage and Poundage till the next day in the
afternoon, and that he would speak with them the next day in the afternoon
at White Hall in the Banqueting House.

Saturday 24.
THe King made a Speech to that purpose.

Monday 26.
MR. Walter did inform the House that diverse ships were laden with corn for
Spain, whereupon a Committee was appointed to inquire of the trading into
Spain, and to other enemies, transporting corn, and other Munition thither: it
is also ordered that some of the prime Council should presently move the King
about stay of the ships.

MR. Secretay Cook then moved that the Bill of Tonnage and Poundage might be
read, and after some debate, it was diverted, and they fell upon points of
Religion, the which Mr. Rowse did first mention.

See his former Speech at large.
Sir Francis Beamor,
IF Religion be not a Rule to all our actions, what policy can we have? If God
fight not our battles the help of man is in vain? In our defect, the cause
thereof is our defect in religion, and the sin is Idolatry and Popery, Papists
increase now more than ever they did: neither do they want their Priests and
Masses, nay his Majesty's name is used to stop proceedings against Papists, and
that since the Parliament, contrary to his Majesty's goodness, and public
profession, and contrary to his many proclamations, and many instructions to
the Judges; and whatsoever is done in the country is undone above.

Mr. Kirton,
IF ever, now it is time to speak, We see what men are raised to preferment; if
we look not to it I shall more fear it than the Spanish Armado, or the loss of
the Sound. Mountague was here questioned: We see the King to all our comforts
is right, it comes not from him, but some that are too near him, are too busy
in this. The ambition of the Clergy brought these stories: We see pulpits are
full of them, we see some that wear white and black it is more than Mountague;
let us bend our wits to reform them.

Mr. Sherland.
WE have a Religion that is worth the loving with all our hearts: it was settled
by the blood of Martyrs, and kept by miracles. To have our noses wiped of this
would grieve any heart; more, to see our Religion go away, and designs made of
it, and Arminianism still to increase, as it does. If do admi, I do persuade my
self the greater part of the Clergy, Nobility, and Gentry, are firm, but it is
the desire of some to labor to bring in a new faction of their own, and so to
drop into the ears of his Majesty, that those that oppose them oppose his
Majesty, and so they put him upon designs that stand not with public liberty,
that he commands what he lists, with Lives, Goods, and Religion, and does as he
pleases; and so they involve all true hearted Englishmen and Christians under
the name of Puritans, and so make their quarrel to be his Majesty's, which is
treason of the highest quality.

Tuesday 27.
A Petition was exhibited concerning one Lewis, that said about the 25 of
December, The Devil take the Parliament, which was avowed by 2 witnesses. It
was resolved to be an offense to the Parliament, and it was ordered he should
be sent for.

SIr Nathaniel Rich tendered a Petition touching the Fast, which was agreed to
be preferred to the King. It was ordered that a conference should be desired
with the Lords about this Petition, who were desired to join with the lower
House: which was done accordingly.

THe King sent a Message by Secretary Cook to this effect, viz. That his
Majesty understanding that the Remonstrance was called for, to take away all
question, commanded me to deliver it to you: but hops that you proceed with
the Bill of Tonnage and Poundage, and give precedence to that business, and to
give an end to further dispute between some of his Subjects, or else he shall
think his Speech that was with a good applause accepted, had not that good
effect which he expected. But before his Messege there was a report made by Mr.
Pym for a Committee for Religion, where a motion was made about the
Remonstrance the last Session, concerning that part which touches Religion:
and the Clark answered, that by command from the King he delivered it to the
Lord Privy Seal; and so the Committee proceeded no farther.

SIr Walter Earl replied to the Message: The last part of the Message calls me
up. For point of precedence, Religion challenges the precedence and the right
of our best endeavors. Vbi dolor ibi digitus. I know justice and liberty is
Gods cause, but what will justice and liberty do when Popery and Arminianisme
join hand in hand together to bring in a Spanish Tyranny, under which those
Laws and liberties must cease? What has been done for Religion since the last
Session? We know what declarations have been made, what persons have been
advanced, what truths confirmed by all Authority of Church, Councels, and
King. For my part, I will forgo my life and estate and liberty, rather than my
Religion. And I dare boldly affirm, that never was more corruption between
Religion and matters of state, than is at this present time. Humana consilia
castigantur ubi, coelestibus se praeferunt. Let us hold our selves to method;
and that God that carried us through so many difficulties the last Parliament
Session, will not be wanting to us now.

Mr. Corrington,
LEt us not do Gods work negligently: We receive his Majesty's Message withal
duty; for our proceedings let us so proceed as it may soonest conduce to his
Majesty's desire. Unity concerns all of us: the unity of this house is sweet,
especially in Gods cause; let us cry and cry again for this let us be resolved
into a Committee, and presently fall to debate thereof.

UPon Mr. Pyms motion. It was ordered that Religion should have the precedence,
and that the particulars before named should be taken into consideration by a
Committee of the whole House.

Wensday 28. Secretary COOK delivered another Message from his Majesty.
HIs Majesty upon occasion of dispute in this House about Tonnage and Poundage,
was pleased to make a gracious declaration, wherein he commended unto us the
speedy finishing thereof, and to give precedence thereto: and since his Majesty
understanding the preferring the Cause of Religion, his Majesty expected rather
thanks than a Remonstrance, yet he does not interrupt you, so you do not
entrench upon that which does not belong unto you; But his Majesty still
commanded me to tell you that he expects precedence in Tonnage and Poundage,
assuring himself he has given no occasion to put it back, and so you will not
put it off.

To this Mr. Long replied,
I Cannot see but with much sorrow, how we are still pressed to this point, I
hoped those near the Chair would have truly informed his Majesty of our good
intentions, but we see how unhappy we are still, some about his Majesty makes
him diffident of us.

Sir Thomas Edmonds,
I am sorry this House has given occasion, of so many Messages about Tonnage
and Poundage, after his Majesty has given us a full satisfaction. You may
perceive his Majesty is sensible of the neglect of his business; we that know
this, should not discharge our duties to you, if we should not persuade you to
that course, which should procure his Majesty's good opinion of you. Your
selves are witnesses how industrious his Majesty was to procure you gracious
Laws in his Fathers time, and since that what enlargement he has made of our
liberties, and yet still we give him cause to repent him of the good he has
done. Consider how dangerous it is to Alienate his Majesty's heart from
Parliamens.

Mr. Corington,
When men speak here of neglect of duty to his Majesty, let them know we know
no such thing, nor what they mean, and I see not how we do neglect the same, I
see it is all our hearts to expedite the Bill of Tonnage and Poundage in due
time: our business is still put back by these Messages, and the business in
hand is of God and his Majesty: Things are certainly amiss, and every one sees
it, and woe be to us if we present them not to his Majesty.

Sir John Elliot, His Speech to the same effect.
IT was ordered that a Committee should be appointed, to pen an Answer to his
Majesty's Message, and show that it is their resolution to give him all
expeditions in his service, and that they hold it fit not only to give him
thanks, but further to show what peril we are in, and that Tonnage is their
own gift, and it is to arise from themselves, and that they intend not to enter
into any thing that belongs not unto themselves.

Thursday 29.
THe former part of the day was spent in dilating of the transportation of corn
and victuals into Spain: and it was ordered that Message should be sent to his
Majesty, that it is now evident that diverse ships are bound for Spain; and to
desire a stay of them. After the House sat at a Committee about Religion, after
long debate it was resolved by the Commons-House as before.

Friday 30.
THe House received an answer from his Majesty touching the Ships, which was,
that he would consider of it, and send them an answer in due time.

Also this day a Committee of the Lower House went to the King in the
Privy-Chamber with the Petition for the Fast; and the Archbishop of York,
after he had made a short Speech, presented it to his Majesty in the name of
both Houses. To which the King answered.

Monday Febr. 2.
THe Lower House presented a declaration to his Majesty in answer to two
Messages sent by him.

Tuesday 3.
SEcretary Cook reported, that himself and the rest of the Committees attended
his Majesty upon Monday: and he said, For my part I have used all diligence to
do all the commands of my Master and this House, and I find that some
exceptions have been taken at some words by me used, when I delivered the Bill
of Tonnage and Poundage, Indeed I used many Arguments in speaking of his
Majesty, I said it much concerned him, and that his Majesty much desired it,
and I required it in his name; which I did not intend but to avoid dispute:
and I said not this was an ordinary revenue, but this Tonnage was the means to
enable his Majesty to set his Fleet to sea.

After this Apology, he read his Majesty's answer to the Petition of the
Lower House.

Sir John Elliot,
Mr. Speaker, I confess this has given great satisfaction for present desires
and future hopes; and howsoever I find the misinterpretation of some, and the
danger of Religion; yet I find his Majesty's ears open, and if these things be
thus as we see, that then he is not rightly counseled. I am confident we shall
render his Majesty an account of what he expects: but Sir, I apprehend a
difference between his Majesty's expression, and the expression of his
Ministers.

First Sir, that Bill was here tendered in his Majesty's name, and now we find
his Majesty disavows it, that he did it not. What wrong is this done to his
Majesty and to this House, to press things in his Sovereigns name, to the
prejudice and distraction of us all? I think him not worthy to sit in this
House.

Mr. Speaker,
THis Honorable person did explain himself, that he did not press it in his
Majesty's name, but only did commend it to your considerations.

Secretary Cook,
I Said, that in regard of the difference between his Majesty and his
Subjects, my desire was to accommodate it.

Sir Humfrey May,
IF ye be too quick to except against the ministers of his Majesty, that serve
his Majesty and this House, it will discourage and stop our mouths whose
service ye daily commend.

At the Committee for Religion.
Sir. John Elliot,
FOr the way of our proceedings, to show the weight and unity thereof to all
the world, we have laid a good foundation. I collect out of the particulars
about the Article of Lambeth, that the difference was in the manner of the use
of them, but all did profess the truth and worth of them: at which unity in
all our hearts we may all rejoice; whereas the enemy abroad gives out, that we
are at faction amongst our selves, whereas all of us took them granted, not
only to make use of them to oppose our adversaries, but also for the worth of
them. Let us boldly rely on the ground already laid, let us look to them that
offended us in this our truth, which I hope we shall live and die in, if there
be cause. Are there Arminians? (for so they are called) look to this, see what
degree they creep, let us observe their Books and Sermons, let us strike at
them, and make our charge at them, and vindicate our truth that seems yet
obscure: and if any justify themselves in their new opinions, let us deal with
them, and then testimony will be needful, our truth is clear, our proofs will
be many, and if these parties will dare to defend themselves, then seek for
proof.

The Remonstrance of the last Parliament was read in part about Arminians, and
also his Majesty's Declaration printed with the book of Articles, and the
Proclamation against Mountagne.

Wednesday Febr. 4.
A Bill preferred that no Clergie-man shall be in Commission for Peace, except
Bishops, Deans, Vice-Chancellors of both Universities, etc. within their
several jurisdictions.

Doctor Reeves, which sat as Judge upon the Conservation of Mr. Mountague,
called in and examined, says, That Objections were offered Ore tenus, and
after offered in writing, but he rejected the same, because they had not an
advocates hand; and upon the whole says, he durst neither admit of any
objections for the present, nor give time for the same, upon pain of praemunire
by the Statute.

Doctor Talbot and Doctor Steward are assigned for Council with Mr. Jones the
Printer in his Cause.

Mr. Seldom,
THe point considerable is not whether Doctor Reeves has done well or ill, for
he did but as any discreet man would have done, but the point is now whether
Mr. Mountague be a lawful Bishop or no. Neither is the question to be debated,
whether the exceptions be lawful or no, but being legal, of what force they be
to hinder the confirmation of the Bishop. All which is agreed, and Doctor
Reeves for the present discharged.

A Petition is preferred by Thomas Ogle against Doctor Cosens, with Articles
annexed thereunto, tending to the introducing of Popish Doctrine and Popish
Ceremonies into the Cathedral Church at Durham.

Sir Euball Thelwall,
THere were two affidavits that Cosens should say, That the King had no more to
do with Religion than his Horse-keeper; and that by the appointment of Mr.
Attorney these affidavits were taken, and he said, to the end a Bill in
Star Chamber might be filed against him. But since Cosens has his pardon; and
the King was told it was only raised by the spleen of some Puritan.

Mr. Shervile,
DEsired that search might be made for the pardons; There were four pardons
under the Great Seal granted to Mountague, Sibthorpe, Cosens and Manwering: it
pardons all Treasons, Premunires, Errors, erroneous Opinions, and all false
Doctrines, scandalous Speeches or Books, and all offenses by word and deed, all
corrupt contracts, etc. Treason to the person of the King, and Witchcraft only
excepted.

Mr. Rousse,
HEre are four persons that have made the Commonwealth sick; thus by the
Physic you see the Diseases: but I conceive there is other physic to be
ministered to those rotten Members, for questionless this is not to be cured
but by cutting off those Members.

Mr. Kirton,
MAster Kirton moved, that the procurers of these Pardons might be enquired
after, that it might be seen, who gave order to the Signet for the going forth
of those Pardons; for questionless there are Cosens at Court too.

Sir Robert Philips,
IF ever any was abused, it was our King in granting those pardons: we would
save the time of doing any thing, if this be not searched to the bottom. The
goodness of our King is much abused. I desire the Attorney may give account by
what Warrant he drew these pardons, so shall we find out those that misled the
King to the heart-grief of us all. It is high time to find out all these things.

A Committee was hereupon named, to enquire who have been the Solicitors and
Procurers of these pardons.

Sir Edward Giles,
I Know not what prevention may happen in these, for questionless the devil of
hell has his hand in it: Therefore presently let us send for Mr. Attorney.
Which was Ordered.

Sir James Perotte,
SIr James Perotte complains further of some instruments of the Bishop of
London, and Doctor Turner, who denied the License of printing the Articles of
Ireland: That diverse books have been licensed by the Bishop of Londons
Chapplains, and then refuse the same, declaring they are of a contrary opinion,
and haven given license to Mr. Chomley and Mr. Butterfield, and therefore would
not give license to these.

Mr. Pym,
MAster Pym does make a full Report of all the proceedings against Mr.
Mountague, since the last Parliament of King James.

Sir Robert Phillips,
REported from Mr. Attorney, that my Lord of Dorset spoke to him to hasten the
Pardons, and that he received a Warrant from the King for drawing them; that my
Lord Carleton brought another Warrant from the King for drawing these pardons,
telling him, that he must make expedition therein, and he must draw the same as
the Council of the parties did direct the same. That Mr. Attorney having made a
rough Draught, being often urged to expedition by the Bishop of Winchester, he
sent the same to the Bishop, who inter-lined and corrected the same, adding the
names of Cosens, Manwering, and Sibthorp to the pardon.

That Mr. Attorney may be asked whether any of these Lords were made acquainted
with the affidavit about Cosens. A Messenger is sent to the Lord Keeper, to
know the reason wherefore he made stop of the Great Seal, and by what
solicitations he was pressed thereunto.

Thursday 5.
A Petition in complaint of an imposition upon Malt, by the City of London,
was this day preferred to the House, which is prefered to the Committee for
Grievances. Some differences being observed in the Articles, as in the
twentieth Article, etc. a Committee is to Compare the old and new Articles with
the Records at Lambeth, and consider how all those differences come in.

Mr. Long,
Complains, that a Prosecution has been against him in the Star Chamber for
sitting in this House the last Session, he being High Sheriff of Wiltshire, and
chosen Burgess of Bath in Somersetshire.

The Preachers are to be chosen to morrow at the Committee for Religion.

Mr. Ogle,
IS called, who averreth his Petition, and will prove the same by witnesses. It
is Ordered, that Cosens shall have intimation to attend to answer here, if he
will on Monday come fortnight, to be sent for by a Sergeant at Arms, and if he
be not of the Convocation; but if he be, then to have notice by the Speakers
letters, and if thereupon he appear not, then to proceed with him as is usual
in like Cases.

If Witnesses be sent for to this House in any Public business, they are to
pay their own Charges.

Secretary Gook,
Says, He has very now received from a Noble person this Message from his
Majesty, That he has appointed the eighteenth of this Month for the Fast for
this place, and the twentieth of the next Month for the whole kingdom.

Sir Robert Phillips,
Moves in the behalf of the Lord Peircie, that having a Cause in dispute in
the Lords House, and three Members of this House being of his Counsel, desires
they may have leave to plead his Cause: Which being conceived to be a Cause
that is not to receive any Judgment here, it is granted.

Friday.
A Petition exhibited against one Wittington a Papist in Northumberland,
Ordered to be sent for by a Sergeant at Arms.

Mr. Harris of St. Margarets Westminster, Mr. Harris of Hanwell in Oxfordshire,
Mr. William Fitz-Ieofferies of Cornwall, are chosen for three Preachers for the
day of the Fast, and for the precedence is referred to the Preachers themselves.

Mr. Shervill
REported, one Parson Scall procured the Pardon for Mountague; one Bartholomew
Baldwin solicited the Pardon for Manwering.

There is also another Pardon found to be granted to Manwering, pardoning the
Judgment late he had given by the High Court of Parliament, and all sums due
to the King thereby.

Sir Nathaniel Rich,
THat we may do somewhat which may give content to those who sent us hither,
and make expedition to the business of his Majesty and the Commonwealth. That
therefore the business of Mr. Mountague may be expedited to the Lords, that
they may enter into these things as well as we.

The Council of Mr. Jones the Printer are to be heard upon Monday next.

Sir O. Roberts
Reports from the Committee sent to Mr. Attorney, that Mr. Attorney staid for
the Affidavits taken by Sir Euball Thelwall. That one Heath a Gentleman of
Grays-Inne, told Mr. Attorney, that Cosens should say, that the King was not
supreme of the Church, and that he had no more to do with Religion, than he
that rubs his horse heels.

Mr. Attorney acquainted the King; whereupon the King charged him to make a
strict Inquisition herein: but the King would not believe the same to be true.
Mr. Attorney sent for his Kinsman again, and being examined, he said so as
affidavits were made thereon.

There was further certificate from the Dean and others at Durham, so that the
business was much lessened thereby: but Mr. Attorney pressing the business
further, casually met with the Bishop of Winchester, who said to Mr. Attorney,
that this business will come to nothing, and King, that made the affidavit was
but a vain fellow.

The Affidavit of Thomas King was read, which verifieth the same.

Mr. Seldom made the rest of this Report, and delivered the Warrant by which
Mr. Attorney drew the Pardons for the Bishop of Winchester. The effect was,
that what Mr. Mountague had done or writ, was not out of any ill meaning; such
a Pardon should be drawn as Mr. Mountagues Council should direct. This Warrant
was under the Lord Dorchester, being the Lord Carleton.

Mr. Seldom delivers likewise the Copy of the Pardon interlined, and razed
by the Lord Bishop of Winchester.

Sir John Elliot.
HEre is high Treason upon oath, a Deposition upon oath, an opposition is not
in Law to be admitted; for here is not only an Admission, but an Invitation of
Certificates for defense, and allowed to sway the case of so high a nature;
that therefore the parties that made the Affidavits, and Mr. Attorney may be
examined, to make a better disquisition in this, for I fear the intimation of
the Bishop of Winchester swayed too far with Mr. Attorney. Be matter true or
false, the neglect of the duty of the Attorney is not to be excused. I am much
grieved to see his Majesty's mercy run so readily to these kind of persons,
and his justice so readily upon others, trifling occasions, nay upon no
occasions, nay upon no occasion, only the misinformation of some Minister. Mr.
Attorney being by Writ to attend the Lords House, cannot be enjoined to attend
this House or to appear upon Warrant: wherefore Mr. Littleton and Mr. Seldom,
being of the same Inn of Court, have undertaken to give notice to Mr.
Attorney, that there being as accusation here against him, he may here answer
and satisfy the House on Monday next.

Saturday.
A Bill against Spiritual Symonie, and a Bill against buying or selling of
places of Judicature.

Mr. Kirton moved, That a time may be appointed to take into consideration the
business of Tonnage and Poundage.

Sir Walter Earl secondeth his motion, that all the world may know, that we
will give to God that which is Gods, and to Caesar that which is Cesars, and to
our Country that which is theirs.

Sir Walter moves, That the Merchants may have their goods, and that his
Majesty may be moved therein.

It is Ordered, That the House on Tuesday next, in a Committee, shall take into
consideration the business of Tonnage, Poundage, and all things incident
thereto.

Mr. Shervill is nominated to take the Chair of the Committee.

Sir Rober Phillips
REported from the Committee for Course of Justice: A Petition of Complaints
was exhibited by Mr. Noell, a Member of this House, against Sir Ed. Moseley
Attorney of the Duchy Court, and his man, in point of injustice, That Moseley
covenanteth, that his man Brograve should have 80 pounds, and then he should
have an Injunction; but the Chancellor having Intimation thereof prevented the
same, yet after by Covenant, Moseley procured his man 50 pounds; That this was
an ordinary course, cited many particulars, that Moseley would in his private
Chamber add to Orders, or detract from them, or that was for the King, or
against the King, as men would come off to him.

This is referred to a Committee to be examined.

Mr. Seldom,
REported from the examination of Allen, for so much as concerns the
Privilege of this House, by the first and third Article against him.

This justified by a Letter written by Allen, to Mr. Barton; the Puritan
faction denied supply like Watermen provoked to War, rowed another way: for
his Author of this, he produces a book set forth by King James, in the 19 year
of his Reign, page 13. to show how the Puritan faction be clear, by mentioning
the particular Members of the Commons House, and page 5. and in the same page
all which they cloak with Religion: and when he had boldly insisted on these,
he said, I pray note it; It is not this Parliament I speak of, it was another.

Sir Robert Phillips,
THat he may be sent to the Tower, and that he may stand in some public place,
with a Paper declaring the cause, or such other punishment as the House shall
think fit.

Mr. Pym,
THat other matter of greater importance being under examination, he may for
the present rest in custody, and I doubt not but there is matter sufficient to
inflict further punishment.

Ordered that Allen shall first answer his contempt at the Committee for
Religion, on Monday next.

Mr. Shervile,
THat the Committee for Pardons is sine die, therefore he moves for another
day, whereupon there is order to meet this afternoon.

Mr. Seldom reported the draught of Mr. Mountagues interlined Pardon,
concerning the Additions more than an ordinary Coronation Pardon, except
sundry causes depending in the three Courts in Westminster Hall, and the High
Commission Court.

For Manwering, all offenses for time past, and for time to come.

Sir John Stanhope
Moves, That one Lynne a Member of this House, and Secretary to the Bishop of
Winchester, may look on the Pardon, and be enjoined to declare whether he know
the hand or no.

Mr. Lynne declares the interlined particulars, to be part his Lords hand, and
part his own hand, by his Lords command; yet some of the interlined particulars
he knew not the hand.

Sir Nathaniel Rich thanked this Gentleman for dealing clearly with the House,
and says, for his encouragement, he deserves thanks from the whole House.

Sir John Elliot moves, That a select Committee may extract a charge against
the Bishop of Winchester, that we may have judgment against him.

Sir Daniel Norton,
THat a Doctor of Divinity, in the Bishop of Winchesters Diocese, a very grave
Divine, Doctor Moor, the Bishop of Winchester said to him, he had heard him
often preach against Popery before the Kings Majesty, which was very pleasing
to the King; but now he must not. The Doctor answers, he must if it comes in
his way: said the Bishop, you must not; and further, your Tables in the Quier
stand as in an alehouse. The Doctor replied, they stood according to Law:
says the the Bishop, there be Articles to controove: said the Doctor, the
Register found it contrary, saying, Your Tables at Winchester stood as Altars.

Sir Robert Phillips,
THus you see how truth in the discovery does grow upon us. And now you see
how the introducing Ceremonies at Durham does arise; and now you see the
greatest aspersion laid on his Majesty that ever I heard of; and now I am
confident the Bishop of Durham procured the Kings hand to the Pardons.

Chancellor of the Duchy,
THis trencheth high to the person of the King, and I am glad to hear it, and
shall be more glad to see it proved.

Sir Thomas Heal
Says, he heard these words from Doctor Moors own mouth: and asking if he
would prove this in Parliament, he said, he would maintain it with his life.

Mr. Valentine
Says, That this Bishop has a Chaplain in Grantham, that preached they were
all damned that refused the Loan, and that he has made a great combustion in
placing the Communion Table there.

The Speakers Letter is to go for Doctor Moore.

Monday 9.
A Petition in complaint of the Post-Masters Patent of London, which is
referred to a Committee.

Mr. Speaker delivered from Mr. Attorney, a Warrant in writing, of his
proceedings in Cosens business.

Mr. John Elliot reported from the Committee for examination of the Merchants
business, that the Committee finding Sheriff Acton in prevarications, and
contradictions in his examinations, which is conceived to be a contempt of this
House, desires he may be sent for to answer his contempt.

Mr. Godwin says, the Sheriff acknowledges his error, and humbly desires so
much favor, that he may once again be called before the Committee, and if then
he give not full contentment by his answer, he will refer himself to the
wisdom and justice of the House.

Mr. Walter secondeth this Motion, so did Alderman Molson, Secretary Cook,
Chancellor of the Duchy, etc. but his abuse being declared to be so great and
so gross, and that he had so many times given him to recollect himself, and
that he being so great an Officer of so great a City, had had all the favor
that he might be, and yet rejected the same, and carried himself in a very
scornful manner; wherefore it is Ordered, that he shall be sent for to the
House as a Delinquent to Morrow morning.

Jones the Printer and his Council are called in to argue the business of Mr.
Mountagues Episcopal Confirmation.

First Quere, Whether the exceptions be legal.

Secondly, whether the Confirmation be good? The last is the point now in hand,
to which the House enjoined the Council to speak.

The Council proposed a Third Quere; What will be the fruit or effect of it, if
in Law the Confirmation prove void? In this the Council said, it will not
extend to make him a Bishop upon the point of Election, but upon the point of
Confirmation only, which makes him punishable if he execute any thing
concerning the Bishopric.

Sir Hen. Martin says, The exception making void the Confirmation, does in Law
work also upon the Election.

Doctor Steward says, The point of setting to of the Advocates hand, is but
matter of Form in the Court, no matter of Law.

Sir Henry Martin says, he will endeavor himself to give the House as full
satisfaction, and he will speak without relation to the Kings Right and Laws of
the Realm.

The Proclamation by the Common Law should not be at Bow Church, but at the
Cathedral Church of the Diocese where the Bishop is to be elected, and the Dean
and Charter of that Diocese is to except, and not every one that will. The
Argument is endless, and to alter a course so long settled, I conceive it is
plain, the King and the Law have power to deprive him of his Bishopprick if he
deserves the same; I think therefore it were good to decline this dispute for
the present, and to proceed to remove him which we are allowed.

Tuseday 10.
A Bill for Ordering the Government and Plantation of the Summer Islands.

A Bill to restrain some abuses in Ministers and Magistrates.

Mr. Rowles complains, that since his last complaint of the breach of the
liberties of this House, his Warehouse has been locked up by one Massey a
Pursevant, and that yesterday he was called forth from the Committee in the
Exchequer-chamber, and served with a Subpena to appear in Star Chamber; but
that since he received a Letter from Mr. Attorney, that it was a mistake. The
Subpena was read, but the Letter not suffered to be read.

Sir Robert Phillips,
YOu see we are made the Subject of scorn and contempt. I conceive this to be a
bone thrown by those that have drawn a cloud over our sun, our Religion, to
divert or interrupt us in the prosecution of them. I desire the Messenger may
be sent for, and examined by what procurement this Subpena was taken forth: for
if we find not out those that throw these scorns upon us, it is in vain to sit
here.

Mr. Chancellor of the Duchy,
THis proceeds from some great error; for I will assure you, this never
proceeded from King nor Council. I therefore desire it may be searched to the
bottom, for be confident, neither King nor Council have cast in this as a bone.

Mr. Seldom,
THis is not to be reckoned an Error, for questionless this is to affront us,
and our own Liberties is the cause of this.

It is Ordered, that Shemington the Messenger that served the Subpena be
presently sent for to the House.

A Committee of six are appointed to see the information in Star Chamber, and
to examine the same, and by whom the same was put in: and they have power to
send for persons, or records that may inform them.

A general Order agreed on, That all the Committees that have power to send for
parties, shall have power to command any of them as they shall think fit, to
attend the House at such times as they shall think fit.

The privilege of the Merchants that are Planters here, may be taken into
consideration by this Committee, concerning the information in Star Chamber.

Sheriff Acton called into the Bar as a Delinquent, upon his knees says, if
he have erred, it is through want of memory and ignorance; for he intended not
the least dislike, or distaste to any Member of the House.

Mr. Long moved he might be sent to the Tower.

Sir Francis Seymour,
THat he may now be referred back to the Committee to be reexamined, if then he
deal not clearly, this House may proceed to further punishment.

Mr. Seldom,
I Cannot remember when we did commit a Sheriff of London, but I remember when
the House did commit both the Sheriffs of London to the Tower, for an abuse of
less nature, only for countenancing of a Sergeant in an Arrest on a Member of
Parliament, though they did acknowledge their faults at the Bar, which this
man has not yet done; the Sergeant was sent to Little-ease, the person, at
whose suit he was Arrested, was committed to the Fleet, and both the Sheriffs
to the Tower.

Mr. Kirton,
I Came into this House with as good an heart to this man as any man, for I was
spoken to to stand for him as I came in, and I promised to do what favor I
could: but if he were my brother he should to the Tower.

Mr. Littleton,
YOu see the affronts by books, by preaching, by rumors, by being daily sued,
with Process, that are put upon us, that we are become but a mere Scarecrow:
the neglect of our duty is the cause of this, it is high time to remedy this,
or it is in vain to sit here.

The Sheriff is again called in to the Bar on his knees, and is sentenced to
the Tower.

Sir Ben. Ruddiard,
THere be diverse Recantations, Submissions, and Sentences remaining on Record,
in both Universities against Arminianisme, that concerning any thing that may
conduce to our end, the Speakers Letter may be sent to the Vicechancellor, for
those Records: which is Ordered.

It is Ordered, that Worsnam Daws and Garmarthen, are to be at the Bar upon
Friday.

Wednesday 11.
MAster Seldom reported concerning the Process of the Merchants, the Coppie of
the Bill brought in and read, that the Merchants did Plot, Practice, and
Combine together against the peace of the Kingdom. This being conceived to be a
business incident to Tonnage and Poundage, is Ordered to be referred till to
Morrow morning.

Mr. Seldom,
THat a Report shall be made to morrow of the Examination of the Complaints of
the Merchants, and the information in the Exchequer may also be brought; which
was also Ordered.

Ordered, That in respect the Term ends to Morrow, and the Assizes is to
follow, and diverse Members Lawyers may be gone down, it is Ordered, that none
shall be gone without leave of the House.

It is alsu Ordered, That the Speakers Letter be sent for Sir Edward Cook.

At the Committee for Religion.
MAster Walter delivered a Petition of the Booksellers and Printers, in
complaint of the restraint of books written against Popery and Arminianisme,
and the contrary allowed of, by the only means of the Bishop of London; and
that diverse of them have been so Pursevanted for printing of Orthodox books,
and that the licensing of books, is now only restrained to the Bishop of
London and his Chaplains.

One of the Printers said he tendered diverse books, one called, The golden Spur
to the heavenly Race. That Turner, one of the Bishop of Londons Chaplains said,
That if he would put out the point, That a man may be certain of his Salvation,
he would license the same: notwithstanding he put out that point, yet he could
not get the same licensed.

Mr. Seldom, The refusing the Licensing of books is no crime, but the Licensing
of bad books is a crime, or the refusing to license books, because then writ
against Popery or Arminianisme is a crime. There is no Law to prevent the
printing of any book in England, only a Decree in Star Chamber: therefore that
a man should be sued and imprisoned, and his goods taken from him, is a great
Invasion on the Liberty of the Subject: moves a Law to be made upon this.

This is referred to a select Committee to examine.

Mr. Shervile,
REported concerning the Pardons, that they have examined Doctor Sibthorp and
Cosens Pardons. Sibthorp solicited his own Pardon, and said, he would get the
Bishop of Winchester to get the Kings hand to it.

It is evident, that the Bishop of Winchester got the Kings hand to Sibthorp
and Cosens Pardons, and also Mountagues Pardon was promised by him.

That Doctor Manwering solicited his own Pardon, and the Bishop of Winchester
got the Kings hand to it.

It is likewise said, the Pardons were all drawn by Mr. Attorney before there
was any Warrant.

Mr. Cromwell says, he had by relation from one Doctor Beard, that Beard said,
Doctor Allablaster had preached flat Popery at Paul's Cross; the Bishop of
Winchester commanded him, as he was his Diocesan, that he should preach nothing
to the contrary.

Sir Robert Philips says, One Doctor Marshall will relate as much said to him
by the Bishop of Winchester, as the Bishop said to Doctor Moor.

Mr. Kirton, That Doctor Marshall and Doctor Beard may be sent for. This
Bishop, though he has leapt through many Bishoprics, yet he has left Popery
behind him.

That Cosens frequenting the Printing House, has caused the Book of
Common Prayer to be new printed, and has changed the word Minister into
Priest, and has put out in another place the word Elect: thus Cosens and his
Lord go hand in hand.

Sir Miles Fleetwood says, We are to give Mountague his Charge, and by his
books, charge him with Schism in error of Doctrine, Faction in point of State,
Thirdly matter of Aggravation.

Sir Walter Earl,
QUi color albus erat, nunc est contrarius albo. says, Doctor White has sold
his Orthodox books, and bought Jesuiticall books; and moves that Bishop White,
may go arm in arm with Mountague. Ordered a select Committee to be named, to
digest these things that have been already agitated, concerning the Innovation
of Religion, the Cause of the Innovation, and the Remedy.

Thursday 12.
THe Sheriff of London, upon his submission at the Bar, is released his
imprisonment in the Tower.

Sir John Elliot made the Report for the Committee, in the examination of the
complaint of Merchants, and delivered the Orders and Injunctions into the
Exchequer.

At a great Committee for Tonnage and Poundage, Mr. SHERVIL in the Chair,
MAster Waller delivered a Petition from Chambers, Felke, and Gilborn, in
complaint of an information against them in the Star Chamber, about Tonnage and
Poundage, and that by the restraint of their goods they are like to be undone.

Sir John Elliot,
THe Merchants are not only kept from their goods by Customers, but by a
pretended Justice in a Court of Justice, as the Exchequer. I conceive, if the
Judges of that Court, had their understanding enlightened of their error by
this House, they would reform the same, and thereby the Merchants suddenly come
to their goods.

Mr. Transtort conceives this to be a difficult way for us to go.

Mr. Corington, Let it be done which way the House shall think fit, but I
conceive the Merchants shall have their goods before we can think of the Bill.
Kings ought not by the Law of God thus to oppress their Subjects. I know we
have a good King, and this is the advice of his wicked Ministers: but there is
nothing can be more dishonorable unto him.

Mr. Stroud, That it may be Voted, That the Merchants may have their goods
before we enter on the Bill.

Chancellor of the Duchy, I shall speak my opinion, because I know not
whether I shall have liberty to speak, or you to hear any more. All the
proceedings of the King and his Ministers, was to keep the Question safe until
this House should meet; and you shall find the proceedings of the Chequer were
Legal; and thus much, not knowing whether I shall have a days liberty to speak
any more here again.

Mr. Thesaurer, There is none here but would think it a hard thing, that a
Possession should be taken from us without any order for Sequestration, that
therefore it was not to be suffered, that these few men should so unjustly
disturb the Government of the State. Desires there may be no interruption, but
that we may proceed to settle the Tonnage.

Mr. Corington, I hope we may speak here, as I hope we may speak in heaven, and
do our duties, and let no fear divert us.

Mr. Waller, It is not so few as 500 Merchants are threatened in this.

Sir Robert Phillips moves, we may go to the King, and satisfy him of these
interruptions.

Mr. Noy, We cannot safely give, unless we be in possession, and proceedings in
the Exchequer nullified, and information in the Starchamber, and the Annexion
to the Petition of Right, and other Records. I will not give my voice to this,
until these things be made void; for it will not be a Gift, but a
Confirmation. Neither will I give, unless these interruptions be removed, and a
Declaration in the Bill, That the King has no Right, but by our free gift.

If it will not be accepted as is fit for us to give it, we cannot help it. If
it be the Kings already, as by these new Records, then we need not to give it.

Mr. Seldom secondeth the Motion of sending a Message to the Exchequer,
declares a President of a Message sent into the Chancerie, for stay of
proceedings in a Cause, and it was obtained; and whatsoever the Judges return
it cannot prejudice us: the Law speaks by Record, and if these Records remain,
it will to posterity explain the Law.

Mr. Littleton, For the Right, there is no Lawyer so ignorant to conceive it,
nor any Judge in the Land to affirm it is against giving to the King, or going
on the Bill. In this case, by the Law, a man cannot be put to a Petition of
Right, but shall recover without Right.

Ordered, that a Message shall be sent to the Court of the Exchequer, That
whereas certain goods of the Merchants, have been stayed by Injunction from
that Court, by a false Affidavit, and that the Customers that made the
Affidavit, have upon examination of this House confessed, that the goods were
stayed only for duties contained in the book of Rates, that therefore that
Court would make void the orders and Affidavits in this business.

Friday 13.
A Petition against one Burges a Priest, who was here complained of the last
Session; some new Articles complained against him, that he could not get a
Copy of his Articles out of the house, until he was fain to get one
counterfeit himself a Puritan to get the same, and other new misdemeanors. He
is Ordered to be sent for.

Sir. John Elliot,
A Motion for Privilege of Merchants. Order is, That any man having a
Complaint depending here, in the mean time intimation shall be given to my Lord
Keeper, That no Attachment shall go forth against the Merchants.

Chancellor of the Duchy reported the Message to the Chequer Court, that the
Treasurer and the Barons, will forthwith take the same into consideration, and
return answer.

It is Ordered, Mr. Secretary Cook shall take care, that intimation shall be
given to the City about the Fast.

Doctor More called in, says, he was referred to the Bishop of Winchester, to
be censured for preaching a Sermon; the Bishop said he had heard him preach,
and deliver many pretty passages against the Papists, which pleased King
James, but he must not do so now.

That you have a brother that preaches against Bowing at the high Altar, or at
the name of Jesus; and that the Communion Tables stood as Tables in Alehouses;
but he would have them to be set as High Altars.

Dr. Moor is to deliver these things in writing to Morrow morning.

At the Committee for Religion.
SIr William Bawstrod, If we now speak not, we may for ever hold our peace;
when besides the Queens Mass, there are two other Masses daily: so that it is
grown ordinary with the out-facing Jesuits, and common in discourse, Will you
go to Mass? or, have you been at Mass at Somerset House? there coming 500 at a
time from Mass. Desires to know by what authority the Jesuits lately in
Newgate were released.

Mr. Corington, Doubts not but his Majesty's intention was good in the
Declaration lately published, but I conceive it will be made use of only to
our disadvantage; that therefore the Declaration made be taken into
consideration.

Sir Richard Gravenor
REports the proceedings of this House against Popery the last Session, and
what fruits have been thereon.

Sir Rober Phillips, If ever there were a necessity of dealing plainly and
freely, this is the time. There is an Admission of Priests and Jesuits, as if
it were in Spain or France: this increase of Papists, is by connivance of
persons in Authority.

Nine hundred and forty persons in houses of Religion, being English, Irish,
and Scots in the Netherlands, maintained by the Papists of England; and of this
I shall deliver the particulars, that we may frame a Remonstrance to the King,
that unless there be some better performance of his Majesty's late answers to
so many Petitions, our Religion will be past recoverie.

Mr. Corington, That the Papists, by Act of Parliament, or Laws of State* may
be removed from their offices, which we have just cause to suspect.

Mr. Seldom moves that these things may be debated in order, and first for
releasing the Jesuits that were arraigned at Newgate, whereof one was
condemned; they were 10 in number, which were Priests who had begun a College
here in London, about Clarkenwell: and these men could not attempt these acts
of boldness, but they must have great countenancers.

Secretary Cook,
THat a Minister (who is said to be himself) having notice of these 10, and
this College intended to be kept at Clarkenwell.

That it is plain there was a place appointed for this College, and Orders and
Relicts prepared.

This Minister made the King acquainted with it, and I should not do my duty,
if I should not declare how much his Majesty was affected with it. His
Majesty refers it to the special care of the Lords of the Council, who
examining the same, sent these ten persons to Newgate, and gave order to Mr.
Attorney, to prosecute the Law against them. That this College was first at
Edmonton, removed from thence to Camerwell, and thence to Clerkenwell.

Ordered, That all the Knights and Burgesses of the House, shall, to Morrow
morning declare their knowledge, what Letters or other hindrances have been
for the staying of proceedings against Recusants.

Mr. Long, a Justice of Peace, who is said to understand much in the business
of the College of Jesuits at Clarkenwell, is sent for and examined; says, by
the appointment of Mr. Secretary Cook, he apprehended these persons, and took
their Examinations; and says further, he heard they were delivered out of
Newgate by order from Mr. Attorney.

That Mr. Middlemore, or General Soliciter for the Papists, hired this house
for the Lord of Shrewsburie, a Papist, and that there are diverse books of
account, of payments and disbursments, to the value of 300 pounds per Annum,
with diverse Recusants names, who allowed toward the maitenance of this
College; and these books and papers, are in the hand of Mr. Secretary Cook.

Secretary Cook says, he cannot so amply declare the truth of the proceedings
herein, until he have leave from his Majesty.

One Cross a Pursevant, is to be examined upon oath: who declares, he could
discover diverse stoppages of the execution of the Laws against Recusants.

Saturday 14.
A Complaint against the Lord Lambert, a Baron of Ireland, and a Member of this
House; who being a Colonel of Soldiers in Midd. has imposed Four pence upon
every Soldier toward his Officers Charges, and the Petitioner, for refusing
to pay, was first set in the Stocks, and after, by the Lord Lambert, committed
to a Public prison.

It is Ordered, that the Lord Lambert shall be sent for to answer this.

Sir John Epsley desires leave to answer a Complaint that is in the Lords
house of Parliament against him.

Mr Seldom, That the use was, and cites Presidents, that no Commander could be
called to the Lords House, but it will trench much to the disadvantage of the
Privilege of this House; and until 18. Iac. there was never President to the
contrary. That therefore this may be considered of by a select Committee.

Ordered, that Sir John Epsley shall not have leave.

Mr. Chancellor of the Duchy, stiffly secondeth Mr. Seldens Motion.

Mr. Secretary Cook, I am as careful to maintain a good correspondencie with
the Lords, as any man; but connivances in this kind may overthrow the
fundamental Rights and Liberties of this House. Let it therefore seriously be
considered of; for this not only concerns the Right of this House, but the
Liberty of the Commonwealth.

Ordered, a select Committee shall be appointed to consider this.

Mr. Chancellor of the Duchy, delivers an answer in writing from the Lord
Chancellor, Trer. and Barons, to the Message sent to them.

Mr. Kirton,
WE looked for Satisfaction, but now you see a Justification of their actions.
I therefore desire now, we may proceed to consider of their proceedings, and
whether ever the Court of Exchequer held this course before, for staying of
Replevies; and whether these have been done by the Regal Prerogative of the
King, in his Court of Exchequer.

It is Ordered, that a select Committee of Lawyers, Chequer-men, shall take
this into consideration.

Mr. Seldom, We have delayed the proceeding with the Customers, expecting some
good success from the Chequer, but finding it otherwise, I desire the Customers
may be called to the Bar on Monday next. Which is Ordered.

At the Committee for Religion.
SIr Thomas Hobbie, from the Committee reported for the examination of the
Keeper and Clerk of Newgate, concerning the Priests, there being a Warrant
under the Attorneys hand for the deliverie of the Persons; a Warrant under the
Lord Chief Justices hand, according to a Letter which he received from the Lord
of Dorset, signifying, that it was his Majesty's pleasure, that the Priest
condemned should be reprived.

Another Warrant under the Attorneys hand, that the Priests condemned should be
reprived; and also in the Kings name to release those other nine persons.

Sir Nathaniel Rich, I am confident, the Grace of the King has been abused in
this; that therefore the privy Counselors of this House, may know whether it
were his Majesty's direction.

It is moved, that Mr. Secretary Cook, may first declare his knowledge in this.

One Cross, gave intimation of these persons.

First the Secretary, Super totam maternam, It is evident, that the College
at Clarkenwell, is a College of Jesuits, holden under a Foreign Supreme power.

Sir Francis Seymour taxes Mr. Attorneys affection and judgment in this, and
also declares continual Letters from Mr. Attorney in stay of proceedings
against Recusants. You see in this, how slightly Mr. Attorney has put over a
business of this weight to Mr. Long.

Cross the Pursevant says, there was an Eleventh man in the New Prison, and
the Keeper of that Prison said, he was delivered by Warrant from the
Councel-board.

Sir John Elliot, No man could find a way on which to vent his malice so much
to this Church and State, as by protecting these men. That this may be fixed
home on that great Lord of Dorset, that I fear has defiled his fingers too far
in this business; and on Mr. Attorney, whom I am sorry I have occasion to
nominate so often in this matter of Religion, in stopping of proceedings
against Recusants.

Mr. Recorder is ordered to be sent for, and to be examined in this, rather
than to be sent for, having had the Honor formerly to sit in the Chair.

Secretary Cook says, we shall find that the King, being merciful in case of
shedding blood, gave direction for the repriving of those Priests.

Sir. John Elliot, I doubt not when we shall declare the depth of this to his
Majesty, but he will render them to judgment that gave him advice herein.

Sir Nath. Rich, These Jesuits are bound by Sureties to answer further at the
Councel-board. I wish these Bonds would produce these Men, that by examination
of them, we may find out the whole pack of their Benefactors and Countenancers.

Mr. Long says, that he offering at Session the Evidence by order from M.
Attorney, the Lord Chief Justice Richardson interrupted him, and told him he
must speak to the point in issue, whether Priests or no Priests: and hereupon
the Judges consulted amongst themselves.

Mr. Seldom says, he was present at the Sessions, and plain Treason was
proved, and nothing done in it. The further examination of this is referred to
a select Committee.

Monday 16.
A Petition of Complaint against Sir Henry Martin, for disposing of the goods
of one Brown (who died intestate) to his own private use.

Sir Henry Martin, If I prove not my self as clear of this as St. John Baptist,
let me be reckoned to be a Jew.

Referred to the Committee for course of Justice.

At the Committee for Religion.
MAster Stroud, That the Lord Chief Justice may be called to give an account of
his stay of Justice, in the execution of the condemned Priests, which he ought
not to have done, though his Majesty signified his pleasure to the contrary.

Chancellor of the Duchy, That was a thing ordinary for a Chief Justice to
do in Queen Elisabeths and King James times, as also a Declaration in the
Star Chamber, that all condemned Priests should be sent to the Castle of
Wisbitch; and from hence (though the King had given no order for the replevie)
he might have taken his Warrant for his proceedings.

Mr. Seldom reports from the Committee, for the further examination of Mr.
Long, concerning the proceeding at Newgate against the Jesuits; whereby plainly
appears, that the evidence tendered in the Court at Newgate, did plainly
testify these men to be Priests, yet the Lord Chief Justice Richardson did
reject the same, against the sense of the rest of the Judges and Justices
present: whereby it is plain he dealt underhand to some of the Jesuits.

Ordered, That two Members shall be sent to each Judge that were present at the
Sessions at Newgate; who were said to be the Lord Chief Justice of the Kings
Bench, and the Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Justice Whitlock, Justice
Jones, and Justice Crook.

Tuseday 17.
MAster Chambers prefers another Petition, in complaint of a Warrant newly
proceeding from the Councel-board, for the stay of the Merchants goods, unless
they paid the duties that were due in King James his time.

Sir John Elliot, You see, as by the last answer from the Exchequer, the
Merchants were bounded within the Court to sue for their own; so they are now
debarred from all means of coming by their own.

It is Ordered, that the Customers shall attend the House on Thurseday next. In
the mean time it is referred to the former Committee.

Ordered, a Committee of six to Collect and take all the names at the Fast, and
to meet at eight of the Clock in the Morning.

Ordered, That a Committee shall consider of a speedy way to put the Merchants
in Possession of their goods, without which it is warned we sit here in vain.

Sir Thomas Hobbie, Reported from my Lord Chief Justice Hide, that he does not
remember any Papers tendered by Mr. Long were rejected, or that he affirmed they
were dangerous persons, and a College of Jesuits; but howsoever Mr. Long
tendered nothing to prove them so, but that he had diverse papers in his hand.

Mr. Wansford Reported from the Lord Chief Justice Richardson, who says, that
Mr. Long did discourse of the place and house, but did not press the reading of
any papers, neither does he know what was in the papers, neither knew he any
thing to prove the persons Priests.

Sir Thomas Barrington delivers the answer of Justice Jones, who says, the
same papers were offered by Mr. Long, but he knows not the Contents thereof,
nor the reason why they were refused: but he came late for want of his health,
and the second day was not there at all.

The like was Reported by Sir Will. Constable, from Justice Crook.

Sir Thomas Barrington says, Although that Justice Jones did not write the
name of my Lord Chief Justice Richardson, yet in discourse named him to be the
man that said, The point in proof is not whether they be Priests or no Priests.

Sir Nath. Rich, Here is a charge of a high nature on the Judges by Mr. Long.
That Mr. Long now may make good his Charge, or suffer for it: for there were
witnesses enough in the Court.

Ordered, Mr. Long to be here on Thurseday Morning.

Ordered, That the Justices about this time, shall be required to deliver in
the names of all Recusants remaining about the Town, and their conditions, and
what Country they be.

It is Moved, That the Gentlemen of the Inns of Court, and of the Chancerie,
may give in their knowledge what Recusants are there.

Sir John Stanhope, That the Court may give in the names of Recusants there,
likewise by what Warrant these be about the Town, and what public charge of
Office any of these persons have, also what Priests and Jesuits are in any
prison in London; for they have liberty sometimes to go five miles to say Mass.

Wednesday 18.
A Public Fast was kept by this House in Westminster, where were three Sermons.

Thursday 19.
MAster Dawes, one of the Customers, called in to answer the point of
Privilege in taking Mr. Rolls his goods, being a Member of this House, says,
he took Mr. Rolls goods by virtue of a Commission under the great Seal, and
other warrants remaining in the hands of Sir John Elliot. That he knew Mr.
Rolls to be a Parliament man, and Mr. Rolls demanded his Privilege; but he
did understand his Privilege to extend only to his person, not to his goods.

Mr. Dawes further says, he took those goods for such duties as were due in
King James his time, and that the King sent for him on Saturday last, and
commanded him to make no other answer.

Mr. Carmarthen, another Customer called in, says, he knew Mr. Rolls to be a
Parliament man, and that he told Mr. Rolls he did not find any Parliament man
exempted in their Commission, and if all the body of this House were in him,
he would not deliver the goods (if he said he said he would not, it was because
he could not.)

Mr. Wansforth, That the delinquence of these men may be declined for the
present, and that we may first go to the King by way of Remonstrance;
considering the matter from whence this did arise. If it were a single
Privilege, it were easily determined.

Mr. Seldom, If there be any near the King that mispresents our actions, let
the curse light on them, and not on us. And believe it, it is high time to
right our selves, and until we vindicate our selves in this, it will be in
vain to sit here.

Sir Nathaniel Rich moves, not to proceed in this, until it be by a select
Committee considered, in regard, the King himself gave order to stay these
goods, though the goods of a Parliament man.

Sir John Eliot, The heart-bloud of the Liberty of the Commonwealth, receives
its life from the Privilege of this House.

Resolved by question, that this shall be presently taken into consideration.
And being conceived a business of great consequence, It is Ordered, That the
House shall be dissolved into a Committee, for the more freedom of debate. Mr.
Harbert in the Chair of that Committee.

Friday 20.
A Petition of Complaint of a Conspiracy against a man's life, by the Lord
Deputy of Ireland, and others, to get the estate of the Petitioner to their
own use.

Which is referred to the Committee for Justice.

Sir John Worsnam, another of the Customers called in, says, he was commanded
from the King: that the goods were taken for duties; and no more: that he was
sought to to Farm the Customs, and told the King, (being sent for to him) that
he was not willing to deal therein, until the Parliament had granted the same.

Mr. Seldom Conceives the case of these three Customers do differ in the
degrees of their offenses. First for Sir John Worsnam, whatever he says here,
he has often confessed the goods were taken for Tonnage and Poundage: so that
as he broke the Privilege in taking the goods, so likewise his swearing one
thing and the contrary, plainly appears upon proof, and his own confession.

Mr. Dawes, his cause differs only in this, Sir John Worsnam is a Patentee,
and Dawes only a sharer.

Mr. Carmarthens cause differs, in saying, if all the Parliament were in him,
he would not deliver his goods.

Ordered, that Worsnams case shall be first decided.

And first the point is, Whether by the Lease Sir John Worsnam having seized
the goods, has interest or no; or whether he be only an accounter to the
King, or not.

Mr. Glanvile, Here is a sum of money advanced, a Lease granted for certain
years, a certain Rent reserved: and though there be a covenant to these men,
that if there be less it shall be abated, yet that cannot take away their
interest.

The substance of the offenses made by the Customers in the Exchequer is, that
the goods of the Merchants seized by them, and remaining in the Kings
Storehouse, were seized only for duties to the King, mentioned in a
Commission under the Kings signet; and that themselves (the Customers) had no
interest, nor pretense of interest.

Saturday 21.
A Petition by Mr. Thomas Symons, in further complaint of the Customers, and
the Two shillings Six pence upon the Currants granted to the Lord Arrundell:
which is referred to the Committee for Merchants.

Sir Robert Pie says, The Lord of Arrundell has delivered in his Pattent to
the King two months since.

At the Committee for Merchants.
MAster Littleton argued, whether a Member of the House has his goods
privileged upon a Prorogation, being seized for the King.

All Privilege is allowed for the good of the Commonwealth, and the
Parliament Privilege is above any other, and the Parliament only can decide
Privilege of Parliament, not any other Judge or Court whatsoever.

That a man may not distrain for rem in Parliament time, but for all arrears
after the Parliament he may distrain: he is not to be employed in any action
personal, nor his goods to be seized in the Exchequer. A Record and Act of
Parliament by Petition, that because the servant of a Member of the Parliament
is in the Kings Royal protection, that it might be High Treason to kill a
Parliament man: and the King answered affirmatively; which made it a Law.

And for the Judges to determine privilege of Parliament, were to supersede the
Law, and make it void. For the Prorogation the Privilege stands good until
the day of Prorogation, notwithstanding a Proclamation of a new Prorogation.

That the King is never so high in point of State as in the Parliament. Cites
the case of Sir Robert Howard in High Commission.

All Privileges unless in Felony, Treason, or breach of Peace.

Sir Robert Phillips, Thus you see how fast the Prerogative of the King does
trench on the Liberty of the Subject, and how hardly recovered. Cites many
Presidents, wherein the goods of a Member of the Parliament were Privileged
from seizure in the Exchequer. In 19 Eliz. it was resolved in Parliament, that
20 days before, and 20 days after was the time of Privilege.

Chancellor of the Duchy, That in this debate we may tie our selves to point
of Law and Authority, not to point of Reason.

And conceives that no Privilege lies against the King in point of his
duties.

Sir Francis Seymour, I desire it may first be debated, Whether this case does
concern the King or no: for I conceive these Customers have not made good that
there was any right: here is only art used to entitle the King. I conceive it
a high offense for any man to lay the scandal upon the King for every project.

Mr. Glanveil, Here is a cunning Project in the Exchequer to entitle the King,
a mere cunning Project, and an offense of a high nature, to shelter their
projects under the Command of the Crown.

Secretary Cook, The point in question is not the right of the Subject, but
the right of Parliament Privilege, and that in the case of Mr. Rolls; and
this is only now in question.

Sir John Strangewaies, I know no reason why we should draw a question upon our
selves which we need not, especially between the King and us. I conceive it
plain, these Customers took the goods in their own right, not in the Kings. In
this Privilege is plainly broken, wherein it is easily determined.

Mr. Banks, In this case there is no interposing of the Kings Right, and the
King, this Parliament has declared as much.

That the Courts at Westminster do grant 12 days privilege to any man to
inform his Council, much more the Court of Parliament are to have their
Privilege. The Kings Command cannot extend to authorize any man to break the
Privileges, no more than it will warrant an entry upon any man's Land without
process of Law.

Mr. Soliciter, If the King have no Right, how can he make a Lease? then this
pretended interest of the Customers must needs be void, and therefore the goods
must not be taken on their own right, but in the right of the King.

Mr. Seldom, If there were any right, the pretended right were in the Subject.
First, whether Privilege in goods. Secondly, whether the right were in the
Customers only. Thirdly, whether privilege against the King.

1. If the Lords have no privilege in Parliaments for their goods, then have
they no privilege at all; for they are privileged in their persons out of
Parliament. 2. For the point of interest it is plain, no kind of Covenant can
alter the interest; and questionless, had the cause in the Exchequer appeared
to the Barons as it does to us, they would never have proceeded as they did. 3.
If our goods may be seized into the Exchequer, be it right or wrong, we were
then as good have nothing.
Sir Nath. Rich, (...) recorded the last Session (and cites other presidents
in this House) that a servant of a Member in Parliament ought to have
privilege in his goods.

Mr. Noy says, that these Commissioners had neither Commission nor Command to
seize. Therefore without doubt we may proceed safely to the other question,
That the privilege is broken by the Customers, without relation to any
Commission or Command of the King.

Secretary Cook says, It is in the Commission to seize, but the Commission
being read, it is not found to be there.

Chancellor of the Duchy says, Mr. Dawes mentioned, that he seized these
goods by virtue of a Commission and other Warrants remaining in the hands of
Sir John Elliot: that therefore these Warrants may be seen, whether there be no
command to seize these goods.

Sir Nathaniel Rich, This days debate much joyeth me, specially the motion
made by Mr. Noy, whereby it is plain we have a way open to go to this question,
without relation to the Kings Commission or Command: and desire it, in respect
there appears nothing before us to incumber the question.

Chancellor of the Duchy, desires again these Warrants may be look into
before we go to the question.

Mr. Kirton, In respect this Honorable Gentleman presses this so far, that it
may appear with what judgment this House has proceeded.

Mr. Glanveil, I consent these Warrants be sent for and read, but withal, if
any thing arise that may produce any thing of ill consequence, let it be
considered from whence it does come.

The Privy Councellers are contented with this Motion.

The Warrants being sent for and read, it is plain there is no Warrant to seize.

Mr. Kirton, If now there be any thing of doubt, I desire those Honorable
persons may make their objections.

Chancellor of the Duchy, I rejoice when I can go to the Court able to
justify your proceedings.

I confess, I see nothing now but that we may safely proceed to the Question.

Mr. Secretary Cook says as much.

Mr. Hackwell argues against Privilege in time of Prorogation.

Mr. Noy says, he had no doubt, but that Privilege was in force in time of
Prorogation, until he heard this Argument of Prorogation of Mr. Hackwell, and
says, that he has nothing from him yet that does alter his opinion; and
cites a cause wherein the Lords House has this very Prorogation adjudged the
Privilege.

Mr. Hackwell says, he is glad to hear it is so, and he is now of the same
opinion.

Decided by Question, That Mr. Rolls ought to have Privilege of Parliament,
for his goods seized 30 October. 5 Iac. and all sithence.

This Committee is adjourned until Monday, and the Customers to attend.

The Protestation of the COMMONS in Parliament on Monday 2. Mar. 1628.
1. WHosoever shall bring in an Innovation in Religion, or by favor or
countenance seek to extend, or introduce Popery or Arminianisme, or other
Opinion differing from the true and orthodox profession of our Church, shall be
reputed a Capital enemy to this Kingdom and Commonwealth.

2. Whosoever shall counsel or advise the taking or leavying of the Subsedies
of Tonage and Poundage, not being granted by Parliament, or shall be an Actor
or an Instrument therein, shall likewise be reputed an Innovator in the
Government, and a Capital enemy to the Kingdom and Commonwealth.

3. If any Merchant, or other person whatsoever, shall voluntarily yield or pay
the said Subsedie of Tonnage or Poundage, not being granted by Parliament, he
shall likewise be reputed a Betrayer of the Liberties of England, and an enemy
to the same.

THE KINGS SPEECH in the House of PARLIAMENT, Mar. 10. 1628. to Dissolve it.
My LORDS,
I Never came here upon so unpleasing occasion, it being for the Dissolving of
a PARLIAMENT; therefore many may wonder why I did not rather choose to do this
by my Commission; it being the general Maxim of Kings, to lay harsh commands by
their Ministers, themselves only executing pleasing things. But considering
that Justice is as well in Commanding of Virtue, as Punishing of Vice, I
thought it necessary to come here to day, to declare to you, my Lords, and all
the world, That it was only the disobedient carriage of the Lower House that
has caused this Dissolution at this time; and that you, My Lords, are so far
from being causers of it, that I have as much comfort in your Obedience,
manifested by all your carriage toward me, as I have cause to distaste their
proceedings. Yet that I may be clearly understood, I must needs say they do
mistake me wondrously that think I lay this fault equally on all the Lower
House; for I know there are many there, as dutiful Loyal Subjects as any are
in the world: I know that it was only some Vi^pers among them, that did cast
this mist of disobedience before their eyes; although there were some there
that could not be infected with this Contagion; insomuch that some by their
speaking (which indeed was the general fault on the last day of the House) did
show their obedience. To conclude, my Lords, as those ill-affected persons must
look for their reward, so you that are here of the Higher House, may justly
claim from me that protection and favor, that a good King bears to his Loyal
and Faithful Subjects and Nobility. Now my Lords, execute that which I
Command you.

Lord KEEPER,
MY Lords and Gentlemen of the House of Commons, the KINGS Majesty does
Dissolve this Parliament; wherefore you have all free leave to depart to your
Residences, etc.

His MAJESTY'S Letter, with Queres concerning Ship Money, and the Answer
thereunto.
To Our trusty and welbeloved, Sir John Bramston Knight, Chief Justices of our
Bench; Sir John Finch Knight, Chief Justice of our Court of Common Pleas; Sir
Humphrey Davenport Knight, Chief Baron of Our Court of Exchequer; and to the
rest of the Judges of Our Courts of Kings Bench, Common Pleas, and the Barons
of our Court of Exchequer.
CHARLES R.

Trusty and welbeloved We greet you well. Taking into Our Princely
consideration, that the Honor and Safety of this our Realm of England, the
preservation whereof is only entrusted to Our care, was, and is now more
dearly concerned than in late former times, as well by diverse Counsels and
attempts, to take from Us the Dominion of the Seas, of which We are sole Lord
and rightful Owner, or Propriator, and the loss whereof would be of greatest
danger and peril to this Kingdom, and other our Dominions, and many other
ways; We, for the avoiding of these and the like dangers, well weighing with
Our self, that where the good and safety of the Kingdom in general is
concerned, and the whole Kingdom in danger, there the charge and defense ought
to be born by all the Realm in general; did for preventing so public a
mischief, resolve with Our self, to have a Royal Navy provided, that might be
of force and power (with Almighty Gods blessing and assistance) to protect and
defend this our Realm, and our Subjects therein, from all such perils and
dangers: and for that purpose We issued forth Writs under Our Great Seal of
England, directed to all Our Sheriffs of Our several Counties of England and
Wales, Commanding thereby all Our said Subjects in every City, Town and
Village, to provide such a number of Ships, well furnished as might serve for
this Royal purpose, and which might be done with the greatest equallitie that
could be. In performance whereof, though generally throughout all the Counties
of this Our Realm, We have found in Our Subjects great cheerfulness and
alacrity, which We graciously interpret as a testimony as well of their
dutiful affections to Us and Our service, as of the respest they have to the
public, which well becomes every good Subject; nevertheless, finding that
some few, happily out of ignorance what the Laws and Customs of this Realm are,
or out of a desire to be eased and freed in their particulars, how general
soever the charge be, or ought to be, have not yet paid and contributed the
several Rates and Assesments that were set upon them; and foreseeing in our
Princely wisdom, that from hence diverse Suits and Actions are not unlikely to
be commenced, and prosecuted in Our several Courts at Westminster; We,
desireous to avoid such inconveniences, and out of Our Princely love and
affection to all our people, being willing to prevent such errors as any of Our
loving Subjects may happen to run into, have thought fit in a Case of this
nature, to advise with you Our Judges, who we doubt not are all well studied
and informed in the rights of Our Sovereigntie. And because the Trials in Our
several Courts, by the formalities in pleading, will require a long
protraction, We have thought fit by this Letter directed to you all, to require
your Judgments in the Case, as it is set down in the enclosed Paper, which
will not only gain time, but also be of more Authority to overruled any
prejudicate opinions of others in the point. Given under Our Signet at Our
Court of White Hall, the Second day of Febr. in the Twelfth Year of our Reign.
1636.

CHARLES R.

WHen the good and safety of the Kingdom in general is concerned, and the
whole Kingdom in danger, Whether may not the KING, by Writ under the Great Seal
of England, Command all the Subjects of this Kingdom, at their charge, to
provide and furnish such number of Ships, with Men, Victuals, and Munition, and
for such time as he shall think fit, for the defense and safeguard of the
Kingdom from such danger and peril, and by Law compel the doing thereof, in
case of refusal or refractoriness?

And whether, in such case, is not the KING the sole Judge both of the danger,
and when and how the same is to be prevented and avoided?

CHARLES REX.

Answer.
MAy it please Your most excellent Majesty, We have, according to Your
Majesty's Command severally, every man by himself, and all of us together,
taken into serious consideration the Case, and Questions, signed by your
Majesty, and enclosed in your Royal Letter: and we are of opinion, that when
the good and safety of the Kingdom in general is concerned, and the whole
Kingdom in danger, Your Majesty may, by Writ under the Great Seal of England,
Command all the Subjects of this Your Kingdom, at their charge, to provide and
furnish such number of Ships, with Men, Victual, and Munition, and for such
time as Your Majesty shall think fit, for the defense and safeguard of the
Kingdom from such danger and peril: and that by Law Your Majesty may compel
the doing thereof, in Case of refusal or refractoriness. And we are also of
opinion, That in such Case Your Majesty is the sole Judge, both of the danger,
and when and how the same is to be prevented and avoided.

John Bramston. John Finch. Humfrey Davenport. John Denham. Richard Hutton.
William Jones. George Crook. Thomas Trevor. George Vernon Robert Barkley.
Francis Crawley. Richard Weston.


FINIS.

