The Turtle-dove (an emblem of the new Creature) her properties described.
THe Turtle-dove truly resemble can
Of any thing, in nature, the New-man,
In heart and whole affections constant, pure,
Does loyal only to her choice endure:
Most searching, piercing storms and darkest night,
In presence of her Lover, she does slight:
But thoughts of separation be so sad,
Created comforts cannot make her glad:
Whiles vexing grief from self-suspition grows,
That his removal from her motion flows:
This Animal the Rational so exceeds,
She for preferment of affection pleads.
They born again this case can only state,
Prevail and far exceed in the debate;
For they refram'd, refined, revived be,
By that anointing makes them hear and see
Himself, who so elects, allures and loves,
His Dove redeemed, reproves, proves, and approves,
Most blessed they thus taught, thus framed, thus gained
To God by grace, and from the world weaned.
CANT. 2.12, 14. The voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land. 14. O my Dove,
that art in the clefts of the Rocks, in the secret places of the Stairs, let me
see thy countenance, let me hear thy voices for sweet is thy voice, and thy
countenance is comely.

PSALM. 68.13. Though ye have lien among the pots, yet shall ye be as the wings
of a Dove, covered with Silver, and her feathers with yellow Gold.


THE TURTLE-DOVE, UNDER THE ABSENCE and PRESENCE OF HER ONLY CHOICE: OR,
DESERTION and DELIVERANCE REVIVED.

1. Ushered with the NICODEMIAN PARADOX explained in a Comparison betwixt the
First and Second BIRTH; and closed with the Characters of the Old and New Man.

2. And seconded with a SURVEY of the First and Second DEATH: which enclosed
with a Sepation-kisse betwixt two most intimate Friends, the Soul and Body of
Man.

3. And a Glimring of the First and Second Resurrection and General Judgment:
closing with a Song of Degrees, from what we were to what we are, and from
thence toward what we shall be.

By a Lover of the Celestial Muses.

JOHN 3.8* The wind blows where it ^is^, etc.

EDINBVRGh, Printed by Andrew Anderson, Printer to the CITY and COLLEGE. Anno
DOM. 1664.

The Presentation of the Turtle-Dove, to the Lady VISCOUNTESS of KENMOOR.
RIght Noble Madam, Please your Honor now,
Accept this present of a Turtle Dove,
Which in the Ark reserved, secure has been,
And both the worlds, new and old hes seen;
The Nations of the old, deaths captives living,
The natives of the new, in death reviving,
She sees preserved from fear, from pit, from snare,
Where wretched worldlings wamble in despair:
Those old ascendent shining and shut out,
These born anew with Songs of safety shout:
Eternal purposes revealed she weighs,
And timous precious promises applies,
Timely performances she truly proves,
And feels how fervently her Lover loves:
Now when you have consideratly seen
Her Songs, and found them clear and Christ-all-clean,
Then let her sweetly by your license fly,
Amongst true mourners with her melody;
These discords well composed abounding there
In concords move a sweet soul-melting air:
Ladies and Lovers, Lidia-like advert,
Till sp'ritual motions mollify your heart:
That molded new, in love true and divine,
Then in your Lovers likeness you may shine.
An ACROSTICK upon the NAME of the Right Honorable LADY, JEAN CAMPBEL,
VISCOUNTESS of Kenmoor,
L LOve-bred designs from deep divine desires,
A A Sp'rit inspires, transcending humane skill,
D Dilating still the will with heavenly fires,
I Inflamed wherewith* admires her Lover still.
E Elected Lady elevated Lover,
J Enjoy the object of thy Love sublime,
A Adore the dictats of thy Divine Mover:
N Now training thee to treasures after time.
E Eternal troubles, inward trials strong
C Come out to make thee famous in thy fight,
A And managed be the mysteries among
M Make up thy life-translation unto light.
P Press through the straits, the precious prize perceive,
B Bounty bestows, and blessed souls receive:
E Eternal triumphs, glory infinite,
L Loves Darling comes thy comforts to complete.
The Minion of the Muses here,
Great Mistress of this gracious Quire,
Whose study unto self-denial
Had suffered to shine, the trial,
Should made the Muses homage do
Her Pen and Person both unto.
An ACROSTICK upon the name of that very Religious and Famous GENTLEWOMAN,
MARION McKNAICHT.
M More happy then imagined can be,
A And blessed are such as with heart sincere,
R Resolve to cleave to Christ to live and die,
I In Him, with Him, and for Him to appear,
O O What transcedent glory grows from grace!
N None but, no not the soul refined shall
Mc Make to appear, that Light, that Life, that peace,
K Known only to the pure Possessors all.
N Now* thou by grace art unto glory gone,
A And gained the Garland of eternal bless,
I In seeing Him, who on the glorious Throne,
C Created, uncreated, glory is:
H Heavens Quire did sing at thy conversion sweet,
T Time posts thy final comforts to complete.
Those names among the living worthily
Preserved be, that true Belivers be.
And such they be that truly do believe,
Who living, learn to die, dying, to live.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, Noble, and Religious LADY, JEAN, VISCOUNTESS of
KENMOOR.
Right Honorable,
BEing past controversy, and universally acknowledged, that bitter Experience
is the best Teacher and Schoolmaster of fools: amongst which rank I do esteem
my self to be inferior to very few; And therefore must be educate under such
exercises and discipline, as the only wise Parent (who knows well the frame,
disposition and inclination of every one of his children) sees meet, for
instructing, rectifying, and reclaiming of the blind-born ignorant, prone to
all manner of perversity, out of that natural darkness, by the illumination of
the holy Ghost, unto the life of grace whereby God makes himself known to the
Elect, and themselves to themselves, and whereby they be moved to hate and
abhore themselves, to love and believe Him, so clearly manifested to them* that
the Devil or his instruments, from without or from within, cannot gain ground
so far, against the work of his begun grace, as to raze it. Nevertheless the
subtle Hunter, cruel and violent Persecutor of such as are thrusting through
the strait gate, cease not to prepare and set many snares privily in our way:
partly by entangling our minds with too much worldly affairs and other vain
inventions: and partly by presenting well-polished idols, for our humors, as
means of diversion, whereby we be marred in our growth, and come slowly unto
maturity. But our only good God, and gracious Father, who, out of his infinite
goodness, has begun, knows also how to accomplish his work in every one of
his own. For proof whereof, I have made bold to let your Ladyship know, that,
after many multiplied compassions, unchangeable love, and long-sufferings,
wherewith my Lord has been driving me nearer to Himself: now at length to lead
me apart, as it were, out of the world, by a singular and unexpected
providence, unto the wilderness, not to be tempted by the Devil, as my dear
Savior was before me, who alone was able to endure and overcome: but to be
allured and enlarged (by freedom from outward, and supply against inward
intanglement) to recent the variety of most observable Dispensations wherewith
I have been exercised these 70. years, and to read over the Endictment of
provocations, upon the travels and troubles that I have been tossed with in
that time allotted me: hereto being sustained under, and rescued from the
distractions of all the trials and temptations that I have tasted of, unto this
day: But specially, since the time that, by grace, I have had, in any measure,
my senses exercised, to discern the benefit of his presence and Providence,
ordinary and extraordinary: and the burden and bitterness of his absence, the
deepest and darkest hell that the child of God meets with; and therefore
carries the name of Desertion, (albeit not properly) being partial) and,
blessed be the Lord) but temporal, and not according to the measure. But I
forbear, knowing that the exercises of Gods children are various and all
wonderful, both in manner and measure. And seeing I have found that the most
sad, tart, distractive or destructive whereof I have tasted, whether upon the
mind, conscience, name, means, body, or friends, have been prescribed by such
wisdom, inflicted by such favor, qualified by such compassion, timed by such
prescience, and sweetened by such deliverance: and thereby produced such inward
consolation, that I have been overcome in admiring and adoring that depth of
excellency that has therein appeared: and thereby become desirous to impart
some part thereof unto others, that the Christian Believers, who have been
sustained under the like trials, feasted upon the like furniture, and delighted
with the like deliverances, may take occasion to renew their songs of
thanksgiving and praise to their Royal Provisor, and Captain of their Salvation.

And likewise, that such who scar at the Profession, and keep at distance by
reason of the Cross and contumelies that cleave unto the Professor, unto whom
nothing is certain but what is seen and present: whereas, unto the Believer,
things future and unseen for the time, be most certain: and yet will, out of
curiosity, glance at every thing, as if they were making use of all things; May
know that it is for want of spiritual discerning and senses, so exercised, to
taste and smell the sweet fruits of a sanctified Cross, that keeps them from
closing with, and coming under the Colors of the Captain of Salvation, who
leads through, and feeds with such freedom and furniture, as should make them
sing under all their sufferings.

The project and end of all being, to induce and persuade unto the ardent study
of this secret and saving way of God upon the soul, unto convincing and
converting, whereby the faith of His eternal Love being increased, all the
desires and delights of the heart may be fixed upon, and fervently intended for
a Communion with Him, who is altogether delectable and only desirable.

The matter, manner and circumstances being consonant to Scripture-verity,
Scripture-president, and the experience of the most sound and sincere, the
figures and metaphors familiar and significant, the composing and personating
thereof to the life, whereby the matter may be the more perspicuous, and leave
the better impression, I trust shall not offend any. And now, most Noble and
truly Religious Lady, although your Ladyship hes been honored with the
patronage of the most exquisite exercise of practical Divinity that hes seen
the light in our days, yet I trust your L. shall not esteem it inconsistent
with that well deserved reputation enjoyed by you, that your L. name is here
most deservedly prefixed as sole Lady and Mistress of this Quire; being so well
versed in exercises of this nature, being also of a continued standing in the
way of Christianity from your infancy, untainted and undanted by temptation or
tribulation, from within or from without, how plausible or how perilous soever
they have appeared: constantly keeping the path that is called holy, by the
line of Truth and Righteousness, as the fruits of that saving faith once given
to the Saints (without reversion) which works by love clear and sufficient
evidence hereof, removing all grounds of suspi^ion of private respects or
vulgar ends; and who can discern aright the virtue, or attain unto the utility
of such supplies of His gracious presence and providence but such as have seen
and felt, tasted and feasted upon the sweet and soul-ravishing fruits of
eternal, infinite and unchangeable love, wisdom, mercy, power and
faithfulness of God in them? The sensible fruition, whereof at some times unto
the Saints, is like sweet ointment powered out, and gives such fragrant smells,
as sets the Virgins upon a Love-ardour and ecstasy in enquiring after Him when
He seems absent, whom they have found altogether Lovely and only desirable,
when in His Garden of Grace He hes been letting down the Dew of Heaven upon the
spices of His own planting.

Here your Ladyship hes been nourisht, cherisht and refresht amongst your
associats, flourisht and been fruitful, and isntrumental to the comfort and
encouragement of others, under the diversity of several cases incident to
these of your fellowship.

I have likewise, after your Ladyship, remembered the name of that famous and
memorable Matron, Marion Macknaught, whose memory hes left a sweet smell behind
her; and whose soul is now so over-joyed in Saviour-love, that she rests
superexceedingly satisfied, attending the final consummating of all things,
subject to alteration, and the glory that is to be revealed: through which she
hes been well guided and guarded, and after whom, and others that be gone
before, Your Ladyship is advancing through the windings and mazes of this
labyrinth, the task and trial of a Christian Believer, where is to be obtained
the greatest victories imaginable, and also, to be gained the richest treasures
of all desirable excellencies attainable, only by the guiding of the holy
Ghost, in holding fast the well twisted thread of sacred truth, whereby we make
a sweet entry, a sure progress, and a victorious retreat: whereas in letting
this grip slip, we fall amongst Rocks and Robbers: and being bemisted amongst
soul-murderers, head-notions, and heart-motions, perverting both wit and will
unto unevitable and unrecoverable ruin, wirh the multitude who, slumbering in
their sensualities, are swallowed up in the groundless gulf of endless
oblivion, unless it please the Lord in an extraordinary way to interpose, and
wonderfully work our rescue, thereby witnessing His unsearchable soveraignity
in saving some (while others are suffered to sink in their own devices) who
seeing themselves self-lost and so saved; they are bred unto self-denial,
simple submission unto, and sole dependence upon their guide: with songs of
joyful deliverance from dangers past, with confidence and courage for future
supply.

All which, for recreation in spare hours, is offered unto your Ladyship, not
being prejudicial to your more solemn and serious exercise, wherein being
daily sprinkled with the dew of grace, and thoroughly purified by the blood of
sprinkling, and so prepared for the places that be prepared for you: when
corruption and all things corruptible being dissolved, glory and immortality
put on, and you admitted (amongst others that stand by) to feast upon the
superexcellencies of joys that are in the King's face, and pleasures that be
enjoyed at His right Hand for evermore, who out of His eternal Love, in an
incomprehensibl^ way of infinite wisdom hes purchased this peace, this grace,
this glory to all the members of the body mystical, whereof He the glorious
Head, i^ the fullness of Him who fills all in all: And unto whose grace and
faithfulness, your Ladyship is fervently recommended, by,

Noble Madam, Your Ladyships most affectionate and humble Servant, JOHN
FULLARTOUN of Careltoun.
Edinburgh, Feb. 8. 1664.
THE EPISTLE TO THE Weak and wrestling Believer.
DAughters of Jerusalem, This weak, and wearied Pilgrim, now coming your way,
who, being long detained in the house of bondage, has been (amongst others)
called out and guided through the Red Sea by a more miraculous deliverance, and
guarded by a greater and better Guide than Moses to Israel: from the pursuit of
more numerous enemies, and oftener at the brink of despair^ until peremptor
Providence of powerful preserva^on appearing, have caused the raging Seas of
most dreadful trials to recoyl for our passage, unto the utter ruin of
unreconcileable enemies: and yet must take journey through a waste and wearisom
wilderness, where we are brought low, and kept under by troubles and trials
unexpressible: and all for our good, till we have fulfilled our course.

And now at the length this Passenger, being arrived at the borders of the
Holy Land, and having tasted of the first fruits thereof: and thereby being
encouraged to attend the appointed time, when he shall be called to pass on
after those that are gone before him through Jordan: so long as the Priests
feet stand firm in the midst of the River, with the Ark of the Covenant upon
their shoulders; And in the mean time does take occasion to recent the most
notable evidences of his supply and support, under greatest crosses, conflicts,
dangers, and deliverances, by mediate and immediate helps of His Presence and
Providence, who has been his God and his Guide, his Sun and his Shield unto
this day: and therefore conceives it to be his duty, to convey some Clusters of
the Grapes, as the first Fruits of that Country (for encouragement) to such as
are upon their journey through the waters of Mara, through fiery serpents
swarming in the wilderness: and must endure what Balak, with the advice and
device of Balaam, can do, that they may be the less afraid of these fierce
assaults that they be to conflict with.

And the sense whereof puts him upon this singing strain, and extracts (rom him
these solemn Song of singular deliverance from all these furious, assaults and
slavish fears that has infested his faith or fostered his dejections: specially
unto the conviction of carnal Professors of this generation, who^ under the
frequency of Gospel Ordinances, having attained unto the theory of Theological
Truths swiming in the brain, are satisfied, and set down under a carnal
security, not affected with the preciousnesse of the adorable Divinity that is
in them: So as by sucking them in, they may sink down to the heart, and
therefrom elevate the soul to press foreward for the prize, with such wakening
and warming zeal to the glory of such multiplied mercies, in the
Gospel Ministry, as might produce the sweet smelling fruits of righteousness,
peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, the proper result of true, living and saving
faith, which works by love in these that, being born again, do walk in the
Spirit, and discern aright in things that differ.

The Course and Method taken, is by a Survey of four several Subjects.

1. The first, Upon the First and Second BIRTH, by way of Comparison betwixt
the Generation, and Growth of MAN in Nature: and the Regeneration and Growth of
the NEW MAN in Grace; And closing with the Portraict of the New and Old Man,
under the Names of Virtue and Vice. 2. The second, Upon the Exercises of the
weak Believing CHRISTIAN, under Desertion and Deliverance: And closing with an
Objection of the Carnal Man, answered with a Rational Advice to the Party. 3.
The third, Upon the First and Second DEATH; And closing with a SEPARATION-KISSE
betwixt two intimate Friends, the Soul and Body. 4. The fourth, Upon the First
and Second RESURRECTIONS and GENERAL JUDGMENT: And closing with a SONG of
DEGREES.


The first of them being a Rational Discourse, most tending to inform and
convince the Natural Man.

The second Practical, and for Spiritual Application.

The third for Deliberation.

The fourth for Consolation.

Which being so ordered, have been laid aside for these six years and above:
Not intending that they should have seen the light, until I had come to the
possession of a greater light than is accessible under mortality. But now, in
all probability, drawing near to the close of my time in the body: And by
providence being in this place, where I have the offer of service assistant for
that effect: and conceiving it doubtful which of us shall see the one, or
other light, first, that where grace, or this where glory shines, I have now
resolved to let them out, to make a Visit among the Daughters of Jerusalem;
With whom a professed Pilgrim may have much assurance of hearty welcome, for
discourses: and so much the more, that he has been admitted unto intimacy, and
honored with a kiss of the hand of so truly Noble, Religious, and Virtuous a
LADY, under whose Patrociny he makes his appearance: but specially will be in
request with such as have undertaken, or do intend to undertake the like
travels: Not for the holy Grave, but for the grace of Holiness, wherein to
make our approaches: Not to see the place where our Lord was laid, but where he
lives, and prepares for us to live with him: Not to carry with us, as a
monument, some of that earth wherein our Savior was interred for a time, but
to receive the promised Comforter, who is only able to conduct, and protect,
through all the passages of our Pilgrimage, to the end of our journey.

And it will be granted, that experiences are most able to make the best report
for difficulties or dangers by Sea or by Land, of ^po^ling by Robbers, or
splitting on Rocks, and may be most able to guard, and give encouragement
against the sons of Anak: And so much the more, as we may gather grounds of
certain victory after a short Conflict: and a never-ending triumph after some
tr^nsitory trials, wherein we are sustained by Him, in whom we be more then
Conquerours. And that you may believe, and be established, shall be the fervent
desire of

Your Fellow-pilgrim, and Servant in Christ Jesus, J. F.

THE OCCASION AND CONTENTS OF THE ENSUING DISCOURSE*
AMongst many other innumerable testimonies of Gods unspeakable goodness (when
contrary to all appearance or probability of expectation) there was by a
gracious dispensation offered unto me, the liberty, freedom and benefit of a
long wished for retirememt, I took the opportunity of the time, to take notice
of the most observable passages of 72. years time passed me: Wherein for the
space of 36. years from my birth, being carried by the swey of mine own
natural and native inclination the concourse of the like company and the
current of time and place.

1. First, in my minority I have had much fearful proof of what impiety the
blind-born, fu^-born, wrath-born, brutish atheist is naturally poisoned with,
and pro^e unto.

2. And secondly, after the years of discretion, and the benefit of breeding a
more fearful proof of the vanity and deceit of self-confidence, upon the
ground of civil carriage and commerce.

3. Thirdly, and most dreadful of all, the conviction of that villainy of
hypocrisy, under a formality of profession.

After all, it being the good pleasure of my God, in a time of love, by the
Ministry of the Word, and convoy of the Spirit, to clear mine eyes, and open
mine ears, unto a right uptaking of mine own bypast madness and misery, and
of His marvelous long-sufferings and mercy, so as (by grace) might have both
humbled me, and helped me.

And now again, for the space of other 36. years, being under the name of a
standing (but more properly stammering) Professor, I have found by better
(although bitter) experience, that the way of Gods Children through the
wilderness is strawed with innumerable piercing thorns of diverse afflictions
and variety of temptations: And that the most searching trials and sharpest
afflictions are so unseparably conjoined, as fire and heat, under the exercise
of desertion, being unto the spiritual man and renewed party a present (but
temporary) hell, and yet carrying a heaven in the heart of it: Whereas the
Fools paradise of sinful pleasures produces in a short time an everlasting
hell. And finding that out of the most terrifying and tormenting troubles,
songs of joyful deliverance were enjoyed, like sweet out of the strong, and
meat out of the eater, although it should seem to the natural man a Paradox:
Yet I shall speak a word to such as are inclining to better clearness then as
yet they have attained unto. That they would make it their study to know that
the Child of God after regeneration, in whom the seed of Grace is graciously
infused, by the effectual operation of the Holy Ghost, in the ministry of the
word, whereby the new Creature is formed in the soul, where the old man of the
flesh or corrupt nature, formerly carried sway without control, that these two
parties now in one person, being of as different qualities as fire and water;
dispositions, designs, desires and delights, as God, the Author of the one, and
Belial of the other: the one being a young and new Intrant, and the other an
old possessor strongly fortified: they enter an intestine war with as great
hostility, as is betwixt Michael and the Dragon: Where the new man endures
daily incursions by the violence and subtle wranglings of the adversary, the
advantage of the one proving the prejudice of the other: Which conflict being
continued in the Beliver, there is prepared for beating down the old works of
the Devil, and purging out the pollutions of the flesh, potions and antidots
answerable to all the poison vented upon our nature by the old serpent, and
whereby we are naturally infected, until the vice, vanity and villainy of the
first generation be fully mortified, and the work of grace, virtue and verity
be implanted, and promoved unto maturity and perfection: And in the evidence
whereof the soul is inwardly overjoyed under all the outward and temporary
annoyances that she suffers, humbly submitting unto all such dispensations,
finding them prove her sensible advantages, and the means of her advancement
unto present growth in Grace, and hope of glory. But this being the secret work
of God in His own Children, unseen and not discernable by the carnal man, in
whose eyes they be but abject and despicable persons who can pretend such
principles, or presume upon so unsensible grounds, not able to conceive, far
less to give credit that such daily seen and sad sufferings, as the Believer
is subject unto, could produce such sweet soul-satisfying fruit, as can make
them sing for joy, and shout for gladness of heart, whence flows the most of
mistakes.

And by this perpetual repugnancy and constant opposition betwixt the
spirituality of the new, and the carnality of the old man: being thoroughly
pondered, it shall easily be agreed upon, that what is affirmed^nent the
beatitude of the Believer, and grounds of encouragement they have under all
their most grievous afflictions, is confirmed: For it may be asserted (being
generally acknowledged by all the Children of God) that the least spunk of
confidence, preserved by grace in the heart of the Believer, under the conflict
of faith powerfully working, produces incomparably more real ground of true
inward and spiritual comfort, then all the splendour, pomp and external glory
that the invention or imagination of man and Angel with the accession of all
the cretures of the universe concentered in one, and flowing out upon the best
capacitat and apprehensive person, habilitute to swim without sinking, or
swelling in that Ocean of all carnal and temporary delights, without the least
disturbance or annoyance unto the largest extent of time, that any of the sons
of Adam hes attained unto; And that (although there were no more, albeit in the
second place) by reason of the brevity of all these carnal, transitory and
perishing pleasures, extinguishing in present stink, and closing in perpetual
torment: And the duration, accomplishment and perfection of the other in
eternal glory, above all conceiving, sense or believing: Which finding, and
still the more looking and delighting to see, and dive in the Majesty of that
wisdom, knowledge and providence that appears in the progress of that work of
His grace in His chosen, called and faithful Children, inferior to none of the
wonders of the Lord: Excepting, first, that great and unsearchable mystery of
godliness. 2 Timothy 3.16.

2. And secondly, that secret and unseen way of infusing the seed of saving
grace in the soul, for forming of the new Creature, John 3.3. to the 9. Out of
which considerations* from the experience attained, and insight of the
breeding, forms and dispositions both of Court, Country, School and City, the
best by breeding, and the worst by birth that can be expected of many; I have
set about, composed and personate the purpose and project in this order, manner,
invention and verse, under Scripture-figures and metaphors, succinct,
significant, and sententious, for taking best impression upon mind, memory and
affections: Not by art or humane learning, wherein I am little versed, but by
the Rudiments of Christianity, and experienced observations, most material and
applicable to the purpose.

I. And first, in the general and whole complex of this discourse, there is
held out the most blessed condition, freedom and felicity of the Church, the
Spouse of Christ, and of every chosen Child of God, and Member of the Body
mystical, after Regeneration: Nevertheless, of all the trials, troubles and
temptations they are to meet with in the strait way.

II. Secondly, in particular there is represented, the sad condition and sharp
affliction of the Child of God under desertion, made appear in a threefold
consideration.

1. First, More felt then real.

Debated from Page 8. to 23. Where it is made evident, that the Child of God,
after Regeneration, may be wrapped under fearful clouds of darkness and
discouragement, and impossible to be comforted, till there come a reviving from
the inward Comforter: And this is most properly Love sickness, being for trial
and prevention, Psa. 42. Psa. 30.7, 8, 9, 10.

2. Secondly, Real and felt.

And this is debated from Page 23. to 49. Wherein there is notice taken of the
several most prevailing tentations, upon several ranks of persons. viz. The
Court-bred, the School-bred, the Countrie-bred and the Citty-bred, the Civilian
also, and the most savage of conversation. Nevertheless, the party deserted,
not able to discern the special cause of the affliction, until the means be
sanctified by inward supply: And this is for chastisement and correction,
tending to humiliation, Psalm. 51. 1 Samuel 1.16.

3. Thirdly, More real then felt.

Debated from p. 49. to 76. Where it is made appear, that the believer may be
lying under much guilt, unsensible un^ill a timous wakning come: and when it is
come, under much perplexity, until a word of peace be pronounced: And this is
for trial and wakening, Isa. 39.12. 2 Samuel 24.10, 11, 12, 13.

III. Thridly, After all this serious debate, unto small purpose, the smoking
flax being long smoothered, and now breathed upon, it kindles swiftly, and
breaks out sweetly in an excessive flame of spiritual fervor: And whereby
then, and not till then, the party being prevailed with, there appears a
correspondent alteration of affections in the whole strain, and uniforme
expressions of the whole Society.

1. First; The perplexed person under absence is now upon renewed sense,
elevated unto a most sublime, soul-ravishing rapture, in a SONG, p. 76. and the
continuation thereof, p. 77, 78. 2. Secondly, The Associates sympathising
therewith in ecstasy, SONG 2. p. 79. 3. Thirdly, The continuation of the
Sympathy in ecstasy, SONG 3. page 80, 81. 4. Fourthly, The Soul-rapture, upon
renewed sense, again renewed, SONG 4. page 82, 83. 5. Fifthly, Solid grounds
of spiritual security, by way of Echo, p. 84. 6. Sixthly, A timous warning to
guard against carnal security, with comforts and encouragements unto
cheerfulness against trials and troubles, till he end his journey, p. 85. to
96. 7. Seventhly, The grounds of Gospel Ordinances presented under the name of
the Pallace-garden: from p. 96. to 107. wherein there are nine several MAZES
making up the Garden, viz. First, A Border of Restriction, p. 98. Secondly, A
Beam of Instruction, 99. Thirdly, Cordials for Encouragement, 100. Fourthly,
Loves Mystery, 101. Fifthly, The Fountain unexhaustible, 102. Sixthly, Loves
Labyrinth, 103. Seventhly, Loves Mirror, 104. Eighthly, Loves Emblem, 105.
Ninthly, Loves Union, 106.
8. Eighthly, The Jewel of Jewels, a Vade-mecum for heart impression and
preservation p. 110. to 114. 9. Ninthly, The Symphonicall desires and delights
of the Redeemed, in their retirements, closing with that Song, Rev. 15.3, 4. p.
114. to 121. 10. Tenthly, A harmonious Consort, and a Song of praise, p. 121.
to 126. 11. Eleventhly, Reviving Recollections and Solliloquies, closing with
the Song of all Saints, Rev. 7.12 p. 127 to 1^4 12. Twelfthly, An Objection by
the mere natural man answered, and the party advised. p. 134. to 142
In all which there is represented sure grounds of ^oud comfort, under all the
trials incident to the Child of Go^ after regeneration, from his birth, in his
life and death and after death his soul enjoyments, bo^es rest and
resurrection, soul and bodies second conjunction, small absolution and endless
beatitude, carrying, also, through the whole discourse from infallible truth*
the terrors of the Law, against all that be under the Law, all ^e^ding to
(...) serious study of keeping a Communion with God in the Spirit, with a
spiritual and cheerful conversation under all dispensations, cross or
comfortable, in that humbleness and singleness of heart, the fruits of saving
faith which works by love, to the praise of the Author, and our own peace.

And as to the additions of a preparatory Paradox. explained in a comparison
betwixt the first and second birth going before, and a subsequent survey of the
first and second death, resurrection* and general judgment, they b^ hereto
annexed for making complete the intended design of delineating the pedigree of
the new Creature from the right stock of his portraict from his true Parent^
and Procreation, his crosses, conflicts, comforts and confidences from the
right Fountain, in life and in death, his restoration from death and darkness
unto immortal life and light of glory, from the all-glorious and ever blessed
Author of his being, and this his most blessed well-being.

TO THE OBSERVANT READER, UPON THE ENSUING POEM.
YOu who desire to know the plain (tho strait)
Pathway, to new Jerusalems high gate,
Whose pav'ment bright (embossed with Gems, be far,
More rich and fine then the most glistring Star)
In glore excells the boundless sapphire bounds
Of lights vast Curtain, these pure Christall-^ounds,
Whose azure Canopy, and pleasant fields,
Great ground of soul-amazing wonder yields:
If any in designs so high aspires,
As to resolve through waters and through fires
Of torturing trouble, to climb the steep yee-rocks
'Twixt Heaven and earth, in spite of Satan's strocks;
And will rest satisfied with nothing less
Then Heaven, yea, God Himself, eternal bless,
Resolving to endure all grief, all pain,
All loss, this great prize, All in all, to gain.
Lo, here is a Pilgrim, who (being guided by
Truths sacred thread, and Gods directing eye)
Is now come near his journies end (not stayed
By fained fraud or vain hopes not dismayed
By force, frowns, hate or groundless fears) expecting
Gods call to enter Jordan, and neglecting
Fond vanities: he is looking from the top
Of Pisgah, by the eye of faith and hope,
Toward the Promised Land, which to enjoy,
Through's time, he mainly did himself employ:
But while God spares, soul-wasting idleness
He loathes, and therefore, on the Wilderness,
Through which he is come, and all that did befall
Him in his way there-through, and in his call
Thereto, reflecting; all he well observes,
And unto others carefully preserves;
Lo, therefore, here held forth, thou wilt clearly see,
Of Christian cases the diversity*
Sometimes rapt to the third heavens by loves wings,
They see their strange soul-ravishing sights, and things
Vnutterably glorious, whence does spring
Amazing joy, true peace, which makes them sing:
Here neither reason, faith, nor hope, but love,
And sense cause the soul-chariot-wheels to move.
Sometimes these soul-transporting objects be
Veiled, whence flow darkness, great perplexity,
Afflicting trouble, torturing grief of mind,
By which they are consumed, in which they are pyn'd:
Then reason's corrupt, faith's weak, sense is gone,
Hope fails, love still remaining's left alone,
Which surely, though unsensibly, unites
The soul to Christ, Christ to the soul invites.
Lo, likewise, here thou wilt see the ground, on which
Some Christians are so tossed, some not so much,
With their procuring causes and occasions,
Grave warnings, suting all such dispensations;
Lest when they be advanced they swell in pride,
And turn secure, then sadly fall, or slide
With heartlesse frettings, When they cannot have
All things, at all times, their vain hearts do crave:
In all which things, his words he fitly squares,
With sound experience its norm, and dares
With open face avow, all here declared,
To have been clearly known, found, seen and heard:
Come therefore, read, and with all care peruse
His words; for love to thee did cause him choose
To publish them: Thy good he did intend,
Next to Gods glory, and if this great end
Be reached, he is recompensed for all his pain:
Give praise to God, thank him, for thine's the gains
W. G.

To my highly Honored, and very obliging FRIEND, upon his rare and suitable
Choice in the ensuing POEM.
MVch honored Sir, the stately peerlesse worth
Of your high soaring spirit, is held forth
In slighting things terrene, divine desiring,
With most undanted boldness, high aspyring,
To know, see, yea, enjoy him, whose perfections
Cannot be reached by most enlarged conceptions
Of most capacious spirits, and deeply dyves
In these hid things, which knowing souls in lives:
Your progress since engaged in this abstruse
Deep art (being helped by the heavenly muse)
Appears in these well framed lines, which contain
A Christians present toil, but future gain.
O but your warnings wise, and counsels, be
Wholesome: conveyed with moving gravity*
Your skillful, well tuned Songs show that you're taught
In heavenly Poesy, and fully fraught
With free Urania's gifts; your lofty strain
Holds forth a heaven sprung, high Poetic vein;
Surely such soul-transporting Songs, could not
By any (not transported) be begot;
How hes your soul been filled with rapting joys?
O how enlarged by the melodious noise
Of these celestial hosts, and glorious throngs?
How elevated by their pleasant Songs?
When such sweet parallels were by your pen
Conveyed (of so great use) to blind-born men?
Great Sir, well done, ye have not basely spent
Your noble and broody spirit (forced to vent
It self on somewhat) in devising vain
Vtopian stories, which Romanticks fain,
Who busk Chymerick notions, which are not
Else where, but in the fanciers brain begot:
And with high-flown decked words, great things portend,
Which tried, into a noisome nothing end.
Your gravity would not permit you choice
Such theams; you fancy not a birthlesse noise;
Your subject's grave, your drift's not transient pleasure,
But solid joy, true peace, these lasting treasures.
W. G.

TO THE JUDICIOUS READER, Upon the excellency and sutablenesse of the AUTHOR,
his Choice and Subject of the Turtle-dove in the ensuing POEM.
HO, curious Spirits, who love to spend your time,
In reading strange new things, in Prose or Rhyme:
Come here, a Creature rare described you will see.
No Monster, yet more strange then Monsters be.
She Is styled a Turtle-dove, hereby's held forth
Her Clement Nature, Properties and Worth:
But if ye'll mark her with a searching eye,
Ye'll find her wonderful, made wondrously:
She is begot, she is born, and yet (O strange!)
Created, nay, renewed: Never such a change
Was heard of by Philosophers: Yet more,
By that same act by which she is made (adore!)
She is espoused, yea matched: Her Maker is
Her Lover, yea her Mate, and she is made his:
His milk's her food, her Collactaneus Mother
Sucks the same breasts, their Nurse is als their B^,
Yet, both his members are* He Is soul and head,
They Feasters, He Is the Table and the Bread.
He Is Prophet, Sacrifice, Priest, Judge and King,
They Judges, Priests and Kings with him shall reign:
And though these seem to be more when alone,
Yet, Husband, Mother, Spouse, Nurse, makes but one.
WILLIAM GORDOUN.

The POEM with the accomplishmenes Epitomized.
BEauty and Valor many Volums prove,
To be the Object of most ardent Love,
And subject, where the most profound confine
Their deepest thoughts, both moral and Divine:
The Streams of Truth unto the Fountain leads,
Where Virtue true from verity proceeds:
Unfading Beauty does in Virtue shine,
And Valor strong triumphs in Truth Divine:
Virtue Truth still victorious does grace,
And Truth in Virtue Beauty fair embrace:
What foes fair Virtue to deface contend,
Truth overturns, and does her cause defend*
From Truth what Rival Virtue would allure,
Virtue disdains, and does his death procure:
Fair Virtue does a constant Conflict keen,
From foes within and foes without sustain:
But by the Truth her Standart-bearer stands
Against the malice of these mighty bands:
Most happy they, and right Heroic sure,
Can faithful hearts unto this fight procure:
But all these conflicts, and these battles be
Spiritual, and discerned sp'ritually:
Yet carnal minds for substance shadows take:
But who for substance shadows does forsake:
True Valor, Virtue, Beauty, Love (come see)
The Subject of these Songs ensuing be;
Where shining in this Portraict shall appear,
The lineaments of a lively Christian clear,
Delineat from his birth and breeding glorious,
^raught with the Trophies of triumphs victorious.
THE NICODEMIAN PARADOX, EXPLAINED By a COMPARISON betwixt the Natural
Generation of MAN, and the Spiritual Regeneration of the NEW CREATURE: CLOSING
With the CHARACTERS of the OLD and NEW MAN.
THE PARADOX.
1. Except a Man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of GOD. 2. That,
before we can come to GOD, we must know our selves captives and slaves to
Satan. 3. That, before we enter the way to Heaven, we must see our selves in
the way to hell. 4. That the most sad Cross produces the most sweet fruit of
most kindly comfort. 5. That the Believer keeps a daily Feast, and also a daily
Fast. 6. That there is no true contentment attainable in any thing present. 7.
That the Believer enjoyes joys unspeakable in things unseen. 8. That the poor,
that have nothing, possess all things, and make many rich.
THese, and the like of these, are unto every man in the state of nature, clear
contradictions: for no Creature is able to surpass its own Sphere.

The Vegetative attains not unto Sense.

The Animal attains not unto Reason.

The Rational can as little apprehend the things of God, which are only
discernable by the Spirit of God.

The most able of men, for judgment, understanding or other parts natural, or
by learning and industry acquired, or extraordinarly given by revelation, are
but common gifts of the Spirit: as proper to the Believer in grace, so to the
unbeliever in nature, and by the man wholly in nature, naturally received and
naturally practiced.

As also, the very devils are known to have more light (by the many advantages
and occasions they have of knowledge, both by experience and revelation) then
all the sons of men: and although they be of a spiritual nature, yet know not,
neither can they put any thing in practice, but naturally.

Yet herein further consists the unhappiness of man, that he cannot conceive,
nor will he be taught to understand, that there is any more excellent
happiness attainable, than that whereunto they have attained, or may naturally
come by: Whereas the Believer, after many calls, wakenings, warnings, purposes,
promises, shifts and debates, being, in the peremptory time of Gods
appointment, (the time of love) effectually wrought upon, by the Spirit, and
word of grace and truth, unto a gracious wakning, quickened and illuminate to
see themselves under darkness, and spiritually dead without God in the world,
and posting on in the way of destruction: and so deservedly, wondering that he
is not long ago swallowed up in the gulf of irrecoverable wrath; Seeing also
the Vail rent, and the entry made by the New and Living Way, for a gracious
relief: and hereby beholding, as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, is
translated from that natural darkness to his marvelous light; And lanching
forth into this Ocean of eternal and unconceivable love, where the deluge of
unsearchable and self-destroying misery meets with the incomprehensible deeps
of infinite mercy: where plunged as in the extremes of contrary Tides, swelling
to such heights, being heaved (as it were) to the Region of the Air, and
hurled, as if they should be instantly sunk in these death-destroying surges of
despair; And yet so strengthened, that they see the wonders of the Lord, who,
before they be aware, commands peace to appear: makes all quiet, and, by the
breathing of a sweet and soft gale, brings safe to the shore. And now
reflecting upon the bypast and natural lost condition: first in the guilt of
the most base and irrational revolt of Original defection, and then in the
stain and stintlesse superfluities of naughtiness, daily sprouting out in
actual provocations, grieving Gods Spirit, and now vexing the New Man.

Observing also, and recenting the long-suffering patience, rich mercy, free
grace, eternal and unchangeable love that hes followed them in that miserable
condition, melted and made them up in a new mould, so as the old things are
past, and all things are become new to them.

They are set upon a twofold task, 1. Of selfdetestation, as self-destroyers:
and 2. Of Saviour-admiration in their deliverance, hating, denying and
forsaking themselves, loving, embracing and relying upon him in a continued
fast of abstinence, from all that hes been offensive to His good Spirit, and
studious to know, and delighting to do whatsoever may be well-pleasing unto
Him, who hes been doing all things well for us, when we were disdaining his
divine bounty: and this being the vast difference betwixt the man in his
natural estate, and in the state of grace, and that no man hes ground of
boasting, of any thing, in themselves more then another, and that there is no
warrant to any man to despair, but for confidence, in following the means
appointed, sincerely; And the matter being of greatest consequence, I have been
taking the more particular notice, by way of comparison, betwixt the first and
second BIRTH, and growth in a most familiar way, how any under the least degree
of grace, may most easily discern what progress they have made: And have
annexed hereto the portraict, both of the new and old man, the better to
inflame the affections to the love of the one, and loathing of the other:

Not that it is possible by any comparison imaginable, whether real or
supposed, to decipher the unsearchable mysterious way of the spirit in the soul
of the elect, in the Ordinances of conversion, or that either Ordinances or
instruments can make effectual the work of God, begetting and bringing forth
the new creature unto life, without the enliving power of the spirit, of the
new life, in the Ordinances: Nevertheless, seeing the Lord hes appointed, and
blessed means, wherein he will shine, and whereby he dispenses His grace; very
reason is convinced that the means are to be followed.

And this comparison is no further to be streached, then in a rational way, to
incite the reasonable party to a reverent attending, with attentiveness to the
Ordinances, and a confident dependence upon the truth and tenderness of the
Author; obedience to whose authority is ever well taken, and never any forsaken
that have been sincere seekers of Him, according to the perfect rule of
Scripture-truth.

THE COMPARISON.
AS the matter of the body of man, by the supreme Ordinance of God, in the
ordinary ^ct of generation is conceived, brought into form and capacitate to
receive the spirit of life, and the ^oul being created and infused in the body,
does operate unto the perfecting of the body, and so by the Lord's singular and
gracious preordination, they do become one compound creature for the
discharging of the offices of an intelligible spirit, joined with the Organs of
a bodily substance, whereby to conceive, and by words and actions to express,
according as they shall be by means ordinar, or extraordinar, natural, or
supernatural taught, as the first Mover shall see meet: Even so, the word of
the Gospel, containing the seeds of the New Man, by the Ordinance of Preaching,
and the ordinar act of hearing, impressions are left upon the understanding and
will, for conceiving and bringing it into form, quality and capacity, to
receive the spirit of spiritual life, which creats and infuseth grace in the
soul; whereby every Elect Child of God, according to God's grac^ous
preordination in this new creature, by t^ efficacious operation of the Holy
Ghost, is ingrafted in the Head Jesus Christ, and by the Union enabled unto the
performance of all Christian duties, incumbent to the New Man; an^ that by
degrees, according to our growth and increase in knowledge and experience,
either unto doing or suffering, according as they be moved o^ called thereunto.

But as in the natural generation, after the Infant hes received form, life,
senses and faculties but not come out unto the light, and so without the object
and exercise of them, but lying under darkness in this weak condition, the
brittle embrio is in hourly hazard of imminent destruction from causes seen and
unseen, innumerable; and often proves abortive, by an over-slow or over sudden
birth. Even so the life of grace, by the Spirit, and Word of the Gospel, being
conceived, yet is the New Man overclouded with much natural darkness: the
Devil taking advantage of the time, sets to work all his machinations, musters
up all his legions, lies in ambush with swarms of temptations, assaulting from
all airts uncessantly: from corruption, from carnal reason, from suggestions
natural and unnatural, wearying the poor youngling with fearful wrestlings;
^ut faithfully guarded against this malice by the ^uthor of his reviving. Only
the yoke of ^ondage, from the undeniable endictment and ^itnesse in his own
guilty conscience, dragging ^im back to the justice seat of a sin revenging
^od, to receive the righteous doom of his own ^righteousnesse; he is under
dreadful confusi^ns and hesitations, in hazard of miscarriage, and ^ady to
give over, until it please the Lord to re^eal Himself more clearly, and
thereby making ^o the work of faith with power, brings out the ^risoner of
hope, unto the open air of the Go^el, to lay hold upon the Prince of life; and
by ^eholding Him, the Captain of our Salvation, (...) giving His Life to the
death for penitent and ^elieving sinners, hes destroyed death, spoiled (...) of
the sting and the law of its strength, quie^ng the conscience in satisfying
justice, and so ^eeing the fearful soul from the rigorous exacti^s of a fierce
and fiery law unto a further growth ^f grace, and the knowledge of our Lord
Jesus Christ: But being by much weakness, almost ^vercome in these wrestlings,
and like an unwise ^n, having stayed long in the breaking forth of ^ildren; by
gracious assistance, having gained ^me better ground of confidence, I break out
in ^is contest with my self.

Ho! hellish heath, do thou not tire to toil
Thy self, along this stinking Stigian Lake?
What can thou like in this forsaken Soil,
Where all that drove of damned devils quake:
Ah, do thou look for Limbos Patrum here,
For Purgatory, or poor Infants pain?
No, the eternal wrath of God severe
Does ever burn, none does return again.
Ho! lo these swelling sulfurous floods that roar,
Gaze no more on these griefly ghosts forlorn,
Wambling in woeful endless torments sore,
Blaspheming God that ever they were born.
Return, withdraw now, do ye danger dread,
Despair attends, and can ye overturn:
Thou had dropped down, if not upheld indeed,
Where all these ever-dying damned mourn:
He that upholds thee bids thee turn in haste,
To taste and feast upon this fervent Love:
Return, my soul, therefore unto thy rest,
Prepare thy heart His mercies force to prove:
How can thou be so base, as misbelieve
Him, who hes shed His blood, to set thee free?
Will thou, by incredulity, deprive
Thy self of peace, so purchased for thee?
Thy guilty Conscience, and the Law exact
He silenced hes, that ye can say no more:
And now, thou may, this day, come see and take
His truth, His grace, Himself thee to restore:
Is it not now so natural to thee.
Him to believe, since thou art born again,
As once it was His truth to vilify,
When thou in natural darkness did remain?
Thy bands, thy bondage, all thy torturing terrors,
From infidelity, unpurg'd, do spring:
May not this ransom now remove thy errors,
When death and hell hereby hes lost the sting?
The Law like the Lawmakers does remain,
Righteous and holy, sp'rituall and just:
So does thy Conscience here bear witness plain
Of what thou do amiss, for that it must:
But none of these can hinder thee to hold
The grip that thou have got of God, by grace:
No, they do let thee see that thou art sold,
By sin, a slave to satan, and do chase
Thee now, with speed, timous supply to take,
And wonder that thou art prevented so,
Before the Law thy conscience did awake:
For then remediless had been thy woe.
Thy reason cannot thy relief receive,
Thy guilt will ever keep thee under grief:
Then shall thou so thine own poor soul deceive,
And it bereave of offered relief.
Arise therefore, and mourn the more for sin,
That now, thou see, it hes procured Gods ire:
Again to see slain Christ for thee begin,
Whose blood does quench that feared infernal fire.
Doubtless I would be fred of this wanrest,
Wherein I wrestle as a wretch forlorn,
Under the weight of guilt and wrath suppressed,
And with the torment of these terrors torn:
But now I see I must for life believe
On Him, who freely loves and freely gives:
Not that for my believing I may live,
That I may live, He gives me to believe,
And firmly now to fix upon His Love
His Mercy, Truth and power infinite,
And by the motions of His Grace to move,
As He shall give assistance by His Sp'rit.
And yet, as the natural man, before he com^ to the years of discretion, by
education and experience, is exposed unto many dangerous trial^ and troubles,
wherein he is often in danger o^ ruin, being like an untamed Colt, or a wild^
Ass in the Wilderness, snuffing up the wind brutishly exposing himself unto
the peril of perishing, every day, in his riot and insolency.

Right so, the new Man, albeit come out of the womb of Regeneration, wrestled
through the straits and travels of new Birth, escaped the power of the Law,
bondage and darkness where under he was kept: and that for the time,
corruption hes been kept far under, that it could not get up the head, having
tasted how good the Lord is and does grow up by sucking in the sincere Mil^ of
the Word.

Yet, the old and bold Serpent, that vigilant, subtle and restless enemy of
our Salvation sleeps not, but lies at all advantage, by all means, to make use
of every time, under all cases, for undoing all that God hes done in us so far
as lies in his power.

Who seeing us so satisfied with what we have received, lets us swell a little,
and then like an Angel of Light lifts us up, and leads us ou^ of the humble
and holy way of self denial and sincere dependence, for daily and immediate
support, unto self-confidence and carnal contentment, abusing the rich mercy,
and turning the free grace, received, unto wantonness: so that, before I was
aware, was left in the dark, pestered with meny piercing temptations, and much
foiled under some fearful devices; Which perceiving^ and after some serious
pause, turning to my strong hold, and putting on the armor of proof, entered
the fight of faith, under his Banner who overcame for me: Confident that He
would also overcome in me, to the praise of the glory of His Grace, I break out
in this passion.

Thou damned Devil, go to the hells and die
That never dying death, thy portion just:
Infernal Feind, fall down, and scoarchingly
For ever. Why? It is thy doom, thou must
Down, downly, die, and there thy power restrain;
The Lord reprove thy pride and malice vain.
This passion thou puts me to perforce,
because thou do perplex and vex me still:
Who, by thy wiles, would me from God divorce,
and dragg me after thy pernicious will:
In plots profound thy wits thou do employ,
By treacherous trains, poor souls for to destroy;
Thou, like a Siren, can thy song enchant,
Until the carnal part thereto incline:
When in resemblance thou do seem a Saint,
This cruel craft is found in thee and thine:
The world and worldlings at thy wish thou have,
And mine own flesh to keep me in unrest:
My facile mind thou also much do mar,
With many foolish fantasies confuse,
And to my judgment er^ors also dare
Present, maintain with lies, and bid me choose
The rules of reason and of carnal sense:
So to destroy my faith, on this pretense,
Thou lets my sins forsaken me before,
And shows, my sorrow is below my sin,
And that to quench the wrath of God the more,
I must to mourn again for sin, begin:
So friend-like teaching me how to remeed
My own undoing, by thy treacherous deed:
And would have me believe, that by repenting
I must redeem my self, or lost remain:
And so ensnare me by thy wise inventing,
And wast my substance in this subtle train;
For better would thou never seek of me,
Then in these fetters perishing to see.
As if my Lord, who has me freely loved,
Did not revive me when my life were spent*
As if, again, this Love I had not proved,
Which moved my heart sincerely to repent:
So as alone He has done all for me,
That by His death I may victorious be.
Hereby again, thou do advantage take,
Careless to make, and carnally secure,
Both sluggishly and senslesly to slack
In duties, whereto Love does me allure:
As if His Love were not of force to guide
Me through the straits, wherein I may be tried.
And when my Lord (better to let me see
My self, whereof I daily stand in need)
The influence of his grace restrains from me,
Then butcher-like thou follows me with speed,
And do surmise, that I do beat the air,
And notions print, to press me to despair:
And when thou can not, by thy wit, prevail,
Because I do, by faith, thy darts resist,
Then, lion-like, thou do in arms assail,
And, by thy wicked instruments, insist
To persecute, in body, state and name,
Thereby to bring me unto public shame.
Thus did thou first begin with lying lewd,
And therein counterfeited* as thou can:
And then thy flattery did convert to feud,
Burning in malice, to betray the man.
The Syrene first, and then the serpent grim,
Now from thy lurking hole, the Lions limb.
But now thy fury to thy face shall turn,
And vex thee in quotidian ecstasy
Of endless woe, for evermore to burn
In pain, when I am from thy spite set free:
For all thy trains shall both increase thy charge,
And for triumphs victorious us enlarge.
For certainly, what thou have done or can,
Yet ever do: in time to come, I know,
Shall do but heap hape on the hopeful man,
And, in the end, turn to thy overthrow;
For, as he is in battle tried, the more
Into his rest, shall he enjoy of glore.
And this I do not gloss upon in pride;
For weakness, with the weakest, I confess:
And when my Lord does leave me to be tried,
Then dwining do I ly in deep distress:
But then, even then, whole hell cannot bereave
Me of this faith, I know whom I believe.
Thus, Satan old, thou see not how I soar
Above thy sight, upon the Eagles wing:
EMANUELS might protects me evermore,
And, in thy spite, shall me to safety bring.
So, go: for lo, I leave thee here to ly,
And, with thy mates, eternally to die.
And now again, as the natural man, being brought to the light, and through
the trials and travels incident to him, in his infancy, and under age, unto the
years of discretion and experience, is to be exercised in serious and important
affairs concerning himself, his Country, and concernment: and thereby is to
give proof of his gifts and endowments, grounded upon justice, temperance,
prudence, and fortitude, with all other subordinate requisites: and yet meeting
with so many difficulties in the progress of his best intended and most
approvable actions, is subject to much haulting, and deviation, in many things
turning to his reproach.

The New Man, in like manner, being come through these, and many such assaults,
and come up to some growth in light and experience, is to be exercised as a
Professor of Christianity, and to exercise himself therein, both in his
general and particular calling, being strengthened by the gifts and grace
received, both to do and endure, as it shall please the Giver to give the
calling: And for this end, that he be endued with these requests.

1. So much knowledge of himself, as may produce sincere self-denial. 2. So
much of GOD, as may make up a sole dependency upon a Providence. 3. Faith,
whereby to sacrifice his Isaac, his dearest darling, to the service of God,
upon a known call. 4. A fixed confidence, that if he should slay thee, thou will trust in him. 5. Love above comparison, so far as God is above the
creature. 6. Zeal, like Phineas, impartial in the execution of justice, in the
Cause of God and our Country. 7. Submission, in what he takes as in what he
gives. 8. Patience, in resting quiet and confident in all he does. 9. Humility,
tending to the increase of grace, thankfulness under the cross, as under
comfort. 10. Cheerfulness, so shall the joy of the LORD be thy strength.
These be the approven grounds, whereby to walk with approbation: but how short
every man comes in the practice, it is too well seen, whether from the world,
when it flattereth or frowns, affecting or repining. And in the unregenerate
part, what a filthy fume flows daily out of that stinking pudle, where the
dregs and spawn of all the devilry of hell is engrossed: and but in part
purged, or rather born down and kept under from out-breaking in palpable
enormities: And yet the Devil knows well what coal to blow at, and how to
quicken more damnable and deadly Vipers, to suck out our spiritual life*
unseen or adverted unto, as, spiritual pride, carnal security under the
exercise of our best actions, taking growth with our gifts: whereby Gods Spirit
is grieved, desertion procured, crosses, afflictions and corrections inflicted,
for humbling, reclaiming, keeping under, and in order, the light and facile
heart, which would miscarry unto ruin, if not prevented. But, for this misery
of self-deceiving deceit, and desperate wickedness of the heart, the many
inventions it finds out (being prompted thereunto by the old Serpent) to undo
it self: and how far the remnants of this corruption may prevail, even in the
Regenerate, it is better seen then guarded against by too many, as much
fearful and bitter experience can witness.

But thus it becomes every one, that knows so much as that God knows the
heart, to make search, till they attain to know the plague of their own heart,
that they may be confounded in themselves, not lifting up their face for shame,
seeing God is pacified toward them for all that they have done, because of the
stability of His Covenant, Ezekiel. 16.62, 63.

But naturally every man being so conceited of himself, scarce any man will
believe, that such things, as both Scripture and experience make clear to be in
the heart of man, can be in his heart, but will be ready to say, Am I a dog,
that I should be tempted to do such things? Till under the trial we become
taught, by woeful proof, the folly of our faithlesnesse in our defections.

And having been much toyled in pruning and suppressing these sproutings, and
superfluities of naughtiness that are always taking life in the body of
death: So Hydra-like, that as one head is stricken off, another more monstrous
and menstruous springs up to be conflicted with, from that fruitful Scorpion
of corruption which multiplies the conception, and make the burden so
unsuperable, that the delivery works her own destruction, but, by the grace of
God, crushed, suppressed and partly purged out, the life of grace is preserved
in the Believer.

And yet nevertheless, there remains an itching dreg in the heart, that it
will needs have some latitude (if no other ways attainable) yet under pretense
of lawful liberty, for recreation or preservation of the outward man, and
under the colors, and in the shadow whereof, some well smelling Aple, or
amiable Idol, may steal in and present it self in such glistrings, as dazels
the eye o^ spiritual discerning: So, as the judging part is blunted and
benumbed under the prevalency of this well masked and bewitching darling, or
Dalilah, doated on unto destruction; and herewith being not only toyled, but
often foiled, I have been driven to fall under this conception, that suppose a
man, even a Child of grace, while he is under mortality, carrying the remanents
of corruption within him, were ravished to heaven and got a blink of the bless
that is to be enjoyed there, and again plunged into hell to behold these
terrible torments, prepared for impenitent sinners, and thereafter, set up for
a season to act a part upon the stage of this world, although it should not
fail to seem to himself and others, that henceforth he should live like a Saint
upon the earth, yet let him be left a little to himself, and the devil
permitted to try him with a bait agreeable to his humor, or an idol well
trimmed to his fancy, under such deceivable pretext, pretense, or otherwise, as
the subtle serpent can well insinuate: It might be too justly feared that he
should be in so great peril as ever our first Parents were in Paradise, so as
to conceive a possibility of standing, but by immediate grace sustaining, it
were most palpable presumption: and that the only way to preserve and increase
grace, is by conversing in Heaven, keeping a Communion with God, and the
frequent use of Ordinances, to lead us out of our selves, unto a sincere
dependence upon God, and out of the world, so as to use it, as if we used it
not, in a humble and cheerful submission unto all His gracious dispensations,
whether bitter or sweet to the natural part; which (I suppose) very hardly any
man who is too conversant in the things of the world, and active about them
(further then a pressing calling calls him to) can attain: the world being but
the Pandor, or Cater to furnish fuel for the Old Man, to feed the affections,
and inflame the fiery lusts of the flesh, the eye, and the pride of life: But
it is possible with God to carry the cable through the eye of the needle,
suppose the strait way must be thrust through, and the kingdom of grace and of
glory taken with violence.

But, reflecting upon this Old Man, and the troubles and trials that the soul
is put to under his jurisdiction, which cannot consent unto tha lawless law
that he would maintain in the members: and to dismantle, unmask, and ripe him
up in some specials; I have here tinkled a little at the description thereof
under the name of Vice. And because all things directly contrar, and opposite
one to another, together presented, are most lively, and best discerned: I have
therefore also herewith delineate the New Man, under the name of Virtue: so as
the one and the other may allure, and procure the heart, unto the affections of
desire and detestation.

THE PORTRAICT AND CHARACTER OF VIRTUE: OR, The New Man shining in Virtue,
DESCRIBED.
COme ye, whose curiosity
Rare, precious, pleasant things would see:
And you who can discern aright
Fair Virtue in ber beauties bright,
Her post and gesture well perceive,
Holy, humble, sweet and grave,
So rarely mixed, so fairly shine,
So lovely, in their luster fine;
Each in its Orb so ord'red see,
That nothing can so pleasant be*
Behold her flourishing forehead,
Where Generosity does spread,
Her brow's a Stage, where, joining hands*
Both Stateliness and meekness stands;
Look in her eyes, for there is seen
That she is prudent, chaste and clean*
The comely portraict of her nose
A searching wit does well disclose;
Her sweetest cheeks, full of delight,
All love, but loyal, banish quite;
Both strength and resolution deck
The fairness of her fairest neck:
Her breasts so beautiful appear,
Both liberal and frugall clear:
Her heart and hands do well agree,
In clemency and charity:
A midst this frame of beauty fair,
A tongue well taught and tamed, where
Expressions proper, sweet and plain,
Witness where wisdom does remain:
Her noble parts her health preserves,
With nutriture the spirits serves:
Out of that store the sellers keep,
Of heavens, earth, seas their hight, their deep*
In all wherein contained she dives,
True good extracts to goodness cleaves:
And does bring out of projects ill,
The means to save was made to kill:
When stormy winds of trouble blow,
Does firmly stand and fairly grow;
Out of afflictions she can find,
Both patience and peace of mind:
And in the midst of sorrows see,
Where best refreshments furnished be:
Contempt and malice she does prise
As manure rich, to make her rise:
From care, disdain, distrust and grief,
Envy, despair, of mischiefs chief,
She sees and knows, and can compose,
By all things gain, by nothing lose:
Time never can her beauty stain,
Nor tyranny approach her gain:
Her riches are beyond the reach
Of all that policy can stretch:
Old Satan when he comes to spoil,
At all incounters gets the foil:
Fond lust and all that carnal crew,
Her feet below she does subdue:
Be slav'd by none, she serves her Maker,
And all her strength unto Him facer:
Deep in the Well of Life she drinks,
And feeds upon the River brinks:
Where that Ambrosia sweet distills,
From Sacred Truth the soul full fills:
She searches all Gods ways, and sees
Divine and heavenly mysteries:
Converts her food in courage strong,
And by sincerity along,
As by the nerves for new supply,
Does act her part most cheerfully?
^ointly conjoined by sinews sure,
Of strongest truths which do endure,
Till all her foes she does outface,
That would her fairest grace disgrace.
Objection^
But pause a little, answer here,
How may this matter so appear*
What fairer, rarer excellency
Had Adam in his innoncencie?
How now can his rebellious race
This beauty and this bless embrace?
For of a man what can you crave,
If he be holy, humble, grave,
Modest, meek, generous, prudent,
Chaste, courteous, lovely, sapient,
Strong, temperat, full of charity,
Circumspection, courage, clemency,
Resolute, liberal, frugall, able,
Patient, active, prompt and stable,
Possessed with truth, delight and peace,
And still sincere, this grace to grace?
Where is the man hereof may boast,
Gods Image seeing he hes lost?
Answer.
Now justly left, (it is true indeed)
None of this poisoned, perverse seed
Can to true happiness attain,
But doats on durelesse shadows vain:
And natural gifts now never can
Accomplish or complete a man:
But thou art carnal that objects,
And does discover thy defects:
A little ponder, understand,
Shall that All-wise, All-working hand,
All-just, All-good, All-holy King
Miss in that most intended thing
His Eyes were on, when He gave being
To all things subject unto seeing?
Did He this spacious Globe erect,
And by their sourse the seas collect*
Becircled by the firmament,
Illustrious and so excellent:
With plenteous store to entertain
Poor wretched men, that lost have been:
No, from eternity He knew,
All what was past, what should ensue:
And in a Second Adam sweet,
Made man again with God to meet:
Who for the Elect Surety stood,
And them restored by His own Blood:
Their flesh assumed for that end*
And does His Sp'rit unto them send:
Which Holy Sp'rit their sp'rit inspires,
With sp'rit-renewing sacred fires,
Quickening, purging and perfuming,
Grace increasing, vice consuming,
Eyes, and heart, and minds enlarging,
With His Image supercharging,
Such searching souls as do embrace
The splendour of his pleasing face:
Rapt, and made apt, with open eyes,
To dyve in these excellencies:
And in that sourse of sweet delight,
To feast upon his beauty bright:
Whereby he does our souls decore,
And to his Image us restore:
On whom by faith firm fixed solely,
The whole affections are made holy,
And humble, by a self-reflect
Upon thy self, for self neglect,
So modesty shines in the face,
And gravity, that Christian grace:
That generous Spirit that does ^acer
Her self, to serve her Saving Maker:
That Sapience that far, far sees,
To compose content from contraries:
That chastity, that can contain
Affections all in order clean:
That love, that virtue does allure.
And all licentious lusts can cure:
That liberal mind, that lively spreads,
And frugally preserves the seeds:
That charity, that cheerfully
Knows when, how, where to give supply:
That temperance, that can subdue,
Proud passions, as they do renew;
That courtesy, that neatly can
Carry the master, like a man:
That clemency, that can declare
The colors clear of virtue fair:
That patience, that prudence leads,
That peace, which pious Spirits feeds,
That fortitude that fairly founded,
With resolutions firmly grounded
On truth, with strong stability,
Expressed with alacrity,
Courage and circumspection, so
That never storm can overthrow
That single heart sincere and sweet,
Where comfort and delight do meet?
That sp'rit of contemplation piercing,
And heavens holy myst'ries searching,
Longing, thronging, thirsting, till
The fruit of faith the Soul full fill:
Then God, beholding the effects
That by his beams, on Saints reflects,
And looking on that beauty rare,
Accounts and calls them sweet and fair,
For grace, in virtue, so does shine,
That virtue does become divine,
This is the virtue, I avouch'd,
The virtue that I would have touched,
The virtue true, that clarifies
And qualifies the qualities:
That does illustrate and ingrain,
And turns in substance shadows vain:
That gives smell and taste unto
All that we think, or speak, or do.
This virtue well accomplish can
And complete the Christian man:
Gain this virtue, and thou shall
Inherit Heaven, and Earth, and all:
More solid solace sweet possess,
Then heart can think, or pen express:
Limb out her lineaments, conceive
Such riches where thou can receive;
Try her parts, taste every place,
Such sweet thou can no where embrace;
Drink her in with all desire,
Until she set thy heart on fire;
Her beams, they will thy breast inflame,
Her streams will qualify the same:
Choice of choises, chief content
Of all beneath the firmament,
Search her, for she waits to see,
Who for her love will fervent be;
And if thou join, thou shall enjoy
That bliss, which nothing can annoy:
For then thou shall into his Image grow,
From whom this virtue fair does freely flow.
The Portraict and Character o^ the Old Man, Under the name of Vice, described.
COme you, who wonders curious are to see,
Or monsters, such as most detested be,
And you, who can indeed discern aright
(This Brat begot in hell) by heavenly light:
Vice here behold, stripped naked to the skin,
Look on her outside, see her well within:
Her port, and gesture, here how vile behold,
Vain, proud, implacable, presumptuous, bold,
Disorderly, by satan's order placed,
As basely in the heart they be embraced:
Each ruling in his sphere, rounding the brain,
And heart, with humors perverse and profane:
Where generositie should bud and flourish,
Debate, deceit, there does she neatly nourish;
There, where the truth sincerely should be stated,
Faithless hypocrisy is firmly seated:
Malice, envy, and horrid hatred there,
Where love should move, is in her breast made bare;
Under the show of chastity most clean,
Closs, impudent, incontinencie is seen:
Ambition, avarice, wrath and cruelty,
Watch, as they may most serviceable be:
Within a cloud of Christian clemency
And humane gentleness, dissimulately
She sets her subtle snares, for to entyse
The weak, for she in wickedness is wise:
Her sottish slaves who serve her, she does lead
Their souls, on sensual lusts to live and feed:
Or otherwise to pry, how to surprise
Their nearest, dearest friends, that they may rise
To treasure, state or store, honor or ease,
As they may their beloved Idol please.
And for those ends, do study to devise,
By all the means that be below the skies,
Without control, directly to content
That humor, in its fixed element.
Objection.
Can all that you have heretofore asserted
Be held for truth? Is poor man so deserted,
And by that devilish villainy possessed,
Which here you have so peremptory pressed?
Is man, who is the creature rational,
Below the brute so fallen by his fall?
You see, most men do something civil live,
Vice misregard* and unto virtue cleave:
It seems, that he does some true light retain*
Suppose it suffered has a fearful stain,
And if it were as you affirm, then he
Not only should below the brutish be,
But might be ranked in degree with devils,
The Author of these specified evils.
What find we more in that apostate sp'rit,
Final impenitency to complete,
Then you of man, each man forlorn has said,
Is it not for His wrack that he was made?
Answer.
Our Glorious King, Eternal, only Wise,
Almighty Mover, moved by advice
Of uncreated wisdom, that he can
No less have done, then well in making man:
Man was made holy, righteous and good,
But he did stumble when he should have stood
Before the trials of the tempter sly,
And slew himself and all his progeny,
By misbelieving Him by whom he lived,
Is left to live to him whom he believed:
And being left of God, he is possessed
Of all the devilry that is here expressed.
Man unregenerate is below most sure,
The vildest bruit on earth, and most impure*
What Lion, Tygre or destroying Boa^,
So fervent, fierce or cruel to devour?
What can with that vild murderer compare,
Who, for to feast his idol, will not spare
His nearest friends, brothers or native seed,
And will imbrew his hands in parricide:
And in his own hot blood, for to fulfill
His humor, give the fatal stroke and kill?
What Crocodil, what scorching Scorpion can
Obscurely watch, to catch the prey, as man?
The beast, whose color every object changes,
And that Hienna through the desert ranges,
And with the voice of man, man to ensnare,
With man's hypocrisy cannot compare:
Who can pretend for Truth and Piety,
Yet tramp on Truth to raise himself, you see.
Who of the bruitare so degenerate,
As with the other kind to generate,
Or sex, (O horrible!) but only he,
Who was appointed most for purity?
In sp'rit-defilements, which no beast do know
Man tempted is, and thereby beasts below*
Malice and envy in the brutish brood
Was never seen, as in our poisoned blood:
And man in light the liar is below,
For God he knows, and trembling stands in aw;
But man forsaken, now no better sees,
Being by the liar led to follow lies:
And look what e're the devil hes to do,
But man he finds an instrument thereto.
How should the beast such levies with him lead,
If man did not for him in arms proceed?
How could man for his acts apologi^e,
If satan taught him not to subtilize?
When the old serpent in the chair him sets,
Pride and disdain, the lying tongues he gets:
The world the avaricious gets for hyre,
And the ambitious honor at desire:
Some unto satan offer service will,
That they by him may gain that hellish skill,
Themselves to help, and in malicious slight
Others destroy, out of revengefull spite;
Some do conceive themselves profoundly wise,
Satan to serve them as they do devise;
And if some curious spirits be more strange,
Incontinent, directly he can change
The bait, and lead them on the stars to gaze,
Put them by natures products in a maze,
By demonaicall demonstrations feeding
The fancy, till he fix them for proceeding;
For he to all their doatings does apply,
Gaining his gain this cruel craft hereby:
Apples and idols trimmed he hes for all
Humors, that under finity can fall:
So is he served, then does he smile to see,
Some others wallow in their vice, and die:
For what remains of all man's natural light,
Tends still unto his more conviction right:
But that there is some sort of order civil
In some, and that in all men every evil
Does not appear alike, yet certainly
The seed of vice in every one does ly:
In some, by providence, vice is restrained,
Some be, by breeding, unto virtue trained:
Some be bound up, by bit and bridle so,
That what they would, they cannot come to do*
And some there be beyond the common line,
By study do to goodness much incline:
But they not knowing right their glorious Maker,
Do not their doings to his glory sacre:
But vainly glory in themselves, to gain
A name and fame, which is their idol vain;
So vile an idol never yet was named,
Whereby most men have most been blamed and shamed,
As is vile man himself, more meet be placed
With devils, then with divine worship graced:
And yet the strong man in his strength will glore,
The wordling in his wisdom glory more,
The rich man in his treasure put his trust,
And dote upon himself in gathering dust:
The man to contemplation addicted,
Though he, of any, least can be convicted,
Yet can an aerial Image fancy feign,
And idolize the vapors of his brain:
And who is he who is not prepossest,
With some heart-darling, hardly dispossessed?
Even by such as press to purge the will
Of all that holy sp'rituall motions kill;
No, too much spiritual pride finds place,
Even where are sown the seeds of saving grace;
How then can such, as do no better see*
Some darling want doting whereon to be?
So that even those who have aspyred highest,
Have fallen short and sunken as thou see:
Scripture indites, and conscience gives the doom,
All flesh is justly damned, until he come,
Who justice satisfies for them elected
By God, from all eternity respected;
And now in time true members do remain,
Been born of water, and of blood again*
Thus as his justice glorious is clear,
So does his merit glorious appear:
For then, when all concluded were in sin
And under wrath, his mercy did begin
So as without all shadow of excuse,
Twice damned they be that this free grace refuse;
So, never think it strange that man in sin,
And vice, ly rotting, till he die therein:
For he is poisoned with the spawn of hell
And seed of satan, since he did rebel:
But wonder! O! this wonder strange behold,
Above what ever can with tongue be told,
That we, in this contagion dyed so deep,
Should cleared be, pure colors white to keep;
But set thy self thy self before in sin,
And to detest thy sinful self begin:
Study thy self, thy Savior then shall see
And shall preveen^ thy soul-perplexity
Most timously, who knows to save alone,
And will advert unto thy hopeful moan;
Open thine ears to hear, thine heart to hold,
The marvels of those mercies manifold,
Held ^ut so much, with such incitements sweet,
As lost man may his comforts yet complete:
So shall thou find, and by experience prove,
Thy Maker is thy God, that man does love.
But if thou do reject his voice allu^ing,
Thy heart in induration obduring*
Thy conscience wakened shall be witness sure,
Destruction to thy self thou do procure.
THE TURTLE-DOVE* UNDER ABSENCE and PRESENCE OF HER ONLY CHOICE: OR, DESERTION
and DELIVERANCE REVIVED.

WHEREIN By way of DIALOGUE, in a POEM, under several significant Figures and
Allegories, the most ordinary exercises of the Child of God after Regeneration,
until, by many most searching trials, he become strong and able to discern
aright in doing and enduring, as he shall be called to i^, in his way and
warfare through the wilderness to his journi^s end, is shadowed out.

WITH A necessary WARNING against Security, in most secure times.

AND Closing with a Word for wakening of the natural Man.

^^.7. Lord by thy favor thou have made my mountain to stand strong* Thou
did hide thy face, and I was troubled

ERRATA.
Page 4. Line 12. read, his Royal. p. 8. l. 1. r. With cunning. p. 10. l. 20.
r. but helpless. p. 12. l. 8. r. thy Lover. Ibid. l. 25. r. world new. p. 26.
l. ult. r. unknown fire. p. 38. l. 12. r. And re-deliv'ry. p 52. l. 14. r.
life's reviving. p. 55. l. 22. r. in the blood, p. 60. l. 13. r. the stony. p.
66. l. 13. r. with his pernicious tares. p. 71. l. 11. r. then left. p. 85. l.
9. r. Thy Spirits. p. 87. l. 7. r. These wak'nings. p. 94. l. ult. begins the
next Speaker (Helen.) p. 122. l. 9. r. man's most deep conceiving. p. 128. l.
29. r. are not weighing.

The NAMES of the SPEAKERS in this Dialogue, and what they represent. The
Signification of the NAMES. SAMUEL, a learned, judicious and experienced
Christian. Placed of God. JEANNA, a Honorable and Religious Lady of much
experience. Gracious. HELENA, a Christian afflicted in spirit under desertion,
and comforted upon deliverance. Pitiful. MARIONA, a Christian conversant in
Heaven. Sweet perfume. GRISSELLA, a School-bred Christian. Grave Lady. MARIA, a
Court-bred Christian. Exalted. ANNA, a City-bred Christian. Merciful. ELIZA, a
Country-bred Christian. God save. THOMA, a Civilian Justiciary converted. A
Twin. ANDREA, a licentious Savage converted, and become a zealous monitor.
Manly. The Echo, Isa. 30.21.

THE ARGUMENT.
A Noble Lady notice takes,
And many other worthies makes
Acquainted with a Christian, moved
By absence of her best Beloved.
They to her present case advert,
And do speak kindly to her heart:
Questions they do propone, explain,
Natural, sp'rituall for her gain;
But under absence of her Lover
No comfort can her heart recover:
Yet they insist, that she may see
Of her mistakes the mystery;
They represent the happiness
Of her condition, not the less:
Of present darkness then debating
The matter, many questions stating,
Clearing, discussing and revolving,
She is convinced at the resolving;
And then so moved at the discourse,
By comfort coming from the sourse,
She plainly does her self express,
Whereby their endeavors increase
So fervently in this pursuit,
That seasonably they reap the fruit:
O'rejoyed join, Loves Songs solemnly sing
To their compassionate Comforter and King.
THE DIALOGUE.
Jeana, Samuel, Helena.
Jea. Much graced Sir, who prudently does spare
This time for recreation and repair,
Whereby we may timous occasion take
You with our cases to acquainted make:
Your doctrine sound, sincere, and sober living,
Full confirmations be of firm believing.
For such as present things so little prize,
Must have more permanent before their eyes.
And what can that man of this world make,
When it does him, and he does it forsake?
Now what we have for to impart, concerns
Another World than this vain world discerns,

Sam. Most noble and religious Lady, sure
You are of what my service can procure.
There hes a world of Believers been,
Dispersed through this world, and unseen:
^ut hated so, that whosoever professed
^incere believing, them did this world detest.
For as the Head, so must the Members be,
^repar'd by sufferings, ere they be set free;
But, as our sufferings do abound, so sure
Our Captain comforts does for us procure,
Which qualifies, and swallows up the sore,
That, by our troubles, we triumph the more*
For in this transient march, through worlds of woes*
Our heaven within-begun makes us rejoice:
While all our furious Persecutors fell,
Their present pleasures but preceed their hell.
This, I suppose, you partly know: therefore
Propose your purpose, we shall parley more.

Jea. We know, there is nothing can preferred be
Unto that peace and true tranquillity,
Procured by our Prince of peace and grace,
To true Believers, that do him embrace:
And that, albeit we be the only Butt,
At whom both devils and men their arrows shoot,
Maliciously to murder by their might,
Yet are we ever conquerours in fight:
And while the wicked make their cup to flow
Of wrath, our comforts in our crosses grow,
With pleasures present, far above the pain,
Which does but for some minutes short remain.
Much more that store, which, by believing, is
Confirmed to them of everlasting bless.
But we who for Professors do appear*
And make acquaintance with them most sincere,
Follow the means, and meetings on the Mountain,
Flock to the Streams of the Life-giving Fountain:
Fed with that Milk and Honey Heaven distills,
Which every fainting, panting heart full fills.
Yet when again our King does call us out,
And to some special charge we go about,
Then, ere we be aware, we are surprised
By subtle slights, against us that is devised:
So as we cannot change so many places,
But trials more we meet of diverse cases.
And for an instance clear, we do present
An Israelite contrite, in mourning spent,
Well known to be in duties diligent,
Grave, humble, gracious, to devotion bent:
Cheerful, and choysing, for her greatest gain*
Others unto the Well of Life to train.
But now you see, what sadness does possess
Her soul, and how her sighing does increase:
And still, the more by us she is exhorted,
She does the more refuse to be comforted,
And often answers us, Who can but grieve,
When he is gone, that should my grief relieve:
And that her Life, her Light, and her Delight,
In deaths dark shads, does shut her out of sight:
Consuming daily under slavish fears,
Become benumb, beneath untimely tears.

Sa. The seed of Grace is, with such sweetness, shed
Into the soul, where the new birth is bred:
And she, delighted in these feelings sweet,
Cannot, with patience, pains of childbirth meet:
And, till the New-man formed be again,
From fainting cannot make the heart refrain:
So as a pleasant life we have, until
We come to act, and there our cause we spill.
For when on duties we delight to dwell,
And are assisted, we are apt to swell:
And when we find not access, as we think,
Then under sadness we are like to sink;
But if, in sense, we were our selves denying,
And, under absence, on His grace relying:
And made our life witness our true believing,
And on believing ground our upright living*
We should attain unto some progress then,
And so enjoy the lot of loved men.
For now Believers are by faith to act,
As if themselves most happy they could make:
And clearly yet to see themselves self-lost,
That of their actings they can nothing boast.
Like little children to the parent cleaving,
Possess the Patent of this Royal giving:
And yet, by force of faith, through Bulwarks break,
And with all violence, the Kingdom take:
For its by grace, through faith, His gift, that we
Are safe preserved and victorious be:
Nor may we think our daily trials strange,
Nor that to diverse crosses we do change.
Till this old man of flesh be fully slain,
He Is looking back to the fleshpots again:
Made up he is of many naughty notions,
Imaginations and superfluous motions:
Must be by many strange restraints restrained,
Before he be from vice to virtue gained.
But the Believer only wonder can,
A self-lost, blind-born brute, a saved man
Become: and such to Satan slaves have been*
Adopted Sons to God, and washed clean!
To see the poison, in our Nature spewed
By Satan, to be purged, and subdued!
To see this viperous brood in us suppressed,
And there a work of grace again encreast!
The mystery great of Godliness does here,
God manifested in the flesh, appear!
The work misterious of Gods Sp'rit divine,
In our Regeneration does shine:
The work of faith, whereby Believers feed
And fruitful grow, by joining to their Head,
A mystery deep; for as we do employ
Him, in his faithfulness, we do enjoy,
In every trial when we tempted be;
But often do mistake most fearfullie,
Whereby we do procure our own tormentings,
And call our faith in question, and repentings.
This the Believer only knows and proves,
Discerns, observes, and his Preserver loves;
For the Believer is the subject, where
God does his glorious wonders most declare,
The portraict vile of the old man defacing,
And the new man with his own Image gracing.
There be, for the Believer, wonders wrought,
Above the apprehensions of our thought:
Wonders in the Believer daily move,
Rounded in the unbounded Orb of love:
Wonders are by Believers brought about,
That cruel tyrants cannot cancel out:
And by Believers to be enjoyed are
Joys wonderful, above conceiving far.
But we shall spare: for more exactly those
Matters we must debate before we close.
Now to the purpose, and the Person precious*
Whom I have seen, and still esteemed gracious,
Notable in the Assemblies of the Saints
And solemn Meetings, where Believers haunt^.
I know the case, and truly see it clear,
Fraught with the fruits of faith, of love and fear*
But she is not in that condition now,
So to confess, far less this to avow;
But in this sentence most succinct, I Will show
The matter, and the meaning shall pursue*
And this it is,
"Heavens child of hope, does faint for want of sight,
"Resolved to grope through darkest deeps for light:
And this assertion sure for to explain,
Take notice now, and answer you again.
You see Celestial from terrestrial things
Exhaling vapors, that much darkness brings.
Eclipses do our natural Sun surprise,
Which yet we see most royally arise.
The worlds first birth, from Gods most pure intention,
Eternal purpose, and divine invention,
Was made to be, by no materials
Existent* pre-existent Seminals;
In darkness swadled up, until the bright*
Creating word in time commanded light;
And when this light aright composed stood,
Night to preceed daylight, God says is good.

Jea. This dispensation sad, you take, I see,
To flow from causes one or more of three:
The first from provocation, I conceive,
The second, what for trial we receive,
The third, to Soveraignity ascends,
The Cause supreme, where causes all depends.
You know, suppose that natural things be used,
And to illustrate sp'rituall matters chused*
Spiritual things are not demonstrate clearly
By natural, that work by nature merely:
The one by the prefixed Rule does run,
The other Arbitrary, how and when.
And yet suppose these generals should contain
Much to this purpose, when by searching seen,
Yet ye must nearer come, her case to clear
From such effects as may be seen appear;
For if she be bemisted, left alone
In this confused condition, she is gone.

Sam. Will ye not condescend that all things be
Good in their time appointed certainly:
And that our only wise and holy King
Profoundly has contrived every thing,
Spiritual, natural, moral, arbitrary,
Contingent, voluntar, and necessary,
And ordered so, this contrary to that,
Man may with dread and reverence stand thereat.

Jea. We trust your charity hes so conceived
That Scripture-truths are all by us believed:
Albeit that under trials several may,
By strong assaults, much weakness often bewray:
We know He Is the supreme and only good,
And all things to his glory do conclude:
And that suppose rejected we should be,
It were our place his grace to magnify;
His wisdom, justice, truth, and holiness
We question not, but our untowardnesse
In not adverting to his counsels grave,
Which only could and should from swerving save:
And yet our tender Lover has appointed,
And with spiritual unction has anointed,
With coming some, and cordialls stored that be,
Sovereign for Soul-diseases seasonablie.
Amongst whom ye be of special esteem,
In binding up the wounds that desperate seem.
I pray you speak in proper speeches plain,
As this perplexed party best may gain:
And lead us in these mysteries divine,
Until the Sun begin again to shine.

Sam. I know it worthy of our pains shall prove,
To dyve in this deep mystery of love:
Therefore* I shall not spare to condescend,
Some of our precious time herein to spend.
This mourning Bride (sure) has propined been
With precious, sweet sp'rit-consolations clean,
Whereby the King of Kings does recreate,
Replenish, purify, and elevate
The soul that to espouse he is, whereby
She in his absence sick of love does ly.

Jea. Be pleased more specially us to acquaint
With these so precious presents, and how sent,
And how received, that so effectual prove,
As to procure such firm and fervent love.

Sam. He cleared hes her blear'd and blinded eyes,
Inflamed her heart, so as she feels and sees.
Her Comforter convey himself with kissings,
And breath into her soul supernall blessings*
The beauty of whose visage her invites
To trace him out when he does make retreats;
For in her heart so hes he shed that seed,
Which her affections after him does lead:
And at a word, created now anew,
She bids the whole Creation adieu,
And in this Sphere of Love celestial soar,
Not stooping to terrestrial triffles more,
Until her Lover come, and do relieve
Her weighted sp'rit, and heart contrite revive.

Jea. Why does she not in patience possess
Her soul, and so attend his timousnesse?

Sam. Baseness of mind such patience she esteems,
Which would suspend her of these warming beams,
By influence whereof she alone does live,
And therefore closely unto him does cleave.

Jea. But is her project lawful? let me know.

Sam. True love was never limited by law.

Jea. But earthly minds in mounting high do burn.

Sam. The Spirit by habit heavenly does turn.

Jea. Does she the body then the more disdain?

Sam. No, but does tune it to a sp^rituall strain:
For it is the organ ordained for to sing
The praises of her Lovely Prince and King.

Jea. How does she then so sadly ly and still?

Sam. She does attend his presence and his will,
Preparing straight his praises to express,
But, till his coming, lurks in heaviness,

Jea. But where is then the hold of Faith and Hope
Fast held, but pressing nearer hard to grope,
Desiring still the Marriage-day to see,
When in His Robes she may arrayed be.
And joining then his sweet soul-feeding face,
Her firm affections fervent may embrace.

Hele. Poor Pilgrim I, in dole and deep unrest,
For want of Faith, with hellish fears suppressed,
Here wandering as a woeful wretch alone,
So void of sense, can do no more but moan.
Unworthy of respect, regard, or view,
Much less your face, my spirits to renew:
It is my wonder that your worth should stay,
So to respect this crocked clog of clay,
So hardened, that affections cannot melt
To mold a new, by any motions felt:
Yet happy you, you Blessings do procure,
Who would conduct, and does instruct the poor:
But from the ways of wisdom I have gone
So far astray, that I may mourn alone,
And groan for grief, now when I cannot mend,
But all my days in dole and dolor spend:
And for to understand your friendly speech,
Or meaning thereof, hardly can I reach.
But true it is, sometimes I have expressed
Some secrets that should not have been confess,
Of feelings sweet, above expression far,
Which for the time but seeming shadows are:
For now deserted, like a desert owl,
I hopeless ly, and can but hopeless howl,
Bewailing often that ever I was born,
For all is gone and I am left forlorn.

Sam. Dear friends, conveened here for this intent*
With mysteries of Love to be acquaint:
Let us unweary, willingly attend,
For all her griefs shall sure in gladness end.

Jea. Our true desire and most delight shall be,
We may more clear this Divine science see,
And with the whole affections of our heart,
To learn the Heavenly Methods of this Art.
I know the heart contrite and broken spirit
Is for our King a Receptacle meet*
I know with timous comforts he does turn
Unto the pure in sp'rit who for him mourn.
I know, the thirsting soul, and hungry heart,
In His sweet face, have fullness for their part.
I know, that pleasures in eternity
Attend their souls that fleshly follies flee.
I know, the penny-earn'st of Peace and Bless,
Received by the meek and lowly is,
And wisely witnessed here may we see,
The might of truth, and height of mercy free,
The strength of Faith, shining through filial fear,
The wing of Love, weak ones to hide and bear.

Hele. I wonder much that you so wise and grave,
Such groundless expectations can conceive!
For showed you are so far of this my case,
That I presumed should have made you cease:
But presuppone that these your strange conceits
Were true of me, which unto me relates,
But nothing unto me I think belong,
Yet were it fearfully free Love to wrong,
And should bewray ingratitude, so far,
As justly might me from his grace debar:
For, sure I am, I had not been cashiered,
If to offend my King my heart had feared:
But gading I, so far astray have stepped,
And in confusions such my self have wrapped,
That now mine eyes are dimmed, my tongue bedumb'd,
Mine ears are deafned, and my heart benumbed,
That what I hear I do not apprehend,
But sure I see my well you do intend.

Jea. Yet with permission, and submission now,
My friend, let me obtain this suit of you.
This is a day of grace, and it may prove,
If you improve it well, a time of love.
Unto this timous counsel grave advert,
Gainstand these griefs, that do disturb thy heart.
Think on what light, life, liberty and peace,
Thou lately tasted hes by special grace,
The earnest of these Treasures rich procured,
For thee, and by the Lover sweet secured;
But under cloud eclipsed thou must be,
By proof to find thine own infirmity.
In Patience, Faith, Dependency, Submission.
Importunately press, thou hes commission:
Then look, and long, and to this promise cleave,
And when thou art rebuked, yet believe.

He. Madam, your counsel gracious, grave, and good,
Does all desired felicities include:
But I have forfault all these offers fair,
And of these Blessings now am stripped bare:
And when I hear of former happiness,
Grief, horror and despair, the more increase.
Once was I light, and now in darkness ly,
Once was I life, now in deaths jaws I dye,
Once had I freedom, now in bondage bound*
Once had I peace, now in vexation stound,
You speak of pleasures, in a word anew,
But dolefully may I bid them adieu.
For I an earn'st of wrath endure I think,
Might all the sinful sons of Adam sink:
The evil spirit, when he does depart,
Returning, enters in the empty heart:
And every devil, of whatsoever deceit,
May in this soul receive a several seat.
And I will tell you more.

Jea. No more; Refrain,
There is too much of this untimely strain.
O fearful but it be, for to let slip,
Of Sacred Truths, by Faith, the saving grip!
And O! how bitter are the agonies
Of absence in soul-searching secrecies?
O horror, terror, dread, what dreadful height
Is absence total, in eternal night!
When timely tastes do so the godly tare,
Where shall the godless go beneath despair?
But I forbear, Sir, speak to her so plain,
That she may be brought to her self again.

Sam. This darkness does the approach of day presage:
And us the more unto the means engage.
Thou harden do thy self in thy mistakes,
And of our tenderness advantage makes:
Thou do expose thy self a present prey,
Syrene deceits of Satan to obey:
Misled with carnal wit, by quaint convoyance,
So subtly to work thy souls annoyance.
Will thou prescribe his coming, or confine
His counsels to these finit thoughts of thine?
Dare thou his faithfulness draw in debate,
Because he does not on thy humors wait*
Does he his influence dispense for hyre?
Dare thou a reason of his rules require?
But these demands in time and place recall:
Examine, and answers receive we shall.
And now in patience yet we shall persist,
And with convincing arguments insist:
Think on, when we from darkness unto light
Translated were, and did receive our right
Unto His Royal Court, and House of Wine,
Where loves bright banner over thee did shine:
Then did thou see in darkness thou had been,
Closed, Embrion-like, into the womb unseen;
Until thy Lover, Mover in this place,
The fruits of His free love made thee embrace:
Then did thou clearly see, that gracious He
Endured to be obscured, for graceless thee:
And that He might thy glorious days begin,
Assumed thy flesh, and suffered for thy sin:
Purged and perfumed thee His Bride to be,
And did present himself Bridegroom to thee,
Thy King, thy Captain, and thy Husband now:
And to engadge thee more him to avow,
His Princely Robes thou saw him lay aside,
Enter the lists, and in his armor bide,
Till all thy foes he had defied in fight,
And from their malice fred thee by his might,
And led thee here among these sweet contents,
Where only children of the King frequents.
But that thou may convinced be the more,
I shall this Country set thy face before:
For as it seems, thou do so sullen ly,
Thou art surprysed with a lethargy:
Or for a proof, art left a little space
To try what love thy Lover can displace.
Thou know the City of our Royal King*
Where He to breed and woo his Bride does bring:
What glory and excellency, alone
Believers, shining see about the Throne?
Thou see Him righteous Judgments daily read:
Give doom unto thy foes, thy causes plead.
When from His Ivorie palaces he comes
Thee to embrace, the smell of His perfumes
Affect the Virgin-bowels for to move,
Frames and inflames the quickened heart to love:
For certainly unto Believers true,
That be renewed, all things becomes new;
And in this World of wicked workers, we
A World enjoy of sweet felicity,
Consisting in a Righteousness procured
For us, with sp'ritual joy and peace secured.
And this new heaven, and earth, and city fair,
Whether the Elect chosen called are,
Above comparison, you know, excells
The rarest, fairest, richest parallels.
The River that out-through the City slides
For every several Citizen divides
Unto refreshment: and the fruitful tree,
That renders various fruits abundantly
For every season, unto all affections,
And sovereign physic, health for all complexions.
Our everlasting light, without declining,
Advancing gloriously, and brightly shining:
Curse from the Cross, force from affliction shed,
The sting from death, from fear and bondage fred:
Where we may daily sing among the branches,
And swime among the streams, our thirst that quenches
And bath us in that River, sweetly flowing,
And feed upon the Spices, neatly growing
About the banks of these delicious fields,
That honey, milk and wine so pleasant yeeld^*
Where we no task are set, but for to sing
The praises of our Liberal Royal King:
And to adore him in our nature now;
Moved by his spirit, his name for to avow,
As Members of His Body mystical,
And dyving still in Divine Myst'ries all:
In Oracles and Ordinances seeing
Him, and Him in His dispensations eyeing.

He. These Metaphors I know not what they mean,
Nor to discern your plainest speech attain:
The one enfolding deepest mysteries,
The other not discerned with carnal eyes.

Sam. Thou do not only in the Faith bewray
Thy weakness, but does wilfully betray
Thy self, in contradicting sweetest feelings*
Experimented sensible revealings,
Flowing and falling timous tides of love,
Which did thy-then lively affections move.
Thou know what every word we speak does mean,
And that it is thy Lovers language clean,
Appointing for our weakness figures frail,
The splendour of spiritual things to vail,
As wine and milk, aples and honey sweet,
Under his shadow feasting we delight:
Lest in His light we should be rapted so,
That souls should suddenly abortive go.
Can thou the body of the Sun behold,
And not be dazzled, if thou were so bold?
Whose light and operations yet thou may
Enjoy, and not thy weakness so bewray:
Amongst the shadows thou may feed securely
Upon the substance that does then allure thee:
Where dyving daily in this depth by seeing,
From glory unto glory formed being,
We come to true tranquillity at length,
And there enjoy our Lovers joy, our strength^
So as we may, with peace, a space suspend
That Glories breaking up, that does attend
To be imparted, for eternity,
When we by grace matured for it be.
Eyes, ears and hearts, see, hear not, nor conceives
Now, what the true Believer then receives:
Farlesse, who can our King conceive aright,
Until we be admitted to his sight,
Who, in such Glory inaccessible,
Enjoyes Himself, to us impenitrable?
But by the grace of faith, so apprehended,
As, for our comfort, He has condescended:
So as we must be bred, led, fost'red here,
For sights unseen, by such as do appear.
This is the life, ye know. Believers live,
To whom both grace and glory He does give.
Up then, my heart, take heart among thy mates,
Ly not so sad, thy Wel-beloved wait^
To see thee stir: for He will thee sustain,
Suppose both weak and wanting thou have been.
Up, up, come, come, go, go with us.

Hell. No, no,
What thou have said, I do believe; But lo,
I am but blind, although to see I seem,
And what I seemed to see, falls out a dream
Or vision, vanished by the way it came,
Nor know I how I do, or what I am.

Sam. This is not unto death, I thee assure,
But shall His honor, and thy health procure:
What thou have seen and felt, do not deny,
But His unchanged love believe, apply.

Hele. How can the blind, the deaf, the dumb confess,
Believe, apply, faith, or felt-love profess?
Doubtless I have His fervent love again
Provoked, and forsaken am.

Sam. Refrain,
Thy sense is gone, it seems: but where is thy reason?
For thou art bourding with a birth of treason.
Because through weakness thou can him provoke,
Must he his constant counsel then revoke?
When in thy birth and blood thou lay, in bands
And hands of death, did he not give commands,
Death to be gone, and thee ordained to live,
What merit for this mercy did thou give?
Knows he not well, that thou no good can do*
Without his presence, and supply thereto?
And shall he now reputed be a changer?

Hele. No: but to me he makes himself a stranger.

Sa. Strange! when thou have thy self from him estranged,
Thy reason should conclude that he is changed:
Or that he has estranged himself so far,
While such love tokens resting with thee are.
Have thou not, biding still beside thee here,
A Mirror full of beauty, passing clear:
Wherein thou do his portraict true possess,
Full means to keep thy heart from heaviness?
He wooed thee in a time of fervent love,
That thou should constant, faithful, loyal prove:
Preparing, trimming, purifying, till
The Nuptiall-rites he should complete fulfill.
Do not what he has done for thee deny,
Extol his act, and on his truth rely.

Hele. What thou have said, that surely have I seen
Acted by him, for me has truly been,
I am convinced, and more than any speech,
Or largest heart-conceptions can reach.
But true it is, when I to admiration.
His deeds had found, surpassing declaration:
And then far, far, far over and above,
Had felt his sweetness in a time of love:
My melting heart within his heart relenting,
That almost warms affections in recenting.
But in that sweetness then I fell asleep,
Surprised with such sopor sad and deep:
That when I did awake, my only One
Was gone, and now poor I, do die alone;
For in his absence. I Am become a block.
A wretched, fruitless, and a withered stock.

Sa. Do thou conceive, these blinks, these smiles, these smells,
These melting motions, whereof now thou tells,
Were tendered out, thy fancy for to feed?
No: but to strengthen faith, for fruit and feed.

Hele. Then shall I no more look to see my Love.

Sam. Sense follows such, as do most faithful prove,
And feelings flee, when they are followed most:
But when we stand by faith, there is nothing lost.

Hele. Oh! lost? What loss can be compared to this,
To lose the only (Author) of my bliss?

Sam. Thy Bless? Conceive me, and resolve me this:
If thou had thy desire unto thy wish,
Should thou in this poor dusty, rusty shrine,
Endure that splendour, by these beams should shine
Upon thy spirits? Thou know how soon they failed,
When with a little blink thou wast assailed.
Look up, make bold, take hold, hold fast by hoping:
And till thine eyes anointed be, be groping
Amongst thy Mates, where I have seen thee there,
Press forward with thy pith, do not despair.

He. I know not what, nor yet whereof ye mean.

Sam. I witness will, as yet, what I have seen.
When first thy Princely Lover, to this place
Translated thee, could thou then sleep or cease?
But with Associats of the City using,
Uncessantly in deepest mysteries musing.
A frequent waiter at solemnities,
Much moved in minding our immunities,
About the River spying out thy spots,
And washing in the Streams away thy blots:
Upon the Mountains, where Heavens dew distills.
And Fountain, that with all refreshments fills.
Thou art so framed, and to a habit new,
Inflamed with firm affections, pure and true:
Exactly set, uncessantly to sing
The praises of thy ever-glorious King:
The rarest Aires and sweetest music matching,
And unto new inventions nightly watching;
Adorned with such ornaments ingrain,
That most infective tempests never stain.
What hes endured been by men of mights,
For to defend our privileged rights,
Thou have observed, and deeply pondered then,
Composed to be wondered at by men.
These things deny thou can not, witness clear
The Citizens thine own Associats here:
Witness thy vestures new, these shining Robes,
From mourning more refrain, restrain thy sobs.
This world new no dolor such admits,
Felt-love, believe, forbear these faithless fits.

Hele. That world of yours no falsehood does admit,
Faithless profession is a feigned fit:
You in the faithful witness do believe,
And by believing faithfully do live:
You grafted in the lively Olive grow,
Where substance sweet does from that fatness flow.
I formerly have in these courses gone,
With others, as you instantly have shown,
But I have stepped aside in following lies,
Upon the mount of many vanities:
What could it make, suppose I should explain
The folly and the figments of my brain,
The levitie of my affections vile?
Some seeming goodness under secret guile.
You by your importunacy do press
Me more particularly to express:
If better more, then prejudice it could,
Or pertinent it were, I surely should.

Sa. Whence comes this conscience of those heart-conceits?
Whence flow these conflicts of these soul-debates?
Corruption against corruption does not side,
Satan against himself does not divide.
Weakness and wandering do in us remain,
And yet our Lover does us not disdain,
He fails us not, as we do (doting) deem,
But that he absent to our sense does seem:
That we may see what of our selves we may
Expect, if he should our supply delay:
And what can make us more our selves forsake,
Then hell-black us, milk-white for Heaven to make?
Such sweetness from the breasts thou have been sucking,
That weaned now, thou do but fall a drouping:
Thou have been dandled on thy keepers knees,
And fed with suggar'd soul-festivities:
But now for to obtain the Royal prize,
Thou must to work, and run, and fight; arise.

Hele. It Is easy Sailing in a gentle Gale,
But grievous when the tempest strieks the Sail:
It Is easy fighting with your fleeing foes,
But dreadful when it turns to bloody blows:
It Is easy speaking to a wounded heart,
But not so easy to retreat the dart:
And searching trials light to some may be,
Which work to others much perplexity.
I pray you therefore leave me now alone,
You, may I hurt, help can you make me none

Sa. In darkest days, and sharpest storms that blow,
Our Pilot, how to land us safe, does know:
And we within the vail, our Anchor sure
Do cast, and so can ride it out secure.
Our Captain stands victorious in the field,
He never lost a man that did not yield.
Our sweet Physician, full of science, sees
Our wounds, diseases, and their remedies,
And does with cordials unto us address,
When dwining we do dream of nothing less;
And it is good thou do not us regard,
Lest at thy hands we should expect reward.
But till you take a breathing, we shall walk,
Beside thee here, and to the matter talk.
Now ye my friends devote, and Ladies dear,
Who this discourse (of ours) do over-hear,
Speak your opinion from experience plain,
And we shall to our purpose turn again;
For in her griefs, if we cannot be grieved,
We shall be grieved when she shall be relieved:
But of her burdens who does take a part,
Her comfort shall reflect upon their heart.

Maria, Anna, Grissilla, Eliza. Thomas.
Maria. IT seems it shall not easy be to find
The bands that do her in this bondage bind:
But let us now recite our special failings,
Their causes and effects, and our prevailings*
And to avoid contest, I shall break in,
And as you bid, be bold for to begin:
Court-breeding leading us to high aspirings,
Swelling in such ambitious desirings,
We can for self-promotion, formal prove
In every project where we mind to move:
And can (Chamelion-like) all colors take,
As for the gaining of our point may make:
And from what airt we see the air to swirle,
For that same course quickly our sails can hurl.
But when we of our selves do get a sight,
We guard against this Idol with our might,
Most deeply humbled at the heart, that we
Are wasted in this frothy vanity:
For then it pleased my King to clear mine eyes,
Divinely to discern deep mysteries,
And take a Pardon in that time of love,
Which made my frozen heart in melting move.
Yet after this, anon I must you tell,
A fearful trial unto me befell:
Even after tasting many comforts sweet,
Intent some meditations to repeat,
Of most concernment, preasing to procure,
In supernat^rall truths, my standing sure;
Such as of souls the immortality,
Whose being in and out of bodies be:
The resurrection, and immortalizing
Of bodies mortal, natural, spiritualizing:
And minding thence, some higher to ascend,
So far as finite thoughts might comprehend
Of God, his goodness, wisdom and his might,
Pre-ordinating all in order right:
By His eternal counsel, pleasure, will,
Who all things works, moving, unmoved still:
But instantly, a voice, both pure and plain,
My musing moved unto another strain.
So friend-like and so friendly muttering then,
Must thou be found the only fool of men:
What business is this thou goes about?
What strange chymaeraes shall we see come out?
We guided be by reason, and by sense,
Where be thy groundless grounds? on what pretense
Do thou entangle, and perturb thy mind
In courious qui^ks, whereto thou art inclined?
Art thou so senseless, as thus to conceive,
Dust turned to dust, turn ghostlesse from the grave:
Or that thy vanished spirits shall return,
These ashes to inspire, spent in that urne?
Some giddie-headed people wonders tell,
Of God, of Heaven, satan, sin and hell:
But these be foolries, fitted to deceive
Some facile Spirits, that fancies do conceive*
Can thou defraud thy self of all thy bless,
By framing to thy self a hell like this?
While as thou might in many pleasures flouri^
And nature in her native notions nourish.
But even then, when I (perplexed) though
What could it be that this diversion wrought:
Unto my sense, there was reply so clear
Returned in my behalf, which made appear
The devil, his drift, and his deluding lure,
Discourse of me by flatt'rie to procure:
But my firm faithful Watchman and my Love^
Seeing the malice of this murdering mover,
Preveens this cruel plot, and interposes
His subtilty, and sophistry discloses:
Objections more then now I can recent*
Which none but very devils could invent,
Confuted and refuted were so clear,
By him alone, who did for me appear.
But then, said I, (in this confusion vexed)
Since it is so, how am I thus perplexed?
Then instantly, my great deliverance wrought,
Was wondrously by my Redeemer brought:
When to gross Atheism, the tempter, he
Had cast his baits for to have hooked me:
And if the inward Teacher had not taught
Me, how to answer these his reasons, fraught
With subtilties, so mystic, that again
I had been tortured in that fearful train.
But sad and bitter were the sore rebukes
Of my dear Lover, and the frowning looks
That I endured, for daring to adventure
With this deceiver in the lists to enter:
Moreover, fears not only me affright,
But, also, I must with afflictions fight:
With many terrors, and with troubles toyled,
And by infirmity am often foiled:
But yet I find it for my best to be
Pressed and distressed in this perplexity:
For on the rode I read, in letters fair,
Love unconceivable, and wisdom there:
And ever since, when I such whisperings hear
Flow from that buzing snake, I stop mine ear.

ANNA. We of the City, sumptuously do live,
And to maintain our wealth do mainly strive.
So avaritious and luxurious grow,
As we in wealth and worldly honors flow*
But when our Lover does remove the vail,
We see the rotten ship wherein we sail,
And fecklesse wares, whereon our souls we waste*
Then to the death we do our selves detest:
But being bred in such societies,
As do advert unto varieties
Of outward forms, must civil be and neat,
According to our rank, degree and state.
I have been showed by one that is most sincere,
That many dangers amongst them do appear:
And that her self was fearfully afraid,
Lest unknown fear her weakness had bewrai'd*
And if I warned had not been before,
I might have splitted on this deadly shore:
But after deeper search, I did perceive
My self was nothing, but a living grave,
Where noisome serpents in the members crawl,
The faculties infecting of the soul:
The soul again, vain, arrogant and proud,
For all her wak'nings walking under cloud.
Then after this I had a fearful blink,
Which under desperation made me shrink:
But then even at the twinkling of an eye,
My Saver, present set me fully free:
So as unto his praise, I must record,
A self-lost soul was saved by the Lord.
Thus my Redeemer so did me Redeem.
My danger and deliverance seen did seem
So near, and I so filled with conceiving,
Sense led me from the way of firm believing:
But in that sweetness, when I fell asleep,
I swelled up in a deadly fever deep:
And moving missed the Author of my joy,
So then my nearest friends I did employ,
Who helps prescribed, and potions did prepare
To swage my swelling, and my health repair.
But then there did such fears my soul assail,
Which through my weakness often did prevail,
To bring in question, how to persevere
Before the straits and trials that appear.
I was brought very low, but never healed,
Until compassion with my Prince prevailed
Me to restore, and make me surely see,
A steadfast faith was firm stability.
So when I looked unto my Lovers might,
All faithless fears evanisht out of sight.

GRISSILLA. We in the Academie that be nourished,
And fruitful grow, when we have early flourished:
Physic* Laws, Metaphysics we debate,
What serves for man's soul, body, or estate:
And by our science and inventions then,
Reduce to order for the use of men:
But swell in pride, and in disdain, when we
Others so far below us we espy:
And often our too curious spirits swerving,
Do over-turn our selves by our deserving;
For by deep speculation, we do see
Wonders, that by none other seen can be;
Produced by natures force, and rendered then
In rare effects, to be admired of men.
The stars in several places we espy,
In constellations, as they ordered be:
Desing'd for signs in every Variation,
Ascent, descent, degrees and inclination:
Several effects on every several thing,
That from the earth, from air and oceans spring.
Gold, Pearls, Stones precious in the earth secured,
Deep steeping closely, till they be matured:
Where by the stars, they do procure their strength,
Of bodies short continuance, and their length:
Of Animals, Herbs, Flowers, their virtues all,
Their birth and growth, their durance and their fall*
Which as in this clear prospect we do see,
By proof, their operations learned have we.
And I one day these marvels so admiring,
Their causes and effects too much desiring,
To search by natures light: And not adoring
The God of nature, but by nature poring,
In this deep study I was sorely stained
With infidelity, and then arraigned,
And left forlorn, a little, as I showed,
Until that by contrition renewed,
I access had, and granted was to see
That my dear Lover, and Life-giver, He
Was natures Author, and that her effects
Were done directly, still as he directs.
Afflictions, fears and too much carnal care,
Temptations be, which lead unto despair:
Again by grace, resisting and repelling,
A devilish drift does lift the heart to swelling,
And herein I much weakness have bewrayed,
But happily therewith has been essayed,
For of his goodness I again do gain,
To guard against these vile debourdings vain.

ELIZA. We who into the Country bred have been,
And little of the Court or City seen,
But in the Wilderness alone were living,
Our bleitting droves unto the fountains driving.
Along the quickening springs and cooling streams,
Sheltr'd with sweetest sprigs from scorching beams,
Delighted in our silent Cipresse Bowers,
Adorned with the fairest rarest flowers:
And satisfied herewith as with silk,
Preferring to their sharpest spice, our milk:
But under all this smooth sobriety,
Ingenuous care, and frugall industry,
We live and die in ignorance endured,
And ly in gross profanity obdured,
And cannot see, until by special grace.
A brighter light do shine upon our face:
But after I was called, and caus^d to see,
And made ashamed of my profanity:
Thereby affected with my Lovers love,
That nothing else near to my heart could move:
The Devil then, under a glist'ring vail,
My weakness (unawares) did so assail,
That I had drunk the poisoned cup so deep,
My senses by the venom were asleep;
For he some instruments had so deceived,
And to most impious principles beslav'd:
Under pretext of love to Christ alone,
Exalting him up to his Royal Throne,
With all that unto him do truly cleave:
That they by doctrines were not now to live,
That they are clean, and cannot be defiled:
Illuminate, and cannot be beguiled:
That all are theirs, and all things common be
Unto that love-bred, love-fed Family:
With others suchlike hatcht-patcht proofs so specious*
And dressed with speeches, seeming very gracious:
My carnal heart did presently affect
To bring a present heaven in respect:
But when the way so pleasant did appear
To flesh and blood, I did begin to fear,
And took me to consult with truth divine:
So as the Majesty therein did shine
Of Holiness, and Righteousness so clear,
The filthiness, and folly did appear,
Wherein they swell, perverting truth so far,
That they obdur'd unto conviction are:
And hereby found I also out again,
That I unstable, facil was, and vain:
And so alas! have blasted been, and broken
With all these blustrings, whereof you have spoken:
Have seen my self, self-lost, self-damn'd, and saved,
And yet so senseless, and so self-depraved,
So far corrupt, so foolish, and so frail,
Conceits impure so much with me prevail:
And yet with mercy and compassion clear
Am compassed, more than I can admire;
For I to wrath my self do still expose,
But my Redeemer still does interpose:
And when I would my self in darkness cast,
I rescued am, for he does hold me fast:
And when despar'dly I would make retreat
From this new City, and these pleasures sweet,
And searches every postern gate, and lirk,
My own destruction cruelly to work,
By separating, yet I am surrounded
In so wise windings, wherein I am bounded:
And breathed upon, even when the breath is failing,
And helped up by everlasting healing:
Whereby my safety does proceed, I prove*
From infinite, and from unchanged love;
For as I am confounded and ashamed,
To see my self in such convictions blamed,
So am I more comforted, to repose
Upon my Prince, and in his peace rejoice:
And now I grant, that by His grace I gain
In watchfulness, and also do refrain,
To taste, or touch, or to aproach too near,
Where peril of infection does appear.

TH0MAS. O deep profound! O! what a deepnesse is
^he wisdom, knowledge and eternal bless,
^f this, who is the glorious King of Saints?
^d graciously among his children haunts?
^d O! How many are our miseries?
^d O! How rescued by such mysteries?
^re I by providence above perceiving,
^ght lessons once receive, above conceiving
^any, but by these are taught aright
(...) see themselves, and to abhore that fight.
(...) we this while a main Professor been,
^use I hated vice, and sin obscene,
^eigh'd against it, and did virtue love,
(...) vicious hate, and verteous did approve:
(...) in this gracious fellowship have seen,
^t hitherto I have but blinded been:
(...) do I see Believers and their rights,
^ir world new and their renewed lights:
(...) trials and the straits they did endure,
^ork for their well, and they preserved sure:
As also, I have seen these lad assailings
Of satan, and your special prevailings,
Whereof I never knew, nor less nor more,
For they were mysteries great to me before.
We in the wilderness that have been bred,
Amongst the brute, on brutish lust were fed:
Your breeding been in School, in Court, and City,
Delicious, curious, delicate and witty:
But not exeem'd from trials more then we,
Exposed to many that most dreadful be.
You do by curious speculations give
Place to the serpent, darts at you to drive:
But as he hes into his fang so fast,
Such windings He for us needs not forecast:
For this I do confess, albeit I could
My heaven upon this love to virtue hold,
Yet Satan of hypocrisy a spice,
Hes in the heart shed, where it sliely lies:
For seeing you with others, who assemble
At solemn meetings, I would them resemble,
Dissemble what within my bosom grew,
And learn to prattle things I never knew:
Likewise, I find too great a trial here
At meetings, when both Sexes do appear,
And ordered so, that oppositely airted
The venom of much vanity is darted
Out from the poison of infective eyes,
At civil and sacred festivities.
Now these and many such enormities,
Naughty, profane, vain superfluities,
We civil men do see, and do forbear
To mortify, when they do most appear*
But you the flesh who do subdue so far,
That fairly springing up afresh you are,
Like fruitful branches, and like garden-flowers,
That wat'red be by sweet Celestial showers,
Preserve your peace, when we our selves consume,
In making up Indictment for our doom.

Andrea, Grissilla, Anna.
And. GReat, good, grave Ladies, wise and Virgins pure*
Ye know ye could not well our sight endure:
For we, what folly in the flesh remains,
By much experience, tasting have with pains,
Do make it now our trade for to travers
Through all the corners of this Univers:
Unvailing vice, and bearing witness good
Against that venom, which infects our blood:
And every one of you, in all your places
With this sweet fellowship of gracious faces,
Cannot deny, but ye had warning all,
Against these slights, which might procure your fall.
Now are we glad to hear you so confess
Your weakness, and your Lovers lovingnesse.

Anna. The most sincere, and self-deny'd agrees
Upon these sacred sweet solemnities,
Which we frequent: for there, by cords of love,
After our Lover, we are moved, and move:
In all sincere devotion avowed,
And unto new obedience are bowed.
Nor does our lib'rall Lord us quite deprive
Of recreations* whilst we warily live.

And. True, this the mind of many is indeed,
But may no^ us discourage to proceed.
The kindness of our King does us constrain
To seek his glory, and your sp'rituall gain.
Daily and doleful proof does witness well
Our weakness, and we may much folly feel
Possess our hearts: for, when we tempted be,
Surprised we are, and can it not foresee.
Many affected seem, and make a show
To follow us, that back again do go.
The cunning Serpent sleeps not, but by flight,
Knows how to enter our corruption right:
Can give it life, and then a bait most sweet,
Prepared for our pleasure, we shall meet,
Colored with recreations, in the name
Of lawful liberties, to save the blame.
This I may say, and can it now avow,
We doing are, our selves for to undo,
All that we can; But, when we are intent
The sacred Mysteries for to frequent,
Advancing still in faith, our selves forsaking,
Tending our King, and his sweet Cross up-taking:
(And who is he that does aright detest
Himself, and on his Lovers favor feast*
And is not this poor ignorance engrain,
When recreations we prefer profane,
Which profit not, nor pleasure, but do perish,
Before the fruit appear from-out the flourish?
Whereas, if we (even here in our traversings)
Had with our King constant and clean conversings)
Then should our tasting, smelling, hearing, seeing,
Render a relish, unto all admiring.
When in the gal^ies he himself were showing*
Feed on his face, enlivening grace renewing:
And when he does himself again retreat,
We have his Word and Works for to repeat,
Where from the least, most common that is named,
Most wondrous ways of wisdom are proclaimed.
And if these marvels we did rightly see,
Then recreated should we fully be,
Above what all created comforts can
Confer upon the sp'rituall-graced man.
Ye know, tho we translated be to light,
Yet all of us our natural temper right
Retain, so as a stronger potion will
Some person save, which would another kill:
So with the gracious we do still consent,
In sowing seeds of sp'rituall nourishment:
But then the sturdy ground must break and bruise,
So as the season may the seed infuse.

An. We know your meaning unto us is good,
And better seen it is then understood:
Out of zeal in every thing you are,
From self-experience bidding us beware:
And in this present purpose to proceed,
It seems that this discourse may be applied:
For we of several ranks, degrees, professions
Presented have our case and our confessions:
And as there be of several persons here,
So do our trials diversely appear:
And doubtless, what would helpful be to some*
Should most untimous to another come.
You see it so, not one of us does find
What bands in bondage does this dam'sell bind:
So sure there does concur, as seems to me,
Some other grounds of this variety
Of exercise, unto us incident,
Who all are sprung from one root and descent,
Such as to our effectual calling may
Refer, or to the manner, time or way.

Gris. Certain, if we exactly ponder would
All that upon our nature and this mould
Had influence, it verily should prove*
Our feeble, frail conceptions far above:
We in the general jointly do confess,
Stars, constellations, signs celestial hes
Much operation in our bodies all,
Their generation, standing and their fall;
Bodies of Elements compounded been
Of humors, some more gross, and some more clean,
In some more equal, some less equalling:
Whence strength and weakness, health and sickness spring:
Hence dispositions and affections move,
Which in some less, in some more vicious prove:
Our distance also from the temp'rat Zone,
The frigid and the hot, the Horizon,
Climat, our customs and our education,
Our frequent fellowship and conversation:
All these, and many more have force upon
Our facile minds, and fond affection.
By this connection of so many things,
Distinguishable by so many signs:
So many various thoughts impression have,
That poisoned inclinations do receive:
Hence is it that some sole-commanding thing
Bears rule in every one as Sovereign King:
Which in the fervor of a strong respect,
Follow the Aples that they most affect:
And in the frenzy of these carnal fires,
Dote on the idol of their chief desires:
And from that folly never can refrain,
Until the sting of death revive their pain:
So when the soul physician comes to cure,
Our sickness (sees) and what we can endure:
And unto our infection he applies,
For all contagions, several remedies,
Corrections, crosses, that we may relent;
Comforting cordials, lest our heart should faint.
And when we have been gained and allured,
And of his favor faithfully assured,
By real feeling of our lost condition,
And ^deliv^ry by our Lords tutition:
Yet not the less, we must be humble held,
So as the devils darts may be repelled:
He did in Paradise with our Parents plead.
And prosecutes his splen against their Seed
Nor is the old man yet so fully slain,
But that he can recover life again:
If we be left a little to be tried
By light temptations, we shall step aside,
Unless we be prevented or restrained,
And so by free immediate grace maintained.
Now these strong reasons and right grounds may be
Of Christian cases the variety:
Nor do I doubt, but that the Christ'an-call,
Manner and time be not alike in all:
Some saved are with fear, some love constrains,
Some hurled from the fire with harder pains:
Much difference of exercise can make,
Which also may the name of trial take.

And. Enough, dear friend, now have you made us see
Our own experience more perspicuouslie:
For we be of our birth and breeding wild,
As likewise of all people most defiled:
But as by times some of us hes been tamed,
Then of our selves we have been much ashamed:
Made it our study vice for to detect.
Destroy, and to draw virtue to respect:
We censured be by many that are good*
To be too rigide, being people rude:
Who to be too far curbed do disdain,
And plead for recreations too profane,
But since it pleased our King us to recall
To this His Paradise spiritual:
And since we did with you assemble here*
We have been set to get the heart sincere:
And what by speculation we take,
Make it impressions unto practice make:
And with much order do our selves address,
To show to men their natural naughtiness,
And that even in the best there does remain
Some of the life of death, as yet, unslain:
But as for us, we have been so ingrain'd
In that corruption, which all flesh has stained,
It so habitual unto us became*
That we converted were unto the same:
And when our eyes at first to see were cleared,
Our misery and mercy most admired,
The causes and the wrath so vively seen,
His everlasting arms to interveen:
There did concur force, fear, love infinite,
Our full reclaiming thereby to complete:
And now our crosses and corrections we
Find for the death of sin in us to be:
Even such, by which, heavens wisdom does reform us,
And to our King and Comforter conform us.

An. This grave and graced person in his speech,
If pondered well it were, might many teach:
For this we know, that of one propagation,
Country and clime, and of one education
Are all that tribe, and surely such as here
Arrived be, most zealous do appear.
And as for us who came from every airt,
Of several qualities partake apart:
As also, some more early, some more late
Have called been unto this happy state,
Some, by our Sovereign King his ointments sweet,
By love came running, when he did invite:
Some, from the sense of wrath when they did cry,
Such mercy felt, that they did melt thereby.
Thus we by conf'rence find, that there must be
Strong reasons' for this strange diversity
Of exercise, and that it is to train
Us to the truth, from triffles false and vain.
And this we know, though we be civil bred,
And in the platform fair of virtue led,
And have not been brought under public blame,
That could have brought us unto open shame,
That yet the seed of every vice remains
In us, as others only grace restrains:
And as we more or less infected are,
Our antidotes stronger or weaker were.
And more particular or plain to be,
You pardon will, to save our modesty:
For our dear Lover, who by grace has loved us,
Above the grace bestowed, has never proved us:
And when our Sex to suffer for their love
Is called, they constant do and loyal prove.

Tho. We as these Ladies congregated are
From every airt, where shines the morning star,
Different by birth, humors and education,
By sight, society and conversation:
Some in their youth have hither been translated,
Some in their age here happily been stated.
Some saved by fear, and some by force constrained
To come, but all by Love and mercy gained,
So that with us strange diff'rences must be:
But far more strange is this strange harmony,
Where contrare inclinations do incline
All to one end: O endless depth divine!
And that the rod upon our folly lies,
More happiness it is then we can prize.
Chastis'd we be as children for our good,
When through the fire, or the most furious flood
Of sore afflictions, we be safely led,
Who in the barren wilderness are bred.
The purest white drinks in the blewest dye:
And if you do take pains for to apply
Some red, some green, according to the grain:
But unto white shall never turn again:
Right so, though we be stained, we can receive,
By industry and education grave,
Civility and righteous colors sweet:
But the first tincture never shall delete,
Until by blood and water both our blots
Be purged out, for cleanging all our spots.
This is the mystery deep that we should mind*
How we may be unto our King combined,
By bands of love, in sucking in His blood,
Which does our consolations all include:
While we perceive the spawn of our proud foes
Remain unpurg'd, wherein can we rejoice?
We suffer not, it is but this old man,
And we should beat him down in what we can:
Delight to see him totally destroyed,
And all devices for that end employed:
That we unto the image of our King
May once appear, and so his praises sing*

Mariona, Grissella.
Ma. WE do not deem that this distressed Maid
Is tainted with the things that we have said:
Or that such guilt, so gross, could find a place
For to obscure such gravity and grace;
But we by bitter proof have truly proved
Matter in us remaining, unremoved,
Which can such motions bring unto respect,
When on these painted Portraicts we reflect,
That are suggested by the serpent sly,
Or by the sense sent to the fantasy;
But though we cannot shun, we see the craft,
And Arrows keen he does against us shaft;
Armor of proof we stand in, and resist
The sharpest dart he at our heart can thrust,
The fairest Idol that he can invent,
The sweetest Apple that he can present:
And when we sleeping be, surpised and foiled,
And ere we be aware, betrayed and spoiled:
Our Captain sees, and cannot long refrain
Us to relieve, and set us right again,
So as to him we do more closely cleave,
And watchful walk for all the time we live:
This subtle hunter he is ever spying
Where we be weakest, and is ever trying
By all means set, to make us swell or swither,
The spunk of life by spouts of hell to smother.
This impure sp'rit, prince of the air, does carry
Into the brain many vain vapors aerie,
Which the affections surely should infect,
If timously we did them not detect:
But if this airt the carnal part incline
To blink asquint when he does Saint-like shine,
Then are we over-clouded, and we know
Our Jealous Lover must us then reprove:
For he corrivall never could endure*
But sealed for himself will have us sure:
Since all that we can wish conjoined in one
Of bless, combined is in him alone:
And we convinced be abundantly,
Of love-obligements unto loyalty,
And when he sees us truly humbled much
Under these trials which the heart does touch,
Then in his tenderness to us does turn
With comforts, as we in his absence mourn.
Thus when we stand, or fight, or faint, or fall,
He is so near that we are saved all:
This love, above all finite reach ascending,
Unalterable, and so condescending.
That even when we are secluded sore,
We obliged be for to believe the more;
For if we were not so rebuked, then
Careless we should become, like carnal men.
These are the flames, this is that force of love,
Floods cannot quench, might, slight cannot remove.
This is our King, our Sun, our Shield, our Friend,
Who by his blood hes us to him combined:
Whose splendent rays, full fraught with virtue, shall
From this gross dross affections pure exhale,
And fix within that element of love,
Where our delights alone on him may move.

Gris. Much graced Matron, your discourse devote,
Much verity and charity does note.
Ye who above us do so far resort,
Can best discern these Arrows to retort,
That from the prince of darkness darted still
Within the dark for to infest the will.
Your charity (grave Matron) most agrees
With rich experience and with cleared eyes.
The mystery of mercy you have seen
Melted in love, and molded have you been,
So as no evil you can think or wrest
To worst, but all interpret to the best:
But many novices come to this place,
Who tasted have and do belong to grace,
Are often on extremes, as they abound
In feelings, or are under absence drowned:
And in their hal^y on days will not allow
Esteem, to any that be them below,
As little for themselves do they preserve,
When under darkness drouping they do starve.
And we be ever checking those mistakes,
But self-conceit obdurate many makes:
Till they be tortured under many trials,
And taught to live by faith, in self-denyals:
But for the number wherewith we must meet,
Not possible it is for to repeat.
Some hes been spoken to by our dear friends,
Both from intention, purpose good. and ends,
And suffer me as yet to signify,
Of these our travels the necessity.
As by this simile we'll better see,
If we dissect our own Anatomy.
The matter, composition and the Art
Of Heaven, admirable in every part,
Flesh, blood, bones, nerves, veins, arteries sustaining.
Humors, hot, cold, moist, dry, and mixed containing;
Seat and assistance, offices and ends,
Each other serving, none another offends;
And all dispersed through all this fabric rare,
By instruments above a thousand pair:
From top to toe by searching we may see
No less then wonders in variety.
The very head a magazin is made
Of marvells, most magnificent and dread.
And whosoever should down to the foot descend,
And on the parts therein contained spend
Some space, in every place they should perceive
Hundreds, which wonders were for to conceive:
And every one that charge for to fulfill,
Appointed by the glorious Makers will:
As by pre-ordination God does give
These souls immortal, whereby we do live:
Ye likewise see that all these parts and powers,
Composed in this little world of ours,
And animated by this living breath,
Lies dwining now under the sting of death,
And that through this defiled body spreads
These soul-preserving, now life-poys'ning threeds;
For as the body does in part defect,
Then can the soul thereby work no effect.
Ye likewise see, the soul cannot be seen,
Which in the body has infused been:
That both might be an instrument to raise
The Authors greatness, and his goodness praise.
And for this end, endowed above conceiving
With large capacities, fit for receiving
All that our Maker shall reveal, to make
Us see him, and his service undertake:
So as her gifts in such excellencies,
In number, worth and great varieties,
Exceeds what e're be said of bodies may,
As does the breath of God excel this clay:
Not only ample, simple, pure, capacious,
But also subtle, pregnant and sagacious:
To dyve, to search, to soar and never cease,
Until she do her Author once embrace,
In whom she shall (far, far above desiring)
Be fed with wonders unto all admiring;
But now in all her parts so far depraved,
By listing to her lust, and so beslaved,
That when she is taught, and rescued, yet again
Constant she cannot in her course remain:
But steps aside, and does her self deprive
Of these revivings that should her enlive.
And as it is most strange, aright to see
These contraries corporeal to agree,
This structure of the body to maintain,
Until it must turn to the dust again:
Albeit some interruptions often make
The soul in all her agitations slack;
But how much more incomparable ye know
Were it to keep in frame? These fancies move
In our light minds, imaginations vain,
From which the carnal part cannot refrain,
Which most does mar that special consolation
We should enjoy by sp'rituall contemplation,
By dyving in these mysteries divine,
Wherein the glory of our King does shine:
And whereby we are by his light delighted,
Until by this his grace we be perfected.
But when his Spirit, to prevent our swelling,
Or from the vapors of that venom dwelling
In us, obstructed is, who then, oh! who
So over-clouded can but sadly go?
For he is the soul by which the soul does live;
Even as the soul the body keeps alive:
Then never think it strange to see us grieve
When he is gone, who should our heart relieve:
Nor strange to see him forced for to retire,
But rather wonder that he should appear,
And through the latters lend a friendly blink,
When he perceives the fainting heart to shrink:
And rather think it strange that so remiss
We prove, in searching what the quarrel is
Of such desertions as the heart do vex,
And with dejection do the sp'rit perplex.
I do confess believing were the best,
In quietness and confidence to rest:
But saving faith to holiness adheres,
And guarded is with many filial fears,
And out of love is ever sorely moved,
When evidences are of love removed.
Though you conversant are, and so inured
In heavenly matters, and so well secured,
Can stand before the gates of hell and make
Your progress, yet the weak may stumbling take
For in this case much grace we take to be,
Hopeful, sincere, in heart humility.
And studying to make out a true disjunction,
From every motion can obstruct that unction,
Whereby we be conjoined in that communion
With our dear Lover, in a sp'rituall union.
So as by grace, grafted in him we grow
Up, by that influence that from him does flow,
Until we be into his image formed,
And most devotly to his will conformed:
But you appear so prudent, that therefore
We leave to be considered less and more.
These our essays at your command pursued,
To be by you corrected and renewed:
And as ye do think meet in time and place,
Composed and right applied to the case.

Samuel, Helena.
Sam. MOst precious people, saved and secured,
By force of felt and fervent love allured:
Your conferences free I have been hearing,
And do approve, and for your better clearing
Do certify, that your most Princely Love
These actings in his children does approve.
We who be named gracious, be it known,
No grace, but what is given, have of our own,
And by that grace immediately maintained,
Converted, called, as you, and so sustained.
The difference only does consist in this,
The King his pleasure good was us to bless;
^ince from the womb we came to humane sight,
To sanctify us by his heavenly light;
And separate we be for this effect,
To do and suffer as he does direct:
^ot specially his elect Flock to feed,
And them unto the living Fountain lead.
You have been over-hearing what was said,
^n reference to this distressed Maid:
You have been careful hereby to conceive
The mystery of her case, I do perceive:
You have been searching out for second causes,
Which cautioned would be with certain clauses.
^ut you are sober, and are satisfied*
^om solid grounds of reason certifi'd.
And this is right; for never one as yet,
Of soundest and profoundest searching wit
In natures secrets, by the Physics poring,
Or winged with the Metaphysics soaring,
Exactly could, the causes and effects,
Matter and form, with all their due respects,
Produced by natures infinite variety,
On several objects, marvelous rariety,
Conceived by science, or by all their Art
Ever demonstrate to the thousand part:
Our princ'ples are with much experience fraught*
So by our practice we are daily taught:
And new essays are set on work, again
More light by new discoveries to attain.
Our King, the God of Nature, only knows
The nature, matter, form, effects and cause
Of all things: for by Him they are, and shall
Bring forth his glory and our gladness all.
This Microcosme (Man) a world contains
Of various parts, his Maker all maintains:
And this great world, in all its several acts,
Subservient unto man's up-making makes;
Bodies celestial, in their several Spheres,
And all that to the Firmament adheres,
In all their various courses, contribute,
To our continuance, comfortable fruit.
What herb, fruit, flower, beast, fowl or fish there is,
But bend their best concurrence to our bless?
The weak, the strong, the bitter, sour and sweet,
The hot, the cold, in their degrees complete,
In all their concords and their sympathies,
Discords, divisions and antipathies,
Find matter for their master (Man) to make
Him see, they do his service undertake.
And who can doubt but man immortal might
Have stood, if not deprived of that light
(Deservedly) which in his soul did shine,
And did all knowledge necessar confine,
His present being to preserve, if he
Preserved had his prime integrity?
They stand in force, but we, now fallen blind
Judicially, death and destruction find
Amidst the means of life: but yet our King
Does us to light and life from darkness bring,
So as that now we may most clearly see,
That every case we come through does agree
With our condition present, presuppose
We should much weakness under wrath disclose.
And as, amongst the sons of men, we find
That many are, in many things, inclined
Alike, none of all Adam's race have been,
That in all things to sympathize were seen;
For as we different in our faces be,
So in our gifts is great diversity.
But as all Simples, from the earth that grow,
Or from the elementary Ocean flow,
By skillful composition refined,
Wonders do work when they are well combined:
Even so with men, in all their several motions,
Deeds, dispositions, and their various notions,
There does result, by heavens high decree,
To our great King, a heavenly harmony.
Let it our study deep be, to devise
The Author of these wonders how to prize*
How we are wonderfully made to be
From nothing, and maintained wonderously.
How wonderfully have we wandered far?
How wonderfully we reclaimed are?
Wonder upon that glorious Majesty
That shines on all his works so wondrously!
Wonder upon his condescentions sweet,
Whereby these wonders with our weakness meet!
Him, him, who perfect is and infinite,
Simple, eternal, essentially complete,
Surpassing wonder, sacredly adore,
And in adoring humbly wonder more!
Wonder upon his wisdoms deep contriving!
By death to bring thy death-bound life's relivieng*
That his eternal Son thy flesh assumed,
To ransom thee that unto death was doomed:
That he eternally did so delight
T'obscure his glory, to procure thy light:
That by the eternal Sp'rit he us inspires,
With grace divine, faith and devote desires:
To know, believe himself, his truth and love,
And thereinto most loyally to move.
These be the contemplations best, that can
Beseem and do become the love-bred man.
These thoughts sublime can elevate alone
The heart, soul-savory fruit to feast upon:
To seal an union and communion sweet,
In all transcendent love, divine, complete:
With him in heaven, who has man's nature placed,
And by his spirit us on earth so graced.
Let us suppose, that all the worlds of men
Stood up on life that ever lived, then
That every man a different world were,
Of all things that has been, shall be, or are,
And variously these all were animated,
With all indowments that have been created;
These all were, also, into one compacted,
And all were in one quintessence extracted.
Those spirits pure, most peircing sure should prove,
And yet be dazzled at this depth of love.
In darkest clouds this love finds out a cleft,
To send a death-bound soul a quickening lift;
And when our Sun seems be eclipsed far,
Faith plays her course by the least twinkling star.
The Wran may flighter on this oceans brim,
The Dolphine dyve, the Elephant may swim.
For loves sweet sympathies consist in looks,
Blinks, smiles and smells, whereby the Lover hooks
The loved, and the loved thence again,
From passion strong cannot it self refrain.
Let this suffice, and ere we do remove,
We'll consolate this Lady sick of love:
Her Lover shall, ere it be long, be sure,
Shine on her soul, and so her peace procure:
For she in childbirth of fair grace does ly,
Let us some cordials for her pangs apply.
And now speak damesell, and let us hear
What fruit from our endeavors does appear,

Hele. Now am I so overcome, constrained to note
Your travels for my well have been devote:
For every parcel of your free confessions
Renews the sense to me of like transgressions:
But now in special, you have specified
Some errors, that I would were rectified*
And all that ye have said, I must confess,
For every word my grief may well increase.
When I look up, what my most Princely Love,
Before he brought me here, made me to prove;
And likewise, also, since he brought me here,
What kingly bounty daily does appear,
Freely bestowed upon a fondling poor,
Whose worth could never thing, but wrath procure?
And now I am convinced, for I have proved.
That with such fervent love he has me loved:
That for my frailties, and infirmnesse great,
His grace and mercy he would not retreat:
Or that his bowels, which for me were moved,
By this my stumbling should have been removed;
But this rich bounty, and this love divine
I lost, and am, deserv'dly, left to dwine
And pine away, in sp'rituall poverty,
For pride of sp'rit, unseen takes root in me:
Which now I find the cause of all my anguish,
Wherein I do consume away and languish:
Nor should I yet have seen this vain conceit,
But by the fruit of that vile root of late:
For I did suffer my fond heart to think
That I was settled, so I could not sink:
And that by grace received I could sustain,
Till from this tent translated I had been:
I doated on his gifts, did not adore
Himself, of whom I did enjoy that store*
The idol of the heart was set in place
Above the Author of my grace and peace:
And now, therefore, of force confess I must,
His judgments are both righteous and just:
For grace abused, thus graceless here to ly*
In place of peace, in deep perplexity.

Sam. And art thou past recov'ry, can thou say?
Is there no ground of hope whereon to stay?
Or art thou so vain-gloriously affected,
Even when that seed of Satan is dissected?

Hele. No, but I am therewith infected sore,
That separate I cannot any more
Therefrom, then from my self, for it is become
Deaf to rebuke, and to defense but dumb.

Sam. Do thou not know, for this is still confes^,
Remnants in us remain undispossest:
Of much perversity, which all our life
To purge, will keep us in continual strife?

Hele. And I immunity do not, indeed,
From provocation, or correction plead*
But this a sprig so privily does sprout,
And with the root and fruit of grace break out
So sp'ritually, and so commixt convoyed,
Until it get the life of grace destroyed.
Even as these spirits, whereby we be enliv'd,
By veins and arteries, the blood derived
Out from the heart the body to maintain,
Unknown contains therewith the bodies bain;
For what I do, or what I do endure,
Progress in grace to make, or growth procure*
In mortifying self, self to reform,
This venom unawars does all deform:
I cannot speak a word by rule of reason,
Nor think nor act religiously in season:
But this vile poison of spiritual pride,
Does sliely in the heart deceitful slide.
This is the thing our King could not endure
In Angels, for by pride they fell impure:
What may I then (base wretch impure) expect,
Who on some drams of grace received reflect?
I am as if of grace a treasure sure
In store I could at my command procure,
Whereas my conscience shows that I am stained
With all that justly may make me disdained:
And that which might this mighty monster check,
His subtilty perverse, detect and break:
But with this tincture now I am so tainted,
And thoroughly as I were therein indented:
Which when I see, and am ashamed sore,
Haughty hereof I do become the more.

Sam. And what but grace, in this most fearful sight,
Could thee sustain against the Serpents slight?
Whereby thou formerly hes still prevailed
Against all the policy he hes assailed.

Hele. The flesh and sp'rit defiled with thoughts impure*
Which carnal hearts do unto lusts allure:
I see and do gainstand by grace, but this
Bred up with grace, grace to displace it is;
And cannot pitch but on the print of grace,
Sincerity of grace for to deface.

Sam. How then is this thou can so moved be,
Since grace thou does confess remains in thee:
Whereon this witch does fix and keep thee waking,
And cast thee over in this fever quaking?
Consider, when a King provoked hes been
By his own Son, by many pranks obscene,
Should give commands in bands to make him ly
In prison dark, to humble him thereby:
And yet indulgently again relent,
To try if he his folly would repent,
Give orders for his further liberty,
Out of the prison dark to set him free:
And yet this ranting child should still remain
So senseless as to think he could retain
This life of freedom, and abused light,
By his own industry or natural right:
Were it not then convenient for to cast
Him in the darkest pit in fetters fast,
Till he by pain and pinching hunger there,
Were taught of vain conceits for to despair?
Does this comparison thy pallat please?
Can thou apply it to thy own disease?
And if thou can, then shall it truly prove
The strong effects of a Parentall love.

Hele. Nothing in nature can decipher more
The case and cause of my distractions sore:
But natural causes have a natural cure,
Yet who a wounded spirit can endure?
How far the heavens above the earth does bend,
Spiritual things our natural thoughts transcend.
My Princely Parent penetrats the sp'rit,
And loves the single humble heart contrite:
He, He alone, with searching piercing eyes,
This privy pride and arrogancy sees:
And cannot passe't, for it does derogate
Most from His dispensations intimate.
Hereby in bondage I endure these stounds,
These hellish torments and these deadly wounds
Of conscience, wherein I to death am bleeding,
Forced by the folly of this fancy feeding*

Sam. I would have thought thou should preferred far
Thy Lovers wisdom, and affections were
All similies before could be devised
By any finite creature, or advised:
Thou by his secret censures sees, he sees
The deepest of these damned subtilties:
And throws thee under bondage, till thou be
Taught how to guard against this devilry.
Now then consider him who sees so brightly,
And in such wisdom makes the wound so rightly:
Physic appoints the poison for to drain
From the infected soul, and flesh to strain:
Which by experience many children knows
Is tended with the like tormenting throws:
But wants He skill or will, who is our King,
Both health and heaven out of this hell to bring?
Albeit this tumor must retain a tent,
The remnant of the humor for to vent,
Faith in thy Lover has this strong perfume,
Which can this poison pestilent consume.

Hele. This devilrie so close to me does cleave,
Which man and angel from my King does drive,
That I am tottering much on this turmoile,
And tortured so, most like to take the foil.

Sam. Come, come, we ly too long aloof, I see,
Toward the shore now let us tackling be.
Mistakes, misapplications most miscarries
The minds of many, when their judgments varies:
Bemisted in the want of faith, whereby
They should distinctly see, weigh and apply.
We have been speaking of much fervent love,
Which in thy Lover does His beloved move;
But now, Oh thou, much loved once, admire,
What most transcendent love does here appear,
When He redeemed thee thou wast lost, and yet
Thou will thy self destroy, if He permit.
That grace thy Lovers gift (thy glory) should
Thy bain become, imagine this who could?
Or could thou have imagined that thy flourish
A cancar-worm into the bud could nourish?
Or that when thou was satisfied with singing,
Thou was unto thy idol incense bringing?
This cockatrice to kill in secret lies,
But being seen, she by her venom dies.
Grace from the Author, as from the fountain water,
When cut, becomes putrified matter,
Like blood, which from the heart, through all the veins
In circular motion by the nerves retains
Strength in the members, and returns again,
To pay the tribute and more vigor drain.
But being obstructed, it corrupt becomes,
The member wanting nourishment benums,
Or as our curling brooks and silver streams,
Which from the fountain to the river foames,
By secret cranies, through the ground, the same
Sweet current turns unto from whence she came.
Right so our Lover and our Princely King,
The ocean unexhausted and the spring,
Of whom we have, from whom do derive
All that we do enjoy, in whom we live.
While from this sourse we daily vigor drive,
Life to preserve, and let it passage have,
Uninterrupted to the font amain,
Then it is increast, and we refresht again:
But when these gifts of grace we do seclude
From this right course, we do our selves denude
Of all our comfort, whence does swiftly grow,
(If not foreseen) our sudden overthrow:
Loves darling then, do thou not thence conclude,
Thy ardent Lover has thee dearly loved:
Who for a little space his grace restrains,
That thou may seek himself, where grace remains.
This love transcendent might a heart of steel
Melt, when affections do such fervor feel.

Hele. My heart is rather like a heart of flint,
Which cannot melt, but does endure the dint.

Sam. Loves force to flesh thy stony heart converts*

Hele. Love unto pride my fleshly heart perverts.

Sam. A fleshly heart is vices willing slave,
A heart of flesh impressions does receive
Of grace and virtue, whereby vice it sees,
Resists, subdues, rejoice in victories.

Hele. Oh now! was any ever sunk so far
In deaths dark shade, and yet delivered were.

Sam. Believe me, for I do assure thee, this
Of many children the condition is:
And never an abject did as yet bemoan
This ground of grief where-under thou do groan:
But so it is, that till experience teach,
We do not to the rule of practice reach.

Hele. Happy, thrice happy should I such esteem,
Who by experience so well taught had been,
To keep that order in his princely sight,
As His sweet company continue might.

Sam. It Is true we are new born again indeed,
And planted here upon heavens dew to feed:
But our Bridegroom, with whom there is no change,
Most faithful bides, in all our failings strange:
Yet will permit to tempt us, for our trial,
As we may best be bred to self-denial:
The gravel also of this poys'ned flesh
Seeds do ingross, that would spring up afresh,
Unless by crosses and corrections meet
They were suppressed, and we more purified.
But this in general we may all conclude,
That every stripe we get is for our good:
Though bitter, biting, sad and fretting sore,
Sweet fruit unto thy taste shall come the more:
And when by proof we find the sweet effects
Produced in every one our King elects;
As purging potions life and health preserving,
Preventing us from sinking in our swerving:
The old man and his notions so subduing,
The new man and his motions so renewing,
That we in our infirmnesse do rejoice,
And under all our sufferings do repose
In such submission as sweet peace does bring,
Whence, out of sorrow, heaven on earth does spring:
Whereof if we did not our selves deprive
By fond mistakes, we should delightful live.
Then for to condescend of force we must,
That no affliction springs from the dust,
Nor yet temptation does from fortune flow,
But do by Providence directly grow,
And by heavens wisdom unto us applied,
That we may be perfected when we are tried.

Hell. In ev^ry thing this day that can be named,
find my self most worthy to be blamed;
As in this solitar reserved design,
Which certainly much detriment does bring
To many, and if that the force of love,
Which in this famous fellowship does move,
Me to attend, so for my help inclined,
Far contrar to my self-conceited mind,
I should have been in this confusion longer,
Weak'ned my self, and made my bands the stronger;
For, till these free discourses do appear,
In this society assembled here,
And by this timous and this tender treating,
Wherein your Grace has been with me debating,
I never could have thought a soul could live,
To which so much contagion should cleave:
At least a person, in this land of grace,
That could the tract of such vain idols trace.
But now more perfectly I do perceive,
That he who freely sought us out, must save,
And by immediate grace must still preserve:
For daily we to be disgraced deserve.
Now to believe, O but I do desire!
But senseless prove when I would most aspire.

Sam. Thou show thy self most sensible of hearing:
Consent therefore, thou shall come unto clearing.

Hell. Some of Gods sons, as they have heard have seen.
Some, that they might endure, have suff'red been
To take a blink of Him cannot be seen.

Sam. Now may we clearly see what thou do mean:
Thou senseless prov'st, indeed, in thy desirings,
Which properly in thee are proud aspirings:
Its strange thou should be satisfied so slightly,
Not vap'ring for high visions more brightly,
Or looking to be rapt above heavens arches,
About the borders of the divine marches.
Must thou be steward of the Royal treasure?
Will no less serve thy sense than Moses measure?
Have thou for such a charge so strong a back?
Should not thy brains below the burden break?
Job, faithful in incomparable trialls,
In darkest days, gave dev'ls and men defyalls:
And never got a blink of light, until
He fell submissive to his Makers will.
Thou knows we live by faith, and not by sight,
By faith we suffer, and prevail in fight.
Where is the fruit of all that sense received
By thee before: and what if all that is craved,
Were streamed out upon thy strong desires,
Should thou not spend them on thy carnal fires?
And when these sparkles of thy heart were spent,
So much the more thy sorrow should augment,
The child of light, through fearful darkness groping,
Takes faster grip and firmer hold, by hoping.
Thou can not deem, and nothing now thou knows,
Who at the coals of this corruption blows:
Nor see how sliely Lucifer can slide,
At twilight time, a plant of privy pride:
Even when we do in all our strength resist,
Then can he at the part best fenced thrust,
And cunningly cause us ly open there,
Whereat the poisoned dart he does prepare.
This venom all of us do clearly see,
This child of grace her great vexation be:
And when she armed best against it is,
How Satan can infest her with a kiss.
Advert with wonder, heavenly, earthly hosts,
Wonder, all glorious, glorified ghosts:
Wonders are seen which make you all adore,
Renewed marvels make you wonder more.
Pure spirits, fill the souls of your desirings,
Extend your minds unto these deep admirings,
The quintessence of heavens counsel glorious,
Man murdered, on his murderer victorious,
In suffering Satan sift, and so surprise,
And with such depth of subtilty devise
Uncessantly, and in such wyndings lurking
Even in our duties, our destruction working.
But here the mystery of salvation is
Crowned with the cape-stone of eternal bless
Of preservation, by our glorious King,
Who our deliverance by his death does bring:
An instance clear hereof, before our eyes,
All the beholders evidently sees:
A chosen, called, faithful child of grace,
Who for the prize most fervently does prease,
Too much neglecting what she had before,
And strongly stretching to increase the more.
One much enriched with light, and lively motions*
Experience deep, and many sp'rituall notions,
In darkness for deliverance debating,
Her poor condition and her case relating,
Sincerely set, our counsel to receive,
But sylour'd, can her self not undeceive;
For at her best attainment now you see,
How Satan snatches opportunity:
He sees the cup she does delight to drink,
And in the liquor does the poison sink.
Let us infer, from what we have been hearing,
And from this pregnant instance here appearing:
Since all the children of the first Creation
Deservedly are under condemnation,
And that the cause even to the Elect cleaves
So close, as unto any one that lives:
And that we every one are severally,
According to our humors diversely,
To some deceit or other more propense,
Then can appear by search unto our sense,
Which would unto infiniteness amount
Above what finite we could make acompt:
And that so many legions of lights,
Malicious devils and spiritual mights,
Our natures, cases, places, erudition,
Daily attend our changes and condition;
And every one with every several bait,
For every posture on us all await.
For this proud wretch does desp'ratly disdain,
That we should be restored by grace again:
Or that our nature now should be renewed,
Or venom purged out, that he had spued
Therein, whereby we in his Image stood,
Till it be blotted out by divine blood;
Yet we, even we that most enlightened be,
Too careless live, before this cruelty*
Much more, and most for to be blamed we prove,
Not studying still this boundless depth of love,
Which in our Lover moves him feed and keep
His straying, sterving and restored sheep;
Yet all that we can do, does but increase
Our debt, but more his mercy does express.
This love we clearly cannot look to see,
Until this body clarified be,
At least, until it be dissolved, that so
The soul her Lover to enjoy may go.
But how is this that we cannot submit
Unto this wisdom, and our selves acquit
By firm believing, as the duty chief,
Whereby from bondage we receive relief?
We see not that our drouping and dejections
His faithfulness dishonours, by reflections,
The growth of grace and inward peace obstructs,
The seeds of weeds into the heart conducts,
Th'envyous man with all his snares and cares,
The serpent sly with all his slights and snares,
Can thou before the fiery trial stand,
When men and devils do against thee band?
Such are in store, and more, thee to befall,
If fond conceits thy folly foster shall:
Ambition such were much to be commended,
Which with sobriety might be defended:
But ye who by confiding quiet may
Repose, beware presumption to bewray.
The Lark, the Princely Eagle never envyes,
Suppose she see him skifting through the skies:
Ten thousand stage above her highest higher,
The suns resplendant beams and beauty nigher.
I am too tedious, but to be excused,
Such disputs to anticipate are used.
Dear daughter, once disdain for to repine
At dispensations that are so divine:
Restrain the rising of such gross deceits:
Refrain devising of such cross debates.
A little faith finds out a fair relief.
Say, I believe, Lord help my unbelief,
And once resolve submission sincere,
Like to the pupil in the fathers fear,
Till which thou cannot put thy faith in act,
To comfort thee, though thou thy brains should crack:
Come then, threap kindness yet upon thy King,
Tell him that in the prison thou will sing
His praises, and never cease until thou see
His face in grace, and then embraced be.
This counsel, daughter, for to practice strive,
For it shall prove the way to make thee thrive;
He either shall the cloud of mist remove,
Or thee remove the clouds and mist above,
Where thou's be feasted in a minutes space,
With all the fruits of thy believing grace:
And from that instant, in eternity
Thy King enjoying shall rejoicing be.

Hele. O fearful cloud of separation sad,
What heart can hear and not for fear fall mad?
Oh, wonderful! that ye so wise can move
Me to unmoved stand, who must remove,
Where death bound ghosts down go, deprived of light,
And suffer so in an eternal night.

Sam. How art thou now come up at words to carpe?
Perverting sense, and using censures sharp,
And wherein thou convinced art before,
Would lead us unto repetitions more:
But lend a blink unto our travels past,
And thou thy self wilt censure for thy haste,
For we are leading thee into believing,
While thou unto thy facile sense art cleaving.

Hele. Oh, to believe 'twere possible for me,
But till I can, excuse, I cannot lie:
And well I know it is Gods love constrains
You to this more then ordinary pains:
And I shall let you see I do not slight
Your travels, but do still recent them right:
For I confess, your presence all before,
There Is not a word has past you less or more,
In reference to my condition duly,
But found so plain, I do apply it truly:
And I shall not deny but I have tasted
The Heavenly Manna, and thereon have feasted:
And at the fountain have refreshed been,
Therein revived and returned clean.
And that when (slumbring) I began to swell,
I have been left in darkness for to dwell,
Until it pleased my King, who knows my pain,
For my relief me to revive again.
I likewise do confess what ye have said,
In ref'rence unto provocations made,
Which have recited been by several here,
And pertinently made for to appear
From sound experience, much diversity,
And nearest numberless variety,
That with the like I have been led astray*
And drawn upon my self a cloudy day:
The cross did with corruption so increase,
I forced have been my folly to confess,
For I might read in every several rod
Real offenses against a righteous God,
Who yet from wretched me did not remove
His tender mercy, faithfulness and love:
For in his coming I might daily see
His goings were for wak'nings unto me.
Again, I shall not take unto denyals,
But that I have acquainted been with trials
From all the Fiends and their infernal states,
Where I have often felt and dealt debates.
His brood within his instruments without,
Inviron and invest me round about,
And yet from all their cruelty and spite
Have been preserved from that malicious might,
And where they had permission to perplex,
Turned to my good, and them the more may vex:
And as this is by you my friends affirmed,
Is likewise now by me again confirmed.
But not the less, ^lace, that I can say,
I have no benefit thereby this day:
You have been arguing long and I replying,
Contending much, and many things denying,
Wherein convinced that ye the right maintain,
Yet know ye not what sorrows I sustain,
For I had never darkness known aright,
If once I had not seen the shining light,
Nor what it were to be beslav'd with devils,
If of their seed I had not seen the evils,
Nor what deliverance or defense could mean,
If fearful danger were not something seen,
But while so many eminent I see,
For light and life, enlargement, liberty,
Forsaken, and before the trial fail,
How can I then presume for to prevail,
Who now so long, so fearfully do ly,
Without relief or hope of remedy?
If ye my dolours knew, ye would deplore
That woeful anguish and vexation sore
That I am wrangled with and wrapped in,
When terrors of the second death begin,
Of outward suffering I make no acount,
Although they do (ye know) too much amount:
A raging devil in the wicked reeling,
Venting their venom with villainous reviling.
Professed friends do privily supplant
The most engaged in their ranting taunt:
And being held in fetters, raging roar,
Because they cannot reach for to devour
My person, means, profession and my name.
To bury in the dust of death they dream.
But when the prince of darkness does begin,
This dark and dozned heart again within,
To raise his works, and to enlive his brood,
What can I (men) less then lost wretch conclude?
And more, this tyrant has attained the leading
Of my affections, even while I am pleading
Against his faunings and his flattering baits,
Whereby I dragged am in dangerous straits,
And cannot stint, because I have no strength,
Nor hope to be relieved at the length;
For this I sigh, for this I weep and mourn,
For this my bowels in my belly turn,
For this I separate my self alone,
For this my blood and moisture both are gone.
Because the Comforter, that can relieve
My heart, no answer for my grief does give:
But in this desperate case, at distance keep,
While all these serpents do about me sweep
With open jaws, sharp claws and cruel sting,
Trusting to sink, and swallow quick, they sing*

Sam. Well I perceive, you have at length been plain,
Yet all does turn unto one thing again,
Except some aggravation of the space,
The measure and ingredients in the case:
This closse eclipse, with storms of flying fire,
Darkness and thundering bolts of dreadful ire
From devils and from every instrument
They could devise, to work they detriment,
And then least for thy self to stand and fight,
So far above thy cunning and thy might:
Partly, because that thou hes known them fall,
Compared with thee a shrub, were cedars tall;
But yet look over thine accounts, and cast,
Thou may come to a reckoning right at last.
These persons eminent at first did yield,
They never tried the fight upon thee field:
And look again aright, and thou shall see
Such as thy self triumph in victory:
Who in the fight by slight have often been foiled,
And yet by strength renewed, the spoiler spoild:
Consider also, if thou could have stood
Before old Belial and his brutish brood:
If they were not by chains of strength restrained,
And thou to use thy arms aright were trained.
The measure and the space which most does move thee,
Is the appointment of thy Prince to prove thee:
That thou may taste His power in preserving,
Under thy want and weakness of deserving.
Do no more plague thy self with this debate,
Against this blessed and believing state.
A fixed faith all slavish fear removes,
And in its orb unto the Author moves:
For measure, time and means, simply surrender
Thy self to Him, He is wise, kind and tender,
Whereof much rich experience thou abuses,
And for tranquillity this torment chooses:
Wherein be sure thou shall be tortured, till
Thou do submit sincerly to His will.

Hele. Now do I well perceive by your discourse,
I have not soundly looked to the sourse
Of dispensations, as I might have seen,
A secret providence did me sustain,
Even in these darkest days and dangers dread,
Which all my torture and my torment breed:
For if I had, then had I never thought
These fiery-brands, that my vexation wrought,
Had loosed been, but were in fetters tied,
And suff'red but to bark till I were tried.
I likewise see (as you have said) that such,
Who in a flourish hes professed much,
The field did never by confession face*
But turned in searching trials with disgrace.
And for the measure and the space, I know
It Is good for me so to be keped low:
I suffered was many essays to take,
Which weighed aright, might many humble make,
And upon me there lies, unto believing,
More real bands then upon any living:
And now, that I should limit him, does wound
Me most, to whom I am so deeply bound:
And that I have so wilfully resisted
The sp'rit, whereby you have with me insisted;
For I have doing been what in me lay
My soul unto the murderer to betray:
But now my Savior worthily shall have
His will, for He, I see, will me but save:
And here I do acknowledge my mistakes,
And that my diffidence the dottage makes:
Bemisted in the mud so have I been,
And so gainsaid what I have felt and seen:
The truth of all that ye have now expressed
Is clear to me, and so by me confessed;
For He my Lover, is not only wise,
And strong and fair, and lovely in mine eyes,
But He is wisdom, beauty, might and love,
Where all delihgts most eminently move,
His countenance the Suns bright rays obscures,
His love the adamantine heart allures,
His wisdom all His works in order dresses,
His might maintains His right, and pride suppresses:
And I am bound His bounty to believe,
Which changes not, but shall my sp'rit relieve,
In His good time, on whom I do rely,
And study shall my self how to deny.

Sam. Now art thou happy, and my heart is glad
To see thy faithful heart from fainting fred:
Hold fast and follow hard with firm desires,
Faith quenches not, but kindles sacred fires.

Hele. It does become me well to wait, I see;
But, Oh again, that He would smile on me:
How shall I find Him out? and where, I pray?

Sam. Hold straight, believe me, thou art in the way:
Deck up thy self, approach, He sees thee come,
And with His comforts shall thee overcome.
The Royal King a Princely Garden plants
With curious flowers, and thither daily haunts,
Feeding among the Lillies, smelling Roses,
Nuts, Spices and perfums, composing Poses.
A sweet Loves feast for thee He does prepare
Down in the fruitful flowery valleys there;
And from the valley shall convey thee thence,
Where thy tried faith in that long longed for sense
Is swallowed up, there, where the marriage loves
Exceeding all conceived desires thou proves:
There, where He shall thy faith bred soul embrace
Within the consolations of His face:
Wherein the splendour of that brightness poring,
And in the glory of that glore adoring,
Renewed rays, immortal life restoring,
Admiring, magnifying, and sweetly soaring
High up amongst these holy, heavenly hosts
Of glorious and glorified ghosts,
With golden harps about the throne who sing
New songs of their redemption to their King.

Hele. O but these sweet expressions relish well,
My frozen heart begins to melt I feel*
These words unto my wearied soul I think,
Like precious oil so savingly do sink,
Slides down, like my Beloveds wine so sweetly,
Wakens from sleep, my tongue to speak completely.
O that once for Himself He would me seal!
What can be named that may with love prevail:
Insist therefore, For I do gladly hear,
And till the tongue be loosed shall lend the ear.

Sam. The weakest means have force enough to move
Affections, when they be surpised with love.
He calls and sees thee come from mountains steep,
Which Leopards and cruel Lions keep,
Leaning on thy Beloved, who does love
His truth and strength at length to see thee prove.
Observe with me this brief gradation now,
And I shall cease a space and hearken you.
For help to our capacity, compare
The outward splendour of this fabric, where
By nature from the caverns of the womb,
Out of which dungeon to the world thou came:
Again compare the difference aright
Betwixt this Paradise and that dark night
Of nature, which the other so transcends,
As over bodies lively spirits ascends,
And there the difference vast again conceive,
Betwixt the life of sense we shall receive,
And this of faith, wherein we forward thrust,
Until we be refined in the dust.
When interruptions all shall be removed,
And we enlarged to love as we be loved,
In knowing and enjoying him who is
The Author of our everlasting bless.
In this gradation we may something see,
But under what it is infinitley.

SONG I. Light out of Darkness.
Hell. INfinitely, most certainly, for feeble we
Conceive aright cannot these mysteries:
The spot upon our blotted eyes rejecting
These rays, which yet with splendour bright reflecting
Upon the then capacitated spirits,
Which warming beams affections invites:
But so transcendent, that our present case
Such super-excellency cannot embrace;
For dazzled with these glistring gleams,
What we receive seems be but dreams,
When we let slip, by our secure neglectings,
The grip of faith, glaming at these reflectings:
Spare therefore to compare,
our deepest apprehensions
Do but impair his praise,
whose love's above dimensions;
He is more fragrant, when he is most remote,
Then nearest, dearest loves whereon we dote.
Conjecture then, when he appears so near,
That thou may touch, and taste, and smell, and hear.
Tell, if thou can, this other man,
And so we shall recall our long debate,
And treat of love for all;
For mine he is, and I am his,
And who could wish so high a bless,
As to be treas'ring up a stock of praise,
While we are hurling through these whirling days.

Sam. Now, my dear friends, it seems to me ye shrink,
And I may well conjecture what ye think:
I showed you first, that you should surely see
Matters to make you much a musing be.

Eliza. This sudden change makes me indeed admire,
And yet the reason must of thee enquire:
And that she may be prayed to proceed,
That on her fullness we may further feed.

Song I. continued.

Hell. God, in his Saints adored, admired,
My soul exalts, this day desired,
Of his free grace, he has appointed,
Among this fellowship anointed,
With ghostly graces for my grieves,
So as my life a new revives:
Surpised with sense of love so far,
That flaming my affections are,
And for the time can do no more,
But the Author of this love adore,
And gladly would be set to sing
The praises of my Spouse and King:
And to record his noble acts,
Who passes by my fond mistakes,
And smiles upon my face again,
That I may faithful hence remain.
Now all you sweetest saints that uses
To haunt these shads, you sacred Muses
And Graces, that with me did groan
In my distracted, mourning moan:
Earth, rivers, all below, above,
Come sympathize in songs of love,
Of love, above all parallel, so far
As stars above the earthly glob that are.
You Groves and Downs, where erst I deadly lay,
I Will rise, and dance about your doors this day.

Eliza. Oh now! for stirring spirits, that could move
Amongst the flames of this heart-forcing love:
Amongst the wonders of this world, most strange,
What can compare with this sweet sudden change?
This day of gladness, let us now agree
To solemnize this glorious victory;
I reverence do the Providence Divine,
Which in this meeting does so clearly shine:
But for to sing or say, confused here,
I cannot speak, or do, but still admire.

Sam. Come, I will take thee by the hand, we'll go
With her, along these Downs and Groves also,
Where she has wandered in her weighty days,
And cease their sorrow with a song of praise:
Then South begin, and blow upon our Myrtle trees,
And North proceed to show thy strength, to eternize
This glory in each airt, a cross the continent,
The whole Creation may with our Love-songs consent.
Now, rocks, begin to roar, for ye's the Treble take:
And trees. attend your lowre, for ye's the Tenor make:
My self the Base shall be: Muses, be ye the Mien,
So we shall seriously sing, Solace we have seen.

SONG II. Life out of Death.
Sam. SAy on, say on, solaced sweetly surely we have been.

Jea. Play on, play on, sense-moving matter surely we have seen.

Rocks. We's roar and cry,

Trees. Our strength we's try,
Our roots lay by,
With startling on our stumps.

Seas. Huge Oceans we,

Mounts. Main Mountains high,

Hills. We Hills that be,
resound shall your transumpts.
Our solace is in thee, who loves the heart contrite,
And is a sanctuary unto the broken sp'rit:
Great joys to thine thou do propine,
By love divine, up with thy self eternal:
When all thy foes, with the godless goes
In endless woes, down to the pit infernal.
Thus all the joy of mind,
And solace we have seen,
Is his sweet face, inclined,
In love still springing green:
So glory we, in knowing Thee, our King to be,
our Life, our Love, our Light:
Who bought us dear, and keeps us here,
till we appear,
by grace in glory bright.

Jea. Sweet maid, thou do to melody incline,
Our minds to move in mysteries divine:
Rapt up, in most Seraphick-love, to sing
The praises of our high exalted King.

SONG III. Liberty out of Bondage.
Sam. NOw thou, who dyving is in this abyss of bless*
Conveyed through all these wonders*
To be enjoyed by so many numbers,
Who were by Adam old depraved,
And by the second Adam saved:
Thou having then seen what thou can
In that great mystery, of Divine Majesty,
GOD-MAN.
And does aspire, with all desire,
to pry, and to admire
These excellencies, the quintessences
Of all felicity, in their simplicity:
Yet think these things to be more high,
Then can conceived be, under mortality,
More then the child unborn, by its sagacity,
Hes of capacity, for to conceive aright
Of this large Universe, where we converse,
until it come to light;
So should it be with thee in heavenly places,
Amongst these faces, made so fair,
By the splendour shining there,
That thou should disdain,
And mourn to turn again
Unto these earthly treasures,
And all created pleasures:
And should admire so much, and more,
As if thou were designed
Alive to be enshrined
in that live-tomb
Of the mothers womb, for evermore;
Yet think again, what shall become of some
who never dreams of these sad theams,
Till they be hurled in everlasting flames,
without remission, or relenting,
When time is past of pardon by repenting.

Hell. Oh now, my soul! shall these thee now exceed
In Songs, along these streams whilst
they thee lead?
Thou dazles, doting where thy guides do go:
But prostrate be, and here in excess show,
With joy of heart, that none can equalize
A soul thus ravished, who shall eternize
The praises of her Love with such content,
Who freed her from so fearful detriment:
Who feeds her now with so delicious fare,
And does propine her with such riches rare:
And leads her to the Land, where she may see
His face, by grace, where joy and glory be.
Now, that I may your sweetest songs excel,
I Will on my Lovers face adoring dwell:
And as I see, and do receive, I shall
Report, unto your mutual comfort all:
Be elevate with full consent again,
To prosecute this Evangelick strain.

SONG IV. The Joy of the LORD.
Hell. OUr glorious, our victorious King does reign,
The hosts of heaven do sing about his Throne,
Where he is gone in all delights to live,
Whence we derive our light and life alone.
Know him who would, make bold, treat for a smile:
He never did beguile a true Believer;
He is a River, full of divine delights:
None like Him in the depths, nor in the heights.
For He was dead, and is alive again:
He did sustain hells pain, when he was slain:
Our freedom to procure, he did endure
What we deserved, and never swerved:
And of these stounds he bears the wounds.
Thus shall thou know him, for he is non-such,
And thou shall say, too much cannot be said
of such a One
Whom man and angel, heaven and earth, alone
Have their dependency eternally upon:
So shall thou need no more,
One blink shall heal thy sore,
And thou shall thirst no more:
For He a Fountain is
of bless supernall,
And this eternal is:
For on his eyes, indeed,
With soul-festivities they feed,
so sweet, so sure,
They cannot more endure to gade*
And when He hides His face,
sad, sad they be:
B^t groping still, and hoping, till
He smile again,
Or do translate them to his heavenly Train,
Where all the Members mystical delighted,
Triumph in him, in whom they are perfected.

Sam. I do rejoice in this thy heart-content.

Hell. And I rejoice that thou wast hither sent.

Jea. And I rejoice here with you both to be.

Hell. And I rejoice, and praise my King for thee.

Sam. Now I must go unto my charge again.

Hell. I pray thee do not so, but stay.

Sam. Refrain.

Hell. Then one word by thine Echo bid me speak.

Echo. Speak.

Hell. Now, need I any more, but to believe?

E. Live.

Hell. And any more to do, but live exact?

E. Act.

Hell. What if I tempted be, shall I endure?

Echo. Dure.

Hell. In suffering what will free me from disgrace?

E. Grace.

Hell. Shall I promove, and constantly persevere?

E. Ever.

Hell. And will my dear Love go from me, or no?

E. No.

Hell. Then shall I sure believe, and live, and act,
Endure by grace, and perseverance make.

The Warning.
Jea. OUr dearest friend unto his charge again
Is gone, and I no longer may remain:
But ere we part, sweet girl, I must thee give
Some warnings, that thou may more warily live.
Thou have been weighted in this absence short,
But sees not what the journey may import,
Now thou art glistering fair upon the mountain,
Extracting life from the life-giving fountain,
They Spirits sp'rituallized are, and poring,
Thy clearer apprehensions highly soaring,
Both bred and fed by divine excellencies,
And breathings of the sweetest influences,
And so delighted art to shine by grace,
And holiness before thy Lovers face:
But yet remember when thou sadly lay
In bondage, under absence, then this day
Of so clear seeing, if thou could conceive
Right, so bethink, if now thou can believe,
That ever such a thing should thee befall,
As may again thy liberty enthrall:
But in the body while thou art, beware,
For we are tempted, and in danger are
To be ensnared, for the old man is prone
To snatch at every bait before us thrown:
For this, I wish thee wisely to uptake
The case of every child of God, and make
The diff^rence right 'twixt the rebellious man
And the obedient, newborn Christian;
The last a weakling, but a willing child.
The first both wicked, false, perverse and wild,
Upon whose back the cross, the rod must ly:
The serpents brood may be born down thereby
Which both so numerous and so nimble be,
As atoms in the air before thine eye:
Or vapours-like from brooks corrupt that rise
And do the shining of the Sun surprise:
Such is the sinning sin, such is the seed
Of Satan in the soul, such is the breed
Whereby the newborn Christian is annoyed,
Till by the grace of Christ they be destroyed.
Worldly desires, delights, cares, fears to daun.
The weeds of carnal lust how to supplant,
So as the seed of grace may sweetly spring,
Which success makes us under sadness sing;
Believing certainly the truth of this,
That all these troubles shall increase thy bless.
And presuppose, by dispensations yet,
Thou were rapt up into an higher fit,
Whereby in Paradise thou could behold
Above what either should or could be told:
Could thou, who do in this flesh temple dwell,
Endure these rays, and neither rust nor swell?
No, under cloud again thou must retreat,
And with the messenger of Satan meet:
Enter the lists therefore* by faith defend
Thy Crown, by perseverance to the end;
For if thou carnally become secure,
Thy fall shall all thy comeliness obscure.
When under sad desertion thou wanders,
And know not what thou do, nor where thou danders,
But do what all thy days makes thee ashamed,
When thou art smittenand by grace reclaimed.
These dreadful, doleful these disastrous days,
When on our souls the subtle Serpent prayers:
These weaknings, warnings, warmings dipped in love,
These smells from heaven, which affections move,
Are meas'red out according to the need
Of every member, by the careful Head:
And if to do, or to endure thou be
Appointed, then anointed thou shall be
With grace sufficient unto steadfastness,
And get a blink to comfort in distress:
So as a Christian, in thy sufferings all
Christ's glorified, wherein thou glory shall:
And argue may thou art in Him complete,
When Head and members in affliction meet.
But thou must be upon thy guard, and watch,
Against the Serpent* at thy soul does snatch:
He will uncessantly against thee fight
By stratagems, renewed by day and night,
With snares, and nets, and grins laid in the way,
To hold thee fast, when thou do slide or stray;
And where he finds thee weak or wandering, will
Enter thy breach, and break thee by his skill.
Corruption from within makes open doors,
To what temptations from without occurres.
And sometime Syren-like he will assail
With flatt'ries, but if he do not prevail,
He will affright thee with a thousands fears,
Which on thy sp'rit that evil spirit rears.
There is no course God for our help does take,
To keep us humble or our comfort make*
But he does thereunto himself apply,
To make us dote or else despair thereby.
By mediat means when he does not prevail,
Then by his fiercest darts he will assail,
And level at thy faith, the fruit of grace,
Thy hope and love, the new man to deface.
He will suggest, inject vile monst'rous notions
Into distrust, of Atheism the motions,
And seek no better party then our reason,
To parley with him on the points of treason:
Capitulation-proof, he knows to be
Means to overcome, experimentallie.
Now then the sp'rituall armor timous take,
And to the fight of faith with fervor make,
Under the Royal standard of thy love
Advance, and by his martial motions move.
Thou know Gods secret ones to circumveen,
No hellish plots have unattempted been;
And what cannot the devil yet contrive,
According as his malice does him drive?
And what is it he can contrive, but sure,
A man to act it out, he shall procure?
For unto such an instrument he can
Masked materials furnish for the man:
And wicked men have still an open ear,
The serpent's subtle whisperings to hear:
And at a wink can change his voice and sight,
Shining Saint-like in much angelick light:
To gain his point how far he shall prevail
By fained friendship, fawning shall assail.
In such commixtion, and so deep devise,
Here to supplant, and there for to surprise:
But when this craft does cross his closse design,
Then in a spleen he sharps his cruel sting,
And in his fury kindles fiery trials
For all that dare give his commands denyals.
And never think it strange that man forsaken
Of God, has now of Satan service taken:
Since Law, nor Gospel, Instance, Word or Rod
Will waken, or reclaim lost man to God:
But they in wicked obduration, will
Persist, their fathers lusts for to fulfill.
Or that the devil rational man can make,
Sometime the colors of a Saint to take:
Another time in tyrrany to boil,
By cruelty the blood of Saints to spoil:
For he of every man the Idol knows,
And at his feet his full contentment throws,
And lets him see this is the way alone
To rise, to stand, to settle in his throne:
And cannot this deceiver, thus deceive,
In making him vain-vile-man to conceive,
That when he has received the world in hyre
To his ambitious carnal hearts desire:
That as a Saint he has it to possess,
And for his followers as their propernesse.
So as they may by any slight or might
People suppress, for to maintain that right.
Is not this truth whereon we fix our standing
Clear, that the devil has man at his commanding.
Prophets, Apostles false, false Christ's, also
We warned are to guard against, ye know.
Who when like rav'ning Wolves they be within,
Clothed like sheep, can so present their skin.
Since Cain first his brothers blood did spill,
The firstborn man, the second man did kill:
Unto this day men-murd'rers are lurking,
And as they moved be do fall a working.
But lest man should, when he is settled, think
Upon his wicked course, and then forethink
His villainy, the devil leads him fair
Upon exploits and deep devices rare:
To make him famous and his fancy feed,
So as his thoughts no further may proceed.
And see ye not some worldly Monarchs great,
For to maintain and to increase their stare,
Are only set their neighbors to disthrone,
That they may reign and only rule alone:
And therefore guard against this strong temptation,
This trying flame of cruel tribulation:
But be not moved, for they cannot smite,
But as God for his glory does permit;
And in the trial of his Saints he will
Them humble, but thereby their joys fulfill.
For thy triumphant King, and Captain just,
These mights, their slights down at his feet shall thrust.
The shining Cherub from his brightness shall
Together with the fairest Cedar fall.
The Beast, the Prophet and the Whore flagitious,
With all their pomp, their spleen and pride pernicious,
Whose terror troubled men while they did live,
The fiery lake the fatal stroke shall give.
Then be not moved, the change may glad thy heart,
When from their heaven they to their hell depart.
Thou from thy hell at heaven shall arrive,
While they in bail, in bless thou's ever live:
For when the devil, by his instruments,
With the blood of Saints does mix the Elements.
Shall not these sufferings, then so much the more,
Shorten their journey and increase their glore:
And are they not o'rejoyed when they see
Their blood include the Church felicity.
But for thy further trial, yet again,
What if the Lord the influence should restrain
Of light, and life, and liberty, even when
Thou art the butt of hell and hellish men?
This* this is it should make the trial sad,
For if his face upon thy soul thou had
Shining, thou should disdain that dreadful crew
Of devils and all the darts they could renew:
But in this exigent he is so near,
That when thou least expects he shall appear:
And when thou have thine own frail faintings felt,
Immediate love and mercy shall thee melt:
And yet what if that thy good God advise
A deeper draught, thy folly to surprise.
We are so prone to fix on proofs, we prove
Both natural in our faith, our hope, our love:
What then when in the light thou seems to live,
And in much lively liberty revive,
And with much confidence thou do conceive
That all that thou have sought, thou shall receive*
And yet thou art not only quite denied,
But the response is contrary replied:
Well this is sharp, but certainly it is sweet,
That divine checks should with our idol meet.
That when vain we would our own morcels carve,
We should be left in hazard for to starve:
Himself, Himself alone, and nothing else,
But what of him, and of His virtue smells.
He, and not we, knows what is for our good,
And never will His own thereof denude;
Both how and when to help, for he does hear
Our sp'rituall supplications, all sincere:
Which qualified according to His will,
He fails not for our well, but shall fulfill.
What if again, poor weakling, yet alace,
Thou should ly groaning at the Throne of grace,
And know not how to seek, or what to say,
Far less can press or pertinently pray?
Yet this is good, God sees thy strong desires,
And flames the sacrifice with sacred fires:
And to His praise, does make our peace appear,
Out of the odours of our sighs sincere:
So that, as yet, we may convinced be,
That all His gifts are grace and mercy free:
For tho the way be strait and full of snares,
And we infirm, possessed with fears and cares:
Our fault it is, we do not soar above
What tempests all the gates of hell can move.
We should an heaven upon earth enjoy,
If thus we did believe, thus him employ,
On him repose, him love, in him delight:
Who is th'ingraven-form, and glory bright
Of the eternal God, in whom we have
Access by grace, to come, seek and receive
All that is for our good, who so does give
Above what we can ask, seek or believe.

Hele. Enough, enough, there needs no more,
My Lover does my life restore:
^n him alone I move, I live,
And bound I am him to believe:
Affections cannot have the force
From his dear love me to divorce.
The flatteries, frowns, the hooked baits,
Whereby the cunning hunter waits
To snatch me unawars, my eyes
Anointed are, and clearly sees
The lying Serpent sliely lurking,
And in his brood most boldly working
Both from within and from without.
But my most Royal Captain stout
Has crushed the Serpents cruel head,
And pleads my cause against his seed,
And daily helps me to subdue
The old man and his notions new,
To purge the heart and make it clean,
And in temptation does sustain
My fainting, and my failings crave
Both food and physic, these I have.
And when I suffer with my Love,
Such comforts as come from above,
And on my sp'rit conferred be,
By His good Sp'rit, spiritually:
That if the Devil knew, he would
Restrain his malice if he could.
So what can interrupt my peace
In this free, full, unchanged grace:
Until through times and trials we
Make entry in eternity.

Jea. Enough, enough, I do confess indeed
With this, which is, in watchfulness proceed,
Guard well against security, and sure
Thou shall from swerving be the more secure.
These wak'nings, and these warmings of affections,
As antidotes unto thy dull dejections*
Out of the cisterns of salvation spring,
Whence we, in sucking consolation, sing:
And if we hereby do our strength renew,
For stormy tempests that be to ensue,
Then happy we, when we have rightly used
These mercies rich; But when they be abused,
By fond conceiving that they shall endure,
We fall asleep, and carnally secure:
And sure, before we be aware, we shall
In slippery places slide, or catch a fall:
And in that slumber be surprised again,
And with disgrace shall our Profession stain.
Most bitter proof and sad experience dear
Hes made this truth in ages all appear:
That many sons go groaning to the grave,
For grieving him, so graciously does save:
By whose immediate merciful supply
They be sustained that still dependent be:
There is no reason for our standing, but
Eternal love that chois'd us, changed not.
Infinite mercy seen can also move
The finite thing, infinite love to love.
Thus living dyving in this sweet abyss*
I leave thee, in a most transcendent bless:
And to my charge again shall now apply,
And thou by sure experience shall try
The precious fruit of precious time so spent,
That these thy pains thou never shall repent.
But as of my infirmnesse thou wast tender,
My Lord to thee shall recompenses render
Abundantly* above what finite we
Can seek, believe, or think, infinitely.

Gris. I likewise go, farewell, my friends most dear,
Who witness were unto these wonders here.
Our King, how comely in his comings be,
And in his goings, for our goods is He?
You see what sadness in his absence is,
And in his presence what a heaven of bless:
And that through godly sorrow from within,
Our sp'rituall comforts rise* and do begin.
Now seek His Name, for therein ye shall see
His mercy meeting with your misery:
And that His grace and His unchanged love
^s greatly our ingratitude above:
And that His Name, as precious ointments sweet
Of fragrant smell, the Virgins pure invite;
For in these ornaments he does appear
Amongst us in the Pallace-garden here,
Where, by his breathings, mixed with warming showers,
^eds out in flourishes our sweetest flowers,
and spices, that he does delight to see,
^mell, taste, defend, and cause to fructify.
^here shall we find our friends frequent that place,
^ceiving and communicating grace,
^o know our King, as he does visits give;
(...) there the dwyning soul he does revive:
^e blind, the deaf, the dumb, the lame also,
^o see, and hear, and speak, and come, and go,
And for the stately palace royal, fair,
He purifies the comers and prepare.
Come, let us come, for here his glorious Name
Of all the Students is the only theme:
And all these curious Mazes and Meanders
Delightful be unto the understanders:
Attending still till they translated be
Into the mansions of eternity.

THE INTRODUCTION TO The Palace Garden.
THe first Man Adam, of the earth earthly, made a living Soul, forfeited to
himself* and all his posterity, the greatest natural happiness imaginable by
the natural Creature: and that after possession received thereof in Paradise,
that Garden of all pleasures and preferments tha^ the whole Universe, and all
therein containe^ could afford; and being crowned with the height of that
beatitude, a communion with God, in the manner, and measure of manifestation,
whereby the creature could be most capable of the Creator*

But this folly of the mutable creature could not frustrate the eternal design
of the only wise, and wonderful God, whose wisdom in the last ADAM, a
quickening Spirit, the Lord from heaven, took delight to be conversant with the
children of men: and out of these lost generations, has revived, and brought
forth from the Womb of Regeneration, a fair Family of Believers: and by the
Gospel Ordinances, gathered them into his Garden of grace, by the New and
Living Way, where the Fountain and Well of Life is opened, free for all that
will come to smell the Flowers, and feast upon the Fruits of eternal and
unchangeable Bounty, infinitely preferable to all their losses: where he,
conversing with them, prepares them for the Pallace-Royall, the Place of his
Habitation, where Mansions are appointed for them, that they may be where He
is, that they may see His Glory, and re^oice in Him for evermore: And that, as
they have born the image of the earthly, so we may ^ear the Image of the
Heavenly.

And here is the prime and most precious Subject of Christian Contemplation,
where the Believer may expatiate, and ingratiate himself, in the ^weetest
Recreations and Consolations: by attaining unto, and entertaining of, an
unseparable communion with God in Christ, by the Holy Ghost, ^nseparably One,
and only adorable.

MAZE 1. for restriction, Job 37.33, 34
HEnce, carnal minds, that apprehend Erroniously,
The Incomprehensible to comprehend most impiously:
Lights glorious Center, inaccessible, who can behold?
Lifes-life eternal, unexpressible, who can unfold?
How then shall men come to conceive
Of this rare Bless some do receive,
By Gods preordinate appointing, who be renewed,
And by the Holy Ghosts anointing, who be endowed,
Brightly to see that Majesty
Of God-Man, that great Mystery,
Of love unto the Elect-seed,
Whence admiration does proceed,
May come and see, and so confess,
Profess His Name, and praise express?
And you, who humbled in the sense of wants,
And search to know the privilege of Saints,
May come in faith, with reverence and fear:
See that without this frame you do forbear.
MAZE 2. for instruction, 1 John 3.2
IN all these Mazes where we move,
The ground we walk upon is love:
And where we make approachings near,
Let Us come in reverence and fear
Before His glorious Name, who is
A Beam supreme of boundless bless:
But so resplendent and transcendent,
To make appear, convincing clear.
Behold this natural Sun, whose gleams does apprehend us,
And whose illuminating beams does comprehend us:
And thence infer, how far
The supreme Author of this all excels this Star.
In this all comprehensive name I AM, so condescending,
Eternal, simple, still the same, all comprehending:
And in Emanuell sweetly seen,
In this fair Garden ever green,
Where daily with celestial showrs
Be nourished His rarest flowrs,
Until He glorify His grace,
In such as here do Him embrace.
MAZE 3. For encouragement, Isa. 55 John 1.27
HEre Soveraignity does shine,
In condescensions so divine,
That ye whose lights are now anointed,
And for these glorious sights appointed,
On whom the Holy Ghost alone
Hes left impressions upon:
Look in loves Christ-all mirror clear,
Where loves sweet mystery does appear
Firmly fixed till acquainted,
Thou be (by faith) therein indented
This is the Mountain of our rest,
This sweetest Fountain, only best:
Come drink salvation at this cup,
And on these consolations sup:
Where pleasures, joy and peace abounds,
And glory to His Grace redounds:
Who (Wonderful) will not conceal
His Excellence, but does reveal
Himself so clear, that we may read
Him in His Name, and on Him feed.
This Food who tastes shall thirst no more,
For fading gain or earthly glore:
But longing still to be translated,
Where they may be for ever stated.
MAZE 4. Loves mystery, 1 Timothy 3.1^
YE all, who find your selves secure,
By lively saving faith, and sure:
Who hes smelled, and who hes tasted,
Who hes felt, and who hes feasted,
On these Love-dazling Mysteries divine,
Which on our cleared eyes do shine,
Of Man in God, and God in Man,
Who sp'ritually, destinctly scan
Humanity, still unconfounded
With Deity, and conjunctly bounded:
And do before
The Unity in Trinity adore,
Advance that most admired Grace,
And feed upon that fairest Face:
For there alone, and no where else,
That Love is found of love that smells,
That can be feasted on, and felt,
The heart of Adamant can melt:
It Is life alone to be resolved:
In this, this love to be disolv'd:
Tract it still, and be allured,
So shall ye surely be secured.
O for these breathings of this Love,
That would the whole affections move!
MAZE 5. The fountain inexhaustible.
I

I am that pure, immense Ens, entium Ens.
Am I not wisdom infinite, and love,
That omnipotent, omnipresent, whence
I in my justice and my mercy move?
Am I not that sublime profound Abyss,
God, Trinity in Unity complete:
All truth, all light, all life, eternal bless,
Glorious, and holy Father, Son and Sp'rit.

GOD
Holy Ghost,
eternal and infinite,
All Light, all Life,
all Virtue pure complete,
Irradiant being, by whom all beings be,
Most blessfull breathings of the Unity:
Sublime, all-piercing and
all-searching Spirit,
God* Holy Ghost,
Eternal and
Infinite.
E Expressed Splendour of the Deity,
M Might, Majesty admired in Man Divine:
M Mercy rejoiced with Justice to agree,
A And Justice seen with joy in Mercy shine,
N Nerve of substantial Truth, Illustrious, fair,
V Wisdom and Well of Life where beauty springs,
E Eternal God of God, God to declare,
L Lights Center, where all Saints enlightened sings.
MAZE 6. Loves Labyrinth, Ephesians. 5.23.
THe race of man, sprung from th'apostate reins deplorable!
And bitter root that all the branches stains restorable.
The mystery of man's defecting ponder,
The mind of God in man's perfecting wonder:
Perfected man, degenerate by defection:
Defected man, regenerate to perfection.
Adam by nature damned, when he defected,
Damned Adam now refram'd, by grace perfected.
O happy they! may now we say,
Are such as sees, with sp'ritual eyes aright, these mysteries,
And do with reverence adore
This Glorious Majesty before,
Fixed by faith till they prevail,
By pregnant prying through the vail.
The root of man elected, leads this round,
And with the fruit of this great mist'ry's crowned:
Come then and see the King, as ye would live,
And by believing herein deeply dyve:
His power and his promise both believe,
So shall thou see, delight, and love, and live;
And with Heavens Quiristers adore and sing
High Hallelujahs to this Glorious King.
MAZE 7. Loves mirror, Isa. 45.22
LOve-dazled eyes, look up and see,
Where purest spirits prying be,
And with seraphick love inflamed,
You shall by fixing prove refram'd:
Gods only Son, Gods rebell-wrath endure,
O love alluring!
Gods Sonship to Gods rebels to procure,
O large procuring!
We lay in darkness till His glory shined,
And now He hes our souls in His combined:
Ingrav'd upon His Heart and Hands we be,
Ingrafted in His God-Man-Flesh be we:
Members and more, made Mates for Marriage loves
To Him, for whom the whole Creation moves:
In heaven, and earth, and hell, whose scepter sweyes,
And dazles humane eyes with divine Rays:
This Love all limits far exceeds,
Of length, and depth, and height, and breadth,
Past comprehension by perusing,
A tractat for eternal musing.
Oh, that our whole affections were
Fixed upon this glorious Star:
Which lightens all the Stars above,
And on poor welps lets out this love.
MAZE 8 Types and emblems, Rev. 5.6, 9, 10
HEre does the Rose in Sharon lively grow,
The faces of the comers coloring:
Here living waters from the fountain flow,
And graces be abundant bullering:
Here feeds the Pelican, her fainting brood
Dying, but being revived by her blood:
The Phoenix tasting death, death to subdue,
Life to restore, and nature to renew.
Captives to rescue here the Lion dread, see and adore!
The Lamb in suffering death a ransom made, man to restore.
Thy faith-bred thoghts unto these theams confine
Where these transcendent mysteries do shine:
For every minut in eternity,
New marvels in this mirror thou shall see.
Join with heavens holy host in heavenly hymns*
Sing hallelujahs with the Seraphims:
Amongst these pregnant Spirits ever poring,
In this abyss of bless and joy adoring:
Adoring God, whose wisdom, bounty bright,
Does shine so fair in this dark cloudy night:
Infer, confer, when thou come out to see
These mysteries clear, what shall that glory be?
MAZE 9. Loves union, Joh. 17.22, 23
NOw Happy Holy Ones, who sees
The Mystery sweet of Mysteries:
How from that Mystery myst'ries flow,
And from that Wonder wonders grow,
Fitting for souls eternal thinking,
When the Redeemed are ever drinking
At the Cisterns of salvation,
In the cups of consolation:
Life from the ever-living Fountain,
Moving on the unmoved Mountain.
In that celestial Communion,
Sublime and unconceived Union;
Where never then incensing stain,
Unto rebuke shall us arraign:
Nor possible again seclude
From this felicity so good:
Of joys transcending and exceeding
All that on his face are feeding:
Past separation quite, which is
The Crown of our eternal bless:
That bless, all finite thoughts above,
Feasting upon eternal love:
Where from the splendour of illustrious beams,
Grace in immortal glory ever streams.
THE FIRST STEP TO THE JEWEL.
NOw in this Garden, where we have been using,
And in these Mazes moved unto musing,
And be returning to our Cypress bowres,
To take a breathing for some silent hours:
Let us beware, for we in danger be
To sleep away our sweet tranquillity.
We members of the Body mystical,
Which Militant we ordinarily call,
Are to regard the universal cases
Of all the parties, in their several places,
Common desires, delights, designs devoted,
As this State-int'rest best may be promoted.
So when in person most remote we are,
We may in sp'rit be best employed far.
Now let us try this course in our retirings,
Fervent and faithful be in all desirings,
And dutiful endeavors for our King,
And for His cause so shall we daily sing:
And let us ever in the faith be eyeing
Him, in His glorious actings, as by seeing,
We may the more by grace enlarged be,
His glorious Name for to exalt on hie:
And in our secret Soliloquies then,
How God has granted grace for graceless men,
Recent, resume, and so the sp'rit compose,
As you in sp'rit may sp'ritually rejoice.
But O! what drowsiness, and what decay,
Infirmity, and failing we bewray,
When from the Garden we debarred be
For any space, until for new supply,
The Silver Trumpet, sounding in our streets,
For fainting souls* a new approach invites:
For help this precious Jewel, as the Root
Of all the Garden, spices* flowers and fruit,
For spirit feeding, feasting, smelling, healing,
Applied to thy affections for prevailing,
Effectual prove: for in these Gemmes imbosed,
All virtue efficacious is enclosed.
With fixed eyes, and warm affections ponder,
And as thou do revive, rejoice and wonder.
The second Step to the JEWEL.
THis Microcosme (Man) of wonders full,
By God made wonderfully wonderful:
And in his lively image made to live,
By breathing in this life that he does give:
A compend of the whole Creation bright,
In whom the Divine Nature took delight
There to converse: as in a mansion meet,
Does join with lifelesse dust a living sp'rit*
This soul does all, in all the parts remain
Of all the body, for the bodies gain,
Relief, and preservation in all cases,
Her self unmoved, whose action never ceases:
So and infinitely above what can
Imagined be by any soul of man:
The glorious Creator does possess
His blessed Self in all this Universe:
Containing all things, uncontain'd, unmoving,
His glory in all motions promoving:
Which shining in His Name and nature, prove
No change to be in His eternal Love,
As by his operations appear,
That Majesty to man and angel, clear:
By dyving wherein there is true delight,
Until through darkness we arrive at light.
The JEWEL of Jewels
The LORD our GOD, who is only PURE,
In TRUTH and GOODNESS does endure:
PERFECTION, JUST, OMNIPOTENT,
OMNISCIENT, and OMNIPRESENT,
INFINITE, ONE, and WONDERFUL
All these rich Gemmes in this fair Jewel seen,
All in all,
All alls involves:
In our believing all resolves.
Believing, knowing, presupposing,
Fervent love, and full rejoicing,
In these most sweet enliving Beams,
True living, and reviving Streams.
from this one All, who shining is
In Bounty, Beauty,
boundless
This Pearl rare transparent does contain.

ETERNAL, BLESS, and MERCIFUL,
EMMANUEL, and high COUNSELOR,
LOVE, LIFE, and only COMFORTER,
UNCHANGEABLE, and WISDOM bright,
LONG SUFFERING, sweet and GRACIOUS LIGHT.
The use of the JEWEL.
THis firmament of starry constellations,
Planets, Signs, Poles in separate scituations!
Which from the Sun, the Prince of Stars, receive
Inliving vigor, to the life they have.
On this Terrestial Glob from every Airt
Their influence on bodies all impart;
To every several kind by sweet infusion,
Diffused variously without confusion:
Wherein infinite multiplicity,
Each one may plead these heavens were made for me.
Like Iron and Adamant alike affecting,
And all things else, except themselves neglecting.
Since then the God of nature has imposed
This natural necessity, composed,
Dead Elements to quicken and revive,
Procreate, preserve, restore and to enlive
The vegetives, and sensitives, what then
Can be the glory he for elect men
Reserved has in himself, to let them prove
The force of servent, free and fountain love?
In moving to discern with open eyes
Aright, a sight of divine mysteries.
This Garden treasure, JEVVEL, every jem
Spring from that sweet, sublime, eternal stem*
In Gospel Ordinances so resplendent,
Industrious divinely condescendent:
And every one in every one so vive*
That every one does every one revive.
Whence flow these various flowers that do affect
Spiritual senses to a sweet reflect:
Cordials of comforts here ingrafted grow,
And sovereign balm from precious spices flow:
That by the influence of refreshing beams,
And constant current of spiritual streams
Upon the proper object, so effecting,
Directed duly by divine directing,
And straightly darted out from every point,
Curing, securing every several joint.
From that One-All unmoved eternal, pure,
Where infinite perfection does endure.
That Omnipotent, Omnipresent is,
And Omniscient savingly to bless:
In Him the Son of righteousness, by name
Emmanuel high, that only glorious beam,
Where wisdom, full of wonder, shines so bright
In ord'ring all these works of wonder right,
That goodness may be seen exceeding good:
It shines in glory on ingratitude:
That mercy may in God admired be,
He makes an object of our misery.
Justice adored shines bright in Jesus bleeding,
By merits, mercy for our persons pleading.
Eternal love shines clear in timous grace,
Gaining the elect of the rebell-race.
Counsel and comfort for the heart contrite,
Long suffering, to convince the haughty sp'rit:
That life and light by which we see and live,
That sp'rit of truth whereby we do believe,
By whom alone these glorious rays transcendent
Become so bountifully condescendent:
And from the grounds of these ingredients green
Sovereign preservatives to save are seen:
For feeding, breeding, feasting, framing right,
The Babe of Grace, translated unto light:
A sp'rituall sympathy of inclination
'Twixt Head and Members, by a new creation:
As natural grafts well grafted in the root,
Come timely to their known and kindly fruit,
By shedding out, and sucking substance sweetly,
Incorp'rate and corroborate completely:
This practical Divinity could make,
Which of the Divine Nature does partake;
For through the vail admitted, by believing,
We instantly receive above conceiving.
To see our selves blind-born sin-born* and more,
Death-born, wrath-born, forlorn for eve^more:
And in that minut then immediately,
Light, life, relief and true tranquillity:
By looking up, and in this JEWEL dyving,
Presented for perpetual reviving:
As on the heart it does impression take,
And kindly motions to the Mover make:
So as with longings we enlarged may be,
This glory to enjoy triumphantly:
From this One-all, One-uncreated Bless,
Who glorious in the whole Creation is:
Till face to face we (Called) come to see,
And changed from glory unto glory be*
The Symphonicall Desires and delights of all Saints in their Retirements. SONG
I.
Darkness depart, do not our eyes deprive
Of this bright Star of day, that does appear
To usher in the Sun, that can revive
Our fainting hearts, and clouded spirits clear.
The Rose of Sharon, all our banks and bowers
Perfumes with odours of all ointment sweet:
Our fields be sending forth the fairest flowers,
The singing birds our slownesse do invite.
The Turtle mourning for her Mate does moan,
Because his coming he so long delays:
And we, affected with her griefs, do groan,
And tune our Lutes unto her mourning lays.
Most glorious Sun of righteousness, consent
To hear, to see, to cause thy face to shine:
The clouds dispell, make clear the firmament,
And for thy coming move us to incline.
Oh, that we could Thee know, believe, and love!
Then could we not but for thy coming long;
Wonder, importunate we do not prove,
Until our sighs be turned to a song.
Most glorious King out through the continent,
The glorious Gospel gloriously convey:
Make all the Nations come with one consent*
To kiss the Son, and on his statutes stay.
The Devil, that by delusion does deceive
The world lost, roaring in fiery rage,
Of whom the Beast, and Prophet false, receive
Babel and Balaam's ruin for their wage:
Endite, condemn, discover, give them doom,
With these the Whoor flagitious detect:
The Serpent, and the Man of Sin consume,
From all their drifts redeem thy dear Elect.
Triumphant Monarch, for thy Truth appear*
And with thy brazen legs these tyrants turn
Out of the way, with eyes of flaming fire,
These fiends pursue, and in thy fury burn.
When shall thy garments stained with blood be seen*
Of these proud foes, that do thy grace disdain?
The glory of these wonders does pertain
To thee, this might and malice to restrain.
How this wild Lion through the earth does reel,
And prey upon poor blind-born Adams race,
Whirling the worldly minded, like a wheel,
Up by his gins, thy Image to deface.
Thou sees, O Thou, who power hes to prevent
This vile, invet'rate, and invective spleen:
And for destroying Satan's works was sent,
Our evil deserts let not thy help detain.
Dread King, who question dare thy just decrees,
Mysterious, holy, righteous and profound?
For, out of all apparent contraries,
Glory and might, right does to thee redound.
Let all the hosts in heaven and earth be still,
And with submission simple thee adore,
The Projects of thy wise, eternal will
To see fulfilled, rejoice for evermore.
All revolutions strange our King aright
Does by a change of providence direct:
By death and darkness, making life and light
Brightly appear for all his dear Elect.
Heavens King, our spirits more sp'ritually dispose,
And shine upon the seed of saving grace:
That faithfully, and fruitfully repose
We may, and all the swey of flesh displace.
The time, that thou art glorious to appear,
Hasten, impediments out of the way
Remove, that seeing eyes cleared to admire
The magnified in thy members may.
The wicked world, that does in lies delight,
The voice of truth and wisdom does disdain,
And will not see, till everlasting night
Close up their fight in soul-tormenting pain.
Longing we be when we himself may see
Shining in glory, on his glorious Throne:
Where feasting in his glorious face we'll be,
When immortality we have put on.
Welcome, great King, let now the glorious Day
Begin to dawn, of thy eternal reign:
In righteousness thy Royal Scepter swey,
Of mercy and of judgment we may sing,
Time mend thy pace, unto thy period post,
Stir up thy strength, do not retard nor slide:
All shall be done anon, be gone thou must,
Eternity to sink thee down does glyde.
Let us our spirits a little time compose,
And fix upon the starry Firmament,
And all the Stars that are, let us suppose,
Full as the Sun did shine, so excellent;
And that this glob of earth transparent were,
And every star, out from his glorious Sphere,
Darting his rays and influence so far,
As all dimensions of the world appear:
^oor worms we never could a blink endure
Of this created glory we conceive:
^ut in the beauty of this brightness, sure,
Be razed, because we could it not receive.
^gain, by faith, in contemplation ponder
What places for the Elect are prepared:
^o far surpassing all the Stars in number,
and to the glory of the Sun compared.
(...) immortality when we are arrayed,
and for these places pure spiritualized,
^ransparent in this splendour there displayed,
and yet humane remain, so subtillized.
Yet our great King those changes, we perceive,
From natural darkness to this light of grace
Exceeds more fully then we can conceive,
Till we receive that fullness in His face,
Where that all-glorious, increated light
Remains, whence we our light and life derive,
And shall enjoy joys in His joyful sight
Unseen, unheard, till there we do arrive.
Who see these marvels but they must admire:
Who see, admire, but doubtless they do long;
Who see, admire, and long, but do aspire
Seated to be these miracles among.
But rather how is it we do not weigh
The wisdom of our King, and condescend
Simply unto His dispensations high,
Who our desires unruly does suspend,
Until by trials strong through truth sustained
Our lost condition, and His love we see;
And by His grace be from the world weaned,
And fitted for this Life of Glory be?
Our glorious King, eternal, only wise,
Incomprehensible all things contains;
Who never does the heart contrite despise,
But by His Sp'rit the broken sp'rit maintains.
By worlds of men thy will fulfilled be
Through all the earth, and let thy glory shine
Jehovah high in Heaven eternally,
And all the Elect to thy praise incline.
SONG II. A Song of triumph, Rev. 15.3, 4.
Great O

GReat greatness does unto our God belong,
And Majesty to be adored alone:
Marvelous and admired, thy Saints among,
Are thy decrees eternal every one.
Thy works within thy Sanctuary are seen,
Works full of wonder thou to light have brought;
Lord, Lord, thy purposes are pure and clean,
God, only God, that thou in us have wrought.
Almighty might, all finite light transcending:
Just justice uncontrolled, in wisdom right,
And righteousness in all thy acts extending:
True God of truth conjoined with glorious might.
Are not the Hosts of heaven, our heavenly King,
Thy Mercy, Justice, Statutes, truth desiring,
Ways, Wisdom, works to see, and seeing sing,
Thou King of Saints, thy Majesty admiring.
King, King of Kings, before whose glorious face
Of glory Kings created Crowns cast down:
Saints separate and sanctified by grace,
Who thee embrace thy praises shall resound.
Shall not the Nations thy great Name regard?
Not thee, by whom their beings only be?
Fear thee, who for thy people have prepared
The consolations of eternity?
O thou who does so far our faith exceed!
Lord lead us to thy truth, thereto to cleave,
And firmly fix our eyes on thee to feed;
Glorify thy Name in us: us Lord, revive.
Thy name is like to ointments only sweet:
Name, O ye Nations! His dread Name with fear,
For He in all perfections is complete,
Thou see Him past comparison appear.
Only thy self, Self-soveraignity,
Art thou incomprehensible alone:
Holy, immense, adored Majesty,
For thou art glorious, Heavens and earth upon.
All, only All, in all thy Name is seen:
Nations in thy Salvation shall rejoice:
Shall not the captives that delivered been
Come, and upon thy grace and peace repose?
And who will not unto thy greatness still
Worship, and homage do, with heart sincere,
Before the Throne, in ardency of will,
The Saints among, when there they shall appear?
For now the wisdom of thy wise decrees,
Thy judgments deep, and so divine, so cleared
Are to the sense of every eye that sees,
Made manifest, and ever are admired.

A Harmonious Consort in a Song of Praise. SONG III. Part. 3.
THrones and dominions now adore
This deep profound abyss before,
Of Wisdom, and of knowledge high,
Shining in just mercy free,
Flowing from that fountain love,
That both the head and members move,
And made the dying head to live,
And all the members dead revive.
The mights, and slights did him defy,
Below His feet down thrown do ly:
They bruised His heel, but from His hand,
Now must they feel an iron brand,
Which breaks the necks of all His foes,
And makes the Hosts of Heaven rejoice.
For now our Glorious Head does render
To God the Kingdom, and does tender
Himself unto His Spouse redeemed,
And members so by Him esteemed;
That so His long desires, that day,
For evermore enjoy He may:
And they refyned and inflamed
With sacred fires and so reframed:
Which the most glorious Head inspires,
And Members glorified admires:
The Universal Heavens filled
With all this influence instilled,
By our victorious King alone,
Christ mystical, God-Man in One,
Whose generations account,
Who can? which does so far surmount
All rational men's conceiving,
Believing, all poor spirits perceiving:
But O! admired does invite
Finite unite, with infinite!
And in their stations sp'ritualized,
And gradation authorized,
Cordially, with all consents,
Above the Orbs and Elements:
The Region of the fire and air,
Adoring be. Echo. Beware: Now spare,
Till there you do approach, and then
Let Angels, and immortal Men
Like Stars resplendent shining sing
Praise to their Author, Spouse, and King.
Do not, I pray thee, so inhibite?
For we cannot be prohibit,
To conceal that grace, that glory
That in this very middle story
We do enjoy by faith and hope,
Which gives latitude and scope;
With much alacrity to sing:
And when we be eclipsed to bring
Unto the Altar timous tears,
And bemoan our faithless fears:
For He is firm who us affects,
And cannot fail who us protects:
And there shall in the darkest night
Arise for us a glorious light:
And in the deepest, deadly hell,
The Balm of Paradise shall smell*
Which shall increase of grace procure,
And shall our souls in peace secure:
Then do us not discharge to sing
Praise to our Royal Spouse and King.
Sing on, but in sobriety,
Beware of soaring too too high,
Flight'ring above the lofty line,
Where Love resides, and does refine
Affections to incline aright
To live by faith, until we come to sight.
The second Part of the third SONG.
THen by this liberty to sing
Of our most Royal Spouse and King,
whose Love does us allure:
His Deity in glory we,
Tri-unity adoring be,
our comforts to secure:
There unapproachable He is,
In all eternity of bless,
above our feelings far:
For at the word of His command
All things appeared where they stand,
from nothing, as they are:
We do these wonders all believe,
And that He hes come to relieve
us, who did so disdain
To do His will and hear His voice,
But wilfully made woeful choice
to sin, which hes us slain.
Here is the Text, here is the Theme,
Here is the Fountain, here the Stream
whence all our comforts spring:
Here all the Angels ever dive,
Hence all the Saints their life derive,
here does our glory sing.
His power experimentally,
By working in us mightily,
we know do, and believe:
For we in ignorance were born,
And in the bands of death forlorn,
till He did us receive.
Who can His wisdom but adore,
And providence so much the more,
as we are ever seeing,
From wonderful varieties.
And seeming contrarieties,
harmonious agreeing.
Him in His truth we worship must,
He being only worthy trust,
as we do daily try:
Far, far above our weak believing,
In every strait He is relieving,
as we His word apply.
His knowledge, whose all-seeing eye
All things that are, were, or shall be,
are ever straight before:
All persons, places, cases right
Divinely ordered in His sight,
which Angels do adore.
And O! how righteously our King
Does to the rule of justice bring,
and equally compose,
Above our weak capacity,
Unmoved by partiality,
alike to friends and foes.
His pitying mercy we admire,
Whereby He does our miseries clear,
and leads us to be cured:
Who in our blood were lying blind,
That we our light and life may find,
by Him, for us procured:
In these excellencies our King
Does shine, we Him enjoy, and sing:
but O! how far above
All finite apprehensions,
And unconceiv'd dimensions
is His unchanged love!
Essential Simplicity,
Only sublime Infinity,
Supreme, transcendent Bless:
Eternities unreachable
Perfections unsearchable
are absolutely His.
This is our King, He does us claim*
And takes EMMANUEL for His Name,
us for his Spouse redeemed:
Who unto sin and satan slav'd,
He sanctified hes and saved,
adopted Sons esteemed:
Who is it then condemn that can
The faithful fruitful Christian,
to Him that does advert?
Where is that tribulation,
Affliction or tentation,
that can procure thy smart?
In this life, Christian, can thou crave
Better then did thy King receive,
since He so well allows
Full freedom from these felt annoys,
And feelings of eternal joys,
for all that Him avows?
Should we not cheerfully with fear
His dying in our body bear,
with Him who are to live?
Whose life shall be made manifest
In such as purely have professed
His Truth, and thereto cleave.
Take courage then, let come what can,
Christ and his cross, O Christian,
does now the Crown preceed.
Delight to see the old man slain,
The New man formed in thee again,
now by the divine seed.
Reviving Recollections and Soliloquies, closing with the song of all Saints,
Rev. 7.12. SONG IV.
O What sore troubles we endure
By listening to the liars lure!
What rescues rare do we enjoy
From dangers, that should us annoy?
Bemisted under shadows here,
See not the perils that appear:
Till after trials we do track
Them to the spring by looking back,
Darts of destruction daily flees
From devils swift, like swarms of bees:
The noisome Pestilence by night,
Maliciously pursues with might.
On Scorpions and on Serpents dread,
And on the Cockatrice we tread:
But sheltered be and and well preserved
When they upon their spleen are starved:
And when we any pain abide,
Is it not when we step aside?
That on this stage we may fulfill
Our task by time the truth until:
And we by these characters spell,
The power that hes no parallel:
And by observance due do see
That He hes an all-searching eye:
His retributive justice here,
And mercy precious does appear.
Here does the Well of Wisdom spring
Knowledge and truth, whereof we sing:
For in all generations,
Regions, respective Nations,
In all imaginable places,
And in all conceived cases;
To all, all times, and every one,
All things are done by Him alone,
And done so well and wondrously,
That all men may admiring be,
And as they do admire, adore
His Royal Attributes before:
Whereby in time we timely taste,
And after time shall ever feast
Upon that fullness, when we shall
Himself enjoy, in and for all.
But Oh! How is it that we can move
In this infinity of love?
In this sublime simplicity,
Perfections and purity:
Immutable and all things moving*
Eternal, Omnipotent proving.
O! What infirmity it is
To slumber under so high bless?
But, Oh! How is it we are not dying?
The excellencies that passes seeing
Hearing, knowledge, or conceiving,
Till they come out above our craving.
When the Members all shall meet,
Incorp'rate in the Head complete;
And as they have preserved been
Unsearchably, as they are seen,
Till one by one they be prepared,
And in appointed time declared,
All members moved by the mind
Of him, to whom they are inclined:
As by the weak resemblance here
Of flesh and spirit may appear,
A fabric wonderfully framed,
And strangly from the fountain streamed,
Composed, commixt, conjoined, divisive,
Wov'n var'ously, visive, invisive:
Hundreds above in numerous places,
Which from their office never ceases,
So naturally by nature led*
And by the vital spirits fed:
Which by the soul her influence pure,
Unseen, is set in order sure,
And seated in the brain, does move
Each member for the man's behove:
And every instant, at her will,
All powers do their part fulfill:
And she is every where perfecting,
Preparing, dressing, and directing:
As may make for the common right,
Wherein she daily does delight.
How much more may we then believe
Above what here we can conceive
Of Him our Head, who hes received
More spirit then can be conceived:
And measures out abundantly,
To every member mightily,
All sp'ritual graces, and anoints us,
As in His wisdom He appoints us:
Into our stations as seems meet
To Him, in whom we are complete:
Anon, alone, that glorious day,
His Saints He shall so sweetly swey:
When we in regions ordered are,
Shining above the brightest Star:
Or as in constellations standing,
Minding only His commanding,
Who only minds the glorious bless
Of God, who Universal is.
O happy day of all delights!
Wherewith compared are naught but nights,
The best of bypast days alone,
Compact and quintessenc'd in one:
One glimpse of which desired day,
Shall all afflictions past, defray:
All anguish and perplexities,
Digested in festivities,
Of sp'rituall joys, for ever springing
In His face, to give us singing:
Renewing every minut store,
To raise our notes for evermore:
When all the mysteries manifold,
In Heavenly Palaces inrold;
To admiration be revealed,
And nothing can be known concealed.
Which wondering still then shall we move,
Wrapped, and rapt up in very love,
When many mighty men shall mourn,
And unto dens of darkness turn,
Who desp'ratly did grace despise,
And mercy offered could not prise:
God to offend would not refrain,
And wisdoms warning did disdain:
Are now forsaken, and in anguish
Left eternally to languish,
And before felt-wrath shall flee,
Like lightnings sclenting through the sky.
Under the doom of torments chief,
Dying ever, never relief.
Where Saints the righteous judgment reads,
That from their righteous Judge proceeds:
And all about the Throne, the more
Him in his mercy shall adore.
Then judgment just and mercy free
The D^apason sweet shall be
Of all that Harmony complete,
From members seeming infinite,
Ordered through these vast dimensions
Extending over apprehensions:
And comprehended only be
By the infinite Deity.
About the Throne of Glory then,
These millions of Elect men,
Through all that blessed, boundless bounds,
With various, and with vocal sounds,
With Angels pure, pure Seraphims,
Exalt their King, with holy Hymns.
For as the soul is full refined,
When glory thereupon has shined:
So shall the body be made meet,
For to possess the Holy Sp'rit:
By whom these curious Organs may,
Well managed, His praise display,
In soul and body, both to bring
All Glory to our Glorious King.
SONG V. Of all Saints, Rev. 7.12.
Amen,

AMEN, AMEN, for evermore,
Blessing to God whom we adore:
And to His Name, which Glorious is,
Glory ascend in Glorious bless.
And to the adored Deity.
Wisdom in all excellency:
And unto Him free Grace does give,
Thanksgiving be by all that live,
And to His all-honoured Name,
Honor duly do proclaim:
And to Him who us preserves,
Power ascribe, who power deserves*
And to the King Almighty high,
Might and eternal Majesty
Be, by all the Elect moving
Unto God, in Jesus loving.
Our God, alone, One Holy Sp'rit,
God ever blessed, Trin One complete.
For evermore our songs shall be
Ever renewed uncessantly:
And His praises to express,
Ever shall our selves address.
AMEN: O Lord, so let it be,
So be it in Eternity.

THE NATURAL MAN Debated with.
HOw come, say some, such sacred flames can boil
So sweet perfumes out of this sullen soil?
This curious question'st with carnal eyes
Bemisted, sees not in these mysteries:
How singing does from sighing flow,
And gladness, how from sadness grow:
How mourning, melting motions move,
In frozen hearts hot flames of love:
From bitterness how sweetness springs,
Refreshment what felt-ruine brings:
How from the groans of inward grief,
Clear freedom rises and relief*
In deepest darkness sure direction,
In dreadful danger safe protection.
Result, and what can be the root
That renders this admired fruit.
For Answer, this.
BY Grace we see our selves with shame
Under abominable blame;
And not the less so freely loved,
Affections feelingly are moved,
And overflow like Nilus River
In the heart of the believer.
Whence grief, and gladness, love, and he at
Reside as in the proper seat,
Whence bitter mourning, grief and woe,
For grieving such a Lover so:
Who surfetted hes been with grief,
From grief to purchase our relief.
Whom seeing vively through the vail,
Love and delight thereby prevail:
So that as by approaching near
Unto that splendour in its sphere,
Be in Combustion dazzled so,
Within these gleams we undergo,
And in this current strong contesting,
Securely in his shadow resting:
Zeal, the birth of love and hate,
Daily abates this love-debate,
Wherewith no concord can compare,
One end discussing all their care:
Being to be made pure and clean,
This fervent love to entertain:
Grace against corruption does begin
A furious fight the soul within:
So that in one poor person here,
Betwixt two parties does appear
A hot contest, with fatal blows,
Tending to others overthrows.
Whence grows this bitter-sweet debate
In this grace-griev'd divided state:
Hence flow these tides, contrary turning,
Mourning to mirth, mirth unto mourning:
The old man being pincht repines,
The new man sweetly sings and shines:
The old man dwyning in his living,
The new man rising, and reviving:
What dolor the old man endures,
Delight to the new man procures.
When grace is most o'resway'd, it swi^gs
Corruption under foot, and sings:
For on a mountain of increasement,
And at a fountain of refreshment,
Bullering up eternal love,
With sp'ritual breathings from above,
Revived by all these blessefull beams,
Shining through our cristal streams,
We in these glist'rings flight'ring be,
Until we take our flight on hie,
These be the Northern gales that blow,
And breathings from the South that flow
Upon the Spices sweet, and Flowers,
Seasoned with Celestial showers:
And in this Garden do agree
Spouses to feast deliciously,
Upon these fruits and spices sweet,
Where all their comforts are complete:
Who do discern aright to rise,
These mercies rich rightly to prize:
But the Believer only sees
That Majesty in these mysteries,
And substance through the shadows more
Of glory, then he can adore.
But that the rational man yet we may lead
Some length, let us by natural reason plead,
Seeing this natural Sun we daily see
On natural bodies work effectually:
Vapors exhaling out of earthy things,
Which rarifi'd, and clarified, brings
(Repelled by colder air) our early showers,
Enamelling the earth with fruits and flowers.
Shall not the Sun of Righteousness far more,
Natures Creator, whom we do adore,
By his almighty Influence divine,
Which on the long-benighted soul does shine,
Affect, attract, and elevating, move
Affections for the element of love:
Which purified, prepared and matur'd,
Are for the service of their Lord allured.
And further yet, by natural things to learn
Spiritual mysteries best to discern,
This supposition make, Conceive the bounds
Of this vast Ocean, that the earth surrounds,
If all the Floods therein were the extracts,
And quintessence that best ingredients makes,
And daily that some of these cristall drops
Melt from such sweet, and sun-refined sops,
And in this Ocean be ingulfed, shall
They not be then transchanged in the fall?
Our reason shows us, that this strong perfume
Should soon the dross of this sweet drop consume.
Consider then, when this immortal sp'rit,
By these divine irradiations sweet,
Here in the Region of grace matur'd,
For glory, and the love thereof allured,
Does from this cloud come out embraced to be
In that incomprehensible excellency,
At the first blink transchanged be so far,
As heat from cold, and light from darkness are,
And though the rising of our bodies be,
From death to life again, a mystery:
Yet when we do behold how nature brings
About, life to restore to lifelesse things:
The earth renewing daily flowers and fruits,
From dozen'd dead, corrupt and rotten roots:
The vapor that is exhaled from the brim,
Where sholes of herring leave their spawn to swim,
Congealed in a cloud again shall power
Of herrings on the ground a swiming shower.
Oh, woeful, wretched, wreaked naturallist,
That naturally does see, and not insist,
To see aright, believe, love and know more
Who natures Author is, and him adore:
For in His time, thou with thy very eyes,
Disclosed, shall see these divine mysteries:
Our body from the Elements arise,
And sp'rited be, to meet Him in the skies:
And at the peep of first appearance pass
To pain or pleasure, as the Indictment was
Recorded clearly, on the conscience grav^d,
Rend'ring response respective, damned, saved:
And all these revolutions orderly
Accomplished in the twinkling of an eye:
For this the period peremptor is,
Eternally determinat for this.
That Glorious Right'ous Justice shining clear
And glorious, righteous mercy may appear:
Where all the damned, convinced, in anguish ly,
The saved on their Savior do rely.
And yet, poor natural atheist, that inquires,
Where is this bless, and where these burning f^es?
Conceive of God aright, who comprehends
All things (incomprehended) and extends
His glory, in His dispensations free
Of mercy and of justice righteously:
Wherein such Majesty adored does shine,
As moves to admiration divine.
Through all these vast dimensions created,
Where all the rational creatures are stated,
Sin-poyson'd persons, wheresoever they be,
Unpurg'd are, under wrath perpetually:
Likeas the Saints are, wheresoever placed,
Within the glorious love of God embraced.
This is the hell beneath, and heaven above,
Here flames of wrath abide, there beams of love:
Justice effects producing so contrarious,
Upon the Objects so directly various.
This natural Sun by nature putrifies,
Some matter, and some matter purifies:
Some matter harden, and some soften more,
Some strike to death, and some to life restore;
In Summer shining with so fervent heat,
And on the vild defiled puddle beat:
The filth therein does such a fume disclose,
As does in darkness all the dung enclose.
Ingend'ring serpents vile, and cruel frogs
Crawling and sprewling in their poisoned drogs.
Right so the Sun of Righteousness shines pure*
While such the poison of their pest endure*
^or all the perturbation, torment, anguish
Is of themselves, wherein they liveing languish.
Thus may the natural man, by natures light,
Convinced be, but never see aright,
Till by the Holy Ghost he be renewed,
And in the heart by special grace endued:
And led unto the new and living way,
Where closing with his Savior, he may
Discern from whence these waters spring that flow,
And make the barren, fruitful ground to grow.
Come then incline, divine assistance can
From nature, thee renew a sp^ritual man,
Aright to see His condescensions
Applying by firm apprehensions,
Him shining clear in His Anointed,
Who is for thy approach appointed;
For He unmoved, all motions moves,
Which minutly His praises proves,
Extracting from most clear distractions
A cluster sweet of solid actions.
For all that is, was, or shall be,
Is His eternal, wise, decree.
Whose high designs adored as His duration,
Admits no parallel or alteration,
Whom we in Christ our Savior sweet must see,
Embrace, enjoy, or die eternally.
But come, and do not in your dreg remain,
Take up the Book and read, and read again:
A serious Survey of this journey take,
This Child of Grace through all his trials tract.
Here shall thou see an unseen strength sustain
The weakest, that has at the battle been:
And wisdom shining in the most unwise,
Might make affections in a rapt to rise:
Which in the Babe new born again does grow,
Whereby he does in Songs of Praises flow,
A Garden here with arbors for reposing,
A Jewel clear, the ground of all rejoicing;
A Fountain, whence waters of life do spring;
A Mountain, thence thou may with safety sing;
A Spirit here, perceive, our spirits inspires,
With sighs, and groans, and answers such desires:
Come then in faith, and as thou seeks, receive
Light, life, relief from darkness, grief and grave.
In brief, behold these whole assertions here,
By proof, from truth believed, made appear,
And He above believing shall convoy
Thee with Himself, Himself for to enjoy:
Himself who is thy Potent Prince, Victorious,
Light, Life, Delight, and Lover, only Glorious:
Come then, attend His call, and humbly say,
Come Lord, thy servant hears and shall obey,
A SURVEY Of the FIRST and SECOND DEATH; Closing with a SEPARATION-KISSE
Betwixt two intimate FRIENDS, The SOUL and BODY. By way of DIALOGUE betwixt
NATURE and GRACE, Under the Names of FLESH and SPIRIT.
Heb. 9.27. And as it is appointed unto men once to die, but after this the
judgment.

Ephesians. 2.1. And you has he quickened, who were dead in sins and trespasses.


1. THE body of man is of the earth, natural, earthy.

2. The soul of man is of a spiritual nature, spiritual.

3. The two joined together in the time of life, make up a person.

4. The separation of the soul from the body, is the natural death of the
person.

5. The separation of Gods favorable Presence by His Spirit from the soul, is
the spiritual death of the person.

6. All the Offspring of the first man, by his apostasy and disobedience, are
deservedly deprived of Gods favorable Presence by his spirit, and so come to
the world dead in sins and trespasses.

7. All these the natural Offspring of the first man, that be left in this
forlorn condition, living and dying in this darkness and ignorance of God, and
do never attain unto the first resurrection, do ly under the first, and be
liable unto the second death at the last day.

8. The Elect and Chosen of God be, by His free grace, in a time of love,
called, and by the effectual working of His Spirit, moved to believe His word,
and to join with Jesus Christ for Salvation.

By whom (nevertheless that they be spiritually dead in sins and trespasses)
they are by His Spirit quickened to see and serve the living God, dying unto
sin, and living unto righteousness, and thereby made partakers of the first
resurrection: Against whom the second death, at the general resurrection,
shall have no place.

9. To be spiritually-dead, the mere natural man knows not, nor (by reason of
his atheism) can know, till the second death sieze upon him: first, at the
separation of the soul and body: and secondly, again, at the resurrection and
judgment.

10. The Believer knows by woeful proof, what it is to be spiritually dead, by
the dead works wherein they have walked, before they knew themselves under
darkness.

11. The Believer knows likewise what the second death means, by being
(sometimes from provocation, and sometimes from trial) deserted, and often
kept at distance, and of such continuance, as has been both a hell of
torments, and hes bred fearful anxiety: and knows also and believes the
Scripture-descriptions of the eternal torments, never dying death and dolor
that the wicked atheist must endure, and perish under, everlastingly: As also,
by being condemned in themselves, and saved by the Lord, they know what it is
to be absolved from that dreadful condemnation.

12. As to the dissolution of the body, albeit it be a beginning of the second
death to the wicked, as it is a preparation to the second resurrection of the
Godly, whose souls are then feasting upon their Savior His Face in Paradise:
It may be more properly named a Sleep, as it is often in Scripture, especially,
seeing the soul hes had her night of partial separation in the body, suppose
but short in comparison of time, yet under many sufferings; whereas the bodies
night in its element is free of trouble: and for the length of time, it is to
rest there under darkness: It is not considerable, in respect of the splendour
of that day of eternal glory which is at the out-breaking. And seeing it is
with this temporal death of the body that the Believer hes only ado, let us
look a little more particularly upon it, and specially as it concerns the
Believer. It is appointed for all men to die, natural death being the
separation of the soul from the body, is rightly named unto mere natural man,
the King of terrors: A metaphor from a King or Tyrant, who is unresistable for
power, unsatiable and unexorable for cruelty, undefatigable for persistence,
furnished with all manner of forces, for execution, in all places, at all times,
through all the Continent, where any of the sons of men takes life: attending
them constantly, till every one of them fall under the fatal and final
stroke. And there is nothing created in this Universe, whether from within us,
or from without us, from the furthest remote of the Stars, to the least pile of
grass or pickle of dust, which were all created for our good, but has been,
or may be the occasion of this dissolution. As also, by what means amongst so
many, and at what time, so uncertain unto any, that it is a wonder that the
rational creatures, who knows themselves subject to it, can think of it
without terror: and most terrible, that the most of men are over-turned before
they think seriously of it: But here appears the greatest wonder that ever any
(of the blind-born, deservedly forsaken, and self-lost generation of apostate
man) should come to know any more hereof then any other: but this being the
prerogative of the regenerate by grace, to see themselves by nature lost, and
saved by the Lord; This death is nothing terrible nor troublesome to them, but
pleasant and comfortable, in what colors, by what knife, at what time, or in
what place they commit their souls to the Father of spirits, and surrender
their bodies to the Elements, whereof they were, and are to be preserved unto
the day that all things be restored; for they see and know that this
dissolution of the body is but the laying off, or suffering the old spotted and
defiled garments to be rent from us till they be refined: and not that we may
be uncloathed, but clothed upon with glory and immortality, until we receive
again these natural, mortal, corruptible bodies, immortal, incorruptible
receptacles, habilitate and fitted to embrace and enjoy without interruption
the glory that a glorified soul is admitted unto: So that unto the Believer,
this natural death is swallowed up of life, being no more death unto them then
the pinching of the body of the Infant in coming through these straits of
ordinary Childbirth, should be to the Child, if it were capacitate to know the
present case and place of its imprisonment, and the light and liberty it were
to come to.

But here nature, even pure nature, does propose some most sensible and
searching trials for impugning my arguments and resolutions, viz. Seeing this
World was created for me, and I created immortal without separation by death,
if I had stood in my integrity, then should I never have had any further desire
but of things present. Now, presuppone that the offer were made me, of the
allowance of all created contentments, perpetually to my desire, with the
blessing upon them, and the blessed use of them, with that peace which should
make up a continued feast: should not we then rather be content to remain in
the body, then desirous to separate from it?

1. For answer: The case is so far altered, that the difference is very vast,
we not being by creation, nor should have been by generation, in the estate of
innocence, capable of any greater bless then that wherein the first man was
created, which was to enjoy the allowed use of the creature, and to converse
with the Creator, at such times, by such means, and in what measure, as the
divine Majesty should think meet.

2. Whereas by regeneration, the Believer attains unto, and is made capable of,
a more sublime and supernatural bless, by being made a member of Christ
mystical, to see and enjoy God in Him, by grace, and to be translated unto
glory after death, which makes it desirable.

It is Objected, Suppose the offer were made of a healthful and lively body,
with the liberty and allowance of all outward contents, with the special
blessing of inward peace in the use of them, and freedom from all disturbance,
which might allay that relish in the fruition of them, until the end of time,
and the coming of the Lord to the general Judgment: Should I not then rather
make choice to remain in the body unto that day, then to separate from it, that
it may be consumed in the dust, for that time?

For answer: Let the supposition be strengthened with all the Arguments that
may warrantably be alleged, they cannot weaken the resolution of a Believer,
nor balance his disposition of an instant and sincere desire to be dissolved
(with submission to the good pleasure of Gods will, both for the time, place
and manner of his removal) that, mortality being swallowed up of life, we may
put on, and be clothed with immortality, life and glory, freed of all ground
of provoking God, or grieving Gods Spirit, and admitted unto His Presence, in
whose Face is the fullness of joy, and at whose right hand are all true,
complete and incomprehensible pleasures for evermore: the body never being
sensible of any loss, and the soul being over-joyed in the continued sense of
unconceivable advantage.

Hereby the Believer, according to the growth of his faith and affection, is
looking and longing for that day, when he may take possession in that house,
which is from heaven, and is eternal in heaven.

And these Truths are so convincingly verified unto us by God himself, by Jesus
Christ our Lord, and by the holy Spirit of God and of Christ, speaking in his
Prophets and Apostles, and justified by instances of raising up the dead to
life again: as, being past controversy, all objection is removed, except it be
by the obstinate atheist, giving thereby undeniable signs of utter and
irrecoverable rejection.

And how is it then that the Believer can be any thing moved at the approach of
that happiest of his days, unless it were unto an excess of joy, from the
sense of so joyful a separation from a dying body lying under darkness, unto
a living Head, stated in all light and delight?

Shall the pangs of death restrain our desires, or abate our resolutions, in
making through that strait entry, unto such certain and eternal felicities?

Would the Child in the mothers womb (if it were capable of sense and reason)
make choice to remain everlastingly in that dark Cell, rather then to hazard
upon what pains there may be in pressing out unto the light?

Would not the Prisoner, fettered in the Galleys, and there held under most
cruel slavery (if he should be called out of that bondage) not only unto
liberty, but also, in stead of his rags, Princely Robes presented to him: and
of bands, the enjoyments of all desirable delights that the most flourishing
Nation under the Sun could render, crowned with many days and years in the
society of Princes and all Princely pleasures: would not the change be most
joyfully embraced by any that were not more then brutish? Now then, how far
above comparison is this change, that the believing Christian is called unto,
from so many sorrows and sufferings as our sin has brought, and keeps us
under, while we are in the body, unto a Crown of glory and immortality, to be
clothed upon with the Robes of our Redeemer his Righteousness, and feasted
with the joys that flourish in the Face of our Mediator: being the fruits of
that Land, where there is no less then everlasting life, light, love, delight,
resulting in superexcellent hymns and songs of eternal praise, in exalting the
King and Savior of Saints?

Is it not from the weakness of our faith, and not keeping our spiritual
senses in action, but sluggishly suffering our affections to frieze: that we
are not still attending when we shall be called, to come out of the body, to
enjoy this beatitude?

And why should we be so anxious of the manner, time or place of laying down our
old clothes? It becomes us well to entrust all to Him, of whom we are, and for
whom we are, without whom nothing can befall us: who is goodness it self, and
of whom we had such real proof, that He makes all things work together for our
good.

And shall we distrust Him for our Conduct through death unto that Life and
Kingdom that He has purchased for us at so dear a price? Or shall we not rather
desire to endure what we can be able, for him, and to be with him who has
endured for us so much, to have us with him, from under the power, and out of
the reach of the sting of death: which is now a vanquished enemy, and not to be
feared: but become a friend, to be especially loved. And albeit the carnal part
would keep us in exercise, under the apprehension of a swift and sudden death,
which were dreadful: is not the spiritual part to be the more studious to make
our calling and election sure: and to be the more vigilant, with the wise
Virgins, for the coming of the Bridegroom. And if a lingering disease be
apprehended, it may prove a precious time for better preparation. If violent,
and extremely painful, it is the more speedily past; If inflicted by the
Persecutor of the Profession, in whatsoever manner, then it is accompanied with
the highest degree of blessedness: for the Spirit of God, and of glory, rests
upon you: and, great is their reward in heaven who suffer for righteousness.
And if by (that which the natural man calls) accident: seeing all things, in
his eyes, fall out alike to the good and to the evil: Yet the Believer knows,
that nothing falls out but by a well-ordered providence; not so much as a hair
of their head, to their hurt, much less shall they be forsaken, when they have
most ado with present and immediate supply.

And whereas some of Gods Children, who have been of a long continuance in the
Profession, singular in their conversation, and zealous in duties, have been at
a very low ebb, for matter of comfort, in the time of their departure. And
others also kept under much wrestling and conviction, when as some, of less
note and esteem, have had all their sails filled with the sense of that
soul-saving sweetness that meets them from the Mediator, at the time of their
removal.

As also, some very weak men have been wonderfully born out, under most
fearful torments inflicted upon them by the Persecuter: and others of far
greater expectation have fainted and fallen off, when the peril appeared: and
yet have been reclaimed by repentance, and found mercy.

Some also we see, that have lived very civilly all their days, have died
under much darkness, and without any signs of a gracious wakening: while as
others, that have been most abominable in their lives, have made a glorious end.

And now, in contemplation of all these various dispensations, may we not, and
must we not see, and adore the glory of the Lord, both in Sovereignty and
Wisdom? And is not every Believer, unto their own felt and sensible experience,
in every passage of their several exercises, exceedingly benefited, unto their
increase of their inward and spiritual consolation? And the beholders, that
are as yet making on to the way, helped unto encouragement and confirmation.
Hereby also may all flesh be taught to finish their salvation in fear: to
beware of swelling under sense, and of sinking under absence: of prescribing
Providence, or ascribing any thing to our selves: but subscribing, and
submitting absolutely, in all things, to the holy and good pleasure of His
will, with whom we have to do: denying our selves, relying and depending upon
Him, like little children: making our entry into the kingdom of heaven by what
way He will have us to go, who is the Author of our vocation, preservation,
perseverance and perfecting: resting in quietness and confidence, till we see
the great salvation of God.

THE CLOSE, IN A SEPARATION-KISSE Betwixt two most intimate FRIENDS, The SOUL
and BODY. By way of DIALOGUE betwixt NATURE and GRACE, Under the Names of FLESH
and SPIRIT.
Spirit. DEar Savior, now, my soul receive,
Flesh, blood and bones, slide to your grave,
And separate sleep from grief and pain,
Till gloriously we meet again.

Flesh. Shall now these terms, so often repeated,
Be instantly, for all, completed?
And must I now in dreadful night,
Deprived be of Life and Light?
Oh, had it not far better been,
This life that I had never seen?
Sweet Ghost, is there no remedy
But thou must go, and I must die?
For of a meeting, who can think,
When sinful I in slime must sink?

Spirit. It Is true, no man by nature sees,
Nor can perceive these mysteries,
That by believing we conceive,
And do the earn'st thereof receive,
When our affections have been feasted
Upon the fruits that we have tasted,
We part a space our grace to try,
You Are not annihilat more then I:
And thou redeemed art from death,
As I, and from eternal wrath.

Flesh. I do confess, and call to mind,
At former warnings of this kind,
By force of these truths truly tende'rd,
Sometimes my soul have freely rendered:
But now it seems that too too slightly
I have past by, not pondered rightly,
How I to thee, or thou to me
Shall come, or when, I cannot see.
Were we not first immortal made,
And but by accident do fade?
Can thou not now who grace hes found,
Find also how we two be bound?
So fast incorporat may remain
Until our Savior come again*

Spirit. Dear Flesh, resist these carnal notions,
So marring and untimely motions:
Thou know it was our vile revolt,
That Paradise did on us bolt:
But now no loss incurres thereby,
Our Head exalted lifts us hie,
'Bove by creation what we were,
Then earth's below the highest star.
When I was sent thee to assume,
Could thou then know that I should come?
That seed whereof thou was congealed,
Thy Parents from their food did yield,
Digested, which from fish, flesh, grain,
And fruits they had received again:
These gross ingredients whence were they,
But from worms, water, grass and clay?
Do not therefore, dear mate, repine,
But to thine element incline:
Till the refreshing time return,
And turn thee up out of thine urne.
When all the Elements shall sweat,
Purging their dross with fervent heat,
And tendering out our substance true:
Like drops refined of Cristal-dew,
While every soul shall be attending
Their bodies fitted for ascending.
In that dread revolution glorious,
Dreadlesse thou shall ascend victorious,
When all this world, these wordly frame^
Shall be burnt up in fiery flames:
When all the Heavens shall be rolled,
And at an instant roundly scroll'd:
Sun, Moon, Stars, Signs and Planets seen
No more, then if they had not been:
The glory of the Lord obscuring
All sights and lights were most alluring:
He, He alone, then only being
The sweetest Object of our seeing:
Nor shall there in this swirle be seen
Confusions, but conclusions clean
Appear from these purposed decrees,
Established from eternities:
Performed peremptorly in time,
Now at the tinkling of this Chyme.
Like as our Horologe, in part,
Keeping the method of the airt,
Unto the stinted time does carry,
Not wearying nor seen to vary:
But at the period of the hours,
When she is most to show her powers,
What strange combustion does it make,
As if in shivers it should shake:
And when that revolution's spent,
The second to essay is bent:
But when the time prefixed is run,
Must be renewed before begun:
Right so our hourly changes are,
Which seem to us irregular,
They be by divine art composed,
And wisely done, as well proposed:
So that this last of time shall crown
All that is past, with high renown*
Believe, believe, this shall thou see,
With these thine eyes most certainly:
Were there not thousands in thy case,
When I was sent thee to embrace
Into the womb: and can God miss,
Now in accomplishing thy bless,
Me to direct again aright,
To fetch thee up unto his sight?
And I, so long who was conversant
With thee, and with thy case acquaint,
Shall I not know thee, love thee, move thee,
And thou delighted be to prove me:
So now confirmed in the faith to meet,
This be a kiss of separation sweet.

FLESH. Dear soul, I dow not let thee go,
Nor dare I, sweet soul, say thee no:
Shall I refuse thee, thee my life?
Shall I consent? O fearful strife!
I must agree my life to give,
Or grieve him, dying, by whom I live.
I am convinced I ought to yield,
Creation only wields the shield:
But death by sin does beat it down:
Now new Creation is my crown:
It moves me likewise, dearest Lover,
Who art alone my nearest Mover,
To see thee thus so long detained
With me, where we be daily stained.
The Galley-slave in fetters tied,
With sad affliction daily tried,
Can have no more desire to be
Delivered hence, then thou of me:
And reason more, for he is but fred
Of grief, but thou with glory clad.
I from this life have thee deferred
Too long, now let me be interred:
Suppose with loss of life I be
Divorced from thy society.
So as thou may more bless enjoy,
Then can compare with my annoy:
Sprent out, spring up at thy desirings,
Possess the prise of thy aspyrings:
For here I do consent, and say,
Angels conduct thee in the way:
And I am moved to believe,
That thou will come me to relieve,
In that day of refreshing clear,
Which we confide shall soon appear.

Spirit. Enough, enough, it is all I crave,
Sincere submission to have:
For that I entered this debate,
Lest out account should come too late.
Now shall I further let thee see,
Thou shall me fail, or I fail thee:
And would thou have me with thee hence,
When thou denuded art of sense:
Thee to enjoy was my delight,
Albeit it was my drowsy night,
As thou a time must be absented*
Yet are we so by faith indented*
And sure ingrafted in our Head,
Living we be, when seeming dead:
Let us, while we do live, believe,
And so we shall, by dying, live.
Hence carnal thoughts, hence natures night,
Welcome now sweet celestial light,
Light, light, light, light, light, light so bright,
What we have seen sets out of sight,
And makes us to conceive of seeing,
Above the bounds of this our being.
Hence incredulity, vile ghuest,
That faithless fears does still suggest;
O happy choice, by closely cleaving
Unto our Life, by firm believing,
Thy glory, by degrees begun,
Now fred of suffering, and of sin:
And I shall still attending be,
Again to be possessed of thee.
The fathers of the former ages,
The greatest, and the gravest sages,
The clearest Saints that e're were seen,
Our meeting there shall not preveen:
Where We our Husband, Head, and King
Enjoying, shall his praises sing,
In glory unconceivable, where we
Shall God, for evermore, adoring be.

The FIRST and SECOND RESURRECTION, AND THE GENERAL JUDGMENT; Closing with a
SONG of DEGREES, Ascending from what we were, to what we are: and from thence,
to what we shall be after time: AS AN INTRODUCTION TO That New SONG of endless
PRAISE, ot be taught in and entered unto, when there shall be no more time.
Matthew. 25.31. to the end. When the Son of Man shall come in His glory, etc.

1 Cor. 15.12. to the end. Now if Christ be preached, etc.


THe Resurrection of the body, and the General Judgment, is universally
acknowledged where Christianity is known, except amongst the brutishly
ignorant, or the professed Atheist. But if it were so known and believed, as it
is condescended unto, it would put Believers to a more serious study to try
their condition, then they be at as yet; for, who could endure to know
believingly, that, living and dying in their natural estate, (without the
interposition of a Mediator, and Savior for their restoration) they being
raised up to join with their soul again, should then be cast down in utter
darkness finally, and rejected of God totally, deprived of all further
expectation of grace: the gnawing worm of conscience wakened, the wrath of a
sin-revenging God upon the guilty person, where, in these everlasting burnings,
amongst innumerable legions of devils, and numberless multitudes of condemned
men, they be to endure eternal torment: Can it be imagined (say I) that any
person, so believing, and that there were a possibility of recovery, could be
in rest, until they had (unto their utmost endeavor) used all imaginable
means: not thinking any pains too great, if it were in compassing the Continent
and the coasts of the sea, for timous relief.

If we, seeing one of our neighbors in the extremity of a Gout, a Gravel-stone
or Gangren: And that we were certainly persuaded, that within such a short
space we should be in the very like condition, unless we did apply our selves
to such a Person, who could assuredly prevent this so fearful, terrible and
horrible torment: would there be any delay made, or difficulty impede us in our
journey, for finding out the Physician? Much more, if he were at hand, making
offer of our relief, and the removal of all our fears, could we make the
refusal?

Again, Is it not evident, that the most part of men do entangle themselves in
most dangerous travels and troubles, for gaining of a little uncertain
treasure, pleasure or preferment, whereunto few attain? And where attained, is
past before it be well possessed.

Is it possible then, that if the Resurrection of the body, and the General
Judgment were believed, and the blessed condition of those that have accepted
of the offer of grace in time: and the utter ruin and eternal perdition of
all such as have contemned this Great-salvation, to sieze upon them, in that
day when they shall call to the mountains to fall upon them, and cover them
from that fierce wrath, which undoubtedly they must underly for evermore? No
certainly, it is neither probable nor possible, but, if these Truths were
believed, there would be little rest amongst the Believers* until they
attained to that assurance of relief that might give them solid rest: And yet
every man is so convinced, that none (that is worthy to have the name of a man)
dar be so shamlesse as to deny such unquestionable truths: seeing, that
thereby, they should be found to deny the Scriptures of God, dyted by His own
Spirit, and the power of God, seen in the creation, and conservation of all
things, the Son of God and the Savior of the World, who in our own flesh has
died and risen again; who has testified all these truths, and recorded them in
His Testament to us, according as He had Himself experimentally tried the
unutterable joys of the one, and the unsuperable dolors of the other to have
been wrestled with, sustained and fred of; but by Himself alone, who was God to
sustain, as He was man to suffer.

And yet for all this conviction and formal profession, what is the greatest
part of all ranks doing, but deceiving themselves, satisfied with a
brain-light, without any heart-change; a lip-religion, without any
life-reformation? So reasonlesse is the rational creature become, as to deny
Him reasonable service, who is the Author of their reason in believing Him, and
acquainting themselves with Him for their good. But to proceed: According to
the difference betwixt the Believer and the unbeliever in life and death, so is
it after death when the Righteous Judge of all men shall give the final
sentence: Then shall the carnal man, who refused that great Salvation, which
is now obtained by believing in the only Son of God, for the remission of sin,
being laid down in the grave, bathed in the abominations of His apostasy, and
impenitencie, be raised up again at the Latter-day, soul and body joining to
receive the irrecoverable sentence of eternal condemnation, and rejection from
the gracious presence of God, unto the place appointed for them: And for the
further manifestation hereof, the Lord has been pleased to suffer some, being
spiritually dead, and refusing to come to the Physician of souls for life: and
being thereby self-condemned, to ly under desperation and torment of
conscience, even in this life: So that both word and example may join to the
conviction of such as will not be converted.

Whereas the true Believer, who in their life had been dying unto sin, and
attained unto the first Resurrection in living unto righteousness, laid down
the body under hope, shall at the second Resurrection, both soul and body being
joined again in that spiritual and incorruptible constitution, agreeable unto
immortality, lift up the head with joy in coming before the Judge* knowing that
all judgment is committed to the Son of God, who is their Kins-man, Mediator
and Redeemer, who knows well for whose transgressions He hes made Himself an
offering, for satisfying the justice of God, that He may see His seed, the
travel of His Soul, and be satisfied: That the pleasure of the Lord, in
justifying many, does prosper in His Hand, and in congregating, and uniting to
Himself, who is the glorious Head, and making up all the Members in one Body,
to become the fullness of Him who fills all in all, that the Marriage-day may
be solemnized, and the marriage fully accomplished before God and all the
Hierarchy of Angels, Archangels, Throns, Dominions, Powers, Seraphims and
Cherubins, with Hosannas and Hallelujahs, shouting for joy and sympathising in
all cordial harmony, the praises of their King, the Author and Finisher of
their Salvation, with songs suitable and acceptable to that all-glorious
Auditory, and the glorified associats and assistants in that unlimited
circumference, whereof the All-blessed and infinite Essence of God is the
incomprehensible Center, and that from minutly renewed and revealed matter,
without intermission for evermore.

And for the further establishment of which truth, some of Gods Children, even
in this life, have attained the fore-tastes of the first Fruits of these
eternal Consolations, that they are to feast upon after this life
everlastingly.

And seeing it is so, and known to be so by the Believer, where should the
furthest extent of his deepest apprehensions and greatest fervencie of his
affections be fixed, but upon Him alone, by whom he shall enjoy all this
bless, salvation and consolation.

And to this end, that as they know, they may commend, and as they prove, they
may love and praise Him, according as they can attain to see and conceive Him,
by the mirror wherein He shines, making Himself and His excellencies the matter
of our songs, in the house of our pilgrimage, until we come up to see Him as
He is, and enjoy Him in the fullness of that bless, by the earnest whereof we
are sustained under Hope.

And for this end, let our study be to take Him up more particularly.

1. First, what He is in Himself. 2. And secondly, what He is to us. 1. He is
in Himself, 1. The mighty God, the everlasting Father, wonderful Counselor,
the Prince of Peace, Isaiah 9.6. 2. He is the second Person of the all-adored
Trinity. 3. His delight hes been from all eternity to be conversant with the
sons of men,


And for that end, and that the fullness of the Godhead might dwell in him
bodily, hes (by the operation of the Holy Ghost) assumed unto Himself the
nature of man, from the seed of the woman, in the womb of the Virgin, whereby
He becomes the kins-man, flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone, subject to
all our infirmities (sin except) that He might be a merciful and a
compassionate high Priest, and a propitiatory sacrifice of a sweet smelling
savor unto God, in giving full satisfaction unto justice for the sins of the
Elect, in cancelling the handwriting that spoke against them, and nailing it
unto the tree of the cross, when after the agony of His Soul, He gave His Body
to be crucified, and His Blood to be shed for the Redemption of His beloved
inheritance, whom He hes thereby justified, and will sanctify and espouse to
Himself: delighted to see the increase of His grace in the Believer, as the
fruit and offspring of the travel of His Soul, and to whom He hes made Himself
known to be the only Messiah.

1. First, As Christ anointed Priest, Altar and Sacrifice, to satisfy, and
intercede for, and reconceal us to God: Prophet, to instruct us in a^l truth,
and reveal the Fathers will to us: and King, to renew and defend His ransomed
flock. 2. Jesus, a Savior, able to save to the utmost, and cleanse them from
all their sins. 3. The Word incarnat, from whom all our spiritual life comes.
4. The Fountain opened, from whence flows all our consolation. 5. The true
Vine, and prime branch, whence influence ascends to all the members. 6. The
morning Star, and Sun of righteousness, by whom we are illuminate and revived.
7. The Rock invincible, and Cornerstone, whereon our Salvation is built. 8.
The Mediator, to procure acceptance to our persons, and grants to our
petitions. 9. The Captain, who is only able to conduct us through the
wilderness with safety. 10. The bountiful Provisor for us, in the midst of
all our malicious enemies. 11. The faithful Witness, who for all our failings
and faithlesnesse, will not deny Himself, who changes not. 12. This is our
Emanuel, our strong and mighty God, who being with us, what is it to us who be
against us; He hes trod the wine press of Gods wrath alone, and none with Him.
He hes bruised the head of the old serpent, that was lifted up against us.

He hes given the deadly stroke to all our enemies, led them captive, and cast
them under chains of darkness, unto the condemnation of the great day: and
were there ever man or Angel, could have imagined of such things to have been
done for them?

And is it possible for us, out of the deepest of our conceivings, to think
seriously of these wonders that the Lord hes eternally designed for us, and in
time done for us, and not be ravished with the admiration of them, and
over-joyed in belief of them?

And yet, what less could He have done for us? seeing it was His holy and
eternal determination to espouse us to Himself; and for that end, to sprinkle
us with His blood, that we may be embraced, and put beauty upon us that we may
be loved by Him who is all love, and admitted to His Bedchamber, and Breasts
of consolation, where feasting upon that all-fulnesse and unconceivable
sweetness that is in Him, we may say and sing.

As we have heard, so have we seen
In the City of our God and of our King.
A SONG OF DEGREES, Ascending from what we were in Nature, to what we are in
Grace, and thence to what we shall be by believing.
NOw Savior dear, my soul receive,
Flesh, blood and bones slides to the grave
Grace has procured, by argument
Of Nature, now, a full consent,
That the body shall remain
Asleep till I return again;
And that I shall approach and prove,
Sweet Savior, now, thy saving Love,
Amongst these mansions shining bright,
Where souls are feasting on thy sight*
And at what instant thou do call,
The body then assume I shall;
That thence restored for evermore,
We in thy face may God adore:
That seeing there as we are seen,
Where never cloud does interveen,
Nor subtle serpent shall appear,
With siren songs to tempt the ear,
Nor interrupt our Songs of love,
So set our present thoughts above;
As is the Heaven of heavens so far
From thoughts infirm, that finite are:
But yet because the Glory there
Transcends believing, let us spare,
And set our Songs in order right,
According to our present Light
Of faith, which fraught with wonders clear,
By pond'ring makes grac'd-men admire.
His Love and beauty still increasing,
While we His praises be expressing:
Let us make His Glorious Name
Our deepest thoughts, our chiefest theme:
So as we may with singing move,
In joyful Songs of Praise and Love.
His Name, His Name most highest high,
Essential God in Majesty;
Who with the Father and the Sp'rit,
As Counselor, did take delight
In this most Glorious Universe,
And here with men for to converse,
By wisdom viewing all the wonders
That now appear, surpassing numbers;
In these magnificent degrees,
And statutes of eternities:
All things by Omnipotency,
From nothing, opening instantly.
Omniscience, all things observing,
His providence all things preserving,
In all their comings, goings, courses,
Places, cases, and recourses,
According to their inclination,
Set by supreme preordination,
Of that eternal counsel standing,
And unsearchably commanding:
Seen and unseen varieties,
Diversities, rarieties,
From that Infinity proceeding,
Transcending this dimm twilight reading:
Even in these clear excellencies,
That obvious be unto our eyes;
Far less find out Him infinite,
In His perfections full complete:
Incomprehensible and pure,
Uncheangable, that does endure:
But let our faithful thoughts be fixed
Upon that new creation next,
Wherein we deeply be concerned
To dive, and be divinely learned:
Not by the line of humane learning,
But by the spirit of discerning;
To know how that most fatal fall
The race of Adam damned all,
Deserv'dly left (and so forlorn)
In bands of death and darkness born:
Till in that Counsel now admired,
That wisdom wonderful umpired,
Mercy and justice entering band,
In upright righteousness to stand,
To ransom from that rotten stock,
And so redeem a saved flock;
By sep'rating a second Root,
That should produce a precious fruit.
And by a sappie substance firm,
Regenerat, renew, confirm:
Whereby the power of His Sp'rit,
The marvel of all marvels meet,
When Members mystical implanted
Be in the divine nature fainted;
As being in the Head divine,
Where God does in His fullness shine:
For by this mystery adored,
Christ mystical's from death restored.
Here Soveraignity does shine,
And Love anterior to time,
Unto the Elect does appear
Illustrious, and shining clear,
Omniscience, observing all.
And every one about this ball,
In every one, and all their cases,
That by His pleasure He embraces:
Omnipotency, such preserving,
As be convinced of no deserving:
His providence likewise prove
The firmness of His faithful Love;
The travel of His Soul reviving,
In that all-wonderfull contriving,
And fully satisfied therein:
Because the fruit should purge our sin,
Whereby we ly in bands of wrath,
Until we do apply His death:
Opening our eyes to see, with grief,
Our selves, and Him a sure relief:
Firmly fixing in our thought
The wondrous ways, whereby he brought*
From nothing us to nature, then,
From reasonlesse to rational men:
From reason rendered reasonlesse,
Not standing in our steadfastnesse;
But prostitute to sinful lust,
Were under death and darkness thrust:
Again, this true, eternal Love,
Moved by His Sp'rit, again to move
Upon that then confused mass,
More marred then the first Chaos was.
When this good Sp'rit to order wrought
That glorious work from nothing brought:
Whereby we may our weakness see,
The more observant hence to be:
Impressions pressing on the heart,
From which he never will depart,
Until His Image be repaired,
And we for glory be prepared,
But guides us all the way we go:
And when we wander warns us so,
That through a world we are led
Of snares, that be before us spread:
Where swarms of devils are devising
Daily, our darkened souls surprising;
And what a fray of lusts unclean,
Are from the spawn of satan seen;
Kindled, and cannot quenched be,
Until corruption crushed be.
O wonder now! and wondering sing*
The praises of this wondrous King:
God His own Son, Gods sole delight,
The life of man, the worlds light;
Man to redeem man's nature taking,
That he might die for man's up-making:
Obscured, be put to grief and brusing,
And all with chiefest pleasure choosing,
In time prefixed, His Seed to see,
EMANUEL marvelous will be:
And now, as then, divinely seeing,
Embraces in this glorious being:
Every minut under time,
Souls redeemed from every clime,
Where this glorious Gospel's sounding,
Alairts and parts this globe surrounding;
Swarming up in several Legions,
Received in celestial regions:
And ordered in prepared places,
According to their gifted graces.
This is our glorious King of Hosts,
Sing to His praise, you blessed ghosts:
For at His feet you^ foes do fall,
While He conveens, combines you all:
Because your high and glorious Head,
His fullness you and Members made:
His pains your gains, His glory now
Made Him delight to be with you.
Angels in these wonders using,
Minds apted rapted be in musing:
And ministering their service still,
Adoring do His glorious will;
And Souls redeemed their songs begin,
This glory as they enter in:
And we in contemplation now,
Delight to sympathize with you:
In your triumphant state adoring
Your King, and in His glory soaring:
Swiming in Oceans of delights,
And visions of transcendent sights.
These glorious objects of your seeing,
The subject of your singing being,
When His comfortable reflectings
Shines upon your cross neglectings,
And your putting Him to grief
Meets with this Royal Grace-relief:
Seeing now as you are seen,
And knowing that you might have been
Amongst the damned, by your deserving,
Under utter darkness starving:
Where millions every minut rumble,
And in endless torments tumble:
While you upon His face do feed,
And the righteous reasons read
Of all His judgments, just and high,
That holy and unchanged be.
When all the Generations
Of men, since the creations,
And Angels, come, both good and bad,
To hear their sentence sweet and sad:
When at the twinkling of an eye,
The wicked shall rejected be,
And will endure eternal pain,
Rather then see that face again,
In righteous judgment justly burning,
For their grievous guilty spurning:
When the Faithful fathered aright,
Remain rejoicing in His sight:
Who be of His rich grace the seed,
And now incorporate in the head:
Wherein of God all fullness grows,
And on the Members overflowes;
Here men and Angels clearly see
The Counsels of eternity,
Wherein the Son of God rejoiced
Eternally to see proposed
This state of Sonship to the Saints,
With whom espoused now He haunts
In heavens of bless so far above,
As is the heavens we see to move
This earth above, and pass accounts,
As infinite finite surmounts,
From every several soul, whose cases,
Differs further then their faces:
But when in these infinities
We enter, and eternities,
And in the pleasures thereof placed,
And glory there by grace embraced;
According to the great design
Of God, our Lord does then resign
Power, Kingdom and authority
To God alone, who sets him free
Of all his foes, who be brought down,
When he receives the Royal C^own
Of triumph, now Christ mystical,
Fully complete who fills all:
Now in Hi^ Bride redeemed rejoicing,
And she with joy on Him reposing,
In these vast dimensions bright,
Where He alone is all her light.
Life, diet and delight alone,
The subjects of their Songs each one:
Nor could created-heavens contain
These glorious Songs, there heard and seen,
Sounding out from every airt,
And every soul a several part:
And in such order sweet composed,
As all the heavens shall be rejoiced
In the uncessant consolation
Of this redeemed corporation,
When the King of Kings, the Head,
A King hes every Member made,
And Priest, to offer praises due,
And constantly their Songs renew.
But as we said, so let us cease,
Toward these mysteries to prease:
Eye hes not seen, ear cannot hear,
Nor heart conceive, till we appear,
What for the Chosen was prepared,
And then it duly be declared:
Only by believing this,
Shall be above believing bless:
And blessedness, which might allay
All our wrestlings in the way,
And under hope the soul sustain,
Until we may the fruit obtain;
When we shall join, and be victorious,
In that triumphant state so glorious;
And springing through the Skies, shall sing
All joyful praises to our King.
FINIS.

