GOOD THOUGHTS IN BAD TIMES, Consisting of Personal Meditations. Scripture
Observations. Historical Applications. Mixed Contemplations.
By THOMAS FULLER.

PSALM. 4.4. Commune with your hearts in your Chamber, and be still.

EXETER, Printed for Thomas Hunt, 1645.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LADY DALKEITH, LADY GOVERNESSE TO HER HIGHNESS
THE PRINCESS HENRIETTA.
Madam,
IT is unsafe, in these dangerous days, for any to go abroad, without a
Convoy, or at the least a Pass: My Book has both, in being dedicated to your
Honor. The Apostle 1 Cor. 9.7.
says, Who planteth a Vineyard and eats not of the Fruit thereof? I am one
of your Honors planting, and could heartily wish, that the fruit I bring
forth, were worthy to be tasted by your juditious Palate. However, accept these
grapes, if not for their Goodness, for their Novelty: Though not sweetest
rellisht, they are soonest ripe, being the First Fruits of Exeter Press,
presented unto you. And if ever my Ingratitude should forget my Obligations to
your Honor, these Black Lines will turn Red, and blush his unworthiness that
wrote them. In this Pamphlet your Ladyshippe shall Praise, whatsoever you are
pleased but to Pardon. But I am Tedious, for your Honor can spare no more
minutes from looking on a better Book, Her Infant Highness, committed to your
Charge. Was ever more hope of worth in a less Volume? But O! how excellently
will the same, in due time, be set forth, seeing the Paper is so pure, and your
Ladyship the Overseer to Correct the Press. The Continuance and increase of
whose happiness here, and hereafter is desired in his daily Devotions, who
rests

Your Honors in all Christian Service. THO. FVLLER.

PERSONAL Meditations.
I
LORD,
HOw near was I to danger, yet escaped? I was upon the Brink of the Brink of
it, yet fell not in; they are well kept who are kept by thee. Excellent Archer!
Thou did hit thy Mark in missing it, as meaning to fright, not hurt me. Let
me not now be such a Fool, as to pay my thanks to blind Fortune for a favor,
which the eye of Providence has bestowed upon me. Rather let the Narrowness
of my Escape make my Thankfulness to thy goodness the larger, lest my
Ingratitude justly cause, that whereas this Arrow, but hit my Hat, the next
pierce my Head.

II.
Lord.
WHen thou shall visit me with a sharp disease, I fear I shall be impatient.
For I am Choleric by my Nature, and tender by my Temper, and have not been
acquainted with Sickness all my life time. I cannot expect any kind usage from
that which has been a stranger unto me. I fear I shall rave, and rage. O
whither will my mind sail, when distemper shall steer it? Whither will my
Fancy run, when diseases shall ride it? My tongue, which of it self is a James
3 6.
fire, sure will be a WILD FIRE, when the Fournace of my Mouth is made seven
times hoter, with a burning Fever. But Lord, though I should talk idely to my
own shame, let me not talk wickedly to thy dishonor. Teach me the Art of
Patience, whilst I am well, and give me the use of it when I am sick. In that
day either lighten my Burden, or strengthen my Back. Make me, who so often in
my health, have discovered my weakness, presuming on my own strength, to be
strong in my sickness when I soly rely on thy Assistance.

III.
Lord.
THis morning my unseasonable visiting of a friend, disturbed him in the
midst of his Devotions: Unhappy to hinder another man's Goodness. If I my
self build not, shall I snatch the Axe, and Hammer from him that does? Yet I
could willingly have wished, That rather then he should then have cut off the
Cable of his Prayers, I had twisted my Cord to it, and had joined with him in
his. Devotions. How ever, to make him the best amends I may, I now request of
thee, for him, whatsoever he would have requested for himself. Thus he shall be
no loser, if thou be pleased to hear my Prayer for him, and to hearken to our
Saviors Intercession for us both.

IIII.
Lord.
SInce these woeful Wars began, one, formerly mine Intimate Acquaintance, is
now turned a Stranger, yea, an Enemy. Teach me how to behave my self toward
him. Must the new Foe, quite justle out the old Friend? May I not with him,
Continue some Commerce of Kindness? Though the Amity be broken on his side,
may not I Preserve my Counter part entire? Yet how can I be Kind to him,
without being Cruel to my self, and thy cause. O guide my shaking hand, to
draw so small a line, strait, Or rather because I know not how to carry my self
toward him in this Controversy, even be pleased to take away the Subject of
the Question, and speedily to reconcile these unnatural differences.

V.
Lord.
MY voice by Nature is harsh, and untunable, and it is vain to lavish any Art
to better it. Can my singing of Psalms be pleasing to thy Ears, which is
unpleasant to my own? yet though I cannot Chaunt with the Nightingale, or Chirp
with the Black Bird, I had rather Chatter with the Isaiah 38.14.
Swallow, yea, rather Croke with the Raven, then be altogether silent. Had
thou given me a better voice, I would have praised thee with a better voice.
Now what my Music wants in sweetness, let it have in sense, singing praises
with Psalm. 47.
understanding. Yea Lord, Create in me a New Heart, (therein to make Ephesians.
5.19.
Mellody) and I will be contented with my Old voice, until, in thy due Time,
being admitted into the Quire of Heaven, I have another, more Harmonious,
bestowed upon me.

VI.
Lord.
WIthin a little Time I have heard the same Precept in sundry Places, and by
several Preachers pressed upon me. The Doctrine seems to haunt my Soul,
wither soever I turn it meets me. Sure this is from thy Providence, and should
be for my Profit. Is it because I am an ill Proficient in this point, that I
must not turn over a new leaf, but am still kept to my old Lesson? Ioh. 21.13
Peter was grieved, because our Savior said unto him the third time, Love
thou me? But I will not be offended at thy often inculcating the same Precept.
But rather conclude, That I am much concerned therein, and that it is thy
Pleasure, that the Nail should be soundly fastened in me, which thou have
knocked in with so many Hammers.

VII.
Lord.
BEfore I commit a sin, it seems to me so shallow, that I may wade through it
dry-shod, from any Guiltiness: But when I have committed it, it often seems so
deep, that I cannot escape without drowning. Thus I am always in the
Extremities: Either my sins are so small that they need not my Repentance, or
so great that they cannot obtain thy Pardon. Lend me, O Lord, a Reed out of thy
Sanctuary, truly to measure the demension of my offenses. But O! as thou
revealest to me, more of my Misery, reveal also more of thy Mercy: Lest, if my
wounds, in my Apprehension, gape wider then thy Tents, my Soul run out at
them. If my Badnesse seem bigger then thy Goodness, but one hair's breadth,
but one Moment, that is Room and Time enough for me to run to eternal despair.

VIII.
Lord.
I Do discover a Fallacy, whereby I have long deceived my self. Which is this:
I have desired to begin my Amendment, from my Birth day, or from the first day
of the Year, or from some Eminent Festival, that so my Repentance might bear
some Remarkable date. But when those days were come, I have adjourned my
Amendment to some other Time. Thus whilst I could not agree with my self when
to Start, I have almost lost the Running of the Race. I am resolved thus to
befool my self no longer. I see no day to To day, the instant Time is always
the fittest time. In Dan. 2.33.
Nabuchadnezars Image, the lower the Members, the Courser the Metal, the
further off the Time, the more unfit. To day is the Golden Opportunity, to
Morrow will be the Silver Season, next day, but the Brazen one, and so long,
till at last I shall come to the Toes of Clay, and be turned to dust. Grant
therefore that Psalm. 95.7.
to day I may hear thy voice. And if this day be obscure in the Kallender, and
remarkable in it self for nothing else, give me to make it memorable in my
soul, thereupon, by thy Assistance, beginning the Reformation of my life.

IX.
Lord.
I Saw one, whom I knew to be notoriously Bad, in great Extremity. It was hard
to say whether his former Wickedness or Present Want were the Greater; If I
could have made the distinction, I could willingly have fed his Person, and
sterved his Profanesse. This being impossible, I adventured to relieve him. For
I know, that amongst many Objects, all of them being in extreme Miseries,
Charity, though shooting at Random, cannot miss a right Mark. Since, Lord, the
Party, being recovered, is become worse then ever before. (Thus they are always
impaired with affliction, who thereby are not improved.) Lord, count me not
accessory to his Badnesse, because I relieved him. Let me not suffer harm in my
self, for my desire to do good to him. Yea, Lord be pleased to clear my Credit
amongst men, that they may understand my hands according to the Simplicity of
my heart. I gave to him only in hope, to keep the Stock a live, that so
afterward it might be better grafted. Now, finding my self deceived, my alms
shall return into my own bosom.

X.
Lord.
THy Servants are now praying in the Church, and I am here staying at home,
detayned by necessary Occasions, Such as are not of my seeking but of thy
sending, my Care could not prevent them, my Power could not remove them.
Wherefore, though I cannot go to Church, there to sit down at Table with the
rest of thy Guests, be pleased, Lord, to send me a dish of their Meat, hither,
and feed my soul with holy thoughts. Number. 11.26.
Eldad and Medad, though staying still in the Camp, (no doubt on just cause)
yet prophesied as well as the other Elders. Though they went not out to the
Spirit, the Spirit came home to them. Thus never any dutiful Child lost his
Legacy for being absent at the making of his Fathers will, if at the same time
he were employed about his Fathers business. I fear too many at Church, have
their Bodies there, and minds at home. Behold in exchange my Body here, and
heart there. Though I cannot pray with them I pray for them. Yea, this comforts
me, I am with thy Congregation, because I would be with it.

XI.
Lord,
I Trust thou have pardoned the bad Examples I have set before others, be
pleased also to pardon me the sins which they have Committed, by my bad
Examples. (It is the best manners in thy Court to heap Requests upon Requests.)
If thou have forgiven my Sins, the Children of my corrupt Nature, forgive me
my Grandchildren also. Let not the Transcripts remain, since thou have blotted
out the Original. And for the Time to come, bless me with Barrenness in bad
Actions, and my bad actions with Barrenness in procreation, that they may
never beget others, according to their likeness.

XII.
Lord,
WHat faults I correct in my Son, I commit my self: I beat him for dabling in
the dirt, whilst my own Soul does wallow in Sin: I beat him for crying to
cut his own Meat, yet am not my self contented with that state thy Providence
has carved unto me: I beat him for crying when he is to go to sl^ep, and yet I
fear I my self shall cry, when thou call me to sleep with my Fathers. Alas,
I am more Childish then my Child, and what I inflict on him, I justly deserve
to receive from thee: Only here is the difference: I pray and desire that my
Correction on my Child, may do him good, It is in thy power, Lord, to effect,
that thy Correction on me, shall do me good.

XIII.
Lord,
I Perceive my soul deeply guilty of Envy. By my good will, I would have none
Prophecy, but mine own Number. 11.28.
Moses. I had rather thy work were undon, then don better by another, then by
my self. Had rather thy Enemies were all alive, then that I should kill but my
thousand, and others their ten thousands of them. My Corruption repines at
other men's better Parts, as if what my Soul wants of them in Substance she
would supply in swelling. Dispossess me, Lord, of this bad Spirit, and turn my
Envy into holy Emulation. Let me Labor to exceed them in pains, who excel me
in parts, and knowing that my sword in cuting down sin, has a duller Edge,
let me strike with the greater force; Yea, make other Men's Gifts to be mine, by
making me thankful to thee for them* It was some comfort to Naomie, that
wanting a son her self, she brought up Ruth. 4.16.
Ruth's child in her bosom. If my soul be too old to be a Mother of Goodness,
Lord, make it but a dry-Nurse. Let me feed, and foster, and nourish, and
cherish the Graces in others, honoring their Persons, praising their Par^s,
and glorifying thy Name, who have given such gifts unto them.

XIIII.
Lord,
WHen young, I have almost quarrelled with that Petition in our Liturgy, Give
Peace in our time* O Lord, Nee^lesse to wish for light at Noonday; for then
Peace was so plentiful, no fear of Famine, but suspicion of a surfeit thereof.
And yet, how many good Comments was this Prayer then capable of? Give Peace,
that is, continue and preserve it. Give Peace, that is, Give us hearts worthy
of it, and thankful for it. In our time, that is, All our Time: for there is
more besides a fair Morning required to make a fair Day. Now I see the Mother
had more Wisdom then her Son. The Church knew better then I, how to pray. Now
I am better informed of the necessity of that Petition. Yea, with the daughters
of the Prove. 30.15.
Horse-leech, I have need to cry, Give, give Peace in our Time, O Lord.

XV.
Lord,
UNruly Soldiers command poor People to open them their doors, otherwise
threatening to break in* But if those in the house knew their own Strength, it
were easy to keep them out. Seeing the doors are Threatening Proof, and it is
not the breath of their Oaths can blow the ^ocks open. Yet silly Souls being
affrighted, they obey, and betray themselves to their Violence. Thus Satan
serves me, or rather thus I serve my self. When I cannot be forced I am fooled
out of my Integrity. He cannot Constrain, if I do not Consent* If I do but keep
Possession, all the Posse of Hell, cannot violently eject me: But I cowardly
surrender to his Summons. Thus there needs no more to my undoing, but my self.

XVI.
Lord,
WHen I am to Travel, I never use to provide my self, till the very Time;
Partly out of Laziness, loath to be troubled till needs I must, partly out of
Pride, as presuming all necessaries for my Journey will wait upon me at the
instant. (Some say this is Scholars fashion, and it seems by following it, I
hope to approve my self to be one) However, it often comes to pass, that my
Journey is finally stopped, through the Narrowness of the Time to provide for
it. Grant, Lord, that my confessed Improvidence in Temporal, may make me
suspect my Providence in Spituall Matters. Eccles. 12.5.
Solomon says, Man goes to his long Home. Short Preparation will not fit so
long a Journey. O! let me not put it off to the last, to have my Mat. 25.10.
Oil to buy, when I am to burn it. But let me so dispose of my self, that when
I am to dye, I may have nothing to do but to dye.

XVII.
Lord,
WHen in any writing, I have occasion to insert these passages, God willing,
God lending me life, etc. I observe, Lord, that I can scarce hold my hand from
incircling these words in a Parenthesis, as if they were not Essential to the
Sentence, but may as well be left out, as put in. Whereas indeed they are not
only of the Commission at large, but so of the Quorum, that without them all
the rest is nothing, wherefore hereafter, I will write those words fully and
fairly without any Enclosure about them. Let Critics censure it for bad
Grammar, I am sure it is good Divinity.

XVIII.
Lord,
MAny temporal Matters, which I have desired, thou have denied me. It vexed me
for the present, that I wanted my will. Since, considering in cold blood, I
plainly perceive, had that which I desired been done, I had been undone. Yea,
what thou gave me, instead of those things which I wished, though less
toothsome to me, were more wholesome for me. Forgive, I pray, my former Anger,
and now accept my humble thanks. Lord grant me one suite, which is this? Deny
me all suits which are bad for me, when I Petition for what is unfitting, O let
the King of Heaven, make use of his Negative Voice. Rather let me fast then
have Number. 11.33.
Quails given with intent that I should be choaken in eating them.

XIX.
Lord,
THis day I disputed with my self, whether or no I had said my Prayers this
Morning; And I could not call to mind any remarkable Passage, whence I could
certainly conclude that I had offered my Prayers unto thee. Frozen Affections,
which left no Spark of Remembrance behind them. Yet at last I hardly recovered
one Token, whence I was assured that I had said my Prayers. It seems I had said
them, and only said them, rather by heart then with my heart. Can I hope that
thou would Remember my Prayers, when I had almost forgotten that I had
prayed? Or rather have I not Cause to fear, that thou remembrest my Prayers too
well, to punish the Coldness and Badnesse of them? Alas, are not Devotions
thus done, in effect left undone. Well Genesis 43.12.
Jacob advised his Sons, at their second going into Egypt, Take double Money
in your hand; peradventure it was an Oversight. So, Lord, I come with my second
Morning Sacrifice: Be pleased to accept it, which I desire, and endeavor to
present, with a little better Devotion, then I did the former.

XX.
Lord,
THe motions of thy Holy Spirit, were formerly frequent in my heart. But, alas,
of late they have been great Strangers. It seems they did not like their last
entertainment, they are so loath to come again. I fear they were Ephesians. 4 3.
grieved, that either I heard them not attentively, or believed them not
faithfully, or practiced them not Conscionably. If they be pleased to come
again, this is all I dare promise, that they do deserve, and I do desire they
should be well used. Let thy holy Spirit be pleased, not only to stand before
the door and Revel. 3.20.
knock, but also to come in. If I do not open the door, it were too
unreasonable to request such a Miracle to come in, when the doors were shut, as
thou did to the Ioh. 20.19.
Apostles. Yet let me humbly beg of thee, that thou would make the Iron Gate
of my heart open of it is own Acts 12.10.
accord. Then let thy Spirit be pleased to sup in my heart, I have given it an
Invitation, and I hope I shall give it room. But O thou that sendest the Guest,
send the Meat also, and if I be so unmannerly, as not to make the holy Spirit
Welcome, O! let thy effectual Grace, make me to make it welcome.

XXI.
Lord,
I Confess this Morning I remembered my Breakfast, but forgot my Prayers. And
as I have returned no praise, so thou might justly have afforded me no
Protection. Yet thou have carefully kept me to the middle of this day, and
entrusted me with a new debt, before I have paid the Old Score. It is now Noon,
too late for a Morning, too soon for an Evening Sacrifice. My Corrupt Heart
prompts me to put off my Prayers till night, But I know it too well, or rather
too ill to trust it. I fear, if till night I defer them, at night I shall
forget them. Be pleased therefore now to accept them* Lord let not a few hours
the later, make a breach: Especially seeing (be it spoken, not to excuse my
Negligence but to implore thy Pardon) a thousand years in thy sight are but as
yesterday. I promise hereafter by thy Assistance to bring forth fruit in due
Season. See how I am ashamed the Sun should shine on me, who now newly start in
the Race of my Devotions, when he like a Giant has run more then half his
Course in the Heavens.

XXII.
Lord,
THis day casually I am fallen into a bad company, and know not how I came
hither or how to get hence. Sure I am, not my Improvidence has run me, but thy
Providence has led me into this Danger. I was not wandering in any base
by-path, but walking in the high way of my Vocation. wherefore, Lord, thou that
calledst me hither, keep me here. Stop their mouths that they speak no
Blasphemy, or stop my ears that I hear none; or open my mouth soberly to
reprove what I hear. Give me to Guard my self, but Lord Guard my Guarding of my
self. Let not the smoke of their Badnesse, put out my eyes, but the shining of
my Innocence lighten theirs. Let me give Physic to them, and not take
Infection from them. Yea, make me the Better for their badnesse. Then shall
their bad Company, be to me like the Dirt of Oysters, whose mud has soap in
it, and does rather scour, then defile.

XXIII.
Lord,
OFten have I thought with my self, I will sin but this one Sin more, and
then I will repent of it, and of all the rest of my Sins together. So Foolish
was I, and Ignorant. As if I should be more able to pay my Debts, when I owe
more: Or as if I should say, I will wound my friend once again, and then I will
lovingly Shake hands with him. But what if my Friend will not Shake hands with
me? Besides, can one Commit one Sin more, and but one Sin more? Unclean
Creatures went by Couples into the Genesis 7.2.
Arc. Grant Lord, at this instant I may break off my Badnesse; Otherwise thou
may justly make the last Minute, wherein I do Sin on Earth, to be the last
Minute wherein I shall Sin on Earth, and the first wherein thou might make
me suffer in another place.

XXIIII.
Lord,
THe Preacher this day came home to my heart. A left handed Gibeonite with his
Judges 20.16.
Sling, hit not the Mark more sure, then he my Darling Sins. I could find no
fault with his Sermon, save only that it had too much Truth. But this I
quarrelled at, that he went far from his Text to come close to me, and so was
faulty himself in telling me of my faults. Thus they will creep out at small
Crannies, who have a mind to escape, And yet I cannot deny, but that that which
he spoke, (though nothing to that Portion of Scripture which he had for his
Text) was according to the Proportion of Scripture. And is not thy Word in
general the Text at Large of every Preacher? Yea, rather I should have
Concluded, that if he went from his Text, thy goodness sent him to meet me.
For without thy Guidance it had been impossible for him so truly to have traced
the intricate turnings of my deceitful heart.

XXV.
Lord,
BE pleased to shake my Clay Cottage, before thou throwest it down. May it
totter a while, before it does Tumble. Let me be summoned before I am
surpised. Deliver me from Sudden Death. Not from Sudden Death, in respect of
it self, for I care not how short my passage be, so it be safe. Never any weary
Traveller Complained, that he came too soon to his Journeys end. But let it not
be Sudden in respect of me. Make me always ready to receive Death. Thus no
Guest comes unawares to him, who keeps a Constant Table.

SCRIPTURE-Observations.
I
LORD,
IN the Parable of the four sorts of Ground whereon the Seed was sown, the
Matthew. 13.8.
last alone proved fruitful. There, the bad were more then the good: But
amongst the Servants Two improved their Matthew. 25.18.
Talents, or Pounds, and Luke 19.20.
One only buried them. There the Good were more then the Bad. Again, amongst
the ten Virgins, five were wise, and five Matthew. 25.2.
Foolish: There the Good and Bad were Equal. I see that concerning the number
of the Saints, in Comparison to the Reprobates, no Certainty can be collected
from these Parables. Good Reason, for it is not their Principal purpose to
meddle with that point. Grant that I may never rack a Scripture Similie, beyond
the true intent thereof. Lest instead of Sucking Milk, I squeez Blood out of it.

II.
Lord,
THou did intend from all Eternity, to make Christ the Heir of all. No
danger of disinheriting him, thy only Son, and so well deserving. Yet thou
say to him. Psalm. 2.8.
Ask of me and I will give thee, the Heathen for thine inheritance, etc. This
Homage he must do, for thy Boon to beg it. I see thy goodness delights to have
thy favors sued for, expecting we should crave, what thou intendest we shall
have; That so, though we cannot give a full price, we may take some pains for
thy favors, and obtain them, though not for the merit, by the Means of our
Petitions.

III.
Lord,
I Find that Ezekiel is in his Prophesies, styled Ninety Times, and more, by
this Appellation, Son of man, and yet surely, not once oftener then there was
need for. For he had more Visions then any one (not to say then all) of the
Prophets of his Time. It was necessary therefore, that his Mortal Extraction
should often be sounded in his Ears, Son of man, lest his frequent
Conversing with Visions, might make him mistake himself, to be some Angel.
Amongst other Revelations, it was therefore needful, to reveal him to
himself; Son of man, lest seeing many Visions might have made him blind with
spiritual Pride. Lord, as thou increasest thy Graces in me, and Favors on me,
so with them daily increase in my soul the Monitors, and Remembrancers of my
Mortal^ty. So shall my Soul be kept in a good Temper, and humble deportment
toward thee.

IV.
Lord,
I Read how Genesis 28 22.
Jacob (then only accompanied with his staff) vowed at Bethell, that if thou
gave him but Bread and Raiment, he would make that place thy House. After his
return, the Condition on thy side, was overperformed, but the Obligation on his
part, wholly neglected: For when thou had made his Staff to swell, and to
break into two Bands, he, after his return, turned Genesis 33 19.
Purchaser, bought a field in Shalem, intending there to set up his rest. But
thou art pleased to be his Remembrancer in a new Vision, and to spur him
afresh, who tired in his Promise. Genesis 35 1.
Arise, go to Bethell and make there an Altar, etc. Lord, if rich Jacob forgot
what poor Jacob did promise, no wonder if I be bountiful to offer thee, in my
affliction, what I am niggardly to perform in my Prosperity. But O! take not
advantage of the forfeitures, but be pleased to demand Payment once again.
Pinch me into the Remembrance of my promises, that so I may reinforce my old
Vows with new Resolutions.

V.
Lord,
I Read when our Savior was examined in the High Priests Hall, that Peter
stood without, till John (being his John. 18.16.
Spokes-man to the Maid that kept the door) procured his Admission in. John
meant to let him out of the Cold, and not to let him in to a Temptation, but
his Courtesy in Intention, proved a mischief in Event, and the Occasion of his
denying his Master. O let never my Kindness concur in the Remotest degree,
to the damage of my friend. May the Chain which I sent him for an Ornament,
never prove his Fetters. But if I should be unhappy herein, I am sure thou will
not Punish my Good will, but pity my ill success.

VI.
Lord,
THe Apostle says to the 1 Cor. 10.13.
Corinthians, God will not suffer you to be tempted above what you are able.
But how comes he to Contradict himself, by his own Confession, in his next
Epistle? Where, speaking of his own sickness, he says, 2 Cor. 1 8.
We were pressed out of Measure above strength. Perchance this will be
expounded by propounding another Riddle of the same Apostles: Who praising Romans
4.18.
Abraham, says, that against hope, he believed in hope. That is, against
Carnal Hope, he believed in Spiritual Hope. So the same wedge, will serve to
cleave the former difficulty. Paul was pressed above his Human, not above his
Heavenly Strength. Grant Lord, that I may not mangle, and dismember thy Word,
but study it entirely, comparing one Place with another: For Diamonds only can
cut Diamonds, and no such Comments on the Scripture, as the Scripture.

VII.
Lord,
I Observe that the vulgar Translation, reads the Apostles Precept thus, 2 Pet.
1 10.
Give diligence to make your Calling, and Election sure by Good Works. But in
our English Testaments these words by Good Works are left out. It grieved me at
the first to see our Translation defective, but it offended me afterward, to
see the other Redundant. For those words are not in the Greek, which is the
Original. And it is an ill work, to put Good Works in, to the Corruption of
the Scripture. Grant, Lord, that though we leave Good Woorks out in the Text,
we may take them in, in our Comment. In that Exposition which our Practice is
to make on this Precept, in our Lives and Conversations.

VIII.
Lord,
I Find the Genealogy of my Matthew. 1.7, 8.
Savior, strangely Chequered with four remarkable Changes in four immediate
Generations.

1 Rehoboham begat Abiam* that is, a bad Father, begat a bad Son. 2 Abiam begat
Asa; that is, a bad Father, a good Son. 3 Asa begat Iehosaphat; that is, a
good Father a good Son. 4 Iehosaphat begat Ioram; that is, a good Father, a
bad Son.
I see Lord, from hence that my Fathers Piety cannot be entailed; that is bad
News for me. But I see also, that Actual Impiety is not always hereditary;
that is good News for my Son.

IX.
Lord,
WHen in my daily Service I read David's Psalms, Give me to alter the Accent of
my soul, according to their several Subjects: In such Psalms, wherein he
confesses his Sins, or requesteth thy Pardon or praises for former, or
prays for future favors, in all these give me to raise my soul to as high a
pitch as may be. But when I come to such Psalms, wherein he curses his
Enemies, O there let me bring my soul down to a lower note. For those words
were made only to fit David's mouth* I have the like breath, but not the same
Spirit to pronounce them. Nor let me flatter my self, that it is lawful for
me, with David, to curse thine Enemies, lest my deceitful heart entitle all
mine Enemies to be Thine, and so what was Religion in David, prove Malice in
me, whilst I act Revenge under the Pretense of Piety.

X.
Lord,
I Read of the two Witnesses, Rev. 11 7.
And when they shall have finished their Testimony, the Beast that ascends
out of the bottomless Pit, shall make War against them, and shall overcome
them, and kill them. They could not be killed whilst they were doing, but when
they had done their work, during their employment they were invincible. No
better Armor against the darts of Death, then to be busied in thy Service. Why
art thou so heavy, O my soul? No Malice of man can Antidate my end a Minute,
whilst my maker has any work for me to do. And when all my daily task is
ended, why should I grudge then to go to Bed?

XI.
Lord,
I Read at the Transfiguration that Matthew. 17.1.
Peter, James, and John, were admitted to behold Christ; but Andrew was
excluded. So again at the reviving of the daughter of the ruler of the Mark.
5.37.
Synagogue, these three were let in, and Andrew shut out. Lastly, in the Mark.
14.33.
Agony, the aforesaid three, were called to be witnesses thereof and still
Andrew left behind. Yet he was Peter's Brother, and a good man, and an Apostle,
why did not Christ take the two pair of Brothers? was it not pity to part
them? But me thinks I seem more offended thereat, then Andrew himself was, whom
I find to express no discontent, being pleased to be accounted a loyal
Subject for the general, though he was no favorite in these particulars. Give
me to be pleased in my self, and thankful to thee, for what I am, though I be
not equal to others in personal perfections. For such peculiar Privileges
are Courtesies from thee when given, and no Injuries to us when denied.

XII.
Lord,
Saint Paul teaches the Art of heavenly thrift, how to make a new Sermon of an
Old. Many ( Phil. 3.18.
says he) walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you weeping, that
they are Enemies to the Cross of Christ. Formerly he had told it with his
Tongue, but now with his Tears, formerly he taught it with his words, but now
with his weeping. Thus new affections make an old Sermon new. May I not, by the
same proportion, make an old Prayer new? Lord, thus long I have offered my
Prayer dry unto thee, now, Lord, I offer it wet. Then will thou own some new
Addition therein, when, though the Sacrifice be the same, yet the dressing of
it, is different, being steep't in his Tears, who brings it unto thee.

XIII.
Lord,
I Read of my Savior, That when he was in the wilderness, Matthew. 4.11.
then the Devil leaves him, and behold Angels came and Ministered unto him. A
great change in a little time. No twilight betwixt night and day. No
Purgatory-condition betwixt Hell and Heaven, but instantly, when Out Devil, In
Angel. Such is the Case of every solitary Soul. It will make Company for it
self. A musing mind will not stand Neuter a Minute, but presently side with
Legions of good or bad thoughts. Grant therefore, that my soul, which ever will
have some, may never have bad Company.

XIV.
Lord,
I Read how Cushi, and Ahimaaz ran a Race, who first should bring Tidings of
Victory to David* Ahimaaze, though last setting forth, came first to his
Journeys end; Not that he had the fleeter feet, but the better brains, to choose
the way of most advantage. For the Text 2 Samuel 18.23.
says, So Ahimaaz ran by the way of the Plain, and overwent Cushi. Prayers
made to God by Saints, fetch a needless compass about. That is but a rough
and un-even way. Besides one Steep Passage therein, questionable whether it can
be climbed up, and Saints in Heaven, made sensible of what we say on Earth. The
way of the plain, or plain way, both shortest, and surest is, Call upon me, in
the time of Trouble. Such Prayers, (though starting last) will come first to
the Mark.

XV.
Lord,
THis morning, I read a Chapter in the Bible, and therein observed a memorable
Passage, whereof I never took notice before. Why now, and no sooner did I see
it? Formerly, my Eyes were as open, and the Letters as Legible. Is there not a
thin Veil laid over thy Word, which is more rarefied by Reading, and at last
wholly worn away? Or was it because I came with more appetite then before? The
Milk was always there in the breast, but the Child till now was not Hungry
enough to find out the Teat. I see the Oil of thy Word will never leave
Increasing whilst any bring an empty Barrel. The Old Testament, will still be
a New Testament to him, who comes with a fresh desire of Information.

XVI.
Lord,
AT the first Exodus 12.41.
Passover, God kept touch with the Hebrews very Punctually: At the end of the
four hundred and thirty years, in the self same day it came to pass, that all
the Hosts of the Lord went out of the Land of Egypt. But at the first Easter
God was better then his word. Having promised, that Christ should lie but three
days in the Grave, his Fatherly Affection did run to relieve him. By a
Charitable Synechdoche, two pieces of days were counted for whole ones. God
did cut the work short in Romans 9.28.
righteousness. Thus the Measure of his Mercy under the Law was full, but it
ran over in the Gospel.

XVII.
Lord,
THe Heb. 13 5.
Apostle diswadeth the Hebrews from Covetousness, with this Argument, because
God said, I will not leave thee, nor forsake thee. Yet I find not, that God
ever gave this Promise to all the Jews, but he spoke it only to Josh. 1.5.
Joshua when first made Commander against the Canaanites. Which, (without
violence to the Anallogie of faith) the Apostle applies to all good men in
general. Is it so that we are Heirs apparent to all promises made to thy
Servants in Scripture. Are the Charters of Grace granted to them, good to me?
Then Will I say with Jacob Genesis 45 28.
I have enough. But because I cannot entitle my self to thy promises to them,
except I immitate their piety to thee; Grant I may take as much Care in
following the one, as Comfort by applying the other.

XVIII.
Lord,
I Read that thou did make Genesis 1.12.
Grass, Herbs, and Trees, the third day. As for the Sun, Genesis 1.16.
Moon, and Stars, thou made them on the fourth day of the Creation. Thus at
first thou did confute the folly of such, who maintain that all Vegetables in
their growth, are inslaved to a Necessary, and unavoidable dependence on the
Influences of the Stars. Whereas Plants were even when Planets were not. It
is false, that the Mary-gold follows the Sun, whereas rather the Sun
follows the Mary-gold, as made the day before him. Hereafter I will admire thee
more, and fear Astrologers less; Not affrighted with their doleful
predictions of Dearth and Drowth, collected from the Complexions of the
Planets. Must the Earth of Necessity be Sad, because some ill-natured Star is
Sullen? as if the Grass Could not grow without asking it leave. Whereas thy
power, which made Herbs, before the Stars, can preserve them without their
propitions, yea, against their Malignant Aspects.

XIX.
Lord,
I Read how Paul writing from Rome, spoke to Philemon. verse 22.
Philemon, to prepare him a lodging hoping to make use thereof, yet we find
not, that he ever did use it, being Martyred not long after. However he was no
loser, whom thou did lodge in a higher Mansion in Heaven. Let me always be
thus deceived to my Advantage. I shall have no Cause to Complain, though I
never wear the new Clothes fitted for me, if, before I put them on, death
cloth me with Glorious Immortality.

XX.
Lord,
WHen our Savior sent his Apostles abroad to Preach, he enjoined them in one
Matthew. 10.10.
Gospel, Possess nothing, neither Shoes, nor a staff. But it is said in
another Mark. 6.8.
Gospel, And he commanded them, that they should take nothing, for their
Journey, save a Staff only. The Reconciliation is easy. They might have a
Staff, to speak them Travellours, not Soldiers: One to walk with, not to
War with, a Staff, which was a Wand, not a Weapon. But Oh! In how doleful
days do we live, wherein Ministers are not (as formerly) armed with their
Nakedness, but need Staves, and Swords too, to defend them from violence.

XXI.
Lord,
I Discover an arrant Laziness in my Soul. For when I am to read a Chapter in
thy Bible before I begin it, I look where it ends. And if it ends not on
the same side, I cannot keep my hands, from turning over the leaf, to measure
the length thereof on the other side; If it swells to many Verses I begin to
grudge. Surely my heart is not rightly affected. Were I truly hungry after
heavenly Food, I would not Complain of the greatest Mess of Meat. Scourge,
Lord, this Laziness out of my Soul, make the reading of thy Word, not a
Penance, but a Pleasure unto me. Teach me, that as amongst many heaps of Gold,
all being equally pure, that is the best, which is the biggest, so I may esteem
that Chapter in thy Word, the best that is the Longest.

XXII.
Lord,
I Find David making a Syllogism, in Mode and Figure, Two Propositions he
perfected.

Psalm. 66.
18 If I regard Wickedness in my heart, the Lord will not hear me.

19 But verily God has heard me, he has attended to the voice of my Prayer.

Now I expected that David should have Concluded thus: Therefore I regard not
wickedness in my heart.

But far otherwise he Concludes.

20 Blessed be God, who has not turned away my Prayer nor his Mercy from me.
Thus David has deceived, but not wronged me. I looked that he should have
clapped the Crown on his own, and he puts it on Gods Head. I will learn this
Excellent Logic, For I like David's better then Aristotle's Syllogismes, That
whatsoever the Premises be, I make Gods Glory the Conclusion.

XXIII.
Lord,
WIse Pro. 30 9.
Agur made it his wish, Give me not poverty, lest I steal, and take the Name of
my God in vain. He says not, Lest I steal, and be caught in the manner, and
then be stockt or whipped, or branded, or forced to four fold Restitution, or put
to any other shameful, or painful punishment. But he says, lest I steal, and
take the name of my God in vain, That is, lest professing to serve thee, I
confute a good Profession, with a Bad Conversation. Thus thy Children count
Sin to be the greatest Smart in Sin, as being more sensible of the wound they
therein give to the glory of God, then of all the Stripes that man may lay upon
them for punishment.

XXIV.
Lord,
I Read that when my Savior dispossessed the Man's Mark. 9.25.
Son of a Devil, he enjoined the Evil Spirit to come out of him, and enter
no more into him. But I find that when my Savior himself was tempted of Luke.
4.13.
Satan, the Devil departed from him but for a Sason. Retreating, as it seems,
with mind to return. How came it to pass, Lord, that he who expelled him
finally out of others, did not propell him so from himself. Sure it does not
follow, that because he did not, he could not do it. Or that he was less able
to help himself, because he was more Charitable to relieve others. No, I see my
Savior was pleased to show himself a God in other men's matters, and but a Man
in such cases wherein he himself was concerned. Being contented still to be
tempted by Satan, that his Suffering for us, might cause our Conquering through
him.

XXV.
IAnnes and 2 Timothy 3.8.
Iambres the Apes of Moses and Aaron, immitated them in turning their Rods into
Serpents; Only here was the difference: Aarons Exodus 7.12.
Rod devoured their Rods. That which was Solid and Substantial lasted, when
that which was slight, and but seeming, vanished away. Thus an Active Fancy in
all outward expressions may immitate a lively Faith. For matter of Language,
there is nothing what Grace does do, but Wit can Act. Only the difference
appears in the Continuance: Wit is but for fits and flashes, Grace holds out,
and is lasting; And, Good Lord of thy Goodness, give it to every one that
truly desires it.

HISTORICAL Applications.
I
THe English Ambassador some years since, prevailed so far with the Turkish
Emperor, as to persuade him to hear some of our English Music, from which (as
from all other liberal Sciences) both He and his Nation were naturally averse.
But it happned that the Musicians were so long in tuning their Instruments,
that the Great Turk distasting their Tediousness, went away in discontent,
before their Music began. I am afraid, that the differences, and dissentions
betwixt Christian Churches, (being so long in reconciling their discords) will
breed in Pagans, such a disrelish of our Religion, as they will not be invited
to attend thereunto.

II.
A Sibill came to Tarquinius superbus King of Rome, and * M. Varro, Solinus,
Plinius, Halicar. etc.
offered to sell unto him three Tomes of her Oracles: But He, counting the
price too high, refused to buy them. Away she went, and burnt one Tome of them.
Returning, she asks him, whether he would buy the two remaining at the same
Rate; He refuses again, counting her little better then frantic. Thereupon
She burns the second Tome. And peremptorily asked him, whether he would give
the Sum demanded for the all three, for the one Tome remaining; Otherwise she
would burn that also, and He would dearly repent it. Tarquin, admiring at her
constant Resolution, and conceiving some extraordinary worth contained therein,
gave her Her Demand. There are three Volumes of M^ns Time; Youth, Man's Estate,
and Old Age; and Ministers advise them, Ephesians. 5.16.
redeem this Time. But men conceive the Rate they must give, to be
unreasonable, because it will cost them the Renouncing of their Carnal
Delights. Hereupon one Third Part of their Life (Youth) is consumed in the fire
of Wantonness. Again, Ministers Counsel men to redeem the remaining Volumes
of their Life. They are but derided at for their pa^nes. And Man's Estate is
also cast away in the smoke of Vanity. But Preachers ought to press
peremptorily on old People, to redeem, now, or never, the last Volume of their
Life. Here is the difference: The Sibill still demanded but the same Rate for
the rem^ining Book; But aged Folk (because of their custom in sining) will find
it harder and dearer, to redeem this, the last Volume, then if they had been
Chapmen for all three at the first.

III.
IN Merianith Shire in Giraldus Cambrensis. and Cambder, in the description of
that shire.
Wales, there be many Mountains whose hanging Top come so close together, that
shepherds, sitting on several Mountains may audibly discourse one with
another. And yet they must go many miles, before their Bodies can meet
together, by the reason of the vast hollow Valleys which are betwixt them. Our
Sovereign, and the Members of his Parliament, at London, seem very near agreed,
in their General and Public Professions; Both are for the Protestant
Religion; Can they draw nearer? Both are for the Privileges of Parliament; Can
they come closer? Both are for the Liberty of the Subject; Can they meet
Evener? And yet, alas, there is a great Gulf, and vast distance betwixt them
which our sins have made, and God grant that our Sorrow may seasonably make
it up again.

IV.
WHen John, King of France, had Communicated the Order of the Knighthood of the
Star, to some of his Guard, Men of mean Birth and Extraction, the Nobility ever
after disdained to be admitted into that degree, and so that Order in France,
was extinguished. Seeing that now adays, drinking, and Swea^ing, and
Wantonness, are grown frequent, even with base beggarly People, It is high
Time, for men of Honor, who Consult with their Credit, to desist from such
sins. Not that I would have Noble Men, invent New vices, to be in Fashion
with themselves alone: But forsake Old Sins, grown common with the meanest of
People.

V.
LOng was this Land wasted with Civil War, betwixt the two Houses of York
and Lancaster, till the red Rose became white with the Blood it had lost, and
the white Rose, Red, with the Blood it had shed. At last, They were united in a
happy Marriage, and their joynt-Titles are ^wisted together in our Gracious
Sovereign. Thus there has been a Great difference betwixt learned Men, wherein
the dominion over the Creature is founded. Some putting it in Nature, others
placing it in Grace. But the true Servants of God have an unquestioned Right
thereunto. Seeing both Nature and Grace, the first and Second Adam, Creation,
and Regeneration are contained in them. Hence their Claim is so clear, their
Title is so true, Ignorance cannot doubt it, Impudence dare not deny it.

VI.
THe Roman Senators conspired against Julius Caesar to kill him: That very next
morning Artemido^us, Plutarch. in Iul. Caesar.
Caesar's friend, delivered him a Paper, (desiring him to peruse it,) wherein
the whole plot was discovered: But Caesar complemented his life away, being so
taken up, to return the salutations of such People as met him in the way, that
he pocketed the Paper, among other Petitions, as unconcerned therein, and so
going to the Senate house, was slain. The World, Flesh, and Devil have a
design for the destruction of men. We Ministers, bring our People a Letter,
Gods Word, wherein all the Conspiracy is revealed. But who has believed our
Report? Most men are so busy about worldly delights, they are not at leisure
to listen to us, or read the Letter, but thus, alas, run headlong to their
own Ruin and Destruction.

VII.
IT is reported of Philip the Second, King of Spain, That besieging the Town of
St. Quintine, and being to make a breach, he was forced with his Cannon to
batter down a small Chapel on the Wall, dedicated to Saint Laurence. In
Reparation to which Saint, he afterward built and Consecrated unto him that
famous Chapel in the Escariall in Spain, for workmanship, one of the wonders
in the World. How many Churches and Chapels of the God of Saint Laurence, have
been laid waste in England, by this woeful War. And which is more, (and more
to be lamented) how many living Temples of the Holy Ghost, Christian People,
have therein been causelessly and cruelly destroyed. How shall our Nation be
ever able to make Recompense for it. God of his Goodness forgive us that Dept
which we of our selves are not able to satisfy.

VIII.
IN the days of King Sir John Heywood* in the life of Edward the 6.
Edward the sixth, the L. Protector marched with a Powerful Army into Scotland,
to demand their young Queen Mary in Marriage to our King, according to their
Promises. The Scotch refusing to do it, were beaten by the English in
Musl^borough fight. One demanded of a Scotch Lord, (taken Prisoner in the
Battle) Now Sir, how do you like our Kings Marriage with your Queen. I
always, (quoth he) did like the Marriage, But I do not like the wooing, that
you should fetch a Bride with Fire and Sword. It is not enough for men to
propound Pious Proj^cts to themselves, if they go about by indirect Courses to
compass them. Gods own Work must be done by Gods own ways. Otherwise we can
take no Comfort in obtaining the end, if we cannot justify the means used
thereunto.

IX.
A Sagamore, or petty King in Virginia, guessing the Greatness of other Kings
by his own, sent a Native hither, who understood English. Commanding him to
score upon a Long Cane (given him of Purpose to be his Register) the number of
English men, that thereby his Master might know the strength of this our
Nation. Landing at Plymouth, a Populous Place, (and which he mistook for all
England) he had no leisure to eat, for notching up the men he met. At Exeter,
the difficulty of his Task was increased; Coming at last to London (that Forest
of People) he brake his Cane in Pieces, perceiving the impossibility of his
employment. Some may conceive that they can reckon up the Sins they commit in
one day. Perchance they may make hard Shifts to Sum up their notorious ill
deeds: More difficult it is, to score up their wicked words. But O how infinite
are their idle thoughts! High Time then, to leave off counting, and cry out
with Psalm. 19.12.
David, Who can tell how often he offends, Lord cleanse me from my secret
sins.

X.
MArtin de Golin, Munsters Cosmography 3. Book. Page 878
Master of the Teutonick Order, was taken Prisoner by the Prusians, and
delivered bound, to be beheaded. But he persuaded his Executioner (who had him
alone) first to take off his Costly Clothes, which otherwise would be spoiled
with the sprinckling of his Blood. Now the Prisoner, being partly unbound, to
be unclothed, and finding his Arms somewhat loos'ned, struck the Executioner
to the Ground, killed him afterward with his own sword, and so regained both
his life and Liberty. John 16 33.
Christ has Overcome the World, and delivered it to Us, to destroy it. But we
are all Achans by Nature; and the Babylonish Garment is a Bait for our
Covetousness: Whilst therefore we seek to take the Plunder of this World's
Wardrobe, we let go the Mastery we had formerly of it. And too often, that
which Christ's Passion made our Captive, our Folly makes our Conqueror.

XI.
I Read how Pope Cambden Brit: in Kent.
Pius the fourth, had a great Ship richly Laden, Landded at Sandwich in Kent,
where it suddenly sunck, and so, with the Sands, choked up the Harbor, that
ever since that place has been deprived of the benefit thereof. I see that
happiness, does not always attend the Adventures of his Holiness. Would he
had carried away his Ship, and left us our Harbor. May his Spiritual
Merchandise never come more into this Island, But rather sinck in Tiber, then
Sail thus far, bringing so small Good, and so great Annoyance. Sure he is
not so happy in opening the doors of Heaven, as he is unhappy to obstruct
Havens on Earth.

XII.
Gualterus Mappaeus de nugis Curialium.
IEffery Archbishop of York, and base Son to King Henry the second, used
proudly to protest by his faith, and the Royalty of the King his Father. To
whom one said, You may sometimes, Sir, as well remember what was the honesty of
your Mother. Good men when puffed up with Pride, for their heavenly Extraction,
and Paternall descent, how they are Gods Sons by Adoption, may seasonably
call to mind, the Corruption which they carry about them. Job. 17.14.
I have said to the worm, thou art my Mother. And this Consideration, will
temper their Souls with humility.

XIII.
I Could both Sigh, and Smile, at the Simplicity of a Native American, sent by
a Spaniard, his Master, with a Basket of Figgs, and a Letter (wherein the Figgs
were mentioned) to carry them both to one of his Masters friends. By the way,
this Messenger eat up the Figgs, but delivered the Letter, whereby his deed was
discovered, and he soundly punished. Being sent a Second Time on the like
Message, he first took the Letter (which he conceived had Eyes, as well as a
Tongue) and hid it in the Ground, sitting himself on the place where he put it;
and then securely fell to feed on his Figgs, presuming that that Paper which
saw nothing, could tell nothing. Then taking it again out of the ground, he
delivered it to his Masters Friend, whereby his fault was perceived, and he
worse beaten then before. Men Conceive they can manage their sins with
Secrecy. But they carry about them a Letter, or Book rather, written by Gods
Finger, their Romans 2.15.
Conscience, bearing witness to all their Actions. But sinners being often
detected and accused, hereby grow wary at last, and to prevent this speaking
Paper for telling any Tales, do Smother, Stifle and Suppress it, when they go
about the Committing of any Wickedness. Yet Conscience, (though buried for a
time in Silence,) has afterward a Resurrection, and discovers all to their
greater Shame, and heavier Punishment.

XIV.
John Courcy, Earl of Vlster in Ireland, endeavored fifteen several Times, to
sail over thither, and so often was beaten back again, with bad Weather. At
last he expostulated his Case with God in a Annals Hybernici, in Anno 1204.
and Cambdens Britt. page 797.
Vision, Complaining of hard Measure, That having built and repaired so many
Monasteries to God and his Saints, he should have so bad success. It was
answered him, That this was but his just Punishment, because he had formerly
put out the Image of the Lawfully I presume to apply a Popish Vision to confute
a Popish Practice.
Trinity, out of the Cathedral Church of Down, and placed the picture of Saint
Patrick in the room thereof. Surely, God will not hold them Guiltless, who
justle him out of his Temple, and give to Saints that Adoration, due alone to
his divine Majesty.

XV.
THe Lybians kept all Women in Common. But when a Child was born, they used to
send it to that Man to maintain (as Father thereof) whom the Infant most
resembled in his Complexion. Satan and my sinful Nature enter-Common in my
soul, in the causing of Wicked Thoughts. The Sons by their Faces speak their
Syres. Proud, Wanton, Covetous, Envious, Idle thoughts, I must own to come from
my self. God forgive me, it is vain to deny it, those Children are so like to
their Father. But as for some hideous horrible Thoughts, such as I start at the
Motion of them, being out of the Road of my Corruption, (and yet which way will
not that wander?) So that they smell of Hells Brimstone about them: These fall
to Satan's lot to Father them. The Swarthy Blackness of their Complexion
plainly shows who begat them, not being of Mine Extraction, but His Injection.

XVI.
MArcus Manlius deserved exceedingly well of the Roman State, having valiantly
defended their Capitol. But afterward, falling into disfavour with the People,
he was Condemned to death. However the People would not be so unthankful as to
su^fer him to be executed in any place, from whence the Capitol might be
beheld. For the Prospect thereof prompted them with fresh Remembrance of his
former merits. At last, they found a low Place, in the Livie libro Sexto, Cap.
20.
Petiline-Grove, by the River-Gate, where no Pinnacle of the Capitol could be
perceived, and there he was put to Death. We may admire how men can find in
their hearts to sin against God. For we can find no one place in the whole
world, which is not marked with a Signal Character of his mercy unto us. It was
said properly of the Jews, but is not untrue of all Christians, that they are
Gods Vineyard. And Isai. 5.2.
God fenced it, and gathered out the Stones thereof, and planted it with the
choicest Vine, and built a Tower in the midst thereof; and also dug a
Wine Press therein. Which way can men look, and not have their Eyes met with
the Remembrance of Gods Favor unto them. Look about the Vineyard, it is
fenced, look without it, the Stones are cast out; look within it, it is planted
with the choicest Vine; look above it, a Tower is built in the midst thereof;
look beneath it, a Wine Press is dug. It is impossible for one to look any
way, and to avoid the beholding of Gods Bounty. Ungrateful man! And as there
is no place, so there is no time for us to sin, without being at that instant
beholden to him. We owe to him that We are, even when we are Rebellious against
him.

XVII.
A Duel was to be fought, by consent of both Annals Hybernici, in Anno 1204.
and Cambdens Britt. page 797.
Kings betwixt an English, and a French Lord. The aforesaid John Courcy Earl of
Vlster, was chosen Champion for the English: A Man of great Stomach and
Strength, but lately much weak'ned by long Imprisonment. Wherefore, to prepare
himself before hand, the King allowed him what Plenty and Variety of Meat, he
was pleased to eat. But the Monsieur (who was to encounter him) hearing what
great Quantity of Victuals Courcy did daily devour, and thence collecting his
unusual Strength, out of fear, refused to fight with him. If by the Standard
of their Cups, and Measure of their drinking, one might truly infer Soldiers
Strength by rules of Proportion, most vast, and valiant Achievements, may
justly be expected from some Gallants of of these times.

XIII.
I Have heard that the Brook near Lutterworth in Lestershire into which the
Ashes of the burnt Bones of Wickliffe were cast. never since does drown the
Meadow about it. Papists expound this to be, because God was well pleased with
the Sacrifice of the Ashes of such a Heretic. Protestants ascribe it rather to
proceed from the virtue of the dust of such a Reverent Martyr. I see it is a Case
for Friend. Such Accidents signify nothing in themselves, but according to the
pleasure of Interpreters. Give me such Solid reasons, whereon I may rest and
rely. Eccles. 10.11.
Solomon says, The words of the wise are like nails, fastened by the Masters
of the Assembly. A Nail is firm, and will hold driving in, and will hold
driven in. Send me such Arguments. As for these Waxen Topicall devises, I shall
never think worse or better of any Religion for their Sake.

XIX.
ALexander the Plutarch. in the life of Alex. the Great.
Great, when a Child, was checked by his Governor Leonidas, for being
overprofuse in spending Perfumes: Because on a day, being to sacrifice to the
Gods, he took both his hands full of Frankincense, and cast it into the fire.
But afterward, being a man, he conquered the Country of Iudaea, (the
Fountain, whence such Spices did flow) he sent Leonidas a Present of five
hundred Talents weight of Frankincense, to show him, how his former
Prodigality, made him thrive the better in Success, and to advise him to be no
more niggardy in Divine Service. Thus they that sow plentifully, shall reap
plentifully, I see there is no such way to have a large heart, as to have a
large heart. The free giving of the Branches of our present Estate to God, is
the readiest means to have the Root increased for the future.

XX.
THe Poets Fable, that this was one of the Labors imposed on Hercules, to make
clean the Augeian Stable, or Stall rather. For therein (they said) were kept
three thousand Kine, and it had not been cleansed for thirty years together.
But Hercules, by letting the River Alpheus into it, did that with ease, which
before was conceived impossible. This Stall, is the pure Emblem of my impure
Soul, which has been defiled with Millions of Sins, for more then thirty
years together. Oh! that I might by a lively faith, and unfeigned repentance,
let the Stream of that fountain into my soul, which is opened for Judah and
Jerusalem. It is impossible by all my pains to purge out my uncleanness. which
is quickly done by the Rivolet of the Blood of my Savior

XXI.
THe Venetians showed the Treasure of their State, being in many great Coffers,
full of Gold and Silver to the Spanish Ambassador. But the Ambassador peeping
under the bottom of those Coffers, demanded, Whether that their Treasure did
daily grow, and had a Root for such (says he) my Masters Treasure has,
meaning both his Indies. Many men have attained to a great height of Piety, to
be very abundant and rich therein. But all theirs is but a Cistern, not
Fountain-Grace, only Gods Goodness has a Spring of it self, in it self.

XXII.
THe Justin. lib. 18. Page 196.
Sidonian Servants agreed amongst themselves, to choose him to be their King,
who that morning, should first see the Sun. Whilst all others were gazing on
the East, one alone looked on the West; Some admired, more mocked him, as if he
looked on the Feet, there to find the Eye of the Face. But he first of all
discovered the light of the Sun, Shining on the Tops of houses. God is seen
sooner, easier, clearer in his Operations, then in his Essence. Best beheld by
Reflection in his Creatures. For the invisible things of him, from the Creation
of the ^om. 1.20.
World, are clearly seen being understood by the things that are made.

XXIII.
AN Italian Prince, as much delighted with the Person, as grieved with the
Prodigality of his eldest Son; commanded his Steward to deliver him no more
Money, but what the young Prince should tell his own self. The young Gallant
fretted at his heart, that he must buy Money at so dear a Rate, as to have it
for telling it. But, (because there was no Remedy) he set himself to his Task,
and being greatly tired with telling a small Sum, he brake off into this
Consideration. Money may speedily be spent, but how tedious, and troublesome is
it to tell it. And by Consequence how much more difficult to get it. Men may
Commit sin presently, pleasantly, with much Mirth, in a Moment. But O that
they would but seriously consider with themselves how many their offenses are,
and sadly fall a counting them. And if so hard truly to sum their sins,
sure harder sincerely to sorrow for them. If to get their number be so
difficult, what is it to get their Pardon?

XXIV.
I Know the Village in Cambridge-shire, Cotenham.
wherein there was a Cross, full of Imagery; Some of the Images were such, as
that People, not foolishly factious, but judiciously conscientious, took just
exception at them. Hard by, the Youths of the Town erected a Maypole, and to
make it of Proof, against any that should endeavor to cut it down, they armed
it with Iron, as high as any could reach. A violent Wind happened to blow it
down, which falling on the Cross, dashed it to pieces. It is possible, what is
Counted Profaneness, may accidentally correct Superstition. But I could
heartily wish that all pretenders to Reformation, would first labor to be good
themselves, before they go about the amending of Others.

XXV.
I Read that Aegaeus the Father of Plutarch. in Theseo
Theseus hid a Sword, and a pair of Shoes, under a great Stone. And left word
with his wife, (whom he left with Child) that when the Son she should bear,
was able to take up that Stone, weild that Sword, and wear those Shoes, then
she should send him to him. For by these Signs, he would own him for his own
Son. Christ has left in the Custody of the Church, our Mother, the Sword of
the Spirit, and the Shoes of a Christian Conversation, the same, which he once
wore himself, and they must fit our Feet, yea, and we must take up the weight
of many heavy Crosses, before we can come at them. But when we shall appear
before our Heavenly Father, bringing these Tokens with us, then, and not
before, he will acknowledge us to be no Bastards but his True-born Children.

MIXED Contemplations.
I.
WHen I look on a Leaden Bullet, therein I can read both Gods Mercy, and Man's
Malice. Gods Mercy, whose Providence foreseeing, that men, of Lead, would make
Instruments of Cruelty, did give that metal a Medicinal Virtue; As it
hurts, so it also heals; and a Bullet sent in by man's Hatred into a fleshly and
no Vital Part, will (with ordinary Care and Curing) out of a natural Charity,
work it is own way out. But Oh! how devilish were those men, who, to frustrate
and defeat his Goodness, and to Countermand the healing power of Lead, first
found the Champing and Impoysoning of Bullets. Fools, who account themselves
honored with the shameful Title of being the Inventors of Evil Romans 1.30.
Things, endeavoring to Out-infinite Gods Kindness, with their Cruelty.

II.
I Have heard some Men (rather causelessely Captious, then judiciously
Critical) cavil at Grammarians, for calling some Conjunctions, Disjunctive, as
if this were a flat Contradiction. Whereas, indeed, the same Particle may
conjoyn words, and yet disjoyn the sense. But alas, how sad is the present
condition of Christians, who have a Communion, disuniting. The Lords Supper,
ordained by our Savior to conjoyn our Affections, has disjoined our
Judgments. Yea, it is to be feared, lest our long quarrels about the manner of
his Presence, cause the matter of his Absence, for our want of Charity to
receive him.

III.
I Have observed, that Children, when they first put on new Shoes, are very
curious to keep them clean. Scarce will they set their foot on the Ground, for
fear to dirty the Soles of their Shoes. Yea, rather they will wipe the Leather
clean with their Coats; and yet perchance the next day, they will trample with
the same Shoes in the Mire up to the Anckles. Alas, Childrens play is our
Earnest. On that day wherein we receive the Sacrament, we are often
over-precize, scrupling to say, or do, those things which lawfully we may. But
we, who are more then Curious that day, are not so much as Careful the next.
And too often, (what shall I say) go on in sin, up to the Anckles, yea, our
sins go Psalm. 28.4.
over our Heads.

IV.
I Know some Men very desirous to see the Devil, because they conceive such an
Apparition would be a Confirmation of their Faith. For then, by the Logic of
Opposites, they will conclude, There is a God, because there is a Devil. Thus
they will not believe there is a Heaven, except Hell it self be deposed for a
Witness thereof. Surely such men's Wishes are vain, and Hearts are wicked: For
if they will not believe, having Moses, and the Prophets, and the Apostles,
they will not believe, no, if the Devil from Hell appears unto them. Such
Apparitions, were never ordained by God, as the means of Faith. Besides, Satan
will never show Himself, but to his own advantage. If, as A Devil, to fright
them, If as an Angel of light, to flatter them, how ever to hurt them. For my
part I never desire to see him. And O! (if it were possible) that I might never
feel him in his motions, and Temptations: I say, let me never see him, till the
day of Judgment, where he shall stand Arreigned at the Bar, and Gods Majesty
sit Judge on the Bench, ready to condemn him.

V.
I Observe, that Antiquaries, such as prize Skill above Profit, (as being
rather Curious, then Covetous) do prefer the Brass Coyns of the Roman
Emperors, before those in Gold and Silver, Because there is much falsenesse
and forgery daily detected, (and more suspected) in Gold and Silver Meddals, as
being commonly cast and Counterfeited; Whereas Brass Coyns, are presumed upon,
as true and ancient, because it will not quit cost for any to Counterfeit them.
Plain dealing. Lord, what I want in Wealth may I have in sincerity. I care not
how mean Metal my Estate be of, if my Soul have the true Stamp, really
impressed with the unfeigned Image of the King of Heaven.

VI.
LOoking on the Chapel of King Henry the seventh, in Westminster, (God grant
I may once again see it, with the Saint, who belongs to it, Our Sovereign,
there in a well conditioned Peace) I say looking on the outside of the Chapel,
I have much admired the Curious Workmanship thereof. It added to the Wonder,
that it is so shaddowed with mean Houses, well nigh on all sides, that one may
almost touch it, as soon as see it. Such a Structure needed no Bace Buildings
about it, as foiles to set it off. Rather this Chapel may pass for the
Emblem of a great Worth, living in a private way. How is he pleased with his
own Obscurity, whilst others, of less desert, make greater Show. And whilst
Proud People stretch out their Plumes in O^tentation, he uses their Vanity for
his Shelter; more pleased to have worth, then to h^ve others take Notice of it.

VII.
THe Mariners at Sea count it the sweetest perfume, when the Water in the Keel
of their Ship does stink. For hence they conclude, that it is but little, and
long since I ak't in. But it is woeful with them, when the Water is felt before
it is smelt, as fresh flowing in upon them, in abundance. It is the best savor
in a Christian Soul, when his Sins are loathsome and offensive unto him. An
happy Token that there has not been of late in him any insensible supply of
heinous offenses, because his Stale Sins, are still his new and daily Sorrow.

VIII.
I Have sometimes considered in what a Troublesome Case is that Chamberlain, in
an Inn, who being but one, is to give Attendance to many Guests. For suppose
them all in one Chamber, yet if one shall Command him to come to the Window,
and the other to the Table, and another to the Bed, and another to the Chimney,
and another to come up Stairs, and another to go down Stairs, and all in the
same instant, how would he be distracted to please them all. And yet such is
the sad Condition of my soul, by Nature; Not only a Servant but a Slave unto
Sin. Pride calls me to the Window, Gluttony to the Table, Wantonness to the
Bed, Laziness, to the Chimney, Ambition Commands me to go up Stairs, and
Covetousness to come down. Vices I see, are as well Contrary to themselves, as
to Virtue. Free me, Lord, from this distracted Case, fetch me from being Sins
Servant to be thine, whose Service is perfect freedom, for thou art but One and
Ever the same; and always enjoynes Commands agreeable to themselves, thy
Glory, and my Good.

IX.
I Have observed, that Towns, which have been casually Burnt, have been Built
again more beautiful then before: Mud-walls, afterward made of Stone; and
Roofs, formerly but thatch't, after advanced to be tiled. The 1 Pet. 4.12.
Apostle tells me, that I must not think strange concerning the fiery Trial
which is to happen unto me. May I likewise prove improved by it. Let my renewed
Soul, which Grows out of the Ashes of the Old man, be a more firm fabric, and
stronger, structure: So shall affliction be my Advantage.

X.
OUr Savior says, Matt. 6 3.
when thou do Alms, let not thy left hand know, what thy right hand does.
Yet one may Generally observe, that Almeshouses are Commonly built by
High-way-sides, the ready road to Ostentation. How ever, far be it from me,
to make bad Comments on their Bounty: I rather interpret it, that they place
those houses so publicly, thereby not to gain applause, but Immitation. Yea,
let those, who will plant pious works, have the liberty to choose their own
Ground. Especially in this Age, wherein we are likely, neither in by ways or
Highways to have any works of mercy, till the whole Kingdom be speedily
turned into one great Hospital, and Gods Charity only able to relieve us.

XI.
HOw wrangling and litigious were we in the time of Peace? how many Actions
were created of nothing, Suits we had Commenced, about a mouthfull of Grass,
or a handful of Hey. Now he, who formerly would sue his Neighbor, for Pedibus
Ambulando, can behold his whole Field lying waste, and must be content. We see
our goods taken from us, and dare say nothing, not so much as seeking any
legal Redress, because Certain not to find it. May we be restored in due Time
to our former Properties, but not to our former Peevishness. And when Law,
shall be again awaked (or rather revived) let us express our Thanks to God,
for so great a Gift by using it not wantonly, (as formerly in vexing our
Neighbors about trifles) but soberly to right our selves in matters of moment.

XII.
ALmost twenty years since I heard a profane Jest, and still remember it. How
many Pious Passages, of far later date, have I forgotten? It seems my Soul is
like a filthy Pond, wherein Fish dye soon, and Froggs live long. Lord, raze
this profane Jest out of my Memory. Leave not a Letter thereof behind, lest my
Corruption (an apt Scholar) guess it out again, and be pleased to write some
pious Meditation in the place thereof. And grant, Lord, that for the time to
come, (because such bad Guests are easier kept out, then cast out) that I may
be careful, not to admit, what I find so difficult to expel.

XIII.
I Perceive there is in the world a good Nature, falsely so called, as being
nothing else, but a facill and flexible Disposition, wax for every impression.
What others are so bold to beg, they are so bashful as not to deny. Such
Osiers, can never make Beams to bear Stresse, in Church and State. If this be
good Nature, let me always be a Clown. If this be good Fellowship, let me
always be a Churl. Give me to set a Sturdy Porter before my Soul, who may not
equally open to every Commer. I cannot conceive, how he can be a Friend to any,
who is a friend to all, and the worst Foe to himself.

XIV.
HA, is the Interjection of Laughter. Ah, is an Interjection of Sorrow. The
difference betwixt them very small, as consisting only in the Transposition of
what is no Substantial Letter, but a bare Aspiration. How quickly in the Age
of a Minute, in the very turning of a Breath, is our Mirth changed into
Mourning.

XV.
I Have a great friend, whom I endeavor and desire to please, but hitherto all
in vain: The more I seek, the further off I am, from finding his favor. Whence
comes this miscarriage? Are not my Applications to man, more frequent then my
Addresses to my Maker? Do I not love his Smiles, more then I fear Heavens
Frowns? I confess, to my Shame, that sometimes his Anger has grieved me more
then my Sins. Hereafter, by thy Assistance, I will labor to approve my ways
in Gods presence; So shall I either have, or not need his friendship, and
either please him with more ease, or displease him* with less danger.

XVI.
THis Nation is scourged with a wasting War. Our Sins were ripe; God could
no longer be Just, if we were Prosperous. Blessed be his Name, that I have
suffered my Share in the Calamities of my Country. Had I poised my self so
politickly betwixt both Parties, that I had suffered from neither, yet could I
have took no Contentment in my safe escaping. For why should I, equally engaged
with others in Sinning, be exempted above them from the punishment. And seeing
the bitter Cup, which my brethren have pledged, to pass by me, I should fear
it would be filled again, and returned double, for me to drink it. Yea, I
should suspect, that I were reserved alone, for a greater Shame and Sorrow. It
is therefore some comfort that I draw in the same Yoke with my Neighbors, and
with them jointly bear the Burden which our Sins jointly brought upon us.

XVII.
WHen, in my private Prayers, I have been to confess my bosom Sins unto God, I
have been loath to speak them aloud. Fearing (though no men could) yet that the
Devil would overhear me, and make use of my words against me. It being
Probable, that when I have discovered the weakest Part of my Soul, he would
assault me there. Yet, since I have considered, that therein I shall tell Satan
no News, which he knew not before. Surely I have not managed my Secret Sins
with such privacy, but that he, from some Circumstances, collected what they
were. Though the fire was within, he saw some smoke without. Wherefore, for
the future, I am resolved, to Acknowledge my darling faults, though alone, yet
aloud; That the Devil who rejoiced in, partly, knowing of my Sins, may be
grieved more by hearing the Expression of my Sorrow. As for any advantage he
may make from my Confession, this Comforts me* Gods Goodness in Assisting me,
will be above Satan's Malice in Assaulting me.

XVIII.
IN the midst of my Morning Prayers, I had a good Meditation, which since I
have forgotten. Thus much I remember of it, that it was pious in it self, but
not proper for that time. For it took much from my Devotion, and added nothing
to my Instruction, and my soul, not able to intend two things at once, abated
of it is fervency in Praying. Thus snatching at two. Employments, I held neither
well. Sure this Meditation came not from him, who is the God of Order. He uses
to fasten all his Nails, and not to drive out one with another. If the same
Meditation return again, when I have leisure, and room to receive it, I will
say it is of his sending, who so mustereth, and marshalleth all good Actions,
that like the Soldiers in his Army, mentioned in the Joel 2.8.
Prophet. They shall not thrust one another, they shall walk every one in his
own Path.

XIX.
WHen I go speedily in any Action. Lord give me to call my soul to an account.
It is a shrewd Suspicion, that my Bowl runs down-hill, because it runs so
fast. And Lord, when I go in an unlawful way, start some Rubbs to stop me, let
my Foot slip or stumble. And give me the Grace to understand the Language of
the Lets thou throwest in my way. Thou have promised, Hosea. 2.6.
I will hedge up thy way. Lord be pleased to make the hedge high enough, and
thick enough, that if I be so mad, as to adventure to climb over it, I may not
only soundly rake my clothes, but rend my Flesh: yea, let me rather be caught,
and stick in the Hedge, then breaking in through it, fall on the other side into
the deep Ditch of eternal Damnation.

XX.
COming hastily into a Chamber, I had almost thrown down a Crystal
Hour-Glasse: Fear, lest I had, made me grieve, as if I had broken it: But,
alas, how much precious Time have I cast away, without any Regret. The
Hour-Glasse was but Crystal, each Hour a Pearl; that but like to be broken,
this lost outright; That but casually, this done wilfully. A better Hour-Glasse
might be bought: But Time lost once, lost ever. Thus we grieve more, for Toys
then for Treasure. Lord, give me an Hour-Glasse, not to be by me, but to be in
me. Teach me to Number my Psalm. 90.12.
days. An Hour-Glasse, to turn Me, That I may apply my heart unto Wisdom.

XXI.
WHen a Child, I loved to look on the Pictures in the Book of Martyrs. I
thought that there the Martyrs at the Stake, seemed like the three Children in
the fiery Dan. 3.27.
Fournace, Ever since I had known them there, not one hair more of their Head
was burnt, nor any smell of the fire singeing of their Clothes. This made me
think Martyrdom was nothing. But O, though the Lion be painted fiercer then he
is, the fire is far fiercer then it is painted. Thus it is easy for one to
endure an affliction, as he limnes it out in his own fancy, and represents it
to himself but in a bare Speculation. But when it is brought indeed, and laid
home to us, there must be the Man, yea, there must be more then the Man, yea,
there must be God to assist the Man to undergo it.

XXII.
Traveling on the Plain, (which notwithstanding has its Risings and Fallings)
I discovered Salisbury Steeple many miles off: Coming to a declivity, I lost
the sight thereof: But climbing up the next Hill, the Steeple grew out of the
Ground again. Yea, I often found it, and lost it, till at last, I came safely
to it, and took my lodging near it. It fares thus with us, whilst we are
way-fairing to heaven, mounted on the Deuteronomy. 34.1.
Pisgat Top of some good Meditation, we get a glimps of our Celestial Canaan.
But when, either on the Flat of an Ordinary Temper, or in the Fall of an
Extraordinary Temptation, we lose the view thereof. Thus, in the sight of our
Soul, Heaven is discovered, covered and recovered, till, though late, at last,
though slowly, surely, we arrive at the Haven of our Happiness.

XXIII.
Lord,
I Find my self in the Latitude of a Fever. I am neither well, nor ill. Not so
well, that I have any mind to be merry with my Friends, nor so ill that my
Friends have any cause to Condole with me. I am a Probationer in point of my
health. As I shall behave my self, so I may be either expelled out of it, or
admitted into it. Lord, let my distemper stop here, and go on further. Shoot
not thy Murdering Pieces against that Clay-Castle, which surrendreth it self
at thy first Summons. O spare me a little! that I may recover my strength. I
beg not to be forgiven, but to be forborne my Debt to Nature. And I only do
crave time, for a while, till I be better fitted, and furnished to pay it.

XXIV.
IT seemed strange to me when I was told, That Aqua-vitae (which restores life
to others) should it self be made of the droppings of Dead Beer. And that
Strong Water should be extracted out of the Dreggs (almost) of small Beer.
Surely many other excellent Ingredients, must concur, and much Art must be
used in the Distillation. Despair not then, O my Soul! No Extraction is
Impossible, where the Chemist is Infinite. He that is All in all, can produce
any thing, out of any thing. And he can make my Soul, which by Nature is settled
on his Zeph. 1.12.
Lees, and Dead in Sin, to be quickened by the Infusion of his Grace, and
purified into a pious Disposition.

XXV.
Lord,
HOw easy is Pen and Paper-Piety for one to write Religiously. I will not say
it costeth nothing, b^t it is far cheaper to work one's Head, then ones Heart
to Goodness. Some, perchance, may guess me to be good by my writings, and so
I shall Deceive my Reader. But if I do not desire to be good, I most of all
deceive my self. I can make an hundred Meditations, sooner then subdue the
least sin in my soul. Yea, I was once in the mind, never to write more; For
fear lest my writings at the last day prove Records against me. And yet why
should I not write? that by Reading my own Book, the Disproportion betwixt my
lines and my life, may make me blush my self, (if not into goodness) into
less badnesse then I would do otherwise. That so my Writings may Condemn me,
and make me to Condemn my self, that so God may be moved to acquit me.

FINIS.

