The BEST NAME ON EARTH Together with several other Sermons lately preached at
St. Brides; and in other places.

By T. Fuller, Batchelour in Divinity.

London Printed for the use and benefit of William Byron, Gent. 1659.

ANTIOCHIA.


Behold this ancient City from whence cam^
As from ye sacred Font the Christians name
Heaven grante ^^ our once famous London may
What Antioch gave in time not take away.
Io: Qu John Stafford Excu: 1657

The BEST NAME ON EARTH Together with several other Sermons lately preached at
St. Brides; and in other places.

By T. Fuller, Batchelour in Divinity.

London Printed for the use and benefit of William Byron, Gent. 1659.

Collegium Emmanuelis Cantabrigiae


The Best name on Earth.
Acts 11.26. And the Disciples were called Christians first in Antioch.
1. WE meet with four names in Scripture whereby the servants of God converted
to embrace the Gospel, were called, before the time that my text was written.
These took their denominations from the four Cardinal graces so necessary to
man's salvation. 1. From their Holiness Called Saints. 2. From their Faith
Called Believers. 3. From their Love Called The Brethren. 4. From their
Knowledge Called The Disciples.
From their Holiness called Saints, Acts 9.13. I have heard by many of this
man, how much evil he has done to thy Saints at Jerusalem. Acts 9.32. He came
down also to the Saints which dwelt at Lydda.

From their Faith called Believers, Acts 5.14. And believers were the more
added to the Lord, multitudes both of men and women.

From their Love called the Brethren, Acts 9.30. Which when the brethren knew,
they brought him down to Cesarea, and sent him forth to Tarsus. Acts 11.1. And
the Apostles and brethren that were in Judea heard that the Gentiles had also
received the word of God.

From their Knowledge called the disciples. The number of the disciples was
multiplied. Acts 6.2. Called the multitude of the disciples unto them. And in
my text, And the disciples were called Christians first in Antioch.

2. Observe in the words, 1. Who were called; The Disciples: all they, and
only they. 2. What they were called, Christians. 3. Where they were called, at
Antioch. 4. And lastly, when they were called; First, neither sooner nor later,
but just now when the Church so increased with the preaching of Saul and
Barnabas.


We will chiefly insist on the second and third parts; and therein for the more
convenience, invert the Order, and begin first with the place called Antioch.

3. First then Negatively, not at Jerusalem, and that for two reasons.

First, because Jerusalem had lately lost its credit with the great God of
Heaven, it was become Bankrupt in its reputation for her ingratitude to God,
and cruelty to his servants, Matthew 23.37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Thou that
killest the prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee; how often
would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathers her
chickens under her wings, and ye would not? Behold, your house is left unto you
desolate. Yea it was utterly unfit that the name of Christians should begin, or
be born in that place where Christ was so cruelly put to death.

4. Secondly, because Jerusalem was of a covetous, envious, and engrossing
nature, ready to monopolize and enclose all honor to it self. So that had the
name of Christians first begun within the walls of Jerusalem, the Jews would
have been ready alone to lay claim thereunto, excluding the Gentiles to have
any participation therein. As Christ therefore suffered without the walls of
Jerusalem, thereby proclaiming himself a public good, not appropriated to that
private nation, and for the same causes the name of Christians began not at
Jerusalem but at Antioch.

5. Secondly, Negatively, The name began not at Rome. O how would the tide of
Tybur have swollen beyond bounds and banks, had the name of Christ first begun
from that City? How would the papists boast (though not without some cause)
yet beyond all measure, that Rome in a manner was the godmother of true
Religion, and gave her the name of Christianity? If a father cannot in his
writings vail his bonnet in a civil respect to the city of Rome, and give it a
regardfull salutation, because it was the imperial city of the world; if an
ancient Ecclesiastical Historian cannot give it a Rhetorical complement, in
respect it was so famous a Church, and most ancient Patriarchall Seat, having
precedence before, though not superiority above, all other Churches; I say, if
in such cases their expressions are hailed and tugged by popish parasites, to
signify (contrary to the mind of the speakers) the primacy and infallibility
of the Romish Church: how would they ere now have hollowed it into the ears of
deaf men, and imperiously upbraided the Church of England, if the name of
Christians had its rise from Rome, and original in the walls thereof? But God
has marred their mark, and payred their pride, and blasted their boasting:
Christians were first so called, not at Rome but at Antioch.

6. Here let us enquire orderly into two things, 1. What was Antioch. 2. What
is Antioch.


What was it? I confess there be many cities in Asia of that name, no fewer
then seven and twenty, which I could easily demonstrate, were it not my work to
preach heaven unto you, and not to read a Geography Lecture.

7. The reason why there were so many Antioches is this, because there were two
Antiochusses successively, both puissant princes and eminent Emperors of Asia,
who founding, repairing, and enlargeing several cities, called them all after
their own name. Besides, they had many friends and favorites who to ingratiate
themselves with these princes, called the cities of their own erection after
the names of Antiochus.

8. But the Antiochia mentioned in the text, is certainly known to be Antiochia
in Coelosyria, so called, because lying in a hollow vale interposed between the
mountains of Libanus and Antilibanus.

It was commonly called Antioch the great, and was a Metropolis for trade in
those Eastern parts.

9. Come we now to consider what is Antioch.

It is a pitiful inconsiderable village, famous only for what it has been;
the Churches therein are buried in their own Churchyards. It falls so much
under the notice of a Geographer, that it falls not under it generally;
omitted in most Mapps, except some charitable ones, which are pleased in pity
to take cognizance thereof.

Yea, which is worst of all, a sound Christian and orthodox in his judgment,
is hardly to be found in that city where Christianity first began. It is at
this day infected with Mahumetisme, and such few sorry Christians as remain
therein, are infected in the Fundamentalls of Religion: for they follow the
Greek Church, and deny the procession of the holy spirit from the son, the
second person in the Trinity.

Use 10. To teach humility to all places of greatness, not to confide in their
own populousness, but to walk in humility before God, seeing Antioch the
great, that voluminous city, is now epitomized to nothing: yea, we may
generally observe, that all cities that wear the surname of Great, are beheld
by God with a jealous eye: partly because greatness is a flower of the Crown
of heaven; partly because great cities presume on their populousness to be
great sinners; hoping in vain that their greatness will procure them an Act of
Indemnity, and God be moved to let them alone, rather then to punish so many,
enough to make the sword of his Justice turn edge, before, it can cut through
them.

11. The premises I say have moved the great God of heaven to hold a strict
eye, and heavy hand over all cities surnamed Great; whilst lesser places,
Zoars, escape best in general judgments: Nineveh the great, Jonah 3.3. Hamath
the great, Rabbah the great, Babylon the great, Revel. 18.2. No the infinite,
Nahum 3.9. And Antioch, by humane writers called Antiochia magna, are all
reduced to ruins.

12. Give me leave to say to this city of London, as Darius did to Daniel in a
holy complement, O Darius, live for ever, that is, (understand it a finite
ever) might he, in life, health, and prosperity, continue to the utmost
possibility of nature. So say I, O London, last for ever, may it flourish as
long as any place has a subsistence in this sublunary world; however, let it
not be high minded, but fear, seeing Antioch a place as plentiful, as
puissant, as populous, is now dwingled away to an inconsiderable village.

13. Come we now to the name of Christians:

This will bear a double debate, first, whether it was imposed by the enemies
of the Church in scorn and derision, or whether the Church it self did assume
it as an act of their own election and approbation.

14. I conceive the first utterly improbable: for had the persecutours of the
Church, the depravers of goodness and good men, given a name unto them, they
would have invented and imposed one more defamatory, of greater shame and
disgrace, as to call them Heretics, Nazarites, Crucifictians, and the like;
and not so noble a name as Christians.

By the way we may observe, that the word Christian is used twice in the Bible,
or if you will, but once and an half. Once, 1 Pet. 4.16. Yet if any man suffer
as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God on this
behalf. The half time, Acts 26.28. when Agrippa said, Thou have persuaded me
almost to be a Christian. In both which places we find the word taken in an
honorable acception, nothing of shame being imported therein; which persuades
us to believe, the name was never fastened on Gods servants by their professed
enemies.

A second enquiry succeeds, viz.

15. Whether this name was by divine injunction immediately bestowed upon them,
or whether the Church meeting together, by a prudentiall Act, with a joint
consent assumed it upon themselves.

I confess at the first reading, I conceived the text in the Original favored
the former, where I read (...): now (...) sometimes contains divine
inspiration therein, and is so used Matthew. 2.12. (...): And being warned of God
in a dream. This, I say, inclined me to believe the name of Christians to be
revealed from God, and by him immediately imposed on the disciples.

16. But on second thoughts, I find the word sometimes to import no more then a
plain denomination. And so it is used, Romans 7.3. (...), she shall be called an
adulteress; which moves me to believe, that without any such immediate
revelation from heaven, in an extraordinary manner, in the manifestation of
Gods will, the Apostles there present, by the assistance of Gods spirit within
them, and the general consent of the Church about them, assumed that name upon
themselves.

17. Possibly because many believed, some of the Circumcision and some of the
Uncircumcision; and because Gentiles was a name odious to the Jews, and Jews
offensive to the Gentiles: therefore the word Christians was pitched upon as
common to both, to bury the former names under it: for though Jew and Gentile
did ever remain as words of civil distinction, they were henceforward
abolished, as terms of hateful disparity.

Quest. 18. But why were they not called Fatherians from God the Father, or
holy Ghostians from the holy Ghost? why only Christians from Christ the second
person in the Trinity? here, if any return that they are too harsh and ill
sounding, too troublesome and tedious to be pronounced, the answer is in no
degree satisfactory to the question.

For, first, were our tongues as long accustomed to the pronunciation of these
words, as they have been used to the word Christian, a very lisping utterance
would easily be able to express them.

Secondly, we in England within these last fifteen years, have acquainted our
tongues with as hard terms, with as numerous syllables, and some of Latin,
others of Greek extraction, ( Presbyterians, Antinomians, Independents,
Representatives, etc.) and yet these go down glib with us in our common
discourse.

Answ. 19. The true answer is this, we are called Christians from that person
in the Trinity, that has merited most in the redemption of mankind.

20. And here far be it from me to make odious comparisons betwixt the
persons in the Trinity, and their deserts toward us, which have most indeared
us unto them. That person who has done least for us, has done more for us
then we can requite, then we can deserve, then we can express, then we can
conceive; however, may dust and ashes in all humility confess this most
necessary and comfortable truth, that Christ the second person in the Trinity,
is the best friend we have in the Court of Heaven, and has both done and
suffered most in the effecting our salvation.

21. Thence is that expression of David, Psalm 110.1. The Lord said unto my
Lord, sit thou at my right hand, until I make thy enemies thy footstool. The
Lord, that is, God the Father, said to my Lord, that is to God the Son, to
Jesus Christ; indeed one can take but little comfort in the Lord, if not for my
Lords intercession. The Lord considered in his greatness and justice, is our
enraged enemy, affording us cause of fear and sadness, till beheld as
reconciled in our Lord unto us.

22. Now it will plainly appear, that Christ has performed most for mankind in
order to our Salvation.

For, first, in operibus ad extra, in all outward actions, Christ the second
person in Trinity has an equal share with the other two. Thus Christ, as well
as the other two persons in Trinity, created the World, and all therein, John
1.1, 2, 3. In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the
word was God. The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by
him, and without him was not any thing made that was made.

23. Secondly, we are justified by Christ, as well as by God the Father, Gal.
2.17. But if while we seek to be justified by Christ, we our selves are also
found sinners, is therefore Christ the minister of sin? God forbid.

24. Thirdly, we are sanctified by Christ as well as by the holy Ghost: for as
it is said, Romans 15.16. Being sanctified by the holy Ghost; so it is said, 1
Cor. 1.2. To them that are sanctified through Christ Jesus.

25. Hitherto we have proved, That Christ's goodness came parallel with the
other two persons in Trinity, in their relation to mankind, creating,
justifying, and sanctifying us: now it remains that we show what Christ has
peculiarly done and suffered for us. And this will plainly appear, if we
consider, how three parts of four in the Creed, are made up of our Saviors
performances for our salvation, wherein he alone had a personal interest.

26. Christ it was, who was conceived of the holy Ghost, Christ it was who was
born of the Virgin Mary; Christ it was who suffered under Pontius Pilat; Christ
it was who was crucified, dead, and buried; Christ it was who descended into
hell; Christ it was who the third day rose again from the dead; Christ it is
who sits on the right hand of God almighty; Christ it shall be, who shall
come to judge both the quick and dead: And thus we see, that the greater part
of the Creed is but a Chronicle of Christ's achievements for mankind, from whom
we are justly called Christians.

27. But some will say, grant it fit that Gods servants should be denominated
from the second person in Trinity, yet, why are they not called Jesuits from
Jesus, rather then Christians from the name of Christ?

28. I answer, The name of Jesus which signifies a Savior, is not of so
transitive a nature as the word Christ is, nor can it be so properly applied to
men, without some suspicion of blasphemy, and confining thereupon; Jesus
imports a Savior, Christ imports anointed; now every servant of God cannot
be termed a Savior, but may properly be called a Christ, and an anointed.

29. This may be proved from the expression of David, Psalm. 45.7. Thou love
righteousness, and hate wickedness, therefore God, thy God has anointed
thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. See we here, That Christ being
anointed above his fellows, implies that his fellows were also anointed,
though in an inferior proportion; though the grand shower of graces fell only
on the head of our Savior, yet some straggling drops did light on all them who
truly believe in him, so that every Saint of God is a little Christ or anointed,

30. They may also be called Christians, that is the professors of the faith,
maintainers of the doctrine which Christ delivered to his Apostles, and
endeavourers to imitate the examples which he set before them.

31. Here we must not forget how the heathen made another deduction, and
etymology of the word Christians; for such pagans, in the Primitive times,
beholding the love and charity betwixt Christians, how they mutually relieved
each others wants; but especially, how they conversed together in the time of
plagues and epidemicall diseases, comforting one another, when heathen people
started from the embraces of their nearest relations: I say, seeing this, they
conceived they were called Christiani quasi Chrestani, from (...) the Greek
word for mild and meek, as more merciful men, more pitiful and compassionate
persons then any others.

32. But alas, should heathens now look on the carriage and conversations of
Christians one toward another, how spiteful and cruel we are, how Bearish,
how Borish, how Brutish we are in our mutual dissentions, they would conclude
us not called from meekness; so ill we broke our names.

33. Come we now to the uses of what has been delivered, which may serve to
confute two sorts of people.

First, Those that are ashamed of the name Christians. Secondly, Those that are
ashame to the name Christian.
For the first, We charge this on the account of the Church of Rome, let them
get it off as they can. For the word Christian in the city of Rome, is taken
to be a term of disgrace, a note or brand of infamy; so that when they will
disparage a person, they call him a See the Rhemish Testament, and Dr. Fulk in
his Annotat. on this verse, Acts 11.26. citing one Christophorus Francius for
the justifying of this observation.
Christian, which amounts to as much as a silly fellow, a mean man, a man of
no parts or endowments.

34. And will you know the true cause thereof? It is this; All pregnant wits of
able and active parts, or of high and honorable parentage, enter themselves
into some Order: if men, of Benedictines, Dominicans, Franciscans, Carmelites,
Jesuits, etc. if women, Bridgittians, Clarians, etc. so that besides the name
of Christians, they have an addition from their Order to distinguish them from
the common sort of people. And if they be Seculars of any considerable
Eminency, then are they known by their dignities of Archdeacons Bishops,
Cardinals, etc. So that such plain poor people which are without welt or
guard of any such Religious Accessions, are called Christians, as useless in
the Church, save as ordinary persons without any degree or dignity therein.
Thus Christian passes there for the civillest expression of a fool, and does
not Rome show her self to be Antichristian to purpose, where the name of
Christian passes for a term of dishonor, or at the best of diminution?

35. In the second place we charge it on our Romish adversaries, that they are
ashamed of the name Christian, because they write themselves Dominicans,
Franciscans, Carmelites, etc. pleasing and priding themselves in those titles,
whilst the name of Christian (though not actually disowned) is disused by
them, and left in silence and obscurity.

36. But here the Romanists turn our own Ordinance against us, and assault us
with our own weapons. They heavily accuse us for being ashamed of the name
Christian, because calling our selves Lutherans, Calvinists, Hugenotes,
Protestants, Remonstrants, Antiremonstrants, etc. Thus as Mary complained, John
20.13. They have taken away the Lord, and I know not where they have laid him.
They charge us that we have left out and lost Christ, under those many strange
names we have assumed to our selves.

37. I must enlarge my self in answer to this Objection. And first I lay down
this Foundation, that we never took these names unto our selves, but they were
fixed and fastened on us by the spleen and envy of our Romish adversaries; and
here we appeal to any unbiassed person to be judge betwixt us, whether this be
fair and ingenuous dealing of the Papists? who first asperse us with such
nicknames, first call us so, and then accuse us for being called so. And this
will plainly appear, upon a particular examination of the aforesaid names.

38. To begin with Lutherans and Calvinists. This we say. We acknowledge Luther
and Calvin two eminent instruments of Gods glory in their generations; whereof
the first was more then a common man, armed cap a pe, with a courageous spirit,
to break through, and rout the ranks of the Romish superstitions. However, we
utterly disclaim to be called by their names: call us Lutherans, call us
Calvinists, call us Protestants, or what they please, we stand silent, and
return no vous aves, as utterly unconcerned in that call, only we sind our
tongues, when termed Christians: For the disciples were called Christians first
at Antioch.

39. We read a passage Isaiah 4.1. much appliable to this purpose. And in that
day seven women shall take hold of one man, saying, we will eat our own bread,
and wear our own apparel, only let us be called by thy name, to take away our
reproach. Here we may plainly perceive, that it is the prerogative Royal of
the Husband alone, and part of his Maritall privilege to have his wife
denominated from him. God therefore who is a jealous God, may justly be
suspicious of our Church her loyalty, if offering to be named from any other,
but from Christ her Husband.

40. What says John the Baptist? John 3.29. He that has the Bride is the
Bridegroom: but the friend of the Bridegroom which stands and hears him,
rejoices greatly, because of the Bridegroomes voice, this my joy therefore is
fulfilled. We allow Luther and Calvin friends of the Bridegroom, shining and
burning lights, stars of the first magnitude, but Christ alone is the
Husband, the Bridegroom to whom our Church humbly and heartily applies it
self, triumphing to be called after his name alone.

41. Come we now to the third term of Protestants, wherein we take no delight,
as cast upon us by our adversaries. Here first, we confess that in a general
sense all the Saints of God may be termed Protestants. S. Paul himself was one,
1 Cor. 15.31. I protest by your rejoicing which I have in Christ Jesus our
Lord, I die daily. Protestation is no more then a solemn and serious profession
of the truth.

42. But the name of Protestants, as imposed on those of our Church, had this
original. The German princes being in war with Charles the fitfh Emperor,
drew up an Instrument which they called a Protestation, containing a Breviate
of the Articles of their Religion, in opposition to the superstitions of the
Church of Rome; and this they protested jointly to defend, with their lives and
estates: hereupon their Adversaries termed them Protestants; a term now
extended to all of their persuasion: but it can never be proved that we took
that name to our selves, or took any delight or contentment therein, as too
narrow a name of party, whilst Rechoboth, God has made us room in the word
Christians, seeing that we rejoice in the latitude and comprehensivenesse
thereof.

43. As for the name Hugenots, it was imposed by the Papists on the servants of
God, who declining the common superstition repaired privately to S. Hughs gate
at Toures in France, there secretly to here Sermons, and receive the Sacrament.
But it cannot be evidenced, that ever they of the Reformation in that country,
appropriated the name to themselves, or did ever style or write themselves by
that Appellation; the same may be said of the remaining names, which without
our consent, yea against our wills, have been fastened upon us.

44. Here I will not descend to those petty names of private Sects, which these
last ten years have produced, nor will I honor them with any mention.
Chiefly, because as the youngest of discretion in this congregation, may
remember the beginning of such names, I hope the oldest may live to see the end
of them, when such ridiculous and absurd names shall utterly be abolished.

45. Come we now to the second sort to be confuted; namely, such as are a shame
to the name of Christian, and these may be reduced to three ranks.

1. The Profane. 2. The Ignorant. 3. The Factious.
To begin with the first. Such may justly forfeit the title of Christian, whose
works confute the word, and conversations contradict their denominations; let
such either live as they are called, Christians, or be called as they live,
Pagans.

46. Scipio the worthy Conqueror of Africa, had a son that had nothing of his
father but the name, being cowardly dissolute, and given to all debauchery. It
happened that he came into the Senate House with a ring on his finger, wherein
the picture of his father was most lively made; where the Council, by an Act of
State, commanded him to forbear the wearing of it, adjudging it unfit that he
should wear his fathers picture, who would imitate none of his fathers virtues.

47. I am sorry the story is too natural to be applied, and your meditations
have prevented me herein. Let them no longer abuse the name of Christ, but
desist from making any further use thereof, except they will make a Reformation
of their lives, with all possible speed, to an acceptable proportion.

48. Secondly, it confutes the ignorant, which wear the name of Christ, yet can
give no account of Christ, from whom they were so named; demand of them a
reason of their denomination, and they are utterly unable to return any
satisfaction.

49. Laban being questioned for his cozonage by his nephew Jacob, for
substituting Leah in stead of Rachel, had nothing to plead for himself, Genesis
29.26. Save only that it was the custom of the country not to marry the
younger first. So were some country people taken to task, and seriously
catechized about the cause of their names, they would render no other reason,
but the custom of the place they lived in; it has been fashionable say they
for many hundred of years, our fathers, grandfathers, Great grandfathers,
time out of mind, have been called Christians, and we succeed, as to their
lands, so to their appellations.

50. It is sad there should be so much darkness in our land of Goshen, where
the Gospel has been so plentifully preached, and publicly professed: these
things I could as heartily wish they were false, as I do plainly know they are
true.

51. Lastly, it confutes those who are factious, and willingly and wilfully
make rents in the Church; how can these without apparent usurpation be entitled
Christians?

52. Well, to conclude, let us leave off all by-names of parties, interest and
factions, and return to our best, largest, and ancientest name of Christians:
best, because no doubt imposed, if not by the command, by the consent of God
himself, and therefore good reason it should always continue as an honorable
denomination. We read, Genesis 2.19. That whatsoever Adam called every living
creature, that was the name thereof. It seems he gave them expressive and
significant names, such as were brief definitions of their natures, or else God
would have reversed and revoked them, and not have suffered them to stand and
remain; seeing therefore the name of Christians was given by a greater then
Adam, being, if not jure divino, at the least jure apostolico, by the joint
concurrence of the apostles thereunto, let it last to all posterity.

53. Yea, as this is the best name, because the best men were the authors
thereof, so is it also, because of the best matter contained therein, the name
Christian well understood, it preaches a double Sermon unto us.

1. It puts us in mind of what Christ has done for us, and the many
benefits we obtained by his life, death, resurrection, and intercession. 2. It
is a remembrancer unto us of what we should do for Christ, in gratitude to the
many favors he has done for us.
54. Secondly, Christians, it is the largest name, it takes in all Christ's
little flock within the compass thereof, agreeing in the same fundamental
doctrine, though there may be difference betwixt them in unimportant
controversies, where the error does not entrench on salvation; though their
opposites may unmercifully censure and condemn them for the same. O! if God
were not more merciful to us then we are charitable one to another, his flock
would be so little, it would not deserve the name of a flock.

55. 3. It is the ancientest proper name; Believers, Saints, Brethren,
Disciples, they were but epithites and appellatives; and though they still be
in being and luster, yet they are all out-shined with the word Christian, the
best, largest and ancientest name for all of our profession; And the Disciples
were first called Christians at Antioch.

FINIS.
THE WORST of EVILS.

Ephesians. 2.3. And were by nature the Children of wrath even as others.

By T. F. B. D.

LONDON, Printed by R. Daniel, MDCLVI.

THE WORST of EVILS.
Ephesians. 2.3. And were by nature the Children of wrath even as others.
IN this chapter S. Paul is the remembrancer to the Ephesians, and reads them
a lecture of their badnesse, before their calling and conversion; and surely
such thoughts are right profitable to Christians, to call to mind how bad they
were whilst they were wild Olives, before they were ingrafted into Christ: for
first it will raise their thankfulness to God; What am I, or what is my
fathers house, that thou should bring me hither? it will make us pay one
tribute of praise more fully, more freely, when we consider if we be vessels of
honor, it is no difference in the clay, but in the pleasure of the Potter.
Secondly, it is excellent physic against the pleasure of pride, to let our
souls blood with the consideration how bad we have been; he that will not
confess his former badnesse, I suspect his present goodness, whether he has
any or not. Lastly, it will make us both pity the present woeful estate of
wicked men, and hope well, and pray heartily for their future conversion; why
should we fear that arm of God should be too short for others, that could reach
us? think not that we are the last lost sheep that shall ever be found; The
most crooked tree will make timber for the temple, if God pleases to hew it.

For these and other reasons, S. Paul in this chapter paints out to the life
the dead estate of the Ephesians, whilst they were in trespasses and sins,
following their own lusts, and the power of the Prince of the air; and in
conclusion shows the cause thereof, namely their corruption by nature; so that
the last item in this black bill is in effect the very imprimis of all the
rest. And were by nature the children of wrath even as others: we will observe
this plain method. 1. That by Nature all are the Children of wrath. 2. How it
comes to pass that we are so. 3. Seeing so it is, what good use we may make
thereof to our selves.


1. That by nature we are the children of wrath, is the very language of my
text; yet lest any should object my text should be but a single Instrument,
hear how it is tuned according to the doleful consort both of scripture and
reason in this point: of scripture, Psalm. 51.5. behold, I was shapen in
iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me: Romans 5.12. wherefore as by
one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon
all men, for that all have sinned.

2. By reason, fetched from the mystery of Circumcision under the old Testament,
and Baptism in the new; the whole, says our Savior, have no need of the
Physician, but those which are sick.

Secondly, because we want that original righteousness wherein we were
created, and which is required to the purity and perfection of our nature;
which righteousness was in Adam who was created after Gods own image,
consisting chiefly in knowledge and holiness* as for Adams knowledge, he gave
sufficient proof thereof in giving names to the Creatures; if a Godfather at
the font give a foolish and fond name to a child, the Bishop at confirmation
has power to alter it; had Adam either imposed improper or insignificant names
on the creatures, God no doubt could have reversed and revoked them, but the
text says Genesis 2.19. whatsoever Adam called living creatures, that was the
name thereof, God did concur with Adam, and approve their names as brief
definitions of their natures: nor was his sanctity any whit inferior to his
knowledge, each faculty of his soul did look straight forwards on his proper
object without squinting aside on any other; so that what was said of this
great world, was as great a truth of this little world man, and behold all
things therein were exceeding good; now because we want thi^ original
righteousness, we are therefore the children of wrath.

Thirdly, because all the part^ and powers of our soul and bod^ are depraved
with original corruption: now as Nehemiah did by night survey the ruins of
the walls of Jerusalem, so let us with shame, sorrow and silence, behold the
breaches and dilapidations of our souls. Our understandings are so bad that
they understand not their own badnesse; our wills which are the Queens of our
souls become the vassals of sin; our memory like Jett good only to draw
strawes, and treasure up trifles of no moment; our consciences through errors
in our understanding, sometimes accusing us when we are innocent, sometimes
accquitting us when we are guilty; our affections all disaffected and out of
order; must not that needs be a monstrous face wherein the blewnesse which
should be in the veins, is in the lips; the redness which should be in the
cheeks, in the nose; the hair that should grow on the head, on the face? and
must not our souls needs seem ugly in the sight of God, who have grief growing
there where joy should, and joy where grief should? we love what we should
hate, and hate where we should love; we fear where no fearis, and fear not
where we ought to fear; and all our affections either mistake their true
object, or exceed their due measure: this made the purest Pagans see somewhat
of their natural impurity, and the most refined Philosophers complain of their
drowsinesse by nature; they saw al^ was not right, all was not well which made
them complain tha^ nature was Noverca, a stepmother nature was a mother in law,
but when or how their own mother dyed, that they could not tell or remember;
they could not know how their souls forfeited original righteousness, being a
mystery too high for them to mount unto, who wanted the wings of holy writ, and
the direction of S. Paul in my text, that we are by nature the children of
wrath even as others.

Here perchance some may expect, that as the master of the feast said to him
that wanted the wedding garment, friend how came thou in hither? so I should
demand of original sin, foe and worst of foes how came thou in hither, and
by what invisible leakes did thou soak into our souls? but I desire if it be
possible to present you this day with a rose without prickles, to deliver plain
and positive doctrine, without thorny disputes or curious speculations, lest as
Abraham's ram was caught in the thicket, so I imbroyle you and my self in
difficult controversies; and here in general to prevent such objections as
might be made against this doctrine of the wrath deserving condition of men by
nature, pray hearken to these three excellent rules.

1. Let us not with our wanton wit kick against the pricks of our own
consciences, and go about to prove by arguments that is not, which we by
woeful experience find is, or that that is not just which is done by justice
it self.

2. Let us not make (...) the doctrine of the chair to determine controversies
between God and us; for the wisdom of the flesh is a malefactor, no wonder if
the malefactor being made a Judge does accquit himself: 2ly. it is enmity to
God; no reason that he should be censured by him that is his enemy, his ways
I say which are often above reason but never against right: let us not make the
pallat of corrupt flesh which savoureth not the things of the spirit, our
taster in spiritual matters.

3. Let us not busy our brains so much to know how Original sin came into
us, as labor with our heart to know how it should be got out of us; but the
worst is, most men are sick of the Rickets in the soul, their heads swell to a
vast proportion, puffed up with the emptiness of airy speculations, whilst their
legs and lower parts do wast and consume, their practical parts do decay,
none more lazy to serve God in their lives and conversations: and here the
better to ballace both mine and your judgments aganinst all blasts and
billows of private opinions, hearken to the resolution of the Church of
England, as she has delivered her self in the article which is the ninth in
number, and bears the title of original or birth-sin: original sin stands
not in the following of Adam, as the Pelagians do vainly talk, but it is the
fault and corruption of every man, which naturally is engendered of the
offspring of Adam, whereby man is very far gone from original righteousness,
and is of his own nature inclined to evil, so that the flesh lusts always
against the spirit; therefore in every person born into the world it deserves
Gods wrath and damnation: and that this infection of nature does remain, yea in
them that are regenerate, whereby the lust of the flesh called in Greek (...)
which some do expound the wisdom, and some sensuality, some the affection,
some the desires of the flesh, is not subject to the law of God; and although
there be no condemnation for them that believe and are baptized, yet the
Apostle does confess that concupiscence and lust has of it self the nature of
sin.

So far the golden Article, which as all the rest was written by their hands
who had good heads and hearts, in whom wisdom did contend with their learning,
but their piety was a Conqueror above both; who what they learnedly distilled
out of the scripture, faithfully infused into these Articles: and as the real
serpent of Moses did devour the seeming serpents which Jannes and Jambres the
Egyptian enchanters did make, so shall the truth of these Articles outlast and
outlive confute and confound all false and erroneous doctrines whatsoever; even
when wilful Heretics shall have their eyes put out with the beams of truth,
and factious Schismatics want a conventicle to hide their shame in, and
furious Innovatours either run themselves out of breath (if the law do not
first overtake them) or else fall down through the giddiness of their own
brains; and then shall the eternal truth of these Articles want nothing but a
foe to oppose them, because herein they concur with the doctrine of S. Paul
in my text, that we are by nature children etc,

Is it so that that we are by nature the children of wrath? this serves to
confute three sorts of people, namely those who either faintly affirm it, or
flatly deny it, or falsely maintain it: faintly affirm it, and such are those
as have written, Peccatum originis non nisi ex duobus scripturae locis
effoditur, original sin is dug out but of two or three places of scripture;
is diggd out, do they mean is extracted by faithful consequence? as if what
were so deduced were not Scripture as well as that which is their (...) in so
many words; Is diggd out, and so are gold and precious stones; and are
mysteries of religion of less price, because they are to be gathered by some
pains? is diggd out, and that is false, for it lies above ground in plain and
pregnant places of scripture, though these men had rather stumble at it then
behold it. But out of two or three places of scripture, why, out of the mouth
of two or three witnesses shall not every truth be established? but out of two
or three places of scripture, as if one were not all one with one thousand,
when it comes from an infallible mouth; places of scripture are not to be taken
out by the tale, but the weight. Thus these men labor to lessen original sin;
O let us all labor to lessen original sin, but not by extenuating it in our
tenets and opinions, but by laboring to crucify and mortify it in our lives
and conversations; and surely many men's immoderate diminishing original sin,
making it next to nothing, gave the unhappy occasion to learned Illyricus to
fall foul on that opinion (if his meaning there be not mistaken) that original
sin was a very substance indeed; an opinion so absurd, that at the same time I
could both laugh at the ridiculous tenet, and weep at the unhappiness of the
man that maintained it; well, let us go backward, and if we want wherewithal
to cover his nakedness, let us do it with the sheets of his own books, and let
his admirable mastery in other things crave a concealment of his error in this.

Flatly deny it, and such are the Pelagians, who say that all sin comes only
by imitation, surely Cain never learned to kill his brother by imitation; he
was the first that set that black copy, and wrote not after any other. Indeed
children would not be so bad, or so soon bad, but for bad examples set before
them; but bad examples are not the root from whence childrens badnesse does
grow, but rather the water or compost tha cause it to spring and sprout more
speedily.

Fasly maintain it, and so the Papists, who though they allow the deprivation
of original righteousness, will not allow the depravation of our nature, but
hold that we differ from Adam no more then a naked man from him whose clothes
are taken away; and to make this more plausible, Bellarmine creates in his
brains, that Adam was created with a reluctanty and rebellion of the inferior
powers of his soul against the superior faculties thereof, nay blusheth not to
affirm that God could not make a man so pure and perfect, but praeter Dei
intentionem ex condition materiae, there would be such a rebellion in him:
Lord! this same Bellarmine at other times without necessity and against reason
could conceive how omnipotency props up accidents without a substance, and
makes the same body at the same time in several places, and now he cannot see
how an infinite power is antidote strong enough to expel out of the matter any
venomous quality whatsoever: true it is that there was in Adam, motion,
tendency, and propensity of each faculty to its proper object, but as for any
obliquity and deordination in them, it neither was nor could be, as repugnant
both to Gods goodness and man's perfection: But thus they go about to make (as
I may say) some corption in Adam in his state of integrity, that they may make
way for some integrity in the sons of Adam after their corruption: but the
best is, that as the Pharisees Act. 23.9. though enemies to S. Paul's person,
yet friends to his tenets about the resurrection from the dead, and valiantly
vindicated both him and the truth from the Sadduces who traduced him for an
Heretic; so the Dominicans who are sound in this point, that we are unsound by
nature, defend both us and the truth against the Jesuitical faction that
maintain the contrary: on then with courage you learned Friars, and may the
school of Dominick be too hard for the shield of Loyola; whilst verity is on
your side, let victory be at your backs, may you as far surpass your enemies
for piety and solid learning, as they go beyond you and all honesty, in policy
and treacherous designs. And thus whilst they fight one against another, let
us come to our selves, and apply what has been delivered, first to those that
are children to parents, then to those that are parents to children.

Ye children to parents have heard how we are by nature the children of wrath
even as others, which wrath-deserving condition is derived to you from Adam by
your immediate parents, they alas could not convey life, but must pass death
unto you also by the same grant, yet this ought not to lessen your love, abate
your affection, diminish your duty unto them, Isay 45.10. woe unto him that
says to his father, what have thou begotten? or unto his mother, what have
thou brought forth? Rather imitate the example of David, though he complained
that in sin had his mother conceived him, yet he was a father to his father,
and a mother to his mother in her old age, taking order with the king of Moab
that they should be provided for, 1 Samuel 22.3. grant our parents should turn
Ostriches unto us and forsake us when we are young, we nevertheless are to be
Storks unto them, and feed them when they are old, having received from them
under God the greatest benefit that can be, our being.

Ye parents to children have heard that this wrath-deserving condition is
derived by you unto your posterity. How solemnly, seriously, and religiously
then ought marriage to be undertaken and used? how too too blame are they who
add to this natural corruption other stains before God and man? antedating
their wives, whores, and heirs, bastards; a sin in some places that is made
so common, that it is made no sin: have we too little wickedness of Peor,
whereof we are not cleansed unto this day, that before the old debt be
satisfied ye run on a new score, and add bastardy and illegitimation to the
natural infection of your children?

2. Secondly, ye see how (though against your wills) ye have propagated this
wrath-deserving condition unto your children; know then that you are bound both
in honor and honesty, civility and Christianity to pluck them out (what lies
in your power) of this pit wherein they are plunged; and this ye may do,
first, by embracing the speediest opportunity to fasten the sacrament of
baptism upon them; by baptism the condemning power of original sin is
drowned, in the font the bane is removed, the blot does remain, the guilt is
remitted, the blemish is retained, the sting is gone, the stain does stay, if
not consented to it cannot damn us, though it may defile us. In baptism, the
finall-peaceable-commanding power is washed away, ever after it may be in us,
not over us, it may rule as a tyrant, not a king, being ever resisted, often
subdued, though never expelled. Some prisoners have eaten off their irons with
Mercury water, but there is no way to fret of the fetters of original
corruption, (wherewith our feet are hurt in the stocks, the irons have entaed
into our souls) but by the water in baptism, and therefore take heed how ye
needlessely deferr it: let marriage feasts be put of till the parties have got
their wedding wardrobe, let churching be deferred to attend the perfect health
of the woman, let funeral pomps be delayed, they may be put of without danger,
which rather please the living, then profit the dead: these are moveable feasts
whereof ye make your own Almanacks, and set them to fall higher or lower,
sooner or later, at your own pleasure, but oh take heed how causelessly ye put
of the baptizing of your children, stand not on the shadow till ye loose the
substance, ne quod deferatur auferatur, lest what ye delay God deny, and whilst
you defer the christening of your child, God take away the child to be
christened, and then, though I will not be the judge to condemn the child, were
I one of the Jury I should scarce accquit the father.

Secondly, let them not want good prayers, which if steept in tears will grow
the better, good precepts, good precedents, and show thy child in thy self what
he should follow, in others what he should shun and avoid, let them not want
wholesome correction, if occasion require; blast not their souls with the
honey-dew of cockering and indulgence; fetch those little malefactors from the
horns of the Altar, from the sanctuaries of their mouths, sides, lips and
bosoms: what says Solomon? folly is bound up in the heart of a child, and the
rod of correction shall drive it out, not drive out the heart, but the folly;
never was brave spirit spoiled with moderate correction. But the mischief is,
that as in the beginning of the year we make much of those weeds which bring
the first news of the approaching spring, nettles are used for pot-hearbs, and
s^llets made of Eldern buds, so fond parents welcome and embrace in their
children the first beginnings of sin, yea please themselves to hear their
infants dispraise God, swear, call names, talk wantonly, yea this is accounted
wit in the little children; I am sure it is want of wit in the greater
children, for so I may fitly call their foolish parents who take delight
therein. I say no more, but as for those parents who will not use the rod upon
their children, I pray God he uses not their children* as a rod for them.

Now least those who at this present time are neither children to parents, nor
parents to children, should complain with the Grecian widows that they this
day are neglected in the dispensation of my doctrine, hearken to a general use
which will take us all in, let us all take notice of a bad principle which
lurks in our hearts, this natural corruption which deserves the wrath of God;
in the low Countries half their houses ly buried in the ground, the laying of
the foundation is counted as much as the rest of the building* so half our
badnesse lies secret and unseen, consisting in original corruption, whereof
too few take notice, for though (as I have said before) baptism takes away
the commanding and condemning power thereof, yet the blot still remaining (as
by woeful experience we daily find) makes us backward to all goodness, and
headlong forwards to all badnesse, this is that which S. Paul to the Romans
(who though he might touch at an improper expression, sure would never land
there and dwell so long therein) calls sin fourteen times, and we shall find
it fourteen thousand times to be so in our selves. Away then with the sick
doctrine of the soundness of freewill, and merit of works; we have always
that in us which baneth the perfection of all our performances, namely the
lawless law in our members which rebelleth against the law of our mind, and
leads us captive to the law of sin which is in our members: Thou shall not
commit adultery, and thou shall commit adultery, thou shall not steal, and thou
shall steal, thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor, and thou
shall bear false witness against thy neighbor; witches (they say) say the
Lords prayer backward, but concupiscence (this witch) in our soul, says all
the commandments backward, and makes us cross in our practice what God
commands in his precepts. Thus every day we sin, and sorrow after our sin, and
sin after our sorrow, and do what we would not, and would what we do not, and
the vvind of Gods spirit blovveth us one way, and the tide of our corruption
hurryeth us another: these things he that sees not in himself is
sottish-blind; he that sees and confesses not, is damnably proud; he that
confesses and bewaileth not, is desperately profane; he that bewaileth and
figheth not against it, is unprofitablely pensive; but he that in some weak
manner does all these, is a Saint in reversion here, and shall be one in
possession hereafter.

FINIS.
THE SNARE BROKEN.

Genes. 49. verse. 6. O my soul come not into their secrets.

By T. F. B. D.

LONDON Printed by R. Daniel, for J. S. 1656.

THE SNARE BROKEN.
Genes. 49. verse. 6. O my soul come not thou into their secrets.
AMong the many arguments to prove the penmen of the scripture inspired by the
spirit of God, this is not the last and least, that the penmen of holy writ do
record their own faults, and the faults of their nearest and dearest relations:
for instance hereof, how coursly does David speak of himself? So foolish was I
and ignorant, I was as a very beast before thee.

And do you think that the face of S. Paul did look the more foul by being
drawn with his own pencill, when he says, I was a murderer, a persecutor, the
greatest of sinners, etc.

This is not usual in the writings of humane authors, who praise themselves to
the utmost of what they could; and rather then loose a drop of applause, they
will lick it up with their own tongues.

Tully writes very copiously in setting forth the good service which he did the
Roman state, but not a wo^d of his covetousness, of his affecting popular
applause, of his pride and vain glory, of his mean extraction, and the like.

Whereas clean contrary Moses, he sets down the sin and punishment of his own
sister; the idolatry and superstition of Aaron his brother; and his own fault
in his preposterous striking the rock, for which he was excluded the land of
Canaan. No wonder then if he tell the faults of Simeon and Levi, both their
cruel murder, and the heavy curse which their father laid upon them.

Old Jacob lies now a dying, the lanthorn of his body was ready to be broken,
and the light that was in it to be ex^inguished; his twelve sons get about
him, every one expects a blessing, and they raise their intentions the more,
because they knew that he was a prophet.

He begins sadly; Reuben has a check, and Simeon and Levi have a curse. No
doubt old Jacob as a private man had affection to them both, but now he speaks
to them as a prophet; he knows no natural affection, being acted with
spiritual inspiration; he leaves off flesh and blood, being prompted by the
spirit of God, and tells them, cursed be their wrath, for for it was fierce,
and their anger, for it was furious.

I shall use no other method in the words, but such observations as are
pertinent to the text, and profitable for your souls.

First, O my soul, etc. seeing Jacob does entertain a discourse with his own
soul, we may learn,

A Christian who can discourse with his own soul, may make good company for
himself.

This was David's precept Psalm. 4. verse. 4. commune with your own hearts upon
your beds; this is no contradiction, there is a kind of discourse which makes
no noise: this communion is the heart of heavenly meditation, he may give
himself a question, and answer it himself; and David what he prescribes to us,
practices himself, when he says, why art thou so sad O my soul, and why art
thou so disquieted within me? trust still in God.

Had people this art of entertaining a time to discourse with themselves, it
would prevent much mischief; thou may divide thy soul into several parts,
and thou may discourse if thou will with every faculty, with thy
understanding, memory, fancy, and the several affections of thy soul.

Ask that question of thy understanding which Philip asked of the Eunuch, Acts
10. understandest thou what thou read? call your understanding to account
whether you understand what you read or not.

Ask thy fancy that question which Acbish once propounded to king David, where
have thou been roving all this day? bring thy fancy to account.

Ask that of thy memory which the master did of the unjust steward, Luke 16.
give an account of thy stewardship; ask thy memory what good have thou measured
up.

When thou find thy self transported with mirth, ask thy soul that question,
God did to Sarah, why laughest thou? when thou see the passion of anger grow
too violently upon thee, ask of it that question which God did to the prophet
Jonah, do thou well to be angry?

Consider, if you could thus discourse with your selves, you would prevent much
bad company; for when we run into the company of good fellows, we have but
one thing to pretend unto as a thing incident to man's nature, that he loves
company. But if we could entertain this discourse with our own souls, we
should be never less alone, then when we are alone, and abate the tediousness
of solitariness with good society.

Oh my soul come not thou into their secrets. The next observation is,

That wicked men have certain secrets, which they communicate to those of their
own society.

We read in the 26. Psalm of the secrets of the Lord; now as the Lord has his
secrets, so the devil has his secrets of iniquity; and the reason why they
keep them secret, is, because otherwise they would not attain to those ends
which they propound to themselves: if all their designs were open, they would
be frustrated and never obtain their hellish intents, and therefore that they
may not be hindered in bringing them about, they keep them secret.

And yet know by the way, though they are secrets to men, they are not secrets
to God; all things are naked and open before him, he is the searcher of the
heart and reins. But no further of this; I come to that which is of more
concernment.

It is a dangerous thing to come into the secrets of wicked men.

I divide wicked men into two sorts, those that call people into their secrets,
and those that come into their secrets when called; the principalls, and the
accessaries: there is a generation of people that think they will fare well
enough, if they be not the first contrivers, or the most active instruments in
an evil design: they think this will bear them out, if they came in but by the
by; oh beloved, know it is not enough to excuse thee.

And know that a man may come into an evil secret, and not command it, contrive
it, or act it.

First by consent to it, thus (not S. Paul) but Saul the persecutor came into
the mischievous secret of stoning Stephen; for though it was openly acted, yet
it was privately plotted. And what did Saul do? he threw never a stone, he did
not, but I tell you what he did, he kept the clothes of those that did it: the
Jews put off their upper garments that their hands might be at the more
liberty, with the more strength and steady aim to throw their stones at him,
which their sleeves hindered; now Paul standing by, and keeping the wardrobe of
their clothes, was equally guilty with them in that act.

The next thing by which a man may be guilty of a wicked sercret, is by
concealing of it, and we find that God brought heavy judgments upon mere
concealing.

In the fifth of the Acts, it is said of Ananias that he kept back the price,
his wife being privy to it, it is not said she did consent, but only conceal
it. Now S Austin says in this case it is one of the hardest things to clear
Gods judgments.

God is just, the fault was in her use of this action, she might have
discovered it unto the Church, and so have been spared.

Thirdly, by commending it; though we neither consent to it, or conceal it, yet
if thou commend it, thou do adopt that wicked act to be thine own, and draw
the guilt thereof upon thee; and so men come to be guilty of other folks
sins.

But if a man be a minister or a magistrate, he may be guilty of sin
otherwise, and neither of these ways here spoken of; the minister if he does
not publicly reprove it, and the magistrate if he do not punish it.

The minister, if he do not reprove it with Christian discretion and
moderation; though in the sins of great men there is much more danger in
reproving them. A crack or want of repair in the top of a steeple is more
dangerous to mend then any part; the mason must have many devices to climb unto
it with the danger of loosing of his life: so it is dangerous to reprove great
persons to high for us to meddle with. But if we be called to it, we must trust
in the assistance of God; and we partake of their sins if we do not reprove
them.

But the magistrate is guilty though he do reprove it, if he do not punish it.
Ely did reprove his sons, it was well he did it, but this is not enough, the
heinousness of their offenses was of that nature, that the proud flesh must be
cut off, and not be suffered to fester in the body. But he being a magistrate
and not punishing of it, suffered himself.

But now let us come to know the secret; what was the mischief which these two
had done? the story is large, and is set down by the spirit of God in the 34.
of Genesis.

Now may I request you, when divine providence shall carry you to your quiet
meditations, to read the whole story.

I shall give you a brief account of it.

Jacob had but one only daughter, and she would go gadding abroad to see other
daughters; see what comes of the wandering of virgins from their parents houses,
for this was it which wrought her misery, she would go abroad to see fashions,
and going forth, she sees and is seen by the prince of the land.

Give now Shechem his due that did her this wrong, he was more honest in his
dishonesty then many in this age, who when they have improved their wicked
thoughts upon women's weakness, how many are there who do scornfully and
spitefully throw them off, and triumph in the conquest they have gotten by
their own treachery, and the others fault, and throw away the snuff of their
wantonness which ends their love?

It is said of Thamar the daughter of David, that after Ammon had abused her,
he fell from her; but Shechem had more generous principles, he does endeavor
to make her, whom formerly he had made his harlot, to be his wife.

This done, the sons of Jacob will not consent, unless they be circumcised,
which done, in comes Simeon and Levi and kills them all, men, women and
children. Now two things give accents to their cruelty.

First, that they abused the holy sacrament of circumcision, which God had
appointed for a sign and a seal to the children of Israel, and to make this a
cloak to their murtherous intents this is the first aggravation, they brought
heaven into their intended designs.

The second was this, that whereas the offense done was personal in Shechem;
yet the punishment fell upon the whole city, and the women and children.

What mischief had the women done, whose known weakness is their professed
armor against any true valiant man? What fault have little infants done, whose
fathers were the only committers of the faults? this added to their cruelty.

But as a musket makes no report when discharged in the same place and time
with a full cannon; so the act of these is but small in comparison of the
cruelty of which this day is our grateful remembrance: my soul come not thou
into their secrets. It was a secret in its nature, but a greater secret in
regard of the time and place in which it was committed; it was plotted in the
bowels of the earth, and they undermined many yards therein, least the sun
ashamed to see it should discover it; or as if they would creep nearer to hell,
from whence it was first invented.

And it was a secret in respect of the persons who were joined and soldered
together with an oath of secrecy; and mark a double concurrence of cruelty in
this secret.

The sons of Jacob abuse the sacrament of circumcision, under the covert
whereof they might the better bring to pass their intended villainies; so
Gardener, he gave the sacrament of the Lords supper, to all those that were
conspirators in this wicked design and treason; that so he might enjoin them
to the greater secrecy.

And as in the secret of Jacobs sons there were men, women and children
slain; so these traitors intended not their cruelty against the king only, but
surely that blow had not been given, but many thousands of people whose
occasions might have summoned them to that place, would have been sent with the
peers of the land the same way of destruction. I do not question but there are
those here present, whose memories have not let fall the day of this great
deliverance; for it must not be said that the deliverance extended only to
those then living, but we, though then in our mothers wombs, and not thought
on, participate fully in the enjoyment thereof. For had it been effected as it
was intended, it is easy for you to judge and conceive the sad condition this
land had groaned under; had it took effect the miseries of this land had been
great, but the dishonor to God had been far greater, and if God had suffered
it to come to pass, presently they had censured their own actions to be good
and just, but the snare is broken, and we are delivered.

Oh let your prayers be therefore joined with mine, that we may be all kept
from the secrets of wicked men, and in a thankful remembrance be constant in
our praises to God for this days deliverance.

Some desire that this day may not be kept, but forgot, and methinks it looks
with a paler color in the Almanac then it use to do, but next year it will be
a full jubilee, fifty years since the contrivance thereof: let all those whom
God shall lend life unto that day, keep in your minds the memorial of so great
a blessing, and to preserve the memory thereof, for what principles of false
doctrine had infected this land, had this plot taken effect? and therefore it
shall be my prayer; that God will write thankfulness in your hearts to a
continual remembrance of the same.

FINIS.
STRANGE JUSTICE.

Judges 19.30. There was no such deed done nor seen, from the day that the
children of Israel came up out of the land of Egypt, unto this day: consider of
it, take advice, and speak your minds.

By T. F. B. D.

LONDON Printed by R. Daniel, for I. S. MDCLVI.

STRANGE JUSTICE.
Judges 19.30. There was no such deed done nor seen, from the day that the
children of Israel came up out of the land of Egypt, unto this day: consider of
it, take advice, and speak your minds.
TRagedyes begin smiling, but end weeping and bleeding; so this chapter: the
former part thereof merry with feasting, the latter mournful with murder, a
murder most strange, most true; and give me leave a little to unfold the
manner thereof, the rather, because it it a leading case, and I pray God that
it may never hereafter have any to follow it. A namelesse Levite with his wife
journeyed on the highwayes side, waited on by one servant. Balaam the false
prophet rode in state with his two men: Numb. 22. the Levite in this chapter is
decently attended, has his man: how many poor ministers now adays for want of
means are forced to be slaves to others, and servants to themselves? going on
they come to the city of Gibeon, whose inhabitants were notoriously wicked,
addicted to the sin of Sodomy, where all the pleasure and delight consists
in the enormity thereof. But as lust in this city was hot, so hospitality was
cold, none invite this Levite home to their house; for then amongst the Jews
there were no inns, or rather every house was an inn, wherein strangers were
freely entertained, and at their departure thanks was all the shot they had to
discharge. At last comes an old man from his work out of the field at evening,
and gives him a free invitation; mark (I pray) his character, ^ he was an old
man: your youthful gallants have more bravery on their backs, then bounty in
their hands; alas! they have been born since the death of hospitality. Even
amongst us for the most part they are old men of an ancient stamp and edition
almost worn out, which are most to be commended for their hospitable bounty. 2,
he came from his work, those are most pitiful to others, who are most painful
in their own callings. Your great gamesters that will play away an estate by
wholesale, are loath to retaile out an alms to the poor, whilst commonly the
best husbands are the best housekeepers; liberality being a fire that is
maintained by thrift. The Levite entered into his house, but finds the haven
more dangerous then the open sea; more safe might he have been in the
wilderness amongst beasts, then in the city amongst beastly men, who now
press to offer that violence to his person, which is not to be named amongst
Christians. At last they are content to spare the Levite himself (which I
impute not to their pity, but to Gods providence) and make his wife the prey of
their lust; till the violence and variety thereof caused her sudden death;
where mark by the way the justness of the ways of God. This woman had
formerly been false to her husband verse 2. and now see wherein she had
offended, therein is she punished.

Culpa libido fuit, poena libido suit.
By lust she had sinned, by lust she does suffer. She that could not be
content to be several to her husband alone, is now against her will made
common to so many, till it cost her her life; yet it might please God so to
sanctify this affliction unto her, as thereby to bring her to a sight and
sorrow for her sins, and her shameful death on earth might occasion to her a
glorious life in heaven. Her husband laying hand on her corpse, with a knife cut
it into twelve parts, and severally sends them to the jury of the tribes of
Israel.

Hard hearted husband, if the least pity be alive in thy breast, offer not this
wrong unto the dead. Is it not enough that her soul is parted from her body,
but her body also must be twelve times parted from it self? suffer her ashes to
sleep in quiet, the pawn for the return of her soul; methinks that knife that
cuts her hands should pierce thine heart: but comdemn not the Levite for this
deed; it was not cruelty, but pity and piety that moved him unto it, that the
sight of the corpse might make the Jews the more thoroughly prosecute the cause,
and every tribe that had a part of her body, might have a part in revenging her
innocent blood. Her mouth only spoke whilst she was living, now each piece of
her mangled corpse speaks when she is dead, whilst the Israelites both
attentively heard and judiciously understood the language thereof, which made
them condemn the causers of her death for matchless offenders: many men have
done villanously, but these surmounted them all, there was no such deed done
nor seen since etc.

I will not mangle my text as the Levite his wife, with often dividing it; let
it suffice to observe therein two principal parts,

First, a narrration of a notorious villainy, there was no etc.

2 The prescribing of wholesome orders for the future: consult, consider, and
give etc.

In the first, two commendable practices of the Jews commend themseIves to our
meditation.

1 First, they were well skilled, well versed in the several actions which
were done in their country before their time, and used to match and compare one
deed with another, to see which was better, which worse, which more which less
vicious; and amongst the army of sins behold this in my text stands like a
Saul, stands higher then his fellows by the shoulders upwards.

Herein let us follow the example of the Israelites, let us read histories that
we be not made an history; let us compare the passages of the time past with
those of the present age; for as it is a great blemish in a Gentleman though
never so proper and personable, if he has but such a crick in his neck, that
he cannot turn his face backward to see what is behind him: so it is a great
shame in such a one as pretends to learning and wisdom, if by the benefit of
wisdom he cannot reflect the eyes of his mind backward, and see those things
which were done in the days of his fathers, and in the old time before them.
You therefore that have the chronicle of our kings in your houses, the Acts and
monuments in your halls, condemn them not to a desk, as the Jews did their
harps to the willows, rather for sight then service, till moths have fretted
out the books as worms have eaten the bodies of those worthy men who compiled
them; but at your best leisure read and peruse them. But when you have read all
humane Authors over, they will be but so many muddy and brackish channells to
the pure and fresh fountain of Gods holy word: meditate therefore in the same
both day and night, wherein alone you shall find stories more true, more
various, more pleasant, more profitable, then all other writers ancient or
modern are able to afford.

2. The second praiseworthy practice in the Israelites is this, they kept the
solemn and constant memorial of their coming out of the land of Egypt; from
which as from a memorable era, and remarkable Epoche they used to date, and
compute their several actions; not since the day that the children of Israel
came out of the land of Egypt. And good reason they had to remember it; God
then bestowing on their fathers a great deliverance, who whilst they lived in
Egypt, lived in continual slavery. Indeed they had meat enough; which may
serve to condemn the cruelty of some masters to their servants now adays, who
though they give them their bellyfull of work, will not give them their
bellyfull of victuals.

The Egyptians dealt better with the Jews in this kind; of onions, cucumbers,
and the fleshpots of Egypt, they had their full by their own confession. Yet
their life being a bondage must needs be miserable; liberty being the very life
of our life without which our life is a continual dying. Yea the coming of the
children of Israel out of Egypt may in some sort seem to them to have been the
creation of the world; Adam was made of the dust of the earth, they then fetched
from the clay of the earth, whereof they had made many hard bricks, though not
half so hard as the hearts of those Taskmasters, which were set over them; the
world was made of nothing, the Jews when they came out of Egypt, being made
formerly for outward respects no better then nothing. And as their remaining
there was miserable, so their removing thence was miraculous; wonderfully
therefore should they have forgot themselves, if they had forgot Gods wonders
toward them in this deliverance.

And have not we English men as many and remarkable deliverances as ever the
Jews had? some common with us to all Christans, as the second birth day of the
world at the birth of our Savior. You therefore that are clarks and notaries,
who in dating of acts and instruments, with your posting pens make such
frequent mention of the year of the Lord, labor that those words which have
been so often written with your hands, may once be written in your hearts, with
the benefits accrued to all mankind by the birth of our Savior. Some proper to
this our nation alone, as the deliverance from the Spanish invasion in 88.
Naomi said to the men of Bethlehem, Ruth 1. call me not Naomi fair; but call me
mara bitter, for the Lord has afflicted me, I went out full but return empty,
etc. so might that great fleet say, call me not the invincible Armado, but call
me the conquered Armado; for the Lord has punished my pride, I went out full,
the terror of the world, but return empty to the scorn of all nations. Go then
you Spaniards, brag of Lisbon, Bilboa, and Toledo blades; sure I am that then
an English sword managed by the arm of the God of heaven was proved to be the
best metal. Nor less miraculously from homebred conspiracy in the gunpowder
treason, where the reason only was intention, but nothing (thanks be to God)
brought to execution, but the traitors. Well, its said that things written in
marble are most durable in difference of time; I would not wish to us a marble,
hard or stony heart, but such a one as is soft, tender and pliable, and surely
this will sooner receive and longest retain the print of Gods favors unto us,
and principally of these deliverances wherein the people of England may be said
to have come out of the land of Egypt.

Now that this sin in my text may appear in its proper colors, consider with
me; first the party to whom the wrong was offered was a stranger; the word
stranger in the very mention of it ought to carry with it a protection from all
wrongs; the heathen Romans were so Christian in this kind, that if their enemy
chanced to enter into their house in nature of a stranger, there was a
cessation from enmity, during his abode under their roof, and revenge gave
place to hospitality, Secondly she was a woman, and that sex may seem in some
sort to be fenced from injury, because it is not fenced from injuries. For such
is the known weakness of women, that we count it weakness in men to offer
them any wrong, and our modesty is the best safeguard and defense for theirs.
Thirdly, she was a Levites wife, and methinks some shadow of sacredness should
be reflected from him on her. Fourthly she was abused to death; indeed she died
not presently, but before she came into the house, her soul got out of her
body, and even in our law it is murder, that comes within the compass of a
year and a day; now murder you know is a crying sin, yea, like Stentor the
Grecian, it shouteth louder then 50. other ordinary offenses. The monster
mother may smother her child, but when she has done, she cannot smother the
murder of her child. Fifthly, abused to death by a whole city: those are
deceived who conceive the multitude of offenders diminish the offense. Rather
the more the sinners, the more heinous the sin; the worst sin that ever
was, was the most general sin that ever was, when all mankind together
sinned at once in Adam: yea in our law that which being done by one or two, is
but a trespass, committed by more assumes the name of a riot. Lastly by a
whole city of Israelites: but if they had been Hivites, or Hittites that had
done me this dishonor, then perchance I should have born it; had they been
Canaanites or Jebusites had offered me this disgrace, then more patiently could
I have digested it, but they pretended to serve the same God, and observe the
same religion. They were descended from the loins of Jacob, and issued from the
womb of Rachel: what good does the ark of God in Shiloh, with Levites a tending
before it, Aarons rod, pot of manna, mercy seat within it, if there be a Sodom
in Sion, a Bethaven in Bethel, folly in Israel? verily I say unto you I have
not found so great an offense no not amongst the Gentiles. Happy those poor
Armenians which live in those remote parts, where the shrill sound of the
gospel was never trumpetted forth, their invincible ignorance will be an Orator
in the ears of the merciful judge, not wholly to excuse but much to diminish
their fault, not to prevail for a full pardon, yet to procure a lighter
punishment, whilst in the same day they shall rise up, and condemn the Jews in
my text, seeing better by the light of a candle, then the Jews by the beams of
the sun.

I come now to the prescribing of the wholesome order for the future consult,
consider, and give sentence: but first we must remove an objection which here
may rise; for may some say, why is it not particularly expressed in the law of
Moses, what punishment ought to be inflicted upon an whole city, when by lust
they abuse a woman to death? had this been a bookcase and the penalty
precisesly specified, it would have spared the Israelites all their pains to
consult and consider; yea this may seem to argue the law of God of some defects
and imperfections, that it is not adaequate to all occasions, and of extent
large enough for all necessities, and needs to be patcht and peeced with the
accession of humane deliberation. For two reasons the particular punishment is
expressed, first because the spirit of God being charity it self, charitablely
presumed that no Israelites would be so wicked; the heathen appointed no
punishment for parricides, supposing that sin could not be committed. Men
must first murder all nature in themselves, before they can be so unnatural
as to murder their parents. Secondly, the mentioning of the punishment might
by satan's suggestion, and man's corruption be abused to make them commit the
sin: some sins are left out in the law, not because they are too little, but
because they are too great; should the punishment of every villainy be put into
the law, the committing of many villainies would be put into our minds, which
otherwise might be forgotten; and sins punisher would be made sins
remembrancer. Yet though this case for circumstance is not set down in the
Bible, for substance it is in several places; who sheddeth man's blood, by man
shall his blood be shed, Genesis 6.9. now the scripture is not written for those
that will be idle, but for such as comparing one place with another, by
faithful consequence will proportionably extract and deduce, what ought to be
done in each several action whose substance in the bible is recorded, though
each circumstance particularly set down. And now I come to the order for the
time to come: but behold in the order it self much confusion arising from the
variety of translations; you shall scarce find three bibles wherein two of
these words are rendered alike: what therefore must we do? the best way to
expound the text is to practice it; and before we give sentence what should be
the meaning of these several words, let us first consult with interpreters,
and consider the original. The first word in the great Bible, consult,
imports in the original a meeting of many together, rendered by learned
Tremelius, adhibete vos ad istud, settle your selves together to this matter.
The observation is this; in matters of moment we are not severally to follow
our private advice, but jointly to unite your selves together in consultation;
eyes see more then an eye (says the proverb.) I must confess Paphnutius with
his one eye (for his persecutors had bored out the other) saw more in the
matter of ministers marriage then the 300 two-eyed bishops assembled in the
council o^ Nice. But he was an exception from a general rule; ordinarily tow
are better then one: yea Solomon the wisest of earthly kings had his council of
aged men, which stood before him, 1 Kings 12.6. nay a greater then Solomon may
be brought for the proof of this point: God himself, Genes. 1.26. being about
to contract the first volume of the world into the abrigement of man, called as
it were a council in the persons of the Trinity; let us make man. Had God any
need of council? is not the same eternal act which is done by one person, done
by all? or are not these things rather written for our instruction? surely for
our instruction they are written, that when we enterprise things of
consequence, we may call for and make use of the councels and directions of
others; to blame then are they, who rashly run on their own heads. I cannot
but commend the swiftness of Ahimaaz his feet, 2 Samuel 18.28. who being sent
out of Cushi came to David before him, yet can I not but dispraise the
shallowness of Ahimaaz his judgment, who running before he had received
perfect instructions from Joab, came to the end of his journey scarce with the
middle of his message.

Is it so then, that we must consult with others? then most lawful, laudable,
and necessary is the vocation of them who are of learned council: for should
your silly clients be entrusted with the managing of their own suits, they would
cut the throat of their most rightful causes, even with the same sword with
which you are able to defend them. But may you be pleased patiently to hear
the best spiritual advice which I freely bestow upon you, who would be glad to
pay your fees, and give you deserved thanks for your council, if mine
occasions so required it. When such a cause shall be brought to your hands, as
your own consciences shall proclaim to be bad, let Baal plead for himself, let
iniquity be her own advocate; offer you not once to defend them: and when the
case shall be good, loose it not in the labyrinths of delays, and Meanders of
demurrs, but bring it the narrowest cut, the nearest course from the first
motion to the final verdict. I must confess there may be much corruption in a
festred sore, but I dare boldly say, there is more corruption in the dishonest
Surgeon, that may quickly cure it, but will not for his private ends: indeed
they that hold leases by lives, could be content that each life in their lease
should be a Methuselah since then your gain depends on the long depending of
suits, some perchance may think it more beneficial for you needlessly to
protract them. But know by the speedy ending of them, your gain shall be the
more by being the less; what is wanting in bulk shall be supplied in blessing,
no diseased tympany shall swell your estate, but all your substance shall be
solid wholesome flesh: all the shekels in your coffers shall be shekels of the
sanctuary, such as you may enjoy with content, whilst you live, and leave to
your wife, and thrifty heirs, when you die. To you therefore it belongs to
consult: this differs from the former, consult is with others, consider is in
our selves; for after we have heard what others can say, we must not so pin
our practice on their opinions, but we must also use our own best
consideration, especially if it be in a case of conscience wherein our own good
is particularly interested. And this consideration is to go before our final
sentence. Before we pass our utmost verdict, we are first seriously to premise
a due deliberation in our selves, as formerly we have had 1 consultation with
others. Let us go down and see, Genesis 1.18.21. whether the sins of Sodom be
according to the cry which is come up unto me. Our adversaries of the Romish
Church are too too faulty herein, in giving sentence before they have well
weighed the cause. In the days of Queen Mary when our land was dark with
ignorance, and light only with those bonfires which burnt the martyrs, a woman
in Jersey at the stake being delivered of a male child, the standers by took
the infant, and threw it into the fire: matchless cruelty! children when newly
born are to be baptized with water, not to be cast into the fire, or did they
take it to be like the viper, Acts 28. which no sooner crawled out of the heat
of the flame, but S. Paul presently cast it in again? alas as yet it was no
viper, no poison in the teeth, no venom in the tongue, whereby it may do hurt.
Or did they think that it would take it by kind, because his mother (as they
termed it) was an heretic? no sin is so thoroughly entailed from parent to
child, but grace and good breeding may break it off. Had they well pondered
those things before hand, perchance they might have prevailed for a reprive, if
not for a pardon for this child. The Hebrews contrary to all other nations,
read their letters backward, so the papists in their practice read backward,
and invert the order of my text, and instead of consult, give sentence and
consider; they first give sentence, and then consult and perchance consider:
and I would to God all that hated popery hated also this popish practice; for
in some sort hereof guilty are they who seeing one wallowing in sins, rashly
reason from the present to the future, and condemn such a one for a reprobate
or castaway. Let us not flatter black and say its white, nor defame white and
say it is black; let us tell Judah of their sins, and Israel of their
transgressions; for our callings warn us: let us tell a drunkard that he is a
drunkard, an adulterer that he is an adulterer, and that his estate is
desperate and damnable, if he live and dye impenitent in that condition. But as
for their final estate, it belongs not to us to give sentence of them; it is
not for us to know these things which the father has put in his own power: but
if our censuring faculty be so sharp (on Gods blessing) let us turn the edge
thereof inward: let us first read a critical lecture on all our own bad
thoughts, words, and actions, and then shall we have less leisure and delight
to rome and range abroad.

Now the word consider in my text, warrants me to address my speech to you
who are of the jury: for after consult is past, after you have heard a case
debated and argued by learned council, then is your duty to consider: your way,
is so hedged on either side you cannot go out of it, except you will wilfully;
for you are only conscionably to find things, according as you hear them
alleged and proved, and this done your office is discharged; but beware of one
thing, the being overswaied by one appearing and potent man amongst you. Barach
said to Deborah, Judge. 4.8. if thou will go up with me, I will go up, but if
thou will not go up with me, then will I not go up. So too often the the rest
of the jury to one principal man amongst them, please you Sr to be for the
plaintiff, we are for the plaintiff, if you be for the defendant, we are for
the defendant; cast the prisoner, and we cast him, accquit you him, and we
accquit him: in a word, we will be the wax, print you upon us what impression you
please. Beloved, these things ought not to be so; that the prisoner should be
cast at the verdict of twelve men, and eleven of these twelve have their
judgments cast by the verdict of one. Look therefore to your selves, except
others will answer to God for your perjury; for to you it belongs to consider.

I come now to the third step of the throne of justice, give sentence; where
we may observe, after due consultation and consideration are past, we ought
not still to be neuters and Scepticks, but absolutely to express and declare
our selves on one side, as we shall see most occasion. And yet how many be
there which have learning too much to be papists, and yet religion too little
to be good protestants? They are loath to say that Luther is in the right, and
they are loath to say that Bellarmine is in the wrong. And as God says of
himself, I am what I am; so may it be said of these men, they are even what you
would have them to be: nor need we go out into the wilderness to see these
reeds shaken with the wind; I am afraid in our towns best traded, places most
populous, there be too many of them who spending all their life in tedious
consulting, and considering of points, continue more unresolved then when they
begun, and will never give sentence. Which word puts me in mind, to apply my
self unto your Lordships to whom his Highness authority has committed the
power of passing the sentence of life and death; but I remember what John
Baptist said to our Savior, Matthew. 3. I have need to come to thee, and come
thou to me? Is your Honors courtesy and humility such as to repair to my
weak pains? when I, whose learning in law matters is no better then ignorance,
have need to come to you, who are the captains of the first form in the school
of justice, and therefore need not now to learn the alphabet of your office:
well do you know how to weild the sword in the hand; when to give a slanting
blow, and where to make a down right stroke; whose actions are a continual
web, whereof justice and mercy are the woof, and the warp. Leaving therefore
your Lordships, I come to them who come to these assizes, neither to do nor to
suffer, but only to hear and behold: when I compare this meeting in my text
with ours at this time, I find a threefold cause for which we ought to be
heartily thankful to the God of heaven* first, that though there be many
sins in our land, yet most of them are personal, not like this in my text,
wherein a whole city together was jointly engaged. Should we have a murder
generally committed by a whole city, I am afraid, that the cable of that
offense twisted with so many lesser cords of several offenders, would be so
tough and strong, it would almost make the sword of justice turn edge before it
could cut through it. God daily diminish the sins of our land, that they may
be fewer for number, lesser for measure, lighter for nature, and may our eyes
live to see our churches more full, our prisons more empty. Not to flatter our
selves, we are a sinful nation; fellonies amongst us are frequent, and murder
sometimes, (and were they never so seldom, they were too often (yet be it
spoken to Gods glory, these be private sins, not city villainies as this of
the Gibeonites: not but that we English men are as wild, and as untamed horses
as ever the Jews were, but that God is pleased to hold us with a stronger
bridle, and curb of his restraining grace then he did them. Let him therefore
have all the honor of the action.

Secondly, we see the poor Levite was fain to send for justice abroad and
about, from Dan to Beersheba with much care and cost: had the allowance of this
Levite been no larger then the poor pittance of some curates and vicars amongst
us, this one charge would have exhausted his two years revenues: but let us
thank God that justice is brought home to our doors. When I have seen with what
tedious paces and weary thighs poor people have painfully climed and clambred
up the steep ascent to the town of Shaftsbury in this county, to bring water to
the town; then have I commended the convenience of those cities, which seated
in champion places have water at will; then have I praised the commodity of
those houses where turn the cock, and plenty flows at pleasure: so when I
consider the great trouble of the Levite in my text, to send about for justice,
then have I just cause to praise God for the benefit of our itinerarie judges
which without our cost, or procuring, bring justice home unto us. If any in this
sense does (...), behold the cup is at his mouth, let him drink his fill.

Thirdly, the cause of all this mischief is set down in the first verse,
because there was no king in Israel; a tyranny is to be preferred before an
anarchy: for a commonwealth to want a chief, it is the chief of all wants,
every man will do what he lists, none what he should. Too much liberty would
make men slaves to their own lusts; Westminster hall would be turned unto the
Gluttons kitchen* in a word, compared to this confusion, that of Babble may
justly seem an exact model of method. But (thanks be to God) our happiness
will appear the greater, if we consider the state of foreign countries,
divided from us no less in condition, then by the sea; look upon high Germany
which ever Prometheus like has a cruel eagle feeding upon her entrails: Is
this the civil law, wherein nothing stands good but violenta passessio, and
firma ejectio? where soldiers keep Term all the year long, and scarce make a
short vacation in the dead depth of winter? whilst thus the continent is
drowned with woes, our happy island is dry; the waves rage round about us, but
thanks be to God none run over us; we are more safe under our vines, then
our neighbors in their castles.

Oh let us take heed that we take not a surfeit of our own happiness, but be
heartily thankful to God, and express our thankfulness in the reformation
of our lives. But what go I about to do? this is none of Joshuas day wherein
the sun stands still, time will wait attendance on none; and I am privy to the
undispenceablenesse of your occasions, wherefore the half of my text shall be
the whole I will add at this time, consult, consider, and give sentence.

FINIS.



