THE CAUSE AND CURE OF A VVOVNDED CONSCIENCE.

By THO: FULLER, B. D.

PROVE. 18. 14. But a wounded conscience who can bear?

LONDON, Printed for John Williams, at the Crown in S. Paul's Churchyard. M D C
XLVII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, And Virtuous Lady, Frances Mannours, Countess of
Rutland.
Madam,
BY the Judicial Law of the Jews, if a servant had Exodus 21. 4.
children by a wife which was given him by his Master, though he himself went
forth free in the seventh year, yet his children did remain with his Master,
as the proper goods of his possession. I ever have been, and shall be a servant
to that noble Family, whence your Honor is extracted. And of late in that
house I have been wedded to the pleasant embraces of a private life, the
fittest wife, and meetest Helper that can be provided for a Student in
troublesome times: And the same has been bestowed upon me by the bounty of
your Noble Brother, EDW: Lord MONTAGUE: Wherefore what issue soever shall
result from my mind, by his means most happily married to a retired life, must
of due redound to his Honor, as the sole Proprietarie of my pains during my
present condition. Now this Book is my eldest Offspring, which had it been a
Son, (I mean, had it been a Work of Masculine beauty and bigness) it should
have waited as a Page in Dedication to his Honor. But finding it to be of the
weaker sex, little in strength, and low in stature, may it be admitted (
Madam) to attend on your Ladyship, his Honors Sister.

I need not mind your Ladyship how God has measured outward happiness unto
you by the Cubit of the Sanctuary, of the largest size, so that one would be
posed to wish more then what your Ladyship does enjoy. My prayer to God shall
be, that shining as a Pearl of Grace here, you may shine as a Star in Glory
hereafter. So rests

Your Honors in all Christian offices, Tho: Fuller.
Boughton, Ian. 25. 1646.
To the Christian Reader.
AS one was not anciently to want a wedding garment at a Marriage feast; So now
adays, wilfully to wear gaudy clothes at a Funeral, is justly censurable as
unsuiting with the occasion. Wherefore in this sad subject, I have endeavored
to decline all light and luxurious expressions: And if I be found faulty
therein, I cry and crave God and the Reader pardon. Thus desiring that my pains
may prove to the glory of God, thine, and my own edification, I rest,

Thine in Christ Jesus, Thomas Fuller.

THE CONTENTS of the several Dialogues.
1. Dialogue. What a wounded conscience is, wherewith the godly and reprobate
may be tortured. page 1. 2. Dial. What use they are to make thereof, who
neither hitherto were (nor happily hereafter shall be) visited with a wounded
conscience. p. 7. 3. Dial. Three solemn seasons when men are surprised with
wounded consciences. p. 14. 4. Dial. The great torment of a wounded conscience,
proved by Reasons and Examples. p. 20 5 Dial. Sovereign uses to be made of the
torment of a wounded conscience. page 30. 6. Dial. That in some cases more
repentance must be preached to a wounded conscience. p. 36. 7. Dial. Only
Christ is to be applied to souls truly contrite. p. 43. 8. Dial. Answers to
the objections of a wounded conscience, drawn from the grievousnesse of his
sins. p. 50. 9. Dial. Answers to the objections of a wounded conscience drawn
from the slightness of his Repentance. p. 59 10. Dial. Answers to the
objections of a wounded conscience, drawn from the feebleness of his faith. p.
72. 11. Dial. God alone can satisfy all objections of a wounded conscience. p.
76. 12. Dial. Means to be used by wounded consciences, for the recovering of
comfort. p. 81. 13. Dial. Four wholesome counsels for a wounded conscience to
practice. p. 95. 14. Dial. Comfortable meditations for wounded consciences to
muse upon. p. 102 15. Dial. That is not always the greatest sin whereof a man
is guilty, wherewith his conscience is most pained for the present. p. 111. 16.
Dial. Obstructions hindering the speedy flowing of comfort into a troubled
soul. p. 118. 17. Dial. What is to be conceived of their final estate who die
in a wounded conscience without any visible comf^rt; p. 124. 18 Dial. Of the
different time and manner of the coming of comfort to such who are healed of a
wounded conscience. p. 134. 19. Dial. How such who are completely cured of a
wounded conscience, are to demean themselves. p. 140 20. Dial. Whether one
cured of a wounded con^cience, be subject to a relapse. p. 147. 21. Dial.
Whether it be lawful to pray for, or to pray against, or to praise God for a
wounded conscience. p. 152.
THE CAUSE and CURE OF A wounded Conscience.
I. Dialogue. What a wounded Conscience is, wherewith the Godly and Reprobate
may be tortured.
Timotheus. SEeing the best way never to know a wounded Conscience, by woeful
experience, is speedily to know it by a sanctified consideration thereof: Give
me (I pray you) the description of a wounded Conscience, in the highest degree
thereof.


Philologus. It is a Conscience frighted at the sight of Psa. 38. 3
sin, and weight of Gods wrath, even unto the despair of all pardon, during
the present Agony.


Tim. Is there any difference betwixt a broken Psalm. 51. 17.
spirit, and a wounded Conscience, in this your acception?


Phil. Exceeding much: for a broken spirit is to be prayed and labored for, as
the most healthful and happy temper of the soul, letting in as much comfort,
as it leakes out sorrow for sin: Whereas a wounded conscience is a miserable
malady of the mind, filling it for the present with despair.


Tim. In this your sense, is not the conscience wounded every time that the
soul is smitten with guiltiness for any sin committed?


Phil. God forbid: otherwise his servants would be in a sad condition, as in
the case of David 1* Sam. 24. 5.
smitten by his own heart, for being (as he thought) overbold with Gods
Anointed, in cutting off the skirt of Saul's garment; such hurts are presently
healed by a Plaster of Christ's blood, applied by faith, and never come to that
height to be counted and called wounded c^nsciences.


Tim. Are the godly, a^ well as the wicked, subject to this malady?


Phil. Yes verily: Vessels of honor as well as vessels of wrath in this world,
are subject to the knocks and br^ises of a wounded conscience. A patient Job,
p^ous David, faithful Paul may be vexed therewith no less then a cursed Cain,
perfidious Achit^phil, or treacherous Judas.


Tim. What is the difference betwixt a wounded conscience in the godly, and in
the reprobate?


Phil. None at all; often times in the parties apprenensions, both (for the time
being) conceiving their estates equally desperate; little, if any, in the
wideness and anguish of the wound it self, which (for the time) may be as
tedious and torturing in the godly, as in the wicked.


Tim. How then do they differ?


Phil. Exceeding much in Gods intention, gashing the wicked, as Malefactors,
out of Justice, but lancing the godly, out of love, as a Surgeon his Patients.
Likewise they differ in the issue and event of the wound, which ends in the
eternal confusion of the one, but in the correction and amendment of the other.


Tim. Some have said, that in the midst of their pain, by this mark they may be
distinguished, because the Godly, when wounded, complain most of their Sins,
and the wicked of their sufferings.


Phil. I have heard as much; But dare not lay too much stresse on this slender
sign, (to make it generally true) for fear of failing. For sorrow for sin,
and sorrow for suffering, are often times so twisted and interwoven in the same
person, yea in the same sigh and Groan, that sometimes it is impossible for
the party himself so to separate and divide them in his own sense and
feeling, as to know which proceeds from the one and which from the other.
Only the Allseeing Eye of an infinite God is able to discern and distinguish
them.


Tim. Inform me concerning the Nature of Wounded Consciences in the wicked.


Phil. Excuse he herein: I remember a Passage in S. Angelicu^ vulnus ver^
medicus qualiter factu^ sit indicare noluit, dum illud postea curare non
destinavit. De mirab. Scrip^. lib. 1. c. 2.
Augustine, who enquired what might be the cause that the fall of the Angels
is not plainly set down in the Old Testam. with the manner and circumstances
thereof, resolves it thus: God, like a wise Surgeon, would not open that wound
which he never intended to cure: Of whose words thus far I make use, that as
it was not according to Gods pleasure to restore the Devils, so it being above
man's power to cure a wounded conscience in the wicked, I will not meddle with
that which I cannot mend: Only will insist on a wounded conscience i^ Gods
children, where, by Gods blessing, one may be the instrument, to give some
ease, and remedy unto their disease.


II. Dialogue. What use they are to make thereof, who neither hitherto were
(nor happily hereafter spall be) visited with a wounded Conscience.
Tim. ARe all Gods Children, either in their life or at their death, visited
with a wounded Conscience?


Phil. O no: God inviteth many, with his Golden Scepter, whom he never bruiseth
with his r^d of iron. Many, neither in their conversion, nor in the sequel of
their lives, have ever felt that pain in such a manner and measure, as
amounts to a wounded conscience.


Tim. Must not the pangs in their Travel of the new birth be painful unto
them?


Phil. Painful, but in different degrees. The Blessed Virgin Mary (most hold)
was delivered without any pain; `as well may that child be borne without
sorrow, which is conceived without sin. The women of Israel were sprightfull
and lively, unlike the Egyptians. Exodus 1. 19.
The former favor none can have, in their spiritual travel; the latter some
receive, who though other whiles tasting of legal frights and fears, yet God
so Psalm. 21. 3.
preventeth them with his blessings of goodness, that they smart not so deeply
therein as other men.


Tim. Who are those which commonly have such gentle usage in their conversion?


Phil. Generally such, who never were notoriously profane, and have had the
benefit of godly education from pious parents. In some Corporations, the sons
of Freemen, bred under their Fathers in their Profession, may set up and
exercise their Fathers Trade, without ever being bound Apprentices thereunto.
Such children whose parents have been Citizens of new Gal. 4. 26.
Jerusalem, and have been bred in the mystery Ephesians. 2. 19.
of godliness, oftentimes are Heb. 12. 22*
entered into Religion without any spirit of bondage seizing upon them, a great
benefit and rare blessing, where God in his goodness is pleased to bestow it.


Tim. What may be the reason of Gods so different dealing with his own
Servants, that some of them are so deeply, and others not at all afflicted with
a wounded conscience?


Phil. Even so Father, because it pleases thee. Yet in humility these Reasons
may be assigned, 1. To show himself a free Agent, not confined to follow the
same precedent, and to deal with all as he does with some. 2. To render the
prospect of his proceedings the more pleasant to their fight, who judiciously
survey it, when they meet with so much diversity and variety therein. 3. That
men being both ingorant when, and uncertain whether or not, God will vi^it
them with wounded Conciences, may wait on him with humble hearts, in the work
of their salvation, looking as the Eyes of the Psa. 123. 2*
servants to receive Orders from the hand of their Master, but what, when, and
how they know not, which quickens their daily expectations, and diligent
dependence on his pleasure.


Tim. I am one of those, whom God hitherto has humbled with a wounded
Conscience: give me some instruction for my behavior.


Phil. First be heartily thankful to Gods infinite goodness, who has not
dealt thus with every one. Now because Repentance has two parts, Mourning, and
mending, or Humiliation, and Reformation, the more God has abated thee, in the
former, out of his Gentleness, the more must thou increase in the latter, out
of thy Gratitude. What thy Humiliation has wanted of other men, in the depth
thereof, let thy Reformation make up in the Breadth thereof, spreading into an
universal Obedience unto all Gods Commandments. Well may he expect more work
to be done by thy Hands, who has laid less Weight to be borne on thy
Shoulders.


Tim. What other use must I make of Gods kindness unto me?


Phil. You are bound the more patiently to bear all Gods rods, poverty,
sickness, disgrace, captivity, etc. seeing God has freed thee from the
stinging scorpion of a wounded conscience.


Tim. How shall I demean my self for the time to come?


Phil. Be not high minded, but fear; for thou can not infallibly infer,
That because thou have not hitherto, hereafter thou shall not taste of a
wounded conscience.


Tim. I will therefore for the future with continual fear, wait for the
coming thereof.


Phil. Wait not for it with servile fear, but watch against it with constant
carefulnes. There is a slavish fear to be visited with a wounded conscience,
which fear is to be avoided, for it is opposite to the free spirit of Grace,
derogatory to the goodness of God in his Gospel, destructive to spiritull joy,
which we ought always to have, and dangerous to the soul wrecking it with
anxieties, and unworthy suspicions. Thus to fear a wounded conscience, is in
part to feel it, antidating ones misery, and tormenting himself before the
time, seeking for that he would be loath to find: like the wicked in the Luke
21. 26.
Gospel, of whom it is said, Men's hearts failing them for fear, and looking
for those things which are coming. Far be such a fear from thee, and all good
Christians.


Tim. What fear then is it, that you so lately recommended unto me?


Phil. One consisting in the cautions avoiding of all causes and occasions of a
wounded conscience, conjoined with a confidence in Gods goodness, that he will
either preserve us from, or protect us in the torture thereof; and if he ever
sends it, will sanctify it in us, to his Glory, and our Good. May I, you, and
all Gods servants, ever have this noble fear (as I may term it) in our hearts.


III. Dialogue. Three solemn seasons when men are surprised with wounded
consciences.
Tim. WHat are those times, wherein men most commonly are assaulted with
wounded consciences?


Phil. So bad a guest may visit a man at any hour of his life: For no season
is unseasonable for God to be just, Satan to be mischievous, and sinful man to
be miserable; yet it happens especially at three principal times.


Tim. Of these, which is the first?


Phil. In the twilight of a man's conversion, in the very conflict and combat
betwixt nature and Innitiall grace. For then he that formerly slept in carnal
security, is awakened with his fearful condition: God, as he says, Psalm. 50.
21. sets his sins in order before his eyes. Inprimis, the sin of his
conception. Item, the sins of his childhood. Item, of his youth. Item, of his
man's estate, etc. Or, Inprimis, sins against the first table. Item, sins
against the second; so many of ignorance, so many of knowledge, so many of
presumption severally sorted by themselves. He committed sins confusedly,
hudling them up in heaps, but God sets them in order, and methodizeth them to
his hand.


Tim. Sins thus set in order must needs be a terrible sight.


Phil. Yes surely, the rather because the Metaphor may seem taken from setting
an Army in Battle array. At this conflict in his first conversion, Behold a
troup of sins comes, and when God himself shall marshall them in Rank and
File, what guilty conscience is able to endure the furious charge of so great
and well ordered an Army?


Tim. Suppose the party dies before he be completely converted in this twilight
condition, as you term it, what then becomes of his soul, which may seem too
good to dwell in outer darkness with devils, and too bad to go to the God of
light?


Phil. Your supposition is impossible. Remember our discourse only concerns
the godly. Now God never is Father to abortive children, but to such who
according to his appointment shall come to perfection.


Tim. Can they not therefore die in this interim, before the work of Grace be
wrought in them?


Phil. No verily: Christ's bones were in themselves breakable, but could not
actually be broken by all the violence in the world, because God has
fore-decreed, A bone of him shall not be broken. So we confess Gods children
mortal, but all the power of devil or man may not, must not, shall not,
cannot kill them before their conversion, according to Gods election of them to
life, with must be fully accomplished.


Ti: What is the 2. solemn time, wherein wounded co^scie^ces assault men?


Phil. After their conve^sion co^pleated, and this either upon the committing
of a conscience-wasting sin, such as Tertullian calls Peccatum devoratorium
salutis, or upon the undergoing of some heavy affliction of a bigger standard
and proportion, blacker hu^ and complexion then what befalls ordinary men, as
in the case of Job.


Tim. Which is the third, and last time, when wounded Consci^nces commonly
walk abroad?


Phil. When men lie on their deathbeds, Satan must now roar, or else for
ever hold his peace: roar he may afterward with very anger to vex himself,
not with any hope to hurt us. There is mention in Scripture of an evil day;
which is most applyable to the time of our death. We read also of an hour of
Revel. 3. 10.
temptation; and the Isa. 58. 7.
Prophet tells us there is a moment, wherein God may seem to for sake us. Now
Satan being no less cunning to find out, then careful to make use of his
time of advantage, in that moment of that hour of that day, will put hard for
our Souls, and we must expect a shrewd parting blow from him.


Tim. Your doleful prediction disheartens me, for fear I be foild in my last
encounter.


Phil. Be of good comfort: through Christ we shall be victorious, both in dying
and in death it self. Remember Gods former favors bestowed upon thee. Indeed
wicked men, from premises of Gods power collect a conclusion of his Weakness,
Psalm. 78. 20. Behold be smot the Rock, that the waters (...) out, and the
streams over-flowed: can he give Bread also? can ^e provide Flesh for his
people? But Gods children 1 Samuel 17. 36.
by better Logic, from the prepositions of Gods former preservations, infer
his power 2 Cor. 1. 10
and pleasure to protect them for the future. Be assured, that God which has
been the God of the Mountains, and made our Mountains strong in time of our
prosperity, will also be the God of the valleys, and lead us safe Psa. 23. 4
through the valley of the shadow of death.


IV. Dialogue. The great torment of a wounded conscience, proved by Reasons and
Examples.
Tim. IS the pain of a wounded Conscience so great as is pretended?


Phil. God Prove. 18. 14.
says it, we have seen it, and others have felt it: Whose complaints, ^avour
as little of dissimulation, as their cries in a fit of the Cholique, does of
counterfeiting.


Tim. Whence comes this wound to be so great and grievous?


Phil. Six Reasons may be assigned thereof. The first drawn from the Heaviness
of the hand which makes the Wound; namely, God himslfe, conceived under the
notion of an infinite angry Judge. In all other afflictions, man encountreth
only with man, and in the worst temptations, only with Satan, but in a wounded
Conscience, he enters the Lists immediately with God himself.


Tim. Whence is the second Reason fetched?


Phil. From the Heb. 4. 12
sharpness of the Sword, wherewith the wound is made, being the Word of God,
and the keen threatenings of the Law therein contained. There is mention Genesis 3.
24. of a Sword turning every way: parallel whereto is the Word of God in a
wounded Conscience. Man's heart is full of windings, turnings and doublings, to
shift and shun the stroke thereof if possible, but this sword meets them
wheresoever they move, it fetches and finds them out, it hants and hunts them,
forbidding them during their Agony, any entrance into the Paradise of one
comfortable thought.


Tim. Whence is the third Reason derived?


Phil. From the tenderness of the Part it self which is wounded; the
Conscience being one of the eyes of the soul, sensible of the smallest hurt.
And when that Callum, Schirrus or Inerustation drawn over it by nature, and
hardened by custom in sin, is once (...) off, the Conscience becomes so
pliant and supple, that ^he least imaginable touch is painf^ll (...) it.


Tim. What is the fourth Reason?


Phil. The Folly of the Patient: who being stung, has not the wisdom to
look up to Christ, the Brazen Serpent but tormenteth himself with his own
activity. It was threatened to Jer. 20. 4.
Pashur, I will make thee a terror to thy self: So fares it with Gods best
Saint during the fit of his perplexed Conscience; Hears he his own voice, he
thinks, this is that which so often has sworn, lied, talked vainly, wanton,
wickedly; his voice is a terror to himself. Sees he his own eyes in a
glass, he presently apprehends, these are those which shot forth so many
envious, covetous, amorous Glances, his eyes are a terror to himself. Sheep
are observed to fly without cause, scared, (as some say) with the sound of
their own feet: Their feet knack, because they fly, and they fly, because
their feet knack, an emblem of Gods Children in a wounded Conscience,
selfe-fearing, selfe*frighted.


Tim. What is the fifth Reason which makes the pain so great?


Phil. Because Satan rak^s his claws in the reeking blood of a wounded
Conscience. Beelzebub the devils name fignifieth in Hebrew the Lord of flies;
which excellently intimates his nature and employment: flies take their
selicity about sores and galled Backs, to infest and inflame them. So Satan no
sooner discovers (and that Bird of Prey has quick sight) a Soul
terrour-struck, but thither he hasts, and is busy to keep the wound raw,
there he is in his throne to do mischief.


Tim. What is the sixth and last Reason why a wounded Conscience is so great a
torment?


Phil. Because of the impotency and invaliditie of all earthly receipts to give
ease thereunto. For there is such a gulf of disproportion betwixt a
Mind-malady and Bodymedicines, that no carnal, corporal comforts can
effectually work thereupon.


Tim. Yet wine in this case is prescribed in Scripture, Prove. 31. 6.
Give wine to the heavy hearted, that they may remember their misery no more.


Phil. Indeed if the wound be in the spirits, (those cursiters betwixt soul
and body) to recover their decay or consumption, wine may usefully be applied:
but if the wound be in the spirit in Scripture phrase, all carnal, corporal
comforts are utterly in vain.


Tim. Me thinks merry company should do much to refresh him.


Phil. Alas, a man shall no longer be welcome in merry company, then he is able
to sing his Part in their Joviall Consort. When a hunted Dear runs for
safeguard amongst the rest of the Herd, they will not admit him into their
company, but beat him off with their horns, out of principles of
selfe-preservation, for fear the Hounds, in pursuit of him, fall on them also.
So hard it is for Man or Beast in misery to find a faithful friend. In like
manner, when a knot of Bad-good-fellowes perceive one of their society dogged
with Gods terrors at his heels, they will be shut of him as soon as they
can, preferring his room, and declining his company, lest his sadness prove
infectious to others. And now if all six reasons be put together, so heavy a
hand, smiting with so sharp a sword on so tender a part of so foolish a
patient, whilst Satan seeks to widen, and no worldly plaster can cure the
wound, it sufficiently proves a wounded conscience to be an exquisite torture.


Tim. Give me I pray an example hereof.


Phil. When Adam had eaten the forbidden fruit, he tarryed a time in Paradise,
but took no contentment therein. The Sun did shine as bright, the Rivers ran
as clear as ever before, Birds sang as sweetly, Beasts played as pleasantly,
Flowers smelt as fragrant, Herbs grew as fresh, Fruits flourisht as fair, no
Puntilio of Pleasure was either altered or abated. The objects were the same,
but Adams eyes were otherwise, his nakedness stood in his light; a thorn of
guiltiness grew in his heart, before any thistles sprang out of the ground;
which made him not to seek for the fairest fruits to fill his hunger, but the
biggest leaves to cover his nakedness. Thus a wounded conscience is able to
unparadise Paradise it self.


Tim. Give me another instance.


Phil. CHRIST JESUS our Savior, he was blinded, buffeted, scourged, scoffed
at, had his hands and feet nailed on the Cross, and all this while said
nothing. But no sooner apprehended he his Father deserting him, groaning under
the burden of the sins of mankind imputed unto him, but presently the Lamb,
(who hitherto dumb before his shearer opened not his mouth) for pain began to
bleat, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?


Tim. Why is a wounded conscience by David resembled to Arrows, Psa. 38. 2
Thine Arrows stick fast in me?


Phil. Because an Arrow (especially if barbed) rakes and rends the flesh the
more, the more metal the wounded party has to strive and struggle with it:
and a guilty conscience pierces the deeper, whilst a stout stomach with might
and main seeks to out-wrastle it.


Tim. May not a wounded conscience also work on the body, to hasten and
heighten the sickness thereof?


Phil. Yes verily, so that there may be employment for Col. 4. 14.
Luke, the beloved physician, (if the same person with the Evangelist) to
exercise both his professions: But we meddle only with the malady of the mind,
abstracted from any bodily indisposition.


V. Dialogue. Sovereign uses to be made of the torment of a wounded conscience.
Tim. SEeing the torture of a wounded conscience is so great, what use is to be
made thereof?


Phil. Very much. And first, it may make men sensible of the intolerable pain
in Hell fire. If the mouth of the fiery Furnace into which the children were
cast, was so hot, that it burnt those which approached it, how hot was the
Furnace it self? If a wounded conscience, the suburbs of Hell, be so painful,
oh how extreme is that place, where the worm never dies, and the fire is
never quenched?


Tim. Did our roaring Boys (as they call them) but seriously consider this,
they would not wish GOD DAMN THEM, and GOD CONFOUND THEM so frequently as they
do.


Phil. No verily: I read in Theodoret of the ancient Donatists, that they were
so ambitious of Martyrdom, (as they accounted it) that many of them meeting
with a young Gentleman requested of him, that he would be pleased to kill them.
He, to confute their folly, condescended to their desire, on condition, that
first they would be contented, to be all fast bound: which being done,
accordingly he took order that they were all soundly whipped, but saved their
lives. In application: When I hear such Riotous youths wish that God would
Damn or Confound them, I hope God will be more merciful, then to take them at
their words, and to grant them their wish; only I heartily desire that he would
be pleased, sharply to scourge them, and soundly to lash them with the frights
and terrors of a wounded conscience. And I doubt not, but that they would so
ill like the pain thereof, that they would revoke their wishes, as having
little list, and less delight to taste of hell hereafter.


Tim. What other use is to be made of the pain of a wounded Conscience?


Phil. To teach us seasonably to prevent, what we cannot possibly endure. Let
us shun the smallest sin, lest if we slight and neglect it, it by degrees
fester and gangrene into a wounded conscience. One of the bravest Sir Tho.
Norris, President of Munster, ex levi vul^ere neglecto sublatus. Cambdens
Elizab. An. 1641.
spirits that ever England bred, or Ireland buried, lost his life by a light
hurt neglected; as if it had been beneath his high mind to stoop to the
dressing thereof, till it was too late. Let us take heed the stoutest of us be
not so served in our Souls. If we repent not presently of our sins
committed, but carelessly contemn them, a scratch may quickly prove an Ulcer;
the rather, because the flesh of our mind, if I may so use the Metaphor, is
hard to heal full of choleric and corrupt humors, and very ready to rancle.


Tim. What else may we gather for our instruction from the torture of a
troubled mind?


Phil. To confute their cruelty, who out of sport or spite, willingly and
wittingly wound weak consciences; like those uncharitable 1 Cor. 8. 12.
Corinthians, who so far improve their liberty in things indifferent, as
thereby to wound the consciences of their weak brethren.


Tim. Are not those Ministers too blame, who, mistaking their message, instead
of bringing the Gospel of Peace, fright people with Legal terrors into
despair?


Phil. I cannot commend their discretion, yet will not condemn their intention
herein. No doubt their desire and design is pious, though they err in the
pursuit and prosecution thereof, casting down them whom they cannot raise, and
conjuring up the Spirit of Bondage which they cannot allay again: Wherefore it
is our wisest way, to interweave promises with threatenings, and not to leave
open a pit of despair, but to cover it again with comfort.


Tim. Remains there not as yet, another use of this poi^t?


Phil. Y^s, to teach us to pity and pray for those that have afflicted
Consciences, not like the wicked, ^sa'. 69. 26.
who persecute those whom God has smitten, and talk to the grief of such
whom he has wounded.


Tim. Yet Eli was a good man, who notwithstanding censured 1 Samuel 1. 13. 14.
Hannah, a woman of a sorrowful spirit, to be drunk with Wine.


Phil. Imitate not Eli in committing, but amending his fault. Indeed his dim
eyes could see drunkenness in Hannah where it was not, and could not see
Sacrilege and Adultery in his own Sons, where they were. Thus those who are
most indulgent to their own, are most censorious of others. But Eli afterward
perceiving his Error, turned tho condemning of Ha^nah into praying for her. In
like manner, if in our passion we have prejudiced, or injured any wounded
Consciences, in cold blood let us make them the best amends and reparation.


VI. Dialogue. That in some cases more Repentance must be preached to a wounded
Conscience.
Tim. SO much for the Malady, now for the Remedy. Suppos^ you come to a
wounded Conscience, what counsel will you prescribe him?


Phil. If after hearty prayer to God for his direction, he appears unto me,
as yet, not truly penitent, in the first place I will press a deeper degree
of Repentance upon him.


Tim O miserable Comforter! more sorrow still! Take heed your eyes be not put
out with that smoking Flax, you seek to quench, and your fingers wounded with
the splinters of that bruised Reed you go about to break.


Phil. Understand me Sir. Better were my tongue spit out of my mouth, then to
utter a word of grief to drive them to despair, who are truly contrite. But
on the other side, I shall betray my trust, and be found an unfaithful
dispencer of Divine mysteries, to apply comfort to him who is not ripe and
ready for it.


Tim. What harm wol^d it do?


Phil. Raise him for the present, and ruin him, without Gods greater mercy for
the future. For comfort dawbed on, on a foul soul, will not stick long upon
it: And instead of pouring in, I shall spill the precious oil of Gods mercy.
Yea I may justly bring a Wounded Conscience upon my self, for dealing
deceitfully in my stewardship.


Tim. Is it possible one may not be ^oundly humbled, and yet have a wounde^
Conscience?


Phil. Most possible: For a wounded Conscience is often inflicted as a
punishment for lack of true Repentance: great is the difference betwixt a man's
being frighted at, and humbled for his sins. One may passively be cast down
by Gods terrors, and yet not willingly throw himself down, as he ought, at
Gods footstool.


Tim. Seeing his pain is so pitiful as you have formerly proved; why would
you add more grief unto him?


Phil. I would not add grief to him, but alter grief in him; making his
^orrow, not greater, but better. I would endeavor to change his dismal,
doleful dejection, his hid^s, and horrible heavines, his bitter exclamations,
which seem to me much mixed in him, with Pride, impatience, and impen^tence,
into a willing submission to Gods pleasure, and into a kindly, gentle, tender
Gospell-repentance, for his sins.


Tim. But there are some now adays who maintain that a Child of God after his
first conversion, needs not any new repentance for sin all the days of his
life.


Phil. They derend a grievous and dangerous error. Consider what two petitions
Christ coupleth together in his Prayer: When my Body which every day is hungry,
can live without Gods giving it daily Bread, then and no sooner shall I
believe, that my Soul, which daily sins, can spiritually live, without Gods
forgiving it its Trespasses.


Tim. But such allege, in proof of their opinion, that a man has his person
justified before God, not by pieces and parcels, but at once and for ever in
his conversion.


Phil. This being granted does not favor their error. We confess God
finished the Creation of the world, and all therein in six days, and then
rested from that work, yet so, that his daily preserving of all things by his
providence, may ^till be accounted a constant and continued Creation. We
acknowledge in like manner, a Child of God justified at once in his conversion,
when he is fully and freely estated in Gods favor. And yet seeing every daily
sin by him committed, is an aversion from God, and his daily Repentance a
conversion to God, his justification in this respect, may be conceived
intrirely continued all the days of his life.


Tim. What is the difference betwixt the first Repentance, and this renewed
Repentance?


Phil. The former is as it were the putting of life into a dead man, the latter
the recovering of a sick man from a dangerous swound; by the former, sight to
the blind is simply restored, and eyes given him; in the latter, only a filme
is removed, drawn over their eyes, and hindering their actual sight. By the
first we have a right title to the Kingdom of Heaven: by our second
repentance, we have a new claim to Heaven, by virtue of our old title. Thus
these two kinds of repentance may be differenced and distinguished, though
otherwise they meet and agree in general qualities: both having sin for
their Cause, sorrow for their Companion, and pardon for their consequent and
effect.


Tim. But are not Gods Children after committing of grievous sins, and before
their renewing their repentance remain still heirs of Heav^, married to
Christ, and citizens of the new Jerusalem?


Phil. Heirs of Heaven, they are, but disinheritable for their m^demeanour.
Married still to Christ, but deserving to be divorced for their adulteri^.
Citizens of Heaven, but yet outlawed, so that they can recover no right, and
receive no benefit, till their out-lawry be reversed.


Tim. Where does God in Scripture injoyne this second Repentance on his own
Children?


Phil. In several places. He threatens the Rev. 2. 5.
Church of Ephesus (the best of the seven) which removing the Candlestick from
them, except they repent: and Christ tells his own disciples, true converts
before, but then guilty of Ambitious thoughts, that Mat. 18. 3
except ye be converted ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Here
is conversion after conversion, being a solemn turning from some particular
sin; in relation to which it is not absurd to say, that there is
justification after justification; the latter as following in time, so flowing
from the former.


VII. Dialogue. Only Christ is to be applied to Souls truly contrite.
Tim. BUt suppose the Person in the Ministers apprehension heartily humbled for
sin, what then is to be done?


Phil. No Corrosives, all Cordialls; no Vinegar, all Oil; no Law, all Gospel
must be presented unto him. Here blessed the lips, yea beautiful the feet of
him that brings the tidings of peace. As 2 Kings 4. 34.
Elisha, when reviving the Son of the Shunamite laid his mou^h to the mouth
of the Child. So the gaping orifice of Christ's wounds must spiritually by
preaching, be put close to the mouth of the wounds of a conscience: happy that
skillful Architect, that can show the sick man, that the Zacha. 4. 7.
Head stone of his sprituall building, must be laid with shouts, crying Grace,
grace.


Tim. Which do you count the Head-stone of the Building, that which is first
or last laid?


Phil. The foundation is the Head-stone in honor, the topstone is the
Head-stone in height. The former the Head-stone in strength, the latter in
stature. It seems that Gods spirit, of set purpose *made use of a doubtful
word, to show that the whole fabric of our salvation, whether as founded, or
as finished, is the only work of Gods grace alone. Christ is the Alpha and
Omega thereof, not excluding all the letters in the Alphabet interposed.


Tim. How must the minister preach Christ to an afflicted conscience?


Phil. He must crucify him before his eyes, lively setting him forth, naked,
to cloth him; wounded, to cure him; dying, to save him. He is to expound and
explain unto him, the dignity of his person, pretiousnesse of his blood,
plenteousnesse of his mercy, in all those loving relations, wherein the
Scripture presents him: A kind Father to a prodicall Child, a careful Hen to a
scattered Chicken, a good Shepherd that brings his lost Sheep back on his
shoulders.


Tim. Spare me one qnestion, why does he not drive the sheep before him,
especially seeing it was lively enough to lose it self?


Phil. First, because though it had wildness too much to go astray, it had
not wisdom enough to go right. Secondly, because probably the ^lly sheep,
had tired it self with wandering; Habbabuk 2. 13. the people shall weary
themselves for very vanity, and therefore the kind shepherd brings it home on
his own shoulders.


Tim. Pardon my interruption, and proceed, how Christ is to be held forth.


Phil. The latitude and extent of his love, his invitation without exception,
are powerfully to be pressed; every one that thi^teth, all ye that are heavy
laden, whosoever believes, and the many promises of mercy are effectually to
be tendered unto him.


Tim. Where are those promises in Scripture?


Phil. Or rather, where are they not? for they are harder to be mist, then to
be met with. Open the Bible (as he 1 King: 22.
drew his bow in Battle) at adventur^s* If thou lightest on an Historical
place, behold Precedents; if on a Doctrinall, Promises of comfort. For the
larter, observe these particulars, Genesis 3. 15. Exo. 33. 6. Isa. 40. 1. Isa. 54.
11. Mat. 11. 28. Mat. 12. 20. 1 Cor. 10. 13. Heb. 13* 5. etc.


Tim. Are these more principal places of consolation, then any other in the
Bible?


Phil. I know there is no choosing, where all things are choicest: Whosoever
shall select some Pearls out of such a heap, shall leave behind as precious as
any he takes, both in his own and others judgment; yea which is more, the
same man at several times may in his apprehension prefer several promises
as best, formerly most affected with one place, for the present more delighted
with another; and afterward conceiving comfort therein not so clear, choose
other places as more pregnant, and pertinent to his purpose. Thus God orders
it, that diverse men (and perchance the same man at different times) make use of
all his promises, gleaning and gathering comfort, not only in one furrow, Land,
or furlong* but as its scattered clean through the whole field of the Scripture.


Tim. Must Ministers have varie^y of several comfortable promises?


Phil. Yes surely: such Masters of the Assembly being to enter and fasten
consolation in an afflicted soul, need have many nails provided aforehand,
that if some for the present, chance to drive untowardly, as splitting, going
awrie, turning crooked or blunt, they may have others in the room thereof.


Tim. But grant, Christ held out never so plainly, pressed never so powerfully,
yet all is in vain, except God inwardly with his spirit persuade the wounded
Conscience to believe the Truth of what he says.


Phil. This is an undoubted Truth, for one may lay the Bread of Life on their
trencher, and cannot force them to feed on it. One may bring them down to the
spring of life, but cannot make them drink of the waters thereof; and
therefore in the cure of a wounded Conscience, God is all in all, only the
touch of his hand, can Deuteronomy. 32. 39.
heal this Kings Evil, I kill and make alive, I wound and I heal, neither is
there any that can deliver out of my hand.


VIII. Dialogue. Answers to the objections of a wounded Conscience drawn from
the grievousnesse of his sins.
Tim. GIve me leave now Sir to personate and represent a wounded Conscience,
and to allege and enforce such principal objections wherewith generally they
are grieved.


Phil. With all my heart, and God bless my endeavors in answering them.


Tim. But first I would be satisfied how it comes to pass, that men in a
wounded Conscience have their parts so presently improved. The Jews did
question concerning our Savior, John 7. 15.
How knows this man letters being never learned? But here the doubt, and
difficulty is greater; How come simple people so subtle on a sudden to oppose
with that advantage, and vehemence, that it would puzzle a good and grave
Divine to answer them?


Phil. Two Reasons may be rendered thereof. 1. Because a man in a diste^per, is
stronger then when he is in his perfect health. What Sampsons are some in the
fit of a Fever? Then their spirits, being intended by the violence of their
disease, push with all their power. So is it in the agony of a distressed
soul, every string thereof is strained to the height, and a man becomes more
then himself to object against himself in a fit of despair.


Tim. What is the other Reason?


Phil. Satan himself, that subtle sophister assisteth them. He forms their
Arguments, frames their objections, fits their distinctions, shapes their
evasions; and this discomforter (Aping Gods spirit the Comforter, John 14. 26.)
brings all things to their remembrance, which they have heard or read to
dishearten them. Need therefore have Ministers, when they meddle with afflicted
men, to call to Heaven aforehand to assist them, being sure, they shall have
Hell it self to oppose them.


Tim. To come now to the objections, which afflicted Consciences commonly make:
they may be reduced to three principal Heads. Either drawn from the
greatness and grievousnesse of their sins, or from the slightness and
lightness of their repentance, or from the faintness and feebleness of their
faith. I begin with the objections of the first form.


Phil. I approve your method I p^ay proceed.


Tim. First Sir, even since my conversion, I have been guilty of many grievous
sins, and (which is worse) of the same sin many times committed. Happy G^.
38. 36.
Judah, who though once committing incest with Thamar, yet the text says, that
afterward he knew her again no more. But I vile wretch have often re-fallen
into the same offense.


Phil. All this is answered in Gods Promise in the Isaiah 1. 18.
Prophet, Though your sins be as scarlet, I will make them as snow. Consider
how the Tyrian scarlet was dyed, not overly dipped, but thoroughly drencht in the
liquor, that colored it, as thy soul in custom of sinning. Then was it taken
out for a time, and dried, put in again, soakt, and sodden the second time in
the Fatt; called therefore (...), twice dyed; as thou complainest thou have
been by relapsing into the same sin. Yea the color so incorporated into the
cloth not drawn over, but diving into the very heart of the wool, that rub a
scarlet rag on what is white, and it will bestow a redish tincture upon it: As
perchance thy sinful practice, and president, have also infected those which
were formerly good, by thy badnesse. Yet such scarlet sins so solemnly and
substantially colored, are easily washed white in the blood of our Savior.


Tim. But, Sir, I have sinned against most serious resolutions, yea against
most solemn vows which I have made to the contrary.


Phil. Vow-breaking, though a grievous sin, is pardonable on unfaigned
repentance. If thou have broken a Vow, the a knot on it, to make it hold
together again. It is spiritual thrift, and no mis-becomming baseness, to
piece and joint thy neglected promises with fresh ones. So shall thy vow in
effect be not broken, when new mended: and remain the same, though not by one
entire continuation, yet by a constant successive renovation thereof. Thus
Compare Genesis 28. 20. with Genesis 35. 1
Jacob renewed his neglected vow of going to Bethel; And this must thou do,
reinforce thy broken vows, if of moment, and material.


Tim. What mean you by the addition of that clause, if of moment and material?


Phil. To deal plainly. I dislike many vows men make, as of reading just so
much, and praying so often every day, of confining themselves to such a strict
proportion of meat, drink, sleep, recreation, etc. Many things may be well
done, which are ill vowed. Such particular vows men must be very sparing how
they make. First, because they savor somewhat of will worship. Secondly, small
glory accrews to God thereby. Thirdly, The dignity of vows are disgraced by
descending to too trivial particulars. Fourthly, Satan has ground given him
to throw at us, with a more steady aim. Lastly, such vows, instead of being
cords to tie us faster to God, prove knots to entangle our Consciences: Hard to
be kept, but oh! how heavy when broken? Wherefore setting such vows aside, let
us be careful with David, to keep that grand and general vow, Psalm. 119 106.
I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous
judgments.


Tim. But Sir I have committed the sin against the holy Ghost, which the
Savior of mankind pronounces unpardonable, and therefore all your counsels
and comforts unto me are in vain.


Phil. The devil, the father of lies, has added this lie to those, which he
has told before, in persuading thee, thou have committed the sin against the
holy Ghost. For that sin is ever attended with these two symptoms. First,
the party guilty thereof never grieves for it, nor conceives the least sorrow
in his heart, for the sin he has committed. The second (which follows on
the former) he never wishes or desires any pardon, but is delighted, and
pleased with his present condition. Now if thou can truly say, that thy
sins are a burden unto thee, that thou do desire forgiveness, and would
give any thing, to compass and obtain it; be of good comfort, thou have not
as yet, and by Gods Grace, never shall, commit that unpardonable offense. I
will not define how near thou have been unto it. As David said to Jonathan,
there is not a hairs breadth betwixt death and me: So it may be thou have m^st
it very narrowly, but assure thy self, thou art not as yet guilty thereof.


IX. Dialogue. Answers to the objections of a wounded Conscience drawn from
the slightness of his Repentance.
Tim. I Believe my sins are pardonable in themselves, but alas my stony Heart
is such, that it cannot relent and repent, and therefore no hope of my
Salvation.


Phil. Would thou sincerely repent? thou do repent. The women that came to
embalme Mark 16. 3.
Christ, did carefully forecast with themselves, Who shall role away the stone
from the door of the Sepulcher? Alas their frail, faint, feeble Arms were
unable to remove such a weight. But what follows? And when they looked, they
saw that the stone was rolled away, for it was very great. In like manner, when
a soul is truly troubled about the massy mighty burden of his stony heart
interposed, hindering him from coming to Christ; I say when he is seriously and
sincerely solicitous about that impediment, such desiring is a doing, such
wishing is a working. Do thou but take care it may be removed, and God will
take order it shall be removed.


Tim. But Sir I cannot weep for my sins; My eyes are like the pit wherein
Joseph was put, there is no water in them, I cannot squeeze one tear out of
them.


Phil. Before I come to answer your objection, I must premise a profitable
observation. I have taken notice of a strange opposition betwixt the tongues
and eyes of such as have troubled Consciences. Their tongues some have known
(and I have heard) complain that they cannot weep for their sins, when at
that instant their eyes have plentifully shed store of tears: not that they
speak out of dissimulation, but distraction. So sometimes have I smiled at the
simplicity of a Child, who being amassed, and demanded whether or no he could
speak? has answered, No. If in like manner at the sight of such a
contradiction betwixt the words and deeds of one in the agony of a wounded
Conscience, we should chance to smile, knew us not to jeere, but joy,
perceiving the party in a better condition, then he conceives himself.


Tim. This your observation may be comfortable to others, but is impertinent to
me. For as I told you I I have by nature such dry eyes that they will afford no
moisture to bemoan my sins.


Phil. Then it is a natural defect, and no moral default, so by consequence a
suffering and no sin, which God will punish. God does not expect the cock
should run water, where he put none into the Cisterne. Know also, their
hearts may be fountains whose eyes are flints, and may inwardly bleed, who do
not outwardly weep. Besides Isa. 61. 3:
Christ was sent to preach Comfort, not to such only as weep, but mourn in
Zion. Yea if thou can squeeze out no liquor, offer to God the empty bottles;
instead of tears, tender and present thy eyes unto him. And though thou be
water-bound, be not wind-bound also, sigh, where thou can not sob, and let
thy Lungs do what thy eyes cannot perform.


Tim. You say something, though I cannot weep, in case I could soundly sorrow
for my sins. But alas, for temporal losses and crosses, I am like R^chell,
^amenting for her children, and would not be comforted. But my sorrow for my
sins is so small, that it appears none at all in proportion.


Phil. In the best Saints of God, their sorrow for their sins being measured
with the sorrow for their sufferings, in one respect, will fall short of it, in
another must equal it, and in a third respect does exceed and go beyond it.
Sorrow for sins falls short of sorrow for sufferings, in loud lamenting or
violent uttering it self in outward expressions thereof; as in roaring,
wringing the hands, rending their hair, and the like. Secondly, both sorrows
are equal in their truth and sincerity, both far from hypocrisy, free from
dissimulation, real, hearty, cordial, uncounterfeited. Lastly, sorrow for
sin exceeds sorrow for suffering, in the continuance and durablenesse
thereof: the other like a land-flood, quickly come, quickly gone; this is a
continual dropping or running river, keeping a constant stream. My sins, says
David, are ever before me; so also is the sorrow for sin in the soul of a
child of God, morning, evening, day, night, when sick, when sound, feasting,
fasting, at home, abroad, ever within him: This grief begins at his
conversion, continues all his life, ends only at his death.


Tim. Proceed I pray in this comfortable point.


Phil. It may still be made plainer by comparing two diseases together, the
toothache and consumption. Such as are troubled with the former, shreek and
cry out, troublesome to themselves, and others, in the same and next roof; and
no wonder, the mouth it self being plaintiff, if setting forth its own
grievances to the full. Yet the toothache is known to be no mortal malady,
having kept some from their beds, seldom sent them to their graves; hindered
the sleep of many, hastened the death of few. On the other side, he that has an
incurable consumption says little, cries less, but grieves most of all. Alas,
he must be a good husband of the little breath left in his broken lungs, not to
spend it in fighing, but in living, he makes no noise, is quiet, and silent;
yea none will say, but that his inward grief is greater then the former.


Tim. How apply you this Comparison to my objection?


Phil. In corporal calamities, thou complainest more, like him in the
tooch-ache, but thy sorrow for thy sin, like a Consumption, which lies at thy
heart, has more solid heaviness therein. Thou do take in more grief for
thy sins, though thou may take on more grievously for thy sufferings.


Tim. This were something if my sorrow for sin were sincere, but alas, I am
but a hypocri^e. There is Isa. 14. 23
mention in the Proph^t of Gods besome of destruction; now the trust of a
hypocrite, Job 8. 14. is called a Spiders web, here is my case, when Gods
besome meets with the cobwebs of my hypocri^e, I shall be swept into hel-fire.


Phil. I answer, first in general: I am glad to hear this objection come from
thee, for selfe-suspition of hypocrisy, is a hopeful symptom of sincerity.
It is a David that cries out, As for me I am poor and needy; but lukewarm
Laodicea that braggeth, I am rich and want nothing.


Tim. Answer I pray the objection in particular.


Phil. Presently, when I have premised the great difference, betwixt a man's
being a Hypocrite, and having some hypocrisy in him. Wicked men are like the
Apples of Solinus Polyhistor in Judea.
Sodom, seemingly fair, but nothing but ashes within, the best of Gods
Servants, like sound Apples, lying in a dusty loft, (living in a wicked world)
gathering much dust about them, so that they must be rubbed or pared, before
they can be eaten. Such notwithstanding are sincere, and by the following marks
may examine themselves.


Tim. But some now adays are utter enemies to all marks of sincerity,
counting it needless for Preachers to propound, or people to apply them.


Phil. I know as much; but it is the worst sign, when men in this nature hate
all signs: But no wonder if the foundred horse, cannot abide the Smiths
pincers.


Tim. Proceed I pray in your signs of sincerity.


Phil. Art thou careful to order thy very thoughts, because the infinite
searcher of the heart does behold them? Do thou freely and fully confess thy
sins to God, spreading them open in his presence, without any desire or
endeavor to deny, dissemble, defend, excuse, or extenuate them? Do thou
delight in an universal obedience to all Gods Laws, not thinking with the
superstitious Jews, by over-keeping the fourth Commandment, to make
reparation to God for breaking all the rest? Do thou love their persons and
preaching best, who most clearly discover thine own faults and corruptions
unto thee? Do thou strive against thy vindicative nature, not only to forgive
those who have offended thee, but also to wait an occasion with humility to
fasten a fitting favor upon them? Do thou love grace and goodness even in
those, who differ from thee in point of opinion, and Civil controversies? Can
thou be sorrowful for the sins of others, no whit relating unto thee, merely
because the Glory of a good God, suffers by their profaneness?


Tim. Why do you make these to be the signs of sincerity?


Phil. Because there are but two principles, which act in men's hearts, namely,
nature and grace; or, as Christ distinguishes them, Flesh, and Blood, and our
Father which is Heaven. Now seeing these actions, by us propounded, are either
against or above nature, it does necessarily follow, that where they are found,
they flow from saving grace. For what is higher then the roof, and very
Pinnacle, as I may say, of nature, cannot belower then the bottom and
beginning of grace.


Tim. Per^hance on serious search, I may make hard shift, to find some one or
two of these signs, but not all of them in my heart.


Phil. As I will not bow to flatter any, so I will fall down as far as truth
will give me leave, to reach comfort to the humble, to whom it is due. Know to
thy further consolation, that where some of these signs truly are, there are
more, yea all of them, though not so visible and conspicuous, but in a dimmer
and darker degree. When we behold Violets, and Prim-Roses, fairly to flourish,
we conclude the dead of the winter is past, though, as yet, no Roses, or
July-flowers appear, which, long after, lie hid in their leaves, or lurk in
their roots; but in due time will discover themselves. If some of these signs
be above ground in thy sight, others are under ground in thy heart, and though
the former started first, the other will follow in order: It being plain that
thou art passed from death unto life, by this hopeful and happy spring of some
signs in thy heart.


X. Dialogue. Answers to the objection of a wounded Conscience, drawn from the
feebleness of his faith.
Tim. BUt faith is that which must apply Christ unto us, whilst (alas!) the
hand of my faith has not only the shaking, but the dead Palsy; it can neither
hold nor feel any thing.


Phil. If thou can not hold God, do but touch him and he shall hold thee,
and put feeling into thee. Saint Paul says, Phil. 3. 1^
If that I may apprehend that, for which also I am apprehended of Christ Jesus.
It is not Paul's apprehending of Christ, but Christ apprehending of Paul, does
the deed.


Tim. But I am sure my faith is not sound, because it is not attended with
assurance of salvation. For I doubt (not to say despair) thereof. Whereas
Divines hold, that the Essence of saving faith consists in a certainty to be
saved.


Phil. Such deliver both a false, and dangerous doctrine; as the careless
mother 1 Kings 3 19.
killed her little infant, for she over-laid it: So this opinion would press
many weak faiths to death, by laying a greater weight upon them then they can
bear, or God does impose; whereas to be assured of salvation, is not a part of
every true faith, but only an effect of some strong faiths, and that also not
always, but at some times.


Tim. Is not certainty of salvation a part of every true faith?


Phil. No verily, much less is it the life and formality of faith, which
consists only in a recumbency on God in Christ, with Jobs resolution, Jo^
13. 15
Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. Such an adherence, without an
assurance, is sufficient by Gods mercy to save thy soul. Those that say that
none have a sincere faith without a certainty of salvation, may with as much
truth maintain, that none are the Kings loyal Subjects, but such as are his
Favorites.


Tim. Is then assurance of salvation a peculiar personal favor, indulged by
God, only to some particular persons?


Phil. Yes verily: Though the salvation of all Gods servants be sure in it
self, yet is only assured to the apprehensions of some select people, and
that at some times: For it is too fine fare for the best man to feed on every
day.


Tim. May they that have this assurance, afterward lose it?


Phil. Undoubtedly they may: God first is gracious to give it them, they for a
time careful to keep it, then negligently lose it, then sorrowfully seek it.
God again is bountiful to restore it, they happy to recover it, for a while
diligent to retain it, then again foolish to forfeit it, and so the same
changes in ones life time often, over, and over again.


Tim. But some will say, If I may be infallibly saved without this Assurance, I
will never endeavor to attain it.


Phil. I would have covered my flowers, if I had suspected such spiders would
have sucked them. One may go to heaven without this Assurance, as certainly,
but not so cheerfully, and therefore prudence to obtain our own comfort, and
piety to obey Gods Command, obliges us all to give diligence to make our
calling and election sure, both in it self, and in our apprehension.


XI. Dialogue. God alone can satisfy all objections of a wounded Conscience.
Tim. BUt, Sir, these your Answers are no whit satisfactorie unto me.


Phil. An Answer may be satisfactorie to the Objection, both in it self, and
in the judgment of all unprejudiced Hearers, and yet not satisfactorie to the
Objecter, and that in two cases: First, when he is poss^ssed with the spirit of
peevishness and perverseness. It is lost labor to seek to feed and fill
those, who have a greedy Horseleach of cavilling in their heart, crying Give,
give.


Tim. What is the second case?


Phil. When the bitterness of his soul is so great and grievous, that he is
like the Exo. 6. 9.
Israelites in Egypt, which hearkened not to Moses, for anguish of spirit, and
for cruel Bondage. Now as those who have meat before them, and will not eat,
deserve to starve without pity: so such are much to be bemoaned, who through
some impediment in their mouth, throat, or stomach, cannot chaw, swallow or
digest comfort presented unto them.


Tim. Such is my condition, what then is to be done unto me?


Phil. I must change my precepts to thee into prayers for thee, that ^od would
Psalm. 90. 14.
Satisfy thee early with his mercy, that thou may rejoice. Ministers may
endeavor it in vain, whilst they quell one scruple, they start another,
whilst they fill one corner of a wounded Conscience with comfort, another is
empty. Only God can so satisfy the soul, that each chink and cranny therein,
shall be filled with spiritual joy.


Tim. What is the difference betwixt Gods, and man's speaking Peace to a
troubled spirit?


Phil. Man can neither make him to whom he speaks, to hear what he says, or
believe what he hears. God speaks with authority, and does both. His words
give hearing to the deaf, and Faith to the Infidel. When, not the Mother of
Christ, but Christ himself, shall salute a sick soul with Peace be unto
thee, it will leap for joy, as John the babe sprang, though imprisoned in the
dark womb of his Mother. Thus the offender is not comforted, though many of
the spectatours, and under- officers tell him he shall be pardoned, until he
hears the same from the mouth of the Judge himself who has power and place
to forgive him; and then his heart reviveth with comfort.


Tim. God send me such comfort: mean time, I am thankful unto you for the
answers you have given me.


Phil. All that I will add is this. The Lacedaemonians had a law, that if a bad
man, or one disesteemed of the people, chanced to give good counsel, he was to
stand by, and another, against whose person the people had no prejudice, was to
speak over the same words, which the former had uttered. I am most sensible to
my self of my own badnesse, and how justly I am subject to exception. Only my
prayer shall be, that whilst I stand by, and am ^ilent, Gods Spirit which is
free from any fault, and full of all perfection, would be pleased to repeat in
thy heart, the selfsame answers I have given to your objections: And then
what was weak, shallow and unsatisfying, as it came from my mouth, shall and
will be full, powerful, and satisfactorie, as reinforced in thee, by Gods
Spirit.


XII. Dialogue. Means to be used by wounded Consciences, for the recovering of
comfort.
Tim. ARe there any useful means to be prescribed, whereby wounded
Consciences may recover comfort the sooner?


Phil. Yes, there are.


Tim. But now adays some condemn all using of means, let Grace alone (say
they) fully and freely to do its own work: and thereby man's mind will in due
time return to a good temper of its ow^ accord: This is the most spiritual
serving of God, whilst using of means, makes but Dunces, and Trewants in
Christ's School.


Phil. What they pretend spiritual, will prove ai^ry and empty, making lewd and
lazy Christians: Means may and must be used with these cautions. 1. That they
be of Gods appointment in his word, and not of man's mere invention. 2. That we
still remember they are but means, and not the main. For to account of helps
more then helps, is the highway to make them hindrances. Lastly, that none
rely barely on the deed done, which conceit will undo him that did it,
especially if any opinion of merit be fixed therein.


Tim. What is the first means I must use, for I reassume to personate a
wounded conscience?


Phil. Constantly pray to God, that in his due time he would speak peace unto
thee.


Tim. My prayers are better omitted then performed: They are so weak they will
but bring the greater punishment upon me, and involve me within the Jer. 48. 10
Prophets curse, to those that do the work of the Lord negligently.


Phil. Prayers negligently performed, draw a curse, but not prayers weakly
performed. The former is when one can do better, and will not; the latter, is,
when one would do better, but alas, he cannot: And such failings as they are
his sins, so they are his sorrows also: Pray therefore faintly, that thou
may pray fervently; pray weakly, that thou may pray strongly.


Tim. But in the Law they were forbidden to offer to God any lame Deuteronomy. 15. 21.
sacrifice, and such are my prayers.


Phil. 1. Observe a great difference, betwixt the material Sacrifice under the
Law, and spiritual Sacrifices (the calves of the lips) under the Gospel. The
former were to be free from all blemish, because they did typifie and resemble
Christ himself: The latter (not figuratively representing Christ, but heartily
presented unto him) must be as good as may be gotten, though many imperfections
will cleave to our best performances, which by Gods mercy are forgiven. 2. Know
that that in Scripture is accounted lame, which is counterfeit, and
dissembling, (in which sense 1 Kings 18. 21.
Hypocrites are properly called halters) and therefore if thy prayer though
never so weak, be sound, and sincere, it is acceptable with God.


Tim. What other counsel do you prescribe me?


Phil. Be diligent in reading the word of God, wherein all comfort is
contained; say not that thou art dumpish and undisposed to read, but remember
how travelers must eat against their stomach; their journey will digest it:
and though their Palate find no pleasure for the present, their whole body will
feel strength for the future. Thou have a great journey to go, a wounded
conscience is far to travel to find comfort, (and though weary, shall be
welcome at his journeys end) and therefore must feed on Gods word, even against
his own dull disposition, and shall afterward reap benefit thereby.


Tim. Proceed in your appointing of wholesome diet for my wounded conscience to
observe.


Phil. Avoid solitariness, land associate thy self with pious and godly
company: O the blessed fruits thereof! Such as want skill or boldness to begin
or set a Psalm, may competently follow tune in consort with others: Many
houses in London have so weak walls, and are of so slight and sl^nder building,
that were they set alone in the fields, probably they would not stand an hour;
which now ranged in streets receive support in them selves, and mutually
return it to others: So may thou in good society, not only be reserved from
much mischief, but also be strengthened and confirmed in many godly exercises,
which solely thou could not perform.


Tim. What else must I do?


Phil. Be industrious in thy calling; I press this the more, because some
erroneously conceive that a wounded conscience cancels all Indentures of
service, and gives them (during their affliction) a dispensation to be idle.
The inhabitants of the Bishopric of Cambd. Brit. in Durham.
Durham pleaded a privilege, that King Edward the first had no power, although
on necessary occasion, to press them to go out of the Country, because*
forsooth, they termed themselves Haly-worke-folke, only to be used in defending
the holy Shrine of S. Cuthbert. Let none in like manner pretend, that (during
the agony of a wounded conscience) they are to have no other employment, then
to sit moping to brood their Melancholy, or else only to attend their
devotions; whereas a good way to divert or assuage their pain within, is to
take pains without in their vocation. I am confident, that happy minute which
shall put a period to thy misery, shall not find thee idle, but employed, as
ever some secret good is accrewing to such, who are diligent in their calling.


Tim. But though wounded consciences are not to be freed from all work, are
they not to be favored in their work?


Phil. Yes verily. Here let me be the Advocate to such Parents and Masters, who
have Sons, Servants, or others under their authority afflicted with wounded
Consciences, O, do not with the Egyptian taskmasters, exact of them the full
tale of their brick, O spare a little till they have recovered some strength.
Unreasonabl^ that maimed men, should pass on equal duty with such Soldiers
as are sound.


Tim. How must I dispose my self on the Lords day?


Phil. Avoid all servile work, and expend it only in such actions, as tend to
the sanctifying thereof. God the great Landlord of all time has let out six
da^s in the week to man to farm them; the Seventh day he reserveth as
Demeanes in his own hand: If therefore we would have quiet possession, and
comfortable use of what God has leased out to us, let us not incroach on his
Demeanes. Some Popish Ifitrains on Sunday before Mess, it will rain all week
more or less. A Popish old ^ime.
people make a superstitious Almanacke of the Sunday, by the fairness or
foulness thereof, guessing of the weather all the week after. But I dare
boldly say, that from our well or ill spending of the Lords Day, a probable
conjecture may be made, how the following week will be employed. Yea I
conceive, we are bound (as matters now stand in England) to a stricter
observation of the Lords Day, then ever before. That a time was due to Gods
Service, no Christian in our Kingdom ever did deny: That the same was weekly
dispersed in the Lords Day, Holy days, Wednesdayes, Fridayes, Saturdayes, some
have earnestly maintained: Seeing therefore, all the last are generally
neglected, the former must be more strictly observed; it being otherwise
impious, that our devotion having a narrower channel, should also carry a
shallower stream.


Tim. What other means must I use for expedition of comfort to my wounded
Conscience?


Phil. Confess 2 Samuel 12. 13. Mat. 3. 6.
that sin or sins, which most perplexes thee, to some Godly Minister, who
by absolution may pronounce, and apply pardon unto thee.


Tim. This confession is but a device of Divines, thereby to skrne themselves
into other men's secrets, so to mold, and manage them with more ease to their
own profit.


Phil. God forbid they should have any other design, but your safety, and
therefore choose your confessor, where you please to your own contentment; so
that you may find ease, fetch it where you may, it is not our credit, but your
cure we stand upon.


Tim. But such confession has been counted rather arack for Sound, then a
remedy for wounded Consciences.


Phil. It proves so, as abused in the Romish Church, requiring an enumeration
of all mortal sins, therein supposing an error, that some sins are not
mortal, and imposing an impossibility, that all can be reckoned up. Thus the
conscience is tortured, because it can never tread firmly, feeling no bottom,
being still uncertain of Confession, (and so of Absolution) whether or no he
has acknowledged all his sins. But where this ordinance is commended as
convenient, not commanded as necessary, left free, not forced, in cases of
extremity, sovereign use may be made, and has been found thereof, neither
M^gistrate nor Minister carrying the Sword or the Keys in vain.


Tim. But, Sir, I expected some rare inventions from you, for curing wounded
consciences: whereas (...) your receipts hitherto are old, stale, usual,
common, and ordinary; there is nothing new in any of them.


Phil. I answer, First, if a wounded conscience had been a (...) disease, never
heard of in Gods Word before this time, (...) perchance we must have been
forced to find out new remedies. But it is an old Malady, and therefore old
Physic is best applied unto it. Secondly, the Receipts indeed are old, because
prescribed by him, who is the Dan. 7. 9.
Ancient of days. But the older the better, because warranted by experience to
be effectual. Gods ordinances are like the clothes Deu. 29. 5.
of the Children of Israel, during our wandering in the wilderness of this
world, they never wax old, so as to have their virtue in operation abated or
decayed. Thirdly, whereas you call them common, would to God they were so, and
as generally practiced, as they are usually prescribed. Lastly, know we meddle
not with curious heads, which are pleased with newfangled rarities, but with
wounded consciences, who love solid comfort. Suppose our Receipts ordinary and
obvious; If 2 Kings 5 12.
Naaman counts the cure too cheap and easy, none will pity him if still he be
pained with his leprosy.


Tim. But your receipts are too loose and large, not fitted and appropriated to
my malady alone. For all these, Pray, read, keep good company, be diligent in
thy calling, observe the Sabbath, confess thy sins, etc.) may as well be
prescribed to one guilty of presumption, as to me ready to despair.


Phil. It does not follow that our physic is not proper for one, because it
may be profitable for both.


Tim. But Despair and Presumption being contrary diseases flowing from
contrary causes, must have contrary cures.


Phil. Though they flow immediately from contrary caufes, yet originally from
the common fountain of natural corruption: And therefore such means as I
have propounded, tending toward the mortifying of our corrupt nature, may
generally, though not equally be useful to humble the presuming, and comfort
the despairing; But to cut off cavills in the next Dialogue, we will come closely
to peculiar counsels unto thee.


XIII. Dialogue. Four wholesome counsels, for a wounded Conscience to practice.
Tim. Perform your promise, which is the first counsel you commend unto me?


Phil. Take heed of ever renounceing thy filial interest in God, though thy
sins deserve that he should disclaim his Paternall relation to thee. The
Prodigal Luke 15. 21
returning to his Father did not say, I am not thy son, but, I am no more
worthy to be called thy son. Beware of bastardizing thy self, being as much
as Satan desires, and more then he hopes to obtain. Otherwise thy folly would
give him more then his fury could get.


Tim. I conceive this a need full c^tion.


Phil. It will appear so if we consider, what the Ephesians 6. 12.
Apostle says, that we wrestle with principalities and powers. Now wrestlers
in the Olympian games were naked, and anointed with oil to make them slick,
and glibbery, so to afford no hold-fast to such as strove with them. Let us not
gratify the Devil with this advantage against our selves, at any time to
disclaim our Sonneship in God: If the Devil catches us at this lock, he will
throw us flat, and hazard the breaking of our necks with final despair. Oh no!
Still keep this point; a Prodigal son I am, but a son, no bastard: A lost
sheep, but a sheep, no goat: An unprofitable servant, but Gods servant, and
not absolute slave to Satan.


Tim. Proceed to your second counsel.


Phil. Give credit to what grave and godly persons conceive of thy condition,
rather then what thy own fear, (an incompetent Judge) may suggest unto thee. A
seared Conscience thinks better of it self, a wounded worse, then it ought:
The former may account all sin a sport, the latter all sport a sin:
Melancholy men, when sick, are ready to conceit any cold to be the cough of the
Lungs, and an ordinary Pustle, no less then the plague sore. So wounded
consciences conceive sins of infirmity to be of presumption, sins of
ignorance to be of knowledge, apprehending their case more dangerous then it is
indeed.


Tim. But it seems unreasonable that I should rather trust another saying,
then my own sense of my self.


Phil. Every man is best judge of his own self, if he be his own self, but
during the swound of a wounded conscience, I deny thee to be come to thy own
self: whilst thine eyes are blubbering, and a tear hangs before thy sight,
thou can not see things clearly and truly, because looking through a double
medium of air and water; so whilst this cloud of pensivenes is pendent before
the eyes of thy soul, thy estate is erroneously represented unto thee.


Tim. What is your third counsel?


Phil. In thy agony of a troubled conscience always look upwards unto a
gracious God to keep thy soul steady, for looking downward on thy self, thou
shall find nothing but what will increase thy fear, infinite sins, good
deeds few, and imperfect: It is not thy Faith, but Gods faithfulness thou must
rely upon; casting thine eyes downwards on thy self to behold the great
distance betwixt what thou deservest, and what thou desire, is enough to make
thee giddy, stagger and reel into despair: Ever therefore Lift up thine eyes
unto the Psalm. 121 1.
hills, from whence comes thy help, never viewing the deep Dale of thy own
unworthines, but to abate thy pride when tempted to presumption.


Tim. Sir, your fourth and last counsel.


Phil. Be not disheartened as if comfort would not come at all, because it comes
not all at once, but patiently attend Gods leisure: they are not styled the
swift, but the Isa. 55. 3. and 58. 8.
Sure mercies of David: And the same Prophet says, 1 Kings 18. 43.
The glory of the Lord shall be thy Rereward, this we know comes up last to
secure and make good all the rest: Be assured, where grace patiently leads the
Front, glory at last will be in the Rear. Remember the prodigious patience of
Eliahs servant.


Tim. Wherein was it remarkable?


Phil. In obedience to his master: He went several times to the Sea; it is
tedious for me to tell what was not troublesome for him to do, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6, 7. times sent down steep Carmel, with danger, and up it again with
difficulty, and all to bring news of nothing, till his last journey, which
made recompense for all the rest, with the tidings of a cloud arising. So thy
thirsty soul, long parched with drowth for want of comfort, though late, at
last, shall be plentifully refreshed with the dew of consolation.


Tim. I shall be happy if I find it so.


Phil. Consider the causes why a broken Leg is incureable in a Horse, and
easily cureable in a man: The Horse is incapable of counsel to submit himself
to the Farrier, and therefore in case his Leg be set, he flings, flounces, and
flies out, unjoynting it again by his mis-imployed mettle, counting all binding
to be shackles and fetters unto him; whereas a man willingly resigneth himself
to be ordered by the Chyrurgeon, preferring rather to be a prisoner for some
days, then a Cripple all his life. Be not like a Psalm. 32. 9.
Horse or Mule, which have no understanding; but let patience have its perfect
work. In thee* When God goes about to bind up the James 1. 3. Isa. 61. 1.
broken hearted, tarry his time, though ease come not at an instant, yea though
it be painful for the present, in due time thou shall certainly receive
comfort.


XIV. Dialogue. Comfortable meditations for wounded Consciences to muse upon.
Tim. Furnish me I pray with some comfortable meditations; whereon I may busy
and employ my soul when alone.


Phil. First consider that our Savior had not only a notionall, but an
experimental and meritorious knowledge of the pains of a wounded conscience,
when hanging on the Cross: If Pau^ conce^ved himself happy being to answer
for himself, before King Agrippa, especially because he knew * Acts 26. 2
him to be expert in all the customs and questions of the Jews; How much more
just cause has thy wounded conscience of comfort and joy, being in thy prayers
to plead before Christ himself, who has felt thy pain, and deserved that in
due time by his stripes thou should be healed?


Tim. Proceed I pray in this comfortable subject.


Phil. Secondly, consider that herein, like Eliah, thou need not complain
that thou art left alone, seeing the best of Gods Saints in all ages have
smarted in the same kind; instance in David: Indeed sometimes he boasts how
he lay in green Psa. 23. 2
pastures, and was led by still waters; But after he bemoaneth that he sinks in
Psa. 69. 2.
deep mire, where there was no standing. What is become of those green
pastures? Parched up with the drowth. Where are those still waters? Troubled
with the tempest of affliction. The same David compares himself to an Compare
P^al. 102. 6 with Psa. 102. 5.
owl, and in the next Psalm resembles himself to an Eagle. Do two fowls
fly of more different kind? The one the Scorn, the other the Sovereign; the
one the slowest, the other the swiftest; the one the most sharp sighted, the
other the most dimme-eyed of all Birds. Wonder not then, to find in thy self
sudden, and strange alterations. It fared thus with all Gods servants, in their
agonies of temptation, and be confident thereof, though now run aground, with
grief, in due time thou shall be all afloate with comfort.


Tim. I am loath to interrupt you in so welcome a discourse.


Phil. Thirdly, consider, that thou have had, though not grace enough to cure
thee, yet enough to keep thee, and conclude that he, whose goodness has so
long held thy head above water from drowning, will at last bring thy whole body
safely to the shore. The Wife of Manoah, had more faith then her husband, and
thus she reasoned; Judge. 13. 23.
If the Lord were pleased to kill us he would not have received a burnt and a
meat offering at our hands. Thou may argue in like manner: If God had
intended finally to forsake me, he would never so often have heard and accepted
my prayers, in such a measure as to vouchsafe unto me, though not full
deliverance from, free preservation in my affliction. Know God has done great
things for thee already, and thou may conclude from his grace of supportation
hitherto, grace of ease, and relaxation hereafter.


Tim. It is pity to disturb you, proceed.


Phil. Fourthly, consider, that besides the private stock of thy own, thou
tradest on the public store of all good men's prayers, put up to heaven for
thee. What a mixture of Languages met in Jerusalem at Pentecost, Acts 2.
Parthians, Medes, and Elamites, etc. But conceive to thy comfort, what a
medley of prayers, in several tongues daily, center themselves in Gods ears
in thy behalf, English, Scotch, Irish, French, Dutch, etc. insomuch, that
perchance thou do not understand one syllable of their prayers, by whom thou
may reap benefit.


Tim. Is it not requisite to entitle me to the profit of other men's prayers,
that I particularly know their persons which pray for me?


Phil. Not at all, no more then it is needful that the eye or face must see
the backward parts, which is difficult, or the inward parts of the body, which
is impossible; without which sight, by sympathy they serve one another. And
such is the correspondency by prayers, betwixt the mystical members of Christ's
body, corporally unseen one by another.


Tim. Proceed to a fifth Meditation.


Phil. Consider, there be five kinds of Consciences on foot in the world:
First, an ignorant conscience, which neither sees nor says any thing, neither
beholds the sins in a soul, nor reproves them. Secondly, the flattering
conscience, whose speech is worse then silence it self, which though seeing
sin, sooths men in the committing thereof. Thirdly, the seared conscience,
which has neither sight, speech, nor sense, in men that ar^ Ephesians. 4. 19.
past feeling. Fourthly, a wounded conscience, frighted with sin. The last,
and best, is a quiet, and clear conscience, pacified in Christ Jesus. Of these
the fourth is thy case, incomparably better then the three former, so that a
wise man would not take a world to change with them. Yea a wounded conscience
is rather painful then sinful, an affliction, no offense, and is in the ready
way, at the next remove, to be turned into a quiet conscience.


Tim. I hearken unto you with attention and comfort.


Phil. Lastly, consider the good effects of a wounded conscience, privative for
the present, and positive for the future. First, primative, this heaviness of
thy heart (for the time being) is a bridle to thy soul, keeping it from many
sins it would otherwise commit. Thou that now sit sad in thy shop, or
walk p^sive in thy Parlour, or stand sighing in thy chamber, or lie
sobbing on thy bed, might perchance at the same time be drunk, or wanton,
or worse, if not restrained by this affliction. God says in his Prophet to
Judah, Hos. 2. 6.
I will ^edge thy way with thorns, namely, to keep Judah from committing
spiritual fornication. It is confessed that a wounded conscience, for the time,
is a hedge of thorns, (as the messenger of Satan, sent to buffet S. Paul, is
termed a 2 Cor. 12 7.
thorn in the flesh.) But this thornie fence keeps our wild spirits in the
true way, which otherwise would be straggling: and it is better to be held in
the right road with briars and brambles, then to wander on beds of roses, in a
wrong path, which leads to destruction.


Tim. What are the positive benefits of a wounded conscience?


Phil. Thereby the graces in thy soul will be proved, approved, improved. Oh
how clear will thy Sunshine be, when this cloud is blown over? And here I
can hardly hold from envying thy happiness hereafter. O that I might have thy
future Crown, without thy present Cross; thy Triumphs, without thy Trial;
thy Conquest, without thy Combat! But I recall my wish, as impossible, seeing
what God has joined together, no man can put asunder. These things are so
twisted together, I must have both or neither.


XV. Dialogue. That is not always the greatest sin whereof a man is guilty,
wherewith his conscience is most pained for the present.
Tim. IS that the greatest sin in a man's soul, wherewith his wounded con
cience, in the agony thereof, is most perplexed?


Phil. It is so commonly, but not constantly. Commonly indeed, that sin most
paineth and pincheth him, which commands as principal in his soul.


Tim. Have all men's hearts some one paramount sin, which rules as Sovereign
over all the rest?


Phil. Most have. Yet as all Countries are not Monarchies, governed by Kings,
but some by free-States, where many together have equal power; so it is
possible (though rare) that one man may have two, three, or more sins, which
jointly domineer in his heart, without any discernable superiority betwixt them.


Tim. Which are the sins that most generally wound and afflict a man, when
his Conscience is terrified?


Phil. No general rule can exactly be given herein. Sometimes that sin, in
acting whereof, he took most delight, it being just, that the sweetness of his
corporal pleasure, should be sauced with more spiritual sadness. Sometimes
that sin, which (though not the foulest) is the frequentest in him. Thus his
idle words may perplex him more, then his oaths or perjury it self. Sometimes
that sin (not which is most odious before God, but) most scandalous before men,
does most afflict him, because drawing greatest disgrace upon his person and
profession. Sometimes that sin which he last committed, because all the
circumstances thereof are still firm and fresh in his memory. Sometimes that
sin, which (though long since by him committed) he has heard very lately
powerfully reproved; and no wonder, if an old gall new rubbed over, smart the
most. Sometimes that sin which formerly he most slighted and neglected, as so
inconsiderably small, that it was unworthy of any sorrow for it, and yet now it
may prove the sharpest sting in his conscience.


Tim. May not one who is guilty of very great sins, sometimes have his
conscience much troubled only for a small one?


Phil. Yes verily: Country Patients often complain, not of the disease which
is most dangerous, but most conspicuous. Yea sometimes they are more troubled
with the symptom of a disease (suppose an ill color, bad breath, weak
stomach) then with the disease it self. So in the soul, the conscience
oft-times is most wounded, not with that offense which is, but appears most,
and a sin incomparably small to others, whereof the party is guilty, may most
molest for the present, and that for three reasons.


Tim. Reckon them in order.


Phil. First, that God may show in him, that as sins are like the sands in
number, so they are far above them in heaviness, whereof the least crum
taken asunder, and laid on the conscience, by Gods hand, in full weight
thereof, is enough to drive it to despair.


Tim. What is the second reason?


Phil. To manifest Gods justice, that those should be choked with a
gnat-sinne, who have swallowed many Camel-sinnes, without the least regreat.
Thus some may be terrified for not fasting on Friday, because indeed they have
been drunk on Sunday: They may be perplexed for their wanton dreams, when
sleeping, because they were never truly humbled for their wicked deeds, when
waking. Yea those who never feared Babylon the Great, may be frighted with
little Zoar; I mean, such as have been faulty in flat superstition, may be
tortured for committing, or omitting a thing, in its own nature, indifferent.


Tim. What is the third reason?


Phil. That this pain for a lesser sin may occasion his serious scrutiny,
into greater offenses. Any paltry curre may serve to start and put up the game
out of the bushes, whilst fiercer, and fleeter Hounds are behind to course and
catch it. God does make use of a smaller sin, to raise and rouse the
conscience out of security, and to put it up, as we say, to be chased, by the
Reserve of far greater offenses, lurking behind in the soul, unseene, and
unsorrowed for.


Tim. May not the conscience be troubled at that, which in very deed is no
sin at all, nor has truly so much, as but the appearance of evil in it?


Phil. It may. Through the error of the understanding such a mistake may follow
in the conscience.


Tim. What is to be done in such a case?


Phil. The parties judgment must be rectified, before his conscience can be
pacified. Then is it the wisest way to persuade him to lay the Axe of
repentance, to the Root of corruption in his heart. When real sins in his
soul are felled by unfeigned sorrow, causeless scruples will fall of
themselves. Till that root be cut down, not only the least bough, and branch
of that tree, but the smallest sprig, twig, and leaf thereof, yea the very
empty ^hadow of a leaf (mistaken for a sin, and created a fault by the
jealousy of a misinformed judgment) is sufficient intollerably to torture a
wounded conscience.


XVI. Dialogue. Obstructions hindering the speedy flowing of comfort into a
troubled soul.
Tim. HOw comes it to pass, that comfort is so long a coming to some
wounded consciences?


Phil. It proceeds from several causes, either from God, not yet pleased to
give it; or the Patient, not yet prepared to receive it; or the Minister, not
well fitted to deliver it.


Tim. How from God not yet pleased to give it?


Phil. His time to bestow consolation is not yet come: now no plummets of the
heaviest humane importunity can so weigh down Gods Clock of Time, as to make
it strike one minute before his hour be come. Till then his Mother her self
could not prevail with John 2. 4.
Christ to work a Miracle, and turn water into wine: and till that minute
appointed approach, God will not, in a wounded conscience, convert the water of
affliction, into that wine of comfort, which makes glad the heart of the soul.


Tim. How may the hindrance be in the Patient himself?


Phil. He may as yet not be sufficiently humbled, or else God perchance in his
providence fore-seeth, that as the prodigal child, when he had received his
portion, riotously misspent it; so this sick soul, if comfort were imparted
unto him, would prove an unthrift and ill husband upon it, would lose and
lavish it. God therefore conceives it most for his glory, and the others good,
to keep the comfort still in his own hand, till the wounded conscience get
more wisdom to manage and employ it.


Tim. May not the sick man's too mean opinion of the Minister, be a cause why
he reaps no more comfort by his counsel?


Phil. It may. Perchance, the sick man has formerly slightand neglected that
Minister, and God will not now make him the instrument for his comfort, who
before had been the object of his contempt. But on the other side, we must
also know that perchance the parties over-high opinion of the Ministers parts,
piety, and corporal presence, (as if he cured where he came, and carried ease
with him) may hinder the operation of his advice. For God grows jealous of so
suspicious an instrument who probably may be mistaken for the principal.
Whereas a meaner man, of whose spiritualnesse the patient has not so high
carnal conceits, may prove more effectual in comforting, because not within
the compass of suspicion to eclipse God of his glory.


Tim. How may the obstructions be in the Minister himself?


Phil. If he comes unprepared by prayer, or possessed with pride, or uns^ilfull
in what he undertakes; wherefore in such cases a Minister may do well to
reflect on himself, (as the Mat. 17. 19.
Disciples did when they could not cast out the Devil) and to call his heart
to account, what may be the cause thereof; particularly whether some
unrepented-for sin in himself, has not hindered the effects of his counsels
in others.


Tim. However you would not have him wholly disheartened, with his ill success.


Phil. O no; but let him comfort himself with these considerations. First,
that though the Patient gets no benefit by him, he may gain experience by the
patient, thereby being enabled more effectually to proceed, with some other in
the same disease. 2. Though the sickman refuses comfort for the present, yet
what does not sink on a sudden, may soake in by degrees, and may prove
profitable afterward. Thirdly, his unsucceeding pains may notwithstanding
facilitate comfort for another to work in the same body, as Solomon built a
Temple with most materials formerly provided, and brought thither by David.
Lastly, grant his pains altogether lost on the wounded Conscience, yet his 1
Cor. 15 58.
Labor is not in vain in the Lord, who without respect to the event will
reward his endeavors.


Tim. But what if this Minister has been the means to cast this sick man
down, and now cannot comfort him again?


Phil. In such a case, he must make this sad accident the more matter for his
humiliation, but not for his dejection. Besides, he is bound, both in honor
and honesty, Civility and Christianity, to procure what he cannot perform,
calling in the advice of others more able to assist him, not conceiving out of
pride or envy, that the discreet craving of the help of others, is a
disgraceful confessing of his own weakness; like those malicious Midwives,
who had rather that the woman in travail should miscarry, then be safely
delivered by the hand of another, more skillful then themselves.


XVII. Dialogue. What is to be conceived of their final estate who die in a
wounded Conscience without any visible comfort.
Tim. WHat think you of such, who yield up their ghost in the agony of an af
flicted spirit, without receiving the least sensible degree of comfort?


Phil. Let me be your remembrancer to call or keep in your mind, what I said
before, that our discourse only concerns the Children of God: This notion
renewed I answer. It is possible that the sick soul may receive secret solace,
though the standers by do not perceive it. We know how insensibly Satan may
spirt and inject Despair into a heart, and shall we not allow the Lord of
heaven to be more dextrous and active with his Antidotes, then the devil is
with his Poisons?


Tim. Surely if he had any such comfort, he would show it by words, signs, or
some way, were it only but to comfort his sad kindred, and content such
sorrowful friends which survive him; Were there any hidden fire of consolation
kindled in his heart, it would sparkle in his looks and gestures, especially
seeing no obligation of secrecy is imposed on him, as on the Mar. 8. 26.
blind man, when healed, to tell none thereof.


Phil. It may be he cannot discover the comfort he has received, and that for
two reasons: First, because it comes so late, when he lies in the Merches of
life and death, being so weak, that he can neither speak, nor make signs with
Zechariah, being at that very instant* when the silver cord is ready to be
loosed, and the golden bowl to be broken, and the pitcher to be broken at the
fountain, and the wheel to be broken at the cisterne.


Tim. What may be the other reason?


Phil. Because the Comfort it self may be incommunicable in its own nature,
which the party can take, and not tell; enjoy, and not express; receive, and
not impart: As by the assistance of Gods Spirit, he sent up Romans 8. 26.
groans which cannot be uttered: so the same may from God be returned with
comfort, which cannot be uttered; and as he had many invisible and privy
pangs, concealed from the cognizance of others, so may God give him secret
comfort, known unto himself alone, without any other men's sharing in the notice
thereof. Prove. 14. 10.
The heart knows his own bitterness, and a stranger does not intermeddle
with his joy. So that his comfort may be compared to the new name given to Gods
servants, Rev. 2. 17
which no man knows, save he that receives it.


Tim. All this proceeds on what is possible or probable, but amounts to no
certainty.


Phil. Well then, suppose the worst, this is most sure, though he die without
tasting of any comfort here, he may instantly partake of everlasting joys
hereafter. Surely many a despairing soul, groaning out his last breath, with
fear and thought to sink down to hell, has presently been countermanded by
Gods goodness to eternal happiness.


Tim. What you say herein, no man alive can confirm or confute, as being
known to God alone, and the soul of the party. Only I must confess, that you
have charity on your side.


Phil. I have more then charity, namely, Gods plain and positive Promise, Mat.
5. 4.
Blessed are such as mourn, for they shall be comforted. Now though the
particular time, when, be not expressed, yet the latest date that can be
allowed, must be in the world to come, where such mourners, who have not felt
God in his comfort here, shall see him in his glory in Heaven.


Tim. But some who have led pious and godly lives, have departed, pronouncing
the sentence of condemnation upon themselves, having one foot already in hell
by their own confession.


Phil. Such confessions are of no validity, wherein their fear bears false
witness against their faith. The finenesse of the whole cloth of their life,
must not be thought the worse of, for a little course list at the last. And
also their final estate is not to be construed by what was dark, doubtful,
and desperate at their deaths, but must be expounded, by what was plain,
clear, and comfortable, in their lives.


Tim. You then are confident, that a holy life, must have a happy death.


Phil. Most confident. The Logicians hold, that, although from false premises a
true conclusion may sometimes follow; yet from true propositions, nothing but a
Ex veris possunt, nil nisi ve^a sequi.
truth can be thence inferred, so though sometimes a bad life may be attended
with a good death, (namely, by reason of repentance, though slow, sincere,
though late, yet unfaigned, being seasonably interposed) but where a godly and
gracious life has gone before, there a good death must of necessity follow;
which, though sometimes doleful (for want of apparent comfort) to their
surviving friends, can never be dangerous to the party deceased. Remember what
S. Paul says, Col. 3. 3.
Our life is hid with Christ in God.


Tim. What makes that place to your purpose?


Phil. Exceeding much. Five cordial observations are couched therein. First,
that God sets a high price, and valuation on the souls of his servants, in
that he is pleased to hide them: None will hide toys, and trifles, but what is
counted a treasure. Secondly, the word hide, as a relative imports, that some
seek after our souls, being none other then Satan himself, that roaring
Lion, who goes about 1 Pet. 5. 8
SEEKING, whom he may devour. But the best is, let him seek, and seek, and
seek, till his malice be weary, (if that be possible) we cannot be hurt by
him, whilst we are hid in God. Thirdly, grant Satan find us there, he cannot
fetch us thence: Our souls are bound in the bundle of life, with the Lord our
God. So that, be it spoken with reverence, God first must be stormed with force
or (...), before the soul of a Saint-sinner, hid in him, can be surprised.
Fourthly, we see the reason, why so many are at a loss, in the agony of a
wounded conscience, concerning their spiritual estate. For they look for
their life in a wrong place, namely to find it in their own piety, purity,
and inherent righteousness. But though they seek, and search, and dig, and
dive never so deep, all in vain. For though Adams life was hid in himself,
and he entrusted with the keeping his own integrity, yet, since Christ's
coming, all the original evidences of our salvation are kept in a higher
office, namely, hidden in God himself. Lastly, as our English proverb says,
he that has hid can find; so God (to whom belongs the Psalm. 68. 20.
issues from death) can infallibly find out that soul that is hidden in him,
though it may seem, when dying, even to labor to lose it self in a fit of
despair.


Tim. It is pity, but that so comfortable a doctrine should be true.


Phil. It is most true: Surely as Luke 2. 48
Joseph and Mary conceived, that they had lost Christ in a crowd, and sought
him three days sorrowing, till at last they found him beyond their
expectation, safe and sound, sitting in the Temple: So many pensive parents
solicitous for the souls of their children, have even given them for gone, and
lamented them lost (because dying without visible comfort) and yet, in due
time, shall find them to their joy and comfort, safely possessed of honor and
happiness, in the midst of the heavenly Temple, and Church Triumphant in glory.


XVIII. Dialogue. Of the different time and manner of the coming of comfort to
such who are healed of a wounded conscience.
Tim. HOw long may a servant of God lie under the burden of a wounded
conscience?


Phil. Act. 1. 7.
It is not for us to know the times and the seasons, which the Father has put
in his own power. God alone knows whether their grief shall be measured unto
them, by hours, or days, or weeks, or months, or many years.


Tim. How then is it that Saint Paul says, that God will give us the ^ Cor.
10. 13.
issue with the temptation, if one may long be visited with this malady?


Phil. The Apostle is not so to be understood, as if the temptation and issue
were twins, both borne at the same instant; for then no affliction could last
long, but must be ended as soon as it is begun; whereas we Act. 9. 33
read how Aeneas truly pious, was bedrid of the Palsy 8. years; the woman
diseased with a Mat. 9. 2.
bloody issue 12. years; another woman bowed by infirmity Luke 13. 11.
18. years; and the man Joh. 5. 5.
lame 38. years at the poole of Bethesda.


Tim. What then is the meaning of the Apostle?


Phil. God will give the issue with the temptation, that is, the temptation and
the issue bear both the same date in Gods decreeing them, though not in his
applying them: At the same time, wherein he resolved his servants shall be
tempted, he also concluded of the means and manner, how the same persons should
infallibly be delivered. Or thus: God will give the issue with the temptation;
that is, as certainly, though not as suddenly. Though they go not abreast, yet
they are joined successively, like two links in a chain, where one ends, the
other does begin. Besides, there is a twofold issue; one, through a
temptation; another, out of a temptation. The former is but mediate, not
final; an issue, to an issue, only supporting the person, tempted for the
present, and preserving him for a future full deliverance. Understand the
Apostle thus, and the issue is always both given and applied to Gods children,
with the temptation, though the temptation may last long after, before fully
removed.


Tim. I perceive then, that in some, awounded conscience may continue many
years.


Phil. So it may. I read of a poor widow, in the Land of Melchior Adamus in
vita Theologorum (...) page 198.
Limburgh, who had nine children, and for 13. years together, was miserably
afflicted in mind, only because she had attended the dressing and feeding of
her little ones, before going to Mass. At last it pleased God, to sanctify
the endeavors of Franciscus Junius, that learned godly Divine, that upon true
information of her judgment, she was presently and perfectly comforted.


Tim. Does God give ease to all in such manner, on a sudden?


Phil. O no: Some receive comfort all in a lump, and in an instant they pass
from Midnight, to bright day, without any dawning betwixt. Others receive
consolation by degrees, which is not poured, but dropped into them by little and
little.


Tim. Strange, that Gods dealing herein should be so different with his
servants.


Phil. It is to show, that as in his proceedings there is no Jam. 1. 17
variableness, such as may import him mutable or impotent, so in the same
there is very much variety, to prove the fullness of his power, and freedom of
his pleasure.


Tim. Why does not God give them consolation all at once?


Phil. The more to employ their prayers, and exercise their patience. One may
admire why Ruth 2. 8
Boaz did not give to Ruth a quantity of Corn more or less, so sending her
home to her mother, but that rather he kept her still to gleane; but this was
the reason, because that is the best charity, which so relieves another
poverty, as still continues their industry* God in like manner, will not give
some consolation all at once, he will not spoil their (painful but) pious
profession of gleaning; still they must pray, and gather, and pray and gleane,
here an ear, there a handful of comfort, which God scatters in favor unto
them.


Tim. What must the party do when he perceives God and his comfort beginning
to draw nigh unto him?


Phil. As Joh. 11. 20
Martha, when she heard that Christ was a coming staid not a minute at home,
but went out of her house to meet him: So must a sick soul, when consolation
is a coming, haste out of himself, and hie to entertain God with his
thankefullnes. The best way to make a Homer of comfort increase to an Ephah,
(which is Exo. 16. 36.
ten times as much) is to be heartily grateful for what one has already, that
his store may be multiplied: He shall never want more, who is thankful for,
and thrifty with a little: Whereas ingratitude does not only stop the flowing
of more mercy, but even spils what was formerly received.


XIX. Dialogue. How such who are completely cured of a wounded conscience, are
to demean themselves.
Tim. GIve me leave now to take upon me the person of one recovered out of a
wounded conscience.


Phil. In the first place, I must heartily congratulate thy happy condition,
and must rejoice at thy upsitting, whom God has raised from the bed of
despair: welcome David out of the deep, Daniel out of the Lions Den, Jonah,
from the Whales belly: Welcome Job from the Dunghill, restored to health and
wealth again.


Tim. Yea, but when Jobs brethren came to visit him after his recovery, every
one gave him a piece of Job 42. 11
money, and an eare-ring of gold: But the Present I expect from you, let it be
I pray some of your good counsel, for my future deportment.


Phil. I have need to come to thee, and come thou to me? Feign would I be a
Paul, sitting at the feet of such a Gamaliel, who has been cured of a wounded
conscience, in the height thereof: I would turn my tongue into ears, and
listen attentively to what tidings he brings from Hell it self. Yea, I
should be worse then the brethren of Dives, if I should not believe one risen
from the dead, for such in effect I conceive to be his condition.


Tim. But waving these digressions, I pray proceed to give me good advice.


Phil. First, thankfully own God, thy principal restorer, and Comforter
Paramount. Remember that of Luke 17. 17.
ten Lepers, one only returned to give thanks; which shows, that by nature,
without grace over-swaying us, it is ten to one if we be thankful. Omit not
also thy thankfulness to good men, not only to such, who have been the
Architects of thy comfort, but even to those, who though they have built
nothing, have borne burdens toward thy recovery.


Tim. Go on I pray in your good counsel.


Phil. Associate thy self with men of afflicted minds, with whom thou may
expend thy time, to thine and their best advantage. O how excellently did Paul
comply with Aquila and Priscilla! As their hearts agreed in the general
profession of Piety, so their hands met in the trade of Act* 183.
Tent-makers, they abode and wrought together, being of the same occupation.
Thus I count all wounded consciences of the same company, and may mutually reap
comfort one by another. Only here is the difference: they (poor souls) are
still bound to their hard task and trade, whilst thou (happy man) have thy
Indentures cancelled, and being free of that Profession, art able to instruct
others therein.


Tim. What instructions must I commend unto them?


Phil. Even the same comfort, wherewith thou thy self was 2 Cor. ^. 4.
comforted of God: with David tell them what God has done for thy soul; and
with Peter, being strong Luke 22. 32.
strengthen thy brethren: conceive thy (...) like Joseph, therefore sent
before, and sold into the Egypt of a wounded conscience, (where thy feet were
hurt in the stocks, the irons entered into thy soul) that thou might
provide food for the famine of others, and especially be a purveyor of comfort
for those thy brethren, which afterward shall follow thee down into the same
doleful condition.


Tim. What else must I do for my afflicted brethren?


Phil. Pray heartily to God in their behalf: When David had prayed, Psalm. 25.
2. O my God I trust in thee, let me not be ashamed; In the next verse (as if
conscious to himself, that his prayers were too restrictive, narrow, and
nigardly) he enlarges the bounds thereof, and builds them on a broader
bottom; yea, let none that wait on thee be ashamed: Let charity in thy
devotions have Rechoboth, room enough: beware of pent Petitions confined to
thy private good, but extend them to all Gods servants, but especially all
wounded consciences.


Tim. Must I not also pray for those servants of God, which hitherto have not
been wounded in conence?


Phil. Yes verily, that God would keep them from, or cure them in the
exquisite torment thereof: Beggars when they crave an alms, constantly use one
main motive, that the person of whom they beg may be preserved from that
misery, whereof they themselves have had woeful experience: If they be blind,
they cry, Master God bless your eye sight; if lame, God bless your limbs; if
undone by casual burning, God bless you and yours from fire. Christ, though
his person be now glorified in heaven, yet he is still subject by sympathy of
his Saints on earth, to hunger, nakedness, imprisonment, and a wounded
conscience, and so may stand in need of feeding, clothing, visiting,
comforting, and curing: Now when thou prayest to Christ, for any favor, it is
a good plea to urge, edge, and enforce thy request withal, Lord grant me such
or such a grace, and never may thou Lord, in thy mystical members, never be
tortured and tormented with the agony of a wounded conscience, in the deepest
distress thereof.


Tim. How must I behave my self for the time to come?


Phil. Walk humbly before God, and carefully avoid the smallest sin, always
remembering Joh. 5. 14.
Christ's caution; Behold thou art made whole, ^inne no more, lest a worse thing
come unto thee.


XX. Dialogue. Whether one cured of a wounded Conscience, be subject to a
relapse.
Tim. MAy a man, once perfectly healed of a wounded con^cience, and for some
years in peaceable possession of comfort, afterward fall back into his former
disease?


Phil. Nothing appears in Scripture or reason to the contrary, though examples
of real relapses are very rare, because Gods servants are careful to avoid
sin, the cause thereof, and being once burnt therewith, ever after dread the
fire of a wounded conscience.


Tim. Why call you it a relapse?


Phil. To distinguish it from those relapses more usual and obvious, whereby
such, who have snatched comfort, before God gave it them, on serious
consideration, that they had usurped that, to which they had no right, fall
back again into the former pit of despair: this is improperly termed a
relapse, as not being a renewing, but a continuing of their former malady, from
which, though seemingly, they were never soundly recovered.


Tim. Is there any intimation in Scripture of the possibility of such a real
relapse in Gods servants?


Phil. There is, when David says, Psalm. 85. 8. I will hear what God the Lord
will speak, for he will speak peace unto his people, and to his Sain^s, but
let them not turn again to folly: this imports, that if his Saints turn again
to folly, which by woeful experience, we find too frequently done, God may
change his voice, and turn his peace, formerly spoken, into a warlike defiance
to their imports.


Tim. But this me thinks is a diminution to the majesty of God, that a man,
once completely cured of a wounded conscience, should again be pained
therewith: Let ^ountebanks palliat cures break out aga^n, being never soundly,
but superficially healed: He that is all ^n all, never does his work by
halves, so that it shall be undone afterward.


Phil. It is not the same individual wound in number, but the same in kind,
and perchance a deeper in degree: Nor is it any ignorance, or falsehood in the
Surgeon, but folly, and fury in the Patient, who by committing fresh sins,
causes a new pain in the old place.


Tim. In such relapses men are only troubled for such sins, which they have run
on score since their last recovery from a wounded conscience.


Phil. Not those alone, but all the sins which they have committed, both
before, and since their conversion, may be started up afresh in their minds and
memories, and anguish and perplex them, with the guiltiness thereof.


Tim. But those sins were formerly fully forgiven, and the pardon thereof
solemnly sealed, and assured unto them, and can the guilt of the same recoile
again upon their consciences?


Phil. I will not dispute what God may do in the strictnes of his justice: Such
Seals, though still standing firm and fast in themselves, may notwithstanding
break off, and fly open in the feeling of the sick soul: He will be ready to
conceive with himself, that as 1. Kin* 2. 44.
Shimei, though once forgiven his railing on David, was afterward executed for
the same offense, though upon his committing of a new transgression, following
his servants to Gath, against the flat command of the King: So God, upon his
committing of new trespasses, may justly take occasion to punish all former
offenses; yea in his apprehension, the very foundation of his faith may be
shaken, all his former title to heaven brought into question, and he tormented
with the consideration that he was never a true child of God.


Tim. What remedies do you commend to such souls in relapses?


Phil. Even the selfsame receipts which I first prescribed to wounded
consciences, the very same Promises, Precepts, Comforts, Counsels, Cautions.
Only as Jacob the second time that his sons went down into Genesis 43. 12.
Egypt, commanded them to carry double money in their hands; so I would advise
such to apply the former remedies with double diligence, double watchfulnes,
double industry, because the malignity of a disease is riveted firmer and
deeper in a relapse.


XXI. Dialogue. Whether it be lawful to pray for, or to pray against, or to
praise God for a wounded conscience.
Tim. IS it lawful for a man to pray to God to visit him with a wounded
conscience?


Phil. He may and must pray to have his high and hard heart, truly humbled, and
bruised with the fight and sense of his sins, and with unfeigned sorrow for
the same: but may not explicitly, and directly pray for a wounded conscience,
in the highest degree, and extremity thereof.


Tim. Why interpose you those terms explicitly and directly?


Phil. Because implicitly, and by consequence, one may pray for a wounded
Conscience: Namely, when he submits himself to be disposed by Gods pleasure,
referring the particulars thereof, wholly to his infinite wisdom, tendering,
as I may say, a blank paper to God in his Prayers, and requesting him to write
therein what particulars he pleases; therein generally, and by consequence he
may pray for a wounded Conscience, in case, God sees the same, for his own
glory, and the parties good; otherwise, directly he may not pray for it.


Tim. How prove you the same?


Phil. First, because a wounded Conscience is a judgment, and one of the
sorest, as the resemblance of the torments of hell. Now it is not congruous to
nature, or grace, for a man to be a free, and active instrument, purposely to
pull down upon himself, the greatest evil that can befall him in this worl^.
Secondly, we have neither direction, nor president of any Saint, recorded in
Gods word to justify and warrant such prayers. Lastly, though praying for a
wounded Conscience may seemingly scent of pretended humility, it does really
and rankly savor of pride, limiting the holy one of Israel. It ill becoming
the patient to prescribe to his heavenly Physician, what kind of Physic he
shall minister unto him.


Tim. But we may pray for all means to increase grace in us, and therefore may
pray for a wounded Conscience, seeing thereby, at last, piety is improved in
Gods Servants.


Phil. We may pray for and make use of all means, whereby grace is increased:
Namely, such means, as by God are appointed for that purpose; and therefore, by
virtue of Gods institution, have both a proportionablenesse, and attendency, in
order thereunto. But properly those things are not means, or ordained by God,
for the increase of piety, which are only accidentally overruled to that end,
by Gods power, against the intention and inclination of the things themselves.
Such is a wounded Conscience, being always actually an evil of punishment,
and too often occasionally an evil of sin: The Byas whereof does bend and
bow to badnesse; though overruled by the aim of Gods Eye, and strength of his
Arm, it may bring men to the mark of more grace, and goodness. God can, and
will extract light out of darkness, good out of evil, order out of confusion,
and comfort out of a wounded conscience: And yet darkness, evil, f^sion, etc.
are not to be prayed for.


Tim. But a wounded conscience, in Gods children, infallibly ends in comfort
here, or glory hereafter, and therefore is to be desired.


Phil. Though the ultimate end of a wounded conscience winds off in comfort,
yet it brings with it many intermediate mischiefs and maladies, especially as
managed by humane corruption: Namely, dullness in divine service, impatience,
taking Gods name in vain, despair for the time, blasphemy; which a Saint
should decline, not desire; shun, not seek; not pursue, but avoid, with his
utmost endeavors.


Tim. Is it lawful positively to pray against a wounded conscience?


Phil. It is, as appears from an argument taken from the lesser to the
greater. If a man may pray against pinching poverty, as wise Pro. 30. 8
Agur did; then may he much more against a wounded conscience, as a far heavier
judgment. Secondly, if Gods servants may pray for ease under their burdens,
whereof we see diverse particulars in that 1 Kings 8. 33.
worthy prayer of Solomon; I say, if we pray to God to remove a lesser
judgment by way of subvention, questionless we may beseech him to deliver us
from the great evil of a wounded conscience, by way of prevention.


Tim. May one lawfully praise God, for visiting him with a wounded conscience?


Phil. Yes verily. First, because it is agreeable to the 1 These. 5. 18. Ephesians.
5. 20. Psalm. 103. 22. and 145. 10.
will of God, in every thing to be thankful; here is a general rule, without
limitation. Secondly, because the end, why God makes any work, is his own
glory; and a wounded conscience being a work of God, he must be glorified in
it, especially seeing God shows much mercy therein, as being a punishment on
this side of hell fire, and less then our deserts. As also, because he has
gracious intentions toward the sick soul for the present, and when the
malady is over, the patient shall freely confess, that it is good for him
that he was so afflicted. Happy then that soul, (...) in the lucid intervals
of a wounded conscience can praise God for the same. Music is sweetest near,
or over Rivers, where the Echo thereof is best rebounded by the water. Praise
for pensiveness, thanks for tears, and blessing God over the floods of
affliction, makes the most melodious Music in the care of heaven.


The conclusion of the Author to the Reader.
ANd now God knows how soon it may be said unto me, Physician heal thy self,
and how quickly I shall stand in need of these counsels, which I have
prescribed to others. Herein I say with Eli to 1 Samuel 3. 18
Samuel, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good: With 2 Samuel 15 26.
David to Zadock, Behold here I am, let him do to me as s^emeth good unto him.
With the Acts. 21. 14.
Disciples to Paul, The Will of the Lord be done: But Oh how ea^ie it is for
the mouth to pronounce, or the hand to subscribe these words! But how hard, yea
without Gods garce, how impossible, for the heart to submit thereunto! Only
hereof I am confident, that the making of this Treatise, shall no ways cause
or hasten a wounded conscience in me, but rather on the contrary (especially if
as it is written by me, it were written in me) either prevent it, that it come
not at all, or defer it that it come not so soon, or lighten it, that it fall
not so heavy, or shorten it that it last not so long. And if God shall be
pleased hereafter to write Job. 13. 26
bitter things against me, who have here written the sweetest comforts I could
for others, let none insult on my sorrows: But whilst my wounded conscience
shall lie like the Acts 3. 2.
Criple, at the Porch of the temple, may such as pass by be pleased to pit^y
me, and permit this Book to beg in my behal^e, the charitable prayers of well
disposed People; till divine Providence, shall send some Peter, some pious
minister, perfectly to restore my maimed soul to her former soundnes.

Amen.
FINIS.

