A Full Description of these Times, Or The Prince of ORANGE's March from EXETER
to LONDON; And Father PETER'S and the rest of the Jesuits put to flight.
The Pope and Jesuits are undone,
They could not England overcome
To bring it into Popery,
Though very boldly they did try;
Until a Prince came over the Main,
And blasted all that they had done;
And now there is no more to be sed,
They run all away and hide their heads
Tune of, Packingtons pound, Country Farmer, Or, Digby's Farwell.


Now let all true Protestants ever Rejoice,
And render thanksgiving with heart and with voice,
The Brave Prince of Orange has been our best friend,
And Routed all Popery out of the Land,
The blessing of God be upon him I say,
And let every Protestant heartily pray,
That would take upon him to do that great work,
Now a Figg for the Devil the Pope and the Turk.
Now, now the true Church it will flourish again,
In England there will be no cause to complain,
The Brave Prince of Orang he takes such great care,
Secures all the Passages every where,
He Will have no Idolitry used in this Land,
For the Gospel of Christ he will ever more stand,
Let Pope and the Jesuits stay all at Rome,
^e will-not allow them in England to come.


They have us tormented (...) three or four year,
Since this course of Rome did in England appear;
But now they are gone to the Pope to Complain,
If they can pass safely (...) the Main;
Our Protestant Ships they may be in their way,
They Will ask them some Questions, and cause them to stay;
They may be prevented from (...) the Pope,
And Tyburn may Noose (...) at last in a Rope.
The fair Londons Tower the Prince does Command,
And all the Seaports (...) England does stand;
Now he is in London (...) Noble Train,
The Bells they did try (...) and again:
The Bone-Ires did (...) People rejoice,
For joy of this Prince (...) up their voice:
The Lord he did bless (...) in his way,
To save and secure our (...) this day.
This Protestant Army that came with the Prince
The Lord gives a Blessing to them ever since:
The Catholic Irish are put to the Rout,
And brave English Men they do Hellow and Shou
The Prince his own Soldiers are Men of Renown,
And they are made much on in every Town:
Let all English People then evermore pray,
The Lord he may bless them by Night and by Day.
They pay all their Quarters most honest and brave,
They charge not the Country for ought that they have;
This Army with God it is blessed to be sure,
And that Prince their Leader, may with them endure:
God grant him long life the true Church to maintain
And true Government be in England again,
For the Popes a deceiver and Jesuits too,
In Pardoning of Sins is more then they can do.
The Irish Bravadoes did fight it is said,
But our English Soldiers away from them fled;
They said they would fight in our Religions defense,
And so they marched away to the Prince,
And sed for the Church of England they would stand,
As long as they could hold a Sword in their hand;
They Will not be drawn in for to fight the Popes Cause,
Against their Religion the Church and the Laws.
And now a free Parliament's that we do crave,
For the Prince and the Nobles they say we shall have,
To settle the Laws, and will give all content,
It cannot be done but by a Parliament:
Then every poor man will be kept in supply,
It will fill all the Nation with Mirth and with Joy;
Then a fig for the Jesuits and Pope of Rome,
That has lost there Mass-houses in England so soon.
When the Laws are well settled, and peace does remain,
In England we shall have brave trading again;
Our Religion's secured, and the Church is set free,
It will be a great comfort for all men to see,
That the Gospel may flourish and have its full course,
And not be endangered by the French Force,
And the true Church of England to stand its own ground,
That the Gospel of Christ may have its full sound.
FINIS.
Printed for A. B.


