A FULL ANSWER TO THE Levellers Petition, Presented to the House of Commons, On
Monday September. 11. 1648.

Wherein the divellish poison therein contained, is discussed throughout: By
way of confutation of every material branch thereof.

Contrived for the satisfaction of all those, who are not able to discover the
danger of those destructive and abominable Principles therein delivered: And to
recall those who are, or shall be misled thereby.

By a Lover of Peace and Truth.

Psalm. 2.1. Why did the Heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing?

Prove. 24.21. My son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with
them that are given to change.

1 Cor. 14.33. God is not the author of confusion, but of peace.

Printed in the Year 1648.

To the Reader.
Christian Brother,
IF thou believe that herein I have sided too much with any Party, thou do
me wrong; for I have ever looked upon the old rule, Amicus Plato, sed magis
amica veritas. I will labor to defend no cause further, then I am persuaded
truth will bear me out; for that, I am assured, will prevail at the last:
Therefore I beseech thee deal heartily and impartially with me, as I hope I
have done with thee. That herein I am neither so large, nor exact as may be
expected, I beseech thee excuse me, in that the public Fast did immediately
succeed the delivery, or at least publishing of this titular Petition: and some
important business has taken me up since, so that I had little above a day to
finish this piece for the Press. Also the unworthiness of the subject matter
in the said Discourse, or ill named Petition, has caused me to be less
punctual herein, then otherwise I should have been. But this (I doubt not) may
be sufficient to help to remove so troublesome an obstacle, that it may not
hinder so great, necessary, and hopeful a work as a Personal Treaty: which
God of his infinite mercy bless, prosper, and make successful; which shall
be the daily prayer, of one who is wholly devoted

To the service of God and his Country.

A brief and summary Confutation, of a divellish and disorderly Paper, styled,
The humble Petition of thousands well-affected Persons, inhabiting, etc.
THat great and grand Imposter, never bewrayed his wants so much as now, in
making use of such weak and silly instruments, to set up his Kingdom; they
having neither sense to express, nor policy fitly to bring about, their
impudent and shameless levelling desires, as is most manifest in that late
published paper altogether repugnant, and discrepant both in Title, and
Substance.

1. In Title, they calling it a Petition, whereas there is nothing therein
petitioned; and an Humble Petition, where as it is extreme saucie, and
Shismatical; saucie, reproving the King and the Lower House thorowout:
Shismaticall, in directing that which they so call a Petition, not to the
Parliament of England, nor unto the two Houses, but to the Right Honorable the
Commons of England assembled in Parliament (altogether leaving out the upper
House) and throughout the whole body of their Petition, acknowledging the Lower
House the Supreme Authority, of this Kingdom, against both the Law of God, and
the Land, and contrary unto both the Oath of Supremacy, and Alegeance, as has
been sufficiently proved unto all men but moderately rational. But herein the
upper House may see, what follows from their own sandy Principles; they have
been content to maintain the two Houses to be a Parliament, first without
Bishops, and afterward without a King, contrary unto the Nature and
Constitution of Parliaments, as they should be by the great Charter of England,
the Statute Laws thereof, and the ancient fundamental customs of our Nation;
and now the Levellers will have a Parliament without an upper House, and all
made fellows at football. But herein the wise Lords, might see if they had any
eyes in their heads, how God has brought it about, that their rebellion may
come to be repayed in it is own coin; and if once their Lordships be got down,
have at the now Honorable Commons next, they are now by the politic Levellers
set highest, that they may when time serves, be the more easily laid lowest.

2. In substance, it is altogether differing from the title, therein being
nothing petitioned; and thus it is a mere silly cobled Remonstrance of their
own aims, and purposes; who thus call themselves Thousands of well affected
persons, therein proclaiming themselves to be nothing but Independents; who
endeavor by their numbers, being thousands, and their own interest blood
guiltienesse, to bring on their designs: Concerning the former of these, if
they were but sober minded, they might remember Gods Prohibition, which is
this, Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil, neither shall thou speak
in a cause, to decline after many, to wrest Judgment, Exodus 23.2. and withal
they might consider, there are many more thousands of wise, understanding,
moderate, and religious Christians throughout the Kingdom, which disallow
their folly.

The other thing whereby they show their folly, in trusting to a broken staff,
is their own interest, bloodguiltinesse; which they call engaging on the Houses
part, and as in their own words they confess, was against the King and his
adherents, which by the Law of God, and the Land makes them selfe-confessing
Rebels, and Traitors; so that God at the great Parliament, of all Parliaments,
the day of Doom, may say unto every one of them, thou art not only ex ore tuo,
but also ex scripto tuo, guilty of the said detestable and damnable crimes.

But to the business; it is so botch't, and patch't up, that there is nothing
but baldness and abruptness in it; wherein in the very first words they would
persuade the world, that they are as earnestly desirous of a safe and well
grounded peace, etc. as any sort of men whatsoever, wherein they declare the
weakness and shallowness of their Judgments, whilst they do persuade
themselves, and would others, that a safe and well grounded peace, may stand
upon the bog and quagmire of disorder and confusion.

Next in the preface of their patchery, they seem to lay down the grounds of
this their manifesto, of which was touched but now; and thence they draw the
sum of their discourse into three nastie rotten branches.

1. The ground and reason, which induced them to aid the honorable House,
against the King ad his Adherents.

2. What their apprehensions are of the Treaty.

3. What they expected from the House, and do still most earnestly desire.

In the first, the ground and reason which induced them to aid the honorable
House, against the King, and his Adherents; they command the lower Houses
pleasure to understand them, be pleased therefore to understand, etc. A man
would think such saucy peremptorinesse would have produced something worth
notice; but it is nothing but the disorderly and unreasonable reasons of their
engagement, with the House against the King, drawn from three most unsound
Arguments.

1. Their own corrupt and erroneous judgment.

2. Their mis-apprehensions of manifold oppressions brought upon the Nation by
the King, his Lords, and Bishops, etc.

3. The illegal and rebellious practice of the lower House.

The first Argument, whereby they were induced to rebel against their King,
was, because they judged the lower House to be the supreme Authority of
England, as chosen by, and representing the people, and entrusted with absolute
power for redress of grievances, and provision for safety, etc.

1. They say they judged the lower House (unto whom they would seem to direct a
Petition) to be the supreme Authority of England: Can there be any greater
error in judgment then this? For let us look back who they are that judged
this, do they not call themselves Thousands of well-affected persons inhabiting
the City of London, West-minster, etc? Certainly then they must either all, or
the greatest part of them be Freemen, who have taken the Oath of Allegiance,
which tells them what is the supreme Authority of England? but theirs is a
dangerous conscience, which is not sensible of perjury, whilst they obstinately
persist therein.

They might also be informed by the Law of the Land, whereby we are to judge
the supreme Authority thereof to remain, Rex habet potestatem and
Jurisdictionem super omnes qui in Regno suo sunt. The King has power and
authority over all which are in his Kingdom, see Judge Jenkins, p. 7.

But they seem to be persuaded unto this opinion, because the lower House is
chosen by, and representing the people, and entrusted with absolute power for
redress of grievances, and provision for safety, etc. which Position in the
former part is only a mere Supposition, and therefore brings an untrue
consequence along with it: their Supposition is this, that because in a legal
Parliament the lower House are chosen by, and representing the people,
therefote this is so; wherein they are much mistaken: for the Country ought to
have a free choice of their Knights of the Shire, and Burgesses of Parliament,
which never was so free as ought to have been in this Parliament; but now the
lower House is filled with men unknown unto their Country, and therefore not
being chosen by the people, they cannot represent the people.

This false Supposition begets another as untrue, which is, that the lower
House being chosen by and representing the people, are entrusted with absolute
power, etc. which absolute power they must either have, by right of
inheritance, or by the Laws of the Land, or they do derive the said power from
some other, upon the virtue of their Election.

1. They may not attain unto this power, by right of inheritance, because they
are to sit there by the election of their Country, according unto Law.

2. Not by the Law of the Land, because the Law of the Land gives this power
unto none but the King.

3. They do not derive the said power from any other, because if so, it must be
derived from either King or people.

1. It is not derived from the King, for he calls them only to appear and
attend the Parliament, consilium impensuri, to give advice, not to exercise
any absolute power.

2. It is not derived from the people, because they have no power at all; the
choosing the said men by virtue of the Kings Writ, gives the people power to
choose men qualified, according unto the Laws and Customs of the Land to sit
in Parliament, only to represent the grievances of the Kingdom unto the King,
and the upper House, and to advise with them concerning the same: but they
cannot give them any greater power, because nil dat quod non habet is true in
this case.

After follows upon these another most Atheistical Tenet, that they did judge
the King was but at the most a public Officer of the Kingdom, and accountable
to the House (the representative of the people, from whence all just Authority
is, or ought to be derived) for discharge of his Office. Here every word has
its poison, and to discover all therein would prove a tax too tedious,
therefore I will rank them into three principal errors.

1. That they thought the King at the most was but the chief public Officer of
the Kingdom.

2 That the King is accountable unto the lower House for the discharge of his
Office.

3. That all just Authority is or ought to be derived from the Representative
of the people.

First, that the King at the most is but the public Officer of this Kingdom;
herein is a great deal of serpentine and Jesuiticall policy, full of
destructive poison unto all Monarchy; which they bring in most cunningly and
covertly, by confounding of terms, and judging the King to be most chief,
wherein they affirm his Supremacy, but this they presently take away again, by
adding public Officer of the Kingdom, as if his power were by the election
and donation of the people, and not by right of inheritance, assured unto him
by the Law of the Land.

The second error is, that the King is accountable unto the lower House, for
the discharge of his Office, contrary unto the Word of God, which says, Is it
fit to say to a King, thou art wicked? or to Princes, ye are ungodly? Job.
34.18. and who dare say unto a King, what do thou? Him God has made supreme,
1 Pet. 2.13. and if he be supreme, unto whom shall he give an account of his
Office, but unto him who has made him so? which Exposition is made good by the
Statute Law of the Land, Ann. 16. Rich. 2. cap. 5. The Crown of England has
been so free at all times, that it has been in no earthly subjection, but
immediately subject unto God in all things, touching the Regality of the same
Crown, and to none other.

The third error is, that all just Authority is, or ought to be derived from
the Representative of the People: Herein they discover their own weakness,
concluding though something misteriously their old fears and jealousies.

Where it is as good as confessed, that all just Authority, is not in the
Representative of the People, but ought to be; by which tenet they argue,
either the established Law of the Land, or the lower House, or the upper House,
or the whole Kingdom, or every of them, with the supreme authority over them
to be unjust; a particular canvasing whereof would take up more time, then now
I am willing to spend so idly: only this; all just Authority is decided, and
determined by the Law of the Land, which gives it unto the King, principally
and originally; This is the principal matter, in the first argument of their
ground and reason, which induced them to aid the Commons against the King and
his Adherents: whereunto they add a discovery of their mistakes, that had they
not been confident that these errors had been truths, they had been
desperately mad to have taken up Arms against the King: etc. because the Laws
of the Land make it expressly a crime no less then Treason, etc. Wherefore
now their surest and safest way, seeing they begin to be something less
hoodwinkt, is not to persist in, but to recant and abandon their Errors, for we
are sure we have a merciful God; and we have found a merciful King.

The second argument, which they say induced them to maintain a war against
the King, was the consideration of the manifold oppressions brought upon the
Nation, by the King, his Lords, and Bishops etc. This argument breaths out a
most audacious, and uncivil accusation of both King, Church and Commonwealth
at once; let it be granted that all herein said were true; is it not a most
inhumane and unchristian dealing, when we have an overture of peace, and
reunion, to rifle old sores, which will sooner get a Gangrene then cure the
wound, but may it be granted which is there said, those manifold oppressions,
(lying now raked in and covered with numberless cruelties and outrages, of
bloody Armies, merciless Sequestrators, unconscionable Excize men, most
tyranicall and arbitrarie Committee men, with infinite Locusts more) are of two
sorts; either by the King or his Officers, those by the King were few, the
chiefest of all being Shipmoney and Monopolies, whereunto his Majesty was
driven by the unnatural dealing of his Subjects, who of late years were grown
so factious and rebellious, that Parliaments did not proceed legally, as in
former times, but would ever be putting him upon unreasonable terms, before
Subsidies would be granted, which compelled him to find out and make use of an
extraordinary course for his supply, all which he willingly and freely took
away this Parliament; which were more then sufficient unto any man, but wise
and moderate,

The faults imputed upon his Subjects are of two sorts, either of
Ecclesiastical, or civil persons; those of Ecclesiastical persons are
partially by heaps thrown upon the Bishops; whom in all things I dare not
vindicate, yet Christian charity, and experience causes me to say thus much of
them, that there was too fatal a division in the Clergy of our Kingdom,
which rise from several geniusses and dispositions which were two prevalent in
this Nation, which may be reduced unto these heads: the Court Faction, the
Popular Faction, and a religious party: the Court Faction, that labored more
after wealth, riches, honor, preserment, and the like, laying aside a wholesome
care for Christ's flock. The Popular Faction; that stood in opposition
thereunto, and did fall so low, that they labored after nothing so much as to
please the people, and thereby forgot to please God, which antipathy betwixt
these parties falling out in an age, wherein many lovers of truth with as much
industry as ever, and with more moderation then formerly, looking into the
reformation, found the same through the heat of opposition, to have left out
somethings advantageous to Gods Church; in prosecution whereof some unusual
tenets and Ceremonies of indifferencies were received into the Church, which
being conscientiously maintained by the BB are now attributed unto them for
oppression; The manifold oppressions brought upon this Nation, by the Lords
Civil as well as spiritual, were all remedied by this present Parliament, if
the Kingdoms Trustees, had showed themselves right Patriots, in contenting
themselves with the good of the people when it was well, these therefore were
nothing but misapprehensions of danger, where none was, which had they been
real and upon good grounds, could not have taken of that infamy, of treason
and rebellion in any one maintaining war against their Sovereign: which (whereof
they are sensible) is concluded by the Law of the Land. Upon this ground they
cast a most cruel and inhumane slander upon his gracious Majesty, and his
government; suggesting unto the world, that his Majesty had a purpose by force
of Arms to continue oppression, whereas taking up of Arms for the defense of
that Law and his sacred Person is maintenance not dissolution of Government.

After this they bring in another addition unto their argument; which is this,
that the safety of the People is above Law, which misconstrued maxim I will
not here meddle with only, it cannot plead for their warring against the King.
Because orderly and obedient Subjects were in no danger, though hereby they
would seem to make up something thence, by a Jesuiticall and nonsensicall
distinction, betwixt the Supreme Authority and the Supreme Magistrate, which
are inseparable: what succeeds in this Argument is sufficiently answered in the
former. The third Argument, which drive them into rebellion, is the illegal
and rebellious practice of the Lower House, which needs no farther answer then
this, vivitur lege non exemplo, we are to live by law and not example; except
we will look a little further upon the unjust and illegal dealing of the Lower
House, with his Majesty, and the Law of the Land, denying him to be judge of
safety, and taking away his Negative voice; excluding the King from having any
share in the Supreme Authority, whereby they are transgressors of the Law of
God, the Law of Nature, and the Common Law of the Kingdom; again they would
seem to make Bishops, an essential part of Supreme Authority by tradition;
whereas they are so by the fundamental Law of the Nation: all herein worth
notice is, that they do show the illegal and unjust proceedings of the lower
House from their own principles, and practices.

What succeeds in the first branch of their titular petition; is only a
publication of their own mistakes, vain opinions and ungrounded hopes; which
are sufficiently answered in what has been said in answer unto their several
arguments. Thus I have done with the first branch of their discourse, now to
the second, which is what their Apprehensions are of a Treaty: wherein are heaps
of dirt, and that so numerous, as it is very troublesome meddling, yet something
shall be done therein: and thus we may discover their complaints, and their
fears; their complaints 1. Of the lower House. 2. Of their own danger.


In the former of these, they proclaim their exceeding grief, upon their
observation of the Commons, their ingratitude toward God, who has given them
victory, thereby inabling them to put the whole Nation into an absolute
condition of Freedom, and Safety; wherein they deceive themselves in their own
principle, which is this, that God having given victory unto Rebels and
Traitors, approves their actions, which way of arguing would set up Mahomet,
and pull down Christ in the most part of the world, and would pull down the
Reformed Churches, and set up Papistrie in the greatest part of Christendom,
witness Ireland; besides if they would consider this aright, they might
remember the Psalmist tells us, that God sets the wicked in slippery places:
but God give all men that are but moral, much more professors of the Gospel,
grace to observe what cruelty these well-affected people breath out, and what
bloody mindedness they belch abroad into the world, in accusing the Commons
for an accustomed passing by the ruin of the Nation, and all the blood has
been spilt by the King and his party; intimating thereby most inhumanely, and
unchristian like, that there can for this Nation, be no attaining unto the
Haven of freedom and safety, but through the innocent blood, of their true
and natural Sovereign, with his faithful Subjects; which wicked and
canniball intentions, God of his infinite mercy destroy, and prevent, that
England may never more be guilty of such horrid crimes.

Next they accuse their Gods the lower House, for betaking themselves to a
Treaty with His Majesty. O hideous wretches! is there any other visible
means left for peace and accommodation? Do you not see the Kingdom thorough
their ruins brought unto an uproare, which will never be appeased but by the
restitution of his Majesty, whereunto a Treaty is the surest and safest
preparation: but this is it which they are too sensible of, now their eyes
begin to be open, and they see how they are guilty of the breach of the Law of
the Land, and they who have so long bragged and boasted of their fear of God
are now in a slavish fear of man; but know they this, that though for a time
they may escape the hand of man, yea and that though our gracious King, which I
know he is willing to do, give them all pardons, yet except they repent, they
cannot escape the judgment of the Almighty: for shame therefore let them cry
out no longer the Law of the Land, and the Law of the Kingdom, and the like,
but cry out of themselves, in that they have by their treason and rebellion
transgressed the Law of God, who is King of Kings, and let them not for the
safety of a few private men, prefer the ruin of a glorious Kingdom, before
the peace and union thereof.

See these weak and false principles wherewith they seem to under-prop this
falling and tottering conceit against a Treaty, because the ruin of the
Nation, and the blood that has been spilt, has been caused by the King, and
his party; for so they speak almost totidem terminis: good people take up your
senses again, and then judge whether the breakers or maintainers of
established Laws, are the cause of the ruin of a Nation, and the bloodshed
therein; and then your consciences must needs tell you, that you and your
party, and not the King and his party, are the sole instruments whereby those
your sad complaints have been effected.

Again you complain against the lower House, for putting one that is but one
single person, and a public Officer of the Commonwealth, in competition with
the whole Body of the people; whereas if this Parliament were the exactest and
compleatest Representative, that ever was in England, it is preposterous for
them to stand in competition with him; though you falsely account them the
supreme Authority of the Kingdom, you are therein far from the truth; for His
Majesty is the supreme Power of the Kingdom, whereunto every man ought to
swear in the Oath of Supremacy, the words are these: I A B do testify, and
from my conscience declare, that the Kings Majesty is the only supreme
Governor of this Kingdom, and all other his Majesty's Dominions and
Territories, as well in all spiritual, or ecclesiastical matters and causes,
as temporal, etc.

Which Oath every man now sitting in the two Houses of Parliament has taken,
therefore their standing in competition with their Sovereign, whose Supremacy
they have so solemnly sworn, and unto whom they have sworn Allegiance,
proclaims them unto all the world guilty of traitorous and rebellious
perjury, and these titular Petitioners do clearly bewray their corrupt, and
unchristian minds, by speaking so irreverently, and unworthily of their
rightful Sovereign, calling him a single man, and public Officer, etc. as a
man of the least consideration in the Kingdom.

What follows in this part, their complaint of the lower House, discloses
their ill will unto Monarchy, and Kingly Government, which considering what
has been hitherto said in the like case is not worth answer.

In their complaint of their own danger, they show us how and which way they
were misled, they took false principles which have deceived them, whereas if
they had but remembered their rudiments of Grammar, they might have called unto
mind the old example Jusipientis est dicere non putaram. I will leave the
English unto their School-boies: still they run upon the old strain, they have
opposed their King in defense of the lower House its Supreme Authority: is not
this wilful obstinate ignorance; will not the same law of the Land, (which to
use their own terms, makes it expressly a crime no less then treason for any
to raise war against the King;) tell them where the supreme Power is: but
this their rash undertakeing, and their forwardness in thus declaring
themselves to have run into innocent bloodshed, upon these grounds, is another
warrant to assure them it must be thus: I am glad there are such pangs within,
it may please God they may produce good effects, for they deem themselves in
the most dangerous conditition of all others, left without all plea of
indemnity for what they have done; (oh it works, this is a very good
symptom) they may become honester long; it is true many of their Associates
have already lost their lives and liberties, for things done or said against
the King, the Law of the Land frequently taking place, and precedencie against
and before the Authority of the lower House, their esteem whereof to be supreme
cannot make it so, but that against it the Law of the Land ought to be pleaded:
the Law of the Land is the safety of the people, and if ever they will enjoy
themselves and their livelihoods, they must recover their Laws, and though
they will condemn these titular Petitioners, yet we have a merciful King, who
will and can give them pardon if they will have the grace to ask it, which is a
sure way, but their depending of the supreme authority of the lower House is a
broken reed which will pierce their hands: and whereas they seem to be
something conscious, that they cannot be exempt from the guilt of Murderers,
and Robbers, if the lower House persist to disclaim their supreme Authority,
they herein aggravate their fault in laboring to persuade the lower House to
claim title unto that which is none of their own, neither will conscience be
able to acquit and justify any for cruelty and unjustice, such as is that
which they call Murder and Robbery; and their attributing of supreme
Authority due or belonging unto the lower House, neither will this plea hold,
that they have opposed none but manifest tyrants, Oppressors and their
adherents. If they have opposed any other, then whom they thus judge, I leave
them to be their own judges, by their own principles: but on the other side,
under the names of manifest Tyrants, Oppressors, and their adherents; against
some they have made opposition; which can be against none but their lawful
King; which they confess is treason by the Law of the Land, except as should
seem they do suppose in these cases mentioned, wherein they fall upon two
dangerous errors.

1. That it is lawful to resist a Tyrant, and Oppressor: which is directly
against the word, and Law of God, for there cannot be found greater Tyrants and
miscreants upon the Earth, then were Tiberius, Claudius, Caligula, and Nero,
all which lived in the times of Christ or his Apostles; yet did none of them
give either precept or example, for resistance or opposition to any of them;
therefore had his Majesty been a Tyrant it had not been lawful for them, or
any of his Subjects, to have maintained war against him.

2. The second error is, that his Majesty has been a Tyrant, which is a most
shameless slander, for there cannot be a Tyrant, but either in his coming to
govern; or in his manner of governing; he cannot be the former; for his
greatest enemies never yet had the impudence to avouch it, neither can he be
the latter because that is a governing contrary unto Law, whereof he is
altogether guiltless, for he has ever governed by Law.

This whole part of this titular Petition, what their apprehensions of a
personal Treaty are, contains nothing but complaints, though I call it their
fears, because these complaints are full of those old fears and Jealousies;
and therefore they are very much affrighted with a Treaty; holding it
altogether unfit, because as they pretend, it has been cried up Principally by
such as have been always disaffected unto the lower House, wherein all the
world may see their aptness to prejudice other men, for was it not first moved
and cried for, by their brethren the Scots, who had entered into Covenant with
them to execute cruelty, and are not the Presbyterians as active therein as any?

And if the lower House were guiltless and innocent, have they need or
sufficient cause to fear the issue of a personal Treaty? there being none to
deal therein on that party, which they account opposite, but a wise, loving,
gracious, and merciful King, assisted by wise, meek, learned, moderate men,
who prefer the common good before their own. And the Treaties being
accompanied with underhand-dealing, is more to be feared on the lower Houses
part, who are raising force in every County in England, then the Kings party,
who are ruined unto nothing. And for an alteration in the King and his party,
what may any rational man expect? seeing they at first took the Word of God,
and the Law of the Land for their rule, and the good of Church and
Commonwealth for their aim, which has caused them with manly fortitude and
Christian patience, by the assistance of God and a good conscience, honorably
to suffer all injuries, yea even death it self.

Their consideration of this, that the present force upon his Majesty will in
time to come be pleaded against all that can or shall be agreed upon, is the
effect of unjust dealings, when men have so entangled themselves in mischief,
that they know not how to wind out thence.

It is true indeed, those great provocations the King has (and that most
basely and injuriously) received from the two Houses, might were he of an
unregenerate temper, be somewhat: but all but cruelty which believes there is no
mercy, may safely trust to his clemency, he is not of that fiery revengefull
spirit, that most of his Predecessors have been of.

These new wars, risings and revoltings, invasions and plottings, which have
been since the last cry for a personal Treaty, have been acted in such an
humble way of petitioning, that the two Houses might therein see the Kingdoms
desire of accommodation, betwixt his Majesty and them, which cannot be
effected without the said Treaty, the want whereof must most certainly increase
repining, grudgings, murmurings, and complanings amongst the people, which
ought rather to persuade unto a personal Treaty, and not to dissuade therefrom.

And as for those victories which the Army has obtained, they ought to be
considered quo jure, by what right, and quo modo, in what manner they were
managed, then quo effectu, by what effect this may give false judgment in
such a case.

This wonderful piece ends this doleful part with a professed wonder and
amazement, to consider the inevitable danger these titular Petitioners are in,
though all things in the Propositions were agreed unto, because of the
resolutions of the King and his party; wherein they display how conscious they
are of the wrongs and injuries done unto them, whom they so much fear,
accounting them as revengefull as themselves, and thereby labor most impiously
to dissuade their great Lords and Masters from all confidence in His Majesty:
but I pray God it may be, that we may have no more irregular licentious
tyrannical and usurping two Houses; but I wish and hope we may have many
glorious, and free well-regulated Parliaments.

The third and last branch of this their titular Petition is, what they
expected from the House, and do still earnestly desire, in the delivering
whereof they pretend a great deal of seeming reluctance, as if they were
enforced thereunto, which desires being granted, they are confident would have
given satisfaction unto all serious people of all parties, which is but their
fond conceit, they not being able to give satisfaction, unto any wise man who
will be subject unto the reins of Government, and love the Common-good above
his private interests, as is clear in their immediately succeeding desires,
which they have reduced unto 27. headless and senseless heads, upon each
whereof to speak in particular, requires more time then such stuff is worth,
wherein the Levellers cross their own Principles: having much labored to
settle supreme Authority in the lower House, now they take it unto themselves
by their making of Laws and unalterable Decrees, which in the end would bring
the lower House to give an account of their actions unto these our new
Lawgivers, as well as his Majesty and Nobility unto the House of Commons.

But to the business: In the four first of their desires, they labor to bring
all Law, Order and Government into such a confused Chaos, that both Church, and
Commonwealth thereupon must needs fall into its own ruin, by taking away all
Negative voices in the King and Lords, which would prove a gap to let in all
mischief, an earnest whereof we have had by too dear experience, their
directions therein likewise practiced, would bring in all licentious and
arbitrarie liberty both in Church and Commonwealth, which is not only
contrary unto the revealed will of God, but would prove destructive unto all
men therein.

In the four next are they absolute Levellers, laboring to make Kings, Queens,
Princes, Dukes, Earls, and Lords, with themselves fellows at football, and
equal unto the poorest Peasant, a desire against all Law, and president of all
Countries and Ages.

In the four next which are the ninth, tenth, eleventh, and twelth of their
desires, they run on in the same strain, only they desire well, in the eleventh
and twelth, which is that all Excise may be abolished, and that all enclosures
of Fens, and other Commons should be laid open, or enclosed only and chiefly,
to the benefit of the poor, whose Patrimony they are.

In the four next, they much discover their ignorance, and weakness in
desiring those things for which the Law has, either altogether, or for the
most part provided a remedy, if they were put in execution: but in the
sixteenth of their desires they belch out their impiety, against both God and
man, in robbing the Church of her right, and portion, by moveing a repeal of
both the Law of God, the Law of Nature, and the Land, for the payment of Tithes.

In the four next of their desires, which are the seventeenth eighteenth
nineteenth and twentieth, they desire that from the lower House, which is far
above both their authority power and ability: therefore we will let them pass.

In their 21. 22. 23. and 24 desires they would persuade the lower House unto
all cruelty, and injustice, against Religion, reason and Humanity; except in
the 22. wherein they desire the abolishing of all Committees, which is not
only justice, but necessary for the good of the whole Kingdom.

In the three last, they go on in their natural strain of self seeking,
hoping to beget their own security, by most bloody and barbarous cruelty
executed upon others, whose inhumane desires may be answered by any who have
but the least tincture of reason and honesty, wherefore I forbear them, any one
but rightly understanding, what has been hitherto said in this kind, being
sufficiently able to give answer thereunto.

After this they relate the old and many hopes, and come nearest unto a
Petition, yet fall short in making it but an earnest desire, that the lower
House would set themselves speedily to effect the ruin of themselves, and the
whole Nation, by a new found way of levelling, coloring the same with some
vain idle and Trivial pretenses and promises, presumptuously concluding a few
giddie brained Levellers, to be the People of the Land, and the main strength
thereof. Thus they end, taking Gods name in vain, by praying that he may be
their guide in most cruel, bloody, destructive, and unwarrantable ways.

Thus I have done, only I wish that all true Christians may heartily and
earnestly pray unto God, to turn and amend their hearts, so as they may truly
and seasonably see the sinfulness of their ways, and the vanity and
destruction which attends such ungodly endeavors, so as now at last they may
betake themselves unto such good and sound principles, as may bring peace unto
our almost destroyed Kingdom, and stand in the day of trial, when the secrets
of all hearts shall be made known; and that he may grant this, and all other
things which are or shall be necessary, for the happiness and salvation of
them and us, and all the elect, in the name and for the merits of Christ Jesus,
to whom be all Honor, Glory, Power, Praise, Might, Majesty, and Dominion, from
hence forward, and for evermore. Amen.

September. 19. 1648.
FINIS.

