ANDRONICVS, OR, The Unfortunate POLITICIAN.

Showing, Sin stoutly punished.

Showing, Right surely rescued.

ECCLES. 8. 11. Because sentence against a dull work is not executed speedily,
therefore the heart of the Sons of men is fully set in them to do evil.

BY THO. FULLER. B. D.

LONDON, Printed by W. WILSON, for John Williams, at the Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1646.

To the Reader.
WE read of King Hest. 2. 6.
AHASHUEROSH, that having hishead troubled with much business, and finding
himself so indisposed, that he could not sleep, he caused the Records to be
called for, and read unto him; hoping thereby to deceive the tediousness of
the time, (an honest fraud) and that the pleasant passages in the Chronicles
would either invite slumber unto him, or enable him to endure waking with less
molestation.

We live in a troublesome and tumultuous age; and he needs to have a very soft
bed, who can sleep soundly now a-dayes, amidst so much loud noise, and many
impetuous rumors. Wherefore it seems to Me, both a safe and cheap Receipt, to
procure Quiet and Repose to the Mind which complains for want of rest, to
prescribe unto it the reading of History.

Great is the pleasure and profit thereof. Lul. 19. 4
Zaccheus, we know, was low and little in stature, but when he had borrowed
some height from the Fig Tree, into which he climbed, the Dwarf was made a
Giant on a sudden; last minute beneath the Arms, but now grown above the
heads of other men. Thus our experimental knowledge is, in it self, both
short and narrow, as which cannot exceed the spanne of our own life. But when
we are mounted on the Advantage of History, we can, not only reach the year
of Christ's Incarnation, but, even touch the top of the worlds beginning, and at
one view over-see all remarkable accidents of former ages.

Wherefore, until such time, as I shall by Gods providence, and the Authority
of my Superiors, be restored to the open Exercise of my profession, on terms
consisting with my Conscience, (which welcome Minute, I do heartily wish, and
humbly wait for; and will greedily listen to the least whisper sounding
thereunto) it is my intent (God willing) to spend the remnant of my days in
reading and writing such Stories as my weak judgment shall commend unto me for
most beneficial.

Our English Writers tell us of David King of the Scots, that whilst he was
Prisoner in a Cave in Nottingham Castle, He, with his Nails, shall I say
carved, (or) scratched out the whole History of our Saviors Passion, in the
Wall. And although the Figures be rough and rude, yet in one respect they are
to be compared unto, yea, preferred before the choysest Pieces, and most exact
Platformes of all Engravers, being done at such disadvantages; cut out of a
maine Rock, without any light to direct him, or Instruments to help him,
besides his bare hands.

The Application of the Story serves me for manifold uses. First, here I
learn, if that Princes, then meaner Persons, are bound to find themselves some
honest employment. Secondly, that in a sad and solitary condition, a Calling is
a comfortable Companion. Thirdly, where men want Necessaries, fit Tools and
Materials, the work that they do, (if it be any degree passable,) deserves,
if not to be praised, to be pardoned. Which encourages me to expect of the
charitable Reader, favor for the faults in this Tract committed, when he
considers the Author in effect banished, and Booklesse, and wanting several
accommodations requisite to the completing an History.

Noah, to make an Essay Genesis 8. 7.
, whether the waters were abated from the face of the earth, before he would
adventure to expose the whole Fraught of his Arc to danger, dispatched a Dove
to make discovery, and report unto him the condition of the World, intending to
order himself accordingly. A deep Deluge has lately over-flowed the whole
Kingdom, to the drowning of many, and dangering of all. I send forth this
small Treatise, to try whether the swelling surges, and boiling billows in
men's breasts, (flowing from the distance in their judgments, and difference in
their affection) begin now to assuage, and whether there be a dry place for
this my innocent Dove, safely to settle her self. If she find any tolerable
entertainment, or indifferent Approbation abroad, it will give me
encouragement to adventure a Volumne of a more useful Subject, and greater
concernment in the view of the world.

Thine in all Christian offices, THO. FULLER.

The Index.
A
Book* Parag. Alexius Comnenus most debauched, 1 1 Foolishly rejoices at the
death of Andronicus. 2 15 Wanted rather Breeding than parts. 3 9 Stoutly
refuses to sign the warrant for his mothers death. 3 11 Yielded at the last,
conquered with importunity. 3 13 Hunted after himself, when sent a hunting 3
14 The cruel manner of his death 3 18 Anna, Widow to Alexius, wooed by
Andronicus 3 19, 20 Married unto him some weeks after her husbands death. 3. 21
Compared to Anne, wife to our King Richard the third. Bemoaneth her miserable
success. 4 9 Dispossessed by an Harlot of her Husbands affections. 4 10
B
Bo. Pa. Basilius, A Bishop, his Character. 2 8 His Speech to Andronicus,
desiring him to be Emperor. 2 9 His rejoinder to Andronicus upon his refusal.
2 11 Made Patriark of Constantinople. 4 12 Reproved for his over-melding in
temporal matters. 4 13 Proudly pleads in his own defense. 4 14 Crowns
Isaacius Emperor. 6 11 Makes a Sermon-like Oration unto him, touching the
duty of Princes. 6 12 Continues in safety and Honor, contrary to all
expectation. 6 16 Dies in his bed. 6 17 Conjectures concerning Gods
proceedings toward him. 6 18 Beggar, Unjustly accused for a Conjurer. 2 19
Delivered to the fury of the people. 2 20 By them miserably Massacred 2 21
Bow-string, mockingly called by Andronicus, the Medicine for all Maladies. 3 18
C
Bo. P. Caesar, An Italian Lord, 1 7 Poisoned. 3 8 Combination, Of several
great Lords to fetch in Andronicus. 1 6 A Catalogue of their hard names. 1 7
Find themselves too late deceived in Andronicus. 2 17 By whom they are
slighted and neglected. 2 18 The vitiousnesse thereof described. 1 4
Constantinople conquered, as soon as entered by Andronicus. 1 14 Preserved by
him from the rapine of his Army, how, and why. 1 18 The Walls thereof repaired
by Andronicus. 3 24 Adorned by him with several stately Structures. ibid.
Conto-Stephanus, Admiral of the Galleys. 1 7 Betrayed the fleet to Andronicus.
1 13 By whose cruelty his eyes were afterward bored out. 3 27 Coronations of
Usurpers, why more pompousin state, then those* of lawful Princes. 2 14
D.
Devil, Why he coucheth his answers in Obscurity. 5 12 His Alphabet to be read
backward. 5 13 Such as have his Text, still need his Comment. 5 14 Drexelius,
His charitable opinion of Andronicus. 6 7 Ducas-Alexius, In vain praises
himself as fit for the Empire. 3 31
E
Franks, Many dwelling in the City of Constantinople. 1 17 Ingrosse all the
Trade from the Natives. ibid. Cruelty exposed to be spoiled and killed by the
Paphlagonian Army. 1 18
G
Georgius Dysipatus. 1 7 Intended to be roasted by Andronicus.. 3 27 Grecians,
No skillful Mariners. 1 12
H
Bo. P. Hermit, his Oration against Clergy mensmedling in civil affairs. 4
13 Husbandry much advanced by Andronicus. 3 26
I
Jester, at the court neglected by Andronicus, as beneath his anger. 3 6 Jests
of Andronicus on dying men. 3 18 Isaacius, Commended by Mamalus to be made
Emperor. 3 30 In vain opposed by Ducas. 3 31 Reasons rendered of his
miraculous preservation. 5 5 Flies into the great Church. 5 4 By his Eloquence
persuades the people to save him. ibid. He is solemnly crowned Emperor. 6 11
L
Lapardus, His speech to the Lords of the Combination. 1 5 His Character. 4 6
Favors Andronicus too long, and yet deserteth him too soon. 4 7 Bo. P. His
speech on the Scaffold, when his Eyes were bored out. 4 8 Library, Of
Andronicus, full of rarities, plundered by the soldiers. 5 7
M
Mamalus, With a mild answer pacifieth the passion of Caesarissa. 3 4 His
speech to the Lords in the behalf of Isaacius. 3 30 Brought naked to the
stake. 4 3 There cruelly burnt. 4 4 Whilst Andronicus barbarously insulteth
over him. 4 5 Manuel, the late deceased Emperor, has his ashes derided by
Andronicus. 2 45 Manuel Son to Andronicus. 3 15 Refuses to execute Xene the
Empress ibid. Modestely answers his Fathers Arguments. 3 16 Opposes the
bloody Edict. 3 27 His eyes bored out by Isaacius. 6 19 Maraptica, an impudent
harlot, her cunning carriage, and great wealth. 5 10 Maria Caesarissa, 1 7 Her
Embassy to Andronicus. 1 8 Bo. P. Excessive passion. 3 1 Her Choleric speech
to the Lords of the Combination 3 3 Mutability of Peoples affection. 6 10
N
Newters: their base temper. 1 11
P.
Palace of Andronicus spoiled 5 6 Patience of Andronicus. 6 5 Popular tumults
most dangerous. 5 7 Presages of Andronicus his death, 5 2 contemned by him. 5 3
Protosebastus Alexius, 1 2 Makes preparation against Andronicus. 1 11 Overcome,
and despightfully used. 1 15
S
Seth, A Famous Conjurer. 5 12 Scripture wrested by Andronicus to countenance
his cruelty. 3 28 Sea, why offended at Andronicus. 5 15 Ship-wrackt goods
preserved by Andronicus, for the owners. 3 25 Stephanus Hagiocristophorita, 1 7
Bo. P. Stifleth Xene the Empress. 3 16 Out of malice contriveth the ruin of
Trypsycus. 4 16
T
Theodorus, The Patriarch. 1 3 Confounded with the Complements of Andronicus. 2
2 Retiroth to the Island of Teribynthus. 4 9 Several reasons why he left the
Court. 4 10 His quiet death, and decent burial. 4 11 Tortures, Used by
Andronicus. 3 23 As extreme used upon him. 6 1. 2 Traitors, caught in their
own subtlety. 5 5 Tyrant, His true description. 4 2
V
Virtues of Andronicus. 3 23
X
Xene, The mother Empress her voluptuousness. 1 2 Even when nearest to
greatest danger 1 10 Accused of high Treason, that she would betray Belgrade
to the King of Hungary. 3 9 Stifled between two pillowes. 3 16
ANDRONICUS OR The unfortunate POLITICIAN.
The first Book.
1. ALexius Comnenus, only An. Dom. 1179.
Son of Manuel Comnenus, succeeded his Father in the Empire of Constantinople.
A child he was in Age and Judgment: of wit, too short to measure an honorable
sport, but lost himself in low delights. He hated a book, more then a
monster did a looking-glass, and when his Tutor indeavored to play him into
Schollership, by presenting pleasant Authors unto him, he returned, that
learning was beneath the An. Dom. 1179
Greatness of a Prince, who, if wanting it, might borrow it from his subjects,
being better stored; for (says he) if they will not lend me their brains,
I Will take away their heads. Yea he allowed no other Library, then a full stored
Cellar, resembling the Butts to Folioes. Barrells to Quartoes, smaller Runlets,
to lesser Volumns, and studied away his time, with base Company, in such
debauchednesse.

2. Leave we Alexius drowning his Care, or rather carelessness in wine, to
behold Zene his mother the Regent Empress. Surfeting also in pleasure with her
husband Proto-sebastus, who had married her, Since the decease of Manuel her
late husband. This Proto-sebastus a better Stallion, then warre-horse, was a
perfect Epicure, (so that Apitius, in comparison of him, was a Churl to starve
himself,) An. Dom. 1179
better at his palate, then his tongue, yet better at his tongue, then his
Arms, being a notorious Coward. He, with the Empress, conspired to the
dissolute Education of young Alexius, keeping him in constant ignorance of
himself, their strength consisting in his weakness, who had he been bred to
understand his own power, might probably have curbed their exorbitances.

3. The Body of the Grecian State, at this time, must needs be stra^gely
distempered, under such heads. Preferment was only scattered amongst Parasites,
for them to scramble for it. The Court had as many Factions, as Lords, save
that all their divisions united themselves in a general vitiousnesse; and that
Theodorus the Patriarh, was scoffed at by all as an antic for using
Goodneesse, when it was out of fashion and was adjudged impudent, for An. Dom.
1179.
presuming to be pious alone by himself.

4. As for the City of Constantinople, the chief seat of the Grecian Empire;
she had enjoyed happiness so long, that now she pleaded Prescription for
prosperity. Because living in Peace Time out of mind, she conceived it, rather
a wrong, to have constant Quiet denied, than a favor, from Heaven, to have it
continued unto her. Indeed, She was grown sick, of a Surfeit of health, and
afterward was broken, with having too much Riches. For instead of honest
industry, and painful thrift, which first caused the greatness of this City:
now flowing with wealth, there was nothing therein, but the swelling of Pride,
the boiling of lust, the fretting of Envy, and the squeezing of Oppression. So
that should their dead Ancestors arise, they would be puzzled to see
Constantinople for it felfe, except An. Dom. 1179.
they were directed there unto, by the Ruins of St. Sophies Temple. True it
was, some years since, upon agreat famine, some hopes were given of a general
Amendment. During which time, Riot began to grow thrifty, pride to go plain,
Gluttons to fast, and wantons were starved into Temperance. But forced
Reformation will last no longer, then the violent cause thereof does Continue.
For soon after, when plenty was again restord, they relapsed to their former
Badnesse; yea afterward became fouler for the Purge, and more wanton for the
Rod, when it was Removed.

5. Now there was an Antifashion in the Grecian Empire, maintained by some
Lords of ancient Extraction, who were highly offended at the great Power whch
Proto-Sebastus, and L. Xene the Empress usurped to themselves; and meeting
privately together, An. Dom. 1179.
Andronicus Lapardas, as prolocutor for the rest, vented his coffeehouse.
Complaining, it was more then high time, that they now awake out of the
Lethargy of Security, into which, by fools lullabyes, they had cousened
themselves. That they in the Empire, which have most at the Stake, are made
only lookers on; sometimes admitted to the Counsel, out of Complement, and for
Countenance barely to concur; but for the maine kept in Ignorance of most
material passages. That their names are all branded for Death, and that no
love to their persons, but fear what might follow, had hitherto secured their
lives. In a word; that they must speedily resolve on some projects for their
protection, or else they should approve themselves heirs to Epimetheus, who is
not found to have left any Land unto his Sons, An. Dom. 1179.
but only to have bequeathed an useless Sorrow unto them, for their Portion.

Hereupon they entered into a strict Combination with themselves secretly,
vowing that they would improve their utmost might to bring in Andronicus
Comnenus, a Prince of the blood, one of great parts and abilities, (but lately
banished out of the Empire) to counterpoise the power of Proto-Sebastus, and to
free young Alexius from the wardship of such as abused him. We will present the
Reader with a list of their Titles and offices, who were engaged in this
design; entreating him not to be offended with us, because of the hardness
and length of their Names; but rather with their Godfathers who Christened
them. We have an English Proverb that bones bring meat to Town, and those who
are desirous An. Dom. 1179.
to feast themselves on the pleasant and profitable passages of History, must
be content some time to stoop their stomachs to feed on hard words, which
bring matter along with them.

7. First, Maria Prophyrogenita Caesarissa daughter to Manuel the late
Emperor, by a former wife, half sister to Alexius the young Emperor. 2.
Caesar her Husband, an Italian Lord, who was so overtopt with the high birth,
and spirit of his wife, that in this History we find him not grown much above
the bare mention of his Name. 3. Conto-Stephanus, the Great Duke, Admiral of
the Galleys. 4. Camaterus Basilius President of the City. 5.
Hagiochristophorites Stephanus, Captain of the Guard. An. Dom. 1179.
6. Disypatus Georgius Lecturer in the great Church, (an higher office, then
the modern acceptance of the word does imply.) 7. Tripsycus Constantinus one
of the most noble extractions. 8. Macroducas Constantinus, no whit inferior to
him in pedigree, or power. 9. Andronicus Lapardas, formerly mentioned, together
with the aforesaid 10. Theodorus, the Patriark, last named, because least
interessed. For in matters of piety, he was governed by his conscience, but in
matters of Policy, by good Company* being therein himself utterly unskilled:
and strangers in unknown ways commonly follow the most beaten Tract of others
before them. All these joined An. Dom. 1179.
in a league to bring Andronicus home to Constantinople, who, what he was, and
how qualified, we will not forestall the Reader, conceiving it, though
something painful, yet more healthful for him to gain his Character by
degrees in the Sequel of his Actions, wherein he will sufficiently discover
himself, without our description of him.


8. Now Maria Caesarissa was employed unto Andronicus (having ability in her
self, and advantage by her Sex for the cunning carriage of the matter) to
acquaint him with their designs. She coming to Oenaeum, where he lived in
Banishment, informed him of the general discontent in the Grecian Empire: And
how those which basely served Xene, did only command in the State. That,
besides those great persons, An. Dom. 1179.
(whose names she presented in writing) many others (as yet scrupulous Newters)
would have their doubts fully satisfied, and declare on his side when they saw
him appear with a powerful Army. That it would be a meritorious work to
enfranchise his Kinsman Alexius from their slavery, where-under he, and the
Grecian Empire did groan.

9. Welcome was this Invitation to Andronicus, to be requested to do, what of
himself he desired. How willingly does the fire fly upwards, especially when
employed to fill up a vacuity; because then doing 3. good Offices, with one
motion; Namely, expressing its Dutifulness to the Dictates of Dame Nature; and
contributing in Case of Necessity, to the Preservation of the Universe; and
pleasing its own peculiar Tendency, which delights An. Dom. 1179.
in ascending: Such now the Condition of Andronicus, who in this undertaking,
would show Courteous in granting the Request of his friends, appear pious in
promoting the general good, and withal satisfy the Appetite of his own
Ambition and Revenge. Wherefore with treasure, whereof he had plenty, he
provided men and Arms, and prepared with all speed for the Expedition.

10. But he could not be more busy about his War, then Xene was employed about
her wanto^nesse, counting in life all spilt, that was not sport, who to revenge
herself on envious death, meant in mirth to make herself Reparation, for the
Shortness of her life. That time, which flies of it self, she sought to
drive a way, with unlawful Recreations. And though Music did jarre, and mirth
was profaneness, at this An. Dom. 1179.
present time, wherein all did feel what was bad, and fear what was worse,
yet she by wa^ton Songs (Panders to Lust) and other provocatives, did awake
the sleeping Sparks of her Corruption, into a flame of open wickedness.

11. But it was a great and sudden abatement to her jollity to hear, that
Andronicus, with a puissant Army, was approaching the City. Alexius
Protosebastus, her minion, did woe al people to make resistance. But he found
abundance of Neuters, (of that lukewarm temper) which Heaven and Hell does
hate,) who would not out of their Houses, but stay at (...)
home and side with neither party, these did maintain that the public Good
was nothing but the result of many men's particular good, and therefore held;
that in saving their own they advanced the general. An. Dom. 1179.
Indeed they hoped, though the great vessel of the State was wrackt, in a
private fly-boat of Neutrality, to waft their own Adventure safe to the Shore.
But who ever saw dauncers on Rops, so equally to poise themselves, but at last
they fell down and brake their Necks? And we will take the Boldness to point
at these hereafter, and to show what was their Success.

12. The best thing which befrended Protosebastus (next to his own Money) was
the obliging disposition of Xene. She had as many Nets as Gestures to catch
affections in, and with her Smiles, did not only press, but pay all Carpet
Knights, and amorous Persons to be of her party. The City of Constantinople
was thrice walled, with wood, stones, and bones, plenty of Shipping,
artificial Fortifications, and multitudes of men. The worst was, their An.
Dom. 1179.
Arsenall was a goodly Stable of gallant wooden Horses, but they wanted Riders
to manage them, The Grecians (at this time) being very simple Seamen, though
Nature may seem both to woe and teach them to be skillful Mariners, by
affording them plenty of Safe Harbors. However the Grecians conceiving
Navigation beneath their honor (which indeed was above their Industry,)
resigned the benefit of Trading in their own Seas to the Italians of Pisa,
Genoa, Florence, and Venice. Protosebastus hired Mercenary Mariners of these,
and with them manned his Ships, Stopping the passages of Propontis, by which
Andronicus coming from Paphlagonia, out of the lesser Asia, was to pass.

13 But now an Admiral was to be provided for his Navy: Conto-Stephanus the
great Duke, formerly mentioned, challenged An. Dom. 1179.
the Place as proper to himself, scorning to be made a Stale to wear the
Style in Peace, and not to execute the Office in war, when occasion was
offered to show his valor, and serve his Country. What should Protosebastus
do? it is equally dangerous to offend, or employ him. Yet he resolves on the
latter, not willing to teach him, to be dishonest by suspecting him, and
conceiving it to be an engagement, on a Noble Nature to be trusty, because he
was trusted. But he no sooner received the Charge, but betrayed all the
Galleyes to Andronicus, whereby in an instant he was made Master of all those
Seas. The news whereof being brought to the City; oh what riding, what running,
what packing, what posting! happy he that could trip up his Neighbors heels,
to get first into the favor of Andronicus. An. Dom. 1179.
Many that stak't their wives and children at home in the City, had laid good
Betts abroad on the opposite Party.

14. Andronicus being easily wafted over, comes to the Gates of Constantinople.
Here to oppose him, there was rather a Skirmish then a Fight, or rather a
flourish then a skirmish, the land forces consisting of two Sorts. First old
Soldiers, who formerly having been notorious Plunderers, had their Arms so
pressed down, with the weight of the peoples just Curses, that they could not
lift up their Swords to any purpose, but having formerly preyed on their
Friends, were made a prey to there Foes: Secondly Citizens; used only to
traverse their Shops, and unacquainted with military Performances. The city
once entered, was instantly conquered, An. Dom. 1179
(whose strength was much overfam'd) such populous Places, like unweildy
bodies, sink with their own weight.

15. Protosebastus was taken Prisoner, and was kept some days and nights
waking, being pinched, when once offering to shut his eyes. A torment which we
meet not with to be used to so high a person, though (they say) of late in
Fashion, for the discovery of Witches.

But to put him out of his pain, Andronicus is conceived by some, merciful
unto him, in causing his eyes to be bored out, seeing it was less torture not
to see, then not to sleep; So much for this great Coward, though this his
Character, cannot be guessed from his Demeanor herein, seeing a better
Soldier might have been worsted in this Expedition againg Force, of open An.
Dom. 1179
Foes, and fraud of seeming friends, it being impossible to make them fight,
who are resolved to fly.

16. The Army thus entering the City, some outrages, they must of Course commit,
but those, neither for Number or Nature, such as might have been expected: For
when a place is taken by Assault, the most strict Commanders are not able to
keep the mouths of their Soldiers Swords fasting, but may be commended for
moderate, if they feed not to a Surfeit. Besides, such was the infinite wealth
of Constantinople, her treasures would tempt the fingers of Saints, much more
of Soldiers; the Paphlagonians, (whereof the Army consisted,) vowed, that
seeing their Swords had done so good service, they would make hilts of Gold,
for An. Dom. 1179.
their Blades of Steel.

17. There was then inhabiting in the City of Constantinople, multitudes of
Frankes (understand French, Germans, and principally Italians,) so that well
might this City be called new Rome, from the abundance of Latins that lived
therein, These first by Manufactures, and then by Merchandice, got great
wealth, (their diligence being more, and Luxury less then the Greeks,)
insomuch that they engrossed all Trading to themselves. This attracted the
Envy of the Natives, that Strangers should suck the Marrow of the State,
alleging, that in Process of time, the Ivy would grow to be an Oak, and
those prove absolute in their own power, which, at first, were dependent for
their Protection. Andronicus with something more than a bare An. Dom. 1179.
Connivance, though less then a full Command, freely consigned these Frankes
over to the Rapine of his Army.

18. Such of them as related, by former Freindship or Alliance to the Grecians,
fled to them for shelter, who, instead of preserving, persecuted them, their
Company being Conceived Infectious, lest it should bring the Plague of the
Soldiers fury along with it. And who finds a faithful friend in Misery? All
their goods were spoild, and most of there lives spilled, save such as formerly
had escaped by flight to their Ships. Thus Andronicus found a cheap way, both
to pay his Soldiers, and please the People, who counted him an excellent
Physician of the State, and this a great Cure done by him, in purging the
superfluous, yea noxius Aliens out of n. Dom. 1199.
the City. Indeed careful he was to preserve the City it self from spoiling,
as having then a squint eye at the Empire; and knowing Constantinople, to be
the Seat thereof, he would not deface that fair Chair into which, in due
time, he hoped himself to sit down.

The Second BOOK.
1. ANDRONICUS being An. Dom. 1189.
thus peaceably possessed of Constantinople, first made his humble address to
the young Emperor Alexius, and ceremoniously kissed his feet. The Spectatours
variously commented on his prodigious humility therein, Some conceiving, he
meant to build high, because he began so low; others thinking that their Toes
had need beware the cramp, whose feet he kissed.

2. The next Stage, whereon his Hypocrisy acted, was the great Church it
self, where, meeting Theodorus the Patriarch at the door, he incountred him
with transcendent Courtship, protesting, An. Dom. 1180.
that in him, he beheld the pattern of of Chrysostom, his famous Predecessor,
it being questionable, whether that worthy father, did more truly survive, in
the learned Books, he left to posterity, or in the looks and life of
Theodorus. And whilst the Patriark was meditating a modest Reply, Andronicus
did power Complements, so full and fast upon him, that stifel'd therewith, he
could breath no Answer in return, but only fell into a swound of Amazement.

3. Hence, he advanced into the Quire, unto the monument of Manuel his kinsman,
and late Emperor. At sight whereof, the tears trickled down his reverent
Cheeks, as if they had run a race, which of them, should be the foremost: some
interpreted this, the love which Andronicus bare to the memory of the An. Dom.
1180.
dead Emperor, and others feared, that as the moist dropping of stones is the
foure-runner of foul weather; so this relenting of his hard heart, presaged
some storm to follow after, in the State. Then coming to Manuels Tomb,
ordering his voice so low, as seeming he might not be, and yet so loud, as
certain he was heard, what he spoke, he expressed himself to this effect.

4. Dear Manuel, my loyalty styles thee Sovereign, but my blood calls thee
cousin. I will not say it was thy fault, but my fate, not to have my love to
thee understood, according to the integrity of my intentions. my Innocence, by
thee, was banished into a far Country. The Burden did not greive me, but
the hand that laid it on; not so much to be an Exile, as an Exile made by thee.
However, An. Dom. 1180.
all my revenge unto thee, shall be in advancing the honor and safety of thy
son Alexius, to free whose Innocence, from the Abuse of his
friend-pretended-enemies, I have embarked my self, in a dangerous and
desperate design: Yea my manifold Infirmities (of which I am most Conscious)
grieve me not so much, in my own behalf, as because thereby I am rendered
dis-able, from being serviceable to your son, in so high a degree, as I
desire.

5. Then sinking his voice, past possibility of being overheard, he continued.
Base bloody Hound, which chasest me from place to place. I here arrest thy
drowsy Ashes, it being now past thy power to break this marble Chest. I
scorn to ungrave thy dust, (wishing that all my Enemies were as Sumptuously
entombed,) But thy Son, Wife, Daughter, Favorites, An. Dom. 1180.
Friends, Name, Memory, I will utterly destroy. The Poets Fancy begat three
Furies in Hell, and I will be the fourth on Earth.

6. Some will demand, how we came to the knowledge of this Speech, being so
secretly delivered? It is answered, it is possible some invisible Ear might
lie in Ambush within the Earereach of his words. Besides, let not me be
challenged for a libell, who can produce the party from whom I received it; and
amongst others, discharge my self on one principal Nicetas Coniates in vita
Alexij numero. 16.
Author of Excellent credit. Though I believe that this Speech was never taken
from the Original of Andronicus his mouth, but was translated from the black
Coppie of his wicked Actions, which afterward he committed.

7. His devotions ended, he An. Dom. 1180.
retired to his own house, and there lived very privately, as renouncing all
worldly Pomp and Pleasure, whilst his Engineeres, underhand, were very active
to procure the Empire for him, which was thus contrived: A Petition was drawn,
in the name of all the People, requesting Andronicus, that he would be
pleased, for the good of the State, to be chosen joint Emperor with Alexius.
This was subscribed by the principal men in every place; and then Herds of
silly Souls did the like. They never consulted with the Contents of the Paper,
whether it was Bond, Bill, Libell, or Petition. But thought it a sin, not to
score their Marks, where they were told, their betters had gone before them. At
first they wanted names for their Parchme^t, but afterward, Parchment An. Dom.
1180.
for their names. Here it would be tedious to recount, what slights and
forgeries were used herein. If any delayed to subscribe, they were presently
urged with great men's Presidents; that it was Superstition, to be more holy
than the Bishops: Rigor, to be more just then the Judges: Malapartnesse, to
pretend to more wisdom than so many Statesmen, who had already signed it. And
thus, many fearful Souls were compelled to consent, by the Tyranny of others
Examples. Indeed some few there were, which durst be honest, whose Souls did
stand on a Basis of their own judgments, without leaning, with implicit
faith, on others. These disavowed this State-Bigamie, protesting against the
Co-Empireship of Andronicus, and boldly affirming, that An. Dom. 1180.
Crowns take a Master if they accept a Mate. But then all their Names, were
returned unto Andronicus, who registered them in his black Kallender, who, for
the present, did remember, and for the future would requite them.

The principal Agent, that openly promoted this Business was Basilius, a
Bishop, one that professed Heaven, and practiced Earth, much meddling in
Temporal matters, being both lewd and lazy in his own profession: only
herein he had the Character of a good Churchman, that by his preaching and
living he set forth his office accordingly.

9. And now the Scene being covertly laid, in a Solemn Assembly, on a high
Festival, this Bishop, as the mouth of the rest, (whose names he An. Dom.
1180.
held in a Parchment Roll) represented to Andronicus the sincere Intentions,
and earnest wishes of the State. Most humbly requesting him, that he would be
pleased so far to ease the tender years of his dear kinsman, young Alexius,
as to bear half the burden of the Crown, and to accept to be
joynt-Emperour with him: Presuming, that such was the Goodness and Humility of
Andronicus, that he would not disdain a Part, though he did deserve the
Whole. And after a long Oration concluded. Thus anciently the Roman Senate
coupled old delaying Fabius, with overhasty Marcellus, blending Youth with
Age, the Swift with Slow: Wholesome mixture, when the one brought Eyes, the
other Hands; the one was for Advice, the other for Action. And thus alone it is
An. Dom. 1180.
possible that the distempered State of the Grecian Empire at this present, can
be cured with this Cordial, and sacred Composition, of the Gravity of your
Highness, to temper the green years of Alexius.

10. Hereat Andronicus discovered a strangeness in his looks, as if he had
needed an Interpreter to understand the Language which was spoken unto him; and
after some Pause proceeded. Let me not be censured for unmannerly in not
returning my thanks, having my soul for the present possessed with an higher
employment of Admiration, That so many Aged Statesmen, as rich in wisdom, as
years, should be so much mistaken in mine Abilities, as to conceive me in any
degree fit for the Moity of a Crown. Go choose some Gallant, whose very flesh
is steel, can march all day, and An. Dom. 1180.
watch all night, whose vast Achievements may add Honor unto your Empire.
Alas! my pale face, lean Cheeks, dimnte eyes, faint heart, weak legs, speak
me fit for no Crown, but a Coffin, no Royal Robes, but a windingsheet. Nor am
I ashamed to confess, that my youth has been exceeding vicious, wherein I
spared the Devil the pains of courting me, by preferring my self to his
service: And now it is my only joy, with grief to recollect my former
wickedness. O flate I have found out a small private place, (call it, as you
please, least of Cells, or greatest of Graves,) wherein I intend wholly to
devote the Remnant of my life to Meditation of Mortality. For seeing naturally
our souls are too deeply rooted in Earthlinesse, it is good to loosen them a
little before, that so by Death, they may be An. Dom. 1180.
plucked up with the more Easiness: Not that wilfully, either out of Laziness,
or Sullenesse, I decline to serve my Country, which claims a Share in me. But
though I know I am not to live for my self, I am to dye to my self, and may
now at this Age, justly Challenge to my self a Writ of ease, from all wordly
employment.

11. But Basilius perceiving that he did but Complement a denial, pressed him
with the greater importunity: Confessing it would torment the modesty of his
Highness to be told how high the Audit of his virtues did amount, knowing that
he desired rather to deserve then hear his own comme^dations. But withal
instantly entreated him to remember (what he full well understood) that the
Entreaties of a whole State, had the power of Commands; and that Heaven An.
Dom. 1180.
it self was not so impregnable, but that it might be battered open, by the
importunity of poor Petitioners, That from his acceptance of this their
humble Proffer, they should hereafter date the beginning of their Happiness.
That this day should stand in the Front of their Almanackes, and in Scarlet
Text, as a leader, command over the rest, which followed it, as the new
Birthday of the Grecian Empire.

12. How ever at that present nothing more was effected, and because it was
late, the Assembly was dismissed, only some principal Persons were appointed
with their private persuasions, to mollify the stiffenesse of Andronicus, who
prevailed so far, that meeting next morning in the full Con course of all
Sorts of People, Andronicus, First loosned An. Dom. 1180.
the Vizard of his dissimulation for a time, letting it fairly hang by, at last
it fell off of it is own Accord, and thankfully accepted their Shouts, and
Exclamations, with GOD SAVE ALEXIUS AND ANDRONICUS JOINT EMPERORS OF GREECE.

13. Then mounted on a high Tribunal, he made an eloquent Oration, as indeed
he was not only sweet, but lushious in his Language, and with the Circles of
fine Phrases, could charm any Stranger, both into love, and admiration of his
person; smiling, with a pleasant Countenance, he told them, that he conceived
his own Condition was represented in the Eagle, displayed in the Imperial
Standard: For as Naturalists report. that Sovereign of Birds, An. Dom. 1180.
renewes his Age; so He seemed to himself grown young again: as if the
Heavens had bestowne upon him, new Shoulders for new Burdens. And seeing it was
their pleasure, to elect him to the place, he promised to rescue Right out of
the Paws of Oppression, to be the only Master of requests: so that all
complaints, should have free Access to him, and, if just, Redress from him.
But especially he would be Careful of his own Conversation, intending, (Grace
assisting him,) to have a Law in his own example. In a word, his speech was
all excellent good in it self, save for this only fault, that not one syllable
thereof, was either truly intended or really performed.

14. The Solemnites of his Coronation were performed in great State, with much
Pomp An. Dom. 1180.
and Expense; And we may observe, that the Coronations of usurpers, are
generally more gorgious in their Celebrations, than those of lawful Princes.
For usurpers, out of excessive joy of what they have undeservedly gotten, care
not what Cost they lavish. Besides, Ceremonies are more substantial to them,
to tell the world what they are, who otherwise would take less notice of them,
as not entitled by any right to the place they possess. Whereas Kings, on whose
Heads Crowns are dropped from Heaven, by lineall descent, often save superfluous
Charges, at their Coronation, as being but a bare Ceremony, deriving or adding
no right unto them, but only clearing and declaring the same to others.

15 The noise of the peoples Shouts, did allarm young Alexius, An. Dom. 1180
which hitherto was fast sleeping in some obscure Corner, and little dreamed,
that mean while, an Empire was stolen away from him. But now coming to
Andronicus, he publicly congratulated His happiness, and with a smiling
Countenance, embraced him, as heartily glad, that he had gotten so good a
Companion in so great an employment. We read, that in the Country of Lituania,
there is a peculiar Custom that married men have Adjutores Tori, Helpers of
the marriage bed, which, by their Consent, lie with their wives; and these
Husbands are so far from conceiving either Hatred or Jealousy against them,
that they esteem them their principal friends. Surely the Beds in that
Country are bigger than in other places: seeing amongst all other Nations, a
wife is a Vessel, wherein An. Dom. 1180.
the Cape-Merchant will not admit any Adventurers to share with him. It seems,
Alexius was one of this Lituanian Temper, that could accept a Partner in his
Empire, tickled with joy at the Shows and Solemnities of his Coronation, (and
well might he laugh till his heart did ache,) though some did verily think,
that amongst all the Pageants there presented, he himself was the strangest,
and most ridiculous spectacle. As for Xene the Empress, she appeared not at
all in public, being pensive at home, having almost wept out her own Eyes,
because Protosebastus had his bored out.

16. Next very day, in all Pattents and public Receipts, their Names were
transposed. First, Andronicus, and then Alexius, this reason being rendered,
that An. Dom. 1180.
it was unfitting that a youth should be preferred before so grave, and
Reverent an old Man. Or rather, because, as in Numeration, the Figure is to be
put before the Cipher. Here some of the friends of Alexius propounded, to stop
the ambition of Andronicus, before the Gangrene thereof spread further; seeing
what he received, did not satisfy, but enlarge his proud breast, prompting new
thoughts unto him, and widening his heart for higher desires. The motion found
many to praise, but not to practice it; none would do, what all desired were
done. The younger sort conceived, that this office, because dangerous, was most
proper for old men to undertake, who need not to be thrifty of their lives,
seeing it was too late to spare at the Bottom. Old An. Dom. 1180.
men were of the opinion, it best beseemed the Boldness and Activity of Youth:
and such as were of middle Age, did partake of the Excuses of both. Thus in a
Project that is apparently desperate, even those who are proudest on their
terms of Honor will be so humble, as in modesty to let meaner men go before
them.

17. As for the Lords of the Combination, (who first procured Andronicus his
coming to Constantinople,) they found themselves, that they now had far
over-shot the Mark they aimed at. For they intended only to use him for the
present, to humble and abate the Pride and power of Protesebastus. Which done,
they meant, either wholly to remove, or warily to confine him. But now what
they chose An. Dom. 1180.
for Physic must be given them for daily food: and woeful is the condition of
that man, who, in case of necessity, taking hot water to prevent Swooning, must
ever after drink it for Beverage, even to the burning out of his Bowels. For
Andronicus, thouhg he came in as a Tenant at will, would hold his place in Fee
to himself and his Heirs. And whereas the aforesaid LORDS promised
themselves, if not Advancement to new Assurance to their old Offices; they
found themselves preferred to nothing but neglect and contempt: neither
entrusted in the Advice, nor employed in the Execution of any matters of Moment.

18. Indeed Andronicus did loath the sight of those Lords, as Debtors do of
Bailiffes, as if their very looks did arrest him An. Dom. 1180.
to pay for those Grand favors which he had formerly received from them,
brought by their help from banishment, to power and wealth in the City. Nor
would he make use of them, as too sturdy to be pliable to his Projects;
standing on their former deserts and present Dignities; but employed those
Osiers of his own planting, which might be easily wreathed to all purposes,
being base up-starts, depending on his absolute Pleasure. And as he used these
alone, so these only in matter of Execution: who taking himself, (and therein
not mistaken) to be sole friend to himself, would not impart his Counsels to
any one, being wont to say, that Ships sink as deep with one, as with
onehundred Leaks.

19. We will conclude this Book with an Independent Story, An. Dom. 1180.
hoping the Reader will take it as we find it. There was a noted Beggar in
Constantinople, well known to the people thereabouts, (as who had almost worn
the Thresholds of Noble men's doors, as bare as his own clothes) an exceeding
tall, raw-bon'd Body, with a meagre, and lanke Belly, so that he might have
passed for Famine it self. This man was found begging about the lodgings of
Andronicus, very late at night, at an unseasonable hour, except one would say,
that men of his profession, as they are never out of their way, so they are
never out of their time, but may seasonably beg at any hour, when they are
hungry. Being apprehended at the Guard, and accused for a Conjurer, (his ugly
face being all the Evidence against him,) Andronicus delivered him over An.
Dom. 1180.
to the indiscreet discretion of the People, to do with him as they pleased.
These wild Justicers, without legal proof, or further proceeding, for Alms,
bestowed on him a Pile of Wood, and a great fire, where they burnt him to
Ashes, whose fact might justly have entitled him to a whipping Post, but not to
a Stake.

20. Say not that this is beneath our History, to insert the Death of a Beggar
in the life of an Emperor. For all Innocents are equal in the Court of
Heaven; And this poor man, who, whilst alive, was so loud at great Men's
doors, for meat to preserve his life, his blood may be presumed to be as
crying and clamorous at the gates of Heaven to revenge his death. For herein
Andronicus taught the People to be Tyrannical, An. Dom. 1180.
a needless Lesson to such apt Scholars, who afterward proved Proficients
herein, to the cost of their Teacher, as, God willing, shall be showed
hereafter.

The third BOOK. An. Dom 1181.

1. THE news of Andronicus his being chosen joynt-Emperour, no sooner arrived
at the ears of Maria Caesarissa, but she was drowned in a deluge of grief:
being beholden to nature that she could vent her self in tears; seeing that
sorrow, which cannot bleed in the eyes, does commonly fester in the heart. And
when her Nurse lovingly chid her, for excessive sadness, she pleaded her sex,
which can scarce do any thing without over-doing; so that Feminine passions,
must either not be full, or overflow. An. Dom. 1181.


2. But Anger, soon after having got the conquest of her own grief, with
furious speed she repaired to the place, where the Lords of the Combination
were assembled, and there she abruptly vented her self in these Expressions.

3. Greece is grown barbarous, and quite bereft of its former worth; not so
much as the ruins of valor left in you, to reach forth unto posterity, any
signs that you were extracted from brave ancestors. Time was when the Grecian
Youth, adventured for the Golden-Fleece, you may now adventure for the Asses
Skin, the dull Emblem of your own Conditions: The merry Greek, has now
drowned the Proverb of the valiant Greek. Tame Traitors all! that could behold
an Usurper, Mate and check your lawful Emperor, and neither wag hand or
tongue in opposition. Did my father Manuel An. Dom. 1181.
for this, impair his own, to raise your estates? He made you honorable and
great: Oh that he could have made you grateful! The best is, your very sin
will be your punishment. And though your practice has been so base, your
judgment cannot be so blind as to believe, that your Channells of Nobility
can have a stream, when the Fountain of Honor is dammed up, by your
unworthiness.

3. The Lords, though by their Silence they seemed first to swallow her words,
yet the expression of Tame Traitors would not go down their Throats; the
largest souls being narrowest in point of credit, and soonest choakt with a
disgrace. Mamalus therefore in the behalf of the rest; Madam (said he)
suffices it now for us, barely to deny your speech. Had you been a man, An.
Dom. 1181.
we should have proceeded to defy the Speaker. What your passion, now
condemns in us for base; your judgment will not only acquit, for right, and
approve, for safe: but even commend for honorable, and advantageous for our
Master Alexius. Our Lives and Lands, are at the sole dispose, and the cruel
mercy of our enemies. We are instantly undone, if we whisper the least and
lowest syllable of Loyalty, and utterly disabled from any future service to
Alexius. We conceive it therefore better, for a time, to bow to our foes,
rather than to be broken by them: To spare in words, and spend what we
please, in thoughts. We want not a will, but wait a time, to express our
Reallity to the Emperor, with most safety to our selves, and effect for him,
in a season, least subject to suspicion.

5. Pacified with these words, An. Dom. 1181.
she was contented to attend the performance of the Promise, in time
Convenient; though never living so long, as to behold it, being prevented by
violent Death. For now Andronicus began freely to rage in Innocent blood,
cutting off such Nobles as he thought would oppose him. Something like truth
was alleged against them, to stop the Clamours of the multitude. And Power
never wants pretenses, and those legal, to Compass what it does desire. They
were indicted of Conspiracy against Andronicus; and Knights of the Post, (of
the Devils own dubbing) did depose it against them. Yea, silence was not
enough to preserve men's Innocence: some being accused that their Noses did
wrinkle, or their Eyes wink, or their Foreheads frown, or their Fingers snap
An. Dom. 1181.
Treason against Andronicus.

6. In this his Epidemical cruelty, it was much, that a famous Iester of the
Court escaped his fury. Of this Fellow, his body downwards was a Fool, his
Head a knave, who did carefully note, and cunningly vent, by the priveledges of
his Coat, many State-Passages, uttering the^ in a wary twilight, betwixt
sport and earnest. But belike, Andronicus would not break himself by stooping
to so low Revenge, and made Conscience in breaking the ancient Charter of
Iesters, though wronging the Liberty of others, of greater Concernment.

7. Of such as were brought to Public Execution, it was strange to behold,
the difference of their demeanor. Some, who were able to be miserable, with an
undaunted mind, did become their afflictions, and by their Patience made their
miseries An. Dom. 1181.
to smile, not bowing their Souls beneath themselves, only appealing for
Justice in another world. Others did foolishly rage, and ramp, mustring whole
Legions of Curces, as if therewith to make the Axe turn Edge. And then seeing
no Remedy but Death, their Souls did not bow by degrees, but fell flat in an
instant; of Lions, turning Calves, half dead with fear, received the fatal
stroke of the Executioner. So many were confusedly hudled to death, it is hard
to rank them in order, only we will insist on some principal Persons,

8. First, Maria Caesarissa, and her husband (whether it was Conscience or
Manners, not to part man and wife:) And because Andronicus durst not, for fear
of the People, bring them to public death, their Physician An. Dom. 1181
was bribed with Gold, which he conceived cordial for himself; And thereupon
he did quickly purge out both their Souls by Poison, (an unsuspected way,)
which robs men of their lives, and yet never bids them to stand.

9. Next followed Xene the Mother Empress being accused of high Treason for
attempting to be tray the City of Belgrade, to Bela King of Hungary. A pack't
council condemned her to death, which though otherwise vicious, was generally
bemoaned; as most innocent in this particular. But, Andronicus the Emperor,
cunningly derived the whole hatred hereof, on young Alexius (whose Power he
never used, or owned, but only to make him the Cloak-father for odious Acts)
urging him to sign the warrant, for her execution. In the stout refusal
whereof, Alexius An. Dom. 1181.
showed more Constancy then was expected to come from him, clearly answering
all Arguments, herein showing himself a child in Affection, and more then a
child in Judgment. Whereupon some ground their presumptions, that his soul
deserved better breeding, and that he was not to be censured for weakness of
Capacity; but rather his friends to be condemned, for want of care, and
himself to be bemoaned, for lack of Education. He flatly told Andronicus,
that Nero was recorded Monster to all Ages, for killing his Mother: And that
he would never consent to her death, that gave him life.

10. But he proceeded to aggravate the Crime of Xene, Belgrade being such a
piece of strength, that it was a whole An. Dom. 1181.
Province in effect. And though but a Town in Bulk, was a Kingdom in
benefit. All Greece awfully attending the fortune thereof. He minded Alexius,
that Fathers of Countries, should know no Mothers; but that Sovereigns
affections are only of kin to the good and safety of their Subjects. Besides,
(says he) you need not scruple so much at her death, who is dead whilst
living, and has been many years drowned in Luxury. So that what was cruelty
in Nero, will be Exemplary Justice in you.

11. Alexius rejoyned, that if his Mother Xene was so drowned in Luxury, the
more need she had to drown her sins in penitent Tears, except it were
conceived Charity to kill both her soul and body. That Princes were not to
own private affections, An. Dow. 1181.
where they were destructive to the Common good, but might and must, where they
consisted with the public safety. Or else to become a Prince, would be all
one, as to leave off to be a man. Grant Belgrade a strong Place* it was still
in their own possession, and her intended Treason succeeded not. And therefore
he conceived it a middle and indifferent way, that she should be deprived of
liberty for Plotting of Treason, and yet be permitted to live because the Plot
took no effect: A Cloister should be provided, whereto she should be close
confined, therein to do Penance for her former enormities. And in this
Sentence, he conceived that he impartially divided himself betwixt the
affection of a Child, and severity of a Judge. An. Dom. 1181.


12. But Andronicus who was resolved to have no denial, highly commended him
for his filial care of his Mothers soul: Yet, said he, for the benefit
thereof, fifty Friars at my own proper charges, shall be appointed, which
after her Death, Night and day, shall dauly pay their prayers in her behalf,
whose suffrages are as well known above, as her Prayers are strangers there:
it being to be presumed, that whilst she is living, the Heavens will be deaf
to her, which so long have been dumb to them. Speak not of her Project that
it took no effect; for had it succeeded, none would have called it Treason,
but have beheld it under a more favorable Notion. He minded Alexius that he
had sufficient power of himself, being joyntEmperour to put her to death, but
that he would in no case deprive An. Dom. 1181.
him of this Peerless Opportunity of Eternizing his memory to Posterity, and
securing the State by his necessary Severity. For all hereafter would be
deterred from attempting of Treason, as despairing of pardon, when they beheld
the Exemplary justice on his own Mother.

13. Alexius still persisting in his denial, Andronicus at last fell to flat
menacing, yet so cunningly carried it, that his threats did not seem to
proceed from any anger, but from love to the person, and grief for the
perverseness of Alexius. He protested he would no more break his sleep, he
would steer the State no longer; Let even the Winds and the waves hereafter
be the Pilots to that crazie vessel. He called the Heavens to witness,
(before whom he An. Dom. 1181.
entered a Caveat to preserve his own Innocence,) how he had tendered happiness
to Alexius, but could not force it upon him, who wilfully refused it. In a
word, so passionate he was, and so violent was the stream of his importunity,
that the young Emperor, either out of weakness, or weariness to swim
against it, was at last carried away with the Current thereof, and subscribed
the Warrant.

14. To divert whose mind from musing upon it, a solemn Hunting in the
Country was contrived, that there he might take his pleasure. In a Forest not
far off a stately Stagge was lodged, ambitious (as they told him) to fall by
the hand of an Emperor, or else to be dubbed an Heart Imperial, if chancing
to escape. All things being ready, Alexius is carried thither; but An. Dom.
1181.
withal, those are sent along with him, which hunted this Hunter, marked all
his motions, learnt the language of his looks, and hands, with the different
Dialects of his several fingers, so that he could not speak a word, or make
sign to any of his faithful servants, but presently it was observed, and if
material, reported to Andronicus. None of his friends durst show any
discontent. If any was seen sadly to wag his head, it was a certain sign that
that head stood but loose on his shoulders, and by the next return, the news
would be, 'that 'twas fallen off: so miserable was the condition of this
Prince, and of all his followers.

But Andronicus had a Hind to hunt at home, and must provide for the Execution
of Xene. An. Dom. 1181.
And now to enter the tender years of his son Manuel, for great Actions, he
thought first to blood him with an Empress, in private delivering the Warrant
unto him. Behold here an unexpected accident! This good Child of a bad Father,
(Grace can cut off the oldest, and strongest Entaile of Wickedness) refused
the Employment, alleging, there was no such dearth of hangmen, that a Prince
need take their Office; and that it was against his Conscience, her Crime being
rather pack't than proved, seeing she was never brought to answer for her
self: Here-at his Father mad with rage, rated and reviled him. Bastard, thou
were never true Eagles Bird, whose eyes are dazzled at the Sun of Woman's
Beauty. What? does thy Cowardice take Sanctuary at Conscience? He An. Dom.
1181.
never climbes a Throne that stands on such poor pretenses. What if she never
appeared to answer? where the fact it self does Cry, it is needless for the
offender to speak: Narrow-hearted fool! A Cottage is fitter for thee than an
Empire. Have I pawned mine own soul, to found thy greatness, and am I thus
requited? and so abruptly brake off into weeping.

16. Manuel Modestly returned: I am sorry Sir, you should pawn your soul for
my sake, but however I am resolved not to loose mine own. Whosoever climbes a
Throne without Conscience, never sits sure upon it. I had rather succeed to
your private paternall possession, then to an ill-gotten Empire. Nor am I
daz'led at the Luster of her beauty, but at the clearenesse of her Innocence;
all men being generally Compurgators An. Dom. 1181.
for her Integrity herein. Employ me, and try my valor in any other service.
Command, and I will fetch the Lions only heir out of his Den, both insight
and spite of Sire and Dam; only herein I desire to be excused, and I hope
deserve not to be accounted a Coward for fearing to commit a sin. How much
Andronicus was bemadded here-at, may easier be conceived, than expressed, to
receive a final repulse from his own Son, insomuch as at the last he was
feign to make use of Hagio Christophorites Stephanus, Captain of the Guard
(who alone of all the Lords of the Combination, stuck to him, and was respected
of him) and he very fairly took order to dispatch her, stifling her (as
some say) betwixt two Pillowes.

17. The next News which took possession of the Tongues and Ears of People,
was the An. Dom. 1181.
cruel and barbarous death of young Alexius: whilst, the vulgar did wonder
that he dyed so soon, and the wise did more admire that he lived so long; and
the difference was not great betwixt him that was now but a Ghost, and whilst
living, but a shadow (...) 2 lib. parag. 9.
Basilius went too far to fetch a fit Parallel out of the Roman History, to
compare An-dronicus and Alexius with old Fabius and sprightfull Marcellus; who
might have met in the same Story far nearer, (because later by 100 years) a
more lively resemblance in the Consulship of Julius Caesar and Bibulus, whereof
the one did all, the other drankeall.

18. The manner of Alexius his death was, that he had his neck broken with a
Bow-string; the punishment in that place, (as still amongst the Turks) much
used: and in this Tyrants Reign, An. Dom. 1181.
the string did cruelly strangle more at home, than the Bow did valiantly kill
abroad. This Bow-string (to make a short digression) was an Instrument whereon
Andronicus used to play, and sportingly to make much Mirth and Music thereon
to himself, calling it his medicine for all Malladies. For whereas (said he)
Purges were base, Vomits worse, Cupping painful, Glisters immodest,
bloodletting Cruel; this Bowstring had all the opposite good qualities unto
them. And the same did quench the heat of Fevers, draine the moisture of
Dropsies, cure Plurisies without piercing a vein, stay the Vertigo, heal the
Strangurie, by opening the Urine, and only stopping the breath. This being one
base humor of Andronicus, (unworthy Civility and Christianity) to break jests
on men An. Dom. 1181.
in misery, just as they were to dye. As for the Corpse of Alexius (on whom he
had practiced with his foresaid Medicine,) they were most unworthily handled,
and dead Bodies, though they cannot be hurt, may be wronged, especially of
such eminent persons.

19. Now to refresh the Reader a-mid'st so many murders, and Massacres; it will
not be amiss, to insert an unexpected Marriage. Alexius left Anna an Empress
Dowager. And some days after her husbands death, he addressed himself a Suitor
unto her, being to encounter with invincible disadvantages. First he came
reaking with the blood of slain Alexius. And what hope could he have that
she would embrace that Viper, that had stung her other-selfe to death!
Secondly the disproportion of his Age, being past 70. An. Dom. 1181.
and what motly colored Marriage, would it make to join his gray to green!
his cold November being enough to kill her flourie May. Notwithstanding all
this, he had formerly been so flesh't with fortune, he conceived he could never
be lean afterward; and knew that in matters of this nature, confidence in
attempting, is more than half the way to success.

20. First, He possessed himself of her judgment, and made her believe, that
all his former undertakeings, were in service to her, grieving that Alexius did
not valewe the Pearl he wore. He protested there was nothing about him, but
his hairs, which were dyed white, not by his Age, but by his Carfulness for
her preservation. Then, He assaulted her affection, principally pressing that
Argument, which was never propounded to a mere An. Dom. 1181.
woman, and returned with a denial, namely, assuring her of power and
greatness, promising she should be the Conduit, through which al his favors
should pass, and all his people under his command, should be blessed or blasted
by her Influence, neither were gifts wanting, and those of the largest size,
bestowed on her servants, (who promoted his cause) and the dullest Bodies work
on the most subtle Souls, by the mediation of such Spirits.

21. Now, whether it was out of Childishness, not being full fourteen, or out
of fear, being far from her friends, and her Person in his power; or out of
pride, loath to abate of her former State; she assented to his desire. But to
speak plainly, he shows him self to have store of leisure, and want of
work, who is employed to find a Root in Reason, for all the fruit that An.
Dom. 1181
grows from Francie: Suffices it, she loved him, affirming it, it was no
wonder, that he should take a poor Ladies Affections captive, whose valor in
the Field, had subdued the most manly of his Enemies.

22. To make this story pass for probable, we may fellow it, with the like in
our English Chronicles. RICHARD the, Third, though not so old, more ugly, then
ANDRONICUS, obtained the love, and was matried to the Countess of Warwick,
the Relictt of Prince Edward (son to King Henry the sixth) whom the same
Richard had slain at Teuxbury, she knowing so much, and he not denying it,
They were Namesakes, both Ann's, and when they had cast up their Audit, both, I
believe, might equally boast of their Bargains.

23. But Andronicus who was An. Dom. 1181.
never unseasonably Amorous (but had his Lust subordinate to his Ambition and
cruelty, when they gave him leave, and leisure to prosecute his pleasure) was
not softened by the Dalliance of Marriage, to remit any thing of his former
Tyranny. He protested that he counted the day lost, wherein he had not killed
or tortured some eminent Person: Or else, so planett-struck him with his
frowns, that he enjoyed not himself after. He never put two men together to
death after the same way; as not consisting with his state to wear one torture
threed-bare, but ever appeared in exchange, and variety of new manner of
punishments. And if any wonder, that there was not a general insurrection made
against this monster of mankind, to rend him from the Earth; Know that he had
one humor, that did much An. Dom. 1181.
help him, in being stern and cruel to Noble men; but affable and courteous
to poor people, and so still kept in with the vulgar. Besides, many stately
Structures he erected, and sweetened his cruelties with some good acts for the
Public. Now, that we might not seem to have weeded the life of Andronicus, or
to be a kin to those flies, which traveling by many fragrant Flowers, only
make their residence, on some sore, or Dunghill, we will recount some of his
good deeds, and pity it was, that they had not proceeded from a better Author.

24. He surveyed the Walls of Constantinople, and mended them, wheresoever the
chinkes thereof did call for reparation. He plucked down all the buildings
without (yet so, that the owners sustained no loss thereby) for fear in case
of an enemies An. Dom. 1181.
invasion, those houses might serve them for Ladders to scale the City with
more ease. Thus all Constantinople was brought within the compass of her
Walls, (as she remains at this day) not like many ill proportioned Cities in
Europe, which groan under overgreat Suburbs (so that the Children overtop
the Mother) and branch themselves forth into out-Streets, to the impairing of
the root, both weakening and impoverishing the City it self. He bestowed great
cost in adorning the Porphyrie Throne, which an Usurper did provide and
beautify, for a lawful Prince to sit upon it. He brought fresh Water, (a
Treasure in that place) through a Magnificent Aqueduct, into the heart of the
City, which after his death, was spoiled out of spite (as private Revenge in a
furious fit, often impaires An. Dom. 1181.
the public good) people disdaining to drink of his water, who had made the
streets run with blood. His benefaction to the Church of forty Martyrs
amounted almost to a new founding thereof, intending his Tomb in that place,
though it was arrant presumption in him, who had denied the right of Sepulture
to others, to promise the Solemnity thereof unto himself.

25. But that which gained him the greatest Reputation far and near, even
amongst those that never saw his face, was, an Edict for the saving of
Ship-wrackt goods. There was amongst the Greeks a constant practice, founded in
Cruelty, and strengthened by Custom; that if a Vessel was discovered in
danger of drowning, those on the shore, like so many ravenous Vultures, An.
Dom. 1181.
flockt about that Carcass, to pick out the eyes thereof, the wealth therein.
These made all their Hay in foul weather, which caused them not only duly to
wait, but heartily to wish for a Tempest: And as the wicked Tenants in the
Gospel concluded to kill the Heir that so the Inheritance might be their
own, These remorselesse men, to prevent future Cavills and clamours about the
goods; dispatched the Mariners, always by wilful neglecting their
preservation, and too often by downright contriving their destruction. More
cruel then the very stocks and stumps of Trees, which growing by Rivers
sides; commonly hang over the water, as if out of pity, tendering their service
to such as are in danger of drowning, and stooping down to reach their hands
to help them to the shore. An. Dom. 1181.
Now, Andronicus taking this barbarous Custom into Consideration, forbad it,
for the time to come, on most terrible penalties, (and this Lion, if enraged,
would by his loudness, roar Hearing into the deaf) and enjoined all to
improve their utmost endeavors, for the preservation of their persons. Hence
followed such an alteration, that shipwrack't goods, if floating to land,
safely kept themselves without any to guard them. Men would rather blow their
fingers, than heat their hands with a rotten Planke* rather go naked, than
cover themselves with a rag of Shipwrackt Canvas: It was ominous to steal the
least inch of of a Cable, lest it lengthned it self into an Halter to him that
took it. All things were preserved equally safe, of what value soever, An.
Dom. 1181.
and untold Pearl, might lie on the Shore untoucht, like so many
Oyster-shells. This dispersed the fame of his Justice and Mercy into foreign
parts: And as Sounds which are carried a-long by the Rivers side, having the
advantage of hollow Banks, and the water to convey them, are heard sooner and
quicker, then Sounds of the same lowdnesse, over the Land; So the Maritim
Actions of Princes, concerning Trading, wherein Strangers, as well as their own
Native Subjects are interessed, report them to the world in a higher Tone, and
by a quicker passage, than any Land-lockt Action of theirs, which has no
further influence, but only terminates in their own Kingdom. Yea this one
ingratiating Decree of Andronicus, did set him up with so full stock with An.
Dom. 1181.
Reputation, that upon the bare credit thereof, might now run on skore, the
committing of many Murders, and never have his Name once called to Account for
any injustice therein.

26. And as the Seamen by water, so the Husbandmen by land (and those we
know have strong Lungs, and stout sides) cried up the fame of Andronicus,
because he was a great preserver of Tillage, and Corn was never at more
reasonable rates than in his Reign. He cast a strict eye on all Customers and
Tax-gatherers, and (as evil Spirits are observed to walk much about silver
Mines) so Andronicus did incessantly haunt all public receivers of money; and
if finding them faulty; oh excellent sport for the people to see how those
Sponges were squeezed! He allowed large and An. Dom. 1181.
liberal maintenance to all in places of Judicature, that want might not tempt
them to corruption. Thus, even the worst of Tyrants light sometimes on good
actions, either stumbling on them by chance, or out of love (not of virtue,
but) of their own security. They are wicked by the general Rule of their
lives, and pious by some Exceptions, just, by fits, that they may be more
safely unjust when they please. And hereby Andronicus advanced himself to be
tolerable amongst Mankind.

27. We could willingly afford to dwell longer under the Temperate Climate of
his Virtues; but Travelers must on their journey. Coming now to the Torrid
Zone of his Fury, which indeed was not habitable: His Foes he executed,
because they were his foes; and his An. Dom. 1181.
friends, because they were his friends. For they that let out a Courtesy at
Interest to a Tyrant, commonly lose the Principal: Witness Conto-Stephanus,
the great Duke, Admiral of the Galleyes, who by betraying his trust, brought
Andronicus to Constantinople, and now fairly had his eyes put out. As for
Georgius-Dissipatus, Andronicus intended to roast him, being a Corpulent man,
upon a Spit, affirming that such fat Venison wanted no Larding, but would baste
it self, and meant to serve him up as a dainty dish in a Charger or Tray, to
his Widow, had not some intervening accident diverted it. He made a bloody
Decree, which had a train of indefinite, and unlimited extent, and would reach
as far as the desire of the measurer: namely, that all such An. Dom. 1181.
of the nobility which were, now, or should, hereafter, be cast into Prison;
should be executed without any legal Trial, with their Children and Kindred.
Prince Manuel, (whose worst fault was, that Andronicus begat him) in vain
opposed this Decree, alleging this to be the ready way for his Father to
un-Emperour himself, by destroying that Relative Title, and leaving himself
no Subjects.

28. But Andronicus had found Scripture, whereby to justify his Act, and
brought St. Romans 7. 19, 20.
Paul for his Patron, whose practice and confession he cited. For the Good
that I would, I do not; But the evil which I would not, that I do. Now if I
do that I would not, it is no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in
me. God keep us from Apocrypha-Comments An. Dom. 1181.
on Canonical Scripture: send us his pure Text without the gloss of
Andronicus, who, belike, conceived he could not be a perfect Tyrant, by only
torturing of men, except also he did rack Gods Word, rending Text from
Con-text, and both, from their true intent.

29. This Decree startles such Lords of the Combination as were left alive,
together with Mamalus, principal Secretary to the late Emperor, and Alexius
Ducas, the most Active, but not nearest, Prince of the blood. These, meeting
together, much bemoaned themselves, till Mamalus counting such puling passion
beneath Masculine Spirits, thus uttered himself.

30. You late adorers of Andronicus, who did conceive it would pose the power
of heaven to cure the State, save oncly by his hand, be An Dom. 1181.
your own Judges, whether it be not just that they should dye of the Physic
who made a God of the Physician. Diseases do but their kind, if they kill,
and, an evil expected, is the less evil: But no such Torment as to die of
the remedy: Only one help is left us, if secretly and speedily pursued. We
know, Isaacius Angelus by birth and merit is entitled to the Crown. True, he
lives privately in a Covent, but worth cannot be hid, it shines in the dark;
and Greatness does best become them to wear it, by whom it is found, before
it is sought for, as more deserved then desired by them: say not that he is of
too mild a disposition; for, his soft temper will make the beter Pultis for
our sore necks, long gauled with the yoke of Tyranny. And seeing we have thus
long been unhappy under the extremities, the childe-hood of Alexius, An. Dom.
1181.
and old years of Andronicus, let us try our Fortunes under the middle age of
Isaacius: And no doubt we shall light on the blessed mean and happy temper of
Moderation.

31. The motion found entertainment beyond belief. And yet Alexius Ducas
offered it to their consideration; that so meek a Dove would never make good
Eagle: Giving a Character, how a Prince should be accomplished with valor and
experience, by insinuation designing himself. It is pleasant to hear a proud
man speaking modestly in his own praise, whilst the Auditors affect a wilful
deafness, and will not hear his whispering, and slenting expressions, till
at last he is feign to hollow downright Selfe-flattery into their Ears.
Here it fared thus with Ducas, who thereby only, exposed himself An. Dom. 1181.
to contempt: and perceiving no success, zealously concurred with the rest for
advancing of Isaacius. All necessary particulars were politiquely contrived,
each one had his task appointed him: some, to seize on the ships, others, to
secure the Palace, make good the great Church: and the whole model was
exactly methodized, considering the vast Volumne thereof, which consisted of
many persons of quality therein engaged.

The Fourth Book.
1. BUT, great designs, An. Dom. 1182
like wounds, if they take Arie, corrupt. This project, against Andronicus,
could not be covertly carried, because consisting of a medly of persons, of
different tempers, and un-suiting souls, having private intents, to
themselves, not cordial, uniting their affections, but only Friends, for the
time being, against the common Foe: So that, through the Riftes, and chinks of
their several aims and ends, which could not be joynted close together, the
vigilancie of Andronicus An. Dom. 1182.
did steal a glymps of their design, apprehensive enough to light a candell
for himself form the spark of the smallest discovery.

2. And now, let him alone to prevent their proceedings, by cutting both them
and theirs off (that no mindful heir might succeed to their spite) and that
with all posible speed; for he steered his actions, by the compass of that
character, which one made of him, as follows.

I love at leisure, favors to bestow:
And tickle men by dropping kindness slow,
But my revenge, I in one instant spend,
That moment which begings it, does it end.
Half doing undoe's many, it is a sin
Not to be soundly sinful; to begin,
And tire; I Will do the work. They strike in vain,
Who strike so, that the stricken might complain.
.3 Mamalus was the first who was brought to Execution, on this manner. A mighty
fire was An. Dom. 1182.
made, and to provoke the Tyranny thereof (as if that pure Element of it self
had been too fine and slender, effectually to torment him) they made the flame
more stiff, and stuffie, by the mixture of pitch and brimstone. Then Mamalus
was brought forth stark naked, insomuch that all ingenuous beholders, out of a
modest Sympathy, conceived, that they saw themselves naked, in seeing him: and
therefore, (as much as lay in their power) they covered him, by shutting their
eyes. When the Soldiers with Pikes, were provided to thrust Mamalus into the
fire, whilst many Spectatours durst not express their pity to him, out of
pity to themselves; lest commiserating of him, should be understood complying
with him; but were cautious to confine their An. Dom. 1182.
Compassion, within the Compass of their breast, that it should not sallie
forth, into their eyes, and outward gestures.

4. Betwixt this Dilemma of Deaths, the sharp Pikes of the Soldiers on the one
side, and fury of the fire, on the other; he preferred the former, not as most
honorable, and best complying with a military Soul; (not being at leisure
alasle, in time of torment, to stand on terms of credit,) but as least
painful. But the Soldiers denied him this choice, and forced him into the
fire; and then hearing his Shreekes, even those who refused, out of favor, to
give any pity to his person, could not, out of justice, deny the payment of
some compassion, (bound there-unto, by the Specialtie of Humanity) unto his
miserable condition.

5. Mean time, Andronicus An. Dom. 1182.
was a spectatour, tickling himself with delight, only offended, that the
sport was so short, and Mamalus dead too soon. The stench of whose burning
flesh (offensive to others) was a perfume to him, who had the Roman-Nose of
Caligula, Nero, Domitian, and such Monsters of cruelty. And, as he pleased his
own Smell, with the Odor of Revenge; his Sight, with beholding the execution;
his Ear with the Music of his enemies dying Groans: So, there wanted not
those that wished, that his other Senses, were also employed, according to his
deserts, his Touch, and Taste, that they migh feelingly partake of the torture
of the fire. Thus died Mamalus, scarce twenty four years of Age, before the
Bud of his youth had opened into a flower; having in his parts, not only
promises, An. Dom. 1182.
but some Assurance, that the hopes of his future worth, should be plentifully
performed, had not this untimely Accident prevented it.

6. Lapardas acted next on the Scaffold, though not condemned todeath, but to
have his Eyes bored out: His Extraction was Noble, State Great, Pride greater;
to maintain which, he contrived the Advancing of Andronicus to the Throne: the
under ground Foundation of whose Greatness, was closely laid, by Lapardas,
whilst he left the vilible Structure thereon, to others. Like a Mole he
conveyed his train, closly spurring on Basilius (who posted of himself,) to Act
in odious Projects, whilst himself sculk't unseen; hoping, if matters held,
to be rewarded by Andronicus, for his secret Service; if they miscarried, to
provide for his own safety; seeing none could challenge him, An. Dom. 1182.
of any appearing open ill Action, wherein he was engaged.

7. But quickly he fell off of his speed in serving Andronicus, whether,
because he conceived his deserts found not a proportionable Reward: or, because
he bare a love to the person of Alexius: or, because he was not perfectly bad,
and fainting in the way of wickedness, could not keep pace therein, with the
fast and wide strides of Andronicus: or, which is most probable, he slowly
perceived his Error, that Tyrants pluck down those stairs, whereby they
ascend to their greatness: and then, too late, began to unravell, what he
weaved beforer. True it was, he had assisted Andronicus, so long, that he had
offended all the side of Isaacius, and had deserted him so soon, that he
dis-ingaged all the party of Andronicus, and so was unhappy, not to have the
An. Dom. 1182.
cordial Affections of either.

8. On the Scaffold he spoke little, expecting that the pain would kill him,
confessing he owed a Death, to Nature, and a violent Death, to Justice, and
forgave all the world, save his own self. Beholding the Sun; Farewell (said
he) Life of my life, my night must be at my noone; and then laying his hands
on his eyes: Must I loose you thus? was it because I shot forth wanton Glances?
Or, beheld Rivalls, with envious looks? Or, adored the Shine of gold; that I
must thus lose you? Or, was it, because I acted in a dark way, to advance the
cruelty of a Tyrant; that now all my endeavors are seen by the world, and I
must be blind? However, Gods justice appears clearest to me, in the loss of
my Eyes. Thus was Lapardas tortured: and though some may think An. Dom. 1182.
that Andronicus swerved from his Principle, taking away only light, not life,
from him, and thereby rather more en raging him for, than wholly disabling him
from, revenge; yet we may be assured, that Tyrant did never so do his works
by the half, but that he struck out their Teeth, whose Eyes he bored out, so
securing their persons, that he put them past power of doing him mischief.

9. During this raging cruelty of Andronicus; we may commend, in Theodorus the
Patriark, rather his success, than Policy, (his simple goodness being
incapable of the later) who seasonably withdrew himself from Constantinople,
to a private place he had provided in the Isle of Terebynthus: here he had
built him an handsome house, equally An. Dom. 1182.
distant from Envy and Contempt, Bravery and Baseness, so that if Security
and sweetness had had a mind to dwell together, they could not have found a
fitter place for that purpose. Several Reasons moved him to his speedy
removal, besides the avoiding the fury of Andronicus. First, because Basilius
undermined him at the Court in his Patriarkship, Theodosius being absent
thence, when present there; bearing only the name and blame, when the other
had the power and profit thereof.

10. Secondly, to avoid the sight of People, conceiving every Eye which did
behold, did accuse him, as a principal cause of their miseries, for helping
Andronicus to the Empire. In whom Theodorus had been strangely mistook, as the
best An. Dom. 1182.
men are soonest deceived with the painted Piety, and pensive looks of
Hypocrites, counting all Gold that shines, all sooth, that is said; betrayed by
their own charity into a good opinion of others. Lastly, it grieved him to
see ignorance and impiety so rampant, base hands committing daily Rapes on the
Virgin Muses; so that they might now even ring out the Bell, for dying
learning, and sadly toll the knell for gaping Religion. Wherefore, as Divines
solemnly observe, to go off of the Bench, just before the sentence of
condemnation is pronounced upon the Malefactor; so this Patriark, perceiving
the City of Constantinople, Cast, by her own guiltiness, and by the
confession of her crying sins against her self; thought it not fit for him to
stay there, till divine Justice should An. Dom. 1182.
pass a final fatal doom upon the place, (which he every minute expected)
but embraced this private opportvnity of departure.

11. Soon after his retiring, he ended his life: we not enquire into his
decease, if we consider his age, accounting now fourscore and four Winters.
And well might his years be reckoned by Winters, as wanting both Springs, and
Summers of Prosperity, living in constant affliction. And yet the last four
years, made more wounds in his heart, than all the former, plowed wrinkles in
his face. He dyed not guilty of any wealth, who long before, had made the
poor, his Heirs, and his own hands, his Executors. After hearty Prayers,
that Religion might shine when he was set, falling into a pious Meditation; he
An. Dom. 1182.
went out as a Lamp, for lack of Oil: no warning Groan was sighed forth to
take his last farewell, but even he smiled himself into a Corpse; enough to
confute those, that they belly death, who call her grim and grizely; which in
him seemed lovely and of a good Complexion. The few servants he left,
proportioned the Funeral, rather to their Masters Estate, than Deserts,
supplying in their sorrow, the want of Spices and Balm, which surely must be
so much the more precious, as the Tears of men are to be preferred before
Gums, which are but the weeping of Trees.

12. The Patriarks place was quickly supplied by Basilus the Bishop, so often
mentioned, preferred to the place by the Emperor. A Patron and Chaplain
excellently met; for what one An. Dom. 1182.
made Law, by his List; the other endeavored to make Gospel, by his Learning.
In stating of any Controversy, Basilius first studied to find out, what
Andronicus intended or desired to do therein: and then, let him alone to draw
that Scripture, which would not come of it self, to prove the lawfulness of
what the other would practice. Thus, in favor of him, he pronounced the
legality of two most incestuous matches; and this Grecian Pope, gave him a
dispensation to free him from all Oaths of Allegiance, which he had formerly
sworn to Manuel or Alexius: for this was the Humor of Andronicus, to have
Religion along with him, so far as it lay in his way, courting the company of
pious pretense, (if possibly they might be procured) to countenance his
designs: But An. Dom. 1182.
in case they were so foul, that no gloss of Justice could be put upon them;
he disdained that Piety which would not befriend him, and impudently acted
his pleasure in open opposition of all Religion.

13. But whilst this Basilius was thus hot about his secular affairs; there
wanted not an aged Hermit, who took him to task, and soundly told him his
own, though it made but small impression in him. Meeting him at advantage;
Hermites, you know, says he, hate both Luxury and Complement. In plain truth,
I must chide you, that seeing, earth is but your Inn, and heaven your Home;
you mistake the first, for the latter. Man's soul is so intent on its present
object, that it is impossible, it should attend two callings at the same time,
but must needs make default in the pursuance An. Dom. 1182.
of one of them. Your temporal intermedling draws the envy of the Laity, for
whose love you should rather labor. Nor are you stored with foreign
Observations, really to enable you for such undertakings. Say not that you may
meddle with temporal State-affaires, and yet not entangle your self with
them, seeing the world is such a Witch, it is impossible to do the one without
the other. Observe those Clergy-sticklers on the Civil Stage, and you shall
seldom find them Crowned with a quiet death. Remember your Predecessor
Chrysostom, who did only Pray, and Preach, and Read, and Write, thereby made
happy in the despite of his Enemies: For though twice expelled his
Patriarkship, he was twice restored with greater honor: so that it was not
want of Policy, which lost, An. Dom. 1182
but store of Piety, which caused him to recover his place again. I speak not
this, out of any repining at the luster of your preferment, who envy outward
Honor no more than the shining of a Glo-worme, but merely out of love to your
person, and desire of your happiness.

14. But Basilius, in some passion returned, I perceive you are lately broken
loose out of your Cell, which makes you more fierce and keen, like Hawks when
they are first un-hooded, and newly restored to the light. Know, Sir, one may
well attend two Callings, if they be sub-ordinate, as the means and the end.
All my secular Business is in order to the good of the Church. The love of the
Laity unto us, without some awe mingled with it, can neither be long-lasting,
or much serviceable. My Education has admitted An. Dom. 1182.
me into general Learning, and made me capable of any employment. I deny not
the World to be a Witch, but I know how to arm my soul with holy Spells
against all her Enchantments. Whereas you say, one cannot meddle with worldly
matters, but must entangle himself therewith, it is all one, as if you should
affirm, that a temperate man cannot eat meat but he must surfeit. Proofs
from the event, argue not the justice or injustice of the Act; and nothing can
be inferred from the ill success of our meddling in secular affairs. To your
instance of Chrysostom, I oppose the example of Augustine Bishop of Hippo, who
set in full brightness, and yet kept a Court in his own house, where he umpir'd
and decided all temporal controversies. You trample on that which you call
pride in me, with that which An. Dom. 1182.
is so in your self. And all this proceeds out of spite, because you cannot
turn your Cowle into a Mitre.

15. But Basilius was deaf to all these persuasions, and joining with
Hagio-christophorites Stephanus, (chief Enginier for Andronicus) advanced all
cruel designs. And now Mamalus and Lapardus being executed, all others were
possessed with a Panick fear: and no wonder when the string is broken, if the
Beads be scattered. It being feared, that the Plot miscarryed, they strove to
make themselves innocent, by first making others guilty. And yet it was vain
to take the pains who should start quickest, when they all met even at the
Post: For Andronicus took order that they were all alike executed.

16. There were two of his Creatures, Trypsycus, and Hagiochristophorites An.
Dom. 1182.
Stephanus, who only fell out, who should be most officious to him: Each had
the other in jealousy, fearing his Rival would engrosse the Emperor unto
him. Especially, Stephanus, was fearful of Trypsycus; understanding that
Andronicus wrote private Letters unto him, stiling him, his Beloved friend,
with other expressions, which spoke more intimacy than Stephanus was willing to
hear. This Trypsycus had been a dangerous Promoter in all company,
Representing to Andronicus every syllable spoken against him, to the
disadvantage of the speaker: and as one says, (I conceive rather in the
Language of the times, than his own) Every man then was to give an account of
every idle Word. It happened therefore that one An. Dom. 1182.
was procured, who accused TRYPSYCUS for jeering of JOHN the Emperors eldest
Son for Deformed, and that he scattered some loose expressions* bewailing the
Misery of the Times. Now, though the grear Service which TRYPSYCUS had done,
might deserve to over-weigh so light an Offense; it cost him his Life,
Confiscation of his goods and Ruin of his Posterity.

17. Now has STEPHANUS room to Domineere alone in the favor of ANDRONICUS,
sending him to seize on ISAACIUS, who for the present was got out of his
Covent. It was past the skill of the Spannel to catch him, who dived for the
instant, but we shall find him in due time above water, and that to purpose.

The fifth Book.
1. SECURITY is the An. Dom. 1183.
Mother of danger, and the Grandmother of destruction. Let ANDRONICUS be a
proof hereof, who now, nearest to his ruin, grew most confident, as
conceiving he had stopp't every cranny, where danger might creep in, and
therefore in a bravery, he sent a defiance to Fortune her self, which
notwithstanding, was returned with his own speedy overthrow.

2. Yet could he not justly complain, that he was suddenly surprised, seeing
Nature might seem to have gone out of her An. Dom. 1183.
way, to give him warning, and Nemesis did not hunt him so fast, but that she
allowed him fair Law to provide for himself, by several Prodigies which
happened at that time. But Andronicus, not only against the full intent, but
almost visible meaning, of the same Accidents, did make a jesting Construction
of them, and and was deaf to the loud language of all ominous passages, as not
relating unto him.

3. Being told of the apparition of a Comet, (no leiger-starre of Heaven, but
an extraordiany Ambassador) portending his death, as some expounded it; he
skoffingly replied, that he was glad to see the heavens so merry, to make
Bone-fires, for his Triumphs: And what was a Comet, but the Kitchin-stuffe of
the air, which blazing for a while, would go out in An. Dom. 1183.
a snuff: Adding, that that Star might presage the fall of some Prince, that
wore long hair, whereas, his was short enough. When another told him of an
Earthquake, which had lately happened; I am glad, says he, that the
Mother-Earth, sick of of the Colic, had so good a vent for a wind: Being
informed that the Statue of Saint Paul, (his Titulary Saint) was seen to weep;
he evaded the sad presage thereof, by distinguishing on Tears, therebeing an
Harmony in their language, as bearing not only different, but contrary Senses,
proceeding either from Mirth or Mourning; and therefore, that weeping might
probably fore-shew good success. In a word; All serious and solemn Omens, he
tuned to a jesting meaning, keeping himself constant to his first principle;
An. Dom. 1183.
That, Fortune; when feared, is a Tyrant; when, scorned, is a Coward. But,
though he unjustly perverted the sense of these Prodigies; the event did
truly interpret them in his destruction.

4. For Isaacius Angelus persecuted by the Executioner, fled into the great
Church, (in those days, the Sanctuary at large for Innocents) where, making an
Oration to the people, he exceeded Expectation, and himself; as if hitherto he
had thriftily reserved his worth (a serious, others say, simple man) to spend
it more freely when occasion required it. He spoke not like those mercenary
people, which make their tongue, their ware, and Eloquence, their Trade; but,
he uttered himself so pathetically, that he did not court Attention, but
command it. He An. Dom. 1183.
made both his Innocence, and the cruelty of Andronicus, to appear so plain,
that the people not only afforded him, protection for the present; but also,
bestowed on him Sovereignty for the future, and instantly elected, and
proclaimed him, Emperor of Greece.

5. Stand we here still, and wonder what should be the Reason, that Andronicus
should suffer this Isaacius, next Prince of the blood, so long safely to
survive, who had cut off other Persons of less danger, and lower degree. We
cannot ascribe it to his incogitancy, as inconsistent with his vast memory, to
forget a matter of such importance; less can we impute it to his Pity, as if
sparing him out of compassion: seeing that a Thread might sooner hope to be
prolonged under An. Dom. 1183.
the knife of of Atropos, than any to find favor under his impartial
cruelty. Was it not then because he had him in his power? and counting
himself sure to seize on him at pleasure; reserved him, as Sweet-meat, to
close his stomach, when first he had fed on several Dishes of courser Diet:
Or, because he slighted him, as a narrow-hearted man, religiously bred in a
Covent, unfit for a Camp, the object rather of his contempt, than fear; for
that his hands might seem tied with his Beads, from being dangerously active,
in the State. But, let us remove our wondering at this neglect of Andronicus, to
make room for our admiration of divine Providence, who confounded this
Politician in his own cunning. Thus the most expert Gamsters may sometimes
over-see; and, Traitors, though they be careful An. Dom. 1183.
to cut down all Trees, which hinder their ambitious Prospect; will unawares
leave one still standing, whereof their own Gallows may be made.

6. Immediately all the Prisons in the City were set open, and those petty
sinks of dissolute people emptied themselves into a common Sewer, and became
into a tumultuous Torrent. Headlong they haste to the Palace of Andronicus,
where, not finding him at home, they wreckt their spite upon that beautiful
building, and sumptuous furniture therein. Should I insist upon particulars,
all sorts of Readers would be sadded therewith. Ladies would lament the loss
of so many Pearls and precious stones, whose very Cases were Jewels.
Soldiers bemoane the spoiling of so magnificent an Armorie. But Scholars
would be most passionate, to An. Dom. 1183.
bewail the want of that Library so full fraught with rarities, that nothing
abated the Pretiousnesse, but the Plenty of them. Many Records, (the Stairs
whereby Antiquaries climb up into the knowledge of former times) were torn in
pieces, though we need not believe them so old, as that some of them had
escaped Noah's flood, and were now drowned in a popular Deluge.

7. Nothing was preserved whole and entire. Whether, because they pretended
some Religion in Revenge, as not aiming, out of Covetousness, to enrich
themselves, but, out of Justice, to punish the Tyrant; or because they thought
the very Goods of Andronicus, were become evil, guilty of their owners faults;
and therefore were all to be abolished as execrable: An. Dom. 1183.
yea, as if the very Chapel it self, which he had built, had been
un-hallowed, by the Profaneness of the Founder; with all the Utensils
thereof, it was defaced. A stately Structure it was, ANDRONICUS not being of
their opinion, who conceiving an holy horror to live in dark and humble
Cells; fancy not Triumphant Churches, for fear that their Hearts be there
lost in their Eyes. But he professed his Devotion to rise with the roof of the
Church; so that his soul seemed to anticipate heaven, by beholding the Earnest
thereof in a beautiful Temple. However, now his Chapel was laid flat to the
ground; and, amongst other things therein, of inestimable value, the Letter,
which, by tradition, was reported to be written by Christ's own hands, to
Abgarus King of Edessa, An. Dom. 1183.
then was embezeled. So irresistible is the Tyrany of a Tumult; and therefore,
it may be all good men's Prayers, that the People may either never understand
their own Power, or always use it a-right.

8. Andronicus, as we said before, had secretly conveyed himself away. Who
would not have thought, but that this great Fencer should have been provided of
variety of Guards, against all the crosseblows of Fortune; at least, to have
had some impregnable place, near hand, to retire unto? Whereas he had no
other Policy to escape, than that poor shift, which the silly simple Hare uses
against the Hounds, by flying before them. Indeed, had the Conspiracy against
Andronicus, been but local, or partial, so that he had had any sound part to
begin on, he would probably An. Dom. 1183.
have made resistance, (as Physicians must have some strength of Nature in
their Patient, to practice on;) but the defection from him was so general and
universal, he found not any effectual friend left him. Only he had scrap't
together a mass of Coin, more trusting in money, than men hoping, in
foreign parts, to buy some friends therewith; knowing that Gold, if weight,
is current in all Countries. Then taking Anna his Empress, and Maraptica his
whore, with some few servants, he durst confide in, and the Treasure he had
formerly provided; he made speed, in a Pinnace, through the black Sea, to the
Tauro-Scythians, out of the bounds of his Empire, hoping there to live in
quiet. And because we have mentioned Anna the Empress, we cannot pass her by
in silence. An. Dom. 1183
For if one would draw a map of misery, to pair like years, with like
mis-hap, it is hard to find a fitter Pattern.

9. Daughter she was to the King of France, being married a child (having
little list to love, and less, to aspire) to the young Emperor Elexius, whilst
both their years, put together, could not spell Thirty. After this, she had
time too much, to bemoane, but, none at al, to amend, her condition, being
slighted and neglected by her husband. Oft-times, being alone (as sorrow loves
no witness) having room, and leisure to bewail her self, she would relate
the Chronicle of her unhappiness, to the Walls, as hoping to find pity, from
stones, when men proved unkind unto her. Much did she envy the felicity of
those Milk-maids, which each morning pass over An. Dom. 1183.
the Virgin-dew, and Pearledgrasse, sweetly singing by day, and soundly
sleeping at night, who had the privilege freely to bestow their affections,
and wed them, which were high in love, though low in condition: Whereas, Royal
Birth had denied her that happiness, having neither liberty to choose, nor
leave to refuse; being compelled to love, and sacrificed to the Politic ends
of her potent Parents.

10. But Anna, unhappy at her first Voyage, hoped to better her Condition by a
second Adventure; yet made more haste than good speed, marrying Andronicus some
weeks after the death of Alexius. Surely there is an Annus luctus, A year of
mourning, which the modesty of widows may do well to observe, lest
neglecting it in their widdowhood, it be required of them afterward, An. Dom.
1183.
with Interest, in the ill success of their second marriage. For, Maraptica, a
proud Harlot, but excellent Musician, justled with Anna in the Emperors
affection: (and half an old Husband was too much for a young Lady to spare)
and in process of time, prevailed to obtain violent possession. The Empress,
knowing her self honest, and amiable, stood on her Deserts; not descending to
beg that love, which she conceived due unto her, but daring him to detain it
at his own peril, seeing he wronged himself in wronging of her, forfeiting
his Troth, which he had publicly pledged unto her. But, the Curtizan, knowing
that that love needs Buttresses in Cunning, which has no foundation in
Conscience; applied her self in all particulars to be complizant An. Dom. 1183.
to the desires of Andronicus. This Maraptica, though she had fair fine
finges to play on the Lute, had otherwise foul great Clutches, to snatch,
graspe, and hold, whatsoever she could comeby. And knowing that she had but a
short Term in the Tenement of her greatness, (subject both to the mortality
and mutabilitie of Andronicus) and withal, that she was not bound to
reparations, therefore cared not what waste she made; but, by wrong and
rapine, scraped together a mass of money. Mean time, Anna was kept poor
enough; who, whilst Maid, Widow, and Wife, (twice a Bride, before once a
Woman) scarce saw a joyful day; though borne of a King, and wedded to two
Emperors.

11. But to return to Andronicus, who pursued after by his An. Dom. 1183.
guilty conscience, found no rest in himself; so that for nights, sleep was a
stranger him. He that had put out other men's eyes, could not close his own;
and when Nature in him starved, for want of rest, did at last hungerly snatch
at short slumbers: Dreams did more terrify, than sleep refresh him. His active
fancy in the night did descant on what he had done before. Sometimes, the pale
Ghost of Alexius seemed with glowing Pincers to torment him; otherwhile, Maria
Caesarissa stitcht hot burning Needles through his side; and, not long after,
two streams of reeking blood seemed to flow out of the eyes of Lapardas,
wherein Andronicus for a while seemed to swim, till, beginning to sink, to
save himself, he caught hold on his Pillow, and so did awake. An. Dom. 1183.


12. When awaked, his mind was musing upon a Prophecy, which some days since
was delivered unto him: For he had employed an Agent, unto one Seth, an old
Conjurer, to know of him what should be the name of his next successor in the
Empire. Now, first a great S. was presented in a Basin of water; and next that,
an I. but, both so doubtfully delineated, that they were hardly legible: done
on purpose for several Reasons. Because, it stood not with the state of the
Prince of Darkness, to be over-cleare in his Acts; and those that vent bad
Wares love to keep blind shops: Besides, obscurity added veneration to his
Oracles, and active Superstitious Fancies, whet with the difficulty of them,
would be sharpe-sighted to read more than was written. But the maine was An.
Dom. 1183.
to save his own credit, taking covert of Mystical Expressions, that in case
Satan should fail in his Answers, he might lay the blame on men's
understanding him.

13. Put then these two Letters together, S. I. and read them backwards I. S.
by an Hysterosis, and take a part of the whole by a Synecdoche; (all favorable
Figures must be used, to piece out the Devils short skill in future
Contingents) and then Andronicus was told by the Conjurer, he had the name of
his Successor. Ask me not why Hells Alphabet must be read backward, let Satan
give an account of his own Couz'nage; whether out of an apish imitation of the
Hebrew, which is read retrograde; or, because that ugly filthy Serpent, (...)
Crawls Cancer-like, or to make his Answers the more An. Dom. 1183.
AEnigmaticall, for the reasons aforesaid. Andronicus by this I. S. understood
I Saurus Comnenus, who lately, by Usurpation, had set up a Kingdom in the Isle
of Cyprus, and therefore always observed him with a jealous eye, and now too
late perceives his error, and finds the Prophecy performed in Isaacius
Angelus.

14. Thus, those that are correspondents with the Devil, for such
Intelligence, have need when they have received the text of his Answers, to
borrow his Comment too, lest otherwise they mistake his meaning. And, men may
justly take heed of Curiosity, to know things to-come; which is one of the
kernells of the forbidden Fruit, and even in our Age sticks still in the
throats of too many, even to the danger of choking them, if it be not warily
prevented. An. Dom. 1183.


15. Hitherto, what disasters had happened to Andronicus, might partly be
imputed to men, and second causes: Whereas now, divine Justice, to have its
power praised in its punishmens, seemed visibly to put out a hand from heaven;
and he wants eyes, that cannot, or shuts them, that will not, behold it. See
now the Gally, wherein he sailed, having having all the Canvas thereof,
employed with a prosperous Wind, when suddenly it was checked in the full
speed, and beaten back with foul weather into a small Harbor, called Chele.
Soon after, the winds serving again, he set forth the second time, and had
not made many leagues, when Neptune with his Trident thrust him back again;
such was the violence of the Seas against him. A third time An. Dom. 1183.
he set forth with a fair Gale, when instantly, the wind changing, forced him
to return. Here, what tugging, what Towing, what Rowing! nothing was omitted,
which Art, or Industry, Skill, or Will, could perform: Andronicus dropping a
shower of Gold to the Sailors, to reward the Sweat that fell from them. All in
vain; For as, indeed, he had offended the Fire, with the Innocents he burnt
therein: angered the Air, with hundreds of Carcasses, which therein he had
caused to be hanged: provoked the Earth, by burying men alive, in her Bosom;
So, most of all he had enraged the Water against him, (now mindful of his
Injuries) by him made a Charnellhouse, and general Grave, into An. Dom. 1183.
which, the body of the young Emperor ALEXIUS was cast, with thousands of his
Subjects. God, herein to prevent all mis-constructions of Casuality (which
otherwise men might fasten upon it,) and knowing that men are slow in their
Apprehensions, and dull in their Memory to learn the Lessons of his Justice,
he re-iterated and repeated it three several times, that the most blockish
Scholar, might learn it perfectly by heart: This is the work of the Lord,
and it may justly seem mavelous in our eyes. Thus ANDRONICUS was, the third
time, sent back to the place from whence he came, and so to the place of
Execution. For he was no sooner come to the shore, but Servants, employed by
ISAACIUS, An. Dom. 1183.
(who had waylaid all the Ports on the Black Sea) stood ready to Arrest him.

The Sixth Book.
1. ANDRONICUS hahaving An. Dom. 1183.
now left him neither Army to fight, or legs to fly; (being in the
possession of his Enemies) betook himself to his Tongue, bemoaning his Case,
and with Tears begging their favor. But those Eyes, which, weeping in jest,
had mocked others so often, could not now be trusted, that they were in
earnest. The storm at Land was more implacable than the tempest at Sea. Two
heavy Iron Chains were put about his neck, (in Mettle An. Dom. 1183.
and weight, different from them he wore before) and laden with Fetters and
Insolences from the Soldiers; (who, in such Ware, seldom give scant measure)
he was brought into the presence of Isaacius. Here the most merciful and
moderate contented themselves with Tongue-revenge, calling him Dog of
uncleanness, Goat of Lust, Tygre of Cruelty, Religions Ape, and Envies
Basilisk. But, others pulled him by the Beard, twitch't the hair left by Age
on his head, and proceeding from depriving him of Ornamentall Execrements,
dashed out his teeth, put out one of his eyes, cut off his right hand; and thus
maimed, without Surgeon to dress him, man to serve him, or meat to feed him,
he was sent to the public Prison amongst Thieves and Robbers. An. Dom. 1183


2. All these were but the beginning of evil unto him. Some days after, with
a shaved head crowned with Garliek, he was set on a scab'd Cammell, with his
face backwards, holding the Tail thereof for a Bridle, and was led clean
through the City. All the Cruelties which he in two years and upwards, had
committed upon several persons, were now abbreviated and Epitomized on him, in
as large a Character, as the shortness of the time would give leave, and the
subject it self was capable of: they burnt him with Torches and Firebrarnds,
tortured him with Pincers, threw abundance of dirt upon him; and withal, such
filthiness, that the Reader would stop his Nose, if I should tell him the
composition thereof; it is enough to say, that the worst thing that comes from
An. Dom. 1183.
Man, was the best in the mixture thereof.

3. Such as consult with their Credit will be cautious how they report
improbable Truths, fearing they will not be received for. Truths, but rejected
for improbable. Efpecially in this Age, wherein men resume their Liberty,
conceiving it against the privilege of their judgments, to have their
Belief, (which should be a Voluntary) pressed by the authority of others, to
give credit to what bears not Proportion with Likelihood. Could an old man
(such as Andronicus was) pass the age of man, threescore and ten, who now
only lived by the courtesy of Death to spare him, endure such pain, three
miles, through so populous a City? The Poets only feigned Atlas to be weary of
carrying of Heaven; but, must not An. Dom. 1183.
our Andronicus be either stifled for want of breath, or back-broken with store
of weight, under so much earth thrown upon him? And was it possible, that He,
who, before these times, had one foot in the grave, should have the other not
follow after, when driven with such cruelty?

4. To render this likely, we may consider; first, that it was the intent of
the People, not to kill, but to torment him. Secondly, when one Dish is to go
clean through a Table of Guests, men are mannerly; all, take some, though none,
enough. Besides, he was one of a strong Constitution, whose Brawny flesh Nature
had knit together with Horny Nerves. And yet, had he been a weak man; a Candle
with glimmering light will burn long in a Socket, being thrifty of it self.
Life was sweet to Andronicus, An. Dom. 1183.
under all those noisome smells; and he would not part with it, whilst he
could keep it. But what was the maine, it was possible God might support his
life, either out of Justice, or mercy. (And, we read in Revel. 9. verse 6.
Scripture, of Men, that they shall desire to dye, and death shall flee from
them.) I say not of Justice, visibly to acquit himself, in the eyes of the
world, by making such a Monster, the open Mark for Man's Revenge; or out of
mercy, giving him a long and large time of Repentance, if he had the
happiness to make use thereof

5. Behold here a strange Conflict, betwixt the Cruelty of the People on the
one side, and the Patience of Andronicus on the other; and yet an indifferent
Umpire would adjudge the Victory to the latter: No raging, no An. Dom. 1183.
Raving, no Muttering, no Repining; but swallowed all in Silence: Only he
cried out, Lord have mercy upon me: And, Why break ye a bruised Reed! and
sensible of his own guiltiness, he seemed contented to pass his Purgatory
here, that so hec might escape Hell hereafter.

6. After multitudes of other Cruelties, tedious to us to rehearse, (and how
painful then to him to endure!) he was hanged by the Heels betwixt two
Pillars: In this posture; He put the stump of his right Arm, whose wound
bleeded afresh, to his mouth, so to quench (as some suppose) the extremity of
his thirst, with his own Blood, having no other moisture allowed him. When one
ran a Sword thorough his Back and Belly, so that his very Entralls were seen,
and seemed to call (though in An. Dom. 1183.
vain) on the Bowels of the Spectators, to have some compassion upon him. At
last, with much a-doe, his soul (which had so many doors opened for it) found
a passage, out of his body, into another world.

7. Hear, how one of great * Learning, is charitably opinioned a Drexeli us
upon eternity, 5. Consideration. p. 147
of his final Estate, making this Apostrophe to his Ghost: Oh, ANDRONICUS! Oh
thou Emperor of the East! how much wast thou bound unto God, whose will it
was, that for a few days thou should suffer such things, that thou might
not perish for ever! Thou wast miserable for a short time, that thou might
not be miserable for all eternity. I make no doubt, but thou had the years
of Eternity in mind, seeing that thou did suffer such things so constantly,
and courageously.

8. But does not so strong An. Dom. 1183.
charity argue a weak judgment? Despair it self may presume of salvation, if
such an-one was saved. How improperly did he usurp that Expression, comparing
himself to a Matt. 12. v. 20.
Bruised Reed, when, another Scriptureresemblance was more applyable unto him,
of a Isai. 58. v. 6.
Bul-rush bowing down his head; only top-heavy for the present, with sense of
suffering, not inwardly contrited in heart, for the sins he had committed.
Must not true Repentance have a longer season to ripen it, and by works
ensuing, to avouch to the world the sincerity thereof? Insomuch that, of late,
some affirm that the good Thief on the Cross did not then first begin, but
first renew his Repentance, lately interrupted by a fellonious Act. Allow
Andronious for a Saint; and we shall people Heaven with a new An. Dom. 1183.
Plantation of Whores and Thieves. (how volumnious will the Book of Martyrs
be, if Pain alone does make them!)

9. On the other side, we must be wary, how, in our Censures, we shut
Heaven-doore against any Penitents. Far be it from us to distrust the power
of Gods mercy, or to deny the efficacy of true (though late) Repentance: the
last groan which divorces the soul from the body, may unite it to God: though
the Arm of his body was cut off, the Hand of his faith might hold. All that I
will add is this, if Andronicus his soul went to Heaven, it is pity that any
should know of it, lest they be encouraged to imitate the wicked Premises of
his life, hoping by his Example to obtain the same happy Conclusion after
death.

10. After his Execution, the An. Dom. 1183.
tide of the Peoples fury did turn, who began to love his memory, and lament
his Loss: Such as before were blinded with Prejudice against him, could now
clearly see many good deeds he had done for the Public, and began to recount
with themselves, many Sovereigne Laws, which he had enacted: some bemoaned
the misery which he had endured, as if his punishment was over-proportion'd to
his deserts. Whether this pity proceeded out of that general humor of men,
never to value things till they are lost; or, because their revenge had
formerly surfeted upon him, and now began to disgorge it self again; Or,
which is most probable, this Compassion arose from the mutability and
inconstancy of humane Nature, which hates always to be imprisoned in one and
the same An. Dom. 1183.
mind; but being in constant Motion through the Zodiac of all Passions, will
not stay long in the same Sign; and sometimes goes from one Extremity to
another.

11. By this time Isaacius was brought by Basilius the Patriarch unto the
Throne, and placed thereon with all solemnity: then the Crown was put upon his
head, on the top whereof was a Diamond-Crosse, (greatness and Care are twins)
which Isaacius kissed: I welcome thee, said he, though not as a stranger, who
have been acquainted with Crosses from my Cradle: Thou art both my Sword and my
Shield; for hitherto I have conquered with suffering. Then weighing the Crown
in his hand; it is (faith he) a beautiful burden, which loads, more than it
adornes.

12. Here Basilius the Patriark An. Dom 1183.
made a Sermon-like Oration unto him, which, as it was uttered with much
Gravity, so it was heard with no less Attention, and embraced by the Emperor,
with great Thankfulness. Not presuming, Sir, to teach you what you do not know,
I am incited by my Calling, and encouraged by your Clemency, to put you in
mind, of what otherwise you may forget. This Crown and Scepter were sent you
from Heaven; only we have done our duty in delivering them unto you. And now
me thinks, that Divine Majesty perfectly shines in You his Image. These our
Eyes upheld, and folded hands, and bared heads, and bended knees are due from
us to God, and we pay them to him, by paying them to you his Receiver. And we
doubt not, but you will improve the Power and Honor bestowed on you, for the
protection An. Dom. 1183.
of the people committed unto you.

13. In a man's body, whilst natural Heat and radical Moisture, observe their
limits; all is preserved in health: if either exceedes their bounds, the body
either drownes, or burns. It fares thus in the constitution of the State,
betwixt your Power, and our Prosperity; whilst both agree, they support one
another: but, if they fall out, about Masterie, even that which over-comes,
will be destroyed in a general confusion. And, if you should betray your
Trust, though we bow, and bear, and sigh, and sob, armed with Prayers and
Tears; yet know, that our sad Mournings will mount into that Court, where lie
the Appeals of Subjects, and the Censures of Sovereigns, which will heavily
be inflicted by him, whom you represent. Speak I not this, An. Dom. 1183.
out of any distrust of your Justice, but out of earnest desire of your
happiness, wishing, that the greatness of Constantine, Founder of this place,
the goodness of Jovian, the success of Honorius, the long life of Valens, the
quiet death of Manuel, the immortal fame of Justinian, and what soever good
was singl'd on them, may jointly be heaped upon you, and your Posterity.

14. Hereupon followed such a shout of the people, as the oldest man present
had not heard the like; and all interpreted it as a token presaging the future
felicity of the new Emperor. And thus we have presented the Reader, with the
remarkable intricacie and perplexity of success (as if Fortune were like to
lose her self in a Labyrinth of her own making,) winding backward and
forward, within An. Dom. 1183.
the compass of five years, with more strange varieties then can easily be
paralelled in so short a continuance of time.

1. First, Alexius; no Andronicus. 2. Then, Alexius; and Andronicus. 3. Then,
Andronicus; and Alexius. 4. Then, Andronicus; no Alexius. 5. Then, Isaacius; no
Andronicus.
Thus, few strings curiously played upon by the cunning fingers of a skillful
Artist may make much Music: and Divine Providence made here a miraculous
harmony by these odd expected transpositions, tuneing all An. Dom. 1183.
to his own glory.

15. Here I intended to end our History, save that I cannot discharge my Trust,
and be faithful to the Truth, without taking some special observation of
Basilius. We cannot forget how Active an Instrument he had been to serve the
cruelty of Andronicus: and when first I looked wishly upon his hands (so busied
in wicked employments) I presently read his Fortune, that he should come to a
violent death. The old * Hermit seemed to me a 4th. Book 13. Paragr.
Prophet, to confirm me in my opinion, (when reproving him for stickling in
temporal matters) and my conjectures grew confident, that this Patriarch in
process of time, would either shake his Mitre from his head, or his head from
his shoulders. An. Dom. 1183.
And, perchance, if the ingenuous Reader would be pleased freely to confess
his thoghts therein, he was possessed with the same expectation.

16. How wide were we from the mark? how blind is Man in future Contingents?
How wise is God, in crossing our conceits, leaving the world amused with his
ways; that men finding themselves at a loss, may learn more to adore, what
they cannot understand! See Basilius, as brave, and as bright as ever; and
whilst all his Fellowservants had their wages paid them by Andronicus, (some
made longer in their Necks, others shorter by their Heads) He alone survives in
Health and Honor: which made most to admire, what peculiar Antidote of
Sovereign virtue he had An. Dom. 1183.
gotten, to preserve himself from the infectious fury of that Tyrant.

17. But that which advances this wonder into the Marks of a Miracle, is, that
this cunning Pilot, should so quickly tacke about, when the wind changed, and
ingratiate Himself with Isaacius. When times suddenly turned from Extremes;
those persons which formerly were first in favor, are cast farthest behind,
and they must be very active and industrious to recover themselves. But
Basilius by a strange Dexterity, was instantly in the front of Favorites, and,
without any abatement, carried it in as high a strain as ever before; and,
although (being weary already) I am loath to travel further into the Reign
An. Dom. 1183.
of this new Emperor, to see in the sequel thereof what became of Basilius at
last; yet, so far as I can from the best chosen Advantage discern and
discover his success; no signal Punishment, above the ordinary Standard of
Casualities, did befall Him; and, for ought appears to the contrary, he dyed
in his bed.

18. Of such as seriously consider this Accident, some perchance may be so
well stockt with Charity, as to conceive, that he repented of his former
Impiety; and, thereupon, was pardoned by Heaven, and came to a peaceable end.
Others may conceive, that as, when a whole Forest of Trees is felled, some
aged, eminent, Oak, by the highways side, may be suffered to survive, as
An. Dom. 1183
useless for Timber, because decayed; yet, useful for a Landmarke, for the
direction of Travelers; for Basilius being now aged, and past dangerous
Activity, was preserved for the Information of Posterity, and (when all others
were cut down by cruel deaths,) he left alone to instruct the ensuing age of
the Tragical passage which had happened in his Remembrance. But the most
solid, and judicious will express themselves in the language of the 1 Timothy 5.
24.
Apostle, Some men's sins are open beforehand, going before to judgment, and
some men's follow after. All notorious offenders are not publicly branded in
the World with an infamous Character of shame or pain: but some carry their
sins concealed, and receive the reward for them in another An. Dom. 1183.
world.

19. It only remains, that we now give the personal dedescription of
Andronicus, so far forth as it may be collected from the few extant Authors
which have written thereof.

I. His Stature.
HE was higher then the ordinary sort of Men. He was seven full feet in length
(if there be no mistake in the difference of the measure.) And whereas, often
the Cock-loft is empty, in those which Nature has built many stories high; his
head was sufficiently stored with all Abilities.

II. His Temper.
OF a most healthful Constitution, of a lively Color, and vigorous Limbs, so
that he was used to say, that he could endure the violence of any Disease for a
Twelvemonth together by his sole natural strength, without being beholding to
Art, or any assistance of Physic.

III. His Learning.
HE had a quick Apprehension, and solid judgment, and was able on any
emergent occasion, to speak rationally on any Controversy in Divinity. He
would not abide to hear any Fundamental Point of Religion brought into
question; insomuch, that when once two Bishops began to contend about the
meaning of that noted place, My Father is greater than I am; Andronicus
suspecting that they would fall foul upon the Arrian Heresy, vowed to throw
them both into the River, except they would be quiet, A way to quench the
hottest Disputation, by an in-artificiall Answer, drawn from such Authority.

IIII. His Wives.
FIRST, Theodora Commenia, Daughter of Isaacius Sebabasto Crator, his nearest
kinswoman; so that the Marriage was most incestuous.

The second, Anna, Daughter to the King of France: of whom, largely before.

V. His lawful Issue, both by his first Wife.
JOHN COMNENIUS his eldest son. It seems he was much deformed, and his
Soul, as cruel, as his body, ugly. He assisted Hagio Christophorita-Stephanus
in the stifling of Xene.

Manuel, his second son, of a most virtuous disposition. Let those, that
undertake the ensuing History, show how both had their eyes bored out by
Isaacius.

VI. His Natural Issue.
I Meet with none of their names, and though he lived wantonly with many
Harlots, and Concubines: yet (what a Father observes) (...), Many Wives make
few children. And it may be imputed to the providence of Nature, that Monsters
(such as Andronicus) in this particular, are happy that they are Barren.

VII. His Burial.
BY public Edict it was prohibited that any should bury his body; however,
some were found, who bestowed, though not a solemn grave, yet an obscure hole
upon him, not out of pity to him, but out of love to themselves; except any
will say, that his Corpse, by extraordinary stinch, provided its own burial,
to avoid a general annoyance.

FINIS.

