The Graver here has well thy Face designed.
But no hand FULLER can express thy Mind
For That a RESURRECTION gives to those
Whom Silent Monuments did long enclose.


THE HISTORY OF THE WORTHIES OF ENGLAND, Who for Parts and Learning have been
eminent in the several COUNTIES. TOGETHER WITH An Historical NARRATIVE of the
Native Commodities and Rarities in each County. Endeavored by Thomas Fuller,
D. D.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. W. L. and W. G. for Thomas Williams, and are to be
sold at the sign of the Bible in Little Britain. MDCLXII.

TO HIS Sacred Majesty.
Most Dread Sovereign:
THE tender of these ensuing Collections is made with as much Fear and
Reverence, as it was intended with Duty and Devotion by the Author whilst
living. The Obligation that lies upon me to endeavor him all right, forced me
unto this presumption. It is the first voice I ever uttered in this kind, and I
hope it will be neither displeasing to Your MAJESTY, or blamed by the World;
whilst (not unlike that of the Son of Croesus) it sounds Loyalty to my
Sovereign, and Duty to my Father.

The matter of this Work, for the most part, is the description of such native
and peculiar Commodities as the several Counties of Your Kingdom afford, with a
revival of the Memories of such Persons which have in each County been eminent
for Parts or Learning. If this Age abound with the like, it is their Glory; if
not, the perusal may perhaps beget in them a Noble Emulation of their
Ancestors. May Your MAJESTY'S Reign be Happy and Long, to see Your Countries
COMMODITIES improved, and Your WORTHIES multiplied.

So prays, Your MAJESTY'S meanest Subject, the Authors Orphan, JOHN FULLER.

To the Reader.
READER,
THou have here presented to thy view a Collection of the Worthies of England,
which might have appeared larger, had God spared [my dear Father] the Author
life. At his death there remained unprinted, the Bishopric of Durham, the
Counties of Derby, Dorset, Gloucester, Norfolk, Northampton, Northumberland,
Nottingham, Oxford, Rutland, with part of Kent, Devonshire, and the Cities of
London and Westminster, which now at length (according to the Copy the Author
left behind him, without the least Addition) are made public.

It is needless here to acquaint thee with the nature of the Work, it being
already fully set down in the first sixteen sheets thereof. Yet thou may be
pleased to take notice, that (although the Title promises thee only the
History of the Worthies of England) in the end there is added a short
Description of the Principality of Wales.

The discounting of Sheets (to expedite the Work at several Presses) has
occasioned the often mistake of the Folio's. What ever faults else occur in
this Impression, it is my request, that thou would score them on my want of
Care or Skill in Correcting the same, that they may not in the least reflect on
the Credit of my dead Father.

JOHN FULLER.

ERRATA.
First Book Page 27. Line 7. for mutive read mutire. l. 8. for Commoreat ^.
Commoveat. l. 13. for Proselytes r. Prose to its. Gloucestersh. Page 366. l. 6.
add, were many. l. 7. for may seem to be, r. many. London Page 213. l. 44. for
unius r. unus. l. 45. for duellum r. duellam. l. 47. for suscipiendum r.
suscipiendam, p. 214. l. 6. for primus acie r. prima acie. York shire Page 220.
l. 40. for Or, a Fess betwixt three Water bougets, Or, r. Argent, a Fess
betwixt threee Water bougets, Gules. Wales Preface l. 43. for grains r. pains,
p. 4. l. 31. add phrase, p. 17. l. 16. dele half. p. 25. l. 23. for Castro r.
Castor, p. 27. l. 9. for Gold r. no Gold, p. 34. l. 30. for is here, r. might
have been here, p. 44. l. 19. for freed r. free, p. 47. l. 39. for must, r.
might, p. 59. l. 39. for awarded r: avoided, l. 43. for as r. then.
THE WORTHIES OF ENGLAND
CHAPTER I. The Design of the ensuing Work.
ENGLAND may not unfitly be compared to an House not very great, but
convenient, and the several Shires may properly be resembled to the rooms
thereof. No, as learned Master Camden and painful Master Speed with others,
have discribed the rooms themselves; so is it our intention, God willing to
discribe the Furniture of those rooms; such Eminent Commodities, which every
County does produce, with the Persons of Quality bred therein, and some other
observables coincident with the same subject.

Cato that great and grave Philosopher did commonly demand, when any new
Project was propounded unto him, * Cui Bono, what good would ensue, in case the
same was effected. A Question more fit to be asked, then facile to be answered
in all undertakings, especially in the setting forth of new Books, Insomuch,
that they themselves, who complain, That They are too many already, help dayl^
to make them more.

Know then, I propound five ends to my self in this Book: First, To gain some
Glory to God. Secondly, To preserve the Memories of the Dead^ Thirdly, To
present Examples to the Living. Fourthly, To entertain the Reader with Delight.
And lastly, (which I am not ashamed publicly to profess) To procure some
honest profit to my self. If not so happy to obtain all, I will be joyful to
attain some, yea, contented and thankful too, if gaining any [especially the
First] of these Ends, the Motives of my Endeavors.

First, Glory to God, which ought to be the aim of all our actions, though too
often our bow starts, our hand shakes, and so our arrow misseth the mark. Yet I
hope that our discribing so good a Land, with the various Fruits and fruitful
varieties therein, will engage both Writer and Reader, in gratitude to that
God, who has been so bountiful to our Nation. In order whereunto, I have not
only always taken, but often sought occasions, to exhort to thankfulness;
hoping the same will be interpreted, no straggling from my Subject, but a
closing with my Calling.

Secondly, To preserve the Memories of the Dead. A good name is an ointment
poured out, smelt where it is not seen. It has been the lawful desire of men
in all ages to perpetuate their Memories, thereby in some sort revenging
themselves of Mortality, though few have found out effectual means to perform
it. For Monuments made of Wood, are subject to be burnt; of Glass, to be
broken; of soft stone, to moulder; of Marble and Metal, (if escaping the teeth
of Time) to be demolished by the hand of Covetousness; so that in my
apprehension, the safest way to secure a memory from oblivion, is (next his own
Virtues) by committing the same in writing toPosterity.

Thirdly, To present examples to the living, having here precedents of all
sorts and sizes; of men famous for Valor, Wealth, Wisdom, Learning,
Religion, and Bounty to the public, on which last we most largely insist. The
Scholar being taxed by his WritingMaster, for idleness in his absence, made a
fair defense, when pleading that his Master had neither left him Paper whereon,
or Copy whereby to write. But rich men will be without excuse if not expressing
their bounty in some proportion, God having provided them Paper enough. [ The
John 12. 8.
poor you have always with you] and set them signal examples, as in our
ensuing Work will plainly appear.

Fourthly, To entertain the Reader with delight. I confess the subject is but
dull in it self, to tell the time and place of men's birth, and deaths, their
names, with the names and number of their books, and therefore this bare
Sceleton of Time, Place, and Person, must be fleshed with some pleasant
passages. To this intent I have purposely interlaced (not as meat, but as
condiment) many delightful stories, that so the Reader if he do not arise
(which I hope and desire) Religiosior or Doctior, with more Piety or Learning,
at least he may depart Jucundior, with more pleasure and lawful delight.

Lastly, to procure moderate profit to my self in compensation of my pains. It
was a proper question, which plain dealing Jacob pertinently propounded to
Laban Genesis 30. 30.
his Father in Law: and now when shall I provide for mine house also? Hitherto
no Stationer has lost by me, hereafter it will be high time for me (all things
considered) to Save for my self.

The matter following may be divided into Real and Personal, though not
according to the legal acception of the words. By Real, I understand the
commodities and observables of every County: by Personal the Characters of
those worthy men, who were Natives thereof. We begin with a Catalogue of the
particular heads whereof this book does consist, intending to show, how they
are severally useful, and then I hope, if good as single instruments, they will
be the better as tuned in a Consort.

CHAP. II. The Real Topics insisted on in the Respective Counties.
The Native Commodities.
NO County has cause to complain with the Grecian Acts 6. 1.
Widows, that they are neglected in the daily Ministration. God has not
given all Commodities to one, to elate it with pride, and none to others to
deject them with pensiveness; but there is some kind of equality betwixt the
Profits of Counties to continue commerce' and balance trading in some
proportion.

We have therefore in this work taken especial notice of the several
commodities which every Shire does produce. And indeed God himself enjoyneth us
to observe the variety of the Earths productions, in this kind. For speaking of
the land of Genesis 2. 12.
Havilah, (where says he) there is Gold, and the gold of that land is good,
there is Bdellium, and the Onix-stone. See here how the holy spirit points at
those places where God has scattered such treasure, and the best thereof in
all kinds, that man (if so disposed) may know where to gather them up.

I confess England cannot boast of Gold, and precious Stones, with the land of
Havilah, yet affords it other things, both above and beneath ground, more
needful for man's being. Indeed some shires, Joseph*like, have a better
colored coat then others; and some with Benjamin have a more bountiful mess
of meat belonging unto them. Yet every County has a Child's portion, as if God
in some sort observed Gavel-kind, in the distribution of his favors, Psalm.
107. 8.
O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare the
wondrous works which he does for the Children of men.

Know Reader, when a Commodity is general to all England, then to avoid
Repetition, it is entered in that County where there was the first, or else the
most and best of that kind. And we have so contrived it, that generally; Three
Commodities are treated of in every County.

The Manufactures.
Some heathen have causlesly complained of nature as a stepmother to mankind,
because other creatures come into the world clothed with Feathers, furs, or
fleeces etc. or armed with paws, claws, beaks, tusks, horns, hoofs, whilst
man is exposed naked into the world. I say a causles charge, because providence
having given men Hands, and Reason to use them, (two blessings denied to other
creatures,) all Clothing and fencing is eminently and transcendently bestowed
upon him.

It is very remarkable to see the Manufactures in England, not knowing whether
more to admire the Rarity or Variety thereof. Undoubtedly the wealth of a
Nation consists in driving a native commodity through the most hands to the
highest artificial perfection, whereof we have taken especial cognizance in the
respective counties, yet so as (though briefly nameing) not largely handling
that Manufacture whereon we have formerly insisted.

It must not be forgotten that there be some things which cannot properly be
termed Natural commodities, because of their quality altered and disguised by
men's industry, and yet they attain not the reputation of Manufactures. As salt,
being water boiled, malt, barley dried, Cider, Apples pressed; seeing therefore
they have a mixed nature they are promiscuosly placed as suiteth best with my
own convenience.

Medicinal Waters.
The God of Nature has not discovered himself so variously wonderful in any
thing as in the waters of Fountains, Rivers, etc. England has as large a share
herein as any Country, and her springs wonderful on several accounts.

1. Color, Black, Red, Yellow, etc. 2. Taste, Sweet, bitter, salt, acide,
corroding, astringing, etc. 3. Odor, stinking of Sulphur, like the scouring of
a gun very fowl. 4. Sound, beating sometimes like a March, sometimes like a
Retreat on several occasions. 5. Heat, Lukewarm, and gradually hot even to
scalding. 6. Weight, considerably heavier or lighter in proportion to other
watters. 7. Motion, though many miles from the sea, sympathizing therewith
ebing and flowing accordingly. 8. Effects, some being surgeons to heal sores,
others Physicians to cure diseases.
The last is proper for our pen, being the Largess of heaven to poor people who
cannot go to the price of a costly cure. Of these more have been discovered by
casualty than industry, to evidence that therein we are not so much beholden to
man's pains as Gods providence. Many Springs formerly sovereign have since lost
their virtue, yet so that other springs have found it, so that their sanative
qualities may seem not taken away but removed. And as there are many mean men
of great ability yet depressed in obscurity, so no doubt there are in our Land
Aquae incognitae of concealed worth and virtue, in effect no whit inferior to
those which in fame are far above them.

However the gift which nature holds forth may be doubled in the goodness
thereof, if the hand of Art do but help to receive it, and the patients be
prepared with Physic in the using of such water, otherwise fons vitae, may be
fons mortis, if diet, due time, and quantity be not observed.

Some will say that our English waters must needs be raw, because so far from
the fire, whilst those are better boiled, which lying more south are nearer
the sun. But experience avow's the contrary, that England affords most
sanative waters for English bodies, if men were as judicious in taking, as
Nature is bountiful in tendering them.

As for the Proprietaries of such (or rather of the ground surrounding such)
Medicinal waters, as I would not have them detrimented in the least degree by
the conflux of people unto them: so it is injurious in my judgment for them to
set them to sale and make gain of Gods free gift therein. I confess water was
commonly sold in the land of Canaan proved by that passage in the Isay 55. 1.
Prophet, H^ every one that thirsts come ye to the waters and he that has no
money etc. Yea so churlish were the Edomites to the Israelites that they would
not give, that is afford them Deuteronomy. 2. 28.
water for money. But it is considerable, Well-w ater in those hot Countries,
was acquired with vast pains and expense, it being dearer to sink a well then
build an house, besides many frustrations in that kind before their indeavous
found full effect, which made it the more equal for the owners, by such sales
to make profit, or rather to make up their reparations. But no such cost being
expended in the case in hand, it may be accounted a kind of Simonie, in such as
sell ease and help to poor people, though they may lawfully buy it, as passive
and necessitated thereunto.

The Wonders.
Of these England affords many, which by several authors are variously
reckoned up. One reckons four as most remarkable, H. Huntington.
another accounted six, a third brings then up to Sir John Sidney, Samuel
Beauland on Ne^eius.
thirteen, which since some have increased. Indeed if so many men, had all
agreed in one Number, that had been a Wonder indeed.

But under this Title we compre hend all rarityes, which are out of the
ordinary Road of nature, the illustration whereof may minister unto us matter
of profitable discourse. Of these wonders, some were transient, lasting only
for a time, (like extraordinary Ambassadors employed on some great affair,)
others Liegers and Permanent, the most proper for our Pen to observe. And to
prevent vacuitie in some Counties (that this Topicke of wonders might be
invested with some matter) some Artificial Rarities are (but very sparingly)
inserted, such as transcend the standard of ordinary performance, But thse are
cast in as over weight, the former being only our proper subject.

Our great design herein is that men may pay the Tribute of their admiration,
where the same is due, to God himself, who, as David observes Psalm. 136. 4.
only does great wonders. Only, exclusively of men and Angels. Does, that is
really solidly and substantially, Iuglers do show not do, whose pretty works
are not Praestationes, but Praestigiae. Great Wonders, called in Scripture
MAGNALIA, and if the Latin allows the word, we could grant the Devil his
Parvalia doing of petty feats, greatened into wonders by his cunning, and our
credulity.

Well let our admiration be given to God, seeing Deliberate Wondering (when the
soul is not suddenly surprised) being raised up to an height is part of
adoration, and cannot be given to any creature without some sacrile^ge. Such
wondering consists of Reverence and ig norance, which best becomes even the
wisest of men, in their searches after God his ways. As for that unkind
wondering, which melts not man's heart like wax into the praising of God, but
clay like hardneth it unto stupefaction, Behold you despisers and wonder Acts
3. 41.
and perish, God keep all good men from being guilty thereof.

A secondary end I have herein to show that England falls not short of foreign
Countries in wonderful sights the same in kind though not in degree. Italy has
her Grotta dela Sibilla, we in Summerset-shire our Wockley Hole. Spain her
Anas, we our Mole, etc. Bnt wonders like prophets are not without honor save
in their own Country, where constancy (or at least Commonnesse of Converse)
with them abateth their respect and reputation.

The Buildings.
Next Reader in our following Book we have inverted the Method, and more
properly placed buildings next to (...).
we take notice of the signal structures which each County does afford. Indeed
the Italians do account all English to be Gothish Buildings, only vast, (and
greatness, must have something of coarsnes therein) however abating for their
advantage above us in Materials, Marble, Pophery etc. their palaces may
admire the art in some English fabrics, and in our Churches especially.

Elisha beholding Hasael, wept by way of prophecy foreseeing that (amongst
other many mischeifs) he would set fire on the strong King. 8. 12.
Cities (and by consequence on the Fair Houses) in Israel. But well may we weep
when looking back on our late Civil war, remembering how many beautiful
Buildings were ruined thereby, though indeed we have Cause to be thankful to
God that so many are left standing in the Land.

But what said our Savior to his Disciples, when transported with wonder at
the goodly stones in the Temple, Luke 21. 6.
are these the things you look upon? such transitory buildings are unworthy of
a Christians admiration. And let it be our care that when the fairest and
firmest Fabrics fall to the ground, yea when our earthly house be dissolved,
we may have an house not made with hands, but eternal in the 2 Cor. 5. 1.
Heavens.

Local Proverbs.
A PROVERB is much matter decocted into few words. Hear what a learned
Salmatius e Levino VVarnero.
Critic says of them; Argutae hae brevesque loquendi formulae, quamvis e
trivio petitae et plebi frequentatae suas habent Veneres, et genium cujusque
gentis penes quam celebrantur, atque acumen ostendunt.

Some will have a Proverb so called from Verbum a word and Pro (as in Proavus)
signifying Before, being a speech which time out of mind has had peaceable
possession in the mouths of many people. Others deduce it from Verbum a word,
and pro for Vice (as in Propraeses) in stead of, because it is not to be taken
in the literal sense, one thing being put for an other.

Six esentials are required to the completing of a perfect Proverb, Namely
that it be.

1. Short. 2. Plain. 3. Common. 4. Figurative. 5. Ancient. 6. True.
Otherwise it is no Proverb but a.

1. Oration. 2. Riddle. 3. Secret. 4. Sentence. 5. Upstart. 6. Libel.
I have only insisted on such local Proverbs in their respective Counties,
wherein some proper Place or Person, is mentioned, such as suggest unto us some
Historical ^int and the interpretation thereof afford some considerable
information, and conduce to the illustration of those Counties wherein they are
used.

Herein I have neglected such narrow and restrictive Proverbs as never
traveled beyond the smoke of the chimneys of that town wherein they were made,
and though perchance significant in themselves, are unknown to the neibouring
Counties, so far they are from acquiring a National reception. Besides. I have
declined all such which are Frivolous, Scurrilous, Scandalous, confining our
selves only to such whose expounding may contribute to the understanding of
those shires wherein they are in fashion.

Objection.
It is more proper for a person of your profession to employ himself in reading
of, and commenting on the Proverbs of Solomon Proverbs 1. 2
to know wisdom and instruction to perceive the words of understanding.
Whereas you now are busied in what may be pleasant, not profitable, yea, what
may inform the fleshly not edify the inward man.

Answer.
Let not our fellow servants be more harsh unto us then our Master himself, we
serve not so severe a Lord, but that he allows us sauce with our meat, and
recreation with our vocation.

Secondly, God himself besides such as I may call Supernatural Proverbs (as
divinely Inspired) takes notice and makes use of the natural or Native
Proverbs of the Country, praising, approving, and applying some, Luke 4. 23.
Physician cure thy self, 2 Pet. 2. 22.
The Dog is returned to his Vomit, and the Swine which was washed to her
wallowing in the mire; D^sliking and condemning others, and commanding Ezekiel. 8.
^.
them to be abolished. The Fathers have eaten sour Grapes, and the Childrens
teeth are set on edge. Now seeing Antiquity without Verity is no just Plea that
any thing should be continued; On this Warrant, I have in these our
Country-Proverbs alleged more than I allow, branding some with a Note of
Infamy, as fit to be banished out of our discourse.

Lastly, besides Information much good may redound to the Reader hereby; It was
the Council which a Wise gave to a Great man, Read Histories that thou do not
become a History. So may we say, Read Proverbs that thou be not made a
Proverb, as God threatened the sinful people of 1 Kings 9. 7.
Israel. Sure I am that David by minding of a Country, (no Canonical Proverb)
viz. [ 1 Samuel 24. 13.
Wickedness proceeds from the wicked] was thereby disfwaded from offering
any violence to the person of Saul then placed in his power, whereby he
procured much Tranquillity to his own conscience.

We have not confined our selves to Proverbs in the strict acception thereof,
but sometimes insist on such which have only a Proverbial Tendency or Lie (as
one may say) in the Marches betwixt Proverb and Prophecy, where they afford us
a fit occasion to salley forth into such Discourse, as may conduce to the
History of our Nation.

The Medicinal Herbs.
Some maintain this Position, That every Country cures the diseases, which it
causes, and brings remedies, for all the maladies bred therein. An opinion
which grant not true, yet may have much of Truth therein, seeing every Country,
and England especially affords excellent Plants were it not partly for men's
laziness, that they will not seek them, partly for their ignorance that they
know not when they have found them, and partly for their pride and
peevishness, because when found, they disdain to use and apply them. Indeed
quod charum, charum, what is fetched far, and bought dear, that only is
esteemed; otherwise were many English plants as rare as they are useful we
would hug in our hands, what we now trample under our feet.

For proof hereof let not the Reader grudge to peruse these words of a grand
Herbalist, speaking of Virga Aurea, or Golden-rod, growing plentifully, but
discovered lately in Middlesex.

Gerard in his Herbal. page 430. It is extolled above all other Herbs, for the
stopping of blood in Sanguinolent Ulcers, and bleeding Wounds, and has in time
past been had in greater estimation and regard then in these days; For in my
remembrance I have known the dry Herb which came from beyond the Seas, sold in
Bucklars-bury in London, for two shillings six pence the Ounce. But since it is
found in Hamsted wood, even as it were at the Towns end, no man will give two
shill^ngs six pence for an hundred weight of it, which plainly sets forth our
inconstancy and sudden mutability, este^ ming no longer of anything (how
precious soever it be) then while it is strange and rare.

We may also observe that many base and barren heaths and hills, which afford
the least food for beasts, yield the best Physic for man, One may also take
notice that such places that are nearest to London, Cambridge, Oxford, Bath, or
where some eminent Herbalist has his habitation, afford us the greater variety
of medicinal herbs. Not that more have grown but more are known there
abouts, where the native plants are not better, but more happy in their
vicinitie to such discoverers. And now to be always within the reach if not the
touch of mine own calling we may observe in Scripture that Gods Spirit directs
men to the gathering of such Simples of his own planting. Is there no * balm
in Gilead? True in a literal sense, as well as mystically of our Savior.

Now the reason why I have been so sparing in this Topic, and so seldom
insist thereon, is because these Herbs grow equally for goodness and plenty, in
all Counties, so that no one Shire can without manifest usurpation entitle it)
self thereunto. Besides they are so Common, and Numerous, they would justle
out matter of more concernment. However we have noted it where the Herb is rare
and very useful, and in our following Book (though here the Method be
transposed) have placed Medicinal Herbs, next Medicinal waters, conceiving that
order most Natural.

CHAPTER III. Of the first Quaternion of Persons.
Viz.
1. Princes. 2. Saints. 3. Martyrs. 4. Confessors.
WE take the Word, as it is of the Common Gender, inclusive of both Sexes, and
extend it only to Kings with their Wives and Children. Of the second sort we
have but few, and those only from the time of King Edward the Fourth, who
first married his Subject, or Native of his Dominions.

We confine our selves to such as were born since the Conquest, otherwise we
should be swallowed up, should we Lanch out beyond that date into the Saxon
Government, especially into the gulf of their Heptarchie, where a Prince could
not be seen for Princes. But if a British, or Saxon-King comes under our Pen,
we prefer to take Cognizance of him in some other notion, (as of Saint,
Martyr, Soldier, etc.) so to preserve the Topic of Prince ship entire
according to our design.

We have stinted our selves only to the legitimate issue of Kings. And after
such who are properly Princes, we have (as Occasion is offered) inserted some
who in courtesy, and equity may be so accepted as the Heirs to the Crown, (in
the Lancastrian difference) though not possessed thereof; or else so near a Kin
thereunto, that much of History does necessarily depend upon them.

We have observed these Nativities of Princes, because such signal persons, are
not only Oaks amongst under-woods, but land-markes amongst Oaks, and they
directorie for the methodical regulation of History. Besides, in themselves
they are of special remarke, as more or less remote from the Crown; not only
their own Honor, but the happiness of thousands being concerned in their
extraction, and Divine Providence most visible in marshalling the order
thereof. For although Nasci a Principibus fortuitum est, may pass for a true
instance in Grammar, it is no right Rule in Divinity; which, though
acknowledging Job 34. 19.
rich and poor the work of Gods hands, pronounces Princes to be men Psalm. 80.
17.
of his right hand, made strong for himself, that is, purposely advanced to
employ their own greatness to his glory.

Let none Object that the Wives of Kings need not to have been inserted, as
Persons of no such consequence in Government; seeing it is the constant
practice of the Spirit of God, after the mention of a new King in Judah, to
record the name of his Mother, and her Parentage; 2 Cor. 13. 2.
His Mothers name also was Micaiah the daughter of Uriel of Gibeah: Chron. 22.
2.
His mothers name was Althaliah the daughter of Omri King. 28. 31.
His mothers name was Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah of Libuah. And Divines
generally render this reason thereof, that if such Kings proved godly and
gracious, then the memory of their mothers should receive just praise for their
good Education; if otherwise that they might be blamed for no better
principling them in their Infancy.

Saints.
This word accepts of several interpretations, or rather they are injuriously
obtruded upon it.

1. Saints of Fiction, who never were in rerum natura, as St. Christopher etc.
2. Saints of Faction, wherewith our age does fwarme, alleging two arguments
for their Saintship. First, that they so call themselves; Sec^ndly, that those
of their own party call them so. Neither of these belong to our cognizance. 3.
Saints of Superstition, reputed so by the Court of Rome. 4. Saints indeed,
parrallel to St. Paul's 1 Timothy 5. 3.
Widows indeed, and both deserve to be honored.
It is confessed, in this our Book we drive a great trade in the third Sort,
and I cannot therefore but sadly bemoan that the Lives of these Saints are so
darkened with popish Illustrations, and farced with Fauxeties to their
Dishonor, and the Detriment of Church History. For as honest men, casually
cast into the Company of Cozeners, are themselves suspected to be Cheats, by
those who are Strangers unto them, So the very true Actions of these Saints
found in mixture with so many Forgeries, have a suspicion of falsehood cast upon
them.

Inquiring into the causes of this grand abuse, I find them reducible to five
heads.

1. First, Want of honest hearts, in the Biographists of these Saints, which
betrayed their Pens to such abominable untruths. 2. Secondly, Want of able
heads, to distinguish Rumors from Reports, Reports from Records, not choosing
but gathering, or rather not gathering, but scraping what could come to their
hands. 3. Thirdly, Want of true matter, to furnish out those lives in any
proportion. As Cooks are sometimes fain to lard lean meat, not for fashion but
necessity, as which otherwise would hardly be eatable for the dryness thereof;
So these having little of these Saints more then their names, and dates of
their Deaths (and though sometimes not certain) do plump up their emptiness
with such fictious additions. 4. Fourthly, hope of gain, so bringing in more
Custom of Pilgrims to the shrines of their Saints. 5. Lastly, for the same
reason for which Herod persecuted Acts 12. 3.
St. Peter, (for I count such Lies a persecuting of the Saints memories) merely
because they saw it pleased the people.
By these and other causes it is come to pass, that the Observation of De Trad.
Discrip. l. 5.
Vives is most true, Quae de Sanctis Scripta sunt, praeter pauca quaedam,
multis foedata sunt Commentis, dum qui scribit affectui suo indulget: and non
quae egit Divus, sed quae illum egisse vellet, exponit; What are written of the
Saints, some few things excepted, are defiled with many fictions, whilst the
Writer indulgeth his own affection, and declares not what the Saint did do,
but what he desired that he should have done. To this let me couple the just
complaint of that honest Dominican Melchior Lib. 11. c. 6.
Canus. Dolenter hoc dico, multo severius a Laertio vitas Philosophorum
scriptas, quam a Christianis vitas Sanctorum, longeque incorruptius and
integrius Suetonium res Caesarum exposuisse, quam exposuerint Catholici, non
res dico Imperatorum, sed Martyrum, Virginum and Confessorum; I speak it to my
grief (says he) that the Lives of the Philosophers are more gravely written by
Laertius, than Saints are by Christians, and that Suetonius has recorded the
Actions of the Caesar's with more Truth and Integrity, than Catholick^ have the
Lives, I say not of Princes, but even of Martyrs, Virgins, and Confessors.

To return to our English Saints. As our Catalogue begins with Alban, it
ends with Thomas Bishop of Hereford, who dyed Anno Domini 1282. the last
Englishman canonized by the Pope. For, though Anselme was canonized after him
(in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh) he was no English, but a Frenchman,
who dyed more then an hundred years before him. Since which time, no English,
and few Foreigners have attained that honor, which the Pope is very sparing to
confer. First because sensible, that multitude of Saints abateth veneration.
Secondly, the Calendar, is filled (not to say pestered) with them, justling one
another for Room, many holding the same day in copartnership of Festivity.
Thirdly, the charge of Canonization is great, few so charitable as to buy it,
the Pope too covetous to give it to the memories of the deceased. Lastly,
Protestants daily grow more prying into the Popes proceedings, and the
[suspected] perfections of such persons, who are to be Sainted; which has made
his Holiness the more cautious, to canonize none whilst their memories are on
the Must, immediately after their Deaths, before the same is fined in the Cask,
with some competent continuance of time, after their decease.

Noble Martyrs.
St. Ambrose in his Te Deum does justify the Epithet, and by Martyrs all know
such only are imported, who have lost their lives for the Testimony of a
fundamental Truth.

However we find the word by one of the purest Writers in the primitive times,
attributed to such who were then alive.

Cyprianus Epist. 77. as marshalled by Pamelian. Cyprianus Nemesiano Felici,
Lucio, alteri Felici, Litteo, Coliano, Victori, Faderi, Dativo, Coepiscopis;
item, compresbyteris and Diaconibus, and caeteris fratribus in metallo
constitutis, martyribus Dei patris Omnipotentis and Jesu Christi Domini, and
Dei conservatoris nostri, aeternam salutem.

See here how he bemartyreth such who as yet did survive, but in so servile a
condition (condemned to the mines) that they were almost hopeless, without
miracle to be released. Yet dare we not presume on this precedent of St.
Cyprian (children must not do what their Fathers may) to use the word so
extensively, but by Martyrs understand persons (not in the deepest durance and
distress) but actually slain for the Testimony of Jesus Christ; which by an
Ingenious pen is thus, not ill expressed.

What desperate Challenger is He?
Before he peris^ in the flame,
What ere his pain or patience be,
Who dares assume a MARTYRS name?
For all the way he goes he is none till he be gone
It is not dying but it is Death,
Only gains a MARTYRS Wreath.
Now such Martyrs as our Land has produced, are reducible to three different
Ranks.

1. Britons, suffering under Dioclesian, the persecuting Roman Emperor, as
Alban, Amphibalus, etc. 2. Saxons, massacred by the Pagan Danes, as King
Edmund, Ebba, etc. 3. English, murdered by the cruelty of Papists, since the
Year 1400. as William Sawtree, John Badby, etc.
In the two former of these we are prevented, and they anticipated from us, by
the Popes canonizing them under the Title of Saints. The third and last only
remain proper for our pen, martyred by the Romish Prelates for above an hundred
and fifty years together.

I confess I have formerly met with some men, who would not allow them for
Martyrs, who suffered in the Reign of Queen Mary, making them little better
then Felons de se, wilfully drawing their blood on themselves. Most of these I
hope are since convinced in their judgment, and have learned more charity in
the School of affliction, who by their own Losses have learned better to value
the Lives of others, and now will willingly allow Martyrship to those, from
whom they wholly withheld, (or grudgingly gave) it before.

We have reckoned up these Martyrs according to the places of their Nativity,
where we could find them, which is my first choice, in Conformity to the rest
of this work. But in case this cannot be done my second choice is, (for know
Reader it is no refuge) to rank them according to the place of their death, which
is their true birthplace in the Language of Origin lib. 3. Commen^ in Job
Albinus (...). de divin. Offic. cap. de Sexta Feria page 60.
Antiquity. Hear how a right Ancient Author expresses himself to this
purpose, Nichol. Papa in Epist. ad consulta Bulgarorum cap. 5. in fine.
Apt consuetudinem tenet Ecclesia, ut solennes beatorum Martyrum vel
Confessorum Christi Dies, quibus ex hoc mundo ad regionem migraverunt Vivorum,
nuncupentur Natales, and eorum Solennia non funebria, tanquam morientium, sed,
(utpote in vera vita nascentium) Natalitia vocitentur. Now if the day of their
Death be justly entitled their Birthday, the place of their Death may be
called their Birthplace by the same Analogy of Reason and Language.

We have given in a List of Martyrs names in their respective Countyes, but not
their Total Number, only in^isting on such who were most remarkable, remiting
the Reader for the rest, to the voluminous pains of Mr. Fox, who has written
All, (and if malicious Papists be believed more then All) of this Subject.

Worthy Confessors.
All good Christians are concluded within the Compase of Confessors in the
Large acception thereof. Romans 10. 10.
With the Mouth Confession is made unto Salvation: But here we restrain this
Title to such, who have adventured fair and far for Martyrdom, and at last,
not declined it by their own Cowardice, but escaped it by Divine Providence.
Confessor is a Name none can wear whom it cost Nothing, It must be purchased
for the Maintenance of the Faith, with the Loss of their Native Land, Liberty,
Livelihood, Limbs, any thing under Life it self.

Yet in this confined sense of Confessors, we may say with Leah, at the birth
of Genesis 30. 11.
Gad behold a Troop comes, Too many to be known, written, read, remembered, We
are forced therefore to reconfine the Word to such, who were Candidates and
Probationers, for Martyrdom in proxima potentia. There was not a stride, but,
(to use David's expression) 1 Samuel 20. 3.
but a step betwixt them and Death, their Wedding Clothes were made (but not
put on) for their marriage to the Fire. In a Word they were soft Wax, ready
chafed and prepared, but the Signature of a violent Death was not stamped upon
them.

Manifold is the use of our observing these Confessors. First to show that God
alone has Parramount power of Life and Death. Preserving those who by men are
Psalm. 79. 11.
appointed to Dye. One whose Son lay very Sick, was told by the Physician, Your
Son Sir, is a dead man, To whom the Father (not disheartened thereat) returned,
I had rather a Physician should call him so an hundred times, than a Judge on
the Bench, should do it once, whose Pronouncing him for a Dead man, makes him
to be one. But though both a Physician in Nature, and a Judge in Law, give men
for Gone, The one passing the Censure, the other Sentence of Death upon them,
GOD, to whom belongs the Issues from Death, may Preserve them long in the
Land of the Living. Hereof these Confessors * Psalm. 68. 20.
are Eminent Instances, and may God therefore have the Glory of their so
strange Deliverances.

Secondly it serves to comfort Gods servants in their greatest distress. Let
hand join in hand; let Tyrants piece the Lions cruelty with the Fox his craft;
let them face their plots with power, and line then with policy all shall take
no effect. Gods servants (if he sees it for his glory and their good) shall
either be mercifully preserved from, or mightily protected in dangers, whereof
these Confessors are a Cloud of Witnesses.

We have an English Proverb, Threatened Folks live long, but let me add, I know
a Threatened Man who did never dye at all, namely the Prophet Elijab, Threatened
by cruel and crafty Iesabel, The 1 King. 19. 2.
Gods do so to me and more also, if I make not thy Life like one of their Lives
by to morrow at this time, Yet did he never taste of Mortallity, being conveyed
by a fiery ( hariot into Heaven. Now although our ensuing History presents
not any miraculously preserved from Death, yet affordetb it Plenty of strange
preservations of Persons to extreme Old age, though they wear the Marks of
many, and mighty men's Menacies, who plotted and practiced their Destruction.

We have persued the same course in Confessors, which we embraced in Martyrs,
viz. We have ranked them according to their Nativities, where we could
certainly observe them, to make them herein Uniforme with the rest of our Book.
But where this could not be attained, we have entered them in those Counties,
where they had the longest or sharpest (...). And this we humbly conceive
proper enough, seeing their Confessor-ship in a strict sense did bare true
date, from place of their greatest Persecution.

CHAPTER IV. Of Popes, Cardinals and Prelates before the Reformation.
Popes.
I Meet with a mess of English Natives advanced to that Honor. Pope John-Joan
is wholly omitted, partly because we need not charge that See with suspicious
and doubtful crimes, whose notorious faults are too apparent; partly because
this He-She, though allowed of English extraction, is generally believed born
at Godwin in Catal. Cardinal* p. 159.
Ments in Germany.

Wonder not that so few of our Countrymen gained the Triple-Crown. For first,
great our distance from Rome, who being an Island or little World by our
selves, had our Archbishop of Canterbury, which formerly was accounted Alterius
orbis Papa. Secondly, (...) ^talians of late have engrossed the Papacy to
themselves, and much good may their Monopoly do them, seeing our English may
more safely repose themselves in some other seat, then the Papal Chair, more
fatal, (it is to be feared) to such as sit therein, than ever 1 Samuel 4. 18.
Eli's proved unto him.

Yea, I assure you, four Popes was a very fair proportion for England; For
having perused the voluminous book of Pantaleon, De Viris illustribus
Germaniae; I find but six Popes Dutchmen by their Nativity, viz. Stephen the
Eighth, Gregory the Fifth, Silvester the Second, Leo the Ninth, Victor the
Second, and Adrian the Sixth. Seeing therefore Germany in the Latitude thereof,
a Continent five times bigger than England, measured by the aforesaid He takes
in all the Netherlands.
Pantaleon with advantage, I say, seeing Germany, the Emperor whereof is, or
ought to be Patron to the Pope, produced but Six of that Order, England's four
acquit themselves in a very good appearance.

I need not observe that our English word Pope, came from the Latin Papa,
signifying a Father, a Title anciently given to other Bishops, but afterward
fixed on the Sea of Rome. One would have him called Papa by abbreviation, quasi
PAter PAtriarcharum, flitting only the two first syllables. A pretty conceit,
which I dare no more avouch than his Fancy, who affirmed the former syllable in
Papa to be short in verse, for the Pope personal, who indeed are short-lived;
whilst the same syllable is long, the word being taken for the succession of
Popes, who have lasted above a thousand years.

Cardinals.
A word of their Names, Numbers, Degrees, Dignities, Titles and Habit.
Cardinals are not so called, because the Hinges on which the Church of Rome
does move; but from Cardo, which signifies the Vitruvius, lib. 10. c. 20.
end of a Tenon put into a Mortais being accordingly fixed and fastened to their
respective Churches. Anciently Cardinalis imported no more than an
Ecclesiastical Person, beneficed and inducted into a cure of Souls; and all
Bishops generally made Cardinals as well as the Pope of Rome.

In proof whereof, there were anciently Founded in the Church of Saint Paul's,
two Cardinals chosen by the Dean and Chapter out of the twelve petty Canons,
whose Office it was to take notice of the absence and neglect of all in the
Quire, to give the Eucharist to the Minister of that Church and their servants,
as well in health as in sickness, to hear Confessions, appoint penance, and to
commit the dead to convenient sepulture. And two of them lie buried in the
Church of Saint Faiths with these Epitaphes.

Hic homo Catholicus VVilielmus West tumulatur,
Pauli Canonicus Minor Ecclesiae vocitatur,
Qui fuerat Cardinalis bonus atque sodalis, etc.
Perpetuis annis memores estote Johannis
Good Succentoris, Cardinalisque minoris, etc.
Many other Churches besides Saint Paul's retained this custom of Cardinal
making.

Viz. Ravenna, Aquileia, Millain, Pisa, Beneventana in Italy, and Compostella
in Spain.

But in process of time Cardinal became appropriated to such as officiated in
Rome, and they are reckoned up variously by Authors, Fifty one, fifty three,
fifty eight, sixty I believe their number arbitrary to ben creased or
diminished, ad libitum Domini Papae. They are divided into three ranks.

Cardinal Bishops, Assessors with the Pope. Priests, Assistants to the Pope.
Deacons, Attendants on the Pope.

The former of these have Chaires allowed them, and may sit down in presence of
his Holiness, and these are seven in number, whose Sees are in the Vicinage of
Rome, and some Englishmen have had the honor to be dignified by them.

Bishop of 1 Hostia,

Bishop of 2 Porto, R. Kilwardby.

Bishop of 3 Sabine,

Bishop of 4 Alba, Nic. Breakspeare.

Bishop of 5 Preneste, Bernar. (...). Simon (...).

Bishop of 6 Rufine.

7 Bishop of Tusculane.

Cardinal Priests succceed, generally accounted twenty eight, divided into
four Septenaries, whose Titles are here presented with such Englishmen,
Sometimes there were* several English Cardinals successively of the same Title
whose names and numbers will be exhibited in their respective Counties.
who attained to be honored with such Churches in Rome.

1. St. Mary's beyond Tyber 2. St. Chrysogon Steph. Langhton A. D. 1212 3. St.
Ce^ily beyond Tyber Thomas Wolsey, An. D. 1515 4. St. Anaftasia John Morton An.
D. 1493 5. St. Laurence in Damaso 6. St. Mark 7. St. Martin in the Mount
William Alan, An. D. 1587 8. St. Sabine John Stafford, An. D. 1434 9. St.
Prisca Reginald Pole, An. D. 1540 10. St. Balbine 11. St. Nereus and Achileus
Phil. Repington, An. D. 1408 12. St. Sixtus 13. St. Marcellus 14. St. Susan.
15. St. Praxis Ancherus, An. Do. 1261 Chr. Bambridge, An. D. 1511 16. St. Peter
ad vincula Ancherus, An. Do. 1261 Chr. Bambridge, An. D. 1511 17. St. Laurence
in Lucina 18. St. Crosses Jerusalem Boso An. Dom. 1156 19. S. Steph. in Mount
Celius Robert Curson, An. Do. *1211 Robert Summercote, A.D. 1234 20. St. John
and St. Paul Robert Curson, An. Do. *1211 Robert Summercote, A.D. 1234 21.
The4. Crowned Saints 22. The holy Apostles 23. S Cyriacus in the Baths Thomas
Bourchier, An. D. 1464 24. St. Eusebius Robert Pullen, An. Dom. 1144 25. St.
Puntiana Boso. An. Dom. 1160 26. St. Vitalis -- St. -- John Fisher, An. Dom.
1535 27. St. Marcelline and Peter 28. St. Clement.

Observe I pray you this Catalogue of Titles (taken out of Sir Henry Spelman
his Glossary) is imperfect, Bish. Godwin in his Catalogue of Cardinals, p. 165.
St. Pastor, being omitted therein, whereof Boso was at last made Cardinal. For
these Cardinals were not so mor^aised to their Churches, but that they might be
removed, especially if advanced a Story higher (from Cardinal Deacons to
Priests, from Priests to Bishops) and sometimes though remaining on the same
flore, they were removed (to make room for others) to some other Title. Many
more Englishmen we had created Cardinals, whose certain Titles are unknown. But
let us proceed to the Cardinal Deacons 16. in number,

1. St. Mary in Dompusinica. 2. St. Lucy. 3. St. Mary the new. 4. St. Cosmus
and St. Damian 5. St. Gregory. 6. St. Mary in the Greek School. 7. St. Mary in
the Porch. 8. St. Nicholas by the Prison. 9. St. Angelus. 10. St. Eustachius.
11. St. Mary in the water. 12. St. Mary in the broad way. 13. St. Agathe. 14.
St. Lucia on thto p of Sabine. 15. St. Quintin. 16. St. The last lost by the
Scribe, in Curia.
I only find one Englishman Boso by Name made Cardinal Deacon, of St. Cosmus
and St. Damian, but it was not long before he was advanced to be a Cardinal
Bishop.

The habit of Cardinals is all Scarlet, whereof Theodore Beza tartly enough,
thus expresses himself.

Creed meae nullo satur antur murice vestes,
Divite nec cocco pallia tincta mihi.
Sed quae rubra vides Sanctoru^ caede viroru^
Et mersa insonti sanguine cuncta made^t.
Aut memor istoru^ quae celat crimina vestis
Pro Domino justo tincta pudore rubet.
My clothes in Purple liquor never were stewd
Nor garments (trust me) richly di'd in grain.
These Robes you see so red, I have imbrew'd
In gore of guiltless Saints, whom I have slain.
Or mindful of the faults they hide, with shame,
The bashful clothes do blush their wearers blame.
They wore also a red Hat of a peculiar fashion to themselves, and rid abroad
on horsback on scarlet Foot-clothes, and Platina in ejus vita.
Pope Paul the Second, made it penal for any beneath their Order in Rome, to
use the same. Yea to such a height of pride did they aspire, that we read this
Note in the Roman Pontifical, Notandum, quod Caesar antequam coronetur simplici
diademate sedet post primum Episcopum Cardinalem, and si quis Rex adest, sedet
tunc post primum omnium Presbyterum Cardinalem. Indeed making their own Canons,
and being their own Heralds to Marshal their own precedence, they had been much
to blame if not carving a good portion of Honor to themselves, whilst devout
Princes, abused by bad Instructors and their own erroneous Consciences, gave to
the Clergy what they were pleased to demand.

None might elect the Pope, save such as were Cardi. yea none out of that Order
were eligible into the Papacy, as in England, one must first be a Sergeant
before he be a Judge. Cardinal Deacons were, in equal capacity of being Popes
with Cardinal Priests, and oftentimes, were preferred before them as they could
strenthen their faction, which carried all in these (and I could wish in no
other) Elections.

WILLIAM ALLEN, who died Anno 1594, was the last Englishman advanced to this
Honor, so that our Country has not had a Cardin^l these sixty years, which
from the former six hundred years, was never without one or two of that Order.
This may seem a wonder, our Nation being as meriting as any for the Romish
Cause, and having as good Heads as any, why should they not wear as gay Hats
as others? nor will the reasons assigned for the contrary give satisfaction,
viz.

1. That the Pope commonly makes Cardinals to gratify Foreign Kings, whilst
our English Sovereigns have ever since been of a different Religion from his
Holiness. 2. That our English Catholics living beyond Seas in the nature of
Exiles, and under persecution (as they call it,) so high an honor is
inconsistent with their suffering condition. 3. That our Englishmen want
preferment and Estates, to maintain the distance of so great a dignity.
There are at the present two English Natives in France of noble extraction and
Romish persuasion, much voyced in common discourse for their probability to
such preferment; but on what grounds I do not know, and list not to enquire.

Surely the matter is not great, seeing that dignity has been observed to be
rather fatal then fortunate to the English, and attended with some sad and
sudden casualties.

1. Cardinal Mackelsfield was four months buried before his Cap was brought
him. 2. Cardinal Sertor dyed in Italy in the Juncture of Time, Inter Pileum
datum and susceptum. 3. Cardinal Fisher, when his Cap was come to Calis, had
his head struck off at Tower Hill. 4. Cardinal Somercot was poisoned in the
very Conclave to prevent his selection to the Popedom. 5. Cardinal Evosham was
sent the same way on the same occasion. 6. Cardinal Bambridge was poisoned at
Rome, by one of his servants being an Italian.
If such their success, I suppose it far easier for Englishmen to have their
caps (though courser and cheaper) made of our own Countrey-wool, which will be
more warm, and may prove more healthful for the wearers thereof. I have done
with this Subject, when I have observed that there is a Cardinal, Bishop of
Sabine, a place near Rome; and a Cardinal Priest of Saint Sabine a Church
dedicated to her Memory in the same City; the not heeding whereof I suspect
has bred much confusion in our English Writers. The best is, our Englishmen,
when they write of Places in Italy cannot commit greater and grosser mistakes,
then what Italians have done, when they have wrote of Towns and Places in
England; Though perchance such is their pride, that they will say it is our
duty to be exact in Italy, and their courtesy to take any notice of England.

Let not the Reader wonder if Cardinals inserted in others, are omitted in our
Catalogue, viz. Ulricus, Ancherus, Theobaldus, Bernardus de Anguiscello, etc.
Seeing I am unsatisfied in some of them, whether they were Cardinals; in
others, whether they were Englishmen, Foreign Countries laying more probable
claim unto them. Nor will it quit the cost of a Contest, nothing more then
their names being left in History withouta ny other observeables.

Prelates before the Reformation.
Next succeed such eminent Clergymen who attained to the honor of being
ArchBishops and Bishops in England, and were famous in their generations.

Objection. These Popes, Cardinals and Prelates, were superstitious persons and
Limbs of Antichrist, whose names are better lost then kept. Yea, it mattered
not much, if some good Josiah served their bones as those of the idolatrous
Priests of 2 Kings 23. 16.
Jeroboam, even burn them to ashes, that so their bodies and memories might
perish together.

Answer. I am afraid our age affords those, who if they were to manage that
Act, would together with their bones, sans difference (notwithstanding the
distinguishing Epitaph) burn the bodies of the young and old Prophet, I mean
utterly extirpate the Ministerial Function. But I answer, it must be confessed
they were deeply died with the Errors and Vices of the Age they lived in, yet
so that some of them were for their Devotion exemplary to posterity; and the
very worst of them, though yielding nothing fit for our Imitation, may afford
what is well worth our Observation.

And here be it remembered, that the same Epithete in several places accepts
sundry Interpretations. He is called A GOOD MAN in common Discourse, who is not
Dignified with Gentilitie; A GOOD MAN upon the Exchange, who has a responsable
Estate; A GOOD MAN in a Camp, who is a tall Man of his Arms; A GOOD MAN in the
Church, who is Pious and Devout in his Conversation. Thus whatsoever is fixed
therein in other Relations, that Person is A GOOD MAN in History, whose
Character affords such Matter as may please the Palate of an Ingenious Reader,
and I humbly crave the Honor to be his Taster in this Behalf.

Now of Bishops before the Conquest, the most were merely nuda Nomina, Naked
Names. As for such appearing Clothed with remarkable History, most of them move
in an higher Sphere of Saints, and so are anticipated. Since the Conquest; for
the first seven Kings, many Prelates were Foreigners, generally French, and so
Aliens from our Subject. It will therefore be seasonable to begin their
Catalogue about the time of King Henry the Third, deducing it unto the Popish
Bishops, who were deprived in the first of Queen Elizabeth.

CHAP. V. Since the Reformation.
NExt those Prelates before, follow such as were since the Reformation, much
different (not in Title but) Tenure from the former, holding their places not
from the Pope, but their Prince, and practicing the principles of the
protestant Religion, for the term of a hundred and twenty years, since the
latter end of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Amongst these, Malice it self
meets with many, which it must allow for their Living, Preaching, and Writing,
to have been the main Champions of Truth against Error, Learning against
Ignorance, Piety against Prof^ss, Religion against Superstition, Unity and
Order against Faction and Confusion, verifying the judicious observation of
Foreigners, Clerus Britanniae, Gloria mundi.

These Prelates, may be Digested into Five Successive Setts, or Companies,
under their respective Archbishops, allowing each of them somewhat more then
twenty years, as large a proportion for the life of a Bishop; as seventy years
for the age of a man.

1. Archbishop Cranmers, whereof four, besides himself, were burnt at the
stake, and the rest exiled in Germany. 2. Archbishop Parkers, in the beginning
of Queen Elizabeth leading Halcion-days, without any considerable Opposition
against the Hierarchy. 3. Archbishop Whitgifts, much Pen-persecuted, and
pelted at with Libellous Pamphlets, but supported by Queen Elizabeth's Zeal to
maintain the Discipline established, 4. Archbishop Abbot's, fortunate all the
peaceable Reign of King James, and beginning of King Charles, though the Sky
was Red and Lowering, foretelling foul weather to follow, a little before their
Death. 5. Archbishop Juxton's, whose Episcopal Chairs, were not only shrewdly
shaken, but (as to outward appearance) overturned in our late mutinous
Distempers.
I know the man full well, to whom Mr. Charles Herle (President of the
Assembly) said somewhat insultingly, I Will tell you News, last Night I buried a
Bishop, (dashing more at his profession then person) in Westminster Abbey, to
whom the other returned with like Latitude to both, Sure you buried him in hope
of Resurrection, This our Eyes at this day see performed, and it being the work
of the Lord, may justly seem mavelous in our Sight.

It is also very remakable, that of this Fifth and Last Company, [all Bishops in
1642.] Nine are alive at this present, viz. (Pardon me if not enumerating them
exactly according to their Consecration) London, Bath, Wells, Ely, Salisbury,
Bongor, Covent. and Lichfield, Oxford, Rochester and Chichester. A Vivacity
hardly to be paralleled of so many Bishops in any other age, providence
purposely prolonging their Lives, that as they had seen the Violent Ruining,
they might also behold the legal Restitution of their Order.

Now although not the Quick but (the) Dead Worthies properly pertain to my pen,
yet I crave leave of the Reader in my following work, to enter a brief Memorial
of the place of their Nativities. Partly because lately they were dead though
not in Law, in the List of a Prevalent party, partly because they are dead to
the World, having most attained, if not exceeded the age of man threescore and
ten years.

To conclude, though the Apostles words be most true that the Lesser are
Blessed of the Greater, and that Imperative and Indicative Blessings, allways
descend from the superior, yet an Optative Blessing (no more then a plain
prayer) may properly proceed from an inferior, so that a plain Priest and
submissive Son of the Church of England, may bless the Bishops and Fathers
thereof. God Sanctify their former afflictions unto them, that as the Dan. 3.
25.
Fire in the Furnace only burnt the bonds (setting them free who went in
fetterr'd) not the cloths (much less the bodies) of the children of the
captivity, so their sufferings without doing them any other prejudice, may only
disingage their souls from all Servitude to this World.

And that for the Future, they may put together, not only the parcels of their
scattered Revenues, but compose the minds of the divided People in England, to
the Confusion of the Factious and Confirmation of the Faithful in Israel.

CHAPTER VI. Of such who have been worthy Statesmen in our Land.
THe word STATESMEN is of great Latitude, sometimes signifying such who are
able to manage Offices of State, though never actually called thereunto. Many
of these men concealing themselves in a private condition, have never arrived
at public notice. But we confine the term to such, who by their Princes favor
have been preferred to the prime places,

Of 1. Lord CHANCELLOURS. Of 2. Lord TREASURERS of England. Of 3. SECRETARIES
of State.
To whom we have added some Lord ADMIRALS of England, and some Lord DEPUTIES of
Ireland.

Lord Chancellours.
The name is taken from CANCELLI, which signifies a kind of wooden Network,
which admits the eyes of people to behold, but forbids their feet to press
on Persons of Quality, sequestered to sit quietly by themselves for public
employment. Hence Chancells have their denomination, which by such a fence were
formerly divided from the body of the Church; and so the Lord Chancellor had a
Seat several to himself, free from popular intrusion.

I find another Notation of this Office, some deducing his name a Cancellando,
from Cancelling things amiss, and rectifying them by the Rules of Equity and a
good Conscience, and this relates to no meaner Author then Johannes In his
book called Nugae (...), or Polyeraticon.
Sarisburiensis.

Hic est qui Leges Regni Cancellat iniquas,
Et mandata pii Principis aequa facit.
Siquid obest populis, aut legibus est inimicum
Quicquid obest, per eum desinit esse nocens.
It Is he, who cancelleth all cruel Laws,
And in Kings Mandates Equity does cause,
If ought to Land or Laws, does hurtful prove,
His care that hurt does speedily remove.
He is the highest Officer of the Land, whose principal employment is to
mittigate the rigor of the Common Law with Conscientious qualifications. For
as the Prophet complains that the Magistrates in Israel had turned Amos 5. 7.
JUD^MENT into WORMWOOD, the like would daily come to pass in England, where
High Justice would be High injustice, if the bitterness thereof were not
sometimes seasonably sweetened with a mixture of Equity.

He also keeps the Great Seal of the Land, the affixing whereof prefers
what formerly was but a Piece of written Parchment, to be a Patent or Charter.
For though it be true what Solomon says Eccles. 8. 4.
Where the word of a King is, there is power; yet that word does not act
effectually, until it be produced under the public Seal.

Some difference there is between learned Authors, about the antiquity of this
Office, when it first began in Eng^and.

Polydore Virgil, who though an Italian, could (when he would) see well into
English Antiquities, makes the Office to begin at the Conqueror. And B. Godwin
accounts them sufficiently ridiculous, who make Swithin Bishop of Winchester,
Chancellor of England under K. Athelwolfe.

Several persons are alleged See Master Philpots Catalogue of English
Chancellors, p. 1. 2, 3.
Chancellours to our English Kings before the Conquest, and King Ethelred
appointed the Abbat of Elie, ut in History of E^ly.
Regis Curia Cancellarii ageret dignitatem.

The Controversy may easily be compremized by this distinction; Chancellor
before the Conquest, imported an Office of credit in the Kings Court (not of
Judicature, but) of Residence, much in the nature of a Secretary. Thus lately
he was called the Chancellor (understand not of the Diocese, but) of the
Cathedral-Church, whose place was to pen the Letters belonging thereunto.
Whereas the notion of the Kings Chancellor since the Conquest, is enlarged and
advanced to signify the supreme Judge of the Land.

The Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, is in effect the same with the Lord
Chancelour of England: save that some will have the Lord Chancellours place ad
Terminum Vitae, and the Lord Keepers ad placitum Regis. Sure it is, that
because Nicholas Heath late Archbishop of York, and Chancellor of England,
was still alive, though outed of his Office, Sir Nicholas Bacon was made Lord
Keeper, and in his time the power of the Keeper was made equal with the
authority of the Chancellor by Act of Parliament.

We have begun our Catalogue of Chancellours at Sir Thomas More, before whose
time that place was generally discharged by Clergy men, entered in our Book
under the Title of Eminent Prelates. If any demand, why such Clergymen, who
have been Lord Chancellours, are not rather ranked under the Title of
Statesmen, than under the Topic of Prelates? Let such know, that seeing
Episcopacy is challenged to be jure Divino, and the Chancellours place
confessed to be of Humane Institution, I conceive them most properly placed and
to their best advantage.

If any ask, why the Lord Chancellours who meddle so much in matters of Law,
are not rather digested under the Title of Lawyers then under that of
Statesmen? Let such know, it is done, because some Chancellours were never
Lawyers ex professo, studying the Laws of the Land, for their intended
Function, taking them only in order to their own private accomplishment.
Whereof Sir Christopher Hatton was an eminent instance. As we begin our
Catalogue with Sir Thomas More, we close it with Sir Thomas Coventry, it being
hard to^ay, whether the Former were more Witty and Facetious, or the Later more
Wise and Judicious.

Lord Treasurers.
Kings without Treasure will not be suitably obeyed, and Treasure without a
Treasurer will not be safely preserved. Hence it was that the Crowns and
Scepters of Kings were made of gold, not only because it is the most pure and
precious of metalls, but to show, that wealth does effectually evidence and
maintain the strength and state of Majesty. We may therefore observe, not only
in profane but holy writ; not only in Old, but New Testnment, signal notice
taken of those who were Ezra 1. 8. ^ Neh. 13. 13.
over the Treasury, in which great place of Trust, the Eunuch served Candace
Queen Acts 8. 27.
of Ethiopia.

The Office of Lord Treasurers was ever beheld as a Place of great charge and
profit. One well skilled in the Perquisits thereof, being demanded, what he
conceived the yearly value of the place was worth? made this Return, That it
might be worth some thousands of pounds to him (who after death) would go
instantly to Heaven, twice as much to him, who would go to Purgatory, and a
Nemo Scit to him who would adventure to go to a worse place. But the plain
truth is, He that is a Bad Husband for himself, will never be a good one for
his Sovereign, and therefore no wonder if they have advanced fair Estates to
themselves, whose Office was so Advantageous, and they so judicious and prudent
persons, without any prejudice to their Master, and (for ought I know) Injury
to his Subjects.

We have begun our Catalogue at William Lord Powlett Marquess of Winchester.
For although before him, here and there Lay-Lords were Entrusted with that
Office, Yet generally they were Bishops, and so anticipated under our Topic of
Eminent Prelates, and blame me not if in this particular, I have made the
Luster of the Lords Spiritual, to Eclipse the Lords Temporal, drowning their
Civil Office in their Ecclesiastical Employment. We close our Catalogue of Lord
Treasurers, with Francis Lord Cottington.

Secretaries of State.
There were but two of these at once in the Kings time, whereof the one was
styled the Principal Secretary, the other the Secretary of Estate. Some have
said that the first in the Senioritie of Admition, was accounted the
Principal, but the Exceptions in this kind, being as many as the Regularities
(the Younger being often brought over the head of the elder to be Principal)
Their chiefnesse was Penes Regis Arbitrium. Nor was the one confined to
Foreign Negotiations, the other to domestic business, (as some have
believed) but promiscuously ordered all affairs, though the Genius of some
Secretaries did incline them most to foreign Transactions. Their Power was on
the matter alike, and Petitioners might make their Applications indifferently
to either, though most addressed themselves to him, in whom they had the
greatest Interest. Their Salaries were some Two hundred pounds a piece, and
five hundred pounds a piece more for Intelligence and Secret Service.

Before the Reformation Clergymen (who almost were all things) were generally
Secretaries of Estate, as Oliver King, Secretary to Edward 4. Edward 5. and
Henry the 7. and those came under our Pen in the Notion of Eminent Prelates. We
therefore begin our Catalogue of Secretaries from Sir Thomas Cromwell, in the
Reign of King Henry the Eighth, because from him until our Time a continued
Series of Laymen have discharged that Office.

We ^onclude our Secretaries of State with Sir John Cook, who perceiving his
aged body not so fit for such Active times, resigned his Place about the
beginning of the Long Parliament, though surviving some years after in a
private condition. We will for the more safety follow the Pattern of so wise a
Statesman, and where he gave over his Office, we will give over writing of
those Officers, for fear we tread too near on the Toes of the Times, and touch
too much on our Modern distempers.

Amiralls or Admiralls.
Much difference there is about the Original of this word, whilst most probable
their Opinion who make it of Eastern Extraction, borrowed by the Christians
from the Saracens. These derive it from Amir, in Arabic a Prince, and (...),
Belonging to the Sea, in the Greek Language, such mixture being precedented in
other words. Besides, seeing the Sultans Dominions in the Time of the Holy War,
extended from Sinus Arabius, to the North Eastern part of the Midland-Sea,
where a barbarous kind of Greek was spoken by many, Amirall (thus compounded)
was significatively comprehensive of his Jurisdiction, Admiral is but a
Depraving of Amirall in vulgar mouths. However it will never be beaten out of
the Heads of the Common sort, that seeing the Sea is Scene of Wonders,
something of Wonderment has incorporated it self in this Word, and that it
has a Glimps, Cast, or Eye of Admiration therein.

Our English Kings following the Precedent of the Politic Romans, who very
seldom entrusted places of great importance (especially during life) in a
single person, as also that they might gratify more and trust less, divided
the Oversight of sea-matters betwixt a Triumvirate of Amiralls, and (like wary
Merchants) ventured the charge in several bottoms for the more Safety.

1. The North Amirall. 2. The South Amirall. 3. The West Amirall. His
jurisdiction reached from the Mouth of Thames, to the outmost Orcades (though
often opposed by the Scots) and had Yarmouth for his prime Residence. His
Bounds stretched from the Thames Mouth to the Lands end, having his station
generally at Portsmouth. His power extended from the lands end to the Hebrides,
(having Ireland under his Inspection) Milford Haven the chief Stable for his
Wooden Horses.

I find that Richard Fitz-alin Earl of Arundell, was by King Richard the
second, made the first Amirall of all England, yet so, that if Three
Co-Admiralls were restored as formerly, his Charter expired. John Vere Earl of
Oxford, was, the sirst of Hen. the seventh, Amirall of England, and kept it
until the day of his Death. Afterward Men were chequered, at the pleasure of
our Princes, and took their turns in that Office. For this cause I can make no
certain Catalogue of them, who can take with my most fixed Eye, no steady aim
at them (the same persons being often alternately In, and Out of the Place)
whilst Officers protermino vitae, may be with some certainty recounted.

Yet have we sometimes inserted some Memorable Amiralls under the Ti^le of
Statesmen; and Vice-Amiralls under the Topic of Seamen, because the former had
no great knowledge in Navigation, (I say great) it being improper, they should
be seamasters who in no degree were seamen) and were employed rather for their
Trust, then skill, to see others do their Duty, whilst the latter were always
persons well experienced in Maritine affairs.

Lord-Deputies of IRELAND.
Ever since King Henry the second conquered Ireland, few of our English Princes
went thither in person, and none continued any long time there, save King John,
and King Richard the second, neither of them over-fortunate. But that Land was
governed by a Substitute, commissioned from our Kings, with the same power
though sometimes under several names.

Lord Lieutenants. Lord Deputies. Lord Chief Justice^. These were also of a
double nature, for Some staid in England and appointed Deputies under them, to
act all Irish Affairs. Others went over into Ireland, transacting all things by
presence, not proxy. Immediately deputed by the King to reside there. We
insist on this title, as which is most constant and current amongst them. Not
of the Kings Bench or CommonPleas but of all Ireland. This power was sometime
sole in a single person and sometimes (...) in two together.

Thus these three Titles are in sense Synonima, to signify the same power and
place. Some erroniously term them Presidents of Ireland, a Title belonging to
the particular Governors of Mounster and Connagh.

It is true of Ireland what was once said of * Edom, their Deputies were Kings.
No 1 King. 22. 47.
Viceroy in Christendom ( Naples it self not excepted) is observed in more
state. He chooses Sheriffs, and generally all Officers, save Bishops and
Judges, and these also, though not made by his commanding, are usually by his
commending to the King. He conferreth Knighthood, has power of life and death,
signified, by the Sword carried commonly before him, by a person of Honor. His
attendance and Housekeeping is magnificent, partly to set a Copy of State to
the barbarous Irish, by seeing the difference betwixt the rude rabble routs
running after their native Lords; and the solemnity of a regulated retinue;
partly to make in that Rebellious Nation, a reverential impression of Majesty,
that by the Shadow they may admire the Substance, and proportionably collect
the State of the King himself, who therein is represented. Our English Kings
were content with the Title of Lords of Ireland, until King Henry the Eighth,
who, partly to show his own power to assume what style he pleased, without
leave or liberty from the Pope (whose Supremity he had suppressed in his
Dominions) partly the more to awe the Irish, wrote himself King thereof, Anno
Dom. 1541. from which Year we date our Catalogue of Lord Deputies, as then, and
not before, Vice-Royes indeed.

Indeed it was no more then needs, for King Henry the Eighth to assume that
Title, seeing, quod efficit tale magis est tale, and the Commission whereby
King Henry the Second made William-Fitz-Adelme his Lieutenant of Ireland, has
this direction; Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Regibus; Comitibus, Baronibus, et
omnibus fidelibus suis in Hibernia, salutem.

Now, though by the post-poning of these Kings to Archbishops and Bishops, it
plainly appears that they were no Canonical Kings, (as I may say) I mean
solemnly invested with the Emblems of sovereignty, [the King of 6 Johannis
Claus* membrani 18
Connagh, the King of Thomond] yet were they more then Kings, even Tyrants in
the exercise of their 6 Hen* 3. Chart. m. 2.
Dominions, so that, King Henry was in some sort necessitated to set himself
King Paramount above them all.

CHAPTER VII. Of Capital Judges, and Writers on the Common Law.
BY CAPITAL JUDGES, we understand not those who have power to condemn Offenders
for Capital Faults, as all the Twelve Judges have (or any Sergeant
commissioned, to ride the Circuit,) but the Chief Judges, who as Capital
LETTERS stand in Power and Place above the rest, viz. 1. the Chief Justice of
the Kings Bench. 2. of the Common Pleas, 3. the Chief Baron of the Exchequer,
and the Learned Antiquary, Sr. Henry Spelman, In his glossary verb,
Justiciarius.
avoweth the Title of Capital Justicers, properly applicable to these alone.

The Chief Justice of the Kings, or Upper Bench, is commonly called the Lord
Chief Justice of England, a Title which the Lord Chancellor (accounting himself
Chief in that kind) looks on, as an injurious usurpation. And many alive may
remember how Sr. Edward Cook was accused to K. James, for so styling himself in
the Frontespiece of his Reports, Part the Tenth and Eleventh, insomuch, that
the Judge was fain to plead for himself, Erravimus cum Patribus, as who could
have produced plenty of Precedents therein.

2. The chief Justice of the Common Pleas in Place beneath, is in Profit above
the former. So that some have out of Design quitted That, to accept of This:
Amongst these was Sr. Edward Mountague, in the Reign of K. Henry the eighth,
who being demanded of his Friends, the Reason of his Self-degradation? I am now
(says he) an Old Man, and love the Kitching above the Hall, the Warmest place
best suiting my Age.

The Chief Baron is chiefly employed in the Exchequer, to decide causes which
relate to the Kings Revenue.

Their Brevia or Writts did commonly run with this Clause, That the Judge should
have and hold his PLACE, quam diu se been geserit, so long as he well behaved
himself, on this Token, That Sr. John Walter, Lord chief Baron of the
Exchequer, being to be outed of his Place, for adjudging the Loan-mony illegal,
pleaded for himself; That he was guilty of no Misdemeanour, who had only
delivered his Judgment according to his Conscience. Others are granted from the
King, durante nostro beneplacito; to continue in their Office, during his will
and pleasure.

We begin the Army of our Judges, (for some Few, like the Forlorn Hope,
advance higher,) about the time of King Edward the first. It is impossible
exactly to observe that Inn of Court, wherein each of them had his Education,
especially some of them being so Ancient, that in their times, Lincolnes Inn
and Greys Inn were Lincoln's Inn and Grey's Inn, I mean, belonged to those
their Owners, from whom they had their Names, as being, before they were
appropriated to the Students of our Municipall Laws.

Here I will condemn my self, to prevent the condemning of others, and confess
our Characters of these Judges to be very brief and defective. Indeed, were the
Subject we treat of overstrewed with Ashes, (like the floor of Bells Temple) it
were easy to find out and follow the Footsteps therein: But here is no such
help to Trace the Footings of Truth, Time having almost out-worn all
impressions thereof. I perceive though Judges leave more Land than Bishops,
they leave less Memorialls behind them, of the time, place, and manner, when
and where born, and dyed, and how they demeaned themselves.

In the same Topic with Judges, we have also placed such as have been Writers
of our Common Law, and such conjunction we hope) is no disparagement,
considering many of them were Capital Judges, (as Broke, Dyer, Coke, etc.) and
the rest, learned Men, of great repute in their Profession, insomuch that the
Judges themselves, in several Cases, have submitted to their Judgments.

And here I can but admire at the comparative paucity of the Books of our
Common Law, in proportion to those written of the Civil and Canon Law. Oh how
corpulent are the Corpus'es of both those Laws. Besides their Shadows are far
bigger than their Bodies; their Glosses larger than their Text.

Insomuch, that one may bury two Thousand pounds and upwards in the Purchase,
and yet hardly compass a Moity of them: whereas all the Writers of the
Common Law, (except they be much multiplied very lately) with all the
Year-Books belonging thereunto, may be bought for threescore pounds, or
thereabouts, which with some men is an Argument, that the Common Law imbraceth
the most compendious course to decide Causes, and by the fewness of the Books,
is not guilty of so much difficulty and tedious prolixity, as the common and
civil Laws.

Yet is it most true, that common Law Books are dearer than any of the same
Proportion, Quot libri, tot librae, holds true in many, and is exceeded in
some of them. Yea, should now an old common Law-book be new-printed, it would
not quit cost to the PRINTRR, nor turn to any considerable account. For the
Profession of the Law is narrow in it self, as confined to few persons, and
those are already sufficiently furnished, with all Authors on that Subject,
which with careful keeping and good using, will serve them and their sons
sons, unto the third Generation. So that a whole Age would not carry off a New
Impression of an Ancient Law-book, and ( quick return being the life of
trading) the tediousness of the sale would eat up the profit thereof.

All I will add is this, that, That TAILOR, who being cunning in his Trade,
and taking exact measure of a Person, makes a suit purposely for him, may be
presumed to fit him better than those, who, (by a general aim) at random make
Clothes for him. In like manner, seeing our municipal Law, was purposely
composed by the Sages of this Land, who best knew the Genius of our Nation, it
may be concluded more proper for our people, and more applicable to all the
Emergencies in this half-Island, than the civil Law, made for the general
Concernment of the whole Empire, by such who were unacquainted with the
Particularities of our Land and Nation.

CHAPTER VIII. Of Soldiers and Seamen, with the necessity to encourage the
Trade of Fishing.
SOLDIERS succeed, though it almost affrighteth my Pen to meddle with such
Martial Persons. It is reported of the God of the Jews, That he would have no
share in the Pantheon at Rome, except he might have (and that justly too) the
whole Temple to himself. So lately we have been so sadly sensible of the
boisterousness of Soldiers, one may suspect, they will [though unjustly]
justle all others out of the Book, to make room for themselves.

But since their violence has (blessed be God) been seasonably retrenched, we
have adventured to select some signal Persons of that Profession, whose
Prowess made eminent impression on Foreign Parts (so purposely to decline all
meddling with the doleful and dangerous Distractions of our Times) beginning
our List in the Reign of King Edward the 3d. and concluding in the beginning of
King Charles.

Seamen.
Surely Divine Providence did not make the vast body of the Sea, for no other
use, than for Fishes to disport themselves therein, or, (as some do conceit)
only for to quench and qualify the drought and heat of the Sun with the
moisture thereof, but it was for higher intendmens. Chiefly, That by sailing
thereon, there may be the continuing of Commerce, the communicating of Learning
and Religion (the Last from Palestine the Staple thereof) and the more speedy
and convenient portage of Burdens, seeing, a laden Ship does fly in
comparison of the creeping of an empty Wagon.

Now to speak what Envy cannot deny, Our Englishmen, either for Fights, or
Discoveries, whether for tame Ships, Merchants Men, or Wild Ships, Men of War
carry away the Garland, from all Nations in the Christian World.

Learned Keckerman, Hoc certum est, omnibus body gentibus navigandi industria,
and peritia, superiores esse Anglos, and post Anglos Hollandos.
who being a German by birth, was unbiased in his judgment, and living in
Dantz, (a Port of great trading, whither Seamen repaired from all parts) and
writing a Book De re nautica, may be presumed skilful therein, allows the
English the best Seamen, and next to them the Hollanders. And if the later dare
deny the truth hereof, let them remember the late Peace they purchased of the
English, and thank God, that they met with so conscientious Chapmen, who set no
higher price thereon.

Yea, Let the Dutch know, that they are the Scholars to the English, in some of
their Discoveries: For I find the four first Circumnavigators of the World thus
qualified for their Nativities,

1. Magellanus, a Spaniard. 2. Sr. Francis Drake, an Englishman. 3. Sr. Thomas
Candish, an Englishman. 4. Oliver Noort, an Hollander.
But be it known, That the last of these had an Englishman, Captain Purchase,
his Pilgrims, lib. 2. Page 17.
Mellis by name, Pilot to conduct him.

Yet let not my commending of our English Seamen be misinterpreted, as if I did
not refer all success to the goodness of God, the grand Admiral of the World.
The praising of Instruments (by way of subordination) is no more detrimental to
the honor of the Principal, than the praising of the edge of the Axe is a
disparagement to the strength of the Arm which uses it. God I confess by his
Providence orders all by Land and by sea; yea, he may be said to be the first
Shipwright; for I behold the Arc, as a Bird, wholly hatched* but utterly
unfledg, without any feathers of Masts and Tackling, it could only float, and
not sail, yet so, that therein was left pattern enough for humane Ingenuity to
improve it to Naval perfection.

Yea, God himself has in Scripture taken signal notice of the dextrous in this
nature, on which account we find the Tyrians, or Men of 1 Kings, 9. 27.
Hiram, praised, for that they had knowledge of the sea, when sent with the
servants of Solomon to Ophir.

We begin our Catalogue of Seamen in the Reign of King Edward the 3d. before
which time there were many good seamen in England, but few good English-seamen,
our King using Mariners of the Hanse Towns. But it is no good huswifery to hire
Chairwomen to do that, which may as well and better be done by her own
servants. In the time of Edward the third, England grew famous for Sea Fights
with the French, and increased in credit, especially since the Navy Royal was
erected by Q. Elizabeth.

Some conceive it would be a great advancement to the perfecting of English
Navigation, if allowance were given, to read a Lecture in London concerning
that Subject, in imitation of the late Emperor CHARLES the fifth, who wisely
considering the rawness of his Seamen, and the manifold shipwracks which they
sustained in passing and repassing between Spain and the West*Indies,
established, not only a Pilote Major, for the examination of such as were to
take charge of Ships in that voyage, but also founded a Lecture for the Art of
Navigation, which to this day is read in the Contraction House at Sivil: the
Readers of which Lecture, have not only carefully taught and instructed the
Spanish Mariners by word of mouth, but have also published sundry exact and
worthy Treatises, concerning Marine causes, for the direction and encouragement
of Posterity.

Here it were to be wished, That more care were taken for, and encouragement
given to the breeding of Fishermen; whom I may call the spawn, or young Fry of
seamen; yea such as hope that Mariners will hold up, if Fishermen be destroyed,
may as rationally exspect plenty of honey and wax, though only old stocks of
Bees were kept without either Casts or Swarms.

Nor can Fishermen be kept up, except the public eating of Fish at set times
be countenanced, yea enjoined by the State. Some suspect, as if there were a
Pope in the belly of every Fish, and some bones of superstition in them, which
would choke a conscientious person, especially if fasting days be observed.
But know that such Customs grew from a treble root, of Popery, Piety, and
Policy; and though the first of these be plucked up, the other must be watered,
and maintained; and Statesmen may be mortified and wise without being
superstitious: Otherwise the not keeping of Fasting-dayes will make us keep
Fasting-Dayes, I mean, The not forbearing of Flesh, for the feeding on Fish,
for the good of the STATE, will in process of time prove the ruin of
Fishermen, they of Seamen, both of Englishmen.

We are sadly sensible of the truth hereof in part, (God forbid, in whole) by
the decay of so many Towns on our North-east Sea, Hartlepool, Whitebay,
Bridlington, Scarborough, Wells, Cromer, Lestof^, Alborough, Orford, and
generally all from New castle to Harewitch, which formerly set out yearly (as I
am informed) Two Hundred Ships, and upwards, inployed in the Fisherie, but
chiefly for the taking of Ling, that Noble Fish, corrival in his Joule with the
surloin of Beef, at the Tables of Gentlemen.

These Fishermen, set forth formerly, with all their male Family, seamen,
sea-youths, I had almost said, sea-children too, (seeing some learned the
Language of lar-board, and star-board, with Bread, and Butter,) Graduates in
Navigation, and indeed the Fishery did breed, the natural and best elemented
seamen.

But since our late Civil Wars not three ships are employed yearly for that
purpos^, Fishermen preferring rather to let their Vesse^ lie, and rot in their
Havens, than to undergo much pain and peril; for, that would not at their
return quit cost in any proportion.

So that it is suspicious, That in process of time we shall lose, (the Masters
being few and aged) the Mystery of Ling-catching, and perchance the Art of
taking and handling some other kind of sound and good Fish* no Nation (without
flattery to our selves be it spoken) using more care and skill in ordering of
that Commodity.

Yea, which is a greater mischief, it is to be feared, that the seminary of
seamen will decay. For (under correction be it spoken) it is not the long
voyages to the EastIndies etc. which do make, but mar seamen* they are not
the Womb, but rather the Grave of good Mariners, it is the Fishery which has
been the Nursery of them, though now much disheartened, because their Fish turn
to no account, they are brought to so bad Markets. Nor is there any hope of
redressing this, but by keeping up Fasting-Dayes, which our Ancestors so
solemnly observed. I say, Our Ancestors, who were not so weak in making, as we
are wilful in breaking them, and who consulting the situation of this Island,
with the conveniences appendant thereunto, suited their Laws and accommodated
their Customs to the best benefit thereof.

Nor was it without good cause why Wednesdayes and Fridayes were by them
appointed for Fish-dayes: I confess some Foreigners render this Reason, (and
father it upon Clemens Alexandrinus) that, Because those days were dedicated
by the Heathen, the one to Mercury the God of cheating, the other to Venus the
Goddess of lust, therefore the Christians should macerate themselves on that
day with Fasting, in sorrowful remembrance of their Pronity to the vices
aforenamed: But waving such fancies our English Fish, or Fasting-Dayes are
founded on a more serious consideration.

For our English Fishermen, in Kent, Sussex, Hants^re, etc. set forth on
Monday, and catch their Fish, which on Tuesday they send up to London, where on
Wednesday it is sold and eaten. Such therefore, who lately have propounded to
antidate Fish-eating, and to remove it from Wednesday to Tuesday, must thereby
occasion the encroaching on the Lord's Day, to furnish the Markets with that
Commodity. Again, such Fishermen as returned on Tuesday, set forth afresh on
Wednesday, to take Fish, which on Thursday they send up to London, to supply
the remainder of the Week; It being observable, that so great is the goodness
of God to our Nation, that there is not one week in the year wherein some
wholesome Fish, caught on our own Coast, is not in the prime Season thereof.

As for Staple or Salt-Fish, there are those that are acquainted in the
Criticismes thereof, and have exactly stated, and cast up the proportions, who
will maintain, that it will do the deed, and set up the Fishery as high as ever
it was, if every one in England able to dispend a Hundred Pounds per annum,
were enjoined to lay out Twenty Shillings a Year, in staple-fish, a Sum so
inconsiderable in the Particulars, that it will hurt none, and so considerble
in the total, it will help all of our Nation. If any censure this for a tedious
Digression, let it be imputed to my Zeal for the good of the Commonwealth.

CHAPTER IX. Of Writers on the Cannon and Civil Law, Physic, Chemistry, and
Surgery.
I Sometimes wondered in my self at two things in the Primitive Church, during
the time of the Apostles, First, That seeing they enjoyed all things in Acts 4.
32.
common, what use they had of Lawyers, seeing no Propriety, no Pleading, and
such a Communion of all things gave a Writ of Ease to that Profession. And yet
I find mention made of Tit. 3. 13.
Zenas the Lawyer, no Scribe of the Law, (as many amongst the Jews) but (...)
an Advocate, or Barrister therein.

Secondly, I wondered what use there was of Physicians in the Church, seeing
the Apostles miraculously cured all Maladies, and so (in my apprehension) gave
a Supersedeas to the Practitioners in that Faculty, and yet I find honorable
mention made of Colos. 4. 14.
Luke, the beloved Physician.

But since I have wondered at my wondering thereat; For that Communion of Goods
was but t^mporal, for a short continuance, and topical, of a narrow compass,
practiced only in Judea, or thereabouts, whilst the Churches amongst the
Gentiles continued their propriety, and particularly at Rome, where Zenas had
his Habitation, and had work enough, no doubt, to exercise his Profession, even
amongst Christians themselves.

As for the Apostles, they had not always power at their own pleasure to work
Mi^acles and cure diseases in all Persons, no, nor always in themselves
(witness 2 Cor. 1. 8, and 9.
sick St. Paul, receiving in himself the Sentence of Death) but as they were
directed, for the glory of God, and other occasions: And therefore
notwithstanding their miraculous Power, St Luke might have plenty of Practice
in his Profession. Not was it probable, that God ( the Author of all
Ingenuity) would by the giving of the Gospel utterly extinguish any literal
Calling, which formerly had been publicly, lawfully, and needfully professed.

We have in our following Book, given in the List of some Eminent LAWYERS,
Civilians, and Cannonists, who have wrote on that Subject, though we confess
them very few in Number, their Profession being lately undeservedly disgraced,
though now we congratulate the probability of the Restitution thereof to its
former Dignity. Sure I am, in the days of Queen Elizabeth, when an Ambassador
was sent to Foreign PRINCES, if it were an Affair of grand importance, and more
than a mere matter of magni^ent complement, some able Civilian, [as Doctor
Hadden, Dale, Fletcher, etc.] was joined in Commission with the Nobleman,
employed on that Embassy. And as the Iron Dogs bear the burden of the fuel,
while the Brasen-Andirons stand only for state, to entertain the Eyes; so the
Negotiating part was loaded on the Civil (...), whilst the Pomp-pageantry was
discharged at the cost of the Nobleman.

Writers on Physic.
The P^ecept in the Apocrypha has a Canonical Truth therein, Honor the
Physician for necessity sake; and although King Asa justly received little
benefit by them, because of his preposterous addressing himself to them, before
he went to 2 Chronicles. 16. 12.
God: and the. Woman in the Gospel (troubled with the Issue) reaped less ease
by Luke 8. 43.
their Endeavors; because God reserved her a Subject for his own Miraculous
Cure; yet in all Ages Millions have been cured by their Practice.

The Ancient Bri^tans, who went without Clothes, may well be presumed to live
without Physic; Yet, seeing very Beasts know what is good for themselves (the
Dear, the Cretan Dictamum, and Toad, his Antidote of plantaine) sure they had
some experimental Receipts used amongst them, and left the rest to Nature, and
Temperance to cure: The Saxons had those they termed Leaches, or Bloud-letters,
but were little skilled in methodical practice. Under the Normans, they began
in England, (and would we had ferch'd Physicians only, and not Diseases from
France.) Yet three hundred years since it was no distinct Profession by it
self, but practiced by men in Orders, witness See their several Characters
under their Names in our ensuing Book.
Nicholas de Fernham, the chief English Physician and Bishop of Durham, Hugh of
Evesham, a Physician and Cardinal, Grisant, a Physician and Pope. Yea, the word
Physician, appears not in our Statutes, till the days of King Henry the eight,
who incorporated their College at London, since which time they have
multiplied and flourished in our Nation, but never more, and more learned then
in our age, wherein that Art, and especially the Anatomical part thereof is
much improved, our Civil Wars perchance occasioning the latter.

We begin our Catalogue at Richardus Anglicus our first Physician, flourishing
Anno 1230. and continue to Doctor Harvey, whom I may term Gulielmus Anglicus,
such honor he has done England by his worthy Writings. Thus wishing them all
happy success in their Practice, I desire a custom in France, and other
foreign parts, naturalized in England, where a Physician is liable to
Excommunication, if visiting a Patient thrice before he acquainteth a Priest of
his sickness, that so the Medicine for soul and body, may go hand in hand
together.

Chimistry.
Chimistry is an ingenious Profession, as which by Art will force somewhat of
worth and eminence from the dullest substance, yea the obduras'st, and hardest
hearted body, cannot but shed forth a tear of precious liquor, when urged
thereunto with its entreaties.

They may be termed Parcel-physicians, every day producing rare experiments,
for the curing of many diseas es. bu

I must confess there occurs t few, (and of those few, fewer Modern ones)
through the whole series of our Book: Yet may we be said to have extracted the
spirits (I mean such as were eminent therein) of this Profession, being
confident the judicious Reader, will value one Jem, before many Barley Corns,
and one Drop of a true extract, before many Bottles of worthless water.

Surgery.
Necessary and ancient their Profession, ever since man's body was subject to
enmity and casualty. For, that promise, John 10. 39.
A bone of him shall not be broken, is peculiar to Christ. As for the other,
Psalm. 91. 12.
To keep them in all their ways, that they dash not their foot against a stone,
though it be extended to all Christians, yet it admits (as other temporal
promises) of many exceptions according to Gods will and pleasure.

It seems by the Parable of the good Luke 11. 34.
Samaritan, who bound up the Passengers wounds, pouring in Oil and Wine, that
in that age, ordinary persons had a general insight in Surgery, for their
own and others use. And it is reported to the just praise of the Scotch
Buchanan Rerum Scoticarum lib. 13. sol. 138. page 1.
Nobility, that anciently they all were very dextrous thereat, particularly it
is written of James the fourth King of Scotland, Quod vulnera scientissime
tractaret, He was most scilful at the handling of wounds. But we speak of
Surgery, as it is a particular Mystery, Professed by such as make a Vocation
thereof. Of whom we have inserted some (eminent for their Writings or
otherwise) amongst Physicians, and that (as we hope) without any offense,
seeing the healing of diseases and wounds were anciently one Calling, (as still
great the Sympathy betwixt them, many diseases causing wounds, as Ulcers, as
wounds occasioning diseases, as fevers,) till in process of time they were
separated, and Chirurgions only consigned to the Manual Operation. Thus wishing
unto them, the three Requisits for their practice, an Eagles Eye, a Ladies
Hand, and a Lions Heart, I leave them, and proceed.

CHAP. X. Writers.
BEING to handle this Subject, let not the Reader expect that I will begin
their Catalogue from Fabulous Antiquity, or rather fanciful Fabels. For if the
first Century of J. Bale or J. Pits. their British Writers were Garbled, four
parts of five would be found to be Trash, such as

1. Samothes Gigas 2. Magus Samotheus 3. Sarron Magius 4. Druys Sarronius 5.
Bardus Druydius 6. Albion Mareoticus 7. Brytus Julius 8. Gerion Augur 9. Aquila
Septonius 10. Perdix Praesagus 11. Cambra Formosa 12. Plenidius Sagax, etc.
Of these some never were men, others (if men) never were Writers, others (if
Writers) never left Works continuing to our age, though some Manuscript-Mongers
may make as if they had perused them. It is well they had so much modesty, as
not to pretend inspection into the Book of life, seeing all other books have
come under their Omnividencie.

We are content to begin our number, at Gildas (commonly surnamed) the wise,
(flourishing about the year 580.) and are right gald to have so good a General,
to lead our Army of Writers, taking it for a token of good success.

Now these Writers were either such who wrote before, or since the Reformation
of Religion. The former again fall generally under a treble division, as either
Historians, Philologists, or Divines, and we will insist a little on their
several employments.

Of Writers on Philology and Divinity.
Doctor Collens Kings Professor in Cambridge, and that Oracle of Eloquence once
founded his Speech (made to entertain Strangers at the Commencement) on the
words of Romans 16. 15.
Saint Paul, Salute Philologus and Olympas. Under the former, he comprised all
persons persent, eminent in Humane Learning, under the later, all skillful in
Heavenly Divinity.

Indeed Philology properly is Terse and Polite Learning, melior literatura,
(married long since by Martianus Capella to Mercury) being that Florid skill,
containing only the Roses of learning, without the prickles thereof, in which
narrow sense thorny Philosophy is discharged as no part of Philology. But we
take it in the larger notion, as inclusive of all human liberal Studies, and
preposed to Divinity, as the Porch to the Palace.

Having passed the Porch of Philology, we proceed to the Palace of Divinity.
The Writers in this Faculty, we distinguish into two sorts. First, Positive
Divines, such I mean, whose works are either Comments on, or else expositions
of some portion of Sacred Writ. Secondly, Schoolmen, who have made it their
business to Weave find Threads of nicer Distinctions.

Writers on History.
This is either Ecclesiastical or Civil. Of both these, England presents
many, but generally Moncks before the Reformation, who too much indulging to
Holy Fraud, have farced their Books with many feigned miracles, to the
prejudice of truth. However, herein foreign Historians have been as guitly as
Englishmen of the same Age, witness the complaint of In his book of the coming
of Saint James the Apostle into Spain, chapter 1.
Mariana the Jesuit, which one may justly wonder how it passed the Index
Expurgatorius. Quis enim negare possit Fastos Ecclesiasticos, aliquando
adulatione Temporum, aut potius incuria hominum, multis maculis contaminatos,
libris aliis, quibus preces Ecclesiasticae ritusque sacrorum continentur,
multas fuisse inspersas confusasque fabulas and commenta: Addam nonnunquam in
Templis reliquias dabias, prophana Corpora pro sanctorum (qui cum Christo in
coelo regnant) exuviis sacris fuisse proposita. Est enim miserum negare non
posse, quid sit turpe confiteri; at nescio quo pacto fictis saepe fabulis, and
prae posteris mendaciorum nugis, populus magis quam veritate ac synceritate
capitur, ea est mentis nostrae inanitas, has sordes, ubi semel irrepserunt in
Ecclesiam sacrorum ritus libros Ecclesiasticos, nobis fortassis dormientibus,
attrectare nemo audet, mutive nemo, ne impietatis suspicionem commoreat,
scilicet, and Religioni adversarius esse videatur.

Nor has our Land been altogether barren of Historians since the Reformation,
having yielded some of as tall parts, and large performances, as any Nation in
Christendom.

Besides these, we have adventured to add such as have been eminent in Poetry,
which may not unfitly be termed the binding of Proselites good behavior, tying
it to the strict observation of time and measure.

Amongst these, some are additioned with the Title of Laureat, though I must
consess, I could never find the root whence their Bays did grow in England, as
to any solemn institution thereof in our Nation. Indeed, I read of Petrarch,
(the pre-coetanean of our Chaucer) that he was crowned with a Laurel, in the
Vita Petrac.
Capitol, by the Senate of Rome, Anno 1341. as also that Frederic the third
Emperor of Germany, gave the Laurel to Holdastus lib. tom. 3 p. 482.
Conradus Celtes, and since the Count Palatines of the Empire claim the
privilege, solemnly to invest Poets with the Bays.

The branches hereof, in all ages have been accounted honorable, in so much
that King James in some sort, waved his crown (in the two and
twenty-shilling-pieces) to wear the Laurel in his new twenty-shilling-pieces.
On the same token, that a wag passed this jest thereon, That Poets being
always poor, Bays were rather the emblem of wit then wealth, since King James
no sooner began to wear them, but presently he fell two shillings in the pound
in public valuation.

As for our English Poets, some have assumed that style unto themselves, as
John Kay in his Dedication of The Seige of Rhodes to King Edward the fourth,
subscribing himself his humble Poet Laureat. Others have in complement given
the title to such persons as were eminent in that Faculty, and nothing more
usual then to see their pictures before their Books, and Statues on their
Tombs, ornamented accordingly. However, all this is done by civil courtesy, or
common custom, no ceremonious creation in Court or University. I write not
this, as if I grudged to Poets a whole grove of Laurel, much less a sprig to
incircle their heads, but because I would not have any specious untruth imposed
on the Readers belief.

Yet want there not those, who do confidently averr that there is always a
Laureat Poet in England, and but one at a time, the Laurel importing Conquest
and Sovereignty, and so by consequence soleness in that faculty; and that there
has been a constant succession of them at Court, who beside their salary from
the King, were yearly to have a tun of win, as very essential to the heightning
of fancy. This last I conceive founded, on what we find given to Geffery
Chaucer,

Vigesimo secundo anno Richardi secundi concessum Galfrido Chaucer unum dolium
vini per annum durante vita, in portu Civitatis London, per manus capitalis
pincernae nostri. But Chaucer, besides his poetical accomplishments, did the
King service both in war and peace, as Soldier and Ambassador, in reward
whereof, this and many other boons were bestowed upon him.

Musicians.
Music is nothing else, but wild sounds civilized into Time and Tune. Such the
extensiveness thereof, that it stoopeth as low as bruit beasts, yet mounteth as
high as Angels. For Horses will do more for a whistle then for a whip, and by
hearing their bells gingel away their weariness.

The Angels in Heaven employ themselves in Music, and one ingeniously
expresses it to this effect The Conceit is Mr. Walle^s, whose book is nor by
me at the present to transcribe the very words.


We know no more what they do do above,
Save only that they Sing, and that they Love.
And although we know not the Notes of their Music, we know what their Ditty
is, namely Hallalu-jah.

Such as cavil at Music, because Genesis 4. 21.
Juball, a descendant from wicked Cain, was the first founder thereof, may as
well be content to lie out of doors, and refuse all cover to shelter them,
because Jaball, of the same extraction, being his own brother, first invented
to dwell in Tents.

I confess there is a company of pretenders to Music, who are commonly called
Crowders, and that justly too, because they Crowd into the company of Gentlemen
both unsent for, and unwelcome; but these are no more a disgrace to the true
professors of that faculty, then Monkies are a disparagement to mankind.

Now right ancient is the use of Music in England, especially if it be true
what I read in a worthy Father, and I know not which more to admire, either
that so memorable a passage should escape Master Camdens, or that it should
fall under my observation. Clemens Alexand. Strom. lib. 6. page 632.

(...) In (...) Insula. S^ Syl. Burgius Latins it.
(...).

They say, even those which compose histories, that in the Island of Britanny,
there is a certain Cave, lying under a Mountain, in the top thereof gaping. The
wind therefore falling into the Cave, and dashing into the bosom of a hollow
place, there is heard a tinckling of Cymbals, beating in Tune and Time.

Where this musical place should be in Britain, I could never find; yet have
been informed, By Master Stephens, a learned servant to the Bishop.
that Doctor Miles Smith, Bishop of Hereford, found something tending that way
(by the help of an active fancy) in Herefordshire. But waving this natural, the
antiquity of artificial Music in this Island, is proved by the practice of the
Bards, thereby communicating Religion, Learning and Civility, to the Britans.

Right glad I am, that when Music was lately shut out of our Churches, (on
what default of hers I dare not to enquire) it has since been harbored and
welcomed in the Halls, Parlors and Chambers, of the primest persons of this
Nation. Sure I am, it could not enter into my Head, to surm se that Music
would have been so much discouraged by such who turned our Kingdom into a
Commonwealth, seeing they prided themselves in the arms thereof, an impaled
Harp being Moity of the same. When it was Asked what made a good Musician, one
Answered a good voice, another that it was skill, but he said the truth, who
said, it was encouragement. It was therefore my constant wish, that seeing most
of our* Musicians were men of maturity, and arrived at their full age and
skill, before these distracted times began, and seeing what the Historian wrote
in another sense, is true here in our acception and application thereof, Res
est unius seculi populus virorum; I say, I did constantly wish, that there
might have been some semenary of youth set up, to be bred in the faculty of
Music, to supply succession, when this Set of Masters in that Science had
served their generation.

Yet although I missed of what I did then desire, yet thanks be to God, I have
lived to see Music come into request, (since our Nation came into right Tune)
and begin to flourish in our Churches and elsewhere, so that now no fear but we
shall have a new generation skillful in that Science, to succeed such, whose
age shall call upon them to pay their debt to nature.

If any who dislike Music in Churches, object it useless (if not hurtful) in
Divine Services, let them hear what both a learned and Hookers Eccle. Pol. page
858. Sect. 38.
able Divine alleges in defense thereof.

So that although we lay altogether aside the consideration of Ditty or Matter,
the very Harmony of sounds being framed in due sort, and carried from the Ear
to the spiritual faculties of the Soul, it is by a native puissance and
efficacy greatly available to bring to a perfect temper, whatsoever is there
troubled, apt as well to quicken the spirits, as to allay that which is too
eager, sovereign against melancholy and despair, forceable to draw forth Tears
of Devotion, if the Mind be such as can yield them, able both to move and
moderate all affections. In recounting up of Musicians, I have only insisted on
such who made it there profession, and either have written books of that
faculty, and have attained to such an eminence therein, as is generally
acknowledged. Otherwise the work would be endless to recount all up who took it
as a quality of accomplishment, amongst whom King Henry the eighth must be
accounted, who (as Erasmus testifies to his knowledge) did not only sing his
part sure, but also compose services for his Chapel, of four, five, and six
parts, though as good a Professor as he was, he was a great destroyer of Music
in this Land; surely, not intentionly, but accidentaly, when he suppressed so
many Quires at the Desolution.

Romish Exile Writers.
After the Writers before the Reformation, succeed those Romish banished
Writers since the same, all living since the reign of Q* Mary which might have
been distanced from the former with a black line interposed, as beheld under a
far different (yea worse) qualification. For the superstitions of the former
were the more pardonable, as living in a dark age, which are less excusable in
these since the light of the Gospel.

I confess the word Exile carries much of commiseration therein, and with
chatably minded men bespeaks pity to the persons, until the cause of their
banishment be well considered. For some in the first of Queen Elizabeth
wilfully left the Land, and so in effect banished themselves, others having
their lives forfeited by the Laws, had their deaths mercifully commuted by ou^
Magistrates into banishment.

Objection. These men might have been lost without loss, and been omitted in
your book as no limb, but a wen, yea an ulcer thereof.

Answer. Grant them never so bad, being digested into a Classis by themselves,
their mixture cannot be infectious to others. Secondly, Abate their errors,
and otherwise many of them were well meriting of the Commonwealth of learning.
Lastly, The passages of their lives conduce very much to the clearing of
Ecclesiastcal History.

In noting of their nativties, I have wholly observed the instructions of
Pitse^s, where I knock off with his death, my light ending with his life in
that subject, since which time I have neither list to enquire, nor convenience
to attain, of these Romish fugitives beyond the seas.

A just Complaint of the numerosity of needless Books.
Solomon was sensible of this vanity, even in his time, when pronouncing of
Book there is no end. The Heathen Poet took notice thereof,

Scribimus indocti doctique Poemata passim.
Poems write a main we do,
Learned and unlearned too.
All this was before the invention of Printing, when books came but single into
the public, which since that Mystery is made common, come swimning into the
world like shoals of Fishes, and one edition spawneth another. This made
learned Erasmus for company sake to jeer himself, that he might the more freely
jeer others, In prefat, in tertiam seriem quarti Tomi Hierom. p. 408.
Multi mei similes hoc morbo laborant, ut cum scribere nesciant, tamen a
scribendo temporare non possunt. Many men like my self, are sick of this
decease, that when they know not how to write, yet cannot forbear from writing.

A worthy English Barronet in his book (incomparable on that subject) has
clearly and truly stated this point.

Here I expect, that the judicious Reader will excuse me, if I take no notice
of many Modern Phamphliteers, seeing unlearned Scriblers, are not ranked with
learned Writers; yea, it was, though tartly, truly said, to the Author of such
a book,

Dum scateant alii erratis, datur unica Libro
Menda tuo, tot^m est intiger error opus.
Whilst others flow with faults, but one is past
In all thy book, it is fault from first to last.
Indeed the Press, at first a Virgin, then a chaste Wife, is since turned
Common, as to prostitute her self to all Scurrilous Pamphlets. When the Author
of an idle and impersect book, ends with a caetera dessiderantur, one altered
it non dessider antur, sed desunt. Indeed they were not (though wanting)
wanted, the world having no need of them, many books being like King Joram, who
lived not being desired, yea, the Press begineth to be an oppression of the
Land, such the burden of needless books therein.

Some will say, the charge may most justly be brought against your self, who
have loaded the Land with more books, then any of your Age. To this I confess
my fault, and promise amendment, that God willing hereafter I will never Print
book in the English tongue, but what shall tend directly to Divinity.

CHAP. XI. Of Benefactors to the Public, wherein also Choice Charities are
recommended to men of Estates.
These are reducible to several Heads, and we will begin with them who have
been Builders of

CHURCHES.
SUch Centurions who have erected us Synagogues, places for Gods public
Worship, seem to me to have given good testimony of their Love to our nation.
Bitter was the Brave which railing Rabsheca sent to holy Hezekiah proffering
him Isaiah 36. 8.
2000 Horses on Condition that the other were but able to find Riders for them.
But it grieves me to see the Superstition of the former insult over the
religion of this present age, bragging that she left us ten thousand Churches
and Chapels more or less ready built, if we can find but repairers to keep
them up: It is in my opinion both dishonorable to God, and scandalous to all
good men to see such houses daily decay: But there is a generation of people
who to prevent the verifying of the old proverb, Pater noster built Churches,
and our Father plucks them down; endeavor to pluck down both Churches and Our
Father together, neglecting, yea despising the use both of the one and the
other. Be it here remembered, that it is not only equal but just, that such as
have been Founders of Churches or Grand Benefactors unto them, should have due
Respect in preserving their Monuments from Violation or Incroachment of others.
I urge this the rather, because abuses have been frequent in this kind, even to
those that have deserved best. I cannot with patience remember the Story of
Henry Keble Lord Mayor of London 1511. who, besides other Benefactions in his
Life time, rebuilded Alder-Mary-Church run to very Ruins, and bequeathed at
his Death a thousand pounds for the finishing thereof. Yet within sixty years
after, his Bones were unkindly yea inhumanely cast Stows Survey of London, page
89.
out of the Vaute wherein they were buried, his Monument plucked down for some
Wealthy Person of the * Idem p. 267.
present times, to be buried therein, I could not but on this Occasion rub up
my old Poetry;

Facit Indignatio Versus.
The Author to Alder-Mary Church.
Ungrateful Church, orerun with rust,
Lately buried in the dust;
Utterly thou had been lost,
If not preserved by Keble's cost:
A Thousand Pounds might it not buy,
Six foot in length for him to lie:
But outed of his quiet Tomb,
For later Corpse he must make Room:
Tell me where his Dust is cast,
Though It be late, yet now at last;
All his Bones with Scorn ejected,
I will see them recollected:
Who feign my self would Kinsman prove
To all that did God's Temples love.
Alder-Mary Churches Answer.
Alas! my Innocence excuse,
My Wardens they did me abuse,
Whose Avarice his Ashes sold,
That Goodness might give place to Gold;
As for his Relics, all the Town,
They are scattered, up and down;
See a Church repaired well,
There a Sprinkling of them fell;
See a new Church lately built?
Thicker there his Ashes spilt:
O that all the Land throughout,
Kebles Dust were thrown about
Places scattered with that seed,
Would a Crop of Churches breed.
I could wish this was the last Barbarism in this kind, and am sorry that upon
small Inquiry, I could insist on later Instances.

Free-Schools and Colleges.
I place Schools before Colleges, because they are introductory thereunto,
intended for the b^eeding of Children and Youth, as the other for youth and
men. And seeing much of Truth is contained in our English Proverb, It is as
good to be unborn as unbred, such may in some sort seem their Second-Parents,
who have provided for their Education.

These Schools are of two kinds. First, those wherein only a Salary is given to
the Schoolmaster to teach Children gratis, and these I confess are good.
Secondly, such wherein a select number of Scholars have competent maintenance
allowed toward their Living in the University, and these all will acknowledge
are better. Some do suspect a surfeit in our Land of the multitude of Schools,
because the Nursery is bigger then the Orchard, the one breeding more Plants
then the other can maintain Trees, and the Land not affording sufficient
preferment for them, Learning is forced to stoop to mean Courses to make a
Livelihood. But I conceive that Store in this kind is no sore* and if we must
not do evil that good may come thereof, we must not forbear doing that which is
good, for fear of accidental Evils which may arise from the same.

Bridges.
Builders of Bridges (which are highways over water) and makers of
Caused-waies, or Causways (which are Bridges over dirt) though last in order,
are not least in benefit to the Commmon-wealth. Such conveniences save the
lives of many, ease the labor of more painful travelers, and may be said in
some sort to lengthen the day, and shorten the way to men in their journeys;
yea, Bridges make and keep this our Island a Continent to it self. How great
the care of the ancient Romans to repair them, for the safety of passengers,
appears by the origination of Pontifex, having the inspection over bridges, by
his primitive institution.

Indeed the word bridge appears not in all Scripture, whereof this the reason;
the rivers of Palestine were either so shallow, that they were passable by
foords, as of Genesis 32. 22.
Jabbok, Isaiah 16. 2.
Arnon and Judges 3. 28.
Jordan, before it grew navigable; or else so deep, that they were ferried 2 Samuel 19. 18
over, as Jordan, when near his fall into the Dead Sea: but most of ours in
England are of a middle size; so deep, that they cannot be foorded; so narrow,
that they need not to be ferried over. Hence come our so eminent bridges, in so
much that such structures are accounted amongst our English Anglia, mons, pons,
etc.
Excellencies.

However Palestine was subject with England to the same inconveniences of bad
highwaies, and therefor in the List of Charitable Actours reckoned up by the
Isaiah 48. 12.
Prophet, he is accounted as a principal, The restorer of paths to dwell in;
for indeed some ways may be said not-habitable, being so ^eep and dirty that
they cut off all intercourse, the End general of all men's dwelling together.

I will conclude this Topic of Bridges with this memo^able accident. Mawd Q*
to King Henry the first being to pass the River Ley about Stratford, near the
falling of the said River into the Thames, was almost Cambd. Brit. in Essex.
drowned in riding over it. But this proved the bad cause of a good effect; For
hereupon she built the Beautiful Bridge there, for the benefit of Travelers:
and the Village probably from a fair Arch or Bow therein, received (as some
conceive) the addition of Stratford Bow. Far be it from me to wish the least
ill to any who willingly would not have their fingers to ache, or an hair of
their heads lessned. Yet this I could desire, that some Covetous churls who
otherwise will not be melted into works of charity, may in their passing over
Waters be put into Peril without Peril. Understand me, might be en^angered to
fright but not ^urt, that others might fare the better for their fears; Such
Misers being minded thereby to make or repair Bridges for public Safety and
convenience.

Almshouses.
Because we live in an age, wherein men begin to be out of charity with charity
it self; and there be many covetous (not to say sacrilegious) people, whose
Fingers itch to be Nimming the patrimony of the poor; we will here present the
Cavils of this against the charity of former ages herein.

Cavil. 1. Show us the foundation of such Structures in Scripture, either in
the Old or New Testament. As for the place with five porches, wherein the John.
5. 2.
impotent poor lay, near the Pool of Bethesda, it was of another Nature.
Alsmhouses therefore not being Jure Divino may lawfully be abolished.

Answer. The Constitution of the Jewish was far different from our English
Commonwealth, wherein every one originally was a Freeholder of some proportion
of land, which, though aliened, reverted to the Owner at the year of Jubilee.
There needs not an express or particular precept for all our actions, that
general one, Prove. 19. 17.
He that has pity upon the Poor lenaeth unto the Lord, is bottom broad enough
to build more Almshouses on, than all ages will afford. Besides this precept,
we have the practice of the primitive Christians in the time of the Apostles,
Acts 4. 34.
parting with the propriety of all their estate, and well then may we
appropriate a part of ours, for the releif of the Poor.

Cavil. 2. The builders of them for the most part, have been people formerly
guilty of oppression, who, having lived like Wolves, turn Lambs on their
deathbeds, and part with their Fleece to people in want. Having ground the
faces of the poor, they give the Toll thereof to build an Almshouse, though
too little to hold half the beggars which they have made.

Answer. The aspersion cannot be fastened on many Founders, so free from the
same, that malice may sooner break her own Teeth and Jaws too, th^n make
impression on their reputation. But, grant the charge true, in this sense,
Beatum est fuisse, Blessed are they that have been BAD; 1 Cor. 6. 11.
And such were some of you: Let not envious man repine at that, whereat the
blessed Angels rejoice, the conversion of sinners, and their testifying thereof
by such public expressions.

Cavil. 3. Such Builders generally have a Pope in their Belly, puffed up with a
proud opinion to merit by their performances.

Answer. When did the Caviller steal the Touchstone of hearts? (for, God, I am
sure would not lend it him, who says, Isaiah 42. 8.
My Glory will I not give to another) that he is so well acquainted with men's
thoughts and intentions. Charity, says the 1 Cor. 13. 5.
Apostle, thinks no evil, whereas this Caviller thinks little good. We are
bound to believe the best of such Founders, especially of such who lived Since
the Reformation, whereby the dangerous Error of merit was exploded.

Cavil. 4. Grant them guiltless of Superstition, they are guilty of
Vainglory. Witness the building of such houses commonly by high*way sides,
whenas our Savior says, Let not thy left hand know what thy right hand does.

Answer. The Objecter shall have leave to build his Alms*house, in what private
place he please; in the middle of a Wood, if he shall think fitting, (But we
know * Matthew. 5. 16.
who says) Let your Light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven. That they may see yours
good works, though not as finis operis, yet as modus operandi thereby to
provoke others to imitation.

Cavil. 5. As some affirm of Tobacco, that it causes as much Rheum as it
brings away: Almshouses do breed as many Poor as they relieve. People in
such places, presume to be idle, beholding Hospitals as their Inheritance,
wherein their old age shall be provided for.

Answer. What is good per se, ought not to be waved for what is ill per a dens
This calls aloud, to the care and integrity of Feoffees entrusted, to be wary
in their elections. Besides, I must stick to mine old Maxim, It is better that
Ten Drones be fed then one Be be famished.

Cavil. 6. Such places are generally abused against the will of the Founders.
Statutes are neglected. What is said of the Laws in Poland, that they last but
three days, is as true of the short lived orders in Almshouses. Not the most
indigent, or who have been the most laborious, but the best befriended reap the
benefit thereof.

Answer. I could wish that Almshouses were the only places, wherein Laws were
broken. But grant too much truth in the Cavil, all will say from the beginning
it was not so, and I will hope, Unto the end it shall not be so.

Cavil. 7. Hospitals generally have the Rickets, whose heads, their Masters,
grow over great and rich, whilst their poor bodies pine away and consume.

Answer. Surely there is some other cure for a Ricketish body, than to kill it,
viz. by opening obstructions and deriving the Nutriment to all parts of the
same. But, enough of this unwelcome Subject, whereof what is spoken, is not to
put new Cavils into the heads of any, but to pluck old ones out of the hearts
of too many, who have entertained them. If these our Answers seem not
satisfactory to any; Know, that as a left handed man has great odds in
Fencing, against one that is right handed: So in Controversies of this kind,
Cavillers with their sinister inferences from men's frailties, have a vast
advantage over those, who are of candid and ingenuous dispositions. Many faults
must be confessed in such Foundations, which for the future may be amended.

But, grant corruptions should continue in such foundations, it is not plea
enough for their abolition. If the sentence of condemnation was pronounced on
those, who saw Christ naked, and would not* cloth him; how heavy a doom will
fall on such, Mat. 25. 43.
who found Christ clothed, and stripped him in his poor Members of endowments
given to their maintenance?

Here let me recommend some choice Charity to bountiful Hearts and plentiful
Estates.
It were arrant presumption for any to imprison freedom it self, and confine
another Bounty by his own [pretended] Discretion. Let the charitably minded do
what, when, where, how, to whom, and how much, God and their own goodness
shall direct them. However it will not be amiss humbly to represent unto them
the following considerations: The rather because many well affected to the
public good, have lately been disheartened with the frustrations of former
Charity.

First, for the time: it is best to do it whilst they are living, to prevent
all suspicions that their intentions should be misimployed. Sem will not be
angry with me for saying Cham was a Mocker of his Father. Peter will not be
offended if I call Judas a betrayer of his Master: Honest Executors will take
no exception if I justly bemoan that too many dishonest ones have a^used the
good intents of the Testators. How many Legacies sound and whole in themselves
have proved before they were paid, as maimed as the Cripples in the
Hospitalls, to whom they were bequeathed? Yea as the blinded Syrians (desiring
to go, and beleiving they went to 2 King. 6. 20.
Damascus) were led to their Enemies, and into the midst of Samaria, so is it
more then suspicious, that many blind and concealed Legacies, intended for the
Temple of God, have been employed against the God of the Temple.

Next for the objects of well doing. Surely a vigilant Charity must take the
Alarm from the Groans of the Prisoners.

The Schoolmen reduce all Corporal Charity to seven principal heads,

1 Visito 1 Visit men in Misery 1 Jer. 38. 11.
Ebedmelech 1 Jeremiah 2 Poto 2 Give drink to the Thirsty 2 1 Kin 18. 13
Obediah. 2 The Prophets 3 Cibo 3 Meat to the Hungry 3 Neh. 5. 17.
Nehemiah 3 The Jews and Rulers 4 Redimo To 4 Rescue the Captive As 4 Genesis 14.
16.
Abraham did to 4 Lot 5 Tego 5 Cover the Naked 5 Acts 9. 39.
Dorcas 5 The Widows 6 Colligo 6 Dress the Wounded 6 Acts 16. 33.
The good Jailer 6 Saint Paul 7 Condo 7 Bury the Dead 7 The Devout men. 7 Saint
Stephen. * Acts 8. 2.


See here how these 7. kinds of good Works are placed like the Planets, whilst
to Redeem Captives, stands like the Sun in the midst of all the rest.

Indeed it may be sadly presumed; that such Captives often times want Visiting,
Meat, Drink, Clothes, Dressing, and all things but burying (except any will
say, that they are buried alive; Liberty being the Life of man's life) so that
the Redeeming of Captives is eminently comprehensive of all these outward acts
of Charity. Yea this Act may extend it self to a Spiritual Concernment; to save
many Souls from Damnation; seeing it may be feared that many dispairing of
Ransom, may put their Souls in Thraldom to purchase the Liberty of their
Bodies, and renounce their Religion.

could therefore wish, That there were in London, a Corporation of able and
honest Merchants (whereof that City affords a plentiful choice) legally
empowered to receive and employ the charity of well affected people for a
General Goal Delivery, of all English Captives, in Tunis, Tripoli, Algier,
Salli, etc. And our Countrymen first discharged, if there were any Surplusage
running over, that it might be disposed for the ransoming of Christians of what
Country soever. This were a Heroic Act indeed, whereby Christians endeavor to
be like Christ himself, who was the Grand Redeemer.

Oh, that I might be but instrumental (in the least degree) to advance their
Enlargement; I should behold it as an advancement to my self. Two Reasons make
me the more importunate therein; One, because the Papists had a Company of
Friars in England, of the Order of the Holy Trinity, De Redimendis Captivis,
which being now extinct, I humbly conceive that we are bound in Conscience, as
to quench the Superstition, so to continue the Charity of so good a design.
Secondly, because whilst other Beggars can tell their own Tale, we must plead
for them who cannot plead for themselves; There being so great a Gulf of
distance betwixt us and them; And God grant, That we may never pass over to
theirs, but they return to our Condition.

Objection, 1. It makes Mariners Cowards, who presuming on good men's charity,
that they shall be ransomed, do not fight it out valiantly against the Turks,
as they ought and might, but surrender themselves on such expectations.

Answer. I see not but the same Objection lies with equal force against the
Redeeming of Soldiers taken in land Fights, by what Foe soever, by exchange,
or otherwise. Secondly, accidental and sinister miscarriages, ought not to
discourage any sincere intention. Lastly, let those, who have given the best
testimonies of their Valor, be first redeemed, and let them lie longer, to
suffer bad usage, till the feeling thereof, shall convert them into more
valor, if (after their Liberty procured) engaging again on the same occasion.

Objection, 2. The late Long Parliament made an Act, since (after some
intermission) renewed, charging a Tax on Merchants Goods (known by the name of
Algier Duty) for the Redemption of Captives in Turkey.

Answer. The blessing of God light on the hearts of those (if living) who first
moved, and since revived it, as I doubt not but those departed this life, have
found their Reward. I could heartily wish, that yearly a Catalogue were printed
of the names of such prisoners thereby redeemed, not knowing whether it would
be more honorable for, or Satisfactory to this Nation. But seeing such
provisions fall short of doing the Work, and cannot strike home to break off
the Fetters of all Prisoners, It will not be amiss to implore the auxiliary
Charity of others.

Next I desire them to reflect upon aged sequestered Ministers; whom with their
Reader, this passage being written some 3. years since, I could not command my
own right hand to cross it out, but it must stand as it did.
charge, the (generally ill paid) fifth part will not maintain, say not it will
be interpreted an affront to the State to Relieve them, which it has adjudged
Offenders. If the best of beings should observe this Rule, all the World would
be starved. Secondly, some of them, abateing only that their Conscience
inclined them to the Royal Cause, were otherwise unblameable both in Life and
Doctrine. Thirdly, the better Divines they were, the worse they are able to
shift for themselves, having formerly no excursion into secular affairs, so
that applying themselves only to, and now debarred the exercise of the
Ministry, they are left in a sad condition. Lastly, allow them faulty, yet quid
teneri infantes? etc. It is pity their Wives and Children should be ruined for
their offense, but enough hereof, seeing in motions of this Nature, a word is
enough to the wise, and half a word too much for others.

Lastly, I recommend unto their Charity, such Servants who have nothing save
what they have gained by their industry, and have lived seven years and
upwards, with the same Master, I mean not Apprentices, but such Covenant
Servants, which are bound to their Masters (their year being ended) with no
other Indentures then their own discretion, and are sensible that they must run
a hazard, and may loose with their alteration. Especially such Females, who
prefer a good Master in certain, before a good Husband in hopes, and had rather
serve in plenty, then wed and adventure Poverty.

I confess such is the cruelty of some Masters, no Servant can, and such the
fickleness of others, no Servant may stay long with them. Such a Master was
he, who being Suitor to a Gentlewoman, came every time he visited her, waited
on by a new man (though keeping but one at once) such was his unconstancy and
delight in Change. Whereupon when taking leave of his Mistress, he proferred
to salute her spare your Complements (said she unto him) for probably I shall
shortly see you again, but let me, I pray you, salute your Servant, whom I
shall never behold any more.

However though sometimes the ^ault may be in the Masters, or Mistresses, yet
generally Servants are to be blamed in our Age, shifting their places so often
without cause. The truth is, the Age that makes good Soldiers, marrs good
Servants, cancelling their obedience, and allowing them too much Liberty. What
Nabal applied falsely and spitfully to David (There be many Servants now a
days which break away every 1 Samuel 25. 10
man from his Master) was never more true then now. Yea, what Tully said of the
Roman Habemus vigilem consulem qui in consulatu suo nunqu^m dormivit.
Consul (chose in the morning and put out before night) some Servants have
been so vigilant, they never slept in their Masters houses, so short their
stay, so soon their Departure.

The Fickleness and Fugitivenesse of such Servants, justly adds a valuation
to their Constancy, who are Standards in a Family, and know when they have met
with a good Master, as it appears, their Masters know when they have met with a
good Servant. It is pity but such Properties of a Household should be
encouraged, and Bounty bestowed upon them, may be an occasion to fix other
Servants to stay the longer in their places, to the general good of our Nation.

I desire these my Suggestions should be as inoffensively taken, as they are
innocently tendered. (...) I know there was in the water of John 6:
Bethesda after the Angel had troubled it, a medicinal power. I know also that
such impotent folk as lay in the five porches, were the proper Subjects to be
cured: But alas! they wanted one at the critical instant, to bring their wounds
and the Cure together, and to put them seasonably into the water. I am as
confident that there be hundreds in England, really willing and able to
Relieve, as that there are Thousands that do desire, and in some sort deserve
their charity. But there wants one in the pr^per juncture of time, to present
such poor objects, to their liberality, and if these my weak endeavors may be
in any degree isntrumental to promote the same, it will be a great comfort
unto me.

I will conclude this Subject with a motive to Charity, out of the Road of,
besides, if not against the ordinary Logic of Men.

Eccles. 11. (...).
Give a portion to Seven and to Eight, for thou know not what evil shall be
upon the Earth. To Seven and to Eight, that is, extend thy Bounty to as high a
Proportion of deserving persons, as can consist with thy Estate, for thou
know not what evil will be upon the Earth, Matters are mutable, and thou
may need the relief of others.

Ergo, says the Miser, part with nothing, but keep all against a Wet day, not
so, Solomon, advising to secure somewhat in a safe bank, the backs and bowels
of the Poor. Never Evil more likely to, never People less knowing of the same
then our selves. And therefore the Counsel never out of, is now most in season.

Why Benefactors Since, are distinguished from them, Before the Reformation.
I conceive it not fit to mingle both together, for these two Reasons* First,
because of the difference of their Charity Since the Reformation, as not
parched up by the Fear of the Fire of Purgatory, but kindly ripened by the Sun,
viz. A Clear Apprehension by the Light of the Scripture, that they were bound
to do good Works.

Secondly, because a Romish Mr. Knot the Jesuit.
Goliath has defied our English Israel, taxing our Church Since the
Reformation, as able to show few considerable pieces of Charity, in comparison
of those beyond the Seas, who may hence be easily confuted.

Indeed when I read the emulations between Peninna and Hanna, it minds me of
the contests betwixt the Church of Rome and us, such the conformity between
them.

Her 1 Samuel 1. 6.
Adversary provoked Hanna sore, for to make her fret, because the Lord has
shut up her Womb.

But how did Hanna rejoice afterward? The Sea the Life of Mr. William Lambert
in Kent.
Barren has born seven, and she that has many Children, is waxed feeble.

It is confessed immediately after the Reformation, Protestant Religion stood
for a while in amaze (scarcely recovered from the Marian Persecutitn) and was
but 1 Samuel 2. 5.
barren in good works. But since her beginning to bear fruit, she has
overtaken her Roman Corrival, and left her fairly behind.

Let the extent of time, and content of ground be proportionably stated, and
England cannot be matched for Deeds of Charity in any part of Spain, France,
and Italy, as by the ensuing Catalogue of Benefactors to the Public will
appear.

Objection. You had better omitted them, leaving them modestly to multiply and
increase in their own silence and secrecy. You know how dear David paid for 2 Samuel 24. 15
numbering the people.

Answer. David did not offend in mere numbering the people, but in not paying
the Poll-money, appointed by Exodus 30. 12.
God in such cases (purposely to decline the Plague) which omission argued his
Pride of heart. It is lawful for Protestants, without any just suspicion of
Vain* glory and Ostentation, to make a list, and take the number of Benefactors
in this kind, provided the Quit-rent of praise, be principally paid to the Lord
of Heaven. Besides we are not Challengers, but Defenders of our selves herein,
against the challenge of another, desiring to do it in all humility, in
confidence of our good cause.

And here I can hold no longer, but must break forth into a deserved
commendation of good works. Glorious things in Scripture are spoken of you, yea
fruits of the spirit. By them the Gospel is graced, wicked men amazed, some of
them converted, the rest of them confounded, weak Christians confirmed, poor
Christians relieved, our faith justified, our reward in Heaven by Gods free
grace amplified; Angels rejoice for them, Devils repine at them, God himself is
glorified in them. Oh therefore! That it were in my power, to exhort my
Countrymen, to pursue good works with all earnestness, which will add so much
to their account.

Some will say, if the English be so forward in deeds of Charity, as appears
by what you said before, any exhortation thereunto is altogether supers^uous.

I answer, the best disposed to Bounty may need a Remembrancer; and I am sure
that Nightingale, which would wake, will not be angry with the Thorn which
pricketh her Breast when she noddeth. Besides, it is a Truth what the Poet
says,

Qui monet ut facias quod jam facis, ipse monendo
Laudat, and hortatu comprobat acta suo.
Who, what thou do, thee for to do does move,
Does praise thy Practice, and thy Deeds approve.
Thus the exhortations of the Apostles at Jerusalem, were commendations of St.
Paul, Only they would that we should remember the poor, the same which I also
was forward to do.

Lastly, though many of our Nation be free in this kind, there want not those,
who instead of being Zealous are Jealous of good works, being so far from
shining themselves, that they enviously endeavor to extinguish the light of
others; whose Judgments I have labored to rectify herein.

The Stating of the Word REFORMATION, with the Extensiveness thereof.
No word occurs oftener in this our Book then REFORMATION: It is as it were the
Equator, or that remarkable Line, dividing betwixt Eminent Prelates, Leaed
Writers, and Benefactors to the Public, who lived Before or After It.

Know then that this Word in Relation to the Church of England, is of above
twenty years extent. For the Reformation was not advanced here, as in some
Foreign FreeStates, suddenly not to say ( rapidly) with popular Violence, but
Leisurely and treatably as became a matter of so great importance, besides the
meeting with much opposition, retarded the proceedings of the Reformers.

We may observe that the Jews returned from the Captivity of Babylon at three
distinct times, under the Conduct of several persons.

1. When the main Body of the Captives was brought home by E^ra. 2. 2.
Zorobabel, by whom the second Temple was built. 2. When a considerable Company
returned with Ezra 8. 5.
Ezra, by whom the Church part (as I may term it) was settled in that Nation.
3. When Nehem. 2 6.
Nehemiah (no doubt with suitable attendance) came home and ordered the State
moiety repairing the VValls of Jerusalem.
In like manner we may take notice of three distinct Dates and different
degrees of our English Reformation, though in relation to the Jewish, I confess
the method was altogether inverted. For,

1. The Civil part thereof, when the Popes Supremacy was banished in the Reign
of King Henry the Eight. 2. When the Church Service was reformed, as far as
that Age would admit, in the first year of King Edward the Sixth. 3. When the
same (after the Marian interruption) was resumed and more refined in the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth.
The first of these I may call the morning Star. The second the dawning of the
day. The third the Rising of the Sun; and I deny not but that since that time
his light and heat has been increased.

But now the Question will be, what is to be thought of those Prelates,
Writers, and Benefactors, which lived in the aforesaid Interval betwixt the
Beginning and Perfecting of this Reformation. For these appear unto us like
unto the Batable ground lying betwixt England and Scotland (whilst as yet two
distinct Kingdoms) in so dubious a posture it is hard to say to which side
they do belong.

It is Answered the only way to decide this difference is to observe the
Inclinations of the said persons so far forth as they are discovered in their
Writings and actions: such as appear in some good degree favorers of the
Gospel are reputed to be since whilst those who are otherwise, are adjudged to
be Before the Reformation.

CHAP. XII. Of Memorable Persons.
THe former Heads were like private Houses, in which persons accordingly
Qualified, have their several habitations. But this last Topic is like a
public Inn, admitting all Comers and Goers, having any extraordinary (not
vicious) Remark upon them, and which are not clearly reducible to any of the
former Titles. Such therefore, who are over, under, or beside the Standard of
Common persons; for strength, stature, fruitfulness, Vivacity, or any other
observeable eminence, are lodged here under the Notion of Memorable Persons,
presuming the pains will not be to Me so much in marking, as the pleasure to
the Reader in knowing them.

Under this Title we also repose all such Mechanics, who in any Manual Trade
have reached a clear Note above others in their Vocation.

Objection. It is Deforme Spectaculum an uncouth Sight, to behold such
handy-craftsmen blended with Eminencies in ingenious professions; such a
mottley color is no good wearing. How would William Cecill, Lord Treasurer of
England, and Baron of Burghleigh be offended, to behold James York the
Blacksmith, set with him at the same Table amongst the Natives of
Lincolne-shire?

Answer. I am confident on the contrary, that he would be highly pleased, being
so great a Statesman, that he would countenance and encourage his Industrious
Country man, accounting nothing little, without the help whereof, greater
matters can either not be attained or not long subsist. Yea, we see what signal
notice the Spirit of God takes of the Genesis 4. 21, 22, 23.
three Sons of Lamech, the first Founders of Tent-making, Organs, and
Ironworks; and it is observable, that whereas all their names are forgotten,
which built the Tower of Babel (though done on design to get them a Genesis 11. 4.
name) these three Mechanics, viz. Jabal, Jubal, and Tubal Cain, are nominatim
recorded to all posterity. Thus is it better to bottom the perpetuity of ones
memory, on honest Industry and ingenuous diligence, then on Stately Structures
and expensive magnificence.

I confess it is easier to add to any art than first to invent it, yet because
there is a perfection of degrees, as well as Kinds, Eminent Improvers of an art
may be allowed for the Co-inventers thereof, being Founders of that accession,
which they add thereunto, for which they deserve to be both regarded and
rewarded.

I could name a worshipful Family in the South of England, which for 16.
several descents, and some hundreds of years, have continued in the same stay
of Estate, not acquiring one foot of Land, either by match, purchase, gift, or
otherwise, to their ancient Patrimony. The same may be said of some
handycrafts, wherein men move in the same compass, but make no further
progress to perfection, or any considerable improvement, and this I impute
generally to their want of competent encouragement.

CHAP. XIII. Of Lord Majors of LONDON.
I Have concluded this Work with these Chief Officers in that great City. A
place of so great Honor and Trust, that it has commonly been said, that on
the death of an English King, The Lord Mayor is the Subject of the greatest
Authority in England, Many other Offices determining with the Kings Life (till
such time as their Charters be renewed by his Successor) whereas the Lord
Majors Trust continues for a whole year, without any renewing after the
Inter-Regnum.

Objection. Such persons had better been omitted, whereof many were little
better then (...), Though by good fortune they have loaded themselves with
Thick clay, and will be but a burden in your Book to the Readers thereof.

Answer. All Wise men will behold them under a better Notion, as the Pregnant
proofs of the truth of 2. Proverbs, not contradictory, but confirmatory one to
another.

Prove. 10. 22. Prove. 10. 4. The Blessing of the Lord makes Rich. The hand of
the Diligent makes Rich.

The one as the principal, the other as the Instrumental cause, and both
meeting in the persons aforesaid.

For though some of them were the Younger Sons of Worshipful and Wealthy
Parents, and so had good Sums of Money left them; Yet being generally of mean
extraction, They raised themselves by Gods Providence, and their own
Painfulness. The City in this Respect, being observed like unto a Court, where
Elder Brothers commonly spend, and the younger gain an Estate.

But such Lord Majors are here inserted, to quicken the Industry of Youth,
whose Parents are only able to send them up to (not to set them up in) London.
For wha^ a comfort is it, to a poor Apprentice of that City, to see the Prime
Magistrate thereof, Riding in his Majoralibus with such Pomp and Attendance,
which another day may be his hap and happiness.

Objection. It comes not to the share of one in twenty thousand, to attain to
that Honor; and it is as impossible for every poor Apprentice in process of
time to prove Lord Mayor, as that a Minum with long living mould become a Whale.

Answer. Not so, the later is an utter Impossibility as debarred by nature,
being Fishes of several kinds. Whereas there is a Capacity in the other, to
arive at it, which puts hopes (the only Tie which keeps the heart from
breaking) into the hearts of all of the attainablenesse of such preferment to
themselves.

Doctor Hutton Archbishop of York, when he came into any Great Grammar School
(which he did constantly visit in his visitations) was wont to say to the young
Scholars, Ply your Books Boys, ply your Books, for Bishops are old men, and
surely the possibility of such dignity is a great Encouragement to the
Endeavors of Students.

Lord Majors being generally aged, and always but Annual, soon make Room for
Succession, whereby the Indevours of all Freemen in Companies are encouraged.
But if they should chance to fall short, as unable to reach the Home of Honor
(I mean the Majoralty it self, yet if they take up their Lodgings at Sheriff,
Alderman, and Common-Councellour with a good Estate, they will have no cause to
complain.

I confess some Counties in our ensuing Discourse, will appear Lord-Maior-less,
as Cumberland, Dorset-shire, Hant-Shire, etc. However though, hitherto, they
have not had, hereafter they may have Natives advanced to that Honor, and it
may put a lawful Ambition into them, to contend who shall be their Leader, and
who should first of those Shires attain to that Dignity. As lately Sir Richard
Cheverton Skinner descended (I assure you) of a right ancient and worshipful
Family, was the first in Cornwall, who opened the Door for others (no doubt) to
follow after him.

Nor must it be forgotten that many have been Lord-Maiors Mates, though never
remembered in their Catalogues, viz. Such, who by Fine declined that Dignity,
and as I am glad that some will Fine, that so the Stock of the Chamber of
London may be increased, so am I glad that some will not fine, that so the
State of the City of London may be maintained.

I begin the observing of their Nativities, from Sir William Sevenoke, Grocer,
Lord Mayor 1418. For though there were Lord Majors 200. years before, yet their
Birthplaces generally are unknown. It was, I confess, well for me in this
particular, that Mr. Stow was born before me, being herein the Heir of
Endeavors, without any pain of my own. For knowing that Cuilibet Artifici in
sua Art est credendum, I have followed him and who him continued, till the
year 1633. at what time their Labors do determine. Since which Term, to the
present year, I have made the Catalogue out by my own Inquiry, and friends
Intelligence. To speak truth to their due praise, one may be generally directed
to their Cradles, though by no other Candle, then the Light of their good
works, and Benefactions to such places.

CHAP. XIV. A Catalogue of all the Gentry in ENGLAND, made in the Reign of King
HENRY the Sixth, why inserted in our Book.
AFter we have finished the Catalogue of the worthy Natives of every Shire, We
present the Reader with a List of the Gentry of the Land, sollemnly returned by
select Commissioners into the Chancery, thence into the Records in the Tower on
this occasion.

The Commons in Parliament complained, that the Land then swarmed with Pilours,
^obbers, Oppressers of the People, Man-stealers, Fellons, Outlaws, Ravishers of
Women, Unlawful Haunters of Forests and Parks, etc. Whereupon it was ordered,
for the suppressing of present and preventing of future mischeifs, that certain
Commissioners should be empowered in every County, to summon all persons of
Quality before them, and tender them an Oath, for the better keeping of the
Peace, and observing the Kings Laws both in themselves and Retainers.

Excuse me, Reader, if I be bold to in^pose my own Conjecture, who conceive,
what ever was intended to palliate the Business, The Principal Intent was, to
detect and suppress such who favored the Title of York; which then began to be
set on foot, and afterward openly claimed, and at last obtained the Crown. 2.
Even-done,

Of the method general used in this Catalogue.
The first amongst the Commissioners is the Bishop of their Diocese, put
before any Earl, partly because he was in his own Diocese, partly because
giving of Oaths (their proper work) was conceived to be of Spiritual cognizance.

Besides the Bishop, when there were three (as generally) Commissioners, the
first of them was either an Earl, or at least (though often entitled but
Chivaler) an Actual Baron, as will hereafter appear: And which will acquaint us
partly with the Peerage of the Land in that Age.

Next follow those who were Knights for the Shire in the Parliament foregoing,
and, if with the addition of Chivaler or Miles, were Knights by dubbing, before
of that their Relation.

All Commissioners expressed not equal Industry and Activity in prosecution of
their trust. For besides the natural Reasons, that in all Affairs, some will be
more rigorous, some more Remiss by their own Temper, some more, some less
fancyed their Employment, insomuch as we find some Shires;

1. Over done, as Oxford and Cambridge-Shires, whose Catalogues are too much
allayed, descending to persons of meaner quality. 2. Even done, as generally
the most are, where the Returns bear a competent proportion to the Populousness
and numerousnesse of the Counties. 3. Under done, as Shropshire, Yorkshire,
Northumberland, etc. where the Returns do not answer to the extent of those
Shires. 4. Not done. Which I sadly confess, and cannot help, being Twelve in
number as hereafter will appear.
I dare not conjecture the cause of this Casualty, whether in such Shires, the
Oaths were never Tendered, or tendered and not taken, or taken and not returned,
or returned and not recorded, or recorded and not preserved, or preserved but
misplaced in some Roll, which hitherto it has not been my hap to lite upon.

It is possible that some disgusted the Kings Design, as who under the pretense
of keeping the peace, indevoured to smother and suppress such, who should
appear for the Title of York, whereof more in the Respective Countyes.

May the Reader be pleased to take notice, that in the Reign of Henry the
Sixth, de such a place, began then to be left off, and the addition of Knight
and Squire to be assumed. Yet because no Fashion can be generally followed at
first, such additions are used in the Returns of some Shires, and neglected in
others.

In some Counties we have the Names of a few Mechanics, returned with their
Trades, Brasier, Smith, Ironmonger, etc. Who no doubt were considerable, either
in themselves, as Robustious Persons, or in their Servants as Numerous, or in
their popular and tumultuous Influence of others. And grant these passing under
the name of Valecti, (whereof formerly) it appears by the penalty imposed on
their Recusancy of the Oath, that they were substantial (...) which stood (and
propably could make others go) on their own Account.

Some Clergymen, not only Regular, as Abbots and Priors, but secular Parochial
priests, are inserted in some Returns. These some will say might well be
omitted, as nothing Informative to the Gentry of the Land, because dead Stakes
in the Hedge, then unconcerned in posterity, because forbidden marriage.
However I have here presented as I found them, intending neither to mingle nor
mangle, conceiving that if I were found guilty either of Omissions or
Alterations, it might justly shake the credit of the whole Catalogue. Indeed if
the word Superstition imports not Trespassing on Religion, and if the bare
signification be adequate to the Etymology thereof, a Super Stando, for
standing in his own opinion too curiously, on a thing which in the Judgment of
others, may not Merit so much Exquisiteness, I here voluntarily confess my
self Superstitious in observing every Punctillo according to the Original.

May the Reader be pleased to take notice that in men's proper names, some
letters of like sound, are confounded in vulgar pronunciation, as V for F.
Fenner and Venner, K. and C. Kary and Carry; F. and Ph. as Purfrey and Purphrey,
though the name be the same in both. Sometimes the name is spelled, not truly,
according to Orthography, but according to the common speaking thereof, which
melts out some essential Letters, as Becham for Beauchamp.

Again there is such an allusion betwixt the forms of some letters (nothing
symbolyzing in sound) that as they are written (though not in ordinary) in
Record-hand, they may easily be mistaken by Writer or Reader, through the
similitude of their Character, as,

m e n f n l g w o u s r t y

This has put us many times to a stand, and sometimes to a loss, what letter,
it has been. But we have in all particulars conformed our Transcript to the
original in all possible exactness, though afterward taking the boldness to
interpose our opinion in our observations.

A later List might be presented of the English Gentry, toward the end of the
Reign of King Henry the Eighth, but such would be subject to just exception.
For, as the Gibeonites, though by their moldy bread, and clouted Shoes,
pretending to a long peregrination, were but of the Vicinage: So most of those
Gentry, notwithstanding their specious claim to Antiquity, will be found to be
but of one Descent, low enough in themselves, did they not stand on the vantage
ground, heightened on the Rubbish of the Ruins of Monasteries.

CHAP. XV. Of SHIRE-REEVES or SHIRIFFES.
REEVE (which has much Affinity with the Dutch Grave) signifies an Officer to
oversee and order, being chief in the Shire. In Latin Vice-comes, or Vicecount.
And, seeing shadows in effect are as ancient as the bodies, they may be
believed as old as Counts, and Counts as Counties, and Counties as King Alfred,
who first divided England into Shires about the year of our Lord 888.

The late fashion was, that the Clerk of the Peace for each County, in
MichaelmasTerm, presented to the Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, six or
more names of able persons for that Office. The Lord Chief Justice calling the
other Judges into the Exchequer Chamber (where the Attorney General, and the
Sollicitour attends) presented three out of that number unto the King, out of
which the King pricks one, who stands Sheriff of the County.

His Power is sufficiently known, to suppress Riots, secure Prisoners, distrain
for Debts, execute Writs, return the choice of Knights and Burgesses for
Parliament, empannel Juries, attend the Jud^ (...) the Execution of
Malefactors, etc.

Several Statutes 9 Edward 2. Lincoln. 4. Ed. 3. 9, 5. Ed. 3. 4.
have provided, that no man should be Sheriff in any County, except he has
land sufficient in the same County, to answer the King and his people. And it
is remarkable, that since the beginning of that Office, it appears not upon
any Record, that ever any Sheriff pro tempore failed in his Estate, but was
responsible in his place. Whereas it is too plain by sad Precedents, that some
Receivers (being men of meaner estates) have.

Sheriffs are bound to abide in their proper persons, within the 4 Hen. 4. 5.
County, that they may the more effectually attend their Office. And in our
Remembrance, some great persons, whose Activity in Parliament was suspected,
have been made Sheriffs to keep them out of harms way, and confine them at
home. But later years have dispensed with such critical Niceties, (unreasonable
that the Sheriff himself should be a Prisoner in his own County) allowing him
more liberty on the providing of an able Deputy in his absence.

Though I will not avouch it true, there may be somewhat of truth in their
spiteful observation, who maintain, that the Shrevalty in ancient times was
Honos sine Onere, in the middle times Honos cum onere, and in our days, little
better than Onus sine honor, though ^ trust the Office will now be restored to
its former honor.

Honos sine onere, An honor without a burden. As when Prince Edward the first,
was for many years together High-Sheriffe of Bedford and Buckingham-shire; and
many prime Peers of the Land, were Honorary Sheriffs, gracing the place with
accepting it; living where they pleased themselves, and appointing their
Substitutes to transact the business of the County.

Honos cum onere, An Honor with a burden, From King Edward the Third, till
within our Remembrance. For the principal Gentry in every shire, of most
ancient extractions and best Estates, were deputed for that place, keeping
great Attendance and Hospitality: So that as some transcripts has for the
fairness of their Character not only evened, but exceeded the Original, the
Vice-comes have pro tempore equalled the Count himself and greatest Lords in
the Land for their Magnificence.

Onus sine honor, A Burden without Honor, when it was obtruded on many as a
punishment for the trouble and charge thereof, and laid as a burden, not on the
back of that horse which was best able to carry it, but who was least able to
cast it off, great persons by friends and favor easily escaping it, whilst it
was charged on those of meaner estates: Though I do believe it found all them
Esquires, and did not make any so, as some will suggest.

Hence was it, that many Sheriffs were forced to consult principles of Thrift,
not being bound so to serve their Country, as to disserve themselves and ruin
their estates; and instead of keeping open houses (as formerly) at the Assizes,
began to latch (though not lock) their doors, providently reducing it to an
ORDINARY expense, and no wise man will conclude them to be the less loyal
Subjects, for being the more Provident Fathers.

At the end of every Shire, after the forenamed Catalogue of the Gentry, in the
Reign of King Henry the Sixth, I have set down a List of the Sheriffs from the
Beginning of King Henry the Second, until the end of King Charles, carefully
collected out of the Records. For I hope that by the former, which I call my
Broad (representing the Gentry of one Generation all over England) and this
which I term my Long Catalogue, extending it self successively through many
Ages, I hope, I say, both being put together, may square out the most eminent
of the Ancient Gentry, in some tolerable proportion. Most eminent, seeing I
confess, neither can reach all the Gentry of the land.

For as in the Catalogue of King Henry the Sixth, many ancient Gentlemen were
omitted, who were Minors in age, and so incapable of taking an Oath, so does
not the List of Sheriffs comprehend all the Gentry in the Shire, finding three
sorts of people excluded out of the same.

Such who were 1. Above Discharging the Office. 2. Besides 3 Beneath

Above. Such were all of the Peerage in the Land, which since the Reign of King
Edward the third were excused I am sure de facto, not employed in that place,
as Inconsistent with their Attendance in Parliament.

Secondly, Such who were Besides the Place, privileged by their profession
from that Office, which may be subdivided into,

1. Swordmen, Employed in Wars beyond the Seas, thus Sir Oliver Ingham, and Sir
John Fastoffe both great men, and richly landed in Norfolk, were never
Sheriffs thereof, because employed in the French Wars, the one under King
Edward the Third, the other under King Henry the Fifth. 2. Gownmen, as Judges,
Sergeants at Law, Barristers, Auditors, and other Officers in the Exchequer,
etc. 3. In relation to the present Mode, otherwise they also were Gownmen
anciently
Cloakmen. Such Courtiers as were the Kings Servants and in ordinary attendance
about his Person.
Lastly, Such as were Beneath the Place, as men of too narrow Estates to
discharge that Office, especially as it was formerly in the magnificent
expensivenesse thereof, though such persons might be Esquires of right ancient
Extraction.

And here under favor I conceive, that if a strict Enquiry should be made
after the Ancient Gentry of England, most of them would be found amongst such
middlesized Persons as are above two hundred, and beneath a Thousand pounds of
Annual Revenue. It was the Motto of wise Sir Nicholas Bacon, Mediocria firma,
Moderate things are most lasting. Men of great Estates in National Broiles have
smarted deeply for their Visible Engagements, to the Ruin of their Families,
whereof we have had too many sad Experiments, whilst such persons who are
moderately mounted above the level of Common people into a Competency, above
want and beneath Envy, have by Gods blessing on their frugality, continued
longest in their Conditions, entertaining all alterations in the State, with
the less destructive change unto themselves.

Let me add, that I conceive it impossible for any man, and difficult for a
Corporation of men, to make a true Catalogue of the English Gentry. Because,
what Mathematicians say of a Line, that it is Divisibilis in semper
divisibilia, is true hereof, if the Latin were, (which for ought I know, if as
usual is) as Elegant, Addibilis in semper addibilia. Not only because New
Gentry will every day be added (and that as I conceive justly too, for why
should the Fountain of Honor be stopped, if the Channel of desert be running?)
but because ancient Gentry will daily be newly discovered, though some of them
perchance for the present, but in a poor and mean condition, as may appear by
this particular.

It happened in the Reign of King James, when Henry Earl of Huntington, was
Lieutenant of Leichestershire, that a Laborers son in that County, was pressed
into the Wars, as I take it to go over with Count Mansfield. The Old man at
Leicester, requested his Son might be discharged, as being the only Staff of
his Age, who by his Industry maintained him and his Mother. The Earl demanded
his name, which the man for a long time was loath to tell (as suspecting it a
fault for so poor a man to confess a Truth) at last he told his name was
Hastings. Cosen Hastings said the Earl, we cannot all be Top Branches of the
Tree, though we all spring from the same Root, Your Son my Kinsman shall not be
pressed. So good was the meeting of Modesty in a poor, with Courtesy in an
Honorable Person, and Gentry I believe in Both. And I have reason to believe,
that some who justly own the Sirnames and blood of Bohuns, Mortimers, and
Plantagenets (though ignorant of their own extractions) are hid in the heap of
Commonpeople, where they find that under a Thatched Cottage, which some of
their Ancestors could not enjoy in a Leaded Castle, contentment with quiet and
security.

To return to our Catalogue of Sheriffs. I have been bold to make some brief
historical Observations upon them, which I hope will not be unpleasing to the
Reader, whom I request first to peruse our Notes on Bark-shire, because of
their public Influence on the rest, facilitating some Difficulties which
return in the Sheriffs of other Counties.

After we have presented the Sheriffs names, we have annexed their addition,
either of estate, as Esquire, or degree, as Knight, Baronet, etc. and this we
have done always after, sometimes before K. Henry the Sixth. For, although the
Statute of Additions, was made in the first of King Henry the fifth, to
Individuifie (as I may say) and separate persons from those of the same name:
And although it took present effect in such Suits and Actions, where process
of Utlary lies, yet was it not universally practiced in other Writings, till
the End of the Reign of King Henry the Sixth.

After their additions, we have in a distinct Columel, assigned the places of
their Habitation, where we could proceed with any certainty, leaving some
blanks to employ the Industry of others. We have endeavored (as near as we
could) to observe proportion of time, in denoting their places, left otherwise
our There be confuted by our Then, the date of the Kings Reign which is
prefixed. If sometimes we have made a Prolepsis, with Virgil his Lavinia
Litora, I mean if we have placed some Sheriffs too early in their possessions,
a little before their Families were fixed there, I hope the candid Reader will
either wink or smile at the mistake.

It often comes to pass, that the same Sheriff in the same Shire, has two or
more fair Seats. This should raise their Gratitude to God, whose own Son was
not so well provided, not having where to lay his hand. In this Variety, our
Catalogue presents but one, sometime the oldest, sometimes the fairest, and
sometimes freely to confess) what comes first to my memory. The best is, truth
does not abate thereby, knowing so much Law; that where a man has an household
in two places, he shall be said to dwell in both of them; so that this addition
in one of them, does suffice.

Next to the place of Sheriffs, we set down their Arms, whereof largely in the
next Chapter. We conclude the Catalogue of Sheriffs with a Comment upon them
presenting their most remarkable Actions. Our Husbandmen in Middlesex, make a
distinction between Dodding and Threshing of Wheat, the former being only the
beating out of the fullest and fairest Grain, leaving what is Lean and Lank to
be Threshed out afterward. Our Comment may be said to have Dodded the
Sheriffs of several Counties, insisting only on their most memorable actions,
which are extant in our Printed Histories, otherwise my Eyes could not look
into locked Chests (I mean) pierce into the private Records of Families,
carefully concealed and kept in their choicest Cabinet. Besides, such unprinted
Records are infinite (understand it in the same sense in which the strength
Nahum. 3.
of Tire is called * Infinite) too many for one Author to manage, and
therefore are left to such as undertake the Description of several Counties.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Coats of ARMS, affixed to such, who have been Sheriffs of
Counties.
SOmething must be premised of Arms in general. They may seem in some sort to
be Jure Divino to the Jews, having a Precept for the practice thereof. Every
Numb. 2. 2.
man of the Children of Israel shall pitch by his own Standard, with the Ensign
of their Fathers house.

The use thereof is great both in War and Peace. I begin with War, because Arms
had their first rise from Arms, and had a military Origination. Without these
an Army cannot be methodized, and is but an heap of men. Like an Army (says
the Cant. 6. 4.
Scripture) terrible with banners. Without which an Army is not terrible, but
ridiculous, routing it self with its own confusion. Now, as no Army without
banners; so no banner without Arms therein. If the Trumpet give 1 Cor. 14. 8.
an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to the battle. Now, as the
Trumpet tells the time, so the banner proclaims the place of meeting, and if it
have not distinguishable Emblems therein, who shall know whither to repair to
his Captain or Company?

Arms are also useful in peace, to distinguish one man from another. They be
termed Nomina visibilia, visible names. For, as a name notifieth a man to the
Ear, so his Arms do signify him to the Eye, though dead many years since; so
signal the service of Arms on Tombs, to preserve the memory of the deceased.

Arms anciently were either assumed or assigned. For at first men took what
Arms they pleased, directed by their own fancy. A Custom still continuing in
the LowCountryes, where the Burgers choose their own Arms with as great
confidence as Tradesmen make their mark, or Innkeepers set up their Signs in
England. Assigned Arms were such as Princes, or their Officers under them
appointed to particular persons, in reward of their Service. And, whereas
Assumed Arms were but personal, these generally were Hereditary and descended
to their Families.

It is the rule general in Arms, that the plainer the ancienter, and so
consequently more honorable. Arma primo nuda sine ornatu. And when a memorable
Gentleman (understand me such an one, the beginning of whose Gentry might
easily be remembered) was mocking at the plain Coat of an ancient Esquire, the
Esquire returned, I must be fain to wear the Coat, which my
great-great-grana-father left me, but had I had the happiness to have bought
one, as you did, it should have been guarded after the newest fashion. Two
colors are necessary and most highly honorable; though both may be Blazoned
with One Word [as VARREY] (formerly born by the Beauchamps of Hatch in
Wilt-shire, and still quartered by the Duke of Somerset) three are very
honorable; four commendable; five excusable; more, disgraceful. Yet have I
seen a Coat of Arms (I mean within the Escocheon) so piebald, that if both the
Metalls, and all the Colors ( seven in all) were lost elsewhere, they might
have been found therein.

Such Coats were frequently given by the Heralds (not out of want of wit, but
will to bestow better) to the new Gentry in the End of the Reign of King Henry
the Eighth. One said of a Coat that it was so well victualled, that it might
endure a Siege, such the plenty and variety of Fowl, Flesh and Fish therein;
though some done so small, one needed a magnifying glass to discover them; but
such surfeited Coats have since met with a good Mr. Camd^n.
Physician, who has cured many of them.

I can not but smile at his fancy, who (counting himself, no doubt,
wonderfully witty) would be a reformer of our Heraldry, and thought it fine,
if it were thus ordered, that all,

1 Descended of ancient Nobility. should give their Field 1 Or. 2 Extracted
from undoubted Gentry. 2 Argent. 3 Advancing themselves by Sea-adventures. 3
Azure. 4 Raised by their Valor in War. 4 Gules. 5 Gown-men preferred for
Learning. 5 Sable. 6 Countrymen raised by good Husbandry. 6 Vert.

Indeed, as these Metals and Colors are reckoned up in order, so are they
reputed in honor, save that the contest betwixt Azure and Gules is not so
clearly decided.

Or and Azure in composition are conceived the richest; Argent and Sable the
fairest coat, because setting off each other discernable at the greatest
distance. The Lion and Eagle are reputed the most honorable, the Cross the most
religious bearing; A Bend is esteemed the best Ordinary, being a Belt born in
its true posture athwart, as a Fess is the same worn about the middle. Things
natural in the charge presented in their proper color are best; and herbs
Vert far better than Or, as flourishing better than fadeing; even stained are
no stained colors when natural. But seeing the whole mystery of Heraldry,
dwells more in the region of fancy, than judgment, few rules of assurance can
be laid down therein.

We meet with some few coats which have reasons rendered of their bearing.
Thus, whereas the Earls of Oxford anciently gave their Coat plain, quarterly
Gules and Or, they took afterward in the first a Mullet or Star Argent, because
the chief of the house had a Falling-star (as my Camdens re^ains in the ^itle
of Armory.
Author says) alighting on his shield, as he was fighting in the Holy Land.
But it were a labor in vain for one to offer at an account, for all things
borne in Armorie.

This minds me of a passage in the North, where the ancient and worthy Family
of the Gascoignes gave for their Arms the Head of a Lucie or Pike, cooped in
Pale; Whereon one merrily,

The Lucy is the Finest Fish,
That ever graced any Dish;
But, why you give the HEAD alone,
I leave to you to pick this Bone.
A Question which on the like occasion may be extended to Beasts and Foul,
whose single heads are so generally born in several Coats.

After the names and places of Sheriffs exemplifyed in their respective
Counties, we have added their Arms ever since the first of King Richard the
second. And, though some may think we begin too late (the fixing of Hereditary
Arms in England, being an Hundred years ancienter) we find it sometimes too
soon to attain at any certainty therein.

In peruseing these Arms, the Reader will meet with much observeable variety,
viz. 1. That the same Family sometimes gives two paternal Coats, as,

Spencer in Northamptonshire. Quarterly Arg. and Gules, the second and third,
charged with a Fret Or, over all on a Bend Sable 3. Escallops of the First.
Azure a Fess Ermin betwixt 6. Sea Meaws heads erased Arg. Sometimes two
distinct Families and Names, give the self same Coat, as in Barkshire,

Fettiplace Gules 2 Cheverons Argent. Hide.

The same name; but being distinct Families in several Counties, give different
Arms.

Gray.
In Leichestershire, Barry of 6. Argent and Azure, in Chief 3. Torteauxes. In
Northumberland, Gules a Lion Rampant with a Border engrailed Argent.
The same Name in the same Shire, being distinct Families, gives different
Coats, as in Northampton shire.

Green.
Of Greens-Norton, Azure three Bucks trippant Or. Of Drayton, Argent a Cross
engrailed Gules.
The same name and Family in the same Shire, gives the same Coat for
Essentials, but disguised in Colors as in Northamptonshire.

Tresham.
Of Lifden. Of Newton.
The same Family gives a Coat this day, bearing some general allusion to, but
much altered and bettered from what they gave some sixty years since, and
forbearing to give an instance hereof, for some reason, I refer it to the
Readers Discovery.

Contented with the Coat it self, I have not inserted the differences of
younger Houses, Crescents, Mullets, Martlets, etc. Chiefly because they are
generally complained of, and confessed as defective, subject to coincidence,
and not adequate to the effectual distinguishing of the branches from the same
root.

As the affixing of Differences if done, were imperfect, so the doing thereof,
is not only Difficult, but also Dangerous. Dangerous, for it would bring many
Old houses (and new ones too) on his Head, who undertakes it, so
undistinguishable are the Seniorities of some Families, parted so long since,
that now it is hard to decide, which the Root, and which the Branch. I remember
a Contest in the Court of Honor, betwixt the two Houses of Constable, the one
of Flamborongh head, the other of Constable-Burton, both in Yorkshire, which
should be the Eldest. The Decision was, it was never decided, both sides
producing such ancient Evidences, that in mounting up in antiquity like Hawks,
they did not only Lessen but fly out of Sight, even beyond the Kenn and
Cognizance of any Record. The Case I conceive occurs often betwixt many
Families in England.

Some names we have left without Arms. Physicians prescribe it as a Rule of
health, to rise with an appetite; and I am loath the Reader should fill himself
with all which he might desire. But (not to dissemble) I could not with all
mine own, and friends skill and industry, attain their Coats, as of Families
either extinct in those Counties before the first, or only extant therein since
the last Visitation of Heralds. Yet let not my ignorance be any man's injury,
who humbly desires, that such Vacuities may hereafter be filled up by the
particular Chorographers of those respective Counties.

This I am sure, A needle may be sooner found in a Bottle of Hay, (a task
though difficult, yet possible to be done) than the Arms of some Sheriffs of
Counties be found in the Heralds Visitations of the said Counties. For many
were no Natives of that Shire, but came in thither occasionally from far
distant places. Thus the Arms of Sir Jervis Clifton (thrice High Sheriff of
Kent in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth) are invisible in any Kentish Heralds
Office, as not landed therein himself though living at Braburn, on the Jointure
of Isabel his Wife, the Villare Cant, page 26.
Widow of William Scot Esquire and I doubt not but instances of the same Nature
frequently are found in other Counties.

We will conclude this Discourse of Arms with this memorable Record, being as
ancient as the Reign of King Henry the Fifth.

Claus. 5. Henrici Quinti Membrana 15. in Dorso in Turre Londinensi.
Rex Vic* Salutem. etc. Quia prout informamur diversi ^omines qui in viagiis
nostris ante haec tempora factis, Arma and Tunicas Armorum vocat. Coat Armours
in se susceperunt, ubi nec ipsi, nec eorum Antecessores hujusmodi Armis ac
Tunicis Armorum temporibus retroactis usi fuerint and ea in presenti viagio
nostro in proximo Deo dante faciend. exercere proponant; Et quanquam Omnipotens
suam gratiam disponat prout vult in naturalibus, equaliter Diviti and Pauperi;
volentes tamen quemlibet Ligeorum nostrorum predictorum juxta status sui
exigentiam modo debito pertractari and haberi. Tibi praecipimus quod in
singulis locis intra Ballivam tuam, ubi per breve nostrum nuper promonst.
faciendis proclamari facias, quod nullus cujuscunq, status, Gradus, seu
conditionis fuerit, hujusmodi Arma sive Tunicas ^rmorum in se sumat, nisi ipse
jure Antecessorto vel ex donatione alicujus ad hoc su^ficientem potestatem
habentis ea possideat aut possidere debeat. Et quod ipse Arma sive Tunicas
illas ex cujus dono obtinet, die Monstrationis suae personis ad hoc per nos
assignatis seu assignandis manifest demonstret Exceptis illis qui nobiscum
apud Bellum de Agincourt Armu portabant sub poenis non admissionis ad
proficiendum in viagio praedicto sub numero ipsius cum quo retentus existit, ac
perditionis Vadiorum suorum ex causa praedicta praeceptorum, nec non rasura,
and ruptura dictorum armorum and Tunicarum vocat. Coat-armours, tempore
monstrationis suae praedicto, si ea super illum monstrata fuerint seu inventa,
and hoc nulla tenus omittas, T. R. apud Civitatem,

Nov. Sarum Secundo die Junii. Per ipsum Regem.

The King to the Sheriff health, etc.
Because there are diverse men as we are informed, which before these times in
the Voyages made by us, have assumed to themselves Arms and Coat-Armors where
neither they nor their Ancestors in times past used such Arms or Coat Armours,
and propound with themselves to use and exercise the same in this present
Voyage which (God willing) we shortly in^end to make. And although the
Omnipotent disposes his favors in things Natural, as he pleases, equally to
the Rich and Poor, yet We willing that every one of our Liege Subjects, should
be had and Handled in due manner, according to the Exigence of his State and
Condition. We command thee, that in every place within thy Bailiwick, where by
Our Writ we have lately shown, you cause to be proclaimed, that no man of what
State Degree or Condition soever he be, shall take upon him such Arms or Coats
of Arms, save he alone who does possess or ought to possess the same, by the
right of his Ancestors, or by Donation and Grant of some, who had sufficient
power to assign him the same. And that he, that uses such Arms or Coats of
Arms, shall on the day of his Muster, manifestly show to such persons assigned,
or to be assigned by us for that purpose, by virtue of whose gift he enjoys
the same. Those only excepted who carried Arms with us, at the Battle of
Agincourt; uuder the penalties not to be admitted to go with us in Our foresaid
Voyage under His Command by whom he is for the present retained, and of the
loss of his wages, as also of the rasing out, and breaking off the said Arms
called Coat-Armours at the time of his Muster aforesaid, if they shall be
showed upon him, or found about him. And this you shall in no case omit.

Witness the King at the City of New Sarum, June the second.

Consimilia Brevia diriguntur Vicecom. Wilts, Sussex, Dors. sub eadem data. I
could wish a reviving of this Instrument in our Age, many Up-starts in our late
Civil wars, having injuriously invaded the Arms of ancient Families.

CHAP. XVII. Of the often Altering of Sirnames, and the Various Writing thereof.
HAving dealt so largely in Sirnames, it is necessary to observe, that Sirnames
of Families have been frequently altered, some Families deposing their Old, and
assuming new names on several occasions: But chiefly for,

1. Concealment in time of Civil Wars. A Name is a kind of Face, whereby one is
known; Wherefore taking a false name is a Vizard whereby men disguise
themselves, and that lawfully enough, when not fradulently done to deceive
others, but discreetly in danger, to secure themselves: Thus during the Contest
'twixt York and Lancaster, Carington in Warwickshire took the name of Smith.
La Blunt the Name of Croke in Buckingham-shire, with many others.

2. For Advancement when adopted into an estate, as Newport the Name of Hatton,
in Northamptonshire; Throckmorton the Name of Carew at Beddington in Surrey,
as long before Westcoat the Name of Littleton in Staffordshire.

Besides the same Surname continued, has been variously altered in Writing.
First, because Time teaches New Orthography, altering, spelling, as well as
speaking. Secondly the best Gentlemen anciently were not the best Scholars, and
(minding matters of more moment) were some what too incurious in their Names.
Besides, Writers engrossing Deeds, were not over critical in spelling of Names,
knowing well where the person appeared the same, the Simplicity of that age,
would not fall out about Misnomer.

Lastly, Ancient Families have been often removed into several Counties, where
several Writings follow the several pronunciations. What Scholar knows not,
that (...) their Greek Name for Jupiter, is by their seven Dialects, written
ten several ways and (though not so many Dialects in England) there is a real
difference betwixt our Southern, Western, and Northern Pronunciations.

Hence it is that the same Name has been so often disguised unto the
Staggering of many, who have mistook them for different.

Idem non Idem, quaeruntque in Nomine Nomen. The same they thought was not the
same,
And in their Name they sought their Name.
Thus I am informed, that the Honorable Name of Villiers is written fourteen
several ways, in their own Evidences, and the like (though not so many)
Variations, may be observed in others.

And the Name of Roper in Darby-shire, changed from Musard to Rubra-Spatha,
Rospear, Rouspee, Rooper, Roper. I insist the longer on this point, because in
our Catalogue of Sheriffs, the same Surname is variously written, which some
(without cause) may impute to my carelessness, being the effect of my care,
conforming the Orthography exactly to the Original, where such variation does
plainly appear, and however such Diversity appears in the Eye of others, I
dare profess that I am delighted with the Prospect thereof.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Modern Battles.
IMmediately before our Farewell to the Respective Counties, we have inserted a
Breviate of Modern Battles since our Civil Distempers. I need here premise
nothing of the difference betwixt a Skirmish (being only the Engagement of
Parties) and a Battle being an encounter betwixt Generals with their Armies.
Nor yet of the difference betwixt Praelium a Fight or Battle, and Bellum a War,
the former being a Fight in Field, the later the continuance of Hostility
(which may be for many years) whilst the difference depends undecided.
Peracto Pr^lio manet Bellum. And though a Truce may give a Comma or Colon to
the War, nothing under a Peace can put a perfect Period thereunto.

In describing these Battles, I am for distinction sake necessitated to use the
word Parliament improperly, according to the Abusive acception thereof for
these latter years. Let us think and judge with the Wise, but if we do not
speak with the Vulgar, we shall be Dumb to the Vulgar. Otherwise I know a
Parliament properly, is a complete Syllogism, the Lords and Commons being the
two Propositions, the King the Conclusion thereof, and our English Tongue
wants one word to express the dissenting part of a Parliament, and I trust in
God, as our Language does not afford the Name, so our Land shall not hereafter
behold the Nature thereof.

These Battles are here inserted, not with any intent (God knows my heart) to
perpetuate the odious Remembrance of our mutual Animosities; that Heart
burnings may remain, when House burnings are removed; but chiefly to raise our
Gratitude to God, that so many Battles should be fought in the bosom of so
little a Land, and so few Scars and Signs thereof extant in their visible
Impressions. Such, who consider how many men we have lost, would wonder we have
any left, and such, who see how many we have left, that we had any lost. In a
word, as it is said of the best Oil, that it has no Taste, that is, no Tang,
but the pure Natural Gust of Oil therein, so I have indevoured to present these
Battles according to plain Historical truth, without any partial Reflections.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Number of Modern Shires or Counties in England; And why the
WORTHIES in this Work are digested County-wayes.
I Say Modern, not meaning to meddle with those antiquated ones, which long
since have lost their Names and bounds, as Rob. de Gloucester, and Codex,
Wigornienfis.
Winchelcomb-shire united to Gloucester-shire, Camdens Brit.
Howdon-Shire annexed to Yorkshire, and Hexham-Shire to Northumberland. As
little do we intend to touch on those small Tracts of Ground, the County of
Poole and the like, being but the extended Limits and Liberties of some
Incorporations.

We add Shires or Counties, using the words promiscuously as the same in sense.
I confess, I have heard some Critics making this distinction betwixt them,
that such are Shires which take their Denomination from some principal Town, as
Cambridgeshire, Oxfordshire, etc. Whilst the rest not wearing the Name of any
Town, are to be reputed Counties, as Norfolk, Suffolk, etc. But we need not go
into Wales to confute their Curiosity (where we meet Merioneth-shire, and
Glamorgan-shire, but no Towns so termed) seeing Devon-shire does discompose
this their English Conceit; I say, English Shires and Counties, being both
Comitatus in Latin.

Of these there be nine and thirty at this day, which by the thirteen in Wales,
are made up fifty two, England (largely taken) having one for every Week in the
year.

Here let me tender this for a real Truth, which may seem a Paradoxe, that
there is a County in England, which from the Conquest, till the year 1607 (when
Mr. Camdens last Latin Britannia was set forth) never had Count or Earl
thereof, as hereby may appear,

In his Conclusion of Bark-shire. Immediately it follows. Haec de Bark shire,
quae hactenus Comitis honor insignivit neminem. In hujus Comitatus complexu
sunt Parochiae 140.

Now this may seem the more strange, because Comes and Comitatus are relative.
But, under favor I humbly conceive, that though Bark shire never had any
Titular, Honourary or Hereditary Earl, till the year 1620. (when Francis Lord
Norris was created first Earl thereof) yet had it in the Saxons time (when it
was first modelled into a Shire) an Officiary Count, whose Deputy was termed
Vice-comes as unto this day.

Why the Worthies in this Work are digested County-ways.
First, this Method of Marshalling them is new, and therefore I hope
nevertheless acceptable. Secondly, it is as informative to our judgments, to
order them by Counties according to their place, as by Centuries (so often done
before) according to the time; seeing WHERE is as essential as WHEN to a man's
being. Yea both in some sort may be said to be jure divino, understand it
ordered by Gods immediate providence, and therefore are coupled together by the
Apostle, Acts 17. 26. And has determined the times before appointed, and the
bounds of their habitation. If of their habitation in general, then more
especially of the most important place of their Nativity.

The Spirit of God in Scripture takes signal notice hereof, Psalm. 87 6.
The Lord shall count when he writes up the people, That this man was born
there. John 1. 44.
Philip was of Bethsaida, the City of Andrew and Peter; and all know how St.
Paul got his best Liberty, where he saw the first light in Tarsus a City of
Cilicia.

When Augustus C^ar issued out a decree to tax the whole World, it was ordered
therein, that Luke 2. 8.
every own should go into his own City, as the most compendious way to prevent
confusion, and effectually to advance the business. I find the same to
expedite this work, by methodizing the Worthies therein according to the
respective places of their Nativities. If some conceive it a pleasant sight in
the City of London, to behold the Natives of the several Shires, after the
hearing of a Sermon, pass in a decent equipage to some Hall, there to dine
together for the continuance and increase of Love and Amity amongst them:
Surely this Spectacle will not seem unpleasant to ingenuous Eyes, to see the
Heroes of every particular County, modelled in a body together, and marching
under the Banners of their several Eminencies.

Here may you behold how each County is Innated with a particular Genius,
inclining the Natives thereof to be dexterous, some in one profession, some in
another; one carrying away the credit for Soldiers, another for Seamen,
another for Lawyers, another for Divines, etc. as I could easily instance, but
that I will not forestall the Readers Observation; seeing some love not a Rose
of another gathering, but delight to pluck it themselves.

Here also one may see, how the same County was not always equally fruitful in
the production of worthy persons; but, as Trees are observed to have their
bearing and barren years: So Shires have their rise and fall in affording
famous persons, one age being more fertile then another, as by annexing the
dates to their several Worthies will appear.

In a word, my serious desire is, to set a noble emulation between the several
Counties, which should acquit themselves most eminent in their memorable off
spring. Nor let a smaller Shire be disheartened herein, to contest with another
larger in extent, and and more populous in persons, seeing Viri do not always
hold out in proportion to Homines. Thus we find the Tribe of Simeon, more
numerous than any in Israel (Judah and Dan only excepted) as which at their
coming out of Egypt, afforded no fewer, than Number. 1. 23.
fifty nine thousand and three hundred. Yet that Tribe did not yield Prince,
Priest, Prophet, or any remarkable person; Apocrypha, Judith only excepted.
Multi gregarii, pauci egregii; and Multitude with Amplitude is never the true
Standard of Eminency, as the judicious Reader by perusing and comparing our
County Catalogues, will quickly perceive.

A Case of Concernment propounded, and submitted to the Equity of the Reader.
It is this. Many Families time out of mind, have been certainly fixed in
eminent Seats in their respective Counties, where the Ashes of their Ancestors
sleep in quiet, and their Names are known with honor. Now possibly it may
happen, that the chief Mother of that Family, traveling in her Travel by the
way side, or by some other Casualty, as visit of a friend, etc. May there be
delivered of the Heir of her Family. The Question is, whether this Child shall
be reputed the Native of that place where his Mother accidentally touched, or
where his Father, and the Father of his Fathers have landed for many
Generations.

On the one side, it seems unreasonable to any man according to his
Historical conscience, that such a casual case should carry away the Sole
credit of his Nativity. This allowed, and tota Anglia Londinizabit, a Moiety
almost of the Eminent Persons in this Modern age, will be found born in that
City, as the Inn-general of the Gentry and Nobility of this Nation. Whether
many come to prosecute Lawsuits, to see and to be seen, and on a hundred other
occasions, among which I will not name, saving of housekeeping in the Country.

One Instance of many. I find by the Register of St. Dunstans, in the West,
London, that Thomas Wentworth afterward Earl of Strafford was born in that
Parish, and Christened in the Church aforesaid, his Mother big with Child,
probably coming thither for the convenience of a Midwife. Now what a wrong is
it to deprive Woodhouse, Wentworth in Yorkshire, where his Family has
continued in a noble Equipage for many years, there possessed of a large Revenue,
of the honor of his Nativity?

On the other side it is clea^ in the Rigor of the Law (and I Question whether
Chauncery in this case, will or can afford any Remedy) that the Minute of the
Birth of any person at any place, truly entitles the same to his Nativity. This
is plain by the Statutes of those Colleges in either University, that confine
Fellowships to Counties, and it will be said, transit onus cum honor, the
burden as well as the Profit is to be conveyed on the same occasion.

Reader, the case thus stated, is remitted to thy own arbitration. However thus
far I have proceeded therein, in this following Work, that when such
Alterations (for I can give them no better term) and accidental Straglings from
the known place of their Family shall appear unto me, I am resolved to enter
them in those places accordingly. But until I receive such Intelligence, I will
confidently admit them in that place which is generally known in persons of
Honor for the principal habitation of their Family.

CHAP. XX. That Clergymen formerly carried the Register of their Birthplace in
their Sirnames, and why; As also that (Since the Reformation) the Sons of the
married Clergy have been as successeful as others.
IT was fashionable for the Clergy (especially if Regulars, Monks, and Friars)
to have their Surnames (for Syr-names they were not) or upper-names, because
superadded to those given at the Font, from the places of their Nativity, and
therefore they are as good evidence to prove where they were born, as if we had
the deposition of the Midwife, and all the Gossips present at their Mothers
labors. Hence it is that in such cases we seldom charge our Margin with other
Authors, their Surname being Author enough, to avow their births therein.

Some impute this custom to the pride of the Clergy, whose extraction
generally was so obscure, that they did (...), were ashamed of their Parentage.
An uncharitable opinion, to fix so foul a fault on so holy a function; and
most false, many in Orders appearing of most honorable Descent. Yet Richard
Bishop of London, quitted Angervill, though his Father Sir Burton in his
Description of Leicester-sh.
Richard Angervil, was a Knight of worth and worship, to be called of Bury;
where he was born, and William Bishop of Winchester waved Pattin to wear
Waynfleet, though he was eldest Son to Godwins in his C^tal. of the Bishops in
Winchester.
Richard Pattin an Esquire of great ancientry.

Others say, that the Clergy herein affected to be Levi-like, Deuteronomy. 33. 9.
who said to his Father and to his Mother I have not seen him, practicing to be
Mimicks of Heb. 7. 3.
Melchisedech, (...), without Father, without Mother, without Descent, so to
render themselves independent in the World, without any coherence to carnal
relations. Surely some were well minded herein, that as they might have no
children, they would have no Fathers, beholding the place of their Birth, as
coheir at least to their estates, to which many did (...), plenti^ully pay for
their nursing therein.

Question. But oftentimes it comes to pass, That there be many Towns in
England, the same to a Title both in spelling and calling. So that on such
uncertain Evidence, no true Verdict can be found for their Nativity. One
instance of many, William of Wickham was the famous Founder of New College in
Oxford. But how can his Cradle be certainly fixed in any place, when it is
equally Rockt betwixt twenty Villages of the same Denomination.

Shire. Hundred. 1 Wickham Berks Kentbury 2 High Wickham Bucks Burnham 3 West
Wickham Bucks Disborough 4 Wickham west Camb. Chilforde 5 Wickham Essex
Thurstable 6 Wickham S. Paul Essex Hinckford. 7 Wickham Bonant Essex Uttlesford
* Collected out of the useful Book of Villare Anglicanum.
8 Wickham Hants Titchfield 9 Wickham-brux. Kent St. Austins 10 Wickham East
Kent Su^ton 11 Wickham West Kent Ibidem 12 Wickham Linc. Ellowe. 13 Wickham
Brook Suffolk Risbridge 14 Wickham Suffolk Wilforde 15 Wickham Skeyth Suffolk
Hartesmer 16 Wickham Oxford Banbury 17 Wickham Sussex Bramber 18 Wickham
York Ridall 19 Wickham York Pickering 20 Wickham Abbey York Ibidem.

See here a Lottery, and who dare assure himself of the prize, having Nineteen
Blanks against him. Indeed if Election should be made by the Eminency of the
place, High Wickham in Buckingham-shire would clearly carry it, as an ancient
Borough Town, sending Burgesses to Parliament. But all these being VVickhams
alike, bring in their Claims to the aforesaid William, and how shall the right
be decided? The same Question may be demanded of several other persons on the
same occasion.

Answer. I confess the case often occurs, though seldom so many places be
Competitors; wherefore herein we have our Recourse to the Circumstances in the
History of such a controverted Person, and Consult the most important of them
with our greatest Diligence and Discretion.

Noscitur e Socio qui non Noscetur ab ipso.
We by their Company do own.
Men by themselves to us unknown.
Such Circumstances may be called the Associats of a man's Life, as where they
most conversed, had their Kindred; got their Preferment, etc. And these though
not severally, jointly se^ve as so many Lights to expound the place of his
Birth, and clearing the Homonymi^ of many places, state that Town justly
wherein he was born.

Thus are we not only in Bivio or Trivio, but as I may say in Vigentivio being
to find Wickhams Birth amongst twenty of his Namesake Villages. But discovering
John Perrot his father, richly landed about Winchester, and the principal
Actions of his Life presented thereabouts, with some other Remarks, all meeting
on the same Scene, one may safely conclude, that Wickham in Hamp-shire, the
Eight in the aforesaid Catalogue) is that individual Wi^kham wherein this
Prelate took his first degree, I mean proceeded into the Light of this World.
The like Evidence (though not always so clear) has upon diligent search
directed us in Differences of the same Nature.

An EXPEDIENT when several Places claim the Birth of the same Person.
It often comes to pass that two or more places entitle themselves to the
Nativity of the same Man; Here my Endeavor is to keep the Peace (as well as I
may) betwixt them, as in the Instance here inserted,

Bradwardin. Castrum, unde ortum and nomen T. Bradwardinus Arch. Cant. habuit.
Camden Brit. in Herefordshire. T. Bradwardinus Hartfeldiae natus in Dioecesi
Cicestriensi. J. Bale de Script. Brit. Cent. 5. page 435. Tho. Bradwardinus
Patria Southsaxia, ex Civitate Cice stria oriundus. Joh. Pits de Ang. Scrip.
anno 1350. Natus fertur Bradwardinus Hatfeldiae, in Comitatu Suffolciensi.
Godwin. in Catal. Episc. Londini impres. anno 1616.

See here four places challenge one man, and I am as unwilling to accuse any of
falsehood, as I am unable to maintain all in the Truth.

However the difference may thus be accomodated, Bradwardins Ancestors fetched
their Name from that place in Herefordshire, according to Camden; though he
himself was born (as Bale says) at Hartfeld in Sussex; within the City (says
Pits) of Chichester, interpret him ex^ensively not to the Walls, but Diocese
and Jurisdiction thereof. As for Suffolk in Bishop Godwin, I understand it an
Erratum in the Printer for Sussex.

Our usual expedient in the like cases is this, to insert the Character at
large of the controverted person in that County, which (according to our
apprehension) produces the best Evidence for him; yet so, that we also enter
his name with a reference in the other respective places, which with
probability pretend unto him.

If equal likelihood appear unto us on all sides, that County clearly carries
away his character, which first presents it self to our Pen, in the
Alphabetical Order.

Thus lately, when the same Living was in the gift of the Lord Chancellor,
Lord Treasurer, and Master of the Wards, that Clerk commonly carried it, who
was first presented to the Bishop. However, though in the disputable Nativities
of worthy men, first come, first served, a Caveat is also entered in other
Counties, to preserve their Titles unprejudiced.

It must not be forgotten, that many, without just cause, by mistake, multiply
differences in the places of men's Births. The Papists please themselves with
reporting a Tale of their own inventing, how the men of two Towns in Germany
fell out, and fought together, whilst one of them was for Martin, the other for
Luther, being but the several names of the same person. If one Author affirms
Bishop Jewel born at Buden, another at Berinerber, let none make strife betwixt
these two Writers, the former naming the House and Village, the later the
Parish wherein he was born, a case which often occurs in the Notation of
Nativities.

That the Children of Clergymen have been as successeful as the Sons of Men of
other Professions.
There goes a common Report, no less uncharitable than untrue, yet meeting
with many Beleivers thereof, as if Clergy men's Sons were generally signally
unfortunate, like the Sons of Ely, 1 Samuel 2. 12.
Hophnies, and Phineaz's, dissolute in their Lives, and 1 Samuel 4. 11.
doleful in their Deaths; This I may call a Libell indeed, according to Sir
Francis Bacon his Description thereof; for first, it is a Lie, a notorious
untruth; and then a Bell, some loud and lewd Tongue has told, yea Rung it out,
and perchance was welcome Music to some hearers thereof.

It is first confessed, that the best Saints and Servants of God, have had bad as
well as good children extracted from them. It is the Note of Illiricus on those
words of Saint John to the Elect Lady: 2 John 4.
I rejoiced greatly, when I found of thy Children walking in the Truth. He
says not all thy but of thy children, intimating that she had mingled Ware,
Corn and Tares in those who were descended from her. Thus Aaron (for I desire
to restrain my self in instances of the Priests) had Nadab and Abihu, two
Levit. 10. 2.
strange Fire Offerers, as well as his Godly Sons Eliazar and Ithamar. Yea, I
find one of the best Fathers, having two (and those I believe all he had) of
the worst 1 Samuel 8. 3.
Sons, even Samuel himself.

Nor do we deny, but that our English Clergy have been unhappy in their
offspring, (though not above the proportion of other Professions) whereof some
have not unprobably assigned these causes. First, If Fellows of Colleges, they
are ancient before they marry. Secondly, their children then are all Benjamins,
I mean the children of their Old age, and thereupon by their Fathers (to take
off as much as we may the weight of the fault from the weaker Sex) cockered and
indulged, which I neither defend or excuse, but bemone and condemn. Thirdly,
Such Children after their Fathers Death are left in their Minority, to the
careless Care of Friends and Executors, who too often discharge not their due
trust in their Education, whence it is such Orphans too osten embrace wild
courses to their own destructions.

But all this being granted, we maintain that Clergy-mens Children have not
been more unfortunate, but more observed than the Children of the Parents of
other Professions. There is but one Minister at one time in a whole Parish, and
therefore the fewer they are, the easier they are observed both in their
Persons and Posterities. Secondly, the Eminency of their place, makes them
exposed and obvious to all discoveries. Thirdly, possibly Malice may be the
Eye Salve to quicken men's Sight, in prying after them. Lastly, one ill Success
in their Sons, makes (for the reasons aforesaid) more impression in the Ears
and Eyes of people, then many miscarriages of those Children whose Fathers were
of another Function. (I speak not this out of Intent to excuse or extenuate the
Badnesse of the one, by the Badnesse of the other, but that both may be
mutually provoked to Amendment.) In a word, other men's Children; would have as
many Eyesores, if they had as many Eyes seeing them.

Indeed, if happiness be confined unto outward Pomp and Plenty, and if those
must be accounted unfortunate (which I in the true meaning of the word must
interpret unprovidenced) who swim not in equal Plenty with others, then that
Epithet may be fixed on the Children of the Clergy. Whose Fathers coming late
to their Livings, and surprised by Death, not staying long on them (which at
the best afforded them but narrow maintenance) leave them oft-times so ill
provided, that they are forced without blame or shame to them (as I conceive)
to take sometimes poor and painful Employments for their Livelihood.

But by our following Endeavors it will plainly appear, that the Sons of
Ministers have by Gods blessing proved as Eminent as any who have raised
themselves by their own Endeavors. For Statesmen George Carew, Privy Councellor
of England, Scotland, and Ireland; and as able a man [ absit Invidia] as the
age he lived in produced, was Earl of Totnes, the same place whereof his Father
was Archdeacon. Sir Edwin Sandys, Son to Archbishop Sandys, will be
acknowledged even by his Enemies, a man of such merit, that England could not
afford an Office which he could not manage. For Lawyers, Sir Thomas Richardson,
lately, and the never sufficiently to be commended Sir Orlando Bridgeman, now
Lord Chief Justice, with many others. For Seamen* Sir Francis Drake, that great
Scourge and Terror to the Spanish Pride.

If any say, these are but thin Instances out of so thick a number, de tot modo
milibus unus, few of so many Hundreds, know we have only taken some Eminent
persons, leaving the rest, for fear to be counted Forestallers to the
Collection of the Reader in our ensuing Book.

But the Sons of Ministers have never been more successeful, then when bred in
the Professions of their Fathers, as if some Peculiar Blessing attended them,
whilst they continue therein. Thus of the Prelatical Clergy, we have Francis
Godwin a Bishop, the Son of a bishop, and Doctor John King Son to his Reverend
Father the Bishop of London. And of other Clergy men we have three Generations
of the wards in Suffolk. As many of the Shutes in York shire, no less painful
then pious and able in their Professions.

Let me add, that there were at one time 3 Fellows of Kings College, Sons of
eminent Divines, and afterward Doctors of Divinity.

1 Samuel Collings. 2 Thomas Goad. 3 William Sclater.
And I believe there were not severally in their Generations, men more signal
in their different Eminencies.

It is easy for any to guess out of what Quiver this Envenomed Arrow was first
shot against the Children of Clergy men; namely, from the Church of Rome. Who
in their Jurisdiction forbid the Banes of all Clergymen, against the Law of
Nature, Scripture, and the practice of the Primitive Church. And in other
places unsubjected to their power, bespatter the posterity of the Clergy with
their scandalous Tongues. Yet be it known unto them, the Sons of English
Priests or Presbyters may be as good as the Nephews of Roman Cardinals.
However, because Antidotes may be made of poisons, it is possible that Good may
be extracted out of this false Report; Namely, if it makes Clergymen more
careful to go before their Children with good Examples, to lead them with good
Instructions; to drive and draw them (if need so requires) with Moderate
Correction seasonably used, putting up both Dry and Wet Prayers to God for his
Blessing on their children. As also, if it makes the children of Clergymen to
be more careful, by their circumspect lives, to be no shame to the Memory and
Profession of their Fathers.

CHAP. XXI. General Rules for the AUTHOR and READERS. Ease.
I Have ranked all persons under their respective Titles, according to their
Seniorities, of the ages they lived in. Good the method of the Sons of Jacob,
sitting down at the Table of their [unknown] brother Genesis 43. 33.
Joseph, the first according to his Birthright, and the Youngest according to
his Youth. If therefore, on this account, a mean man take place of a mighty
Lord, the later (as being dead) I am sure will not, and the Living Reader
should not be offended thereat.

Of the Dates of Time annexed to the Persons and their Actions.
The Sun, that Glorious Creature, does serve Mankind for a double use, to
lighten their Eyes with his Beams, and Minds with his Motion. The later is
performed by him as appointed for Genesis 1. 10.
Signs and for Seasons, as he is the great Regulator of Time, joynted into
Years and Months, carved into Weeks and Days, minced into Hours and Minutes.

At what a sad loss are such, who living in Lone Houses, in a Gloomy Winter
Day, when the Sun does not at all appear, have neither the benefit of Watches,
Silent Clocks, nor of Clocks, Speaking Watches, being ready oft-times to
mistake Noon for Night, and Night for Noon. Worse Errors are committed by
those, who being wholly ignorant in Chronology, set the Grandchildren before
their Grandfathers, and have more HysteronProterons, than of all other Figures
in their Writings.

The Maxim, He who distinguishes well instructs well, is most true in the
observing of the Distinction of time. It will pose the best Clerk to read (yea
to spel) that Deed, wherein Sentences, Clauses, Words and Letters, are without
Points or Stops, all continued together. The like Confusion arises, when
persons and their actions are not distanced by Years, nor pointed with the
periods of Generations.

I have endeavored in my following work, to Time Eminent Persons by one of
these Notations, First, that of their Morning or Nativity, the second, that of
their Noon or Flourishing, the last, that of their Night or Death. The first is
very uncertain, many Illustrious Men being of obscure Extraction. The second
more conspicuous, when Men's Luster attracts many Eyes to take Notice of them.
Many see the Oak when grown, (especially if a standard of Remark) whilst few
(if any) remember the Acorn, when it was set. The last is not the least
Direction, as which is generally observed. It comes to pass sometimes, that
their Deaths acquaint us with their births, viz. when attended on their Tomb
with Intelligence of their age, so that by going backward so many years from
their Coffins we infallibly light on their Cradles.

Some Persons in our Works are notified by all of these Indications, most with
two, and all with one of them. When we find a Contest amongst Chronologers, so
that with the mutinous Ephesians, Acts 19. 32.
some cry one thing, and some another, being as much dispersed in their
Opinions, as the Amorites in their Persons (when defeated by Saul) so ^ Sam.
11. 11.
that two of them were not left together, in such a case, I have pitched on
that Date (under correction of better judgments) which seemed to me of
greatest Probability.

An Apology for Qualificatives used, and Blanks left in this History.
I approve the plain Country Byword, as containing much Innocent Simplicity
therein,

Almost and very nigh,
Have saved many a Lie.
So have the Latins their prope, fere, juxta, circiter, plus minus, used in
matters of fact by the most authentic Historians. Yea, we may observe, that
the Spirit of Truth it self, where Numbers and Measures are concerned, in
Times, Places and Persons, uses the aforesaid Modificatives, save in such
cases, where some mystery contained in the number, requires a particular
specification thereof.

In times. In places. In persons. Dan. 5. 33. Darius being about threescore and
two years old. Luke 24. 13. From Jerusalem about sixty furlongs. Exodus 12. 37.
About six hundred thousand men on foot. Luke 3. 23. Jesus began to be about
thirty years of age. Joh. 6. 19. Had rowed about five and twenty furlongs. Act.
2. 41. Added to the church about 3 thousand (...).

None therefore can justly find fault with me, if on the like occasion I have
secured my self with the same Qualificatives. Indeed such Historians who grind
their Intelligence to the powder of fraction, pretending to cleave the pin, do
sometimes miss the But. Thus one reports, how in the Persecution under
Dioclesian, there were neither under nor over, but just nine hundred ninety
nine Martyrs. Yea, generally those that Trade in such Retail-ware, and deal in
such small parcells, may by the ignorant be commended for their Care, but
condemned by the judicious for their ridiculous curiosity.

But such who will forgive the use of our foresaid Qualificatives (as but
limping and lamenesse) will perchance not pardon the many blanks which occur in
this Book, accounting them no better then our Flat fallingto the ground, in
default of our Industry where they found their best preferment, especially if
Convents or Dignities of signal note; as Henry of Huntington, not born, but
Archdeacon there; William of Malmsbury, and Matthew of Westminster, no Natives
of those Towns; but Monks of the Monasteries therein.

However to prevent Cavils, and avoid Confusion, and to distinguish those from
the former, their Names are marked with S. N. for second Nativity, to show,
that whence soever they fetched their Life, here they found their best
Livelihood. But when a person plainly appears born beyond the Seas, We take no
notice of him, though never so highly advanced in England, as without our Line
of Communication, and so not belonging to this Subject.

What REM. for Remove when affixed in the Margin does Denote.
We meet with some persons in this our Work, whose Nativities we cannot Recover
with any great Probability, neither by help of History, or Heraldry, or
Tradition, or Records, or Registers, or Printed, or Written books, which
hitherto have come to our hands. Now if such persons be of no Eminence, we
intend not to trouble our selves and Reader with them, Let Obscurity even go to
Obscurity, when we find no great note in them, we take not any notice of them.
But in case they appear men of much Merit, whose Nativities are concealed by
some Casualty, we are loath that their Memories, who whilst living were
Worthies, now dead should be Vagrants, reposited in no certain place.

Wherefore we have disposed them in some Shire or other, not as Dwellers, no
nor so much as Sojourners therein. But only as Guests, and we render some
slight Reasons, why we invited them to that place, rather then another, seeing
a small motive will prevail with a charitable mind, to give a Worthy Stranger a
Nights Lodging.

However, that these may not be confounded with those, of whose Nativities we
have either assurance or strong presumption. We have in the Margin charactered
them with a Rem. for Remove, it being our desire that they should be
transplanted on the first convincing Evidence, which shall appear unto us, to
their proper place. And therefore I behold them as standing here with a Staff
in their hands, ready to pack up, and go away, whither any good Guide shall
give them direction.

Always provided, that as they are set here, with little, they be not removed
hence with less probability; an unset bone is better then a bone so ill set,
that it must be broken again to double the pain of the Patient. And better it
is these persons should continue in this their loose and dislocated condition,
than to be falsely fixed in any place, from whence they must again be translated.

Now Reader (to recollect our marginal or prefixed characters) know it is the
best sign when no Sign at all is added to a name, for then we proceed on
certainty; at least wise, on the credit of good Authors, for the place of his
Nativity, thus the best of the house gives his Coat plain, whilst the
following differences are but the Diminutions of the younger brothers, viz.

1. Amp. Where our Evidence of a persons birth is but conjectural and craveth
further instruction. 2. S. N. When having no aim at the place of their birth,
we fix them according to their best Livelihood. 3. REM. When wholly
unsatisfied of their position, we remit their Removal to the Readers
discretion.
Now seeing order only makes the difference betwixt a wall and a heap of
stones, and seeing, Quibene distinguit been docet, we conceived our selves
obliged to part, and not jumble together the several gradations.

How Persons belonging to several Topics are ranked.
It often (...) to pass, that the same person may justly be entitled to two
or more ^opicks, as by the ensuing may appear. for not seeking due Information.
But let such know, that those Officers, who by their place are to find out
persons enquired after, deserve neither to be blamed nor shamed, when having
used their best diligence, they return to the Court a Non est inventus.

For my own part, I had rather my Reader should arise hungry from my Book, than
surfeited therewith; rather uninformed than misinformed thereby; rather
ignorant of what he desires, than having a falsehood, or (at the best) a
conjecture for a truth obtruded upon him.

Indeed, I humbly conceive that vacuity which is hateful in nature, may be
helpful in History. For, such an hiatus beggeth of posterity, to take pains to
fill it up with a truth (if possible to be attained) whereas, had our bold
adventure farced it up with a conjecture, intus existens prohibuerit extraneum,
no room had been left for the endeavors of others.

What Ampliandum, so often occurring in this Book, does import.
It is sufficiently known to all Antiquaries, that causes brought to be heard
and determined before the Roman Judges, were reducible to two kinds.

1. Liquets. 2. Ampliandums. When the case as clear and plain, was pre^
decided. When, being dark and difficult, they were put off to farther debate,
somewhat alluding to our Demurrs.

Hence it is, that we find the Roman Pro Cec. 290. a.
Orator complaining of an unjust Judge, Cum causam non audisset, and potestas
esset Ampliandi, dixit sibi Liquere.

I should be loath to be found guilty of the like offense in rash adjudging men's
Nativities to places, on doubtful Evidence, and therefore when our presumptions
do rather incline then satisfy, we have prefixed AMP. before the Names of such
persons. For when they appear undoubted English, and Eminent in their
respective Qualities, it would be in us a sin of omission not to insert them;
and yet being ignorant of the exact place of their Birth, it would be
presumption peremptorily to design it without this Note of Dubitation, though
on the most tempting Probabilities. Know also that when AMP. is used in the
Arms of Sheriffs, it is only done in such an Exigent, where there are different
Coats of very ancient Families, and largely diffused, as [ Nevil, Ferrers,
Basset, etc.] So that it is hazardous for me to fix on one in such great
variety.

What S. N. frequently appearing prefixed to Men's NAMES does signify.
When we cannot by all our indevours inform our selves of the Nativities of
some eminent person, we are forced to this Refuge (so creditable, that I care
not what Eyes behold us entering under the Roof thereof) to insert such persons
in those Counties, where we find them either first or highest preferred: and
this we conceive proper enough, and done upon good consideration. For the wild
Irish love their Nurses as well (if not better) than their own Mothers, and
affect their Foster-brothers, which sucked the same breast, as much as their
Natural-brothers whith sprang from the same Womb. If any say these are the wild
Irish, whose barbarous customs are not to be imitated, I defend my self by the
practice of more civilized people.

The Latins have a Proverb, non ubi nascor, sed ubi pascor, making that place
their Mother, not which bred, but which fed them. The Greeks have but one word,
(...), both for Life and Livelihood. The Hebrews accounted that place was to
give a Man his Native Denomination, where he had his longest and most visible
(...), from (though not sometimes in) his Infancy. By which common mistake
Jesus was entitled on the cross, of Nazareth instead of Bethlehem.

Yea, we may observe; that though generally our English Clergy (...) (...) from
their Birth places: Yet some few quitted them, to be named from those (...),

Two of Bishops, Writers, Arth. Lakes. Two of Seamen, Soldiers, Sir Francis
Drake. Physicians, Benefactors, Jo. Caius. Statesmen, Soldiers, Sir Ralph
Sadler. Three of Bishops, Writers, Benefactors, Lancelot Andrews. Three of
Statesmen, Lawyers, Benefactors, Sir Nicholas Bacon. Martyrs, Bishops, Writers,
Thomas Cranmer. Statesmen, Lawyers, Writers, Sir Francis Bacon. Four of Saints,
Bishops, Writers, Statesmen, Tho. Becket. Four of Lawyers, Statesmen, Writers,
Benefactors, William Lord Cecil. Confessors, Bishops, Writers, Benefactors Ed.
Grindall. Soldiers, Seamen, Statesmen, Writers, Sir Walter Raleigh.

The Question is now, under what head they shall be properly placed, seeing so
many lay claim unto them?

Some will say, let them be ranked in that capacity wherein they excelled. This
I humbly conceive is an invidious work for any to perform. Seeing none have
made me, I will not make my self a Judge in this Case, many appearing equally
eminent in their several capacities, but have embraced the following Order.

First, The Titles of Saints and Martyrs carries it clearly from all others, I
behold them as heavenly honors, and Glory outshines Gold; next I deny not, I
have an affection for Benefactors to the Public, and much indulge that Topic,
clean thorough this Work, Psalm. 119.
David says to God himself, thou art good, there is a clear spring, and thou
do good, there is a comfortable stream. Benefaction therefore being a
God-like*act, blame me not if under that Title, those have been ranked, who
otherwise had more outwardly honorable Relations. For the rest I am not
ashamed to confess, that Casualty in such who came first, and Convenience in
such, who agreed best with my present occasion, regulated them in their method,
and so be it they be here, the placing of them is not so much material.

CHAP. XXII. An Accommodation to prevent Exceptions about the Precedence of
several Professions.
IAm sadly sensible, that being to treat of the Worthies in several
professions; I shall incur many men's displeasure, in not ranking them according
to their own desires; the rather because there always has been a Battle Royal
about Precedence, betwixt,

1. Swordmen and Gow^men. 2. Swordmen and Swordmen. 3. Gownmen and Gownmen.
Concerning the first couple, The Question* An doctor praecedat militem?
hangs as yet on the File, and I believe ever will, as which is often
determined affirmatively in time of peace, but always Negatively in time of War.

Nor less is the contest betwixt Swordmen and Swordmen (I mean of the same side
and Interest) about Priority, whether Land or Sea Captains should take place.
The former they plead, that they fight on a fixed Element (not so subject as
the Sea to casual advantages) which being a settled Theater of Valor, men may
indifferently try their courage upon it. The Sea Captain alleges, that the
greater danger the greater dignity, and precedence therefore due to their
Profession, who encounter the Winds and the Water, besides the Fierceness and
the Fury of their Enemies. Besides, it is very difficult if possible for a ship
engaged in Fight, to escape by Flight, whereby many in Land battles easily
preserve themselves.

I confess that Custom (the best Herald in controversies of this kind) has
adjudged the Precedence to Land Captains, but not without the great grudge and
regret of (...) therein. We may observe in Nature, that though the water and
earth make one Globe, and though Providence preserves the Earth from being
overflown by the Water, yet the Water as the lighter Element, challenges the
highest place to its self, and watches all opportunities, (especially when
great Rain meet with low banks) to regain its superiority by Inundations. Sea
Captains in like manner, though depressed by practice and custom to give place
to Land Captains, do it with that distaste and dislike, that thereby (though
they cannot recover their right) they continue their claim to precedence,
watching their opportunity, and now (in our so many Naval expeditions) not
altogether out of hope to regain it.

Nor less the difference betwixt Gownmen and Gownmen, who should take the upper
hand* witness the Contest betwixt Doctors of Phyfick, and of Canon Law, on
that Account, the former pleading the following Instrument in their behalf.

Memorandum quod anno Domini 1384, in Vigilia Purificationis Beatae Mariae
Virginis, in * Caius de Ant. Cantab. page 20.
plena Convocatione Regentium and non Regentium, per fidem Convocatorum
declaratum est, quod Doctor in Medicina dextram partem Cancellarii in
Congregationibus and Convocationibus retineret and non Sinistram, Doctor vero
in jure civili partem Sinistram and non dextram. Facta est haec Declaratio ex
praecepto Regis Richardi Secundi post conquestum, anno Regni sui Octavo, Add to
this what a great Nicholaus Vernias Theatinus in praefatione in Burleum super
Physici^ Aristotelis.
Professor of Philosophy, living in Padua anno 1482, concludes after a long
debating of the Question. Dicamus ergo cum SANCTA ROMANA Ecclesia, quod
Medicina est Nobilior jure civili, quodque Medicinae Professores Domini
mereantur Dici; Juristae vero Praecones.

But for all this, the Doctors of the Canon (since in England united with the
Civil) Law, will not yield unto them, pleading for themselves; First, That
Professions are to take place according to the Dignity of the Subject they are
employed about. Secondly, That the Soul is more worth than the body, which is
the Sphere of the Physician. Thirdly, That Canonists meddle with many cases of
Soul concernment, and therefore ought to have the Precedence.

Wherefore, to prevent all exceptions about Priority, may the Reader acquaint
himself with this our method therein.

1. We place Princes; And both Loyalty and Civility will justify us therein.
2. Saints; As our Savior said Ioh. 18. 6.
My Kingdom is not; so their Dignity is not of this World, and therefore none
I hope will repine thereat. 3. 4. Martyrs and Confessors. If any grudge them
this their high place, let them but give the same price they paid for it, and
they shall have the same Superiority. 5. Eminent Prelates; A distance which
they might justly claim in those days above others, as generally the Lord
Chancellours and Treasurers of the Land. 6. Statesmen; Whose eminent Offices do
warrant and avouch this their station against all opposition. 7. Capital
Judges; To whom this place does of right belong.
These premised, in the next four we have observed an order without order. Some
will maintain that sometimes a Riot is as good as a Diet: When at a Feast all
meats cast together, help one to digest another. Qui vivit medice, vivit
misere, sure I am, Scribit misere, qui scribit methodice, I mean, when tied up
to such strict terms of method, in such cases that every misplacing is subject
to exception.

I commend the no less politic then peaceable custom of the Skinners and
Merchant Tailors of London, who after many long and costly suits betwixt their
Companies for Precedence, to prevent future quarrels agreed with themselves at
last, to go first by turns or alternatly. The same method I embrace in ranking
Soldiers, Seamen, Civilians, Physicians, sometimes one first, sometimes
another, ringing no artificial but a merely casual Change in the ordering their
Professions. These thus ranked next follow,

12. Learned Writers. Though many of these since the Reformation, being Doctors
of Divinity, may challenge Precedence of some named before, yet they will not
be discontented to come last, having learned the Apostles rule, Romans 12. 2.
In honor preferring one another, and God make us as humble as we are humbled.

13. Benefactors to the Public. It is good to conclude and go out with a good
savor, on which account these worthy persons are placed last, to leave the
grateful perfume of their memory behind them.

As for Memorable persons, they are last, last placed, because (as that Title
(...) taken by us) they are cast in, as Superpondium, or Overweight, our work
being ended before.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the AUTHORS from whom our Intelligence in the Following WORK
has been Derived.
THe plain English saying has very much of downright Truth therein; I tell you
my Tale and my Tale-master, which is essential to the begetting of credit to
any Relation. Indeed when one writes with St. John (waving his Infallible
Inspiration) that which we have heard, which we have seen with our Eyes, which
we have looked * 1 Ioh. 1. 1.
upon, and our hands have handled, such clogging a Book with Authors were
superfluous, which now is necessary in him that writes what was done at
distance, far from, in time long before him.

First, to assert and vindicate the Writer. When Adam complained that he was
naked, God demanded of him, Who told thee that thou wast naked? Intimating thus
much, * Genesis 3. 11.
that if he could not produce the person who first so informed him, he might
justly be suspected (as indeed he was) the Author as well as Utterer of that
sad Truth. Our Savior said to Ioh. 18. 34.
Pilate, Say thou this thing of thy self, or did others tell thee? and all
things reported are reducible to this Dichotomie, 1. The Fountain of Invention.
2. The Channel of Relation. If one ignorantly buyeth stolen Cattle, and has
them fairly vouched unto him, and publicly in an open Fair pays Tole for
them, he cannot be damnified thereby: The case I conceive of him who writes a
falsehood, and charge his Margin with the Author thereof.

Secondly, To edify and inform the Reader; Frustra creditur quod sine
agnitione Originis creditur. It is vainly believed, which is believed without
the knowledge of the Original thereof. Yea, properly it is no Rational b^leif,
but an easy, lazy, supine Credulity.

Such as designingly conceal their Authors, do it either out of Guiltiness or
Envy. Guiltiness, when conscious to themselves, that if Inspection be made of
such Quotations, they will be found defectively, redundantly, or Injuriously
cited, distorted from their genuine Intention.

Or else they do it out of Envy. Tyrants commonly cut off the stairs by which
they climb up unto their Thrones (witness King Richard the third, beheading the
Duke of Buckingham) for fear, that if still they be left standing, others will
get up the same way. Such the jealousy of some Writers, that their Readers
would be as (if not more) knowing than themselves, might they be but directed
to the Original, which they purposely intercept.

Some to avoid this Rock of Envy, run on as bad of Ostentation, and in the end
of their Books, muster up an Army of Authors, (though perchance they themselves
have not seriously perused one Regiment thereof) so that the Goodness of their
Library, not Greatness of their Learning may thence be concluded, that they
have (if with the Prophets 2 King. 6. 5.
Axe some were not borrowed) for I will not say have read, many books in their
possession.

I have endeavored to steer my course betwixt both these Rocks, and come now to
give in the particulars, whence I have derived my Information, knowing full
well quantus Author, tanta Fides. These may be referred to 3. heads; First,
Printed Books; Secondly, Records in Public Offices; Thirdly, Manuscripts in
the Possession of private Gentlemen. To which we may add a fourth, viz.
Instructions received from the nearest Relations, to those Persons, whose Lives
we have presented.

We pass by Printed books, (cited in the Margin) and obvious to all who are
pleased to consult them, and first pitch on the Records of the Tower. Master
William Riley was then Master of those jewels, for so they deserve to be
accounted, seeing a Scholar would prefer that place before the keeping of all
the Prisoners in the Tower. I know not whether more to commend his care in
securing, dexterity in finding, diligence in perusing them, or courtesy in
communicating such Copies of them, as my occasions required, thanks being all
the fees expected from me.

I place next the Records in the Exchequer, for although I had a Catalogue of
the Sheriffs of England lent me by Master High-more of the Pipe-office, which I
compared with another, of that learned Knight Sir Winkefield Bodenham, yet
being frequently at aloss, I was forced to repair to the Originals in the
Exchequer. Here le^ not my gratitude be buried in the graves of Master John
Wit, and Master Francis Boyton, both since deceased, but whilst living
advantageous to my Studies.

To these Authentic Records let me add, the Church Registers in several
Parishes, denied indeed by our Commons Lawyers, but stickled for by some
Canonists to be Records-fellows at least, and having though not the formality
in Law, the force thereof in History, very useful to help us in many Nativities.

And here I cannot but bemoan the (...) that great G^lph, or broad blank left
in our Registers, during our Civil Wars, after the laying aside of Bishops, and
before the Restitution of his most Sacred Majesty. Yea, hereafter this sad
Vacuum is like to prove so thick, (like the Egyptian Darkness) that it will be
sensible in our English Histories.

I dare maintain that the Wars betwixt York and Lancaster, (lasting by
intermission some sixty years) were not so distructive to Church-records, as
our Modern Wars in six years. For during the former, their differences agreed
in the same Religion, impressing them with reverence of all Sacred Muniments,
whilst our Civil Wars founded in Faction, and variety of pretended Religions,
exposed all naked Church Records, a prey to their Armed violence.

Let me add, that it conduced much to the exactness of Jewish Genealogies,
that their children were solemnly Circumcised and Named on the Eight-day. On
the contrary, the omitting the baptizing of Infants, till they be adult, (which
causes, that though the weekly birth exceed the burials, the burials exceed
the christenings in London,) will perplex those who in the next age shall write
the nativities of such persons. Say not it matters not though their nativities
be utterly forgotten. For though their fathers were factious Phanaticks, the
sons (by Gods grace) may prove sober Christians and eminent in their
generations.

The last Port to which I traffiqued for intelligence, toward our ensuing
Work, was by making my addresses by letters and otherwise, to the nearest
Relations of those whose Life's I have written. Such applications, have
sometimes proved chargable; but if my weak pains shall find preferment, (that
is acceptance) from the judicious Reader, my care and cost is forgotten, and
shall never come under computation.

Here I cannot but condemn the carelessness, not to say ingratitude of those (I
am safe whilst containing my self in general terms) who can give no better
account of the Place, where their fathers or grandfathers were born, then the
child unborn, so that sometimes we have been more beholden to strangers for our
instructions herein, then to their nearest Kindred. And although some will say
Sons are more comfortably concerned to know the time of their Fathers death,
then place of their birth, yet I could almost wish, that a moderate fine were
imposed on such heirs, whose Fathers were born before them, and yet they know
not where they were born. However, this I must gratefully confess, I have met
with many who could not, never with any who would not furnish me with
information herein.

It is observable, that men born an hundred years since and upwards, have their
nativities fixed with more assurance, then those born some eighty years since.
Men's eyes see worst in the Twilight, in that intervale after the Sun is set,
and natural light ended, and before candles are set up, and artificial light
begun. In such a crepusculum oftime those Writers lived, who fall short of the
history of Bale and Leland, yet go before the memory of any alive, which
unhappy insterstice has often perplexed us, and may easier be complained of,
then amended.

To conclude, should I present all with Books, who courteously have conduced to
my instruction, the whole Impression would not suffice. But I remember the no
less civil then politic invitation of Judge. 1. 3.
Judah to the Tribe of Simeon, Come up with me into my Lot, [to Conquer the
Cananites] and I likewise will go with thee into thy Lot, if such who have lent
me theirs, shall have occasion to borrow mine assistance, my Pains, Brains and
Books, are no more mine, then theirs to command, which (besides my prayers for
them, and thanks to them,) is all my ability in requital can perform.

CHAP. XXIII. A double Division of the English Gentry, 1. According to the
Nation whence they were extracted, 2. According to the Profession whereby they
were advanced.
THis discourse I tender the Reader, as a preparative to dispose him for the
better observing and distinguishing of our English Gentry, in our ensuing Lives
and Catalogue of Sheriffs.

We begin with the Britains the Aborigines, or Native Inhabitants of the South
of this Island, but long since expelled by the Saxons into the West thereof;
None then remaining in, some since returning into our Land, of whom hereafter.

We confess the Romans Conquered our Country, planted Colonies, and kept
Garrisons therein, but their descendants are not by any character discernable
from the British. Indeed, if any be found able to speak Latin naturally,
without learning it, we may safely conclude him of Roman Extraction. Mean time,
it is rather a pretty conceit, then a solid notion of that great Vestegan of
Decayed Intelligence page 313.
Antiquary, who from the allusion of the name collecteth the noble family of
the Cecils (more truly Sytsilts) descended from the Cecilii a Senatorian Family
in Rome.

The Saxons succeed, whose Offspring at this day are the main bulk and body of
the English (though not Gentry) Nation, I may call them the whole cloth
thereof, though it be guarded here and there, with some great ones, of foreign
Extraction. These Saxons though pitifully depressed by the Conqueror, by Gods
goodness, King Henry the first favor, their own patience and diligence, put
together the plankes of their Shiprack'd Estates, and afterward recovered a
competent condition.

The Danes never acquired in this Land a long and peaceable possession thereof,
living here rather as Inroders then Inhabitants, the cause that so few families
(distinguishable by their Surnames) are descended from them, extant in our age.
Amongst which few, the respected Stock of the Denizes, (often Sheriffs in See
CamdensBrit. in Devonshire.
Devon and Gloustershire) appear the principal. As for Fitz-Hardinge, the
younger son of the King of Denmark, and direct ancestour of the Truly
Honorable George Lord Berkeley, he came in long since when he accompanied the
Conqueror

I must confess, that at this day, there passes a Tradition among some of the
Common People, that such names which Terminate in Son, as Johnson, Tomson,
Nicolson, Davison, Saunderson, are of Danish Origination. But this fond
opinion, is long since con^uted by Vestegan, that ingenious and industrious Of
decayed Intelligence.
Antiquary. Yea, he urges this as an argument (which much prevails with me)
why those Surnames were not derived from the Danes, because they had no such
name in use amongst them, as John, Thomas, Nicholas, David, Alexander, from
whence they should be deduced.

Yea, he further adds, that it is more probable, that they made the Child's
name, by adjecting the syllable Son to the Appellation of the Father; (a
custom which is usual, even at this time amongst the Vulgar sort of the
Dutch.) Yet is there not remaining any sign thereof amongst the names of our
Age, which probably might have been, Canutson, Ericson, Gormoson, Heraldson,
Rofolson, etc.

The Normans or French, under the Conqueror swarmed in England, so that then
they became the only visible Gentry in this Nation, and still continue more
then a Moity thereof; several Catalogues of their Names I have so largely
exemplifyed in my Church History, that some have taxed me for tediousness
therein, and I will not add an new obstinacy to my old error.

But besides these, we have some Surnames of good Families in England, now
extant, which though French, are not by any diligence to be recovered in the
lists of such as came over with the Conqueror, and therefore we suppose them
to have remained of those Gentlemen and others, which from Henault attended
Queen Isabel, wife unto King Edward the second. Of this sort was Deureux,
Mollineux, Darcy, Coniers, Longchamp, Henage, Savage, Danvers, with many more.

Of the British or Welsh, (after their expulsion hence by the Saxons) some
signal persons have returned again, and by the Kings Grant, Matches, Purchases,
etc. have fixed themselves in fair possessions in England, especially since the
beginning of the reign of their Countryman, King Henry the seventh, rewarding
the valor of many, contributing to his Victory in the battle of Bosworth. Of
the Welsh, now re-estated in England, and often Sheriffs therein, some retain
their old Surnames, as the Griffins in Northamptonshire, the Griffiths and
Vaughans in Yorkshire; some have assumed New ones, as the Caradocks, now known
by the new Name of Camdens Brit. in Somersetshire.
the Newtons in Somersetshire.

Many Scotch (long before the Union of the two Kingdoms under King James)
seated themselves in this Land, flying hither for succor from their Civil
Wars, and surely it was against their mind, if they all went back again:
Distress at Sea has driven others in, as the Stewards High-sheriffs in
Cambridgeshire. As other accidents have occasioned the coming in of the
Scrimpshires an hundred years since High sheriffs in Staffordshire, more lately
the Nappers in Bedfordshire, and before both, the Scots of Scots-hall in Kent.

I much admire that never an eminent Irish native grew in England to any
greatness, so many English having prospered in that Country. But it seems, we
love to live there, where we may Command, and they care not to come where they
must Obey.

Our great distance from Italy, always in Position, and since the Reformation
in Religion, has caused that few or none of that Nation, have so incorporated
with the English, as to have found Families therein. Yet have we a sprinkling
of Italian Protestants, Castilian a valiant Gentleman, of Berkshire. The
Bassanoes excellent Painters and Musicians, in Essex, which came over into
England under King Henry the eight, and since in the reign of Queen Elizabeth,
Sir Horatio Palavicine, (Receiver of the Popes Revenues) landed in
Cambridgeshire, and the Caesar's (alias Dalmarii) still flourishing in
Hartfordshire, in Worshipful Estates, though I never find any of these
performing the office of Sheriff.

The High Dutch of the Hans Towns, anciently much conversed in our Land, (known
by the name of Easterlings) invited hither by the large privileges our Kings
conferred upon them, so that the Steel-yard proved the Gold-yard unto them. But
these Merchants moved round in their own Sphere, matching amongst themselves,
without mingling with our Nation. Only we may presume, that the Easterlings,
(corruptly called Stradlings) formerly Sheriffs in Wiltshire, and still famous
in Glamorganshire, with the Westphalings, lately Sheriffs of Oxfordshire, were
originally of German Extraction.

The Low Countrymen frighted by Duke D'Alvas Tyranny, flocked hither under
King Edward the sixth, fixing themselves in London, Norwich, Canterbury, and
Sandwich. But these confined themselves to their own Church discipline, and for
ought I can find, advanced not forward by eminent Matches into our Nation. Yet
I behold the worthy Family of De la Fountain in Lecestershire, as of Belgian
Original, and have read how the ancestors of Sir Simon D'us in Suffolk, came
hither under King Henry the eight, from the Dunasti or D'us in Gelderland.

As for the Spaniards, though their King Philip matched with our Queen Mary,
but few of any eminence now extant (if I well remember) derive their Pedigrees
from them. This I impute to the shortness of their Reign, and the ensuing
change of Religions. Probable it is, we might have had more Natives of that
Kingdom to have settled and flourished in our Nation, had he obtained a
marriage with Queen Elizabeth, (of Blessed Memory) which some relate he much
endeavored.

As for Portugal few of that Nation have as yet fixed their habitations, and
advanced Families to any visible height in our Land. But it may please God,
hereafter we may have a happy occasion, to invite some of that Nation to
reside, and raise Families in England. Mean time the May's (who have been
Sheriffs in Sussex) are all whom I can call to mind of the Portugal Race, and
they not without a Mixture of Jewish Extraction.

Come we now to the second Division of our Gentry, according to the Professions
whereby they have been advanced. And here to prevent unjust misprision, be it
premised, that such professions Found most of them gentlemen, being the (though
perchance Younger) Sons of wealthy Fathers, able to give them liberal
education. They were lighted before as to their Gentility, but now set up in a
higher Candlestick, by such professions which made a visible and conspicuous
accession of Wealth and Dignity, almost to the ecclipsing their former
condition. Thus all behold Isis, increased in name and water, after its
conjunction with Them at Dorchester, whilst few take notice of the first
Fountain thereof, many miles more Westward in Gloucestershire.

The Study of the Common Law, has advanced most ancient extant Families in our
Land. It seems they purchased good Titles, made sure Setlements, and entailed
Thrift with their Lands, on their posterity. A Sir Edw. Coke.
prime person of that profession has prevented my pains, and given in a List
of such principal Families, I say principal, many being omitted by him in so
Copious a subject. Miraculous the mortality in Egypt, where there was not a
Exodus 12. 30.
House wherein there was not one dead. But I hope, it will be allowed
Mavelous, that there is not a generous and numerous House in England, wherein
there is not one, (though generally no first Born but a Younger Brother,)
anciently or at this day Living, Thriving, and Flourishing, by the Study of the
Law. Especially if to them ( what in Justice ought) be added those who have
raised themselves in Courts relating to the Law.

The City has produced more then the Law in number, and some as broad in
Wealth, but not so high in Honor, nor long lasting in time, who like
Land-floods, soon come, and soon gone, have been dried up before the third
Generation.

Yet many of these have continued in a certain channel, and carried a Constant
stream, as will plainly appear in the sequel of our Worthies.

The Church before the Reformation, advanced many Families. For though Bishops
might not marry, they preferred their Brothers Sons to great Estates. As the
Kemps in Kent, Peckhams in Sussex, Wickham in Hampshire, Meltons in Yorkshire.

Since the Reformation, some have raised Families to a Knightly and Worshipful
Estate, Hutton, Bilson, Dove, Neil, etc. But for Sheriffs, I take notice of
Sandys in Worcester and Cambridgeshire, Westphaling in Herefordshire, Elmar in
Suffolk, Rud in Carmarthenshire, etc.

Sure I am, there was a generation of People of the last Age, which thought
they would level all Clergymen, or any descendants from them, with the ground.
Yea, had not Gods arm been stretched out in their preservation, they had
become a prey to their enemies violence, and what they had designed to
themselves (and in some manner effected) had ere this been time perfectly
completed.

As for the inferior Clergy, it is well if their narrow maintenance will
enable them to leave a livelihood to their little ones. I find but one ( See
Benefactours to the Public in Lincolnshire.
Robert Johnson by name) attaining such an estate, that his Grandson was
pricked Sheriff of a County, but declined the place, by pleading himself a
Deacon, and by the favor of Archbishop Laud.

The Study of the Civil-Law, has preferred but few. The most eminent in that
faculty, before the Reformation being persons in Orders, prohibited marriage.
However since the Reformation there are some Worshipful Families which have
been raised by the Study in this Faculty.

Yet have our wars (which perhaps might have been advocated for in Turks and
Pagans, who bid defiance to all humanity, but utterly mis-beseeming Christians)
been a main cause of the moulting of many Eminent and Worthy persons of this
Profession. Nor could it be expected that the Professors of humane laws should
have been allowed favor, during our unnatural Dissentions, (the promoters
thereof having a constant pique at whatever bore but the resemblance of Order
and Civility) when the true dispensers of Gods Laws, yea the Law of God, yea
God himself, was vilified and contemned.

The best is, that as Divine Providence has in his mercy been pleased to
restore our Sovereign, so with him we have received both our ancient Laws and
Liberties. And now it begins to be^ fair weather again, as with this so with
all other necessary and useful Vocations, which in due time may repair their
decayed fortunes.

Physic has promoted many more, and that since the reign of King Henry the
eighth. Indeed before his time, I find a Doctor of Physic, Father to Reginald,
first and last Lord Bray. But this Faculty has flourished much the three last
fifty years, it being true of Physic, what is said of Sylla, suos divitiis
explevit. Sir William Butts Physician to King Henry the eight, Doctor Thomas
Wendy and Doctor Hatcher to Queen Elizaheth, raised worshipful and wealthy
Families in Norfolk, Cambridge, and Lincolnshire, having born the office of
Sheriff in their respective Counties.

Some have raised themselves by Sea service, and Letters of Mart, especially in
the reign of Queen Elizabeth, when we had war with the Spaniard. But such
Estates, as flowing so have ebbed, with the tide, seldom of long continuance.
Such Prises have been observed best to prosper, whose Takers had least of
private revenge, and most of public service therein. Amongst these, most
remarkable the Baronets Family of Drakes in Devonshire, sometimes Sheriffs of
that County.

Some have raised themselves by their attendance at Court, rewarded by the
Kings Favor. Court, where many have carried away more, for bringing the less
to it. Here some Younger Brothers have found their lost Birthright, mending
their pace to Wealth, though they started late by their Nativity. But I only
generally point at, without touching them, that I may not fore-stall the
Reader, whose pains may be pleasant unto him, in his own discovery thereof.

Many have advanced themselves by their Valor in foreign Wars, especially in
France, as the Knolls, a noble Family, and the ^aveleys, often Sheriffs in
Cheshire, so that Mars in this sense, may be said to be the father of Plutus,
his Steel weapons procuring to his followers the more acceptable metals of
Gold and Silver. But the worst is, where foreign Wars have raised one, our late
Civil ones, have ruined ten Families.

Some may object, that as they have destroyed, so they have raised many
Families (which before in themselves were mean and contemptible) to high
Titles, and large Possessions. All I shall return in answer thereunto, is that
as most alive saw them rise (per saltum) by unwarrantable means to such a pitch
of preferment, so there is but few alive, but may (if not willingly and
wilfully blind) see them deservedly thrown down with disgrace and contempt, to
their former mean and despicable condition.

Clothing as it has given garments to Millions of people, has conferred Coats
of Arms (and Gentility therewith) on many Families in this Land. As on the
Springs High-sheriffs of Suffolk.

The Country with her two full breasts, Grasing and Tillage, has raised many
Families * Josephus renders a reason, as weak in it self, as wide from the
truth, why Abells Sacrifice was preferred before Cains, viz. Because Abell
fairly took, what nature freely tendered in the increase of his Cattle, whilst
Cain violently wounded the Earth with his ploughing. But Saint Heb. 11.
Paul teaches use better Doctrine, that faith caused the reception of the one,
and unbelief the rejection of the other. Surely, both Callings are equally
acceptable to God, who has so blessed their endeavors, that thereby many have
gained estates, inabling them to serve Sheriffs of their County. But I forbear
to instance them, least what was the honor of their Ancestors to raise such
Families, be counted in this Captious Age to be a dishonor to their Posterity,
to be raised by so plain (though honest and necessary) an employment.

Some (the surer to hit the mark of Wealth) have had two strings to their Bow,
a complication of prefessions, concurring to their advancement. Thus the
Chichlies in Cambridgeshire, are descendants from a Lord Mayor; allied also
Collaterally to an Archbishop of Canterbury.

On the main, we may observe, how happy a liberal (at least lawful) Vocation,
has proved to Younger Brethren, whereby Ephraim has out-grown Manasse, the
Younger out-stript the Heir of the Family. I knew a Schoolboy, not above
twelve years old, and utterly ignorant in all Logical terms, who was commanded
to English the following Distick,

Dat Galenus opes, dat Justinianus Honores,
Cum Genus, and Species, cogitur ire pedes.
Only they favored the Boy so far, to inform him, that Galenus did signify
the Profession of Physic, Justinianus of Law, on which ground he thus
proceeded,

Galenus, the Study of Physic, dat, gives, Opes Wealth,
Justinianus, the Study of Law, dat, gives, Honores, honor,
Cum, When, Genus, high Birth, and Species, and Beauty,
[having no other calling ( says the Boy) to maintain them,]
Cogitur, is compelled, ire Pedes, to go on Foot.
To prevent such foot-travailing, it is good to be mounted on a gainful
Vocation, to carry one out of the mire, on all occasions.

CHAP. XXIV. Some General Exceptions against the Style and Matter of the AUTHOR
prevented.
Exception. 1. You usurp the Style of Princes, speaking often in the plural;
come we now, pass we now, proceed we now, etc. Which is false Grammar, from a
Single, ill Ethics from a private person.

Answer* First, I appeal to any exercised in reading of Books, whether the same
be not used in other Authors.

Secondly, We, in such cases includes the Writer and Reader, it being presumed
that the Eye of the one goes along with the pen of the other.

Thirdly, It also compriseth all other Writers, out of whom any thing is
transcribed, and their Names quoted in the Margin.

Let me add to Gods Glory, my Friends credit, and my own comfort, that our We,
is comprehensive of all my worthy Friends, who by their pains or purses, have
been contributive to my weak Endeavors.

Exception 2. The Worthies of England being your Subject, you have mingled many
Unworthies among them, rather Notorious then Notable, except in the same sense
wherein Barrabas is termed Math. 21. 16.
Notable in the Gospel.

Answer. Such persons are so few, their Number is not considerable; Secondly,
they are so Eminent in their Generations, that their Omission would make a maim
in History; Thirdly, how bad soever their Morals, their Naturals and
Artificials were transcendent, and the Oracle like Wisdom of wicked
Achitophel, found praise from the 2 Samuel 16. 23.
Pen of the Holy Spirit; Lastly, the worst of such men have a black line
(serving pro Nigro carbone) prefixed to their Name for distinction sake.

Exception 3. You might better have omitted the mention of some Modern persons,
reputed Reader, this being written in the Midnight of our (...), I could not
command my hand to expunge it.
Malignants by the present power, and blasted by these times in their estates.

Answer. All Persons unhappy, must not presently be accounted unworthy,
especially in distracted Times. Have you not heard of that humerous Waterman on
the Thames, who would carry none in his Boat, save such who would go along with
the Tide, till by feeding his humor he had almost starved himself, for want of
Employment? I should be as peevish as partial, should I admit those only into
my Catalogue of Worthyes, who of late years did swim in plenty, seeing many
have been great Sufferers, deservedly commendable by the testimony of their
Adversaries.

Exception 4. You only report the Virtues, but conceal the Faults of many
persons within our own memories.

Answer. I conceive my self bound so to do, by the Rules of Charity. When an
Orator was to praise a person deceased, generally and justly hated for his
Viciousness, it was suspected that he would for his Fee, force his Conscience
by flattery to commend him, whose expectations he thus defeated, This dead
person (says he) must in one respect be spoken well of by all, because God
made him; and in another respect, should not be spoken ill of by any because he
is dead; and de mortuis nil nisi bonum. How much more, when men have many good
Virtues, with some Faults, ought the later to be buried in their Graves with
forgetfulness.

Exception 5. You make many uncivil and unsatisfactory References of your
Reader, to those Books which you have formerly printed, remiting them to be
there further Informed, as if when you had invited Guests, you consigned them
over (coming to dine with you) to fetch a Dinner at an house they do not know;
It being probable that many may read this your Book, who never had your former
Works.

Answer. Such Refferences are very sparing, only to avoid Repetition in those
Life's, which I have formerly written at large, as, St. Dunstans, Cardinal
Woolsey, Thomas Lord Cromwell, Sir John Cheek, Archbishop Whitgift, Mr.
Perkins, etc. And I appeal to all Writers of many Books (of which fault I my
self am guilty) whether such Refferences be not usual in the like Cases. I will
not add that I have passed my promise (and that is an honest man's bond) to my
former Stationer, that I will write nothing for the future, which was in my
former Books, so considerable, as may make them Inter-fere one with another to
his Prejudice.

Exception 7. You often apply the Word create to men, as to create a Cardinal,
an Earl, etc. Whereas conscientious people, allow that word appropriable to
God alone, as importing the making of something out of Nothing.

Answer. I hope our Common Lawyers will plead for me in this Case, having the
phrase so frequent in their Mouths, to create right, to create a Title.
Besides, I observe, that such who scruple the useing the Simple Verb, boggle no
whit at the compound to recreate and Recreations. Now seeing to Recreate is to
Create twice, I understand not how the useing this word once should be a Sin,
whilst it is no Sin in the Repetition or Reaction thereof. In a word, in words
of this Nature, I conceive one may conform himself to the Custom of Common
Language.

Exception 8. You out of Flattery, conceal the mean Extraction of many
(especially Modern) men, who have attained to great preferment, pointing at the
place of their Birth, but suppressing their Parentage.

Answer. I conceive my self to have done well in so doing. If enquiry be made
into all men's descents, it would be found true what the Poet does observe.

Majorum primus quisquis fuit ille tuorum
Aut Pastor fuit, aut illud quod dicere nolo.
The first of all thine Ancestors of Yore,
Was but a Shepherd, or, I say no more.
Besides, it plainly proves the Properness of their parts, and Tallnesse of
their Industry, who thereby, and by Gods blessing thereon, reached so high
preferment, though disadvantaged by standing on so low ground of their
extraction.

Exception 9. Have makes Wast, you have hudled your Book too soon to the
Press, for a Subject of such a Nature. You should have sent to the Gentry of
several Counties, to have furnished you with Memorables out of their own
Pedegrees, and should have taken a longer time to compose them.

-- Nonumque prematur in annum. Eight years digest what you have rudely hinted,
And in the Ninth year let the same be printed.
Answer. That Ninth year might happen Eight years after my Death, being
sensible of the Impression of Age upon me, and a Stranger to my method, would
hardly rally my scattered and posthumed Notes. By the difficulty to get some
few, I conclude the impossibility to procure all the observeables out of
Gentlemen's Records, and therefore leave the Task to the Industry of others in
their Respective Counties.

Exception. 10. Some Instructions have lately been sent you, concerning some
persons which appear not in this your Work.

Answer. Lately indeed, though neither many nor considerable, since such Shires
were put under the Press. In Holland, VVagons go to, and return from their
Stages at set hours, though carrying but one Passenger, and sometimes
altogether empty. Such the Condition of the Press it stays for no man, nor will
attend the Leisure (not to say Lagging) of any, but proceeds on with what it
has in present, be it never so little.

Exception 11. In your, Protestant Writers, you promiscuously mingle some very
zealous for Episcopacy, others as active for Presbytery, these ought to have
been sorted severally by themselves, seeing the great distance of Judgment
betwixt them.

Answer. I hope such conjoyning of them, may happily presage a comfortable
Expedient betwixt them, who differ not in Fundamentals of Religion. 2. I had
rather privately bemoan, then publicly proclaim, the difference betwixt them
when alive, charitably believing that being dead;

Jam been convenient, and in una sede morantur Now they are agreed well,
And in bliss together dwell.
However it is not without Precedents in the best Authors, to conjoine those in
History, who dissent in opinion; Witness Thuanus when concluding every year,
with the Funerals of eminent persons, though fervent in opposite persuasions.

Exception 12. There is great disproportion, betwixt your Catalogue of
Statesmen, beginning the Lord Treasurers, under King Henry the Seventh; the
Lord Chancelours, under King Henry the Eighth; other Statesmen at other
Epoches: whereas had you observed the same Era in all of them, it had added
much to the Uniformity of your Work; And as all start not from the same place,
they run not to the same mark, some being continued to this day, some concluded
seven years since, such imparity making the List seem lame, like the Legs of a
Badger.

Answer. I hope, that a more charitable fancy, with as good a judgment, will
compare it to the Pipes of an Organ; which though of an uneven length,
contribute to the better melody. A reason is rendered, in the respective places,
where these general Topics are premised, why such several Catalogues begin and
end at such times. And I do believe, that they will prove Satisfactory to such
ingenuous Readers, that come with no cavilling premeditation.

Exception 13. In your Catalogue of Learned Writers, you have omitted many, as
may appear by Pitseus his Appendix Illustrium Angliae Scriptorum. For, of the
four hundred by him mentioned, not fifty appear in your List of them.

Answer. Pitseus himself shall plead for me, who, in his Preface to his
Appendix, ingenuously confesses, Eos adhuc efficere non valeo dignos, qui
inter illustres Scriptores locum obtineant. So that one may call them Obscuros
illustres, little being known of the books which they wrote, less of the times
when they lived, nothing of the places where they were born. However, seeing
some persons of eminence have stragled amongst them, I have selected such with
my best care, and presented them in my Catalogue.

Exception 14 Of some men you have little save their Name, Life, and Death, and
yet you term such eminent persons.

Answer. Surely they were so in themselves, and deserve more should be then is
left written of them, through the injury of time. All that I will plead in my
own Defense is this; There is an Officer in the Exchequer, called Clericus
nihilorum, or the Clerk of the Nichils, who makes a Roll of all such sums as
are nichill'd by the Sheriff upon their Estreats of the Green wax, when such
sums are set on persons, either not found, or not found solvible. This Roll, he
delivers into the Treasurers Remembrancers office, to have execution done
upon it for the King; and thus the Clerk has done his duty, leaving it to them
to see, if they can make any thing of his Return.

I conceive in like manner I have performed my utmost, in that I return such
persons to have nothing more to be said of them, findable by all my endeavors.
However I consign them over to more able Historians, whose pains I will neither
prejudice nor discourage; but if they be pleased to begin where I ended, I wish
them more happy success in their discoveries.

Exception 15. Your Book is surcharged with Scripture observations, and
reflections in Divinity, even when no necessity leads you thereunto.

Answer. The Reader has Con^itentem, but I will never acknowledge Reum,
pleading Custom and Conscience in my just excuse. Custom being habited by my
profession therein. The Learned observe of St. Luke, that being a Physician by
his function, and describing the great difference between Paul and Barnabas, he
made use of an expression in his own faculty, Acts 15. 39.
and there was betwixt them a Dissension [in Greek (...)] that is, the height
and heat of a burning Fever. So that the Spirit of God guiding his Pen,
permitted him to make use of the Language proper to his Vocation. And I presume
the same favor will be indulged to me by all ingenuous persons, to have (I
will not say a partiality) but an affection to the expressions of, and
excursions into my own Calling. Secondly, I plead Conscience, that, seeing some
may Cavil this Work to be a Deviation from my function (and I my self perchance
sensible of some truth therein) I will watch and catch all opportunity to make
a fair Regresse to my profession.

Exception 15. You lay down certain Rules for the better regulating your work,
and directing the Reader, promising to confine your self to the observation
thereof, and break them often your self. For instance, you restrain the Topic
of Lawyers to Capital Judges and Writers of the Law, yet under that head insert
Judge Paston, and others, who were only puny Judges in their respective Courts;
You limit Statesmen to Lord Chancelours, Treasurers, English Secretaries of
State, etc. and put in Sir Edward Waterhouse* who was Secretary but in Ireland.
In a word, few heads are preserved pure according to their constitution,
without the mixture of improper persons amongst them. Why did you break such
Rules, when knowing you made them? why did you make such Rules, when minding to
break them? And this is an Exception of Exceptions against you.

Answer. I never intended to tie my self up so close, without reserving lawful
Liberty to my self upon just occasion. Indeed we read of St. Ranulph Ce^. in
ejus vita Math. West. Anno 712. Florent. Wigor. An. 708.
Egwin the third, Bishop of Worcester, that he made for himself a pair of Iron
Shakels, and locking them close unto his Legs, cast the Key thereof into the
Severn, desiring never to be loosed till he had made satisfaction for his Sins;
Returning from Rome, a Fish leaped into the Ship, in whose Belly was found the
Key, and so Egwin was miraculously restored to his Liberty.

Had I in like manner fettered my self to the Topics propounded, on
presumption of so strange a release, none would have pitied my restraint,
wilfully contracted on my self. But the best is, I resolved to keep the Key in
my own hands, to enlarge my self when I apprehended a just cause thereof.
However I have not made use of this Key, to recede from my first Limitations,
save where I crave leave of, and render a reason to the Reader; such anomalous
persons being men of high merit, under those heads where they are inserted.

Exception 16. You have omitted many Memorable persons still surviving, as
meriting as any you have inserted.

Answer. The return of I. 8. Epig. 69.
Martial in a case not much unlike, may much befriend me herein,

Mi^aris Veteres, Vacerra, solos,
Nec laudas nisi mortuos poet as,
Ignos^as petim^s Vacerra, tanti
Non est, ut placeam tibi, perire.
Deceased Authors thou admir'st alo^e,
And only praisest Poets dead and gone.
Vacerra pardon me: I will not buy
Thy praise so dear, as for the same to dye.
All men being like-minded with Martial herein, none surviving will distaste
their omission in a work, for reasons afore-alledged (save in some cases)
confined to the memories of the departed.

Exception 17. Speaking of the Commodities of several Counties, you say the
Wool of Hereford shire is best, and yet Gloucester-Shire is best, the Wheat of
Hereford-shire is best, and yet Middlesex best, the Lead of Darby-shire best,
and yet Somersetshire best, the Iron of Sussex best, and Staffordshire best.
The same may be observed in your praising of persons, making several men at the
same time the best Poets, Divines, Schoolmen, etc. and this must be both
falsehood and flattery together.

Answer. Impute it (I pray) to my peaceable disposition, unwilling to occasion
discord betwixt Eminencies, the rather because things of the same kind may
severally be the best in sundry Qualities. Some Wool best for Cloth, other for
Hats, some Wheat best for yiedling of most, other finest flower, some Lead best
for Bullets, other for Sheeting Houses, some Iron best for Ordnance, other for
Nails, Keys, and smaler U^ensils.

Neither is it without precedent in Scripture to Character several men best in
the same Profession, both 2 King. 18. 5.
2 Kin. 23. 25.
(...) and Josiah being commended to have had none like unto them neither
before nor after them.

Exception 18. During the later years of King Charles of blessed Memory, you
have for the most part omitted the Sheriffs in your Catalogue.

Answer. There was then, (as I may say) a Schism in that Office, betwixt the
Sheriffs and Anti Sheriffs. As for the former, made by the Kings Designation,
and beheld as the only Legal Ones, I durst not Name them, as the times then
stood, when I collected that Catalogue, for fear lest thereby I might betray
some of them (till that time concealed) to a Sequestration. I therefore
preferred to leave a void space in my List, and wish it were the worst Breach
or Desolation made by our late Civil Wars.

Exception 19. But since the happy turn of the times, you might have inserted
them, not only without any Danger, but with great Honor unto them.

Answer. When the Danger was removed, the Difficulty did deter me. For in those
Tumultuary times; the Royal Sheriffs did not Regularly, (according to ancient
Custom) pass their Accounts in the Exchequer at London, so that I was at a
loss to recover Certainty herein. Wherefore according to my General Motto, [a
Blank is better then a Blot] I left a Vacuity for them. For which Bald Place,
the Reader (if so pleased) may provide a Perewake, and with his pen insert such
Sheriffs as come to his Cognizance.

Exception 20. It was expected, that you should have presented the Maps of all
Shires, which would have added much Light and Luster to your Work, (which now
is as an House without Windows, very Dark and uncomfortable) as also that you
should have Cut the Arms of all Gentlemen, in Copper (at the least in VVood)
which would have been more satisfactory to them, and Ornamental to your Book.

Answer. (...) are (...), as I have found by dear Experience* Besides, when
they are done, they are not done, the working them off at the Rolling Press
being as expensive as the Graving them; both which will mount our Book to an
unreasonable price; Secondly, it would be disgraceful to Cut those Maps worse,
and difficult (if not impossible) to do them better then they are done already.
Thirdly, such Gentlemen (not formerly furnished therewith) may procure them at
a cheaper rate then I could afford them. Lastly, such new Re-Graving them would
be injurious to the Owners of the Old Maps, and I will not bottom my Profit on
another man's prejudice.

Exception 21. You betray unworthy partiality in omitting and inserting of
Persons. For John of Gaunt, though son to a King, and worthy VVarrier, can get
no room in your Book, whilst Simon de Gaunt a Bishop of Salisbury (both of them
by their Sirnames equally appearing Foreigners) has a place found for him
therein. It seems a Prelate finds more favor from you then a Prince.

Answer. Is there not a cause, and that a Satisfactory one? I prefer not a
Prelate before a Prince, but Truth before both, and the methodical regulation
of my book, according to the rules premised, without which all will fall to
confusion. It is as notoriously known, that John of Gaunt was born at Gaunt in
Flanders (and so an Alien from our Subject) as plainly it appears, that Simon
de Gaunt (though his Father was a Fleming) was born in London, Magister Simon
de Gaunt (says Matt^ew of Westminster) Editus Londini, vir in art Theologiae
peritus.

Exception 22. You discover much negligence in dateing of particular persons,
instancing the time only when they flourished, without observing when they were
born or dye^; and this minds me of a passage in Tully in Verrem. Orat.
Tully, charging Verres the Deputy of Sicily with notorious Laziness, quod
nunquam solemn nec orientem, nec occidentem viderat, that he never saw the sun
rising, being in bed after, nor setting being in bed before it: Thus your Pen
is altogether a Sluggard, only taking notice of them when shining in the
Vertical Height, without either beholding them Rising out of their Cradle, or
setting in their Coffin.

Answer. Let Tully tell out his Story, and it will befriend and furnish me with
a just defense. Sicily (says he) enjoys so clear a Sky, that the Sun is
seen there every day in the year rising or setting. Intolerable therefore the
Sloth of Verres (noble at nothing but oppression) that he never saw the Sun
either to rise or set, as Roosted after or before; Were it so that either the
rising or setting of eminent persons (their Birth and Death) were (with the
Sicilian Sun) ever visible, as always recorded by Authors, I would confess my
self justly taxed with unexcusable Laziness: But seeing sometimes a Pannick
silence herein, not meeting either with the Midwife, or Sexton, who delivered
or buried such people, we conceive our selves have satisfied, if instanceing
only the time wherein such persons flourished.

Exception 23. It had been more proper and more Satisfactory for you to have
placed your Exceptions and Answers, rather at the end then beginning of your
Book, when the Reader had wholly perused it, only Premising you will be
responsible to such Objections as would be made against your Endeavors herein.

Answer. I am of his opinion, who said, Premising, is better then Promising.
Sure it is a safer way to prevent a disease then to remove it. Besides I hope,
that, clearing these obstructions in the Front of my Book, I shall smooth the
Readers way, and invite him the rather to peruse it. However these Answers
(wherever placed) are placed aright, if meeting (which I desire) a Candid
acceptance thereof.

Exception 24. It is easy for one to cast down a Pillar of his own erection,
but let another set it up, and then let him try his Strength thereat. None
will pinch themselves so as to fetch blood, though others may do it. Your
Exceptions are all of your own making to your own advantage.

Answer. I have endeavored to propound them without any Partiality. However if
my labors meet with greater and more exception from others against them, I
hope they shall also meet with the general Courtesy and Candor of Course,
which Custom has in some sort made due to Authors, to forgive their smaller
faults, on which comfortable confidence I proceed.

CHAP. XXV. An Apology for the unvoluntary Omissions in this BOOK.
WHen I first communicated my design herein to a person of The truly Noble
Robert Lord Bruce.
Honor, he offered this grand Objection against it, That no Industry could be
so circumspect, or Intelligence so comprehensive, but that many Memorable
persons would escape his Observation, and then Exception will be taken at such
Omissions. This Objection many since have renewed and enforced, alleging that
the Omitting of One shall get me more Anger then the inserting of many, gain me
good will.

To this I Answer first in general. It is the privilege of Divine Writ alone,
to be so perfect that nothing may be taken thence, or added thereunto; The best
humane Authors have had their failings in their best performances, far be it
from me to pretend my dim Eyes more quick-sighted then St. Bernards, who
notwithstanding non vidit omnia; I trust therefore, that favor will be
indulged to my Endeavors, for my many Infirmities.

To Come to particulars, some seeming Omissions will appear to be none, on
better Enquiry, being only the leaving of many persons (which belong not to our
land) to their Foreign Nativities. If any ask, why have you not written of
John a Gaunt? I answer, because he was John of Gaunt, born in that City in
Flanders. Thus whilst our Kings possessed large Dominions in France (from King
William the Conqueror, to King Henry the Sixth) many eminent English men had
their birth beyond the Seas, without the bounds of our Subject.

Secondly, I hope real Omissions will neither be found many nor material; I
hope I shall not appear like unto him, who undertaking to make a Description of
the Planets, quite forgot to make mention of the Sun, I believe most of those
who have escaped our Pen, will be found Stars of the Lesser Magnitude.

Thirdly, I protest in the presence of God, I have not wittingly, willingly or
wilfully shut the Door against any worthy person which offered to enter into my
knowledge, nor was my prejudice the Porter in this kind, to exclude any (of
what persuasion soever out of my Book) who brought merit for their Admission,
Besides, I have gone, and rid, and wrote, and sought and searched with my own
and friends Eyes, to make what Discoveries I could therein.

Lastly, I stand ready with a pencel in one hand, and a Sponge in the other, to
add, alter, insert, expunge, enlarge, and delete, according to better
information. And if these my pains shall be found worthy to pass a second
Impression, my faults I will confess with shame, and amend with thankfulness
to such as will contribute clearer Intelligence unto me.

These things premised, I do desire in my omissions the pardon especially of
two sorts, concerned in my History; first Writers since the Reformation,
(having those before it completely delivered unto us) who cannot be exactly
listed.

First, for their Numerousnesse, and therefore I may make use of the Latin
Distick, wherewith John Pitseus page 923.
closes his Book of English Writers.

Plura voluminibus jungenda volumina nostris
Nec mihi scribendi terminus ullus erit.
More Volums to our volums must we bind,
And when that's done a Bound we cannot find.
Secondly, for the scarceness of some Books, which I may term Publici-privati
juris, because though publicly printed, their Copies were few, as intended
only for friends, though it does not follow that the Writers thereof had the
less Merit, because the more Modesty.

I crave pardon in the second place for my Omissions, in the List of
Benefactors to the Public, for, if I would, I could not complete that
Catalogue, because no man can make a fit garment for a growing Child, and their
Number is daily increasing.

Besides if I could, I would not. For I will never drain (in Print) the spring
so low, but to leave a Reserve; and some whom I may call Breeders for
posterity, who shall pass un-named, in which Respect, I conceive such
Benefactors most perfectly reckoned up, when they are Imperfectly reckoned up.

All I will add is this, when St. Paul writing to the Phil. 4. 3.
Philippians had saluted three, by name, viz. Euodias, Syntyche, and Clement,
he passes the rest over with a Salutation General, whose Names are in the Book
of Life. Thus I have indevoured to give you the most exact Catalogue of
Benefactors; but this I am sure, what is lost on Earth by my want of Industry,
Instruction, etc. Will be found in Heaven, and their names are there recorded,
in that Register which will last to all Eternity.

As for my omitting many Rarities and Memorables, in the respective Counties, I
plead for my self, that mine being a general Description, it is not to be
expected that I should descend to such particularities, which properly belong
to those who write the Topography of one County alone. He showed as little
Ingenuity as Ingeniousnesse, who Cavilled at the Map of Grecia for imperfect,
because his Fathers house in Athens was not represented therein. And their
expectation in effect is as unreasonable, who look for every small observeable
in a General work. Know also, that a mean person, may be more knowing within
the Limits of his private Lands, then any Antiquary whatsoever. I remember a
merry challenge at Court, which passed betwixt the Kings Porter, and the Queens
Dwarf, the latter provoking him to fight with him, on condition that he might
but choose his own place, and be allowed to come thither first, assigning the
great Oven in Hampton Court for that purpose. Thus easily may the lowest
domineere over the highest skill, if having the advantage of the ground within
his own private concernments. Give me leave to fill up the remaining Vacuity,
with,

A Corrollary about the Reciprocation of Alumnus.
The word Alumnus is effectually directive of us (as much as any) to the
Nativities of Eminent persons. However we may observe both a Passive and Active
interpretation thereof. I put Passive first, because one must be bred before he
can breed; and Alumnus signifies both the Nursed child and the Nurse, both him
that was educated, and the Person or Place which gave him his Education.
Wherefore Laurentius Valla (though an excellent Grammarian) is much deceived,
when not admitting the double sense thereof, as by the ensuing instances will
appear.

Passive Pro Educato. Active Pro Educatore. Cicero Dolabellae. Mihi vero
gloriosum, te juvenem Consulem florere laudibus, quasi Alumnum Disciplinae
meae. Pliny lib. 3. de Italia. Terra omnium terrarum Alumna, eadem and parens
numine Deum electa. De finibus 122. b. Aristoteles, caeterique Platonis Alumni.
Augustinus lib. 70. Civit. Jovem Alumnum cognominaverunt, quod omnia aleret.

The Design which we drive on in this observation, and the use which we desire
should be made thereof is this, viz. That such who are born in a Place, may be
sensible of their Engagement thereunto; That if God give them ability and
opportunity, they may express their Thankfulness to the same.

Quisquis Alumnus erat, gratus Alumnus erit. A Thankful man will feed
The Place which did him breed.
And the Truth hereof is eminently conspicuous in many Persons, but especially
in great Prelates before, and rich Citizens since the Reformation.

BARK-SHIRE has Wilt-shire on the West, Hamp-shire on the South, Surry on the
East, Oxford and Buckingham-sh^re (parted first with the Isis, then with the
flexuous River of Thames) on the North thereof. It may be fancied in a form
like a Lute lying along, whose belly is toward the West, whilst the narrow
neck or long handle is extended toward the East. From Coleshull to Windsor, it
may be allowed in length forty miles. But it amounts to little more then half
so much in the broadest part thereof* It partaketh as Plentiful as any County
in England of the Common Commodities, Grass, Grain, Fish, Foul, Wool, and
Wood, etc. and we will particularly instance on one or two of them.

Natural Commodities.
Oaks.
It was given in instruction to the Spies sent to search the Land of Canaan,
that amongst other enquiries, they should take particular notice, Whether there
be Number. 13. 20.
Wood therein or not? An important question, the rather because at that time
the Israelites were in Arabia the Desert, where they saw not a tree in many
months travail (in so much that it is Recorded for a wonder, that in Elim
were Exodus 12. 27.
seventy Palm trees) and now knew the worth of wood by wanting it.

But Bark-shire affords abundance of trees of all kinds, though her Oaks in
Windsor-Forest for the present come only under our commendation. First for
their firmness, whereof our Ships are made. The Oak in other Kingdoms may be
called cowardly, as riving and splitting round about the passage of the bullet,
fearing as it were the force thereof; whilst our English, as heart of Oak
indeed, though entered with bullet, remains firm round about it.

Secondly, for the conveniencie of Portage. The wealth of a covetous man
(wanting an heart to make use thereof) may not unfitly be compared to the Oaks
and Firretrees, (good and plentiful indeed) in the High-lands in Scotland, but
growing on such unaccessible mountains, no Strength or Art can render them
useful, nature in this kind having given them full coffers, but no key to
unlock them.

Whereas so indulgent is Divine Providence to England, that our four principal
Forests lie either on the Sea, or Navigable Rivers; viz. New-Forest on the Sea,
Shirewood on the Trent, Dean on the Severne, and this Windsor-Forest on the
Thames, and I could wish more care were taken for preserving the Timber therein.

Bark
The very name of this Shire justly intitles us here to handle this Commodity,
(though common to other Counties,) because Bark-shire (as some will have it)
was so called from a stripped or Camd. Brit. in this County.
Bark-bared-Oake, to which signal place the people repaired in time of trouble
to make their general defense. It is essential for making good Leather, though
lately one has propounded a way to tanne it solid and saleable without the
help thereof, on condition (and good reason too) he may be allowed reasonable
profit for so rare an invention. But many think, that he that waits for dead
men's shoes, and he that stays for Leather-shooes made without bark, may both
of them go a long time barefoot.

Trouts.
This is a pleasant and wholesome Fish, as whose feeding is pure and cleanly, in
the swiftest streams, and on the hardest gravel. Good and great of this kind
are found in the River of Kennet nigh Hungerford, though not so big as that
which Gesner affirms taken in the Leman-lake, being three cubits in length.
They are in their perfection in the month of May, and yearly decline with the
Buck. Being come to his full growth, he decays in goodness, not greatness, and
thrives in his head till his death. Note by the way, that an hog-back and
little head, is a sign that any fish is in season. Other commodities of This,
return in other Counties, where they may be mentioned with more conveniencie.

The Manufactures.
Clothing.
It is plied therein, and because we meet with the best of our Manufactures in
the first of our Shires, a word of the Antiquity thereof.

1. Cloth sure is of the same date with Civility in this Land. Indeed the
ancient Britains are reported to go naked, clothed only with colors painted,
custom making them insensible of cold, with the beggar, who being demanded how
he could go naked, returned, all my body is face. But no sooner had the Romans
reduced this Island, but cloth though course, such as would hide and heat, was
here generally made and used.

2. Fine Cloth (though narrow) for persons of worth at home to wear, and for
foreign Exportation began in England about the beginning of the Reign of King
Edward the Third. Before which time our Statutes take no Cognizance of Clothing
as inconsiderable, (Wool being transported in specie) and needing no Rules to
regulate it, save what prudence dictated to private Husbands with their own
families.

3. Broad Cloth (wherein the wealth of our Nation is folded up) made with broad
loomes, two men attending each of them, began here in the Reign of King Henry
the eighth. And I have been informed that Jack of Newberry was the first that
introduced it into this County. Well may the Poets feign Minerva the Goddess of
Wit, and the Foundress of Weaving, so great is the ingenuity thereof.

The Buildings.
Windsor Castle was a Royal seat ever since the Conquest, but brought to the
modern Beauty, chiefly at the cost of King Edward the Third. It is a Castle for
Strength, a Palace for State, and has in it a College for Learning, a Chapel
for Devotion, and an Almes-house (of decayed Gentlemen) for Charity. In this
Palace most remarkable, the Hall for greatness, Winchester-Tower for height,
and the Terrace on the North-side for pleasure, where a dull eye may travail
twenty miles in a moment. Nor boasts so much, that it consists of two great
Courts; as that it contained two Great Kings [ John of France, and David of
Scotland,] Prisoners therein together, as also that it was the seat of the
Honorable Order of the Garter.

Many neat Houses and pleasant seats there be in this County, both on the
Kennet and Thames, which seem dutifully to attend at distance on Windsor
Castle, as Aldermaston, Inglefield, etc. most sweet in their situations.

Proverbs.
I meet with [but one] in this County, but either so narrow that they stretch
not beyond the bounds thereof, or else so broad, that all other Counties
equally share in the cause and usage of them. Wherefore seeing this is the
first English Shire in the Alphabetical Order, to avoid a Vacuity, we will here
insert such Proverbs, wherein England or Englishmen are by express mention
concerned. But first we will dispatch that sole Proverb of this County, viz.

The Vicar of Bray, will be Vicar of Bray still.] Bray, a Village well known in
this County, so called from the BIBROCES a kind of ancient Britons Inhabiting
thereabouts. The Vivacious Vicar hereof living under King Henry the 8. King
Edward the 6. Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth, was first a Papist, then a
Protestant, then a Papist, then a Protestant again. He had seen some Martyrs
burnt (two miles off) at Windsor, and found this fire too hot for his tender
temper. This Vicar being taxed by one for being a Turn-coat, and an unconstant
Changeling, Not so, said he, for I always kept my Principle, which is this, to
live and die the Vicar of Bray. Such many now adays, who though they cannot
turn the wind, will turn their Mils, and set them so, that wheresoever it
blows, their Grist shall certainly be grinded. Proceed we now to the Proverbs
General of England:

When our Lady falls in our Lords lap]
Then let England beware a sad clap]
Then let England beware a mishap]
alias,

Then let the Clergyman look to his cap.]
I behold this proverbial prophecy, or this prophetical menace, to be not above
six score years old, and of Popish extraction since the Reformation. It
whispereth more then it dare speak out, and points at more then it dares
whisper; and fain would intimate to credulous persons, as if the blessed Virgin
offended with the English for abolishing her Adoration watches an opportunity
of Revenge on this Nation. And when her day (being the five and twentieth of
March, and first of the Gregorian year) chances to fall on the day of Christ's
Resurrection, then (being as it were fortified by her Sons assistance) some
signal judgment is intended to our State, and Churchmen especially. Such
Coincidence has happened just fifteen times since the Conquest, as Elias
Ashmole Esquire, my worthy friend, and Learned Mathematician, has exactly
computed it; and we will examine by our Chronicles, whether on such years any
signal fatalities befell England.

A. D. Anno Reg. D. L. G. N. Signal Disasters. 1095 W. Rufus 8. G 13 K. Rufus
made a fruitless invasion of Wales. 1106 H. first 6. G 5 K. Hen. subdueth
Normandy, and D. Robert his Brother. 1117 H. first 17. G 16 He forbids the
Popes Legate to enter England. 1190 R. first 2. G 13 K. Richard conquereth
Cyprus in his way to Palestine. 1201 K. John 2. G 5 The French invade Normandy.
1212 K. John 13. G 16 K. John resigneth his Kingdom to the Pope. 1285 Ed. first
13. G 13 Nothing remarkable but Peace and Plenty. 1296 Ed. first 24. AG 5 War
begun with Scotland, which ended in Victory. 1380 R. second 4. AG 13 The Scots
do much harm to us at Peryth Fair. 1459 H. sixth 38. G 16 Lancastrians worsted
by the Yorkists in fight. 1543 H. eighth 34. G 5 K. Henry entered Scotland, and
burnt Edinburgh.

Hitherto this Proverb has had but intermitting truth at the most, seeing no
constancy in sad casualties. But the sting (will some say) is in the tail
thereof, and I behold this Proverb born in this following year.

1554 Q. Mary 2. G 16 Q. Mary sets up Popery and Martyreth Protestants. 1627
Charles 3. G 13 The unprosperous Voyage to the Isle of Rees. 1638 Charles 14. G
5 The first cloud of trouble in Scotland. 1649 G 16 The first complete year of
the English Commonwealth (or Tyranny rather) which since, blessed be God, is
returned to a Monarchy.

The concurrence of these two days does not return till the year 1722. and let
the next generation look to the effects thereof. I have done my part in
showing, remitting to the Reader the censuring of these occurrences. Sure I am
so sinful a Nation deserves that every year should be fatal unto it. But it
matters not, though our Lady falls in our Lords lap, whilst our Lord sits at
his Fathers right hand, if to him we make our addresses by serious repentance.

When HEMP is Spun
England is Done.
Though this Proverb has a different Stamp, yet I look on it as Coined by the
same Mint- Master with the former, and even of the same Age. It is faced with a
Literal, but would be Lined with a Mystical sense. When Hemp is Spun, that is,
when all that necessary Commodity is employed, that there is no more left for
Sails and Cordage, England (whose strength consists in Shipping) would be
reduced to a Doleful Condition. But know under HEMP are Couched the Initial
Letters of Henry the 8. Edward the 6. Mary, Philip and Elizabeth, as if with
the Life of the last, the Happiness of England should expire, which time has
confuted. Yet to keep this Proverb in Countenance, it may pretend to some
Truth, because then England with the Addition of Scotland lost its name in
Great Britain by Royal Proclamation.

When the Black Fleet of NORVVAY is come and gone]
ENGLAND Build Houses of Lime and Stone,]
For after Wars you shall have none.]
There is a Larger Edition hereof, though this be large enough for us, and more
then we can well understand. Some make it fulfilled in the eighty eight, when
the SpanishFleet was beaten, the Sur-name of whose King, as a Learned The Lord
Bacon in his Essaies. page 215.
Author does observe, was NORVVAY* Others conceive it called the Black Fleet of
Norway, because it was never black (not dismal to others, but woeful to its
own Apprehension,) till beaten by the English, and forced into those Coasts
according to the English Historian.

They betook J. Speed in his History of Great Brit. in the year 1588.
themselves to Flight leaving Scotland on the West, and bending toward Norway
ill advised. (But that necessity urged, and God had Infatuated their Counsels)
to put their shaken and battered bottoms into those Black and Dangerous Seas. I
observe this the rather, because I believe Mr. Speed in this his Writing, was
so far from having a Reflection on, that I Question, whether ever I had heard of
this Prophecy.

It is true that afterward England built houses of Lime and Stone, and our
most handsome and Artificial Buildings, (though formerly far greater and
stronger,) bear their date from the defeating of the Spanish Fleet. As for the
Remainder, After Wars you shall have none; We find it false, as to our Civil
Wars by our woeful Experience.

And whether it be true or false, as to Foreign Invasions hereafter, we care
not at all, as beholding this prediction either made by the wild fancy of one
foolish man; and then, why should this many wise men attend thereunto? or else
by him, who always either speaks what is false, or what is true with an intent
to deceive; So that we will not be ellated with good, or dejected with bad
success of his foretelling.

England is the ringing Island.] Thus it is commonly called by Foreigners, as
having greater, more, and more tuneable Bells than any one County in
Christendom, Italy it self not excepted, though Nola be there, and Bells so
called thence, because first founded therein. Yea, it seems, our Land is much
affected with the love of them, and loath to have them carried hence into
foreign parts, whereof take this eminent instance. When Arthur Bulkley the
covetous Bishop of Godwin in his Bishops of Bangor.
Bangor, in the Reign of King Henry the eighth, had sacrilegiously sold the
five fair Bells of his Cathedral, to be transported beyond the Seas, and went
down himself to see them shipped, they suddenly sunk down with the Vessel in
the Haven, and the Bishop fell instantly blind, and so continued to the day of
his death. Naught else have I to observe of our English Bells, save that in the
memory of man, they were never known so long free from the sad sound of
Funerals of general infection, God make us sensible of, and thankful for the
same.

When the sand feeds the clay, England cries An old Interjection of Lamentation.
Well a day:]
But when the clay feeds the sand, it is merry with England.]
As Nottingham-shire is divided into two Camd. Brit. in Nottingh.
parts, the sand and the clay, all England falls under the same Dicotomie, yet
so as the sand hardly amounts to the Fifth part thereof. Now a wet year,
which drowneth and chilleth the clay, makes the sandy ground most fruitful
with corn, and the general Granarie of the Land, which then is dearer in other
Counties; and it is harder for one to feed four, than four to feed one. It is
furthermore observed, that a drought never causes a dearth in England, because
(though parching up the sandy ground) the clay, being the far greatest moiety
of the Land, having more natural moisture therein, affords a competent
increase.

-- England were but a fling,]
Save for the crooked stick and the gray-goose-wing.]
But a fling That is, a slight, light thing, not to be valued, but rather to be
cast away, as being but half an Island. It is of no great extent. Philip the
Second, King of Spain, in the reign of Queen Elizabeth called our English
Ambassadors unto him, (whilst as yet there was Peace betwixt the two Crowns)
and taking a small Map of the World, laid his little finger upon England,
(wonder not if he desired to finger so good a Country,) and then demanded of
our English Ambassador, where England was? Indeed it is in greatness
inconsiderable to the Spanish dominions.

But for the crooked stick, etc.] That is, use of Archery. Never were the
Arrows of the Parthians more formidable to the Romans, then ours to the French
horsemen: Yea remarkable his Divine Providence to England, that since Arrows
are grown out of use, though the weapons of war be altered, the English man's
hand is still in Ure as much as ever before, for no Country affords better
materials of Iron, Saltpeter and Lead; or better workmen to make them into
Guns, Powder, and Bullets; or better marks-men to make use of them being so
made: So that England is now as good with a straight Iron, as ever it was with
a crooked stick.

England is the Paradise of Women, Hell of Horses, Purgatory of Servants.] For
the first, Billa vera Women, whether Maids, Wives, or Widows, finding here the
fairest respect, and kindest usage. Our Common Law is a more courteous carver
for them, than the Civil-Law beyond the seas, allowing Widows the thirds of
their Husbands Estates with other Privileges. The (...), or highest seats are
granted them at all Feasts, and the wall (in crowding, most danger to the
weakest, in walking most dignity to the worthiest) resigned unto them. The
Indentures of maidservants are cancelled by their Marriage, though the term be
not expired; which to youngmen in the same condition is denied. In a word,
betwixt Law and (Laws-Corrival) Custom, they freely enjoy many favors, and we
men, so far from envying them, wish them all happiness therewith.

For the next, ^ Englands being an Hell for Horses] Ignoramus, as not
sufficiently satisfied in the evidence alleged. Indeed the Spaniard, who keeps
his Gennets rather for show than use; makes wantons of them. However, if
England be faulty herein in their over-violent Riding, Racing, Hunting; it is
high time the fault were amended, the rather because, The Prove. 10. 12.
good man regards the life of his beast.

For the last, ^ Pugatory for servants] we are so far from finding the Bill, we
cast it forth as full of falsehood. We have but two sorts, Apprentices, and
Covenant-servants. The Parents of the former give large sums of money to have
their Children bound for seven years, to learn some Art or Mystery; which
argues their good usage, as to the generality in our Nation. Otherwise it were
madness for men to give so much money to buy their Childrens misery. As for our
Covenant-servants, they make their own Covenants, and if they be bad, they may
thank themselves. Sure I am, their Masters if breaking them and abusing their
servants with too little meat or sleep, too much work or correction, (which is
true also of Apprentices) are liable by Law to make them reparation.

Indeed, I have heard how in the Age of our Fathers, servants were in far
greater subjection than now adays, especially since our Civil Wars has lately
dislocated all relations; so that now servants will do whatsoever their Masters
enjoin them; so be it, they think fitting themselves. For my own part, I am
neither for the Tyranny of the one, nor Rebellion of the other, but the mutual
duty of both.

As for Vernae, Slaves or Vassals, so frequent in Spain and foreign parts, our
Land and Laws (whatever former Tenures have been,) acknowledge not any for the
present. To conclude, as Purgatory is a thing feigned in it self; so in this
particular it is false in application to England.

A famine in England begins first at the horse-manger.] Indeed it seldom begins
at the horse-rack; for, though hay may be excessive dear caused by a dry
summer, yet winter-grain (never impaired with a drought) is then to be had at
reasonable rates. Whereas, if Pease or Oats, our horse-grain, (and the latter
mans-grain also generally in the North for poor people) be scarce, it will not
be long ere Wheat, Rye, etc. mount in our Markets. Indeed, if any grain be very
dear, no grain will be very cheap soon after.

The King of England is the King of Devils.] The German Emperor is termed the
King of Kings, having so many free Princes under Him: The King of Spain, King
of men, because they willingly yield their Sovereign rational obedience: The
King of France, King of Asses, patiently bearing unconscionable burdens: But
why the King of England King of Devils? I either cannot, or do not, or will not
understand. Sure I am, S. Gregory gave us better language when he said, Angli
velut Angeli, for our fair complexions; and it is sad we should be Devils by
our black conditions.

The English are the Frenchmen's Apes.] This anciently has been, and still is
charged on the English, and that with too much truth, for ought I can find to
the contrary.

-- dolebat,
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
-- it is to us a pain
This should be said, and not gainsaid again.
We ape the French chiefly in two particulars. First in their language, ( which
if Jack could speak, he would be a Gentleman) which some get by travel, others
gain at home with Dame Eglentine in In his Prologue of the Prioresse.
Chaucer,

Entewned in her voice full seemly,
And French she spoke full feteously
After the scole of Stratford at Bow,
For French of Paris was to her unknow.
Secondly in their Habits, accounting all our fineness in conformity to the
Frenchfashion, though following it at greater distance than the field-pease in
the Country the rath ripe pease in the garden. Disgraceful in my opinion, that
seeing the English victorious Arms had twice charged through the bowels of
France, we should learn our fashions from them to whom we taught Obedience.

The English Glutton.] Gluttony is a sin anciently charged on this Nation,
which we are more willing to excuse than confess, more willing to confess than
amend. Some pretend the coldness of Climate in excuse of our sharp Appetites;
and plead the Plenty of the Land ( England being in effect all a great
Cookes-shop, and no reason any should starve therein,) for our prodigious
Feasts. They allege also that foreigners (even the Spaniards themselves)
coming over hither, acquit themselves as good Trencher-men as any; so that it
seems want, not temperance makes them so abstemious at home.

All amounts not to any just defense, excess being an ill expression of our
thankfullness to God for his goodness. Nor need we with the Egyptians to serve
up at the last course a dead man's head, to mind us of our mortality, seeing a
Feast well considered is but a Charnel house of foul, Fish and Flesh; and those
few shellfish that are not killed to our hands are killed by our teeth. It is
vain therefore to expect that dead food should always preserve life in the
feeders thereupon.

Fox, Stow, Speed, all our English Historians in the first year of K. Ed. 3.
Long beards heartless, painted-hoods witless;]
Gay-coats graceless, make England thriftless.]
Though this has more of Libell than Proverb therein, and is stark false in it
self, yet it will truly acquaint us with the habits of the English in that Age.

Long-beards heartless.] Our English did use nutrire comam, both on their Head
and beards, concieving it made them more amiable to their friends, and terrible
to their foes.

Painted-hoods witless.] Their hoods were stained with a kind of color, in a
middle way betwixt dying and painting, (whence Painters-stainers have their
name) a Mystery vehemently suspected to be lost in our Age. Hoods served that
Age for Caps.

Gay-coats graceless.] Gallantry began then to be fashionable in England, and
perchance those who here taxed them therewith would have been as gay
themselves, had their Land been as rich and able to maintain them.

This sing-song was made on the English by the Scots, after they were flushed
with Victory over us in the Reign of King Edward the Second. Never was the
Battle at Cannae so fatal to the Romans, as that at Sterling to the Nobility of
England; and the Scots puffed up with their Victory, fixed those opprobrious
Epithets of heartless, witless, graceless upon us. For the first, we appeal to
themselves, whether Englishmen have not good hearts, and with their long
beards, long swords. For the second we appeal to the World, whether the wit of
our Nation has not appeared as considerable as theirs in their Writings and
Doings. For the third we appeal to God, the only Searcher of hearts, and trier
of true grace. As for the fourth thriftless, I omit it, because it sinks of it
self as a superstructure on a foundred and sailing foundation.

All that I will add is this, that the grave, sage and reduced Scotish-men in
this Age, are not bound to take notice of such expressions made by their
Ancestors; seeing when Nations are at hostile defiance, they will mutually
endeavor each others disgrace.

He that England will win,]
Must with Ireland first begin.]
This Proverb imports that great designs must be managed gradatim, not only
by degrees, but due method; England, it seems, is too great a morsel for a
foreign foe to be chopped up at once, and therefore it must orderly be
attempted, and Ireland be first assaulted. Some have conceived, but it is but a
conceit (all things being in the bosom of Divine Providence,) that, had the
Spanish Armado in eighty eight fallen upon Ireland, (when the well affected
therein were few and ill provided,) they would have given a better account of
their service to him, who sent them. To rectify which error, the King of Spain
sent afterward John de Aquila into Ireland, but with what success is
sufficiently known. And if any foreign Enemy has a desire to try the truth of
this Proverb at his own peril, both England and Ireland lie for Climate in the
same posture they were before.

In England a buss^l of March dust is wo^th a King^ randsom.] Not so in
Southern sandy Counties, where a dry March is as destructive, as here it is
beneficial. How much a Kings randsom amounts unto, England knows by dear
experience, when paying one hundred thousand pounds to redeem Richard the
first, which was shared between the German Emperor and Leopoldus Duke of
Austria. Indeed a general good redounds to our Land by a dry March, for if our
clay-grounds be over-drowned in that month, they recover not their distemper
that year.

However, this Proverb presumes seasonable showers in April following, or
otherwise March dust will be turned into May-ashes, to the burning up of grass
and grain; so easily can God blast the most probable fruitfulness.

England a good Land and a bad People.] This is a French Proverb, and we are
glad, that they being so much Admirers and Magnifiers of their own, will allow
any goodness to another Country.

This makes the wonder the less, that they have so much endeavored to get a
share in this good Country, by their former frequent invasions thereof; though
they could never since the Conquest, peaceably posse^s a hundred yards thereof
for twenty hours, whilst we for a long time have enjoyed large Territories in
France.

But this Proverb has a design to raise up the Land to throw down the People,
graceing it to disgrace them. We Englishmen are, or-should be ready humbly to
confess our faults before God, and no less truly, then sadly to say of our
selves; Ah sinful Nation! However before men we will not acknowledge a visible
badness above other Nations: And the plain truth is, both France and England
have need to mend, seeing God has formerly justly made them by sharp Wars
alternately to whip one another.

The High Dutch Pilgrims when they beg, do sing; the Frenchmen whine and cry;
the Spaniards curse, swear, and blaspheme; the Irish and English steal.] This
is a Spanish Proverb, and I suspect too much truth is suggested therein, the
rather because the Spaniards therein spare not themselves, but unpartially
report their own black Character. If any ask why the Italians are not here
mentioned, seeing surely their Pilgrims have also their peculiar humors; know,
that Rome and Loretta the staples of Pilgrimages, being both in Italy, the
Italians very seldom (being frugal in their Superstition.) go out of their own
Country.

Whereas stealing is charged on our English, it is confessed, that our poor
people are observed light-fingered, and therefore our Laws are so heavy,
making low Felony highly Penal, to restrain that Vice most, to which our
Pezantry is most addicted.

I wish my Country more true Piety, then to take such tedious and useless
journeys; but if they will go, I wish them more honesty, then to steal; and the
people, by whom they pass, more Charity, than to tempt them to stealth, by
denying them necessaries in their journey.

Princes.
JOHN, Eldest Son of King Edward the first and Queen Eleanor, was born at
Windsor before his Fathers voyage into Syria. His short life will not bear a
long Character, dying in his infancy J. Speed hist. page 563.
1273. (the last year of the Reign of King Henry the 3d.) and was buried August
the 8. in Westminster, under a Marble Tomb, in-laid with his Picture in an Arch
over it.

Idem p. 564.
ELEANOR Eldest Daughter to King Edward the first and Queen Eleanor, was born at
Windsor Anno Dom. 1266. She was afterward married by a Proxy, (a naked sword
being in bed interposed betwixt him and her body,) to Alphons King of Arragon
with all Ceremonies of State. And indeed they proved but Ceremonies, the
substance soon (...), the said King Alphons dying Anno Dom. 1292. before the
Consummation of the M^rriage. But soon after this Lady found that a Living Earl
was better then a Dead King. when Married to Henry the 3d. Earl of Berry in
France, from whom the Dukes of (...) and Kings of Sicil are descended. This
Lady deceased in the seven and twentieth of her Fathers Reign, Anno Dom. 1298.

MARGARET, third Daughter of King Edward the first and Queen Eleanor, was born
at Windsor Speeds Chron. p. 564.
in the 3d. year of her Fathers Reign, 1275. When fifteen year old she was
Married at Westminster, July 9th. 1290. to John the second Duke of Brabant, by
whom she had Issue, John the third Duke of Brabant, from whom the Dukes of
Burgundy are descended.

MARY, sixth Daughter of King Edward the first and Queen Eleanor, was born at
Windsor April the 12. 1279. being but ten years of Age, she was made a Nun at
Amesbury in Wilt-shire without her own, and (at the first) against her Idem
Ibidem.
Parents consent, merely to gratify Queen Eleanor her Grandmother. Let us pity
her, who probably did not pity her self, as not knowing a veil from a
kerchief, not understanding the requisites to, nor her own fitness for that
profession, having afterward time too much to bemoan, but none to amend her
condition.

As for the other Children of this King, which he had by Eleanor his Queen,
probably born in this Castle, viz.

HENRY. ALPHONSE. BLANCH.
Dying in their infancy immediately after their Baptism, it is enough to name
them, and to bestow this joint Epitapb upon them.

^leansed at Font we drew untainted Breath,
Not yet made bad by Life, made good by Death.
The two former were buried with their Brother John, (of whom before) at
Westminster in the same Tomb, but where Blanch was interred is altogether
unknown.

Edward the Third Son to Edward the Second and Queen Isabel, was born at
Windsor October 13. 1312. (and proved afterward a pious and fortunate Prince.)
I behold him as merely passive in the deposing of his Father, practiced on in
his Minority by his Mother and Mortimer. His French Victories speak both of his
Wisdom and Valor; and though the Conquests by King Henry the fifth were
thicker, (achieved in a shorter time) His were broader, (in France and
Scotland by Sea and Land,) though both of length alike, as lost by their
immediate Successors.

He was the first English King which Coined* Gold, which with me amounts to
Camd. Rem. under the title of Moneyr.
a wonder, that before his time all yellow payments in the Land should be made
in foreign Coin. He first stamped the Rose-Nobles, having on the one side,

Jesus autem transiens per medium illorum ibat. And on the reverse, his own
image with sword and shield, sitting in a ship waving on the Sea. Hereupon an
English Rhymer, Manuscript in (...). Cotton.
in the Reign of King Henry the sixth,

For four things our Noble she weth to me,
King, Ship, and Swerd, and Power of the Sea.
He had a numerous and happy issue by Philippa his Queen, after whose death,
being almost seventy years old, he cast his affection on Alice Pie^ce his
Paramour, much to his disgrace; it being true what Epictetus returned to Adrian
the Emperor, asking of him what Love was, In puero, pudor; in virgin, rubor;
in soemina, furor; in juvene, ardor; in seen, risus. In a boy, bashfulness; in
a maid, blushing; in a woman, fury; in a young man, fire; in an old man, folly.
However, take this King altogether at home, abroad, at Church, in State, and he
had few equals, none superiors. He dyed Anno Dom. 1378.

Speeds hist. page 602.
WILLIAM, sixth Son of King Edward the third and Queen Philippa, was born at
Windsor. Indeed his second Son born at Hatfield was of the same name, who dyed
in his infancy, and his Mother had a fond affection for another William,
because her Fathers, Brothers, and a Conquering Name, till his short Life also,
dying in his cradle, weaned her from renewing her desire. As for King Edwards
female Children, Isabel, Joan, Blanch, Mary and Margaret, there is much
probability of their French, and no assurance of their English Nativity.

HENRY the sixth, Son to Henry the fifth, was born in Windsor-Castle, against
the will of his Father, by the wilfulness of his Mother. He was fitter for a
Coul then a Crown; of so easy a nature, that he might well have exchanged a
pound of Patience for an ounce of Valor: Being so innocent to others, that he
was hurtful to himself. He was both over-subjected and over-wived; having
married Margaret the Daughter of Reinier King of Jerusalem, Sicily and Arragon,
a Prince only Puissant in Titles, otherwise little able to assist his Son in
Law. Through homebred Dissentions he not only lost the foreign acquisitions
of his Father in France, but also his own inheritance in England to the House
of York. His Death, or Murder rather, happened 1471.

This Henry was twice Crowned, twice Deposed, and twice Buried, (first at
Chertsy, then at Windsor,) and once half Sainted. Our Henry the seventh
cheapned the price of his Canonization, (one may see for his love, and buy for
his money in the Court of Rome) but would not come up to the sum demanded.
However this Henry was a Saint (though not with the Pope) with the People,
repairing to this Monument from the farthest part of the Land, and fancying
that they received much benefit thereby. He was the last Prince whom I find
expressly born at Windsor. It seems that afterward our English Queens grew out
of conceit with that place, as unfortunate for Royal Nativities.

Saints.
MARGARET ALICE
RICH were born at Abbington The English Martyrology in the 15. and 24. of Aug.
in this County, and were successively Prioresses of Catesby in
Northamptonshire. They were Sisters to St. Edmund, whose life ensues, and are
placed before him by the Courtesy of England, which allows the weaker Sex
the upper hand. So great the Reputation of their Holiness, that

The former Dying Anno 1257. The latter 1270.

Both were honored Ma^h. Paris in hist. Majori. ad an. D. 1217. and deincep^.
for Saints, and many Miracles reported by crafty, were believed by Credulous
people, done at their shrine by their Relics.

St. EDMUND Son to Edward Rich and Mabel his Wife, was born at Antiq. Brit.
page 165.
Abbington in Bark-shire, and bred in Oxford. Some will have Edmunds-Hall in
that University built by his means, but others (more probably) named in his
Memory. He became Canon of Salisbury, and from thence, by the joynt-consent of
Pope, King and Monks, (three cords seldom twisted in the sa ne Cable) advanced
Archbishop of Canterbury, where he sat almost ten years till he willingly
deserted it; partly, because offended at the power of the Popes Legate, making
him no more then a mere Cipher, signifying only in conjunction (when
concurring with his pleasure;) partly, because vexed at his polling and peeling
of the English people, so grievous, he could not endure, so general, he could
not avoid to behold it. For these reasons he left the Land, went (or, shall I
say, fled?) into France, where he sighed out the remainder of his Life, most at
Pontiniack, but some at Soyssons where he dyed Anno 1240.

Pope Innocent the fourth Canonized him six years after his death, whereat many
much wondered, that he should so much honor one, a professed foe to Papal
Extortions. Veritus, ne min^s i^sius (...) Romanam sedem ob tot acceptas
injurias vindicarent.
Some conceived he did it se defendendo, and for a ne noceat, that he might not
be tormented with his Ghost. But what hurt were it, if all the Enemies of his
Holiness were Sainted, on condition they took death in their way thereunto?
Sure it is that Lewis King of France, a year after translated his Corpse, and,
three years after that, bestowed a most sumptuous Shrine of Gold, Silver, and
Crystal upon it; and the 16. of November is the Festival appointed for his
Memorial. M. Parker Antiq. Brit. page 173.


Martyrs.
It appears by the Fox, Acts and Mon. page 817.
confession of Thomas Man (Martyred in the beginning of King Henry the eighth)
that there was at Newberry in this County a glorious and sweet Society of
faithful Favorers, who had continued the space of fifteen years together, till
at last by a certain lewd person, whom they trusted and made of their Council,
they were betrayed, and then many of them to the number of six or seven score
were abjured, and three or four of them burnt. Now although we knew not how to
call these Martyrs who so suffered, their Names no doubt are written in the
Book of Life.

We see how the day of the Gospel dawned as soon in this County, as in any
place in England, surely Seniority in this kind ought to be respected, which
made Paul a pusney in piety to Romans 16. 7.
Andronicus and Iunia his kinsmen, to enter this caveat for their Spiritual
precedence who were in Christ before me.] On which account, let other places
give the honor to the Town of Newberry, because it started the first (and I
hope not tire for the earliness thereof) in the race of the Reformed Religion.
Yea Doctor William Twis, the painful Preacher in that Parish, was wont to use
this as a motive to his flock, to quicken their pace, and strengthen their
perseverance in piety, because that Town appears the first fruits of the Gospel
in England. And Windsor the next in the same County had the honor of Martyrs
ashes therein, as by the ensuing list will appear.

There was in Windsor a company of right godly persons, who comfortably enjoyed
themselves, until their enemies designed their extirpation, though it cost
them much to accomplish it, one of them confessing that for his share he
expended an hundred marks, besides the killing of three Geldings. These
suspecting that the Judges Itinerant in their circuit would be too favorable
unto them, procured a special Session, got four arraigned and condemned by the
Commissioners, whereof the three following were put to death, on the Statute of
the six Articles.

1. Fox, Acts and Mon. page 1211. etc.
Anthony Persons, a Priest and profitable Preacher, so that the great Clerks of
Windsor thought their idleness upbraided by his industry. Being fastened to the
stake he laid a good deal of straw on the top of his head, saying, this is Gods
hat, I am now armed like a soldier of Christ.

2. Robert Testwood, a singing-man in the Quire of Windsor. There happened a
contest betwixt him and another of that Society, singing an Anthem together to
the Virgin Mary.

Robert Philips on the one side of the Quire. Robert Testwood on the other side
of the Quire. Oh Redemtrix and Salvatrix! Non Redemtrix, nec Salvatrix.

I know not which sung the deepest Base, or got the better for the present.
Sure I am, that since by Gods goodness the Nons have drowned the Ohs in
England. Testwood was also accused for dissuading people from Pilgrimages, and
for striking off the nose of the image of our Lady.

3. Henry Fillmer Churchwarden of Windsor, who had Articled against their
superstitious Vicar for heretical Doctrine.

These three were burnt together at Windsor, Anno 1544. and when account was
given to their patient death to King Henry the eighth sitting on horseback,
the King turning his horses head said, Alas poor innocents! A better speech
from a private person then a Prince, bound by his place not only to pity, but
protect oppressed innocence. However by this occasion other persecuted people
were pardoned and preserved, of whom Under the ensuing Title of Confessors.
hereafter.

This storm of persecution thus happily blown over, Bark-shire enjoyed peace
and tranquillity for full twelve years together, viz. from the year of our Lord
1544. till 1556. When Dr. Jeffrey the cruel Chancellor of Sarisbury, renewed
the troubles at Newberry and caused the death of

JULINS PALMER. See his Character (being born in Coventry) in Warwickshire.
JOHN GWIN. THOMAS ASKINE.
These three July 16. 1556. were burnt in a place nigh Newberry called the Fox,
Acts and Mon. page 1934.
Sandpits, enduring the pain of the fire with such incredible constancy, that
it confounded their fo^s, and confirmed their friends in the Truth.

Confessors.
JOHN MARBECK was an Organist in the Quire of Windsor and very skilful therein,
a man of Admirable Industry and Ingenuity, who, not perfectly understanding the
Latin Tongue, did out of the Latin with the help of the English Bible make an
English Concordance, which Bishop Gardener himself could not but commend as a
piece of singular Industry, Professing that there were no fewer then twelve
Learned men to make the first Latin Concordance; And King Henry the eighth
hearing thereof, said that he was better employed, then those Priests which
accused him. Let therefore our Modern Concordances of Cotton, Newman, Bernard,
etc. as Children and Grandchildren do their duty to Marbecks Concordance, as
their Parent at first endeavored in our Language.

This Marbeck was a very zealous Protestant, and of so sweet and amiable
Nature, that all good men did love, and few bad men did hate him. Yet was he
condemned Anno 1544. on the Statute of the 6. Articles to be burnt at Windsor,
had not his pardon been procured, diverse assigning diverse causes thereof;

1. That Bishop Gardener bare him a special affection for his skill in the
Mystery of Music. 2. That such who condemned him, procured his pardon out of
Remorse of Conscience, because so slender the evidence against him, it being
questionable whether his Concordance was made after the Statute of the 6.
Articles or before it, and, if before, he was freed by the Kings General
pardon. 3. That it was done out of design to reserve him for a discovery of the
rest of his party; if so, their plot failed them. For being as true as Steel,
(whereof his fetters were made, which he ware in Prison for a good time) he
could not be frighted or flattered to make any detection.
Here a mistake was committed by Mr. Fox in his first Edition, whereon the
Papis^s much insult, making this Marbeck burnt at Windsor for his Religion,
with Anthony Persons, Robert Testwood, and Henry Fillmer. No doubt Mr. Fox
rejoiced at his own mistake, thus far forth; both for Marbecks sake who escaped
with his Life, and his Enemies who thereby drew the less guilt of blood on
their own Consciences. But hear what he pleads for his mistake.

1. Marbeck was dead in Law, as condemned whereon his error was probably
grounded. 2. He confessing that one of the four condemned was pardoned his
Life, misnaming him (...) instead of Marbeck. 3. Let Papists first purge their
Lying Legend from manifest and Intentionall untruths, before they censure
others for casual slips and un-meant Mistakes. 4. Recognizing his Book in the
next Edition, he with blushing amended his error. And is not this Penance
enough according to the principals of his accusers Confession, Contrition, and
Satisfaction?
All this will not content some morose Cavillers whom I have heard jeeringly
say, that many who were burnt in Fox in the Reign of Queen Mary, drank Sack in
the days of Queen Elizabeth. But enough is said to any ingenious person; And it
is impossible for any Author of a Voluminous Book consisting of several persons
and circumstances (Reader in pleading for Master Fox, I plead for my self) to
have such Ubiquitary intelligence, as to apply the same infallibly to every
particular. When this Marbeck dyed is to me unknown, he was alive at the second
English Edition of the Book of Martyrs 1583. thirty and nine years after the
time of his Condemnation.

ROBERT BENET was a Lawyer living in Windsor, and a zealous Professor of the
true Religion. He drank as deep as any of the Cup of Affliction, and no doubt
had been condemned with Testwood, Persons, and the rest; Had he not at the same
time been sick of the Fox, Acts and Mon. page 1220.
plague sore in the Prison of the Bishop of London, which proved the means of
his preservation; Thus it is better to fall into the hands of God, than into
the hands of men. And thus as out of the devourer came food, out of the
Destroyer came life, yea the Plague Sore proved a Cordial unto him. For by the
time that he was recovered thereof, a Pardon was freely granted to him; as also
to Sir Thomas Cardine, Sir Philip Hobby, (both of the Kings Privy-chamber) with
their Ladies and many more designed to death by crafty Bishop Gardner, had not
His Majesty's mercy thus miraculously interposed.

Cardinals.
I have read of many, who would have been Cardinals, but might not. This County
afforded one, who might have been one, but would not, viz. WILLIAM LAUD, the
place being no less freely proffered to, then disdainfully refused by, him with
words to this effect: That the Church of Rome must be much mended, before he
would accept any such Dignity. An expression which in my mind amounted to the
Emphaticall Periphrasis of NEVER. But we shall meet with him hereafter under a
more proper Topic.

Prelates.
WILLIAM of READING a M^tth. West. in flor. Hist.
Learned Benedictine, employed by King H. the Second in many Embassies, and by
him preferred Archbishop of Bourdeaux, where he dyed in the Reign of King
Richard the first.

JOHN DE BRADFIELD, sive de lato Campo. Finding fifteen Villages of the Name, I
AMP
fixed his Nativity at Bradfield in Berks, as (in my measuring) the nearest to
Rochester, where he was Chanter and Bishop Bishop Godwin in his Bishops of
Rochester.
1274. If mistaken, the matter is not much seeing his Surname is controverted
and otherwise written, John de HOE. However being Charractred, Vir
conversationis honestae, decenter literatus and in omnibus morigeratus. I was
desirous to crowd him into our Book where I might with most probability.

RICHARD BEAUCHAMP was Brother says Bishop Godwin to Walter Beauchamp
(mistaken for William, as may appear by In his Brit. in this County.
Mr. Camden) Baron of St. Amand, whose chief habitation was at Wydehay in this
County, he was bred Doctor in the Laws, and became Bishop first of Hereford,
then of Salisbury. He was Chancellor of the Garter, which Office descended to
his Successors, Windsor-Castle the seat of that Order being in the Dioces of
Salisbury. He built a most beautiful Chapel (on the South Side of St. Mary's
Chapel) in his own Cathedral, wherein he lies buried. His death happened Anno
Dom. 1482.

Since the Reformation.
THOMAS GODWIN was born at Francis Godwin his Son in his Catalogue of Bishops
of Bath and Wells.
Oakingham in this County, and first bred in the Free School therein. Hence was
he sent to Magdalen College in Oxford, maintained there for a time by the
bounty of Doctor Layton Dean of York, till at last he was chosen Fellow of the
College. This he exchanged on some terms for the Schoolmasters place of
Barkley in Gloucester-shire, where he also Studied Physic, which afterward
proved beneficial unto him; when forbidden to teach School in the Reign of
Queen Mary. Yea Bonner threatened him with fire and faggot, which caused him
often to Obscure himself and Remove his Habitation. He was an Eloquent
Preacher, Tall and Comely in Person; qualities which much Indeared him to Q.
Elizabeth, who loved good parts well, but better, when in a goodly Person. For
18. years together he never failed to be one of the Select Chaplains, which
Preached in the Lent before her Majesty. He was first Dean of Christ-church in
Oxford, then Dean of Canterbury, and at last Bishop of Bath and Wells.

Being infirm with Age, and deseased with the Gout, he was necessitated for a
Nurse to marry a second wife, a Matron of years proportionable to himself. But
this was by his Court-Enemies (which no Bishop wanted in that Age) represented
to the Queen to his great Disgrace. Yea they traduced him to have married a
Girl of twenty years of age, until the good Earl of Bedford Sir John Harington
in his aditional supply to Bp. Godwin. Page 115.
casually present at such discourse; Madam, (said he to her Majesty) I know not
how much the Woman is above twenty, but I know a Son of hers is but little
under forty.

Being afflicted with a Quartern fever, he was advised by his Physicians to
retire into this County, to Oakingham the place of his Birth, seeing in such
Cases Native Air may prove Cordial to Patients, as Mothers milk to (and old men
are twice) children. Here he dyed (breathing his first and last in the same
Place,) November the 19. 1590. And lies buried under a Monument in the
South Side of the Chancell.

THOMAS RAM was born at Sir Jam^s Warede Praesulibus Lageniae Page 67.
Windsor in this County, and admitted in Kings College in Cambridge Anno Dom.
1588. whence he was made Chaplain first to Robert Earl of Essex, then to
Charles Lord Mountjoy, both Lord Lieutenants in Ireland, After many mediate
Preferments, he was made Bishop of Fernos and Laghlin in that Kingdom, both
which he Peaceably enjoyed, Anno 1628.

WILLIAM LAWD was born at Reading in this County, of honest Parentage, bred in
Saint John's College in Oxford, whereof he became P^esident; Successively
Bishop of Saint David's, Bath and Wells, London, and at last Archbishop of
Canterbury. One of low Stature, but high Parts; Piercing eyes, Cheerful
countenance, wherein Gravity and Pleasantness, were well compounded: Admirable
in his Naturalls, Unblameable in his Morals, being very strict in his
Conversation. Of him I have written in my Ecclesiastical History, though I
confess it was somewhat too soon for one with safety and truth, to treat of
such a Subject. Indeed I could instance in some kind of course Venison, not fit
for food when first killed, and therefore cunning Cooks bury it for some hours
in the Earth, till the rankness thereof being mortified thereby, it makes most
palatable meat. So the memory of some Persons newly deceased are neither fit
for a Writers or Readers repast, until some competent time after their
Interment. However I am Confident that unpartial Posterity, on a serious review
of all Passages, will allow his Name to be reposed amongst the HEROES of our
Nation, seeing such as behold his expense on St. Paul's as but a Cipher, will
assign his other Benefactions a very valuable Signification, viz. his erecting
and endowing an Almes-house in Reading, his increasing of Oxford Library with
Books, and St. John's College with beautiful buildings. He was beheaded Jan.
10. 1644.

Statesmen.
Sir JOHN MASON Knight was born at Abbington (where he is remembered among the
Benefactors to the beautiful Almes-house therein,) bred in All souls in
Oxford. King Henry the eighth coming thither was so highly pleased with an
oration Mr. Mason made unto Him, that he instantly gave order for his education
beyond the seas, as confident he would prove an able Minister of State. This
was the politic discipline of those days to select the pregnancies of either
Universities, and breed them in foreign parts for public employments. He was
Privy-Councellour to King Henry the eighth, and K. Edward the sixth. One Sir
Jo. Hay^ ward in his Edw. the 6. page 105.
makes him His Secretary of State, which some suspect too high; Stows Annals
Edw. 6. page 612.
another, but Master of the Requests, which I believe as much beneath him. He
continued Councellor to Q. Mary, and Q. Elizabeth, to whom he was Treasurer of
the Household, and Chancellor of the University of Oxford.

Mr. Camden gives him this true character, Vir fuit gravis, atque eruditus:
which I like much better then that which follows, so far as I can understand
it,

Came. Eliz. Anno 1566. sub fin m.
Ecclesiasticorum These words are absurdly rendered by A^ (...) Darcy (who
understood not L^tin, and translated Camden aut of the F^nch Trans^ation) He
was diligent and careful to the preservation of Benefits.
Beneficiorum incubator maximus. Surely he could be no Canonical Incumbent in
any Benefice, not being in Orders, which leaves him under the suspicion, of
being a great ingrosser of long leases in Church Livings, which then used to be
let for many years, a pityful pension being reserved for the poor Curate.
Thought possibly in his younger time, he might have Tonsuram primam, or be a
Deacon, (which improved by his great power) might qualify at least countenance
him for the holding of his spiritual promotions. He died 1566. and lies buried
in the Quire of St. Paul's (over against William Herbert first Earl of
Pembroke,) and I remember this Distick of his Long Epitaph:

Tempore quinque suo regnantes ordine vidit,
Horum a Consiliis quatuor ille fuit.
He saw five Princes, which the scepter bore,
Of them, was Privy-Councellour to Four.
It appears by His Epitaph, that he left no Child of his own Body, but adopted
his Nephew to be his Son an Heir.

Sir THOMAS SMITH Knight was born at Abbington, bred in the University of
Oxford, God and himself raised him to the eminency he attained unto,
unbefriended with any extraction. He may seem to have had an ingenuous
emulation of Sir Tho. Smith senior, Secretary of State, whom he imitated in
many good qualities, and had no doubt equalled him in preferment, if not
prevented by death. He attained only to be Master of the Requests, and
Secretary to K. James, for His Latin Letters, higher places expecting him,
when a period was put to his life November. 28. 1609. He lies buried in the
Church of Fullkam in Middlesex, under a monument erected by his Lady, Frances
daughter to William Lord Chandos, and since Countess of Exeter.

Soldiers.
HENRY UMPTON Knight, was born (as by all Indications in the Heralds Office
does appear) at Wadley in this County. He was Son to Sir Edward Umpton, by Anne
(the Relick of John Dudley Earl of Warwick, and) the Eldest Daughter of Edward
Seymour Duke of Somerset. He was employed by Queen Elizabeth Ambassador into
France, where he so behaved himself right stoutly in her behalf, as may appear
by this particular.

In the Month of March Anno 1592. being sensible of some injury offered by the
Duke of Gwise to the honor of the Queen of England, he sent him this ensuing
Exemplifyed in Mills his Catalogue of honor in the Edition of Royal paper in
the List of the ^arls of Warwick.
challenge.

For as much as lately in the Lodging of my Lord Du Main and in public
elsewhere, Impudently, Indiscreetly, and over boldly you spoke badly of my
Sovereign, whose sacred Person, here in this County I represent. To maintain
both by word and weapon her honor, (which never was called in question among
people of Honesty and Virtue) I say you have wickedly lied in speaking so
basely of my Sovereign, and you shall do nothing else but lie, whenever you
shall dare to tax her honor. Moreover that her sacred Person (being one of
the most complete and Virtuous Princess that lives in this world) ought not to
be evil spoken of by the Tongue of such a perfidious Traitor to her Law and
Country, as you are. And hereupon I do defy you, and challenge your Person to
mine with such manner of Arms as you shall like or choose, be it either on
horse back or on foot. Nor would I have you to think any inequality of Person
between us, I being issued of as great a Race and Noble house (every way) as
your self. So assigning me an indifferent place, I will there maintain my
words, and the Lie which I gave you, and which you should not endure if you
have any Courage at all in you. If you consent not, meet me hereupon, I will
hold you, and cause you to be generally held for the arrantest coward, and most
slanderous slave that lives in all France. I expect your Answer.

I find not what answer was returned. This Sir Henry dying in the French Kings
Camp before Lofear had his Fnn* by Lee Cl^rentiaux. marked fol. 45.
Corpse brought over to London, and carried in a Coach to Wadley, thence to
Farington, where he was buried in the Church on Tuesday the 8. of July 1596. He
had allowed him a Barons Hearse, because dying Ambassador Leigier.

Writers.
HUGH of READING quitted his expectances of a fair Estate, and sequestring
himself S. N.
from worldly delights, embraced a Monastical life, till at last he became
Abbot of Reading. Such, who suspect his sufficiency, will soon be satisfied
when they read the high Commendation which Petrus Bloesensis Arch Deacon of
Bath, (one of the greatest Scholars of that Age) bestows upon him. He wrote a
Book (of no Trival Questions) fetched out of the Scripture it self, the reason
why I. Bale De Scrip. Brit. Cent. 3. number. 20.
(generally a back-friend to Monks) has so good a Character for him, who
flourished Anno Dom. 1180.

ROGER of WINDSOR I vehemently suspect this man, merely made by the mistake of
Pitseus [Anno 1235.] for R^ger Wendover.
was undoubtedly born in this Town, otherwise he would have been called Roger
of St. Albans, being Chanter in that Convent. Now in that Age Monks were
reputed men of best Learning and most leisure. The cause why our English Kings
always choose one of their order (who passed by the name of Historicus Regius,
the Kings Historian) to write the remarkable passages of his time. Our Roger
was by King Henry the third selected for that service, and performed it to ^is
own great credit and the contentment of others. He flourished in the year of
our Lord 1235.

ROBERT RICH Son to Edward and Mabell his Wife, Brother of St. Edmund
Archbishop of Canterbury, was born at Abbington in this County; he followed
his Brother at very great distance both in Parts and Learning, (though
accompanying him in his Travells beyond the Seas) and wrote a Book of the Life,
Death and Miracles of his Brother, being much to blame, if he did not do all
right to so near a Relation. He dyed about the year of our Lord 1250.

RICHARD of WALLINGFORD was born in that Market Town, pleasantly seated on the
River Thames, wherein his Father was a Blacksmith. He went afterward to
Oxford, and was bred in Merton Coll* then a Monk, and at last Abbot of St.
Albans, where he became a most expert Mathematician, especially for the
Mechanical part thereof, and (retaining somewhat of his Fathers Trade) was
Dexterous at making pretty engines, and Instruments.

His Masterpiece was a most Artificial Clock, made (says my B^le de Scrip.
Brit. Ce^t. 5. number. 19.
Author) Magno labor, majore sumptu, Art vero maxima, with much Pain, more
Cost, and most Art. It remained in that Monastry in the time of John Bale (whom
by his words I collect an Eyewitness thereof) affirming that Europe had not
the Like; So that it seemed as good as the famous Clock at Strasburg in
Germany, and in this Respect better, because ancienter; It was a Calendar as
well as a Clock, Showing the fixed Stars and Planets, The Ebbing and Flowing of
the Sea, Minutes of the Hours, and what not?

I have heard that when Monopolies began to grow Common in the Court of France,
the Kings Jester moved to have this Monopoly for himself, viz. a Cardescue of
every one who carried a Watch about him, and cared not how he employed his
Time. Surely the Monks of Saint Albans were Concerned to be careful how they
spent their hours, seeing no Convent in England had the like Curiosity; This
their Clock gathering up the least Crum of Time, presenting the Minutary
fractions thereof; On which account, I conceive Richard the maker thereof, well
prepared for the time of his dissolution, when he died of the Leprosy, Anno
Dom. 1326.

Since the Reformation.
HENRY BULLOCK was most prob^bly born in this County, where his ancient AMP.
name appears in a worshipful estate. He was bred Fellow and Doctor of Divinity
in Queens College in Cambridge. A good Linguist, and general Scholar, familiar
with Erasmus, (an Evidence of his Learning, it being as hard to halt before
acriple, as to deceive his Judgment,) calling him Bovillum in his Epistles
unto him.

By the way our English Writers, when rendering a Surname in Latin which has
an Appellative signification, content them to retein the Body of the Name, and
only disguise the termination, as Cross, Peacok, Crossus, Peacocus, etc. But
the Germans in such a Case do use to mould the meaning of the name, either
into Latin, as I. Fierce they translate I. Ferus, Bullock, Bovillus, or into
Greek, as Swarts they render Melanthon, Reeck-lin Capnio.

It Is confessed our Bullock Ba^e de Scrip (...). (...). 9. Number. 7.
compelled by Cardinal Wolsy wrote against Luther, but otherwise his affections
were biased to the Protestant Party. The Date of his death is unknown.

WILLIAM TWIS was born at Spene in this County, which was an ancient Roman
Camd^ns Brit. in Bark-shire.
City mentioned by Antonine in his Itinerary by the name of Spinae. This
minds me of a passage in Lib. 2. (...). (...).
Clemens Alexandrinus, speaking of sanctified afflictions, Nos quidem e Spinis
uvas colligimus; and here in another sense Gods Church gathered grapes, this
Good man, out of this thornie place. Hence he was sent by Winchester-School to
New-Colledge in Oxford, and there became a general Scholar. His plain
preaching was good, solid disputing better, pious living best of all. He
afterward became Preacher in the place of his nativity ( Spinham lands is part
of Newberry,) and though generally our Saviors observation is verified, A
prophet is not without honor save in his own country, (chiefly because
Minutiae omnes pueritiae ejus ibi sunt cognitae) yet here he met with deserved
respect. Here he laid a good foundation, and the more the pity, if since some
of his fancifull auditors have built hay and stubble thereupon. And no wonder
if this good Doctor toward his death was slighted by Sectaries, it being usual
for New-lights to neglect those who have born the heat of the day. His Latin
Works give great evidence of his abilities in controversial matters. He was
chosen Prolocutor in the late Assembly of Divines, wherein his moderation was
very much commended, and dying in Holborn he was buried at Westminster, Anno
Dom. 164.

WILLIAM LYFORD was born at Peysmer in this County, and bred in Magdalen
College in Oxford, where he proceeded Bachelour of Divinity 1631. He was also
Fellow of that foundation, on the same token that his Conscience Post factum
was much troubled, about his resigning his place for money to his Successor,
but (as his friends have informed me) he before his death took order for the
restitution thereof.

The modesty of his mind was legible in the comeliness of his countenance, and
the meekness of his Spirit visible in his courteous Carriage: He was afterward
fixed at (...) in Dorset-shire, where his large Vineyard required such an able
and painful Vine-dresser; Here he laid a good foundation (before the
beginning of our Civil Wars) with his learned Preaching and Catechizing; and
indeed, though Sermons give most Sail to men's souls, Catechizing lays the
best Ballast in them, keeping them stedy from being carri^d away with every
wind of Doctrine. Yet he drank a deep Draught of the bitter Cup, with the rest
of his brethren, and had his share of Obloquie from such factious Persons as
could not abide the wholesome words of sound Doctrine. But their Candle (without
their Repentance) shall be put out in darkness, whilst his memory shall shine
in his Learned works he has left behind him. He died about the year of our
Lord, 1652.

Romish Exile W^iters.
THOMAS HYDE was born at Register of New (...). Anno 1543.
Newberry in this County, and bred a Master of Art in New College in Oxford;
he was afterward Canon of Winchester, and chief Master of the school therein:
He, with ^ohn marti^l the second Master, about the beginning of the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, left both their School and their Land, living long beyond the
Seas; This Hyde is charactred by Pits. d^ Scrip. Brit. Anno 1597.
one of his own persuasion, To be a man of upright life, of great gravity and
severity: He wrote a book of Consolation to his fellowexile. And died Anno Dom.
1597.

B^nefactors to the Public.
ALFREDE the fourth Son to K. Athelwolph was born at Camb. Brit. in Bark-shire.
Wantage a market town in this County. An excellent scholar, though he was past
Mr. (...) in his notes on (...), page 192.
twelve years of age before he knew one letter in the Book; and did not he run
fast who starting so late came soon to the mark? He was a Curious Poet,
excellent Musician, a valiant and successeful Soldier, who fought seven
Battles against the Danes in one year, and at last made them his Subjects by
Conquest, and Gods servants by Christianity. He gave the first Institution, or
(as others will have it) the best (...) to the University of Oxford. A Prince
who cannot be painted to the Life without his loss, no words reaching his
worth.

He Divided
1. Every natural day (as to himself) into three parts, eight hours for his
devotion, eight hours for his employment, eight hours for his sleep and
refection. 2. His Revenues into three parts, one for his expenses in War, a
second for the maintenance of his Court, and a third to be spended on Pious
uses. 3. His Land into Thirty two shires, which number since is altered and
increased. 4. His Subjects into Hundreds, and Tythings, consisting of Ten
persons, mutually Pledges for their Good behavior; such being accounted
suspicious for their Life and Loyalty that could not give such Security.
He left Learning, where he found Ignorance; Justice, where he found
Oppression; Peace, where he found Distraction. And having Reigned about Four
and thirty years, He dyed and was buried at Winchester, Anno 901. He loved
Religion more then Superstition, favored Learned men more then Lasie Monks,
which [perchance] was the cause that his memory is not laden with Miracles,
and He not solemnly Sainted with other Saxon Kings who far less deserved it.

Since the Reformation.
PETER CHAPMAN was born at Stows Sur. of Land. p. 98.
Cokeham in this County, bred an Iron-monger in London, and at his death
bequeathed five pounds a year to two Scholars in Oxford, as much to two in
Cambridge; and five Pounds a year to the Poor in the town of his Nativity,
besides threescore pounds to the Prisons in London, and other Benefactions. The
certain date of his death is to me unknown.

JOHN KENDRICK was born at Reading in this County, and bred a Draper in the
City of London. His State may be compared to the Mat. 13. 32.
Mustard Seed, very little at the beginning, but growing so great, that the
birds made nests therein, or rather he therein made ne^ts for many birds; which
otherwise being either infledged or maimed, must have been exposed to wind and
weather.

The Worthiest of David's WORTHIES were digested into * Sam. 23. 19.
Ternions, and they again subdivided into two Ranks. If this double Dichotomie
were used to methodize our Protestant Benefactors since the Reformation, sure I
am that Mr. Kendrick will be (if not the last of the first,) the first of the
second Three. His Charity began at his Kindred, proceeded to his Friends and
Servants, (to whom he left large Legacies,) concluded with the Poor, on whom he
bestowed above twenty thousand pounds, Reading and Newbury sharing the deepest
therein. And if any envious and distrustful Miser (measuring other men's hearts
by the narrowness of his own) suspecteth the truth hereof, and if he dare
hazard the smarting of his bleered eyes to behold so bright a Sun of Bounty,
let him consult his Will Stows Survey of Lon. 193.
publicly in Print. He departed this life on the 30. day of September, 1624.
and lies buried in St. Christophers London. To the Curate of which Parish he
gave twenty pounds per annum for ever.

RICHARD WIGHTWICK, Bachelor of Divinity, was Rector of East Isley in this S. N.
County: What the yearly value of his living was I know not, and have cause to
believe it not very great; however one would conjecture his Benefice a
Bishopric by his bounty to Pembroke College in Oxford, to which he gave one
hundred pounds per annum, to the maintenance of three Fellows and four
Scholars. When he departed this life is to me unknown.

Memorable Persons.
THOMAS COLE commonly called the rich clothier of Reading. Tradition and an
authorless pamphlet make him a man of vast wealth, maintaining an hundred and
forty meniall servants in his house, besides three hundred poor people whom he
set on work; insomuch that his Wains with cloth filled the highway betwixt
Reading and London, to the stopping of King Henry the first in his Progress;
Who, notwithstanding (for the encouraging of his Subjects industry) gratified
the said Cole, and all of his profession, with the set measure of a Yard, the
said King making his own Arm the standard thereof, whereby Drapery was reduced
in the meting thereof to a greater certainty.

The truth is this, Monks began to Lard the lives of their Saints with lies,
whence they proceeded in like manner to flourish out the facts of Famous
Knights, ( King Arthur, Guy of Warwick, etc.) in imitation whereof some meaner
wits in the same sort made description of Mechanics, powdering their lives
with improbable passages, to the great prejudice of truth: Seeing the making of
Broad-cloath in England could not be so ancient, and it was the arm (not of
King Henry) but King Edward the first, which is notoriously known to have been
the adequation of a yard.

However, because omnis fabula fundatur in Historia, let this Cole be accounted
eminent in this kind, though I vehemently suspect very little of truth would
remain in the midst of this story, if the gross falsehoods were pared from both
sides thereof.

JOHN WINSCOMBE, called commonly Jack of Newberry, was the most considerable
clothier (without fancy and fiction) England ever beheld. His Looms were his
lands, whereof he kept one hundred in his House, each managed by a Man and a
Boy. In the expedition to Flodden-field against James King of Scotland he
marched with an hundred of his own men, (as well armed, and better clothed then
any) to show that the painful to use their hands in peace could be valiant,
and employ their Arms in War. He feasted King Henry the eighth and his first
Queen Katharine at his own house, extant at Newberry at this day, but divided
into many Tenements. Well may his house now make sixteen Clothiers houses,
whose wealth would amount to six hundred of their estates. He built the Church
of Newberry from the Pulpit westward to the Tower inclusively, and died about
the year 1520. some of his name and kindred of great wealth still remaining in
this County.

Lord Mayors.
Name Father Place Company Time 1 John Parveis John Parveis Erlgeston
Fishmonger 1432 2 Nicholas Wyfold Thomas Wyfold Hertley Grocer 1450 3 William
Web John Web Reading Salter 1591 4 Thomas Bennet Thomas Bennet Wallingford
Mercer 1603

The Names of the Gentry of this County, returned by the Commissioners in the
twelfth year of King Henry the Sixth, 1433.
Robert Bishop of Sarum. Commissioners to take the Oaths. William Lovel
Chivaler Robert Shotsbroke, Knights for the Shires. William Fyndern.

Johan. Prendegest. Praeceptor Hospitalis St. Johan. Jerus. in Anglia de
Grenham Johannis Golefre Armigeri Willielmi Warbelton Ar. Willielmi Danvers Ar.
Johannis Shotesbrooke Ar. Thomae Foxle Ar. Phi. Inglefeld Ar. Thomae Rothewell
Ar. Willielmi Perkyns Ar. Thomae Drew Ar. Richardi Ristwold Ar. Richardi
Makeney Ar. Johannis Rogers Ar. Willielmi Stanerton Ar. Willielmi Floyer Ar.
Thomae Bullok Ar. Richardi Bullok Ar. Johannis Estbury Ar. Johannis Kentwode
Ar. Richardi Hulcote Ar. Johannis Gargrave Ar. Johannis Chaumpe Ar. Willielmi
Baron Ar. Willielmi Fitzwaryn Ar. Johannis Stowe. Willielmi Hales Johannis Hyde
Johan. Stokys de Brympton Willielmi Fachell Roberti Vobe Thomae Pynchepole
Johannis York Johannis Ildesle Thomae Ildesle Johannis Colle Richardi Wydeford
Richardi Abberbury Thomae Lanyngton Thomae Denton Nicholai Whaddon Petri
Delamare Johannis Martyn Thomae Frankeleyn Willielmi Felyce Richardi Hamwell
Roberti Wodecok Johannis Warvyle Johannis Rokys Johannis Seward Willielmi
Walrond Iohannis Medeford Rogeri Merlawe Willieimi Latton Richardi Shayle
Thomae Coterell Iohannis George Iohannis Sewalle Iohannis Sturmy Thomae Hammes
Iohannis Wering Roberti Beche Iohannis Coventre Iohannis Lokwode Iohannis
Fitzwarwin Henrici Samon Thomae Plesance Edwardi Gybbes Will Coke de Kingeston
Lyle Iohannis Firry Nicholai Hunt Hugonis Main Willielmi Newman senioris
Davidis Gower Iohannis Dienys Richardi Dancastre Willielmi Drew de Hungford
Iohannis Parker de Doington Willielmi Standard Richardi Collis Nicholai Long
Roberti Chevayn Richardi Walker Walteri Canonn. de Crokeham. Parker Roberti
Rove de Abendon Iohannis Richby de Reding Iohannis Stokes de Abendon Iohannis
Whitwey Willielmi Umfray Simonis Kent Iohannis Hatter Willielmi Brusele
Richardi Irmonger Richardi Vayre Gilberti Holeway Iohannis London Willielmi
Pleystow Iohannis Bancbury Thomae Liford Henrici Ildesle Iohannis Chebeyn
Iohannis Mortymer Iohannis Spynache Iohannis Moyn de Faryndon Iohannis Ely
Iohannis Goddard Willielmi Ditton Walteri Suttou Nicholai Harbor Willielmi
Jacob Iohannis Benet de Newberry Iohannis Magot Willielmi Croke de Newberry
Willielmi Clement Iohannis Moyn de Moryton Roberti Freman Iohannis Jews Thomae
Steward Willielmi Sydmanton Richardi Waltham Iohannis Babeham Iohannis Clear
Iohannis Botele de Newberry Richardi Meryvale Willielmi Waleys Iohannis Beneton
Willielmi Croke de Welford Willielmi Charectour Willielmi Hertrugge Iohannis
Kybe Willielmi Wylton Richardi Coterell Laurentii Alisandre Thomae Bevar
Vincentii Bertilmewe Iohannis Pynkeney Thomae Attevyne Iohannis Crouchfeld
Iohannis Smewyn Iohannis Sifrewast Iohannis Batell Iohannis Bythewode Thomae
Bowell Thomae Honey Walteri Waryn Iohannis Yernemouth Henrici Russel^ Roberti
Ivenden Henrici Berkesdale Iohannis Absolon Iohannis Berkesdale Iohannis Clerk
de Inkpenny Richardi Bertlot Gilberti Cohenhull Gilberti Vyell Gilberti
Attewyke Richardi Attepitte Thomae Padbury Hugonis Rose Iohannis Woderove
Thomae Pert Iohannis Merston Richardi Grove Rogeri Burymill Thomae Greece
Richardi Pekke Richardi Mullyng Johan. Parker de Wokingham Iohannis Whitede
Johan. Sherman de Wyndesor Willielmi Wodyngton Rogeri Felter Willielmi Field
Iohannis Billesby Iohannis Gunter Iohannis Glover Richardi Atteforde Iohannis
Stacy Iohannis Baron de Wytenham Iohannis Horwode Willielmi More Willielmi
At-mille Henrici de la River Iohannis Poting Henrici Brown Iohannis Brown
Richardi Rissul Iohannis Yatynden Iohannis Kete Iohannis Pernecote Rogeri
Gunter Thomae Swyer Richardi Bocher de Thacham Iohannis Elys de Thacham Thomae
Merry Richardi Phelipp Iohannis Thoursey and Iohannis Bassemore.
Gardiners complain that some kind of Flowers and Fruits will not grow
prosperously and thrive kindly in the Suburbs of London; This they impute to
the smoke of the City offensive thereunto. Sure I am that ancient Gentry in
this County sown thick in former, come up thin in our Age.

Antiqua e multis nomina pauca manent. Of names which were in days of yore,
Few remain here of a great store.
I behold the vicinity of London as the cause thereof, for though Barkshire be
conveniently distanced thence, (the nearest place sixteen, the farthest sixty
miles from the same) yet the goodness of the ways thither, and sweetness of the
seats there, (not to speak of the River Thames, which uniteth both in
commerce,) sets Barkshire really nearer then it is locally to London: The
cause, I believe, that so few families remain of the forenamed Catalogue.

The paucity of them makes such as are extant the more remarkable, amongst
whom William Fachel or Vachel (the 29nth. in number) was right ancient, having
an estate in and about Reading, as by the ensuing Deed will appear:

Sciant presents and futuri, quod ego Joannes Vachel dedi, concessi, and hac
praesente charta mea confirmavi Rogero le Dubbare, pro servicio suo, and pro
quadam summa pecuniae quammihi dedit primo manibus, totum and integrum illud
tenementum cum pertinentiis suis quod habui in veteri vico Rading inter
tenementum quod quondam fuit Thomae Goum in part boreali, and tenementum quod
quondam fuit Jordani le Dubbar in part australi, habend. and tenend. dicto
Rogero, and haeredibus suis vel Assignatis, libere quiet, integre, in bona
pace in perpetuum de capitalibus dominis illius foedi per servicium inde
debitum and consuetum, Reddendo inde annuatim mihi and haeredibus vel
Assignatis meis duos solidos and sex denarios, ad festum Sancti Michaelis, pro
omni servicio seculari, exactione, and donand. and ego praedictus Joannes and
heredes mei vel mei assignati, totum praedictum tenementum cum omnibus suis
pertinentiis dicto Rogero, and haeredibus vel assignatis suis Warrantizabimus,
and contra omnes gentes defendemus in perpetuum per servitium praedictum. In
cujus rei testimonium praesenti chartae sigillum meum apposui, hiis Testibus,
Radulpho de la Batili, Thom. de Lecester, Nicho. Bastat, Waltero Gerard,
Robert. le Taylur, Johan. le Foghel, Bado le Foghellar, Gilberto de Hegfeild,
and aliis. Dat. Rading duodecimo die Februarii, anno Regni Regis Edward. fill.
Regis Henrici vicesimo nono.

The descendents of this name are still extant in this County at Coley in a
worshipful condition.

SHERIFFS.
Anciently this County had sometimes the same, sometimes a distinct Sheriff
from Oxfordshire, as by the ensuing Catalogue will appear so well as we can
distinguish them.

Of Barkshire. Of both. Of Oxfordshire. Anno HEN. II. 1 Restoldus 1 Willielm.
de Pontearch 2 Henr. de Oille 2 Richard. de Charvill 3 Henricus de Oille 3
Gilbertus de Pinchigen 4 4 5 Henricus de Oille 5 Gulielmus Pinchigen 6 6 7
Manassar Arsic 7 Richard. Lucy 8 Idem. 8 Adam. le Cadinns 9 Idem. 9 Adam. de
Catmer 10 Thomas Basset 10 Idem. 11 11 Adam. de Catmer 12 12 Idem. 13 13 Idem.
14 14 Idem. 15 15 Idem. 16 Hugo de Bockland 16 Adam. Banaster 17 Idem. 17 Idem.
18 Idem. 18 Idem. 19 Idem. and Hugo de Bockland 19 Idem. Anno Anno 20 Hugo de
Bockland 20 Alard. Banaster 21 Idem. 21 Idem. 22 Idem. 22 Rob. de Turvill 23
Hugo 23 Idem. 24 Idem. 24 Idem. 25 Hugo de Sto. Germano 25 Idem. 26 Idem. 26
Galf. Hose 27 Idem. 27 Galf. Hosatts 28 Idem. 28 Idem. 29 Idem. 29 Rob.
Witefield 30 Idem. 30 Idem. 31 Idem. 31 Alan. de Furnell 32 32 Idem. 33 Rogerus
filius Renfr. 33 Idem. Anno RICHARD. I. Anno 1 Robertus filius Renfr. 1 Rob. de
la Mara 2 2 Robertus de la Mara 3 3 Willielmus Briewere 4 4 Idem. 5 5 Idem. 6 6
Idem. 7 Willielmus filius Rad. 7 Henricus de Oille 8 Philippus filius Rob. 8
Henr. de Oille and 8 Alan. de Marton. 8 Pagand. de Chaderington 9 Philip.
filius Rob. 9 Hugo de Nevill 9 Alan. de Manton. 9 Galf. de Savage 10 Stephan.
de Turnham 10 Hugo de Nevill 10 Johannes de Ferles. 10 Galfr. de Salvage Anno
JOHANNES. Anno 1 Stephan. de Turnham 1 Hugo de Nevill 1 Johannes de Ferles. 1
Galfr. Slavagius 2 Rob. de Cantelu 2 Gilbert. Basset 2 Fulk. de Cantelu 2
Richard. Caverton 2 Nich. de Kent 3 Will. Briewere and 3 Will. Briewere 3 Rich.
de Parco 4 5 Hubert. de Burgo. 5 Jo. de Wickeneholt junior 6 6 Thom. Banaster 7
Richard. de Tus 8 Tho. Basset 9 Rob. de Amnari 10 Richardus de Tus. 10 Tho.
Basset 11 Robert. de Magre 11 Idem. 12 Johan. de Wikenholton 12 Idem. and Rob.
de Magre 13 Idem. 13 Idem. 14 Johan. de Wikenholton 15 Tho. Basset 15 Johan. de
Wikenholton 15 Rob. e Magre 16 Tho Basset 16 Idem. 16 Rich. Letus 17 Johan. de
Wikenholton Anno HEN. III. Anno 1 1 2 Richardus filius Reg. 2 Fulco de Breantee
2 Hen. de Saio. 2 Rad. de Bray 3 Idem. 3 Idem. 4 Idem. 4 Idem. 5 Idem cum
filiis Radulph. de 6 Hen. de Saio. Bray. 6 Idem. 7 Idem. 7 Falkesius de
Breantee 7 Ric. de Brakele 8 Fakesius de Breantee 8 Ric. de Ripariis 9 Hen. de
Saio 9 Ric. de Brakele 10 Henricus de Saio 11 Hugo de Batonia 11 Galfr. de
Craucombe, 11 Rob. de Haya 12 Hugo de Bada 12 Philippus de Albritaco 13 Rob. de
Haya 13 Galfr. de Craucombe 14 Hen. de Saio 14 Galf. de Craucombe 14 Rob. de
Haya 15 Idem. 15 Idem. 16 Idem. 16 Idem. 17 Johan. de Hulcot. 18 Rob. de
Maplederham 19 Englelard de Cicomaco 19 Nich. de Hedington 19 Johan. Bruus 20
Idem. 20 Idem. 21 Rob. Bren* 21 Johan. de Tiwe 22 Simon de Lauchmore 22 Idem.
23 Idem. 23 Idem. 24 Sim. de Lauchmore. 24 Johan. de Plesseto 24 Will. Hay 25
Idem. 25 Will. Hay 26 Idem. 26 Idem. 27 Idem. 27 Idem. 28 Alanus de Farnham 28
Will. Hay 29 Idem. 29 Idem.

Sheriffs of Barkshire and Oxfordshire.
HEN. III.
Anno 30 Aland. de Farhnam Anno 31 Idem. Anno 32 Widom. filius Roberti Anno 33
Idem. Anno 34 Idem. Anno 35 Nich. de Henred for 9 years together. Anno 44
Walter. de la Knivere Anno 45 Idem. Anno 46 Idem. Anno 47 Fulco de Kucot Anno
48 Idem. Anno 49 John de Sto. Walerico Anno 50 Idem. Anno 51 Idem. Anno 52
Nich. de Wiffrewash Anno 53 Tho. de Sto. Wigore Anno 54 Idem. Anno 55 Will. de
Insula. Anno 55 Rog. Epis. Cov. and Lich. Anno 56 Idem.
EDW. I.
Anno 1 Gilb. Ki^kby Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Hen. de Shoctebroke Anno
5 Hen. de Shoctebroke Anno 6 Jacob. de Patebery Anno 7 Hen. de Shoctebroke Anno
7 Alanus filius Roll. Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Jac. Croke Anno 9 Joh. de Cridemers
Anno 10 Johan. de Cridemers Anno 11 Idem. Anno 12 Idem. Anno 13 Johan. de
Tudemers Anno 13 Radul. de Beauyes Anno 24 Radul. de Beauyes Anno 15 Thom. de
Duners Anno 16 Idem. Anno 17 Idem. Anno 18 Willielmus de Gresmull Anno 19
Richar. de Wilniescote Anno 20 Will. de Bremchele for 4 years together. Anno 24
Hen. de Thistelden for 5 years together. Anno 29 Nich. de Spershete for 7 years
together.
EDW. II.
Anno 1 Tho. Danvers Anno 2 Rich. de Ameray Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Tho. Danvers
Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Idem. and Phil. de la Beach Anno 7 Phil. de la Beach Anno 8
Richar. de Windsor Anno 9 Richar. de Poltiampton Anno 10 Idem. Anno 11 Otvelus
Pursell, and Richar. de la Bear Anno 12 Richar. de la Bear, and Joh. de
Brumpton Anno 13 Johan. de Brumpton Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15 Drogo Barentine for 5
years together.
EDW. III.
Anno 1 Johan. de Brumpton Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Johan. de Bockland Anno 4
Philip. de la Beach Anno 5 Rich. de Colshul. Anno 6 Idem. Anno 7 Johan. de
Brumpton Anno 8 Willielm. de Spershalt Anno 9 Johan. de Alveton Anno 10
Willielm. de Speshalt Anno 11 Johan. de Alveton for 4 years together. Anno 15
Edward. de Morlins Anno 16 Robert. Fitz-Ellis Anno 17 Johan. de Alveton for 5
years together. Anno 22 Johannes Laundeles for 6 years together. Anno 28 Johan.
de Alveton Richar. de Nowers Anno 29 Johan. de Willamscot Anno 30 Johan.
Laundeles Anno 31 Idem. Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Robert. de Moreton Anno 34 Idem.
Anno 35 Roger. de Elmerugg Anno 36 Idem. Anno 37 Roger, de Cottesford Anno 38
Idem. Anno 39 Idem. Anno 40 Roger. de Elmerugg for 3 years together. Anno 43
Roger. de Cottesford Anno 44 Tho. de la Mare Anno 45 Idem. Anno 46 Gilbert.
Wace Anno 47 Roger. de Elmerugg Anno 48 Johan. James Anno 49 Gilbert. Wace Anno
50 Regind. de Maliris Anno 51 Johan. de Rothwell
Reader, let me freely confess my self to thee, had I met with equal
difficulty in the Sheriffs of other Counties as in this, the first shire it had
utterly disheartened me from proceeding. The Sheriffs of Barkshire and
Oxfordshire are so indented, or (pardon the metaphor,) so entangled with
Elflocks, I cannot comb them out.

I will not say that I have done always right in dividing the Sheriffs
respectively, but have endeavored my utmost, and may be the better believed,
who in such a subject could meet with nothing to bribe or bias my judgment to
partiality.

Be it premised, that though the list of Sheriffs be the most comprehensive
Catalogue of the English Gentry, yet is it not exactly adequate thereunto. For
I find in this County, the Family of the Pusays so ancient, that they were
Lords of Pusay, (a village nigh Faringdon) long before the Conquest, in the
time of King Canutus, holding their lands by the tenure of Cornage (as I ^ake
it,) viz. by winding the Horn, which the King aforesaid gave their Camdens
Brit. in this County.
family, and which their posterity, still extant, at this day do produce. Yet
none of their name, (though Persons of Regard in their respective generations,)
appear ever Sheriffs of this County.

I am glad of so pregnant an instance, and more glad that it so seasonably
presents it self in the front of our work, to con^ute their false Logic who
will be ready to conclude Negatively, for this our Catalogue of Sheriffs
excluding them the lines of ancient Gentry whose Ancestors never served in this
Office. On the other side, no ingenuous Gentleman can be offended with me if he
find not his Name registered in this Roll, seeing it cannot be in me any
Omission, whilst I ^ollow my Commission, faithfully transcribing what I find in
the Records.

Richard I.
3 WILLIELMUS BRIEWERE,]

He was so called, (says Ca^dens Brit. in Sommerset.
my Author) because his Father was born upon an Heath, though by the similitude
of the Name, one would have suspected him born amongst briers. But see what a
poor man's child may come to: He was such a Minion to this King Richard the
first, that he created him Baron of Odcomb in Sommersetshire. Yea, when one
Fulk Paynell was fallen into the Kings displeasure, he gave this William
Briewere the Town of Bridgewater, to procure his reingratiating. His large
inheritance (his son dying without issue) was divided amongst his Daughters,
married into the honorable Families of Breos, Wake, Mohun, La-fert, and Percy.

8

PHILIPPUS filius ROB.] ALAN. de MARTON.]
It is without precedent, that ever two persons held the Shrevalty of one
County, jointly, or in Co-partnership, London or Middlesex alone excepted,
(whereof hereafter.) However, if two Sheriffs appear in One year, (as at this
time, and frequently hereafter) such Duplication comes to pass by one of these
Accidents;

1. Amotion of the first put out of his place for misdemeanor, (whereof very
rare precedents) and another placed in his Room. 2. Promotion. When the first
is advanced to be a Baron in the year of his Shrevalty, and an other
substituted in his Office. 3. Mort. The former dying in his Shrevalty, not
privileged from such Arrests to pay his Debt to Nature.
In these cases Two (and sometimes Three) are found in the same year, who
successively discharged the office. But if no such mutation happened, and yet
two Sheriffs be found in one year, then the second must be understood
Sub-vice-comes, (whom we commonly also call Mr. Sheriff in courtesy,) his
Deputy, acting the affairs of the County under his Authority. However, if he
who is named in this our Catalogue in the second place, appear the far more
Eminent Person, there the Intelligent Reader will justly suspect a
Transposition, and that by some mistake the Deputy is made to precede him, whom
he only represented.

Be it here observed, that the place of Under-Sheriffs in this age was very
honorable, not hackned out for profit. And although some uncharitable people
(unjustly I hope) have now adays fixed an ill character on those who twice
together discharged the place, yet anciently the office befitted the best
persons; little difference betwixt the High-Sheriffe and Under-Sheriffe, save
that he was under him, being otherwise a man of great credit and Estate.

Henry III.
2 FULCO de BREANTEE. Oxf.]

This Fulco, or Falkerius, or Falkesius de Breantee, or Breantel, or Brent, (so
many several ways is he written,) was for the first six years of this King
High-Sheriffe of Oxford, Cambridge, Huntington, Bedford, Buckingham, and
Northampton shires, (Counties continued together) as by perusing the Catalogues
will appear. What this Vir tot locorum, Man of so many places was, will be
cleared in In the Title Soldiers.
Middlesex, the place of his Nativity.

56 ROG. EPIS. COVENT. and LICH.]

That Bishops in this age were Sheriffs of Counties in their own Dioceses, it
was usual and obvious. But Bark-shire lying in the Diocese of Sarum,
Oxfordshire of Lincoln, that the far distant Bishop of Coventry and Lich.
should be their Sheriff, may seem extraordinary and irregular.

This first put us on the inquiry who this Roger should be, and on search we
found him surnamed De Molend, alias Longespe, who was Godw^n in the Bishops of
Coventry and Lich.
Nephew unto King Henry the third, though how the kindred came in I can not
discover. No wonder then if his royal relation promoted him to this place,
contrary to the common course; the King in his own great age, and absence of
his Son Prince Edward in Palestine, desiring to place his Confidents in offices
of so high trust.

Edward II.
6 PHIL. de la BEACH]

Their Seat was at Aldworth in this County, where their Statues on their Tombs
are Extant at this day, but of Stature surely exceeding ^igies Justo Majores
impositae, Camd. Brit. ^n B^rkshire.
their due Dimension. It seems the Grecian Officers have not been here, who had
it in their Charge to order Tombs, and proportion Monuments to the Persons
represented. I confess Corpse do stretch and extend after their Death, but these
Figures extend beyond their Corpse, and the People there living extend their
Fame beyond their Figures, Fancying them Giants, and fitting them with
Porportionable Performances. They were indeed most Valiant men, and their Male
Issue was extinct in the next Kings Reign, whose Heir General (as appears by
the H^ralds Visitation,) was married to the ancient Family of WHITLOCK.

Sheriffs of Bark-shire and Oxfordshire.
Name Place Arms RICH. II. Anno 1 Edmund Stoner Azure, 2 ^ars Dancet^ee Or, a
Chief G. 2 Tho. Barentyn Sable, 2 Eaglets displayed Arg. Armed Or. 3 Gilbertus
Wa^ 4 Johannes Ieanes 5 Richar. Brines 6 Tho. Barentyn ut prius 7 Johan.
Hulcotts Fusilee Or and Gules a Border Azure. 8 Rober. Bullock Arborfield Gu.
a Cheveron twixt 3 Bulls Heads Arg. armed Or. 9 Johan. Holgate 10 Tho. Barentyn
ut prius 11 Gilb. Wace, mil. 12 Thomas Pool 13 Williel. Attwood 14 Hugo. Wolfes
15 Robert. Bullock ut prius 16 Williel. Wilcote 17 Tho. Farington Sable, 3
Unicorns in pale, Current, Arg. armed Or. 18 Tho. Barentyn ut prius 19 Edrum.
Spersholt 20 Williel. Attwood 21 Johan. Golafre 22 Idem. HEN. IV. Anno 1 Will.
Wilcote 2 Tho. Chaucer Johan. Wilcote Ewelme Ox. Partee per pale Ar. and G. a
bend counter-changed. 3 Robert. James 4 Idem. 5 Tho. Chaucer ut prius 6 Will.
Langford 7 Rob. Corbet, mil. Or. a Raven proper. 8 Johan. Wilcote 9 Th.
Harecourt, m. Stanton Ox. Gules, two Bars Or. 10 Petrus Besiles Lee Berk.
Argent, 3 Torteauxes. 11 Rob. Corbet mil. ut prius 12 Will. Li^le mil. Or, a
Fess betwixt 2 Cheverons Sable. HEN. V. Anno 1 Thomas Wykham Arg. 2 Cheverons
Sable, ^etwixt 3 Roses Gules. 2 Johan. Golofre 3 Johan. Wilcote ut prius 4
Rober. Ieames 5 Tho. Wikhammil. ut prius 6 Rober. Andrews 7 Johan. Wilcote 8
Will. Lysle ut prius 9 Idem. ut prius HEN. VI. Anno 1 Willielmus Lisle ut prius
2 Tho. Stonore ut prius 3 Ioh. Gowfre, at. 4 Ri. Walkested, mi. 5 Tho. Wykham
ut prius 6 Tho. Stonar ut prius 7 Rober. James 8 Phil. Englefield Inglefield
Barry of six Gules and Arg. on a Chief Or, a Lion Passant Azure. 9 Tho.
Wikham. mi. ut prius 10 Will. Finderne 11 Will. Darell Azure a Lion Ramp. Arg.
Crowned Or. 12 Steph. Haytfield 13 Rich. Restwold Argent three Bends Sable. 14
Tho. Fetiplace Children. Gules, 2 Cheverons Arg. 15 Ri. Quatermayns OXFOR. G. a
Fess betwixt 4 hands Or. 16 Johan. Norys Quarterly, Arg. and Gules, a Fret Or,
with a Fess Azure. 17 Edward. Read* 18 Walter Skull * G. a Saltyre twixt 4
Garbs Or. 19 Johan. Stokes Ar. a Bend...betw. 6 Lions-heads erased of the
Field. 20 Petrus Fetiplace ut prius 21 Johan. Norys ut prius 22 Johan. Charles
23 Johan. Lidyard Benham Arg. on a Chief Or, a Flower de luce Gules. 24 Io.
Roger, Iuri. 25 Edw. Langford 26 Idem. 27 Johan. Penicok 28 Will. Wikham ut
prius 29 Edward. Read ut prius 30 Io. Chalers, mil. 31 Io. Roger, ar. ut prius
32 Tho. Stonore ut prius 33 Ric. Quatermayns ut prius 34 Rob. Harecourte ut
prius 35 Wall. Mantell 36 Johan. Noris, ar. ut prius 37 Will. Brocas, ar. 38
Tho. de laMore, ar. Arg. 6 Martlets 3.2 and 1 Sable EDWARD. IV. Anno 1 Rich.
Harecourte ut prius 2 Ri. Restwood, ar. ut pruis 3 Idem. u prius 4 Tho. Roger,
ar. ut prius 5 Io. Barantyn, ar. ut prius 6 Tho. Stonore, ar. ut prius 7 Ri.
Harecourt, ar. ut prius 8 Ioh. Howard, mil. NORKF. Gu. a Bend inter 6 Croslets
fitchie Argent. 9 Will: Norys, mil. ut prius 10 Tho. Prout, ar. 11 Ed.
Langford, ar. 12 Will. Staverton 13 Will. Bekynham, 14 Johan. Langston 15 Hump.
Forster, ar. Aldermasto^. S. a Cheveron between 3 Arrows Argent. 16 Tho. de
laMoremi. ut prius 17 Tho. Restwold ut prius 18 James Vyall 19 Johan. Norys,
ar. ut prius 20 Hum. Talbot, mil. G. a Lion Ramp. within a Border engrailed Or.
21 Tho. de la More ut prius 22 Will. Norys, mil. ut prius RICH. III Anno 1 Tho.
Kingeston 2 Johan. Bar^ntyn 3 Edward. Frauke ut prius HEN. VII. Anno 1 Edw.
Mountford 2 Will. Norys, mil. ut prius 3 Tho. Say 4 Will. Besilles ut prius 5
Th. Delamore. mi. ut prius 6 Ioha. Horn, mil. 7 Will. Harecourt ut prius 8 To.
Harecourt, ar. ut prius 9 Geo* Gainsord, ar. 10 Id^m. 11 Ioh. Ashfield, ar. 12
Hugo Shirley, ar. Paly of 6, 0, and Az. a Cant. Er. 13 Anr. Fetiplace, ar. ut
prius 14 Ge. Gainsford, ar. 15 Johan. Basket Az. a Cheveron Erm. betwixt 3
Leopards heads Or. 16 Will. Besilles, ar. ut prius 17 Rich. Flower, mil. 18 Io.
Williams, mil. Tame Ox. Az. an Organ-pipe in Bend Sinister Saltirewise
surmounted of another Dexter betwixt 4 Crosses Patee Arg. 19 Will. Harecourt ut
prius 20 Edw. Grevill, ar. 21 E. Chamberlain 22 Io. Horn, ar. Gules a Cheveron
Arg. twixt 3 Escallops Or: 23 Idem. 24 Io. Langford, mil. HEN. VIII. Anno 1
Will Ess^x, ar. Lamborn Az. a Cheveron Ermin betwixt 3 Eagles displayed Arg. 2
Will. Harecourt ut prius 3 Will. Barantin, ar. ut prius 4 Tho. Haydock, ar. 5
Wall. Raducy, mil. 6 Si. Harecourt, mil. ut prius 7 Io. Dauncy, mil. Azure a
Dragon Or. and Lion comb^tant Arg. 8 Geor. Foster, mil. ut prius 9 Ed.
Chamberl. mi. ut prius 10 Will. Essex, mil. ut prius 11 Tho. Englefeld, ar. ut
prius 12 Hen. Brugges, ar. Argent on a Cross S. a Leopardshead Or. 13 Io.
Oswalston, ar. 14 Sim. Harecourt ut prius 15 Io. Fetiplace, ar. ut prius 16
Will. Essex, mil. ut prius 17 Will. Barantin, m. ut prius 18 Tho. Denton, ar.
Gul^s a Cheveron, twixt 3. Cressents Arg. 19 Tho. Ellyot, ar. 20 Si. Harecourt,
mil. ut prius 21 Will. Stafford, ar. Bradfield Or. a Chev. G. and a Canton Erm.
22 Hen. Brugges, ar. ut prius * Az. on a Fess Engrailed Or, between 3
Spear-Heads Arg. a Greyhound cursant Sable. 23 Tho. Umpton, *ar. Wadley 24
Hum. Forster, mil. 25 Will. Farmar, ar. Arg. a Fess Sable twixt 3 Leo-pards
Heads Erased Gul. 26 Walt. Stoner, mil. ut prius 27 Tho. Carter, ar. 28 An.
Hungerford Sable, 2 Bars, Arg. in Chief 3 Plates. 29 Si. Harecourt, mil. u^
prius 30 Ioh. Williams, mi. ut prius 31 Rich. Brigges, ar. ut prius 32 Will.
Essex, mil. ut prius 33 Wall. Stoner, mil. ut prius 34 Will. Barantin, m. ut
prius 35 Will. Farmor, ar. ut prius 36 Ioh. Williams, ar. ut prius 37 Hum.
Foster, mi. ut prius 38 Le. Chamberlain ut prius EDW. IV. Anno 1 Fra.
Englefeld, m. ut prius 2 Anth. Cope, *mil. Hanwel * Ar^ a Chev. Az. betw. 3
Roses Guslipp'd and leaved Vert, 3 Flowers de Luce, Or. 3 Will. Rainsf. mil. 4
Richar. Fines, ar. Broughton, Az. 3 Lions Rampant Or, 5 Will. Hide, ar. S.
Denchw. Gu. 2 Cheverons Ar. 6 Le Chamberl. mi. ut prius REX PHIL. and Ma.
Regina. Anno 1 Io. Williams, mi. and Io. Brom, mil. ut prius 1, 2 Ric.
Brigges, mil. ut prius 2, 3 Will. Rainsford 3, 4 Tho. Brigges, ar. ut prius 4,
5 Ioh. Denton, ar. ut prius 5, 6 Rich. Fines, ar. ut prius REG. ELIZA* Anno 1
Edw. Ashfeld, ar. 2 Edw. Fabian, ar. 3 Ioh. Doyle, ar. Or 2 Bendlets Az. 4 Hen.
Norys, ar. ut prius 5 Ric. Wenman, ar. Quarterly Gules and Az. a Cross Patence
Or. 6 Ioh. Croker, ar. Tame P. Ox. Argent on a Cheveron Engrailed Gules between
3 Crows, as many Mullets Or, pierced. 7 Tho. Stafford, ar. ut prius 8 Christ.
Brom

Henry IV.
2 THOMAS CHAUCER.]

He was sole son to Geffery Chaucer, that famous Poet, from whom he inherited
fair lands, at Dunnington-Castle in this County, and at Ewelme in Oxfordshire.
He married Maud daughter and coheir of Sir John Burwash, by whom he had one
only daughter named Alice, married unto William de la Pole Duke of Suffolk. He
lies buried under a fair tomb in Ewelme Church, with this inscription. Hic
jacet Thomas Chaucer, Armiger, quondam Dominus istius villae and Patronus
istius Ecclesiae, qui obiit 18. die Mensis Novembris Anno Dom. 1434. and
Matilda uxor ejus, quae obiit 28. mensis Aprilis Anno Domini 1436.

Henry V.
1 THOMAS WIKHAM.]

I behold him as kinsman, and next heir to William Wykham, that famous Bishop
of Winchester, to whom the Bishop left, notwithstanding above Bishop Godwin in
Bishops of Winchester.
six thousand pounds bequeathed by him in legacies, (for the discharge whereof
he left ready money) one hundred pound lands a year. As for his Arms, viz.
Argent, two Cheverons Sable between three Roses Gules; a most ingenious Sir
Isaac Wake in his Musae Regnant^s.
Oxfordian conceives those Cheverons (alias Couples in Architecture) given him
in relation to the two Colleges he built, the one in Oxford, the other in
Winchester. It will be no sin to suspect this, no original of, but a
post-nate-allusion to his Arms, who was (whatever is told to the contrary)
though his parents were impoverished, of a Harpfield Eccle. Hist. page 550.
Knightly extraction. But if it was his assigned, and not hereditary Coat, it
will be long enough ere the Heralds Office grant another to any upon the like
occasion.

Henry VI.
JOHANES GOWFRE, Ar.

No doubt the same with him who 2do Hen. 5nti. was written John Golofre. He is
the first person who is styled Esquire, though surely all who were before him
were (if not Knights) Esquires at the least: And afterward this addition grew
more and more fashionable in the Reign of King Henry the sixth. For after that
^ack Straw (one of the grand founders of the Levellers) was defeated, the
English Gentry, to appear above the common sort of people, did in all public
instruments insert theit Native or acquired Qualifications.

Edward IV.
8 JOHN HOWARD, Miles.]

He was son to Sir Robert Howard, and soon after was created a Baron by this
King, and Duke of Northfolk by King Richard the third, as Kinsman and one of
the Heirs of Anne Duchess of York and Northfolk, whose Mother was one of the
Daughters of Thomas Mowbray Duke of Northfolk. Soon after he lost his life in
his quarrel who gave him his honor in Bosworth field.

From him descended the Noble and Numerous family of the Howards, of whom I
told E
Arundle Notingham Suffolk Barksh.
B
Moubray Estrick.

four Earls and two Barons sitting in the last Parliament of King Charles. I
have nothing else for the present to observe of this Name, save that a
Verstegan of decayed intelligence, page (...).
great Antiquary will have it originally to be Holdward (L. and D. being
omitted for the easier pronunciation) which signifies the Keeper of any
Castle, Hold, or Trust committed unto them, wherein they have well answered
unto their Name. Did not Thomas Howard Earl of Surry well hold his ward by
Land, when in the reign of King Henry the eighth he conquered the Scots in
Flodden-field, and took James the fourth their King Prisoner? And did not
Charles Howard (afterward Earl of Nottingham) hold his ward by Sea in 88. when
the Armado was defeated? But hereof (God willing) hereafter;

15 HUMPHRY FOSTER, Ar.]

This must be he (consent of times avowing it) who was afterward Knighted, and
lies buried in Saint Martin^ in the Fields London, with the following Weav^rs
Fun. Mon. page 447
inscription.

Of your charity, pray for the soul of Sir Humphery Foster Knight, whose body
lies buried here in earth under this Marble-stone; which deceased the 18. day
of the Month of September, 1500. on whose Soul sesu have mercy, Amen.
Hen^y VII.
8 ROBERT HARECOURT, Miles.]

Right ancient is this family in France, having read in a French Jean LeFeron
eale Chapter d. (...) Mar^schaviz, de France, sol. 5.
Herald who wrote in the reign of King Edward the sixth, that it flourished
therein eight hundred years, as by a Genealogy drawn by him should appear.

Of this Family (for both give the same Coat at this day ( viz.) G^les two
Bars Or,) a younger branch coming over at the Conquest, fixed it self in the
Norman Infancy at Staunton Harecourt in Oxfordshire. And I find that in the
reign of King ^ohn, Richard de Harecourt of Staunton aforesaid, marrying
Orabella daughter of Saer de Quincy Earl of Winchester, had the rich manor of
Bosworth in Leichestershire bestowed on him for his wifes portion.

I cannot exactly distinguish the several Harecourts contemporaries in this
County, and Sheriffs thereof, so as to assign them their several habitations,
but am confident that this Robert Harecourt (Sheriff in the reign of King
Henry the seventh,) was the same person whom King Edward the fourth made Knight
of the Garter. From him lineally descended the valiant Knight Sir Simon
Harecourt, lately slain in the wars against the Rebels in Ireland, whose Son,
a hopeful Gentleman, enjoys the Manor of Staunton at this day.

15 JOHN BASKET.]

He was an Esquire of Remark and martial activity in his younger days, who in
some years after removed to Devenish in Dorsetshire, to whom King Henry the
eighth, going over into France, committed the care of that County, as by his
following Letter will appear:

Henry VIII.
By the King.

Trusty and Well-beloved, We greet you well. And whereas we at this time have
written as well to the Sheriff of that Our Shire, as also to the Justices of
Our Peace within Our said Shire, Commanding and straightly Charging, that as
well the said Sheriffs as the said Justices, endeavor them for the keeping of
Our Peace and the entertainment of Our Subjects, in good quiet and
restfullness, durying the time of Our journey into the parties of beyond the
Sea; to the which We entend to dispose us about the latter end of this present
month of May: And forasmuch also as We have for your great ease spared you of
your aettendance upon Us in Our said journey, and left you at home to do Us
service in keeping of Our Peace, and good Rule amongst Our said Subjects. We
Will therefore and Command you that dureing the time of Our said absence out of
this Our Realm, ye have a special oversight, regard and respect, as well to
the Sheriff, as to the said Justice, how and in what diligence they do, and
execute Our Commandment, comprised in Our said Letters. And that ye also from
time to time as ye shall see meet quickly and sharply call upon them in Our
name, for the execution of Our said Commandment; and if you shall find any of
them Remiss or Negligent in that behalf, We will that ye lay it sharply to
their charge, Advertising that in case they amend not their defaults, ye will
thereof Advertise Our Council rem^ining with Our dearest Daughter the
Princess, and so We charge you to do indeed: And if Our said Sheriff or
Justice, or any other Sheriff or Justice of any Shire next to you, upon any
side adjoining, shall need or require your Assistance, for the Execution of Our
said Commandments, We Will and Desire you that what the best power ye can make
of Our Subjects i^ Harneys, ye be to them Aiding and Assisting from time to
time as the Case shall require. Not failing hereof as you intend to please Us,
and as We specially tru^t you.

Given under Our Signet at Our Manor of Greenwich, the 18. day of May.

Henry VIII.

1 WILLIAM ESSEX, Ar.]

He was a worthy man in his generation, of great command in this County,
(whereof he was four times Sheriff,) and the first of his family who fixed at
Lambourn therein, on this welcome occasion. He had married Elizabeth, daughter
and sole heir of Thomas Rogers of Benham, whose Grandfather John Rogers had
married Elizabeth, daughter and heir of John Shote^broke of Bercote in this
County (whose ancestors had been Sheriffs of Barkeshire in the fourth, fifth
and sixth of King Edward the third,) by whom he received a large inheritance.

Nor was the birth of this Sir William (for afterward he was Knighted) beneath
his estate, being Son unto Thomas Essex Esquire, Remembrancer and
Vice-Treasurer unto King Edward the fourth; who dyed November 1. 1500. lies
buried with a plain Epitaph in the Church of Kensington, Middlesex. He derived
himself from Henry de Essex, Baron of Rawley in Essex, and Standard Bearer of
England, (as I have seen in an exact Pedigree attested by Master Camden,) and
his posterity have lately assumed his Coat, viz. Argent an Orle Gules. There
was lately a Baronet of this family, with the revenues of a Baron, but * riches
endure not for ever, if providence be not as well used in Prove. 27. 24.
preserving as attaining them.

24 HUMPHRY FORSTER, Knight.]

He bare a good affection to Protestants, even in the most dangerous times, and
(...). Acts and Mon. p. 1219.
spoke to the Quest in the behalf of Master Marbeck that good (...); yea he
confessed to King Henry the third, that never any thing went so much against
his Idem p. 1221
Conscience which under his Graces authority he had done, as his attending the
execution of three poor men Martyred at Windsor.

Edward VI.
1 FRANCIS INGLEFIELD, Mil.]

He afterward was Privy-Councellor unto Queen Mary, and so zealous a Romanist,
that after her death he left the land, with a most large inheritance, and lived
for the most part in Spain. He was a most, industrious agent to solicit the
cause of the Queen of Scots, both to his Holiness, and the Catholic King. As
also he was a great Promotor of, and Benefactor to the English College at
Valladolit in Spain, where he lies interred in a family of his alliance is
still worshipfully extant in this County.

Queen Mary.
1 JOHN WILLIAMS, Miles.]

Before the year of his Sherivalty was expired, Queen Mary made him Lord
Williams of Tame in Oxfordshire. In which town he built a small Hospital, and
a very fair Came. Brit. in (...).
School; He, with Sir Henry Bennyfield, were joynt-Keepers of the Lady
Elizabeth, whilst under restraint, being as civil as the other was cruel unto
Her. Bishop Ridley when martyred requested this Lord to stand his friend to the
Queen, that those Leases might be confirmed which he had made to poor Tenants;
which he See the picture of Bishop Ridley his burning in Mr. Fox.
promised and performed accordingly.* His great estate was divided betwixt his
two daughters and coheirs, one married to Sir Henry Norrice, the other to Sir
Richard Wenman.

Queen Elizabeth.
4 HENRY NORRICE, Ar.]

Son-in-law to the Lord Williams aforesaid. He was by Queen Elizabeth created
Baron Norrice of Ricot in Oxfordshire; it is hard to say whether this tree of
honor was more remarkable for the root from whence he sprung, or for the
branches that sprang from him: He was Son to Sir Henry Norrice, who suffered in
the cause of Queen Anne Bullen, Grandchild to Sir Edward Norrice, who married
Fridswide sister and coheir to the last Lord Lovell. He was Father (though
himself of a meek and mild disposition) to the Martial brood of the Norrices,
of whom I (...) description of Oxfordshire, Title Soldiers.
hereafter.

Elizabeth his great Grandchild, sole Daughter and heir unto Francis Norrice
Earl of Barkshire, and Baroness Norrice, was married unto Edward Wray Esquire,
whose only Daughter Elizabeth Wray, Baroness Norrice lately deceased, was
married unto (...) Bertue Earl of Lindsey, whose Son, a Minor, is Lord Norrice
at this day.

Sheriffs of Barkeshire alone.
Name Place Arms REG. ELIZA. Anno 9 Edw. Unton, mil. Wadley (...) on a Fess
Eng. Or, twixt 3 Spear-Heads Arg. a Hound cursant, S. collered Gu. 10 Io.
Fetiplace, ar. Chilrey G. 2 Chev. Argent. 11 Will. Forster, ar. Aldermerston
Sable, a Chev* betw. 3 Arrows Arg. a Chev. 12 Will. Dunch, ar. Litlewitna^ Or,
(...) 2 Toures in (...) and a flour de Lice in Base. Arg. 13 Ioha. Winchcomb
Budebury 14 Hen. Nevill, mil. Billingber 15 Tho. Essex, ar. Lamborn (...). a
(...). Erm. betw. 3 Eagles Arg. 16 Ric. Lovelace, ar. Hurley Gules. on a chief
indented, Sable, three Marvets Or. 17 Anth. Bridges, ar. HemstedMarshal 18
Thom. Parry, ar. See our Notes. 19 Io. (...), (...). ut prius 20 Tho Stafford,
ar. Bradfeld Or, a Chev. Gul. and Canton Er. 21 Tho. Stephans, ar. 22 Hum
(...). ar. ut prius 23 Tho. Bullock, ar. (...) Gules a Chev. twixt three
Bullsheads Ar. armed Or. 24 Tho* Read, ar. Abington G. a Saltyre twixt 4 (...),
Or. 25 (...). Molens, ar. Clapgate 26 Be. Fetiplace, ar. ut prius 27 Edw.
Fetiplace, ar. ut prius 28 Chri. Lillcot, ar. Rushcomb Or. 2 (...) vairry Arg.
and Sable. 29 Edm. Dunch, ar. ut prius 30 Thom. Parry. ar. ut prius 31 Tho.
(...), ar. Shaw. Azure a Fess (...) inter * (...) Or. 32 Johan. (...), ar. 33
Rich. Ward, ar. 34 Fr. Winchcombe* ut prius 35 Hum. Forster, ar. ut prius 36
Ricar. Hide, ar. S. Denchw. Gules, 2 Chev^rons Arg. 37 Hen. Nevill, ar. ut
prius 38 Edm. Wiseman, ar. Stephenton Sable, a Chev. twixt 3 Bars of Spears
Arg. 39 Chri. Lidcotte, mi. ut prius 40 Hen. Pool, mil. 41 Tho. Reed, mil. ut
prius 42 Sa. Backhouse, ar. Swallofield 43 Ioha. Norris, mil. 44 Ed. Fetipl^,
mil. ut prius Ed. Dunch, ar. and (...) Ja. ut prius JAC. REX. Anno 1 Edm.
Dunch, ar. Sable, a Chev. betw. 3 Towers Argent. 2 Ant. Blagrave, ar. Or. on a
Bend Sable, 3 Greaves Errased at the Ankle, Ar. 3 Tho. Read, ar. ut prius 4
Will. Stonhou. ar. Radley Arg. on a Fess Sable, between 3 Falcons volant Az. a
Leopardsheads and 2 Mullets, Or. 5 Fr. Winchcombe ut prius 6 Will. Foster, mil.
ut prius 7 Anth. Barker, mil. Suning. 8 Ric. Lovelace, ml. ut prius 9 Tho.
Vachell, mil. Colly. Bender of six pieces, Er. and Az 10 Tho. Hinton, ar. 11
Car. Wiseman, ar. ut prius 12 Io. Ayshcombe, ar. 13 Will. Young, mil. 14 Will.
Standin, ar. A^borfield 15 Val. Knightley, m. Quarterly Er. and Or. 3 Pales.
Gu. 16 Ioh. Catcher, ar. 17 Hum. Foster, ar. ut prius 18 Gabri. Pyle, mil.
Compton 19 Io. Winchcombe ut prius 20 Io. Marrycot, ar. 21 Will. Hide, ar. ut
prius 22 Io. Blagrave, mil. ut prius 23 24 CAR* I. REX Anno 1 Ioh. Darrell,
Bar. W. Woodh. Az. a Lion Ramp. Or, Crowned Arg^t. 2 Edr. Clark, mil. Ardigton
3 Gor. Willmot, ar. Charlton 4 Edw. Yates, Bar. Buckland 5 Sam. Dunch, ar. ut
prius Per Fess embattel'd Arg. and Sable 3 Yates caunterchanged. 6 Io.
Fetiplace, ar. ut prius 7 Hen. Samborn, ml. Moulsford 8 Hen. Powle, ar. 9 Edm.
Dunch, ar. ut prius 10 Hum. Dolman, ar. ut prius 11 Will. Barker, ar. ut prius
12 Ric. Harrison, mi. Hurst Or, on a Chief Sable, 3 Eagles displaied of the
first. 13 Ge. Stonhouse, B. ut prius 14 Hump. Hide, ar. ut prius 15 Geo.
Puresy, ar. Wadley S. 3 Pair of Gantlets dipping, Ar. 16 Peregrine Hobby Bisham
Ar. 3 Fusiles upon Slippers G^. 17 Tanfield Vachel ut prius 18 19 20 21 22 Io.
Southleg, ar.

Queen Elizabeth.
9 EDWARD UNTON or UMPTON, Miles.]

This ancient and worshipful name was extinct in the days of our fathers for
want of Issue Male, and a great part of their lands devolved by an Heir-general
to G. Purfen of wadley Esquire, whose care is commendable in preserving the
Monuments of the Umptons in Farington Church, and restoring such as were
defaced in the war to a good degree of their former fairness.

26 BESILIUS FETIPLACE]

Some may colourably mistake it for Basilius or Basil, a Christian-name
frequent in some families, whereas indeed it is Besil a Surname. These lived in
great regard at Lee, thence called Besiles-Lee in this County, until Elizabeth
danghter and heir of William Besiles, last of that name, was married unto
Richard Fetiplace, whose greatgreat-grand-child was named Besile, to continue
the remembrance of their Ancestors.

Reader, I am confident an instance can hardly be produced of a Surname made
Christian in England, save since the Reformation; before which time the Priests
were scrupulous to admit any at Font, except they were baptized with the name
of a Scripture or Legendary-Saint. Since it has been common; and although the
Lord Coke was pleased to say he had noted many of them prove unfortunate, yet
the good success in others confutes the general truth of the observation.

King James.
8 RICHARD LOVELACE, Knight.]

He was a Gentl^man of Metal, and in the reign of Queen Elizabeth making use
of letters of Mart, had the success to light on a large remnant of the King of
Spains Cloth of silver, I mean his West-Indian Fleet; wherewith he and his
posterity are the warmer to this day: King Charles created him Lord Lovelace of
Hurley.

King Charles.
1 Sir JOHN DARELL, Baronet.]

He being the first, who in the Catalogue of Sheriffs occurreth of that order,
a word of the institution thereof. We meddle not with ancient Baronets, finding
that word formerly promiscuously blended with Bannerets, (Sir Ralph Fane in a
Rot. Pat. quarto Edwardi sexti.
Patent passed unto him, is expressly termed a Baronet,) but insist on their
new erection in the ninth of King James.

Their Qualifications. Their Service. Their Dignity. 1. They were to be
persons, Morum, probitate spectati. 2. Descended at least of a Grandfather, by
the Fathers side, that bare Arms. 3. Having a clear estate of one thousand
pounds per annum, two thirds thereof at least in possession, the rest in
reversion expectant on one life only, holding in Dower or in Jointure.
1. Each of them was to advance toward the planting of the Province of Ulster
in Ireland, with Colonies and Castles to defend them, money enough to maintain
thirty Foot for three years, after the rate of eight pence a day for everyone
of them. 2. The first years wages was to be paid down on the passing of their
Patent, the remainder, as they contracted with the Kings Commissioners,
authorized to treat and conclude thereof.
1. They were to take place, with their wives and children respectively,
immediately after the sons of Barons; and before all Knights-bachelours of the
Bath, and Bannerets; save such solemn ones ashereafter should be created in the
field by the King there present, under the Standard Royal displayed. 2. The
addition of Sir was to be prefixed before theirs, of Madam, their wives names.
3. The Honor was to be hereditary, and knighthood not to be denied to their
eldest sons of full age, if desiring it. 4. For an augmentation in their Arms
they might bear a bloody hand in a Canton or Escutcheon, at their pleasure.


The King did undertake that they should never exceed two hundred, which number
completed if any chanced to die without issue-male, none were to be
substituted in their place, that so their number might daily diminish, and
honor increase. He did also promise for himself and his Heirs, that no new
Order under another name should be superinduced.

The Battles.
Newberry the first 1643. September. 20.
The Earl of Essex having raised the Siege of Gloucester, and returning toward
London, was rather followed then overtaken by the Kings army. Both sides might
be traced by a tract of bloody footsteps, especially at Auborn in Wilts, where
they had a smart encounter. At Newberry the Earl made a stand: Here happened a
fierce fight on the East Side of the Town, wherein the Londoners did show that
they could as well use a Sword in the field, as a Met-ward in a Shop. The
Parliament was conceived to lose the most, the King the most considerable
persons; amongst whom the Earl of Carnarvon and Sunderland, the Viscount
Falkland, Colonel Morgan, etc. Both armies may be said to beat and be beaten,
neither winning the Day, and both the Twilight. Hence it was that both sides
were so sadly filled with their Supper over night, neither next morning had any
stomach to breakfast, but keeping their stations, were rather contented to
face, then willing to fight one another.

Newberry the second 1644. October. 27.
One would wonder, where the Earl of Essex, so lately stripped out of all his
Infantry in Cornwall, so soon reinvested Himself with more Foot, save that
London is the Shopgeneral of all Commodities, recruited with fresh (but not
fresh water) Soldiers, he gave the King battle. This fight was as long and
fierce as the former, but the conquest more clear on the Parliaments side. The
Cornish (though behaving themselves valiantly) were conceived not to do so
well, because expected to have done better.

The Royalists were at night fain to hang lighted matches on the Hedges, (so to
similate their abode thereabouts) whilst they drew of, securing their Canon in
Dunnington-castle, (the Governor whereof Sir J. Bois did the King Knights
service,) and so in a pace slower then a flight, and faster then a retreat,
returned in as good order as their condition was capable of. Many here lost
their lives, as if Newberry were so named by a sad Prolepsis, fore-signifying
that that Town should afford a new-burying place to many slain in two bloody
Battles.

The Farewell.
Being to take my leave of this Shire, I seriously considered what want there
was therein, that so I might wish the supply thereof. But I can discover no
natural defect, and I therefore wish the inhabitants, a thankful heart to
that God, who has given them a Country so perfect in profit and pleasure.
Withal it is observed that the lands in Barkshire are very skittish, and often
cast their Owners, which yet I impute not so much to the unruliness of the
Beasts, as to the unskilfullness of the Riders. I desire heartily, that
heareafter the Barkshire Gentry may be better settled in their, Saddles so that
the sweet places in this County, may not be subject to so many mutations.

BEDFORD-SHIRE.
BEDFORD-SHIRE has Northamptonshire on the North, Huntington and
Cambridge-shires on the East, Hartford-shire on the South, Buckingham shire on
the West thereof. It lies from North to South in an ovall form, and may be
allowed two and twenty miles in length, though the general breadth thereof
extends not to full fifteen.

The soil consists of a deep clay, yet so that this County may be said to
wear a belt or girdle of sand about, or rather athwart the body thereof, (from
Woburne to Potton) affording fair and pleasant, as the other part does
fruitful and profitable places for habitation, which partakes plentifully in
the partage of all English conveniences.

Here let this Caveate be entered to preserve its due [but invaded] right, to
much grain growing in this County. For Corne-Chandlers (the most avouchable
Authors in this Point) will inform you, that when Hartford-shire Wheat and
Barley carries the Credit in London, thereby much is meant (though miscalled)
which is immediately bought in and brought out of Hartford-shire, but
Originally growing in Bedford shire, about Dunstable and else where. But let
not the dry Nurse, which only carried the Child in her Arms and dandled it in
her Lap, lay claim to that Babe which the true Mother did breed and bear in
her body.

Natural Commodities.
Barley.
White, large, plump and full of flower. The Country man will tell you, that of
all our grains this is most nice, and must be most observed in the several
seasons thereof. It does not only allay hunger, but also in a manner quenches
thirst, when ordered into Malt. It is (though not so t oothsome) as wholesome
as Wheat it self, and was all the Staff of Bread, which Christ's body leaned on
in this life: Eating to attest his Humanity; Ba^ly-loaves to evidence his
Humility. John 6. 9^


Malt.
This is Barley with the property thereof much altered, having passed both
water and fire, ste^ped and dried on a kilne. That the use hereof was known to
the Greeks, plainly appears by the proper word wherewith they express it
(...); and no Maltster of Bedford can better describe the manner thereof then
is done by Lib. 10. c. 29.
Aetius; Est hordeum madefactum, quod germen emisit, deinde cum ligulis enatis
tostum est. Besides, we read of (...), and Lib. 1. and 10.
Athenaeus makes mention of such, who were

-- -- (...), Drinkers of Barley-wine. A liquor probably more wholesome for
Northern bodies then that which grows in grapes.

What great estates Maltsters got formerly in this County, may be collected
from the wealth of the Ale-brewers therein, there being so near a relation
betwixt the two Callings. For I read in the reign of King Henry the fifth, of
William Murfley an Alebrewer of Dunstable, (accounted, I confe^s, a Lollard,
and follower of the Lord Cobham;) who when Harp^ield Hist. of Wik. page 708.
and Holinshed page 544.
taken, had two horses trapped with gilt armor led after him, and had a pair
of gilt-spurs in his bosom, expecting (say they) Knighthood from the Lord
Cobham. And although I believe not the report in full habitude, it is enough to
intimate unto us, that in that age it was a wealthy employment.

Fullers-Earth.
Great store of this is dug up not far from Woburne in this County, whence
it is commonly called Woburne-earth. Such the use thereof in Drapery, that good
cloth can See more hereof in Surrey, Ti le, Not. Commod.
hardly be made without it, foreign parts affording neither so much, nor so
good of this kind. No wonder then if our Statutes strictly forbid the
transportation thereof, to preserve the perfection of clothing amongst our
selves. But were this Fullersearth like Terra Lemnia, or Sigillata, and all the
parcells thereof locked up under a seal, yet the Dutch (so long as they are so
cunning, and we so careless,) will stock themselves hence with plentiful
proportions thereof.

Larks.
The most and best of these are caught and well dressed about Dunstable in this
Shire A harmless bird whilst living, not trespassing on grain; and wholesome
when dead, then filling the stomach with meat, as formerly the Ear with Music.
In winter they fly in flocks, probably the reason why Alauda signifies in
Latins both a Lark and a Legion of Soldiers; except any will say a Legion is
so called, because Helmetted on their heads and crested like a Lark, therefore
also called in Latin Galerita. If men would imitate the early rising of this
bird, it would conduce much unto their healthfu^ness.

The Manufactures.
Fat folk (whose Collops stick to their sides) are generally Lasie, whilst
leaner people are of more activity. Thus fruitful Countries (as this is for
the generality thereof) take to themselves a Writ of Ease; the principal cause
why Bedford shire affords not any trades peculiar to it self.

The Buildings.
This County affords no Cathedral, and the Parochial Churches entitle not
themselves to any eminency. Only I hear such high commendations of a Chapel
and Monument erected at Maldon by Thomas Earl of Elgin to the memory of his
deceased Lady Diana Cecil, that I am impatient till I have beheld it, to
satisfy my self, whether it answers that Character of curiosity which
credible persons have given thereof. Taddington, Amphtill and Wobourn carry
away the credit amongst the houses of the Nobility in this County.

Wonders.
At Hareles-wood commonly called Harold in this County, the River of Ouse
Hypodagma page 163.
Anno 1399. parted asunder, the water from the Fountain standing still, and
those toward the Sea giving way, so that it was passable over on foot for
three miles together, not without the astonishment of the beholders. It was an
Ominous Prefage of the sad Civil Wars betwixt the two houses of York and
Lancaster.

There is a Rivolet in this County (though confining on Buckingham-shire) near
a Village called Aspeley, and takes the strange operation thereof from his Pen,
who (though a Poet) is a credible Author,

The Brook which on her bank does boast that earth alone, * Draitons
Poly-olbion the 22. Song.

Which noted of this I Will, converteth wood to stone.
That little Aspeleys earth we anciently instile,
Amongst sundry other things, A wonder of the I Will.
But, by his leave, there is an other of the same nature in Northamptonshire,
which because less known, I will there enlarge my self on that Subject.

Proverbs.
As plain as Dunstable Road.]

It is applied to things plain and simple without either welt or guard to
adorn them, as also to matters easy and obvious to be found without any
difficulty or direction. Such this Road being broad and beaten, as the
confluence of many leading to London from the North and North-west parts of
this Land.

As crooked as Crawley brook.]

This is a nameless brook arising about Wobourn, running by Crawley, and
falling immediately into the Ouse. But this proverb may better be verifyed of
Ouse it self in this Shire, more Maeandrous then Maeander, which runs above
eighty miles in eighteen by land. Blame it not, if sensible of its sad
condition, and presaging its fall into the foggy fens in the next County, it be
loath to leave this pleasant place; as who would not prolong their own happiness?

The Baylife of Bedford is coming]

This Proverb has its Original in this, but Use in the next County of
Cambridge, The River Ouse running by is called the Baylife of Bedford, who
swelling with rain, snow-water, and tributary brooks in the winter, and coming
down on a sudden arresteth the I Will of Ely with an inundation. But I am
informed that the Drayners of the fenns, have of late with incredible care,
cost, art and industry, wrested the Mace out of this Bailiffs hand, and have
secured the Country against his power for the future.

Princes.
MARGARET BEAUFORT Countess Richmond and Derby, No person of judgment or
ingenuity will find fault with her Posture under this Title, who was
Great-great-grand-child to King Edward the third, and Mother to King Henry the
seventh, besides her [almost incredible] Alliance to so See their number in her
funeral Sermon preached by Bishop Fish^r.
many foreign Princes.

Thus Reader, I am confident I have pleased thee as well as my self, in
disposing her in this place. And yet I am well assured, that were she alive she
would ( half-offended hereat,) be more contented to be ranked under another and
lower Topic of Benefactors to the Public; yea, (if left to her own liberty)
would choose that Reposing Place for her memory. This is not only most
consonant to her humility and charity, (desiring rather to be Good then Great,)
but also conformable to her remarkable expression, (according to the devotion
of those darker days,) that if the Christian Princes would agree to march with
an Army for the recovery of Palestine, she would be their Landress.

This is she who besides a Professor of Divinity place in both Universities,
founded the two fair Colleges of Christ's and Saint John's in Cambridge. By the
way be it observed, that Cambridge has been much beholden to the strength of
bounty in the weaker Sex. Of the four Halls therein, two, viz. Clare and
Pembroke, were (as I may say) feminine foundations; and of the 12. Colleges,
one third, Queens, Christ's, Saint John's and Sidney, owe their Original to
worthy women. Whereas no female ever founded College in Oxford, (though
bountiful Benefactors to many,) seeing Queens College therein, though
commended to the Queens of England for its successive Patronesses, had R.
Eglesfield for the effectual founder thereof.

And Cambridge is so far from being ashamed of, she is joyful at, and
thankful for such charity, having read of our Savior himself, that Mary
Magdalen, and Joanna, Luke 8. 3.
and Susanna, and many other women ministered unto him of their substance. But
this worthy Lady Margaret being too high for a mean man to commend, is long
since gone to the great God to reward, dying in the beginning of the reign of
her Grandchild King Henry the eight.

Saints.
AINULPHUS of Royal British blood was an holy Hermit, who waving the vanities
of this wicked world, betook himself in this County to a solitary life,
renowned for the Sanctity (or rather Sanctimony) thereof. The age he lived in
is not exactly known, but sure it is, that Ainulphs-bury (a Town in the
confines of This and Huntington-shire,) was erected in his memory, part whereof
(corruptly called Ainsbury) is extant at this day, and the rest is disguised
under the new name of Saint Neots.

Martyrs.
THOMAS CHASE, an ancient and faithful labourer in God's vineyard, led his
life most in Buckingham-shire, but found his death in this County, long kept in
durance and hanged at last in the Bishops prison at Wobourn. His Executioners
to palliate their murder, and asperse his Memory, gave it out that he had
destroyed himself. A loud lie, seeing he was so laden with Fox Acts and Monu.
page 775.
Chains, that he could not lift up his own body. But the clearing hereof must
be remitted to that day, wherein all things done in secreet shall be made
manifest. His martyrdom happened in the reign of King Henry the seventh, Anno
Domini 1506.

Prelates.
SILVESTER de EVERTON, for so is he written in the Records of Whence Bishop
Godwin transcribed his Catalogue of Bishops.
Carlisle, (though Eversden and Everseen in other books) which are most to be
credited, as passing under the pens of the best (and to his particular the most
knowing) Clearks, no doubt, took his name from Everton a Village in this (but
the confines of Cambridge) Shire. He was a man memorable for his preferment,
and very able to discharge the Lay-part thereof, receiving the Great Seal, Anno
the 29. of King Henry the third 1246. and is commended for one most John
Philipot, in his Chanelors of England page 20.
cunning in customs of Chancery. The same year he was chosen Bishop of
Carlisle, though demurring on the acceptance thereof (conscious to himself
perchance as unqualified) his consecration was deferred until the next year.

He with the rest of the English Bishops addressed themselves to King Henry the
third, and boldly enough Requested-Required of him, that all foreigners and
(...) persons might be put out of their Bishoprics. Now, as to the point of
insufficiency, the King singling out this Silvester thus bespake him. (...)
Paris Anno 1253.


Et tu Silvester Carliolensis, qui diu lambens Cancellariam, Clericorum meorum
Clericulus extitisti, qualiter post-positis multis Theologis, and personis
reverendis, te in Episcopum sublimavi, omnibus satis notum est. And thou
Silvester of Carlisle, who so long licking the Chancery, was the little Clark of
my Clergymen, it is sufficiently known to all, how I advanced thee to be a
Bishop, before many reverend persons, and able Divines.

His expression licking the Chancery has left Posterity to interpret it,
whether taxing him for Ambition, liquorishly longing for that Place: Or for
Adulation, by the soft smoothing of flatery making his way thereunto: Or for
Avarice, licking it so, that he gained great (if good) profit thereby. As for
his expression, little Cleark, it is plain it referred not to his stature, but
dwarfness in learning. However all this would not persuade him into a
resignation of his Bishopric, though it was not long before he lost both it
and his life, by a fall from a skittish-horse, Anno Domini 1254.

I find no Bishop born in this County since the Reformation, and therefore we
may go on in our propounded method.

Capital Judges, and Writers on the Law.
Sir JOHN COKEYN Knight, Chief Baron of the Exchequer in the reign of King
Henry the fourth, founded a worshipful Family at, and imparted his Surname to
CokeynHatley in this County. But being convinced, that he was born at Ashbourn
in Derbyshire, I have reserved his character for that County.

EDMOND WINGATE Esquire. was a Native of this County, whose family flourishes at
Hartington therein: He was bred in Greys-(...) in the Study of our Commonlaw,
whereof he wrote besides others a Book Entitled, The Reason of the Common Law,
and is lately deceased.

Writers.
JOHN of DUNSTABLE, so called from a Market Town in this County wherein he was
born. If hitherto the Reader has not, it is high time for him now, to take
notice of a person of such perfection. Indeed at first my Pen feared famishing,
finding so little; since surfeiting, meeting so much of this man. For this John
of Dunstable was John of all Arts, as appears by his double Epitaph, one
inscribed on his Monument, the other written on his memory. But be it premised
of both, that we will not avouch the truth of the Latin, or quantity in these
verses; but present them here as we find them, with all their faults, and his
virtues on whom they were made.

On his tomb in Saint Stephen's Wallbrook, London.
Clauditur hoc tumulo qui (...) pectore clausit,
Dunstable I, Juris Astrorum conscius ille,
......... novit..... (...) pondere (...);
Hic vir erat tua Laus, tua Lux, (...) Musica Princeps
Quique tuas fulces per (...) sparserat Arts,
..........................................................
Suscipiant proprium (...) (...) sibi Cives
The second made by Extant in (...) Fun. Mon. page 577.
John Wheathamsted, Abbot of Saint Albans.
Musicus hic Michalus alter, novus and Ptolomaeus.
Junior ac Atlas supportans robore (...).
Pausat sub cinere; melior vir de muliere
Nunquam natus erat, vitii quia labe carebat.
Et virtutis opes possedit unicus omnes.
Perpetuis annis celebretur fama Johannis
Dunstable; in pace requiescat and hic sine fine.
What is true of the bills of some unconscionable Tradesmen, if ever paid,
over paid; may be said of this hyperbolical Epitaphs, if ever believed, over
believed. Yea, one may safely cut off a Third in any part of it, and the
remainder will amount to make him a most admirable person. Let none say that
these might be two distinct persons, seeing (besides the concurrence of time
and place,) it would bank-rupt the Exchequer of Nature to afford two such
persons, one (...) at once being as much as any will believe. This Dunstable
died an. 1455.

Sinee the Reformation.
GEORGE JOY was born in this Bale. de Scrip. Brit. Cent. 9.
County, though the exact place be not expressed. He was a great friend to
Master Fox. Acts and Monu. page 1027.
Tindall, and therefore perfectly hated by Woolsey, Fisher, and Sir Thomas
Moor, the perticulars of his sufferings if known would justly advance him into
the reputation of a Confessor.* He translated some parts of the Bible into
English, and wrote many books reckned up by Bale; notwithstanding many
machinations against his life, he found his Coffin where he fecht'd his Cradle,
in sua patria sepultus, being peaceably buried in his native Country 1553. the
last year of King Edward the sixth.

FRANCIS DILLINGHAM was born at Dean in this County, and bred Fellow in
Christ-Colledge in Cambridge. He was an excellent Linguist, and subtle
Disputant. My Father was present in the Bachillors-Scholes, when a Greek Act
was kept, between him and William Alabaster of Trinity-Colledge, to their
mutual commendation. A disputation so famous that it served for an Era or
Epoche, for the Scholars in that age, thence to date their seniority.

He was afterward chosen Anno 1607. to be one of the Translators of the Bible,
and being richly beneficed at Wilden in this County, died a single man, leaving
a fair estate to his brother Master Thomas Dillingham, who was chosen one of
the late Assembly, (though for age, indisposition, and other reasons not
appearing therein,) and for many years was the humble, painful, and faithful
Pastor of Deane, the place of his Nativity.

WILLIAM SCLATER was born at So was I informed by his Son, Doctor (...) late
Minister of Peter's (...) (...):
Layton-buzard in this County, son to Anthony Sclater the Minister thereof for
fifty years together, who died well nigh an hundred years of age. This William
his son was bred in (...), then in Kings College in Cambridge, where he
commenced Bachillor, and (after many years discountinance) Doctor of Divinity.
Hence he was invited to be (...) at Walsal in Staffordshire, where he began
his sermons (afterward printed) on the three first Chapters of the Romans.
Afterward John Coals Esquire of Sommerset-shire over-intreated him into the
Western parts, where he presented him Vicar of Pitmister. Here he met with
manifold and expensive vexations, even to the Jeopardy of his life, but by the
goodness of God his own innocence and courage, with the favor of his Diocesan,
he came off with no less honor to himself, then confusion to his adversaries.

He was at first not well affected to the Ceremonies of the Church, but
afterward on his profound studying of the point, he was reconciled to them, as
for order, and decency, and by his example others were persuaded to conform.

Constancy of studying contracted the stone upon him, which he used to call
flagellum studiosorum. Nor was his health improved by being removed to a
wealthier Living, when John Lord Pawlet of Hinton (at the instance of Elizabeth
his Lady, in whose inheritance it was, a worthy favourer of piety and pious
men,) preferred him to the rich Parsonage of Limpsam in Somersetshire, where
indeed there was scarce any element good save the earth therein. Whereupon for
his own preservation he was re-perswaded to return to Pitmister, there
continuing till the day of his death, which happened in the year of our Lord
1627. in the fifty one year of his age, leaving many learned works behind him,
as his Comment on the Romans, and on the Thessalonians, Sermons at Paul's cross,
and the treatise of Tithes, styled the Ministers portion, with other posthume
works, some since set forth by, more remaining in the hand of his son William
Scalter Doctor of Divinity, and Minister at London, lately deceased.

Benefactors to the Public.
Sir WILLIAM son to William HARPER was born in the Town of Bedford, but bred a
Merchant-taylor in the City of London. Where God so blessed his endeavors,
that Anno 1561. he was chosen Lord Mayor thereof. In gratitude to God and the
place of his Nativity, he erected and Sto. Survey of London page 62.
endowed a free-schole in Bedford, in which Town he lies buried.

HENRY GRAY son to Henry Gray was born at Wrest in this County. Something must
be premised of his extraction. Richard Gray third Earl of Kent of that family,
was so profuse a person, that he wilfully wasted his Estate, giving away what
he could not spend to the King and others; so little he reflected on Sir Henry
Gray his Brother (but by a second Venture) of Wrest in this County. Hereupon the
said Sir Henry, though heir to his Brother Richard after his death; yet
perceiving himself overtitled or rather under-stated, for so high an honor,
(the undoubted right whereof rested in him) declined the assuming thereof. Thus
the Earldome of Kent lay (though not dead) asleep in the family of the Greys
almost 50. years, viz. form the 15 of King Henry the eight till the 13. of
Queen Elizabeth, when she advanced Reginald Gray, grandchild to Sir Hen. Gray
aforesaid, (who had thriftily recruted himself with competence of Revenues) to
be Earl of Kent, Anno 1571.

This Reginald dying Issuelesse within the year, Henry his Brother (the subject
of our present description) succeeded to his honor. A person truly noble,
expending the income of his own Estate and of his Ladies fair Joynter, ( Mary
the Relict of Edward Earl of Darby) in hospitality.

He was a most Cordial Protestant, on the same token that being present at the
execution of the Queen of Scots, when she requested the Nobility there, to
stand by and see her death, he ( Camb. Eliz. ^ Anno 1587.
fearing something of Superstition) hardly assented thereunto. Yet was he as
far from the faction as Superstition, deserving the caracter given unto him.

Idem in his Brit. in Kent.
Omnibus verae nobilitatis Ornamentis vir long Honoratissimus. He left no
Isue, except some will behold him in some sort Parent of Sidney College in
Cambridge, as one of the executors to the Foundress thereof, who did both Prove
and Improve her will, besides his Personal benefaction thereunto. And being
the surviving executor, he did perpetuate the fellowships (formerly temporary)
according to the implicit trust deposited in him, to the advantage of that
foundation. He died Anno Domini 1613.

FRANCIS CLEARK Knight, was born at Eaton-soton in this shire near to Saint
Neots, in the Lordship there commonly called the Parsonage. He was a noble
Benefactour to Sidney-colledge, augmenting all the Scholarships of the
Foundation, and erecting a fair and firm range of building. Such his skill in
Arithmetic and Architecture, that staying at home, he did provide to a brick
what was necessary for the finishing thereof. He founded four new Fellowships,
and had he been pleased to consult with the College, the settlement with the
same expense might have proved more advantageous. For, though in gifts to
private persons, it be improper that the Receiver should be the Director
thereof, a Corporation may give the best advise to improve the favors
conferred upon it. But it is a general practice, that men desire rather to be
broad then thick Benefactours.

However seeing every one may do with his own as he pleases, blessed be the
memory of this worthy Knight, whose gift in effect was selt by the College
before the giver thereof was seen, being himself a mere stranger unto it. Some
say, that because this was the youngest foundation in the University (generally
the last child has the least left it,) his charity pitched upon it. But I have
been informed, that Sir F^ancis coming privately to Cambridge, to see unseen,
took notice of Doctor Ward his daily presence in the Hall, with the Scholars
conformity in caps, and diligent performance of exercises, which indeared this
place unto him. Thus the observing of old Statutes, is the best lodestone to
attract new Benefactours. His death happyned, Anno Domini, 163

Memorable Persons.
A WOMAN, whose name I cannot recover, lived, died, and is buried at Dunstable
in this County. It appears by her Hackwil's Apolog^ page 253.
Epitaph in the Church, that she had nineteen children at five births, viz.
three several times three children at a birth, and five at a birth, two other
times. How many of them survived to man's estate is unknown. Here I must dissent
from an Huartes in the trial of wits.
Author maintaining that more Twins were born in the first Age of the World,
then now adays. Whereas we meet with none but single births in the Patriarchs
before the Flood, and more (...) six hundred years after the Deluge, Esau and
Jacob were the first Twins mentioned in Scripture.

Lord Mayors.
Name Father Place Company Time 1 Thomas Chalton Thomas Chalton Dunstable
Mercer 1449 2 William Stoker Thomas ^toker Eaton Draper 1484 3 William Butler
^ichard Butler Bidenham Grocer 1515 4 William Harper William Harper Bedford
Merchant-Taylor 1561

The Names of the (...) of this County Returned by the Commissioners in the
twelfth year of King Henry the sixth.
William Bishop of Lincoln, John de Fanhope Chivaler. Commissioners. John
Wenlock Armig. Knights for the shire. John Gascoigne Armig. Knights for the
shire.

Abbatis de Woborn, and sui Celerarii Abbatis de Wardon Prioris de Dunstable
Prioris de Chekesond Prioris de Nunham Prioris de Chaldwell Prioris de
Buschemede Simonis Filbrigge, Chivaler. Henrici Bronnflete, Chivaler. Thomae
(...) Chivaler. Thomae Maningham Thomae Hoo Johannis Broughton Johan. Enderby
Roberti Mordant Johan. Hertusherne Hen. Godfrey Johan. Boteler de Northzele
Hum. Acworth Johan. Ragon Thomae Ragon Johan. (...) Johan. Radwell Johan. Fyse
Johan. Coldington Chri. Preston Steph. Cruker Tho. Roxston Will. Lancelin Hen.
de Lie Johan. Conquest de Houghton Tho. Lonnde Walte. L^nnde Johan. Lonnde
Rich. Merston Johan. ^eeke junioris Tho. Peeke Will. Peeke Johan. Glove
junioris Johan. Turvey de Turvey Johan. Ferrour de Bedford Johan. Gerveys de
Maldon Hen. Etewell Rober. Bollock Will. Wale Nich. Ravenhull Nich. Low
Valentini Bailli de Luton Willielmi White de eadem Johan. Boughton Hugonis
Hasselden Thomae Bailli de Houghton Will. Trought Hen. Manntell Rober. Valence
Johan. Attehay Will. Ypping Johan. Petifer Tho. Purvey Will. Purvey Will.
Shotfold Will. Wingate Will. Kene Tho. Stokker Ade Alford Johan. Morton Tho.
Morton Tho. Stratton Tho. Chamberlain Radulp. Cleark Math. Stepeing Nich.
Harding Will. Marham Rich. Sampson Rober. Warner Johan. Coke de Crawley. Will.
Sileham Will. Purvey Will. Read Tho. Blondell Will. Milward Rober. Ratele
Johan. Kiggill de Todinton Johan. Pestell de Nunham Thomae Chopper de Turvey
Johan. Marram Thomae Jakes Johan. Pikot Will. Molso Johan. Sewell Hen. Sewell
Radul. Falwell Hug. Billingdon Johan. Baldoe Will. Palmer Rober. Davy, junioris
Johan. Stanlow Rich. Lincoln Waleri Taillard Thomae Spencer de Geton Johan.
Spencer Iohannis King de Harowdon Johan. Wait Will. Bochell Thomae William
Roberti Ratull Rober. Warner de le Hethe Io^an. Potter Johan. Grecell Will.
Bocher de Henlow Will. H^le de Chitingdon Johan. Halle Will. Ludsopp Johan.
Conquest de Houghton Stephani Cruker Tho. Rokeston Will. Lancelein Hen. de Lie
^o. Ragon Johan. Mepurshale Johan. Fitz Johan. Pekke, junioris Hugonis
Billingdou Tho. Pekke Will. Pekke Johan. Glove, junioris
Hungry Time has made a Glutton ^eal on this Catalogue of Gentry, and has
left but a very little morsel for manners remaining; so few of these are found
extant in this ^hire, and fewer continuing in a Gentile Equipage. Amongst whom
I must not forget the Family of the Blundels, whereof Sir Edward Blundell
behaved himself right valiantly, in the unfortunate expedition to the Isle of
Ree.

Sheriffs of Bedford and Buckingham-shire.
HEN. II.
Anno 1 Rich. Basset and Albertus de Veer. Rob. Carun Anno 2 Henri^ de Essex
constituit Simonem Fitz. Petre Vicecomitem for 4 years. Anno 6 Gal. filius
Radulph Anno 7 Rich. fil^us O^rti for 3 years. Anno 10 Hug. de la Leg^ and
Rich. filius Osberti for 6 years. Anno 16 David. Archidea. and Will. filius
Rich. Anno 17 Will. filius Rich. and David. Arch. for 3 years. Anno 20 Will.
filius Rich. for 6 years. Anno 26 Will. Rufus for 7 years. Anno 33 Will. Rufus,
and Oger. filius Ogeri, pro dimad. Anni.
RICH. I.
Anno 1 Will. Rufus for 6 years. Anno 7 Simon. de Belchampe for 3 years. Anno
10 Will. de Albeny and Rob. Braybrook
JOHAN. R.
Anno 1 Will. de Albeny Anno 2 Galf. filius Petri, and Rob. de Braybrook for 4
years. Anno 6 Rob. de Braybrook and Rob. filius Hemer. Anno 7 Rob. and Rober.
Anno 8 Rob. filius Hemeri Anno 9 ^dem. Anno 10 Rob. de Braybrook for 3 years.
Anno 13 Rob. de Braybrook, and Hen. filius ejus Anno 14 Hen. Braybrook, and
Rob. Pater ejus Anno 15 Idem. Anno 16 Hen. Braybrook Anno 17 Idem.
HEN. III.
Anno 1 Anno 2 Fulco de Breantel Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Full. de Breantel and Rad.
de Bray for 4 years. Anno 8 Full. de Breantel Anno 9 Walt. de Pateshull de
Accestane for 4 years. Anno 13 Steph. de Wegrave and Will. de Martiwaste Anno
14 Steph. de Segne Anno 15 Steph. de Segne and Rich. de Atteneston for 3 years.
Anno 18 Steph. de Segne and Joh. Ulecot Anno 19 Radus. filius Reginald Anno 20
Will. de Bello Campo. and Ric. de Porchhalt Anno 21 Will. de Bello Campo Anno
22 Reginald. de Albo Monasterio Anno 23 Rob. de Hega Anno 24 Pau^us Penire Anno
25 Idem. Anno 26 Joh. ^rumband Anno 27 Will. Holdwell for 7 years. Anno 34
Alex. de Hammeden for 3 years. Anno 37 Null. Tile Com. in Rotulo Anno 38 Simon
de Glendon Anno 39 Idem. Anno 40 Rob. le Savage. Rich. le Savage filius Johan.
Anno 41 Rob. de Tottenhall Anno 42 Idem. Anno 43 Alex. de Hamden. for 4 years.
Anno 47 Alex. de Hamden. and Simon de Pateshill for 5 years. Anno 52 Edw.
filius Regis Primogenitus Anno 53 Idem. Anno 54 Edw. filius primo genitus and
Barthol. de Towen Subvic. ejus for 3 years.
EDW. I.
Anno 1 Thomas de Bray Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Hugo de Stapleford for 4 years. Anno
7 Johan. de Chedney for 4 years. Anno 11 Radul. de Goldington for 3 years. Anno
14 Will. de Boyvill for 3 years. Anno 17 Will. de Tarrevill Anno 18 Joh. de
Popham Anno 19 Idem. Anno 20 Will. de Turrevill for 5 years. Anno 25 Sim. de
Bradenham Anno 26 Walter. deMolesworth for 10 years.
EDW. II.
Anno 1 Gil. de Holme, and Wall. de Molesworth Anno 2 Will. Merre for 4 years.
Anno 6 Walt. de Molesworth, and Joh. de Pabenham for 3 years. Anno 9 Joh. de la
Hay Anno 10 Idem. Anno 11 Joh. de la Hay, and Rog. de Tirringham. Anno 12 Phil.
de Aylesbury. and Rich. de Cave Anno 13 Rich. de Cave, and Ingilran de Berenger
Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15 Ingelramus Berenger Anno 16 Anno 17 Rog. de Tiringham
Anno 18 Rog. de Tiringham and Joh. de la Hay Anno 19 Johan. de la Hay and Phil.
de Aylesbury.
EDW. III.
Anno 1 Johan. de la Mareschall and Phil. de Aylesbury Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 John
de Mareschall Anno 4 Phil. de Aylesbury for 3 years. Anno 7 Null. Titl. Com. in
Rotulo Anno 8 Rad. de Wedon Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Rich. Ward Anno 11 Rad. de
Wedon Anno 12 Nich. de Passelow, and Will. Aloton Anno 13 Idem. Anno 14 Nich.
Passelow Anno 15 Ger. de Braybrook Anno 16 Henric. Chalfhunt, and Gerrard. de
Braybrook Anno 17 Joh. Aygnell, and Hen. Chalfhunt Anno 18 Hen. Chalfhunt, and
Joh. Wignell Anno 19 Tho. de Swinford Anno 20 Idem. Anno 21 Will. Croyser Anno
22 Idem. Anno 23 Tho. Fernibrand Anno 24 Idem. Anno 25 Joh. Chastilion, and
Tho. Fernibrand Anno 26 Joh. Chastilion Anno 27 Ger. de Braybrook Anno 28 Idem.
Anno 29 Pet. de Salford, and GerBraybrook Anno 30 Pet. de Salford Anno 31 Joh.
de Hampden, and Hug. Chastilion Anno 32 Joh. de Hampden Anno 33 Idem. Anno 34
Pet. de Salford Anno 35 Joh. de Hampden Anno 36 Pet. de Salford for 4 years.
Anno 40 Joh. de Aylesbury for 6 years. Anno 46 Johan. Chyne Anno 47 Johan.
Ragoun Anno 48 Johan. Aylesbury Anno 49 Johan. de Arden Anno 50 Johan. de
Broughton Anno 51 Johan. de Ollueyge
Henry II.
1 RICHARDUS BASSET, and ALBERICUS DE VEER.]

The Catalogue of the Sheriffs of Cambridge and Huntington-shires, as also of
Essex and Hartford-shire, begins with the same names so that ^ix Counties
(but all lying together) were under their inspection. None need to question,
but that this Albericus de Veer was the very same with him, who by Maud the
Empress was made the first Earl of Oxford, of whom hereafter this year in
Cambridge-shire. Mean time we take notice of an Usterosis, beholding R. Basset
(though first named) as his Undersheriff.

2. HENRY de ESSEX.]

He is too well known in our English Chronicles, being Baron of Raleigh in
Essex, and Hereditary Standard Bearer of England. It happened in the reign of
this King, there was a fierce battle fought in Flint-shire at Coleshull,
betwixt the English and Welsh, wherein this Henry de Essex, Com^e Camdens Brit.
in Essex, with him i^ Flintsh^re.
Animum and Signum simul abjecit, betwixt Traitor and Coward cast away both his
Courage and Banner together, occasioning a great overthrow of English.

But he that had the baseness to do, had the boldness to deny the doing of so
foul a fact; until he was challenged in combat by Robert de Momford, a
Knight, Eyewitness thereof, and by him overcome in a Duel. Whereupon his
large inheritance was confiscated to the King, and he himself, partly thrust,
partly going into a Convent, hid his head in a Could, under which, betwixt
shame and sanctity, he blushed out the remainder of his life.

16 DAVID ARCHIDIACONUS, etc.]

It may justly seem strange, that an Archdeacon should be Sh^riff of a Shire,
and one would have sought for a person of his Profession rather in a Pulpit,
then in a ShireHall.

Some will answer, that in that Age Men in Orders engrossed not only Places of
Judicature, but also such as had Military and Martial Relations, whereof this
Sheriff did in some sort partake. But under correction, I conceive, that though
Bishops (who had also Temporal Baronies) were sometimes Sheriffs, yet no
inferior Clergymen, being in Orders, were ever advanced to that Office,
neither in Anoient, nor in Modern Times. Sure I am, that in the reign of King
Charles, one being pricked Sheriff of Rutland, escaped, pleading that he was a
Deacon.

Yet we meet with many, whose surnames sound of Church-relation, both in the
Catalogue of Ancient and Modern Sheriffs.

1. Abbot of London 2. Archdeacon of Cornwall 3. Bishop of Sussex 4. Chaplain
of Norfolk Clerk of Northamptonshire Dean of Essex Friar of Oxfordshire Moigne
of Dorsetshire M on of Devonshire Parson of Buckinghamshire Pope of Oxfordshire
Prior of London

It adds to the difficulty, that whereas persons of their profession were
formerly enjoined single lives, we find in this list some of their sons in the
next generation Sheriffs also.

But take one answer to all, as these were Lay*men, so probably their Ancestors
were Ecclesiastics, and did officiate according to their respective Orders and
Dignities. These afterward having their patrimony devolved unto them, by the
death of their elder brethren, were dispensed with by the Pope to marry, yet so
that they were always afterward called by their former profession, which was
fixed as a surname on their posterity. Thus we read how in France, Hugh de
Lusignian, being an Archbishop (and the last of his family) when by the death
of his Brethren, the Signieuries of Partnay, Soubize, etc. fell unto him, he
obtained license to marry, on condition that his posterity should bear the name
of Archevesque, and a Miter over their Arms for ever.

As for the Surname of Pope in England, it is such a transcendent, I cannot
reach it with mine own, and must leave it to more judicious conjectures.

King John.
13. ROB. de BRAYBROOK, and HEN. filius. ejus.]

14. HEN. BRAYBROOK, and ROB. pater ejus.]

Here is a loving reciprocation. First, a son Undersheriff to his father, *
that was his duty; Secondly the father Undersheriff to his son, that was his
courtesy. Indeed I can name one Under sheriff to his own father, being a
Gentleman of right worthy extraction and estate, which son afterward (in my
memory) became Lord Chief Justice, and Treasurer of England.

Henry III.
52 EDVARD. filius REGIS primo-genitus.]

It sounds not a little to the honor of these two shires, that Prince
Edward, afterward the most renowned King of England, (first of his Christian
name since the Conquest) was their Sheriff for five years together. Yea, the
Imperial-Crown found him in that office, when it fell unto him, though then
absent in Palestine. We may presume, that Bartholomew de Fowen his
Undersheriff, was very sufficient to manage all matters under him.

Sheriffs of Bedford and Buckingham-shire.
Name Place Arms RICH. II. Anno 1 Ioh. de Aylesbury Aylesbury Azure a Cross
Argent. 2 Tho. Peynere 3 Egidius Daubeny SOMER. Gules four Lozenges in Fess
Argent. 4 Tho. Sackwell SUSSEX Quarterly Or and Gules a Bend Vayre. 5 Ioh. de
Aylesbury ut prius 6 Idem. ut prius 7 Ioh. Widevill Northam. Arg. a Fess, and
Canton Gu. 8 Rob. Dikeswell 9 Tho. Covell Az. a Lion Ramp. Arg. a File of 3
Lambeaux Gu. 10 Ioh. de Aylesbury ut prius 11 Rad. Fitz. Rich. 12 Tho. Peynere
13 Tho. Sackvill ut prius 14 Edm. Hampden Hampden Buc. Arg. a Saltire G. betw.
4 Eaglets displayed Az. 15 Will. Teringham Teringha B. Az. a Cross ingrailed
Arg. 16 Tho. Peynere 17 Phil. Walwane 18 Ioh. Longvile Wolverto^ Gules a Fess
Indented betwixt 6 Cross Croslets Arg. 19 Edm. Hampden ut prius 20 Regin. Ragon
21 Ioh. Worship 22 Idem. HEN. IV. Anno 1 Tho. Eston 2 Edw. Hampden ut prius 2
To. Beauchamp Eaton Bed. G. a Fess, betw. 6 martlets Or. 3 Reg. Ragon 4 Johan.
Boys KENT Or a Griffin Sergreant S. within 2 Borders G. 5 Idem. 6 Edw. Hampden
ut prius 7 Tho. Peynere 8 Rich. Hay Sable, three Pickaxes Arg. 9 Bald. Pigott
Stratton Bed. 10 Tho. Strickland YORK sh. G. a Chev. Or between 3 Crosses
formee Arg. on a Canton ermin, a Bucks-head erased, sable. 11 Rich. Wyott 12
Bald. Pigott ut prius HEN. V. A^no 1 Tho. Strickland ut pri^s 2 Edw. Hampden ut
prius 3 Tho. Wauton 4 Rich. Wyott 5 Ioh. Gifford 6 Will. Massy 7 Walt. Fitz.
Rich. 8 Johan. Radwell 9 Ioh. Radwellet 10 Will. Massy 11 Idem. HEN. VI. Anno 1
Johan. Wauton 2 Ioh. Chen*y mil. Cheneys B. Checky Or and Az. a Fess G. Fretty
Erm. 3 Rich. Wyott 4 Ioh. Cheney ut prius 5 Will. Massy, ar. 6 Hum. Stafford,
ar. Or, a Chev. G. a Quarter Erm. 7 Tho. Wauton, mi. 8 Tho. Hoo Quarterly
Sable, and Arg. 9 Ioh. Cheney ut prius 10 Egid. Daubeny, m. ut prius 11 Tho.
Wauton, mil. 12 Ioh. Glove 13 Ioh. Hampden, ar. ut prius 14 Ioh. Broughton 15
Rob. Manfeld 16 Hum. Stafford, mi. ut prius 17 Ioh. Hampden ut prius 18 Walt.
Strickland ut prius 19 Ioh. Brekenoll 20 Edw. Campden ut prius 21 Edw. Read 22
Tho. Singleton 23 Ioh. Wenlock Arg. a Chev. betw. 3 Black-moreheads conped
Proper. 24 Tho. Rokes 25 Tho. Gifford 26 Gor. Longvile ut prius 27 Idem. ut
prius 28 Will. Gedney 29 Ioh. Hampden ut prius 30 To. Whittingham 31 Rob. Olney
32 Edw. Read, ar. 32 Ioh. Poulter HARTF. Arg. a Bend voided Sable. 33 Tho.
Singleton 34 Tho. Charlton, m. 35 Ioh. Hampden ut prius 36 Ioh. Maningham 37
Ioh. Heyton, ar. 38 Ioh. Broughton Arg. a Chev. betwixt 3 Mullets Gules.
EDWARD. IV Anno 1 Edw. Read, ar. 2 Tho. Reins 3 Idem. 4 Pet. House, ar. 5 Ioh.
Broughton ut prius 6 Ioh. Bottiler, mil. Biddenham G. a Fess compone Arg. and
Sable betw. six Crosses Croslets Or. 7 Tho. Hampden ut prius 8 Ioh. Foster, ar.
BERKS. S. a Chev. engrailed betw. 3 Arr. A. 9 Will. Lucy, ar. G. Crasaly Or, 3
Pikes hauriant Arg. 10 Rob. Does, ar. CHESH. Arg. 3 Boars-heads erased Sable,
Tusked Or. 11 Regin. Gray Wrest. Bed. Barry of 6 Ar. and Az. in chief 3
Toreauxes. 12 Ioh. Lanoston, ar. 13 Ioh. Botiler, mil. ut prius 14 Rich.
Bulstrode See our Notes in BUCKS. 15 Hugo. Brudenell BUCK. Ar. a Cheveron Gu.
between 3 Chapp^ws Az. 16 Edw. Molinen 17 Io. Rotheram, ar. Luton Bed. Vert 3
Roe-Bucks tripping Or, a Baston G. 18 Tho Rokes 19 Tho. Fowler 20 Rich.
Enderby, ar. Arg. 3 Bars Dancette S. a Pale in Chief Ermine. 21 Ioh. Verney Az.
on a Cross Arg. five mullets G 22 Tho. Hampden ut prius RICH. III Anno 1 Dru.
Brudnell ut paius 2 Tho. Fowler 3 Ioh. Boon, mil. HEN. VII. Anno 6 Gor.
Ingleton 2 Tho. Rokes 3 Tho. Fowler 4 Ioh. R^theram ut prius 5 Rich. Go^frey 6
Ioh. Laneston se. 7 Rich. R^stwood LaVache B* 8 Edw. ^kaine, ar. Hatley Arg.
three Cocks G. 9 Rich. Godfrey, ar. 10 Will. R^de 11 Tho. Darell Lillingsto^ B.
Az. a Lion Ramp. Or, Crowned Argen^* 12 Tho. Langston 13 Ioh. Gefford, ar. 14
David. Phillip, ar. 15 Rich ^estwood 16 Hug. Conway, mi. S. on a B^ne twixt 2
Cotises Ar. a Rose G. twixt ^ Annulets of the 17 Ioh. St. John, mi. Bletso.
Bed. Arg. on a Chief Gules 2 mullets pierced Or. 18 Rich Blount, ar. B^rry
Formy (...) of ^ Or and sable. 19 Edw. Bulstrod, ar. ut prius 20 Tho. Darell
ar. ut prius 21 Ioh. Cheyney, ar. ut prius 22 Will. Gascoigne Cardinto^ B. Arg.
on a Pale S. a Lucies-head erected Or. 23 Ioh. Longvile, mi. ut prius 24 Geor.
Harvey, ar. ^. on a (...) Arg. three Tre-foiles (...). HEN. VIII. Anno 1 Ioh.
Mordant, ar. Tur^ey Be. A^. a Cheveron-inter 3. Estoiles S. 2 Ioh. Dive, ar.
Brum^ B. Part per Pale Arg. and G. a Fess Azure. 3 Rad. Verney, ar. ut prius 4
Tho. Dineham, ar. 5 Will. Gascoigne ut prius 6 Edw. Bray, ar. Arg. a Chev.
between 3. Eagles-legs ^rased ^. 7 Ioh. St. John, mil. ut prius 8 Gor. Harvey,
mil. ut prius 9 Will. Gascoigne ut prius 10 Mi^h. Fisher, ar. 11 Will. Read,
mil. 12 Ioh Cheney, ar. ut prius 13 Rob. Lee, mil. Quarendon Ar. a Fess b^tw. 3
Cr^ssants S. 14 Rob. (...), ar. Winge Bu. Az. 10 Bellets 4, 3, ^, and 1, Or, in
a chief of the second, a Lion Issuant (...). 15 Tho. Langston, ar. 16 Rad.
Verney ut prius 17 Tho. Rotherham ut prius 18 ^dw. Grevill, mil. Sable a
Bordure and Cross Engrai^ed Or, therein five pellets. 19 ^an. Pigote, ar. ut
prius ^0 I^h H^pden, m. ut prius 21 Ioh. St. John, mil, ut prius ^2 Mich.
Fisher 23 Rob. Dormer, ar. ut prius 24 Edw. Dun, mil. 25 Rob. Lee, mil. ut
prius 26 Ioh. St. John, mil. ut prius 27 Rog. (...), ar. SHROP. Or, a Riven
Proper. 28 Tho. Longvile, ar. ut prius 29 Will. Windsor, m. Bradenham Gules, a
Saltier Arg. between 12 cross croslets Or. 30 Rob. Dormer, mil. ut prius 31
Tho. Rotheram, ut prius 32 Rad. Verney, mil. ut prius 33 Joh. Gostwick, m.
Willingto^ Arg. a Bend Gules cotized sable twixt 6 Cornish choughes proper on a
Chief Or 3 mullets ve^t. 34 Idem. ut prius 35 Tho. Giffard, ar. 36 Mich.
Fisher, mil. 37 Lod. Dy^e, ar. ut prius 38 Rob. Drury, mil. Arg. on a Chief
^vert the Lette^ Tau betwixt 2 mullets pierced Or. EDW. VI. Anno 1 Fran*
Russell* mil. Cheneis A Lion Ramp. Gules on a chief sables 3 ^calops of the
first. 2 Fran. Pigott, ar. ut prius 3 Ioh. St. John, mil. ut prius 4 Tho.
Rotheram, ut prius 5 Oliv. St. John, ar. ut prius 6 Tho. Pigott, ar. ut prius
MARIA REG. Anno 1 Will. Dormer, mi. ut prius REX PHIL. and Ma. Regina. Anno 1
Arth. Longvile, ar. ut prius 2 Rob. Drury, mil. ut prius 3 Rob. Peckham, mi. 4
Tho. Pigott, ar. ut prius 5 Hum. (...), m. Arg. a Bend engrailed Sable. 6 REG.
ELIZA: Anno 1 Will. Hawtry, ar. Checkers B. Argent 4 Lioncells passant Sable
betwixt 2 Gemews in ^end. 2 Tho. Teringham ut prius 3 Rob. Drury, mil. ut prius
4 Ioh. Goodwin, ar. 5 Paul Damil, ar. 6 Tho. Fleetwood, Vache Bu. Part per
pale Nebule Az and Or. 6 marteletts counterchanged. 7 Hen Cheyne, ^ui.
Tuddington 8 Ioh. Cheny, ar. AMP. 9 Ioh. Burlacy, ar. 10 Will. Dormer, mi. ut
prius Sable a Fess engrailed (...) 3 flower. de luce Arg. 11 Edw. Ashfeld, mi.
12 Lod. Mordant, mi. ut prius 13 Tho. Pigo^, ar. ut prius 14 Lodo. Dive, ar. ut
prius 15 Gor Peckham, mi. 16 Rad. Astry, ar. Harlingto^ B. Barry-wave of 6.
Arg. and Az. on a Chief G. 3 Bezants.

Henry VI.
8 TNOMAS HOO.]

If any ask me the place of his residence in these Counties, I must return,
non sum informatus. But this is he, who is caractered by Brit. (...).
Master Camden, Vir egregius, whom King Henry the sixth made Knight of the
Garter, and Lord Hoo and Ha^tings. He left four Daughters thus married.

1 Anne to Sir Jeffry Bollen. 2 Eleanor to Sir Richard Carew. 3 Jane to Robert
Cople, Esquire. 4 Elizabeth to Sir John Devenish.
From the first of these was Queen Elizabeth descended. Some of the Issue Male
of the same family were very lately extant in Hertford-shire.

23 JOHN WENLOCK.]

His surname seems to have something in it of Salopi^n reference, to a
Market Town therein so called; However, his principal residence was (but where,
to me unknown) in this County, whereof he was returned Knight to the
Pa^liament, in the twelfth of this Kings reign. The very same, whom afterward
this King created Baron Wenlock, and Knight of the Garter, and who afterward
lost his life in His cause, valiantly fighting in the battle of Teuxbury. It is
charity to enter this memorial of him, the rather because he died without
issue, (and his fair estate forfeited to King Edward the fourth, was quickly
scattered amongst many Courtiers) but from his Cousin and Heire-general, the
Lauleys in Shropshire are lineally descended.

Henry VII.
17 Sir JOHN SAINT JOHN, Mil.]

There were three Sir John Saint John's successively in the same family, since
their fixing in this County:

1. The father, (this year Sheriff) being son to Sir Oliver Saint John, by
Margaret daughter and sole heir to Sir John Beauchamp. This Margaret was
afterward married to John Duke of Somerset, to whom she bare Margaret, Mother
to King Henry the seventh. 2. The son [Sheriffe in the seventh year of King
Henry the eighth.] 3. The grandchild, Sheriff in the third of Edward the
sixth, and father to Oliver the first Lord Saint John.
This we insert to avoid confusion, it being the general complaint of Heralds,
that such Homonymie causes many mistakes in pedigrees.

22 WILLIAM GASCOIGNE.]

Much wondering with my self how this Northem Name stragled into the South, I
consulted one of his Family, and a good Antiquary, by whom I was informed that
this William was a Younger Brother of Gauthorpe house in Yorkshire, and was
settled at Cardinton nigh Bedford in this County, by Marrying the Inheritrix
thereof. He was afterward twice Sheriff under King Henry the eighth,
Knighted, and Controler of the House of Cardinal Woolsey. A rough Gentleman,
preferring rather to profit then please his Master. And although the Pride of
that Prelate, was sar above his Covetousness, yet his Wisdom well knowing
Thrift to be the Fuel of Magnificence, would usually digest advice from this
his Servant, when it plainly tended to his own Emolument. The Name (and which
is worse) the Essate is now quite extinct in this County.

Henry VIII.
1 JOHN MORDANT, Ar.]

He was extracted of a very Ancient parent in this County, and married one of
the Daughters and Heirs of Henry Vere of Addington in Northamptonshire,
whereby he received a great Inheritance, being by Aged persons, in those parts,
remembered by the name of John of the Woods. (Reader I was born under the
shadow), and felt the warmth of them,) so great a Master he was of Oaks and
Timber in that County, besides large possessions he had in Essex, and elsewhere.
King Henry the eight owning him deservedly for a very wise man, created him
Baron Mordant of Turvey.

29 WILLIAM WINDSOR, Mil.]

He was descended from Walter Fitz Came: Brit. in Bark-shire.
Otho, Castle-keeper of Windsor, in the time of King William the Conqueror, and
was by King Henry the eighth created Baron Windsor of Bradenham in
Buckingham-shire Ancestor to the present Lord Windsor, descended from him by an
Heir-general so that Hickman is his Surname.

E^ward VI.
1 FRANCIS RUSSEL, Mil.]

He was Son to John Lord Russel, afterward Earl of Bedford. Succeeding his
Father in his honor, so great was his Hospitality that Queen Elizabeth was
wont to say pleasantly of him, That he made all the beggars. He founded a small
School at Wobourne, and dying in great age and honor, was buried at Cheneys
1585.

5 OLIVER SAINT JOHN, Ar.]

He was by Queen Elizabeth made Lord Saint John of Bletso in this County, and
left two sons who succeeded to his honor. First John whose only daughter Anne
was married to William Lord Effingham, and was mother to Elizabeth now Countess
Dowager of Peterborough. His second son was Oliver, blessed with a numerous
issue, and Ancestor to the present Earl of Bullinbrook.

Queen Mary.
1 WILLIAM DORMER, Mil.]

He was son to Sir Robert Dormer (Sheriff the 14. of K. Henry the 8.) by Jane
Newdigate his wife, which Lady was so zealous a Pap^st, that after the death of
Q. Mary, she left the land, and lived beyond the Seas. This Sir William by Mary
Sidney, his wife, had a daughter, married to the Count of Feria, when he came
over hither with King Philip.

This Count, under pretense to visit his sick Lady, remaining here, did very
earnestly move a Came. Eliz. (...) 1558.
match betwixt King Philip, his Master, and Queen Elizabeth, which in fine took
no effect. He the^ also mediated for Jane Dormer, his Grandmother, and some
other fugitives, that they might live beyond the Seas, and receive their
revenues out of England; which favor the Queen though not fit to indulge,
whereat the Count was so incensed, that he moved Pope Pius the fourth to
excommunicate Her, Uxore frustra (...) i^tente idem, Anno 1560.
though his wife did with all might and maine oppose it.

Sheriffs of this County alone.
Name Place Arms REG. ELIZA. Anno 17 (...). Rotheram, Es. Farly Vert, 3 Roe
bucks tripping Or, a Baston Gul. 18 Ioh (...) ^ewelbury G. a Salter engrailed
Arg. 19 Ge. Kenesham. Es. Temsford 20 Ioh. Spencer, Esquire Cople 21 Nich. Luke,
Esquire. Woodend Ar. a Bugle-horn S. 22 Hen. Butler, Esquire. Biddenha^ G. a Fess
Cho^kee Ar. and S. betw. 6 Cross (...) Ar. 23 Ioh. Tompson, Es. Crawley 24 Ric.
Conquest, Es. Houghton Q. Ar. and S. a Labelw*th 3 points. 25 Lodo. Dive, Esquire.
Brumham Part per Pale Ar. et G. a Fess Az. 26 Ioh. Row, Esquire and Ric.
Charnock, Es. Holeot Ar. on a Bend S. 3 Crosses Croslet of the field 27 Oliv.
St. John, Es. Ar. on a Chief G. 2 Mullets Or. 28 Ric. Charnock, Es. ut prius 29
Will. Butler, Esquire. ut prius 30 Rad. Astry, Esquire. Westning Barr^wavee of six Ar.
and Az. on a Chief G. 3 Bezants. 31 Oliv. St. John, Es. ut prius 32 Ge
Rotheram, Es. ut prius 33 Exp. Hoddeson, Es. ut prius 34 Will. Duncombe
Batlesden Party per Chev. count^r Flore G. and Arg. 3 Talbots-heads Erazed
countercharged. 35 Nich. Luke, Esquire. ut prius 36 Ioh. Dive, Esquire ut prius 37 Will.
Gostwick, Es. Willingto^ Arg. a Bend G. cotized S. twixt 6 C^rnish chaughes
proper on a chief Or 3 Mullets vert. 38 Ric. Conquest, Es. ut prius 39 Tho.
Cheney, Esquire. Sundon 40 Edr. Rateliffe, Knight. Elstow Arg. a Bend engrailed S. 41
W^ll. Butler, Esquire ut prius 42 Ioh. Crossed, Knight. 43 Ric Charnocks, Es. ut prins 44
Geo. Francklyn, Malvern 45 Ioh. Dive, Knight. ut prius JAC. REX. Anno 1 Ioh. Dive,
Knight. ut prius 2 Ioh. Leigh, Esquire. 3 Edr. Sands, Knight. Eaton 4 Fran. Anderson, E.
Eworth Arg. a Cheveron twixt 3 CrossCroslets S. 5 Tho. Snagge, Knight. Marson 6 Edw
Mord^nt, Es. Ockley A^a. a Chev. (...) 3 Estoyles S. 7 Tho. Ancell, Esquire.
Barford G. on a Saltier Or, betw. 4 Bezants a Malcel of the first. 8 Fran
Ventres, Knight. Campton Azu. a lutie beewaot 2 Bendswavy Arg. 9 Rob. Sandy, Esquire.
10 Will. Beecher, Esquire. Hooberry 11 Ric. Sanders, Esquire. Marson Part per Chapter Ar.
and S. 3 Elephants heads Erazed ceunterchanged. 12 Edw. Duncombe ut prius 13
Will. Plomer, Esquire. Holms Vert a Chapter between 3 Lions-heads Erazed O^ Billited G.
14 Rog. Burgoyne,* Sutton 15 Oliv. Luke, Kr. ut prius * G a Chev. Or, between 3
Talbots on Chief embattled Arg. as many martlets S. 16 Edw. Conquest, K^ ut
prius 17 Ge. Keynsham, Es. 18 Fran. Stanton, Es. Birchmor. 19 Will. Briars,
Esquire. Woodbery 20 Will. Hawkins, Es. Tilbrook 21 Fran. Clerk, Knight. 22 Math.
Denton, Es. Barton CAR. I. REX Anno 1 Ioh. Wingate, esquire. Harlingto^ S. a Bend
Erm. Cotized Or betw. 6 martlets Arg. 2 Edw. Gostwick, knight. ut prius 3 Ioh.
Moore, esquire. 4 Anth. Chester, ba. P^r pale, Ar. and S. a Chev. betw. 3
^ams-heads ervsed armed Or, within a horderingrailed roundly, all
counterchanged. 5 Mich. Grigg, esquire. 6 Will. Cater, esquire.* Kempston 7 Edm.
Anderson, ut prius 8 Ia. Beverley, esquire. Clapwell * Erm. an a Pile G. a Lion
Pass. Guard. Or. 9 Oufl. Winch, esquire. Everton 10 Hum. Monoux, es. Wootton E^mine,
a Rose Gules. 11 Rich. Gery, esquire. Bushmede 12 Hen. Chester, esquire. ut prius 13
Will. Boteler, esquire. ut prius 14 Will. Plomer, esquire. ut prius 15 Rich. Child,
esquire. Puddingto^ G. a Chev. engrailed Erm. twixt 3 Doves Arg. 16 Ioh. Burgogne,
es. ut prius 17 Tho. Alflon, Knight. b. Wodhill Azure, ten Stars Or. 18 19 20 Nich.
Denton, esquire. 21 22 Math. Tailor, esquire. Eaton

The Farewell.
Being to take my farewell of this County, I am minded of the mistake (what
Writer is free from them?) in Mr. Stow, telling us of Stow in survey of London
page 18 writing of the river Thames.
tide-boats, till-boats and barges, which come from Bedford-shire down the
Thames to London, which surely must row over many miles of drie-land in their
passage thereunto. But, if there be a possibility of such a conveyance by art
and industry to be effected, may his words prove true by way of prediction,
seeing certainly such a convenience must needs be advantageous to this County.

BUCKINGHAM-SHIRE.
BUCKINGHAM-SHIRE it is a long narrow County, (the miles therein proportioned
accordingly) stretching forty four miles from North to South, whilst the
breadth is content with fourteen at the most. A fruitful Country, especially
in the vale of Alesbury, where one [lately]intire Pasture, called Beryfield
(now part of the Inheritance of Sir Robert Lee, Baronet) in the Manor of
Quarendon, is let yearly for eight hundred pounds, the tenant not complaining
of his Bargain.

This County takes its name from Buckingham the chief town therein, as that
from Beeches, (called in the Saxon tongue Buccen) growing plentifully
thereabouts, as in other places in this County, and therefore placed first
amongst its

Natural Commodities.
Beech.
This was esteemed sacred amongst the Romans. Plin, lib. D.cimo s^xto page ^87.
cap. 38. verse. 44.
Manius Curi^s juravit se ex praeda nihil attigisse, praeter guttum faginum quo
sacrificaret; Protested, that he touched nothing of the Prey besides a
Beech-cup, wherewith he should sacrifice. It is also Medicinal, though we
would wish none sore Lips or Eyes, to try the truth of Plin. lib. Nig^s. quar.
page 442. cap. 5. verse. 37.
Plinys report, whether Beech-leaves cure the one, or the ashes of Beech-mast
heal the other. Our ordinary u^e thereof (besides making of many Utensils) is
for building of Houses. One asked, when Beach would make the best Timber,
meaning what season of the year was best to cut it down for that purpose: It
was answered, that Beech would make the best Timber when no Oak was to be had;
a time I assure you which daily approaches in our Land.

Hence it was, that such care was taken in the reign of King Sta^. 35. of Hen.
the eight cap. 17.
Henry the eighth, (when woods were in a far better condition then now adays,)
for the preserving of the Standells of Beech. As also it was provided in the
Stat. Primo Eliza. cap. 15.
first of Queen Elizabeth, that no Timber Trees of Oak, Beech and Ash, (where
Beech deservedly is made second,) being one foot square at the Stub, and
growing within fourteen miles of the Sea, or any Navigable River, should be
converted to coal or fuel, as the debasing of that, which if Nature did not
first intend, Necessity must employ for better service.

Sheep.
The best and biggest bodied in England are the Vale of Ailsbury in this
County, where it is nothing to give ten pound or more for a Breed-ram. So that,
should a Forrainer hear of the price thereof, he would guess that Ram rather to
be some Roman Engine of battery, than the creature commonly so called.

I know not, whether his observation, with the reason thereof, be worth the
inserting, who first took notice, that our cattle for food, are English, when
feeding in the field, but French when fed on in a family.

English 1. Sheep. 2. Ox. 3. Calfe. 4. Hog. 5. Pigg. French 1. Mutton. 2. Beef,
3. Veal. 4. Bacon. 5. Pork.

Whereof he assigned this reason, that after the Norman-conquest the French so
tyrannized over the English-tenants, that they forced them to keep and feed
their cattle, but the Monsieurs eat all their good meat, after it was
slaughtered.

Forrainers much admire at our English sheep, because they do not (as those
beyond the seas) follow their shephards like to a pack of dogs, but wander wide
abroad; and the Popish priests tell their simple flocks, that this disobedience
of our sheep happens unto us, Sam. (...) (...) page 84.
because (Risum teneatis amici?) we have left the great Shephard the Pope,
whereas they did so long before our separation from Rome, because freed from
the fear of wolves (infesting them in foreign parts) they feed safely in the
fields, needing neither guide to direct, nor guard to defend them.

Tame Pheasants.
They first took their name from Phasis a River in Asia, and long their flight
thence into England: A Fowl fair in the Feathers, a Cock especially, ( Males by
nature (though Female by art) the finest of both Sexes) and dainty in the
flesh. Abundance of these are kept about Wicombe, the care being more then the
cost, seeing their general repast is on Pismires. Whether these tame be as
good as wild-pheasants, I leave to Pallate-men to decide.

The Manufactures.
It is true of this County, that it lives more by its Lands then by its Hands.
Such the fruitfulness, venting the native Commodities thereof at great rates,
(thank the vicinity of London, the best Chapman) that no handy-crafts of note,
(save what common to other countries) are used therein. Except any will
instance in Bonelace, much thereof being made about Owldney in this County,
though more I believe in Devonshire, where we shall meet more properly
therewith.

Proverbs.
Mich. Dra^ton in his P ly olbion.
Buckingham-shire Bread and Beef.]

The former is as fine, the latter as fat in this as in any other County. If
therefore the inhabitants thereof come with hearty grace and hungry appetites,
no doubt both strength and health will follow on their repast.

Here if you beat a Bush it is odds youl'd start a Idem ibidem.
Thief.]

No doubt there was just occasion for this Proverb at the Original thereof,
which then contained Satyricall truth, proportioned to the place before it was
Reformed, whereof thus our Came. Brit. in Buckinghamsh.
great Antiquary.

It was altogether unpassable in times past by reason of Trees, until that
Leofstane Abbot of St. Albans did cut them down, because they yielded a place
of refuge for thieves.

But this Proverb is now Antiquated, as to the truth thereof, Buckingham-shire
affording as many maiden Assizes as any County of equal populousness. Yea,
hear how she pleads for her self, that such High-way-men were never her
Natives, but fled thither for their Shelter out of Neighboring Counties.

Saints.
St. EDBURG daughter unto Redwald King of the East Angles embraced a
Monastical life at Alesbury in this Coun^y, where her Body was deposited, and
removed afterward to Edburgton, (now Edburton) in Suffolk her Native Country;
It seems her person would make one County proud, which made two happy. Alesbury
observing her Memory on the day of -- -- -- whilst Edburton was renowned for
her Miracles. By the way, it seems wonderful that in Scripture we only meet
with one PosthumeMiracle, viz. the Grave-f^llow of Elisha, raised with the
touch of his Bones; whilst most of Popish miracles are [reported] born after
the Saints death, merely to mold men's minds to the Adoration of their Relics.

St. RUMALD was the same with St. Rumbald, (commonly called by Country people
St. Grumbald,) and St. Rumwald as others spell him; but distinct from another
St. Rumwald of Irish ext^action, a Bishop and Martyr, whose Passion is
Celebrated at M^chlyn in Braband. This Criticisme, Reader, I request thee to
take on my credit for thy own ease, and not to buy the truth of so difficult a
tris^e with the trouble I paid for it.

Entering now on the Legend of his life, I writ neither what I believe, nor what
I expect should be believed, but what I find written by others. Some make him
Son of a British The English Martyrology on the 28. of August.
King, which is sufficiently confuted by his own Saxon name. More probable
their tale who relate him Son to a King of Northumberland, by a Christian
daughter of Penda King of Mercia. Being born at Came* Brit. in Buckinghamsh.
Kings Sutton in this County, as soon as he came out of his Mothers womb, he
cried three times, I am a Christian. Then making a plain Consession of his
faith, He desired to be baptized, chose his Godfathers and his own name Rumwald.

He also by his fingers (...) Legend^ Anglica in the life of Saint Rumwald.
directed the standers by to fetch him a great hollow-stone for a font, which
sundry of his fathers servants essayed in vain as much above their strength:
Till the two Priests (his^ designed Godfathers) did go and fetch it easily at
his appointment. Being Baptized, He for three days discoursed of all the Common
places of Popery, and having confirmed their truth, he bequeathed his body to
remain at Sutton one year, at Brackly two, and at Buckingham ever after. This
done he expired.

Reader, I partly guess by my own temper how thine is affected with the reading
hereof, whose soul is much divided betwixt several actions at once.

1. To frown at the impudency of the first inventors of such improbable
untruths. 2. To smile at the simplicity of the believers of such improbable
untruths. 3. To sigh at that well-intended devotion abused with such improbable
untruths. 4. To thank God that we live in times of better and brighter
knowledge.
Now although St. Rumwald was born in this County, he was most honored at
Boxley in Kent, and thereon a story depends.

There was in the Church of Boxley a short Statue of St. Rumwald (as of a
boy-saint) small, hollow, and light, so that a child of seven years of age might
easily lift it. The moving hereof was made the Criterion of women's chastity.
Such who paid the Priest well might easily remove it, whilst others might tugg
at it to no purpose. For this was the contrivance of the cheat, that it was
fastened with a Pin (...) i^ his Perambulation of Kent page 187.
of wood by an invisible stander behind. Now when such offered to take it who
had been bountiful to the* Priest before, they bare it away with ease, which
was impossible for their hands to remove who had been Close-fisted in their
Confessions. Thus says my Id^m ibidem:
Author it moved more laughter then Devotion, and many chaste virgins and wives
went away with blushing faces, leaving (without cause) the suspicion of their
wantonness in the eyes of the Beholders; whilst others came off with more
credit, (because with more coin,) though with less chastity. The certain time
of his life is unknown, but may be guessed about the year 680.

Martyrs.
JOHN SCRIVENER was Martyred at Amersham Anno Dom. 1521. on whom an
extraordinary piece of cruelty was used, his own Fox Acts and Mon page 838*
children being forced to set the first fire upon him, for which the law Deuteronomy.
13. 6. was most erroneously pretended, as will appear by the perusing thereof,

If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy* son, or thy daughter, or the
wife of thy bosom, or thy friend which is as thy own soul entice thee
secretly, saying, let us go and serve other gods. -- -- Thou shall not consent
unto him, nor hearken unto him. -- -- But thou shall surely kill him, thine
hand shall be first upon him to put him to death. See we here how in the case
of Idolatry one is to spare none related unto them, either as Equals or
Inferiors. But this Law injoines not children to accuse or execute their own
parents, as Scrivener his children were compelled to do. A barbarous cruelty,
especially seeing the Civil law among the heathen Romans did provide, that
filius non torquetur in caput parentis, A son shall not be examined on the rack
to accuse his father, in such cases wherein his life is concerned. Others
besides Scrivener were martyred, and more Confessors (...) in this small
County, See Fox his Acts and Mon. in that ye^r.
Anno 1521. then in all England elsewhere for twenty years together.

P^elates.
RICHARD de WENDOVER, (a place well known in this Shire,) was Rector of Bromley
in Kent, where the Bishop of Rochester has a Palace* and that See being
vacant, he was lawfully chosen the Bishop thereof. But Edmond Archbishop of
Canterbury (afterward Sainted) refused to give him consecration, because he
was rude Godwin in the Bishops of Ro^.
and unlearned. Hereupon Wendover appealed to the Pope, whom he found his
better friend, because Edmond (a bitter inveigher against Papal extorsions) was
a Foe unto him, and so was consecrated. Now none will gr^dge him his Place
amongst our Worthies, seeing what he lacked in learning he had in holiness, and
such his signal Idem ibidem.
sanctity, that after his death he was by special Mandate of King Henry the
third buried in the Church of Westminster (as another Jehojadah) for his
public 2 Chr. 2416.
goodness, Anno 1250.

JOHN BUCKINGHAM (for so his Name is truly written) alias Bokingham and
Bukingham, took his Name and Nativity no doubt from Buckingham in this County,
ala-mode of that Age. He was bred at the University of Oxford, and although
since by some causelessly slandered for want of Learning, was a great Disputant,
and well studied Scholar, as his J. Bile and J. Pits de script. B^t.
works do declare. He was afterward preferred Bishop of Lincoln, where several
contests happened betwixt him and Pope Boniface the ninth, who in revenge ex
plenitudine Potestatis removed him from Lincoln to Litchfield, that is, from
the Hall into the Kitchen, a Bishopric of less credit and profit. Buckingham
grew sullen hereat, and would rather shut himself out, then play at a less
game, and so quitting Episcopacy 1397. lived and died a private Monck at
Canterbury, where he lies buried the lowermost in the body of Christ-Church,
under a very fair Gravestone, as my ^ill. Summers in his Antiquities of Cant.
page 181.
industrious friend has well retrived his memory, though the brass on his
Monument be worn or rather torn away. He indented with the Prior and Covent at
Canterbury, to build him a Chantry-Chappel near his Sepulcher, which I find not
performed.

JOHN YOUNG was born at New* col. Regi. Anno 1482.
Newton-longvile in this County, and bred in Newcolledge in Oxford, on the same
token that there are no fewer then ten Youngs in their Register, reckoned
Fellows of that Foundation; and one said, that Seeing the College was always
New, well may many Fellows be Young therein. This John Young became Warden
thereof, and afterward was made Bishop of the fair City of Callipoli in
Greece. An excellent place to fat a (neither Camel nor Lion but) Camelion in,
and seeing the great Turk was his Tenant, little the rent he paid to this his
Landlord. However this titular Bishopric gave him Precedence, a Vote in
General Councils, and Power of Ordination. But some English Earth does not well
with such Grecian Air, and for his better support he was made Master of the
Rowles Jan. 12. in the first of King J. Philpot in his Catalogue of the Masters
of the Rowles.
Henry the eighth, and either died or resigned his Office some eight years
after. As I remember he lies buried with a brass Inscription in New-colledge
Chapel.

JOHN HOLYMAN was born at New-colledge Register Anno Dom. 1512.
Codington in this County, bred in New-colledge in Oxford, and afterward
became a Benedictine in Reading, until that Monastery was dissolved. Queen
Mary in the first of her reign preferred him Bishop of Bristoll, whilst his
predecessor Paul Bush (deprived for being married) was yet alive. He lived
peaceably, not embrewing his hands in Protestants blood, and died seasonably
for himself, a little before the death of Queen Mary, 1558.

Since the Reformation.
JOHN HARLEY was born in the Parish of Newport-Paganel in this County, as a
learned Mr. Martin beneficed near Northampton.
Antiquary (a native of the same place) has informed me, where some of his
kindred were lately (if not still) in being. He was bred first Fellow, then
SchoolMaster in Magdalen-colledge in Oxford, in the dangerous days of King
Henry the eighth, he was an hearty but concealed Protestant.

In the first week of the reign of King Edward the sixth, whilst most men's
minds stood at a gaze (it being dead-water with them, which way the tide would
turn,) Master Harley in the Parish Church of Saint Peter's in Oxford and a
solemn Lent-Sermon, publicly preached Antipapal doctrine, and powerfully
pressed justification by faith alone, whereupon the over-officious Laurence
Humphred in the latin life of Bishop Jewe^l.
Vice Chancellor hurried him up to London for an Heretic, there to answer for
his contempt.

But the case was soon altered, Harley was acquitted, commended, preferred to
be Tutor to the sons of John Earl of Warwick, afterward Duke of
Northumberland. He was thence made Bishop of Hereford.

It is said of Genesis 15. 15.
Abraham, he was buried in a good old age. It cannot be said of our Harley, he
died in an old age (finding him not above fifty,) though expiring in a good age
in two respects; in relation to the piety of his life past, and in reference to
the future troubles, which immediately followed. Surely had he survived a
little longer, he had lost his life, as he did his Bishopric for being Bp.
Godwin in his (...). of the Bishops of Hereford.
married, in the first of Q. Mary.

Doctor LAURENCE HUMPHRED, Harley his Scholar in Magdalen-colledge has
consecrated this Distick to the memory of his Master, though the Muses in my
mind looked very solemnly, without the least smile at the making thereof,

Flo^ domui Harlaeus, socius ludique Magister,
Celsus-deinde throno, celsior inde polo.
He died Anno Domini 1554. shifting from place to place, the cause why there is
no certain intelligence where he was interred.

ROBERT ALDRICH, although he lived but in the twilight of Religion, he is
justly to be placed not on the Dark but Light side of Reformation. For though
his actions were but weak, his affections were sincere therein. Mr. Hatchers in
his Manuscript Cat. of the Fellows of Kings-colledge.
Born he was at Burnham in this County, bred in Kings-colledge in Cambridge,
*Proctor of that University anno 1525. About which time many letters passed
betwixt him and his familiar friend Erasmus, who styles him Blandae
eloquentiae juvenem. He was afterward Schoolmaster, then Fellow and Provoster
of Eaton, and at last made Bishop of Carlisle, anno 1537. by King Henry the
eighth. He was never a through paced Papist, (much less a persecutor of
Protestants,) though a complyer with some superstitions. He died at Horncastle
in Lincoln shire, (a house belonging to his See) in the reign of Queen Godwin
in his Catal. of (...).
Mary, 1555.

WILLIAM ALLEY was born at Mr. Hatcher ut prius.
Wi^kham in this County, bred first at Eaton, then in Kings-colledge, where he
was admitted Anno Domini 1528. Hence he went away being Batchelour of Arts, and
afterward became Lecturer in Saint Paul's, I say Lecturer, which name though
since it has sounded ill in some jealous ears as infected with faction, was an
ancient office founded in some Cathedralls to read Divinity there, and this
Master Alleys learned lectures (according to that age) are Extant in Print. He
was Consecrated Bishop of Exeter, July 14. 1560. and dying 1576. lies buried
under a fair Marble in his own Cathedral.

RICHARD COX was born at Idem ibidem.
Whaddon in this County, and bred for some years in Kings-colledge in
Cambridge; Even when Cardinal Woolsy was erecting Christschurch in Oxford. This
great Prelate, desiring that this his College should be as fair within as
without, and have learning answerable to the building thereof, employed his
Emisaries, to remove thither the most hopeful Plants of Cambridge, and this
Richard Cox amongst the rest. He became afterward Schoolmaster of Eaton,
which was happy with many flourishing wits under his endeavors, and Haddon
amongst the rest whom he loved with filial affection, nor will it be amiss to
insert the Poetical Pass betwixt them.

Walter Haddon to Doctor COX his Schoolmaster.
Vix caput attollens e lecto scribere carmen
Qui velit, is voluit, scribere plura, Vale.
Doctor COX to Walter Haddon his Scholar.
Te magis optarem salvum sine ^armine Fili
Quam sine te salvo, carmina multa, Vale.
Hence he was sent for to be Instructor to Prince Edward, which with good
conscience, to his great credit he discharged. Here, Reader, forgive me in
hazarding thy censure, in making and translating a Distick upon them,

Praeceptor doctus, docilis magis an puer ille?
Ille puer docilis, Praeceptor tu qu^que doctus.
Master more able, child of more docility?
Docil the child, Master of great ability.
At last he was prefered Bishop of Ely 1559. commendably continuing therein,
whatever causless malice has reported to the contrary, twenty one years, and
dying Anno Domini, 1580.

THOMAS BICKLEY was born at Godwin in Catal. of (...). of Chichester.
Stow in this County, bred first Chorister, then Scholar, then Fellow in
Magdalen-colledge in Oxford. In the first of Edward the sixth his detestation
of Superstition may rather be commended, then his discretion in expressing it,
when (before the public abolishing of Popery) at Evening-prayer he brake the
consecrated Host with his hands, and Dr. Humfred in his Latin life of Bishop
Jewel page 73.
stamped it under his feet, in the Colledge-chappel. Afterward he fled over
into France, living an exile at Paris and Orleans all the reign of Queen Mary.
Returning into Eugland, he became Chaplain to Archbishop Parker, who preferred
him Warden of Merton-colledge, wherein he continued twenty years. When passed
the age of a man (eighty years old) he began the life of a Bishop, and was
rather contented, then willing to accept the Bishopric of Chichester * freely
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...), non nim^ (...) (...) pit. Godwin ut p^s.
offered unto him. Yet lived he eleven years therein, and died ninety years of
age, April 30 1596. and had a most sumptuous funeral, all the Gentry of the
Vicinage doing their homage to the Crown of his old age, which was foun'd in
the way of truth. He led a single life, left an hundred pound to
Merton-colledge, and other moneys to pious uses.

JOHN KING was born at Warnhall nigh Tame in this County, Robert King the last
Abbot of Osney and first Bishop of Oxford being his great Uncle, he was first
Deane of Christ-church, then Bishop of London, being full fraught with all
Episcopal qualities, so that he who endeavors to give a perfect account
thereof, will rather discover his own defects, then describe this Prelates
perfections. He died Anno Dom. 1618. being buried in the Quire of Saint Paul's
with the plain Epitaph of Resurgam, and I cannot conceal this elegant Elegy
made upon him.

Sad Relic of a blessed soul, whose trust
We sealed up in this Religious dust.
O do not thy low Exequies suspect,
As the cheap Arguments of our Neglect.
'Twas a commanded duty that thy Grave
As little pride as thou thy self should have.
Therefore thy covering is an humble stone,
And, but a word, Resurgam.
for thy inscription;
When those that in the same earth neighbor thee,
Have ^ach his Chronicle and Pedigree.
They have their waving Pennons and their flaggs,
Of Matches and Alliance formal Braggs.
Whenthou (although from ancestors thou came,
Old as the Heptarchy, great as thy name,)
Sleepst there inshrin'd in thy admired parts,
And have no Heraldry but thy deserts.
Yet let not them their prouder Marbles boast,
For they rest with less Honor, though more cost.
Go search the world, and with your Mattokwound
The groaning bosom of the patient ground.
Digg from the hidden veins of her dark womb
All that is rare and precious for a tomb:
Yet when much treasure, and more time is spent,
You must grant his the Nobler Monument,
Whose faith standsore him for a Hearse, and has
The Resurrection for his Epitaph.
See more of the character of this most worthy Prelate, in our Ecclesiastical
History anno 1620. wherein he died.

RICHARD MONTAGUE was born at So am I informed by his Son-in-law Doctor David
S^okes.
Dorney (where his Father was Vicar of the Parish) within 3. miles of Eaton,
and so (though not within the reach) within the sight of that Staple Place for
Grammar learning, wherein he was bred; Thence was he chosen successively Fellow
of Kings College in Cambridge, Fellow of Eaton, Parson of Stanford Rivers in
Essex, Canon of Windsor, Parson of Petworth, elected Bishop of Chichester, and
at last of Norwich. He spent very much in repairing his Parsonage-house at
Petworth, as also on his Episcopal house at Allingbourn near Chichester.

He was most exact in the Latin and Greek; and in the Vindication of Tithes
wrestled with the grand Antiquary of England, and gave him a fair flat fall in
the point of a Greek Criticisme, taxing him justly for mistaking a God (amongst
the Egyptians) more then there was, by making a Man amongst the Grammarians
fewer then they should be.

He has many learned works extant against the Papists, some in English, some
in Latin; and one called, his Appello Caesarem, which (without his intent and
against his will) gave occasion of much trouble in the Land. He began an
Ecclesiastical History, and set forth his Apparatus, and alas! it was but an
Apparatus; though, through no Default of his, but defect of his Health;
sickness, troublesome times, and then death surprising him: Had it been
finished, we had had Church Annalls to put into the Balance with those of
Baronius; and which would have swayed with them for Learning, and weighed them
down for Truth. He dyed Anno Dom: 1641.

HENRY KING D. D. son to John King (lately mentioned) Bishop of London and his
wife (of the ancient family of the Conquests) was born in this County, in the
^me town, house, and chamber with his father; a local Coincidence which in all
considerable particulars cannot be paralleled.

We know the Scripture-Proverb used in Exprobration, Ezekiel. 16. 44
As is the mother so is the daughter, both wicked, both woeful. But here it may
be said by way of thankfullness to God, and honor to the persons, As was the
father so is the son, both pious, both prosperous, till the calamity of the
times involved the later.

Episcopacy Anno 1641. was beheld by many in a deep consumption, which many
hoped would prove mortal. To cure this it was conceived the most probable
cordial, to prefer persons into that Order, not only unblameable for their
life, and eminent for their learning, but also generally beloved by all
disingaged people; and amongst these King Charles advanced this our Doctor,
Bishop of Chichester.

But all would not do, their Innocence was so far from stopping the mouth of
malice, that malice almost had swallowed them down her throat. Since God has
rewarded his Patience, giving him to live to see the Restitution of his Order.

David says, that the good Psalm. 1.
Tree [Man] shall bring forth his fruit in due season; so our Doctor varied his
fruits according to the diversity of his age. Being brought up in Christchurch
in Oxford, he delighted in the studies of Musi^k and Poetry, more elder he
applied himself to Oratory and Philosophy, and in his reduced age fixed on
Divinity, which his Printed Sermons on the Lords-prayer, and others which he
preached, remaining fresh in the minds of his Auditors will report him to all
posterity. He is still living Anno Domini 1660.

Writers on the Law.
Sir GEORGE CROOK Knight, son of Sir John Crook and Elizabeth Unton his wife,
was born at In his life prefixed to his Reports.
Chilton in this County, in the second year of the reign of Queen Elizabeth,
bred first in Oxford, then a double Reader in the Inner Temple, Sergeant at
Law, and the Kings Sergeant, Justice first of the Common-bench 22. Jacobi, and
then of the Upper-bench 4. Caroli.

His ability in his profession is sufficiently attested by his own Printed
Reports. Eight eminent Judges of the Law out of their knowledge of his great
wisdom, learning and integrity, approving and allowing them to be published
for the Common benefit.

He was against the Illegality of Ship Money, both publicly in
Westminster Hall, and privately in his judgment demanded by the King, though
concluded to subscribe (according to the Course of the Court) by plurality of
voices, The Country-mans wit (levelled to his brain) will not for many years be
forgotten. That Ship Money may be gotten by H^ok, but not by Crook, though
since they have paid taxes ( loins to the little finger, and Scorpions to the
Rod of Ship Money,) but whether by Hook or Crook, let others inquire.

His piety in his equal and even walkings in the way of God through the
several turnings and occasions of his Life, is evidenced by his Charity to man,
founding a Chapel at Beachley in Buckingham-shire, two miles at least
distanced from the Mother Church, and an Hospital in the same Parish with a
liberal Revenue.

Considering his declining and decaying age, and desiring to examine his Life,
and prepare an Account to the Supreme Judge, he petitioned King Charles for a
Writ of Ease, which though in some sort denied, (what wise Mr. would willingly
part with a good Servant?) was in effect granted unto him. He dyed at
Waterstock in Oxford shire, in the eighty second year of his age, Anno Dom.
1641.

EDWARD BULTSTRODE Esquire. born in this County, bred in the studies of our
municipall Laws in the Inner Temple, and his Highness his Justice in
North Wales, has written a book of diverse Resolutions and Judgments, with the
reasons and causes thereof, given in the Court of King's Bench in the reigns of
King James and King Charles; and is lately deceased.

Soldiers.
Sir WILLIAM WINDSOR Knight. I am confident herein is no mislocation beholding
him an Ancestor to the right honorable Thomas Windsor Hickman Lord Windsor,
and fixed at Bradenham. He was deputed by King Edward the third in the forty
seventh year of his reign Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, which Country was then in
a sad Condition. For the King was so intent on the Conquest of France (as a
Land nearer, fairer, and due to him by descent,) that he neglected the
effectual reduction of Ireland.

This encouraged the Irish Grandees (their O's and Mac's) to Rant and Tyrant it
in their respective seignieuries, whilst such English who were planted there,
had nothing Native (save their Surnames) left; degenerating by degrees to be
Irish in their Habits, Manners and Language. Yea, as the wild Irish are
observed to love their Nurses or Fosters, above their natural Mothers, so these
barbarizing English were more endeared to the interest of Ireland which fed,
then of England which bare and bred them.

To prevent more mischief this worthy Knight was sent over, of whose valor and
fidelity the King had great experience. He contracted with the King to defray
the whole charge of that Kingdom, (as appears by the instrument in the 47.
Edw. 3. claus. pers. 2* M. 24. and 26.
Tower) for eleven thousand two hundred thirteen pounds, six shillings and
eight pence per annum.

Now Sir William undertook not the Conquest, but Custody of the Land in a defen
sive war. He promised not with a daring Mountebank to Cure, but with a discreet
Physician to ease this Irish Gout.

Indeed I meet with a passage in The same also in effect i^ found in (...) in
Rich. ^he second.
Froissard relating how Sir William should report of himself, that he was so
far from subduing the Irish, he could never have access to understand and know
their Countries, albeit he had spent more time in the service of Ireland, then
any Englishman then living. Which to me seems no wonder, the Irish vermin
shrowding themselves under the Scabs of their Bogs, and Hair of their Woods.
However he may truly be said to have left that land much improved, because no
whit more impaired during those dangerous distractions, and safely resigned his
office (as I take it) in the first of K. Richard the second.

ARTHUR GRAY Baron of Wilton is justly reckoned amongst the Natives of this
Shire, whose father had his Habitation (not at Wilton a decayed Castle in
Hereford-shire whence he took his Title, but) at Waddon a fair house of his
Family not far from Buckingham.

He succeeded to a small Estate much diminished on this sad occasion. His
father William Lord Gray being taken Prisoner in France, after long
ineffectuall soliciting to be (because captivated in the public service)
redeemed on the public charge, at last was forced to ransom himself with the
sale of the best part of his Patrimony.

Our Arthur endeavored to advance his estate by his valor being entered in
Feats of war, under his Martial father at the siege of Lies, 1560. where he
was Camdens Eliz. anno notato.
shot in the shoulder, which inspirited him with a constant antipathy against
the Scotch. He was afterward sent over Lord Deputy into Ireland anno 1580.
where before he had received the Sword or any Emblemes of Command ut Camdens
Eliz. anno 1580:
acrioribus initiis terrorem incuteret, to fright his foes with his fierce
beginning, he unfortunately fought the rebels at Glandilough to the great loss
of English blood. This made many commend his Courage above his Conduct, till he
recovered his credit, and finally suppressed the rebellion of Desmund.

Returning into England, the Queen chiefly relied on his counsel for ordering
our Landforces against the Spaniards in 88. and fortifying places of
advantage. The mention of that year (critical in Church differences about
discipline at home, as well as with foreign foes abroad) minds me that this
Lord was but a Back-friend to Bishops, and in all divisions of Votes in
Parliament or Council Table sided with the Anti-prelatical party.

When Secretary Davison, that State-Pageant, (raised up on purpose to be put
down,) was censured in the Star Chamber about the business of the Queen of
Scots, this Lord Gray only defended him, as doing nothing therein but what
became an able and honest Minister of State. An Camdens Eliz. anno 1587.
ear-witness says, Haec fuse oratorie and animose Greium disserentem
audivimus. So that besides bluntness (the common and becoming eloquence of
Soldiers) he had a real Rhetoric, and could very emphatically express
himself. Indeed this warlike Lord would not wear two heads under one Helmet,
and may be said always to have born his Beaver open, not dissembling in the
least degree, but owning his own judgment at all times what he was. He deceased
anno Dom. 1593.

Writers.
ROGER de WENDOVER was born at that Market Town in this County, bred a
Benedictine in St. Albans, where he became the Kings Historian.

Know, Reader, that our English Kings had always a Monck, generally of St.
Albans (as near London, the Staple of news and books) to write the remarkables
of their reigns. One adds (I am sorry he is a Ponticus Viru^ius cited by J.
B^le de script. Brit. Cent* 4. number. 94.
forrainer, and therefore of less credit at such distance,) that their
*Chronicles were locked up in the Kings Library, so that neither in that Kings,
nor his Sons life they were ever opened. If so, they had a great encouragement
to be impartial, not fearing a blow on their teeth, though coming near to the
heels of truth, which in some sort were tied up from doing them any hurt.

This Roger began his Chronicle at the Conquest, and continued it to the year
1235. being the 19. year of King Henry the third. Indeed Matthew Paris does
quarter too heavily on the pains of Wendover, who only continuing his
Chronicle for some years, and inserting some small See Dr. Watts his Prefatory
notes to Math: Paris.
alterations, is entitled to the whole work. As a few drops of blood, because
of the deep hiew thereof, discoloureth a whole basin of water into redness; so
the few and short Interpolations of Paris, as the more noted Author, give a
denomination to the whole History, though a fabric built three stories high
whereof our Roger laid the foundation, finished the ground-room and second
loft, to which by Mr. Paris was added the garret, as since the roof by W.
Rishanger. This Wendover died about the year of our Lord 1236.

JOHN AMERSHAM was born in that small Corporation in this County, bred a Monck
in St. Albans, where he contracted not only Intimacy, but in some sort
Identity of Affection, with John Wheathamsted Abbot thereof; insomuch that what
was said of two other friends was true of them, ( Ethics making good the
Grammar thereof) Duo Amici Vixit in eodem Conventu.

Now there was a great Faction in that Convent against their Abbot, which to me
seems no wonder; for the generality of Moncks being lewd, lazy and unlearned,
they bare an Antipathy to their Abbot, who was pious, painful, and a profound
Scholar. Nor did they only rail on his Person whilst living, but also revile
his Memory when dead. Our Amersham, surviving his dear friend, wrote a book
(besides other of his works) entitled the Bale de script. Brit. and Pits.
Aetat. 14. number* 843.
Shield of Wheathamsted, therein defending him from the undeserved Darts of his
Enemies Obloquy. He flourished Anno Dom. 1450.

MATTHEW STOKES was born in the Hatchets M. S. 8. of the Fellows of
KingsColledge.
Town, and bred in the School of Eaton, until he was admitted in
Kings-colledge in Cambridge, Anno Domini 1531. He afterward became Fellow of
that house, and at last Esquire Bedle, and Register of the University.

A Register indeed both by his place and painful performance therein; for he
(as the Poets fain of Janus with two faces) saw two worlds, that before and
after the Reformation. In which juncture of time so great the confusion and
embezeling of Records, that had not Master Stokes been the more careful, I
believe, that though Cambridge would not be so Oblivious as Massala Corvinus
who forgot his own name, yet would she have forgotten the names of all her
Ancient Officers.

To secure whose succession to Posterity, Mr. Stokes with great industry and
fidelity collected a Catalogue of the Chancellours, Vice-Chancellours and
Proctors. He was a Zealous Papist (even unto persecution of others) which I
note not to disgrace his Memory, but defend my self, for placing him before the
Reformation, though he lived many years in the reign of Q. Elizabeth.

Since the Reformation.
WALTER HADDON was born of a Knightly Family in this B^le de script. Brit.
Ceat. nono. Number. 87.
County, bred at Eaton, afterward Fellow in Kings-colledge, where he proceeded
Doctor of Law, and was the Kings Professor in that Faculty, chosen
Vice Chancellor of Cambridge 1550. soon after he was made President of
Magdalen-colledge in Oxford, which place he waved in the reign of Queen Mary,
and sheltered himself in obscurity. Queen Elizabeth made him one of the Masters
of her Requests, and employed him in several Embassies beyond the Seas. Her
Majesty being demanded whether She preferred him or Buchanan for learning,
wittily and warily returned,

Buchananum omnibus antepono, Haddonum nemini postpono. Indeed he was a most
Eloquent man, and a pure Ciceronian in his style, as appears by his writings,
and especially in his book against Osorius. The rest may be learned out of his
Epitaph.

S. Memoriae.

GUALTERO HADDONO Equestri loco nato juris consulto, Oratori, Poet^
celeberrimo, Graecae Latinaeque Eloquentiae sui temporis facile principi,
sapientia and sanctitate vitae, in id evecto, ut Reginae Elizabethae a
supplicum libellis magister esset, destinareturque majoribus nisi facto
immaturius cessisset: Interim in omni gradus viro long eminentissimo, conjugi
sui optimo meritissimoque Anna Suttona, uxor ejus secunda flens maerens
desiderii sui signum posuit. Obiit Anno Salut. hum. 1572. Aetatis 56. This his
fair Monument is extant in the wall at the upper end of the Chancell of
Christs-church in London. Where so many ancient Inscriptions have been
barbarously defaced.

LAURENCE HUMPHRED was born in this Humfredus Patri^a Buchingam s. Baleus de
Script. Brit. Cent. 9. number. 93.
County, bred in Magdalen-colledge in Oxford, a great and general Scholar,
able Linguist, deep Divine, pious to God, humble in himself, charitable to
others. In the reign of Queen Mary he fled into Germany, and there was
Fellow-Commoner with Mr. Jewel, (whose life he wrote at large in Latin) in
all his sufferings. Here he translated Origin de Recta Fide, and Philo de (...)
tate out of Greek.

Returning into England in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, he was made (...) of
Magdalen-colledge in Oxford, and Dean of Winchester. Higher preferment he (...)
ver attained, because never desired it, though a learned Camdens Elizabeth in
Anno 1589.
Author seems to put it on another account, fortasse eo quod de adiaphoris non
juxta cum Ecclesia Anglicana senserit. I deny not but he might scruple some
ceremonies, but sure I am he was much molested in his College with a party of
fierce (not to so furious) Nonconformists, from whom he much dissented in
judgment. He died Anno Dom. 1589.

Here I must confess a mistake in my Ecclesiastical History (misguided therein
with many others by general tradition) when I reported the gold lately found
and shared amongst the President and Fellows of Magdalen-colledge in Oxford, to
have been the gift of this Doctor Humphred, which since appears a legacy left
by William Wainfleet their Founder. Would I had been mistaken in the Matter as
well as in the Person, that so unworthy an act had never been performed. But
what said Cen. 43. 13.
Jacob to his sons? Carry back the money again, peradventure it was an
oversight. Seasonable restitution will make reparation.

ROGER GOAD was born at Mr. Hatcher in his M. S. Catalog. of the Fellows of
Kings-col.
Houton in this County, and was admitted Scholar in Kings-colledge in Cambridge
1555. Leaving the College he became a Schoolmaster at Guilford in Surrey. But
pity it is that a great candle should be burning in the Kitchen, whilst light
is lacking in the Hall, and his public parts pent in so private a profession.
He was made not to guide boys, but govern men. Hence by an unexpected election
he was surprised into the Provostship of Kings-colledge, wherein he remained
forty years. He was thrice Vice-chancellonr of Cambridge; a grave, sage and
learned man. He had many contests with the young Fry in this College, chiefly
because he loved their good better then they themselves. Very little there is
of his in print, save what he did in Conjunction with other Doctors of the
University. By his Testament he gave the Rectory of Milton to the College, and
dying on Saint Marks day 1610. lies buried in a Vestery on the North-side of
the Chapel.

JOHN GREGORY was born November 10. 1607. at Amersham in this County, of honest
though mean parents, yet rich enough to derive unto him the hereditary
infirmity of the gout, which afflicted him the last twenty years of his life.
He was bred in Christ-church in Oxford, where he so applied his book, that he
studied (...) his life (...) to his boo^.
sixteen hours of the four and twenty for many years together. He attained to
be an exquisite Linguist and general Scholar, his modesty setting the greater
luster on his learning. His notes on Dr. Redleys book of Civil-law gave the
first testimony of his pregnancy to the world, and never did text and comment
better meet together.

He was first Chaplain of Christ-church, and thence preferred by Bishop Duppa,
Prependary of Chichester and Sarum, and indeed no Church-preferment compatible
with his age was above his deserts. He died at Kidlington in Oxfordshire 1646.
and was buried at Christ-church in Oxford. I find a smart Epitaph made by a
friend on his memory, and it was in my mind as well valiantly (consider the
times) as truly indicted.

Ne premas Cineres hosce, Viator,
Nescis quot sub hoc jaeent Lapillo;
Graeculus, Hebraeus, Syrus,
Et qui te quovis vincet Idiomate.
At ne molestus sis
Ausculta, and causam auribus tuis imbibe:
Templo exclusus
Et avita Religione
Jam senescente, (ne dicam sublata)
Mutavit Chorum, altiorem ut capesceret.
Vade nunc, si libet, and imitare.
R. W.
His Opera Posthuma are faithfully set forth, by his good friend John Gurgain,
and deservedly dedicated to Edward Bish Esquire, one so able that he could,
charitable that he would, and valiant that he durst relieve Master Gregory in
his greatest distress.

SAMUEL COLLINS, son to Baldwin Collins (born in Coventry, a pious and painful
preacher, prodigiously bountiful to the poor, whom Queen Elizabeth constantly
called Father Collins) was born and bred Hence he styles himself in his books
Aetonensis.
at Eaton, so that he breathed learned air from (...) of his nativity. Hence
coming to Kings-colledge in Cambridge, he was succes^ively chosen Fellow,
Provost, and Regius Professor. One of an admirable wit and (...), the most
fluent Latinist of our age: so that as Caligula is said to have sent (...)
soldiers vainly to fight against the tide, with the same success have any
encountered the torrent of his tongue in Disputation. He constantly read his
Lectures twice a week, for above forty years, giving notice of the time to his
Auditors in a ticket on the School-dores, wherein never any two alike; without
some considerable difference in the critical language thereof. When some
displeased Courtier did him the injurious courtesy to prefer him downwards
(in point of profit) to the Bishopric of Bristol, he improved all his friends
to decline his election. In these troublesome times (affording more Preachers
then Professors) he lost his Church but kept his Chair, wherein he died about
the year 1651.

WILLIAM OUGHTRED was (though branched from a right ancient Family in the
North) born in the Town, bred in the School of Eaton, became Fellow of
Kingscolledge; and at last was beneficed by Thomas Earl of Arundel at Albury in
Surrey. All his contemporaries unanimously acknowledged him the Prince of
Mathematicians in our Age and Nation. This aged Simeon had (though no
Revelation) a strong persuasion that before his death he should behold Christ's
anointed restored to his Throne, which he did accordingly to his incredible
joy, and then had his Dimittis out of this mortal life, June 30. 1660.

Romish Exile Writers.
THOMAS DORMAN was born at Ammersham in this County, being nephew unto Thomas
Dorman of the same town, A Confessor in the reign of King Henry the eighth.
True it is, this his Uncle through weakness did abjure (let us pity his, who
desire God should pardon our failings,) but was ever a cordial Protestant. He
Fox his Acts and Mon. page 838.
bred this Thomas Dorman juni^r at Berkhamsted-school (founded by Dr. Incent)
in Hartfordshire, under Mr. Reeve a Protestant Schoolmaster.

But this Dorman turned tail afterward, and became a great Romanist, running
over beyond the seas, where he wrote a book entitled Against Alexander Nowel,
the English Calvinist. J. Pits does repent that he affords him no room in the
body of his book, referring him to his Pagin^ 914.
Appendix. He flourished Anno 1560.

Memorable Persons.
JOHN MATTHEW Mercer, son to Thomas Matthew was born at Sherington in this
County, Lord Mayor of London, Anno Dom. 1490. He is eminent on this account
that he was the first Stow Surv^y of London page 573.
Bachelar that ever was chosen into that office. Yea it was above a hundred and
twenty years before he was seconded by a single person succeeding him in that
place, viz. Sir John This Mayor was the second Batchlor says How, continuing
Slow in his Survay of London page 195.
Leman Lord Mayor 1616. It seems that a Lady Mayoresse is something more then
ornamentall to a Lord Mayor, their wives great portions or good providence,
much advantaging their estates, to be capable of so high a dignity.

Dame HESTER TEMPLE, daughter to Miles Sands Esquire was born at Latmos in this
County, and was married to Sir Thomas Temple of Stow Baronet. She had four Sed
quaere.
sons and nine daughters, which lived to be married, and so exceedingly
multiplied, that this Lady saw seven hundred extracted from her body. Reader, I
speak within compass, and have left my self a reserve, having bought the truth
hereof by a wager I lost. Besides there was a new generation of marrigable
females just at her death, so that this aged vine may be said to wither, even
when it had many young boughs ready to knit.

Had I been one of her relations, and as well enabled as most of them be, I
would have erected a monument for her thus designed. A fair tree should have
been erected, the said Lady and her Husband lying at the bottom or root
thereof; the Heir of the family should have ascended both the middle and
top-bough thereof. On the right hand hereof her younger sons, on the left her
daughters should as so many boughs be spread forth. Her grandchildren should
have their names inscribed on the branches of those boughs, the
great-grand-children on the twiggs of those branches, the
great-great-grand-children on the leaves of those twiggs. Such as survived her
death should be done in a lively green, the rest (as blasted) in a pale and
yellow fading-colour.

Lib. 7. cap. 13.
Pliny, who reports it as a wonder worthy the Chronicle, that Chrispinus
Hilarus, Praelata pompa, with open ostentation, sacrificed in the Capitol,
seventy four of his children and childrens children attending on him, would
more admire if admitted to this spectacle.

In comment upon the 8. c. os Lib. 15. De Civit. Dei.
Vives tells us of a Village in Spain of about an hundred houses, whereof all
the inhabitants were issued from one certain old man who then lived, when as
that Village was so peopled, so as the name of propinquity how the youngest of
the children should call him, could not be given. Lingua enim nostra supra
abavum non ascendit, Our language (says he, meaning the Spanish) affords not a
name above the great-grandfathers father. But had the offspring of this Lady
been contracted into one place, they were enough to have peopled a City of a
competent proportion, though her issue was not so long in succession, as broad
in extent.

I confess very many of her Descendants dyed before her death, in which respect
she was far surpassed by a Roman Matron, on whom the Ausonius Epitap. Heroum
number. 34.
Poet thus Epitapheth it, in her own person.

Viginti atque novem, genitrici Callicratea,
Nullius sexus mors mihi visa fuit.
Sed centu^ et quinque explevi been messibus annos,
Intremulam baculo non subeunte manun.
Twenty nine births Callicrate I told,
And of both Sexes saw none sent to grave.
I was an hundred and five winters old,
Yet stay from staff my hand did never crave.
Thus in all ages God bestows personal felicities on some, far above the
proportion of others. The Lady Temple dyed Anno Dom. 1656.

Lord Mayors.
Name Father Place Company Time 1 John Brokle William Brokle Newport Paganel
Draper 1433 2 Thomas Scot Robert Scot Dorney Draper 1458 3 Henry Collet Robert
Collet Wendover Mercer 1486 4 John Matthew Thomas Matthew Shreington Mercer 1490
5 John Mundy William Mundy Wycombe Goldsmith 1522 6 John Coats Thomas Coats
Bearton Salter 1542

The Names of the (...) of this County R^turned by the Commissioners in the
twelfth year of King Henry the sixth, 1433.
William Bishop of Lincoln, Commissioners to take the Oaths. Reginald de Gray
de Ruthyan Chivaler. Thomas Sakevile Miles, Knights for the Shire. William
Wapload. Knights for the Shire.

Reginaldi Lucy, Chiv. Walteri Lucy, Chiv. Johan. Cheyne, Chiv. Tho. Chetewode,
Chiv. Johan. Cheyne, Arm. Johan. Hampden de Hampden, Ar. Andreae Sper^ing
Thomae Rokes, Ar. Johan. Lange^on, Ar. Johan. Iwardby, Ar. David Breknook, Ar.
Thomae Stokes, Ar. Johan. Hampden de Kimbell. Walteri Fitz Richard, Armigeri.
Johan. Stretlee, Ar. Tho. Shyngelton, Ar. Thomae Cheyne, Ar. Johan. Stokes, Ar.
Thomae Gifford, Ar. Johan. Gifford d^ Whaddon Senioris, Ar. Thomae Boteler, Ar.
Rob. Puttenham, Ar. Roberti Olney de Weston, Ar. Johan. Tyringham, Ar. Johan.
Brekenock, Ar. Thomae Rufford, Ar. Johan. Dayrell, Ar. Nicolai Clopton Edmundi
Brutenell Johan. Sewell Johan. Watkins Willillmi Brook de Chesham. Bernardi
Sanderdon Thomae More Will. Fouler. Iohannis Arches Johan. Skydmore Johan.
Kimbell Will. Joyntour Rogeri More Johan. Horewode Johan. Baldewin Thomae At
Well Will. Chapman de Aylesbury Tho. Turnour Johan. Knight de Hampslape Will.
Watford Thomae Oliver Will. Colingrgg de Toursey Thomae Malins Will. Parker de
Eton Will. Burton person Ecclesiae de Crowle Johan. Clerk de Olney Rich.
Hawtreve Johan. Giffard de Hardmede Johan. Tapelo de Hampslape Thomae Knight de
eadem Johan. Giffard de Whaddon junioris Johan. Sapcote de Olney Rich. Arnecok
Will. Edy Nich. Brackwell Will. Sambroke Johan. Edy junioris Thomae Edy Johan.
Puchas Will. Berewell Ade Ashinden David. Whitchirche Johan. Sweft Will.
Britwell de Cherdesle Johan. Verney Eustachii Grenvile Johan. Fitz John Will.
Gerebray Tho. Maudeleyn Johan. Vesy Tho. Wodewarde Rich. Enershawe Johan.
Harewold de Weston Hen. Loveden Johan. Thorp Johan. Parker de Fenny Stratford
Nicholai Baker de Crowle Nich. Hobbesson Tho. Malette Johan. Kerye Tho. Tappe
Rich. Hoo de Snenston Johan. Manchestre Johan. Phelip Hen. Hunkes Rich. Miches
Will. Meridale Tho. Edward Johan. Vaux Will. Dun Hen. Toursey Hen. Dicon Will.
Winslowe Johan. Bilindon Hen. Porter Tho. Turgens Rober. Dalafeld Math. Colett
Johan. Hampden de Wycombe Johan. Wellesburn Tho. Merston Will. Attegate Tho.
Merry Rich. Milly Will. Wodeward Tho. Pusey Roberti Broun de Beknesfeld Johan.
Iourdeley Tho. Houghton Rich. Yaulode Johan. Gold de Ailesbury Will. Clarke de
eadem Will. Clarke de Culverdon Thomae Kene de Horsendon Will. Symeon Will.
Fether Johan. Caradons Will. Comb de Aylesbury Will. Gill Rich. Lamburn Will.
Hid^ Tho. Bristow Nich. Baron Will. Cook de Fertwell Johan. Glover de Kimbell
Johan. Balke de Aylesbury Johan. Lucy and Rich. Lucy
Sheriffs.
This County had the same with Bedford-shire, until they were parted in the
seventeenth year of Queen Elizabeth. Since which time these have been the
Sheriffs of this County alone.

Name Place Arms REG. ELIZA. Anno 17 Ioh. Croke, ar. Chilton G. a fess between
6 martlets Arg. 18 Griff. Hampden, armiger. Hampden Argent a Saltire Gules
betwixt 4 Eaglets Az. 19 Mich* Blount, ar. Barry (...) of. 6 Or. and Sable. 20
Rob. Drury, ar. (...) Arg on a Chief vert the (...) Tau betw^xt 2 (...) pierced
Or. 21 Rich. Crafford, ar. 22 Paul. Darell, ar. Lillingstone Az. a Lion Rampant
Or, (...) Argent. 23 Th. Tasborough, a. Az. on a Cross Arg. 5 mullets G. 24
Edm. Verney, ar. Arg. 4 Lions passant S. betwixt 2 Gemewes in Bend. 25 Will.
Hawtrey, ar. Checkers Az. 10 billets 4, 3, 2, and 1. Or, in a Chief of the
second a Lion issuant Sable. 26 Rob. Dormer, ar. Wing 27 Edw. Bulstrod, ar. See
our Notes. Arg. on 2 Bars S. 6 martlets Or. 28 Ioh. Temple, ar. Stow * Ar. on a
Bend S. 2 Cubit arms Issuant out of 2 pettet Clouds Rayonated all proper
Rending of a of a (...) Or. 29 Ioh. Goodwin, ar. See 21 of K. James. 30 Ioh.
Burlace, *ar. 31 Fran. Cheney, ar. Chesham the Vache Checky Or and (...) Fess G
Fretty Erm. 32 Ge. Fleetwood, a. Partee per pale Nebulee Az. and (...), 6
martilets counterchanged. 33 Ale. Hampden, a. ut prius 34 Hen. Longvile, ar.
Wolverto^ Gules a Fess indented twixt 6 Crosses (...) Arg. 35 Tho. Pigot, ar.
Dodershal S. 3 (...) Arg. 36 Mic. Harecourt, a. Or. 2 Bars Gules. 37 Edw.
Tirrell, ar. Thornton Arg. 2 Chev. Az. within a Border Engrailed G. 38 An.
Tirringham, a. Tirringham Az. a (...) Engrailed Arg. 39 Ioh. Dormer ut prius 40
Will. Garrend, ar. See our Notes in Northamptonshire. 41 Will. Clarke, mil. 42
Tho. (...), ar. G. a Chev. between 3 Cressets Ar. 43 Will. Burlace, ar. ut
prius 44 Anth. Chester, ar. Chichely Per Pale Arg. and Sable, a Chev. between 3
Rams-heads Erased armed Or, within a Border ingrailed, roundelly, all
Counterchanged. 45 Fran. Cheney, mi. ut prius REG. JAC. Anno 1 Fran. Cheney,
mi. ut prius 2 W. Willoughby. m AMP. 3 Ri. Ingoldesby, m. Lethenbor. Erm. a
Saltire Engrailed S. 4 Hen. Longvile. m. ut prius 5 Will. Andrews, m G. a
Saltire Or, Charged with another, (...). 6 Fran Fortescu, m. Az. a Bend
Engrailed Ar. cotised Or. 7 Anth. Greenway, a. 8 Rob. Lovet, mil. Liscomb Arg.
3 wolves passant in Pale S. 9 Iero. Horsey, mil. Az. 3 Horses-heads Couped Or,
Bridled Ar. 10 Edw. Tirrell, mil. ut prius 11 Sim. May ne, ar. Arg. on a Bend
ingr. S. 3 dexter handsof the first. 12 Bri. Johnson, ar. Beaconfield Quarterly
Azure and G. a Cross Patoncee, and a Chief Or. 13 Edm. Wheeler, mi. Riding-Co.
Or. a Chev. between 3 Leopardsheads (...). 14 Th. Temple, m. and B. ut prius 15
Ioh. Laurence, mi. Iver Arg. a Cross knotted G. on a Chief Az. 3 Leopards-heads
Or. 16 Fra. Duncombe, a. Party per Chev. counter-Flore, G. and Arg. 3
Talbots-heads Erazed countercharged. 17 Be. Winchombe, a. See our Notes. 18
Hen. Lee, m. and ba. Quarrendo^ Arg. a Fess betwixt 3 Cressants Sable. 19 Ioh.
Denham, mil. Gules 3 (...) Erm. 20 Will. Fleetwood ut prius * Per pale Or and
G. a Lion Ramp. (...) three flower de luces counterchanged. 21 Fra. Goodwin,
*m. 22 Will. Pen, ar. Pen Arg. on a Fess S. 3 Plates. REG. CARO. Anno 1 Edw.
Coke, mil. Stoke Partee per pale G. and Az. 3 Eagles Argent. 2 Gil. Gerrard,
bar. Quarterly, the 1 and 4 Arg. a Sal. G. the 2 and 3 Az. a Lion Ramp. Erm.
Crowned Or. 3 Tho. Darel, a. ut prius 3 F. Catesby. a. Northamp. Ar. 2 Lions
passant, S. crowned Or. 4 The. Lee, ar. ut prius 5 Will. (...), m. ut prius 6
Tho. Hide, baro. Or, a Chev. betwixt 3 (...) Az. in Chief an Eagle of the
first. 7 (...). Dupper, ar. 8 Rob. Dormer, ar. ut prius 9 Fran. (...), mi. ut
prius 10 Pet. Temple, mil. ut prius 11 Heneage Proby, a. Erm. on a Fess* G* a
Lion Passant the tail extended, Or. 12 Anth. Chester, ba. ut prius 13 14 15
Tho. Archdale, ar, 16 17 Rich* Grevile, mi. Sable a border and Cross engrailed
Or, thereon 5 Pellets. 18 19 20 Hen. Beak, ar. 21 22 Will. Collier, ar.

Queen Elizabeth.
17 JOHN CROKE Ar.]

Being afterward Knighted, he was the son of Sir John Crook a Six-clerk in
Chancery, and therefore restrained marriage until enabled by a statute of the
14. of Henry the eighth. His (...) in the Civil wars between York and
Lancaster concealed their * Pref. to Crok's Reports.
proper name Le Blount under the assumed one of Croke.

As for this Sir John Croke, first Sheriff of Buckingham after the division of
Bedfordshire, he was most fortunate in an issue happy in the knowledge of our
municipall Law: Of whom Sir John Croke his eldest son Speaker of the Parliament
in the 43. of Queen Elizabeth. He received this Eulogium from Her Majesty, That
he had proceeded therein with such wisdom and discretion, that none before him
had deserved better. As for Sir George his second son, we have spoken of him In
the Wri^ of Law in this County.
before.

26 ROBERT DORMER Ar.]

He was on the 10. of June 1615. made Baronet by King James, and on the 30. day
of the same Month was by him Created Baron Dormer of Wing in this County.

His grandchild Robert Dormer was by K. Charles in the 4. of his reign Created
Viscount Ascot and Earl of Carnarvan. He lost his life, fighting for him who
gave him his Honor, at the first battle of Newbury. Being sore wounded, he was
desired by a Lord, to know of him what suit he would have to his Majesty in his
behalf, the said Lord promising to discharge his trust in presenting his
request, and assuring him that his Majesty would be willing to (...) him to the
utmost of his power: To whom the Earl replied, I will not dye with a suit in my
mouth to any King, save to the King of Heaven By Anne daughter to Philip Earl
of Pembrook and Montgomery, He had Charles now (...) of Carnarvan.

27 EDWARD BULSTROD Ar.]

I have not met with so ancient a Coat (for such it appears beyond all
exception) so voluminous in the Blazon thereof, viz. Sable, a Bucks head
Argent, attired Or, shot the Nose with an Arrow of the third, headed and
feathered of the second, a Cross Patee fitchee betwixt the Attire, Or.

34 HEN. LONGVILE Ar.]

He had to his fourth son Sir Michael Longvile, who married Susan sole daughter
to Hen. Earl of Kent. Now, when the issue in a direct line of that Earldome
failed in our memory, Mr. Seldom was no less active then able to prove that the
Barony of (...) was dividable from the Earldome, and descended to the son of
the said Sir Michael, and thereupon he sat as Baron Ruthyn in our late long
Parliament.

Since his death his sole daughter and heir has been married unto Sir Henry
Yelverton of Easton in the County of Northampton Baronet, a worthy Gent. of
fair estate, so that that Honor is likely to continue in an equipage of
breadth proportionable to the height thereof.

King James.
17 BENEDICT WINCHCOMBE Ar.]

His arms (too large for the little space allotted them) I here fully
represent in gratitude to the Memory of his Ancestor, so well deserving of See
Memorable persons in Bark-shire.
Newbury, viz. Azure, on a Chev. engrailed between three Birds Or, as many
Cinque foiles of the first, on a Chief of the second a Flower the Luce between
two spears heads of the first.

King Charles.
1 EDWARD COKE Knight.]

This was our English (...), so famous for his Comments on our Common Law. This
year a Parliament was called, and the Court-party was jealous of Sir Edwards
activity against them, as who had not digested his discontentments. Hereupon to
prevent his election as a member, and confine him to this County, he was
pricked Sheriff thereof.

He scrupuled to take the oath, pretending many things against it, and
particularly that the Sheriff is bound thereby to prosecute Lollards, wherein
the best Christians may be included.

It was answered, that he had often seen the Oath given to others without any
regreet, and knew full well that Lollard in the modern sense imported the Sir
Henry (...) in (...) (...) verbo Lollard.
opposers of the present Religion, as established by Law in the Land.

No excuses would serve (...) turn, but he must undertake this office. However
his friends beheld it, as an injurious degradation of him, who had been Lord
Chief Justice, to attend onthe Judges at the Assizes.

9 FRANCIS CHENEY Mil.]

It is an Epidemical disease, to which many ancient Names are subject, to be
variously disguised in writing. How many names is it Chesney, Chedney, Cheyne,
Chyne, Cheney, etc. And all de Casineto. A name so Noble and so diffused in the
Catalogue of Sheriffs, it is harder to miss then find it any County.

Here, Reader, let me amend and insert what I omitted in the last County. There
was a fair Family of the Cheneys flourishing in Kent, (but landed also in other
Counties,) giving for their Arms, Azure, six Lions Rampant Argent, a Canton
Ermin. Of this house was Henry Chency High sheriff of this County and Bedford
shire in the 7. of Q. Elizabeth, and not long after by her created Baron of
Tuddington in Bedford-shire. In his youth he was very wild and venturous,
witness his playing at Dice with Henry the second King of France, from whom he
won a Diamond of great worth at a Cast: And being demanded by the King, what
shift he would have made to repair himself in case he had lost the cast; I have
(said young Chency in an hyperbolical brave) SHEEPS TAILS enough in Kent, with
their Wool to buy a better Diamond then this. His reduced Age afforded the
befitting fruits of Gravity and Wisdom, and this Lord deceased without Issue.

As for Sir Francis Cheney Sheriff for this present year, we Viz. in the 31.
year of Q. Elizabeth.
formerly observed the distinct Arms of his Family. This worthy Knight was
father to Charles Cheney Esquire. who by his exquisite Traveling has Naturalized
foreign perfections into himself, and is exemplarily happy in a virtuous Lady,
Jane Daughter to the truly Noble William Marquis of New Castle, and by her of
hopeful Posterity.

The Farewell.
On serious consideration, I was at a loss to wish to this County, what it
wanted, God and the Kings of England have so favored it with natural
perfections, and civil privileges. In avowance of the latter it shows more
Burrow-towns (sending Burgesses no fewer then twelve to the Parliament) then
any Shire, (though thrice as big) lying in the Kingdom of Mercia. Now seeing
at the instant writing hereof, the general News of the Nation is, of a
Parliament to be called after his Majesty's Coronation, my prayers shall be
that the Freehoulders of this County shall (amongst many therein so qualified)
choose good Servants to God, Subjects to the King, Patriots to the County,
effectually to advance a happiness to the Church and Commonwealth.

CAMBRIDGE-SHIRE.
CAMBRIDGE-SHRE has Lincoln shire on the North, Northfolk and Suffold on the
East, Essex and Hartford-shire on the South, Huntington, and Bedford-shires on
the West, being in length thirty five, in breadth not fully twenty miles. The
Tables therein as well furnished as any, the Southpart affording bread and
beer, and the North (the Isle of Ely) meat thereunto. So good the grain growing
here, that it out-selleth others some pence in the Bushel.

The North-part of this County is lately much improved by drayning, though the
poorest sort of people will not be sensible thereof. Tell them of the great
benefit to the public, because where a Pike or Duck fed formerly, now a
Bullock or Sheep is fatted, they will be ready to return, that if they be taken
in taking that Bullock or Sheep, the rich Owner ^indicteth them for Felons;
whereas that Pike or Duck were their own goods only for their pains of catching
of them. So impossible it is that the best project though perfectly performed
should please all interests and affections.

It happened in the year 1657. upon the dissolution of the great Snow their
banks were assaulted above their strength of resistance, to the great loss of
much Cattle, Corn, and some Christians. But soon after the seasonable industry
of the Undertakers, did recover all by degrees, and confute their jealousies
who suspected the relapsing of these lands into their former condition.

This Northern part is called the Isle of Eelie, which Doctor Smith in the lise
of his Father-in-law Doctor ^illet.
one will have so named from the Greek word (...) Fenny or Marish-ground, But
our Saxon Ancestors were not so good Grecians, and it is plain that plenty of
Eels gave it its denomination. Here I hope I shall not trespass on gravity, in
mentioning a passage observed by the In his Comitiat Oration De duobus Testibus
page 15.
Reverend Professor of Oxford Doctor Prideaux, referring the Reader to him for
the Authors attesting the same. When the Priests in this part of the County
would still retain their wives, in despite of whatever the Pope and Monks
could do to the contrary, their wives and children were miraculously turned
all into Eels (surely the greater into Congers, the less into Griggs) whence it
had the name of EELY, I understand him a LIE of EELS. No doubt the first
founder of so damnable an untruth, has long since received his reward. However
for this cause we take first notice amongst this Counties

Natural Commodities,
Of Eels.
Which though they be found in all Shires in England, yet are most properly
treated of here, as most, first, and best, the Courts of the Kings of England
being thence therewith anciently supplied. I will not engage in the controversy
whether they be bred by generation as other fish, or aequivocally out of
Putrefaction, or both ways which is most probable; Seeing some have adventured
to know the distinguishing marks betwixt the one and other. I know the Silver
Eels are generally preferred, and I could wish they loved men but as well as
men love them, that I my self might be comprised within the compass of that
desire. They are observed to be never out of season, (whilst other fishes have
their set times,) and the biggest Eels are ever esteemed the best. I know not
whether the Italian proverb be here worth the remembering, Give Eels without
wine to your Enemies.

Hares.
Though these are found in all Counties, yet because lately there was in this
Shire an Hare-park nigh New Market, preserved for the Kings game, let them here
be particularly mentioned. Some prefer their sport in hunting before their
flesh for eating, as accounting it melancholic meat, and hard to be digested,
though others think all the hardness is how to come by it. All the might of
this silly creature is in the flight thereof, and remember the answer which a
schoolboy returned in a latin distick, being demanded the reason why Hares
where so fearful,

Cur metuunt lepores? Terrestris, nempe, marinus,
Aethereus quod sit, tartareusque canis.
Whether or no they change their sex every year, (as some have reported) let
Huntsmen decide. These late years of our civil wars have been very destructive
unto them, and no wonder, if no law has been given to hares, when so little
has been observed toward men.

Saffron.
Though plenty hereof in this County, yet because I conceive it first planted
in Essex we thither refer our description thereof.

Willows.
A sad Tree, whereof such who have lost their love make their mourning
garlands, and we know what Exiles hung up their Psalm 137. 2.
Harps upon such doleful Supporters. The twiggs hereof are Physic to drive
out the folly of children. This Tree delights in moist places, and is
triumphant in the Isle of Ely, where the roots strengthen their Banks, and lop
affords fuel for their fire. It grows incredibly fast, it being a byword in
this County, that the profit by Willows will buy the Owner a Horse, before that
by other Trees will pay for his Saddle. Let me add, that if green Ash may burn
before a Queen, withered Willows may be allowed to burn before a Lady.

Manufactures.
Paper.
Expect not I should by way of Preface enumerate the several inventions,
whereby the ancients did communicate, and continue their Notions to Posterity.
First by writing in Leaves of Trees still remembered, when we call such a
Scantling of Paper a Folio or Leaf. Hence from Leaves men proceeded to the
Bark of Trees, as more solid, still cou^enanced in the Notation of the word
Liber. Next they wrote in Labels or Sheets of Lead, wherein the Letters were
deeply engraven, being a kind of Printing before Printing, and to this I refer
the words of Job (an Author allowed Contemporary with, if not Senior to Moses
himself.) ^ob 19. 23.
Oh that my words were now written, oh that they were printed in a book.

To omit many other devices in after ages to signify their conceptions, Paper
was first made of a broad Flag (not unlike our great Dock) growing in and nigh
Canopus in Egypt, which it seems was a s^aple commodity of that Country, and
substantial enough to bear the solemn Curse of the Prophet, The Paper-reeds by
the brooks shall wither; be driven away, and be no more. Isaiah 19. 7.


Our Modern Paper is made of Grinded Rags, and yet this New Artificial does
still thankfully retain the Name of the Old Natural Paper. It may pass for the
Emblem of Men of m^an Extraction, who by Art and Industry, with Gods blessing
thereon come to high preferment. Psal^ 113. 7.
He raises the poor out of the dust, and lifts the needy out of the
dunghill, that he may set him with his Princes, even with the Princes of his
People. One may fin^, if searching into the pedigree of Paper, it comes into
the world at the doungate, raked thence in Rags, which refined by Art,
(especially after precious secrets are written therein) is found fit to be
choicely kept in the Cabinets of the Greatest (...). Pity it is that the first
Author of so useful an invention cannot with any P. Virg. de (...)
inventionibus lib. 2. cap. 8.
assurance by assigned.

There are almost as many several kinds of Paper as conditions of Persons
betwixt the Emperor and Beggar, Imperial, Royal, Cardinal, and so downwards to
that course Paper called Emporetica, useful only for Chapmen to wrap their
wares therein. Paper Participat^s in some sort of the Caracters of the
Countrymen which make it, the Venetian being neat, subtle and courtlike, the
French light, slight and slender, the Dutch thick, corpulent and gross, not to
say sometimes also charta Bibula, sucking up the Ink with the sponginess
thereof.

Paper is entered as a Manufacture of this County, because there are Mills, nigh
Sturbridge-fair, where Paper was made in the memory of our Fathers. And it
seems to me a proper Conjunction, that seeing Cambridge yeildeth so many good
writers, Cambridg-shire should afford Paper unto them. Pity, the making
thereof is disused; considering the vast sums yearly expended in our Land for
Paper out of Italy, France, and Germany, which might be lessened were it made
in our Nation. To such who object that we can never equal the perfection of
Venice-paper, I return, neither can we match the purity of Venice-glasses, and
yet many green ones are blown in Sussex, profitable to the makers and
convenient for the users thereof, as no doubt such courser ( homespun Paper)
wouldbe found very beneficial for the Commonwealth.

Baskets.
These are made of the Osiers plentifully growing in the moist parts of this
County, an acre whereof turns to more profit then one of wheat. A necessary
utensill in an house, whereby many things are kept, which otherwise would be
lost. Yea, in some sort it saved the life of St. Paul, when let down by the
wall of Damascus in 2 Cor. 11. 33.
a basket. Whence some (not improbably) conjecture him hominem tricubitalem, a
man of low stature. Martial confesses Baskets to have been a British
invention, though Rome afterward laid claim thereunto.

Barbara de pictis veni Baseauda Britannis,
Sed me jam mavult dicere Roma suam.
1 foreign Basket first in Britain known,
Am now by Rome accounted for her own.
Their making is daily improved with much descant of art, splitting their
wickers as small as threads, and dying them into several colors, which daily
grow a greater commodity.

The Buildings.
Cambridge is the chief credit of this County, as the University is of
Cambridge. It is confessed, that Oxford far exceeds it forsweetness of
situation; and yet it may be maintained, that though there be better air in
Oxford, yet there is more in the Colleges of Cambridge. For, Oxford is an
University in a Town, Cambridge, a Town in an University; where the Colleges
are not surrounded with the offensive embraces of Streets, but generally
situated on the outside, affording the better convenience of private Walks and
Gardens about them. But having In my History of that University.
formerly written of the fabrics of Cambridge, I forbear any further
enlargement.

Eely Minster.
This presents it self afar off to the eye of the traveller, and on all sides
at great distance, not only makes a promise, but gives earnest of the beauty
thereof. The Lanthorn therein built by Bishop Hotham, wherein the labor of
twenty years, and five thousand ninety four pounds eighteen shillings ten pence
half penny farthing was expended, is a Masterpiece of Architecture. When the
bells ring, the wood-work thereof shakes and gapeth, (no defect but perfection
of structure) and exactly chocketh into the joints again; so that it may pass
for the lively emblem of the sincere Christian, who, though he has motum
trepidationis, of Phil. 2. 12.
fear and trembling, stands firmly fixed on the basis of a true faith. Rare also
is the art in the Chapel of Saint Mary's, the pattern or parent of that in
Kings-colledge in Cambridge, though here (as often elsewhere) it has happened,
the child has out-grown the father. Nor must the Chapel of Bishop West be
forgotten, seeing the Master-masons of King James, on serious inspection, found
finer stone-work herein, then in King Henry the seventh his Chapel at
Westminster.

It grieved me lately to see so many new ligh's in this Church, (supernumerary
windows more then ^re in the first fabric) and the whole structure in a
falling condition, except some good men's cha^y seasonably support it. Yet, was
I glad to hear a great Antiquary employed to transcribe and preserve the
monuments in that Church, as all others in the late-drowned-land. And it is
hard to say, which was the better office, whether of those who newly have dried
them from the inundation of water, or of those who shall drain them from the
deluge of oblivion, by perpetuating their antiquities to posterity.

Wonders.
Let me here insert an artificial wonder of what is commonly called
Devils-ditch; Country-folk conceiting that it was made by the Devil, when the
Devil he made it, being the work of some King or Kings of the East Angles. See
the laziness of posterity, so far from imitating the industry of their
ancestors, that they belibell the pure effects of their pains as hellish
atchivements. But if the aforesaid Kings merely made this ditch to get
themselves a name, Divine Justice has met with them, their names being quite
forgotten. More probably it was made to divide and defend their Dominions from
the Kingdom of Mercia, or possibly to keep the people in employment, for
diversion of mutinous thoughts, laziness being the mother of disloyalty,
industry of obedience.

Proverbs.
Cantabrigia petit Aequales Aequalia. Cambridge requires all to be equal.]

Some interpret this of their Commons, wherein all of the same Mess go share
and share alike. Others understand it of the expenses out of the Hall, all
being (...) in their Collations, all paying alike. Which Parity is the best
Preservative of Company, according to the Apothegme of Solon, which In vita
Solo^is.
Plutarch so commends for the wisdom thereof, (...), Equality breeds no
Battles. Otherwise it is a Murthering-^hot where one pays all the Reckoning, as
recoiling on him that discharges it: Yea such inequality is a certain symptom
of an expiring society.

Some expound the words, that Graduates of the same degree, (either within or
without the University) are to be Fellows well met one with another. Dido had a
piece of State in her Court peculiar to her self, (which may be called an
Equipage indeed) where she had a hundred servants in ordinary attendance (...)
pares (...) ministri. Virg. Ae^. lib. 1. juxta finem.
all of the same age. Thus the same Degree in effect levells all Scholars, so
that seniority of years ought not to make any distance betwixt them, to hinder
their familiarity. I have nothing else to add of this Proverb, saving that it
is used also in Oxford.

Cambridge-shire Camels.]

I cannot reconcile this common saying to any considerable sense, I know a
Camel passes in the Latin proverb, either for gibbous and distorted, or for
one that undertaketh a thing awkely or ungeenly. (...) in Helvidium.
Camelus saltat, or else for one of extraordinary bulk or bigness, all
unappliable in any peculiar manner to the people of this County, as straight
and dexterous as any other, nor of any exorbitant proportions.

All that I can recover of probability is this, the Fen-men dwelling in the
Northern part of this County, when stalking on their Stilts are little giants
indeed, as Camden in Cambridgeshire.
Master Camden has well observed. However that Mathematician who measured the
height of Her^ules by the bigness of his foot, would here be much mistaken in
his dimensions, if proportionably collecting the bulk of their bodies from the
length of their legs.

A Boisten horse and a Cambridge Master of Art, are a couple of Creatures that
will give way to no body.]

This Proverb we find in the Letter of William Zoon written to George Bruin in
his Theater of Cities, and it is objected against us by an (...). Twin. Ant.
Acad. Ox. page 333.
Oxford Antiquary, as if our Masters wanted manners to give place to their
betters, though all things considered it sounds more to their honor then
disgrace.

For mark what immediately went before in the same Gulielmus Zoon.
Author, In plateis ambulantes, decedi sibi de via, non a civibus solum, sed
etiam a peregrino quovis nisi dignitate excellat, postulant: Walking in the
Streets, they require, not only of the Townsmen, but also of every stranger
except they excel in dignity, that they go out of the way unto them. Herein
two things are observable in the Scholars,

1. Their Manners or Civility. 2. Their Manhood or Courage. If the party,
whatever he be, appear dignified above them, they willingly allow him
Superiority, what is this, but to give what is due to another? If he seem
beneath them, then they do uti jure suo, and take what is their own to
themselves.

What reason is it he should give place to a Towns-man? ut quid cedat Plenum
vacuo, scientia ignorantiae? This minds me of a passage in Plutarch
concerning Themistocles, when a Boy going home from School, he met one of the
Athenian Tyrants in the City, and the people cried out unto him to go out of
the way, What (said Themistocles) is not all the street broad enough for him,
but I must be put out of my path and pace to make room for him? This was
interpreted by such as heard him, as a presage of his future magnanimity. And
surely it shows not want of breeding, but store of spirit, when a man will not
be put out of his way, for every swelling emptiness that meets him therein.

An Henry-Sophister]

So are they called, who after four years standing in the University, stay
themselves from commencing Bachelors of Art, to render them (in some Colleges)
more capable of preferment. Several reasons are assigned of their name.

That tradition is senseless, (and inconsistent with his Princely magnificence)
of such who fancy, that K. Henry the eighth coming to Cambridge, staid all the
Sophisters a year, who expected a year of grace should have been given unto
them. More probable it is, because that King is commonly conceived of great
strength and sta^ure, that these Sophistae Henriciani were elder and bigger
then others. The truth is this, in the reign of King Henry the eighth, after
the destruction of Monasteries, ^earning was at a loss, and the University
(thanks be unto God more scared then hurt) stood at a gaze what would become of
her. Hereupon many Students staid themselves, two, three, some four years, as
who would see, how their degrees, (before they took them) should be rewarded
and maintained.

Martyrs.
WILLIAM FLOWER was born at So Mr. Fox spells it, in his Acts and Mon. page
1573. called S^il Well at this day.
Snow-hill in this County, bred first a Monk in Ely, till relinquishing his
habit he became a Secular Priest and a Protestant, and after many removals
fixed at last at Lambeth.

Wonder not, Reader, to see a long black line prefixed before his name, which
he well deserved to distinguish him from such men, who had an unquestionable
title of Martyrdom. Whereas this Flower dangerously wounded a Popish Priest
with a Woodknife, (a mischievous weapon) in Saint Margarets Westminster, just
at the Ministration of the Mass, so that the blood of the Priest Spirted into
the Challice.

A fact so foul, that the greatest charity would blush to whisper a syllable in
the excuse thereof. As for such who in his defense, plead the precedent of Elia
his killing of Baals Priests, they lay a foundation for all impiety in a
Christian Commonwealth. If in the Old World Giants were the Product of those
Marriages, when the sons of God took to Wives the Genesis 6. 2.
daughters of Men, (a Copulation not unlawful, because they were too near a
kin, but because they were too far off;) what Monsters will be generated from
such mixtures, when Extraordinary actions by immediate Commissions from God
shall be matched unto Ordinary Persons of mere men, and Heaven unjustly
alleged and urged for the defense of Hell it self?

However it plainly appears that Flower afterward solemnly repented of this
Abominable act, and was put to death for the Testimony of the truth. Grudge not
Reader to peruse this following Parallel, as concerning the hands of the
Martyrs in the reign of Queen Mary.

The right hand of Thomas Tomkins was burnt off in effect (so as to render it
useless) by Bishop Bonner, some days before he was Martyred. Archbishop Canmer
at the Stake first thrust his right hand into the flame to be burnt in Penance
for his subscription to a Recantation. The right hand of William Flower, before
he went to the Stake, was cut off by order of the Judges for his Barbarous
fact.

Yet though his right hand suffered as a Malefactor, there want not those who
maintained that There were but 3. more Maryred in this County, whereof John
Hullier Fellow of Kings-col. was most remarkable.
Martyr belongs to the rest of his Body.

Prelates.
STEPHEN de FULBORN was born at Fulborn (no other of that name in England) in
this County. Going over into Ireland to seek his Providence (commonly nicknamed
his fortune) therein, he became anno 1274* Sir James Ware in the Archbishops
of Tuam.
Bishop of Waterford, and Lord Treasurer of Ireland. Hence he was preferred
Archbishop of Tuam, and once, and again was Chief Justice of that (allow me a
Prolepsis) Ireland properly was no Kingdom till the time of K. Henry the
eighth.
Kingdom. He is reported to have given to the Church of Glassenbury in
England, Sir James ut prius.
Indulg^nces of an hundred days which I cannot understand, except he promised
pardon of so many days, to all in his Province who went a Pilgrimage to that
place; and this also seems an over-papal Act of a plain Archbishop. He died
1288. and was buried in Trinity Church in Dublin.

NICHOLAS of ELY, was so called (say some) from being Archdeacon thereof,
which dignity so died his Denomination in grain, that it kept color till his
death, not fading, for his future higher preferments, though others conjecture
his birth also at Ely. When the bold Barons obtrued a Chancellor John Philipot
in his Catal. of Chancellors page 23.
(A Kings Tongue and Hands by whom he publicly speaks and acts) Anno 1260.
they forced this Nicholas on King Henry the third for that Office, till the
King some months after displaced him, yet (knowing him a man of much merit)
voluntarily chose him L. Treasurer Idem in his Catalogue of Treasurers page 16.
when outed of his Chancellors place, so that (it seems) he would trust him
with his Coffers, but not with his Conscience; yea he afterward preferred him
Bishop of Worcester, then of Winchester. Here he sat 12. years, and that
Cathedral may (by a Synedoche of a novel part for the whole) challenge his
interment, having his Heart Bishop Godwin in the Bishops of Winchester.
enclosed in a Wall, though his body be buried at Waverly in ^urry 1280.

WILLIAM of BOTLESHAM was born at Bottlesham (contractly Botsam) in this
County. This is a small village, which never amounted to a Market Town, some
five miles East of Cambridge, pleasantly seated in pure air, having rich
arable on the one, and the fair health of New Market on the other side thereof.
It has been the nursery of refined wits, affording a Triumvirate of learned
men, taking their lives there, and names thence: and to prevent mistakes (to
which learned pens in this point have been too prone) we present them in the
ensuing parallels.

William Godwin in the Catal. of Landaffe and Rochester.
of Bottlesham, John of Bottlesham, Nicholas of Bottlesham, Made by the Pope,
first Bishop of Bethlehem in Syria, afterward Anno 1385. Bishop of Landaffe,
and thence removed to Rochester. A famous Preacher, Confessor to King Richard
the second, and learned Writer, but by Walsingham and Bale, called John by
mistake. He dyed in Febru. Anno 1399. Nor must we forget that he was once
Fellow of Pembroke-hall. Was bred in Peter-house in Cambridge, whereunto he was
a Benefactor, as also to the whole University, Chaplain to T. Arundel,
Archbishop of Canterbury; by whose recommendation he was preferred to succeed
his Towns-man in the Sea of Rochester; which he never saw (says my Idem in the
Biposhs of R^chester.
Author) as dying in the beginning of the year 1401. Was a Carmelite bred in
Cambridge, afterward removed to Paris, where in Sorbone he commenced Doctor of
Divinity. Returning to Cambridge he became Prior of the Carmelites (since
Queens-colledge) where he wrote many books, and lies buried in his own Bale
page 576. and Pits. page 625.
Covent Anno Domini 1435.

Let all England show me the like of three eminent men, (all contemporaries at
large) which one petty village did produce. Let Bottlesham hereafter be no more
famed for its single Becon, but for these three lights it afforded.

THOMAS of NEW MARKET was born therein, and though that Town lies some part in
Suffolk, my Bale de Script. Ang. Cent. 7. Number. 60.
Author assures his Nativity in this County. He was bred in Cambridge, an
excellent Humanist and Divine, (having left some learned Books to Posterity)
and at last was advanced to be Idem i bidem.
Bishop of Carlisle.

Surely then he must be the same with Thomas Merks, consecrated Anno 1397. Bale
makes him to flourish under K. Henry the fourth.
consent of time most truly befriending the conjecture. Merks also and Market
being the same in effect. Neither does the omission of New in the least degree
discompose their Identity, it being usual to leave out the Prenomen of a Town
for brevity sake, by those of the Vicenage, (amongst whom there is no danger of
mistake,) commonly calling West-chester, Chester, South-hampton, Hampton. If
the same, he is famous in our English Histories, because his devotion (in a
Transposed Posture to public practice) See his speech in Parliament Speed page
worshipped the Sunsetting, King Richard the second, for which his memory will
meet with more to commend then imitate it. Yet was his Loyalty shent, but not
shamed: and King Henry the fourth being sick of him, not daring to let him to
live, nor put him to death, (because (...) Prelate) found an Expedient for him
of a living death, confining him to a Titular Godwin in the Bishop of Carlisle.
Grecian Bishopric. He dyed about 1405.

THOMAS THIRLBY Doctor of Laws, was (as I am assured by an excellent Mr. Martin
beneficed near Northampton.
Antiquary) born in the Town, and bred in the University of Cambridge, most
probably in Trinity hall. He was very able in his own faculty, and more then
once employed in Embasseys by King Henry the eighth, who preferred him Bishop
of Westminster. Here, had Thirlby lived long, and continued the course he
began, he had prevented Queen Mary from dissolving that Bishopric, as which
would have dissolved it self for lack of land, sold and wasted by him. And
though probably he did this to raise and enrich his own family, yet such the
success of his sacrilege, his name and alliance is extinct.

From Westminster he was removed to Norwich, thence to Ely. He cannot be
followed (as some other of his order) by the light of the Fagots kindled by him
to burn poor Martyrs, seeing he was given rather to Prodigality then cruelty,
it being signally observed that he wept at Archbishop Cranmers degradation.
After the death of Queen Mary, he was as violent in his opinions, but not so
virulent in his expressions; always devoted to Queen Mary, but never invective
against Queen Elizabeth. He lived in free custody, dyed, and is buried at
Lambeth 1570.

Since the Reformation.
GODFREY GOLDSBOROUGH D. D. was born in the Town of Cambridge, where some of
his Sur-name and Relation remained since my memory. He was bred in
Trinity-colledge, (Pupil to Archbishop Whitgiff) and became afterward Fellow
thereof, at last he was consecrated Bishop of Gloucester Anno Dom. 1598. He was
one of the second set of Protestant Bishops, which were after those so famous
for their sufferings in the Marian days, and before those who fall under the
cognizance of our generation; the true reason that so little can be recovered
of their character. He gave a hundred mark to Trinity*colledge, and died Anno
Dom. 1604.

ROBERT TOWNSON D. D. was born in Saint Botolphs parish in Cambridge, and bred
a Fellow in Queens-colledge, being admitted very young therein, but 12. years
of age. He was blessed with an happy memory, insomuch that when D. D. he could
say by heart the second Book of the Aeneads which he learnt at School, without
missing a Verse. He was an excellent Preacher, and becoming a Pulpit with his
gravity. He attended King James his Chaplain into Scotland, and after his
return was preferred Dean of Westminster, then Bishop of Salisbury.

Hear what the Author of a Pamphlet, who inscribeth himself A. W. says in a
Book which is rather a Satyr then a History, a Libell then a Character, of the
Court of King James, for after he had slanderously inveighed against the
bribery of those days in Church and State, hear how he seeks to make amends for
all.

King James's Court, page 129, 130. Some worthy men were preferred gratis to
blow up their [ Buckingham and his party] Fames, (as Tolson a worthy man paid
nothing in fine or Pension, and so after him Davenant in the same Bishopric.)
Yet these were but as Music before every hound. Now although both these
persons here praised were my Godfathers and Uncles, (the one marrying the
sister of, the other being Brother to my Mother) and although such good words
seem a Rarity from so railing a mouth, yet shall not these considerations tempt
me to accept his praises on such invidious terms as the Author does proffer
them.

O! Were these worthy Bishops now alive, how highly would they disdain to be
praised by such a pen, by which King James their Lord and Master is causelessly
traduced! How would they condemn such uncharitable commendations, which are (if
not founded on) accompanied with the disgrace of others of their order?
Wherefore, I their Nephew in behalf of their Memories, protest against this
passage, so far forth as it casts Luster on them, by Eclipsing the credit of
other Prelates their contemporaries. And grant corruption too common in that
kind, yet were there besides them at that time, many worthy Bishops raised to
their dignity by their Deserts, without any Simonicall complyances.

Doctor Townson had a hospital heart, a generous disposition, free from
covetousness, and was always confident in Gods Providence, that, if he should
dye, his children (and those were many) would be provided for, wherein he was
not mistaken. He lived in his Bishopric but a year, and being appointed at
very short warning to preach before the Parliament, by unseasonable ^tting up
to study, contracted a Fever, whereof he died, and was buried in Westminster
Abbey, Anno Dom. 1622.

THOMAS (son to William) WESTFIELD D. D. was born Anno Dom. 1573. in the Parish
of Saint Mary's in Ely, and there bred at the Free School under Master Spite,
till he was sent to Jesus-colledge in Cambridge, being first Scholar, then
Fellow thereof. He was Curate, or Assistant rather, to Bishop Felton, whilst
Minister of Saint Mary le Bow in Cheapside, afterward Rector of Hornsey, nigh,
and Great Saint Bartholomews in London, where in his preaching he went through
the four Evangelists. He was afterward made Archdeacon of Saint Albans, and
at last Bishop of Bristol, a place proffered to, and refused by him twenty five
years before. For then the Bishopric was offered to him to maintain him; which
this contented meek man, having a selfsubsistence, did then decline, though
accepting of it afterward, when proffered to him to maintain the Bishopric,
and support the Episcopal dignity by his signal devotion. What good The
particulars of this were procured for me by my worthy friend Matthew Gilly
Esquire, from Elizabeth the Bishops sole surviving daughter.
opinion the Parliament (though not over-fond of Bishops) conceived of him,
appears by their Order ensuing,

The thirteenth of May 1643. From the Committee of Lords and Commons for
Sequestration of Delinquents Estates.

Upon information in the behalf of the Bishop of Bristoll, that his Tenants
refuse to pay him his Rents, it is Ordered by this Committee, that all profits
of his Bishopric be restored to him, and a safe conduct be granted him to pass
with his family to Bristoll, being himself of great age, and a person of great
learning and merit. Jo. Wild.

About the midst of his life he had a terrible sickness, so that he thought (to
use his own expression in his Diary) that God would put out the candle of his
life, though he was pleased only to snuff it. By his will (the true Copy
whereof I have) he desired to be buried in his Cathedral Church near the tomb
of Paul Bush, the first Bishop thereof. And as for my worldly goods, (Reader,
they are his own words in his Will) which (as the times now are) I know not
well where they be, nor what they are, I give and bequeath them all to my dear
wife Elizabeth, etc. He protested himself on his deathbed a true Protestant of
the Church of England, and dying Junii 28. 1644. lies buried according to his
own desire above mentioned, with this inscription;

Hic jacet Thomas Westfield, S. T. D. Episcoporum intimus, peccatorum primus.
Obiit 25. Junii, anno MDCXLIV. Senio and moerore confectus. Tu Lector (quisquis
es) vale and resipisce. Epitaphium ipse sibi dictavit vivus. Monumentum uxor
moestissima Elizabetha Westfield Marito desideratissimo posuit superstes. Thus
leaving such as survived him to see more sorrow, and feel more misery, he was
seasonably taken away from the evil to come. And according to the Anagram made
on him by his Daughter,

Thomas Westfield, I dwell the most safe. Enjoying all happiness and possessing
the reward of his pains, who converted many, and confirmed more by his
constancy in his Calling.

Statesmen.
JOHN TIPTOFT son and heir of John Lord Tiptoft, and Mills Cat. of Hon. page
1010.
Joyce his wife (daughter and Coheir of Edward Charlton Lord Powis by his wife
Eleanor, sister and Coheir of Edmund Holland Earl of Kent) was born at Bale de
script. Brit. Cent. 8. number. 46.
Everton in this (but in the confines of Bedford) shire. He was bred in
Baliol-colledge in Oxford, where he attained to great learning, and by King
Henry the sixth was afterward created first Vice-count, then Earl of
Worcester, and Lord H^gh Constable of England, and by K. Edward the fourth
Knight of the Garter.

The skies began now to lowre, and threaten Civil Wars, and the House of York
fell sick of a Relapse. Mean time this Earl could not be discourteous to Henry
the sixth who had so much advanced him, nor disloyal to Edward the fourth in
whom the right of the Crown lay. Consulting his own safety, he resolved on this
Expedient, for a time to quit his own and visit the Holy Land. In his passage
thither, or thence, he came to Rome, where he made a Latin speech before the
Pope, Pi^ the second, and converted the Italians into a better opinion then
they had formerly of the English-mens learning, insomuch that his holiness wept
at the elegancy of the Oration.

He returned from Christ's sepulcher to his own grave in England, coming home in
a most unhappy juncture of time, if sooner or later, he had found King Edward
on that Throne, to which now Henry the sixth was restored, and whose
restitution was only remarkable for the death of this worthy Lord. Thus those
who when the house of the State is on fire, politickly hope to save their own
chamber, are sometimes burned therein.

Treason was charged upon him for secret siding with King Edward, who before
and afterward de facto, and always de jure, was the lawful King of England; on
this account he lost his life. Then did the axe at one blow cut off more
learning in England then was left in the heads of all the surviving nobility.
His death happened on Saint Lukes-day 1470.

Edward Lord Tiptoft his son was restored by Edward the fourth, Earl of
Worcester. But dying without Issue his large Inheritance fell to his three
Milles ut supra.
Aunts, sisters to the learned Lord aforesaid, viz. First Philip, married to
Thomas Lord Ross of Ham-lake. Second, Jo^ne, wife of Sir Edmund Ingoldsthorp of
Borough-green in this County. Third Joyce, married unto Sir Edward Sutton son
and heir of John Lord Dudley, from whom came Edward Sutton Lord Dudley, and
Knight of the Garter.

JOHN CHEEK Knight, Tutor to King Edward the sixth, and Secretary of State,
was born over against the Market-cross in Cambridge. What Crosses afterward
befell him in his course of life, and chiefly before his Pious death, are
largely related in our ChurchHistory.

Soldiers.
The courage of the men in this County before the Conquest, plainly appears
by this authentic passage in a memorable author, who reports, that when the
rest of the East Angles cowardly fled away in the field from the Danish army,
Chronicon. ^o. Bromton page 887.
Homines comitatus Cantabrigiae viriliter obstiterunt: The men of the County of
Cambridge did manfully resist. Our author adds, Unde Anglis regnantibus laus
Cantabrigiensis Provinciae splendide florebat; Whence it was that whilst the
English did rule, the praise of the people of Cambridge shire did most
eminently flourish.

Nor lost they their reputation for their manhood, at the coming in of the
Normans, who partly by the valor of their persons, partly by the advantage of
their fens, made so stout resistance, that the Conqueror who did fly into
England, was glad to creep into Ely. Yea, I have been credibly informed that
Cambridge-shire men commonly passed for a current proverb, though now like old
coin, almost grown out of request.

Indeed the Common People have most Robustious Bodies, insomuch that
Quartersacks were here first used, men commonly carrying on their backs (for
some short space) eight bushels of Barley, whereas four are found a sufficient
load for those in other Counties. Let none say that Active valor is ill
inferred from Passive strength, for I do not doubt but (if just occasion were
given) they would find as good Hands and Arms as they do Backs and Shoulders.

Writers.
MATTHEW PARIS is acknowledged an Englishman by all, (save such who mistake
AMP.
Parisius for Parisiensis) and may probably be presumed born in this (as bred
in the next) County, where the name and family of Paris is right ancient, even
long before they were settled therein at Hildersham, which accrued unto them by
their marriage with the daughter and Heir of the Camdens Bri^. in
Cambridgeshire.
Buslers. Sure I am, were he now alive, the Parises would account themselves
credited with his, and he would not be ashamed of their affinity.

He was bred a Monk of Saint Albans, skilled not only in Poetry, Oratory and
Divinity, but also in such manual as lie in the suburbs of liberal Sciences,
Painting, graving, etc. But his Genius chiefly disposed him for the writing of
Histories, wherein he wrote a large Chronicle from the Conquest, unto the year
of our Lord 1250. where he concludes with this distich;

Siste tui metas studii, Matthaee, quietas
Nec ventura petas, quae postera proferat aetas.
Matthew here cease thy pen in peace, and study on no more;
Nor do thou rome at things to come, what next age has in store.
However he afterward resuming that work, continued it until the year 1259.
This I observe, not to condemn him, but excuse my self from inconstancy, it
being it seems a catching disease with Authors, to obey the importunity of
Others, contrary to their own resolution.

His history is unpartially and judiciously written, (save where he ^geth too
much to Monkish Miracles and Visions,) and no writer so plainly discovers the
pride, avarice, and rapine of the Court of Rome, so that he seldom kisseth the
^opes to^ without biting it. Nor have the Papists any way to wave his true
jeeres, but by suggesting, haec non ab ipso scripta, sed ab aliis falso illi
Pits. de it. Aug. d^script. page 3^8.
ascripta; insinuating a suspicion of forgery, in his last edition: understand
them in what ^ome 80. years ^ince was set forth by Matthew Parker, whereas it
was done with all integrity, according to the best and most ancient
Manuscripts, wherein all those Anti-papal passages plainly appear, as since in
a latter and exacter Edition, by the care and industry of Doctor William Wats.
This Matthew left off living and writing at the same time, viz. anno 1259. I
will only add, that though he had sharp nails, he had clean hands, stri^t in
his own, as well as striking at the loose conversations of others, and for his
eminent austerity was employed by Pope Innocent the fourth, not only to visit
the Monks in the Diocese of Norwich, but also was sent by him into Norway, to
reform the discipline in Holui, a fair Convent therein, but much corrupted.

HELIAS RUBEUS was born at B^le d^pt. Brit. Cent. 4. Number. 48.
Triplow in this County, bred D. D. in Cambridge. Leland acquainteth us that he
was a great Courtier, and gracious with the King, not informing us what King it
was, nor what time he lived in; only we learn from him, that this Rubeus
(conceive his English Name Rouse, or Red) seeing many who were Nobilitatis
Portenta (so that as in a Tympany their very greatness was their Disease)
boasted (if not causelessly) immoderately of their high Extraction, wrote a Book
contra Nobilitatem inanem. He is conjectured to have flourished about the year
1266.

JOHN EVERSDEN was born at one of the Eversdens in this County, bred a Monk in
Bury-Abbey, and the Cellerer thereof An Officer higher in sense then sound,
being by his place to provide diet ^or the whole Convent, assigning particular
persons their portions thereof; But our Eversdens mind mounted above such mean
matters, busied himself in Poetry, Law, History, whereof he wrote a fair volume
from the Bale descript. Brit. Cent. 5. Number. 40.
beginning of the world, according to the humor of the Historians of that age;
starting all thence, though they run to several marks. Being a Monk he was not
over fond of Friars. And observes that when the Franciscans first entered Bury
Anno 1336. there happened a hideous Hericano, levelling trees and towers, and
whatsoever it met with. The best was, though they came in with a Tempest, they
went out with a Calm, at the time of the dissolution. This John flourished
under King Edward the third, and dyed about the year 1338.

RICHARD WETHERSET, commonly called of Cambridge, (says Bale) because he S. N.
was Chancellor thereof. But there must be more in it to give him that
denomination, seeing many had that office besides himself. He was a great
Scholar, and deep Divine, it being reported to his no small praise, That he
conformed his Divinity to Bale Descript. Brit. Cent. 5. Number. 88.
Scripture, and not to the rules of Philosophy. He flourished under King Edward
the third anno 1350.

WILLIAM CAXTON born in that Town (a noted stage betwixt Roiston and
Huntington) Cent. octa. Number. 43.
Bale begins very coldly in his commendation, by whom he is charactered, Vir
non omnino stupidus, aut ignavia torpens; but we understand the language of his
Liptote, the rather because he proceeds to praise his Diligence and Learning.
He had most of his Education beyond the Seas, living 30. years in the Court of
Margaret Duchess of Burgundy, Sister to King Edward the fourth, whence I
conclude him an Anti-Lancastrian in his affection. He continued Polychronicon,
(beginning where Trevisa ended,) unto the end of King Edward the fourth, with
good judgment and Fidelity. And yet when he writes Polychron. lib. ult. cap.
10.
that King Richard the second left in his Treasury Money and Jewels, to the
value of seven hundred thousand pounds, I cannot credit him, it is so contrary
to the received Character of that Kings Riotous Prodigality. Caxton carefully
collected and printed all Chaucers works, and on many accounts deserved well of
Posterity, when he died about the year 1486.

Since the Reformation.
RICHARD HULOET was born at Bal^ d^ript. B^. C^w. 9. Number. 67.
Wishich in this County, and brought up in good learning. He wrote a book
called the English and Latin A B C, and dedicated the same to Thomas Goowrich
Bishop of Ely, and Chancellor of England. Some will condemn him of
Indiscretion, in presenting so low a subject to so high a person, as if he
would teach the Greatest Statesman in the land to spell aright. Others will
excuse him, his book being, though, of low of general use for the Common
people, who then began to betake themselves to reading, (long neglected in the
land) so that many who had one foot in their grave, had their hand on their
primer. But I believe that his book (whereof I could never recover a sight)
though entitled an A B C, related not to Literal reading, but rather to some
Elementall grounds of Religion. He flourished Anno Domini 1552.

JOHN RICHARDSON was born of honest parentage at Linton in this County, bred
first Fellow of Emanuell, then Master of Saint Peter's, and at last of
Trinity-colledge in Cambridge, and was Regius Professor in that University.
Such who represent him a dull and heavy man in his parts, may be confuted with
this instance.

An extraordinary Act in Divinity was kept at Cambridge before King James,
wherein Doctor John Davenant was Answerer, and Doctor Richardson amongst others
the opposers. The Question was maintained in the negative, concerning the
excommunicating of Kings. Doctor Richardson vigorously pressed the practice of
Saint Ambrose excommunicating of the Emperor Theodosius, insomuch that the
King in some passion returned, profecto fuit hoc ab Ambrosio insolentissime
factum. To whom Doctor Richardson, rejoyned, responsum vere Regium, and
Alexandro dignum, hoc non est argumenta dissolvere, sed desecare. And so
sitting down he desisted from any further dispute.

He was employed one of the Translators of the Bible, and was a most excellent
linguist, whose death happened Anno Dom. 1621.

ANDREW WILLET D. D. was born at Ely in this County, bred Fellow of
Christscolledge in Cambridge. He afterward succeeded his father in the
Parsonage of Barley in Hertford shire, and became Prebendary of Ely. He
confuted their cavil who make children the cause of covetousness in
Clergymen, being bountiful above his ability, notwithstanding his numerous
issue. No less admirable his industry appearing in his Synopsi^, Comments, and
Commenta^ies, insomuch that one considering his Polygraphy, said merrily, that
he must write whilst he slept, it being unpossible that he should do so much
when waking. Sure I am, he wrote not sleepily nor oscitanter, but what was
solid in it self, and profitable for others.

A casual fall from his horse in the highway near Hodsden breaking his leg,
accelerated his death. It seems that Gods promise to his children to keep them
in all their ways, that they dash not their foot against the stone, It Is (as
other Temporal promises) to be taken with a Tacit clause of revocation, viz.
if Gods wisdom does not discover the contrary more for his glory and his
childrens good. This Doctor died Anno Domini 1621.

Sir THOMAS RIDLEY Knight. Dr. of the Laws, was born at Ely in this County, bred
first a scholar in Eaton, then Fellow of Kings-colledge in Cambridge. He was a
general scholar in all kind of learning, especially in that which we call
melior literatura. He afterward was Chancellor of Winchester, and the Vicar
general to the Archbishop of Canterbury: his memory will never dye whilst his
book called the view of the Ecclesiastical Laws is living; a book of so much
merit, that the Common Lawyers (notwithstanding the difference betwixt the
professions) will ingeniously allow a due commendation to his learned
performance in that subject. He died Anno Domini 1629. on the two and twentieth
day of January.

ARTHUR HILDERSHAM was born at Strechworth in this County, descended by his
mothers side from the Bloud-Royal, being great-great-grand-child to George Duke
of Clarence, brother to Edward the fourth. Yet was he not like the proud Nobles
of Tecoa, who counted themselves too good to put their hands to Gods work. But
being bred in Christs-colledge in Cambridge, he entered into the Ministry. How
this worthy Divine was first run a ground with poverty, and afterward set a
float, by Gods Providence, how he often alternately lost and recovered his
voice, being silenced and restored by the Bishops, how after many intermediate
afflictions, this just and upright man had peace at the last, is largely
reported in my Ecclesiastical History, to which (except I add to the truth) I
can add nothing on my knowledge remarkable. He died Anno Domini 1631.

R. PARKER, for so is his Christian name defectively written in my Book, was
born in Ely, (therefore Place-nameing himself Eliensis) was son (as I am
confident) to Master Parker Archdeacon of Ely, to whom that Bishopric in the
long vacancy (after the death of Bishop Cox) was proffered, and by him refused,
tantum opum usuram iniquis conditionibus sibi oblatam respuens. Our Parker was
bred in, and became Fellow of Caiuscolledge, an excellent Herald, Historian,
and Antiquary, Author of a short, plain, true, and brief Manuscript, called
Sceletos Cantabrigiensis, and yet the bare Bones thereof, are Fleshed with much
matter, and has furnished me with the Nativities of several Bishops who were
Masters of Colleges.

I am not of the mind of the Italian, (from whose Envy God deliver us) Polidore
Virgil, who having first served his own turn with them, burnt all the rare
English Manuscripts of History he could procure, so to raise the valuation of
his own works. But from my heart I wish, some ingenious person would Print Mr.
Parkers Book, for the use of Posterity. He was a melancholy man, neglecting all
Preferment, to enjoy himself, and died in the place of his Nativity, as I
conjecture, about 1624.

MICHAEL DALTON Esquire, He was bred in the study of our Municipall-law in
Lincolns Inn, and attained great skill in his own profession. His gravity
graced the Bench of Justices in this County, where his judgment deservedly
passed for an Oracle in the Law, having enriched the world with two excellent
Treatises, the one of the Office of the Sheriffs, the other of the Justices of
Peace. Out of the Dedicatory Epistle of the later, I learnt this (which I knew
not before) that K. James was so highly affected with our English Government by
Justices of Peace, that he was the first, who settled the same, in his Native
Country of Scotland. Mr. Dalton dyed before the beginning of our Civil
Distempers.

THOMAS GOAD D. D. was son to Dr. Roger Goad (for more then forty years
Provost of Kings-colledge) but whether born in the Provosts Lodgings in
Cambridge, or at Milton in this County, I am not fully informed. He was bred a
Fellow under his Father, afterward Chaplain to Archbishop Abbot, Rector of
Hadly in Suffolk, Prebendary of Canterbury, etc. A great and General Scholar,
exact Critic, Historian, Poet, (delighting in making of verses, till the day
of his death) School-man, Divine. He was substituted by K. James, in the place
of Doctor Hall, (indisposed in health) and sent over to the Synod of Dort. He
had a commanding presence, an uncontrolable spirit, impatient to be opposed,
and loving to steer the discourse (being a good Pilot to that purpose) of all
the Company he came in. I collect him to have died about the year 1635.

ANDREW MARVAIL was born at So his son-inlaw informed me.
Mildred in this County, and bred a master of Arts in Trinity-colledge in
Cambridge.

He afterward became Minister in Hull, where for his life time he was well
beloved. Most facetious in his discourse, yet grave in his carriage, a most
excellent preacher, who like a good husband never broached what he had new
brewed, but preached what he had pre^studied some competent time before.
Insomuch that he was wont to say, that he would cross the common proverb,
which called Saturday the working day, and Monday the holy day of preachers. It
happened that Anno Dom. 1640. Jan. 23. crossing Humber in a Barrow-boat, the
same was sand-warpt, and he With Mrs. Skinner (daughter to Sir Ed. Coke) a very
religious Gentlewoman.
drowned therein, by the carelessness (not to say drunkenness) of the boat-men,
to the great grief of all good men. His excellent comment upon Saint Peter, is
daily desired and expected, if the envy and covetousness of private persons for
their own use, deprive not the public of the benefit thereof.

Benefactors to the public.
HUGO de BALSHAM (for so is he truly written) was born in this County as may
easily be spelled out of the four following probabilities put together.

First, it was fashionable for Clergymen in that age to assume their Surnames
from the place of their Nativity. Secondly, Balsham is an eminent village in
this County, whereof an ancient Henry of Huntington.
Author takes notice, naming thence the neighboring ground Amaenissima
Montana de Balsham. Thirdly, There is no other Village of that name throughout
the Dominions of England. Fourthly, It is certain this Hugh was bred in this
County, where he attained to be Sub-prior, and afterward Bishop of Ely.
This Hugh was he who founded Peter-house in the University of Cambridge, the
first built (though not first endowed) College in England. This Foundation he
finished Anno 1284. bestowing some lands upon it, since much augmented by
Bountiful Benefactors. He sat 28 years in his See, and dyed June the 6. 1286.

Sir WILLIAM HORN Salter, son to Thomas Ho^n was born at Snail-well in this
County, he was Knighted by King Hen. the seventh, and Anno 1487. was L. Mayor
of London. He gave bountifully to the Preachers at Saint Paul's cross, and
bestowed five hundred Stows survay of London page 575.
Marks to the mending of the high ways, betwixt Cambridge the County Town where
he had his first Life, and London the City where he got his best livelihood.

Know in that Age Horn his five hundred Marks, had in them the intrinsic value
of our five hundred pounds, which in those days would go very far in the wages
of Laborers.

Sir WILLIAM (son of JOHN) PURCASE was born at Gamlinggay in this County, bred
a Mercer in London, and Lord Mayor thereof, Anno 1497. He caused Morefields
under the walls to be made plain ground, then to the great pleasure, since to
the greater profit of the City.

Sir THOMAS (son of JOHN) KNEISWORTH was born at Kneisworth in this County,
bred a Fishmonger in London, whereof he was Lord Mayor, Anno 1505. He appointed
the Water-conduit at Bishop-gate to be built, to the great convenience of the
City, formerly much wanting that useful Element. Be it here observed for the
encouragement of the industry of Cambridg-shire Apprentices, that by the
premises it does appear that this small County in the compass of eighteen years
afforded three L. Mayors and Benefactors, which no other Shire of equal or
greater quantity ever produced.

Since the Reformation.
JOHN CRANE was born in Wishbeech in this County, bred an Apothecary in
Cambridg, so diligent an youth, that some judicious persons prognosticated that
he would be a rich man. Dr. Butler took so great a fancy unto him, that he
lived and died in his Family, yea and left the main body of his rich Estate
unto him.

This Mr. Crane had a large heart, to entertain his friends, and Annually very
nobly treated all the Oxford men at the Commencement. He gave at his death no
less then three thousand pounds to charitable uses, bestowing the house he
lived in (and that a very fair one) aster his Wives death, on the Public
Professor of Physic, and in settlement of his other Benefactions, discreetly
reflected on Wishbeech where he was born, (to which he gave 100l. to build a
Town Hall) Cambridge, where he lived, Lin, where he was well acquainted,
Ipswich, where Doctor Butler (the first founder of his estate) was born, and
Kingston where his lands lay. He in some sort gives Preventing Physic to the
Scholars now he is dead, by giving 100l. to be lent gratis to an honest man,
the better to enable him to buy good Fish and Fowl for the University, having
observed much sickness occasioned by unwholesome food in that kind. He
bequeathed to Dr. Wren Bishop of Ely, and Doctor Brounrigg Bishop of Exeter,
one hundred pounds a piece by his Will, and as much by a Codecil annexed
thereunto. Besides his concealed Charities, his hand was always open to all the
distressed Royalists. He died in May, 1650.

Memorable Persons.
WILLIAM COLLET was born at Over in this County, bred a Clerk in London, till
at last he attained to be Keeper of the Records in the Tower, none equalling
him in his dexterity in that office. He went the same path with his predecessor
in that place, Master Augustine Vincent, but out-went him as survivor. And
because Method is the mother of Memory, he orderly digested all Records, that
they were to be found in an instant. He abominated their course, who by a water
would refresh a Record, to make it useful for the present, and useless ever
after. He detested under the pretense o^ mending it, to practice with a pen on
any old writing, preserving it in the pure nature thereof. Indeed Master Seldom
and others in their Works, have presented Posterity with a plentiful feast of
English rarities, but let me say that Collet may be called their Caterer, who
furnished them with provision on reasonable rates. He died to the great grief
of all Antiquaries Anno Dom. 1644.

EDWARD NORGATE son to Robert Norgate D. D. Master of Bennet-colledge, was born
in Cambridge, bred by his Father-in-law (who married his Mother) Nicholas
Felton Bishop of Ely, who finding him inclined to Limning and Heraldry,
permitted him to follow his fancy therein. For, parents who cross the current
of their childrens genius, (if running in no vicious chanells) tempt them to
take worse courses to themselves.

He was very judicious in Pictures, to which purpose he was employed into Italy
to purchase them for the Earl of Arundel. This story is o^ his own relation.
Returniug by Marseilles he missed the money he expected, and being there
unknowing of, and unknown to any, he was observed by a French Gentleman (so
deservedly styled) to walk in the Exchange (as I may ^ll it) of that City, many
Hours every Morning and Evening, with swift feet and sad face, forwards and
backwards. To him the civil Monsieur addressed himself, desiring to know the
cause of his discontent, and if it came within the compass of his power, he
promised to help him with his best advise. Norgate communicated his condition,
to whom the other returned, Take I pray my Counsel, I have taken notice of your
walking more then 20* miles a day, in one furlong upwards and downwards, and
what is spent in needless going and returning, if laid out in Progressive
Motion, would bring you into your own Country. I will suit you (if so pleased,)
with a light habit, and furnish you with competent money for a Footman. Norgate
very cheerfully consented, and footed it (being accommodated accordingly)
through the body of France, (being more then five hundred English miles,) and
so leasurely with ease, safety, and health, returned into England.

He became the best Illuminer or Limner of our age, employed generally to make
the Initial letters in the Patents of Peers, and Commissions of Ambassadors,
having left few heirs to the kind, none to the degree of his art therein. He
was an excellent Herald by the title of -- and which was the crown of all, a
right honest man. Exemplary his patience in his sickness (whereof I was an
eyewitness) though a complication of diseases, Stone, Ulcer in the bladder,
etc. ceased on him. He died at the Heralds Office, Anno Dom. 1649.

Lord Mayors.
Name Father Place Company Time 1 Robert Clopton Thomas Clopton Clopton Draper
1441 2 William Horn Thomas Horn Snaylewell Salter 1487 3 William Purchase John
Purchase Gamelinghey Mercer 1497 4 Thomas Kneisworth John Kneisworth Kneisworth
Fish-monger 1505 5 Thomas Mirfine George Mirfine Ely Skinner 1518 6 William
Bowyer William Bowyer Harstone -- 1543 7 Richard Mallory Anthony Mallory
Papworthamus Mercer 1564

The Names of the Gentry of this County Returned by the Commissioners in the
twelfth year of King Henry the sixth, 1433.
John Bishop of Ely, Commissioners to take the Oaths. John de Tiptoft
Chivaler. William Allington Knights for the shire. John Burgoin miles. Knights
for the shire.

Will. Pole, Mil. Johan. Colvyle, Mil. Will. Hazenhull, Mil. Will. Malory, Mil.
Johan. Argenton, Mil. Will. Alyngton Senioris de Horseth Laurencii Cheyne de
Ditton Hen. Somer de Grancotre Johan. Cheyne de Longstanton Thomae Dischalers
de Whaddon Will. Frevill de Shelford Ioha^. Hoar de Childerle Ioh. St. George
de Haclee Will. St. George de Eadem Rob. Bernard de Iselham Rob. Alyngton de
Horseth Walt. Clovile de Pampisworth Walt. Cotton de Ladevade. Will. Burgoyne
de Caxton Ioh. Moris de Trumpiton Ioh. Pigot de Aviton Tho. Cotton de Lanwade
Simo. Brunne de Wenelingham Edm. Seyntlowe de Malketon Alexan. Child de Horton
Johan. Keterich de Beche Nicholai Cald^cote de Melreth Walt. Hunty don de
Trumpiton Radul. Sanston de Sanston Will. Fulburne de Fulburn Rob. Kingston de
Berklow Rich. Stotevil de Brinkelee Rich. Foster de Bodekisham Johan. Ansty
senioris de Ovye Johan. Totehill de Swafham Johan. Church de Bassingburn Edm.
Bendisch de Barenton Johan. Ansty junioris de Tanerisham Radul. Hamelin de
Sanston Johan. Fulburn de Fulburn Johan. Borlee de Iselham Johan. Bury de
Stretelee Magistri de Chepenham de Chepenham Nich. Hamond de Swofham Tho.
Cantyes de Littillington Johan. Walter de Cranden Johan. West de Croxton Johan.
Knesworth de Knesworth Warini Ingrith de Melreth Johan. Wilford sen. de
Badbrurgham Johan. Wilford junio. de eadem Sim. Hokington de Hokington Johan.
Clopton de Clopton Johan. Bungeye de Fulburn Ioh. Mars de Abiton Tho. Danseth
de Conyton Tho. Haneheech de Shelford Hen. Calbech de Balsham Will. Sternede de
Stapileford Johan. Wizhton de Hokington Rob. Anfleys de Eltislee Will.
Eremilond de Iselham Johan. Vescey de Swanesey Galf. Clopton de Clopton. Will.
Baily de Saham Tho. Parker de Kertelenge Tho. Bulseham de Chenele Johan. Bate
de Reche Johan. Taillour de Brinkle Johan. Cotisford de Weston Rog. Hunte de
Balseham Johan. How de Sanston Tho. Paris de eadem Johan, Trope de Dokisworth
Jacob. Russil de Skelington Rich. Hoggepound de wrotting Johan. Palgrave de
eadem Tho. Cokeparker de Campis Johan. Petzt. de eadem Steph. Petiz de eadem
Johan. Lambard de eadem Johan. Smith de eadem Johan. Britsale de Berkelow Will.
Fuller de Lintone Johan. Plukerose de eadem Thomae Hamont de eadem Johan.
Person de eadem Johan. Haberd de Onye Johan. Orveye de Ditton Philip. Grome de
Hinton Edm. Preston de Botisham Tho. Bunte de eadem Ioh. Wilkin de Wilburgham
Will. Thornton Warnier de Saham Tho. Stapelton de Badburgham Johan. Ray de Novo
Mercato Hen. Attelane de Beche Johan. Knith de eadem Walt. Foot de Middilton
Ioh. Andrew de Waterbeche Rob. Bertelct de eadem Johan. Tylly de eadem Hen.
Clerk de eadem Ioh. Annfleys de Critton Johan. Fox de eadem Richard. Mably de
Howis Johan. Attechercke de eadem Johan. Mably de eadem Will. Colyn de
Maddyngle Johan. Custance de eadem Tho. Mesynger de eadem Will. Reynolt de
eadem Will. Knight de Chesterton Johan. Bacon de eadem Ioh. Bernard de eadem
Henrici Speed deHyston Will. Page de eadem Johan. Smith sen. de eadem Walt.
Spernd de Cotenham Hen. Mey de eadem Hugon. Bernard de eadem Will. Burbage de
Drayton Johan. Gifford de eadem Rober. Salman de eadem Hen. Roys de Lolworth
Johan. Asplen de eadem Johan. Ganelock de Over Ioh. Sampson Bocher de eadem
Johan. Barby de eadem Hen. Okeham de eadem Will. Shetere de Wenelingham Johan.
de Botre de eadem Johan. Shetere de eadem Will. Bakere de Swansey Sim. Hurlpeny
de eadem Rich. Wright de eadem Johan. Halton de eadem Ioh. Howesson de
Ellysworth Johan. Bole de eadem Will. Fermour de eadem Johan. Wareyan de eadem
Io. Annfleys de Papworth Everard Io. Kent de Papworth Anneys Johan Dantre de
Granele Io. Annfleys de Conyton Thom. Crispe de eadem Will. Beton de Fendrayton
Will. Pecard de eadem Ioh. Grewere de eadem Rich. Hemington de Longstanton
Henri. Read de eadem Io. Page jun. de eadem Will Driffeld de eadem Ioh. Hawkyn
de eadem Will. At low de eadem Tho. Pelle de Hokington Ioh. Fulham de eadem
Ioh. Williem de Westwyk Tho. Herward de eadem Hen. Page de Rampton Will Page de
eadem Ioh. Watesson de eadem Ioh. Bette de Herdewyk Tho. Newman de Toft Tho.
Basely de eadem Tho. Crispe de Caldecote Ioh. Faceby de eadem Tho. Adam de
Everisdon Magna Henri. Bocher de eadem Tho. Tant de Everisdon parva Will Baron
de eadem Will. Parnell de Kingston Rich. Mading le de eadem Ioh. Couper de
eadem Sim. Lavenham de Brunne Galfri. Norman de eadem Sim. Wareyn de Stowe Will
Semer de eadem Thom. Bette de eadem Johan. Freman de Esthatbee Johan. Bradfeld
de eadem Tho. Fysher de Gamelingey Ioh. Brampston de eadem Walt. Aydrok de
eadem Ioh. Smith de eadem Johan. Drap^r de eadem Johan. Goneld de Croxton
Willielm. Redford de eadem Johan. Michell de Eltislee Johan. Gylmyn de eadem
Thom. Bernard de eadem Tho. Burgoyn de Caxton Ioh. Noris de eadem Johan. Pachat
de eadem Will. Mold de Whaddon Richar. Lylye de eadem Johan. Oradle de eadem
Will. Adam de Melreth Tho. Cosyn de eadem Will. Lylye de eadem Johan. Gentyng
de eadem Ioh. Zok^sle de Meldeburn Johan. Turnere de eadem Tho. Gentyng de
eadem Johan. Bailey de eadem Nich. Pulter de eadem Will. Turpin de Knesworth
Ioh. Street de eadem Will. Willwys de Royston Thom. Mellman de eadem Walt. King
jun. de Hungrihatle Guidonis Moyn de eadem Johan. Pynk de eadem Ioh. Malbern de
Stepilmorden Johan. Crystmasse de eadem Johan. Busshe de eadem Will. Frost de
Gyldemyorden Johan. Lyly de eadem Rich. Pern de eadem Rich. Wolleys de
Bassingburn Johan. Parlet de eadem Johan. Reymond de eadem Johan. Bettele de
eadem Rich. Batte de Abiton Thomae Lorkin de eadem Ioh. Gibbe de Litillington
Johan. Benizch de eadem Will. Baker de Tadlow Tho. Pelle de eadem Ioh. Goslin
de Cranden. Will. Ward de Tadlow Ioh. Derby sen. de Copton Rich. Derby de eadem
Tho. Sherlee de Shengey Johan. Smith de eadem Will. Pink de wendy Prioris de
Bernwell Prioris de Angleseye Prioris de Speneye Prioris de Fordham Will.
Lasselys person Ecclesiae de Over. Tho. Attewode person Ecclesiae de
Ellisworth Ioh. Terinton person Ecclesiae de Lolworth Ioh. Deping person
Eccl. de ^ritton Nich. Holey person Eccl. de ^wansey Ioh. Car away person
Eccl. de Fulburn Radulphi Wathe person Eccl. de Willburgham parva Will.
Lavender person Eccl. de Middilton Rich. Drayton person Eccl. de Kingston.
Tho. Lawngham person Eccl. de Eltyslee Rob. Dixon person Ecclesiae de
Shelford Magna Adam person Eccl. de Dokisworth Will. Midleton person Eccl. de
Clopton Ioh. Blak person Eccl. de Hungrihatlee Will. Mowt vicarii Ecclesia de
Brunne Ioh. Camisby person Eccl. de Sneyleswell Johan. Smith person Eccl. de
Brynkle Io. Bocher vicarii Eccl. de Longstanton Io. Gotobed vicarii Eccl. de
Swafham Rect. de Chenele vicarii de Dittons Valens Person Eccl. de Fiditton
The Sheriffs of Cambridge and Huntington-shires.
HIN. II.
Auno 1 Rich. Basset, Albericus de Veer. Auno 2 Paganus Vic. and Rob. Grimball.
Auno 3 Idem. Auno 4 Auno 5 Idem. Auno 6 Auno 7 Idem. Auno 8 Idem. Auno 9 Nich.
de Chenet Auno 10 Hamo Petom Vic. Auno 11 Idem. Auno 12 Hamo Petom, and Phil.
de Daventre Auno 13 Phil. de Daventre for 3 years. Auno 16 Ebrar. de Beach, and
War. de Basingborn Auno 17 Idem. Auno 18 Ebrardus de Beach for 6 years. Auno 24
Walt. filius Hugonis for 3 years. Auno 27 Walt. filius Hugonis, and Will.
filius Stephani Auno 28 Walt. filius Hugonis Auno 29 Rad. de Bardulff. Auno 30
Idem. Auno 31 Nich. filius Roberti for 3 years.
RICH. I.
Anno 1 Nich. filius Roberti Anno 2 Will. Muschet Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Rich*
Anglicus Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Reginaldus de Argentuen Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Tho.
de Huntsd^on Anno 9 Merric. de Marignes Anno 10 Rob. de Iusula.
JOH. R.
Anno 1 Rob. de Insula Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Hamo de Valoignes, and Rall. de
Valoigne Anno 4 Walt. de Stuieclea Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Rob. de Tateshall, and
Magister Aristoteles Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Iosteli. de Stuieclea Anno 9 Idem.
Anno 10 Fulco filius Theobaldi for 6 years. Anno 16 Will. Comes. Sarisb. and
Were. de Marigne Anno 17 Will Comes. Sarisb.
HEN. III.
Anno 1 Anno 2 Fulco de Breante, and de Radul. Bray Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Idem.
Anno 5 Fulkesius de Breante, and Joh. de Ulicot for 4 years. Anno 9 Galf. de
Hacfield sive Hadfield for 8 years. Anno 17 Geremias de Caxton for 4 years.
Anno 21 Henri. de Colvel for 6 years. Anno 27 Hugo de Hodeng Anno 28 Rad. de
Hereford for 3 years. Anno 31 Phil. de Staunton for 3 years. Anno 34 Henr.
Colvile Anno 35 Idem. Anno 36 Simon. de Ho^ton Anno 37 Idem. Anno 38 Ioh. de
Moyne Anno 39 Ioh. de Moyne, and Ioh. de Marines Anno 40 Idem. Anno 41 Will. de
la Stow Anno 42 Idem. Anno 43 Will. le Moyne Anno 44 Ioh. de Scalarus Anno 45
Ioh. de Scalarus, and Ioh. Lovell. Anno 46 Saer de Frivile Anno 47 Johan.
Lovell for 5 years. Anno 52 Almaricus Pech Anno 53 Saerus de Frivile Anno 54
Idem. Anno 55 Rob. del Estre Anno 56 Idem.
EDW. I.
Anno 1 Rob. del Estre Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Walt. Shelfhanger Anno 4 Will le
Moyne for 3 years. Anno 7 Bal. de Sto Georgio Anno 8 Will. de Rothing Anno 9
Idem. Anno 10 Tho. de Belhus. for 7 years. Anno 17 Hugo de Babington for 8
years. Anno 25 Will. de Mortuo Mari Anno 26 Will de Sutton Anno 27 Tho. de
Gradinor Anno 28 Idem. Anno 29 Rob. Hereward Anno 30 Rob. de Bajose for 5
years.
EDW. II.
Anno 1 Ioh. Crekes, and Rob. de Hoo for 3 years. Anno 4 Johan. de Crekes for 3
years. Anno 7 Tho. de Stolarus Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Radul. Giffard for 3 years.
Anno 12 Math. de Bassingborne Anno 13 Ioh. de Crekes Anno 14 Almaricus de Zouch
for 5 years.
EDW. III.
Anno 1 Math. de Bassingborne Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Almar. la Zouch Anno 4 Idem.
Anno 5 Will. le Moyne Anno 6 Will. filius Ioh Muchett Anno 7 Rich. de Bajocis,
and War. de Bassing Anno 8 Anno 9 Ioh. de Lymbery, and Will. Muschetts Anno 10
Tho. de Lacy Anno 11 Will. Muschett Anno 12 Idem. Anno 13 Warrin. de
Bassingborn Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15 Ioh. de Papworth, and Ioh. de Lacy Anno 16
War. de Bassingborn for 4 years. Anno 20 Rob. de Engane Anno 21 Idem. Anno 22
Guido. de Sto Cler. for 4 years. Anno 26 Johan. Lisle de Rubeo. Monts. Anno 27
Gui. de St. Clear Anno 28 Idem. Anno 29 Tho. de Scalar Anno 30 Ioh. de Harewdon
Anno 31 Nich. Stanell for 4 years. Anno 35 Ioh. Furneux, and Tho. Cheyne Anno
36 Nich. Styvecle for 10 years. Anno 46 Will. de Pappeworth Anno 47 Rog.
Harlaston Anno 48 Tho. Sewalle Anno 49 Tho. Torell Anno 50 Bald. St. George
Anno 51 Ioh. Deugayne
Sheriffs of Cambridge and Huntington.
Name Place Arms RICH. II. Anno 1 Ioh. Avenel Gamlinggay. Arg. a Fess betw. 6
Annulets G. Az. Cresuly, a Fess Dansette Ar. 2 Will. Moygn^ 3 Radu. Wykes 4
Hen. English 5 Tho. Sewale 6 Will. Moygne ut prius 7 Phil. Tillney Arg. a Chev.
betwixt 3 Griffinsheads erased G. 8 Hen. English 9 Ioh. Heningford G. 3
Unicorns-heads cooped Or. 10 Rob. Paris Hildersha^ 11 Will. Pappeworth 12 Will.
Chenye Azure a Fess inter 3 Leopardsfaces Or. 13 Edw. de la Pole 14 Rob. de
Paris ut prius 15 Nice. Steucle Stivele H 16 Ioh. Kinost 17 Will. Chenye, mi.
18 Nich. Paris ut prius 19 Ioh. Lakynghech 20 Ioh. Harlington 21 Andr. Newport
Arg. a Cheveron, Gules betwixt 3 Leopards-heads S. 22 Idem. ut prius HEN. IV.
Anno 1 Tho. Hasdden 2 Will. Rees and Jo. Howard Gules a Bend betwixt six Cross
Croflets Fitchee Arg. 3 Idem. 4 Ioh. Hobildon ut prius 5 Idem. 6 Rob. Scotte 7
Ioh. Bernakes 8 Ioh. Hobildon 9 Ioh. Paniel 10 Bald. St. George Hatley C. Arg.
a Chief Az. over all, a Lion Ramp. G. Crowned Or. 11 Will. Allein 12 Rob.
Scotte HEN. V. Anno 1 Rob. Hockshe cho 2 Will. Alington Horsheath S. a Bend
betwixt 6 Billetts Arg. 3 Tho. Reviles 4 Rob. Scott 5 Walt. Pole, mil. ut prius
6 Will. Asconhall 7 Tho. Reviles 8 Rob. Scott 9 Idem. ut prius 10 Idem. ut
prius HEN. VI. Anno 1 To. Scott, and Will* Alington ut prius 2 Wall de la Pole,
m. ut prius 3 Nich. Slyvebley 4 Ioh. Hoar Childerley 5 Tho. Dischalers Whaddon
Gules 6 Scallops 3, 21. Arg. 6 Nich. Alington ut prius 7 Walt. de la Pole ut
prius 8 Lavi. Cheyney Ditton c. AMP. 9 Ioh. Austey 10 Io. Shardelo^, m. Ioh.
(...). S. a Bend Ar. between 2 Cotisses Dancette Or. 11 Rob. Stonham Arg. on a
Cross Sable 5 Escalopes Or. 12 Rog. Hunt 13 Idem. 14 Rob. Stonham ut prius 15
Idem. 16 Will. Alington ut prius 17 Gilb. Hoar ut prius 18 Hen. Langley 19
Idem. 20 Will. Lee 21 Tho. Peyton Isleham S^. a Cross ingrailed Or, in the
first Quarter a Mullet Arg. 22 Will. St. George, m. ut prius 23 Idem. ut prius
24 Ioh. Chalers ut prius 25 Id^m. 26 Tho. Bernard Ar. a Bear ramp. and Border
Eng. S. 27 Wall. Trumpingto^ Tru^pington Az. Cresulee 2 Trumpets Or. 28 Ioh.
Harlaston Arg. a Fess Ermin erised Sable. 29 Will. Alington ut prius 30 Tho.
Tiesham Northamp. Partee per Saltyrs, Sa. and Or. 6 Trefoiles of the first. 31
Tbo. Peyton ut prius 32 Will. Hasdden 33 Hen. Paris, ar. ut prius 34 35 36 Tho.
Tresham, ar. ut prius 37 Ioh. Colvill, mil. Az. a Lion ramp. Arg. over all a
Label G. 38 Tho. Findern, m. EDW. IV. Aano 1 Ioh. Alington, ar. ut prius 2 Ioh.
Stuke, ar. 3 Idem. 4 Ioh. Cheyne 5 Ioh. Boughton, ju Ar. a ^hev. betwixt 3
Mullets G. 6 Ioh. Berleley, mil. Gul. a Chev. betwixt 10 Crosses from 6 and 4
Arg. 7 Ioh. Forster, * ar. 8 Will. St. George, ut prius * S. a Chiv. betwixt 3
Arrows Ar. 9 Rich. Sapcote, m. Elton Sable 3 Dove-coats Arg. 10 Tho. Gray, ar.
Barry of six, Arg. and Az. 3 Torteauxes in Chief. 11 Tho. Gray, mil. ut prius
12 Ioh. Austy 13 Tho. P^gott Abington c. Sable 3 Pickaxes Argent. 14 Io.
Broughton, m. ut prius 15 Io. Cheyue, mil. 16 Tho Cotton, ar. Ladwade c. S. a
Cheveron twixt 3 Griffonsbeads eraced Arg. 17 Will. Alington, ju. ut prius 18
Will. Frevill, ar. Sheford ca, G. 3 cressants Ermine. 19 Rob. Patis, ar. ut
prius 20 Tho. Huntingdon 21 Gal. Blodwell 22 Rob. Tilney ut prius RICH. III.
Anno 1 Rob. Tan^eld 2 Ioh. Wake, ar. Salston C. Or, 2 Bars Gules 3 Torteaxes
in Chief. 3 Io. Hudleston, *m * G. Frettee Arg. HEN. VII. Anno * G. a Lion
ramp. Queve forchee, Arg. within a Border V. charged an Enteir of 8 Escallop.
Or. 1 Will. Findern 2 Tho. Oxenburgg* 3 Will. Taillard Quarterly Arg. and S. a
cross patonce quarterly perced counterch. 4 Ioh. Hafilden 5 Will. Wentworth S.
a Chev. betwixt 3 Leopardsheads Or. 6 Tho. Cheyney, m. 7 Will. Cheyney, ar. 8
Ioh. Burgoyne Caxson ca. Az. a Talbot passant Arg. 9 Tho. Cotton, ar. ut prius
10 Gerrard Steukly 11 Tho. Cheney, m. 12 Chri. Peyton, ar. ut prius 13 Rich.
Stutvill, ar. Brynklo ca. Barruly Arg. and G. a Lion Ramp. Sable. 14 Rob.
Peiton, mil. ut prius 15 Tho. Cotton, ar. ut prius 16 Jo. Clarevax 17 Edw.
Lucy, ar. G. Crusuly Or, 3 Lucies, [or Pikes] Hauriant Arg. 18 Tho. Cheyne, m.
19 Chri. Druell, ar. 20 Ioh. Frevile, ar. ut prius 21 Anth. Mallory, ar. Or, a
Lion ramp. G. collered of the first. 22 Idem. ut prius 23 Will. Findern, m. 24
Tho. Gery HEN. VIII. Anno 1 Fra. Halisden, ar. 2 Ioh. Paris, ar. 3 Egid.
Alington, m. ut prius 4 Tho. Cotton, ar* Conningto^ Az an Eagle displayed Arg.
5 Tho. Throsby 6 Ra. Chamberlein Or, Fretty S. on a Chief of second 3 Bezants.
7 Ioh. Paris, ar. ut prius 8 Ioh. Cut, mil. Childerly c. Argeni on a B^ud
Engrailed S. 3 Plates. 9 Will. Tanfeld, ar. 10 Anth. Malory, ar. ut prius 11
Egid. Alenton, m. ut prius 12 Fran. Alisdon, ar. 13 Ioh. Moor, ar. 14 Ioh.
Huddleston ut prius 15 Anth. Hansard Gules three mullets Argent. 16 Ioh.
Huddleston ut prius 17 Rob. Payton, ar. ut prius 18 Tho. Piggot, ar. ut prius
19 Rob. Aprice, ar. VVashingly ^s. S. 3 Spears-heads Arg. 20 Ioh. Paris, ar. ut
prius 21 An. h. Hansard, ar. ut prius 22 Egi. Alington, m. ut prius 23 Anth.
Malory, ar. ut prius 24 Tho. Eliot, mil. Carlto^ ^ 25 R^ch. Sapcotte, m. ut
prius 26 Tho. Chichele, ar. Or a Chev. betwixt 3 Cinkfoiles Gules. 27 Rob.
Peyton, mil ut prius 28 Tho. Crumwell, a. See our Notes in this year. 29 Tho.
Megges, ar. 30 Tho. Hutton, ar. 31 Phu. Paris, ar. ut prius 32 Rich. Crumwell,
Hinchinbrook H. Sable a Lion rampant Argent. 33 Oliv. Leder, ar. 34 Edw. North,
mil. Catlidge Az. a Lion passant Or between 3 flower de lices Arg. 35 Rob.
Aprice, ar. ut prius 36 Tho. Eliot, mil. ut prius 37 Egid. Alington, m. ut
pri^s 38 Law. Tailard, m. ut prius EDW. VI. Anno 1 Tho. Cotton, ar. ut prius 2
Ioh. Hudleston ut prius 3 Ioh. Cotton, ar. ut prius * Ar. on a Chev. betwixt 3
Boarsheads couped S. ^as many Scallops Or, a Border Vert B^zantee. 4 Tho.
Bolles, * ar. 5 Ioh. Cut, mil. 6 Egi. Alington, m. ut prius MA. REGI. Anno 1
Rob. Peyton, ar. ut prius REX PHIL. and Ma. Regina. Anno 2 Oliv. Leaden, mil. 3
Law. Tayla rd, m. ut prius 4 Ioh. Cotton, mil. ut prius 5 Rob. Tirwhite, m.
LINCO. Gules, 3 Pewets Or. 6 Will. Laurence, ar. St. Ives Arg. a cross Ragule G.
on a chief of the second a Lion passant Gardant Or. REG. ELIZA. Anno 1 Ioh.
Hutton, ar. Ar. a chief Vert, charged with an Eagle disp, within a Border eng.
G. 2 Tho. Cotton, mil. ut prius Arg. on a Cbev. G. 3 Lozinges Or twixt as many
Goats-heads grazed Az. armed and chollered of the third on a chief S. a Lion
passant Gardant Ermine. 3 Fran. Hynde, ar. Madenly C. 4 Hen. Darcy, ar.
Leighto^ H. Azure 3 Cinque-fotles betwixt 9 Crosses-croflets Arg. 5 Cle.
Chichiley, ar. ut prius 6 Will. Mallory, ar. ut prius 7 Hen. Williams, alias
Cromwell, m. ut prius 8 Will. Worthingto^ 9 Rob Peyton, ar. ut prius 10 Tho.
Revell. ar. 11 Hen. Long, ar. Shengey C. S.' a Lion ramp. betwixt 8 Crosses
crossed Argent. 12 Fran. Hynde, ar. ut prius 13 Hen. Crumwell ut prius 14 Ioh.
Cutts, mil. ut prius 15 Tho. Wendy Hastin^ield Ca. Az. a Chev. twixt 3
Lions-heads eraced within a Border engrai^ed Or. 16 Ioh. Hutton, ar. ut prius
17 Will. Mallory, ar. ut prius 18 Rob. Bevill, ar. Chasterto^ G. a Chev. Or
betwix^ 3 Bezantes. 19 Tho. Reu, ar. 20 Fitz Rad Chamberlain ut prius 21 Tho:
Holmes, ar. 22 Hen. Crumwell, m. ut prius 23 Rob. Tailor 24 Tho. Cotton. ar. ut
prius 25 Hen. Darcy, mil. ut prius 26 Anth. Cage, mil. Party per pale Az. and
G. over all a Saltire Or. 27 Tho. Wendy, ar. ut prius 28 Rob. Peiton, ar. ut
prius 29 Fran. Crumwell ut prius 30 Rad. Bevill, ar. ut prius 31 Fran. Hynde,
m. ut prius 32 Tho. Chichley, ar. ut prius 33 Ioh. Cotton, ar. ut prins 34 Hen.
Crumwell ut prius 35 Ioh. Peyton, ar. ut prins 36 Tho. March, ar. Waresley H.
Or, 3 Pales Az. on a Chief G. 3 Talbets-heads erazed of the first. 37 Rob.
Brudenell Diddington H. Ar a Cheverou G. twixt 3 Capps Azure 38 Anth. Cage, ar.
ut prius 39 Iar. Clifton, mil. Leighton H. Sa. semee de Cinq foiles a Lion
ramp. Argent. 40 Oli. Crumwell, m. ut prius 41 Egi. Allington, ar. ut pri^s 42
Will Hind, ar. ut prius 43 Ioh. Cutts, mil. ut prius 44 Tho. Wendy, ar. ut
prius 45 Ioh. Bedell, mil. and pri. Iaco. Hamarton Hunt. Gules a Chev.
engrailed betwixt 3 scollopps A^g. REG. JAC. Anno 1 Ioh. Bedell, mil. ut prius
2 Ioh. Peyton, mil. ut prius 3 Rob. Bevill, mil. ut prius 4 Tho* Iermy, mil.
Teversha^ C. Arg. a Lion ramp. Guarda nt G. 5 Rob. Pain, mil. Medlow H, Az. a
Bend trunked R^gulee betwixt six Esto^les Or. 6 Ioh. Cage, ar. ut prius 7 Oliv.
Cheney, mi. Steukley H, 8 Reg. Millicent, m. 9 Sim. Steward, mi. Sturney C.
Q^arterly, First France on a bord^r. G. 8 Ferm^lauxes Or. The second Or, a fess
Checky arg. and Az. a border engrailed G. 10 Edw. Hind, ar. ut prius 11 Tho.
Baldwyn, ar. 12 Edw. Aldred, ar. 13 Mi. Sands, m. and b Wilburham Or a Fess
indented betwixt 3 Crosses-croslets Fitche G. 14 Fran. Brown, ar. 15 Will.
Wendy, ar. ut prius 16 Tho. Steward, m. ut prius 17 Ioh. Cutts, mil. ut prius
18 Tho. Maples, ar. Stow Az. a Chev. quarterly O^. and Ar. between 3 Flower
deluce. of the second. 19 Rob. Symonds Wichsord C. 20 Ed. Pe^ton, m. and b. ut
preus 21 Rob Audley, ar: St Ives 22 Iac. Reynold, mil. CAR. REG. Anno 1 Mart.
Pierce, ar. CAMBR. G. a Cheveron, Ermine twixt 3 D^a* ons-heads eraced Arg. 2
Ioh. Goldsburgh Godman chester A. 3 Rob. Hagar, ar. Buyne-cast: Ca. A^g. on a
Bend S. 3 Lions passant of the first. 4 Tho. Parker, ar. 5 Jacob. Pedley, ar. 6
Tho. Terrell, ar. Fulborn C. Arg. two Cheverons Az. within a border engrailed
G. 7 Rich. Covil, ar. Az. a Lion ramp. Arg. a File os 3 Lambeaux G. 8 Capel.
Bedell, ar. ut prius 9 Anth. Cage, ar. ut prius 10 Rob. Ballam, ar. 11 Ludo.
Dyer, Bar. Gr. Ston ton Hu. O^, a chief indented Gules.

The Sheriffs of Cambridge-shire alone.
Name Place Arms 12 Ioh. Carleton, ba. Chevely Arg. on a Bend Sa. 3 Mascats of
the first. 13 Tho. Chichesley ut prius 14 Tho. Wendy, ar. ut prius G. a Fess
twixi 3 Scallops Or. 15 Tho. Pichard * Tru^pington Arg. a Fess betwixt 3
Crosses Fitchee G. 16 Ioh Crane, ar. Kingston 17 Ioh. Cotton, mil. Landwad S. a
Cheveren betwixt 3 (...) ^heads erazed Arg.

The Sheriffs of Cambridge and Huntington-shires again.
Name ^lace Arms 18 Tho. Martin, mil. Barton Arg. an Eagle displayed G. 19
Idem. ut prius 20 On slo. Winch, ar. 21 Tris. Diumond Well.

Edward IV.
16 THOMAS COTTON, Ar.]

This Thomas Cotton (different in Arms, and descent from the Cottons of Hunt.)
was of Cambridg-shire (the same person who in the. Gentry of that County [
Henric^ 6. 12.] was returned the twenty second in Order.

Henry the VIII.
24 THOMAS ELIOT, Mil.]

He was son to Sir Richard Bale descript. B^t. Cent. oct. Number. 77.
Eliot, and born, some say, in Suffolk, but his house and chief estate lay in
this County. After his long sailing into foreign parts, he at last cast anchor
at home, and being well skilled in Greek and Latin was the Author of many
excellent works. Of these one in Latin was styled Idem ibidem.
Defensorium bonarum mulierum, or the defense of good women; though some will
say that such are hardly found, and easily de^ended.

He wrote also an excellent Dictionary of Latin and English, if not the first,
the best of that kind in that age; and England then abounding with so many
learned Clergymen, I know not which more to wonder at, that they mist, or he
hit on so necessary a subject; let me add Bishop Cooper grafted his Dictionary
on the stock of Sir Thomas Eliot, which worthy Knight deceased 1546. and was
buried at Carlton in this County.

28 THOMAS CROMWELL, Ar.]

Here Reader I am at a perfect los^, and do desire thy charitable hand to lead
me. No Cromwell Thomas can I find at this time in this County, and can hardly
suspect him to be the Cromwell of that Age, because only additioned Armiger.
Indeed I find him this very year created Baron of Okeham, but cannot believe
that he was Un-knighted so long, besides the improbability that he would
condescend to such an Office, having no Interest I ever met with in
Cambridg-shire, though (which may signify somewhat) he was at this time
Chancellor of the University of Cambridge. Thus I have started the doubt, which
others may hunt down to their own satisfaction.

34 EDWARD NORTH, Mil.]

He was a prudent Person, and in managing Matters of importance of great
dispatch, not unskilled in Law, and eminently employed in the Court of
Augmentation. A Court though short lived (erected in the end of King Henry the
eighth, dissolved in the beginning of King Edward the sixth his reign) yet very
beneficial to the Officers therein. This Sir Edward was made by Queen Mary
Baron of Catlidge in this County, and was a considerable Benefactor to
Peter-house in Cambridge, where he is remembered in their Parlour with this
Distich under his Picture;

Nobilis Hic vere fuerat si Nobilis ullus,
Qui sibi (...) Nobilitatis erat.
He was Father to Roger Lord North, and Great-grand-father to Dudly Lord North
now surviving.

Edward the VI.
2 JOHN Misprinted Sir Robert ^n my Ecclesiastical History.
HUDDLESTON, Mil.]

He was highly honored afterward by Queen Mary, and deservedly. Such the T^ust
she reposed in him, that (when Jane Gray was proclaimed Queen) she came
privately to him to ^alston, and rid thence behind his servant (the better to
disguise herself from discovery) to Framlingham castle. She afterward made him
(as I have heard) her Privy-Councellor, and (besides other Great Boones)
bestowed the bigger part of Cambridgecastle (then much ruined) upon him, with
the stones whereof he built his fair house in this County. I behold his Family
as branched from the Huddlestones in Cumberland.

Queen Elizabeth.
14 JOHN CUTS, Mil.]

He was a most bountiful housekeeper, as any of his estate, insomuch that
Queen Elizabeth in the beginning of her reign (whilst as yet she had peace with
Spain) the sickness being at London, consigned the Spanish Ambassador to this
Knights house in this County. The Ambassador coming thither, and understanding
his name to be John Cuts, conceived himself disparaged to be sent to one of so
short a name, the Spanish Gentlemen generally having voluminous Surnames,
(though not so long as the Deity in New-Spain, called Lord Herbert in the life
of K. Henry the 8 page 181.
Yoca huvaovamaorocoti) usually adding the place of their habitation for the
elongation thereof. But soon after the Don found that what the Knight lacked in
length of name, he made up in the largeness of his entertainment.

34 HENRY CROMWELL, Mil.]

This was the fourth time he was Sheriff in the reign of the Queen. He was son
to Richard Cromwell Esquire, Sheriff in the 32. of King Henry the eighth, to
whom his Valor and Activity so endeared him, that he bestowed on him so much
Abby-land in this County, as at that day, at a reasonable rate, is worth twenty
thousand pounds a year, and upwards. He was no whit at all allied to (though
intimately acquainted with) Thomas Lord Cromwell, (the Mauler of Monasteries,)
which I knowingly affirm, though the contrary be generally believed.

For when Doctor Goodman late Bishop of Gloucester presented a Printed paper to
Oliver Cromwell (Grand child to this our Sheriff) mentioning therein his near
Affinity to the said Lord Cromwell, the pretended Protector, desirous to
confute a Vulgar Error, in some passion returned, That Lord was not related to
my Family in the least degree.

39 JARVASIUS CLIFTON, Mil.]

He had a fair Estate at Barrington in Somersetshire, whence he removed to
Huntingtonshire, on his Match with the sole Daughter and Heir of Sir Henry
Darcy of Leightonbromswold in that County. This Sir Jarvase was by King James
created Baron of Leighton aforesaid, and there began a beautiful house, which
he lived not to finish. His sole Daughter Katherine was married to Esme
Steward, Duke of Lenox, to whom she bare the truly Illustrious (by Virtues and
high Extraction,) James Duke of Richmond.

King James.
9 SIMON STEWARD, Mil.]

I remember he lived (after he was Knighted) a Fellow-commoner in Trinity-hall,
where these his Arms are fairly depicted in his Chamber, with this Distich
over them.

Francoru^ Carolus voluit sic Stemmata ferri,
Singula cum valiant sunt meliora simul.
French Charles would have these Coats to be thus worn;
When singly good, their better jointly born.
But how the Royal Name of Steward came first into this County, consult I pray
the ensuing Epitaph in Ely Minster, transcribed (as my Son has informed me) by
himself, exactly from his Monument.

Premendo sustusit. Ferendo vicit.

Secundum Redemptoris Mundi adventum expectat hic Marcus Steward Miles, filius
haeresque Simeonis Steward Armig. Nicholao Steward Armig. geniti, qui patrem
habuit Richardum Steward Armig. quem genuit Thomas Steward Armig. Johannis
Steward militis filius, cujus Pater erat Johannes Steward Miles, ejus nominis
in Anglia primus, qui cum Jacobo Roberti Scotiae Regis filio in Franciam
tranfretans, (regnante tunc Henrico quarto) vento eorum propositis opposito, in
Anglicano littore applicuerunt, ubi diu post pro obsedibus custodiebantur: Sed
hic Johannes in amorem cujusdam virginis Anglicanae, nomine Talmach, incidens,
obtentaque Johannae Reginae venia, cui ancilla inserviebat, eam in conjugem
cepit, in fidemque Regis Henrici dum vixisset solenniter est juratus. Hujus
pater erat Alexander, quem genuit Andreas Steward, Miles, Alexandri,
cognominati Ferocis filiorum natu minimus, cujus pater erat Walterus Steward, a
Dun de vale in Scotia dictus. Sed Primus in Genealogia hac summonitus, and hic
sepultus, ex Anna una filiarum and Haeredum Roberti Huicke Armig. Reginae
Elizabethae Medici pri marii, varios habuit liberos, quos omnes inadultos Fata
rapuere, praeter duos, Marians scilicet Gulielmo Forster in Com. Berke. militi
nuptam, and Simionem Steward Militem, Haeredem filiumque suum moestissimum, qui
pii Officii, singularisque erga Patrem Amoris gratia, hoc posuit monumentum,
ubi inscriptum legas, quod cum multos Annos, and Bello, and Pace, pro Patria
feliciter egisset, aetate tandem confectus militari singulo, and Auratis
Calcaribus a Jacobo Rege Screnissimo ornatus, senex pene octogenarius fatali
Necessitati concessit, 28. Februarii, Anno salutis 1603.

The Farewell.
It is hard for a Physician to prescribe proper Physic to such a Patient, who
has a Hot Liver, and a Cold Stomach, because what is Good for the One is Bad
for the Other. As hard it is, for Weather to please the Concernments of this
County, whose Northern part being Moist and Fenny, desires Fair weather; ^outh
and South-eastern Dry and Heathy, delights so much rain, that it can well
digest (save in harvest time) one shower every Day, and two every Sunday. But
the God of Heaven, * who can make it rain on one place, Amos 4. 7.
and not on another, can fit tue Nec^ssity of B^th, and I remitte them both to
his Providence.

CHES-SHIRE.
CHES-SHIRE lies in form of an Axe, Wirral being the handle thereof, having
Lanca-shire (parted with the river Mersey) on the North, a corner of Yorkshire
on the North-East, Darby and Stafford* shires, (severed with mountains) on the
East, Shrop-shire on the South, Denbigh, Flint-shire, and the Irish Ocean on
the West thereof. The longest part (advantaged with excursions) is four and
forty, the broadest twenty five miles.

This County was reputed a Palatinate before the Conquest, and since continued
in the same dignity. It is much senior to Lancashire in that honor, which
relates to Cheshire as the copy to the original, being Palatinated but by King
Edward the third, referring the Duke of Lancaster to have his regal
juridiction. Adeo integre and libere sicut Comes Cestriae, etc. And whereas
Records are written in the Common Law, Contra Coronam and dignitatem Regis, in
this County they run thus, Contra dignitatem gladii Cestriae.

It abounds with all things necessary to man's life, and it is observable that
all the rivers, and rivolets therein, rise in, or run through, some mere or
pool, as Cumber-meer, Bag-meer, Pick-meer, Ridley-pool, Petty-pool, etc. so
that Cheshire has more lakes in this kind, then all the neighboring Counties,
affording plenty of Carps, Tenches, Trouts, Eeles, etc. therein.

The Gentry of this County are remarkable upon a fourfold account. 1. For
their Numerousness, not to be paralleled in England in the like extent of
ground. 2. Their Antiquity, many of their Ancestors being fixed here before the
Norman-conquest. 3. Their Loyalty, especially against a Northern enemy,
heartily hateing a Vate Royal of Eng. page 19.
Scot, understand it before the union of the two Kingdoms. 4. Hospitality, no
County keeping better houses, which because all grows on their own, may be the
better afforded.

One said pleasantly that it appeared to all people that the Cheshire Gentry
were good housekeepers, because they gave so many wheat-sheaves (bread being
the staff of hospitality, wheaten the best of bread) in their Coats of Arms.
Indeed I have told no fewer then six and twenty, called Garbs in Herauldry,
which are born in the several Coat-Armours of the Gentry of this County. The
Original whereof is sufficiently known to be out of conformity to Hugh (...)
the fifth Earl-Palatine of Chester, who gave Azure six Garbs, Or. And many of
the Gentry of the County being his dependents, had assigned them, or did assume
in their sheilds something in allusion thereunto.

Natural Commodities.
Salt.
This is most Essential to man's Livelihood, without which neither Sacrifice
was acceptable to God, nor Meat is savory to Man. It is placed on the Board
with bread, to show that they are equally necessary to man's sustenance.

A General in our late wars soundly chid a Captain for his so soon surrendering
of a Castle, seeing he had store of Powder therein. I had (returned the
Captain) plenty of BLACK, but no WHITE Powder at all.

And here it is Remarkable to Observe the defects which sundry places have
herein.

1. Some Countries have Salt without Flesh within many miles, as in the
Southpart of Africa. 2. Some have plenty of Flesh, but no Salt to make use
thereof, as in many parts of Tartary. 3. Some have Flesh and Salt, but the
Flesh utterly incapable of seasoning, as about Nombre de Dios, and other places
near the Meridian in America. 4. Some have Flesh, Salt, and Flesh capable
thereof, but so unconscionably dear, that Common people have little comfort
therein, as in France* no Country having Salt most plentiful, and (for reason
of State) most excessive in the* rate thereof.
These things considered, we who have Flesh, Salt, Salt at reasonable prises,
and Flesh capable thereof, have cause to profess,

O Fortunati nimium bona si sua norint
Angligenae*
The manner of making of Salt in this County, is so largely and exactly
described by Mr. Camden, that nothing can be added thereunto.

Cheese.
Poor men do eat it for hunger, Rich for digestion. It seems that the Ancient
Camdens Brit. in Ch^shire.
British had no skill in the making thereof, till taught by the Romans, and now
the Romans may even learn of us more exactness therein. This County does afford
the best for quantity and quality, and yet their William Smith in his Vale
Royal page 18.
Cows are not (as in other Shires) housed in the Winter, so that it may seem
strange that the hardiest Kine should yield the tenderest cheese. Some Esayed
in vain to make the like in other places, though hence they fetched both their
kine and Dary-maids. It seems they should have fetched their ground too,
(wherein surely some Occult excellency in this kind) or else so good Cheese will
not be made. I hear not the like commendation of the Butter in this County, and
perchance these two Commodities, are like Stars of a different Horizon, so that
the Elevation of the one to Eminency is the Depression of the other.

Mill stones.
Stones they are Natural, as Fitted for that Purpose, Artificial. Very great
and good, are dug up at Mowcop-hill in this County, though one Moity thereof
be in Staffordshire, out of which the River Trent does arise. How necessary
these are for man's sustenance, is proved by the painful experience of such aged
persons, who wanting their Molare Teeth must make use of their Gums for
Grinders, and such bad shifts should men be put to, if wanting Mills where
stones turn Corn into bread. Manufactures considerable, I meet with none in
this County, and therefore proceed.

The Buildings.
Beestone-castle, Situated on a steep-hill, carried away the Credit of this
County for Building; it was erected by Ray^ulf the third Earl of Chester, when
he returned victorious from the holy land. I am much taken with the neatness of
the structure, though, I confess, my eye never did, and now never shall behold
it.

When some justly quarrel at Virgill his fiction, making Dido fall in love
with Eneas, who indeed was dead many years before her Cradle was made. Others
have sought ingeniously to salve the Anticronisme in History, by the Plea that
she fell in love with his picture which she saw in Tapestry. Yet I may truly
aleadge for my self that I was affected with the delight of this Castle, though
by me never seen, and now levelled to the ground, (since the late Wars)
Beholding the delineation thereof, cut by the charge of John Savage Esquire.

Veraque cum desunt Maenia picta juvant When Real Walls are vanished quite,
Painted ones do us delight.
I confess learned Leland is very confident that this Castle shall see better
times, deriving his intellegence from ancient predictions.

Tempus erit quando rursus caput ex^ret altum,
Vatibus antiquis si vas mihi credere vati.
Beestone in time its head a loft shall heave,
If I a Prohet, Prophets may believe.
But I give credit to Lelands History, when he tells what is past, more then to
his prophecy when he foretells what is to come.

The Wonders.
It is reported by credible and believed by discreet Persons, that there is a
Pool adjoining to Brereton, the seat of the honorable family of the Breretons,
wherein bodies of Trees are seen to swim for certain days together, before the
death of any Heir of that House. If so, let not all men look for so solemn
summons to pay their Debts to Nature. God grant us that Gray-haires, Dimness of
Sight, Dullness of other Senses, Decay in general of Strength, Death of our
Dearest Relations, (especially when far younger then our selves) before our
eyes, etc. may serve us (instead of Swimming Logs) and be sanctified unto us,
for sufficient and effectual Monitors of our Mortality.

We must not forget the many Fir-Trees found here buried under ground, whereof
largely hereaft^r in In the wonders of Angle sea.
a more proper place. The People of this County cut such pieces of Wood very
small, and use them instead of Candles, which give a good light. My (...).
Smith in his Vale-royal of England page 17.
Author adds, that such Wooden-candles have long Snuffes, and yet says he
(which to me amounts to a Wonder,) In falling do no harm, though they light
into Tow, Flax, or the like. Strange that the least fire should be so Dead as
not to be Revived with such Cordials: Let not this encourage Careless Servants
to tempt Providence with such Combustible Conjunctions. No County being more
sadly sensible of Casualties by fire. Nantwich, a fair Market therein, being
Once Anno 14. and again Anno 1583.
twice burnt down to the ground, within the compass of one hundred and fifty
years.

Proverbs.
Cheshire Chief of Men.] Say not that this Proverb carries a challenge in it,
and our See our Pro verbs in Kent.
(...) of Kent will undertake these Chief of Men, for engrossing Manhood to
themselves. And some will opposeto this narrow County-Proverb, an English one
of greater latitude, viz. No man so good, but another may be as good as he.
For, rather then any difference shall arise, by wise and peaceable men, many
Chief's will be allowed.

Indeed the Cestrians have always demeaned themselves right valiantly in their
undertakings. This was well known to K. Richard the second, who in dangerous
times sent for Holinshead Chron. page 489.
two thousand Cheshire men, all Archers, to attend him. Which number, in time
of a suspicious Parliament was Stows Survey of London page 522.
doubled by him, all having Bouch of Court, (bread and beer) and six pence a
day, large wages in that age.

Pity it was that the valor of these Cheshire men, was once wasted against
themselves, in a terrible battle betwixt King Henry the fourth, and Henry Percy
surnamed Hotspurr, not ill described by our Author,

There Draytons Po* lyalbion, Song (...).
Dutton, Dutton kills* a Done does kill a Done;
A Booth, a Booth; and Leigh by Leigh is overthrown;
A Venables, against a Venables does stand;
And Troutbeck fights with a Troutbeck hand to hand;
There Molineux does make a Molineux to die;
And Egerton, the strength of Egerton does try;
O Cheshire were thou mad, of thine own native gore,
So much until this day thou never shedst before!
Nor does this abate our former commendation of their loyalty, the cause they
maintained, being so intricate and perplexed; one side fighting for Mortimer,
who should be King by right; the other for Henry the four^h, who actually was
so; and politic men, who know the one were loyal, will be loath to say, that
the other were Traitors.

Let no Ill-natured wit, urge in opposition to the Manhood of Cheshire men,
their late miscarriage under a Worthy Knight, whom I forbear to name, partly,
because he nameeth himself, (though I say nothing of him,) partly, because
before my pains pass the Press, he will probably be honorably Additioned. For
had other Counties seasonably contributed their promised Assistance, what now
proved an abortive birth would have been a Vital Infant. Besides, better things
were provided for our Gracious Sovereign, that he the Copy, as God the Original
might not come in the tempestuous Wind of War, Fire of (...), or Earthquake of
open Enmity, but in the still ^ Kings 19. 12.
voice of a Peaceable Composition. And to show that this should not be Man's
work, God suffered both the Men of Kent, and Cheshire Chi^f of Men to fail in
their Loyal Endeavors, that it might only be GODS WORK, and justly marvailous
in our Eyes.

Better Wed over the Mixon then over the Moor. Over the (...), that is hard by
or at home, Mixon being that heap of Compost which lies in the yards of good
husbands.

Then over the Moor, that is fun off or from London. The road from Chester
leading to London, over some part of the Moor-lands in Staffondshire. The
meaning is, the Gen^ry in Cheshire find it more profitable to match within
their County, then to bring a Bride out of other (...).

1. Because better acquainted with her birth and breeding. 2. Because (though
her Portion perchance may be less) the expense will be less to maintain her.
Such (...) in (...) County have been observed, both a prolonger of worshipful
families, and the (...) of (...) (...) (...) them, seeing what In his Brit. in
Ireland.
Mr. Camden reported of the Citizens of (...), is verified of the Cheshire
Gentry, they are all or an Alliance.

Cardinals.
WILLIAM MAKILESFIELD was says my Author Pitz de (...)- script page 388.
(...) (...). Bishop In his (...) of Cardinals.
Godwin (...) little (...), (...) [(...)] in Civitate (...). However I conceive
him born in this (...) finding a (...) Market Town and Forest therein so
named, though he was reputed a (...), because (...) in that Age was in the
(...) of Coventry and Lichfield. But, (...) (...) (...) not swim against the
stream, I Remit the Reader to his Character in Warwickshire.

(...).
WILLIAM BOOTH was first bred in (...) Inn in London, in the study of our
Municipall Laws, till he (...) that profession on the proffer of a (...) Place
in Saint Paul's, and took Orders upon him. It was not long before he was (...)
Bishop of Letchfield, and six years after translated to (...). He expended much
money (...) (...) (...) (...) his (...) (...) (...), and (...) (...) (...) died
and was buried in Saint Mary's Chapel in Southwell 1464.

LAURENCE BOOTH Brother (but by another Mother) to William aforesaid, was bred
and became Master of (...)-hall in (...); and was Chancellor of that
University. He made the Composition (...) the (...) and (...) college to their
mutual advantage, and was an eminent (...) to his own College, bestowing
thereon all the (...) ((...) (...)) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) Church,
amongst which was St. (...) (...) (...) (...) the College of a Pension of five
pounds which he redeemed, and and Conferred there on the (...) and Patronage of
Overton-Waterfield in Huntingtanshire.

As it is Gods, so it is all! (...) (...) method, in (...) (...) Servants* Be
faithful in a little, and thou shall rule over much. Doctor Booth well
performing his Chancellors Place, in Cambridge, was (...) (...) (...) to (...)
(...) (...) to (...) the fixth. Well (...) (...) (...), he was (...) (...)
(...)* of King (...) the fourth made Lord High Chancellor, ((...) seems his
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...), but (...)) (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...)* Bishop of York, and deserving well of both Sees. For
he built in the first the (...) of (...) college, and (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...).

It must not be forgotten than this (...) (...) (...) (...) of (...) (...)*
till the day of his death, and (...) (...) his (...) (...) (...) (...) (...),
(...) (...), and Bishop (...), not that they were (...) ((...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...),) of the place, but the place (...) (...)
(...)* (...) (...) (...) (...) with them, as it is this day by the Right
Reverend Father in God Benjamin Lany Lord Bishop of Peturborough. This
Archbishop died Anno Dom. 1480.

JOHN BOOTH Brother to Laurence, aforesaid, Bachellor of Laws, was consecrated
Bishop of Exceter in the sixth of King Edward the fourth, 1466. He built the
Bishops Chair or Seat in his Cathedral, which in the judicious Eye of Bishop In
his Cata- of Bishops of Exeter.
Godwin has not his Equal in England. Let me add, that though this be the
fairest Chair, the soft Cushion thereof was taken away, when Bishop Vescy
alienated the Lands thereof. The worst was, when Bishop Booth had finished this
Chair, he could not quietly sit down therein, so troublesome the times of the
civil wars betwixt York and Lancaster. So that preferring his privacy, he
retired to a little place of his own purchasing at Horsley in Hampshire, where
he dyed April the first 1478. and was buried in Saint Clements Danes, London.

We must remember that these three Prelates had a fourth and eldest Brother Sir
Roger Booth Knight, of Barton in Lancashire, Father of Margaret, Wife of Ralph
Nevill third Earl of Westmerland. And may the Reader take notice, that though
we have entered these Bishops (according to our best information) in Cheshire,
yet is it done with due reservation of the right of Lancashire, in case that
County shall produce better Evidence for their Nativities.

THOMNS SAVAGE was born at Bishop God^ in the Arch bishop (...) York.
Maklefield in this County, his Father being a Knight, bred him a Doctor of Law
in the University of Cambridge. Hence was he preferred Bishop of Rochester, and
at last Archbishop of York. He was a greater Courtier then Clerk, and most
Dextrous in managing Secular Matters, a mighty Nimrod, and more given to
Hunting, then did (...) (...) (...) (...).
consist with the Gravity of his Profession.

No doubt there wanted not those, which taxed him, with that Passage in Idem
(...).
Saint Jerome, Penitus non invenimus in scripturis sanctis, sanctum aliquem
Venatorem, Piscatores invenimus sanctos. But all would not wean him from that
sport, to which he was In his comment on the 90. (...).
so much addicted.

His provident Precedent spared his Successors in that See many pounds of
needless expenses, by declining a costly instaulation, being the first who
privately was instauled by his Vicar. Yet was he not Covetous in the least
degree, maintaining a most numerous Family, and building much, both at Scroby
and Cawood. Having sat seven years in his See, he died, 1508. his Body being
buried at York, his Heart at Maklefield, where he was born, in a Chapel of his
own Erection, intending to have added a College thereunto, had not death
prevented him.

Since the Reformation.
WILLIAM CHADERTON D. D. Here I solemnly tender deserved thanks to my
Manuscript R. Parker in Scel. Cant, in the Masters of Queens-colledge.
Author, charitably guiding me in the Dark, assuring, that this Doctor was ex
praeclaro Chadertonorum Cestrensis comitatus stemmate prognatus. And although
this doubtful Direction does not cleave the Pin, it does hit the White, so
that his Nativity may with most Probability (not prejudicing the right to
Lancashire when produced) here be fixed. He was bred first Fellow, then Master
of Queens, and never of Magdalencolledge in Cambridge, (as Reverend Bishop In
his Cata. of the Bishops of Lincola Printed 1616.
Godwin mistaketh) and chosen first the Lady Margarets then Kings Professor in
Divinity, and Doctor Whitacre succeeded him immediately in the Chair. He was
Anno 1579. made Bishop of Chester, then of Lincoln. 1594. demeaning himself in
both to his great commendation. He departed this life in April 1608.

His Grandchild a virtuous Gentlewoman of rare accomplishments, married to Mr.
Joceline Esquire, being big with child, wrote a Book of advise, (since Printed
and Entitled) the Mothers Legacy to her unborn Infant, of whom she died in
travail.

WILLIAM JAMES D. D. was born in this In (...) Cestriensi natus Bishop Godwin
in the Bishops of Durham.
County, bred a Scholar in Christschurch in Oxford, and afterward President of
the University College. He succeeded Bishop Mathews in the Deanary and
Bishopric of Durham.

He had been Chaplain to Robert Dudly Earl of Lecester, and (I hope) I may
lawfully transcribe what I read,

Sir J. Harrington view of the Church of England, page 204. This hope of
Comfort came to his Lord-ship thereby, that if it pleased God to impart any
mercy to him, (as his mercy endures for ever,) it was by the especial Ministry
of this Man, who was the last of his Coat, that was with him in his sickness.
He was a principal means of recovering Durham house unto his See. This house
was granted by King Edward the sixth, to the Lady (afterward Queen) Elizabeth,
(only for term of life,) and lay long neglected during her Reign, till Bishop
James about the sixth of King James regained it, and repaired the Chapel,
(which he found not only Profaned, but even defaced) to his great cost, and
furnished it very decently.

He once made so Sir J. Harrington page 206.
complete an Entertainment for Queen Elizabeth, that Her Majesty commended the
order and manner thereof for many years after. This makes me the more to
admire at what I have heard reported, that when King James in his progress to
Scotland Anno 1617. passed through the Bishopric of Durham, some neglect was
committed by this Bishops Officers, for which the King secretly and sharply
checked this Bishop, who laid it so to heart, that he survived the same
Reproof not a full twelvemonth.

JOHN RICHARDSON was (as he told me) born in this County, of a Family of good
worship and great antiquity therein. After his hopeful education in Country
Schools, he was bred in the University of Dublin, where he was Graduated Doctor
in Divinity, and afterward was made Bishop of Ardagh in Ireland. In the late
Rebellion he came over into England, continuing for many years therein.
Episcopal Gravity was written in his Countenance, and he was a good Divine
according to the Rule, Bonus Textuarius, bonus Theologus, no man being more
exact in Knowledge of Scripture, carrying a Concordance in his Memory. Great
was his pains in the Larger Annotations, especially on Ezechiel. For let not
the Cloaks carry away the credit from the Gowns and Rochet in that Work, seeing
this Bishop might say, Pars Ego magna fui, and Doctor Featly, with others of
the Episcopal Party, bare a great share therein. Our Savior we know, lived on
the Charity Luke 8. 3.
of such good People, as ministered unto him; and yet it may be collected that
it was his constant custom, (especially about the feast of the Joh. 13. 29.
Passover) to give some Alms to the poor. So our Bishop who was relieved by
some, had his Bounty to bestow on others, and by his Will (as I am Informed) he
bequeathed no inconsiderable Legacy to the College in Dublin. He died Anno
1653. in the 74. year of his Age.

States men.
Sir THOMAS EGERTON Knight, was extracted from the Ancient Family of the
Egertons of Ridley in this County, bred in the Study of the Municipal Laws of
our Land, wherein he attained to such eminency, that Queen Elizabeth made him
her Solicitor, then Master of the Rolls, and at last Keeper of the Great Seal,
May 6. in the 38. year of her Reign, 1596.

Olaus Magnus reports that the Emperor of Muscovia, at the Audience of
Ambassadors, sends for the Gravest and Seemliest men in Musco and the
Vicinage, whom he apparelleth in Rich Vests, and placing them in his presence,
pretends to Forraigners, that these are of his Privy Council, who cannot but
be much affected with so many Reverend aspects. But surely all Christendom
afforded not a Person which carried more Gravity in his Countenance and
Behavior, then Sir Thomas Egerton, in so much that many have gone to the
Chancery on purpose only to see his Venerable Garb, (happy they who had no
other business) and were highly pleased at so acceptable a Spectacle.

Yet was his Outward Case nothing in comparison of his Inward Abilities, Quick
Wit, Solid Judgment, Ready Utterance. I confess Master In his Elizabe^h Anno
1596.
Camden says he entered his Office* Magna expectatione and Integritatis
opinione, With a great expectation and opinion of Integrity. But no doubt had
he revised his Work in a second Edition, he would have afforded him a
full-faced commendation, when this Lord had turned his expectation into
performance.

In the first of King James, of Lord Keeper he was made Lord ^hauncellour,
which is only another Name for the same Office, and on Thursday the seventh of
November. 1616. of Lord Elismer he was created Viscount Brackley.

It is given to Courts whose Jurisdictions do border, to fall out about their
bounds, and the Contest betwixt them, is the hotter, the higher the Spirits and
Parts of the Respective Judges. Great the Contention for many years together
betwixt this Lord of Equity, and Sir Edward Cook the Oracle of Justice at
Westminster Hall, I know not which of them got the better, sure I am such
another Victory would (if this did not) have undone the Conqueror.

He was attended on with Servants of most able parts, and was the sole
Chancellor since the Reformation, who had a Bishop Williams.
Chaplain which (though not immediately) succeeded him in his place. He gave
over his Office which he held full twenty years, some few days before his
death, and by his own appointment his body was brought down and buried at
Duddleston in this County, leaving a fair Estate to his Son, who was afterward
Created Earl of Bridgwater.

When he saw King James so profuse to the Scots, with the grave Fidelity of a
Statesman, he sticked not often to tell him, that as he held it necessary for
his Majesty amply to remunerate those his Countrymen, so he desired him
carefully to preserve his Crown Lands for his own support, seeing he or his
Successour^, might meet with Parliaments, which would not supply his Occasions,
but on such Conditions as would not be very acceptable unto him.

It was an ordinary Alled^'d by Sir F^a. B^con in his Censure on the Earl of
Some rset.
Speech in his Mouth to say, Frost and Fraud both end in Foul. His death
happened Anno Dom. 1616.

Capit^l Judges.
Sir HUMPHRY STARKEY was born with most Probability in this County, where AMP.
his Name is in good, has been in a better Esteem and Estate. He in the Study
of our Laws so profited, that (after some intermediate Dignities) he was
preferred Chief Baron of the Exchequer. I cannot with certainty fix his
admission into that Office ( Confused Sir Hen. Sp. G^oss. verbo justiciarius,
seems to assign him, 1 Edw. 5. 1 Rich. 3. 1 Hen. 7.

Times causing Confused Dates) but with as much certainty as we can collect, we
conclude him preferred to that place 1. Henrici 7.

We need enquire no farther into his ability, finding him by so wise and frugal
a King, employed in a place belonging to his Coffers, who though he was
sometimes pleased to be remiss in matters which concerned his Subjects, was
ever careful in things wherein his own Emolument was interested. Wonder not
that we have so little left of this Judge his Actions, because Empson and Dudly
(Loaders grinding more then the Chief Miller) were such Instruments, whose
over-activity made all others seem Slugs in that Court. It does sound not a
little to the praise of our Starkey, that whereas that Age was justly
complaining of the Extortions of the Kings Officers, nothing of that nature (
no hearing, best hearing in this kind) is laid to his charge. He was buried in
Leonard Shorditch, where this remains of his Epitaph.

Orate pro Animabus Humphredi Starkey, Militis, nuper Capitalis Baronis de
Scaccario Domini Regis Henrici septimi, and Isabellae Uxoris ejus, and omnium
amicorum suo^um, etc. The date of his death, defaced on his Tomb, appears In
Sir Henry Spelm. ut prius.
elsewhere to be at the end of K. Henry the seventh, so that his on the Bench
was parallel with his Sovereigns sitting on the Throne, begun in the first, and
ended in the last of his reign.

Sir HENRY BRADSHAW Knight. This Surname being diffused in Darbyshire and
Lancashire, as well as in this County, his Nativity advantaged by the Alphabet,
( first come first served) is fixed herein. He became so noted for his skill in
our Common Law, that in the sixth of K. Edward the sixth in Hillary term, he
was made Chief Baron of the Exchequer, demeaning himself therein to his great
commendation.

Pity it is that Demetrius who is well reported of all* men, should suffer for
his name John 12.
sake Demetrius the Silver Smith, who made the Shrines for Acts 19. 24
Diana, and raised persecution against Saint Paul. And as unjust it is, that
this good Judge of whom nothing ill is reported, should fare the worse for one
of the same Surname of Execrable Memory, of whom nothing good is remembered. I
have cause to conceive, that this Judge was outed of his place for Protestant
inclination 1. Mariae finding no more mention of him.

Sir RANDAL CREW was born in this County, bred in the study of our Municipal
Law, wherein such his proficiency, that (after some steps in his way thereunto)
in the 22. of K. James he was made Lord Chief Justice of the Upper Bench, and
therein served two Kings, (though scarce two years in his Office) with great
integrity.

King Charles his occasions calling for speedy supplies of Money, some
Great-Ones adjudged it unsafe to adventure on a Parliament, (for fear in those
distempered Times, the Physic would side with the Disease,) and put the King
to furnish his necessities by way of Loan. Sir Randal being demanded his
Judgment of that Design, and the Consequence thereof, (the imprisoning of
R^usants to pay it) openly manifested his dislike of such Preter-legal Courses,
and thereupon, November 9. 1626. was commanded to forbear his sitting in the
Court, and the next day was by Writ discharged from his Office, whereat he
discovered no more Coffeehouse, then the weary Travailer is offended, when
told that he is arrived at his journies end.

The Country has constantly a Smile for him for whom the Court has a Frown,
this Knight was out of Office, not out of Honor, living long after at his
house in Westminster, much praised for his Hospitality.

Indeed he may the better put off his Gown, (though before he goes to bed) who
has a warm Suit under it, and this learned Judge, by Gods blessing on his
endeavors, had purchased a fair Estate, and particularly Crew-hall in
Cheshire, (for some ages formerly the possession of the Falshursts) but which
probably was the Inheritance of his* Ancestors. Nor must it be forgotten, that
Sir Randal first brought the Model of excellent Building into these remorter
parts, yea, brought London into Cheshire, in the Loftiness, Sightliness and
Pleasantness of their Stuctures.

One word of his Lady, a virtuous wife being very essential to the integrity of
a Married Judge, lest what Westminster Hall does conclude, Westminster
Bedchamber does revoke. He married Julian Daughter and Coheir of John Clipsby
of Clipsby in Northfolk, Esquire. with whom he had a fair Inheritance. She died at
Que in Surry, 1623. and lies buried in the Chancell of Richmond with this
Epitaph.

Antiqua fuit orta Domo, pia vixit, inivit
Virgo pudica thorum, sponsa pudica polum.
I saw this worthy Judge in health 1642. but he survived not long after, and be
it remembered he had a Younger Brother Sir Thomas Crew, a most honest and
learned Ser^eant in the same Profession. Whose Son John Crew Esquire, (of his
Majesty's PrivyCouncel,) having been so instrumental to the happy change in our
Nation, is in General report, (which no doubt will be effected before these my
pains be public) designed for some Title of Honor.

Sir HUMFREY DAVENPORT. His Surname is sufficient to entitle this County unto
him, but I will not be peremtory till better information. He was bred in the
Temple, had the reputation of a Studied Lawyer, and upright person, qualities
which commended him to be chosen Chief Baron of the Exchequer. How he behaved
himself in the case of the Ship Money, is fresh in many men's memories. The
Reader cannot be more angry with me, then I am grieved in my self, that, for
want of intelligence, I cannot do the right which I would and ought, to this
worthy Judges Memory, who died about the beginning of our Civil distempers.

Soldiers.
Sir HUGH CALVELY born at Calvely in this County. (...) Brit. in Cheshire.
Tradition makes him a man of Teeth and Hands, who would Feed as much as two,
and Fight as much as ten men, his quick and strong Appetite, could digest any
thing but an Injury, so that killing a man, is reported the cause of his
quitting this County, making hence for London, then for France. Here he became
a most eminent Soldier, answering the Character our great Camden ibidem.
Antiquary has given him,

Art militari ita in Gallia inc^ruit, ut vivide ejus virtuti nihil fuit
impervium.

I find five of his principal A^hievements.

1. When he was one of the thirty English in France, who in a duel encountered
as many Britans. 2. When in the last of King Edward the third, being Governor
of Calice he looked on, (his hands being tied behind him by a Truce, yet in
force for a Month,) and saw the English slain before his eyes, whose blood he
soon after revenged. 3. When in the first of King Richard the second, after an
unfortunate voyage of our English Nobility, beaten home with a Tempest, he took
Bark bulloigne and five and twenty other French-ships, besides the Castle of
Mark, lately lost by negligence, which he recovered. 4. When in the next year
he spoiled Estaples, at a Fair-time, bringing thence so much Plunder as
enriched the Calicians for many years after. 5. When he married the Queen of
Aragon, which is most certain, her Arms being quartered on his Tomb, though I
cannot satisfy the Reader in the Particularities thereof.
The certain date of his death is unknown, which by proportion may be collected
about the year 1388. After which time, no mention of him, and it was as
impossible for such a spirit not to be, as not to be active.

Sir ROBERT KNOWLES Knight, was born of mean parentage in this Weavers Fun Mon.
page 436
County, yet did not the weight of his low extraction depress the wings of his
Martial mind, who by his valor wrought his own advancement. He was Another of
the thirty English, who for the honor of the Nation, undertook to duel with as
many Sir Wall. R^leigh Hist. of the World lib 5. page 545.
Britons, and came off with great reputation.

He was afterward a Commander in the French-war under King Edward the third,
where in despite of their power he drove the people (...) him like sheep,
destroying Towns, Castles and Cities, in such manner and number, that many
years after, the sharp points, and Gable end of overthrown houses, (cloven
asunder with instruments of war) were commonly called KNOWLES Lamberts ^er amb.
of Kent.
HIS MITRES.

The last piece of his servrce, was performed in suppressing Wat Tiler and his
Rebels. Then I behold aged Sir Robert, buckling on his armonr, as old Priam at
the taking of Troy, but with far better success, as proving very victorious;
and the Citizens of London infranchized him a member (...) of, in expression of
their thankfulness.

His Charity was as great as his Valor, and he rendered himself no less loved
by the English, then feared of the French. He gave bountifully to the building
of Rochesterbridge* founding a Chapel and Chantery at ^he East end thereof,
with a College at (...) in Yorkshire, where Constance his Lady was born,
endowing it with one hundred and eighty pounds per annum.

He died at his (...) of Scon^-Thorp in Norfolk, in peace and honor, whereas
(...) generally set in a cloud; being at least ninety years of age, for he must
be (...) no (...) then (...) years old, when Anno ^52. he was a General under
K. Ed^ (...) third, and he (...) until the (...). of August 1407. being buried
in WhiteFriers in London, to which he had been a great benefactour.

JOHN SMITH Captain, was (...) in (...) County, as Master Arthur Smith his Kins
man, and my Schoolmaster did inform me. But whether or no, related unto the
Worshipful Family of the Smiths at (...) (...) in this County.
(...). I know not.

He spent the most of his life in (...) (...). First in Hungary under the
Empe^, fighting against the Turks, Three of which, he himself killed in single
Duells, and therefore, was Authorized by So is it writ in the Table over (...)
tomb.
(...) King of Hungary to bear three Turks-heads, as an Augmentation to his
Arms. Here (...) gave intelligence to a besieged City in the night, by
significant (...)-works formed in (...), in legible Characters, with many
strange performances, the Scene whereof is laid at such a distance, they are
cheaper credited, then confuted.

From the Turks in Europe, he passed to the Pagans in America, where toward
the latter end of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, such his Perils,
Preservations, Dangers, Deliverances, they seem to most men above belief, to
some beyond Truth. Yet have we two witnesses to attest them, the Prose and the
Pictures both in his own book, and it sounds much to the diminution of his
deeds, that he alone is the Herald to publish and proclaim them.

Two Captains being at dinner, one of them fell into a large relation of his
own atchivements, concluding his discourse with this question to his fellow,
And pray Sir (said he) what service have you done? To whom he answered, Other
men can tell that. And surely such reports from strangers carry with them the
greater reputation. However, moderate men must allow Captain Smith to have been
very isntrumental, in settling the plantation in Virginia, whereof he was
Governor, as also Admiral of New England.

He led his old age in London, where his having a Princes mind imprisoned in a
poor man's purse, rendered him to the contempt of such who were not ingenuous.
Yet he efforted his spirits with the remembrance and relation of what formerly
he had been, and what he had done. He was buried in Sepulchres-Church-Quire, on
the Southside thereof, having a ranting Epitaph inscribed in a table over him,
too long to transcribe. Only we will insert the first, and last verses, the
rather because the one may fit Alexanders life for his valor, the other his
death for his religion;

Here lies one conquered that has conquered Kings.
Oh may his soul in sweet Elysium sleep.
The Orthography, Poetry, History and Divinity in this Epitaph are much alike.
He on the 21. of June, 1631.

Physicians.
If this county has bred no Writers in that faculty, the wonder is the less,
if it be true what I read, that if any here be sick, They William Smith
Vale-royal page 16.
make him a posset, and tie a kerchieff on his head; and if that will not mend
him, then God be merciful to him. But, be this understood of the common
people, the Gentry having the help (no doubt) of the learned in that profession.

Writers.
THOMAS ECLESTONE (A Village in Broxtone Hundred) was born in this County, bred
a Franciscan in Oxford. Leland says of him, that under the conduct of prudence
and experience, he contended with many paces to pierce into the Penetrales of
Learning. He wrote a book of the succession of Franciscans in England, with
their works and wonders, from their first coming in, to his own time,
dedicating the same to (not G. Notingham the Provincial of his Order) but to
his friend and Fellow-Frier, his mortified mind (it seems) not aiming at honor
therein. He wrote another Book entitled, De impugnatione Pitz* de scrip^.
Brit. Anno 1340.
Ordinis su^ per Dominicanos, Of the assaults which the Dominicans made on his
Order. These two sorts of Friars whipping each other with their Cords or
Knotted Girdles to the mutual wounding of their reputations. He died Anno
Domini 1340.

Since the Reformation.
RALPH RADCLIFFE was born in this Bale Script. Brit. Cent. 8. Number. 98.
County, who traveling Southward, fixed himself at Hitching in Hertfordshire,
where he converted a demolished house of the Carmelites, into a Public
Grammar School. He here erected a fair stage, whereon, partly to entertain his
Neighhours, and partly to embolden his Scholars in pronuntiation, many
interludes were acted by them. Ang. Script. Number. 992.
Pitz. praises him, being a Schoolmaster, that he confined himself to his own
profession, not meddling with Divinity, and yet amongst his books he reckons
up a Treatise of the Burning of Sodom, and another of the Afflictions of Job.

Nor must we forget his book entitled de triplice Memoria, of the Threefold
Memory, which (though I never met with any that saw it) may probably be
presumed,

of the Water Wax Iron Memory, receiving things very somewhat very hardly
easily retaining them no a little long Time.

He flourished under the reign of King Edward the sixth, Anno Domini 1552. and
it is likely he died before the reign of Queen Mary.

JOHN SPEED was born at Farrington in this County as his own Mrs. Blackmore a
Stationers wife in Pauls-Churchyard.
Daughter has informed me; he was first bred to a handicraft, and as I take it
to a Tailor. I write not this for his but my own disgrace, when I consider how
far his Industry has outstript my Ingenious Education. Sir Fulk Grevill, a
great favourer of Learning, perceiving how his wide soul was stuffed with too
narrow an occupation, first wrought his enlargement as the said Author does
ingeniously confess,

Whose In his description of Warwickshire.
merits to me-ward I do acknowledge in setting this hand free from the daily
employments of a manual Trade, and giving it his liberty thus to express the
inclination of my mind, himself being the procurer of my present Estate. This
is he who afterward designed the Maps and composed the History of England,
though much helped in both (no shame to crave aid in a work too weighty for any
ones back to bear,) by Sir Robert Cotton, Master Camden, Master Barkham and
others. He also made the useful Genealogies preposed formerly to English
Bibles in all Volumes, having a Patent granted him from King James, in reward
of his great Labors, to receive the benefit thereof to him and his. This was
very beneficial unto them by Composition with the Company of Stationers,
until this Licentious age neglecting all such Ingenious helps to understand
Scripture, and almost levelling (if not prevented) the propriety of all Authors
of Books. He dyed in London Anno 1629. and was buried in Saint Giles without
Criplegate, in the same Parish with Master John Fox, so that no one Church in
England, contains the Corpse of two such useful and voluminous Historians.
Master Josias Shute Preached his Funeral Sermon: and thus we take our leaves
of Father Speed, truly answering his name in both the acceptions thereof for
Celerity and Success.

JOHN DOD was born at Shottliedge in this County, (where his Parents had a
competent Estate) bred in Jesus-colledge in Cambridge, by Nature a Witty, by
Industry a Learned, by Grace a Godly Divine, successively Minister of Hanwell
in Oxford, FennyCompton in Warwick, Cannons-Ashby and Fausly in
Northamptonshire, though for a time silenced in each of them.

A Father (who shall pass nameless) is censured by some for his over-curiosity
in his conceit, rather then Comment, Math. 5. 2. And he opened his mouth and
taught them. For Christ (says he) taught them often, when he opened not his
mouth, by his Example, Miracles, etc. Here I am sure, accordingly Master Dod,
when his mouth was shut, (prohibited preaching) instructed almost as much as
before, by his holy demeanor, and pious discourse. A good Chimist, who could
extract Gold out of other men's lead, and how loose soever the premises of other
men's discourse, piety was always his natural and unforced conclusion inferred
thereupon.

For the rest I refer the Reader to Master Samuel Clark, by whom his life is
written, wherein are many remarkable passages. I say Master Samuel Clark, with
whose pen mine never did, nor shall interfere. Indeed as the flocks of Jacob
were distanced three Genesis 30. 36.
days journeys from those of Laban, so (to prevent voluntary or casual
commixtures) our styles are set more then a Months journey asunder.

The Jewish Rabbis (have a fond and a false conceit, that Methuselah, who
indeed dyed in the very See Archbishop ushers Cron.
year (and his death a sad prognostic) of the deluge, had a Cabin built him in
the outside of Noah's Ark, where he was preserved by himself. But most true it
is, that good Father Dod, though he lived to see the flood of our late Civil
Wars, made to himself a Cabin in his own contented conscience, and though his
cloths were wetted with the waves, (when plundered) he was dry in the deluge,
such his self-solace in his holy meditations. He dyed being eighty six years of
age, Anno 1645.

When thieves break in a house and steal, the owner thereof knows for the
present that he is robbed, but not of what or how much, till some days after he
finds out, by the want of such things which were taken from him. The Vicenage
of Fausly, where Mr. Dod dyed, knew then they were bereaft of a worthy
treasure, though ignorant in the perticulars of their losses, till daily
discovery has by this time made them sensible thereof.

Benefactors to the Public.
Sir RICHARD SUTTON was born at So my good friend Dr. Tates Principal of
Brasen-Nose has informed me.
Presbury in this County, he is generally believed a Knight, though some have
suspected the same, but suppose him but Esquire. He was one of a Plentiful
Estate and Bountiful Hand.

It happened that William Smith Bishop of Lincoln began Brasen-Nose-Colledge,
but dyed before he had finished one Nostrill thereof, leaving this Sutton his
Executor, who over-performed the Bishops Will, and completed the Foundation
with his own liberal Additions thereunto. When the following Verses were
composed, in the Person of Brasen-Nose-Colledge, the Muses seemed neither to
smile nor frown, but kept their wonted countenance. But take them as they are.

Begun by one but finished by another,
Sutton he was my Nurse, but Smith my Mother:
Or if the Phrase more proper seem, say rather,
That Sutton was my Guardian, Smith my Father;
'Cause equal Kindness they to me expressed,
Better I neither love, love both the best.
If Both they may be called, who had one will,
What One designed, the Other did fulfill.
May such Testators live who Good intend,
But if they dye, Heaven such Exec'tors send.
This Worthy Knight being born in this County, deservedly reflected upon his
own Countrymen, making them (and those of Lancashire) most capable of
Preferment. I collect his death to have happened about the middle of the Reign
of King Henry the eighth.

Since the Reformation.
ROBERT BRASSY was born at Mr. Hatcher in his Manuscript Catalogue of the
Fellows of Kings-colledge.
Bunbury (contracted for Boniface-Bury) in this County, bred D. D. in
Kings-colledge in Cambridge, whereof he was elected the 13. Provost. He being a
Learned and Stout man, publicly protested against the Visitors of the Fox,
Acts and Mon. page 1958.
University in the Reign of Queen Mary, as to his own College. Say not he
only opposed Superstition with Superstition, pleading Popish Exemptions: For
considering the times, he Drove the nail which would best go, and thereby took
off the edge of those Persecuting Commissioners.

But let none Envy him a place under this title, who deserved so well of
Cambridge. For when many Doctors therein, whose Purblind souls saw only what
was next them, for the present, and either could not, or would not look far
forward to Posterity, had resolved to sell their Rights in Sturbridge-fair for
a trifle to the Townsmen, (which if done, the Vice Chancellor might even have
held the Stirrup to the Mayor,) he only Mr. Ha^cher ut prius.
opposed it and dashed the designs. He dyed Anno Domini 1558. and lies buried
on the South Side of the Chapel.

GEORGE PALIN was (as I have Cogent presumptions) born at Wrenbury in this
County, bred a Merchant in London, free of the Company of Girdlers. Indeed we
may call his Benefactions Aureum Cingulum charitatis, the Golden Girdle of
Charity. With our Savior he Went ABOUT Acts 10. 38.
doing good, completing the Circuit of his Bounty, continuing till he ended
where he began.

1. To Wrenbury (where we believe him born) two Hundred pound to purchase Lands
for the relief of the poor. 2. Nine Hundred pound for the building of
Almes-houses in or about London. 3. To Trinity-colledge in Cambridge three
hundred pound. 4. To the College of Saint John's the Evangelist in Cambridge,
three Hundred pounds. 5. To the Hospital of Saint Thomas in Southmark, fifty
pounds. 6. To the Preachers at Paul's Cross, toward the bearing of their
charges, two Hundred pounds. 7. Toward the making a sweet Chime in Bow-church,
one Hundred pounds. 8. To six Prisons in and about London, sixty pounds. 9. To
Brasen-Nose-colledge in Oxford, two Scholar-ships, to each yearly four pounds.
10. To the College of Saint John Baptist in Oxford, two Scholar-ships of the
same value. 11. To Christ-Church Hospital, three Hundred pounds. 12. To the
Church and Poor (to buy them Gowns) of Wrenbury, seventy pounds.
With other Benefactions; Verily, I say unto you, I have not met a more
universal and unpartial Charity to all Objects of want and worth. He died
about the beginning of the reign of King James.

JOHN BREWERTON Knight, a Branch of that well-spred Tree in this County, was
bred one of the first Scholars of the foundation in Sidney-colledge, and
afterward being brought up in the study of the Common Law, he went over into
Ireland, and at last became the Kings Sergeant therein. I say at last, for at
his coming thither (in the tumults of Tirone) neither Rex nor Lex, neither King
nor Sergeant were acknowledged, till Loyalty and Civility were by degrees
distilled into that Nation.

He obtained a plentiful Estate, and thereof gave well nigh three thousand
pounds to Sidney-colledge. Now as it is reported of Ulysses returning from his
long travail in Foreign Lands, that all his family had forgot him, so when the
news of this Legacy first arrived at the College, none then extant therein
ever heard of his name, (so much may the sponge of forty years blot out in this
kind) only the written Register of the College faithfully retained his name
therein.

This his gift was a gift indeed, purely bestowed on the College, as loded
with no detrimentall Conditions in the acceptance thereof. We read in the
Prophet, Isaith 9. 3.
Thou have increased the Nation, and not multiplied their Joy. In proportion
whereunto we know it is possible, that the comfortable condition of a College
may not be increased, though the number of the Fellows and Scholars therein be
augmented, superadded Branches sucking out the sap of the Root. Whereas the
Legacy of this worthy Knight, ponebatur in lucro, being pure gain and
improvement to the College. His death happened about the year 1633.

JOHN BARNSTON D. D. was born of an ancient Family in this County, bred Fellow
of Brasen-Nose-Colledge in Oxford, afterward Chaplain to Chancellor Egerton,
and Residentiary of Salisbury. A bountiful Housekeeper, of a cheerful
spirit, and peaceable disposition, whereof take this eminent Instance. He sat
Judge in the Consistory when a Churchwarden, out of whose house a Chalice was
stolen, was sued by the Parish to make it good to them, because not taken out
of the Church-Chest, (where it ought to have been reposited) but out of his
private house. The Churchwarden pleaded that he took it home only to scour
it, which proving ineffectuall, he retained it till next morning to boil out
the in-laid Rust thereof.

Well (said the Doctor) I am sorry that the Cup of Union and Communion should
be the cause of difference and discord between you. Go home and live lovingly
together, and I doubt not, but that either the Thief out of remorse will
restore the same; or some other as good will be sent unto you, which by the
Doctors secret Charity came to pass accordingly. He founded an Hebrew Lecture
in Brasen-Nose-Colledge and departed in Peace in the beginning of our Wars
about the year 1642.

Memorable Persons.
WILLIAM SMITH was born in this County, wherein his Surname has been of signal
note for many ages. His Genius inclined him to the study of Heraldry, wherein
he so profitted, that Anno -- -- he was made Persuivant of Arms. By the name of
Rougdragon, he wrote a description Geographical and Historical of this County,
left (it seems) in the hands of Raynulph Crew Knight, sometimes L. Chief
Justice of the Kings Bench, and lately set forth by the favor of Mr. Raynulph
Crew Grandchild to that worthy Knight, the time of his death is to me unknown.

WILLIAM WEB a native of this County, was bred a Master in Arts* and a^terwards
betook himself to be a Clark of the Mayors Court in Chester. It appears also
he was Under* sheriff to Sir Richard Lee High-sheriffe of this County, in the
thirteenth year of King James. He compiled a description of Cheshire and
Chester, lately Printed by procurement of that no less Communicative then
Judicious Antiquary Sir Simon Archer of Tamworth, in Warwickshire. I cannot
attain the certain date of his death.

RANDAL CREW Esquire, second Son to Sir Clipsby, Grandchild to Judge Crew. He
drew a Map of Cheshire, so exactly with his pen, that a judicious eye would
mistake it for Printing, and the Gravers skill and industry could little
improve it. This Map I have seen, and Reader, when my eye directs my hand, I
may write with confidence. This hopeful Gentleman went beyond the Seas, out of
design to render himself by his Travells more useful for his Country, where he
was Barbarously Assassinated by some Frenchmen, and honorably buried with
general lamentation of the English at Paris 1656.

Lord Mayors.
Name Father Place Company Time 1 Hugh Witch Richard Witch Nantwich Mercer 1461
2 Thomas Oldgrave William Oldgrave Knotysford Skinner 1467 3 Edmond Shaw John
Shaw Donkenfield Goldsmith 1482 4 James Spencer Robert Spencer Congleton
Vintner 1527 5 Thomas Offley William Offley Chester Merchant-Taylor 1556 6
Humfry Weld John Weld Eaton Grocer 1608 7 Thomas Moulson 1634

I am certainly informed that this Thomas Moulson ^ounded a fair School in the
Town where he was born, but am not instructed where this is, or what Salary is
settled thereon.

Reader, know this, that I must confess my self advantaged in the description
of this County, by Daniel King a native of this County, whence it seems he
traveled beyond the Seas, where he got the Mystery both of Survaying and
Engraving. So that he has both drawn and graven the portraicture of many
ancient structures now decayed.

I hope in process of time this Daniel King will outstrip King Edgar, erecting
more Abbeys in Br^ss, then he did in Stone, though he be said to have built one
for every day in the Year. But Cheshire is chiefly beholding to his Pains,
seeing he has not only set forth two Descriptions thereof, (named the Vale
Royal of England,) with the praise to the dead Persons the Authors thereof duly
acknowledged, but also has enlivened the same with several Cuts of Heraldry
and Topography, on whom we will bestow this Distick.

Kingus Cestrensi, Cestrensis Patria Kingo
Lucem Alternatim, debet uterque suam.
Cheshire to King and King to Cheshire owes,
His light, (...) does (...)* what each B^stows.
What is amiss in my Poetry, shall be amended in my Prayers for a Blessing on
his and all ingenious-mens undertakings.

Cheshire is one of the 12. pretermitted Counties, the Names of whose Gentry
were not returned into the Tower, in the 12. year of K. Henry the sixth.

Sheriffs.
HEN. II.
Anno 30 Gilbert. Pipehard Anno 35 Rich. de Pierpoint
RICH. I.
Anno 1 RECORDA MANCA
JOHAN.
Anno 1 (...) Rich. de Burham Anni Incerti
HEN. III.
Anno 15 Rich. de Sonbach Anno 23 Rich. de Wrenbury Anno 52 Jordan. de
Peulesdon Anno 56 Hugh de Hatton.
EDW I.
Anno 4 Patrick de Heselwall Anno 9 Will. de Spurstow Anno 15 Rich. de
Wilbraham Anno 26 Will. de Prayers Anno 33 Robert. de Bressey
EDW. II.
Anno 2 Philip. de Egerton Anno 5 David. de Egerton Anno 13 Will. de Mobberley
Anno 16 Rich. Filhurst
EEW. III.
Anno 1 John de Wrenbury Anno 10 Adam. de Parker Anno 19 Rich. de Oulton Anno
22 Jacob. Audley, Mil. Anno 24 Tho. Daniers Anno 33 Tho. le Young Anno 41
Johan. Scolehall Anno 44 Lauren. de Dutton, Mil.
Sheriffs.
Name Place Arms RICH. II. Anno 1 Hu. de Venables Kinderton Azure 2 Bars
Argent. 8 Tho. del. Wood 9 Hu. E. of Stafford Or, a Cheveron Gules. 10 Idem. ut
prius 11 Ioh. Massy, mil. Quarterly counterchanged Gules and Or. in the first a
Lion pass. 12 Rob. Gravenour Eton Azure a Garb Or. 17 Rob. Leigh High-liegh
Arg. five fusils Bend-wise Sable. HEN. IV. Anno 1 Ioh. Massy Puddington Ut
prius, save that in the first quart. 3 flour de lu^es Ar. 2 Idem. 3 Hen. (...)
Arg. a Cheveron betwixt 3 Ravens-heads erazed S. 10 Will. Bruerton, m. Bruerton
Argent 2 Bars Sable. HEN. V. Anno 3 Tho. (...) Adlington Az. 2 Bars Arg. a Bend
c^mponce Or and Gules. 10 Hugh. Dutton Dutton Quarterly counter-changed Arg.
and G. in the 2 and 3 Quarter a Fret Or. HEN. VI. Anno 5 Rich. Warberton Arley
Arg. 2 Cheverons and a Canton G. a Mullet Or. 8 Ran. Bruerton, m. ut prius 16
Ioh. Troutbeck Az. 3 Troutes (...) in Triangle, Test a la (...) Arg. 17 Rob.
Booth, m. Dunham 18 Rob. Booth, mil. prioris filius. ut prius Arg. 3
Boars-heads eraz ed and erected Sable. EDW. IV. Anno 2 Will. Stanly Howton Arg.
on a Bend Az 3 Stags-beads (...) Or. RICH. III. Anno (...) Idem. ut prius HEN.
VII. Anno 1 Idem. ut prius 10 Ioh. Warberton ut prius 21 Rasp. Birkenhead S. 3
Garbes Or, within a border engrailed Argent. HEN. VIII. Anno 1 Idem. ut prius
17 Will. Stanly, mil. ut prius 18 Geo. Holford Holford Arg. a Greyhound
Passant S. 19 Tho. Venables ut prius 20 Idem. ut prius 21 Ioh. Done Az. 2 Bars
Arg. on a Bend G. 3 Arrows. 22 Idem. ut prius 23 Edw. Fitton Gowsworth Arg. on
a Bend Az 3 Garbs Or. 33 Ioh. Holford ut prius EDW. VI. Anno 1 Idem. ut prius
REG. MARI. Anno 1 Will. Brereton, k. ut prius PHIL and MAR. Anno 2, 1 Pet
L^igh, kni. ut prius 3, 2 Hu Cholmley, es. Gu. in Chief 2 Helmets Arg. in Base
a Garb Or. 4, 3 (...). Wilbraha^, es. Wodey Az. 2 Bars Arg. on a Canto^ S. a
Wolfs-head etased of the second. 5, 4 Tho. Venables, es. ut prius 6, 5 Phi.
Egerton, esquire. Ridley Arg. a Lion Ramp. G. betwixt 3 Pheons Sable. REG. ELIZA.
Anno 1 Will. Cholmley, es. ut prius 2 Ioh. Savage, esquire. Rocksavage. Argent 6
Lions rampant Sable. 3 Ral. Egerton, es. ut prius 4 Io (...), es ut prius 5
Rich. Brook, esquire Cbecque Or and Sable. 6 Will. Massey, esquire. ut prius 7 Ioh.
Savage, esquire. ut prius 8 Hug. Cholmly, es. ut prius * Az. 2 B^rs (...) Erm* on a
chief O^, a demi Lion Issuant S. 9 Lau. Smith * esquire. Hough 10 Ral. Done, esquire.
Az. 2 Bars Arg. on a Bend G. 3 Arrows of the second. 11 Geo. Calveley, es. Arg.
a. Fess G. betwixt 3 Calves, Sable. 12 Ioh. Savage, esquire. ut prius 13 Will.
Booth, kn. (...) Arg. 3 (...) Erected S. 14 Tho. Stanley, esquire. Arg. on a Bend
Az. three 15 Ioh. Savage, kni. ut prius 16 Ioh. Savage, mil. ut prius 17 Hen.
Manwaring. Argent 2 Bars Gules. 18 Row. Stanley, es ut prius 19 Ioh. Warren,
esquire Checkee Azu. and O^, on a Canton G. a Lion R^mpant Arg. 20 Tho. Brook, esquire.
ut prius 21 Ioh. Savage, kni. ut prius 22 Ral. Egerton, es. ut prius 23 Geo
Calveley, kn. ut prius 24 Will. Brereton, kn. ut prius 25 Pet. Warberton, e. ut
prius 26 Will. Leversage, e. Whelock Arg. a (...) betwixt 3 Plow-^hares S. 27
Tho. Wilbraham ut prius 28 Hug. Calveley, es. ut prius 29 Ran. Davenport, e.
Damport A^g. a Cheveron betwixt 3 Cross Croslets Fitch. e S. 30 Tho. Leigh,
esquire. ut prius 31 Hu Cholmley, kn. ut prius 32 Will. Brereton, kn. ut prius 33
Ioh. Savage, kn. ut prius 34 Tho. Brook, esquire. ut prius 35 Tho. Venables: es. ut
prius 36 Per. Warberton, e. ut prius 37 Per. Leigh, esquire. ut prius 38 Ioh. Done,
esquire. ut prius 39 Geo. Booth, kni. ut prius 40 Edw. Warren, kn. ut prius 41 Tho.
Holcroft, kn. Arg. a Cross and Border. engrailed S. 42 Tho. Smith, kn. ut prius
43 Tho. Ashton, kn. Ashton Per Cheveron. S. and Arg. 44 Ric. Gravenor, k. ut
prius JAC. REX. Anno * Az. a Fess Arg. Frettee G. betw^xt 3 Flower de Luces Or.
1 Geo. Le* cester, * Toft 2 Will. Davenport, k. ut prius 3 Ra. Manwaring, k. ut
prius 4 Tho. Vernon, kn. Hasting Or on a Fret Azure 3 Garbes of the first. 5
Ioh. Savage, kn. ut prius 6 Hen. Bunbury, kn. Staney Arg. on a Bend S. 3
Chest-rooks of the first. 7 Will. Brereton, es. ut prius 8 Geff. Shakerly, es.
Arg. 3 Molehills vert. 9 Tho. Dutton, esquire. ut prius 10 Will. Brereton, kn. ut
prius 11 Urian. Leigh, kn. ut prius 12 Geo. Calveley; kn. ut prius 13 Rich.
Lea* kn. Lea. Arg. a Cheveron betwixt 3 Leopards-heads S. 14 Rich. Wilbraha^,
k. ut prius 15 Ioh. Davenport ut prius 16 Ralp. Calveley, es. ut prius 17 Ran.
Manwaring ut prius 18 To. Cholmondely ut prius 19 Tho. Marbury, es. Marbury Or
on a Fess engrailed Azure 3 Garbes of the first. 20 Geor. Booth, bar. ut prius
21 Tho. Smith, kn. ut prius 22 Ric. Gravenor, b. ut prius CAR. REG. Anno 1 Tho.
Brereton* kn. ut prius 2 Ioh. Done, kn. ut prius 3 Ioh. Calveley, es. ut prius
4 Edw. Stanley, bar. ut prius 5 Tho. Leigh, esquire. ut prius 6 Pet. Dutron, esquire.
ut prius 7 Tho. Stanley, esquire. ut prius 8 Ric. Brereton, es. ut prius 9 Edw.
Fitton, esquire. ut prius 10 Pet. Venables ut prius 11 Tho. Ashton, bar. ut prius
12 Will. Leigh, esquire. ut prius. 13 Tho. (...) bar. Duddingto^ Arg. a Cheveron
(...). (...) Or, betwixt 3 Gadds of stteel S. 14 Tho. Cholmley ut prius 15
Phil. Manwaring ut prius 16 Tho. Powell, bar. Berkenhad Sable 3 Roses Arg. 17
Ioh. Billot, esquire. Arg. on a Chief G. 3 Cinque foils of the Field. 18 Hug.
Calvely, k. ut prius 19 Tho. Leigh, esquire. ut prius 20 Ri. Gravenor, ba. ut prius
21 Rob. Totton, esquire. Winthaw Quarterly Arg. and G. 4 Crescents counter changed.
22 Hen. Brood, esquire.

Reader, if thou discoverest any difference in the Method betwixt this and the
other Catalogue of Sheriffs, impute it to this cause, that whilst I fetched the
Rest from the Fountain in the Exchequer, I took these out of the Cestern, I
mean the Printed Book of Vale-royal. I presume, that the Sheriff who is last
named, continued in that Office all that Intervale of years, till his Successor
here nominated entered thereon.

The Reader may with the more confidence rely on their Arms, imparted unto me
by Mr. Daniel King, who to me really verifieth his own Anagram.

DANIEL KING, I KIND ANGEL. And indeed he has been a Tutelar one to me,
gratifying me with whatsoever I had need to use, and he had ability to bestow.

Henry III.
56 HUGH de HATTON.]

King William the Conqueror bestowed Lands on one of his Name and Ancestors at
Hatton in this County. From him is Lineally descended that Learned and
Religious (witness his pious meditations on the Psalms*) Sir Christopher
Hatton Knight of the Bath, created by King Charles the first, Baron Hatton of
Kerby in Northamptonshire. The Original of this grant of the Conquerors is
still in this Lords Possession, preserved in our Civil Wars, with great care
and difficulty by his virtuous Lady. On the same token that her Lord patiently
digested the plundring of his Library and other Rarities, when hearing the
welcome tidings from his Lady, that the said Record was safely secured.

Queen Mary.
3 Sir HUGH CHOLMLY or CHOLMONDELEIGH.]

This worthy person bought his Knighthood in the field at Leigh in Scotland.
He was five times High-sheriffe of this County, (and sometimes of Flintshire,)
and for many years one of the two sole deputies Leiutenants thereof. For a good
space he was Vice President of the Marches of Walls under the Right Honorable
Sir Henry Sidney Knight, conceive it during his abscence in Ireland. For Fifty
years together he was esteemed a Father of his Country, and dying Anno 157..
was buried in the Church of Mallpasse, under a Tomb of Allabaster, with great
lamentation of all sorts of people, had it not mitigated their Mourning, that
he left a Son of his own name Heir to his Virtues and Estate.

2 JOHN SAVAGE, Ar.]

I behold him as the direct Ancestor unto Sir Thomas Savage Knight. and Baronet,
Created by K. Charles the first, Baron Savage of Rock savage in this County.
This Lord (a very prudent Statesman) married Elizabeth eldest Daughter and
Coheir of Thomas Lord Darcy of Chich, Viscount Colchester, and Earl of Rivers,
Honors entailed on his Posterity, and now enjoyed by the Right Honorable
Thomas Savage Earl Rivers.

The Battles.
Rowton heath 1645. Sept. 24.
His Majesty being informed, that Colonel Jones had seized the Suburbs and
Strong Church of St. John's in Chester, advanced Northward for the relief
thereof. Poins, one of the Parliaments Generals, pursued his Majesty. At
Rowton-heath within 3. miles of Chester the K. Army made an Halt, whilst his
Majesty with some prime persons marched into the City.

Next day a fierce Fight happened on the Heath, betwixt the Kings and Poinses
Forces, the latter going off with the greater loss. Judicious Persons conceive,
that had the Royalists pursued this Single Enemy, (as yet unrecruited with
additional strength,) they had finally worsted him, which Fatal omission (
opportunities admit of no after-games) proved their overthrow.

For next day Col. Jones drew out his men into the field, so that the Royalists
being charged on the Heath in Front and Rear, were put to the worst, the whole
body of whose Army had Wings without Legs, Horse without Foot, whilst the
Parliament was powerful in both.

Immediately after, a considerable Party of Horse (the Lord Byron Governor of
the City being loath to part with any Foot as kept to secure the Kings person,)
came out of Chester, too late to succor their defeated Friends, and too soon
to engage themselves. Here fell the Youngest of the three Noble Brethren, who
lost their lives in the King service, Bernard Stuart Earl of Leichfield, never
sufficiently to be lamented.

The Farewell.
To take my leave of Cheshire, I could wish that some of their hospitality were
planted in the South, that it might bring forth fruit therein; and in exchange
I could desire, that some of our Southern delicacies might prosperously grow in
their gardens, and Quinces particularly, being not more pleasant to the palate,
then restorative of the health, as accounted a great cordial. The rather,
because a Will. Smith in his V^le page 18.
native of this County, in his description thereof, could not remember he ever
saw Quince growing therein.

CHESTER is a fair City on the North-east side of the River Dee, so ancient
that the first founder thereof is forgotten, much beholding to the Earls of
Chester and others for Increase and Ornaments. The Walls thereof were lately in
good repair, especially betwixt the New-tower and the Watergate. For I find
how Anno 1569. there was a personal fight in this City betwixt the two The
ValeRoyal of England, page 86. Idem page 199.
Sheriffs thereof, viz. Richard Massey and Peter Lycherband, (who shall keep
peace if aged Officers break it?) who deservedly were fined for the forfeiting
of their gravity, to repair that part of the Wall. It seems it is more honor
to be keeper of a gate in Chester, then a whole City elsewhere, seeing Eastgate
therein was committed to the c^ody formerly of the Earl of Oxford, Bridgegate
to the Earl of Shrewsbury, Watergate to the Earl of Da^by, and Northgate to the
Mayor of the City.

It is built in the form of a Quadrant, and is almost a just Square, the four
Cardinal Streets thereof (as I may call them) meeting in the middle of the
City, at a place called the Pentise, which affords a Pleasant Prospect at
once into all Four. Here is a property of building peculiar to the City called
the Rows, being Galleries, wherein Passengers go dry without coming into the
Streets, having Shops on both sides and underneath. The fashion whereof is
somewhat hard to conceive, it is therefore worth their pains, who have Money
and Leisure to make their own Eyes the Expounders of the manner thereof. The
like being said not to be seen in all England, no nor in all Europe again.

The Buildings.
Saint Werburges Church is a fair structure, and had been more beautiful if
the tower thereof (intended some say for a steeple, the first stone whereof was
laid 1508.) had been finished. It was built long before the Conquest, and being
much ruined was afterward repaired by Hugh Lupus first Earl of Chester. It was
afterward made by King Henry the eighth, one of his five Royal Bishoprics,
Oxford, Gloucester, Bristol and Peterborough, being the other four. I say Royal
Bishoprics, as whose Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions were never confirmed by the
Pope, nor Baronies by the Parliament.

The first is plain, King Henry the eighth erecting them after he had
disclaimed the Popes Supremacy, and in the days of Queen Mary, when England was
in some sort reconciled to Rome, the Pope thought not fit to contest with the
Queen about that Criticisme^, because these five Bishoprics were erected
without his consent, but suffered them to be even as he found them. Their
Baronries also were not (though their Bishoprics were,) ever confirmed by Act
of Parliament, so that they owed their beings solely to the Kings Prerogative,
who might as well Create Spiritual as Temporal Peers, by his own Authority. And
therefore when some Anti-praelatists in the late Long Parliament, 1641.
endeavored to overthrow their Baronries, (as an Ess^y and Preludium to the
rest of the Bishoprics,) for want of Parliamentary Confirmation, they desisted
from that design as fond and unfeisable, on better consideration.

Proverbs.
When the Vale- royal of England, written by Wit. Webb, p. 22.
daughter is stolen, shut Pepper-gate.] Pepper-gate was a postern of this City,
on the East Side (as I take it) thereof; but in times past closed up and shut
upon this occasion. The Mayor of the City had his daughter (as she was playing
at ball with other Maidens in Pepper-street,) stolen away by a Young Man,
through the same gate; whereupon in revenge he caused it to be shut up, though
I see not why the City should suffer in her conveniences, for the Mayor his
want of Care, or his Daughter her lack of Obedience. But what shall we say Love
will make the whole Walla Gate to procure its own Escape. Parallel to this
Proverb is the Latin, Sero sapiunt Phryges, when men instead of preventing,
postvide against dangers.

Martyrs.
GEORGE MARSH was condemned by Bishop Coats, and cruelly burnt without this
City, near unto Spittle Boughton; but because he was born elsewhere, see his
character in Lancashire.

Prelates.
GEORGE DOUNHAM D. D. son to John Dounham Bishop of Chester, was born in this
City, as by proportion of time may most probably be collected. He was bred in
Christs-colledge in Cambridge, elected Fellow thereof 1585. Christs-coll.
Register.
and chosen Logick-professor in the University. No man was then and there
better skilled in Aristotle, or a greater Follower of Ramus, so that he may be
termed the Top-twig of that Branch.

It is seldom seen, that the Clunch-fist of Logic (good to knock a man down
at a blow) can so open it self as to smooth and stroke one with the Palm
thereof. Our Dounham could do both, witness the Oration made by him at
Cambridge, (preposed to his book of Logic) full of Flowers of the choicest
eloquence. He preached the Sermon April 17. 160^. at the Consecration of James
Mountague Bishop of Bath and Wells, irrefragably proving therein Episcopacy
jure Divino.

He that receives a Bishop in the Name of a Bishop, shall receive a Bishops
reward. It was not long before Doctor Dounham was made Bishop of Derry in
Ireland, then newly augmented with the addition of Londonderry, because so
planted with English, it was easy to find London in Derry, but not Derry in
Derry, so much disguised from itself with new buildings. But this Learned
Bishop was the greatest beauty thereof, endeavoring by gentleness to Cicurate
and Civillize the wild-Irish, and proved very successful therein. The certain
date of his death I cannot attain.

Sea men.
DAVID MIDDLETON was born in this City, as his Kinsman and my Master John
Spencer Library Keeper of Zion-colledge.
Friend has informed me. He was one of those who effectually contributed his
assistance to the making of Through lights in the World, I mean New Discoveries
in the East and WestIndies, as we may read at large in his own Pu^chas his
Pi^grims, 1. part, page 226. and s^q.
Printed relation.

The tenderhearted Reader whose affections go along with his eye, will sadly
sympathize with his sufferings, so many and great his dangers, with Caniballs
and Portugals, Crocodiles and Hollanders, till at last he accomplished his
intentions, and settled the English trade at Bantam, I meet with no mention of
him after 1610.

Sir HENRY MIDDLETON Knight, was younger brother (as I take it) to the former,
deservedly knighted for his great pains and perils in advancing the English
trade. Amongst many most remarkable is his Voyage into the Red Sea, which had
like to have proved the Dead sea unto him, I mean cost him his life. Here he
was tolled to land at Moha, by the treacherous Aga, and then had eight of his
men barbarously sl^in, himself and seven more chained up by the Necks. The
pretense was because that Port was the Door of the Mat. 4. ^.
Holy City, which (though it be Jerusalem in the language of the Scripture) is
Mecca in the Phrase of the Alcaron, and it is Capitol for any Christian to
come so near thereunto. Then was he sent eightscore miles and upwards to the
Bashaw at Zenan in Arabia, in the Month of January 1611. This City of Zenan
lies but sixteen degrees and fifteen minutes of Northern latitude from the
Equator, and yet was so cold, that there was Ice of a Fingers thickness in one
night, as the said Sir Henry did Purchase his Pilgrims lib. 3. page 255.
relate; This confuteth the Character of these Countries misapprehended by
Antiquity not to be habitable, for the excess of heat therein.

At last the Turkish Bashaw gave him leave to depart, and sailing Eastwards, he
repaired himself by a gainful composition with the Indians, for the losses he
had sustained by the Turks. His ship called the Trades increase, well answered
the name thereof, until it pleased God to visit his men therein with a strange
disease, whereof one hundred English deceased, the grief whereat was conceived
the cause of this worthy Knights death, May 24. 1613. whose name will ever
survive whilst Middletons Bay (from him so called) appears in the Dutch Cards.

Writers.
ROGER of CHESTER was born and bred therein, a Benedictine Monk in Saint
Werburges. In obedience to the Bishop of Chester, he wrote a British Chronicle
from the beginning of the World. This was the fashion of all Historians of that
age, running to take a long rise, [from the Creation it self] that so (it
seems) they might leap the further with the greater force. Our Rogers Chronicle
was like a ship with double decks, first only continuing it to the year 1314.
and then resuming his subject, he superadded five and twenty year more
thereunto, entitling it

Polycratica Temporum. Both Bale and Pitz praise him for pure latin (a rarity
in that age) and assign 1339. the time of his death, Chester the place of his
burial.

RANDAL or RANULPH HYGDEN, (commonly called Ranulph of Chester) was bred a
Benedictine in Saint Werburge. He not only Vamped the history of Roger
aforesaid, but made a large one of his own from the beginning of the World,
commendable for his Method and Modesty therein.

Method, assigning in the Margent, the date of each action. We read Genesis 1.
that Light was made on the First, and the Sun on the Fourth day of the
C^eation, when the Light (formerly diffused and dispersed in the Heavens, was
Contracted, United,) and Fixed in one full Body thereof. Thus the Notation of
Times confusedly scattered in many ancient Authors, (as to our English Actions)
are by our Ranulphus reduced into an Entire bulk of Cronology.

Modesty. Who to his great commendation, Bale de script. Brit. Gent. 6. Nu^. 1^.
Unicuique suorum Authorum, honorem integrum servans, confeseth himself (to use
his own expression,) with Ruth the Moabite, to have gleaned after other
Reapers. He calls his book

Poly-Cronicon. He continued sixty four years a Monk, and dying very aged,
1363. was buried in Chester.

HENRY BRADSHAW was born in this City, and lived a Benedictine therein. A
diligent Historian, having written no bad Chronicle, and another Book of the
Life of Saint Werburg in verse. Take a taste at once, both of his Poetry, and
the Original Building of the City, both for Beauty alike.

The Founder of this City, as says Polychronicon,
Was Leon Gawer, a mighty strong Giant.
Which builded Caves and Dungeons many a one,
No goodly Building, ne proper, ne pleasant.
These his verses might have passed with praise, had he lived, (as Arnoldus
Vion does erroniously insinuate Pits de Ang. Script. page 690.
Anno 1346. But flourishing more then a Century, since [ viz. 1513.] they are
hardly to be excused. However Script. Brit. Ceut. 9. Number. 17.
Bale informs us that he was (the Diamond in the Ring) pro ea ipsa aetate,
admodum pius, and so we dismiss his Memory with Commendation.

Since the Reformation.
EDWARD BRIERWOOD was as I am informed born in this City, bred in
Brasennose-colledge in Oxford. Being Candidate for a Fellowship, he lost it
without loss of credit. For where preferment goes more by favor then merit,
the Rejected have more honor then the Elected.

This ill success did him no more hurt then a Rub does to an over-thrown Bowl,
bringing it the nearer to the mark. He was not the more sullen, but the more
serious in his studies, (retiring himself to Saint Mary-hall) till he became a
most accomplished Scholar in Logic, witness his worthy work thereof,
Mathematics, being afterward a Lecturer thereof in Gresham-colledge, All
learned and many modern languages, hereof he wrote a Learned book, called his
Enquiries. No Sacrilegious Enquiries, whereof our age dothsurfet. ( It is a
Snare after vows to make Pro. 20. 25.
Enquiries,) but judicious disquisitions of the Original and Extent of
Languages.

A little before his death Pens were brandished betwixt Master Byfield and him,
about the keeping of the Sabbath, Master Brierwood learnedly maintaining that
th*other exacted more strictness therein then God enjoined. Let me contribute
my symbol on this Subject. Our Savior is said to be made Gal. 4. 4.
under the Law, and yet he says of himself, The Son Mat. 12. 8.
of Man is Lord even of the Sabbath. Indeed he was made under the fourth
Commandment, as under the rest of the Law, to observe the dominion, not
tyranny thereof, (usurped, partly, by the misinterpretation of the Priests
partly, by the misapprehension of the People,) and therefore both by his Life
and Doctrine did manumisse men from that vassallage, that the day instituted
for rest and repose should not be abused for self-affliction and torment.

To return to our Brierwood, I have heard a great Scholar in England say, That
he was the fittest Man whom he knew in England, to sit at the Elbo of a
Professor to prompt him. But in my opinion he was a very proper person to
discharge the place himself. I conjecture his death about 1633.

JOHN DOWNHAM younger Son of William Downham Bishop of Chester, was (as far as
my best enquiry can recover) born in this City, bred in Cambridge B. D. and
afterward became a painful and profitable Preacher in London. He was the
first who commendably discharged that eminent In the Church behind the Exchange.
Lecture, plentifully endowed by Master Jones of Munmouth, and is memorable to
posterity for his worthy work of the Christian Warfare. Well had it been for
England, had no other war been used therein, for this last twenty years, all
pious Persons being comfortably concerned in the prosecution thereof. Seriously
considering that their Armor is of proof, their Quarrel is lawful, their
Fight is long, their Foes are fierce, their Company are Saints, their Captain
is Christ, their Conquest is certain, their Crown is Heaven. This grave Divine
died very aged about the year 1644.

Benefactors to the Public.
WILLIAM ALDERSEA a pious and godly man, was Mayor of the City 1560. demeaning
himself in his place with much Gravity and Discretion. He caused with much Cost
and Industry the Catalogue of the Mayors of Chester to be completed, and that
on this occasion. He found by Authentic Evidences, that one Alano de Whetly
^ad been four times Mayor of Chester, and yet his name was never mentioned in
the ordidinary Book of Mayors. This put this good Magistrate on the employment,
( Detection of faults informs little without Correction of them,) to amend and
complete that lame list out of their Records. Thus Imperfections may occasion
Perfection, which makes me to hope, that hereafter the Defects of this my Book
(without prejudice to my Profit or Credit,) will be judiciously discovered, and
industriously amended by others. This William died the twelfth of October Anno
1577. and lies buried in the Chancell of Saint Osswalls under a fair stone of
Alabaster.

Sir THOMAS OFFLEY Son to William Offley was Stows Su^vey of London page 585.
born in the City of Chester, and bred a Merchant-taylor in London, whereof he
became Lord Mayor Anno 1556. The useful custom of the night Bellman
(preventing many Fires and more Felonies,) began in his Mayoralty. He was the
Zachaeus of London, not for his low Stature, but his high Charity, bequeathing
the half of his Estate (computed by a Reverend D^. Willet in his Catalogue of
good works since the Reformation page 1226.
Divine, to amount to five thousand pounds) unto the Poor, although he had
children of his own. Yea, he appointed that two hundred pound should be taken
out of the other half (left to his son Henry) and employed to charitable uses.
He died 1560. and was buried in the Church of Saint Andrews Undershaft. I am
heartily sorry to meet with this passage in my Stows Survey of London page 1226.
Author.

Sir Thomas Offley bequeatheth one half of all his goods to charitable actions.
But the Parish [meaning Saint Andrews Undershaft] received little benefit
thereby. If the Testators Will were not justly performed, it sounds to the
shame and blame of his Executors. But if the charity of Sir Thomas acted Eminus
not Comminus, I mean at some distance, and not at his own habitation, it was no
injury for any to dispose of his own at his own pleasure. I find also two other
of the same Sur-name, not mutually more allied in blood, then in charitable
dispositions.

Master Hugh Offley Leather-seller, Sheriff of London in the year 1588. buried
also in Saint Andrews aforesaid. Besides many other Stow his Survey of London
page 154.
benefactions, he gave six hundred pounds to this City to put forth Vale Royal
of England pa. 207.
youngmen. Mr. Robert Offley bred in London, and (as I take it) Brother to the
aforesaid Hugh Offley did in year the of our Lord 1596. bestow six hundred
pounds on twenty four youngmen in Chester whereof twelve were Ibidem.
Apprentices. I know not the exact date of his departure.

It is hard to instance in a Lease of kinsmen born so far from, bred in London,
meeting together in such bountiful performances.

I believe it was the First of these three Offleys on whom the Rhythme was made,

Offley three dishes had of daily Roast,
An Egg, an Apple, and (the third) a Toast.
This I behold neither sin nor shame in him, feeding himself on plain and
wholesome repast, that he might feast others by his bounty, and thereby
deserving rather praise then a jear from posterity.

JOHN TERER Gentleman, and a Member of this City. He erected a seemly waterwork
built Steeplewise at the Bridgegate, by his own ingenious industry and charge.
This since has served for the conveying of River-water from the Cisterne, in
the top of that Work, through Pipes of Lead and Wood, to the Citizens houses,
to their great conveniences. I could wish all designs in the like nature
hopefully begun, may as h^ppily be completed. My industry cannot attain the
exact time of his death, only I find that his son of the same name, endeavored
the like to bring water from a fine spring, to the midst of this City, which I
believe was effected.

The Farewell.
And now being to take our leave of this Ancient and Honorable City, the worst
that I wish it is, that the distance betwixt Dee and the New-tower may be made
up, all Obstructions being removed, which cause or occasion the same. That the
Rings on the New-tower (now only for sight) may be restored to the Service for
which they were first intended, to fasten Vessels thereunto. That the Vessels
on that River (lately degenerated from Ships into Barks) may grow up again to
their former Strength and Stature.

CORNWALL.
CORNWALL, it has its name partly from the Form, partly from the Inhabitants
thereof: from the former it is so called, because narrow in fashion of a horn,
which (by the way) is a word of all others passing thorough both Learned and
Modern Languages with the least variation,

1 Keren, Hebr. 2 Keras, Gr. 3 Cornu, Lat. 4 Corn, Fr. 5 Cuerno, Span. 6 Corno,
Ital. 7 Horn, Eng. 8 Horn, Dut. 9 Kerne, Well.
The latter Wale signifies strangers, for such were the Inhabitants of this
County, reputed by their Neighbors.

It has Devonshire on the West, divided from it generally with the River
Tamer, encompassed with the Sea on all other sides, affording plenty of
Harbors, so that Forraigners in their passage to or from Spain, Ireland, the
Levant, East or West Indies, sometimes touch herewith, sometimes are driven
hither against their will, but never without the profit of the Inhabitants,
according to the Common Proverb, where the horse lies down, there some hairs
will be found.

The Language of the Natives, it is a different tongue from the English, and
dialect from the Welsh, as more easy to be pronounced, and is sufficiently
copious to express the conceits of a good wit both in Prose and Verse. Some
have avouched it derived from the Greek, producing for the proof thereof many
words of one sense in both, as Kentron, A spur; Schaphe, A boat; Ronchi,
Snoring, etc. But the judicious behold these as no regular congruities, but
casual coincidencies, the like to which may be found in languages of the
greatest distance, which never met together since they parted at the confusion
of Babel. Thus one would enforce a conformity between the Hebrew and English,
because one of the three giants sons of Anak, was called Ahiman.

The Cornish-tongue affords but two natural oaths, or Carews Survey of
Cornwall page 55.
three at most; but whether each of them be according to the kinds of Oaths,
divided by the Schoolmen, one Assertory, the other Promissory, to which some
add a third, Comminatory, is to me unknown. The worst is, the Common Cornish
supply this (I will not say defect) not only with swearing the same often
over, but also by borrowing other oaths of the English.

Natural Commodities.
Diamonds.
These of themselves sound high, till the Addition of Cornish substracteth from
their Valuation. In Blackness and Hardness, they are far short of the Indian.
Yet Set with a good Foil (advantaged Hypocrisy, passes often for Sincerity,)
may at the first sight deceive no unskilful Lapidary: as their Luster is less
then Orient Diamonds, so herein they exceed them, that Nature has made both
their Face and their Dressing, by whom they are Pointed and Polished. But,
enough hereof, the rather, because some from the Latin names of Jewels,
Jocalia, things to be jested and played with, and Baubellae, things which are
Trifles and Baubles, spightfully collect that Stones, accounted precious, are
more beholding to the Consent of Fancy, then their own Intrinsic worth for
their high valuation.

Ambergreese.
I confess this precious Commodity is fixed to no place in the world, as too
great a Treasure for any one Country to engross, and therefore it is only
fluctuating and casually found by small parcells, sometimes in one place, and
sometimes in another; yet, because the last, greatest and best quantity
thereof, that ever this Age did behold, was found on the Coasts of this County,
we will here insert a little of the name, nature, and use thereof.

It is called Ambra-gresia, That is, gray Amber, from the Color thereof, which
modern name utterly unknown to the Ancients, does speak it to be of later
invention, whereof a Learned Doctor of Physic has assigned this probable
reason, because it was never found in the Midland-sea, (which in effect was all
the Seas to the Ancients) but only in the main Ocean, which was not navigated
on, till within this last two hundred years, since Seamen have gotten the use
of the Card and Compass.

It is almost as hard to know what it is, as where to find it. Some will have
it the sperme of a fish, or some other unctuous matter arising from them;
others, that it is the foam of the Sea, or some excrescency thence boiled to
such a height by the heat of the Sun; Others, that it is a gum that grows on
the shore. In a word, no certainty can be collected herein, some Physicians
holding one way, and some another, but this is most sure, that Apothecaries
hold it at five pounds an Ounce, which some say is dearer then ever it was in
the memory of man.

It is a rare Cordial for the refreshing of the spirits, and sovereign for the
strengthening the head, besides the most fragrant scent, far stronger in Consort
when Compounded with other things, then when singly it self.

A mass of this Ambergreese was about the third year of King Charles found in
this County, at Low water, close to the shore of the Manor of Anthony, then
belonging to Richad Carew, Esquire.

Garlic.
Here is a great and sudden fall indeed, from the sweetest of Gums, to the most
stinking of Roots. Yet is not the distance so great, if the worth of Garlic be
such as some have avouched it. Not to speak of the murmuring Number. 11. 5.
Israelites, who prized it before Manna it self; some avow it Sovereign for men
and beasts in most Maladies. Indeed the scent thereof is somewhat Valiant and
Offensive, but wise men will be contented to hold their noses, on condition
they may thereby hold or recover their health. Indeed a large book is written
de esu allii, which if it hold proportion with truth, one would wonder any man
should be sick and dye, who has Garlic growing in his Garden. Sure I am, our
Palate-people are much pleased therewith, as giving a delicious Hault-gust to
most meats they eat, as tasted and smelt in their Sauce, though not seen
therein. The best Garlic is about Camdens Brit. in Cornwall.
Stratton in this County.

Pilchards.
Plenty hereof are taken in these parts, persecuted to the shore by their
enemies, the Tunny and Hake, till in pursuance of their private revenge, they
all become a prey to the Fisherman. The Pilchard may seem contemptible in it
self, being so small, though the wit of the vulgar here will tell you, they
have seen many Pilchards an elllong, understand it laid at length, head and
tail together. Their numbers are incredible, employing a power of poor people,
in Polling, (that is, Beheading,) Gutting, Splitting, Powdering and Drying
them, and then (by the name of Fumadoes,) with Oil and a Lemon, they are meat
for the mightiest Don in Spain. I wish, not only their nets, but fish may
hold, suspecting their daily decay, their shoals usually shifting coasts, and
verging more westward to Ireland. Other fish here be which turn to good
account, all welcome to Fishermens hooks, save the Star-fish, esteemed
contagious.

Blew-Slate.
These are commonly found under the Walling-Slate, when the depth has brought
the workmen to the water. They are thin in substance, clear in color, light in
weight, and lasting in continuance. Generally they carry so good a regard, that
(besides the supply of home-provisions) great store of them are imported into
other parts of the land, and transpotted into France and the Low Countries. All
that I have to say of Slate, is that Polydore Virgil, de Invent. Rerum in lib:
3. Cap. 8. Page 251.
Cinyra the son of Agriopae is said first to have found them in Cyprus, for the
Covering of Houses.

Tin.
The most and best in Christendom this County does produce. Yea it was the
Only Tin in Europe, until a Fugitive Miner running hence, discovered Tin
in Voiteland; in the Confines of Bohemia. God may be said in this County, to
rain Meat (such the plenty thereof,) and give Dishes too, made of Pewter, which
has Tin for the Father, and Lead for the Mother thereof, and in our Age does
Matriza^e too much. Vast their Expense in making their Addits, (understand them
Addresses, and Accesses to the Mine,) with Dressing, Breaking, Stamping;
Drying, Crazing, Washing and Melting, all plentifully repayed in the Selling of
it.

The discovery of many of these Mines have been very remarkable, for some have
gained more Sleeping, then others Waking, having dreamt that in such
[Impropable] places, Tin was to be found, and pursuing such Directions, have
found it accordingly.

The Virg. (...). 6.
Poet we know faineth Two Ports of Dreams,

Sunt geminae somni portae; quarum: altera ^ertur
Cornea, quaveris facilis datur exitus umbris:
Altera Candenti, perfecta nitens Elephanto,
Sed falsa ad Coelum m^ttunt insomnia manes.
Dreams have two Gates, one made [they say of Horn
By this Port pass, true, and Prophe^ticks Dreams
White Ivory the other does adorn,
By this false Shades, and lying Fancies streams.
Strange that the Best Gate, for matter [ Ivory] should present the Worst
[false] Dreams. It seems these Cornish Dreams passed through the Horny Gate,
which fell out so happily, that, thereby many have been enriched, and left
great Estates to their Posterity.

I cannot take my leave of these Tinners, until I have observed a strange
practice of them, that once in seven or eight years, they burn down (and that
to their great profit) their own Melting houses. I remember a merry Epigram in
Lib. 3. Epig. 5^.
Martial, on one Tongilian, who had his house in Rome, casually [reputed]
burnt, and gained ten times as much, by his friends contribution to his loss.

Collatum est decies. Rogo non potes ipse videri
Incendisse tuam, Tongiliane domum?
Gaining ten fold, tell truly I desire,
Tongilian did not set thy house on fire?
But here the Tinners avow themselves incendiaries of their own houses, on a
profitable account. For, during the Tinnes melting in the blowing-house,
diverse light sparkles thereof, are by the forcible wind, which the bellows
sends forth, driven up to the thatched roof, on the burning whereof they find
so much of this light Tin in the ashes, as pays for the new building, with
a gainful overplus.

The Buildings.
Master Attorney Noy was wont pleasantly to say, that his house had no fault in
it, save only that it was too near unto London, though indeed distanced thence
full three hundred miles, in the remoter part of this County. But seriously one
may say, and defend it, that the distance of Cornwall from that Metropolis, is
a Conventent Inconveniency. As for the structure of their Houses, they are
generally but mean, though the Nobility and Gentry have hansome habitations,
and amongst them none excels.

Mount-Edgecomb^.
It was built by Sir Richard Edgecomb Knight, take his Character from C^rew in
his Sur. of Corn. page 100.
one who very well knew him, mildness and stoutness, diffidence and wisdom,
deliberateness of undertakings, and sufficiency of effecting; made in him a
more commendable, then blazing mixture of virtue. In the Reign of Queen Mary
(about the year 1555.) he gave entertainment at one time, for some good space
to the Admirals of the English, Spanish, and Netherland, and many Noble men
besides. A passage the more remarkable, because I am confident that the
Admiralls of those Nations never met since, (if ever before) amicably at the
same Table. Mount-Edgcombe was the Scene of this Hospitality, a house new built
and named by the aforesaid Knight, a square Structure with a round Turret at
each end, Garretted on the top. The Hall (rising above the rest) yields a
stately sound as one enters it, the Parlour and Dyning-Roome afford a large
and diversified prospect both of Sea and Land. The high situation (cool in
Summer, yet not cold in Winter) gives Health: the Neighbor River wealth. Two
Block-houses great safety, and the Town of Plymouth good company unto it. Nor
must I forget the fruitful ground about it, (pleasure without profit, is but a
flower without a root,) stored with Wood, Timber, Fruit, Deer and Gonnies, a
sufficiency of Pasture, Arable and Meadow, with Stone, Lime, Marl, and what not?

I write not this to tempt the Reader to the breach of the Tenth Commandment,
To covet his Neighbors house, and one Line in the prevention thereof. I have
been credibly informed that the Duke of Medina Sidonia Admiral of the
Spanish-Fleet in the 88. was so affected at the sight of this House (though but
beholding it at a distance from the Sea,) that he resolved it for his own
possession in the partage of this Kingdom, (blame him not if choosing best for
himself,) which they had preconquered in their hopes and expectation. But he
had caught a great Cold, had he had no other Clothes to wear, then those which
were to be made of a skin of a Bear, not yet killed.

Medicinal Waters.
I know none in this County, which are reported to be Sovereign constantly for
any diseases. Yet I meet with one so remarkable a recovery, that it must not be
omitted. However I remember his Good Counsel, He that tells a miraculus
truth, must always carry his Author at his Back. I will only Transcribe his
words, speaking of the good Offices which Angels do to Gods Servants.

Doctor Joseph Hall then Bishop of Exeter, since of Norwich, in his Book
called, The Great Mystery of Godliness, page 169. Of this kind was that (no
less then Miraculous) Cure, which at Saint Maderns in Cornwall was wrought upon
a Poor Cripple, whereof (besides the attestation of many hundred of the
Neighbors,) I took a strict and impartial Examination in my last Visitation.

This Man for sixteen years together was fain to walk upon his hands, by reason
the sinews of his legs were so contracted, and upon Monitions in his Dream to
wash in that Well, was suddenly so restored to his limbs, that I saw him able
both to walk, and get his Own Maintenance. I found here was neither Art, nor
Collusion. The thing done, the Author Invisible of God.

So Authentical an Author, (without any other Assistance ad Corroborandum,) is
enough to get belief in any, save, such surly souls, who are resolved on
Infidelity of what their own Eyes have not beheld.

The Wonders.
If the word be strained up to the height, I confess Cornwall affords none at
all; but if it be slackned, and let down a little, there are those things which
this Duchy does tender, and we all willing to take for Wonders, for discourse
sake, at the least, viz.

The HURLERS.
These are Stones competently distanced, whom Tradition reports, to be
formerly Men Metamorphoz'd into Stones, for Hurling (a Sport peculiar to
Cornwall) on, and so profaning of the Lord's Day. Thus unequally yoaking
Scripture and Ovid together, the Tale is made up betwixt them. But seeing such
Devotion is not durable which is founded on Deceit, we protest against, and
reject this fiction, the rather, because* the same Lawgiver, who enjoined us,
Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day, gave us also in Command, Thou shall
not bear false witness against thy Neighbor, and we will not accept a false
Doctrine, to make a true use thereof. Yet surely conformable to the Judgment
of those Times was this Tradition made, and thence one may collect that
boisterous Exercises (or Labors rather,) so far from refreshing the weary,
that they weary the refreshed, are utterly inconsistent with the conscientious
keeping of that Day, and deserve heavy Punishments, for profaning thereof.

Otherwise we really believe, these Stones were Originally set up for Limits
and Bounds, or else a Monument erected in Memory of some Victory here achieved.

Main Amber.
Main is in Cornish the Stone, and Amber as some conceive of Came, English Brit.
in Cornwall.
Ambrosius that valiant Brittan, erected probably by him on some Victory
achieved against the Romans, or some other Enemies. This is a Masterpiece of
Mathematics and Critical Proportions, being a great stone of so exact
position on the Top of a Rock, that any weakness by touching it may move it,
and yet no force can remove it, so justly is it poised. I have heard in common
discourse, when this Main Amber has been made the Emblem of such men's
dispositions, who would listen to all counsel, and seem inclined thereunto, but
are so fixed, that no reason can alter them from their first resolution.

But know Reader, that this Wonder is now Unwondred, for I am credibly informed
that some Soldiers of late have utterly destroyed it. Oh, how dangerous is it
for Art to stand in the way where Ignorance is to pass! Surely covetousness
could not tempt them thereunto, though it did make one to deface a fair
Monument in Turkey on this occasion.

A Tomb was erected near the highway (according to the Fashion of that
Country,) on some person of quality, consisting of a Pillar, and on the Top
thereof a Chapter or great Globe of stone, whereon was written in the Turkish
Tongue,

The Brains are in the Head. This passed many years undemolished, it being
Piaculum there to violate the concernment of the dead, until one not of more
Conscience, but Cunning then others, who had passed by it, resolved to unriddle
the meaning of this Inscription; breaking the Hollow Globe open, he found it
full of Gold, departed the richer, not the honester for his discovery. Sure I
am, if any such temptation invited the Soldiers to this Act, they missed their
mark therein.

Their pretense as I understand to this destructive design was Reformation,
some People as they say making an Idol thereof, which if true, I pity the
destroying of Main Amber, no more then the Stamping and Pulverizing of the
brazen Serpent by King Hez^kiah. But I cannot believe so much Stupidity in
Christians, they took much pains by cutting off the Stone to dislodge it from
its Center, (in how few minutes may envy ruin what art has raised in more
hours,) and now Cornwall has one Artificial wonder fewer then it had before.
Except any will say that to keep up the number, the unexampled Envy of these
Soldiers may be Substituted in the room thereof. And let them sink in
Obscurity, that hope to swim in Credit by such mis-atchivements.

Proverbs.
By Tree, Pol, and Pen,]
You shall know the Cornishmen.]
These three words are the Dictionary of such Surnames, which are originally
Cornish, and though Nounes in sense, I may fitly term them Prepositions.

1. Tree a Town. Hence Tre-fry, Tre-lawney, Tre-vanion, etc. 2. Pol signifies
an Head. Hence Pol-wheel. 3. Pen a Top. Hence Pen-tire, Pen-rose, Pen-kevil,
etc.

Some add to these a fourth inchoation, viz. Car (which I guess to signify a
rock) as Carmino, Carzew, etc. but I dare not make additions, but present it as
I find it in my Author.

To give one a Cornish Hugg.] The Cornish are Masters of the Art of Wrestling,
so that if the Olympian Games were now in fashion, they would come away with
the victory. Their Hugg is a cunning close with their fellow combitant, the
fruits whereof is his fair fall, or foil at the least. It is figuratively
appliable to the deceitful dealing of such, who secretly design their
overthrow, whom they openly embrace.

C^ews Sur* (...) C^wall fol. 115.
Hengsten down, well ywrought,]
Is worth London town, dear ybought.]
The truth hereof none can confirm, or confute; seeing under-ground-wealth is a
Nemo scit, and vast may the treasure be of Tin in this Down. Sure I am, that
the gainful plenty of metal formerly afforded in this place, is now fallen to
a scantsaving-scarcity. But, to make the Proverb true, it is possible, that
the Cornish Diamonds found therein, may be pure and orient (as better
concocted) in the bowels thereof. For, though crafty (not to say dishonest)
Chapmen, put the best grain in the top, and worst in the bottom of their sack;
such is the integrity of nature, that the coursest in this kind are higher, and
the purest still the lowest.

Id^m fol. 141.
Tru-ru,]
Triveth eu,]
Ombdina geveth try-ru.]
Which is to say, Tr^u consists of three streets, and it shall in time be
said, Here Truru stood. I trust the men of this town are too wise, to give
credit to such predictions, which may justly prove true to the superstitious
believers thereof. Let them serve God, and defy the Devil with all his
Pseudo-prophesies. Like to this is another fond observation, presaging some sad
success to this Town, because ru, ru, which in English is Woe, Woe, is twice in
the Cornish name thereof. But, let the men of Truru, but practice the first
syllable in the name of their town, and they may be safe and secure from any
danger in the second.

He does sail into Cornwall without a Bark.] This is an Italian Proverb, where
it passes for a description (or derision rather) of such a Man who is wronged
by his Wises disloyalty.

I wonder the Italians should take such pains to travail so far to fetch this
expression, having both the Name and Matter nearer home. Name, Having the field
Cornetus (...) lib. 8. cap. 3.
Campus in agro falisco, (called Corneto at this day.) And a people called
(...).
Corni in Latium, with the Cornicti montes near Tiber, not to speak of its two
Promontories termed by good Authors (...). lib. 3. cap. 5. Mela lib. 2. cap. 4.
Cornua duo Italiae, the two Horns of Italy. Matter, Keeping their wives under
restraint as generally full of Jealousy, which if just, I much bemoan the
Gaolers, if not, I more pity their Prisoners.

Whereas in our Cornwall, the Wives liberty is the due reward of their
Chastity, and the Cause of their husbands comfortable confidence therein.

He is to be (...) Sur. of Cornwall fol. 126.
summoned before the Mayor of Halgaver.] This is a joculary and imaginary
Court, wherewith men make merriment to themselves, presenting such Persons as
go Slovenly in their Attire, untrussed, wanting a spur, etc. Where judgment in
formal terms is given against them, and executed more to the scorn then hurt of
the persons. But enough hereof, least I be summoned thither my self.

When Dudman and Ramehead meet.] These are two forelands, well known to
Sailers, well nigh twenty miles asunder, and the Proverb passes for the
Periphrasis of an impossibility. However, these two Ca^ew (...) of Cornwall
fol. 141.
Points have since met together, (though not in position) in possession of the
same owner, Sir Pierce Edgecombe, enjoying one in his own, the other in right
of his wife.

Saints.
SAINT KIBY was son to Solomon Duke of Cornwall, whom several inducements
moved to travail. First, because A Prophet has the least Honor in his own
Country. Secondly, because Britain at that time was infected with Arianisme.
Thirdly, because he had read so much of the works, and heard more of the worth
of Saint Hilary Bishop of Poicteers in France. This main motive made him
address himself to that worthy Father, with whom he lived fifty years, and
afterward says learned Leyland was by him made Bishop of the Isle of Anglesey.

Pardon me Reader, if suspending my belief herein, seeing, surely that holy and
humble French Saint would not pretend to any Metropoliticall power, in
appointing a Bishop in Britain. More probable it is that Saint Hilary made him
a Bishop at large sine titulo, whereof there are some precedents in Antiquity.
However into Wales he went, and there converted the Northern parts thereof to,
and confirmed the rest in Christianity.

A Threefold memorial is in the Isle of Anglesey, extant at this day. One of
his Master, in Point Hilary, another of himself, in Caer-Guiby, and a third of
both, in Holyhead. He flourished about the year of our Lord, 380.

URSULA daughter to Dinoth Duke of Cornwall, was born in this County. This is
she, who se life is laden with such Anticronismes, and Improbabilities, that
it is questionable, whether this fable was ever founded in a truth, or has any
thing in History for its Original.

This Ursula is said to have carried over out of Britain, eleven thousand Maids
of prime quality, besides See Master (...) notes on Polyolbion page 131.
threescore thousand of meaner rank, ( seventy one thousand in all, a
prodigious number,) to be married to so many in little Britain in France.
Preposterous in my mind, to proffer themselves, and it had argued more modesty
if their Husbands had fetched them hence.

But blame them not, who paid so dear for their Adventures. All shipped from
London, some of them were drowned in their Passage, the rest slain by the
Hunnes of Colen, say some, at Rome, say others, by King Attila under Gratian
the Emperor. Mendacium Aequabile, observing equal Temper of untruth, in time,
place, and person. However, there is a Church at Colen dedicated to their
Memories, where the Virgin Earth (let the Rich. White of Basing-Stoke in Hist.
Brit. Mart. and English Martyr. on October. 21.
reporter have the Whetstone) will digest no other body, no not the Corpse of an
Infant newly Baptized, (as good a Maid I believe as the best of them) but will
vomit it up in the night time again, as if they had never been buried. This
Massacre is reported to have happened in the year of our Lord 383.

SAINT MELIORUS was only son of Melianus, Duke of this County, who being
secretly made a Christian, was so maliced by Rinaldus his Pagan-brother-in-law,
that he first cut off his right hand, and then his (...). (...) in Cata. Sanct.
Brit. Anno D^m. 411:
left-legg, (no reason of this transposed method of cruelty, save cruelty,) and
at last his head about the year 411. whose body being buried in some old Church
in this County, by the miracles reported to be done thereat, procured the
reputation of a Saint to his memory.

Prelates.
WILLIAM de GREN-VIL was born of a worshipful family in this Carew Survey of
Corn. fol. 59.
County, and became Canon of York, Dean of Chichester, Chancellor of England,
(under K. Edward the first,) and Archbishop of York. But the worst was, two
years his Confirmation was deferred until he had paid nine thousand fiveh
undred marks. Let him thank the Pope, who gave him the odd five hundred, not
mounting it to even ten thousand. Besides he had this favor, not (as many
others) to be consecrated by a Proxy, but the very hands of P. Clement the
fifth. This payment reduced him to such poverty, he was relieved by the Clergy
of his Province, by way of Benevolence. This, not doing the deed, to make him a
Saver, he was fain to crave another help of the same Hand, under the new Godwin
in the Arch-bish. of York.
name of a Subsidy. Indeed it was pity that the Father of the Diocese should
want any thing, which his Sons could contribute unto Him. He highly favored
the Templars, though more pitying, then profiting them, as persons so stiffly
opposed by the Pope and Philip King of France, that there was more fear of his
being suppressed by their Foes, then hope of their being supported by his
Friendship. He was present in the Council of Vienna, on the same token, that
therein he had his place assigned next the Archbishop of Triers, and that I
assure you, was very high, as beneath the lowest Elector, and above Wortzbury
or Herbipolis, and other German Prelates, who also were Temporal Princes. But
now he is gone, and his pomp with him, dying at Cawood 1315. and buried in the
Chapel of Saint Nicholas, leaving the reputation of an able Statesman, and no
ill Scholar behind him.

MICHAEL TREGURY was born in this B^le de Scrip. Brit. Cent. Oct. Number. 13.
County, and bred in the University of Oxford, where he attained to such
eminency, that he was commended to King Henry the fifth, fit to be a foreign
Professor. This King Henry, desiring to Conquer France, as well by Arts, as
Arms, (knowing that learning made Civil Persons, and Loyal (...),) reflected
on the City of Cane (honored with the Ashes of his Ancestors) in Normandy, and
resolved to advance it an University, which he did Anno 1418. placing this
Michael, the first Professor in the College of his Royal Erection. Hence King
Henry the sixth, preferred him Arch bishop of Dublin in Ireland, wherein he Sir
James Were, de scrip. Hib. lib. 2. page 13^.
continued 22. years, deceasing December 21. 1471. and is buried in the Church
of Saint Patrick in Dublin. I am sorry to see the Author of so many learned
books disgraced on his Monument, with so barbarous an Epitaph.

Idem de Arch epis. Dublin. page 30.
Praesul Metropolis Michael hic Dubliniensis,
Marmore Tumbatus, pro me Christum flagitetis.
Allowing him thirty years old when Professor at Cane, he must be extremely
aged at his departure.

JOHN ARUNDLE was born of right ancient Parentage of Garews S^r. Corn. fol. 59.
and Bishop Godwin in the Bishops of Exeter.
Lanhearn in this County, bred in the University of Oxford, and was by King
Henry the seventh preferred Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, anno 1496. thence
translated to his Native Diocese of Exeter, 1501.

Impute it to the shortness of his continuance in that See; that so little is
left of his Memory, (not enough to feed, much less Feast the Pen of an
Historian.) He dyed at Bishop Godwin ut prius.
London, anno 1503. and lies buried says my Author in St. Clements, Stows
Survey.
not acquainting us whether Clements East cheap, or Clements* Danes; but I
conclude it is the latter, because the Bishops of Exeter had their Inn or
City-house (now converted into Essexhouse) within that Parish.

Capital Judges and Writers on the Law.
There passes a pleasant Carew Survey of Cornwall fol. 59.
Tradition in this County, how there stands a man of great strength and
stature with a black Bil in his hand, at Polston-bridge (the first entrance
into Cornwall, as you pass toward Launceston, where the Assizes are holden)
ready to knock down all the Lawyers that should offer to plant themselves in
that County. But in earnest, few of that profession have here grown up to any
supereminent height of Learning, Livelihood or Authority. Whether because of
the far distance of this County from the Supremer Courts, or because of the
multiplicity of petty ones nearer hand, (pertaining to the Duchy, These cannot
now be pretended an hinderance, being put down by the long-lasting Parliament.
Stannerie's, and other Franchises,) enabling Atturneys and the like of small
reading to serve the peoples turn, and so cutting the profit from
better-studyed Counselors.

Some conceive that Sir Robert Tresillian, chief Justice of the King's Bench in
the fifth of King Richard the Second, to be this Countryman, though producing
no other evidence save Tree the initial syllable of his Surname, as a badge of
Cornish extraction. However we have purposely omitted him in this our
Catalogue; partly, because not claimed by Mr. Carew in his Survey for their
Countryman, partly, because no Worthy, as justly executed by Act of Parliament
for pronouncing their Acts revocable at the Kings pleasure. As for one Cornish
man (though neither Writer nor actual Judge) his worth commands us to remember
him: namely,

WILLIAM NOY born in this County, was bred in Lincoln's Inn, a most sedulous
Student, constantly conversant with ancient Records, verifying his Anagram:

WILLIAM NOY, I Moyl in Law. He was for many years the stoutest Champion for
the Subjects Liberty, until King Charles entertained him to be his Attorney;
after which time, I read this Character of him in an History written by an
Hamond L'Estrange Esquire his Life of King Charles.
ingenious Gentleman.

He became so servilely addicted to the Prerogative, as by Ferretting old
penal Statutes, and devising new exactions, he became for the small time he
enjoyed that power; the most pestilent Vexation to the subjects that this
latter age produced. However others behold his Actions with a more favorable
eye, as done in the pursuance Reader, in the last page I affirmed, that Mr. Noy
was no writer. But since I am informed, that there is a Posthume Book of his.
of the place he had undertaken, who by his Oath and Office was to improve his
utmost power to advance the profit of his Master. Thus I see that after their
Deaths, the Memories of the best Lawyers may turn Clients, yea and sue too in
forma Pauperis, needing the good word of the Charitable Survivors to plead in
their behalf. He dyed, anno Domini 163.. Let me add this passage from his mouth
that was present thereat. The Goldsmiths of London had (and in due time may
have) a Custom once a year to weigh Gold in the Star Chamber, in the presence
of the Privy Council and the Kings Attorney. This solemn weighing by a word
of art they call the Pixe, and make use of so exact scales therein, that the
Master of the Company affirmed, that they would turn with the two hundereth
part of a grain. I should be loath (said the Attorney Noy standing by) that all
my actions should be weighed in those Scales. With whom I concur in relation of
the same to my self. And therefore seeing the Balance of the Sanctuary held in
Gods hand are far more exact, what need have we of his mercy and Christ's merits
to make us Passable in Gods presence?

Soldiers.
King ARTHUR, Son to Uther-Pendragon, was born in Tintagel-Castle in this
County, and proved afterward Monarch of Great Britain. He may fitly be termed
the British Hercules in three respects,

1. For his illegitimate birth, both being Bastards, begotten on other men's
Alomena wife to Amphitruo, and Igern wife to G^loise Pr. of Cornwall.
wives, and yet their Mothers honest women, deluded, the one by Miracle, the
other by Art-Magick of Merlin, in others personating their husbands. 2.
Painful life, one famous for his twelve labors, the other for his twelve
victories against the Saxons, and both of them had been greater, had they been
made less, and the reports of them reduced within compass of probability. 3.
Violent and woeful death, our Arthurs being as lamentable, and more honorable,
not caused by Feminine Jealousy, but Masculine Treachery, being murdered by
Mordred, near the place where he was born.
Draytons Polyolbion page 5.
As though no other place on Britains spacious earth,
Were worthy of his end, but where he had his birth.
As for his Round-Table, with his Knights about it, the tale whereof has
Trundled so smoothly along for many ages, it never met with much belief
amongst the judicious. He died about the year Anno Dom 542.

And now to speak of the Cornish in general. They ever have been beheld men of
Valor. It seems in the reign of the aforesaid King Arthur, they ever made up
his Vanguard, if I can rightly understand the barbarous Verses of a Michael
Cornubiensis.
Cornish Poet.

Nobilis Arcturus nos primos Cornubienses,
Bellum facturus vocat (ut puta Caesaris enses)
Nobis, (non aliis reliquis) dat primitus ict^m.
Brave Arthur, when he meant a field to fight,
Us Cornish-men did firstof all invite.
Only to Cornish (count them Cesars swords,)
He the first blow in Battle still affords.
But afterward in the time of King Joan. Sarishu. de nugu Curial. 5. cap. 18.
Canutus, the Cornish were appointed to make up the Rear of our Armies. Say not
they were much degraded, by this transposition from Head to Foot, seeing the
judicious in Marshaling of an Army, count the ^rength (and therefore the
credit) to consist in the Rear thereof.

But it must be pitied, that these people misguided by their Leaders, have so
often abused their valor in rebellions, and particularly in the reign of King
Henry the seventh, at Black Heath, where they did the greatest execution, with
their Arrows, reported to be the L*Verulam, in King Henry the seventh page 171.
length of a Taylors-yard, the last of that proportion, which ever were seen in
England. However the Cornish have since plentifully repaired their credit, by
their exemplary Valor and Loyalty, in our late Civil Wars.

Seamen.
JOHN ARUNDEL of Trerice Esquire, in the fourteenth of King Henry the eighth
took prisoner Carew's survey of Cornwall.
Duncane Campbell a Scot, (accounted their Admiral by his own Countrymen, a
Pirat by the English, and a Valiant man by all,) in a fight at Sea. This his
Goodly, Valiant, and Jeopardous enterprise, (as it is termed) was represented
with advantage by the Duke of Norfolk to the King, who highly praised and
rewarded him for the same.

Civilians.
JOHN TREGONWELL was born in this Carew in his survey of Cornwall sol. 61.
Speed Chron. page 780.
County, bred in Oxford, where he proceeded Doctor of the Laws, both Canon and
Civil, and attaining to great perfection in the Theoretick, and practical
parts of those professions, he was employed to be Proctor for King Henry the
eighth, in the long and costly cause of his divorce from Queen Katherine
Dowager. Now as it was said of the Roman Dictator, Sylla suos divitiis
explevit, So King Henry full fraught all those with wealth and rewards, whom he
retained in that employment. This Doctor he Knighted, and because so dexterous
and diligent in his service, gave him a pension of forty pounds per annum. And
upon the resignation thereof, (with the paying down of a Prima part rot. 9^.
in the remembrancers (formerly called Osbornos) office.
Thousand pounds) he conferred on him and his heirs the rich demesne and site
of Middleton, a Mitred Abbey in Dorsetshire, possessed at this day by his
posterity. This Sir John died about the year of our Lord one thousand five
hundred and forty, and is buried under a fair Monument in the Church of
Middleton aforesaid.

Physicians.
Although this County can boast of no writer graduated in that faculty in the
University, and that generally they can better vouch practice for their
warrant, then warrant for their practice, yet Cornish-men would be offended if
I should omit

RAW Carew in his survey of Cornwall fol. 66.
HAYES a Blacksmith by his occupation, and furnished with no more learning then
is suitable to such a calling, who yet ministered Physic for many years, with so
often success and general applause, that not only the homebred multitude
believed so mainly in him, but even persons of the better calling resorted to
him, from the remote parts of the Realm, to make trial of his cunning, by the
hazard of their lives, and sundry either upon just cause, or to Cloak their
folly, reported that they have reaped their errands ends at his hands. He
flourished Anno Dom. 1602.

-- ATWELL born in this County and Parson of Saint Tue therein, was well seen
in the Theoricks of Physic, and happy in the practice thereof, beyond the
belief of most, and the reason that any can assign for the same. For although
now and then he used bloodletting, he mostly for all diseases prescribed milk,
and often milk and apples, which (although contrary to the judgments of the
best esteemed practitioners) either by virtue of the Medicine, or fortune of
the Physician, or fancy of the Patient, recovered many out of desperate
extremities. This his reputation for many years maintained it self unimpaired,
the rather, because he bestowed his pains and charge gratis on the poor, and
taking moderately of the rich, left one half of what he received in the
households he visited. As for the profits of his benefice, he poured it out with
both hands in pious uses. But for the truth of the whole, fit fides penes Carew
in his Survey of Cornwall fol. 60.
authorem. This Atwell was living 1602.

Writers.
HUCARIU the LEVITE was born in this Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 2. Number. 47.
and Pits. an. 1040.
County, and lived at Saint Germans therein. All-eating Time has left us but a
little Morsel for manners of his Memory. This we know, he was a pious and
learned man, (after the rate of that Age) and it appears that he was eminent
in his function of Divine Service, because Levite was (...) fixed upon him. In
his time (as in the days of Eli) the Word of God was precious, which raised the
repute of his pains, who wrote an hundred and ten Homilies, besides * 1 Samuel 3.
1.
other Books. He flourished 1040.

JOHN of CORNWALL (so called from the County of his B^le de script. A^g. Cent.
3. Number. 6.
Nativity,) leaving his Native soil, studied in foreign Universities, chiefly
in Rome, where his Abilities commended him to the Cognizance of Pope Alexander
the third. It argues his learning, that he durst cope with that Giant, Peter
Lumbard himself, commonly called The Master of the Sentences, and who on that
account, expected that all should rather obey, then any oppose his judgment.
Yea it appears, that the judgment of this Peter Bishop of Paris, was not so
sound in all points, by a passage I meet with in Anno 1179.
Matthew Paris of Pope Al^xander the third, writing a letter to an Archbishop
of France, to abrogate the ill doctrine of Peter sometimes Bishop of Paris,
about Christ's Incarnation.

But our John wrote against him in his life time, a book de Homine assumpto,
and put Peter's Pen to some pains to write his own vindication. He wrote also a
book of Philosophy and Heresies. Wonder not at their conjunction, Philosophy
being in Divinity, as Fire and Water in a Family, a good Servant, but bad
Master; so Sad it is, when the Articles of our Creed must be tried by the
Touchstone of Aristotle. This John flourished under K. Henry the second, Anno
1170.

SIMON THURWAY was born in this Bale de script. Br^t. Cent 3. Number. 47.
County, bred in our English Universities, until he went over into Paris,
where he became so eminent a Logician, that all his Auditors were his admirers.
Most firm his memory, and fluent his expression, and was knowing in all things,
save in himself: For, profanely he advanced Aristotle above Moses, and himself
above both. His pride had a great and sudden fall, losing at the same instant,
both language and memory, becoming completely (...) without reason or speech.
Yet was his dumness to all intelligent people, a loud Sermon on Saint Paul's
Romans 12. 3.
precept, Not to think of themselves more highly then they ought to think, but
to think soberly. Polydore Lib. 15 Angl. H^st
Virgil says of him, Juvene nil acutius, seen nihil obtusius; whilst others
Bale ut prius.
add, he made an inarticulate sound like to lowing. This great judgment
befell him about the year of our Lord 1201.

MICHAEL BLAUNPAYN born in Bale de script. Brit. Cent. ^. Number. 10.
Cornwall, (some so commonly call him Michael the Master, that he had almost
lost his native name,) was bred in Oxford and (...), and became as good a
riming Poet as any in that Age. In happened one Henry of Normandy chief Poet to
our Henry the third, had traduced Cornwall as an inconsiderable Country, cast
out by nature in contempt into a corner of the land. Our Michael could not
en^ure this affront, but full of Poetical fury falls upon the Libeller, take a
taste (little thereof will go far) of his strains.

Non opus est ut opes numere^ quibus est opulenta,
Et p^ quas inopes sustentat non open lenta,
Piscibus and Stanno nusquam tam fertilis ora.
We need not number up her wealthy store,
Wherewith this helpful land relieves her poor,
No Sea, so full of Fish, of Tinn no Shore.
Then as a valiant Champion he concludes all with this exhortation to his
Countrymen.

Quid nos deterret? si firmiter in pede stemus,
Fraus ni nos superat, nihil est quod non superemus.
What should us fright, if firmly we do stand?
Bar Fraud, and then no Force can us command.
His Pen so lushious in praising when so pleased, was as bitter in railing when
disposed, witness this his Satirical character of his foresaid Antagonist.

Est tibi Hence ^ Gammon.
Gamba Capri, crus passeris, and latus Apri,
Os leporis, catuli nasus, dens and gena Muli,
Frons Vetulae, tauri caput, and color undique Mauri,
His argumentis quibus est argutia Mentis,
Quod non a Monstro differs, satis hic tibi Monstro.
Gamb'd like a Goat, sparrow-thigh'd, sides as Boar,
Hare-mouth'd, Dog-nos'd, like Mule thy teeth and chin,
Brow'd as old wife, bul-headed, black as More.
If such without, then what are you within?
By these my Signs, the wise will easily conster,
How little thou did differ from a Monster.
He flourished Anno 1350. though the certain time and place of his death is
unknown.

GODFREY of CORNWALL was bred a Doctor in Paris and Oxford, and afterward
became a Carmelite of no mean esteem amongst those of his own order. It
happened in his time that Gerardus Bononiensis, a Frenchman, Master General
of the Carmelites, made two Provincials (formerly but one) of that order in
England, alleging that two (...). 4. 9.
* are better then one, and matters would be the more exactly regulated, by
their double inspection. The plain truth was, the Frenchman did it out of
covetousness, that so two loaders might bring double grists to his Mill. Our
Godfrey appeared a Champion for the old way, that matters might run in their
ancient channel, and wrote (...) de (...). Brit. (...). 5. Number. 6.
a Book to that purpose, as many others on several subjects.

John Baconthorpe, his Contemporary, much esteemed him, and quoted him by the
Title of

(...). 29. (...) (...).
Doctor Solennis. I doubt not but this our Godfrey in mannerly requital,
re-gave Baconthorpe the courtesy of Doctor Resolutus, and here I would fain be
satisfied how these received Epithetes [Doctor Profundus, Doctor Subtilis,
etc.]came first to be fixed on such and such Schoolmen. Surely they as^umed
them not themselves, which had argued too much pride and presumption. Nor could
I ever, as yet, meet with any Authentic record of Pope or University, which
settled it upon them. Possibly one Eminent Writer gave it to another his
Correspondent, who in reciprocation of kindness ( title thou me, and I will
title thee,) returned as splendid a style to him again. This our Solemn Doctor
flourished Anno Domini 1310.

JOHN TREVISA was born at Caradock in this County, bred in Oxford, afterward
Vicar of Berkeley in Gloucester-shire, and Chaplain to Thomas Lord Berkeley, at
whose instance (besides other Histories writ by him) he translated the Bible
into English, a daring work for a private person in that age, without
particular Command from Pope or Public Council.

Some much admire he would enter on this work, so lately performed (about fifty
years before) by John Wicklife. What was this, but actum agere, to do what was
done before? Besides Wicklife and Trevisa agreeing so well in their judgments,
it was much he would make a Retranslation. Such consider not, that in that age
it was almost the same pains for a Scholar to translate as transcribe the Bible.

Secondly, the time betwixt Wicklife and Trevisa was the Chrisis of the English
tongue, which began to be improved in fifty, more then in 300. years formerly.
Many course words (to say no worse) used before are refined by Trevisa, whose
translation is as much better then Wicklifes, as worse then Tyndals. Thus,
though the fountain of the Original has always clearness alike therein,
channels of Translations will partake of more or less purity, according to the
translators age, industry and ability. This Trevisa died a through old man,
about the year 1400.

Since the Reformation.
JOHN SKUISH was born in ^.
Cornwall, a man of much experience and general learning. He was says my
Author a consiliis to ^ardinal Woolsy, whereby I collect him learned of the
Laws, and of his Counsel, except that, that great Prelate like a Prince, had
Counsel of State belonging unto him. This Skuish wrote a Chronicle being
collected out of many several Authors. I have some presumptions to conclude
him inclined to the Protestant reformation. He flourished Anno Dom. 1530.

BARTHOLOMEW TRAHERON. The first syllable of his Name, and what is added
thereunto by my Author, (...) (...). (...). page 696.
parentum stemmate clarus, and the sameness of his name with an ancient Family
in this County, are a threefold Cable to draw my belief, that he was this
Countryman. He was bred in the University of Oxford, and having attained to
good learning therein, twice travailed beyond the Seas.

Once for pleasure and curiosity into France and Italy, whereby he much
improved himself. Returning home, he became Library Keeper to King Edward the
sixth, and Dean of Chichester. The second time for safety and necessity, in the
first of Q. Mary, getting (I believe) his best subsistence (being an Exile in
Germany,) with making and translating of Books, where he was living 1556. and
may be rationally presumed to dye before Q. Elizabeth came to the Crown,
because being a man of merit, and Ecclesiastically Dignified, we hear no more
of his preferment.

RICHARD CAREW Esquire, son to Thomas Carew and Elizabeth E^gecomb, was born at
Anthony in this County, of right worshipful parentage, who honored his
extraction with his learning. He was bred a Gentleman-commoner in Oxford,
where, being but fourteen years old, and yet three years standing, he was
called out to dispute ex tempore, before the Earls of Leicester and Warwick,
with the matchless Sir Philip Sidney.

-- si quaeritis hujus,
Fortunam pugnae, non est superatus ab illo.
-- Ask you the end of this contest?
They neither had the better, both the best.
He afterward wrote the pleasant and faithful description of Cornwall, and I
will not wrong his memory with my barbarous praise, after so eloquent a pen.

Sed haec Camdens Brit. in Cornwall.
planius and planius docuit Richardus Carew de Anthony, non minus generis
splendore, quam virtute and doctrina nobilis qui hujus regionis descriptionem
latiore specie, and non ad tenue elimavit, quemque mihi praeluxisse non possum
non agnoscere. This his book he dedicated to Sir Walter Raleigh, with this
modest complement, In his Dedicatory Epistle.
that he appealed to his direction, whether it should pass; to his correction,
if it might pass; and to his protection, if it did pass. Adding moreover, that
duty not presumption, drawing him to that offering, it must be favor, not
desert, must move the other to the acceptance thereof. This Survey was set
forth 1602. and I collect the Author thereof died about the middle of the reign
of K. James. I know not, whether he or his son first brought up the use of
Gambadoes, much worn in the West, whereby whilst one rides on horseback, his
legs are in a Coach, clean and warm, in those dirty Countries.

CHARLES HERLE was born in this County, of an Ancient and Worshipful Family,
bred (though never Fellow A mistake in my Church History.
) in Exeter-colledge, and at last richly Beneficed in Lancashire.

We read how Pharaoh Genesis 47. 21, 22.
removed all the Egyptians, (the Priests alone excepted) from one end of the
Borders of the land to the other end thereof, but we the Ministers in England
are of all men most and farthest removeable, three hundred miles and more being
interposed betwixt the place of Mr. Herles Birth and Benefice.

He was a good Scholar, and esteemed by his party a deep Divine, and (after the
death of Doctor Twiss) President of the Assembly. As I dare not defend all the
doctrine delivered in his Printed books; so I will not inveigh against him,
lest in me it be interpreted a revenge on his memory for licencing a book By
Mr. John (...).
written against me, wherein I was taxed for Popish Compliance, though since
(in my self still the same man) I groan under a contrary Representation. The
best is, innocence does turn such groans in to songs of gladness. Mr. Herle
departed this life about 1655.

Having received no instructions of any eminent benefactors in this County,
either before or since the Reformation, we may proceed to

Memorable Persons.
-- Carew in his survey of Cornwall fol. 63.
KILTOR in the last Cornish Commotion, (which was in the reign of King Edward
the sixth, Anno Dom. 1546.) was committed to Launceston Gaol, for his activity
therein. This man lying there, in the Castle-green, upon his back, threw a
stone of some pounds weight, over the Towers top, (and that I assure you is no
low one,) which leads into the Park.

JOHN BRAY Tenant to Master Richard Carew, (who wrote the survey of this
County) carried upon his back about the year 1608. at one time by the space
well near of a Butt length, six Idem fol. 6^.
Bushells of Wheaten Meal, reckoning fifteen gallons to the Bushel, and upon
them all the Miller, a Lubber of four and twenty years of age.

JOHN ROMAN his Contemporary, a short Clo^nish*Grub, may well be joined with
him. He may be called the Cornish Milo, so using himself to burdens in his
Childhood, that when a man, he would bear the whole carkase of an Ox, and (to
use my Idem fol. 63.
Authors words) yet never tugged thereat.

VEAL, an old man of Bodmin in this County, was so beholden to Mercuries
predominant * Idem fol. 62
strength in his nativity, that without a teacher, he became very skillful in
well-near all manner of handy-crafts, a Carpenter, a Joyner, a Mill-wright, a
Free-mason, a Clock-maker, a Carver, a Mettall-founder, Architect, and quid
non? yea, a Surgeon, Physician, Alchimist, etc. So as that which Cic. de
O^at.
Gorgias of Leontium vaunted of the liberal Sciences, he may prosess of the
Mecanicall, viz. to be ignorant in none. He was in his eminency Anno 1602.

EDWARD Carew in his survey of Cornw^ll, page 13^.
BONE of Ladock in this County, was servant to Mr. Courtney therein. He was
Deaf from his Cradle, and consequently Dumb, (nature cannot give out where it
has not received,) yet could learn, and express to his master any news that
was stirring in the Country. Especially, if there went speech of a Sermon
within some miles distance, he would repair to the place with the soonest, and
setting himself directly against the Preacher, look him steadfastly in the face,
while his Sermon lasted, to which religious zeal, his honest life was also
answerable. Assisted with a firm memory, he would not only know any party,
whom he had once seen, for ever after, but also make him known to any other, by
some special observation and difference. There was one Kempe, not living far
off, defected accordingly, on whose meetings, there were such embracements,
such strange, often, and earnest tokenings, and such hearty laughters, and
other passionate gestures, that their want of a tongue, seemed rather an
hinderance to others conceiving them, then to their conceiving one another.

Lord M^yors
I meet with but this one and that very lately [Sir Richard Cheverton Skinner]
born in this County, imputing it chiefly to their great distance from London.
Insomuch that anciently when Cornish-men went (or rather were driven up by the
violence of their occasions) to that City, it was usual with them to make their
Wills, as if they took their Voyage into a Foreign Country.

Besides the children of the Cornish Gentry, counted themselves above, and
those of the Poorer sort counted themselves beneath a Trade in London, as
unable to attain it, by reason of the differance of their Language, whose Feet
must travail far to come to London, whilst their Tongues must travail further
to get to be understood when arrived there.

This is one of the twelve pretermitted Counties, the names of whose Gentry
were not returned into the Tower in the 12. of King Henry the sixth.

Sheriffs of Cornwall.
HEN. II.
Anno 1 RECORDA MANCA Anno 22 Eustachius fill. Stephani for 5 years. Anno 27
Alanus de Furnee for 4 years. Anno 31 Hug. Bardulph Dapifer Anno 32 Idem. Anno
33 Idem.
RICH. I.
Anno 1 Will. de Bachland Anno 2 Rich. Revel for 9 years.
JOHAN. R.
Anno 1 Ioh. de Torrington Anno 2 Hug. Bardolph Anno 3 Rich. Flandry Anno 4
Idem. Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Will. de Botterel for 5 years. Anno 11 Ioh. filius
Richard. for 6 years.
HEN. III.
Anno 1 Anno 2 Anno 3 Guliel. Lunet Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Gul. de
Pucot Anno 7 Reg. de Valle Torta Walt. de Treverden Anno 8 Reg. de Valle Torta
Anno 9 Gul. Bregnen junior Rog. de Langford Reg. de Valle Torta
A BLANK in the Records to the end of this Kings Reign, (being forty four
years) except, any suppose (which is not very probable, that) the three
forementioned persons, all, two, or one of them, continued so long in their
Office.

EDW. I.
Anno 1 Anno 2 Anno 3 Ioh. Wigger Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Rob. de Chini Anno 6 Anno
7 Will. de Munckton for 5 years. Anno 12 Alex. de Sabridsworth Anno 13 Idem.
Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15 Simon. de Berkeley Anno 16 Idem. Anno 17 Edw. Comes
Cornubiae for 12 years. Anno 29 Thom. de la Hide for 7 years.
EDW. II.
Anno 1 Anno 2 Anno 3 Pet. de Gaviston Com. Cornubiae Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Idem.
Anno 6 Tho. de la Hide Anno 7 Tho. de Excedekney Anno 8 Rich. de Polhampton
Anno 9 Rich. de Hewish Anno 10 Hen. de Willington Anno 11 Anno 12 Anno 13 Isab.
Regina Angliae Anno 14 Nullus Titulus in Rotulo Anno 15 Nullus Titulus in
Rotulo Anno 16 Nullus Titulus in Rotulo Anno 17 Isab. Reg. Angliae, Regis
Consors Anno 18 Idem.
EDW. III.
Anno 1 Eliz. Regina, Regis matter for 5 years. Anno 6 Will. de Botreaux Anno 7
Idem. Anno 8 Ioh. Petit Anno 9 Idem Anno 10 Ioh. de Chudeleigh Anno 11 Ioh.
Hamly Ioh. Petit Anno 12 Idem. Anno 13 Anno 14 Edw. Dux Cornubiae Anno 15 Hen.
Terrill Rog. de Prideaux Anno 16 Edw. Dux Cornubiae Anno 17 Idem. Anno 18
Guliel. Pipehard Anno 19 Edw. Dux Cornubiae for 9 years. Anno 28 Ioh. Northcot
Will. Auncell Anno 29 Idem. Anno 30 Idem. Anno 31 Guliel* Auncell Anno 32
Edward. Dux Cornubiae to the end of this Kings reign.
Sheriffs.
Name Place Arms RICH. II. Anno 1 Nich. Wampford 2 Rad. Carmino Azure a bend
Or, a Labell of 3 points G. 3 Oto. de Bodrigay 4 Will. Talbot AMP. 5 Ioh.
Bevill Gwarnack Arg. a Bull Passant G. armed and Tripped Or. 6 Wa. Archdeaco^,
m. Anthony Arg. 3 Cheverons S. 7 Will. Fitzwanter, m. 8 Rich. de Kendall Arg. a
Cheveron betwixt 3 Dolphins Sable. 9 Ioh. Bevill ut prius 10 Nich. Wamford 11
Ioh. Colyn 12 Rich. Sergeaux 13 Tho. Peverell 14 Will. Talbot ut prius 15 Ioh.
Colyn 16 Ioh. Col shall 17 Ioh. Herle Arg. a Fess G. betwixt 3 Sheldrakes
proper. 18 Ia. Chuddelegh Ermin, 3 Lions Rampant G. 19 Will. Talbot ut prius 20
Ioh. Bevill ut prius 21 Ioh. Colshull 22 Gal. Seyntal^yn Or, on a Cross G. 5
Bezants. HEN. IV. Anno 1 Hen. fill. Regis Hen. 4. Primogenitus and Johannes
Keynes. The Arms of England with the Difference of the Heir Apparent. 2 Idem.
ut prius 3 Idem. ut prius 4 Idem. ut prius 5 Pre. Henricus ut prius 6 Ioh. Cole
7 Pre. Henricus ut prius 8 Idem. ut prius 9 Idem. ut pri^s 10 Idem. ut prius 11
Idem. ut prius 12 Idem. ut prius HEN. V. Anno 1 Ioh. Kederow 2 Idem. 3 Will.
Talbot ut prius 4 Oto. Trevartha^, m. 5 Hen. Fullford G. a Cheveron Arg. 6 Ioh.
Arundel, mil. Lanhearn S. 6 Swallows in pile Arg. 7 Steph. Derneford 8 Ioh.
Arundel, mi. ut prius 9 Ioh. Arundel, mil. Trerice Ut prius, with due
difference. HEN. VI. Anno 1 Ioh. Arundel, m^. ut prius 2 Tho. Carmyno ut prius
3 Will. Talbot ut prius 4 Ioh. Herle, mil. ut prius 5 Ioh. Arundel, mil. ut
prius 6 7 Ioh. Namson 8 Tho. Carmino ut prius 9 To. Chambleyn 10 la.
Chuddeleigh ut prius 11 12 Ioh. Herle, mil. ut prius 13 Tho. Bonevill S. 6
Mullets, 3, 2, and 1. Ar. 14 Ioh. Yerd 15 Tho. Whalesbrew ut prius 16 Ren.
Arundel ut prius 17 Ioh. Collshull 18 Ich. Nanson 19 Ioh. Masndy 20 Th
Whalesbrough 21 Ioh. Blewet Or, a Cheveron betwixt 3 Eagles displaied vert. 22
Ioh. Arundel ut prius 23 Ni vel Mic. Power 24 Io. Champernoun Gul. a Saltire
Vairee, twixt 12 Billets Or. 25 Ioh. Austill 26 Hen. Foretscu Az. a Bend
engrailed Arg. Cotissed Or. 27 Ioh. Trevilyan 28 Ioh. Basset G. a Demyhorse
Arg. issuing out of the waves of the sea. 29 Ioh. Nanson 30 Tho. Butside 31
Will. Dawbeney Arg. a Fess lozengee Gules. 32 Th Walesbrough 33 Ioh. Petyt 34
Ioh. Conkworth 35 Ioh. Nanson, ar. ut prius 36 Ioh. Arundel 37 Ioh. Walesbrough
ut prius 38 Ioh. Trevilian, ar. EDW. IV. Anno 1 To. Champernon ut prius 2 Ren.
Arundel ut prius 3 Ren. Arundel ut prius 4 Tho. Bear 5 Alver. Cordburgh 6 Will.
Bear 7 Ioh. Collshull, m. 8 Ioh. Sturgeon, ar. 9 Alver. Cornburgh 10 Ioh.
Arundel, mil. ut prius 11 Ioh. Fortescu, ar. ut prius 12 Idem. ut prius 13
Idem. ut prius 14 Idem. ut prius 15 Rich. Dux Glouc. vir, ad terminum vic.
suae. France and England, on a Label of three Ermine, as many Cantons G. 16 Ioh
Fortescu, ar. 17 Egid. Dawbeney ut prius 18 Will. Cornsnyowe 19 Rob.
Willoughby, 20 Rich. Nanson 21 Tho. Greenvil Gules Three Rests Or. 22 Tho.
Fullford Gules, a Cheveron Arg. RICH. III. Anno 1 Ioh. Treffey Foy S. a
Cheveron betwixt 3 Hawthorns Arg. 2 Ia. Tirell, mil. ESSEX. Arg. 2 Cheverons
Az. within a Border engrailed G. 3 Will. Houghton HEN. VII. Anno 1 Tho.
Greenvil ut prius 2 Ioh. Tremayn G. 3 Arms in Circle joined at the Tronkes, Or
with Hands proper. 3 Alex. Carew Anthony Or, 3 Lions Passant Gardant S. Armed
and Langued G. 4 Rich Nanson 5 Ioh. Treffey, mil. ut prius 6 Ioh. Roscarrock
Roscarrock Arg. a Chever. twixt 2 Roses G. a Sea*Tenchnayat proper. 7 Th.
Tregarthen, a. Walt. Enderby, ar. LINCO. Arg. 3 bars Dancette S. a pale in
chief Ermine. 8 Rich. Vivian * 9 Wall. Enderby, ar. * Arg. a Lion Ramp, G.
mounted on 2 Bars Wavee in Base Az. 10 Petrus Bevell ut prius 11 Edw. Arundel,
ar. ut prius 1^ Ioh. Basset 13 Pe. Edgcombe, m. Edgcombe G. on a Bend Ermin
between 2 Cotises Or, 3 Boars-heads cooped Arg. 14 Idem. ut prius 15 Ioh.
Treffey, mil. ut prius 16 Will. Treffey, ar. ut prius 17 Pet. Bevill ut prius 18
Wit. Trevanyon Cary-hays Arg. on a Fess, B 3 Escalops Or between 2 Cheverons G.
19 Ioh. Godolphin* Godolgha^ 20 Rich. Vivian, ar. ut prius * G. an Eagle
displayed with 2 Heads twixt 3 flour de luces Argent. 21 Pet. Eggcombe, m. ut
prius 22 Mich. Vivian, ar. ut prius 23 Will. T^evanion, a. ut prius 24 Th.
Trevanion, m. ut prius HEN. VIII. Anno 1 Ioh. Arundel, mi. Talvern 2 To
Graynfield, a. ut prius 3 Will. Carsew, ar. Bokelly S. a Goat Passant Arg.
attired and Tripped Or. 4 Iac: Eryse, ar. S. a Chevern twixt 3 Griffons
Sergeant Or. 5 Ioh. Ca^myno ut prius 6 Ioh. Carew, at. ut prius 7 Wit.
Trevanion, m. ut prius 8 Pe. Eggcombe, m. 9 Io. Basset, mil. 10 To. Greenfield,
a. ut prius 11 Io. Arundell de Trevise, ar. ut prius 12 Ioh. Skewys, ar. 13
Ioh. Basset, mil. ut prius 14 To. Greenfield, a. ut prius 15 Io. Arundell de
Trevise, ar. ut prius 16 Will. Lour, ar. Az. a Cheveron engrailed Or between 3
Roses Arg. 17 Rich. Penrose, ar. Arg. 3 Bends S. charged with 9 rest of the
field. 18 Ri. Greenfield, ar. ut prius 19 Hu. Trevanyon, a. ut prius 20 Ioh.
Chamond, ar. Launcels Arg. a Cheveron betwixt 3 flour de luces G. 21 Will.
Godolphin, a. 22 Chri. T^ednoke, a. 23 Ioh. Arundell de Trevise, ar, ut prius
24 Hu. Trevanion, m. ut prius 25 Wi. Godolphin, m. 26 Pe. Edgcombe, m. ut pr^us
27 Ioh. Reshymar, m. Hailford Az. 3 Bars Arg. in chief a Wolf Passant of the
first. 28 Ioh. Chamond, m ut prius 29 Hug. Trevanyo^, m. 30 Wi. Godolphin, m.
31 Ioh. Reskymer, ar. ut. prius 32 Ioh. Arundell, ar. ut prius 33 Ioh.
Arundell, m. ut prius 34 Hu. Trevanyon, a. ut prius 35 Ric. Chamond, ar. ut
prius 36 Ric. Greenfield, a. ut prius 37 Tho. Saint Albine, ar. ut prius 38
Ioh. Trelawney, a. Pool Arg. a Cheveron S. betwixt 3 Oake-leaves vert. EDW. VI.
Anno 1 Ioh. Milaton, ar. 2 Pet. Chamond, ar. ut prius 3 Will. Godolphin, m. ut
prius 4 Ric. Roscorrek, ar. ut prius 5 Hu. Trevanyon, m. ut prius 6 Reg. Mohun,
ar. Or, a Cross engrailed Sable. REG. MARI. Anno 1 Io. Arundell de Trevise,
mil. ut prius PHIL. and MAR. Anno 1, 2 Io. Arundell de Lanhern, mil. ut prius
2, 3 Ric. Edgcombe, a. ut prius 3, 4 Io R^skymer, ar. ut prius 4, 5 Ioh. Bevil,
ar. ut prius 5, 6 Io Carminoe, ar. ut prius REG. ELIZA. Anno 1 Reg. Mohun, ar.
ut prius 2 Ioh. Trelawny, ar. ut prius 3 Ric. Roscarrake, a. ut prius 4 Ric.
Chamond, ar. ut prius 5 Hen. Chiverton, ^. Arg. a Castle S. on a Hill Ve^t. 6
Hu Trevanyon, a. ut prius 7 Will. Milliot, ar. 8 Ioh Trelawny, ar. ut prius 9
Ioh. St. Albyen, ar. ut prius 10 Wi. Godolphin, m. ut prius 11 Pet. Edgcombe,
a. ut prius 12 Hen. Curwen, mi. CUMBE. Arg. Frettee G. a chief Az. 13 Will.
Mohun, ar. ut prius 14 Pet. Courtney, ar. Ladock Or 3 Torteaux and a File with
as many Lambeaux Az. 15 Ioh. Arundel de Trevise, ar. ut prius 16 Ioh. Bevil ut
prius 17 Geo. Ke^kwick, ar. ^atch-French Arg 2 Lions in Bend passant S. cotised
G. 18 Rich. G^evill, ar. 19 Will. Mohum, ar. 20 Will. Lover, ar. ut prius 21
Fr. Godolphin, ar. ut prius 22 Ioh. Arundel, ar. ut prius 23 Ioh. 24 Rich
Carew, ar. ut prius 25 Ge. Greenvill, ar. nt prius 26 Tho. Cosworth, a.
Cosworth Arg, on a Chev. betwixt 3 wings Az 5 B^zants. 27 Io. Roscarroke, ar.
ut prius 28 Ioh. Wray, ar. Trebigh S. a Fess betw. 3 B^tle-axes Ar. ^9 Ant.
Rouse, ar. Halton O^, an E^gle displayed B. prunin? her w^ng (...) and Langued
G. 30 Tho. St. Albin, ar. ut prius 31 Will. Bevill, ar. ut prius 32 Walt.
Kendall, ar. Argent a (...) betwixt 3 D^lphins S. 33 Geo Kegwhich, a. ut prius
34 Ri. Cham^ernown ut prius 35 Tho. Lower, ar. ut prius 36 Ioh. Trelawne, ar.
ut prius 37 Car. Trevanion, a. ut prius 38 Ber. Grenvill, ar. ut prius 39 Pet.
Courtney, ar. ut prius 40 Will. Bevill, ar. ut prius 41 Will. Wray, ar. ut
prius 42 Fran. Buller, ar. Tregarrids S. on a plain Cross Arg. quart erpierced
4 E^gles of the field. 43 Hanibal Vivian ut prius 44 Anth. Rouse, ar. ut prius
* S. 3 Croissants, within a border Agent. 45 Arth. Harris, ar. * and primo Iac.
JAC. REX. Anno 1 Arth. Harris, ar. ut prius 2 Fr. Godolphin, m. ut prius 3 Nic.
Predeaux, ar. Padstow A Cheveron Sab. in chief, a Fyle with 3 Lambeaux G. 4
Degrees. Chamond, a. ut prins 5 Ioh. Arundell, ar. ut prius 6 Io. Rashly, a. mo.
Ioh* Acland, m. Sa. a Cross twixt 2 Croissants Argent. Cheekee Arg. and S. a
Fess G. 7 Chri. Harris, mil. ut prius 8 Ri. Edgcombe, m. ut prius 9 Rich.
Bullar, ar. ut prius 10 Will Wrey, mil. ut prius 11 Will. Coriton, ar. Argent a
Saltire Sable. 12 Rich. Roberts, ar. Trewro Az. 3 estoyles and a Chief wavy Or.
13 Io. Chamond, ar. ut prius 14 Will. Dode, ar. 15 Fran. Vivian. ar. Argent a
Li^n ram^ant G. 16 Rich. Carsew, ar. ut prius 17 Reskmim. Boniton Cardew Arg. a
Chev^twixt 3 flow^rs de luces S. 18 Nich. Glyn, ar. Glynfford Arg. a Chev.
betwixt 3 Sammons spears S. 19 Sa. Pendervis, a.* 20 Ioh. Speccot, ar. * S. a
Falcon rising betwe^t 3 Mullets O^. 21 Rich. Gedy, ar. 22 Io. Moyle, ar. vir.*
S. Germains Or on a Bend G. 3 Millroinds Argent. CAR. REG. * G. a Moyle passant
Arg. Anno 1 Tho. Wivell, ar. 2 Ioh. Trefuses, ar. Arg. a Cheveron betw. 3
wharrow Spindles S. 3 Io. Rashleigh, ar. ut prius 4 Geor. Hele, ar. G. a Bead
Losengee Erm. 5 6 Io. Trelawney, m. ut prius 7 Ioh. Prideaux, ar. ut prius 8
Nic. Loure, mil. ut prius 9 Cha. T^evanio, a. ut prius 10 Hu. Bosgawen, ar.
Vert a Bull passant Arg. Ar^ed Or, in a Chief Ermin a Rose Gules. 11 Io. St.
Albin, a. ut prius 12 Rich. Buller, mil. ut prius 13 Fran Godolpin, a. ut prius
14 15 Rich. Trevill, ar. Or, a Cross engrailed Sa. in the first quarter a
Mull^t G. 16 Fran. Willear 17 18 19 20 21 22 Edw. Heile, ar. ut prius

Edward III.
ROGER de PRIDDEAUX.]

My eye cannot be entertained with a more welcome object, then to behold an
ancient Name, not only still continuing to, but eminently flourishing in our
age. On which account, I cannot but congratulate the happiness of this Family,
expecting a daily Accession of Repute from the hopeful branches thereof.

Edward IV.
10 JOHN ARUNDLE, Mil.]

This worthy Knight was forewarned, (by what Calker I wot not,) that he should
be slain on the C^rews Survey of Co^n. page 119.
Sands. This made him to shun his house at Efford (alias Ebbing-ford) as too
Maritime, and remove himself to Trerice, his more Inland habitation in this
County. But he found it true, fata viam inveniant; for being this year Sheriff,
and the Earl of Oxford surprising Mount Michael (for the House of Lancaster) he
was concerned by his Office, and Command from the King, to endeavor the
reducing thereof, and lost his life in a skirmish on the sands thereabouts.
Thus it is just with Heaven, to punish men's curiosity in enquiring after,
credulity in believing of, and cowardice in fearing at such prognostications.

21 THOMAS GRANVIL.]

Be it entered (by way of caveat) that there is some difference in the blazoning
of the coat of the Granvils or Greenvils. What usually are termed therein
Rests, being the Handles of Spears; (most honorable in Tilting to break them
nearest thereunto,) are called by some Critics, (...), being the necessary
appendants to Organs, convaying wind unto them. If, (as it seems) their
dubious Form, as represented in the Scutcheon, does ex aequo answer to both,
with me they shall still pass for the Rests of Spears. For though I dare not
deny, but the Greenvils might be good Musicians, I am assured they were most
valiant Soldiers in all their Generations.

But the merits of this ancient Family are so many and great, that engrossed
they would make one County proud, which divided would make two happy. I am
therefore resolved equally to part what I have to say thereof, betwixt Cornwall
and Devonshire.

Richard III.
The Reader will take notice, that, (as it is in our Catalogue) Richard Duke of
Gloucester was High Sheriff of this County, ad terminum vitae, a strange
Precedent, (if it may be said to go before, which has nothing to follow
after,) seeing for the last two years, he was both King of England and Sheriff
of Cornwall. We therefore behold all the following persons unto the first of
King Henry the seventh, but as so many Deputies under him, and amongst these we
take special notice of

2 JAMES TIRREL, Mil.]

This is he, so infamous in our English Histories, for his activity in
murdering the Innocent sons of King Edward the fourth, keeping the Keys of the
Tower, and standing himself at the foot of the Stairs, whilst Mr. Forest and
J. Dighton, stifled them in their Beds. I behold this Sir James as an
Essex-man, though now the prime Officer of this County. For King Richard
accounted Cornwall the back door of Rebellion, and therefore made this Knight
the Porter thereof. Indeed it is remote from London, and the long sides of this
County afford many landing-places, objected to Britain in France, whence the
Usurper always feared (and at last felt) an Invasion, and therefore he
appointed him Sheriff to secure the County, as obliged unto him, by gratitude
for favors received, and guilt for faults committed. This Tirrel was
afterward executed for Treason, in the Tower yard in the beginning of King
Henry the seventh.

Henry VII.
12 JOHN BASSET.]

This was a busy year indeed in this County, when the Cornish Commotion began
(headed by Flammock a Lawyer, and Michael Joseph a Blacksmith,) at the Town of
Bodmin. Let none impute it to the neglect of this Sheriff, that he suppressed
them not, seeing (besides that they quickly quitted this County, and went
Eastward) it was not the work of Posse Comitatus, but Posse Regni, to encounter
them. However, after long-running, (for they marched the breadth of the land,
from Cornwall to Kent, before battle was bid them,) they were overtaken, and
overcome at Black Heath.

13 PETER EDGCOMBE, Mil.]

The Names of pierce [or Peter] and Richard, have been (says my (...) in
(...), fol. 101.
Author) successively varied in this family, for six or seven Descents. Such
Chequering of Christian Names serve Heralds instead of Stairs, whereby they
ascend with assurance into the Pedigrees of Gentlemen, and I could wish the
like alternation of Font-names fashionable in other families. For where the
Heirs of an House, are of the same Name, for many generations together, it
occasioneth much mistake, and the most cautious, and conscientious Heralds, are
guilty of making Incestuous Matches, confounding the Father for the Son, and so
reciprocally.

Queen Elizabeth.
4 RICHARD CHAMOND, Esquire.]

He received at Gods-hand an extraordinary favor of long life, serving in the
office of a Justice of Peace almost sixty Carew in his Survey of Cornwall page
1 8.
years. He saw above fifty several Judges of the Western Circuit, was Uncle
and Great-uncle to three hundred at least, and saw his youngest child above
forty years of age.

19 WILLIAN MOHUN.]

He was descended from the ancient Lords of Dunster, and Earls of Somerset, of
which one received a great Papal privilege, whereof largely in my Church
History. I behold him as Grandfather to John Lord Mohun of Oakehampton,
(descended by a Coheir from the Courtneys Earls of Devonshire,) and
Great-grand-father to the Right Honorable Warwick Lord Mohun.

29 ANTHONY ROUSE, Esquire.]

Give me leave only to transcribe what I find written of him, Ut prius page 114.
He employeth himself to a kind, and uninterrupted entertainment of such as
visit him, upon his not sparing, inviting, or their own occasions, who (without
the self-guilt of an ungrateful wrong) must witness, that his frankness
confirms their welcome, by whatsoever means, provision, the fuel of
Hospitality, can in the best manner supply. He was Father to Francis Rouse,
late Provost of Eaton, whose Industry is more commendable then his Judgment in
his many Treatises.

King James.
2 FRANCIS GODOLPHIN, Mil.]

Master Carew confesses in his page 13.
Survey of this County, that from him he gathered sticks to build that nest,
who was assistant unto him in that playing labor, as he terms it. This
ingenious Gentleman entertained a Dutch Mineral-man, and taking light from his
experience, built thereon far more profitable conclusions, from his own
invention, practicing a more saving way, to make Tinn, of what was rejected for
refuse before.

And here the mention of his Ingenuity, minds me how Hereditary Abilities are
often intailed on Families, seeing, he was Ancestor unto Sidney Godolphin slain
at....... in Devonshire, valiantly fighting for his Lord and Master. His
Christian and Sur-name divisim signify much, but how high do they amount in
conjunction? There fell wit and valor, never sufficiently to be bemoaned.

10 WILLIAM WREY, Mil.]

He was direct Ancestor to Sir Chichester Wrey Knight and Baronet, who though
scarce a Youth in Age, was more then a Man in Valor, in his loyal service. He
married Anne one of the Daughters and Coheirs of Will. Bourchier Earl of Bath,
whose son Bourchier Chichester, shall ever have my prayers, that he may answer
the nobleness of his Extraction.

12 RICHARD ROBERTS.]

He was afterward created a Baron, and was Father unto the Right Honorable
the Lord Roberts, one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, lately
designed Deputy of Ireland, as a Person of singular ability and integrity.

The Battles.
I shall enlarge my self the rather on this subject, because building my
discourse therein, not on the floting sands of uncertain relations, but the
Rock of real Intelligence. Having gotten a Manuscript of Sir Ralph Hoptons,
(courteously communicated unto me by his Secretary Master Tredui,) interpolated
with his own hand, being a Memorial of the Remarkables in the West, at which
that Worthy Knight was present in person.

I begin with that which is called the Battle of Liskerd, taking the name from
the next Town of note thereunto, otherwise Bradock-Downe was the particular
place thereof. Before the Fight began, the Kings Side took it into their
seasonable consideration, that seeing by the Commission the Lord Mohun brought
from Oxford, four Persons, [viz. the said Lord Mohun, Sir Ralph Hopton, Sir
John Berkeley and Colonel Ashburn ham,] were equally empowered in the managing
of all Military matters, and seeing such equality might prove inconvenient,
(which hitherto had been prevented with the extraordinary moderation of all
Parties,) in ordering a Battle, it was fittest to fix the power in One Chief,
and general consent settled it in Sir Ralph Hopton*

He first gave order that public Prayers should be had in the Head of every
Squadron, and it was done accordingly, (and the Enemy observing it, did style
it saying of Mass, as some of their Prisoners afterward did confess.) Then he
caused the Foot to be drawn up in the best order they could, placed a Forelorn
of Musketeers in the little Enclosures, winging them with the few Horse and
Dragoons he had.

This done two small Mynion- Drakes speedily and secretly fetched from the Lord
Mohuns house, were planted on a little Barrough within Randome-shot of the
Enemy, yet so, that they were covered from their sight, with small Parties of
Horse about them. These concealed Mynions were twice discharged with such
success, that the Enemy quickly quitted their ground, and all their Army being
put into a Rout, the Kings Forces had the execution of them, which they
performed very sparingly. They took Twelve Hundred and Fifty Prisoners, most of
their Colors, all their Cannon, (being four Brass-guns upon Carriages,
(whereof Two were Twelve-pounders,) and One Iron ^aker,) all their Ammunition,
most of their Arms, and marching that night to Liskard, the Kings Forces first
gave God Public thanks and then took their own Private repose.

STRATTON fight succeeds on Tuesday 16. May 1643. But first let us take a true
account of the two Armies respectively, with the visible Inequality betwixt
them.

The Kings Forces were in want of Ammunition, and were to hew out their own way
up a Steep-hill with their Valor, exposed to all Disadvantages and Dangers.
Their Horse and Dragoons exceeded not five hun dred, their ^oot about two
thousand four hundred in number. The Parliament Army had plenty of all
Provisions, and had Advantagiously Barocadoed themselves on the top of a Hill.
Their Horse indeed were not many, (having lately sent away twelve hundred to
surprizethe Sheriff and Commissioners at Bodmin,) but Foot were five thousand
four hundred by Pole as their Major General did acknowledge.

As for the Kings Forces order was given that by four several Avenues they
should force their Passage to the top of the Hill, which was very steep, the
Enemy as obstinately endeavoring to keep them down, as the other did valiantly
strive to ascend.

The fight continued doubtful with many countenances of various events, (from
5. of the Clock in the Morning till 3. in the Afternoon,) amongst which most
remarkable the smart Charge made by M. G. Chudeleigh, with a Stand of Pikes, on
Sir Bevill Greenfield, so that the Knight was in Person overthrown, and his
Party put into disorder, which would have proved destructive unto it, had not
Sir John Berkeley (who led up the Musketeers on each side of Sir Bevill
Greenfield,) seasonably relieved it, so re-inforcing the Charge, that Major
General Chudelegh was taken Prisoner.

Betwixt three and four of the Clock the Commanders of the Kings Forces, who
embraced those four several ways of Ascent, met to their mutual joy almost at
the top of the Hill, which the routed Enemy confusedly forsook. In this
Service, though they were Assaylants they lost very few men, and no
considerable Officer, killing of the Enemy about three hundred, and taking
Seventeen hundred Prisoners, all their Cannon [being thirteen pieces of
Brass-ordnance,] and Ammunition, [ Seventy Barrels of powder,] with a Magazin
of Biscuit, and other provisions proportionable. For this Victory Public Prayer
and Thanksgiving was made on the Hill, and then the Army was disposed of, to
improve their success to their best advantage. For this good Service Sir Ralph
Hopton was afterward, at Oxford, created Baron of Reader being (...) to this
worthy Lord, I c^uld do no less, then (in G atitude to his (...)) make this
Exemplification.
Stratton, in form as follows,

CAROLUS Dei gratia Angliae, etc. Cum and Nominis nostri and Posteritatis
interest, and ad clara exempla propaganda utilissime compertum, palam fieri
omnibus premia, apud nos vertuti sita, nec perire fidelium Subditorum officia,
sed memori and benevolo pectore fixissime insidere; his praesertim temporibus,
cum plurimorum (quibus antehac nimium indulsimus) temerata, aut suspecta fides,
pretium aliorum constantiae addidit. Cumque nobis certo constat Radulphum
Hopton militem de Balneo Splendidis and Antiquis Natalibus, tum in caetera sua
vita integritatis and morum eximium, tum in hac novissima tempestate, fatalique
Regni and rebelli motu, rari animi fideique exemplum edidisti, Regiae
dignitatis in eaque public contra utriusque Adversarios assertorem and
Vindicem acerrimum.

Quippe quia non solum nascenti huic Furori (nec dum omnibus manifesto) optimis
Consiliis fortis in Curia Senator restiteret; Sed insinuante se latius veneno
and crescente foerocia Dom^m ad suos reversus fortior Miles in Agro suo
Somersetensi and vicini partibus omni open and manu iniquissimam causam
oppugnaverit, in Arce praesertim Sherborniana sub Auspiciis Marchionis
Hertfordiae egregiam operam navaverit. Mox ulterius progressus pollenti in
Devonia factionis Tyrannide, and munitissima Civi^ate in foedus illecta, and
jam undique bonis Subditis perniciem minante, ipse pene in illa Regione Hospes,
contracto e Cornubia milite, and primoribus statim impetum eorum repressit,
jacentesque and afflictas nostras parts mirifica virtute recreavit: Et licet
summis necessitatibus conflictanti exigua pars negocii ^ostes erant, tantum
ab^uit ut vel illis, vel istis succumberet, ut contra copiis auctiores and
bellico apparatu instructissimos, saepius signis collatis in aciedemicans
semper superior excesserit.

Testis Lanestonia, Saltash, Bradock, aliaque obscura olim nomina and loca,
nunc Victoriis illius and perduellium cladibus nobilitata. Vix etiam ab his
respiraverat cum novus belli furor lassas jam fere and continuis praeliis
luxatas vires numerocissimo exercitu adortus, uberiorem triumphandi dedit
materiam. Cum ille in Campis Strattoniae, in difficillimas licet angustias
redactus, inops militaris instrumenti and consumpto jam pulvere tormentario,
armatos inermis, vallo munitos intectus, sola causa and virtute animatus, ita
retudit, concidit, castris exuit, ut totam belli molem cum ipsis authoribus
prof^igavit; Quicquid fugae illius residuum erat, inter Urbis unius Moenia
eaque arcta obsi deon^ astricta concluso. Qua quidem pugna memorabili praeter
quod miserum Popellum, Jugo intolerabili levaverat, Seeds suas expulsis,
Ecclesias Pastoribus, Pacem omnibus, and Firmamentum Pacis obsequium pristinum
restituerit. Et jam sequenti armorum nostrorum faelicitati qua parts Regni
Occidentales maturius ad officium and verum Dominum redierunt and viam
aperuisse and momentum ingens extitisse libentissime profitemur; In hac opera
lau dabili cum praefatus Radulphus perstet adhuc invicto animo and industria
indefessa nullo arduo quantumvis labor and periculo excusatus, cumque mill
Argumentis testatum fecerit, Honorem salutemque nostram sibi omni fortuna and
captio potiorem, nos virum fortissimum optimeque affectum animum benigno studio
prosequi and amplius demereri volentes, hunc and praeconio merito ornandum, and
propriori ad nos gradu extollendum censuimus. Sciatis igitur nos de gratia
nostra speciali (...) ex certa scientia and mero motu praefatum Radulphum
Hopton ad statum, gradum, stilum, Dignitatem, Titulum and Honorem Baronis
Hopton de Stratton in Comitatu nostro Cornubiae, etc. In cujus rei testimonium
has Literas nostras fieri fecimus patentes.

Test meipso apud Oxon. Quarto die Septembris, Anno Regni nostri decimo nono.

This Honor determined in this Lord, dying Issuless at Bruges in Flanders,
since which time King Charles the second has conferred the Title of Baron of
Stratton on Sir John Berkeley, younger Sonto Sir Maurice Berkeley of Bruiton in
Somersetshire. This was he who was one of the first four Tetrarchs or
Joint-managers in chief of Marshall matters in Cornwall, this is he who was so
highly Isntrumental in the reducing of Exeter, being afterward deservedly
appointed the Governor. How since he has shared in his Majesty's sufferings
beyond the Seas is sufficiently known.

As for the general disarming and disbanding of the Parliament Army in this
County Anno 1644. It was a Conquest without a Battle, on this occasion* I have
seen the Head, bow down to take a Thorn out of the Foot. Such the proportion
of Cornwall to England, and such was the Condescension of the King to come into
this County. Essex followed him with all his Forces, till he penned himself in a
narrow Place (or rather large Pound,) so that he was surrounded on all Sides,
with the Sea and the Kings Soldiers.

Hereupon Essex (with some prime Commanders) shipped himself for Plymouth,
thence for London, whither also their Horse forced their Passage (without
considerable loss,) under the Conduct of Sir William Belfore, whom the Kings
Horse did sequi, non assequi, follow but not overtake. The Foot left behind,
submitted to the King on such conditions as are generally known.

His Majesty earnestly endeavoring (by the Enemies own confession,) the exact
observing of Articles, which if some unruly Royalist did violate, (Soldiers
will hardly wear bad Clothes, whilst their Foes being in their Power have
better on their Backs,) it was not so much an Offering as returning of an
Injury, some of them having formerly felt the same Usage on the like occasion.
The Parliament Foot did not depose their Disaffections with their Arms, soon
resuming (or rather retayning) their former Principles, which made them add
new Arms to their old inclinations in the second Battle at Newbury.

The Farewell.
Being now to part with this County, I wish it all happiness, and particularly
that Flaws or Flaughs may either never come thither or quickly depart thence.
Which being a kind of English Hericano has little civility therein, as
throwing down some houses, more trees, and making more waste with the blast
thereof. And may the same Divine Providence, which is their (...), be also
Neptune unto it, to secure this County, from the fury of Water, as well as from
the fierceness of the Wind, that their LIONESS may never get a LION unto it, so
to propagate Inundations betwixt them.

And now to wish an Honor to this Duchy, and therewith a happiness both to It
and all England, the strength of my weak prayers (twisted with many Millions
more proceeding from Loyal hearts in this Land) shall never be wanting, that
God would be pleased to bestow a Duke of Cornwall, of the loins of our
Gracious Sovereign, to be possessed of the virtues, and to be Heir Apparent to
the Lands of his Father. A Duke, presumed in Law to be of full age to all
purposes and intents, the first minute of his birth, which happy minute God in
due time send for the comfort of our Nation.

CUMBERLAND.
CUMBERLAND has Scotland on the North, Northumberland and Westmerland on the
East, Lancashire on the South, and the Irish^ sea on the West. It is not unlike
a Half Moon in the form thereof, which from its Tips North and South may be
allowed to be somewhat more then 40. miles, though East and West it spreads
not above 26. miles. The soil though generally hard, and exacting much toil to
improve it, is pleasant with the Varieties, and profitable with these

Natural Commodities.
Pearls.
These are found commonly by the river Irt, where Mussels (as also Oysters and
other Shellfish,) gaping for the Dew, are in a manner impregnated therewith. So
that some conceive that as Dew is a Liquid Pearl, so a Pearl is Dew
consolidated in these fishes. Here poor people getting them at low water, sell
to Jewellers for Pence, what they sell again for Pounds. Indeed there is a
Spanish Proverb, that a Lapidary who would grow rich, must buy of those who go
to be executed, (as not caring how cheap they sell,) and sell to those that go
to be married, as not caring how dear they buy. But waving these advantages,
such of that Mystery which Trade with Country People herein, gain much by
buying their Pearls, though far short of the Indian in Orientness. But whether
not as useful in Physic is not as yet decided.

Black-lead.
Plenty hereof is dug up about Keswick, the only place (as I am informed)
where it is found in Europe, and various is the use thereof.

1. For Painters (besides some mixture thereof in making Lead^colours,) to draw
the Pictures of their Pictures, viz. those shadowy lines made only to be
unmade again. 2. For pens, so useful for Scholars to note the remarkables they
read, with an impression easily deleble without prejudice to the book. 3. For
Feltmakers for coloring of hats. 4. To scour leaden cisternes, and to
brighten things made of Iron. 5. In Flanders and Germany, they use it for
glasing of stuffs.
Besides these visible, surely there are other concealed uses thereof, which
causes it daily to grow the dearer, being so much transported beyond the seas.

Copper.
These mines lay long neglected, (choked in their own rubbish) till renewed
about the beginning of Queen Elizabeth, when plenty of Copper was here
afforded, both for home-use and ^orraign transportation. But Copper it self was
too soft for several military services, and could not alone (no single person
can prove a parent) produce brass most useful for that purpose. Here taste and
see, Divine Providence, which never does its work by halfes, and generally
doubleth gifts by seasonable giving them. Lapis calaminaris (whereof hereafter
in due place,) was then Bishop Carletons Thankful Remem cap. 1. page 4.
first found in England, the Mother of Brass as Copper the father hereof. Hence
came it to pass that Queen Elizabeth left more brass then She found
Iron-ordnance in the Kingdom. And our wooden walls (so our ships are commonly
called) were rough-casted over with a coat of a firmer constitution.

We must not forget the names of the two Dutchmen (good froggs by sea, but
better moles by land,) who re-found out these Copper-mines, wherein also some
silver (no new milk without some cream therein,) viz. Thomas Shurland and
Daniel Hotchstabter of Auspurge in Germany, whose Nephews turning purchasers of
lands hereabouts, prefer easily to take what the earth tenders in her hands
above ground, then painfully to pierce into her heart for greater treasure.

I am sorry to hear, and loath to believe what some credible persons have told
me, that within this twenty years the Copper within this County has been
wholly discontinued, and that not for want of Metal, but Mining for it. Sad,
that the industry of our age could not keep, what the ingenuity of the former
found out. And I would willingly put it on another account, that the burying of
so much steel in the bowels of men, dureing our Civil Wars, has hindered their
digging of Copper out of the entralls of the Earth, hoping that these peaceable
times will encourage to the resuming thereof.

The Buildings.
This County pretends not to the mode of Reformed Architecture, the Vicinity
of the Scots causing them to build rather for Strength then State. The
Cathedral of Carlisle, may pass for the Emblem of the Militant-Church, Black
but Comely, still bearing in the Complexion thereof, the remaining signs of
its former burning. Rose-castle, the Bishops best Seat, has lately the Rose
therein withered, and the Prickles in the Ruins thereof only remain.

The houses of the Nobility and Gentry are generally built Castle-wise, and in
the time of the Romans, this County (because a Limitary) did abound with
Fortifications, Mr. Cambden taking notice of more Antiquities in Cumberland and
Northumberland, then in all England besides.

The Wonders.
Although, if the word, Wonders, be strained up high and hard, this County
affords none, yet if the sense thereof be somewhat let down, the compass
thereof fetches in the

Moss-Troopers. So strange the condition of their living, if considered in
their Original, Increase, Height, Decay and Ruin.

1. Original, I conceive them the same called Borderers in Mr. Cambden, and
charactered by him to be a wild and warlike people, they are called
Moss-Troopers, because dwelling in the Mosses, and riding in Troops together.
They dwell in the Bounds, or meeting of two Kingdoms, but obey the Laws of
neither. They come to Church as seldom as the 29. of February comes into the
Calendar.

2. Increase, When England and Scotland were united in Great Britain, they that
formerly lived by Hostile incursions, betook themselves to the robbing of their
Neighbors. Their Sons are free of the trade by their Fathers Copy, they are
like unto Job (not in piety and patience, but) in sudden plenty and poverty,
sometimes having Flocks and Herds in the morning, none at night, and perchance
many again next day. They may give for their Motto, vivitur ex rapto, stealing
from their honest Neighbors, what sometimes they re-gain. They are a nest of
Hornets, strike one and stir all of them about your ears. Indeed if they
promise safely to conduct a Traveller, they will perform it with the fidelity
of a Turkish Janizary, otherwise, woe be to him that falls into their quarters.

3. Height, Amounting forty years ^ince to some Thousands. These compelled the
Vicenage, to purchase their security, by paying a constant rent unto them. When
in their greatest height, they had two great Enemies, the Laws of the Land, and
the Lord William Howard of Naworth. He sent many of them to Carlisle, to that
place, where the Officer always does his work by daylight. Yet these
Moss-Troopers, if possibly they could procure the pardon for a condemned person
of their Company, would advance great sums out of their Common stock, who in
such a case, cast in their Lots amongst themselves, and all have one Prove. 1.
14.
purse.

4. Decay, Caused by the wisdom, valor and diligence, of the Right Honorable
Charles L. Howard, now Earl of Carlisle, who routed these English-Tories with
his Regiment. His severity unto them will not only be excused, but commended
by the judicious, who consider, how our great Lawyer does describe such persons
who are solemnly (...).

Bracton. Lib. tertio Tract. 2. Cap. 11.

Ex tunc gerunt Caput Lupinum, ita quod sine judiciali inquisitione rite (...),
and secum (...) judicium portent, and merito sine L^ge pereunt, qui secundum
Legem vivere recusarunt; Thenceforward [after they are out-law'd] they wear a
In the Law of K. Edw. an Out-lawed person is called (...) (...) Lambert fol.
127. B. Number. 7.
Woolfs-head, so that they lawfully may be destroyed, without any judicial
inquisition, as who carry their own Condemnation about them, and deservedly die
without Law, because they refused to live according to Law.

5. Ruin. Such the success of this worthy Lords severity, that he made a
Through Reformation amongst them, and the Ringleaders being destroyed, the
rest are reduced to Legal obedience, and so I trust will continue.

Proverbs.
-- Cambd. Brit. in Cumberland.
If Skiddaw has a cap]
Scruffell wots full well of that.]
These are two neighbor hills, the one in this County, the other in Anan-dale
in Scotland. If the former be capp'd with clouds and foggy mists, it will not
be long before rain falls on the other. It is spoken of such who must expect to
sympathize in their sufferings, by reason of the vicinity of their habitation.

Tum tua res agitur paries cum proximus ardet. When thy neighbors house does
burn,
Take heed the next be not thy turn.
The Cumberlanders have found the truth hereof by their sad experience, in our
Civil Wars, paying dear for their vicinity with Scotland.

Cambd. Brit. ibidem.
Skiddaw, Lauvellin, and Casticand,]
Are the highest hills in all England.]
I know not how to reconcile this ryme, with another which I meet with in the
same Combd. Brit. in Lancash^re.
Author,

I^gleborrow, Pendle and Penigent,
Are the highest hills between Scotland and Trent.
But in order of an expedient betwixt them, we may observe. First, that every
County is given to magnify (not to say altify) their own things therein.
Secondly, that the survey goes according to the guess of men's eyes (as never
exactly measured) variable according to several apprehensions. Thirdly, some
hills are higher in view, rising almost perpendicularly of a sudden by
themselves, whilst the invisible greatness of others is not heeded so much,
which mount with the Country about them creeping up insensibly by degrees. Mean
time no mention of Plynillymon hill, as being in Wales, and without compare the
Monarch of all mountains South of Scotland.

Saints.
Saint H^REBERT Priest and Confessor may justly be referred to this County. For
there is a lake therein ( Lib. (...) cap. 9. (...). Ang.
Bid calls it Pr^grande Stagnum) nigh Keswick made by the River Darwent,
wherein three Islands are found, in the least of which this Herebert lead an
Eremiticall life. If he travailed hence it was to visit his friend Saint
Cuthbert, betwixt whom such Intimacy, that (...) telling him how his own death
approached, Herebert falling down at his Idem (...)
feet, importunately requested him, that they might both pass out of this World
together, which by Saint Cuthberts prayers is said to be obtained. Thus as they
were loving in their lives, so in their death they were not divided; departing
this World the same day and hour, Anno Dom. 688.

Saint ALRIKE born and bred in this County, led an Eremiticall life in a
forest near to Carlisle. This man did not more macerate himself with constant
fasting, then time since has consumed his memory, which has reduced it to
nothing more then the scelleton of his name, without any Historical passages
to flesh and fill up the same, for I account the report of Saint Vide (...).
(...) in (...) 1170.
Goderick, another Hermit, (and present at this man's death) not worth the
remembering, viz. that he saw the soul of Alrike ascend to Heaven, as it were in
a Sphericall form of a burning wind, but we lissen unto it but as unto wind. He
dyed Anno 1107.

Martyrs.
This County affords none in the reign of Queen Mary, whereof accept a double
reason. First, the People thereof generally were nuzell'd in Ignorance and
Superstition. Secondly, such as favored the Reformation were connived at by
Owin Ogelthorp, the courteous Bishop of Carlisle, who Crowed Queen Elizabeth,
and who in requittall had a favor for him had he lived any longer. However
Cumberland had one Native, who going up to London, first found a Husband and
then met with Martyrdom therein, viz.

ELIZABETH FOSTER was born at Fox. Acts and Mon. pa. 1857.
Graystock in this County, though her Maiden Sur-name be unknown. Travailing to
London, she was there married to one John Forster Cutler, of the Parish of
Saint Brides in Fleetstreet, and being summoned before Bonner, for not coming
to Church, was imprisoned and strictly examined. Being moved by the Bishop to
desert her answers, I will not (said she) go from them by Gods grace. Hereupon
she was condemned, and being fifty five years of age accordingly suffered with
six other Martyrs, all in one fire in Smithfield, Jan. 27. 1556.

Prelates.
ROGER WHELPDALE was born in the borders of this County, (so that Westmerland
pretends to a share of him) bred in Baliol-colledge in Oxford, and afterward
became Provost of Queens-colledge in that University.

A good 1. Logician witness his books of 1. Summulae Logicales. 2.
Mathematician 2. De Quanto and Continuo. 3. Divine 3. De Deo invocando.

Bale Centuria Sexta Nam. 29.
ingenuously confesses, that he cannot find where this Learned man after his
long labors in Oxford, led the rest of his life, and Pitz (who seeing with
Bales eyes, both are blind or sighted together) is at the same loss. But herein
we are able guide our guides, and light a candle to direct them, for he was by
King Henry the fifth, preferred Bishop of Carlisle, 1419. he sat three years in
that See, and dying at London Feb. 4. 1422. was buried in Saint Paul's.

ROGER LAY^URN was born of a Noble Family, not living far from Godwin in the
Bishops of Carlisle.
Carlisle. A Noble Family indeed, expiring in the days of our Grandfathers,
when Elizabeth sole daughter and heir of Sir Francis Layburn, was married to
Thomas Dacre last Baron of Gilsland and Graystock. This Roger was bred Fellow
in Pembroke-hall, Doctor of Divinity, and at last was consecrated Bishop of
Carlisle, 1503. two years after he solemnly accepted of the Mastership of
Pembroke-hall in Cambridge, which I have heard called Episcopale Collegium, not
only because it has bred so many Bishops (for the proportion thereof,) but
chiefly because many Prelates have held the Mastership thereof, even until
their death. Doctor Layburn dyed soon after 1509. before he could express his
good intentions to his College or Cathedral.

Since the Reformation.
EDMUND GRINDALL was born at Saint Bees in this County, bred Scholar, Fellow
and Master of Pembroke-hall in Cambridge, and Proctour of the University. In
the reign of Queen Mary, he fled beyond the seas, and was no Violento in the
Troubles of Franckford, but with all meekness to his might, endeavored a
pacification. Returning home he was made successively Bishop of London, Arch
bishop of York and Canterbury, by Queen Elizabeth, highly favoring him for his
learning, piety, modesty and single life; till at last he lost Her love, by the
mischievous practices of his enemies. His fault was for keeping others from
breaking two of Gods Commandments, Thou shall not steal, when he would not let
the Lord of Leicester have Lambeth-house; and, Thou shall not commit adultery,
when he would not permit Julio, the Earls Italian Physician, to marry another
man's wife.

But it was objected againsthim to the Queen, that he was a fierce defender of
factious Prophesying, which in process of time would undermine the Hierarchy,
though moderate men were of the opinion, they might prove profitable, as by
Archbishop Grindall, limited and regulated.

Being really blind more with grief then age, (dying at sixty four) he was
willing to put off his clothes before he went to bed, and in his life time to
resign his place to Doctor Whitgiff, who Sir. G. Paul in (...) li^e page 27.
refused such acceptance thereof. And the Queen, commiserating his condition,
was graciously pleased to say, that, As She had made him, so he should die an
Arch bishop, as he did July 6. 1583.

Worldly wealth he cared not for, desiring only to make both ends meet; and as
for that little that lapped over, he gave it to pious uses in both
Universities, and the founding of a fair Free School at Saint Bees, the place
of his nativity.

HENRY ROBINSON D. D. was born in So Mr. Robinson Stationer and his Countrym^n
informed me.
Carlisle, bred Fellow, and at last Provost of Queens-colledge in Oxford, and
afterward 1598. was consecrated Bishop of the place of his nativity.

When Queen Elizabeth received his Homage, She gave him many Gracious words, of
the good Opinion, which She conceived of his Learning, Integrity and
Sufficiency for that place. Moreover adding, that She must ever have a care to
furnish that See with a worthy man, for his Sir J. Harington in his view of the
Church of England, p. 108.
sake who first set the Crown on Her Head, and many words to the like purpose.

He was a Prelate of great gravity and temperance, very mild in O. Oglethorp.
Speech, but not of so strong a constitution of body as his countenance did
promise. And yet he lived to be a very old man. He dyed Anno Dom. 16...

RICHARD SENHOUSE D. D. was born of worshipful parentage at Netherhall in this
County. A valiant man in his younger days, and I have heard that in his old
age, he felt the admonitions of his youthful over-violent exercises. He was
bred Fellow of Saint Johns-colledge in Cambridge, and became an Excellent
Preacher, his Sermons losing no lusture by his good utterance, and graceful
delivering of them. He was Chaplain to King Charles whilst Prince, and Preached
his Sermon at His Coronation. He was preferred Bishop of Carlisle, enjoying the
place but a short time. He dyed Anno Domini 1626.

Capital Judges and Writers on the Law.
Sir RICHARD HUTTON It is pity his Manuscripts on the Law should be smothered
in private hands, which I hope will hereafter become publici ^uris.
was born at Perith of a Worshipful Family, (his elder Brother was a Knight,)
and bred in Jesus College in Cambridge. He intended his Studies for Divinity,
till dissuaded by the importunity of his friends (amongst whom George Earl of
Cumberland most eminent,) he became Barrister in Gray's Inn. But in expression
of his former affection to Divinity, he seldom (if ever) took Fee of a
Clergyman. Afterward being Recorder of York, he was Knighted and made Judge
of the Common Pleas. In the Case of Ship Money, though he was against the King,
(or rather for the Commons) yet His Majesty manifested not the least distaste,
continuing to call him the Honest Judge.

This person so pious to God, and charitable to his poor Members, was dissolved
about the beginning of our National misery. Thus God before he new ploweth up a
land, with the furrows of a Civil War, first cutteth down his old crop, and
gathers them like ripe sheaves into his barn. He dyed at Serjeants-Inn, and
was buried at his earnest desire without any Funeral Sermon, (save what his
own virtues preached to posterity,) at St. Dunstons in the West on the 27. day
of Febr. Anno Dom. 1638.

Sir JOHN BANKS was born at Keswick, of honest parents, who perceiving him
judicious and industrious, bestowed good breeding on him in Gray's Inn, in hope
he should attain to preferment, wherein they were not deceived. After he was
called to the Bar, for some years he solicited suits for others, thereby
attaining great practical experience. He afterward might laugh at them, who
then did smile at him, leaving many behind him in learning, whom he found
before him in time, until at last he was Knighted by K. Charles, made first
his At^urney, then Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, dying in the midst and
heat of our Civil dissentions.

He ordered by his Will (the Copy whereof I have received from my good Mr: John
(...) Minister at (...).
friend) that his body should be buried under some plain Monument, at the
discretion of his Executors, and after an Epitaph mentioning the several
places he had held, This Motto to be added,

Non nobis Domine, non nobis, sed Nomini Tuo da gloriam. It must not be
forgotten that by his said Will he gave to the value of thirty pounds per
annum, with other Emoluments to be bestowed in Pious uses, and chiefly to set
up a Manufacture of Course Cottons in the Town of Keswick, which I understand
has good, and is in hopes of better success.

Civilians.
GEORGE PORTER was born at Weery-hall in the Parish of Bolton in this County,
of gentile extraction. He was afterward Fellow of Queens-colledge in Cambridge,
Doctor and Professor of Civil-law therein, for above thirty years, so that he
might have been made Comes Imperii primi ordinis, according to the constitution
of Theodosius the Emperor, allowing that honor to Professors in that faculty,
Cod. Theod. lib. 6. (...). 21.
Cum ad viginti annos observatione jugi, ac sedulo docendi labor pervenerint.

He was of a pitiful nature, and we commonly called him (for I had often the
honor to be in his mess,) The Patron of infirmities, whose discourse was
always defensive and charitable, either to excuse men's failings, or mitigate
their punishments. He was valiant as well as learned, and with his stern looks
and long sword, frighted three thieves from setting upon him. He dyed Anno
Domini 163.. and Doctor Collins, (who with Saint Chrysostom was in laudatoriis
hyperbolicus,) Preaching his Funeral Sermon, endeavored to heighten his
memory to his soul, mounting it above the skies for his modesty and learning.

Writers.
JOHN CANON. Some will have him so called, because Canon of some Cathedral
Church, and if so, there were Hundreds of John Canons besides himself: others,
because he was Doctor of Canon Law, which leaves as great a Latitude as the
former, for hundreds (with equal right) to justle with him for the same
Surname. I have cause to conceive, until I shall be clearly convinced to the
contrary, that he was born at Canonsby in this County, By being set by for
brevities sake.

Bilious Bale bespattereth him more then any of his Order. Hear how he ranteth,
He turned a Cent. 5. number. 3.
Minotaure, (I should say Minorite) and with his Thrasonicall Boasting, etc.
But I am not bound to believe him, the rather, because Trithemius a Foreign,
Judicious and Moderate Writer, gives him great commendation. Whence I collect
that his worth was not like a Candle in the House, only burning at Home in
England, but a Torch, blazing abroad beyond the Seas, the University of Paris
and other places taking signal notice of his Learning. He flourished under K.
Edward the second 1320.

WILLIAM EGREMONT. He has almost lost his true Surname amongst the various
writing thereof. ^e ^cript. Brit. (...). 7. Number. 12.
Bale calls him Egumonde, (though no such place in all England,) Pits,
reduces it to a Saxon Name, and calls him De Ang. scrip. 1390.
Egmund; Leland, (for a reason immediately following) names him William of
Stamford, but Egremont is the Orthography of his name, from a small Market Town
(yet a Barony of the late Earls of Sussex,) in this Shire where he was born.

Quitting this cold Country, he took his Progress into the South, and fixing
himself at Stamford, became an Augustinian Eremite, and proceeded Doctor of
Divinity. Going beyond the Seas, he was by the Pope made Episcopus Pissinensi^,
(some poor pitiful Bishopric, so that one would scarce trouble himself to
find it out to have the profit there^f, and therewith held the Suffragane-ship
under Henry Beaufort Bishop of Lincoln. Indeed that voluminous Diocese (a full
fourth part of England, before Eli, Peterborough and Oxford, were cantoned out
of it) required a Co-adjutor. Many are the learned works written by him, and
(seeing he is Doubly qualified) I thought fitter to repose him under the Topic
of Writers then of Prelates, being confident that he got more credit by his
Books, then profit by his Bishopric. He flourished under King Richard the
second, anno 1390.

JOHN SKELETON was a younger branch of the Skeltons of Skeleton in this County. I
crave leave of the Reader, (hitherto not having full instructions, and)
preserving the undoubted Title of this County unto him, to defer his character
to Norfolk, where he was Beneficed at Diss therein.

Since the Reformation.
RICHARD CRAKENTHORP D. D. was descended of an Ancient Family in this County,
as appears by their frequent being Sheriffs thereof. He was bred Fellow of
Queens-colledge in Oxford, and afterward in the first of King James went over
Chaplain to the Lord Evers, sent Ambassador to the King of Denmark, and other
prime Princes of Germany. Here by use he got an easiness in the Latin tongue,
and correspondency with several persons of eminent Learning.

He was an excellent Logicia^, (witness his work in that kind) and became
Chaplain in Ordinary to King James, Rector of Black-Notley in Essex, greater
preferments expecting him, had not his death prevented it.

Pliny observes, that Posthume Children born after the death of their Father,
and Caesar's, (understand such, who are cut out of the womb of their Mother)
prove very happy in success. What reason soever Naturalists assign hereof,
Divines justly impute it to Gods goodness, graciously remembering those Orphans,
which cannot remember their own Parents.

The Observation may be applied to the Books of this worthy Doctor, set forth
after his death, one called* Vigilius Dormitans, in defense of the Emperor
Justinian, and a general Council held by him Anno 553. set forth by his
Brother George Crakenthorp; the other being an answer to the Manifesto of the
Archbishop of Spalato, set forth by that Learned Antiquary Dr. John Barkham,
and both of these Books finding an universal and grateful reception among the
Learned and Religious. I cannot certainly fix the date of his death, and be it
here solemnly entered that Westmerland shall be unprejudiced, if he were born
(as a most credible person has informed me) at NewBiggin in this County.

-- SALKELD was a branch of a Right Worshipful Family in this County, bred a
Divine beyond the Seas, but whether (...) or Secular Priest I know not. Coming
over into England to Angle for Proselites, it seems his Line broke, and he was
cast into prison. Hence he was brought out and presented to K. James, by whose
Arguments (and a Benefice bestowed on him in Somersetshire,) he became a
Protestant.

This he used in all companies to boast of, that he was a Royal Convert,

-- Nobisque dedit solatia victor And was it not a Noble thing,
Thus to be conquered by a King?
Indeed His Majesty in some of his works styleth him the Learned Salkeld, which
the other much vaunted of, often telling it to such who well knew it before,
for fear they might forget it. His preaching was none of the best, and he
retained some Popish (though not Opinions) Fancies to the day of his death. I
have heard much of his discourse more of his own praise, then to his own praise
in my judgment. But his true character may be taken out of the Book he wrote of
Angels. He died about the year, 1638.

GERARD LANGBAIN D. D. was born at Kirk-Banton in this County, bred first
Fellow in, then Provost of Queens-colledge in Oxford. A skillful Antiquary,
ingenious, industrious and judicious in ^is Writings, as by his Works will
appear.

Who so shall read over the History of the Council of Trent, transl^ted out of
Italian by Sir Nathaniel Brent, will conceive it so complete a Narration of all
the concernments in that Council, that nothing of consequence can be added
thereunto. Yet this his mistake will be confuted, by perusing the Works set
forth by Doctor Langbain, of the dissent of the Gallican Churches from several
conclusions in that Council.

As his Brain was the Mother of some, so was it the Midwife to other good
books, which he procured to be published. Especially a book made by Sir John
Cheek, concerning Rebellion and Loyalty, seasonably reprinted in the beginning
of our Civil Wars. But alas, such then was the noise of men's Animosities, that
the Still voice of Truth could not be heard amongst them. More Excellent Tracts
were expected from him, (particularly an Edition of Brian Twine, with Additions
concerning the Antiquity of Oxford,) when God was pleased almost in the midst
of his days to put an end to his life, Anno 1657.

Benefactors to the Public.
ROBERT EAGLESFIELD born in this County, was a pious and learned man according
to the rate of that age, Chaplain and Confessor to Philippa, Queen to King Ed
ward the third. He founded a fair College in Oxford, by the name of
Queens-colledge, for a Provost and twelve Fellows, whom he ordered to sit in
the Hall in purpura, and that they should be attended on more Curiali. He
appointed that those of Cumberland and Westmerland should be proper for
perferment in his Foundation, rendering this reason why he reflected most on
those Northern Counties, Propter insolitam vastitatem, and melioris literaturae
infrequentiam.

But prevented by death, he finished not his intentions, leaving only to the
College the Manor of Renwick in this County, with the impropriation of Burgh
under Stanmore, and, which I assure you was considerable, most excellent
Statutes.

To show himself both Courtier and Scholar, he ordered that in the Hall they
should speak either Latin or French. He bequeathed his College to the
honorary Patronage of the Queens of England, and his Sur-name is still extant
in this County in persons of quality, but how to him related to me unknown. He
dyed about the year of our Lord 1370.

Memorable Persons.
MAUD the Daughter of Thomas Lord Lucy, Sister and Heir of Anthony Lord Lucy,
and Baron of Cokermouth, the Widow of Gilbert Humfrevile, Earl of Angus, was
the second Wife of Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland. Who, when she saw that
she should dye without Issue, gave to Earl Henry her husband, the Castle and
Honor of Cokermouth, with many other Manors in Copeland and Westmerland, with
condition, that his Issue should bear her Arms of the Lucies, [viz. Gules,
three Lucies [or Pikes] Hauriant Argent,] quartered, with their own Arms of
the Percies. And for it levied a Fine, in the Court of King Richard the second.

Hitherto verbatim out of Master Catalog. of Honor page 719.
Mills. But, by his favor, his words are not sufficiently expressive of the
agreement betwixt them. The Earl conditioned, not only to quarter the Arms of
the Lucies, (as the Percies now quarter many more besides, viz. Poynings,
Fitz-Pain, Brians, etc.) but he also covenanted (as in the words of the
Instrument) Defer quateriatim, To bear them quarterly with his own Arms,
incorporated into one Coat in effect. This promise the Percys have bona fide
performed, preserving so near a relation between the two Coats, that in a
manner, Mutuo se ponunt and auferunt; so that, if Either, Both always appear
together.

This Lady is entered amongst Memorable Persons, partly, because of her harmless
device, to perpetuate her memory; partly, because of her great affection to her
Husband; She but a second, and no wife of his youth, bringing him no children,
and having (no doubt) heirs of her own name and blood, though she were barren,
would be bountiful to endow that Family with possessions, which she could not
enrich with posterity. Say not the Percys profit, was the Lucies loss; for,
what says the Mat. 21. 15.
Scripture? Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? She died
about the year of our Lord 1382.

Lord Mayors.
I find none of this County, nor is the wonder great if it be true what
Credible persons have informed me, that there are no Carriers (the Post from
Carlisle is excepted,) which immediately come from this County to London. It
seems Cumberland is Terra suis contenta bonis, neither proud of the Gayety, nor
covetous of the Money of London.

The Names of the Gentry of this County Returned by the Commissioners, in the
twelfth year of King Henry the sixth.
Marmaduke Bishop of Carlisle, Commissioners. Thomas de Dacre de Gilsland.
William Legh Chivaler, Knights for the Shire. William Laton Armiger. Knights
for the Shire.

Tho. Barnby Prioris Carlioli Will. Reddekar Abbatis de Holm Tho. Stanley
Abbatis de Wederhill Rog. Kirkeby Prioris de Saint Beys Alex. Walton Prioris de
Lanecost Rich. Hodleston Crist. Culwan, Sheriff Pet. Tilioll Ioh. Penyngton
Ioh. Skeleton Ioh. Lamplewe Nich. Radclyff, Mil. Hen. Fenwyk Hug. de Louther
Will. Stapleton Ioh. Broughton Tho. Culwen Tho. Delamore Geor. Warthwyk Will.
Twates Ioh. Eglisfeld, sen. Will. Martindale, sen. Ioh. Hoton Hug. Forster Ioh.
de Skeleton Will. Thirskeld Will. Louther de Rosa Ioh. de Denton Will. Arlosch
Rich. de Kirkebride Will. Dykes Tho. de Stanewikes Ioh. Blanerhasset Tho.
Aglanbly Tho. Appulby Tho. Salkeld Tho. Beuchamp Roll. Vaux Ade de Denton Tho.
Grane Tho. Hethryngton Tho. de Sands Ioh. Swynburn Ioh. Eglisfeld, junio.
Rich. Eglisfeid Will. Martyndail, junioris Ioh. Culwen Tho. Senenhans Will
Osmonderlawe Will. Lowther de Crokdaile Nich. Irton Alex. Heighmore Ioh. Rybton
Rob. Bristow Will. Aglanby Ioh. Louther de Alwardby Nioh. Stanle Tho. Wodhall
Will. Hodliston de Copland Rob. Scot de Caldebeke Will. Denton Majoris Karlioli
Will. Cardoile Tho. Frankyssh Ballivi ibidem Tho. Delmore Will. Kelet Ioh.
Graneson Galf. Bar Ioh. Middilham Ioh. Person de Lowswater Pet. Iakson de
eadem Rich. Bristow Leo. Howchonson Will. Redman Tho. Rickman de Cokyrmouth,
Baker
This is a comfortable Catalogue, for one delighting in Ancient Families to
practice upon. It is the observation of Vitruvius (alleged and approved by
Master In his Eliz. Anno 1489.
Cambden) that Northern-men advancing Southward, Non possunt durare sed
disolvuntur, Cannot endure the heat, but their strength melts away and is
disolved, whilst Southern-people removing Northward, Non modo, non laborant
immutatione loci, valetudinibus, sed etiam confirmantur, Are not only, not
subject to sickness through the change of place, but are the more confirmed in
their strength and health.

Sure I am, that Northern Gentry transplanted into the South, by Marriage,
Purchase or otherwise, do languish and fade away within few generations.
Whereas Southern men on the like occasions removing Northward acquire a
setlement in their Estates with long continuance. Some peevish natures
(delighting to comment all things into the worst sense) impute this to the
Position of their Country, as secured from sale by their distance from London,
(the staple place of pleasure,) whilst I would willingly behold it as the
effect and reward of their discreet thrift and moderate expense, Two thirds of
this Catalogue of Cumberland being still extant, and the third extinct, for
lack of Issue and not Estate.

Sheriffs of Cumberland.
HEN. II.
Anno 1 Hildretas Anno 2 RECORDA MANCA. Anno 3 Anno 4 Anno 5 Rob. Fitz. Troit
for 14 years. Anno 19 Idem and Adam filius ejus. Anno 20 Adam filius Rob.
Trutts Anno 21 Rob. de Vaus Anno 22 Anno 23 Rob. T^utt. Adam filius ^jus pro
eo. Anno 24 Rob. de Vallibus Anno 25 Idem. Anno 26 Rob. de Vallibus and Rog. de
Legeire Anno 27 Rob. de Vallibus ^or 4 years. Anno 31 Hug. de Morwich Anno 32
Idem. Anno 33 Idem. and Nich. Frater ejus.
RICH. I.
Anno 1 Will. de Aldelin for 9 years.
JOH. REX.
Anno 1 Will. de Stuteivill and Johan* Laleman Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Will. de
Stutevill and Phus. Escrar Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Rog. de Lasy
Constabut. Cestrie. Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Rog. de Lasy Constabut. Cestrie, and
Walt. Marescallus for 4 years. Anno 12 Hug. de Nevill for 4 years. Anno 16 Rob.
de Ros, and Alanus Candebe^.
HEN. III.
Anno 1 Walt. Mauclere for 7 years. Anno 8 Walt. Ephus. Carliol. and Rob.
filius Will. de Hampton for 7 years. Anno 15 Walt. Ephus. Carliol. and Tho.
filius Johannis Anno 16 Idem. Anno 17 Tho. de Muleton for 4 years. Anno 21
Will. de Dacre for 12 years Anno 33 Ioh. Daylock for 8 years. Anno 41 Will.
Com. Albemarl. and Remigius de Todington for 5 years. Anno 46 Eustachius de
Bayloel for 5 years. Anno 51 Eustachius de Baylloet and Mathe. de Ebor. for 4
years. Anno 55 Rad. de Dacre
EDW. I.
Anno 1 Rob. Carliol. Ephus. Math. Cordil. and Roger. de Pocklington Anno 2
Idem. Anno 3 Rob. de Hampton Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Ioh. de
Windeburne and Anno 7 Mich. de Neilbigging Ad. Newbegin. Gil. Cureweune Anno 8
Idem. Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Rob. de Brus for 4 years. Anno 14 Mich. de Arcla
(Arcla) for 12 years. Anno 26 Will. de Mulecaster for 5 years. Anno 31 Ioh. de
Lucy Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Will. de Mulcaster Anno 34 Idem.
EDW. II.
Anno 1 Alex. de Wastwenthoyte Anno 2 Andreas. de Harcla for 4 years. Anno 6
Andr. de Harcla and Alex. de Bastenthwayt Mi. for 7 years. Anno 13 Null.
Titulus, Comitis in hoc Rotulo Anno 14 Anno 15 Anno 16 Anno 17 Hen. de Malton
and Rob. le Brum. Anno 18 Hen de Malton
EDW. III.
Anno 1 Pet. Tilloll and Rob. and Brun Anno 2 Anno 3 Pet Tilloll Anno 4 Rad. de
Dacre (Ranulphus) for 6 years. Anno 10 Ric. de Denton Anno 11 Anth. de Lucy and
Roll. Vaux Anno 12 Idem. Anno 13 Anth. de Lucy Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15 Hug. de
Moriceby, and Anth. de Lucy Anno 16 Idem. Anno 17 Hug. de Moriceby Anno 18
Idem. Anno 19 Tho. de Lucy, and Hug. de Moriceby Anno 20 Idem. Anno 21 Tho. de
Lucy Anno 22 Idem. Anno 23 Idem. Anno 24 Rich. de Denton Anno 25 Idem. Anno 26
Hug. de Louthre Anno 27 Idem. Anno 28 Idem. Anno 29 Null. Titulus Comitis in
Rotulo Anno 30 Will. de Thirkeld Anno 31 Rob. Tillioll Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33
Will. de Lancaster Anno 34 Chri. de Moriceby Anno 35 Rob. de Tillioll Anno 36
Idem. Anno 37 Chri. de Moriceby Anno 38 Idem. Anno 39 Idem. Anno 40 Idem. Anno
41 Will. de Windesor Anno 42 Idem. Anno 43 Adam. Puinges Anno 44 Idem Anno 45
Idem. Anno 46 Ioh. de Denton Anno 47 Rob. de Moubray Anno 48 Ioh. de
Derwentwater Anno 49 Ioh. de Denton Anno 50 Ioh. de Derwentwater Anno 51 Ioh.
Bruyn
King Henry II.
21 ROBERTUS de VAUS.]

Alias de Vaux or de Vallibus, a right ancient name (still extant) in this
County. There is a Cross in the Churchyard of Beu-castle, about twenty foot in
height, all of one square stone carved with the Arms of Vaux, whence Master
Cambden concludes it, (though otherwise the inscription thereon not legible)
of their erection. I behold this Robert as Father to John de Vallibus, of whom
In hi^ History Anno 1263.
Matthew Paris says, that he was one of those, that, muneribus excaecati, a
fidelitate, quam Baronibus in commune juraverant, recesserunt: Blinded with
bribes, they went back from the (some will say, such breach no breach of)
fidelity, which they had jointly sworn to the Barons. Indeed the same Author
reckons him amongst those whom Ibid m Anno 1364.
he terms, Clarissimos milites, on whose loyalty and valor King Henry the
third relied. The Lord Vaux of Harrowden in Northamptonshire, does hence fetch
his Extraction.

King Henry III.
8 WALT. EPIS. CARLIOL. and ROB. filius WILL. de HAMPTON.]

This Walter Bishop of Carlisle, was he, who commonly was called Male-Clerk,
English it as you please, Bad-scholar or Clergyman. It seems to me a strange
Transposition, that Henry the first King of England, should be termed
Beau-Clerk, a Good-scholar, and our Walter a Bad One, who was a Bishop in
Orders.

However though Male-Clerk, had he been Bon-Homme a Good Man, the matter had
been much mended. But I find little praise of his manners. Indeed he was Lord
Trea surer of England, and found false both in Word and Deed, avowing his
Accounts even, when he was justly charged with an hundred pound (a sum in
that age, in the purse of a poor King) debt to the Exchequer. This cost him
much molestation, so that at last he resigned his Bishopric, which by my
Godwin in the Bishops of Carlisle.
Author is beheld as no kindly act of mortification, but that he came unjustly
by his place, and was afraid to lose, though ashamed to keep it any longer. He
afterward became a Friar at Oxford, as if lacking learning in his Youth, he
would recover it in his Old Age, where he dyed October 28. 1248.

Edward II.
2 ANDREAS de HARCLA.]

Had his latter end answered his beginning, he might deservedly have been
ranked, amongst the Worthies of Westmerland, (where he was born at Harcla,)
whereas now it shall suffice, to make this oblique mention of him in this place.

He behaved himself right handsomely in the service of King Edward the second,
many years together, especially at the battle of Borough-brigge, where he
killed Humphrey Bohun, Earl of Hereford, and took Thomas Plantagenet, Earl of
Lancaster, with many others of the Nobility prisoners, and delivered them to
the King. In reward whereof he was Created in the 19. ^ear of that King, Earl
of Carlisle, and had the Isle of Man bestowed upon him. Next year, I know not
upon what coffeehouse, he fell into private confederacy with the Kings foes
the Scots, for which he was taken and condemned. Now lest the Nobility of
others should by secret sympathy suffer, in his disgraceful death, the Earl
was first parted from the Man, and his honor severed from his person, by a
solemn degradation, having his knightly spurs hewed off from his heels, which
done he was hanged, drawn and quartered.

Sheriffs.
Name Place Arms RICH. II. Anno 1 Io. Derwentwater Ar. 2 bars G. ^ a Canton
of the second, a Cinqsoile of the first. 2 Will de Stapleton* 3 Gilb. de Culwen
(...) * Argent a Lion rampant Sable. 4 Io. de Dewe^rwater ut prius Arg. Frettee
G. a Chief Azure. 5 Ama. Mounceaux 6 Rober. Parning 7 Ama. Mounceaux 8 Ioh.
Therlwall 9 Ama. Mounceaux 10 Ioh. Therlwall 11 Pet. Tillioll 12 Ioh. Ireby
A^gent, Frettee a Canton Sable. 13 Rich. Redman G. 3 Cussions Erm. buttoned and
Tasselled Or. 14 Chri. Moriceby 15 Ioh. de Ireby ut prius 16 Tho. de Musgrave
Azure, six Annulets Or. 17 Rich. Redman ut prius 18 Pet. Tiliot 19 Ioo. de
Ireby ut prius 20 Ricq. Redman ut prius 21 Will. Culwen ut prius 22 Rich. Redman
ut prius HEN. IV. Anno 1 Will. Leigh 2 Will. Louther Or. six Annuletes Sable. 3
Rich. Redman, and Will. Osmunderlaw ut prius Arg a Fess between 3 Martlets
Sable. 4 Pet. Tillioll 5 Idem. 6 R^ch. Skeleton (...) Fess (...) 3 Flower de
(...) Or. 7 Will. Louther ut prius 8 9 10 Ioh. Delamore 11 Rob. Rodington 12
Rich. Redman, m. ut prius HEN. V. Anno 1 Ia. Harington* m. Sable, Frettee
Argent. 2 Will. Stapelton ut prius 3 Chri Culwen, m. ut prius 4 Ioh. Lancaster
Arg. 2 Bars G. on a Canton of the same a Lion passant Or. 5 Will. Osmunder law
ut prius 6 Rob. Louther, mi. ut prius 7 Ioh. Lamplough Or, 2 Cross floury
Sable. 8 Will. Stapilton ut prius 9 Will. Stapleton and ut prius Rich.
Ratcliffe Darwentwater. Arg. a Bend engrailed Sable. HEN. VI. Anno 1 Will.
Leigh, mil. 2 Chri. Gulwen, m. ut prius 3 Chri. Moresby, m. Arg. a Cross S. in
the first quarter a (...) of the second. 4 Nich. Ratcliffe, m. ut prius Or,
five Fusils in Fess, Az. 5 Io. Penington, m. 6 Chri. Culwen ut prius 7 Chri.
Moresby ut prius 8 Tho. Delamore Argent, 6 Mattlets 3, 2. and 1. Sable. 9 Ioh.
Penington ut prius 10 Ioh. Skeleton 11 Ioh. L^mplow, m. ut prius 12 Chri. Culwen
ut prius 13 Io. Penington, m. ut prius 14 Ioh. Broughton Arg. a Chev. betwixt 3
mullets G. 15 Hen. Fenwick, m. Per Fess G. and Arg. six Martlets counterchanged
16 Chri. Culwen, m. ut prius 17 Chri. Moresby ut prius 18 Hug. Louther ut prius
19 Ioh. Skeleton, ar. 20 Will. Stapilton ut prius 21 Tho. Beauchamp AMP. 22 Tho.
Delamore ut prius 23 Chri. Curwen ut prius 24 Ioh. Skeleton, ar. ut prius 25
Ioh. Broughton, ut prius 26 Tho. Delamore ut prius 27 Th. Crakenthorp, Or, a
Cheveron betwixt 3 Mullets pierced Az. 18 Tho. Curwen, m. ut prius 29 Ioh.
Skeleton, ar. ut prius 30 Roll. Vaux, ar. Chekee, Or and Gules. 31 Tho. Delamore
ut prius 32 33 Ioh. Hodilston, ar. Gules Frettee Argent. 34 Hug. Louther, ar.
ut prius 35 Tho. Curwen ut prius 36 Rich. Salkeld Vert. Frettee Argent. 37 Hen.
Fenwick, m. ut prius EDW. IV. Anno 1 Rich. Salkeld, ar. ut prius 2 Roll. Vaux,
ar. ut prius 3 Idem. ut prius 4 oh. Hudleston, m. ut prius 5 Th. Lamplough, a.
ut prius 6 Rich. Salkeld, ar. ut prius 7 Roll. Vaux, ar. ut prius 8 Ioh,
Hodilston, m. ut prius 9 Idem. ut prius 10 Will. Leigh, mil. 11 Chri Moresby,
m. ut prius 12 Will. Parr, mil. WESTMINSTER. Arg. 2 Bars Az. a Border (...) S. 13
Ioh. Hodilston, m. ut prius 14 Will. Leigh. mil. 15 16 Ric. Dux. Glouc. and Io.
Hodilsto^, m. Sub. ut prius France and England, on a Label of 3 Erm* as many
Cantons Gules. 17 Idem. 18 Rich. Dux. Glouc. ut prius 19 Null. Titulus Commit is
in Rotulo. 20 Rich. Dux. Glou. ut prius 21 Idem. ut prius 22 Idem. ut prius
RICH. III. Anno 1 Rich. Salkeld ut prius 2 3 HEN. VII. Anno 1 Chri. Moresby, m.
ut prins 2 Null. Titulus Comitis in Rotulo. 3 Chri. Moresby, m. ut prius 4 Th.
Beauchamp, a. ut prius 5 6 Null. Titulus Co^ in Rotulo. 7 Ioh. Musgrave, m. ut
prius 8 Null. Titulus Comitis in Rotulo. 9 Edw. Redman ut prius 10 Rich.
Salkeld, m. ut prius 11 Chri. Moresby, m. ut prius 12 Tho. Beachamp ut prius 13
Chri Dacre, ar. Gu. 3 Fscalop-shells Argent. 14 Idem. ut prius 15 Idem. ut
prius 16 Idem. ut prius 17 Idem. ut prius 18 Idem. ut prius 19 Idem. ut prius
20 Hug. Hutton, ar. AMP. 21 Chri. Dacre, ar. ut prius 22 Io. Hudleston, m. ut
prius 23 Ioh. Ratcliffe, ar. ut prius 24 Idem. ut prius HEN. VIII. Anno 1 Ioh.
Curwen, m. ut prius 2 Io. Penington, mi. ut prius 3 Ioh. Shelton, mil. ut prius
4 Io Crakenthorp, (...). ut prius 5 Idem and Edward. Musgrave ut prius 6 Ioh.
Radcliffe, m. ut prius 7 Ioh. Louther, m. ut prins 8 Tho. Curwen, mi. ut prius
9 Gawin. Eglesfeld Or, 3 Eglets displaied Gules. 10 Ioh. Radciffe, mi. ut prius
11 Edw. Musgrave ut prius 12 13 Christ Dacre ut prius 14 15 Ioh. Ratcliffe, mi.
ut prius 16 Chri. Curwen, mil. ut prius 17 Chri. Dacre, mil. ut prius 18 Ioh.
Ratcliffe, mi. ut prius 19 Edw. Musgrave, m. ut prius 20 Will. Peningto^, m. ut
prius 21 Tho. Wharton, m. Sable, a Maunch Argent. 22 Rich* Ireton Arg. a Fess
S. 3 (...) in Chief Gules. 23 Christ. Dacre, m. ut prius 24 Will. Musgrave, m.
ut prius 25 Christ. Curwen ut prius 26 Cut. Hutton, ar. ut prius 27 Tho.
Wharton, m. ut prius 28 Tho. Curwen, m. ut prius 29 Ioh. Lamplo, mil. 30 Ioh.
Thwaits, ar. Arg. a Cross S. Frette Or. 31 Tho. Wharton, m. ut prius 32 Tho.
Dalston, ar. Dalston Arg. a Cheveron between 3 Ravens-heads S. billed Or. 33
Will. Musgrave, m. ut prius 34 Ioh. Louther, mi. ut prius 35 Tho. Salkeld, ar.
ut prius 36 Edw. Aglyonby, a. Azu. 2 Bars and 3 Martlits in Chief (...). 37
Rob. Lamplo, ar. ut prius 38 Tho. Sandford Per Cheveron S. and Erm* two
Boars-heads in Chief coopedOr. EDW. VI. Anno 1 Tho. Wharton, m. ut prius 1 Ioh.
Leigh, ar. 3 Ioh. Lamplow, ar. ut prius 4 Ioh. Louther, mil. ut prius 5 Ric.
Eglesfeld, ar. ut prius 6 Will. Penington ut prius REG. MARI. Anno 1 Tho.
Leigh, ar. PHIL. and MAR. Anno 1, 2. Rich. Musgrave ut prius 2, 3. Tho.
Sandford, a. 3, 4. Rob. Lamplow, a. ut prius 4, 5. Ioh. Leigh, ar. ut prius 5,
6. Will. Penington ut prius ELIZ. REG. Anno 1 Th. Dacre, sen mi. ut prius 2 Th.
Lamplough, a. ut prius 3 Hug. Ascough, m and Hen. Curwen, a. ut prius S. a Fess
Or, (...) 3 Asses passant, Ar. mained and unguled of the second. 4 Will.
Musgrave ut prius 5 Ant. Hudleston, a. ut prius 6 Chri. Dacree, ar. ut prius 7
Will: Penington, a. ut prius 8 Rich. Louther, ar. ut prius 9 Ioh. Dalston, ar.
ut prius 10 Cut. Musgrave, ar. ut prius 11 Sim. Musgrave, ar. ut prius 12 Hen.
Curwen ut prius 13 Geo. Lamplough ut prius 14 Ioh. Lamplough ut prius 15 Will.
Musgrave ut prius 15 Will. Musgrave ut prius 16 Anth. Hudleston ut prius 17
Ric. Salkeld, ar. and Hen. Tolston, ar. ut prius Vert, on a Chief Azu. ^
Martlets Or. 18 Ioh. Dalston, ar. ut prius 19 Geo. Salkeld, ar. ut prius 20 Fr.
Lamplough, a. ut prius 21 Ioh. Lamplough ut prius 22 Hen. Curwen, ar. ut prius
23 Chri. Dacre, ar. ut prius 24 Wilfr. Lawson, ar. Per Pale, Arg. and S. a
Chev. counterchanged. 25 Ioh. Dalston, ar. ut prius 26 Ioh. Midleton, ar. 27
Geo. Salkeld; ar. ut prius 28 Ioh. Dalston, ar. ut prius 29 30 Rich. Louther,
ar. ut prius 31 Hen. Curwen, (...). ut prius 32 Chr. Pickering, ar. Ermin a
Lion Rampent Azure Crowned Or. 33 Ioh. Southwike, a* 34 Will. Musgrave, a. ut
prius 35 Ger. Louther, ar. ut prius 36 Ioh. Dalston, ar. ut prius 37 Lau.
Salkeld, ar. ut prius 38 Chri. Dalston, ar. ut prius 39 Wilfri. Lawson ut prius
40 Tho. Salkeld, ar. ut prius 41 Ios. Penington, ar. ut prius 42 Nich. Curwen,
ar. ut prins 43 Will. Orfen^r, ar. 44 Edm. Dudley, ar. Or a Lion rampant duble
queve Vert. 45 Will. Hutton, ar. and prim. Jac. ut prius JAC. REX. Anno 1 Will.
Hutton, ar. ut prius 2 Ioh Dalston, ar. ut prius 3 Chri. Picke^ing, a. ut prius
4 Wilf. Lauson, m. ut prius 5 Chri. Pickering m. ut prius 6 Hen. Blencow, ar.
Sable on a Bend 3 Chaplets G. 7 Will. Hutton, m ut prius 8 Ios. Penington, ar.
ut prius 9 Chr. Pickering, m. ut prius 10 Wilf. Lawson, m. ut prius 11 Th.
Lamplough, a. ut prius 12 Edw. Musgrave, m. ut prius 13 Rich. Flecher, ar.
Hutton Arg. a Salter engrailed betwixt 4 Roundlets each ch^rged with a Pheon of
the field. 14 Will. Musgrave, m. ut prius 15 Will. Hudleston, a. ut prius 16
Geo. Dalston, ar. ut prius 17 Hen. Curwen, mi. ut prius 18 Io Lamplough, a. ut
prius 19 Hen. Fetherston G. a Chev. betwixt 3 Oestridges feathers. 20 Fran.
Dudley vid. Admi. Tho. Dudley, ar. and Edw. Dudley, ar. defund. and Tho.
Lamplough, mil. ut prius ut prius ut prius 21 Rich. Samford, m* ut prius 22
Rich. Fletcher, m. ut prius CAR. REG. Anno 1 Hen. Blencowe, m. ut prius 2 Pet.
Senhouse, ar. Scascall Arg. a (...) proper. 3 Chri. Dalston, ar. ut prius 4
Will. Layton, ar. 5 Will Musgrave, m. ut prius 6 Chr. Richmond, a. 7 Leon.
Dykes, ar. Or, 3 Cinquefoils Sable. 8 Ioh. Skeleton, ar. ut prius 9 Will.
Orfener ar. 10 Rich. Barvis, ar. ut prius 11 Will. Lawson, ar. 12 Patri Curwen,
ar. ut prius 13 Tho. Dacre, (...) ut prius 14 Ti. Fetherston, (...) ut prius 15
16 Chri. Louther, ar. ut prius 17 Hen. Fletcher, bar. ut prius 18 19 20 21 22
Hen. Tolson, ar. ut prius

Edward IV.
16 RICHARD DUKE OF GLOUCESTER.]

He is notoriously known to Posterity, without any ^ Comment or Character to
describe him. In his Arms, it is observable, that the younger sons of Kings,
did not use our Common Modern manner of differences, by Cressants, Mullets,
Martilets, etc. but assumed unto themselves, some other differencing devices.

Wonder not that his Difference being a Labell (disguised with some additions)
has some Allusion to Eldership therein, whilst this Richard was but the Third
son, seeing in his own Ambition, he was not only the Eldest, but Only Child
of his Father, as appears by his Project, not long after, to Basterdize both
his Brethren. And now did he begin to cast an Eye on, and forecast a way to the
Crown, by securing himself of this County, which is the Back (as Northumberland
the Fore) Door into Scotland. In the mean time, Cumberland may count it no mean
Credit, that this Duke was for six years together, and at that very time, her
High Sheriff, when he was made, (or rather made himself) King of England.

Henry VIII.
21 THOMAS WHARTON.]

This must needs be that worthy person, whom King Henry the eighth, afterward
created first, L. Wharton, of Wharton in Westmerland, and who gave so great a
defeat to the Scots at Solemn Moss, that their King James the fifth, soon after
died for sorrow thereof.

Indeed the Scottish Writers conceiving it more creditable to put their defeat
on the account of Anger, then of Fear, make it rather a Surrender then a
Battle, as if their Countrymen were in effect unwilling to Conquer, because
unwilling to Fight. Such their Disgust taken at Oliver Sentclear, a man of Low
Birth, and High Pride, obtruded on them that day, by the King for their
General. And to humor their own coffeehouse, they preferred rather to be
taken Prisoners by an Enemy, then to fight under so distasted a Commander.

As for the Lord Wharton, I have read, (though not able presently to produce my
Author,) that for this his service, his Arms were augmented, with an Orle of
Lions paws in Saltier Gules, on a Border Or.

The Farewell.
I understand two small Manufactures are lately set up therein, the one of
course Broadcloath at Cokermouth, (vended at home.) The other of Fustians some
two years since at Carlisle, and I wish that the Undertakers may not be
disheartened with their small encouragement. Such who are ashamed of
Contemptible beginnings, will never arrive at considerable endings. Yea, the
greatest Giant was (though never a Dwarf) once an Infant, and the longest line
commenced from a little point at the first.

DERBY-SHIRE.
DERBY-SHIRE has Yorkshire on the North, Nottingham-shire on the East,
Leichestershire on the South, Stafford and Cheshire on the West. The River
South Darwent falling into Trent, runs through the middle thereof. I say
South Darwent, for I find three more North thereof.

Darwent which divides the West from the East riding in Yorkshire. Darwent
which separateth the Bishopric of Durham from Northumberland. Darwent in
Cumberland which falls into the Irish Ocean.

These I have seen by Critical Authors written all alike, enough to persuade
me, that Dower, the British word for water had some share in their
denomination.

The two extremes of this Shire from North to South, extend to thirty eight
miles, though not fully twenty nine in the broadest part thereof. The South and
East thereof are very fruitful, whilst the North part (called the Peak) is
poor above, and rich beneath the ground. Yet are there some exceptions therein.
Witness the fair pasture nigh Haddon (belonging to the Earl of Rutland) so
incredibly battling of Cattle, that one proffered to surround it with shillings
to purchase it; which because to be set side-ways, (not edge-ways) were refused.

Natural Commodities.
Lead.
The best in England (not to say Europe) is found in this County. It is not
churlish, but good natured Metal, not curdling into knots and knobs, but all
equally fusil; and therefore most useful for Pipes and Sheets, yea, the
softness thereof will receive any artificial impressions. The Miners thereof
may be called a Commonwealth within our Commonwealth, governed by Laws
peculiar to themselves, often confirmed by Act of Parliament, and take a few of
them.

1. If any of this Nation find a 3 and 4. Phil. and Mar. Act* 4.
Rake, or Sione, or Leading to the same, he may set in any ground to get Lead
Oar. 2. But Churches, Houses and Gardens are free from this Custom of the
Minery. 3. All Miners ought to commence their suits for Oar-debt, in the
Bargemoot-Court, Otherwise they must lose their 3 Edw. 6. Act. 9.
debt, and pay cost too. 4. The Barge-Master keeps his two great Courts twice a
year in Barge-Moot-Hall, the Steward under him once in three weeks to decide
Controversies, and punish offenses betwixt Miners. 5. Plaintiffs or Defendants
having three Verdicts passed against them, are bound up for ever. 6. He that
steals Oar twice, is 16 Edw. 1. c. 2.
fined, and the third time struck through his hand with a Knife unto the haft
into the Stow, and is there to stand until death, or loose himself by cutting
off his hand. 7. The Lord for Lot, has the thirteenth dish of Oar, within
their Mine, and six pence a load for Cope.
This Manual (as other Liberal) Art, has Terms peculiar to it sef, which will
not be understood without an Interpreter of their own profession.

Composed by Edward Manlove, Esquire heretosore Steward of the Barge-^Court, for
the Lead Mines* within the said VVapentake.
Bunnings. Polings, Stemples, Forks, and Slyder,
(...), Yokings, Soletrees, Roach and Rider,
Water holes, Wind holes, Veyns, Coe-shafts, and Woughs,
Maine Rakes, Cross Rakes, Brown henns, Buddles, and Soughs,
Bre^k-offs, and Buckers, Randum of the Rake,
Freeings, and chasing of the Stole to the Stake,
Starting of Oar, Smilting, and driving drifts,
Prim-gaps, Roof-works, Flat-works, Pipe-works, shifts,
Cauke, Spar, Lid-stones, Twitches, Daulings and Pees,
Fell, Bous, and Knock-bark, Forstid-Oar and Tees,
Bing-place, Barmoot Court, Barge-master and Stowes,
Crosses, Holes, Hange-benches, Turntree and Coes,
Founder-meers, Taker-meers, Lot, Cope, and Sumps,
Stickings, and Stringes of Oar, Wash-Oar, and Pumps,
Corfe, Clivies, Deads, Meers, Groves, Rake-soil the Gange,
Binge-Oar, a Spindle, a Lampturne, a Fange,
Fleaks, Knockings, Coestid, Trunks and Sparks of Oar,
Sole of the Rake, Smitham, and many more.
Let me add, that whereas Miners complain, that Lead in Somersetshire (as the
Tin in Cornwall) does daily decay, here it does improve and increase. For, as
if Phoebus himself had been their Vulcan, massy pieces of Lead are frequently
found (whereof lately I had one in my hand) so well ripened in the bowels of
the Earth, that they seemed refined, such the original purity thereof.

Manufactures.
Malt.
Though commonness causes contempt, excellent the Art of the first inventing
thereof. I confess it facile to make Barley Water, an invention which found
out it self, with little more than the bare joining the ingredients together.
But to make Malt for Drink, was a masterpiece indeed. How much of Philosophy
concurred to the first Kill of Malt, and before it was turned on the Floor,
how often was it tossed in the Brain of the first inventer thereof.

First to give it a new growth more than the earth had bestowed thereon.
Swelling it in the water to make it last the longer, by breaking it, and taste
the sweeter by corrupting it. Secondly, by making it to pass the fire, the
grain (by Art fermented) acquiring a lusciousnesse (which by nature it had not)
whereby it does both strengthen and sweeten the water wherein it is boiled.

ALE.
Ceres being our English Bacchus, this was our Ancestors common drink, many
imputing the strength of their Infantry (in drawing so stiff a Bow) to their
constant (but moderate) drinking thereof. Yea, now the English begin to turn to
Ale (may they in due time regain their former vigorousness:) and whereas in our
remembrance, Ale went out when Swallows came in, seldom appearing after Easter;
it now hops (having climed up May Hill) to continue its course all the year.
Yet have we lost the Preservative, what ever it was, which (before Hops was
found out) made it last so long in our land some two hundred years since, sor
half a year at the least after the brewing thereof; otherwise of necessity they
must brew every day, yea pour it out of the Kive into the Cup, if the
prodigious English Hospitality in former ages be considered, with the multitude
of menial Servants and strangers entertained. Now never was the Wine of Sarepta
better known to the Syrians, that of Chios to the Grecians, of Phalernum to the
Latins, than the Canary of Derby is to the English thereabout.

Buildings.
Chatsworth erected by the magnificent Lady Elizabeth Cavendish Countess of
Shrewsbury, is a stately Structure thus described by the Mr. Hobbs de
Mirabilibus P^cci.
Poet,

Stat Chatsworth praeclara domus, tu^ mole superba,
Tum Domino magnis, celere^ Deroentis ad unda^.
Miranti similis portam praeterfluit Amnis
Hic tacitus, saxis, infra, supraque sonorus.
Chatsworth which in its bulk it self does pride
And Lord (both great) stands Derwens bank beside.
Which slides still by the gate, as full of wonder,
Though loud with stones above the house and under
The Garden on the backside, with an artificial Rock and Wilderness,
accomplisheth the place with all pleasure.

Wonders.
God who is truly (...), the only Worker of Wonders, has more manifested his
might in this than in any other County in England; such the heaps of Wonders
therein, amongst which we take special notice of

Maim Tor, or Mam-Tor.
Tor is a Hill ascending steep as Glassenbury-Tor. Maim, says Mr. Hobbs de
Mirabilibus pecci.
one, because maimed or broken in the top thereof. Others following the vulgar
pronounciation will have it Mam-Tor (that is) the Mother Hill, because it is
always delivered, and presently with child again: for incredible heaps of sandy
earth constantly fall thence, yet is it not visibly diminished, having, it
seems, (as a constant stream) such a spring of matter whence it is recruited.
It may pass for the Emblem of the liberal man, never impoverished by his
well-bounded and grounded charity, his expenses being re-supplyed by a secret
providence.

Medicinal Waters.
Buxton Well, dedicated to St. Anne, sending forth both cold and warm water, is
little less than miraculous in the effects, thus described by our Idem ibidem.
Author.

Haec resoluta senum confirmat membra trementum,
Et refovet nervos lotrix haec lympha gelatos,
Huc infirma regunt baculis vestigia claudi,
Ingrati referunt baculis vestigia spretis.
Huc, Matter fieri cupiens, accedit inanis,
Plenaque discedit, puto, nec veniente marito.
Old men's numbed joints new vigor here acquire,
In frozen Nerves, this Water kindles Fire.
Hither the Creples halt, some help to find,
Run hence, their (...) unthankt left behind.
The barren Wife here meets her The Translator durst not be so bold as the
Author.
Husbands love,
With such success she strait does Mother prove.
This Well is also famous for the abode of Mary Queen of Scots thereby, who
found much refreshing by the waters thereof.

Princes.
I find no Prince since the Conquest, who saw his first light in this County,
probably because our English Kings never made any long residence therein.

Saints.
St. ALKMUND, son to Alred, King of Northumberland slain in a Battle, on the
behalf of Ethelmund Viceroy of Worcester, pretending to recover Lands against
Duke Wolstan, who detained them, was therefore reputed Saint and Martyr. It
would pose a good Scholar to clear his Title to the later, who lost his life in
a quarrel of civil concernment. On which account in all Battles betwixt
Christians, such as are slain on one side, may lay claim to Martyr-ship.
However it befriendeth his Memory, that his body translated to Derby, was
believed to do miracles, being there with great veneration interred in a Church
called Saint Alkmunds (on the right hand) as Passengers (from the South) go
over the Bridge, whither the Northern people made many Pilgrimages, till
discomposed by the Reformation. What relation Alkmundsbury a Town in
Hantingdonshire has unto Him, is to me unknown.

Martyrs.
JOAN WAST was a blind Woman in the Town of Derbey, and on that account the
object of any man's Alms, rather than the Subject of his cruelty. Besides, she
was seemingly a silly Soul, and indeed an Innocent, though no Fool. And what
says our Ioh. 9. 39.
Savior, For judgment am I come into this world, that they which see not
might see, and that they which see, might be made blind. This poor Woman had a
clear apprehension of Gods Truth, for the testimony whereof she was condemned,
and burnt at the Stake, by the command of Bishop Baines, who as he began with
the Extremes, Mistress Joyce Lewis, one of the best; and this Joan Wast, one of
the basest birth in his Diocese: So no doubt (had not Queen Mary died) he would
have made his cruelty meet in persons of a middle condition.

Cardinals.
ROGER CURSON was born, says my John Bale de script. Brit.
Author, ex nobili quodam Anglorum genere, of Worshipful English extraction.
Now I find none of his surname out of this County, (except some branches lately
thence derived) but in the same, two right ancient Families, one formerly at
Croxton (whose heir general in our age was married to the Earl of Dorset) the
other still flourishes at -- in this County; which moves me to make this Roger
a Native thereof. Bred he was first a Scholar in Oxford, then a Doctor in
Paris, and lastly a Cardinal in Rome, by the Title of Saint Stephen in Mount
Celius. When the City of Damiata in Egypt was taken under John Brenn King of
Jerusalem, our Cardinal Curson was there accompanying Pelagius the Popes
Cardinal: He * Mat. Paris in Anno 1228.
wrote many Books, and came over into England as the Popes Legate in the reign
of King Henry the third. The certain time of his death is unknown.

PHILIP de REPINGDON took, no doubt, his name and birth from Repingdon
(commonly contracted and called Repton) in this County: and I question whether
any other in England of the same name. He was bred, and commenced first
Bachelor, then Doctor of Divinity, in Oxford, where he became a great Champion
and Assertor of the Doctrine of John VVickliff, which caused him much trouble,
and many strict examinations. But, alas, he became like the seed on Mark 13. 20.
stony ground, which not having root in it self, endured but for a while, and
withered away in persecution: for he solemnly recanted his opinions, Fox. Act.
and Mon. page 444.
November. 24. Anno 1383. And to give the better assurance that he was a true
Anti-VVickliffite, from a Professor he became a pers^cutor, and afterward was
termed Rampington by those poor people, whom he so much molested.

Then preferment flowed in thick and threefold upon him, from a Canon, he
became Abbot of Leicester; and Anno 1400. he was made Chancellor of Oxford,
1405. Bishop of Lincoln, 1408. by Pope Gregory the twelfth, he was created
Cardinal of Saint Nerius and Achilleius; though that Pope had solemnly sworn he
would make no more Cardinals, till the Schism in Rome were ended. The best is,
the Pope being Master of the Oath-Office may give himself a Pardon for his own
perjury. What moved this Repington willingly to resign his Bishopric 1420. is
to me unknown.

Prelates.
WILLIAM GRAY, was son to the Lord Gray of Codnor in this County. He suffered *
Godwin in the Bishops of Eely out of Bale and Pits.
not his Parts to be depressed by his Nobility; but, to make his mind the more
proportionable, he endeavored to render himself as able as he was honorable.
He studied first in Baliol College in Oxford, then at Ferrara in Italy, where
he for a long time heard the Lectures of Guarinus of Verona, that accomplished
Scholar. No man was better acquainted with the method of the Court of Rome,
which made our King appoint him his Procurator therein. It is hard to say,
whether Pope Nicholas the fifth, or our King Henry the sixth, contributed most
to his free Election to the Bishopric of Eely; whilst it (...) out of doubt,
his own deserts concurred most effectually thereunto. He sat in that See
twenty four years, and wrote many Pitscus in Appen. Viror. illustrum.
Books, which the envy of time has denied to posterity. Bishop Godwin by See
Sir Hen. Spelmans Catalogue in his Gloss. and Jo. Philpots, page 75.
mistake makes him Chancellor of England, whereas indeed, he was Lord
Treasurer in the ninth of King Edward the fourth, Anno 1469. Let me add, he
was the last Clergyman that ever discharged that Office, until Bishop Juxton
in our days was preferred thereunto. He died Aug. 4. 1478. and lies buried
between two Marble Pillars in his Church, having bestowed much cost in the
reparation of the famous Bellfrie thereof.

Since the Reformation.
GEORGE COOK, D. D. Brother to Sir John Cook Secretary of State, was born at
Trusley in this County, bred in Pembroke Hall in Cambridge. Afterward he was
beneficed at Bigrave in Hertford-shire, where a lean Village (consisting of but
three Houses) makes a fat Living. Hence, he was successively made Bishop of
Bristol and Hereford. A meek, grave and quiet man, much beloved of such who
were subjected to his jurisdiction. He was in the same condemnation with the
rest of his Brethren for subscribing the PROTEST in Parliament in preservation
of their Privileges. The times trod so heavily upon him, that (though he ever
was a thrifty person) they not only bruised the Foot, but brake the Body of
his Estate: so that he had felt want, if not relieved by his rich relations,
dying about the year 1650.

Statesmen.
Sir JOHN COOK, younger Brother to Sir Francis Cook was born at Trusley (in
the Hundred of Appletree) in this County, of ancient and Worshipful Parentage,
allied to the best Family in this County. He was bred Fellow of Trinity
College in Cambridge, and being chosen Rhetoric Lecturer in the University,
grew eminent for his Ingenious and Critical Readings in that School on that
Subject: He then travailed beyond the Seas for some years; returning thence
rich in foraign Language, Observations, and Experience.

Being first related to Sir Fulk Grivell Lord Brook, he was thence preferred to
be Secretary of the Navy, then Master of the Requests, and at last Secretary of
State for twenty years together. He was a very zealous Protestant, and did all
good Offices for the advancement of true Religion: and died the eighth of
September. 1644.

Capital Judges and Writers on the Law.
JOHN STATHOM. He was born in this County, in the Reign of King Henry the
sixth, and was a learned man in the Laws, whereof he wrote an Abridgement, much
esteemed at this day for the Antiquity thereof. For otherwise, Lawyers behold
him (as Soldiers do Bows and Arrows, since the invention of Guns) rather for
sight than service. Yea, a Grandee in that Profession has informed me, that
little of Stathom (if Stathom Tit. Toll. last case of the Title*
any at all) is Law at this day, so much is the practice thereof altered,
whereof the Learned in that faculty will give a satisfactory account; though
otherwise it may seem strange that reason continuing always, the same Law
grounded thereon, should be capable of so great alteration. The first and last
time that I opened this Author I lighted on this passage,

It is the Gospel appointed for the day.
Molendinarius de Matlock tollavit bis ^o quod ipse audivit Rectorem de eadem
villa dicere in Dominica Ram. Palm. Toll, toll. The Miller of Matlock took
toll twice, because he heard the Rectour of the Parish read on Palm It is the
Gospel appointed for the day.
Sunday, Toll, Toll, i. e. crucify him, crucify him.

But, if this be the fruit of Latin Service, to encourage men in Felony, let
ours be read in plain English.

Sir ANTHONY FITZ-HERBERT, Son of Ralph Fitz-Herbert, Esquire, was born at
Norbury in this County. He was first the Kings Sergeant at Law, and was
afterward, in the fourteenth of King Henry the eighth, made one of the
Justices of the Common Pleas; so continuing until the thirtieth year of the
said King, when he died. He wrote the excellent Book De Natura Brevium, with a
great and laborious Abridgement of the Laws, and a Calendar and Index
thereunto; Monuments which will longer continue his Memory, than the flat blew
Marble stone in Norbury Church under which he lies interred.

Seamen.
Sir HUGH WILLOUGHBY was Camb. Brit. in Derby-shire.
extracted from a right worthy and ancient stock at Riseley in this County. He
was in the last year of the reign of King Edward the sixth employed for the
North-East passage, and by the King and Merchants of London, made Captain
General of a Fleet for Discovery of Regions, and places unknown.

Their Fleet consisted of three Ships, the Bona Esperanza Admiral, of one
hundred and twenty Tun; the Edward Bonaventure (whereof Richard Chancelour
Pilot-Major) of one hundred and sixty Tun; and the Good Confidence of ninety
Tun. A large Commission was granted unto them, which Commission did not bear
date from the year of our Lord, but from the year Exemplified in Hackluits
Voyages, Vol. 1. page 231.
of the World, 5515. because in their long Voyage they might have occasion to
present it to Pagan Princes.

They departed from Debtford, May 10. 1553. and after much foul weather,
steered up North-North-East. But on the second day of August a tempest arose,
and their ships with the violence of the Wind were much shattered, and the
Bonaventure, scattered from the other two ships, which never after saw it again.

Sir Hugh, holding on his course, descried a Land (which for Ice he could not
approach) lying from Synam (an Island belonging to the King of Denmark) one
hundred and sixty leagues, being in Latitude seventy two Degrees. This was then
called Willoughby-land, as well it might, seeing it had neither then, or since,
any Owner or Inhabitant pretending to the propriety thereof.

It appears by a Will found in the ship which was the Admiral, in the pocket
of a person of quality, how in January 1554. Sir Hugh and most of his Company
were then in health, though all soon after froze to death in a River or Haven,
called Arzina in Lapland. We are bound in charity to believe them well prepared
for death, the rather because they had with them a Minister, Hackluit ut (...),
page 230
Mr. Richard Stafford by name, (one of the twelve Counselors to manage the
design) who read constantly every morning and evening the English Service, to
those who were in the Admiral, with the Bible and Paraphrases thereon. So that
this may be termed, the first reformed Fleet, which had the English Prayers and
Preaching therein.

However seeing Nocumenta, Documenta, and, that the Ship-wrecks of some are
Seamarks to others; even this Knights miscarriage proved a direction to others.
As for the Bonaventure, which answering its name, was only found by losing it
self, it returned safe, and performed afterward most excellent service, in
opening the Traffic to Muscovy.

Thus, as the last Dog most commonly catches the Hare, which other Dogs have
turned and tired before; so such who succeed in dangerous and difficult
enterprises, generally reap the benefit of the adventures of those who went
before them. As for Sir Hugh and his Company their Discoveries did thaw, though
their Bodies were frozen to death; the English the Summer following finding a
particular account of all passages of their voyages remaining entire in the
Ship wherein they perished.

Lapland has since been often surrounded (so much as accosts the Sea) by the
English, the West part whereof belongs to the King of Sweden, but the East
moity, to the Muscovite. They were generally Heathen, as poor in knowledge as
estate, paying their Tribute in Furs, whose little Houses are but great
^oles, wherein generally they live in the ignorance of Money.

Here let me insert a passage (to refresh the Reader after this long and sad
story) of a Custom in this barbarous Country, from the mouths of credible
Merchants, whose eyes have beheld it. It is death in Lapland to marry a Maid
without her Parents or Friends consent. Wherefore if one bear affection to a
young Maid, upon the breaking thereof to her friends, the fashion is, that a
day is appointed for their friends to meet, to behold the two young parties to
run a Race together. The maid is allowed in starting, the advantage of a third
part of the race, so that it is impossible, except willing of her self, that
she should ever be overtaken. If the Maid overrun her Suitor, the matter is
ended, he must never have her, it being penal for the Man again to renew the
motion of Marriage. But if the Virgin has an affection for him, though at the
first running hard, to try the truth of his love, she will (without Atalantaes
Golden Balls to retard her speed) pretend some casualty, and make a voluntary
hault before she comes to the mark, or end of the race. Thus none are
compelled to marry against their own wills; and this is the cause that in this
poor Country the married people are richer in their own contentment than in
other lands, where so many forced Matches make fained Love, and cause real
unhappiness.

Physicians.
THOMAS LINACER Doctor of Physic, was born in the Town of Weavers Fun. Mon.
page 370.
(...), bred in Oxford, whence, he afterward traveled beyond the Seas,
residing chiefly at Rome and Florence. Returning into England, he brought
Languages along with him, and was the first restorer of Learning in our Nation.
It is questionable. whether he was a better Latinist or Grecian, a better
Grammarian or Physician, a better Scholar or Man for his moral deportment. By
his endeavors, Galen speaks better Latin in the Translation, than he did
Greek in the Original. The last Volume whereof Linacer promised to dedicate to
Archbishop Warham, and excuses his failing therein by a Latin Letter, which
for several reasons I have here exemplified. First, for the quickness of
conceit and purity of style therein. Secondly, because never formerly Printed.
Thirdly, because there is but one Copy thereof writren with Linacers own hand,
prefixed to that numerical Book, which he presented to the said Arch Bishop
bestowed by my old Friend Doctor George Ent on the College of Physicians.
Lastly, because Doctor Christopher Merrick has been pleased carefully to
compare it with the Original.

Reverendissimo in Christo Patri, ac Domino, Domino Gulielmo Dei gratia
Cantuariensi Archi-episcopo, totius Angliae Primati, and Apostolicae sedis
Legato, Thomas Linacrus Medicus, salutem cum debita dicit Observantia.
QUod tibi (Archiepiscope Clarissime!) opus hoc, sicuti promiseram, non
dedicavi, sed ejus duntaxat exemplum ad Te misi, nolis, obsecro, pro spectata
humanitate Tua, me magis aut promissi putare immemorem, aut ejus levem habuisse
curam, quin id implere maxim cupientem, facere tamen non potuisse. Nam cum in
ea sententia sic perstitissem, ut ex ea me, praeter unum, nemo hominum dejicere
potuisset, is profecto, nec alius, eam mutavit. Quippe Rex ipse, cum ex
certorum hominum sermon, qui nimio studio mei, mea omnia nimio plus
praedicant, intellexisset, e tribus partibus, quibus tota Medicinae ars
integratur, hanc, quae hoc codice continetur, esse reliquam; eam quoque, veluti
justam sibi, nec a reliquis nuncupatione distrahendam, vendicavit: justitque
Domino Iohanni Chamber, observantissimo Paternitatis Tuae famulo, tum praesenti
atque audienti, ut sibi eam inscriberem. Itaque cum Te perspicere non dubitem,
quantum apud me valere, quamque legis instar haberi debeat ejus voluntas; non
difficulter, ut spero, a Te impetrabo (id quod etiam magnis precibus contendo)
ut alio quopiam, ex iis, quae in manibus sunt, opere, and studiosis (ut opinor)
futuro non ingrato, oppigneratam Tibi fidem reluere liceat. Quod si concedes,
utrumque per Te simul fiet, ut and voluptate, quam ex requisitis a tanto
principe vigiliis meis concepi, ea fruar; and solicitudine, qua pro redimenda
fide angebar, ea liberer. Nec eo spectat (Reverendissime Praesul!) haec tam
sedula excusatio, quasi ullas meas nugas sic censeam, ut Tibi usquam expetitas,
expetendasve putem. Sic eam potius intelligi postulo, cum Tu mihi primus ad
otium literarium beneficiis aditum aditum patefeceris, justissimum existimasse
me, Tibi ejus otii rationem aliquam esse reddendam, ex qua me intelligeres non
omnino id frustra conterere: Sed cum id, partim instituendis quibusdam, partim
his qualiacunque sunt, ad usum studiosorum scribendis impendam, hoc agere
imprimis, ut qui ex eo audientes legentesve fructum aliquem percipient, Tibi,
quem non minimum ejus autorem ubique profiteor, bonam ejus partem acceptam
referant. Quod utique tum in his, quae jam edidimus, velim faciant, tum quae
alias unquam scribam; nedum quae Tibi nominatim (modo vita supersit)
dicabuntur. Diu valeas, Pater Amplissime.


No Englishman in that age had so learned Bale de scrip. Brit. Cent. 8. Number.
65. and J. Pits in Anno 1524.
Masters, viz. Demetrius, Politian, and Hermolaus Barbarus; so noble Patrons,
viz. Laurence Medices Duke of Florence, whilst he was beyond the Seas, King
Henry the Seventh and Eighth (to whom he was chief Physician) after his return
into England; so high born Scholars, Prince Arthur, with many Lords Sons his
Contemporaries; so learned Friends, Erasmus, Melancthon, Vives, etc.

This Linacer founded two public Lectures in Oxford, and one in Cambridge
(dutifully his respect to his Mother, double above his Aunt) for the study of
Physic, and that Students of that faculty of both Universities may meet the
more conveniently together, he founded the College of Physicians in London.

I much wonder at what I find in good Idem ut prius
Authors, that Linacer a little before his death turned Priest, and began to
study the Scripture, with which he formerly was unacquainted, in so much, that
reading the fifth, sixth, and seventh Chapters of Saint Matthew, he vowed, That
either this was not the Gospel, or We were not Christians, which speech (though
much condemned by the Johan. Check. de Pronunciatione Gr^ca.
Relater thereof) is capable of a charitable sense, as taxing men's Practice so
much different from Gods Precepts.

He died Anno Dom. 1524. on the twelfth of October, and lies buried in Saint
Paul's, under a stately Monument built to his Memory by Doctor John Caius, and a
Phoenix is erected on the top thereof. Yea, I may call these two Doctors, the
two Phenixes of their Profession in our Nation, and justify the expression,
seeing the later in some sort sprang of the Ashes of the former, and Caius came
not into general credit till after the decease of Linacer.

Writers.
THOMAS ASHBURNE was born at that well-known Market Town in this County, (and
not in Stafford shire, as both Bale and Pits mistake) and became an Augustinian
therein; going afterward to Oxford he was doctorated in Divinity. He was a
great Adversary to Wickliff, and in that Synod wherein his Doctrines were
condemned for Heresy, by ten Bishops, twenty Lawyers, and four and forty
Divines, our Ashburne made up one of the last number.

Yet once he did some good, or rather diverted much evil. It happened that one
Peter Pateshul an Augustinian preaching in London, had some passages in favor
of Wickliff, which so displeased those of his own Order, that they plucked him
out of the Pulpit, dragged him into the Covent of Augustines (near Broadstreet)
intending more violence to his person.

This allarumed the Londoners (amongst whom a considerable party of
Wickliffites) to rescue poor Pateshul, who in their rage had burnt the Covent
about the Friars ears, had not our Thomas Walsingham and ex illo Bale Gent. 6.
Number. 77.
Ashburne with his prayers and tears seasonably interceded. He flourished under
King Richard the Second, 1382.

Benefactors to the Public since the Reformation.
ELIZABETH HARDWICK was Daughter to John Hardwick of Hardwick in this County,
Esquire. A Lady of an undaunted spirit, and happy in her several Marriages to
great persons. First, to Sir William Cavendish, then to Sir William Saintloo,
and at last to George Earl of Shrewsbury. She left two sacred (besides civil)
Monuments of her Memory in this County; one that I hope will not [Her Tomb in
All-Hallows] the other, that I am sure cannot be taken away, as registered in
the Court of Heaven: Her stately Almshouse for twelve poor people in Derby.

It will not be amiss here to relate a passage which is reported of this
Countess. Mary Queen of Scots being committed to the keeping of her husband
George Earl of Shrewsbury, the custody of so great a Princess on the Earls
cost, was found not only chargeable, but dangerous; the Popish party daily
practicing her enlargement. Now it happened that this In my computation of
time, this is more proportionable that some ascribe this passage to Girt^ude
the first Wife of George Earl of Shrewsbury.
Countess coming to Court, Queen Elizabeth demanded of her, how the Queen of
Scots did. Madam (said she) she cannot do ill, while she is with my Husband,
and I begin to grow jealous, they are so great together. The Queen, who
disliked any familiarity of that royal Prisoner with so great a Peer,
presently ordered her removal thence into the custody of others. This Countess
died, Anno Dom. --

There is a Free School in the Town of Derby, built as I understand by that
Corporation, and endowed with threescore pounds a year, and I conjecture Mr. R.
Fletcher thrice Bailiff of the Town, I say, by his laudatory Epitaph, I
conjecture him very instrumental to this Work. I understand also that the said
Town has large Privileges, in so much that L^ndoners in some cases pay Toal
at Derbey, but Derbey men in no case Toal at London. I grudge them not their
great Privileges, so long as they employ their public stock to pious uses.

To conclude this Topic, I meet with this memorable passage in one, who
continues the Work of an industrious Stows Survey of London* page 67.
Author, which I will not, yea must not omit.

Diverse well disposed Citizens of London, desirous (as yet) not to be named,
being born in or near to Ashburne in the Peak, in the County of Derbey,
combining their loving benevolence together, have builded there a fair
School-House, with convenient lodgings for a Master, and liberal maintenance
allowed thereto. I hope that their forwardness has since provoked many, and
that their Charity (to allude to their staple Commodity of this County) but in
the Oar, in the times of our Fathers, has since been refined to perfection.

The Names of the Gentry of this County returned by the Commissioners in the
twelfth year of King Henry the sixth.
William Bishop of Coventrie and Lichfield. Commissioners to take the Oaths.
Henry de Gray de Codnore. Richard Vernon. Knights for the Shire. John Cokayne.
Knights for the Shire.

Roberti Carrington. Nicholai Maysham. Thome Stokkes Johan. Wyther Thome
Henster Rog. Wolley. Johan. Strelley Johan. Allibon Johan. Chester Johan.
Wandell Johan. Houghton Will. Orme Will. Burton Will. Rossel. Hen. Sanky Thome
Hye Will. Peek Thome Peek Thome Roberd, Brasier. Roberti Warpeley Johan.
Fassakirley Hen. Bancroft Johan. Hegge Rob. Shore Hen. Crabbe Johan. Cook
Rich. Peek Rob. Hewster Johan. Tykhull Edm. Johnson Johan. Stretton Hen.
Shepherd Thome Draper Will. Thorstell Johan. Burton Will. Maskyr Will.
Satteby Rob. Stanley, Smith Tho. Stanley, Ironmonger Hen. Cook Edm. Lacy Johan.
Pesall Johan. Peek, Curriour Johan. Benet, Brasier Nicholai Lacy Iohannis By
Watyr Johannis Spicer Johannis Lockyer, sen. Iohannis Lockyer, jun. Richardi
Baker Iohannis Dunston Thome Stanley, Smith Williel. Smith, Tailor. Johannis
Wodecok Roberti Clerk, Smith Iohannis Manyashe, Glover. Nicholai Cust Roberti
Hudgray Iohannis Greaterler Richardi Walker Iohannis Butler Johan. Chestirshire
Johan. Bower, Senioris Johan. Bower, Junioris Johannis Halom Nicholai Baxter
Williel. Cartwright. Rich. Brown Skinner Henrici Derley Roberti Potter
Hankeston Johannis Potter Richardi Whitehalls Johannis Wede Plasterer Johan.
Persal, Tailour Iohannis Hoke Rich. Wright Iohannis Somer Rad. Batesson Johan.
Litlechirch Willielmi Johnson Richardi Talliour Richardi Colleman Roberti Nundi
Iohannis Hegge Iohannis Hatton Willielmi Goldsmith Willielmi Bullock Rogeri
Spicer. Richardi Mody Willielmi Seler Iohannis Stone Henrici Shore Willielmi
Walker Iohannis West Johannis Pen Willielmi Cutteler Richardi Keye Willielmi
Shepherd Johan. Deye, Couper Roberti Euyngton Henrici Perpoint, Chivalier Thome
Folliambe, Armigeri Nicholai Johnsill, Armigeri Iohannis Leek, Armigeri
Williel. Ulkerthorpe, Armigeri Iohannis Lynacre, Armigeri Simonis Ulgerthorpe,
Gent. Thome Cause, Gentleman Rob. Newbolt, Gent. Rad. Clappewell Willielmi
Hardwick Gent. Willielmi Lynacre; Gent. Williel. Ulgerthorp, Gent. Johan.
Halmworth de Stanley Iohannis Whitington Gent. Iohannis Both de Elmeton, Gent.
Iohannis Barker de Door, Gent. Rich. Seliok, Gent. Roberti Wennesley, Gent.
Joh. Marshal de Egynton, Gent. Thome Marshal de Onlecotes, Gent. Will. Smith de
Egynton, Gent. Rob. Parker de Norton. Tho. Fox de Aston. Johannis Noble de
Hohneffeld Ioh. Parker de Norton Tho. Cook de eadem Will. Del More de Grenhul
Williel. Botonne Willielmi Parker de Shirlond Rich. Stykland, de Ashover Rad.
Huchonson, de eadem Roberti Seriount de Dronfield VVilliel. Outrem de Holmfeld
Iohannis Fox de Barleylees Rad. At Wode Iohannis Shanghe de Somersale
Iohannis Shagheuoc Will. Roudolf Williel. Budde Iohannis Capronn Iohannis
Brailesforth Roberti Shoter Richardi Callcroft de Chesterfeld Richardi Delkere
de eadem Ely Dikkesson de eadem Thome Callcroft de eadem Henrici de
Brythrechefold, Arm. Thome Hugate de Chesterfeld Johan. Harison de Egynton
Johan. Spynkhull Roberti Hasellherst Willielmi Grene de Ken Walmersho Sannyer
Atkin de eadem Thome Walshe de Stanley Roberti Bishangh de Sutton Johan.
Webster de Bellesouer Thome Mariori de eadem Johan. Wodeword Thome Withwyth
Willielmi Aleyn de Norton Willielmi Bullok de eadem Rogeri Pynder de Pilleslay
Willielmi Pynder de eadem. Johan. Amori Thome Gresley, Chivaler Roberti
Francys, Armigeri Iohannis Curson de Croxhale Henrici Holland de Caldwale
Iohannis Abbeny Thome Stokes Iohannis Franceys de Tykenall Will. Lymster
Iohannis Waren Iohannis Perfy Richardi Eyton Thome Tronche Nicholai Chaloner
Johannis Elton Johannis Godhale, Senioris Johannis Elton, Junioris Willielmi
Pont Richardi Twigg Thome Paynter Johannis Moseley Johan. Smith Ferrour. Johan.
Smith, Baker. Johannis Elyson Johannis Sharp Richardi Madley Johannis Baker
Rad. Gyles Rogeri Wilkinson Johannis Bate Johannis Pees Roberti Vernonn Rogeri
Cowhope Richardi Smalley Roberti Twyforth Walteri Twyforth Iohannis Stathum
Thome Makworth Johan. Lathebury Johan. Welbek Johan. Leymestyr Richardi Keys
Ingram Frannceys Jerardi Moynell Hen. Makworth Roberti Smalley Rich. Frannceys
de Stanton Roberti Cokfeld Gilberti Keys de Spondon Iohann. Grandon de eadem
Iohannis Grandon de Denby Henrici Slack de Stanley Roberti Winter Tho.
Babyngton Joh. Sancheverell Will. Lemestre Roberti Kneton Iohannis Roleston de
Lee Walteri Wolley Iohannis Gretray de Elton Ioh. Richardeson de Alsop Rogeri
Hawe de Elton. Nicholai Mountgomery Chiv. Hen. Kneton, Armigeri Rad. Shirley.
Armigeri Henrici Bradbourne. Henrici Both, Armigeri Iohannis Curson, Armigeri
Thome Kneton de Mircaston Willielmi Dethyk de Braidesall Nicholai Fitz-Herbert
Iohannis Fitz-Herbert Willielmi Mountgomere Rob. Shanghe Iohannis Ronyngton.
Iohannis Roleston de Swarston Willielmi Lemestyr. Iohannis Crewker Henrici de
Sale Galfridi de Sale Rob. Miller de Roddesley Rob. Millner de Roddesley Thome
Prince de Trusseley Thome Saperton Ioh. Dantre de Hatton ^illielmi de Cross de
Hilton Roberti Weyke de Hatton Rich. Slater de Brailesforth Rob Bradshaugh de
Wyneley Thome Prince de eadem. Richardi Millner de Hagge Petri de la Pole
Radulphi de la Pole Henrici de la Pole Johannis Mountgomery Henrici Rolleston
Iohannis Rollesley, Senioris Iohannis Rollesley, Junioris Iohannis Northwode
Johannis Cook de Edensore Rogeri Calton de ea. Willielmi Hikedonne Sen. de
eadem Will. Hikedonne, jun. Rogeri North de B^bynhall Willielmi Jackson de
Hassop Rogeri Cok de Edensore Io. Stafford de Midleton Johan. Stafford de Eyham
Rich. Cobyn de Eyham Io. Shakerley de par Longesdon Oliveri Halley de Aston
Iohannis Balgy de Aston Rob. Hayr de Padley Rad. Leche de Padley Willielmi Hayr
de eadem Thurstam de Hall Thome Woderoffe Nicholai Scaley Nich. del Air de
Hope Will. Kingesson Roberti Ratcliff de Mellehour Iohannis Hide de Longlee
Nich. Hollond de Lies Thome Wolley de Chalesworth Willialmi Wolley de eadem
Johan. del Both de Chalesworth Thome Wagstaffe de Glossop Nich. Wagstaffe de
eadem. Rad. Bradbury de Oldresset. Rogeri Bradbury de eadem Iacobi de Lie de
Fernely Johan. Shaleros de Shaleros Will. Ragge de Bondon Edwardi Bradshaugh
de eadem Nicholai Bronn de Mershe Egidii Claybrook, Vicarii Ecclesiae de
Castelton Thome Claybrook de eadem. Rad. Newham de eadem Thome Newham de eadem
Thome Newham de Flixton Rich. Newham de Castelton Thome Nedham de Foxlowe
Roberti Woderof de VVormhill Iohannis Tunsted de eadem Iohannis Nedham de eadem
Hug. VVillesson de Lytton Richardi Ropere de eadem VVillel. Bradshaugh de
Tiddeswall Hugonis Strelley de Burg Will. Manyashe de Manyashe Thome Fletcher
de eadem. Iohannis Delmere de eadem Rich. None de Hurdelow Nich. Bradshaugh de
Tiddeswall Henrici Bradshaugh de eadem Henrici Bradshaugh de eadem Rog. Massy
de Highlowe Rich. Stafford de ead. Henrici Stafford de Derley Thome Fox de
Banford Rad. Bagshaugh de Cunbes Willielmi Bagshaugh de capella supra le Fryth.
Thome Bagshaugh de Rigge Radul. Stanley personae de Kirke-Ireton Iohannis
Stepyngstones Capellani and Vicarii Ecclesiae de Penteryche.
Sheriffs of Derby and Nottingham Shires.
HEN. II.
Anno 1 Osbertus Silvan Anno 2 Radulph. filius Engelrami Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4
Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Anno 7 Radus filius Engelrami, for five years. Anno 12 Rob.
filius Radulph. for four years. Anno 16 Will. filius Radulph. for eight years.
Anno 24 Will. filius Rad. and Serlo de Grendon Anno 25 Serlo de Grendon Anno 26
Will. filius Rad. and Serlo de Grandon Anno 27 Radul. Mordach, for seven
RICH. I.
Anno 1 Rad. Murdach Anno 2 Null. Tit. Com. in Rotulo. Anno 3 Anno 4 Anno 5
Anno 6 Willel. Breewerre, for five years.
Reg. JOHAN.
Anno 1 Williel. Bryewerr Anno 2 Anno 3 Hugo. Bardulph. and Willel. de Lech
Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Hugo. Bardul. and Regin. de Carduill Anno 6 Rob. de Veteri
ponte and Rich. de Bello Campo Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Idem. Ut
Custos. Anno 10 Anno 11 Idem. Anno 12 Ph. Marc. and Pet. Marks, for four
years. Anno 12 Ph. de Marc. and Eustach. de Ludenham. Anno 17 Ph. de Marc.
HEN. III.
Anno 1 Anno 2 Ph. Marc. for six years. Anno 8 Radulph. filius Nicholai Anno 9
Idem. Anno 10 Idem. Anno 11 Rad. filius Nich. and Hugo. le Bell, for 8. years.
Anno 19 Rad. filius Nich. and Will. de Derley Anno 20 Idem. Anno 21 Hugo.
filius Rad. and Rob. le Vavesor Anno 22 Idem. Anno 23 Idem. Anno 24 Williel. de
Cantilupo, and Bald. de Pannton Anno 25 Idem. Anno 26 Baldwin. de Pannton, for
five years. Anno 31 Rob. de Vavesor, for eight years. Anno 39 Roger de Lunetal.
Anno 40 Idem. Anno 41 Idem. Anno 42 Simon. de Heydon Anno 43 Idem. Anno 44
Simon. de Aslacton Anno 45 Johan. de Baylloel and Simon. de Heidon. Anno 46
Idem. Anno 47 Will. fill. Herberti ut Custos Hen. filius ejus. Anno 47 Hugo. de
Stapilford Cleric. ejus. Anno 48 Idem. Anno 49 Regin. Gray and Hugo de
Stapelford, for 5. years. Anno 54 Hugo. de Stapilford, Clericus. Anno 54
Walterus Ebora. Archiepiscopus. Anno 55 Idem.
EDW. I.
Anno 1 Walt. Ebora. Archiep. Anno 2 Walt. de Stirchesley, for 5. years. Anno 7
Gervasius de Clifton, for 7. years. Anno 14 Johan. de Arasle, for five years.
Anno 19 Will. Chetworth Anno 20 Idem. Anno 21 Ph. de Pannton Anno 22 Walt.
Goufle, for 4. years. Anno 26 Johan. de Harington Anno 27 Rad. de Shirle Anno
28 Idem. Anno 29 Rich. de Turneaus Anno 30 Rad. de Shirle Anno 31 Petrus Picot,
for 4. years Anno 35 Will. de Chelardeston
EDW. II.
Anno 1 Petrus Picot and Williel. de Chelaston Anno 2 Johan. de Strichesley
Anno 3 Rad. de Crophul Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Idem. and Johan. de la Beach Anno 6
Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Johan. de Bellaside, for 4. years. Anno 12 Idem. and Hugo
de Stokes Anno 13 Johan. Darcy Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15 Idem. Anno 16 Anno 17 Hen.
de Taucombye Anno 18 Idem.
EDW. III.
Anno 1 Rob. Ingram Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Johan. Greet and Mundus Cressey Anno 3
Tho. Languilers Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Rob. de Jorce Anno 6 Idem. Anno 7 Anno 8
Johan. de Oxon. Anno 9 Tho. de Bickeringe, and Joh. de Oxon. Anno 10 Idem. Anno
11 Tho. de Beckeringe Anno 12 Egid. de Meyguil, and Joh. de Oxon Anno 13 Idem.
Anno 14 Egidius de Meyguil. Anno 15 Hugo de Hercy Anno 16 Nich. de Langforde
Anno 17 Idem. Anno 18 Johan. de Musters and Nich. de Langford Anno 19 Gervasius
de Clifton Anno 20 Tho. de Bickeringe Anno 21 Johan. de Vaux Anno 22 Idem. Anno
23 Idem. Anno 24 Johan. Walleys, for five years. Anno 29 Walt. de Monte Gomeri,
and Johan. Walleys Anno 30 Rog. Michal Anno 31 Rich. de Gray and Rogerus
Michael Anno 32 Johan. de Gresley Anno 33 Hen. de Bralesford Anno 34 Rob. de
Morton Anno 35 Rog. Beler. Anno 36 Idem. Anno 37 Rich. de Bingham Anno 38
Simon. de Leykes Anno 39 Rob. de Twiford Anno 40 Idem. Anno 41 Idem. Anno 42
Sampson de Strelley Anno 43 Roger. Belor, for five years. Anno 48 Johan.
Francis Anno 49 Samp. de Strelley Anno 50 Anno 51
Sheriffs of Derby and Nottingham Shires.
Name Place Arms. RICH. II. Anno I All the reign of this King. RECORDA MANCA.
(...) IV. Anno I From the first to the last year of this King. RECORDA MANCA.
HEN. V. Anno I This Kings whole reign. RECORDA MANCA. HEN. VI. Anno 1 Ioh.
Gokain, Mil. A shdown. Arg. three Cocks, Gules. 2 Tho. Chaworth, m. Wiverton.
Azure, 2 Ch^verons, Or. 3 Rich. Vernon, mil. Haddon. Arg. Fretty, Sab. a
Canton, G 4 Ioh. la Zouch, mil. Haringw. Gul. 10. Bezants, a quarter Er. 5 Tho.
Greisly, mil. Greisly C. Varry, Erm. and Gules. 6 Norm Babingt ^ a. Dethlck.
Arg. ten Torteauxes, 4. 3. 2. and 1. 7 Ioh. Cokain, mil. ut prius. 8 Ioh.
Cakfeld, ar. 9 Hug Willoughby, (...) Ris^ly. Or, on 2 Bars, Gul. 3 water
Bougets, Arg. 10 Nich. Montgom. m* 11 Will. Meringe. * G. achev. bet. 3 flow.
de lys Or. 12 Rob. Markham, m* Az. in a chief, Or, a Lion issuant Gul. and
Border, Arg. 13 Ioh. Kokain, mil* ut prius 14 Tho. Darcy. 15 Ioh. Curson.
Kedliston Arg. on a Bend, Sab. 3. Popingaies, Or, collared Vert. 16 Ioh.
Hikeling. 17 Will. Meringe. 18 Ioh. Cockfeld. 19 Tho. St^nnton. Vorry, Arg. and
S. a Canton, G. 20 Io. Walbyes. 21 Io. Pole. Radburne Per pale, Or, and Sab. a
saltire engrailed counterchanged. 22 Tho. Nevil. * * Gules, a saltire, Ermin.
23 Io. Stathum. 24 Rob. Strelley. 25 Tho. Blount. Bar Nebulee of six, Or, and
S. 26 Nich. Fitz-Herbert Norbnry. Arg. a Chief Vairee, Or, and Gules, a bend,
Sable. 27 Tho. Stannton ut prius 28 Rich. Willough by. ut prius 29 Rob.
Clifton. Clifton N Sable, seem de Cinque foils, a Lion rampant, Arg. 30 Rob.
Strelley. 31 Will. Plumpton, m. 32 Ioh. Grisley, mil. ut prius 33 Ioh. Stanop.
Shelford Quarterly Ermine and Gules. 34 Will. Babington. ut prius 35 Ioh.
Wastneis. Hendon Sable, a Lion rampant, Arg. collared, Gules. 36 Will.
Chaworth, ar. ut prius 37 Will. Fitz-Herbert. ut prius 38 Rob. Clifton ar: ut
prius. EDW. IV. Anno 1 Rich. Willoughby ut prius 2 Ioh. Stanhop, ar. ut prius 3
Idem. ut prius 4 Rob. Strelley, mil. 5 Ph. Okere, mil. 6 Nich. Fitz-Herb. ar ut
prius 7 Nich. Kniveton, ar. Mercasto Gul. a Chev. Vairee, Arg. and Sable. 8 Rob
Clifton, mil. ut prius 9 Hen. Perpoint, mil. Halm Per. Arg. a Lion rampant,
Sable, in an Orle of cinque foyles, Gules. 10 Will. Blount, ar. ut prius 11
Hen. Perpoint, mil. ut prius 12 Ger. Clifton, ar. ut prius 13 Ioh. Curson, ar.
ut prius 14 Ph. Oker. 15 Hen. Stathum, ar. 16 Will. Basset, ar. Brailesf. Or,
three piles, Gules, a canton, Ermin. 17 Rad. Pole, ar. ut prius 18 Gerv.
Clifton, ar. ut prius 19 Ioh. Babington, ar. ut prius 20 Rob. Markham, mil. ut
pri^s 21 Rob. Air. 22 ^ar. Pilkinton. RICH. III. Anno 1 Gerv. Clifton, mil. ut
prius 2 Ioh Curson, ar. ut prius 3 Nich Montgomery. ut pr^us HEN. VII. Anno 1
Ioh. Byron, mil. 2 Ioh. Curson, ar. ut prius 3 Gerv. Clifton. ut prius 4 Ioh.
Leeke, ar. Sutton D. Arg. on a Saltyr engrailed, Sable, 9. Annulets, Or. 5
Nich. Knifton, sen. ut prius 6 7 Iacobus Savage, ar. 8 Nich. Byron, ar. 9 Nich.
Knifton, jun. ut prius 10 Bri. Stamford, ar. 11 Hen. Willoughby, m ut prius 12
Rad. Shirley, mil. Shirley D. Paly of six, Or, and Azure, a canton, Erm. 13
Tho. Babington. ut prius 14 Will. Both, ar. 15 Humf. Hercy, ar. 16 Rad.
Longford, m. 17 Gerv. Clifton, mil. ut prius 18 Will. Perpoint, ar. ut prius 19
Hen. Vernam, mil. ut prius 20 Simon. Digby, ar. Azure, a flower de lys, Arg. 21
Will. Mering, mil. 22 Idem. 23 Edw. Stanhope, m. ut prius 24 Idem. ut prius
HEN. VIII. Anno. 1 Br. Stapulton, mil. 2 Will. Zouch, ar. ut prius 3 Rich.
Basset, ar. ut prius 4 Geo. Chaworth, ar. ut prius 5 Roger Minars: 6 Will.
Mering, mil. 7 Ioh. Zouch, mil. ut prius 8 Rob. Brown, ar. 9 Br. Stapulton,
mil. 10 Ioh. Markham, m. ut prius 11 God. Fuliamb, mil. ut prius 12 Ioh.
Cokain, mil. ut prius 13 Will. Perpoint, mil, ut prius 14 Ioh. Vernon, ar. ut
prius 15 Ioh. Byron, mil. 16 Godf. Fuliamb, mil. ut prius 17 Ioh. Markham, mil.
ut prius 18 Ioh. Vernon, ar. 19 John Byron, mil. 20 Nich. Strelley, ar. 21 Tho.
Cokain, mil. ut prius 22 Hen. Sachenerel, m. Argent, a Saltire, Azure, 5. water
Bougets, Arg. 23 Will. Coffin, ar. 24 Ioh. Hercy, ar. 25 Anth. Babing ton, m ut
prius 16 27 Rad. Langford, mil 28 Godf. Fuliamb mil. ut prius 29 Nich.
Strelley, mil. 30 Ioh. Markham, mil. ut prius 31 Will. Basset, mil. ut prius 32
Gerv. Clifton, mil. ut prius 33 Hen. Sachenerel, m. ut prius 34 Ioh. Byron,
mil. 35 Ioh. Hercy, arm. 36 Ioh. Zouch, ar. ut prius 37 Ioh. Markham. mil. ut
prius 38 Gerv. Clifton, mil. ut prius EDW. VI. Anno 1 Fran. Leeke ut prius 2
Ioh. Hercy, mil. 3 Tho. Cokain, mil. ut prius 4 Hen. Sotton, mil. 5 Ioh. Byron,
mil. 6 Anth. Nevil, mil. ut prius PHIL. and MAR. Anno M. 1 Ioh. Port, mil. 1.
2. Geo. Clifton, mil. ut prius 2. 3. Ia. Fuliamb, mil. ut prius 3. 4. Io.
Chaworth. mil ut prius 4. 5. Will. Hollis, mil. Houghton Erm. 2. Piles, Sable.
5. 6. Gerv Perpoint, m. ut prius ELIZ. REG. Anno 1 Tho. Kockeyne, mil. ut prius
2 Will. Mering, mil. 3 Ioh. Zouch, mil. ut prius 4 Tho. Stanhop, mil. ut prius
5 Humf. Bradborn, (...) 6 Fr. Molineux, ar. Azure, a Cross moline quarter
pierced, Or. 7 Tho. Gerard, mil. 8 Godf. (...), m. ut prius 9 Fr. Curson, arm.
and Anth. Strelly. ut prius

Sheriffs of Derby-shire alone.
E^IZ. REG. Anno 10 Nich. Langford. 11 Tho. Kokayn, mil. Ashburne Arg. three
Cocks, Gules. 12 Pet. Frechvile, ar. Azure, six scallops^ Argent. 13 Ioh.
Zouch, mil. Gul. ten Bezants, a quarter Er. 14 Fra. Leke, ar. Sutton Arg. on a
saltire, engrailed, Sab. 9. Annulets, Or. 15 Humf. Bradborn. 16 Germ. Pole. ar.
17 Ioh. Manners, ar. Haddon Or, two Bars, Az. on a Chief quarterly, 2 flower de
lys of France, and a Lion of (...). 18 Fran. Wortley, ar.* York shire 19 Will.
Basset, ar. 20 Godf. Fuliamb, ar.* Walton * Arg. a Bend with 3 Besants betwixt
6 Martlets, Gul. 21 Tho. Cockain, mil. ut prius 22 Ioh. Zouch, mil. ut prius
Or, 3 Piles, Gul. a Canton Er. 23 Ioh. Harper, ar. Calke ^ S. a Bend bet. 6.
scallops, Or. 24 Hen. Cavendish. ar* Chatswo. Arg. a Lion rampant within a
border engrailed, S able. 25 Fran. Curson, ar. Kedlifton 26 Ioh. Vernon, ar. *
* Sable, 3 Bucks Heads cabosed, Arg. attired, Or. 27 Tho. Cockayn, mil. ut
prius 28 Fran. Leake, ar. ut prius Arg. on a bend, Sab. 3. Popingais Or,
collered, Vert. 29 Will. Kniveton, ar. Mircaston 30 Ioh. Manners, ar. ut prius
* Arg. frettee Sab. a canton, G. 31 Godf. Fuliamb, ar. ut prius 32 Humf.
Dethick, ar. Arg. a Fesse Varr^, Or, and Gul. bet. 3. water bougets, Sa. 33
Tho. Gresley, ar. Greisly C. 34 Will. Basset, ar. ut prius Varry, Ermin and
Gules. 35 Fran. Cockain, ar. ut prius 36 Ioh. Rodes, ar. Balbrough Arg. a Lion
passant, bend-ways, Gul. dotfessed Ermin, betw. 37 Will. Cavendish, ar. ut
prius 38 Geo. Curson, ar. ut prius 3. Acorns, Azure. 39 Ioh Manners, ar. ut
prius 40 Hen. Sacheverel, ar Arg. a saltire, Az. 5. water Bougets, Argeet. 41
Io. Willoughby, ar* Riseley 42 Edw Cockain, ar. ut prius * Or, on two Bars,
Gul. 3. water Bougets, Argent. 43 Pet. Frechvile, ar. ut prius 44 Fran
Fitz-Herbert. Norbury Argent, a Chies Varry, Or, and Gules, a (...), Sable. 45
Tho. Gresley, mil. ut prius JACOBUS. Anno 1 Tho. Gresley, mil ^t prius 2 Fran.
Leake, mil. ^t prius 3 Ioh. Harper, mil. ut prius 4 Hen Willoughby. a ut prius
5 Rich Harpe^, ar. ut prius 6 Hen. Cavendish, ar ut prius 7 Ioh. Curson, ar* ut
prius 8 Tho. Burdet, ar. Az on 2 (...), Or, 6. Martlets, Gules. 9 Geo. Fulwood
mil. 10 He^. Leigh, mil. Gul. a Cross engrailed, in the first quarter a
Lozenge, Arg. 11 Tho. (...), mil.* 12 Will Kniv^ton, bar. ut prius * Gul. on a
Bend, Argent, 3. 13 Ioh. Bullock, ar. Crosses patee, Sable. 14 Hen. Agard, ar.
15 Fran. Monday, ar. 16 Rog. Manners. mil. ut prius 17 Godf. Tacker, ar. 18
Ioh. Milward, ar. Erm. on a fess, Gules, 3. plates 19 Tho. Air, ar. 20 Iacinth
Sacheverel, Argent, on a Saltyre, Azure, 5. water Bougets of the field. 21
(...). Kniveton, m. ut prius 22 Ioh. Fitz-Herbert. ut prius CAROL. I. Anno 1
Hen. Harper, ar. ut prius 2 Ioh Fitz Herb. mil. ut prius 3 Edw. Vernon, mil. ut
prius 4 T^o. Burton, ar. 5 Ioh. Stanhope, mil. ut prius 6 Fran. Bradshaw, ar. 7
Humf. Oakeover, ar. 8 Ioh. Manners, ar. ut prius 9 Fran. Foliamb, b^r. ut prius
10 Ioh. Gell. ar. 11 Ioh. Millward, ar. ut prius 12 Ioh. Harpur, mil. ut prius
13 Ioh. Harpur, bar. ut prius 14 Ioh. Curson, bar. ut prius 15 Ioh. Agard, ar.
16 17 Ioh. Harpur, bar. ut prius 18 19 20 Edw. Cook, bar. Partee per (...),
Gules and Azure, 3. Eagles, Argent. 21 22 Mich Bartonar.

Hen. VIII.
18. JOHN VERNON, Arm.]

Indeed I meet with many Vernons in this Catalogue of Sheriffs, Henry, John,
etc. but cannot find him I seek for, viz. Sir George Vernon of Haddon in this
County. I assign my self this reason, that he never executed that Office,
because it was beneath a Prince to be a Sheriff; and such his vast revenues and
retinue, that in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth, he was called the King of
the Peak. This Sir George left two Daughters, Coheirs, Elizabeth married to Sir
John Manners, Ancestor to the present Earl of Rutland, and Margaret to Sir
Thomas Stanley, younger Son of the House of Derby, deriving a vast Inheritance
to their Husbands.

How this Sir John, this year Sheriff, stood to him related, is to me unknown:
sure I am, some of his surname and alliance still flourish in this and the
neighboring Counties, where they have a fair Estate. Yet will they remember
their Motto, Ver non semper floret, so ill it is to trust in the fading Spring
of humane felicity.

The Farewell.
I understand that it is fashionable in this County for Adventurers to begin a
Mine with this solemn expression,

Edward Manlow, Esquire in his customs of the BargeMoot-Court.
For the Grace of God, and what I there can find. By the grace of God
understanding good success, otherwise saving Grace is not to be sought for by
mining of Earth, but mounting up to Heaven by Faith and Repentance. This their
expression I approve, the Earth being the Lords, and the fullness thereof (both
beneath and above ground) belongs unto him.

I have read, that the Vicars in that Country do receive every tenth Dish of
Oar for their due, being obliged thereby to pray heartily for the Miners. Now
though no such place or profit belongs unto me, yet, treating of this
subject, I conceive my self bound (if not in Conscience) in Courtesy, to wish
these Workmen a good speed in their lawful endeavors, whilst they only
undermine the Earth, and not their Neighbors right by fraudulent practices.
May their Lot prove a Prize unto them, that they may gain, at the least no
Blank to lose thereby. Particularly, may Divine Providence fecure the Persons
of their Laborers from Damps and other casualties, which have happened to
many, when the Earth (though cruel to kill) was courteous to bury them by the
same mischance.

DEVON-SHIRE.
DEVON-SHIRE has the Narrow Sea on the South, the Severn on the North, Cornwall
on the West, Dovset and Somersetshire on the East. A goodly Province, the
second in England for greatness, clear in view without measuring, as bearing a
square of fifty miles. Some part thereof, as the South-Hams, is so fruitful, it
needs no art; some so barren, as Dart-more, it will hardly be bettered by art;
but generally (though not running of it self) it answers to the spur of
industry. No Shire shows more industrious, or so many Husbandmen, who by Marle
(blew and white) Chalk, Lime, Sea-sand, Compost, Sopeashes, Rags, and what not?
make the ground both to take and keep a moderate fruitfulness; so that Virgil,
if now alive, might make additions to his Georgicks, from the Plough-practice
in this County. As for the Natives thereof, generally they are dexterous in any
employment, and Queen Elizabeth was wont to say of their Gentry, They were all
born Courtiers with a becoming confidence.

Natural Commodities.
Silver.
This formerly was found in great plenty in the Parish of Comb-Martin (Miners
be ing fetched out of Derby-shire for the digging thereof) in the Reign of King
Edw. 1. (which as appears by Extant in the Tower, in the years here noted.
Record on the account of those trusted therein) turned to a considerable
profit.

In the two and twentieth Year of the Reign of King Edward the first, William
Wymondham accounted for two hundred and seventy pounds weight of Silver. It was
forged for the Lady Elianor Duchess of Bar, and Daughter to the said King,
married the year before.

In the twenty third year of the said King, was fined five hundred and twenty
one pounds ten shillings weight.

In the four and twentieth year of his Reign, there was brought to London in
fined Silver in Wedges, seven hundred and four pounds three shillings and one
penny weight.

In the twenty fifth year of his Reign, though three hundred and sixty Miners
were impressed out of the Peak and Wales, great was that years clear profit in
Silver and Lead.

In the Reign of Edward the third, it appears by the Record of particular
Accountants, that the profits of the Silver were very considerable toward the
maintenance of the Kings great expenses in the French War.

These Mines long neglected (as I conjecture, by reason of the Civil Wars
bewixt York and Lancaster) were re-entred on by an Artist in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, who presented a Silver Cup made thereof to the Earl of Bath, with
this Inscription:

In Martins-Comb ^ng lay I hid, obscure, deprest with grossest soil.
Debased much with mixed Lead, till Bullmer came, whose skill and Toil
Reformed me so pure and clean, as richer no where else is seen.
These Mines have not as yet recovered their former credit: Though I understand
that some are still pursuing this design, and I do wish well to their
endeavors. Not that Private Men should lose by their Lead* But the public
gain by their Silver.

Tinn.
God said to Israel by the mouth of his Isaiah 1. 25.
Prophet, And I will take away all thy Tinn. Sad the case of this County, if so
served. But what went before? 1. 22.
Thy Silver is become Dross. It seems the Kings of Israel, being reduced to
poverty, debased their Coin (the last refuge of Princes) adulterating it with
Tinn, and herein God promised, that their Coin should be refined to the true
Standard. This the litteral meaning of the Promise, mistically imports; that
God would restore the Primitive Purity of his Service, purged from Errors and
Vices.

In this mistical sense, it will not be amiss to wish, that God would take
away the Tinn from Devon-shire, seeing such taking it away may consist with the
Continuance and Advance of the Metal therein.

As for their Litteral Tinn, so plentiful herein, I wish some Artifice might be
found out (hitherto unknown) to sever the Gold and Silver from the Tinn,
without wasteing: Till this be done, I desire some invention might prepare
Sea-coals for the melting thereof; hereby much Wood would be saved, and the
Product of the Tinn not diminished, and not so much wasted in the Blast, which
now they are fain to run over three or four times: I am encouraged in the
Feasibility thereof, because a Doctor Jordan in his History of Baths. Page 60.
Learned Chemist (no Emperick, but well experimented) affirmed, that it may be
done, on his own knowledge, by many trials which he has made upon it.

Herrings.
These still are taken in great, and were formerly in greater plenty in this
County. For I read of great quantities of them for six or seven years together,
taken at Limmouth, until the Manuscript of Baronet Northcolt.
Proctor (as is said) not contented with reasonable and indifferent Tithes,
vexed the Poor Fishermen, with unusual and extraordinary payments. Whether
since the God of Nature, to condemn such covetousness, has withdrawn such
store of Fish, or whether the Fishermen disheartened with such exactions,
withdrew their own Industry, I know not. This I know, that light gains, as in
all other commodities, so especially in Tithes of this nature, make the
heaviest purses. But we shall speak more conveniently of Herrings in Norfolk.

Strawberries,
In Latin Fraga, most toothsome to the Palate, (I mean if with Claret Wine or
sweet Cream) and so plentiful in this County, that a Traveller may gather them,
sitting on Horseback in their hollow Highwayes; they delight to grow on the
North side of a bank, and are great coolers. These small and sour, as growing
wild (having no. other Gardener then Nature) quickly acquire greatness and
sweetness, if transplanted into Gardens, and become as good as those at
Porbery in Somersetshire, where twenty pounds per annum (thank the vicinity of
Bristol) have been paid for the Tithe thereof. I would not wish this County the
increase of these Berries, according to the Proverb; Cut down an Oak, and set
up a Strawberry.

Hurtberries,
In Latin Vaccinia, most wholesome to the Stomach, but of a very astringent
Nature, so plentiful in this Shire, that it is a kind of Harvest to poor
people, whose Children nigh Axminster, will earn 8 pence a day for a Month
together, in gathering them. First they are green, then red, and at last a dark
blew. The whitest hands amongst the Romans did not disdain their Blackness,
witness the Virg. Eclog. 2.
Poet,

-- Vaccinia nigra leguntur. Nothing more have I to observe of these Berries,
save; that the Ancient and Martial Family of the Baskervills in Hereford-shire
give a Cheveron betwixt three Hurts proper, for their Arms.

Manufactures.
Bone-lace.
Much of this is made in and about Honyton, and weekly returned to London. Some
will have it called Lace, a Lacinia, used as a fringe, on the borders of
clothes; Bonelace it is named, because first made with bone (since wooden)
bobbins. Thus it is usual for such utensills both in the Latin and English
Names, gratefully to retain the memory of the first matter they were made of;
as Cochleare, a Spoon, (whether made of Wood or Metal) because Cockle-shells
were first used to that purpose.

Modern the use thereof in England, not exceeding the middle of the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth: Let it not be condemned for a superfluous wearing, because it
does neither hide nor heat, seeing it does adorn: Besides; (though private
persons pay for it) it stands the State in nothing, not expensive of Bullion,
like other Lace, costing nothing save a little thread descanted on by art and
industry: Hereby many children, who otherwise would be burdensome to the
Parish, prove beneficial to their Parents: Yea, many lame in their limbs, and
impotent in their arms, if able in their fingers, gain a livelihood thereby;
Not to say, that it saves some thousands of pounds yearly, formerly sent over
Seas, to fetch Lace from Flanders.

The Buildings.
Bediford Bridge is a stately Structure, and remarkable in many respects.

1 It stands out of and far from any public Road, in a corner of the County,
so that Bediford Bridge is truly Bediford Bridge, intended solely for the
convenience of that Town. 2 It is very long, consisting of twenty four Pears,
and yet one William Alford (another Milo) of Bediford carried on his back for a
Wager, four A Busnel is two strikes in this County.
Bushel, Salt-water-measure, all the length thereof. 3 It is very high, so that
a Barge of sixty Tuns may pass and repasse (if taking down her Masts) betwixt
the Pears thereof. 4 The Foundation is very firmly fixed, and yet it does (or
seem to) shake at the slightest step of a Horse. 5 The Builder of so worthy a
Work, is not (the more the pity) punctually known.
Yet Tradition (the best Author where no better is to be had) makes that
finished by the Assistance of Sir Theobold Greenvill, the Goldneyes and
Oketenets, (Persons of great Power in those parts) Peter Quivill Bishop of
Exeter granting Indulgencies to all such as contributed to the forwarding
thereof.

As for the Houses of the Gentry in this County, some may a^tract, none ravish
the Beholder, except it be Wenbury the House of the Heales near Plymouth,
almost corrival with Greenwich it self, for the pleasant Prospect thereof.

The Wonders.
Not to speak of a River about Lidford, whose stream sinketh so deep, that it
is altogether invisible, but supplying to the Ear that it denies to the Eye,
so great the noise thereof.

There is in the Parish of North-Taunton (near an House called Bath) a Pit, but
in the Winter a Pool, not maintained by any spring, but the fall of rain water
(in Summer commonly dry.) Of this Pool it has been observed, that before the
death or change of any Prince, or some other strange accident of great
importance, or any Invasion or Insurrection, (though in an hot and dry season)
it will without any rain overflow its Banks, and so continue till it be past
that it prognosticated. Be the truth hereof reported to the Vicenage (the most
competent Judges thereof) seeing my Author Manuscript of Baronet Northcott.
(who finished his Book 1648.) reports, that it over-flowed four times within
these last thirty years.

Some will be offended at me, if I should omit the Hanging Stone, being one of
the Bound Stones which parts Comb-Martin from the next Parish. It got the
name from a Thief, who having stolen a Sheep and tied it about his own neck to
carry it on his back, rested himself for a while upon this Stone, which is
about a foothigh, until the Sheep struggling From the same Author*
, slid over the Stone on the other side, and so strangled the man. Let the
Lawyers dispute whether the Sheep in this case was forfeited to the Kings
Almoner as a Deo-Dand: It appears rather a Providence, then a Casualty, in
the just execution of a Malefactor. To these Wonders, I will add, and hazard
the Readers displeasure for the same,

The Gubbings.
So now I dare call them (secured by distance) which one of more valor durst
not do to their Face, for fear their fury fall upon him. Yet hitherto have I
met with none, who could render a reason of their Name. We call the Shavings of
Fish (which are little worth) Gubbings; and sure it is they are sensible that
the Word imports shame and disgrace. As for the suggestion of my worthy and
learned Mr. Joseph Maynard.
Friend, borrowed from In his Talmudical Rabinical Dictionary, Verbo (...)
Buxtorfius, that such who did inhabitare Montes Gibberosos, were called
Gubbings, such will smile, at the Ingenuity, who dissent from the truth of the
Etymology.

I have read of an England beyond Wales See Camdens Brit. in Pem. broke-shire.
; but the Gubbings-Land is a Scythia within England, and they pure Heathens
therein. It lies nigh Brent-Tor in the edg of Dartmore. It is reported, that
some two hundred years since, two Strumpets being with child, fled hither to
hide themselves, to whom certain lewd Fellows resorted, and this was their
First Original. They are a Peculiar of their own making, exempt from Bishop,
Archdeacon, and all Authority either Ecclesiastical or Civil: They live in
Cotts (rather Holes than Houses) like Swine, having all in common, multiplied
without Marriage into many Hundreds: Their Language is the dross of the dregs
of the Vulgar Devonian; and the more learned a man is, the worse he can
understand them. During our Civil Wars, no Soldiers were quartered amongst
them, for fear of being quartered amongst them. Their Wealth consists in
other men's goods, and they live by stealing the Sheep on the More, and vain it
is for any to search their Houses, being a Work beneath the pains of a Sheriff,
and above the Power of any Constable. Such their Fleetnesse, they will outrun
many Horses; Vivaciousnesse, they out live most men, living in the Ignorance of
Luxury, the Extinguisher of Life: They hold together like Burrs, offend One,
and All will revenge his Quarrel.

But now I am informed, that they begin to be civilized, and tender their
Children to Baptism; and return to be men, yea Christians again: I hope no
Civil people amongst us will turn Barbarians, now these Barbarians begin to be
civilized.

Proverbs.
To Devon-shire ground.]

It is sad when one is made a Proverb by way of derision; but honorable to
become proverbial, by way of imitation, as here Devon-shire has set a Copy of
Industry and Ingenuity to all England. To Devon-shire land is to pare off the
surface or top-turffe thereof, then lay it together in heaps and burn it, which
ashes are a marvailous improvement to battle barren ground. Thus they may be
said to Stew the land in its own liquor, to make the same ground to find
compost to fatten its self; An Husbandry, which where ever used, retains the
name of the place where it was first invented, it being usual to Devonshire
land in Dorset-shire, and in other Counties.

A Plymouth Cloak.]

That is a Cane or a Staff, whereof this the occasion. Many a man of good
extraction, coming home from far Voiages, may chance to land here, and being
out of sorts, is unable for the present time and place to recruit himself with
Clothes. Here (if not friendly provided) they make the next Wood their Drapers
shop, where a Staff cut out, serves them for a covering.

Ho may remove Mort-Stone.

There is a Bay in this County called Mort-Bay, but the Harbor in the entrance
thereof is stopped with a huge Rock, called Mort-Stone, and the People merrily
say that none can remove it, save such who are Masters of their Wives. If so,
wise Socrates himself (with all men who are (...), under Covert-feme (as I may
say) will never attempt the removal thereof.

-- First hang and draw,
Then hear the cause by Lidford Law.]
Lidford is a little and poor (but ancient) Corporation in this County, with
very large privileges, where a Court of the Stanneries was formerly kept. This
Libellous Proverb would suggest unto us, as if the Townsmen thereof (generally
mean persons) were unable to manage their own Liberties with necessary
discretion, administering preposterous and preproperous Justice.

I charitably believe, that some Tinners, justly obnoxious to censure, and
deservedly punished (by fine or otherwise) for their misdemeanors, have
causelessely traduced the proceedings of that Court, when they could not
maintain their own innocence.

Saints.
WENFRIDE BONIFACE was born at C^editon (corruptly Kirton) once an Episcopal
See in this County, bred a Monk under Abbot Wool^hard in Exeter. Hence he went
to Rome, where Pope Gregory the second (perceiving the ability of his parts)
sent him to Germany, for the converting of that stiff-necked Nation. This
service he commendably performed, baptising not fewer than a Hundred Thousand
in Bavaria, Thuringia, Hassia, Friesland, Soxony, etc.

But here I must depart from De Script. Brit. Cent. 2. Number. 13.
Bale, because he departs (I am sure) from Charity, and I suspect from Verity
it self. Charity, who (according to his Bold and Bald A^ocaliptical
Conjectures) makes him the Other Beast assending out of the Earth with two
Revel. 19.
Horns. And why so? Because forsooth he was made by the Pope Metropolitan of
Mentz, and kept the Church of Colen in Commendam therewith.

Secondly Verity, when saying that he converted men terrore magis quam
Doctrina, it being utterly incredible; that a single man should terrify so
many out of their opinions. And if his words relate to Ecclesiastical Censures
(with which Weapons Boniface was well provided) such were in themselves
(without Gods wonderful improving them on men's consciences) rather ridiculous
then formidable to force Pagans from their former persuasions. But if Bale
(which is very suspitous) had been better pleased with the Germans continuing
in their Pagan Principles, than their conversion to corrupted Christianity; he
will find few wise and godly men to join with his judgment therein. Yet do I
not advocate for all the Doctrines delivered and Ceremonies imposed by
Boniface; beholding him as laying the true Foundation, Jesus Christ, which
would last and remain, but building much hay and stubble of Superstition
thereon. But he himself afterward passed a purging fire in this life, killed
at Borne in Friesland, with fifty four of his companions, Anno Dom. 755. in the
sixty year of his age, after he had spent thirty six years, six months, and
six days in his German employment.

WILLIBALD, descended of high Parentage, was born in this Bale De Sc^ipt. Brit.
Cent. 2. Number. 16.
County, Nephew to St. Boniface aforesaid, whom he followed in all respects;
later in time, lower in parts, less in pains, but profitable in the German
Conversion; wherein he may be termed his Uncles Armor-bearer, attending him
many a mile, though absent from him at his death. Herein he was more happy than
his Uncle, that being made Bishop of Eystet in Germany, as he lived in honor,
so he died in peace, Anno Dom. 781.

Martyrs.
AGNES PIREST or PRESSED, was the sole Martyr under the Reign of Queen Mary;
Wherefore as those Parents which have but one Child, may afford it the better
attendance as more at leisure: So seeing by Gods goodness, we have but this
single Native of this County, yea of this Diocese; we will enlarge our selves
on the Time, Place, and Cause of her suffering.

1. Her Christian Name, which Mr. Fox could not learn, we have recovered from
another Excellent Mr. Vowell in Hollinshed. Page 1309.
Author. 2. I am informed by the Inhabitants thereabouts, that she lived at
Northcott in the Parish of Boynton, in the County of Cornwall, but where born,
is unknown. 3 She was a simple woman to behold, thick, but little and short in
stature; about fifty four years of age. 4 She was indicted on Monday Idem,
ibidem.
the fourth Week in Lent, An. Phil. and Mar. 2 and 3. before W. Stanford
Justice of the Assize (the same as I conceive, who wrote on the Pleas of the
Crown:) So that we we may observe more legal formality was us^d about the
condemnation of this poor Woman, than any Martyr of far greater degree. 5 Her
own Fox Acts and Monum. Page 2050.
Husband and Children were her greatest persecutors, from whom she fled,
because they would force her to be present at Mass. 6 She was presented to
James Troublefield Bishop of Exeter, and by him condemned for denying the
Sacrament of the Altar. 7 After her condemnation she refused to receive any
money from well affected people; Saying, Idem, Page 2052.
She was to go to that City where Money had no mastery. 8 She was burnt without
the Walls of Exeter, in a place called Sothenhay, in the Month of November
1558.
She was the only person in whose persecution Bishop Troublefield did appear;
and it is justly conceived that Black-stone his Chancellor was more active
than the Bishop, in procuring her death.

Confessors.
This County afforded none either in or before the Reign of Q. Mary; But in our
Age it has produced a most Eminent One, on an account peculiar to himself.

JOHN MOLLE was born in or nigh The ensuing Relation I had from his son, Mr.
Henry Molle, late Orator of Cambridge.
South-Mollton in this County, bred in France, where he attained to such
perfection in that Tongue, that he made a Dictionary thereof for his own use:
After his youth spent in some military employments of good trust, he was in his
reduced Age made, by Thomas Lord Burgley and President of the North, one of the
Examiners in that Court.

Going afterward Governor to the Lord Ross, he passed the Alps (contrary to
his own resolution) prizing his Fidelity to his charge above his own security.
No sooner were they arrived at Rome, but the young Lord was courted and
feasted, Mr. Molle arrested and imprisoned in the Inquisition. I hus at once
did he lose the comfort of his Wife, Children, Friends, own land, and liberty,
being kept in most strict restraint. Add to all these vexations, visits of
importunate Priests and Jesuits, daily hacking at the Root of his Constancy
with their Objections; till finding their Tools to turn edge, at last they left
him to his own Conscience.

What says the Holy Spirit? Revel. 18. 4. Come out of Babylon my Teople. But
here alas was he, who would, but could not come thence, detained there in
durance for thirty years together: How great his sufferings were, is only
known to God, who permitted, his Foes, who inflicted, and himself, who endured
them; Seeing no friend was allowed to speak with him alone. He died in the 81.
year of his Age, about the year of our Lord 1638.

Cardinals.
WILLIAM COURTNEY was born (probably at Okehampton) in this County, * Godwin
in the Archbishops of Canterbury.
son to Hugh Courtney Earl of Devon-shire, successively Bishop of Hereford,
Winchester and Canterbury; The credit of T. Walsingham an exact Historian (and
born before Courtney was buried) makes me confident, that the Pope made him a
Cardinal, and Ciaconius and Onuphrius two Italians, confirm the same; that a
Bishop of London (though mistaking his Name, Adam for William) was at this time
rewarded with a Red Hat.

How stoutly he then opposed John of Gaunt (Wickliffe his Patron) in his Church
of St. Paul is largely related in my Church History, and I can add nothing
thereunto. For if the men of Laconia (whose work was to study concisenesse)
punished him severely, for speaking in Three, what might have been said in Two
Words; Critics will severely censure me, for such tedious repetition.

Only we may observe; that when Archbishop of Canterbury, his Metropolitical
Visitation charged through and through, every Diocese in his own Province, no
resistance being of Proof against him, all Opposers giving some trouble to him,
but disgrace to themselves; soon suppressed by his high blood, strong brains,
full purse, skill in Law, and plenty of powerful friends, in the English and
Romish Court. The difficulty which he underwent herein, made the work easy to
his Successors ever after. He deceased July 31. Anno Domini 1396.

Prelates.
ROBERT CHICHESTER. Here I had been at a perfectlosse, had I not met with a
good Guide to direct me: For I had certainly from his Surname concluded him
born at Chichester in Sussex, according to the Custom of other Clergymen. But
this single swallow (which makes no Summer) had a Flight by himself, retaining
his Paternal Name, descended from a Noble and Ancient Family (says my
Author*;) Still flourishing [at Godwin in the Bishops of Exeter.
Rawleigh] in this County. He was first Dean of Sarisbury, then Anno 1128.
Consecrated Bishop of Exeter; highly commended by many VVriters, for his Piety,
though the Principal thereof consisted in his Pilgrimages to Rome, and
procuring Relics thence. He bestowed much money in building and adorning his
Cathedral, and having sat therein two and twenty years, died and was buried
1150, on the South side of the High Altar, nigh a Gentleman of his own Surname,
whose inscribed Arms are the best Directory to this Bishops Monument.

GILBERT FOLIOT was born at Tamerton Manuscript of Baronet Northcott.
Foliot in this County, Abbot of Gloucester, (Bale says Exeter) then
successively Bishop of Hereford and London.

He was observed when a Common Jo. Sarisbu^ in Policratic. cap. 7.
Brother of his Covent, to inveigh against the Prior; when Prior, against the
Abbot; when Abbot, against the pride and laziness of Bishops; but when he
himself was Bishop, all was well, and Foliots mouth when full, was silent:
Whether because all things do rest quiet in their center, or because Age had
abated his juvenile Animosity; or because he found it more facil to find faults
in others, then mend them in himself. Indeed, often times mere Moros^ness of
Nature, usurps the reputation of Zeal, and what is but a bare disgust of men's
persons, passes for dislike of their vices. However our Foliot, the less he
had in Satyrs, the more he had of Elegies afterward, secretly bemoaning the
badnesse of the Age he lived in: Hear a Pass betwixt him and a strange voice,

Satan's Challenge.
Godwin in the Bishops of London.
O Gilberte Foliot
Dum revolvis tot and tot,
Deus tuus est The Goddess of the Zidonians.
ASHTAROT.
Foliots Answer.
Mentiris Demon, qui est Deus
Sabbath, est ille meus.
He finds little favor from our Historians of his Age, because they do
generally Becketize; whilst Foliot was all for the King, being a professed
Enemy to the (not person, but) pride of that Prelate*. This wise and learned
Bishop died Feb. 18. 1187.

ROBERT FOLIOT Archdeacon of Oxford, was near Cosen Bale de Scrip* Brit. Cent
3. Number. 8.
(and therefore is placed Country man) to Gilbert aforesaid. He was bred first
in England, then in France, where he got the Surname of Robertus Melundinensis,
probably from the place of his longest abode. He was first Tutor to Becket, and
Becket afterward was Patron to him, by whose procurement he succeeded his
Kinsman in the Sea of Hereford. He wrote several Books, whereof One of the
Sacraments of the Old Law is most remarkable.

Hitherto we have followed Bale with blind obedience, until Bishop Godwin, whom
we rather believe, has opened our eyes in two particulars:

1 That Robert de Melune (Bishop also of Hereford) was a distinct person from
our Robert. 2 That our Foliot was advanced Bishop after the Godwin in the
Bishops of Hereford.
death of Becket, probably for the affection he bore unto him, not the
assistance he received from him. His deah happened Anno 1186. Nor must we
forget, there was also one Hugh Foliot ArchDeacon of Shrewsbury, afterward
Bishop of Hereford; of whom nothing remains, but his Name and the date of his
Death 1234.
WILLIAM BREWER, was born in this County (or in Somersetshire) whereof William
his Father was several years Sheriff under King Henry the Second, See our
Catalogue of Sheriffs in Henry the Second.
where we shall insist on the occasion of his Surname.

Bishop Godwin informs us, that he was Brother to Sr. William Brewer Knight,
if there be not an error therein, seeing Two Brethren surviving their Parents
together; both of a Name, are seldom seen in the same Family. He was preferred
Bishop of Exeter Anno 1224.

A Great Courtier, and employed in such Godwin in the Bishops of Exeter.
Embassies proper for a Person of Prime Quality, as when he was sent to conduct
Isabel Sister to King Henry the Third, to be married to Frederick the Emperor;
whom he afterward attended to the Holy Land* Returning to his See, he set
himself wholly to the adorning and enriching thereof, founding a Dean and 24
Prebendaries, allowing the later the Annual Stipend of Four Pounds, which they
receive at this day. But I am lately informed that the Dean and Residenciaries
of Exeter have since augmented the Salary of all the Prebendaries at large to
twenty pounds a year: Which Intelligence if false, they are not injured, if
true, they are courteously used. This Bishop died Anno Domini 1244.

WILLIAM de RALEIGH, was born at that well known Town in this County, preferred
first Canon of St. Paul's, then successively Bishop of Norwich and The effect of
what follows is taken o^t of Bishop Godwin, in his Bishops of Winchester.
Winchester: The last of which cost him much trouble, his Election being
stiffely opposed by King Henry the Third, intending a Valentinian (Uncle to the
Queen) for that Bishopric; whom the Monks of Winchester refused; terming him,
Vir Sanguinum, A man of Blood.

Whether in that sense wherein David is so termed (and on that account
prohibited the building of the Temple) because a Martial Man; or whether only
because descended of high blood, whose Descent was all his Desert, so that they
ridgidly adhered to the election of Raleigh.

King Henry who seldom used to be angry, and more seldom to swear; swear in
his anger, That he would have his will at last, or they should never have
Bishop; and how his Conscience came off without Perjury herein, his own
Conf^ssor was best able to satisfy him.

Raleigh had (be^ides his own merits) two good friends, his Purse and the Pope,
the former procuring the later. He presented his Holiness with six thousand
Mark, which effected his Work. Here two persons were at once deceived, the Pope
not expecting so great a sum should be tendered him, and Raleigh not suspecting
he would take all; but leave at least a morsel for manners. But his hands will
take what ever is tendered him, if not too Hot or too Heavy.

Raleigh thus runin debt, could never creep out thereof, though living very
privately, and dying very penitently: For when the Priest brought the ^uchrist
unto him, lying on his Deathbed; Raleigh expressing himself in language like
to that of John Baptist Matthew. 3.
: I have need to come to thee, and come thou to me; would rise out of his Bed
to meet him. His death happened Anno Dom. 1249.

RICHARD COURTNEY was one of great Bishop Godwin in the Bishops of Norwich.
lineage (allied to the Earl of Devonshire) and no less Learning (excellently
skilled in the Knowledge of both Laws:) So that at the instant suit of K. Henry
the Fifth; He was preferred Bishop of Norwich, Anno 1413. His person (the Inn
of his Soul, had a fair Sign) was highly favored by his Prince, and beloved by
the people; Yet all this could not prolong his life: So that he died of a flux
at the siege of Harflew in Normandy, in the second year of his Consecration,
and his Corpse brought over, was honorably entombed in Westminster.

J^AMES CARRY, was born in this County, his name still flourishing nt Cockington
therein: He was at Rome made Bishop of Lichfield, and travailing thence
homewards toward England, did again light on the Pope at Flor^nce, just at the
news of the vacancy of Exeter, and the same See was bestowed on him, the more
welcome, because in his Native County. Say not this was a Degradation; For
though in our time Lichfield is almost twice as good as Exeter, ^xeter then was
almost four times as good as Lichfield. This appears by their valuations of
their Income into Compa e Bishop Godwin page 331. with page 415.
First Fruits; Exeter paying the Pope six thousand Ducats, whilst Lichfield
paid only seventeen hundred at the most. But what ever the value of either or
both was, Carry enjoyed neither of them; dying and being buried in Florence.
Thus, though one may have two Cups in his hand, yet some intervening accident
may so hinder, that he may taste of neither. He died 1419.

JOHN STANBERY, was (says De Sc ip. Brit. cent. 8. Number. 34.
Bale out of Leland) in Occidentali (...) part natus. But the Western parts,
being a wide Parish, thanks to our Author, who has Mannse ipt of Baronet
(...).
particularized the place of his Nativity, viz. the Farm of Church-hill, within
the Parish of Bratton or Broad-Town in this County, where some of his Name and
Kindred remain at this day. He was bred a Carmelite in Oxford, and b^came
genera^ly as learned as any of his Order, deserving all the dignity which the
^niversity did or could confer upon him. King H^n. the sixth highly favored
and made him the first Provost of Eaton, being much ruled by his advice in
ordering that his new Foundation. He was by the King designed Bishop of
Norwich, but William de la Poole Duke of Suffolk (See the presumption of a
proud Favorite or Minion rather) got it from him for his own Chaplain, and
Stanbery was for to stay his stomach on the poor Bishopric of Bangor, till
Anno 1453, he was advanced Bishop of Hereford.

Leland does condemn him for his over compliance with the Pope in all his
intolerable taxes, and others commend him as much for his fidelity to his
Master King Hen. whom he deserted not in all his adversity; so that this Bishop
was taken prisoner in the Battle of Northampton. Say not to this Prelate, as
Eliab to David, 1 Samuel 17. 28.
Why came thou down hither? with whom have thou left those few sheep in the
Wilderness? I know the pride and the malice of thy heart, for thou art come
down to see the Battle; For Stanbery being Confessor to King Henry, he was
tied by his Oath to such personal attendance. After long durance in Warwick
Castle, he was set at liberty, and dying Anno 1474, was buried in the Convent
of Carmelites at Ludlow; where his barbarous and tedious Epitaph (ill suiting
with the Author of such learned and pithy Books) is not worth the inserting.

PETER COURTNE^ son to Sir Gowin in the Bishop^ of Winch^er.
Phillip Courtney, was born at Powderham in this Shire. He was first preferred
Archdeacon, then Bishop of ^xeter, expending very much money in finishing the
North Tower, giving a great (called Peter) Bell thereunto. He was afterward
Anno 1486, translated to Winchester; where he sat five years. It is much one of
so Illustrious Birth should have so obscure a Burial, Bishop Godwin con^fessing
that he knew not whereabouts in his Church he lies interred.

Since the Reformation.
JOHN JEWEL bearing the Christian Name of his Father, Grandfather, and Great
Grandfather, was born at Buden (a Farm possessed more than two hundred years by
his Ancestors) in the Parish of (...), nigh Illfracombe in this County, on the
24th of May 1552. His mothers Surname was Bellamy, who with her husband John
Jewel lived happily fifty years together in Holy Wedlock, and at their death
left ten children behind them.

It may be said of his Surname; Nomen, Omen, Jewel his Name, and Precious his
Virtues: So that if the like ambition led us English men, which does
Foraigners, speciously to render our Sirnames in Greek or Latin, he may be
termed Johnnes Gemma, on better account then Gemma Frisius entituleth himself
thereunto.

He was chiefly bred in the School of Barstable, where John Harding afterward
his Antagonist, was his School fellow, and at 15 years of age was admitted in
Merton Coll^dge, under the tuition of John Parkhurst, afterward Bishop of
Norwich. Such his sedulity, rising always at 4 of the Clock, and not going to
bed till 10; that he was never punished for any exercise; and but once for
absence from Chapel. Hence he was removed to Corpus Christi College, where he
proved an Excellent Poet (having all Horace by heart) Linguist, and Orator.

Thus having touched at all Humane Arts, he landed at Divinity, being much
assisted by Peter Martyr the Kings Professor therein. St. In his Apologia,
adversus (...).
Jerome tells us that so great was the intimacy betwixt Pamphilius that
worthy Martyr, a Priest, and Eusebius the Bishop of Caesarea, ut ab uno alter
nomen acceperet; that they mutually were surnamed the one from the other,
Pamphilius Eusebii, and Eusebius Pamphilii: No less the unity of affections be
twixt these two, who accordingly might be called Martyrs Jewel, and Jewels
Martyr; as seldom in body, and never in mind asunder.

What eminent changes afterward befell him in the course of his life, how he
fled into Germany, lived at Zurick, returned into England, was preferred Bishop
of Salisbury, wrote learnedly, preached painfully, lived piously, died
peaceably, Anno Dom. 1572. are largely related in my Ecclesiastical History,
and I will trouble the Reader with no repetitions.

JOHN PRIDEAUX was born at Hartford in the West part of this County, bred
Scholar, Fellow, and R^ctor of Exeter College in Oxford, Canon of
Christ-Church, and above thirty years Kings Professor in that University. An
excellent Linguist, but so that he would make words wait on his matter, chiefly
aiming at expressivenesse therein; he had a becoming Fe^ivity, which was
Aristotle's, not St. Paul's (...).

Admirable his memory, retaining what ever he had read. The Welsh have a
Proverb (in my mind somewhat uncharitable) He that has a good memory, gives
few Alms; because he keeps in mind, what and to whom he had given before: But
this Doctor crossed this Proverb, with his constant charity to all in want.

His learning was admired by Foreigners, Sextinus Amma, Rivet, etc. He was not
Vindicative in the least degree: One Mr. Jos^ph Maynard Fellow of Exeter
College.
intimate with him, having assured me, that he would forgive the greatest
injury, upon the least show of the parties sorrow, and restore him to the
degree of his former favor; and though Politicians will thence collect him no
prudent man, Divines will conclude him a good Christian.

Episcopacy in England being grievously wounded by malevolent persons, King
Charles the First conceived that the best Wine and Oil that could be powered
into those wounds, was, to select persons of known Learning and unblameable
Lives to supply the vacant Bishoprics; amongst whom Dr. Prideaux was made
Bishop of Worcester. But alas, all in vain, such the present fury of the
Times.

He died of a Fever 1650, and I have perused a Manuscript Book (But alas not
made by Oxford, but Worcestershire Muses) of Verses on his Funeral. Amongst
which I take notice of these,

Define mirari caecos errasse tot Ignes,
In prompt^ causa est, lux Prideauxus obit.
Mortuus est Prideaux? scriptis post funera vivit;
Aufertur Letho Mitra, Corona datur.
To these we may add the Chronogram, which I meet with amongst the same Verses.

Johannes PrIDeaVXVs (...) VVIgornIae MortVVs, est. 1650. He was buried at
Bredon in Worcestershire, August the 1^th. Such as deny Bishops to be Peers,
would have conceived this Bishop a Prin^e, if present at his Interment, such
the Number and Quality of Persons, attending his Funeral.

Statesmen.
Sir ARTHUR CHICHESTER Knight, was descended of a right ancient Family,
dwelling at Rawley in this County. He spent his youth first in the University,
then in the French and Irish Wars; where by his valor he was effectually
assistant, first to plough and break up that barbarous Nation by Conquest, and
then to sow it with seeds of civility, when by King James made Lord Deputy of
Ireland.

Ind ed good Laws and provisions had been made by his Predecessors to that
purpose, but alas they were like good lessons set for a Lute out of tune,
useless until the Instrument was fitted for them. Wherefore in order to the
civilizing of the Irishry, in the first year of his Government he established
two new Circuits for Justices of Assize, the one in Connaught, the other in
Munster. And whereas the Circuits in former times only encompassed the English
Pale (as the Cynosura does the Pole) henceforward, like good Planets in their
several Spheres, they carried the influence of Justice, round about the
Kingdom. Yea, in short time, Ireland was so cleared of Thieves and Capital
Offenders, that so many Malefactors have not been found in the Two and Thirty
Shires of Ireland, as in Six Sir John Davis in his Discourse of Ireland. page
270.
English Shires in the Western Circuit.

He reduced the Mountains and Glinns on the South of Dublin (formerly thorns in
the sides of the English-Pale) into the County of Wicklowe, and in conformity
to the English Custom, many Irish began to cut their Mantles into Cloaks. So
observant his eye over the actions of suspected persons; that Tyrone was heard
to complain that he could not drink a full carouso of Idem, page 2^1.
sack, but the State was within few hours advertised thereof.

After he had been continued many years in his Deputy-ship, and deservedly made
a Lord, King James recalled him home, and (loath to leave his abilities
unimployed) sent him Ambassador to the Emperor, and other German Princes.
Being besieged in the City of Mainchine (a place much indebted to his prudence,
for seasonable victualling it:) by Count Tilley; he sent him word that it was
against the Law of Nations to besiege an Ambassador: Tilley returned, that he
took no notice that he was an Ambassador. The Lord Chichester replied to the
Messenger; Had my Master sent me with as many hundred men, as he has sent me
on fruitless Messages, your General should have known, that I had been a
Soldier, as well as an Ambassador.

King James at his return, entertained him with great commendation, for so well
discharging his trust, and he died in as great honor as any Englishman of our
age, Anno Dom. 162..

Capital Judges.
Sir WILLIAM HERLE Knight, was made by King Edward the Third, Chief Justice of
the King's Bench, in Hillary Term, the first year of his Reign, and before the
Term ended, ( viz. Jan. the 29.) was made Chief Judge of the Common Pleas, by
his own free consent, as I have cause to conceive; he standing fair in the
Kings favor. For, whereas sixty marks was in that age the annual salary of
that place, the King 1 of Edw. 3. Pat. 4. Parl. 1. Memb. 35.
granted him an augmentation of two hundred and forty marks a year, so long as
he kept that Office. This was some four years, for I find Sir John Sir Hen.
Spelmans Gloss. tit. Justic. page 417.
Stoner put into his place, in the Fourth of the Kings Reign, yet so, that this
Sir William was his Successor the year after, such alterations being usual in
that age. I collect him to die in the ninth of King Edward the Third (the
mention of him sinking that year) and is placed here; because, if not born at
(which is most probable) he was owner of Illfracombe in this County, the Manor
whereof was held by his issue till the Reign of King Henry the Seventh; and I
understand that a Family of his Name, and I believe of his lineage, has still a
Worshipful existence in Cornwall.

Sir JOHN CARRY Knight, was born at Cockington in this County, and applying
himself to the Study of the Laws, was made Chief Baron of the Exchequer in the
tenth year of King Richard the Second. The greatest fault I find charged on
him, was Loyalty to his Lord and Master, which, if any dare call a disease: I
assure you it is a catching one, among conscientious people. On this honorable
account this Judge lost his Office, Goods, and Lands, in the first of King
Henry the Fourth; whose losses, not long after providence plentifully repayed
to his Posterity; On this occasion. A Knight Errant of Arragon coming into
England, and challenging any to tilt with him, was undertaken by Sir Robert
Carry, son to Sir John aforesaid; who vanquished the vain glorious Don; So that
King Henry the Fifth out of a sympathy of valor, restored all his estate unto
him. This Judge dyed about the year of our Lord 1404.

Sir WILLIAM HANKFORD was born at Amerie in this County (a Manor, which from
owners of the same name by their daughter and heir descended to the Hank fords)
bred in the study of the Laws, till he became Chief Justice of the Kings Bench,
in the first of King Henry the Fifth; which place he adorned with great
Learning and Integrity, though doleful the manner of his death; on this
occasion:

Coming home discontented from London, he expressed extreme anger (somewhat
trespassing on his judicial gravity) against his Keeper; for that (as he said)
his Deer were stolen, and charged him to shoot any man in the Park whom he
should find there, and stood not being spoken unto, and he would discharge him.
The next night being dark, he presents himself, and refusing to stand, the
Keeper according to his Injunction, shot and killed him. The stump of the Oak,
nigh which this sad accident happened, has been shown to some eminent Lawyers
riding that Circuit, which are yet alive.

However no violent impression is intimated in this his peaceable Epitaph on
his Monument in Amerie Church:

Hic jacet Will. Hankford Miles, quondam Capitalis
Justiciarius Domini R. de Banco, qui obiit duodecimo
Die Decembris Anno Domini 1422. cujus, etc.
His Figure is portraied kneeling, and out of his mouth in a Label, these two
sentences do proceed;

1 Miserere mei Deus secundum magnam misericordiam tuam. 2 Beati qui custodiant
judicium, and faciunt justitiam omni tempore.
No charitable Reader, for one unadvised act will condemn his Memory, who, when
living, was habited with all requisites for a person of his place.

Sir JOHN FORTESCUE was born of a right Ancient and Worthy Family in this
County, first fixed at Wimpstone in this Shire; but since prosperously planted
in every part thereof. They give for their Motto Forte Scutum Salus Ducum, and
it is observable that they attained eminency in what Profession soever they
applied themselves.

In the Field. In Westminster Hall. In the Court. Sir HEN FORTESCUE a valiant
and fortunate Commander under King Henry the Fifth in the French Wars, by whom
he was made Governor of Meux in Berry. Sir HEN. FORTESCUE was Lord Chief
Justice of Ireland, and justly of great esteem for his many virtues; especially
for his sincerity in so tempting a place. Sir JOHN. FORTESCUE that wise Privy
Councellor, Overseer of Queen Elizabeth her Liberal Studies; And Chancellor of
the Exchequer, and Duchy of Lancaster. Sir ADRIAN FORTESCUE Porter of the Town
of Calice, came over with King Henry the Seventh, and effectually assisting him
to regain the Crown, was by him deservedly created Knight Banneret. Sir JOHN
FORTESCUE our present Subject, Lord Chief Justice and Chancellor of England,
in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth, whose learned Commentaries on the Law,
make him famous to all posterity.

Sir LEWIS POLLARD of Kings Nimet in this County, Sergeant of the Law, and one
of the Justices of the Kings Bench in the time of King Henry the Eighth, was a
man of singular knowledge and worth; who by his Lady Elizabeth had,

Eleven Sons, whereof four attained the honor of Knighthood:

Sir Hugh. Sir John of Ford. Sir Richard. Sir George, who got his honor in the
defense of Bullen.
All the rest, especially John Arch Deacon of Sarum, and Canon of Exeter, were
very well advanced.

Eleven Daughters married to the most potent Families in this County, and most
of them Knights: So that (what is said of Cork in Ireland, that all the
Inhabitants therein are Kin) by this Match almost all the Ancient Gentry in
this County are allied.

The Portraiture of Sir Lewis and his Lady, with their two and twenty Children,
are set up in a Glass Window at Nimet-Bishop. There is a Tradition continued
in this Family; that the Lady glassing the Window in her husbands absence at
the term in London; caused one child more then she then had, to be set up,
presuming (having had one and twenty already, and usually conceiving at her
husbands coming home) she should have another child; which inserted in
expectance, came to pass accordingly. This memorable Knight died Anno 1540.

Sir JOHN DODERIDG Knight, was born at...... in this County, bred in Exeter
College in Oxford; where he became so general a Scholar, that it is hard to
say, whether he was better Artist, Divine, Civil, or Common Lawyer, though he
fixed on the last for his public Profession; and became second Justice of the
Kings Bench. His soul consisted of two Essentials, Ability and Integrity,
holding the Scale of Justice with so steady an hand, that neither love nor
lucre, fear or flattery, could bow him on either side.

It was vehemently suspected that in his time, some gave large sums of money,
to purchase places of Judicature. And Sir John is famous for the expression,
That as old and infirm as he was, he would go to Tyburn on foot to see such a
man hanged; that should proffer money for a place of that nature; For certainly
those who buy such Offices by whole sale, must sell Justice by retail, to make
themselves savers. He was commonly called the Sleeping Judge, because he would
sit on the Bench with his eyes shut, which was only a posture of attention, to
sequester his sight from distracting objects, the better to lissen to what was
alleged and proved. Though he had three Wives successively, out of the
respectful Families of Germin, Bamfield, and Culme, yet he left no issue behind
him. He kept a Hospital House at Mount-Radford near Exeter, and dying Anno
Domini 1628. the thirteenth day of September; (after he had been seventeen
years a Judge) in the seventy third year of his age, was interred under a
stately Tomb in our Ladys Chapel in Exeter.

To take my leave of the Devonian Lawyers, they in this County seem innated
with a Genius to study Law, none in England (Northfolk alone excepted)
affording so many; Cornwall indeed has a Famine, but Devon-shire makes a Feast
of such, who by the practice thereof have raised great Estates. Three Sergeants
were all made at one Call^, Sergeant Glanvil [the Elder] Dew, and Harris, of
whom it was commonly said (though I can nor care not to appropriate it
respectively:)

One Gained as much as the other two. Spent Gave

One Town in this Shire, Tavistock by name, furnishes the Bar at this present,
with a Constellation of Pleaders, wherein the biggest Stars Sergeant Glanvil,
who shines the brighter, for being so long eclipsed; and Sergeant Maynard, the
Bench seeming sick with long longing for his sitting thereon. As it is the
Honor of this County to breed such able Lawyers; so is it, its happiness,
that they have most of their Clients from other Shires, and the many Suits
tried of this County, proceed not so much from the Litigiousnesse, as
Populousness of her Inhabitants.

Soldiers.
Sir RICHARD GREENVIL Knight, lived and was richly landed at Bediford in this
County. He was one of the Twelve Peers which accompanied Robert Fitz-Haimon in
his expedition against the Welsh; when he overthrew Rhese ap Theodore, Prince
of South Wales, and Justine Lord of Glamorgan; and divided the conquered
Country betwixt those his Assistants.

This Sir Richard in my apprehension appears somewhat like the Patriarch Genesis
14.
Abraham: For he would have none make him rich, but God alone, though in his
partage, good land was at Neath, (Nidum a City in Antoninus) in Glamorgan-shire
allotted unto him. Indeed Abraham gave the tenth to God in Melchisedeck, and
restored the rest to the King of Sodom, the former proprietary thereof. This
Knight (according to the Devotion of those darker days) gave all to God,
erecting and endowing a Monastery (dedicated to the Virgin Mary) at Neath, for
Cistertians, bestowing all his military Acquests on them for their maintenance,
so that this Convent was valued at 150 li. per. annum at the dissolution. Thus
having finished and settled this foundation, he returned to his own Patrimony at
Bediford in this County, where he lived in great repute, 1100. under the Reign
of King William Rufus, (and may seem to have ^ntailed Hereditary Valor on his
Name and still flourishing Posterity.

JAMES Lord AUDLEY is challenged by several Counties, (Staffordshire,
Herefordshire, Dorsetshire, etc.) And that with almost equal probability, to be
their Native: But my Author, well verst in the Antiquities of this Shire,
clearly adjudgeth his birth thereunto: Avouching the Castle of Barstable the
place of his principal Mansion and Inhabitance.

This is that Lord Audley, so famous for his valiant service in France, at the
Battle of Poictiers, where the Black Prince rewarded him with a yearly Pension
of 500 Marks, which presently the Lord Audley gave as freely to his four
Esquires; having (as he said) received this Honor by their means. The news of
this Largess being quickly brought to the Prince his Ears, he questioned the
Lord, whether he conceived his Gift not worthy his esteem; as beneath his
acceptance? To whom the Lord replied, Th^se Squires have done me long and
faithful service, and now especially in this Battle, without whose assistance
I being a single man, could have done little. Besides, The fair Estate left
meb^ my Ancestors, enableth me freely to serve your Highness; whereas these my
men may stand in need of some support; only I crave your pardon for^giving it
away without your license: The Prince highly pleased thereat, praised his
Bounty as much as his Valor, and doubled his former Pension into a thousand
Marks. This noble Lord by my computation died about the beginning of the Reign
of King Richard the Second.

THOMAS STU^LEY. Were he alive, he would be highly offended to be ranked under
any other Topic than that of Princes; whose memory must now be content and
thankful too, that we will afford it a place amongst our Soldiers.

He was a younger brother, of an ancient, wealthy, and worshipful Family, nigh
Illfracombe in this County, being one of good parts, but valued the less by
others; because over-prized by himself. Having prodigally misspent his
Patrimony, he entered on several projects (the issue general of all decayed
estates) and first pitched on the peopleing of Florida, then newly found out in
the West Indies. So confident his ambition, that he blushed not to tell Queen
Elizabeth, that he preferred rather to be Sovereign of a Molehill, than the
highest Subject to the greatest King in Christendom; adding moreover, that, he
was assured he should be a Prince before his death: I hope (said Queen
Elizabeth) I shall hear from you, when you are stated in your Principality: I
will write unto you (quoth Stukely.) In what Language? (said the Queen) He
returned, In the Style of Princes; To our dear Sister.

His fair project of Florida being blasted for lack of money to pursue it, he
went over into Ireland, where he was frustrate of the preferment he expected,
and met such Physic, that turned his Fever into Frenzy. For, hereafter
resolving treacherously to attempt, what he could not loyally atchieve, he went
over into Italy.

It is incredible how quickly he wrought himself thorough the notice into the
favor, through the Court into the Chamber, yea Closet, yea bosom of Pope Pius
Quintus.; so that some wise men thought his Holiness did forfeit a parcel of
his infallibility, in giving credit to such a Glorioso, vaunting that with
three thousand soldiers he would beat all the English out of Ireland.

The Pope finding it cheaper to fill Stuckleys swelling sails, with aerie
Titles, than real Gifts, created him Baron of Ross, Viscount Murrough, Earl of
Wexford, Marquess of Lemster, and then furnished this Title-top-heavy General,
with eight hundred soldiers paid by the King of Spain for the Irish Expedition.

In passage thereunto Stuckley lands at Portugal, just when Sebastian the King
thereof, with two Moorish Kings, were undertaking of a voyage into Africa.
Stuckly scorning to attend, is persuaded to accompany them. Some thought he
wholly quitted his Irish design, partly because loath to be pent up in an
Island (the Continent of Africa affording more elbow-room for his
Achievements) partly because so mutable his mind, he ever loved the last
project (as Mothers the youngest child:) best. Others conceive he took this
Affrican in order to his Irish design; such his confidence of Conquest, that
his Breakfast on the Turks, would the better enable him to dine on the English
in Ireland.

Landing in Africa, Stuckley gave counsil, which was safe, seasonable and
necessary; namely, that for two or three days they should refresh their land
Soldiers* whereof some were sick, and some were weak, by reason of their
tempestuous passage. This would not be heard, so furious was Don Sebastion to
engage; as if he would pluck up the bays of Victory out of the ground, before
they were grown up* and so in the Battle of Alcaser their Army was wholly
defeated: Where Stuckley lost his life.

A fatal fight, where in one day was slain,
Three Kings that were, and One that would be fain.
This Battle was fought Anno 1578. Where Stuckley with his eight hundred men
behaved himself most valiantly, till overpowered with multitude.

I hope it will be no offense, next to this Bubble of Emptiness, and Meteor of
Ostentation, to place a precious Pearl, and Magazine of secret merit, whom we
come to describe.

GEORGE MONCK. Some will say he being (and long may he be) alive; belongs not
to your Pen, according to your Premised Rules. But know he is too High to come
under the Roof of my Regulations, whose merit may make Laws for me to observe.
Besides, it is better that I should be censured, than he not commended. Pass
we by his High Birth (whereof hereafter) and ^ard breeding in the
Low Countries, not commencing a Captain per saltum (as many in our Civil Wars)
but proceeding by degrees from a private Soldier, in that Martial University.
Pass we also by his Employment in Ireland, and Imprisonment in England for the
King; his Sea service against the Dutch; Posting to speak of his last
performanc^, which should I be silent, would speak of it self.

Being made Governor of Scotland, no power or policy of O. C. could fright or
flatter him thence. Scotland was his Castle, from the top whereof he ^ook the
true prospect of our English affairs. He perceived that since the Martyrdom of
King Charles, several sorts of Government (like the Sons of Jesse before Samuel)
pafsed before the English People; but neither God nor our Nation had chosen
them. He resolved therefore to send for despised David out of a Foreign Field;
as well assured that the English Loyalty would never be at rest, till fixed in
the center thereof. He secured Scotland in faithful hands, to have all his
Foes before his (...), and leave none behind his back.

He enters England with excellent Foot, but his Horse so lean, that they
seemed tired at their first setting forth. The chiefest strength of his Army
consisted in the Reputation of the strength thereof, and wise conduct of their
General. The Loyal English did rather gaze on, than pray for him, as ignorant
of his intentions, and the Apostle observes that the private man knows not
how to say Amen to what is spoken in an unknown Language.

Now the scales began to fall down from the eyes of the English Nation (as from
Saul, when his sight was received) sensible that they were deluded, with the
pretenses of Religion and Liberty, into Atheism and Vassallage. They had
learnt also from the Soldiers (whom they so long had quartered) to cry out One
and All, each Shire setting forth a Remonstrance of their grievances, and
refusing farther payment of Taxes.

Lambert comes forth of London, abounding with more outward advantages than
General Monk wanted; Dragon like he breathed out naught but fire and fury,
chiefly against the Church and Clergy. But he met with a Saint George, who
struck him neither with sword nor spear; but gave his Army a mortal wound,
without wounding it. His Soldiers dwindled away, and indeed a private person (
Lambert at last was little more) must have a strong and long hand on his own
account to hold an whole Army together.

The Hinder part of the Parliament sitting still at Westminster, plied him with
many Messengers and Addresses. He returned an answer neither granting nor
denying their desires; giving them hope, too little to trust, yet too much to
distrust him. He was an absolute Riddle, and no ploughing with his Heifer to
expound him. Indeed had he appeared what he was, he had never been what he is,
a Deliverer of his Country. But such must be as dark as midnight, who mean to
atchieve Actions as bright as Noonday.

Then was he put on the unwellcome Office to pluck down the Gates of London,
though it pleased God that the Odium did not light on him that acted, but those
who employed him. Hence forward he sided effectually with the City: I say the
City, which if well or ill affected, was then able to make us a happy or
unhappy Nation.

Immediately followed that TURN of our TIMES, which all the World with wonder
does behold. But let us not look so long on second causes, as to lose the sight
of the Principal, Divine Providence. Christ on the Cross said to his Beloved
Disciple behold thy Mother; and said to her behold thy Son: Thus was he
pleased effectually to speak to the hearts of the English, Behold your
Sovereign, which inspirited them with Loyalty, and a longing desire of his
presence; saying likewise to our Gracious Sovereign, Behold thy Subjects, which
increased his ardent affection to return; and now, blessed be God, both are met
together, to their mutual comfort.

Since the Honors which he first deserved have been conferred upon him,
completed with the Title of the Duke of Albemarle, and Master of his Maj^sties
Horse, etc. Nor must it be forgotten that he carried the Scepter, with the Dove
thereupon (the Emblem of Peace) at the Kings Coronation. But abler Pens, will
improve these Short Memoires into a large History.

Seamen.
WILLIAM WILFORD was a Native nigh Plymouth in this County, a valiant and
successeful Seaman. It happened in the Reign of King Henry the Fourth, that
the French out of Britain by a sudden Invasion burnt sixteen hundred Houses in
Plymouth, if there be not a mistake in the figures, which I vehemently suspect.
Sure it was a most sad desolation, remembered at this day in the division of
Plymouth, whereof the one part is called the Britons-side, the other the
Old-Town.

But let the French boast their gain, when the Game is ended, which now was but
began. This fire enflamed all the English, and especially our Wilford, with
desire of revenge. Within a short time he made them to pay besides costs and
charges, more than sixfold damages, by taking forty ships on the Coast of
Britains, and burning as many at Penarch; besides many Towns and Villages for
six leagues together. I collect the death of this W. Wilford, to be about the
beginning of the Reign of King Henry the Fifth*

Sr. HVMPHREY GILBERT, or Jilbert, or Gislibert, was born at Green-way in this
County, the pleasant Seat of his Family for a long continuance. He was famous
for his knowledge both by Sea and Land. In the year 1569 he valiantly and
fortunately served in Ireland: Afterward he led nine Companies to the
assistance of the Hollanders. In the year 1583 he set forth with five ships to
make discoveries in the North of America, where he took Sezin and Possession of
New Foundland (according to the Ancient Solemn Ceremony of cutting a Turf) for
the Crown of England.

He resolved to adventure himself in his Return in a Vessel of sorty Tun. And
with two ships (the only remains of five) did make for England. In the instant
of their winding about (I may confidently report what is generally in this
County averred and believed:) A very great Lion, not swimming after the manner
of a Beast, with the motion of his feet; nor yet diving sometimes under water,
and rising again; (as Porpyces and Dolphins do) but rather gliding on the water
with his whole body, except legs in sight, shunned not the ship, nor the
Mariners, who presented themselves in view; but turning his head too and fro,
yawning and gaping wide, made a horrible roaring. It is conceived no Spectrum
or Apparition, but a real fish, seeing we read that such like a Lion, in all
lineaments was taken at Sea Anno 1282. and presented to Pope Martin the Fourth.

Instantly a terrible Tempest did arise, and Sir Humphrey said cheerfully to
his companions, We are as near Heaven here at Sea as at Land. Nor was it long
before his ship sunck into the Sea withal therein, though the other recovered
home like Jobs Messengers, to bring the tidings of the destruction of their
companions. This sad accident happened 158.

....... COCK. I am sorry I cannot add his Christian Name, and more AMP.
sorry that I cannot certainly avouch his Nativity in this County (though
inclined with many motives to believe it) being a Cock of the Game) indeed. For
in the Eighty eight, Solus Came. Eliz. boc Ann.
Cockus Anglus in sua inter medios hosts navicula, cum laud periit. And
whereas there was not a noble Family in Meteran in Historia Belgica.
Spain, but lost either Son. Brother, or Nephew in that Fight; this Cock was
the only man of note of the English, who fighting a Volanteer in his own ship,
lost his life to save his Queen and Country.

Unus homo nobis pereundo restituit rem. Pity it is his memory should ever be
forgotten, and my Pen is sensible of no higher preferment, then, when it may be
permitted, to draw the Curtains about those who have died in the bed of Honor.

Sir FRANCIS DRAKE. Having formerly in my Holy State written his life at large,
I will forbear any addition; and only present this Tetrastrick, made on his
Corpse when cast out of the Ship (wherein he died) into the Sea.

H. Holland* Herologia Anglia page 110.
Religio quamvis Romana resurgeret olim.
Effoderet Tumulum non puto Drake tuum.
Non est quod metuas, ne te combusserit ulla
Posteritas, in aqua tutus ab igne manes.
Though Romes Religion should in time return,
Drake none thy Body will ungrave again:
There is no fear Posterity should burn
Those bones which free from fire in Sea remain.
He died (as I am informed) unmarried, but there is of his Alliance a
Worshipful Family extant in this County, in the condition of a Baronet.

Sir WALTER RAWLEIGH. The sons of Heth said unto Abraham, thou Genesis 23. 6^.
art a great ^rince amongst us, In the choice of our Sepulchers bury thy dead,
none shall withold them from thee. So may we say to the memory of this worthy
Knight, repose your self in this our Catalogue underwhat Topic you please, of
Statesman, Seaman, Soldier, Learned Wrirer, and what not? His worth unlocks
our closest Cabinets, and provides both room and welcome to entertain him.

He was born at The House its Name was called Hayes.
Budeley in this County, of an Ancient Family, but decayed in Estate, and he
the youngest brother thereof. He was bred in Oriel College in Oxford, and
thence coming to Court, found some hopes of the Queens favors reflecting upon
him. This made him write in a glass Window, obvious to the Queens eye,

Fain wauld I climb, yet fear I to fall, Her Majesty either espying, or being
shown it, did under-write,

If thy heart fails thee, climb not at all. However he at last climbed up by
the stairs of his own (...). But his Introduction into the Court bare an elder
date. From this occasion: This (...) (...) coming cut of Ireland to the English
Court in good habit (his (...) being then a considerable part of his estate)
found the Queen walking, till meeting with a Plashy place, she seemed to
scruple going thereon. Presently Raleigh cast and spread his new Plush Cloak on
the ground whereon the Queen trod gently, rewarding him afterward with many
Suits, for his so free and seasonable tender of so fair a foot (...). Thus an
advantageous admission into the first notice of a Prince, is more than half a
degree to (...).

It is reported of the Women in the Balear Islands, that to (...) their Sons
expert archers; they will not, when children, give them their breakfast before
they had hit the mark. Such the dealing of the Queen with this Knight, making
him to earn his Honor, and by pain and peril, to purchase what places of
credit or profit were bestowed upon him. (...) it was true of him, what was
said of Cato (...); That he seemed to be born to that only which he went
about: So dexterous was he in all his undertakings, In Court, in Camp, by Sea,
by Land, with Sword, with Pen, witness in the last his History of the World;
wherein the only default or ( defect rather) that it wants one half thereof.
Yet had he many enemies (which worth never wants) at Court, his cowardly
Detractors, of whom Sir Walter was wont to say, If any man accuses me to my
face, I will answer him with my mouth; but my tail is good enough to return an
answer to such who (...) me behind my ba^k.

Civilians.
JOHN COWEL was born at Yarnesborow in this County, bred first at Eaton, then
in Kings-Colledg in Cambridg. He was Proctor thereof 1586. Doctor of the Law,
Master of Trinity Hall, Vice Chancellor in the year 1603 and 1614, Doctor of
the Arches, and Vicar General to Archbishop Bancroft. Though Civil was his
Profession, such his skill in Common Law, he was as well able to practice in
Westminster Hall as Doctors Commons.

In his time the contest was heightened, betwixt the Civilians and Common
Lawyers, Cowell being the Champion of the former, whom King James countenanced
as far as he could with convenience. Indeed great were his abilities, though a
grand Oracle of the Common Law, was pleased in derision to call him Doctor
Cow-heele; and a Cow-heele (I assure you) well dressed is good meat, that a
Cook (when hungry) may lick his fingers after it.

Two chief Monuments he has left to Posterity, his Book entitled
Institutiones (...) Anglicani, and his Interprerer of the hard words in the
Common Law. Indeed he had both the essentials of an Interpreter, who was both
gnarus and sidus. Many slighted his Book, who used it; it being questionable
whether it gave more information or offense. Common Lawyers beheld it as a
double trespass, against them; first pedibus ambulando, that a Civillian
should walk in a Profession several to themselves; Secondly, that he should
pluck up the Pales of the bard terms, wherewith it was enclosed, and lay it
open and obvious to common capacities.

But an higher offense was charged upon him, that he made the King to have a
double Prerogative, the one limited by Law, the other (...); which being
complained of in Parliament, his Book was called in and condemned. Some other
advantages they got against him, the grief whereof (hearts sunk down are not to
be boyed up) hastened his death Anno Domini 1611. and he lies buried in
Trinity-Hall Chapel.

ARTHVR DVCK, was born of wealthy parentage at Heavy-tree in this County. He
was bred in Oxford, Fellow of All-souls-Colledge, and wrote the life of Arch
Bishop Chicheley the Founder thereof, in most elegant Latin. Proceeding Doctor
of Law, he became Chancellor of Wells and London, and Master of the (...),
designed also Master of the Roles, had not an intervening accident diverted it.
One of most smooth Language, but rough speech: So that what the (...) in (...).
Comedian faith of a fair (...) in Mean Apparel, was true of him.

In ipsa inesset forma, vestes formam (...). Had there not been a masculine
strength in his matter, it had been marred with the disadvantage of his
utterance. He died on the Lords Day, and (in effect) in the At (...) (...)
Middlesex.
Church, about 1648: Leaving a great estate to two Daughters, since married to
two of his Name and Kindred.

Writers.
ROGER the CISTERTIAN, Lived (near the place of his birth) at Ford Abbey in
this County. Here the judicious Reader will please himself to climb up the two
following Mountains of extremes (only with his eye) and then descend into the
Vale of Truth, which lies betwixt them.

Leland. Bale Cent. 3. Number. 23. Doctis artibus and (...), insolito quodam animi
ardore, noctes atque dies invigilavit. Invigilavit fallaciis atque imposturis
Diabolicis, ut Christi gloriam obscuraret.

I believe that Bilius Bale, would have been sick of the yellow Jaundies, if
not venting his choler in such expressions. But to speak impartially, the
works of this Roger concerning the Revelations of Elizabeth Abbess of
Schonaugh, and the Legend that he wrote of St. Ursula, with her Thousands of
Maids killed at Colen, are full (to say no worse) of many fond falsities. He
lived mostly in the Low Countries, and flourished 1180 under King Henry the
Second.

JOHN de FORD was probably born at, certainly Abbot of Ford in this County;
esteemed insignis Theologus in his age; following the footsteps of his friend
and Patron Baldwin, Archbishop of Canterbury. He travailed into Foreign parts,
which he did not, as too many, weed, but gathered the Flowers; returning stored
with good Manners, and stocked with good Learning. He endeavored, that all in
his Convent should be like himself, and Ford-Abbey in his time had more
Learning therein, than three Convents of the same bigness. He was Confessor to
King John, wrote many pious Works, and dying, was buried in his own Convent,
without any Funeral Pomp, about the year 1215.

RICHARD FISHAKER or FIZACRE ( Matthew In Anno Domini 1248. page 747.
Paris terms him FISHACLE) was, says De Scrip. Brit (...). 4. number. 6.
(...), born in Exoniensi Patria, which I english, in Devonshire. He was bred
first in Oxford, then in Paris, and became a Dominican Friar: For his Learning
and Preaching as highly esteemed as any of that age. He was (says Learned
Leland) as fast linked in Friendship to Robert Bacon (of whom In the Writers of
Oxford Shire.
hereafter) as ever (...) to Bacchius, or Thes^us to Perithous: So that one may
say ofthem, there was two friends. This Richard disdaining to survive Robert
a^oresaid, hearing of his death, expired in the same year 1248. and was buried
at Oxford.

JOHN CUT-(...) was born at the Manor of Gammage in this County, where his Name
and Family do continue Owners thereof. Now, because that which is pretty is
pleasing, and what is little, may be presumed pretty; we will insert the short
(and indeed all the) information we have of him.

Manuscript of Baronet Northcott.
In the time of King Edward the Third, Johannes Rupe-Scissanus, or de Rupe
scissa [Cutclif] being a very sincere and learned man, opposed himself against
the Doctrine and Manners of the Clergy, and wrote against the Pope himself. I
see Baleus non vidit omnia, for Pitzeus, it is no wonder if he be pleased to
take no notice of a Writer of an opposite judgment to himself. When we receive,
then will we return more Intelligence of this Author.

RICHARD CHICHESTER was not born at Chichester in Sussex, as his Name does
import, but was an Manuscript of (...) Northcott.
extract of that Ancient Family, still flourishing at Raleigh in this County.
He became a Monk in Westminster, seldom spending any spare time in vanity; but
laying it out in reading Scripture and good History. He wrote a Chronicle from
Hengisius the Saxon, to the year of our Lord 1348. done indeed fide Historica.
His death happened about the year 1355.

ROBERT PLYMPTON was born in Plypmton in this County, and bred an Augustinian
in the Town of his Nativity. He was afterward preferred Archdeacon of
Totnesse, conscientiously discharging his place: for perceiving people
extremely (...), he was another John Baptist in his painful preaching
repentance unto them, which Sermons he caused to be written; and it is
conceived they wrought a very good (...) on the Devonians. The time wherein he
flourished is not certainly known.

NICHOLAS UPTON was born in this County, of an Ancient Family, still
flourishing therein at........... He was bred Doctor in the Canon Law, and
became Canon of Salisbury, Wells and St. Paul's. Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, the
Me* coenas. General of goodness and learning, had him in high esteem, and gave
him great rewards: Hereupon Upton, in expression of his gratitude, presented
his Patron with a Book (the first in that kind) of Heraldry, and the Rules
thereof; a Book since set forth in a fair impression, by Edward Bish Esquire, a
Person composed of all worthy accomplishments. He flourished under King Henry
the Sixth 1440.

Since the Reformation.
RICHARD HOOKER was born at Manusc^ipt of (...) onet (...).
Heavy-tree nigh Exeter, bred in Corpus Christi College in Oxford, and
afterward was preferred by Archbishop Whitgift Master of the Temple, whilst
at the same time Mr. Walter Travers was the Lecturer thereof. Here the Pulpit
spoke pure Canterbury in the Morning, and Geneva in the Afternoon, until
Travers was silenced.

Hooker his Style was prolixe, but not tedious, and such who would patiently
attend and give him credit all the reading or hearing of his Sentences, had
their expectation over-paid at the close thereof. He may be said to have made
good Music with his fiddle and stick alone, without any Rosin; having neither
Pronunciation nor gesture to grace his matter.

His Book of Ecclestiastical POLITY is prized by all generally, save such who
out of Ignorance cannot, or Envy will not understand it. But there is a kind of
People who have a Pike at him, and therefore read his Book with a prejudice;
that as Jephtha vowed to sacrifice the first living thing which met him, these
are resolved to quarrel with the first word, which occurreth therein.

Hereupon it is, that they take exception at the very Title thereof,
Ecclesiastical Polity; as if unequally yoked; Church with some mixture of
City-nesse, that the Discipline Jure Divino, may bow to Humane Inventions. But
be it reported to the Judicious, whether when all is done, a Reserve must not
be left for prudential Supplies in Church Government.

True it is, his Book in our late Times was beheld as an Old-Almanack grown out
of date; but blessed be God, there is now a Revoluion, which may bring his
Works again into reputation.

Mr. Hooker leaving London (no inclination of his own, but obedience to others,
put him on so public a place) retired to his small Benefice in Kent, where he
put off his Mortality Anno 1599, leaving the Memory of an humble, holy, and
learned Divine. Here I must retract (after a St. Augustine.
Father no shame for a Child) two passages in my Church History. For, whereas I
reported him to die a Bachilour, he had From the mouth of his Sister lat^ly
livn^g at Hogsden nigh London.
Wife and Children, though indeed such as were neither to his comfort, when
living, nor credit when Dead. But Parents cannot stamp their Children from
their Heads or Hearts. Secondly, his Monument was not erected by Sir Edwin
Sandys (a person as probable as any man alive for such a performance) but by
Sir William Cooper, now li ving in the Castle of Hartford, and let the good
Knight have the due Commendation thereof.

JOHN REINOLDS was born in this County, bred in Corpus-Christi-Colledge in
Oxford, of whom I have spoken plentifully in my Church History.

NATHANIEL CARPENTER, Son to a Minister, was born in this County, bred Fellow
of Exeter-Colledge in Oxford. He was right-handed in the Cyclopedy of all Arts;
Logic, witness his Decades, Mathematics, expressed in the Book of his
Geography, and Divinity, appearing in his excellent Sermons called Achitophel.
As for his Optics it had been a Masterpiece in that kind, if truly and
perfectly printed.

I have been informed, that to his great grief, he found the written Preface
thereof CaChristmass Pies in his Printers House ( Pearls are no Pearls, when
Cocks or Coxcombs find them) and could never after from his scattered Notes
recover an Original thereof.

He went over into Ireland, where he became Chaplain to James Usher Archbishop
of Armagh, and Schoolmaster of the Kings Wards in Dublin. A place of good
profit, great credit, greatest trust, being to bring up many Popish Minors in
the Protestant Religion, who under his Education grew daily out of the Nonage
of their Years and Vassall^ge of their Errors.

He died in Dublin, Robert Usher (soon after Bishop of Kildare) preached his
Funeral Sermon, on that Text, Behold a true Israelite, wherein there is no
guile, showing how he was truly a Nathaniel, Gods Gift, and a Carpenter, a Wise
Builder of Gods House, until the Dissolution of his Own Tabernacle, about the
year 1636.

Benefactors to the Public.
PETER BLUNDELL of Tiverton in this County, was a Clothier by his Profession,
and through Gods Blessing on his Endeavors therein, raised unto himself a fair
Estate. Nor was he more painful and industrious in gaining, then Pious and
Prudent in disposing thereof; erecting a fair Free School in the Town of his
Nativity: By his Will he bequeathed thereto a competent maintenance (together
with convenience of Lodging) for a Master and Usher. And lest such whose Genius
did incline, and Parts furnish them for a further Progress in Learning, should
through want of a Comfortable Subsistency be stopped or disheartened, he
bestowed two Scholarships and as many Fellowships on Sidney College in
Cambridge; carefully providing that the Scholars bred in his School at
Tiverton, should be elected into the same. I cannot attain to a certainty in
the Time of his Death, though it be thought to have happened about the year
1596.

WILLIAM BURGOIN Esquire must not be forgotten, finding this his Epitaph on his
Marble Stone in the Church of Arlington.

Here lies Will. Burgoin a Squire by descent,
Whose death in this World many People lament.
The Rich for his love; The Poor for his Alms;
The Wise for his Knowledge; The Sick for his Balmes.
Grace he did love, and Vice conroul:
Earth has his body, and Heaven his Soul.
He died on the Twelfth day of August in the Morning, 1623. as the Inscription
on his said Tomb does inform us.

Memorable Persons.
HENRY de LA POMERAY lived at, and was Lord of Berry-Pomeray in this County.
This Henry taking heart at the imprisonment of Richard the First by Leopaldus
Duke of Austria, surprised and expulsed the Monks out of Michaels-Mount in
Cornwall, that there he might be a petty Prince by himself. But, being
ascertained of his Sovereigns enlargement, and fearing deserved death, to
prevent it, he laid violent hands on himself, as Roger Hoveden does report.

But the Carews Survey of Cornwall, page 155.
Descendants from this Pomeray make a different relation of this accident;
affirming, that, a Sergeant at Arms of the Kings came to his Castle at
Berry-Pomeray, and there received kind entertainment for certain days
together, and at his departure, was gratified with a liberal reward. In
counter-change whereof he then, and no sooner, revealing his long concealed
errand, flatly arrested his Host, to make his immediate appearance before the
King, to answer a capital crime. Which unexpected, and ill carried Message, the
Gentleman took in such despite, that with his Dagger he stabbed the Messenger
to the heart.

Then despairing of pardon in so superlative an offense, he abandoned his home,
and got himself to his Sister, abiding in the Island of Mount-Michael in
Cornwall: Here he bequeathed a large portion of his land to the religious people
dwelling there, to pray for the redeeming of his soul; and lastly (that the
remainder of his estate might descend to his heir) he caused himself to be let
blood unto death.

JOHN de BEIGNY Knight, lived Lord of Ege-Lifford in this County, who having
been a great Travailer and Soldier in his youth, retired home, married, and
had three Sons in his reduced Age. Of these, the third put himself on Foreign
Action, in the War against the Saracens, in Spain; whereof Fame made a large
report, to his Fathers great contentm^nt, which made him the more patiently
dispense with his absence. But after that death had bereft him of his two elder
Sons, he was often heard to say, Oh that I might but once embrace my (...)
(...) (...):
Son, I would be contented to die presently. His Son soon after returning
unexpectedly, the old man instantly expired with an ecstasy of Joy. An English
Father I see can be as passionate as the Italian Mother, which died for (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
Joy, after the return of her Son from the Battle of (...). Thus, if all our
random desires should hit the Mark, and if Heaven should always take us at
our word, in our wishes; we should be tamed with our Wild prayers granted
un^ous us, and be drowned in the Deluge of our own Passions. This Knight (as I
take it) flourished under King Edward the Third.

CHILD, (Whose Christian Name is unknown) was a Gentleman, the last of his
Family, being of ancient extraction at Plimstock in this County, and great
Possessions. It happened that he hunting in Dart-More, lost both his Company
and way in a bitter Snow. Having killed his Horse, he crept into his hot bowels
for warm^h, and wrote this with his blood;

He that finds and brings meto my Tomb,
The Land of Plimstock shall be his doom.
That n^ght he was frozen to death, and being first found by the Monks of
Tav^stock, they with all possible speed hasted to interre him in their own
Abbey. His own (...) of Plimstock hearing thereof, stood at the Ford of the
River to take his Body from them. But they must rise early, yea not sleep at
all, who overreach Monks in matter of profit. For they cast a slight Bridge
over the River, whereby they carried over the Corpse and interred it. In
avowance whereof, the Bridge (a more Premeditate Structure (I believe) in the
place of the former Extempore Passage) is called Guils Bridge to this day. And
know Reader, all in the Vicinage will be highly offended with such who either
deny or doubt the credit of this common Tradition. And sure it is, that the
Abbot of Tavistock got that rich Manor into his Possession. The exact Da^e of
this Child's Death I cannot attain.

NICHOLAS ANDREW
TREMAINE were Twins and younger Sons to Thomas Tremaine of (...) in this
County Esquire. Had they preceded Hypocrates in time, posterity would have
presumed them the sympathising Twins, whereof he makes so large mention. Such
their likeness in all lineaments, they could not be distinguished but by their
several habits, which, when they were pleased on private confederacy to
exchange for disport, they occasioned more mirthful mistakes, than ever were
acted in the Amphitruo of Plautus. They felt like pain though at distance, and
without any intelligence given, they equally desired to walk, travail, sit,
sleep, eat, drink together, as many credible Gentry of the Vicinage (by
relation from their Father) will attest. In this they differred, that at
New Haven in France, the one was a Captain of a Troop, the other but a private
Soldier. Here they were both slain 1564, death being pitiful to kill them
together, to prevent the lingering languishing of the Surviver.

Lord-Mayors.
Never one of this Office was a Devon-shire man by birth, on my best enquiry:
Whereof some assign these reasons.

1 The Distance of the Place, whose Western part is removed from London Two
hundred Miles. 2 Because the Devonians have a Little London (understand it
Exeter) in their own County; (Besides other Haven Towns) wherein Wealth is
gained near at hand.
But what ever be the cause, this County has made so little use of the
Exchange in London: No English Shire-men have applied themselves more
profitably to the Kings Court, and Innes of Court therein; or has attained
greater Wealth and Honor by living in those places.

The Names of the ^entry of this County, returned by the Commissioners in the
12 year of King Henry the Sixth. 1433.
E. Bishop of Exeter Roger Champernounce Knight. Knights for the Shire.
Commissioners to take the Oaths. Phillip Carry Knight.

Philip. Courtney chiv.. Nicholai Carru chiv. Thomae Brrok chiv. (...) Dynham
chi. Roberti Chalonns chi. (...) Herle chiv. Thomae Carmynowe ar. Roberti Hille
armig. Johannis Chichester ar. (...) Chuddelegh ar. Roberti Cornn armig.
Baldewini Foleford ar. (...) Speak armig. Johannis Wise arm. Johannis (...)
arm. (...) (...) arm. (...) Hille armig. Walteri Reynell armig. (...) Holand
arm. Johannis Bamfield ar. Nicholai Keynes arm. Johannis (...) de (...)
armigeri Johan. Prideaux de (Adeston arm. Johannis Gorges arm. Thomas Denis
armig. Philip. Lacy armig. Ricardi Yard armi. Walteri Polard arm. Johannis
Holand arm. Johannis (...) ar. Thomae Werthe armig. Willielmi Malerbe ar.
Johannis Malerbe ar. Johannis Yeo armig. Edwardi Saint John ar. Thomae
Boneville arm. VVillielmi Wanard Johannis Copleston. Nicholai Radeford.
Johannis Mulys. Henrici Fortescu. Henrici Drew. Johannis Lauerance VVillielmi
Mey. Henrici VVhiting. Ricardi Piperoll Johannis Marshal Rogeri Baron. Stephani
Giffard Willielmi Bishop. Nicholai Coterell. Willielmi Blenche Johannis Bolter.
Nicholai Trebarth ar. Petri Fry. Ricardi Yeo. Nicholai Tyrant. Johannis Gambon
Sen. Walteri Whitelegh ar. VVillielmi H^leway. Thomae Kyngeslond. Thomae ^erot
Petri Eggecombe ar. Johannis Harry. Thomae Prons. Thomae Latom. Willielmi
Colyn. Johannis Cokeworthy. Henrici (...) ar. Walteri Elyot. Johannis (...) ar.
(...) Beard. Edwardi Pomeray ar. Roberti Kirkham.
Sheriffs of Devonshire.
H^N. II.
Anno 1 Galfridus de Furnell. Anno 2 Richardus Com. Anno 3 Richardus de Ridner,
and Williel. Boterell, Anno 4 Anno 5 Williel. de Botterell. Anno 6 Anno 7 Hugo
de Ralega, for 4 years. Anno 11 Robertus filius Bernardi, and Hugo de Ralega.
Anno 12 Robertus filius Bernardi. Anno 13 Hugo Ralega. Anno 14 Robertus filius
Bernardi, for 4 years. Anno 18 Comes Reginaldus. Anno 19 Idem. Anno 20 Idem.
Anno 21 Comes Regin. Paganus, Capels and Alan. de Furnell. Anno 22 Williel.
Ruffus. Anno 23 Idem. Anno 24 ^ugo de Gunds. Anno 25 ^dem. Anno 26 Anno 27
(...) Bruer for 7 years.
RICH. I.
Anno 1 Willielmus de Brewere. Anno 2 Henry de Furnell for 9 years.
JOHAN. Rex
Anno 1 Willielmus de Wratham. Anno 2 Osbt. filius Willielmi. Anno 3 Radulp.
Morin. Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Willielmus Brieuere and Radus de Mora. Anno 6
Willielmus Brieuere. Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Williel. Brieuere, and Radus de Mora,
for 4 years. Anno 12 Robertus de Vetere Ponte, and Guido de Bello-campo. Anno
13 Anno 14 Robertus de Vetere Ponte, and Guido de Bello-campo. Anno 15 Idem.
Anno 16 Idem. Anno 17
HEN. III.
Anno. 2 Robertus de Currency. Anno. 3 Idem. Anno. 4 Robtus de Courtney. Anno.
5 Robtus de Courtne: Walter de Pohier. Anno. 6 Anno. 7 Anno. 8 Walter de
Trererd: Walter de Pohier. Anno. 9 Regin. de villa torta. Anno. 10 (...):
Raleg. Anno. 11 Williel: de Boleia. Anno. 12 Idem. Anno. 13 Rogerus: La Zouch.
Anno. 14 Tho. de Cicencester and Tho. de Lawill. Anno. 15 Idem. Anno. 16 Idem.
Anno. 17 Tho de La: Wile. Anno. 18 Robtus de valibus et Ric. de Langford. Anno
19 N^cus de Molis et Walter de Bada. Anno 20 Idem. Anno 21 VValterus de Bada,
for 13 years. Anno 34 VValterus de Bathond. Anno 35 Idem. Anno 36 VVilliel. de
Englefeurd. Anno 37 Idem. Anno 38 Idem. Anno 39 Radus de Wilton. Anno 40 Ger.
de Horton, and Hen. de Horton filius. Anno 41 Idem. Anno 42 Willielmus de Cu
rcen say Anno 43 Idem. Anno 44 Radus Lodescomb. Anno 45 Idem and Johan. de
Muscegros. Anno 46 Radus de Esse. for 7 years. Anno 53 VVilliel. de Bikels.
EDW. I.
Anno 1 Thomas Delpin. Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Anno 4 Anno 5 Matthew de
Egglesheill. Anno 6 Thomas Delpin. Anno 7 VVarinus de Sechevile. Anno 8 Idem.
Anno 9 Thomas Delpin, for 6 years. Anno 15 VVilliel. de Munketon et Rog. de
Ingepen. Anno 16 Robtus de VVodton. Anno 17 Matthew Filius Johannis. Anno 18
Idem. Anno 19 Idem et. Tho. de Scobhull. Anno 20 Matthew et Tho. Anno 21 Gilber.
de Knovill for 8 years. Anno 29 Thomas de Ralegh for 6 years. Anno 35
EDW. II.
Anno 1 Thomas de Ralegh. Anno 2 Nich. de Kirkham. Anno 3 Nich. de Tukesbury
for 3 years. Anno 6 Idem, and Matthew Ferneaux. Anno 7 Matthew de Furneaux. Anno
8. Math. de Furneaux, et Robt. de Horton. Anno 9 Anno 10 Matthew de Clivedon.
Anno 11 Math. de Clivedon, et Robt. de Bendon. Anno 12 Robt. de Bendon Joh. de
Bikkebur. Anno 13 Idem. Anno 14 Rob. Bendon, and Nic. Cheigne Anno 15 Null. Tit.
Com. in Rotulo. Anno 16 Anno 17 Matheus de Crowthorne. Anno 18 Math. de
Crowthorne, and Jacob. de Cokington.
EDW. III
Anno 1 James de Cokington. Anno 2 VVilliel. de Chiverston. Anno 3 Anno 4
VVilliel. de Fawconbge. Anno 5 Matthew de Crowthorne. Anno 6 Idem. Anno 7 Regin.
de Moveforti. Anno 8 Willielmus de Alba Marla. Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Anno 11
Johanes de Ralegh de Grandeport. Anno 12 Johan. Ralegh de Grandport. Anno 13
Idem. Anno 14 Anno 15 Johan. Ralegh de Charles. Anno 16 VVillil. Pupard. Anno
17 Anno 18 Edward. Dux Cornubiae, and Walt. Horton. Anno 19 Hen. Tirell,
Johan. Childston. Anno 20 Idem. Anno 21 Radus Brit. Rad. Peaupell. Anno 22 Anno
23 Almaricus Fitz. Warren. Anno 24 Idem. Anno 25 Robtus At Haach. Anno 26
VVilliel Auncel. Anno 27 Idem. Anno 28 Ricus Chambeuon. Anno 29 Idem. Anno 30
Idem. Anno 31 Johan. Daubernonn. Anno 32 VVilliel. Yoo. Anno 33 Ricus de
Brankescomb for 3 years. Anno 36 Almaricus Fitz. Warren. Anno 37 Martin.
Fitzacre. Anno 38 Williel. de Brighele. Anno 39 Johanes Boys. Anno 40 Williel.
de Servington. Anno 41 Anno 42 Ricus de Brankescomb and Ric. Channbuon. Anno 43
Anno 44 Tho. Chavubuon. Anno 45 Ricus Beaumond. Anno 46 Nichus Whitting. Anno
47 Ricus Chusden. Anno 48 Johanes Damuarle. Anno 49 Richus de Brandescomb. Anno
50 Nichus La Pomeray. Anno 51 Johan. de Ralege.
I cannot deny, but I have a Catalogue of the Sheriffs of this County
(beginning but Anno 1349. the 24th of King Edward the third) whence and by whom
collected to me unknown, somewhat differing from this List, now by us
exemplified, though I shall forbear the nominating of them, as sticking to the
Catalogue communicated unto me out of the Pipe Office.

HENRY the Second.
2. RICHARDUS COMES.] This is but a blind and lame Indication Richard the
Earl, not telling us, whereof, as if there had been but one English Earl
Richard in that Age. Whereas there was Rich. Fitz-Gilbert, Earl of Clare, and
Rich. de Ripariis, [or Rivers] both flourishing at this Time. But here, the
Letters of these must be meant, who was Earl of this County, the self same who
married Avis, Daughter and Heir of Reginald Earl of Cornwall, the base Son of
King Henry the first. Came. Brit. in Somers^t.


27. WILLIELMUS BREWER] His Mother unable (to make the most Charitable
Constructions) to maintain, cast him in Brewers, (whence he was so named) or in
a Bed of An ^ld English word.
Brakes, in New Forest. In him the words of David found performance, When my
Father and Mother forsake me, the Lord takes me up. King Henry the Second
riding to rousea Stag, found this Child, and caused him to be nursed and well
brought up till he became a man, and (the Honor of all Foundlings) a prime
Favorite to King Henry and Richard the first, made Baron of Odcomb, and his
Issue Male failing, his large Inheritance was by Daughters derived to Breos,
Wake, la Fort, and Percy.

EDWARD the Third.
32. WILLIAM YOO.] His family is still extant in this County, in a worshipful
condition, on the same token that they give for their Arms, Gwillim his Display
of Heraldry, page 161.
Argent, a Cheveron Sable, between three Turky-Cocks in their prideproper.

Let no over-critick causlesly cavil at this Coat, as but a modern bearing,
because Turky-Cocks came not into England till about the tenth Stows Chro. page
1038.
year of the Reign of King Henry the eighth, being here formerly shown as
rareties, though not fed on as Tablefoule till that time. Besides, Heralds
have ever assumed that privilege to themselves, to assign for Arms, both
those Creatures which are found only in foreign Countries ^ The Crest of the
Marquess of Hertford.
(Leopards, Tigers, etc.) and those, whose sole existence is in the fancy of
Poets and Painters, as a* Phoenix, Harpey and the like.

Sheriffs.
Name. Place. Arms. RICH. II. Anno. 1 John Damerell Throwley 2 John Fitzpayn
Or, three Piles Azure. 3 John Strech 4 Wall. Corn Arg. a Chevron betwixt 3 bugle
horns, Garnished Sab. 5 Ric. Champernoun Modberie Gules, a Saltire varee,
betwixt 12 Billeis Ar. 6 Ric. Kendall Argent a Cheveron betwixt 3 Dolphins
Sable. 7 Will. de Hasthorpt. 8 Ja. Chudleygh Ermin, three Lions Ramp. Gu. 9 Ric.
Whitiley Azure on a bend, Or 3 Torteauxes. 10 Ric. Champernoun ut prius 11 John
Pawlet. Sab. 3 Swords in pyle Ar. 12 Nic. Kerckham. Erm. 3 Lions Ramp. G.
within a Border engrailed S. alias ar. 13 Will. Bonevile. VViscombe Sab. 6.
Mullets Arg. Pierced Gules. 14 Will. Carminow Az. a Bend Or, a Label of 3
points Gule. 15 Joh. Greenvile Bediford Gules 3 Rests Or. 16 Tho. Rawleigh
Rawleigh Gules, a Bend Lozingee Arg. 17 Tho Brook 18 Will. Ferers Arg. a bend
Gu. on a chief Vertrect 2 Cinque foiles the field. 19 VVil. Malehe^b Or a
Cheveron Gules between 3 Nettle leaves proper. 20 Tho. ^everell Gules a Fess
Arg. betwixt six Crosses Patee Or. 21 Will. Beaumont Azure Seem, Or, Flower de
lis, a Lion Ramp. Or 22 23 HEN. IV. Anno. 1 John Keynes 2 Tho. Pomeroy. Pery
Pom. Or. a Lion Rampant Gules. 3 John Herle, Miles Ilfarcombe Arg. a Fess Gules
betwixt 3 Sheldrakes proper. 4 John Keneys 5 John VVike Northwick 6 John B^vil
Cornwall Arg. a Bull Passant G. armed and tripped, Or. 7 John Che^eldon 8 Phil.
Cole Arg. a Bull passant Sab. armed, Or, within a border of the second
Bezantee. 9 Joh. Herle, miles ut prius 10 Edw^ Pine Gules a Cheveron Ermine
bebetween 3 pine Apples, Or, 11 Will. Cheney Pineho Gules on a Fess of four
Lozengies, Arg. as many Escalops Sab. 12 Robert 13 Ric. Pomeroy ut prius 14
Ric. Peveril ut prius HEN. V. Anno. 1 Tho. Beaumond ut prius 2 Tho. Pomeroy ut
prius Sab. Six Swallows in Pile Argent. 3 John Arundell Cornwall 4 Joh. Bevill
ut prius 5 VVil. Talbot Talbotswick. 6 Ste. Dumeford 7 Hug. Courtnay Powderham
Or, 3 Torteauxes. 8 Tho. Be^umont ut prius 9 Rob. Challons 10 Tho Beaumond ut
prius HEN. VI. Anno. ut prius 1 Tho. Beaumond and Sr. VVil. Bonvile. ut prius 2
Ric. Hanckford 3 Tho, Brook 4 VVil. Palton do Umberl. 5 Joh. Bamp^yld Polmo^e
Or, on a bend Gules 3 Mullets Arg. 6 Tho. Beaumond ut prius 7 Rob. Hill 8 la.
Chudleigh ut prius 9 Ioh. Bozome Argent 3 bolts Gulcs. 10 Edw. Pemeroy ut prius
11 Edw. Pine ut prius 12 Ioh. Cheynede ut prius 13 Tho. Stowell Gules. A Cross
Lozenges, Argent. 14 Rog. Champernoun ut prius 15 Tho. Beaumont ut prius 16
Tho. Arundell ut prius 17 Ja. Chudleigh ut prius 18 VVil. Beauchamp Gules a
Fess betwixt six Martlets, Or. 19 Rob. Burton Argent, 3 palmer slaves, in Fess
Az. 20 VVil. VVadham SOMER Gules, a Cheveron betwixt 3 Roses Arg. 21 Rich.
Yeard YeardCol. Arg. a Chev. G. be^wixt 3 water-Boug^ts of the (...)* 22 Ioh.
Cheny ut prius 23 Ioh. Bluet Or. a Cheve. (...) ^ Eagl^s displaied Gul^s. 24
Nic. B^oughton Arg. a Chev. (...) 3 Mullets Gules. 25 Hen. Fortescue. Azure, a
Bend Ingrailed Ar. (...) O^. 26 Th ^ Budeokshed St. B^deox Sa. 3 Lo^enges, in
Fes. between 3 (...) ^eads cabossed, arg. 27 Hugh (...) Affeton (...) 3 Pears,
Or. 28 Jer. (...) ut prius 29 30 (...). (...) 31 Hen. (...) ut prius 32 John
(...) ut prius 33 Rich H^les Arg. a (...). (...) 3 Griffins Heads erased.
(...)* 34 And. Hillingdon 35 Edw. Landford 36 John Nan^an 37 Rich. Hales ut
prius 38 Bald. Sutford Miles 39 John Dinham Gul. 3 Fu^ils in Fess, within a
Border, (...)* 40 Walt. Dennis Holcombe (...). 3 Battle-Axes, Gules EDWARD IV.
Anno 1 John Cheney ut prius 2 Idem ut prius 3 John Chiche^er Checky Or and
Gules, a Chie^ varry. 4 John Arundle ut prius 5 Christop. Wolsey 6 Will. Dynis,
(...). ut prius 7 Phil. Beaumont ut prius 8 Rich. Chichester ut prius 9 Nich.
Carew, Arm. Or. 3 Lions passant Sab. armed and langued, Gules. 10 Phil.
Courtn^y ut prius 11 Phil. Copleston Warley Aar. a Cheveron ingraild, Gules
between 3 Leopards heads, (...). 12 John Cheney ut prius 13 Rich. Pomeray ut
prius 14 Rich. Chichester ut prius 15 Otho G^lbert Arg. on a Cheveron Sab.
three Roses, of the Field. 16 Cha. Dinham ut prius 17 John Sapcote Sable, 3
Dove-coats, (...) 18 Edw. Courtnay ut prius 19 20 Rob. Willoughby 21 Giles
Daubeney gules, 4 (...) in Fess. arg. 22 Will. Courtnay ut prius RICHARD III.
Anno 1 Will. Courtney ut prius 2 Hamath* Malevorer Yorkshire Sable, three
(...) cursant, in (...) argent. 3 Tho. Malevorer (...). Maheel ut prius HENRY
VII. anno 1 John Hawell, Miles Or, on a Bend Sable, 3 Goats passant (...) of
the field. 2 Rich. Edgcombe M. (...) (...), on a Bend, er. betwixt 2 (...), Or,
3 (...) (...) coped, Arg. 3 Robert (...) 4 Roger Holand Azure, 5 Flower de Lis,
a Lion (...) gardant, arg. 5 John Hallywell ut prius 6 Will* (...), (...) 7
Walter Enderby 8 Rich. Pomeray, (...). ut prius 9 Roger Holand, Arm ut prius
10 Peter Edgcombe (...) ut prius 11 (...). Fortescue, arm. ut prius 12 VVil.
Carew, miles ut prius 13 Per* Edgcomb, (...) ut prius 14 Roger Holand, arm ut
prius 15 James Chudleigh, a ut prius 16 Rich. VVhytley, ar ut prius 17 Rich.
VVadham, a. ut prius 18 Rich Hallywell, (...). ut prius 19 John Fortescue, ut
prius 20 VVil. Norwood, ar 21 John Kyrcham ut prius 22 John (...) ut prius 23
Thom. Denis, arm. ut prius HENRY VIII. Anno 1 Tho. (...), armiger ut prius 2
John Crocker, arm. Linam Arg. a Chev. engrailed betwixt 3 Crows proper. 3
Thom. Goodman 4 Thom. Denis, Miles ut prius 5 VVil. Carew, armiger ut prius 6
Nich. VVadham. (...). ut prius 7 John Clifton, miles Sab. Semee of
Cinquefoiles, a Lion rampant, argent. 8 John Speak, miles Arg (...) Bars
azure, over all an Eagle displayed Gules. 9 Peter Edgcombe ut prius 10 Thom.
Dennys ut prius 11 Ralph Paxsal 12 Tho. Stukley, arm. ut prius 13 William
Courtney ut prius 14 Thomas Dennis ut prius 15 John Kirckham, mi. ut prius 16
John Basset, Miles Arg. three (...) wavee (...) 17 VV. Courtnay, Mil. ut prius
18 Phi. Champernoun ut prius 19 Tho. Dennys, Miles ut prius 20 Peter Edgcomb,
M. ut prius 21 Joh. Chamond, Ar. Cornwal^ Arg. a Cheveron betwixt three Flower
de Lis, gules. 22 Georg. St. Leoger Azure, Fretee arg. a chief- gules 23 Tho.
Dennys, Miles ut prius 24 Rich. Grenvile ut prius 25 VVil. Courtney vt prius 26
John Fullford Gules, a cheveron arg. 27 Hugh Pollard ut prius Arg. a cheveron
Sab. between 3 Escalop-shells, gules. 28 Geor. Carew, Arm. ut prius 29 Rich.
Pollard ut prius 30 Hugh Chamond ut prius 31 Hugh Pollard ut prius 32 John
Fulford, Mil. ut prius 33 Hugh Paulet, Mil. ut prius 34 George Carew ut prius
35 Rich. Edgcombe ut prius 36 Hugh Stukeley ut prius 37 Hugh Pollard ut prius
EDWARD VI. Anno 1 Peter Carew, Miles ut prius 2 Gwin. Carew, Miles ut prius 3
Peter Courtney ut prius 4 Tho. Dennys, miles ut prius 5 John Chich^ster ut
prius 6 Rich* Chudleigh, ar. ut prius PHIL. Reg. MA. Regin. Anno 1 Rich.
Edgcombe ut prius 1.2 Tho. Dennys, miles ut prius 2.3 James Cortenay, a. ut
prius 3.4 Rob. (...), armig. Cockington ut prius 4.5 John Fullford, (...). ut
prius ELIZABETH, Regin. Anno 1 Rob. Dennys, miles ut prius (...) Tho.
Southcoat, ar. Arg. a Cheveron Gul. betwixt three Coots, Sab. 3 Arth.
Champernoun ut prius 4 John St. Ledger, miles ut prius 5 Christ. Coppleston, a
ut prius 6 Richard Fortescue, a ut prius 7 Richard Duke, arm. (...) Partee per
fess. Arg. and Azure 3 Chaplets counterchanged. 8 Thomas Mounck, ar. Gules, a
Ceveron* betwixt 3 Lions Heads erased, Arg. 9 Per. Edgcombe, arm. ut prius 10
Lewis (...), ar. ut prius 11 Robert Dennys, ar. ut prius 12 Will. Stroade, ar.
Arg. 3 Conyes Sab. 13 John Mallet armig. Azure 3 Escalops Or. 14 Tho.
Southcote, ar. ut prius 15 (...) (...), armig Burrington 16 John (...), miles
ut prius 17 Tho. Carew armig. ut prius 18 Arthur (...) ut prius 19 20 Richard
Bampfiel^ ut prius 21 ^ohn Chichester a. ut prius 22 Rog. Prideaux, ar. Arg. a
Cheveron Sab. a Label Gules. 23 VVil. Cortenay, mi ut prius 24 John (...),
miles ut prius 25 John Fitz. (...). Arg. a Cross, Gul. (...) de Sang. 76 Hugh
Fortescue ut prius 27 Ed. Seimour, miles Bury- (...) Gules, 2 Angels-wings
palewayes (...), Or, 28 Richard Reynell Masonry, Arg. a Chief* indented Or, on
a Bend Gules, 3 Mill^* Arg. 29 Humph* Specote 30 Will. Kyrcham, ar. ut prius 31
32 33 34 Ric. Champernoun ut (...) 35 Will. Sttowd, arm. ut prius 36 Tho.
(...), mile ut (...) 37 Ed. Seimour, armig* ut prius 38 Will. St^owd, (...)
Arg. 3 Balls Heads, cabossed, Sab. armed, Or. 39 John Coplestone, (...) 40
Will. Fortescue ar. ut prius 41 Henry Roll ut (...) 42 Tho. Rugway, arm. Torre
43 (...)* Parker, (...). Sab. 3 Bucks heads cabossed, between 2 Flanches, Or.
44 Thom. Heal, armig. Gules, a bend Lozengie ermine. alias Arg. 5 (...) in
Pale. 45 William Pool, ar. Shute Gules, on the middlemost a Leopards head, Or.
46 Amic. Bamfield, ar. ut prius King JAMES. Anno 1 Ami* Bamfield, a. ut prius 2
John Drake, a. Ash ut Infr^, 3 Edward Semour, a. ut prius 4 John Abbot, a.
Gules, a cheveron betwixt 3 Pears, Or. 5 Robert Rolls, a. ut prius 6 John
Acland, mil^s Checky, Arg. and Sab a Fess. Gules. 7 Will. Grymes, a. 8 Hugh
Acland, armig. ut prius 9 Thomas Wise, (...) (...) Sable, three-Cheverons,
Ermine Per Cheveron, Arg. and purple a Lion Rampant counterchanged 10 Edw
Gyles, (...) 11 George Smith, miles 12 John Specot, miles ut prius 13 John
Gefford, arm. Sab. 3 Lozenges in Fess, (...). 14 George Southcoate, ut prius 15
Thomas Heal, ar. ut prius 16 War^. Heal (...) ut prius 17 Christ Savo^ y,
miles 18 (...) Heal, (...) ut prius 19 Edmond Parker, ar. ut prius 20 Edm.
(...), (...) ut prius 21 Henry Tottle, arm. Azure, on a bend Argent cottised,
Or. a Lion passant, Sa. 22 Simon Leach King CHARLES I. (...) 1 (...) Fry,
armig. Yarty Vert, 3 Horses in pale cur. arg. 2 John Northcoate, A. Arg. 3
Croslets bendwaise, (...) 3 Waler Young, arm. 4 Henry Rouswel, mil. Fordabbey 5
John Davy, armiger Arg. a Cheveron Sab. (...) 3 Mullets Gules, peirced. 6 Henry
Ashford, arm. Ashforde Arg. three Pine-apples Vert, twixt 2 Cheveronels, Sable.
5 Edward (...), (...) Anery ^arty per Cheverons Azu, and Erm* ^ Stags heads,
cabos. (...) 8 (...) Drake, Bar. Buckland Sab. a Fess. (...) between the 2 pole
Stars Arg. alias, a (...) wings elevated. (...) Ermine, a Lion passant, Gules.
ut prius. 9 ^ohn (...), ar. ut prius 10 Thomas Drew, miles 11 Thomas Heal, Ba.
Fleet 12 Dennys Roll, (...). ut prius 13 Thomas Wise, arm. ut prius 14 John
Poole, (...) ut prius 15 Nichol* (...), m Oxon Or, 2 Bars, Gules. 16 Nicholas
Putt (...) Arg. a Lion rampant, impounded within a Muscle, Sable. Richard
Collums, a Azure, a Cheveron Ermine, bebetwixt 3 Pellicans vulning themselves,
Or. 17 Edmond (...) ut prius 18 Henry Careye ut prius 19 John Acland, armi. ut
prius 20 Richard Greenvile, ut prius 21 Francis Drake, miles ut prius 22

RICHARD II.
1. JOHN DAMEREL] Throwely in Dartmore, his chief (...), came to his Family by
match with the eldest Daughter and coheir of (...), (who married AVIS, sole
Heir to Sr. William le Prouze, in the reign of K. Edward the second) her Two
younger Sisters being married to North-coat and Wibery, amongst whom a great
Inheritance was divided. And by Writ of Particion (sued out in the 14 of K.
Edward the third) * Throwley fell to the share of Damerel.

HENRY VII.
2. RICHARD EDGECOMB.] He was a Knight and memorable in his Generation. For,
being zealous in the Cause of Henry Earl of Richmond, (afterward K. Henry the
7.) he was in the time of K. Richard the 3. so hotly persued and narrowly
searched for, that he was forced to hide himself in his thick Woods, at his
House at (...) in Cornwall. Here extremity taught him a sudden Policy, to put a
stone in his cap, and tumble the same into the water, whilst these Rangers
were fast at his heels, who looking down after the noise, and seeing his cap
swimming thereon, Carew Survey of Cornw. fol. 114.
supposed that he had desperately (...) himself, and (deluded by this honest
fraud) gave over their farther persuit, leaving him at liberty to shift over
into Britain. Nor was his gratitude less than his ingenuity, who in
remembrance of his delivery, after his return, built a Chapel (lately extant)
in the place where he lurked, and lived in great repute with Prince and People.
King Henry the seventh rewarded his Loyalty by bestowing the Castle of Totnes
in this (...). (...) in Devonshire.
Countyupon him.

EDWARD VI.
1. PETER CAREW, Miles] This active Gentleman had much ado to expedite
himself, and save his life, being imprisoned for his compliance with Sr. Thomas
Wyate Afterward he did signal service in the Irish Wars. This Memorial
remains for him

Viro Nobilissimo, D. PETRO CAREW; Equiti Aurato: Est hoc structum Monumentum:
Qui obiit Rosae in Laginia Hyberniae 27 Novembris, Sepultus autem Waterfordiae,
15 Decembris, 1575. Terra Cadav^r habet. The rest of the Epitaph is not
legible. Queen ELIZABETH.
11. ROBERT DENNIS, Miles] This worthy Knight, Anno 1592. erected a fair
Almes-House in the Suburbs of Exeter, for 12 poor Aged Men, allowing to each a
plot of ground for an Herber, and 12 Pence weekly. This Family so ancient in
this County (deriving its Name and Original from the DANES) is now extinct, the
Heir-general being married into the House of the ROLLS.

45. AMIAS BAMPFIELD, Arm.] Right ancient and worthy his extraction, especially
since one of his Ancestors married one of the Daughters and Coheirs of the
Lord Semaur, or de sancto Mauro, whereby a fair Inheritance at South-Molton, in
this County, accrewed into this Family, in which Church this Amias with his
Father lies interred: and their joynt-Epitaph will acquaint us with the
numerosity of their Issue then living or dead.

Twelve of Seventeen are not, of Fifteen are Eleven
Proceeding from this stock, praise be to God in Heaven.
However Pottimore near Exeter is their prime Habitation, and has been ever
since the time of K. Edward the first, witness this Inscription on a Monument
in that Church,

Hic ^acet Joh. Bampfield, and Agnes Uxorejus, Pater and Matter Will* Bampfield,
qui hanc Ecclesiae Maximam Campanam fieri fecerunt, 1310. As for Sr. Coplestone
Bampfield (now Sheriff of this County) and so cordial to the Kings Cause in
the worst of times, he does by his Virtues add a New Luster to his ancient
extraction.

King CHARLES.
12 DENNIS ROLLS Arm.] His Mother was Coheir to Sr. Thomas Dennis, Knight, of
right ancient extraction. As for this worthy Esquire, I remember the old
Sentence, Praestat nulla quam pauca dicere de Carthagine, on which account I
forbear further praise of him. He was the last of his House, not in the sense
wherein Salust is called altimus suae domus, because he lavished away all his
Lands in Luxury, but God denied his Male-Issue to attain to Man's estate.

The Farewell.
I am most credibly informed, that a Rock, lately (so lately that as yet it is
not named) has been discovered by an Hamburger being Master of a ship, who
made the first report thereof (on his own Oath, and the oaths of all in his
company) to the Corporation of Seamen at the Trinity-house nigh London. It
lies one league off from the START in Devonshire. It is more then suspicious,
that many hundreds have here had their silent Deaths, never landing to relate
the cause of their destruction. For it is very dangerous for a Ship that
draws above eleven or twelve foot water, if it should chance to strike upon
it at a low water, with an indifferent Sea. It is the more dangerous because:
Picked the form thereof, so that if you chance to heave one cast upon it, the
next cast shall be no less than fourteen or fifteen fathom water.

I am sorry if the Discoverer hereof met not with a proportionable Reward,
understanding that he had made a better Bargain if he had addressed himself
first to the Dutch, (most bountiful in such cases) though our Nation be most
concerned therein. Let all ships passing thereby be fore-armed because,
forewarned thereof, seeing this Rock can no otherwise be resisted than by
avoiding.

EXETER.
EXETER* It is of a circular (and therefore most capable) form, sited on the
top of an Hill, having an easy assent on every side thereunto. This (...) much
to the cleanness of this City, Nature being the chief Scavenger thereof, so
that the Rain that falls there falls thence by the declivity of the place.
The Houses stand sidewaies backward into their Yards, and only (...) with
their Gables toward the Street: the City therefore is greater in content than
appearance, being bigger than it presents it self to (...) through the same.

Manufactures.
Clothing is plied in this City, with great Industry and Judgment. It is
hardly to be believed what credible Persons attest for truth, that the return
for Serges alone in this City amounts weekly, (even now when Trading though
not dead is sick) to three Thousand Pounds, not to ascend to a higher
proportion.

But the highest commendation of this City is for the Loyalty thereof,
presenting us with a pair-Royal of Services herein;

when besieged by 1 Perkin Werbeck, in the Reign of King Henry the seventh. 2
The Western Rebels, in the Reign of King Edward the sixth. 3 The Parliament
Forces, in the Reign of King Charles the first.

There Valor was in vincible in the two first, and their Loyalty unstained in
the last, rewarded by their Enemies with the best made, and best kept Articles,
yea in the very worst of times, a depressed party therein were so true to their
Principles, that I meet with this epitaph in the Chancell of St. Sidwells.

Hic jacet Hugo Grove in Comitatu Wilts, Armiger, in restituendo Ecclesiam, in
asserendo Regem, in propugnando Legem ac Libertatem Anglicanam, captus and
decollatus 6 Maii, 1655. The Buildings.
The Cathedral dedicated to St. Peter is most beautiful, having the West end
thereof adorned with so lively Statues of stone, that they plainly speak the
Art of those who erected them.

There is in this City a Castle, whitherto King Richard the Usurper repaired,
and for some days reposed himself therein. He demanded of the Inhabitants, how
they called their Castle, who returned the name thereof was RUGEMONT, though I
confess it a Rarity, that the castle in a City should be called by any other
name than a Castle. Hereat the Usurper was much abashed, having been informed
by Wizards, that he should never prosper after he had met a thing called
Rugemont. It seems Satan either spoke this Oracle low or lisping, desirous to
palliate his fallacy and ignorance; or that King Richard (a guilty conscience
will be frighted with little) mistook the word, seeing not Rugemont but
Richmond, (the title of King Henry the seventh) proved so formidable to this
Usurper.

As for Parish-Churches in this City, at my return thither this year I found
them fewer than I left them at my departure thence 15 years ago. But the
Demolishers of them can give the clearest Account, how the plucking down of
Churches conduces to the setting up of Religion; besides I understand that
thirteen Churches were exposed to sale by the public Crier, and bought by
well-affected Persons, who preserved them from destruction.

The Wonders.
When the City of Exeter was besieged by the Parliaments Forces, so that only
the southside thereof toward the Sea was open unto it, incredible number of
Larks were found in that open quarter, for multitude like Quails in the
Wilderness (though blessed be God) unlike them both in cause and effect, as
not desired with Man's destruction, nor ^ent with Gods anger, as appeared by
their safe digestion into wholesome nourishment: hereof I was an eye and mouth
witness. I will save my credit in not conjecturing any number, knowing, that
herein though I should stoop beneath the truth, I should mount above belief:
they were as fat as plentiful, so that being sold for two Pence a dozen, and
under, the Poor (who could have no cheaper, as the (...) (...) (...) meat) used
to make pottage of them, boiling them down therein. Seve^al natural Causes were
assigned hereof: 1. That these Fowl frighted with much shooting on the Land,
(...) to the Seaside for their Refuge. 2. That it is familiar with them in
cold winters (as that was) to shelter themselves in the most (...) parts. 3.
That some sorts of Seed were lately fown in those parts which invited them
thither for their own repast. However the Cause of causes was Divine (...),
thereby providing a Feast for many poor people, who otherwise had been pinched
for provision.

Princes.
HENRIETTA youngest Child of King Charles and Queen Mary, was born at
BedfordHouse in this City, Anno 1644. on the sixteenth day of June. After her
long and sad night of Affliction, the day dawned with her, in her Brothers
happy return. Since she is married to the Duke of Orleance. I hope that I once
related unto her as a Chaplain, may ever pray for her, that her soul may be
sanctified with true Grace, and she enjoy both the Blessings of this and a
Better life.

Prelates.
BARTHOLOMEUS ISCANUS, born in this * City, was accounted in that age the
Goodwin, in his Catalogue of Bishop.
Oracle of Learning and Religion, so that in all Conventions to that purpose
his suffrage clearly carried it. He became afterward Bishop in the place of
his nativity, being intimate with his City-man, whose Character next follows,
Baldwin of Devonshire, then but Abbot of Ford, afterward advanced to higher
preferment. These mutually dedicated Books each to others Commendation so that
neither wanted praise nor praised himself. This Leland calls pulcherimum
certamen. Indeed this Alternation of reciprocal Encomiums, became them the
better, because it was merit in both, flattery in neither. This Bartholomew was
an opposer of Becket his insolence: and having sat Bishop 14 Years ended his
life, Anno 1185.

BALDVINUS DEVONIUS was born in this City, of poor Parentage, save that in some
sort a worthy man may be said to be Father to himself. His preferment increased
with his Learning and deserts, being first a Schoolmaster, then an
Archdeacon, then Abbot of Ford: afterward Bishop of Worcester, and lastly
Archbishop of Canterbury. An eloquent Man, and a pious Preacher, according to
the Devotion of those days, so that the errors which he maintained may justly
be accounted the Faults of the tim^s, and in him but infirmities. When King
Richard the first went to Palestine, he conceived himself bound both in
conscience and credit, to partake of the pains and perils of his Sovereign,
whom he attended thither but not thence, dying there, and being buried at Tire,
Anno Dom. 1190.

WALTER BRONSCOMBE was Son to a very mean * man in this City, and therefore
Hooker, alias (...), in (...) Catalogue of the Bishops of EXETER.
the more remarkable, that taking no rise from his extraction, he raised
himself by his own industry to be Bishop of Exeter. Here he built and endowed
an Hospital for poor people, and also founded a fair College at Perin in
Cornwall. The Angel Gabriel was very much beholding to him, for instituting an
Annual Festival unto Him, (observed, as I humbly conceive, only in his own
Cathedral, or own Diocese at the most) and least people should complain of the
dearnesse of their Devotion, he left good Land to defray the cost of that
Solemnity. He is much blamed for compassing the Manor of BishopsClift to his
Church by indirect means, to which I can say nothing, but only observe, that
this small City, within eighty Years did afford three eminent Prelates (whereof
two Episcopi in Patria) the Natives thereof, which will scarcely be paralelled
in any Place of the same proportion, He died Anno 12..

Writers.
JOSEPHUS ISCANUS was born at this City, anciently called Isca, from the River
Isk, (now named Eske) running thereby. A golden Po^t in a leaden Age, so terse,
and elegant were his Conceits and expressions,. This our English Maro had for
his Mecenas Baldwin Archbishop of Canterbury. But I revoke my words, and desire
to turn Maro into Cornelius Nepos, under whose name the Dutchmen have lately
printed a Poem, made by this Josephus, debello Trojano. It sounds much to a
Man's honor, even to be mistaken for another Man of eminency: for though there
may be much of error in the mistake, there must be something of truth in the
error, especially with the judicious: Yea in such case a general conformity
betwixt the Persons is not enough to build the mistake on, without some (...)
(...); as here the affinity of phrase, and fancy betwixt these two Poets.

This (...) Nepos under whose name the Poems of this Josephus were printed,
flourished in the time of Tully. Indeed I find not any Poems made by him,
though having to that purpose perused all Scaliger, de Art (...), as a most
probable Author. But most sure it is, that this Corn^lius was most judicious
in that Art, because Valerius Catullus dedicated his Poem unto him, as best
able to p^sse a learned censure thereon, this Josephus Iscanus flourished under
King John, Anno 1210, being Archbishop of Bordeaux.

I have nothing more to observe of him, save what, with the Readers pardon, I
cannot omit, viz. that this Josephus always minded me of another Josephus
Iscanus, I mean Joseph Hall, lately Bishop of Exeter, a witty Poet, when young,
a painful Preacher, and solid Divine in his middle, a patient- Sufferer in his
old age, of whom God willing, more See Writers in Lecestershire.
in due place.

WILLIAM of Exeter was Bale, de scrip. Brit. cent. 5. p. 405. and Pi^z. anno
1330.
born in this City, bred a Doctor of Divinity in Oxford, and afterward became
(...) of the (...) in the place of his nativity. Now in his age foam Franciscan
Friars so praised the perfectiou of Poverty, that they touched the Popes
Coppy-hold of Inheritance, For if Poverty was so essential to Piety, Papal
pomp, and plenty must needs argue profaneness: In confutation hereof, this
William of Exeter undertook William of Ockam, though indeed impar congressus
betwixt them; for Exeter, a fair City did not more exceed Ockam a small village
in Surrey in beauty, and building, than that Ockam William excelled this Exeter
William in parts and Learning; however what he wanted in brains, he had in a
good back to assist him: and William of Exeter with John the three and
twentieth Pope of Rome was able to undertake any Author of that age, He
flourished in the Year of our Lord 1330. under the Reign of King Edward the
third.

Since the Reformation.
RICHARD MARTYN was born in this City, and bred partly in the Court, partly in
the Inns of Court; and at last ^etook himself to the Study of the Law, He was
accounted one of the highest Wits of our Age and his Nation, King James being
much delighted with his facetiousnesse, a quality (which with other of his
Abilities) commended him to be chosen Recorder of London; He is eminent, as for
many Speeches, so especially for that he made in Parliament in the tenth year
of King James, when account was taken of Forty Gentlemen in the House, which
were not twenty, and some of them not sixteen years of age: Formerly (said this
R^order Martyn) it was the custom of Old men to make Laws for Young ones,:
But now Nature is invaded and inverted, seeing Young men enact Laws to govern
their Fathers: He had an excellent Pen, and wrote very much, and the more the
pity that they are suppressed from public use; his death happened about the
year 1616.

WILLIAM MARTIN Kinsman to the aforesaid Recorder was born in this City, and
bred a Student in the Laws of the Land: He wrote a short and clear of the
Kings of England since the conquest. I have been credlbly informed, that King
James took some exceptions at a Passage therein, sounding either to the
derogation of his own Family, or of the Scotch Nation, which he took so
tenderly that Mr. Martin was brought into trouble for the same; and though he
wethered out the Kings displeasure, and was reconciled to his Majesty, yet he
never r^covered his former cheerfulness. It seems that a Princes Anger is a
disease which though cured, is not cured, grief for the same being conceived to
hasten his death, which happened about the year 1616.

WILLIAM TUCKER, was born in this N. College Register. in an. 1577.
City, bred fellow of New-Colledge in Oxford, and after became Doctor in
Divinity, Canon of Sarisbury, Archdeacon of Barnstable, and Dean of
Lichfield,. The purity of his Latin Pen procured his preferment, writing, and
dedicating a Book to Queen Elizabeth, de Charismate, of our Kings of England
their gracious healing the Evil, being the best that I have seen on that
Subject, vindicating such cures from all imposture, unlawful Magic, and from
some French Writers bold usurpations, who lay claim to it, as originally
belonging to their Kings alone; Whereas, under correction I conceive, that the
word Sovereign which properly imports the Supreme Majesty, does also in our
English Tongue, in a secondary sense signi^ie, what is cordial to cure and heal
Diseases or sores, ever since such sanative power has been annexed to the
Crown of England. This Doctor may be said to have worn half a Miter, seeing his
Congee de-lire was signed (if not sent) to elect him Bishop of Gloucester, but
afterward by Order from King James it was revoked, on what occasion I list not
to enquire. I conjecture the date of his death was much about the Year 1617.

JOHN BARKHAM, born in this City, was bred in Corpus Christi College in
Oxford, whereof he was Fellow, Chaplain afterward to Archbishop Bancroft, and
Parson of Bocking in Essex. Much his Modesty and no less his Learning; who,
(though never the public Parent of any) was the careful Nurse of many Books,
who otherwise had expired in their Infancy, had not his care preserved them. He
set forth D.* Crackenchorp his Posthume Book against Spalato, and was helpful
to John Speed, in the composing of his English History; yea, he wrote the whole
Life of the Reign of King John, (which is the King of all the Raigns in that
Book, for profound penning) discoverable from the rest of the different style,
and much Scripture scited therein: Mr. Guillim in his Heraldry, was much
beholden to this Doctors Emendations.

He was a greater Lover of Coyns than of Money, rather curious in the stamps,
than Covetous for the Metal thereof. That excellent Collection in Oxford
Library was his Gift to the Archbishop, before the Archbishop gave it to the
University. He dyed March 25. 1641.

Benefactors to the Public.
JOAN TUCKVILE, a Merchants Widow in this City, first procured the possession,
then the consecration of a parcel of Ground which she had fairly compassed
about, for the Interment ofsuch as were executed at Hevie-tree hard by,
allowing Land to buy a shrone for every one of them; that such as dyed
Malefactors might be buried as men, yea as Christians; who having passed under
the hand of Justice, received a Boon from her hand, who was merciful to the
dead: This I may call exemplary Charity indeed, as which set a coppie for
others, but such as hitherto has not (to my knowledge) by any been transcribed.
She dyed about the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

The Farewell.
Malice knows no other Heaven than to do mischief to others, though thereby
no good to it fels: Such the spite of the Cornish Rebels besieging Exeter, who
to damnifie the City, damned and stopped up the Channel of the River EX (near
to a Village thence called Camd. Brit. in C^nsh.
Wear at this day) to such a degree that thereby the access of lesser Vessels
is much hindered, and of the greater ships wholly debarred.

Some knowing Sr. Simon Baskervile, (a Physician and native of this place) to
have a plentiful purse, and public Spirit, wished he would have taken the
work in hand, to cure this Obstruction: but it was no Physicians work to meddle
therewith, nor is it either powder of Steel, or gilded pills which can do the
deed, but only pills of massy gold and silver, so expensive is the performance.

Indeed several Acts of* Parliament have ordered the removeal of these
Stoppages, Idem ibidem.
but nothing is effected in this kind, these real Remoraes remaining as before.

It is urged as an Argument of Aristotle, against the conceit of Plato his
having all Women in common, and their Children to be brougbt up on the public
charge, that then the Education of such Children will be neglected, because
wh^t is ever man's work, is no manswork: The truth hereof appears in the slow
avoiding of these steam-(...). I could heartily wish, that one Act of
Parliament more [an Eunuch, yet not barren] may be made, eunuch, that it may
beget no more Acts to cause the retarding and elongation of this work; yet not
barren, that it may effectually remedy this Grievance, and that a general good
be no longer postponed to men's private profit.

DORCET-SHIRE.
DORCET-SHIRE. It has Devonshire on the West, Somerset and Wilt-shire on the
North, Hant shire on the East, and the Narrow Sea on the South, extending from
East to West about forty miles, though not past six and twenty the broadest
part thereof.

It has a self-sufficiency of all Commodities necessary for man's temporal
well-being, and needs not be beholding to any neighboring County; for it can

1. Feed it self with fine Wheat, fat Flesh, dainty Foul, wild and tame, fresh
Fish from Sea and Rivers. To this meat it yields that sauce, without which
all the rest is little worth, I mean Salt, made here in some measure, but which
has been and may be in more abundance. 2. Cloathe it self with its own Wool,
and Broad-cloath made thereof; and it is believed, that no place in England
affords more Sheep in so small a compass as this County about Dorchester. And
as they are provided for warmth in their Woollen, so for cleanliness, with
their Linnen-cloath, great store of good Flax and Hemp growing therein. 3.
Build its own Houses with good Timber out of Black-more Forest, and with (if
not better, I am sure more) Freestone out of Portland, most approaching that of
Normandy (as in position so) in the purity thereof. Nor wants it veins of
Marble in the Isles of Purbeck. And to all this an excellent Air, and the
convenience of a Sea, to export for their profit, and import for their
pleasure, as whose necessities were provided for before.
Natural Commodities.
Tenches.
Plenty hereof are bred in the River Camb. Brit. in this County.
Stowre, which is so much the more observable, because generally this Fish Mr.
Walton his Complete Angler, page 245.
loves Ponds better than Rivers, and Pits better then either. It is very
pleasant in taste, and is called by some the Physician of Fishes. Though in my
opinion may better be styled the Surgeon; for it is not so much a disease as a
wound that he cures, nor is it any potion but a plaster which he affords,
viz. his Natural unctuous glutinousness, which quickly consolidateth any green
g^sh in any fish.

But the Pike is Camb. Brit. in Midlesex.
principally beholding unto him for cures in that kind, and some have observed,
that that Tyrant, though never so hungry, forbeareth to eat this Fish which is
his Physician; not that Pikes are capable (which many men are not) of
gratitude: but that they are endued with a natural policy, not to destroy that
which they know not how soon they may stand in need of.

Tobacco-Pipe-Clay.
This is a fine Clay, which will burn white (while others turn red) found in
several parts of England; but so far from the Sea, it will not quit cost of
portage to London, save from two places,

1. Poole, in this County. 2. Isle of Wight. This wrought alone makes an hard
Pipe, but so shrunk and shriveled, it is unhandsome to the eye. This wrought
alone, makes a fair and full Pipe, but so brittle, that it is uncerviceable for
use.

Both compounded together make these Utensils both hard and handsome. This Clay
brought to London by Ship for Ballast, is there worth about Thirty shillings
the Tun.

Hemp.
England has no better than what grows here betwixt Remister and Byrdport,
the use whereof is of absolute necessity for cordage, clothing, etc. So that a
man may admire that the seed being so profitable, and our Land affording so
much strong and deep ground proper for the same, so little is sown thereof.

The rather, because Hemp in effect secureth it self, first against Cattle,
against which it is its own fence, seeing none ( Deer only excepted) will offer
to eat thereof. Secondly, from thieves, not because it is ominous for them to
steal that which is the instrument of their execution, but because much pains
(which idle persons hate at their hearts) is required to reduce Hemp to profit:
whilst Wheat and Barley left in the field, are more subject to Felony, as
which, when threshed will render a present profit. But see more of this
Commodity in Lincolnshire.

To these we may add Rubia Silvestris, VVild Madder, which grows at Hodhill
in this County, on the next side of the River at Stur-paine (two miles from
Blanford) at Warham likewise, and at other places, and at a place called
Somervill near to Chapel, which by the landing place, as ye come from Altferr^
to Chesil, is in Parkingson, page 285.
great abundance. It is an assured remedy for the Yellow Jaundice, opens the
obstructions of the Spleen, etc.

Buildings.
The Houses of the Gentry herein are built rather to be lived in, than to be
looked on, very low in their situation (for warmth and other conveniences*)
Indeed the rhyme holds generally true of the English structures,

The North for Greatness, the East for Health,
The South for Neatness, the West for Wealth.
However amongst the Houses in this County, Lullworth Castle, and
Sherburn-Lodge are most eminent, escaping pretty well in the late war, so that
they have cause neither to brag nor complain.

Proverbs.
As much a kin as Lenson-hill to Pilsen-pen.]

That is no kin at all. It is spoke of such who have vicinity of habitation or
neighborhood, without the least degree of consanguinity or affinity betwixt
them. For these are two high hills, the first wholly, the other partly in the
Parish of Broad Windsor, whereof once I was Minister.

Yet, Reader, I assure thee, that Seamen make the nearest Relation betwixt
them, calling the one the Cow, the other the Calf; in which forms it seems they
appear first to their fancies, being eminent Sea-marks to such as sail along
these Coasts. And although there be many Hills interposing betwixt these and
the Sea, which seem higher to a land Traveller, yet these surmount them all: so
incompetent a Judge, and so untrue a Surveyor is an ordinary eye of the
Altitude of such places.

Stabbed with a Byrdport Dagger.]

That is, hanged, or executed at the Gallows. The best, if not the most Hemp
(for the quantity of ground) growing about Byrdport a Market Town in this
County. And hence it is, that there is an ancient Statute (though now disused
and neglected) that the Cable Ropes for the Navy Royal were to be made there
abouts, as affording the best Tackling for that purpose.

Dorset-shire Dorsers.]

Dorsers are Peds or Panniers carried on the backs of Horses, on which Haglers
use to ride and carry their Commodities. It seems this homely, but most useful
implement was either first found out, or is most generally used in this County,
where FishJobbers bring up their Fish in such contrivances above an hundred
miles, from Lime to London.

Saints.
EDWARD, son to Edgar King of England, was in his Childhood bred under the
cruel correction of Elfrida his Mother-in-law, who used for small faults to
whip him with Wax-Candles. In so much, that it is reported, it made such an
impression in this young Princes memory, that, when a man, he could not endure
the sight of Rab. Glouc. cited by Mr. Seldom in his notes upon Polyolbion in
his notes upon the 12. Song.
WaxCandles.

But Edward afterward outgrew his Mothers tuition, and succeeded his Father in
his Throne. However, such her ambition, that, advantaged with the others
easiness of nature, She managed most matter of State, leaving her Son in-law
little more than the bare title of Sovereign. Not contented herewith, and to
derive the Scepter to her own Son Ethelred, caused him to be stabbed at Corfe
Castle, in this County, coming in a civil visit unto her. His hidden ^ody being
miraculously discovered, was first buried at Warham, and thence removed to
Shaftsbury, which Town for a time was termed Malmes. lib. de Pnotific. 2.
Saint Edwards, from his interment. His murder happened about the year of our
Lord, 978.

Cardinals.
JOHN MORTON was born at Saint Andrews Milborne in this County, of a right
Worshipful Family still extant therein. He was bred in Oxford, and after many
mediate preferments, made Bishop of Ely, Anno 1578. Not long after, when many
groaned under the Tyranny of King Richard the third, this Prelate first found
out the design of marrying Elizabeth eldest daughter to Edward the fourth of
the House of York, to Henry Earl of Richmond, the last who was left of the line
of Lancaster. Indeed the Earls title to the Crown, was not enough to make a
countenance therewith, much less a claim thereto; but, as the Lady had a Title,
and wanted a man to manage it; the Earl was man enough to manage any design,
but wanted a Title; and pursuing this advice, by Gods blessing, he gained the
Crown, by the name of Henry the seventh. In expression of his gratitude, he
made this Bishop Chancellor of England, and afterward Archbishop of
Canterbury. He was a great instrument in advancing a voluntary Contribution to
the King through the Land; persuading Prodigals to part with their money,
because they did spend it most; and the Covetous, because they might spare it
best. So making both extremes to meet in one medium, to supply the Kings
necessities; who, though prodigiously rich, may be said always to need, because
never-satisfied. This Bishop with vast cost, cut a new Channel in the Fennes,
for the public good, but it neither answered his expectation nor expense. He
was magnificent in his buildings, and bountiful to poor Scholars, enjoining his
Executors to maintain twenty poor Scholars in Oxford, and ten in Cambridge
twenty years after his death, which happened in October, 1500.

Prelates.
JOHN STAFFORD, Son to Humphrey Stafford, sixth Earl of Stafford, was born at
G^dwin in his Catal. of Archbishops of Canterbury.
Hook in this County (then a most stately House belonging to this Family) and
bred a Doctor of the Laws in Oxford* he was afterward Dean of the Arches, and
Dean of Saint Martins. This was a fair College near Aldersgate in London,
founded Anno 1056. by Ingelricus, and Edvardus his Brother, privileged by our
Kings of England with great immunities; the cause of many and high contests
betwixt this College and the City of London. Afterward he was made Bishop of
Wells, and for eighteen years (a continuance, hardly to be paralleled) was
Chancellor of England. At last he was advanced Archbishop of Canterbury, and
no Prelate (his Peer in Bi^th and pre^erment) has either less good, or less
evil recorded of him. He died at Maidstone, 1452. and lies buried in Canterbury.

ROBERT MORTON was God. in the Bishops of (...).
Brothers Son to Cardinal Morton (of whom before) whose Father had a fair
Habitation at Saint Andrews Milborne in this County. His relation to so good an
Uncle, mixed with his own merits, preferred him to the Bishopric of Worcester.
Of whom we have little more than the date of his consecration, 1486. and of his
Death 1497. He lies buried in the body of Saint Paul's Church in London.

JAMES TURBERVIL, or De turbida villa, was born of a worshipful Family, who
long have lived in great account in this At Bear. Gam^ (...). in (...).
County ^ First a Monk, but afterward brought up in New-Colledge in Oxford. He
was consecrated Bishop of Exeter 1556. and deserved right well of that See.
When he entered thereon, it was most true what his Bishop Hall in his ass^rting
Episcopacy.
Successor therein since said, That the Bishop of Exeter was a Baron, but a
Bare one: so miserably that Cathedral had been pilled and polled. But Bishop
Turbervil recovered some lost lands, which Bishop Voysey had Driven amay, in
the dialect of the West.
vezed: and particularly obtained of Queen Mary the ^estitution of the fair
Manor of Crediton. But, who can stay what will away? It was afterward
alienated again in the reign of Queen Elizabeth.

This Bishop Turbervil carried something of trouble in his name, though nothing
but mildness and meekness in his nature. Hence it was, that he staved off
persecution from those in his Jurisdiction, so that not so many as properly may
be called some, suffered in his Diocese. He being deprived in the beginning of
Queen Elizabeth, lived peaceably for many years in great liberty, the privacy
of whose life caused the obscurity of his death, and the uncertainty of the
date thereof.

Since the Reformation.
THOMAS WINNIFFE was born at Sherborne in this County, and was bred
contemporary with Doctor Hackwell in Exeter College in Oxford, and we may
observe a threefold parallel betwixt these two eminent persons. First they
were Fellows of the same foundation. Secondly Chaplains to the same illustrious
Master, Prince Henry. Thirdly, both out of (indiscretion at the worst) no ill
intent, ran on the same Rock, though not to the same degree of damage. Dr.
Hackwel, for opposing the Spanish Match, was un-Chaplain'd, and banished the
Court; Doctor Winniffe, for a passage in his Sermon (not against, but) about
Gondomer, was committed close prisoner to the Tower, and there for some days
remained.

During which time, a great Lord (who shall pass nameless) with great
importunity endeavored to beg away all his Church preferment, to dispose of at
his pleasure. No (said King James) I mean not thus to part with the man. The
Lord perceiving his suit hopeless, vowed most solemnly, that he did it only to
try his royal resolution, protesting that his Majesty had not one of more merit
amongst all his Chaplains. Indeed he was observed to run (with emulation
without envy) in the race of virtue even with any of his Order, striving to
exceed them by fair industry, without offering proudly to justle their credit,
much less falsely to supplant their reputation.

He was first Dean of Gloucester, afterward of Saint Paul's, and lastly was
chosen Bishop of Lincoln, 1642. being one of those six choice persons elected,
Ut nutantis Episcopatus molem, pietatis ac probitatis suae fulcimine
sustentarent. All in vain, being borne down under the ruins thereof. Since
that government has been happily resumed, and long may it flourish in its full
luster. He died Anno Dom. 1654. and was buried at Lamburne in Essex, having
formerly been the painful Minister thereof. He was seventy eight years of age,
and has a handsome Monument erected to his Memory, the Epitaph whereof being
too long to transcribe, thus begins;

Effare marmor silens Quid and quem Luges; Funus non privatum, sed publicum,
Anglicanae Ecclesiae (nisi Deus antevertat) pene cadaver, Thoman Wynnyffum,
etc. I would add more in his just Commendation, but because I am prohibited by
his Epitaph, whereof this the conclusion,

Anima haec in Coelos recepta non Laudationem quaerit Sed Imitationem. Nor will
we forget that for some years before his aged Father was buried in the same
Grave.

Soldiers.
THOMAS BASKET, Esquire, of Divelish in this County. How much King H^nry the
eighth confided in his Wisdom and Valor, will plainly appear by the Letter he
wrote unto him, exemplified by us in our Observations of the Sheriffs of this
County in the twelfth year of the reign of the King aforesaid. He was commonly
called Little Mr. Basket the great Soldier. He died about the year of our Lord
1530.

JOHN RUSSEL, son of -- Russel, Esquire was born at The inheritance whereof is
still possessed by his Family.
Kingston-Russel in this County, and being bred beyond the Seas, arrived at
great accomplishments, and returned home about the time when Philip King of
Castile (Father to Charles the fifth Emperor) was forced by foul weather into
the Haven of Weymouth. But, it is an ill wind that blows no body profit, this
accident proving the foundation of Mr. Russels preferment.

For when Sir Thomas Trenchard bountifully received this Royal Guest, Mr.
Russel was sent for, to complete the entertainment; King Philip taking such
delight in his company, that at his departure he recommended him to King Henry
the seventh, as a person of abilities fit to stand before Princes, and not
before mean men. Indeed he was a man of spirit, carrying a badge of Valor (no
blemish, but a beauty) in his face, the loss of an eye at the siege of Montrule.

King Henry the eight much favored him, making him Controller of the Household,
and Privy Councellor, and Anno 1538. created him Lord Russ^l, and made him
Keeper of the Privy Seal. A good share of the golden shower of Abbey Lands fell
into his lap; two Mitred ones, viz. Tavestock in Devonshire, and Thorney in
Cambridge-shire, being conferred upon him, and at this day possessed by his
posterity. King Edward the sixth (who made him Earl of Bedford) sent him down
to suppress the Western Commotion, and relieve the besieged City of Exeter,
which difficult service he performed with no less Wisdom than Valor, Success
than either. This worthy Lord died in the month of March, 1554. and lies
interred at Cheineys in Buckingham shire.

Sir RI^RD BINGHAM was born at Binghams-Melcolm in this County, of as ancient a
Family as any therein, having my self seen an Inquisition of Lands taken ou^ of
the Tower Rolls, which William de Bingham his Ancestor, held in Dorset shire in
the reign of King Henry the third. In his youth he traced most parts of the
World, to search for service, and find fit objects for his valor. He was at
the siege of Saint Quintin in France, the sacking of Lies in Scotland, served
in Candia under the Ven^tian against the Turk; then returned into the
Netherlands, being obse^ved to be fortis and foelix in all his undertakings.
His judgment was much relied on in Eighty eight, about ordering the Land Army
in Tilbery Camp.

After long traveling, his feet were fixed in Ireland, where he was not
bebogg'd (as some otherwise his equals) with ill success; but being president
of Connaugh, conquered and drove away O Rorke, that most dangerous Rebel.

Sir William Fitz-VVilliams, Lord Deputy of Ireland, was offended at that
service, though he could find no fault therewith, save that it was not done by
Pro (...) indignante hanc gloriam sibi areptam. ^amb. Eliz. Anno 1590.
h^mself. Indeed Bingham met with that which all men of merit must expect
(except they will be surprised unawares) envy from others, suspecting that
their own Bays did wither, because his did seem so verdant. Hereupon they
accused him of cruelty, to the Queen and her Council, who being employed in
Connaugh (the very Ireland of Ireland in that age) was necessitated into
severity for his own security. For this cause he was brought over into England
outed his Offices, and kept for some time Camb. Eliz. Anno 1598.
in restraint, all which he being inured to hardship, as who had not eat his
bread (nor fasted neither) all in a place, bare with invincible courage.

But neglected worth will come into fashion once in seven years. Tyrone begins
to trouble Munster, and none found fit for to order him but Sir Richard
Bingham, who is sent over with more honor and power, Marshal of Ireland, and
General of L^mster, to undertake that service, whereof no doubt he had given a
good account, had not death overtaken him at Dublin. Wherever buried, he has a
Monument of mention in the South side of Westminster Abbey.

Sea Men.
RICHARD CLARK of Hic (...) English Voyages, Vol. 3. page 163.
Waymouth in this County was a most knowing Pilot, and Master of the Ship
called the Delight, which Anno 1583. went with Sir Humphrey Gilbert for the
discovery of Norembege. Now it happened (without any neglect or default in the
same Richard) how that Ship struck on ground, and was cast away in the year
aforesaid, on Thursday August 29. Yet wave followed not w^ve faster than wonder
wonder, in the miraculous preservation of such as escaped this Shipwreck.

1. Idem. page 164.
Sixteen of them got into a small Boat, of a Tun and half, which had but one
Oar to work withal. 2. They were seventy leagues from Land, and the weather so
soul, that it was not possible for a Ship to brook half a course of Sail. 3.
The Boat being over-burdened, one of them, Mr. Hedly by name, made a motion to
cast Lots, that those four which drew the shortest, should be cast overboard,
provided, if one of the Lots fell on the Master, he notwithstanding should be
preserved, as in whom all their safety were concerned. 4. Our Richard Clark
their Master disavowed any acceptance of such privilege, replying, they would
live or die together. 5. On the fifth day Mr. Hedly (who first motioned
Lot-drawing) and another died, whereby their Boat was somewhat allightned. 6.
For five days and nights they saw the Sun and Stars but once, so that they
only kept up their Boat with their single Oar, going as the Sea did drive it.
7. They continued four days without any sustenance, save what the Weeds which
swam in the Sea, and salt water did afford. 8. On the seventh day, about eleven
a clock they had sight of, and about three they came on the South part of New
found land. 9. All the time of their being at Sea, the wind kept continually
So^th, (which if it had shifted on any other Point, they had never come to
land) but came contrary at the North within half an hour after their arrival.
10. Being all come safe to Shore, they kneeled down, and gave God praise (as
they justly might) for their miraculous deliverance. 11. They remained there
three days and nights, having their plentiful repast, upon Berries and wild
Peason. 12. After five days rowing along the shore, they happened on a Spanish
Ship of Saint* John de Luz, which courteously brought them home to Biskay. 13.
The Visitors of the Inquisition coming aboard the Ship, put them on
examination, but by the Masters favor, and some general Answers, they escaped
for the present. 14. Fearing a second search, they shifted for themselves, and
going twelve miles by night, got into France, and so safely arrived in England.
Thus we may conclude with the Psalmist, They which do go down into the Sea,
and * Psalm. 107. 23
occupy in the great waters: These men see the works of the Lord, and his
wonders in the deep.

GEORGE SUMMERS, Knight, was born in or near Lyme, though on my best enquiry
(living some years within seven miles of the place) I could not attain the
exactness thereof. He afterward was a successful Voyager into far distant
Countries, and first discovered the Bermuda's, from and by him named the Summer
Islands. A Plantation, though slighted of late, (whether for want of industry
in the Planters, or staple Commodities, I hnow not) yet were it in the hand of
the Spaniard (as by Gods blessing never shall) it would be over-considerable
unto us. Yea, that which now is quarrelled at for not feeding us with any
provision, might then stop the mouths, yea knock out the teeth of such who now
so undervalue it. I say, they were called the Summer Islands from this Knight,
which I conceive necessary to observe.

For, I find, that though the County of Somerset is undoubtedly so called from
Sommerton, once the principal Town therein, yet because that Town at this day
is mean and obscure, some have strongly fancied, and stiffly defended it so
named from the Summer, the fruitfulness whereof so appears therein. Possi^ly
in process of time, (with a more probable cover for their mistake) these
Summer Islands may be conceived so named, because there Winter does never
appear.

This Sir George Summers was a Lamb on the Land, so patient that few could
anger him, and (as if entering a ship he had assumed a new nature) a Lion at
Sea, so passionate, that few could please him. He died (modest conjectures are
better than confident untruths) about the year of our Lord, 1610.

Before we take our final farewell of the Seamen in this County, I conceive
fit, that the following Note should not be forgotten. Anno 1587. when Tho.
Cavendish, Esquire was in the pursuit of his Voyage about the world, some of his
men August 1. went a shore at Cape Quintero to fetch fresh water, when two
hundred Spanish Horsemen came poudring from the Hills upon them. They being
hard at work, in no readiness to resist, suddenly surprised, and overpowered
in number, were sl^in, to the number of twelve men, a third of which loss fell
on this county, whose names ensue;

1. William Kingman of Dorset-shire in the Admiral. 2. William Biet of
Waymouth in the Vice Admiral. 3. Henry Blacknals of Weymouth. In the
Hugh-Gallant. 4. William Pit of Sherborne. In the Hugh-Gallant.
But their surviving Countrymen, (being but fifteen in number who had any
weapons on the shore) soon revenged their death, who coming from the works, not
only rescued the rest, but also ^orced the enemy to retire with the loss of
25. of his men, and then watered there in despite of all opposition.

Civilians.
Sir THOMAS RYVES, Doctor of the Laws, was born at The Register of New College.
Little Langton in this County, bred in New College in Oxford. A general
Scholar in all polite learning, a most pure Latinist (no hair hanging at the
neb of his Pen) witness his most critical Book of Sea-Battels; a Subject
peculiar, I think, to his endeavors therein. He was at last made the Kings
Advocate, and indeed he formerly had been Advocate to the King of heaven, in
his poor Ministers, in his Book entitled, The Vicars Plea, wherein much Law,
and Learning, and Reason, and Equity is shown in their b^half. A grievance
(...) camplained of than heard, oftener heard than pitied, and oftener (...) than
redressd, so unequal is the contest betwixt a poor Vicars Plea, and a wealthy
Impropriators Purse. He was a man of valor as well as of much learning, and
gave good evidence thereof (though well stricken in years) in our late wars. He
died in his native County, about the year 1652

Benefactors to the Public since the Reformation.
ROBERT ROGERS, born at Stow in his Survey of London (continued by How) page 97.
Poole in this County, was afterward a Leather-seller in London, and dying a
rich Bachelor, bequeathed a great part of his estate to pious uses, viz.

For the building of AlmsHouses in Pool 333 l.

For the relief of poor Prisoners (neither Atheists nor (...)) each man, at
the sum of twenty Nobles, 150 l.

For poor Preachers (allowing to each man ten pound) 100 l.

To decayed Artificers, charged with wife and children 100 l.

To the Merchant Adventurers, for the relief of old, and support of young
freemen, 400 l.

To Christ's Hospital 500l

To erect Almshouses in and about London, 600 l.

For a weekly dole of bread to the poor, 200 l.

For the maintaining of two Scholars in each University, intrusting the
Leather-sellers with the managing thereof, 400 l.

I have only gathered the greatest clusters of his Charity which the top boughs
thereof did produce, purposely concealing the smaller bunches of his bounty,
growing on the under branches. He died Anno Dom. Idem. page 347.
1601. and lies buried in Christ-Church in London.

Memorable Persons.
THOMAS de la LYND, a Gentleman of a fair Estate in this County killed a white
Heart in Blackmore Forest, which King Henry the third by express will had
reserved for his own chase. Hereupon a mulct was imposed upon him and the whole
County (as accessory for not opposing him) which is paid, called White-Hart-
Silver to this day into the Exchequer. My self has paid a share for the sauce,
who never tasted any of the meat; so that it seems Kings Venison is sooner
eaten than digested. Let the Latin Proverb, Albo gallo, etc. in Dorset-shire,
be turned into Albo cervo ne manum admoliaris.

ARTHUR GREGORY of Lyme in this County had the admirable Art of Forcing the
Seal of a Letter, yet so invisibly, that it still appeared a Virgin to the
exactest beholder. Secretary Walsingham made great use of him, about the
Pacquets which passed from Foreign parts to Mary Queen of Scotland. He had a
pension paid unto him for his good service out of the Exchequer; and died at
Lyme about the beginning of the reign of King James.

WILLIAM ENGLEBERT, born at So was I informed by Mr. William Swettenham (being
himself born in (...)) eminently known an Under-teller in the Exchequer, who
for many years paid this pension.
Sherborne, was an incomparable Ingeneere, and much used in the Eighty eight.
Queen Elizabeth, (an excellent House-wife of her Treasure) allowed him a
pension of one hundred Marks per annum, which was paid him until the day of his
death. He requested of King James his Privy Council leave to serve Foreign
Princes and States (long peace rendering him useless in England) proffering to
wave his Pension on that condition, but they utterly denied him license to
depart, who lived and died in Westminster about the year, 1634.

The Names of the Gentry of this County returned by the Commissioners in the
twelfth year of King Henry the sixth.
William Bishop of Bath and Wells, Chancellor of England. Commissioners to take
the Oaths. William de Botreaux, Chivaler. John Chedyok, Knight. Knights for the
Shire. William Turbervill. Knights for the Shire.

Humf. Stafford, Chiv Ioh. Newburgh, sen. Radulph. Bush Johan. Latymer Johan.
Neburgh, jun. Williel. Bronning Roberti Frampton Nicholai Latymer Walteri Gonis
Thome Manston Johan. Cammel Johan. Frantleroy Henrici Sherard Will. Anketill
Johan. Hering Johan. Carent Roberti Turbervile Richardi Fitton Iohannis Moan
Iohannis Peterel Rich. Strode Iohannis de la Lynde Roberti Rempston Will.
Gerrard Will. Godwyn Will. Dakcombe Roberti Savage Roberti Bannet Edw. Stone
Roberti Larkestoke Iohannis Frampton de Dorchester Rogeri Rochford Iohannis
Stampford Roberti Hymerford Stephani Russel Henrici Russel Roberti Tredosa
Willi. Chetil Walt. Hayngstrigge Ioh. Talbot Simonis Talbot Richardi Byle
Williel. Hornsbow Radulphi Belton Iohannis Phillippe Thome Anketill Willielmi
Clavil de Fern Willielmi Morton de Chestesbury Willielmi Cole Willielmi
Bontley Johan. Butt Rogeri Grogge de Lyme Willielmi Warner de Pole Roberti
Bertram de Dorchester Tho. Tinam de Lyme Rob. Abbot de Melcombe Regis Richardi
Kaynell Johan. Hillary de Shirborn Johan. Scryveyn de Shirborn.
Sheriffs of Dorset and Somerset Shires.
HEN. II.
Anno 1 Warinus Anno 2 Rich. de Raddona Anno 3 Warinus de Lisoris Rich. de
Raddona
Anno 4 Anno 5 Rich. de Raddona Warinus de Lisoris
Anno 6 Anno 7 Warinus de Lisoris Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Robertus de Bello Campo.
Anno 10 Gilbertus Percy Anno 11 Rich. de Raddon Gilb. de Percy
Anno 12 Rob. de Pucherel, for four years. Anno 16 Alud. de Lincoln, for six
years. Anno 22 Rob. de Bello Campo, for seven years. Anno 29 Will. de Bendenger
Anno 30 Idem. Anno 31 Rob. filius Page Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Idem.
RICH. I.
Anno 1 Hugo Bardulph Anno 2 Rob. Anno 3 Willielmus de Chahaignes Rad. de
Chahaignes, for 4. years.
Anno 7 Will. Chahaignes Walt. de Giffardus
Anno 8 Anno 9 Will. de Chaignes Pet. de Schidemore
Anno 10 Will. de Cahaignes.
Reg. JOHAN.
Anno 1 Pet. de Schidemore Anno 2 Rob. Belet Hen. de Stokes
Anno 3 Hubert. de Burge Alanus de Wigton
Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Will. de Monte Acuto, for four years. Anno 10
Will. Briewre Rad. de Brey
Anno 11 Idem. Anno 12 Will. Mallet, sive Malet, for four years. Anno 16 Rich.
de Marisco Rog. de Pealton

HEN. III.
Anno 1 Anno 2 Pet. de Malo Lacu. Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Rog. de
Forda Ralph. Clericus
Anno 6 Rog. de Forda Ralph. Clericus.
Anno 7 Sheriffs of Dorset-Shire.
Radus Germein Ermegundus de Wenham
Sheriffs of Somersetshire
Rob. de Ford. Rich. Abbas de Michelem.
Anno 8 Sheriffs of Dorset-Shire.
Radus Germin Rich. Episcopus Saresb. Gilbert. de Staplebigg.
Sheriffs of Somersetshire
Johan. Russel, and Radus Russel. Joscelin. Bathon. Episcopus. Lucas Rupel.
Anno 9 Sheriffs of Dorset-Shire.
Ricus Episcopus Saresb. Gilbert. de Staplebig.
Sheriffs of Somersetshire
Joscelin. Bathon. Episcopus. Lucas Russel.
Anno 10 Sheriffs of Dorset-Shire.
Rich. Episcopus Saresb. Gilbert. de Staplebigg.
Sheriffs of Somersetshire
Joscelin. Bathon. Episcopus. Will. de Schorewell.
Anno 11 Will. filius Henerici Anno 12 Idem. Anno 13 Tho. de Cirencester Anno
14 Idem. Anno 15 Idem. and Hen. de Campo Florido Anno 16 Tho. de Cirencester
Hen. de Campo Florido Anno 17 Tho. de Cirencester Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Idem.
and Hen. de Campo Florido Anno 20 Tho. de Cirencester Hen. de Campo Florido
Anno 21 Tho. de Cirencester Anno 22 Idem. Anno 23 Idem. Anno 24 Jordan Oliver.
Anno 25 Hugo. de Vinon for six years. Anno 31 Hugo. de Vinon. Barth. Peach, for
four years. Anno 35 Hen. de Derleg. Anno 36 Elias de Cabian. Anno 37 Idem. Anno
38 Idem. Anno 39 Idem. and Walterus de Burges. Anno 40 Steph. de Hasseton Anno
41 Idem. Anno 42 Walt. de Burges Anno 43 Williel. Everard. Humf. Chaehet. Will.
Lecombe Clericus Anno 44 Phil. de Cerve Anno 45 Idem. Anno 46 Johan. Basset
Anno 46 Johan. Basset Hen. Aultun Anno 47 Phil. Basset Hen. Aulton, for five
years. Anno 53 Tho. de Sancto Vigor. Anno 54 Idem. Anno 55 Joh. de Sancto
Waller Tho. de Sancto Vigore
EDW. I.
Anno 1 John de Sancto Valerno. Anno 2 Rich. de Coleshul. for five years. Anno
7 Joh. de Cormailess Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Joh. de Cormailes Pet.
de Bolemer Anno 11 Joh. de Cormailes Anno 12 Joh. de Sancto Laudo, for six
years. Anno 18 Rich. de Burghunt Anno 19 Idem. Anno 20 Walt. de Lovene Anno 21
Idem. Anno 22 Walt. de Glouc. for five years. Anno 27 Nich. de Chednoy Anno 28
Joh. Gerbert Anno 29 Idem. Anno 30 Joh. de la Lee. Anno 31 Joh. Gerberte Anno
32 Idem. Anno 33 Math. Fornius Johan. de Monte Acuto Anno 34 Idem. Anno 35
Nich. de Langland
EDW. II.
Anno 1 Nich. de Cheney Walt. de Easthidmore Anno 2 Rich. de Chiseldon. Anno 3
Idem. Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Walt. Esquidemor Tho. de Marleberge Anno 6 Walt. de
Esquidemore Anno 7 Joh. de Chidiokes Anno 8 Joh. de Earl Anno 9 Math. de
Furneaux. Anno 10 Joh. de Kingston Anno 11 Idem. Anno 12 Tho. de Marleberge
Nich. de Cheigney Anno 13 Tho. de Marleberge Nich. de Cheigney Anno 14 Joh.
Tichburne Anno 15 Tho. de Marleberge Anno 16 Anno 17 Idem. Anno 18 Idem. Anno
19 Idem.
EDW. III.
Anno 1. Will. de Whitfeld, for four years. Anno 5 Will. de Whitfeld Hugo. de
Langland Anno 6 Joh. de Wraxhale Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Hildebrand de London Joh.
de Wroxhall Anno 9 Hildebrand. de London Joh. de London Anno 10 Walt. de Rodney
Hildebrand. de London Walt. de Rodney Anno 12 Walt. and Hildebrand. Walterus
Anno 13 Walt. and Hildebrand. Walterus Anno 14 Walt. and Hildebrand. Walterus
Anno 15 Joh. de Durburgh Anno 16 Hugo Tirell Anno 17 Edw. de Stradlinge Anno 18
Tho. de Carry, for 8. years. Anno 26 Johan. de Palton Anno 27 Idem. Anno 28
Idem. Anno 29 Joh. de Sancto Laudo. Joh. de Palton Anno 30 Joh. de Sancto Laudo
Anno 31 Rich. de Turbuil Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Joh. de Raleigh Anno 34 Idem.
Anno 35 Theobald. de Gorges Edrius de Chivedon Anno 36 Tho. de Bridport Anno 37
Joh. At Hall Anno 38 Idem. Anno 39 Joh. Langland, for four years. Anno 43
Edw. Cheyne Anno 44 Idem. Anno 45 Will. de Winterborne Anno 46 Roger. Mamugford
Anno 47 Joh. Hameley Anno 48 Hugo. de Durburgh Anno 49 Will. Latymer Anno 50
Edw. Fitz-Herbert Anno 51 Hugo. Burburgh
Sheriffs of Dorset and Somerset Shires.
Name Place Arms. RICH. II. Anno 1 Ioh. de la Mare. Nonny C. Gul. 2. Lions
passant guard. Arg. 2 Will. Stafford. Gul. 3. Oak leaves, Arg. 3 Ioh. Burgherst.
G^a ^ion ramp. with 2 tails, O 4 Will. Latymer* Gul. across Patance, Or. 5
Will. Bonevile. Chuton Sab 6. mullets, Arg. pierced, G. 6 Edw. Fitz-Herb. Per
pale, Az. and Gul. 3. Lions rampant, Arg. 7 Joh. Streche. 8 Ioh. Burgherst. ut
prius * Arg. a Chev. engrailed, Gul. betw. 3. Leopards heads, Az. 9 Ioh.
Copleston.* Devon. 10 Humf. de Stafford Hoke D. Or, a Chev Gul on a cant. Er.
11 Ioh. Rodney Rodney Or, 3. Eaglets displayed; Purp. 12 Joh. Moygne Ar. 2.
Bars, and 3. Mull. in Chi. S 13 Tho. Brook. Gul. on a Chev. Arg. a Lion ramp.
Sab. crowned, Or. 14 Ioh. Berkeley. * 15 Humf. de Stafford. ut prius. * Gul. a
Chev. betwixt ten Crosses sormee, Arg. 16 Ioh. Beach. 17 Theob. Wickham. 18
Tho. Berkeley ut prius 19 Ioh. Mogyne. ut prius 20 Ioh. Rodnev. ut prius 21
Tho. Dacombe Stepleton Vert, a (...) surgeant, Arg. 22 HEN. IV. Anno 1 Tho.
Arthur, mil. 2 Rich. Boyton, and Ioh. Lutterel, mil. Dunster C. Or, a bend
betw. 6. Mart^ets, ^ 3 Ioh. From. 4 Will. Worth. 5 Idem. ut prius 6 Rich.
Boyton. 7 Walt. Rodney. ut prius 8 Ioh. Horsey. Clifton D Azure, 3 Horses heads
coped, Or, bridled, Argent. 9 Math. Coker. Coker 10 Rich. Boyton. Arg. on a
bend, Gul. 3. Leopards heads, Or. 11 Humf. Stafford, mil. ut prius 12 Ioh.
Horsey. ut Horsey HEN. V. Anno 1 Walt Hungerford. Sab. 2. Bars and 3. Pla^es,
A^g. 2 Ioh. War. 3 Humf. Stofford, m. ut prius 4 Rich. Boyton 5 Math. Coker.
ut prius 6 Ioh. Flory. Comb Flo 7 Rob. Hill. Gul. a Ch^veron engrailed, Erm.
betwixt 3. Garbs, Or. 8 Ioh. Neuburgh. 9 Rob. Hill. ut prius HEN. VI. Anno 1
Rob. Hill, and ut prius 1 Rob Coker. ut prius 2 Humf. Stafford. ut prius 3 Edw.
Stradling. Pale ways of 6. Arg. and Az. 4 Egid. Daubeny a S. (...) on a bend,
G. 3. cinque foils, Or 5 Will. Fynderne. b a Gul. 4. Lozenges in fess, Ar. 6
Will. Carrant. c b Arg. ^ Chev. betwixt 3 crosses pateee fitchee, Sable. 7 Ioh.
Stourton, mil. d Candel. 8 Ioh. War c Arg. three round Cheverony of 6 Gules
and Azure. 9 Ioh. Pawlet. e Nonny C* 10 Ioh. Stourton. ut pr^us d Sable, a
bend, Or, betwixt 3. Fountains proper. 11 Ioh. Seyndowe. 12 Ioh. Seymor. f
Haahbech e Sable, 3. swords in Pyle, Arg. Hills and Pomels, Or. 13 Will.
Carrant. ut prius 14 Tho. Them. f Gules, two Angels wings pale ways inverted,
Or. 15 Ioh. Sentelo. 16 Will. Stafford. ut prius g Arg. a Chev. engrailed betw,
3 Talbots heads erased, Sab. 17 Edw. Hall. or Hull. g 18 Walt. Rodney. ut prius
19 Will. Carrant. ut prius 20 Will. Stafford. ut prius 21 Ioh. Saint Low. ^2
Edw. Hall, mil. ut prius 23 Rob. Capps. 24 Ioh. Norys Quarterly, Arg. and
Gules, a Fret, Or, with a fess, Az. 25 Will. Carrant. ut prius 26 Tho.
Chidiokes ChidiokD Gul. an In-escoucheon betw. an Orle of Martilets, Arg. 27
Edw. Hall, mil. ut prius 28 Ioh. Austil. A^g. a Saltire Ragule, Vert. 29 Will.
Carrant, ar. ut prius 30 Tho. Tame. ^1 Rich. War 32 Nich. Latymer. ut prius
33 Ioh. Cheney, ar. Plume Checky, Or, and Azure, a^fess Gul. frettee, Ermin. 34
Io. Willoughby, ar. 35 Nich. Saint Low, ar. S. b. a cross engrailed, Or. 36
Rob. War, ar. 37 Ioh. Scintbarbe 38 Ioh. Carrant, jun. ar. ut prius EDW. IV.
Anno 1 Humf. Stafford. ut prius 2 Tho. He^bert, ar. ut prius 3 Id^m. ut pr^us 4
Will. Browinge, ar* 5 Ch^istoph. Wo^sley Arg. a Chev. S. betw. 3. Cornish
choughs proper. 6 Io. Sydenham, sen.* Brimpt^n 7 Geo. Darrel, mil. * Sab. 3.
Ra^ens, A gent. 8 Rob. St^wel, ar. * Stowel Az. a Lion ramp^nt, Or, crownad,
Arg. 9 Rog. Stourton, mil. ut prius 10 Christop. Worsly. m ut prius * Gut. a
cross Lozenge, Arg. 11 Nich. Latimer, mil ut prius 12 Ioh. Cheverel, ar. Arg.
on a saltire, Az. 5. Water bougets, Or, a Chief, Gul. 13 Ioh. Baconell. 14 Rob.
Palmer, ar. 15 Egid Daubency ut prius 6 Will. Colingborne 17 Tho. Norton, ar.
Vert, a Lion rampant, Or, alibi, Arg. 18 Will. Beckl^y. ^9 Will Say, a^m. 20
Edw, Hardgile. 21 Egid. Daubney, ar. ut prins 22 Rich. Mo^eton. S. Anch.
Milborne. (...), Gul. and E^min, a Go^ts head erased, A^g. on the first and
last qu^rter. RICH. III. Anno 1 Nich. Crowmer. 2 Edw. Redwaine. Gu^. 3.
Cushions, E^m. but^oned and tasselled, Or. 3 Tho Fulford. * * Gules, a
Cheveron, Arg. HEN. VII. Anno 1 Amic. Paulet. ut prius 2 Ioh. Tu be^vile. Bear
Do. Erm, a Lion rompant, Gules, crowned, Or. 3 Iam. Daubney. ut prius 4 5 Will.
Maruen. Pertword 6 Amic. Pauler, mil. ut prius Arg. a demi Lion rampant couped,
Sab. charged on the shoulder with a flow* de lys, ^ 7 Will. Knole, ar. 8 Walt.
Enderby. 9 Edw. Carew. Devonsh. Or, 3. Lions passant gardant. S. armed and
lan^ued, Gul. 10 Samp. Norton, ar. ut prius 11 Edw. Gorges, mil. (...), Or, and
Azure. 12 Rog. Newbourgh, ut prius 13 Rich. Pudsey, mil. 14 Nich. Wadham, ar.
(...). Gules, a ch^veron betwixt 3* Roses, Arg. 15 Amic. Paulet, mil ut prius
16 Will. Marrin, ar. ut prius 16 Will. Carew, mil. ut prius 17 Ioh. Trevilion,
mil. Nettle C. Gul. a demi-Horse Arg. issuing out of the waves of the sea. 18
Edw. Wadham, ar. ut prius 19 Hen. ^uedale, ar. Arg. a Cross moline, Gul. 20
Ioh. Horsey, ar. ut prius 21 Ioh. Sidenham, ar. ut prius 22 Ioh Carew, mil. ut
prius 23 Ioh. Williams, mil. Oxfordsh. Azure, an Organ-pipe in bend sinister
Saltire wise surmounted of another Dexter betw. 4. 24 Rich. Weston, ar. HEN.
VIII. Crosses pattee, Arg. Anno. 1 Tho. Trenchard, m. Wotton D Per pale Arg.
and Az. 3 palets, S 2 Ioh. Speak, mil. Whitlack. Arg. 2 bars, Az. over all, an
Eagle displayed, Gul. 3 Walt. Rodney. ut prius 4 Egid. Strangways Melbury Sab.
2. Lions passant, Arg. 5 Will. Compton, m. Sab. a Lion passant, Or, inter three
Helmets, Arg. 6 Edw. Gorges, mil. ut prius 7 Ioh. Seymor, mil. ut prius 8 Tho.
de la Lynd, m. Gul. 3. Bucks heads cooped, Argent. 9 Egid. Strangways. ut prius
10 Edw. Hungerford. ut prius 11 Ioh. Bourchier, ar. Arg. a Cross engrailed,
Gules, betw. 4. water Bougets, Sab. 12 Will. Wadham, ar. ut prius 13 Ioh.
Rogers, mil. 14 Will. Carrant, ar. ut prius 15 Tho. Trenchard, m. ut prius 16
Egid. Strangways. ut prius 17 Geo. Speak, ar. ut prius 18 Ioh. Seymor, mil. ut
prius 19 Ioh. Russel, mil. Kingston. Arg. a Lion ramp. Gules, on a Chief, S. 3.
scalops of the first. 21 Andr. Lutterel, m. * 21 Edw. Gorges, mil. ut prius *
Arg. a fess betw. 3. Otters, S. 22 Tho. Arundel, ar. Wiltshire Sab. 6 Swallows
3. 2. and 1. Arg 23 Edw. Seymor, mil. ut prius 24 Tho. More, mil. Melplash
Ermin on a Cbeveron betwixt 3. Mores heads proper, two swords, Arg. 25 Egid.
Strangways, m ut prius 26 Nich. Wadham, m. ut prius 27 Pran. Dawrel, ar. ut
prius 28 Hugo. Pawlet, mil. ut prius 29 Tho. Horsey, mil. ut prius 30 Hen.
Long. mil. Wiltshire. Sab. a Lion rampant betwixt 8. Crosses crossed, Arg. 31
Tho. Speak, mil. ut prius 32 Tho. Arundel, mil. ut prius 33 Egid. Strangways, m
ut prius 34 Hugo. Pawlet, mil. ut prius 35 Ioh. Pawlet, mil. ut prius 36 Ioh.
Horsey, mil. ut prius 37 Nich. Fitz-James, a. RedLinch Azure, a Dolphin naiant
imbowed, Argent. 38 Ioh. Sidenham, ar. ut prius EDW. VI. Anno 1 Hugo. Pawler,
mil. ut prius 2 Ioh. Thinn, mil. Wiltshire Barry of ten, Or, and Sab. 3 Tho.
Speak, mil. ut prius 4 Gor. de la Lynd, ar. ut prius 5 6 Ioh. Rogers, mil. ut
prius PHIL. and MAR. Anno Ioh. Tregonwel, mil. Midleton. Arg. 3. Ogresses bet.
2. Cotises in fess, Sable, as many Cornish Choughes proper. 2 Ioh. Sidenham,
mil ut prius 3 Hen. Ashley, mil. * S. G. Win. 4 Ioh. Wadham, ar. ut prius *
Azure, a cinque foil, Ermin, a Border engrailed, Or. 5 Humf. Colles, ar. 6
Ioh. Horssey, mil. ut prius ELIZ. REG. Anno 1 Tho. Dyer, mil. Or, a Chief
indented, Gul. 2 Ia. Fitz-Iames, mil ut prius 3 Ioh Wadham, mil. ut prius 4
Geo. Speak, mil. ut prius 5 Ioh. Horner, ar. Melles Sab. 3. Talbots passant,
Arg. 6 Hen. Ashley, mil. ut prius 7 Hen. Uuedall, ar. ut prius 8 Tho. Morton,
ar. ut prius

Sheriffs of Dorcet-shire alone.
ELIZ. REG. Anno 9 Rob. Coker, ar. * Maypoud. * Arg. on a Bend, Gul. 3 Leopards
heads, Or. 10 Rob. Williams, ar. a Herringst 11 Ioh. Young, ar. a Arg. a
greyhound current betw. 3 Birds within a border engrailed, Sab. 12 Will.
Hadeley, ar. 13 Hen. Uudall, ar. b 14 Ioh. Strode, ar. c Parnham b Arg. a cross
moline, Gules. 15 Rich. Rogers, ar. d Brianston c Ermin, on a Canton, Sable, a
Cr^ssant, Argent. 16 Ioh. Horsey, mil. e Clifton 17 Math. Arundel, m. f
Wiltshire d Arg. a Mullet, S. on a Chief, Gul. a flower de lys, Or. 18 Will.
Web, ar. g Motcomb 19 Nich. Turbervil, ar. h Bear e Az* 3. Horses heads coped,
Or, bridled, Argent. 20 Tho. Mullins, ar. 21 Tho. Chafin, ar. Chettle f S. 6.
Swallows. 3. 2. and. 1. Ar. 22 Geo. Trenchard, ar. i VVoolton g Gul. a cross
betw. 4. Eaglets close, Or. 23 Nich. Martin. ar. k 24 Ioh. Williams, ar. ut
prius h Erm. a Lion rampant, Gul. crowned, Or. 25 Tho. Strangways, a. ut prius
26 Hen. Coker, ar. ut prius i Per pale, Arg. and Azure, in the first 3. palets,
Sablo. 27 Ioh. Horsey, ar. ut prius 28 Christ. Percy, ar. m k Az. 3. bendlets,
Arg. a Chief, Ermine. 29 Rich. Rogers, ar. ut prius 30 Rob. Frampton, ar. n m
Or, a Lion ram^. Az. quartered with G. 3 lucies hauriant, Argent. 31 Ioh.
Brown, ar. Frampton 32 Tho. Chaffin, ar 33 Radus Horsey, ar. ut prius n Sab. 2.
Lions paws issuing out of the Dexter and sinister base points erected in form
of a Cheweron, Argent, armed, Gules. 34 Ioh. Williams, ar. ut prius 35 Geo.
Morton. ut infra 36 Rob. Strod, ar. ut prius 37 Tho. Hussy, ar. o Shopwick 38
Geor. Trenchard, m ut prius o Barry of 6. Erm. and Gul. 39 Tho. Freke, ar.
Shrowton 40 Gor. Mo^ton, ar. Clenston Quarterly, Gul. and Er. a goats head
errased, Arg. in the first and last quarter. 41 Rob. Miller, ar. * Briddie 42
Tho. Uudall, ar. ut prius 43 Ioh. Stoker, ar. * Azure, four Mascles, Or. 44
Ioh. Rogers, ar. ut prius JACOB. Anno 1 Ioh. Fitz-Iames, ar. Lewston Az. a
Dolph. naiant imbow. Ar. 2 Ioh. Tregonwel, ar. Milton 3 Ioh. Ryves, ar.
Blanford 4 Rob. Napper, mil. Middle M. Arg. a salt. S. bet. 4. roses, Gul. 5
Will. Web, mil. ut prius 6 Christ. Auketil, ar. Arg. a saltire ragule, Vert.
7 Edr. Uuedall, mil. ut prius 8 Ioh. Heni^g, ar. Pokeswell Barry Wavy of six
pieces on Chief, Gul. 3. plates. 9 Tho. Freke, mil. 10 Ioh. Strangways, m ut
prius 11 Rob. Coker, a^. ut prius 12 Ioh. Hanham, mil. Wimborn 13 Ioh. Brewyne,
ar. Addle-M. Azure, a Crossmoline, Or. 14 Ioh. Tregonwel ar. ut prius 15 Ioh.
Brown, mil. 16 V Valt. Earl, mil. Charboro. Gal. 3. escalops and a border
engrailed, Arg. 17 Anth. Ashly, mil. * S. G. Wim. 18 Nath. Napper, mil. ut
prius * Az. a cinque foil, Ermin, a border engrailed, Or. 19 Edw. Lawrence, m.
20 Ioh. Harbyn, ar. Ermin, a Cross Ragulee, Gul. a Canton, Erminess. 21 Will.
Francis, ar. * Combflor. 22 Bam. Chafin, ar. * Ar. a Che. bet. 3. mull. G.
pierc. CAROL. I. Anno 1 Fran. Chaldecot, a. 2 Will. Uuedell, mil ut prius 3
Fitz-James, ar. Azure, a Dalphin naiant imbowed, Arg. 4 Tho. Still, ar.
Redlinch 5 Angel. Gray, ar. St^nsford 6 Joh. Mellet, mil. ut prius 7 Bria.
Williams, m. ut prius 8 Joh. Brown, ar. 9 Will. Colyer, ar. Pidle * Per pale,
Arg. and Azure, 3. Palets, Sab. 10 Tho. Trenchard, * 11 Joh. Feel. ar. 12
Rich. Rogers, arm. ut prius 13 14 Rich. Bingham, ar. Melcombe Azure, a bend
cotized betw. six Crosses pattee, Or. 15 VVil. Churchil, a. * 16 * Sab. a Lion
ramp. Arg. debruised with a bend, Gul. 17 Ed. Lawrence, mil. ut prius 18 B^llum
nobis haec otia secit. 19 20 21 22

Hen. V.
8. JOHN NEWBURGH.]

This Family of the Newburghs, or De Novo Burgo, is right ancient, as which
derive their Pedigree from a younger Son of Henry the first Earl of Warwick of
the Norman line. Yea, Master Cambden says, that they held Winfrot with the
whole Hundred, by the gift of King Henry the first, Per servitium Camerarii in
Capite de Domino Rege, that is, in service of Chamberlain in chief from the
King, though afterward under the reign of King Edward the first it was held
by Sergeanty, namely, by holding the Lauer or Ewre for the King to wash in,
upon his Coronation Day.

Hen. VIII.
4. EGIDIUS STRANGWAYES.]

Thomas Strangways was the first advancer of this Family in this County, who
though born in Lancashire, was brought into these parts by the first Marquess
of Dorcet, and here raised a very great Inheritance. Nor was it a little
augmented through this Marriage with one of the Daughters and Inheritrices of
Hugh Stafford of Suthwich, by whom there accrued unto him Woodford, where Guy
Brent, a Baron and renowned Warrior once had a Castle. The Heirs of this
Thomas built a fair seat at Milbery.

24. THOMAS MORE, Mil.

He dwelt at Melplash in the Parish of Netherbury, and by Tradition is
represented a very humerous person. Aged folk have informed me (whilst I lived
in those parts) by report from their Fathers, that this Sir Thomas, whilst
Sheriff, did in a wild frolic, set open the Prison, and let loose many
Malefactors. Afterward considering his own obnoxiousness for so rash a fact,
he seasonably procured his pardon at Court, by the mediation of William Pawlet
Lord Treasurer (and afterward Marquess of Winchester) and a Match was made up
betwixt Mary this Sheriffs Daughter, and Coheir, and Sir Thomas Pawlet, second
Son to the said Lord, by whom he had a numerous Issue.

The Farewell.
And now being to take our leave of this County, I should according to our
usual manner wish it somewhat for the completing of its Happiness. But it
affording in it self all necessaries for man's subsistence; and being through
the convenience of the Sea supplied with foreign Commodities, I am at a loss
what to beg any way additional thereunto. Yet seeing great possessions may be
diminished by Robbery, may the Hemp [The Instrument of common Execution]
growing herein, be a constant Monitor unto such who are thievishly given
whither their destructive ways tend; and mind them of that end which is due
unto them, that they leaving so bad, may embrace a better [some industrious]
course of living.

DURHAM.
DURHAM. This Bishopric has Northumberland on the North (divided by the
Rivers Derwent and Tine) Yorkshire on the South, the German Sea on East and on
the West (says Mr. Speed) it is touched by Cumberland (touched he may well
say, for it is but for one mile) and Westmerland. The form thereof is
triangular, the sides not much differing, though that along the Seacoasts is
the shortest, as not exceeding twenty three miles. However this may be ranked
amongst the (...) Shires of England: And yet I can remember the time when the
people therein were for some years altogether unreprosented in the Parliament;
namely, in the Interval after their Bishop was dep^ved of his Vote in the House
of Lords, and before any in the House of Commons were appointed to appear for
them.

Princes.
CICELY NEVIL. Though her Nativity cannot be fixed with any assurance (whose
Fathers vast estate afforded him a Mansion House for every week in the year)
yet is she here placed with most probability, Raby being the prime place of the
Nevils residence. She may pass for the clearest instance of humane frail
felicity.

Her Happiness. Her Miseries. She was youngest Daughter and Child to Ralph Earl
of Westmerland (who had one and twenty) and exceeded her Sisters in honor,
being married to Richard Duke of York. She saw her Husband killed in battle;
George Duke of Clarence, her second Son, cruelly murdered; Edward her eldest
son, cut off by his own intemperance, in the prime of his years; his two sons
butchered by their Uncle Richard, who himself, not long after, was slain at the
bartel of Bosworth. She was blessed with three Sons (who lived to have issue)
each born in a several Kingdom, Edward, at Bourdeaux in France; George, at
Dublin in Ireland; Richard, at Fotheringhay in England. She saw her own
reputation murdered publicly at P^uls-Cross, by the procurement of her
youngest son Richard, taxing his eldest Brother for illegitimate. She beheld
her eldest Son Edward, King of England, and enriched with a numerous posterity.

Yet our Chronicles do not charge her with elation in her good, or dejection in
her ill success, an argument of an even and steady soul in all alterations.
Indeed she survived to see Elizabeth her grand child married to King Henry the
seventh, but little comfort accrued to her by that conjunction, the party of
the Yorkists were so depressed by him.

She lived five and thirty years a widow, and died in the tenth year of King
Henry the seventh, 1495. and was buried by her Husband in the Quire of the
Collegiate Church of Fotheringhay in Northamptonshire, which Quire being
demolished in the days of King Henry the eighth, their bodies lay in the
Churchyard without any Monument, until (...) (...). in (...).
Queen Elizabeth coming thither in Progress, gave order that they should be
interred in the Church, and two Tombs to be erected over them. Hereupon, their
bodies lapped in Lead, were removed from their plain Graves, and their Coffins
opened. The Duchess Cicely had about her neck hanging in a Silver Ribband, a
(...) (...) Gen^, page (...), *
Pardon from Rome, which penned in a very fine Roman Hand, was, as fair and
fresh to be read as if it had been written but yesterday. But alas, most mean
are their Monuments, made of Plaster, wrought with a Trowell, and no doubt
there was much daubing therein, the Queen paying for a Tomb proportionable to
their Personages. The best is, the memory of this Cicely has a better and more
lasting Monument, who was a bountiful Benefactress to Queens College in
Cambridge.

Saints.
BID, And (because some Nations measure the worth of the person by the length
of the name) take his addition, Venerable. He was born at Camb. Brit. in this
Bisho^.
Girwy (now called Yarrow) in this Bishopric, bred under Saint John of
Beverly, and afterward a Monk in the Town of his Nativity. He was the most
general Scholar of that age. Let a Sophister begin with his Axioms, a Bachelor
of Art proceed to his Metaphysics, a Master to his Mathematics, and a Divine
conclude with his Controversies and Comments on Scripture, and they shall find
him better in all, than any Christian Writer in that age, in any of those Arts
and Sciences. He expounded almost all the Bible, translated the Psalms and New
Testament into English, and lived a Comment on those Words of the * Apostle,
Phil. 2. 15.
shining as a light in the world, in the midst of a crooked and perverse
Generation. He was no gadder abroad, credible Authors avouching that he never
went out of his Cell; though both Cambridge and Rome pretend to his habitation.
Yet his Corpse after his death, which happened Anno 734. took a journey, or
rather were removed to Durham and there enshrined.

Confessors.
JOHN WICKLIFFE. It is a great honor to this small County, that it produced
the last maintainer of Religion (before the general decay thereof) understand
me, Learned Bid, and the firm restorer thereof, I mean this Wickliff, the
subject of our present discourse.

True it is, His Nativity cannot be demonstrated in this Bishopric, but if
such a scientia media might be allowed to man, which is beneath certainty, and
above conjecture, such should I call our persuasion, that Wickliff was born
therein.

First, all confess him a Northern man by extraction. Secondly, the Camb. Brit.
in this Bishopric.
Antiquary allows an ancient Family of the Wickliffs in this County, whose Heir
general, by her match, brought much wealth and honor to the Brakenburies of
Celaby. Thirdly, there are at this day in these parts, of the name and
alliance, who continue a just claim of their kindred unto him.
Now he was bred in Oxford, some say in Baliol, others more truly in Merton
College: and afterward published opinions distasteful to the Church of Rome,
writing no fewer than two hundred Volumns (of all which largely in our
Ecclesiastical History) besides his translating of the whole Bible into English.

He suffered much persecution from the Popish Clergy. Yet after long exile, he,
by the favor of God and good Friends returned in safety, and died in
quietness, at his living at Lutterworth in Leicestershire, Anno 1387. the last
of Bale de scrip. Brit. Cent. 6. Number. 1.
December, whose bones were taken up and burnt 42. years after his death.

Disdain not Reader, to learn something by my mistake. I conceive that Mr. Fox
in his Acts and Monuments had entered the Names of our English Martyrs, and
Confessors, in his Calendar, on that very day whereon they died. Since I
observe he observes a Method of his own fancy, concealing the reasons thereof
to himself; as on the perusing of his Catalogue will appear. Thus VVickliff
dying December the last, is by him placed January Master Fox would not put out
the Feast of the Circumcision.
the second, probably out of a design to grace the new year with a good
beginning: though it had been more true, and (in my weak judgment) as
honorable for VVickliff to have brought up the rear of the old as to lead the
front of the new year in his Calendar.

Prelates.
The Nevills.
We will begin with a Quaternion of Nevils, presenting them in Parallels, and
giving them their Precedence before other Prelates (some their Seniors in time)
because of their Honorable Extraction. All four were born in this Bishopric,
as I am informed by my worthy Friend Mr. Charles Nevil, Vice-Provost of Kings
in Cambridge, one as knowing (...) Universal Heraldry as in his own College;
in our English Nobility, as in his own Chamber; in the ancient, fair, and far
branched Family of the Nevils, as in his own Study.

All the remarkable passages of these four Lives are taken out of Bishop God^
in his respective Catalogue of Bishops.
RALPH NEVIL was born at Raby in this Bishopric, was Lord Chancellor under
King Henry the third (none discharging that Office with greater integrity and
more general commendation) and Bishop of Chichester, 1223. He built a fair
House from the ground in Chancery Lane, for himself and successors for an
Inn, where they might repose themselves, when their occasions brought them up
to London.

How this House was afterward aliened, and came into the possession of Henry
Lacy, Earl of Lincoln (from whom it is called Lincolns Inn at this day) I know
not. Sure I am, that Mr. Mountague (late Bishop of Chichester) intended to lay
claim thereunto, in right of his see. But alas, he was likely to follow a cold
scent (after so many years distance) and a colder suit, being to encounter a
Corporation of Learned Lawyers so long in the peaceable possession thereof.

Bishop Nevil was afterward canonically chosen by the Monks (and confirmed hy
King Henry the third) Archbishop of Canterbury, being so far from rejoicing
thereat, that he never gave any (...), (or reward for their good news) to the
two Monks which brought him tidings, nor would allow any thing toward the
discharging their costly journey to Rome; foreseeing perchance that the Pope
would stop his Consecration.

For some informed his Holiness, that this Ralph was a Prelate of High Birth,
haughty Stomach, great Courtship, gracious with the King, and a person probable
to dissuade him from paying the Pension (promised by his Father K. John) to the
Court of Rome, and then no wonder if his Consecration was stopped thereon. But
was it not both an honor and happiness to our Nevil thus to be crossed with the
hands of his Holiness himself? yea it seems that no Crosier (save only that of
Chichester) would fit his hand, being afterward elected Bish. of Winchester,
and then obstructed by the K. who formerly so highly favored him. He built a
Chapel without the east gate of Chichester, dedicated to S. Michael; and
having merited much of his own Cathedral, died at London, 1244.

ALEX. NEVIL, third Son of Ralph Lord Nevil, was born at Raby, became first
Canon, then Archbishop of York, where he beautified and fortified the Castle
of Cawood with many Turrets. He was highly in Honor with King Richard the
second, as much in hatred with the party opposing him.

These designed to imprison him (putting Prelates to death not yet in fashion)
in the Castle of Rochester, had not our Alexander prevented them by his flight
to Pope Urban to Rome, who partly out of pity (that he might have something for
his support) and more out of policy, (that York might be in his own disposal
upon the removal of this Archbishop) translated him to Saint Andrews in
Scotland, and so dismissed him with his Benediction.

Wonder not that this Nevil was loath to go out of the Popes blessing into a
cold Sun, who could not accept this his new Arch- Bishopric, in point of
credit, profit, or safety.

1. Credit. For this his translation was a Post-Ferment, seeing the
Archbishopric of Saint Andrews was subjected in that age unto York.

2. Profit. The Revenues being far worse than those of York.

3. Safety. Scotland then bearing an Antipathy to all English (and especially
to the Nevils, redoubted for their victorious valor in those northern parts)
and being in open hostility against them

Indeed half a loaf is better than no bread, but this his new translation was
rather a stone, than half a loaf, not filling his Belly, yet breaking his
Teeth, if feeding thereon. This made him prefer the Pastoral Charge of a
Parish Church in Lovaine, before his Arch-noBishoprick, where he died in the
fifth year of his Exile, and was buried there in the Convent of the Carmelites.

ROB. NEVIL, sixth Son of Ralph, first Earl of Westmerland, by Joane his second
Wife, Daughter of John of Gaunt, bred in the University of Oxford, and Provost
of Beverly, was preferred Bishop of Sarisbury, in the sixth of King Henry the
sixth, 1427.

During his continuance therein, he was principal Founder of a Convent at
Sunning in Berkshire (anciently the Bishops See of that Diocese) valued at the
dissolution (says Bishop Godwin) at 682 l. 14 s. 7 d. ob. which I rather
observe, because the estimation thereof is omitted in my (and I suspect all
other) Speeds Catalogue of Religious Houses.

From Sarisbury he was translated to Durham, where he built a place called the
Exchequer, at the Castle gate, and gave (in allusion of his two Bishoprics,
which he successively enjoyed) two Annulets innected in his Paternal Coat. He
died, Anno Dom. 1457.

GEO. NEVIL, fourth Son of Rich. Nevil Earl of Salisbury was born at Midleham
in this Bishopric, bred in Baliol College in Oxford, consecrated Bishop of
Exeter, when he was not as yet twenty years of age, so that in the race not of
age, but youth, he clearly beat Tho. Arundel, who at twenty two was made Bishop
of Ely. Some say this was contrary not only to the Canon Law, but Canonical
Scripture. S. * 1 Timothy 3. 6.
Paul forbidding such a Neophyte or Novice admission into that Office, as if
because Rich. the make-King Earl of Warwick, was in a manner above Law, this
his Brother also must be above Canons. His Friends do plead that Nobility and
Ability supplied age in him; seeing five years after, at 25. he was made Lord
Chancellor of England, and discharged it to his great commendation.

He was afterward made Archbishop of York, famous for the prodigious Feast at
his Installing, wherein, besides Flesh, Fish, and Foul, so many strange Dishes
of Gellies. And yet amongst all this service I meet not with these two.

But the inverted Proverb found truth in him, One GluttonMeal makes many hungry
ones: for some years after falling into the displeasure of King Edward the
fourth, he was flenderly dyetted, not to say famished in the Castle of Calis;
and being at last restored by the Intercession of his Friends, died
heart-broken at Blyth, and was buried in the Cathedral of York, 1476.

Besides these, there was another Nevil (Brother to Alexander aforesaid) chosen
Bishop of Ely, but death, or some other intervening accident hindered his
Consecration.

Since the Reformation.
ROBERT HORN was born in this Bale de scrip. A g. Cent. 9. Number. 95.
Bishopric, bred in Saint John's College in Cambridge. Going thence under the
reign of King Edward the sixth he was advanced Dean of Durham. In the Marian
days he fled into Germany, and fixing at Frankford, became the head of the
Episcopal party, as in my Ecclesiastical History at large does appear.

Returning into England, he was made Bishop of Winchester, Feb. 16. 1560. A
worthy man, but constantly* ground betwixt two opposite parties, Papists and
Sectaries. Both of these in their Pamphlets sported with his name, as hard in
Nature, and crooked in Conditions, not being pleased to take notice, how Horn
in Scripture imports Power, Preferment, and Safety; both twitted his person,
as dwarfish and deformed, to which I can say nothing, (none alive remembering
him) save that such taunts, though commonly called ad Hominem, are indeed ad
Deum, and though shot at Man, does glance at Him, who made us, and not we our
selves. Besides it shows their malice runs low for might, (though high for
spite) who carp at the Case when they cannot find fault with the Jewel. For my
part, I mind not the Mould wherein, but the Metal whereof he was made, and
lissen to Mr. In his Eliz. (...) 1559.
Cambden his Character of him, Valido and foecundo ingenio, of a sprightful and
fruitful wit. He died in Bishop Godwin in the Bishops of Winchester.
Southwark, June 1. 1589. and lies buried in his own Cathedral near to the
Pulpit.

And now Reader, I crave leave to present thee with the Character of one who (I
confess) falls not under my Pen according to the strictness of the Rules which
we proposed to follow, as not being of the number of those Bishops, who may not
unfitly be termed (with Noah) righteous in their Generations, having seen two
Sets (if I may so speak) of their Order, but preferred to that Dignity since
our late happy Revolution. He is here fixed (though no Native of this County)
because the fittest place, I conceive (it is happy when the Antidote meets the
Poison where it was first sucked in) seeing formerly treating (in my Church
History) of this Cathedral, I delivered his Character (to his disadvantage)
very defectively.

JOHN COSEN, D. D. was born in the City of Norwich, bred in Cays College in
Cambridge, whereof he was Fellow. Hence was he removed to the Mastership of
Peter-House in the same University. One whose abilities, quick apprehension,
solid Judgment, variety of Reading, etc. are sufficiently made known to the
world in his learned Books, whereby he has perpetuated his name to posterity.

I must not pass over his constancy in his Religion, which rendereth him
aimable in the eyes not of good men only, but of that God with whom there is no
variableness, nor sh^dow of changing. It must be confessed that a sort of fond
people surmised as if he had once been declining to the PopishPerswasion. Thus
the dim sighted complain of the darkness of the room, when alas, the fault is
in their own eyes: and the lame of the unevenness of the floor, when indeed it
lies in their unsound legs. Such were the silly folk, (their understandings
(the eyes of their minds) being darkened, and their affections (the feet of their
soul) made lame by prejudice,) who have thus falsely conceited of this worthy
Doctor.

However, if any thing that I delivered in my Church History (relating therein
a Charge drawn up against him, for urging of some Ceremonies, without inserting
his Purgation, which he effectually made, clearing himself from the least
imputation of any fault) has any way augmented this opinion, I humbly crave
pardon of him for the same.

Sure I am, were his Enemies now his Judges (had they the least spark of
ingenuity) they must acquit him, if proceeding according to the evidence of his
Writing, Living, Disputing. Yea, whilst he remained in France, he was the
Atlas of the Protestant Religion, supporting the same with his Piety and
Learning, confirming the wavering therein, yea daily adding Proselytes (not of
the meanest rank) thereunto.

Since the return of our gracious Sovereign, and the reviving of swooning
Episcopacy, he was deservedly preferred Bishop of Durham. And here the Reader
must pardon me, if willing to make known my Acquaintance with so eminent a
Prelate. When one in his presence was pleased with some Propositions, wherein
the Pope condescended somewhat to the Protestants, he most discreetly returned
(in my hearing,) We thank him not at all for that which God has always allowed
us in his Word: adding withal, He would allow it us so long as it stood with
his Policy, and take it away so soon as it stood with his Power. And thus we
take our leave of this Worthy Prelate, praying for his long life, that he may
be effectual in advancing the settlement of our yet distracted Church.

Civilians.
RICHARD COUSIN Doctor of Law was born at Hartly Poole (a well known harbor for
the safety) and some observe a providence that he who afterward was to prove
the grand Champion of Episcopacy, should (amongst all the counties of England)
be born in (...) ^ishoprick. His Father was a person of quality, a Captain of a
Company in Must^borough field, whence his valor returned with victory and
wealth; when crossing the River Tweed [O the uncertainty of all earthly
happiness!] was drowned therein, to the great loss of his Son Richard: and
greater, because he was not sensible thereof, as left an infant in the cradle.

His Mother afterward married one Mr. Meddow, a Yorkshire Gen^leman, who bred
this his Son-in-law at a School at Scypton in the Craven; wherein, such his
proficiency, that before he was twelve years old, [little less than a wonder to
me in that age from so far a Country] he was admitted in Trinity College in
Cambridge: Some of his Friends in Queens College in that University had a
design to fetch him thence, had not Doctor Beamont prevented the Plot, in
making him Scholar and Fellow as soon as by his Age, Degree, and the Stat^tes
he was capable thereof.

He was a general Scholar, Geometrician, Musician, Physician, Divine, but
chiefly Civil and Canon Lawyer. By Archbishop Whitgift, he was preferred to b^
first Chancellor of Worcester [in that age a place non tam gratiosus, quam
negotiosus] and afterward Dean of the Arches, wherein he carried himself
without giving (though many took) offense at him.

Of these one wrote a Book against him called the Abstract [abstracted says my
Author from all Wit, Learning, and Charity] to whom he returned such an answer
in the defense of the High Commission, and Oath ex officio, that he he put his
Adversary to silence.

Others lay to his charge, that he gave many Blank Licenses, the common
occasions of unlawful marriages, and the procurer herein is as bad as the
thief, robbing many a parent of his dear child thereby. But always malice looks
through a multiplying glass. Euclio complained, Intromisisti sexcentos Coquos,
Thou have let in six hundred Cooks, (...). in Au^ria.
when there was but two truly told [ Anthrax and Congrio] so here was there
but one which a fugitive servant stole from the Register to make his private
profit thereby.

God in his sickness granted him his desire which he made in his health, that
he might be freed from torture, which his corpulency did much suspect,
bestowing (...) upon him, a sweet and qutet departure, pious his dying
expressions; I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ* Phil. 1. The
wages of sin is death, Romans 6. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Revel. 12. and
his last words was these, Farewell my surviving friends, remember your
mortality and eternal life.

He gave forty pound to the building of a Chamber in Trinity College, and
fifteen pound per* annum for the maintenance of two Scholar-ships therein: a
good gift out of his Estate, who left not above fifty pound a year clear to his
Heir; a great argument of his integrity, that he got no more in so gainful a
place. Dying at Doctors Commons, he was buried by his own appointment in
Lambeth Church, and Doctor Andrews preached his Funeral Sermon. Amongst the
many verses made by the University of Cambridge, this (with the allowance of
poetical License) came from no bad Fancy.

Magna Deos inter lis est exorta: creatas
Horum qui lites dir^mit, ille deest.
Cosinum petiere Dii componere tantas
Lites, quod vero jure peritus erat.
It must not be forgotten that Doctor Barlow (afterward Bishop of Lincoln) was
bred by Doctor Cosen, at his charge in his own Family, who in expression of his
Thankfulness, wrote this Doctor Cosen's Life, out of which most of our
aforesaid Character has been excerped.

Writers.
WILLIAM SHIRWOOD was born in this J. Pits de A^g. scrip. in Anno 1249.
Bishopric (being otherwise called William of Durham) bred first in University
College in Oxford, then in Paris, and afterward was made Chancellor of
Lincoln. In his time the University of Oxford was Interdicted for some affronts
offered to the Popes Legate, and had lain longer under that burden, had not the
hands of this Joh. Rouse of Warwick.
William helped to remove it, showing therein no less his love to his Mother,
than his power with the Pope.

In that age the English Clergy did drive a great Trade of preferment in France
(King Henry the third having large Dominions therein) and amongst the rest this
William was advanced Arch Bishop of Roan, where he died Anno Dom. 1249.

JOHN of DARLINGTON was born in this Bishopric, at a Town so called, needing
no other Indication, than the Rode passing through it into Scotland. He was bred
a Dominican, and a great Clerk. Ad Annum 1256.
Mat. Paris gives him this Testimony, that he was one, qui literatura pollebat
exellenter and consilio. King Henry the third made him his Confessor (which
argues his Piety, that so devout a Prince used him in so conscientious an
Office) and afterward he became Archbishop of Dublin in Ireland on this
occasion.

The Prior and S^r (...) (...) in his Archbishops of Dublin.
Covent of Trinity Church, chose William de la Corner the Kings Chaplain,
whilst the Dean and Chapter of Saint Patricks elected F^omund le Brun, the
Popes Chaplain into that See.

Hence ensued an hot and high contest, and Pope John 21. unwilling to engage
therein ca^ted both their Elections, and pitched on our Darlington as a good
expedient.

A person in whom King and Pope met in some equal proportion, seeing he was (as
we have said) Confessor to the one, and to the other his Collector of
Peter Pence, (as also to his two Successors Nicholas the third, and Martin the
fourth) through all Ireland. Many Books he wrote to Reckoned up b^ ^. (...) and
J. Pits.
Posterity, and returning into England, sickned, died and was buried in
Preaching Friars in London, 1284.

WILLIAM SIVEYER was born at Shinkley in this Bishopric, where his Father was
a Bishop Godwin in his Catalogue of Bishops.
Siveyer or Sive-maker; and I commend his humility in retaining his Fathers
Trade for his Surname, to mind him of his mean extraction. He was bred in
Merton College, whereof he became Warden, and Provost of Eaton, and afterward
Bishop of Carlisle, 1496. whence five years after he was tra^lated to Durham.
His Sur-name so contemptible in English, sounds ^erially, and Episcopally when
latinized. In which language he is rendered, Gulielmus Severus, severity well
agreeing with the gravity of his Function. He died Anno Dom 1505.

All I will ad is this, that England neither before nor since saw two
^ieve-makers Sons at the same juncture of time advanced to so high dignity,
this William in the Church, Sir Richard Empson in the Common wealth.

(...) the Reformation.
THOMAS JACKSON, born of a good Family in this County was designed to be a
Merchant in New Castle, till his Parents were diverted by Ralph Lord (...), and
persuaded to make him a Scholar. He was admitted first in Queens College in
Oxford, and then became Candidate of a Fellowship in Corpus Christi; knowing of
the election but the day before, he answered to admiration, and was chosen by
general cons^nt.

Soon after, in all likelihood, he lost his life, being drowned in the River,
and taken out rather for desire of decent burial, than with hope of any
recovery: He was wrapped in the Cowns of h^s fellow Students (the best shroud
which present love and need could provide him) and being brought home to the
College, was revived by Gods blessing on the care of Doctor Chenil, equally to
all peoples joy and admiration. His gratitude to the Fishermen (who took him
up) extended to a revenue unto them ^u ring his life. Thus thankful to the
Instrument, he was more to the Principal, striving to repay his life to that
God who gave it him.

He was afterward Vicar of New Castle (a Factor for Heaven, in the place where
he was designed a Merchant) a Town full of men and opinions wherein he
endeavored to rectify their Errors, and unite their Affections. At this
distance was he chosen President of Corpus Christi College, never knowing of
the vacancy of the place, till by those Letters (which informed him) it was
refilled with his elect^on.

Here he lived piously, ruled peaceably, wrote profoundly, preached painfully.
His Charity had no fault, if not of the largest size, oftentimes making the
Receiver richer, than it left him that was the Donor thereof. Learn the rest of
his praise from the Learned Writer of his Life, in whom nothing wanting, save
the exact place of his birth, and date of his death, which happened about the
year, 1640.

SAMUEL WARD was born at Bishops Middleham in this County, his Father being a
Gentleman of more Ancientry than Estate. He was first Scholar of Christ's, then
Fellow o^ Emanuel, and afterward Master of Sidney College in Cambridge, and
Margare^ Professor therein for above twenty years. Now, because the Pen of a
Pupil may probably be suspected of partiality; of an Historian I will turn a
Translator, and only endeavor to English that Character, which, Dr. Thomas
Goad in h^s ^dnsing his Sermon called Gratia dis^.
one who knew him as well as most men, and could judge of him as well as any
man, does bestow upon him.

Age, perge Cathedram ornare (quod facis) sacram
Subtilitate non levi, rapida, vaga,
Sed Orthodoxa quam coronat veritas,
Et justa firmat soliditas, patiens librae:
Antiqu^ at is, crypta tu penetras frequens,
Scholasticorum tu profundos vortices,
Te'nulla fallit, nulla te scium latet
Distinctionum tela, rationum stropha
Tam perspicacem mente, judicio gravem;
Linguis peritum, tamque nervosum stylo,
His addo genium temperatum, (...),
Placidum, modestum, lite rixosa, procul.
Go to, go on, deck (as thou do) the Chair,
With subtilty not light, slight, vage as air,
But such as Truth does crown, and standing sure,
Solidly fixed will weighing well endure.
Antiquities hid depths thou often do sound,
And School-mens whirl-pools which are so profound.
Distinctions threads none can so finely weave,
Or Reason wrench, thy Knowledge to deceive,
None thy quick sight, grave judgment can beguile,
So skilled in Tongues, so sinewy in style;
Add to all these that peaceful Soul of thine,
Meek, modest, which all brawlings does decline.
He turned with the Times as a Rock rises with the Tide; and for his
uncomplying there with, was imprisoned in Saint John's College in Cambridge. In
a word, he was counted a Puritan before these times, and Popish in these times,
and yet being always the same, was a true Protestant at all times. He died
Anno 1643. and was the first man buried in Sidney College Chapel.

Memorable Persons.
ANTHONY Lord GRAY, and eighth Earl of Kent of that Surname, Son of George
Gray, (...) and (...) Salvam his Wife, Son to Anthony Gray, Esquire and Briget
Holland his Wife, Son to G^orge Gray second Earl of Kent of that Family (who
died in the twentieth year of King Henry the seventh) was born at Out of his
p^vate pedigr^ communicated unto me.
Branspath in this Bishopric. If any ask what occasion drew his Ancestors into
the North, know that his GrandFather was invited thither to enjoy the company
of his Friend and Kinsman, the Earl of Westmerland.

This Gentleman being bred in the University of -- applied himself to the study
o^ Divinity, and became Rector of Burbach in Leichestershire, where he preached
con^antly, and kept an hospitable house for the poor according to his estate.
It happened (...) by the death of Henry Gray his Kinsman, and the seventh Earl of
Kent, that Earldom descended upon him, Anno Dom. 1639.

We read of Sigismund the Emperor, that when he had knighted a Doctor of the
Laws, the Knight Doctor sequested himself from the company of Doctors, and
associci^ted wholly with Knights; whereat the Emperor smiled, and taxed his
folly, For 1 (said he) can make many Knights at my pleasure, though indeed I
cannot make one Doctor. Not so this good Lord, who after the accession of his
Title did not in the least degrte disdain the society of his fellow Ministers,
to converse with the Nobility; yea, he ^bated nothing in the constancy of his
preaching, so long as he was able to be led up into the Pu^pit. He had read in
Scripture this Character given to the Acts 17. 11.
Bereans, These were more noble than these in Thess^lonica, in that they
received the Word with all readiness, and counted it most noble to labor in
Gods Vineyard, and to deliver his Word to others. However a Diamond is best
when set in Gold, and Goodness is most Illustrious when supported with
Greatness.

He was summoned as a Peer to Parliament, but excused himself, by reason of
Indisposition and Age. Such his humility, that Honors did not change Manners
in him. Thus a mortified mind is no more affected with additions of Titles,
than a Corpse with a gay Coffin. By Magdalene Purefoy his Wife, he had (besides
other Children) Henry ninth Earl of Kent. He died Anno Dom 164 --

Sheriffs.
Expect not that to make this Bishopric Uniform with other Counties, I should
present a Catalogue of the Sheriffs thereof. For the Princely Prelate of this
Bishopric (his S^l not Oval like others, but round, the more Princely
proportion; and as I remember, gave a crowned Mitre for his Crest) was himself
always Paramount Sheriff, deputing one, (often his own Servant) under him to
execute the Office. This Deputy never acc^unted at the Exchequer, but made up
his Audit to the Bishop, to whom all perquisites and profits of this place did
belong.

Since after a long discontinuance this County has obtained its ancient
Sheriff, the Bishop thereof, of whom formerly.

The Farewell.
I understand that there is an intention of erecting an University in Durham,
and that some hopeful progress is made in order thereunto, which I cannot but
congratulate; For I listen not to their Objection, alleging it monstrous for
one Face to have three Eyes, [one Land three Universities] seeing I could wish
that Argus-like it had an hundred in it. Would all men were Number. 11. 28.
Moses minded, that all the people of God might prophecy, the rather because I
am sure, that ignorance is no more the Mother of Devotion, than the Lying
Harlot 1 King. 3. 22.
which pleaded before Solomon, was Mother to the living Child.

I confess I was always much affected with their fears, who suspect that this
Convenience for the North would be a Mischief for the South, and this new one
in process of time prove detrimental to the old Universities. Nor were these
jealousies, when moved, removed in my serious consideration, not being well
satisfied of the intentions and design of some prime persons undertaking the
same.

But since this Fresh-man College lived not to be matriculated, much less (not
lasting seven years) graduated, God in his wisdom seeing the contrary fitter.
The worst I should have wished this new spring (if continuing) was pure water,
pious and orthodox Professors to have Principled and Elemented the Members
therein with Learning and Religion.

ESSEX.
ESSEX has Kent on the South, divided by the River Thames; Suffolk on the
North, severed by the River Stoure, Cambridge, Hertford shire and Middlesex on
the West, the two later generally parted by the River Ley, and the German Ocean
on the East.

A fair County, bearing the full proportion of five and thirty miles square,
plentifully affording all things necessary to man's subsistence, save that the
Eastern part is not very healthful in the Air thereof.

These parts adjoining to the Sea are commonly called the Hundreds of Essex,
and are very fruitful in Cattle. However the Vulgar wits of this County much
astonish strangers with the stock of poor people in these parts, five hundred
Cows, nine hundred Sheep, w^ch indeed are but five Cows, and nine Sheep, in
this part of the County called the Hundreds.

Natural Commodities.
Saffron.
Plenty hereof in this County growing about Walden a fair Market Town, which
Saffron may seem to have colored with the name thereof. It is called (as
Serapione affirms) Sahafaran by the Arabians, whence certainly our English
word is derived. In it self it is atmost admirable Cordial, and under God I
owe my life, when sick of the small pox, to the efficacy thereof. Now because
our own writers may probably be challenged of partialty, hear what forraigners
speak in the praise of English Saffron.

Anglia Johannes Bauhinus h^st. plant. univers. Tom. 2. lib. 19 cap. 5.
and Hibernia laudatissimum Crocum ferunt, quo Belgium, Germania aliique,
vicini cibos condiunt ac medicamentis miscent. Johannes Bodeus in Theophrastum.
Propagatur (inter alia loca) etiam in Britanniae insulae meridionali part,
quam Angliam vocant. Natus ex altera vero and septentrionali, quam Picti and
Scoti tenent reprobus est. No precious drug is more adulterated with Cartamus,
the inward pilling of Willow, and generally all yellow flowers, when it is
bought in great parcells, which ought to quick en the care of Chapmen herein.
In a word, the Sovereign Power of genuine Saffron, is plainly proved by the
Antipathy of the Crocodiles thereunto. For the Crocodiles tears are never true,
save when he is forced where Saffron grows, (whence he has his name of
(...), or the Saffron-fearer,) knowing himself to be all Poison, and it all
Antidote.

Oysters.
The best in England, Fat, Salt, green-finn'd, are bred near Colchester, where
they have an excellent art to feed them in Pits made for the purpose. King
James was wont to say, he was a very valiant man, who first adventured on
eating of Oysters; most probably mere hunger put men first on that trial. Thus
Necessity has often been the Purveyor to provide diet for delicacy it self,
famine making men to find out those things which afterward proved not only
wholesome, but delicious. Oysters are the only meat which men eat alive, and
yet account it no cruelty. Sometimes Pearls conside rabble both in bulk and
brightness have been found within them.

Hops.
In latin Lupulus, or the little-wolf, which made a merry man complain, that
this Wolf did too often devour the innocent Malt in beer. Gerard observes they
grow best in those Countries where Vines will not grow, intimating, that nature
points at their use therein.

They are not so bitter in themselves as others have been against them,
accusing Hops for noxious, preserving beer, but destroying those who drink it.
These plead the Petition presented in Parliament, in the reign of King Henry
the sixth, against the wicked weed called Hopps. Their back-friends also
affirm, the Stone never so epidemicall in England, as since the general
reception and use of Hops in the beginning of King Henry the eighth.

But Hops have since out-grown and over-topped all these accusations, being
adjudged wholesome, if Statutable and unmixed with any powder, dust, dross,
sand, or other soil whatsoever, which made up two parts See the Statute 1.
Jacobi cap. 18.
of three in foreign Hops formerly imported hither.

They delight most in moist grounds, no commodity starteth so soon and sinketh
so suddenly in the price, whence some will have them so named from hopping in
a little time betwixt a great distance in valuation. In a word, as Elephants,
if orderly, were themselves enough alone to gain, if disorderly; to lose a
victory; so great parcells of this commodity, well or ill bought in the Crisis
of their price, are enough to raise, or ruin an estate.

Puits.
There is an Island of some two hundred Acres, near Harwick in the Parish of
LittleOkeley, in the Manor of Matthew Gilly Esquire, called the Puit Island,
from Puits in effect the sole inhabitants thereof. Some affirm them called in
Latin Upulae, whilst others maintain, that the Roman Language does not reach
the Name, nor Land afford the Bird. On Saint* So am I informed by Capt. Farmer
of NewgateMarket, Copyholder of the Island.
George his day precisely they pitch on the Island, seldom laying fewer then
four, or more then six Eggs.

Great their love to their Young ones. For though against foul weather they
make to the main land, (a certain Prognostic of Tempests,) yet they always
Weather it out in the Island, when hatching their young ones, seldom sleeping
whilst they ^it on their Eggs, (afraid it seems of Spring-tides) which
signifies nothing as to securing their Eggs from the Inundation, but is an
Argument of their great Affection.

Being young they consist only of Bones, Feathers and Lean-flesh, which has a
raw Gust of the Sea. But Roulterers take them then, and feed them with Gravel
and Curds, (that is Physic and Food,) the one to scour, the other to fat them
in a fortnight, and their flesh thus recruted is most delicious.

Here I say nothing of Eringo Roots, growing in this County, the candying of
them being become a Staple commodity at Colchester. These are Sovereign to
strengthen the Nerves, and pity it is, that any vigor acquired by them should
be otherwise employed then to the Glory of God.

Manufactures.
This County is charactred like the good wife described by Pro. 31. 19.
Bathshebah. She lays her hand to the spindle, and her hands hold the
distaffe. Bays, and Says, and Serges, and several sorts of Stuffes, which I
neither can or do desire to name, are made in and about Colchester, Coxal,
Dedham, etc. I say, desire not to name, because hoping that new kinds will
daily be invented, (as good reason) and by their Inventers entitled. I know
not whether it be better to wish them good Wares to Vent, or good Vent for
their Wares, but I am sure, that both together are the best. It will not be
amiss to pray that the Plough may go along, and wheel around, that so being fed
by the one* and clothed by the other, there may be by Gods blessing, no danger
of starving in our Nation.

Gunpowder.
Why hereof in this, rather then in other Counties? Because more made by Mills
of late erected on the river Ley, betwixt Waltham and London, then in all
England besides. Though some suppose it as ancient as Archimedes in Europe,
(and antienter in India,) yet generally men behold the Friar of Mentz the first
founder thereof, some three hundred years since. It consists of three
essential ingredients:

1. Brimstone, whose office is to catch fire and flame of a sudden, and convey
it to the other two. 2. Char-coal pulverized, which continues the fire, and
quenches the flame, which otherwise would consume the strength thereof. 3.
Saltpeter, which causes a windy exhalation, and drives forth the bullet.
This Gunpowder is the emblem of politic revenge, for it biteth first, and
barketh afterward, the bullet being at the mark before the report is heard, so
that it makes a noise, not by way of warning, but triumph. As for white*powder
which is reported to make no report at all, I never could meet with Artist who
would seriously avouch it. For, though perchance the noise may be less and
lower, yet no sound at all is inconsistent with the nature of Saltpeter, and
the ventosity thereof causing the violent explosion of the bullet. It is
questionable, whether the making of Gunpowder be more profitable or more
dangerous, the Mills in my Parish having been five times blown up within seven
years, but, blessed be God, without the loss of any one man's life.

The Buildings.
This County has no Cathedral, and the Churches therein cannot challenge to
themselves any eminent commendation. But as for priva^e houses, Essex will own
no Shire her superior, whereof three most remarkable.

1. Audley-End, built by Thomas Howard, Earl of Suffolk and Treasurer of
England, as without compare the best Subjects house in this Island. Yet is the
structure better then the standing thereof, as low on one side, so that it may
pass for the emblem of modest merit, or concealed worth; meaner houses
boasting more, and making greater show afar off in the eyes of passengers. 2.
New*Hall, built by the Ratcliffs, Earls of Sussex, but bought from them by
George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham; surpassing for the pleasant shady approach
thereunto, and for the appurtenances of Parks round about it. 3. Copt*Hall, (in
Records Coppice-Hall, from the Woods thereabouts,) highly seated on an hill in
the midst of a Park, built by the Abbot of Waltham, enlarged by Sir Thomas
Heneage and others; and it is much that multiform fancies should all meet in so
uniform a fabric. Herein a Gallery, as well furnished as most, more
proportionable then any in England, and on this a story does depend.
In the year of our Lord 1639. in November here happened an Hirecano or wild
wind, which entering in at the great East-window, blew that down, and carried
some part thereof, with the picture of the Lord Coventry (singled from many
more, which hung on both ^ides untouched) all the length of the Gallery (being
about 56. yards) out of the West-window, which it threw down to the ground. It
seems the wind, finding this room in form of a trunk, and coarctated therein,
forced the stones of the first window, like pellets, clean thorough it. I
mention this the rather, because pious Doctor Jackson, Head of Corpus Christi
College in Oxford, observed the like wind about the same time as ominous, and
presaging our civil dissentions.

The Wonders.
This Shire affords none properly so called, unless some conceive the bones
reducible thereunto dug out of this Camdens Brit. in Ess^.
County at the Ness near Harwich, which with their bigness and length amazed
the beholders. I cannot see how such can maintain them to be the bones of men,
who must confess that according to the proportion of the doors and roofs of
ancient building, (either as extant or read of) they must Ingredi and incedere
proni, go in Stooping, not to say Lie along. Except the Avouchers be as
Incurious of their Credit as the Travellor was, who affirming that he saw Bees
as big as Dogs, and yet their Hives of our ordinary size; and being demanded
what shift they made to get in; Let them (said he) look to that.

More probable it is, that those were bones of Elephants, store whereof were
brought over into England by the Emperor Claudius. Indeed some Sciolists will
boast to distinguish bones of Beasts from Men by their Porosity, which the
learned deride as an undifferencing difference. Indeed when a Scull may be
produced of such magnitude, (which by its form is secured from mistake as
appropriate to man alone,) then the wonder will begin indeed: Till which time I
behold these Shanks and Thigh b^nes pretended to Men, to be of Elephants.

To these Wonders it will not be amiss to add the ensuing relation written by
the Pen of Master Thomas Smith of Sewarstone, in the Parish of Waltham Abbey, a
discreet person not long since deceased.

It so fell out that I served Sir Edward Denny, (toward the latter end of the
reign of Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory,) who lived in the Abbey of
Waltham-Crosse in the County of Essex, which at that time lay in ruinous heaps,
and then Sir Edward began slowly now and then to make even and re-edify some of
that Chaos. In doing whereof, Tomkins his Gardner, came to discover (among
other things) a fair Marble Stone, the Cover of a Tomb hewed out in hard
Stone: This Cover, with some help he removed from off the Tomb, which having
done, there appeared (to the view of the Gardner, and Master Baker Minister of
the Town, (who died long since) and to my self and Master Henry Knagg, ( Sir
Edwards Bayliffe,) the Anatomy of a Man lying in the Tomb abovesaid, only the
Bones remaining, Bone to his Bone, not one Bone dislocated: In observation
whereof, we wondered to see the Bones still remaining in such due order, and no
Dust or other Filth besides them to be seen in the Tomb: We could not conceive,
that it had been an Anatomy of Bones only laid at first into the Tomb; yet if
it had been the whole Carcass of a It is generally conceived the body of King
Harold.
Man, what became of his Flesh and Entrals? for (as I have said above) the Tomb
was clean from all Filth and Dust, besides the Bones.

This when we had all well observed, I told them, that if they did but touch
any part thereof, that all would fall asunder, for I had only heard somewhat
formerly of the like accident. Trial was made, and so it came to pass. For my
own part, I am persuaded, that as the Flesh of this Anatomy to us became
invisible, so likewise would the Bones have been in some longer continuance of
time. O what is Man then, which vanishes thus away, like unto Smoke or Vapor,
and is no more seen? Whosoever thou art that shall read this passage, thou
may find cause of humility sufficient.

Proverbs.
Essex Miles.]

These are cried up for very long, understand it Comparatively to those in the
Neighboring County of Middlesex, otherwise the Northern Parts will give Essex
odds, and measure Miles therewith. The truth is this, good way, and a good
horse, shorten Miles, and the want of either, (but both especially) prolong
them in any Country whatsoever.

Essex Styles.]

See the Proverbs in Suffolk.]

Essex Calves.]

A Festus lib. 9. see Mercators Atlas p. 298.
learned Author tells us that Italy was so called, quasi vitalae, because
the best Calves were bred therein. Sure this will be condemned as a far fetched
and forced Deduction; but if true, Essex may better pretend to the Name of
Italy, producing Calves of the fattest, fairest and finest flesh in England,
(and consequently in all Europe,) and let the Butchers in Eastcheap be appealed
unto as the most Competent Judges therein. Sure it is a Cumberland-cow may be
bought for the Price of an Essex-calfe, in the beginning of the Year. Let me
add that it argues the goodness of Flesh in this County, and that great gain
was got formerly by the Sale thereof, because that so many stately monuments
were erected anciently therein for Butchers, (inscribed Carnifices in their
Epitaphs) in Cogshall, Chelmsford, Church and elsewhere, made of Marble, inlaid
with Brass, (befitting, says my Weavers Fun. Mon. p. 641.
Author a more eminent man,) whereby it appears, that these of that trade have
in this County been richer, (or at least prouder) then in other places.

The Weavers Beef of Colchester.]

These are Sprats caught hereabouts, and brought hither in incredible
abundance, whereon the poor Weavers (numerous in this City) make much of their
repast, Cutting Rands, Rumps, Surloyns, Chines, and all Joints of Beef out of
them, as lasting in season well nigh a quarter of a year. They are the Minums
of the Sea, and their cheapness is the worst thing, (well considered the best)
which can be said of them. Were they as dear, they would be as toothsome (being
altogether as wholesome) as Anchovies, for then their price would give a high
gust unto them in the judgment of Pallat Men. True it is, that within these
last sixteen years, better Men then Weavers have been glad of worse meat then
Sprats, (and thankful to God if they could get it) in the City of Colchester.

Jeering Alias Cogshall.
Coxhall.]

How much truth herein, I am as unable to tell, as loath to believe. Sure I am,
that no Town in England of its bigness, afforded more Martyrs in the reign of
Queen Mary, who did not jeer or jest with the fire, but seriously suffered
themselves to be sacrificed, for the testimony of a good Conscience. If since
they have acquired a jeering quality, it is time to leave it, seeing it is
better to stand in pain, till our legs be weary, then sit with ease in the
chair of the scorners.

He may fetch a flitch of Bacon from Dunmoe.]

This proverb depends on a custom practiced in the Priory of Dunmow, which
was founded says In his Catal. of Religious houses in Essex.
Speed, by Juga, a noble Lady, Anno IIII. for black Nuns. But it seems,
afterward the property thereof was altered into a Male-Monastery, the
mortified men wherein were mirthfull sometimes, as hereby may appear.

Any person, from any part of England, coming hither, and humbly kneeling on
two stones at the Church-door, (which are yet to be seen,) before the Prior or
Convent, might demand at his own pleasure a Gammon or Flitch of Bacon, upon the
solemn taking of the ensuing oath,

You shall swear by the custom of our confession,
That you never made any nuptial transgression,
Since you were married man and wife,
By household brawles, or contentious strife;
Or otherwise in bed or at board,
Offended each other in deed or word:
Or since the Parish-Clerk said Amen,
Wished your selves unmarried again;
Or in a twelve-moneth and a day,
Repented not in thought any way;
But continued true and in desire,
As when you joined hands in holy Quire.
If to these conditions without all fear,
Of your own accord you will freely swear;
A Gammon of Bacon you shall receive,
And bear it hence with love and good leave.
For this is our custom at Dunmow well known,
Though the sport be ours, the Bacons your own.
It appears in an old Now in the possession of the Earl of Warwick.
book on record, that Richard Wright of Badesnorth in Norfolk, in the twentieth
third of Henry the sixth, when John Canon was Prior; that Stephen Samuel of
Little-Easton in Essex, the seventh of Edward the fourth, when Roger Rullcot
was Prior; and that Thomas Lee of Coxhall in Essex, the second of Henry the
eight, when John Tailor was Prior, demanded their Bacon on the premises, and
received it accordingly.

Princes.
HENRY FITZ-ROY natural son to King Henry the eight. Here we confess our
Trespass against our own Rules, who confined our selves to the Legitimate Issue
of Kings; presuming that the worth of this Henry will make amends for our
breach of order herein. He was begotten on the Body of the Lady Talbois, and
born at J (...) (...). (...) 703.
Blackmore-Mannor in this County, Anno 1519. being afterward Created Earl of
No^tingham, and Duke of Richmond. He confuted their Etymology who deduced
Bastard from the Dutch words boes and art, (...).
that is an abject Nature, and verifyed their deduction deriving it from
Kilianus.
besteaerd, that is the best disposition: Such was his forwardness in all
Martial Activities, with his knowledge in all Arts and Sciences; Learned
Leland dedicating a book unto him. He married Mary daughter to Thomas Duke of
Norfolk, and dying Anno 1536. (in the seventeenth year of his age,) was buried
at Framlingham in Suffolk with great lamentation.

Saints.
Saint HELEN was born at Colchester in this County, daughter to Coel King
thereof, as all our British Authors unanimously do report. She was Mother of
Constantine the first Christian Emperor, and is famous to all ages for finding
out Christ's Cross on Mount Calvary. Hence it is, that in memorial hereof, the
City of Colchester gives for its Arms a Camden in Ess^x.
Cross enragled between four Crowns. A scandal is raised on her name that she
was Stabularia, A Stableress, whereof Ric. V^tus Basing. ad lib. 5. (...). B^t.
(...). 26.
one renders this witty r^ason, because her Father was Comes Stabuli (an high
office, equivalent to the Constable in France) unto the Emperor. Others (more
truly) make her so nick named by Pagan malice, for her officious devotion in
finding out the Stable of Christ's Nativity.

Heathen pens have much aspersed her, calling her (...), whose tongues are no
slander, seeing the Disciple is not above his Master. More was I moved, when
first finding thispassage in Paulinus the pious Bishop of Nola,

Paulin. Epist. 11. ad Severum This englished ad verbum. Prompto filii
Imperatoris adsensu matter Augusta, patefactis ad opera sancta thesauris, toto
abusa fisco est. She being Mother Emperess, the treasuries being set open to
pious works, by the ready consent of her Son the Emperor, she wholly abused the
exchequer.

I wondered to see Paulinus charging such abuses upon her, being a person so
prodigiously charitable, that he is said to have sold himself to redeem a
widows son from captivity; but consulting the best of See Nizolius in Obs. on
Tully, on the word abuti.
Orators, I find abuti sometimes fixing no fault, and importing no more then
Thus Saint ^erome, Apostolicis stolic^ testimoniis abu^ quae jam (...) ia
g^ntibusdivulgata.
uti; so that abusing the Exchequer, signifies no more then a full and free
usage thereof. She died at Rome being eighty years of age, Anno Domini 337.

Saint CONSTANTINE son to the aforesaid Saint Helen, was born also at
Colchester, one sufficiently known to all posterity by the mere mentioning of
him. My pen shall now do penance with its silence, to expiate its tediousness
in describing his character in our Ecclesiastical History. He died Anno Domini
339.

Saint Ethelburgh Hildetha Theorithoid Edilburge Wolfhild Sister to Erkenwald
Bishop of London was by him appointed first Abbess of the Nunnery of Barking in
this County, by him built and endowed. Here she led a very austere life, and
obtained the veneration of a Saint after her death, which happened 676. Sister
to St. Ethelburgh aforesaid, succeeded her in the government of the said
Nunnery for the term of four and twenty years, so that she died very aged with
the reputation of a Saint. Anno 700. (The first of whose name sounds Greek,
the second Saxon,) was in this respect inferior to the two former, because no
Abbess but only a Nun of Barking. Yet did she equal them in some sort in the
holiness of her life, and her memory may go a breast with them in the Classis
of Sts. She died 678. Wife to Ina K. of the West Saxons, by the consent of her
husband (who went a Pilgrim to Rome) became a Nun at Barking, and after her
death Anno 740. room was made for her memory amongst the rank of Saints.
Afterward Barking - Nunnery destroyed by the Danes, was rebuilt by King Edgar.
Daughter to Wulfhelme E. of the WestSaxons, (born after the 18. year of her
Mothers barrenness) was by King Edgar made Abbess of Barking, which was the
first Nunnery of England, the richest (valued at above 1000l. of year rent at
the dissolution) and the fruit fullest of Saints as by this parallel does
appear. St. Wolfhild died Anno 989.

Saint OSITH. She was daughter to the King of the East Angles, and wife to
Suthred last King of East Saxons; by whose consent forsaking the world, she was
veiled, and at last became Abbess of a Monastery of her own founding at Chich
in this County; until the Danes infesting these fea-coasts, cut off her head
in hatred of Religion.

Yet this her head, after it was cut off was carried by Saint Osith [oh wonder!
oh lie!] three EnglishMartyrolog. on October. 7. page 272.
furlongs, and then she fell down and died. The same mutatis mutandis is told
of Saint Dionys in France, Saint Winefride in Wales and others, such being the
barrenness of Monkish invention, that unable to furnish their several Saints
with variety of fictions, their tired fancy is fain to make the same miracle
serve many Saints. She was martyred about the year of our Lord 870.

Saint NEOTS (why Sir-named Adulphius I know not) was born (says De script.
Brit. Cent. 2. Number. 23.
Bale,) either in Essex or Kent, but De Ang. script. in Anno 883.
Pitz. who wrote sixty years after him, says positively he was born in Essex.
It seems he met with some evidence to sway down the even beam to preponderate
on the side of this County. Waving the pleasures of the world, he lived long an
E^emite in Cornwell, and then leaving his solitary life, he became a painful
and profitable Preacher of the Gospel. He was a Zacheus for his Stature, and
with him tall in Piety and Charity. He moved King Alfred to found (or restore)
the University of Oxford, on which account his memory is sacred to all
posterity. He died Anno Dom. 883. whose body was buried by one Barry his
Scholar in Eynsebury, (since St. Neots) in Huntington-shire, and some say was
afterward removed to the Abbey of Crouland.

Martyrs.
Of the forty four Martyrs in this Shire, Three were most Remarkable.

1. JOHN LAURENCE who at the Stake was permitted a These as the following
observables are taken out of Mr. Foxes Acts and Mon. in their respective
Martyrdomes.
Posture peculiar to himself; For being so infeebled with long durance and hard
usage, that he could not stand; he had a Chair allowed him, and had the
painful ease to sit therein. Nor must we forget, how little Children being
about the fire, C^ied unto him, God strengthen you, God strengthen you, which
was beheld as a product of his providence, who out of the mouth of Babes and
Sucklings ordained Strength, as also it evidenced their Pious Education. To say
Hosanna is as soon learnt by children, as go up thou Bald head, if it be as
surely taught unto them.

2. THOMAS HAWKS Gentleman, first brought into trouble for refusing to
Christen his Child after the Popish fashion. This man going to the Stake
promised his friends to give them some solemn token of the clearness and
comfort of his Conscience. In performance where of, whilst his body was burning
he raised up himself; and though having the sense, having no fear of the Fire,
joyfully clapped his hands over his head, to the admiration of all the
beholders.

3. ROSE ALLIN a Virgin, who being in her Calling, (fetching Beer for her
Bedrid Mother,) was intercepted by Justice, or rather un-justice Tyrrell, who
with a Candle most cruelly burnt her wrists, which her Fire-proof patience most
constantly endured: What was said of the Roman scaevola, when he burnt his hand
before Porcenna, is more appliable to this Maid, Manum amisit, sed Palmam
retinuit* Tyrrell did this merely by the Law of his List; otherwise no statute
(except written on the backside of the book) did authorize him for so
Tyrannical an act: Some days after, the fire which here took Livery and seisin
of her hand, brought her whole body into the possession thereof.

Confessors.
RICHARD GEORGE Labourer, of West-Barfold, is most eminent amongst the many
Confessors in this Shire. For he had successively three wives, whereof F^x Acts
and Mon. p. (...)
two were burnt, and the third imprisoned for Religion, viz.

1. Agnes George, burnt at Stratford-Bow, June 27. 1556. 2. Christian George,
burnt at Colchester, May 26. 1558. 3............ George, imprisoned in
Colchester, and escaped by Queen Mary's death November. 17. 1558.
Some who consult the dates of his wives deaths, will condemn him for
over-speedy marriage; and the appetite to a new wife is not comely, before the
grief for the former be well digested. Such consider not, that their glorious
death in so good a cause, was the subject rather of his joy then grief, and
that being necessitated (for his children sake) to marry, he was careful, as
it appears, to marry in the Lord. Nor did he thrust his wives into the fire,
and shrink back from the flames himself, who being imprisoned Fox Acts and Mon.
p. 2037.
in Colchester, had followed his two first, and gone along with his last to the
Stake, had not Divine Providence by Queen Mary's death prevented it.

Cardinals.
THOMAS BOURCHIER was son to Sir William Bourchier, who (though but an English
Knight) was a French Earl of Ewe in Normandy, Created by King Henry the fifth,
and had a great*estate in this County, with many Mansion-houses, Camdens Brit.
in Essex.
Hawsted being the place of their*principall residence, where I presume this
Prelate was born.

He was bred in the University of Oxford, whereof he was Chancellor 1454. Dean
of Saint Martins, then successively Bishop of Worcester, Ely, Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Cardinal by the title of Saint Cyriacus in the Baths. A
Prelate, besides his high birth aforesaid, and brotherhood to Henry Bourchier,
first Earl of Essex of that Surname, remarkable on many accounts.

First, for his vivacity, being an old man, and proportionably, an older Bishop.

1. Being consecrated Bishop of Godwin in his Catal. of Bishops.
Worcester 1435. the fourteenth of Henry the sixth. 2. Dying Archbishop of
Canterbury 1486. the second of K. Henry the seventh. Whereby it appears, that
he wore a Mitre full fifty one years, a term not to be paralleld in any other
person.
Secondly, he saw strange revolutions in State, the Civil-wars between
Lancaster and York, begun, continued, and concluded. For, though Bishop Morton
had the happiness to make the match, Archbishop Bourchier had the honor to
marry King Henry the seventh, to the Daughter of King Edward the fourth, so
that his hand first solemnly held that sweet posie, wherein the White and Red
Roses were tied together.

Thirdly, for his wary compliance, that he lost not himself in the labyrinth of
such intricate times, applying himself politiquely to the present predominant
power. However it may be said of him,

Praestitit hic Praesul nil tanto sanguine munere tempore dignum. He left no
monument to posterity proportionable (what was an hundred pounds, and a chest
given to Cambridge?) to his great blood, rich place, and long continuance
therein. But this my Idem in the Archbishops of Canterbury.
Author imputes unto the troublesomeness of the times, seeing peace was no
sooner settled, and the land began to live, but he died March 30. 1486.

I know not what generous planet had then influence on the Court of Rome, this
I know, that England never saw such a concurrence of noble Prelates; who, as
they were Peers by their places, were little less by their descent. I behold
their birth a good buttress of Episcopacy in that age, able in Parliament to
check and crush any Antiprelaticall project, by their own relations. But let us
count how many were contemporaries with Thomas Bourchier, from his first
consecration at Worcester, till the day of his death.

John Stafford, son to the Earl of Stafford, Archbishop of Canterbury. Robert
Fitzhugh

Bishop of London.

Henry Beauford, son to John Duke of Lancaster, Bishop of Winchester.

William Gray, son to the Lord Gray of Codnor, Bishop of Ely.

Marmaduke Lumley, extracted from the Lord Lumley, Bishop of Lincoln.

Richard Beauchamp, brother to the L. Saint Amand, Bishop of Sarum.

Lionel Woodvile, son to the Earl of Rivers, Bishop of Sarum.

Peter Courtney, extracted from the Earls of Devon, Bishop of Exeter.

Richard Courtnee, of the same extraction, Bishop of Norwich.

John Zouch, descended of the Lord Zouch, Bishop of Landaffe.

George Novile, brother to the MakeKing Earl of Warwick, Archbishop of York.

William Dudley, son to the Lord Dudley, Bishop of Durham.

William Piercy, son to the Earl of Northumberland, Bishop of Carlisle.

But after the death of Bourchier, I meet with but three Bishops of noble
extraction, viz. James Stanley, Edmond Audley and Cardinal Pole. However, they
were, though of lower image, of no less learning and religion.

Prelates.
RICHARD de BARKING took his name (according to the Clergy-mens Heraldry in
that age) from that well noted Town in this County. In process of time he
became Ab^ot of Vit^ Abb. West. M. S.
Westminster for twenty four years. He was so high in favor with King H^nry
the third, that he made him one' of his special Councillors, Chief Baron of
the Exchequer, and for a short time J. Philipot Cat. of Treasurers page 13.
Lord Treasurer of England. He died Anno. 1246. buried in Westminster-Church,
whose marble tomb before the middle of the Altar, was afterward pulled down
(probably because taking up too much room,) by Friar Comb, Sacri^t of the
House, who laid a plain marble stone over him, with an Epitaph too tedious and
barbarous to be transcribed.

JOHN de CHESILL. There are two Villages so called in this County, where the
North-west corner thereof closes with Cambridge-shire. I will not define in
which this John was born, time having left us nothing of his actions, saving
the many preferments thorough which he passed, being Dean of Saint Paul's,
successively Archdeacon and Bishop of Godwin in the Bishops of London.
London, and twice Chancellor of England.

viz. Anno Domini 1264. in the 48. of King Henry the third* viz. Anno Domini
1268. in the 53. of King Henry the third* He was afterward also J. Phili^ot
Car. of Treasurers page 17.
Lord Treasurer of England, and died Anno Domini 1279. in the seventh year of
the reign of King Edward the first.

JOHN of WALTHAM was so named from the place of his nativity, and attained to
be a prudent man, and most expert in government of the State, so that he became
Master of the Rolls, Keeper of the Privy Seal, and Anno 1388. was consecrated
Bishop of Salisbury.

But he missed his mark, and met with one, who both matched and mastered him,
when refusing to be visited by Courtney Archbishop of Canterbury, on the
Godwin in the Archbishops of Cant. in the life of Courtney.
criticisme, that Pope Urbane the sixth, who granted Courtney his Commission
was lately dead, till the Archbishop excommunicated him into more knowledge
and humility, teaching him that his Visitations had a self-support, without
assistance of Papal power, cast in only by the way of religious complement.
This John of Waltham was afterward made Lord Treasurer, and Richard the second
had such an affection for him, that dying in his Office, he caused him to be
buried (though many muttered Tho. Walsingham in Anno 1395.
thereat) amongst the Kings, and next to King Edward the first in Westminster.
His death happened 1395.

ROGER WALDEN, taking his Name from his Birth, in that Eminent Market Town in
this County, was as considerable as any man in his Age, for the alternation of
his fortune. First he was the son of a poor man, yet by his Industry and
Ability, attained to be Dean of York, Treasurer of Calis, Secretary to the
King, and Treasurer of England.

Afterward, when Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury fell into the
disfavour of King Richard the second, and was banished the land, this Roger was
by the King made Archbishop of Canterbury, and acted to all purposes and
intents, calling of Synods, and discharging of all other offices. However, he
is beheld as a Cipher in that See, because holding it by Sequestration, whilst
Arandell the true Incumbent was alive, who returning in the first of King Henry
the fourth resumed his Archbishopric.

And now Roger Walden was reduced to Roger Walden, and as poor as at his first
beginning. For though all maintained that the Character of a Bishop was
indelable, this Roger found that a Bishopric was delable, having nothing
whereon to subsist, until Archbishop Arundell, nobly reflecting upon his
Worth, or Want, or Both, procured him to be made Bishop of London. But he
enjoyed that place only so long, as to be a testimony to all posterity of
Arundell his Civility unto him, dying before the year was expired 1404.

He may be compared to one, so Jaw-fallen with over long ^asting, tha^ ^e
cannot eat meat when brought unto him, and his spirits were so depressed with
his former ill fortunes, that he could not enjoy himself in his new unexpected
happiness. Why he was buried rather in Saint Bartholomews in Smithfi^ld, then
his own Cathedral Church, is too hard for me to resolve.

Since the Reformation.
RICHARD HOWLAND was born at (...) S^elt. (...). M. S^ in the M^sters of St.
John's.
Newport-P^nds in this County, first Hellow of Peterhouse, then chosen 1575.
Master of Magdalen, and next year Master of Saint JohnsColledge in Cambridge.
He was twice Vice Chancellor of the University, in the year 1584. he was
Consecrated Bishop of Godwin in the Bishops of Peterborogh.
Peterborough, in which place he continued sixteen years, and died in June 1600.

JOHN JEGON was born in this Parker ut prius.
County at Coxhall, Fellow first of Queens, then Master of Bennet-colledge in
Cambridge, and three times Vice Chancellor of the University. A most serious
man and grave governor, yet withal of a most face^ious disposition, so that
it was hard to say whether his counsel was more grateful for the soundness, o^
his company more acceptable for the pleas^ess thereof. Take one eminent
instance of his ^genuity.

Whilst Master of the College he chanced to punish all the Under-graduates
therein for some general offense, and the penalty was put upon their Heads in
the Buttery. And because that he disdained to convert the money to any private
use, it was expended in new whiteing the Hall of the College. Whereupon a
scholar hung up these verses on the Skreen,

Doctor Jegon, Bennet-colledge Master,
Brake the Scholars head, and gave the walls a plaster.
But the Doctor had not the readiness of his parts any whit impaired by his age
for perusing the paper ex tempore he subscribed,

Knew I but the Wagg that writ these verses in a Bravery,
I would commend him for his Wit, but whip him for his Knavery.
Queen Elizabeth designed him, but King James confirmed him Bishop of Norwich,
where if some in his Diocese have since bestowed harsh language on his memory,
the wonder is not great, seeing he was a somewhat severe presser of Conformity,
and dyed Anno Domini 1618.

SAMUEL HARESNET was born at Colchester in the Parish of Saint Butolph, bred
first Scholar, then Fellow, then Master, of Pembrock-hall in Cambridge. A man
of gr^t learning, strong parts and stout spirit. He was Bishop first of
Chichester, then of Norwich, and at last Archbishop of York, and one of the
Privy Council of King Charles, the 2. last dignities being procured by Thomas
Earl of Arundell, who much favored him and committed his younger son to his
Education.

Dying unmarried he was the better enabled for Public and Pious uses, and at
Chigwell in this County, (the place of his first Church-preferment,) he built
and endowed a fair Grammar School. He conditionally bequeathed his Library to
Colchester where he was born, as by this passage in his Proved June 8. 1631.
Will may appear:

Item, I give to the Bailiffs and Corporation of the Town of Colchester, all my
Library of Books, provided, that they provide a decent room to set them up in,
that the Clergy of the Town of Colchester, and other Divines may have free
access for the reading and studying of them. I presume the Town corresponding
with his desire, the Legacy took due effect. He died Anno Domini 1631. and
lies bu^ied at Chigwell aforesaid.

AUGUSTINE LINSELL D. D. was born at Bumsted in this County, bred Scholar and
Fellow in Clare-hall in Cambridge. He applied himself chiefly to the Studies of
Greek, Hebrew, and all Antiquity, attaining to great exactness therein. He was
very knowing in the ancient practices of the Jews, and from him I learned, that
they had a Custom at the Circumcising of their Children, that certain
Undertakers should make a solemn stipulation for their pious education,
conformable to our Godfathers in Baptism.

He was afterward made Bishop of Peterborough, where (on the joint-cost of his
Clergy) he procured Theophilact on the Epistles (never printed before) to be
fairly set forth in Greek and Latin. Hence he was remove^ to Hereford where he
died 163..

Statesmen.
Sir THOMAL AUDLEY Knight, where born, my best Industry and Inquiry cannot S N.
attain. He was bred in the Study of the Laws, till he became Attorney of the
Duchy of Lancaster, and Sergeant at Law, (as most affirm) then Speaker of
the Parliament, Knighted, and made Keeper of the great Seal, June 4. 1532.
being the twenty fourth of King Henry the eight, and not long after was made
Lord Chancellor of England, and Baron Audley of Audley End in this County.

In the feast of Abbey Lands, King Henry the eight carved unto him the first cut
(and that I assure you was a dainty morsel,) viz. the Sto^s survey of London,
p. 146.
Priory of the Trinity in Eald-gate Ward London, dissolved 1531. which as a Van
Currier foreran other Abbeys by two years, and foretold their dissolution. This
I may call (afterward called Dukes-Place) the Covent Garden within London, as
the greatest empty space within the Walls, though since filled, not to say
pestered, with houses. He had afterward a large Partage in the Abbey Lands in
several Counties.

He continued in his Office of Chancellor thirteen years, and had one only
daughter Margaret, who no doubt answered the Pearl in her name, as well in her
precious qualities, as rich Inheritance, which she brought to her husband
Thomas last Duke of Norfolk. This Lord Audley died April 30. 1544. and is
buried in the fair Church of Saffron-walden with this lamentable Epitaph,

The stroke of deaths Inevitable Dart,
Has now, alas! of Life beref^t the Heart,
Of Sir Thomas Audley, of the garter Knight,
Late Chancellor of England under our Prince of might
Henry the eight, worthy of high renown,
And made him Lord Audley of this Town.
This worthy Lord took care, that better Poets should be after then were in his
age, and founded Magdalen-colledge in Cambridge giving good lands thereunto, if
they might have enjoyed them according to his Donation.

Sir RICNARD MORISIN Knight, was born in this County, as J. Bale his
Fellowexile A M P.
does Bale (cript. B^t. Cent. oct. Number. 9
acquaint us: yet so, as that he qualifieth his intelligence with Ut fert^r,
which I have commuted into our marginall note of Sir R. Baker in his Chronicl^,
page 469. says he was born ^n Oxfordshire.
dubitation. Our foresaid Author adds that, per celebriora Anglorum gymnasia
arts excoluit: bred probably first in Eton or Winchester, then in Cambridge or
Oxford, and at last in the Inns of Court. In those he attained to great skill
in Latin and Greek, in the Common and Civil Law, insomuch, that he was often
employed Ambassador by King Henry the eight, and Edward the sixth, unto
Charles the fifth Emperor, and others Princes of Germany, acquitting himself
both honest and able in those negotiations.

He began a beautiful house at Cashobery in Hertford-shire, and had prepared
materials for the finishing thereof; but alas, this house proved like the life
of his Master who began it, I mean King Edward the sixth, broken off, not
ended, and that before it came to the middle thereof. Yea, he was forced to fly
beyond the Seas, and returning out of Italy died at Id^ ibidem.
Strasburgh on the 17. of March, Anno Domini 1556. to the grief of all good
men. Yet his son Sir Charles finished his fathers house in more peaceable
times, whose great-grand daughter (augmented by matches with much honor and
wealth) a right worthy and virtuous Lady lately deceased, was wife to the first
Lord Capel, and Mother to the present Earl of Essex.

Sir ANTHONY COOK Knight, great-grant child to Sir Thomas Cook Lord Mayor of
London, was born at Giddy hall in this County, where he finished a fair house,
begun by his great-grand-father, as appears by this inscription on the
frontispiece thereof,

Aedibus his frontem Proavus Thomas dedit olim, Addidit Antoni caetera sera
manus. He was one of the Governors to King Edward the sixth when Prince, and
is charactered by Master Camdens Eliz. Anno 1576.
Camden, vir antiqua severitate. He observes him also to be happy in his
daughters, learned above their sex in Greek and Latin, namely

1. Mildred married unto 1. William Cecil Lord Treasurer of England. 2. Anne 2.
Nicholas Bacon Chancellor 3. Katherine 3. Henry Killigrew Knights. 4. Elizabeth
4. Thomas Hobby 5. 5. Ralph Rowlet

Indeed they were all most eminent Scholars, (the honor of their own, and the
shame of our sex) both in prose and poetry, and we will give an instance of the
later.

Sir Henry Killigrew was designed by the Queen, Ambassador for France, in
troublesome times, when the employment always difficult, was then apparently
dangerous. Now Katherine his Lady, wrote these following verses to her sister
Mildred Cecil, to improve her power with the Lord Treasurer her husband, that
Sir Henry might be excused from that service,

Si mihi quem cupio cures Mildreda remitti,
Tu bona, tu melior, tu mihi sola Soror.
Sin male cunctando retines, vel trans mare mittes,
Tu mala, tu pejor, tu mihi nulla Soror,
It si Cornubiam, tibi pax six, and omnia l^ta,
Sin mare Cecili, nuntio bella, vale.
We will endeavor to translate them, though I am afraid falling much short of
their native elegancy,

If, Mildred, by thy care he be sent back, whom I request,
A Sister good thou art to me, yea better, yea the best.
But if with stays thou keepst him still, or sendst where seas may part,
Then unto me a Sister ill, yea worse, yea none thou art,
If go to Cornwall he shall please, I peace to thee foretell,
But Cecil if he set to Seas, I war denounce, farewell.
This Sir Anthony Cook died in the year of our Lord 1576. leaving a fair estate
unto his son, in whose name it continued until our time.

Sir THOMAS SMITH Knight. was born at Camdens Eliz. Anno 1577.
Saffron Walden in this County, and bred in Queens-colledge in Cambridge, where
such his proficiency in learning, that he was chosen out by Henry the eight, to
be sent over, and brought up beyond the Seas. It was fashionable in that age,
that pregnant Students were maintained on the cost of the State, to be
Merchants for experience in foreign parts, whence returning home with their
gainful adventures, they were preferred (according to the improvement of their
time) to offices in their own Country. Well it were if this good old custom
were resumed; for if where God has given Talents, men would give but Pounds, I
mean encourage hopeful Abilities with helpful Maintenance, able persons would
never be wanting, and poor men with great parts would not be excluded the Line
of preferment.

This Sir Thomas was afterward Secretary of State to Queen Elizabeth, and a
grand benefactor to both Universities, as I have formerly declared In my
history of Cambridge.
at large. He died Anno Domini 1577.

THOMAS HOWARD, wherever born, is justly reputed of this County, wherein S N.
he had his first honor, and last habitation. He was second son to Thomas last
Duke of Norfolk, but eldest by his wife Margaret, sole heir to Thomas Lord
Audley.

Queen Elizabeth made him Baron of Audley, and Knight of the Garter; and King
James (who beheld his father a State-Martyr for the Queen of ^ots,) in the
first of his reign, advanced him Lord Chamberlain, and Earl of Suffolk, and in
the twelfth of his reign July 12. Lord Treasurer of England.

He was also Chancellor of Cambridge, loving and beloved of the University.
When at his first coming to Cambridge, Master Francis Nethersole Orator of the
University, made a Latin Speech unto him, this Lord returned, though I
understand not Latin, I know the Sense of your Oration is to tell me that I am
welcome to you, which I believe verily, thank you for it heartily, and will
serve you faithfully in any thing within my power.

Doctor Hasnet the Vice Chancellor laying hold on the Handle of so fair a
Proffer, requested him to be pleased to Entertain the King at Cambridge, a
Favor which the University could never compass from their former great and
wealthy Chancellours, I will do it (says the Lord) in the best manner I may,
with the speediest convenience. Nor was he worse then his word, giving his
Majesty not long after so Magnificent a Treatment in the University, as cost
him five thousands pounds and upwards.

Hence it was, that after his death, Thomas his second son, Earl of Bark-shire,
not suing for it (not knowing of it) was chosen to succeed him, losing the
place (as some suspected) not for lack of voices, but fair counting them. He
died at Audley end, Anno Domini 1626. being Grandfather to the right
Honorable James Earl of Suffolk.

RICHARD WESTON. I behold him son to Sir Jerome Weston, Sheriff of this A M P.
County in the one and fourtieth of Queen Elizabeth, and cannot meet with any
of his relations, to rectify me if erroneous. In his youth he impaired his
estate, to improve himself with public accomplishment, but came off both a
saver and a gainer at the last, when made Chancellor of the Exchequer, and
afterward (upon the remove of the Earl of Marlburrough) July 15. in the fourth
of King Charles Lord Treasurer of England.

But I hear the Cocks crow proclaiming the dawning day, being now come within
the ken of many alive; and when men's memories do arise, it is time for History
to haste to bed. Let me only be a Datary, to tell the Reader, that this Lord
was Created Earl of Portland, February 17. in the eight of King Charles, and
died Anno Domini 163.. being father to the right Honorable Jerome now Earl of
Portland.

Capital Judges.
Sir JOHN BRAMSTONE Knight, was born at Maldon in this County, bred up in the
Middle Temple in the study of the Common Law, wherein he attained to such
eminency, that he was by King Charles made Lord Chief Justice of the
King's Bench.

One of deep learning, solid judgment, integrity of life, gravity of
behavior; in a word, accomplished with all qualities requisite for a Person of
his place and profession.

One instance of his integrity I must not forget, effectually relating to the
Foundation wherein I was bred: Sergeant Bruerton (of whom Benefactors to the
Public in Cheshlre.
formerly) bequeathed by Will to Sidney-colledge well nigh three thousand
pounds, but (for haste or some other accident) so imperfectly done, that (as
Doctor Samuel Ward informed me) the gife was invalid in the Rigor of the Law.
Now Judge Bramstone, who married the Sergeants Widow, gave himself much
trouble ( gave himself indeed, doing all things gratis,) for the speedy payment
of the money to a Farthing, and the legal settling thereof on the College,
according to the true intention of the dead. He deserved to live in better
times; the delivering his judgment on the Kings side in the case of Ship ^oney
cost him much trouble. The posting Press would not be persuaded to stay till I
had received farther instructions from the most Hopeful sons of this worthy
Judge, who died about the year 1646.

Soldiers.
ROBERT FITZ-WALTER. It is observable what I read in my Stows Annals in the
reign of K. John.
Author, that in the reign of King John, there were three most eminent Knights
in the land, (...) for their prowess, viz. Robert Fitz-Roger, Richard Of
StandedMont-Fitchet in this County.
Mont-F^chet and this Robert Fitz-Walter. Two of which three (a fair
proportion) fall to be natives of this County.

This Robert was born at Woodham-walters, and behaved himself right (...) on
all occasions, highly beloved by King Richard the first, and King John, until
the later banished him the land, because he would not prostitute his daughter
to his pleasure. But worth will not long want a Master, the French-King
joyfully entertained him, till King John recalled him back again on this
occasion: five-years truce being concluded betwixt the two Crowns of England
and France, an Englishman challenged any of the French, to just a course or
two on horseback with him, whom Fitz-Walter (then o^ the French party)
undertook, and at the first Stow ut prius.
course, with his great spear, felled horse and man to the ground. Thus then
and ever since Englishmen generally can be worsted by none but Englishmen.
Hereupon the King, next day sent for him, restored his lands with license for
him to repair his Castles, (and particularly Bainards-castle in London,) which
he did accordingly. He was styled of the common people, The Marshall of Gods
Army and Holy-Church. He died Anno Domini 1234. and lies buried in the Priory
of Little-Dunmow.

Sir JOHN HAWKEWOOD Knight, Son to Gilbert Hawkewood Stow ut pr^us.
Tanner, was born in Camd. Brit. in Essex.
Sible heningham. This John was first bound an apprentice to a Stow ut prius.
Tailor in the City of London, but soon turned his needle into a sword, and
thimble into a shield, being pressed in the service of King Edward the third
for his French Wars, who rewarded his valor with Knighthood. Now that mean men
bred in manual and mechanic trades, may arrive at great skill in Martial
performances, this Hawkewood, though an eminent, is not the only instance of
our English nation.

The heat of the French Wars being much remitted, he went into Italy and served
the City of Florence, which as yet was a Free State. Such Republiques preferred
forrainers rather then natives for their Generals, because, when the service
was ended, it was but disbursing their pay, and then disbanding their power, by
cashering their Commission; such Forraigners having no advantage to continue
their command, and render themselves absolute, because wanting an interest in
alliances and relations. Thus a single Stake if occasion serves, is sooner
plucked up then a tree fastened to the earth, with the many fibrae appendant to
the root thereof.

Great the gratitude of the State of Florence to this their General Hawkewood,
who in testimony of his surpassing valor and singular faithful service to
their State, adorned him with the Statue of a man of arms, and sumptuous
Monument, wherein his ashes remain honored at this present day. Well it is
that Monument does remain seeing his Coenotaph or honorary tomb, which
sometimes stood in the Parish Church of Sible-heningham (arched over, and in
allusion to his name berebussed with Weavers Fun. Mon. p. 623.
Hawks flying into a Wood,) is now quite flown away and abolished.

This Sir John Hawkewood married Domnia daughter of Barnaby the warlike brother
of Galeasius Lord of Millain, (father to John the first Duke of Mallain,) by
whom he had a son named John born in Italy, made Knight and naturalized in the
seventh year of King Henry the fourth, as appears by the In Bib. Cot. and in
Arch Tarris Land. 1 Pars Pat. An. 8. H. 4. m. 20.
Record, Johannes, filius Johannis Haukewood, Miles, natus in partibus Italiae
factus indigena Ann. 8. Hen. 4. matter ejus nata in partibus transmarinis.

This valiant Knight dyed very aged Anno 1394. in the eighteenth of King
Richard the second, his friends founding two Chantreys to pray for his and the
souls of John Oliver and Thomas Newenton Esquires, his military companions,
and, which probably may be presumed, born in the same County.

THOMAS RATCLIFF Lord Fitz-walter second Earl of Sussex of that Surname, twice
Lord Deputy of Ireland, was a most valiant Gentleman. By his prudence he caused
that Actual Rebellion brake not out in Ireland, and no wonder if in his time
it Rained not war there, seeing his diligence dispersed the clouds before they
could gather together. Thus he who cures a disease may be the skilfubest, but
he that prevents it is the safest Physician.

Queen Eliz^beth called him home to be her Lord Chamberlain, and a constant
Court faction was maintained betwixt him and Robert Earl of Leicester, so that
the (...) and the Leicesterians divided the Court, whilst the (...) as neuters
did look upon them. Sussex had a great Estate left him by his Ancestors,
Leicester as great given or restored (...) by the Queen: (...) was the hones^
man and greater Soldier, (...) the more faceit (...) and deep Politician; not
for the general good, but his particular profit. Great the (...) betwixt them,
and what in vain the Queen endeavored, death performed, taking this Earl away,
and so the competition was (...). NewHall in this County was the place if not
(as I believe) of his Birth, of his principal Habitation. He dyed Anno
Domini.... And lies buried in the Church of Saint Olives Hartstreet London.

Sir FRANCIS and Sir HORACE VERE sons of Geffrey Vere. Esquire, who was son of
John Vere the (...) Earl of Oxford, were both born in this County, though
several places (He^ngham Castle, Colchester, Tilbury juxta clare,) be by
sundry men assigned for their Nativity. We will first consider them severally,
and then compare them together.

Sir FRANCIS was of a fiery spirit and rigid nature, undaunted in all dangers,
not over valuing the price of men's lives, to purchase a victory therewith. He
served on the Scaene of all Christendom where war was acted. One masterpiece
of his valor was at the Battle of Newport, when his Ragged Regiment (so were
the English then called from their ragged Cloths,) helped to make all whole, or
else all had been lost. Another was, when for three years he defended Ostend
against a strong and numerous Army, surrendering it at last a bare skeliton to
the King of Spain, who paid more years purchase for it, then probably the world
will endure. He dyed in the beginning of the reign of King James, about the
year of our Lord 16...

Sir HORACE had more meekness, and as much valor as his Brother, so pious,
that he first made his peace with God, before he went out to war with man. One
of an excellent temper, it being true of him what is said of the Caspian Sea,
that it does never (...) nor Flow; observing a constant Tenor, neither (...)
nor depressed with success. Had one seen him r^turning from a victory, he would
by his silence have suspected that he had lost the day; and had he beheld him
in a retreat, he would have collected him a Conqueror, by the cheerfulness of
his spirit. He was the first Baron of King Charles his Creation. Some years
after coming to Court he fell suddenly sick and speechless, so that he dyed
before night Anno Domini 163.. No doubt he was well prepared for death, seeing
such his vigilance, that never any Enemy surprised him in his quarters.

Now to compare them together, (such their Eminency, that they would hardly be
paralleled by any but themselves:) Sir Francis was the elder Brother, Sir
Horace lived to be the older man, Sir Francis was more feared, Sir Horace more
loved, by the Soldiery: The former in Martial discipline was oftimes Rigidus
ad ruina^; The later seldom exceeded Adterrorem. Sir Francis left none, Sir
Horace no Male issue, whose four Coheirs are since matched into Honorable
families. Both lived in War, much Honored; dyed in Peace, much Lamented.

HENRY VERE was son of Edward Vere the seventeenth Earl of Oxford, and Anne
Trentham his Lady, whose principal habitation (the rest of his patrimony being
then wasted) was at Heningham Castle in this County. A vigorous Gentleman, full
of courage and resolution, and the last Lord Chamberlain of England of this
Family. His sturdy nature would not bow to Court-Compliants who would maintain
what he spoke, spoke what he thought, think what he apprehended true and just,
though sometimes dangerous and distastefull.

Once he came into Court with a great Milk-white Feather about his hat, which
then was somewhat unusual, save that a person of his merit might make a
fashion. The Reader may guess the Lord, who said unto him in some jeer, My
(...) you wear a very fair feather; it is true (said the Earl,) and if you
mark it there is ^e'r a T^int in it. Indeed his family was ever Loyal to the
Crown, deserving their Motto,

VERO NIL VERIUS. Going over one of the four Engish Colonells into the Low
Countries, and endeavoring to raise the Siedge of Bxeda, he so over-heat
himself with Marching, Fighting and Vexing, (the design not succeeding) that he
dyed few days after Anno Domini 16... He married Diana one of the Coheirs of
William Earl of Exeter, (afterward married to Edward Ea^l of Elgin,) by whom
he left no issue.

Physicians.
WILLIAM GIL^T was born in I received the ensuing intelligence from his near
Kinsman Mr. William Gilbert of Brental-Ely* in Suffolk.
Trinity Parish in Colchester, his Father being a Counselor of great Esteem
in his Profession, who first removed his family thither from Clare in Suffolk,
where they had resided in a Gentile Equipage some Centuries of Years.

He had (says my informer) the Clearness of Venice Glass without the
Brittleness thereof, soon Ripe and long Lasting in his Perfections. He
Commenced Doctor in Physic, and was Physician to Queen Elizabeth, who Stamped
on him many Marks of her Favor, besides an Annual Pension to encourage his
Studies. He addicted himself to Chemistry, attaining to great exactness
therein. One says of him that he was Stoicall, but not Cynicall, which I
understand Reserved, but not Morose, never married, purposely to be more
beneficial to his Brethren. Such his Loyalty to the Queen, that, as if
unwilling to survive, he dyed in the same year with her 1603. His Stature was
Tall, C^plexion Cheerful, an Happiness not ordinary in so hard a Student and
retired a Person. He lies buried in Trinity Church in Colchester, under a
plain Monument.

Mahomets Tomb at Mecha is said strangely to hang up, attracted by some
invisible Lodestone, but the Memory of this Doctor will never fall to the
ground, which his incomparable Book De Magnete will support to Eternity.

Writers.
GERVASE of TILBURY born at that Village in this County, (since famous for a
C^mpe, against the Spaniards in 88.) is Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 3. page
250. and Pitz. de Ill^str. Ang. Aetat. 13. page 274.
reported Nephew to King Henry the second. But though Nepos be taken in the
Latitude thereof (to signify Son, to Brother, Sister, or Child,) I cannot make
it out by the Door, and am loath to suspect his coming in by the Window. This
Gervase may be said by his Nativity, to stand but on one foot (and that on tip
toes) in England, being born on the Sea side, at the mouth of Thames, and
therefore no wonder if he quickly convayed himself over into Foreign Parts. He
became Courtier and favorite to his Kinsman Otho the fourth Emperor, who
conferred on him the Marshal-ship of the Archbishopric of Arles, (which
proves the Imperial Power in this Age, over some parts of Province,) an
office which he excellently discharged. Though his person was wholly conversant
in Foreign Air, his Pen was chiefly resident on English Earth, writing a
Chronicle of our Land, and also adding illustrations to G^ffrey Monmouth. He
flourished Anno 1210. under King John.

ADAM of BARKING (no mean market in this County) was so termed from the Town of
his Nativity. Wonder not, that, being born in the East of England, he went
Westward as far as Sherborn (where he was a Benedictine) for his education; it
being as usual in that age for Monks, as in ours for Husbandmen, to change
their soil for the seed, that their grain may give the greater increase. He was
a good Preacher and learned Writer, and surely would have soared higher, if not
weighed down with the ignorance of the age he lived in, whose death happened
Anno 1216.

RALPH of COGSHALL in this County, was first Canon of Barnewell nigh Cambridge,
and afterward turned a Cistertian Monk. He was a man Pitz. de script. Angl.
Anno 1218.
Incredibilis frugalitatis and parsimoniae, but withal of great learning and
abilities. These qualities commended* him to be Abbot of Cogshall (the sixth in
order after the first foundation thereof,) where he spent all his spare hours
in writing of Chronicles, and especially of additions to Radulphus Niger.
Afflicted in health he resigned his place, and died a private person about the
year 1230.

ROGER of WALTHAM was so called from the place of his Nativity. I confess there
be many Walthams in England and three in Essex: but as in Herauldry the plain
Coat speaks the bearer thereof to be the best of the house, whiles the younger
Brethren give their Arms with differences; so I presume that Waltham here
without any other addition, (of Much*Waltham, Wood-Waltham, etc.) is the Chief
in that kind, viz. Waltham in this County within twelve Miles of London,
eminent in that Age for a wealthy Abbey. The merit of this Roger, being (says
De script. Brit. Cent. 4. p. 302.
Bale) terse, nitide and eleganter eruditus, endeared him to Fulke Basset
Bishop of London, who preferred him Canon of Saint Paul's. He wrote many worthy
works, flourishing under King Henry the third, Anno Domini 1250.

JOHN GODARD (wherever born) had his best being at Bale de script. Brit. Cent.
4. Number. 11. compared with Pitts in Anno 1250.
Cogshall in this County, S. N.
where he became a Cistercian Monk. Great was his skill in Arithmetic, and
Mathematics, a Science which had lain long asleep in the World, and now first
began to open it is eyes again. He wrote many certain Treatises thereof, and
dedicated them unto Ralph Abbot of Cogshall. He flourished Anno Dom. 1250.

AUBREY de VERE extracted from the right Honorable Earls of Oxford, was born
(says my Bale Number. 13. and Pitz. 1259.
Authors) in Bonaclea Villa Trenovantum, Three miles srom Saint Osith, by which
direction we find it to be Great Bentley in this County. Now although Sir John
Sucling his verses on the right honorable and learned Earl of Monmouth.
a witty Gentleman says, that Noblemen have seldom any thing in Print save
their Cloths, yet this Aubrey so applied his studies, that he wrote a Learned
Book of the Eucharist. In his old age he became an Augustinian of Saint Osiths,
preferring that before other places, both because of the pleasant retireness
thereof, and because his kindred were great Benefactors to that Covent, witness
their Donation de septem Mills his Cat. of honor p. 677.
Libratis terrae thereunto. This Aubrey, the most learned of all Honorable
Persons in that Age, Flourished Anno Domini 1250.

THOMAS MALDON was born at J. Bale J. Pitz.
Maldon, no mean Market Town in this County, anciently a City of the Romans
called Camulodunum. He was afterward bred in the University of Cambridge,
where he Commenced Doctor of Divinity, and got great reputation for his
Learning, being a Quick Disputant, Eloquent Preacher, Solid in Defining, Subtle
in Distinguishing, Clear in Expressing. Hence he was chosen Prior of his own
Monastery in Maldon, where he commendably discharged his place till the day of
his death, which happened 1404.

THOMAS WALDENSIS was son to John and Maud Netter, who declining the Surname of
his Parents, took it from Bale de script: Brit. Cent. 7. Number. 84.
Walden the noted place in this County of his Nativity; so much are they
mistaken, that maintain, that this Waldensis his name was Vuedale, and that he
was born in Hant-shire.

In some sort he may be termed Anti-Waldensis, being the most professed Enemy
to the Wicklevites, who for the main revived and maintained the Doctrine of the
Waldenses. Being bred a Carmelite in London, and Doctor of Divinity in Oxford,
he became a great Champion of, yet Vassal to, the Pope; witness his sordid
Complement, consisting of a conjunction, or rather confusion and misapplication
of the words of Ruth to Naomi, and David to Goliath.

Perge Domine In lib^ de sacramentis, cap. 17.
Papa, perge quo cupis: and ego tecum ubicunque volueris, nec deseram, in
Authoritate Dominorum meorum incedam, and in armis eorum pugnabo. He was in
high esteem with three succeeding Kings of England, and might have changed his
Coul, into what English Miter he pleased, but refused it. Under King Henry the
fourth, he was sent a solemn Ambassador 1410. about taking away the Schism^,
and advancing an Union in the Church, and pleaded most eloquently before the
Pope, and Segismund the Emperor. He was Conf^ssor and Privy*Councellour to
King Henry the fifth, (who died in his Bosom) and whom he taxed for too much
lenity to the Wicklevites, so that we behold the Breath of Waldensis, as the
Bellows which Blew up the Coals, for the burning of those Poor Christians in
England, under King Henry the sixth, he was employed to provide at Paris all
necessaries for his solemn Coronation, and dying in his journey thither Anno
1430. was buried at Roan. He was 16 years Provincial of his Order, throughout
all England, and wrote many books against the Wicklevites.

Bale cites four (all sorraign) Authors, which make him solemnly Sainted,
whilst De Ang. script. in Anno 1430*
Pitzeus more truly and modestly only affirms, that he died, non sine
sanctitatis opinione. Indeed, as the Pagans had their Lares and Penates, Dii
Minorum Gentium, so possibly this Thomas, (though not publicly Canonized)
might pass for a Saint of the lesser Size, in some particular places.

Since the Reformation.
THOMAS TUSS^R was born at Riven-hall in this County, of an ancient family
(since extinct) if his own In his hist. at the end of his Boo^ of Husbandry.
pen may be believed. Wh^lst as yet a Boy he lived in many Schools,
Wallingford, S^int Paul's, Eaton, (whence he went to T^inity hall in Cambridge,)
when a Man, in Staffordshire, Suffolk, Northfolk, Cambridge-shire, London, and
where not? so that this Stone of Sisiphus could gather no Moss. He was
successively a Musician, School master, Servingman, Husbandman, Grasier Poet,
more skillful in all, then thriving in any V^cation. He traded at large in
Oxen, Sheep, Dairies, Grain of all kinds, to no profit. Whether he bought or
sold, he lost, and when a Renter impoverished himself, and never enriched his
Landlord. Yet has he laid down excellent Rules in his Book of Husbandry and
Houswifery, (so that the Observer thereof must be rich*) in his own d^fence. He
spread his Bread with all sorts of Butter, yet none would stick thereon. Yet I
hear no man to charge him with any vicious extravagancy, or visible
carel^ssness, imputing his ill success to some occult cause in Gods counsel.
Thus our English (...), might say with the Poet,

-- -- Monitis sum minor ipse meis, None being better at the Theory, or worse
at the Practice of Husbandry. I match him with Thomas (...)-yard, they being
marked alike in their Poetical parts, living in the same time, and (...) alike
in their Estates, both low enough I assure you. I cannot find the certain date
of his death* but collect it to be about 1580.

FRANCIS QUARLES Esquire, son to James Quarles Esquire, was born at S^wards, in
the Parish of Ru^ford in this County, where his son (as I am informed) has an
Estate in expectancy. He was bred in Cambridge, and going over into Ireland,
became Secretary to the Reverend James Usher Archbishop of Armagh. He was a
most excellent Poet, and had a mind by assed to devotion. Had he been
contemporary with Plato, (that great back-friend to Poets,) he would not only
have allowed him to live, but advanced him to an office in his Common wealth.

Some Poets, if debarred pro^ess, want oness, and Satyricalness, (that they may
neither abuse God, themselves, nor their neighbors,) have their tongues cut
out in effect. Others only trade in wit at the second hand, being all for
translations, nothing for invention. Our Q^arles was free from the f^ts of the
first, as if he had drank of Jordan in stead o^ Helicon, and slept on mount
Olivet for his Pernassus, and was happy in his own invention. His visible
Poetry (I mean his Emblems) is excellent, ca^ching therein the eye and fancy at
one draught, so that he has out Aleiated therein, in some men's judgment. His
Verses on Job are done to the life, so that the Reader may see his sores, and
through the^ the anguish of his soul.

The troubles of Ireland, where his loss^s were great, forced his return
hither, bearing his crosses with great patience; so tha^ (according to the
advice of Saint Hierome,) Verba vertebat in opera, and practiced the Job he had
described, dying about the year 1643.

JOSEPH MEDE was born in this County, a little east of Bishop-Startford. Men in
^cripture generally are notified by their Fathers, as Johnadab the Son of
Rechab, Simon the Son of Jona. Some few are described by their Sons, as Simon
of Cyren, the Father of Mark 15. 2.
Alexander and Rufus, wherein it is presumed that their Sons were most eminent,
and their Branches not known by the Root, but the Root by the Branches. Such
the case here, where the Parents obscure in themselves, may hereafter be known
for having Joseph Mede to their Son.

He was bred in Christs-colledge in Cambridge, where he attained to great
Learning by his own industry. R. was Shiboleth unto him, which he could not
easily pronounce, so that a set-speech cost him the double pains to another
man, being to fit words as well to his Mouth as his Matter. Yet by his Industry
and Observation, He so conquered his Imperfection, that though in private
discourse, he often smiled out his stammering into silence, yet choosing his
words, he made many an excellent Sermon, without any considerable Hesitation.

The first fruits of his Eminent Studies, was a written Treatise, de sanctitate
Relativa, which he presented to Bishop Andrews, who besteded him with the Kings
favor, when his election into his Fellow-ship met with some opposition. He
afterward became an Excellent Linguist, Curious Mathematician, Exact Text-man;
happy in making Scripture to expound it self by Parallel places. He was
charitable to poor people with his Alms, and to all people with his candid
censure.

Of one who constantly kept his Cell, (so he called his Chamber) none Travailed
oftener and farther over all Christendom. For things past he was a Perfect
Historian; for things present, a Judicious Novilant; and for things to come, a
Prudentiall (not to say Prophetical) Conjecturer.

To his private friends he would often insist on the place of Scripture, Judges
3. 30. and the land had a rest Four score years, which was the longest term of
Peace which he ever observed the Church of God to enjoy, after which many
troubles did ensue. And seeing the same lease of Halcion days was expired in
England since the first of Queen Elizabeth, he grievously suspected some
strange Concussion in Church and State, which came to pass accordingly. I
confess his Memory has suffered much in many men's Judgments, for being so
great a Fauter of the fancifull opinion of the Millenaries. Yet none can deny
but that much is found in the Ancient fathers tending that way. Besides, I dare
boldy say, that the furious Factors for the fifth Monarchy has driven that Nail
which Master Mede did first enter, farther then he ever intended it, and doing
it with such violence, that they split the truths round about it. Thus when
ignorance begins to build on that Foundation, which learning has laid, no
wonder if there be no Uniformity in such a Mungrell Fabric. He died in the
fifty third year of his age Anno Domini 1638. leaving the Main of his Estate to
the College, about the value of 300l. a large sum to Issue out of the purse of
a Scholar.

Benefactors to the Public.
RICHAED BADEW born of a Knightly family at R. Parker in Sceletos
Cantabrigiensis in manuscript.
Great Badew* (commonly called Great Baddow nigh Chelmesford,) was bred in the
University of Cambridge. He so profited in literature, that by general consent
Anno 1326. the Scholars therein chose him their Chancellor; in which year this
Richard purchased two Tenements in Milnestreet, and in their place erected a
small College, by the name of University-hall, wherein Scholars living under a
Principal had their Chambers gratis, (a great favor in that age) though
otherwise maintaining themselves on their own expenses.

Sixteen years after by a sad accident this College was casually burnt down to
the ground, whereupon Doctor Badew with the consent of the University resigned
all his interest therein, into the hands of Elizabeth Countess of Clare, who
fayrely refounded this College as in See Suffolk in the title of Benefactours.
due place here after God willing shall be related.

Since the Reformation.
WALTER MILDMEY Knight, was born at Chelmesford in this County, where he was a
younger Son to Thomas Mildmey Esquire. He was bred in Christs-Colledge in
Cambridge, where he did not (as many young Gentlemen) study only in Complement,
but seriously applied himself to his book.

Under King Henry the eighth and King Edward the sixth, he had a gainful
Office in the Court of Augmentations during the Reign of Queen Mary, he
practiced the politic precept, Been vixit qui been Latuit. No sooner came
Queen Elizabeth to the Crown, but he was called to State-imployment, and it was
not long before he was made Chancellor of the Exchequer.

It is observed, that the Exchequer never fares ill, but under a good Prince;
such who (...) of Conscience will not oppress their people, whilst Tyrants pass
not for what they (...) out of their Subjects.

Indeed Queen Elizabeth was very careful not to have her Coffer swelled with
the Consvmption of her Kingdom, and had Conscientious Officers under Her,
amongst whom Sir (...) was a principal.

This Knight sensible of Gods blessing on his Estate and knowing that, Omne
Beneficium requirit Officium, cast about to make his return to God. He began
with his Be^ to Christ's* College in Cambridge, only to put his hand into
practice, then his bounty embraced the generous resolution (which the painful
piety of St. Paul (...) to himself, viz.) not to build on another man's
foundation, but on his own (...) he (...) a new College in Cambridge by the
name of Emanuel.

A right Godly Gentleman he was, though some of his baek friends suggested to
the Queen, (...) he was a better (...) then Subject, and that he was
over-popular in Parliaments, insomuch, that his life did set Sub nubeculd under
a Cloud of the Royal displeasure. Yet was not the Cloud so great, but that the
beams of his Innocence, (...) those of the (...) (...)* had easily dispelled
it, had he survived longer, as appeared by the great grief the Queen professed
for the loss of so grave a Councelour, who leaving (...)-Sons and three*
Daughters; dyed Anno Dom. 1589.

(...) PETRE, Daughter to Sir William Petre Secretary of State, and Sister to
John Lord Petre was certainly born in this County, but uncertain whether at
(...), (...) or Engerstone, three fair houses in Essex of that wealthy family.
Thus variety of habitations (...) the nativities of great persons doubtful,
whilst we are led with more assurance to the cradles of meaner people.

She was married to Nicholas Wadham of Merrifield in (...)-shire Esquire. We read
of 1 Kings 2. 25.
Ahab* that he sold himself to work wiekedness, whom Jezebel his wife stirred
up: but this worthy man gave himself over to all actions of bounty and charity,
whom, his Wife answering her name ( A gift of God indeed) encouraged therein.
He founded, she finished, both (...) endowed Wadham College in Oxford, by
whose joint bounty it is become as rich as most, more uniform than any College
in England.

THOMAS EDEN D.L. was born in the South-part of Sudberry within this County,
where his Name and Family are continued in a Worshipful degree in Ballington
Hall. He was bred Fellow and then Master of Trinity Hall in Cambridge, a
singular good Advocate, Chancellor of Ely, Commissary of (...) and
Westminster, Professor of Law in GreshamColledge, etc.

But leaving his ability in his own Profession to be praised by others, his
Charity here comes under our Cognizance, who bestowed one thousand pounds on
Trinity Hall, therewith purchasing Lands to maintain Wax Candles in the
Chapel, an Annual Commemoration with a Latin Speech, and other excellent
Benefactions. He dyed Anno ^moni 164. leaving a considerable Estate, and making
Mr. James Bunce Alderman of London his Executor (though an utter stranger unto
him) on this occasion. The Alderman repaired to him for his Advice on a Will
wherein he was Executor, desiring from him the true meaning of a Clause
therein: the Doctor returned that the Passage in Question was equally capable
of two several senses; but tell me (said Mr. (...)) what do you believe in your
Conscience was the very mind of the Testator, being my Resolution to perform it
what ever it cost me. A Speech which stayed with the Doctor after the Speaker
thereof was departed, making such impression in his spirit; that hence he
concluded the Alderman a (...) Person, and deputed him the Executor to his own
Will. I am informed that since the Doctors death, a Match has been made
between their nearest Relations.

Memorable Persons.
MATILDA FITZ* WALTER, by some surnamed The Fair; by others* The Chaste;
(qualities admirable when united) was Daughter to that (...) Knight Sir Robert
Fitz Walter, of Woodham* Fitz* Walter in this County of whom In the title of
Soldiers.
before.

Some would persuade us, that as the Trojan-war was occasioned by Helena in
revenge of her wantonness: so the Barons-war, in the Reign of King John by this
Matilda, in reward of her chastity, which the King in vain did assault; though
surely the same was too private and personal to cause a national engagement;
especially the fact being only attempted, not effected.

The King banishing her father beyond the Seas (in hope by his absence the
(...) to compass his desire) renewed his (...) with more earnestness, and the
same success. For Matilda still answered her Anagram, Tal Maid, both in stature
and (...) of her virtuous resolution; till at last the King, quia noluit
consentire Abstract of the Chron* of Dunm. in Biblioth. Cotton.
toxicavit (...), procuring one to poison her in a poach'd egg; meat which in
the shell may safely be eaten after a (...), out of it, not after a malicious
hand.

I much admire she was not made a Saint, (a dignity in those days conferred on
some of less desert) and conceive she had surely been Sainted (...) (...), and
found the less favor for being no Votarie, but a Virgin at large. She was
murdered 1213. and lies buried betwixt two pillars in the Quire of
Little-Dunmo-Church. I have nothing to add to this story, save to observe that
he who procured her poisoning in her (...), was poisoned in his own drink
afterward.

SIMON LYNCH, Son of William Lynch Gentleman, was born at Groves in the Parish
of (...) in (...), (...). 1562* bred a Student in Queens College in Cambridge,
and afterward Bishop Aylmere his kinsman bestowed on him a small living (then
not worth above 40(...). per (...)) at North Weal nigh Epping (...) this
County, and ^ly said unto him, Play Cousin with this a while, till a better
comes. But Mr. Lynch continued therein (the first and last place of his
Ministry) sixty four years. The Bishop ^terwards (...) him Brent-Wood Weal,
three times better (...) North-(...), to whom Mr. Lynch (to use his own words)
returned this answer, That he (...) the weal of his (...) souls before any
other weal whatsoever. He lived sixty one years in wedlock with Elizabeth eane
his wife. He was an excellent house keeper, (...) yet provided well for his ten
children. He was buried at North-Wale Anno (...). 1656

Lord Mayors.
Name (...) Place Company Time 1 William Edwards William Edwards Hoton Grocer
1471 2 Robert Basset Robert Basset Billenkei Salter 1475 3 John Shaa John Shaa
Rochford Goldsmith 1501 4 Laurence Aylmer (...) (...) (...) Draper 1507 5
William Baily John (...) Thackstead Draper 1524 6 (...) Allen Richard (...)
Thackstead Mercer 1525 7 Richard Martin Thomas Martin Saffron Walden Goldsmith
1593 8 Thomas (...) (...) Skinner Walden Clothworker 1596 9 (...) Dean George
Deane MuchdunMowe Skinner. 1628

The Names of the Gentry of this County Returned by the Commissioners, in the
(...) year of King Henry the sixth 1433.
Ralph Bishop of London or his (...) general, the Bishop being absent beyond
the (...). Commissioners to take the (...) John Earl of Oxford. Henry (...)
Chivaler. Knights for the Shire. John Tyrill Chivaler. Knights for the Shire.

Ioh. Mongom. chiv. Nich. Thorle, chiv. (...). (...), chiv. Edm. Benst. chiv.
Ioh. Fitz-Sim. chiv. Will. Golingh. chiv. Ludov. Ioh. ar. Ioh (...), ar. Rob.
Darey, ar. Tho. (...), ar. Edvar. Torell, ar. Will. (...), ar. Tho. Rolf. Ioh.
Teye, arm. Tho. Knevet, ar. Hen. Langley, ar. Georgii Langham ar. Ricardi Fox,
ar. Ioh. Helyon ar. Tho. Batyll, ar. Tho. Henenyngh. ar. Ioh. Godmanston, ar.
Rob. Hunte, ar. Ioh. Leventhorp, jun. arm. Tho. Barington, ar. Tho. Pynthon,
ar. Tho. Pykenham, ar. Galf. Robell, ar. Hen. Chater^on, ar. Tho. Storkedale,
ar. Will. Senklere, ar. Ioh. Godeston, ar. Rogeri Spyce, ar. Tho. Bendysh, ar.
Hug. Nayllingh. ar. Tho. Rigedon Ricardi Priour Ioh. Green Ioh. Basset Rogeri
Deyncourt Ioh. Poynes Ioh. Santon Ioh Malton Tho. Basset Ioh. Walchif Edm.
Pressed on Rob. Sudbury Ioh. Baryngton W^ll. Ardale Nich. Mortimer Hen. Aleyn
Rob. Weston Ioh. Chamber Tho. Chittern Will. Aleyn Ioh. Beche Rob. Pri^ur
Ballivi Burgi Colcesteri Rich. Beamond Will. Gorge Balivi Burgi de Maldon Rob.
Simond de Hatfield Tho. Hardekyn Tho. Mullyng Ioh. Gale de Farnham Ioh.
Stodehawe Tho. Aldres Egidii Lucas Ioh. Stanford Rob. Wade Tho. Blosme Will.
Ga^ton Rob. Wright de Thurrok. Ioh. Barowe Rob. Brook de Dedham Ioh. Steph^nede
de Elmestede Tho. Andrew Rich. Dykeleygh Will. Cony Ioh. Rouchestre Ioh.
Marlere Rob. de Bury Tho. Stanes Ioh. a Benham de Witham Rich. Jocep Ioh.
Berdefeld Tho. Brentys Tho. Selers Ioh. Boreham Rob. Seburgh Hen. Maldon Ioh.
Caweston Th. Mars. de Dunmow. Ioh. Hereward de Thapstede Ioh. Fill. Will. At
Fan* de eadem Reg. Bienge de eadem Walt. Goodmay Will. Spaldyng Hug. Dorsete
Rich. At More Radul. Bonyngdon Tho. Barete Radul. de Uphavering Ioh. Gobyon
Will. Scargoyll Ioh. Shyunyng Will. Higham Ioh. Rich Ioh. Veyle senioris Ioh.
Hicheman Edm. Botere Ioh. VVestle Will. Admond Ioh. Campion Rich. Sewale
Walt. Tybenham Ioh. Marshant de Peldon Rich. Eylotte Ioh. Baderok Ioh. Wait
de Branketre Ioh. Park de Gestmyngthorp Will. Manwode Hen. Hoberd Rog.
Passelewe Will. At Cherche Will. Reynold Ioh. Sailler Rich. Billingburgh
Allani Bushe Ioh. Wormele Ioh. Glyne Rob. Ferthyng Mart. Stainer Rob. Beterythe
Rob. Smyth de Waltham.
Observations.
Some part of this County lies so near London, that the sound of Bow-bell
(befriended with the wind) may be heard into it. A Bell that ringeth the
Funeral Knell to the ancient Gentry, who are more healthful and longer-liv'd
in Counties at greater distance from the City.

R. Bishop of London being absent beyond the Seas, was Robert Fitzhugh, who
was twice sent Goodwin in his Catalogue of Bishops.
Ambassador into Germany, and once unto the Pope. John Earl of Oxford, was
John de Vere second of that name, and eleventh Earl of Oxford; beheaded
afterward Anno 1462. in the fifth of King Edward the fourth for his Loyalty to
the House of Lancaster.

HENRY BOURCHIER]

Here additioned Chivaler, appears by all proportion of time and place the self
same person, who married Elizabeth sister to ^ichard Plantaganet Duke of York,
and who by his Nephew King Edward the fourth was created Earl of Essex* He dyed
an aged person 1483* I conceive that his Father William Lord Bourchier (Earl of
Ewe in Normandy) was living when this Henry Bourchier was chosen Knight for the
shire; a place usually conferred on the Eldest Sons of Peers, in the lifetime
of their Fathers.

JOHN TE^RYLL Chivaler]

Was chief of that family, rich andnumerous in this County, of exemplary note
and principal regard. Great Thorndon was the place of their sepulture, where
their Monuments to the Church, both ruinous. This name (if still alive) lies
gasping in this County, but continuing health^ull in Buchingham shire.

JOHN MOUNTGOMERY, Chivaler.]

I find him Supervisor to the Will of Sir Robert Darcy, Anno 1469. and conceive
that Surname since utterly extinct.

MAURICE BRUYN, Chivaler.]

He had his seat at South-Okenton. From the two heirs general of this family
often married, Charles Branden Duke of Suffolk, the Tirells, Berners,
Harlestons, Heveninghams, and others are descended. A branch of the Heir-male
removed into Hant-shire, since into Dorset-shire, where they subsist in a right
Worshipful equipage.

WILLIAM GOLDINGHAM, Chivaler.]

Though the great tree be blasted, a small sprig thereof still sprouteth in
this County.

JOHN DOREWARD, Esquire.]

He lived at Bocking-Doreward, in this County, and was Patron of the rich
Parsonage therein, which no ingenious person will envy to the worthy Incumbent
Doctor John Gauden. This John Doreward lies buried in the Church with this
inscription,

Hic jacet Johannes Doreward Armiger, qui obiit xxx. die Januar. Anno Domini
Mil. cccc. lxv. and Blancha uxor ejus quae obiit... die Men's... Anno Dom. Mil.
cccc. lx. quorum animabus propitietur Deus, Amen. Claviger Aethereus nobis sit
janitor almus. ROBERT DARCY, Ar.]

An ancient name in this County, having Danbury (whilst living) for their
residence; and the Church in Maldon (when dead) for their Sepulture, where
there be many of their shamefully defaced Monuments.

This Robert Darcy afterward Knighted, by his Will made the fifth of October
1469. bequeathed his body to be buried in Alhallows-church in Maldon before the
Alter, where his father lied in a Tomb of Marble. He willed that forty marks
should be disposed for Two thousand Masses (four p^nce a Mass) to be said for
his soul, an^ the souls of his Relations, within six weeks after his discease;
willing also that every Priest in Pembroke-Hall in Cambridge, should have a
share of that money, etc. He made Elizabeth his Wife, and others his Executors:
the Earl of Essex, the Lord Dinham, Thomas Mountgomery, Thomas Terryll,
supervisors of his Will, beseeching them to help his Son Thomas and all his
children. He willed the Earl of Essex and the Lord Dinham should have a Butt of
Malmsy, Sir Thomas Mountgomery and Sir Thomas Terryll a Pipe of Red wine for
their pains. Thomas Darcy his son, Esquire of the body to King Henry the sixth
and Edward the fourth, married Margaret, one of the D^ughters and Heirs of John
Harelton of Suffolk, Esquire. He dyed 25. of September 1485. as appears by his
Epitaph on his Tomb in the Church aforesaid.

HENRY LANGLEY, Esquire.]

He lived at Langley-Wilebores in the Parish of Rickling, in the Church whereof
he lies buried with this Inscription,

Hic jacet Henricus Langley, Armiger, qui obiit xx. September. M. cccc. lviii.
and Margareta uxor ejus una filiarum, and Haredum Johannis Waldene, Armiger.
quae obiit v. Martii M. cccc. liii. There is in the same Church a Monument for
his Son, the more remarkable, because the last of his Family.

Here lies Henry Langley, Esquire. and dame Catherine his wife, which Henry
departed this life, ii. April M. cccc. lxxxviii. and Dame Katherine died....
the year of our Lord God M...... It is not usual for the wife of an Esquire. to be
styled Dame, except she was daughter to an Earl, or Relict to a Knight. This
H^nry left three daughters, (portracted on his Marble Tomb) betwixt whom his
Inheritance was divided.

THOMAS HENENINGHAM,]

His family flourishes in Norfolk.

JOHANNES LEVENTHORP, Jun. Ar.]

His posterity flourishes in Hertford-shire.

THOMAS BARYNGTON, Ar.]

He lived at Barington-hall in the Parish of Hatfield-Brad-Oake, and lies
buried in the Church with this Inscription.

Hic jacent Thomas Barington, Armig. and Anna uxor ejus, qui quidem Thomas
obiit v. Aprilis M. cccc. lxxii. and Anna proximo die sequenti, quorum Animabus
propitietur Altissimus. See here a sympathizing wife, dying the next day after
her husband, of whom it may be said,

He first deceas*d, ^he for few hours tried
To live without him, liked it not, and died.
The family is of signal nativity, enriched with large possessions in the
reign of King Stephen, by the Barons of Montfitchet; and since received an
accession of honor and estate, by marrying with Winifred, daughter and coheir
of Henry Pole Lord Montague, son of Margaret Plantagenet Countess of Salisbury,
descended of the blood Royal. At this day there is a Baronet thereof, with
other branches of good account.

THOMAS BENDYSH, Ar.]

Bomsted in this County was and is the habitation of his Family.

EGIDIUS LUCAS.]

The name is honorable at this day, and has a seat with fair possessions near
Colchester, but how related to this Giles, I know not. Sure I am, that it
appears on a window, in the North-side of the Church of Saxham-parva in
Suffolk, that Anno Domini 1428. ( five years before this return of Gentry) one
Thomas Lucas (kneeling there with his wife in their Coat-Armours) was Servant,
Secretary and one of the Council, to Jasper Duke of Bedford and Earl of
Pembroke.

THOMAS BARRET,]

Was an Esquire of signal note, and the ensuing nameless Exemplefied in
Weavers Funeral Monuments pa. 417.
Manuscript will acquaint us with the Time of his death,

Thomas Barryt Squ^r to King Harry the sixth, oftentimes employed in the French
wars, under the command of John Du^ of Bedford; as also John Duc of Norfolk,
being always true liege man to his Sovereign Lord the King; having taken
Sanctuary at Westminstre to shon the fury of his and the Kings enemies, was
from these hayled forth, and lamentably hewyn a pieces, about whilke tym or a
lityl before, the Lord Skales late in an evening entrying a Wherry Bolt with
three persons, and rawghing toowards Westminstre, there likewise too have taken
Sanctuary, was discride by a woman, where anon, the wherry man fell on him,
murdered him, and cast his mangled corpse alond by Saint Marie Overys. As for
the date of his death, we may learn it out of his Epitaph on his Tomb in the
Church of Saint Martins in the fields London.

Hic jacet Thomas Barret prenobilis Armiger, qui quidem Thomas erat abstractus
de sanctuario Beati Petri Westmonasterii, and crudeliter Interfectus per manus
Impiorum contra Leges Anglie, and totius universalis Ecclesie privilegia and
jura, Anno Domini 1461. and Anno Illustrissimi Regis Edward. quarti post
conquestum primo. Sub eod^m quoque marmoreo Lapide Johannes Barret ejusdem
Thome primogenitus sepelitur, qui quidem Johannes obiit..... die..... Anno....
This family of the Barrets received much wealth by the daughter and heir of
Bell house, of Bellhouse (an ancient and fair seat in the Parish of Avely in
this County) and some few years since determined in Sir Edward Barret Knight,
Lord Baron of Newburg in Scotland, Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, A
Hospital housekeeper, and founder of an Almes-house in Avely aforesaid. He
adopted Lennard Esquire (son to the Lord Dacres by the daughter of the Lord
North,) heir to his estate, on condition he should assume the Surname of Barret.

Sheriffs of Essex and Her^ford shire.
HEN. II.
Anno 1 Rich. Basset and Albericus de Verr. Anno 2 Rich. de Lucy. Anno 3
Mauricus Anno 4 Anno 5 Mauricus de Tireter, for 5 years. Anno 10 Tullus-Bovilla
Anno 11 Nich. Decanus, for 4 years. Anno 15 Nich. Decanus and Steph. de Bell.
Campo dimid. Anno Anno 16 Rob. Mantellus, for 12 years. Anno 28 Oto. filius
Willielm. for 6 years.
RICH. I.
Anno 1 Oto. filius Willielm. Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Galf. filius Petri Anno 4
Galf. filius Petri and Rich. Heriett Anno 5 Anno 6 Galf. filius Petri and
Simon. Pateshalla Anno 7 Will. de Long. Campo. Canc. Dom. Regis Anno 8
Reginall. de Argento. Anno 9 Regind. de Argent* and Hug. de Nevil. and Hum. de
Barton. Anno 10 Hugo de Nevill and Johan. de Nevill
JOHAN. REX.
Anno 1 Hugo. de Nevill and Johan. de Nevill Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Rich. de
Montfitchet and Ioh. de Cornheard Anno 4 Rich. de Montfitchet Anno 5 Rich. de
Montfitchet and Ioh. de Cornheard Anno 6 Math. Mantell Com. for 4 years. Anno
10 Ioh. Mantell Anno 11 Albic. Willielm* filius Fulconis Anno 11 Comes.
Albericus and Idem Willielm. for 4 years. Anno 16 Math. Mantell and Galf.
Roinges Anno 17 Rob. Mantell fr. and H. Matheus Mantell
HEN. III.
Anno 1 Anno 2 Will. Marescallus and Ioh. de Cornerd Anno 3 Walt. de Udon Anno
4 Rob. Mantell Anno 5 Steph. de Segne and Ra^. filius Reginal. Anno 6 Idem.
Anno 7 Steph. de Segne and Petr. de S^o Edward. Anno 8 Rich. de Argentoem* and
Will. de Culcword, for 9 years. Anno 17 Rob. de Walsh Anno 18 Will. de
Hollewell Anno 19 Will. de Coleworth Anno 20 Petr. de Tany for 4 years. Anno 24
Bartr. de Crioll Anno 25 Ioh. de Walton Anno 26 Idem. Anno 27 Rich. de
Munfitchet, for 4 years. Anno 31 Will. filius Regind. for 4 years. Anno 35
Rich. de Whitsand Anno 36 Hen. de Helegton Anno 37 Anno 38 Idem. Anno 39 Rad.
de Ardene Anno 40 Idem. Anno 41 Tho. de Cameden Anno 42 Hub. de Monte Came. Anno
43 Idem. Anno 44 Rich. de Taney Anno 45 Rich. de Taney and Math. de la Mare
Anno 46 Math. de la Mare Anno 47 ^dem. Anno 48 Idem. Anno 49 Nich. le
Epigornell Anno 50 Nich. de Sathrich Anno 51 Idem. Anno 52 Idem. Anno 53 Ioh.
de Kammell and Walt* de Essex. Anno 54 Will. de Blunvill Anno 55 Idem. Anno 56
Walt. de Essex
EDW. I.
Anno 1 Walt. de Essex Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Tho. de Sandivic. Anno 4 Laur. de
Scio Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Idem. Anno 7 Will. de San. Caro Anno 8 Regin. de
Ginges for ^ years. Anno 13 Idem and Will. de Lamburne Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15
Hugo. de Blound Anno 16 Idem. Anno 17 Rad. de (...) Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Hen.
Grap^ill Anno 20 Idem. Anno 21 Will. le Gross Anno 22 Will. de Su^ton Anno 23
Idem. Anno 24 Idem. Anno 25 Simon. de Bradenham Anno 26 Idem. Anno 27 Idem.
Anno 28 Ioh. de Le Anno 29 Idem. Anno 30 Will. de Harpden Anno 31 Ioh. de
Bassenburne Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Ioh. de la Le Anno 34 Idem. Anno 35 Ioh. de
Harpessend
EDW. II.
Anno 1 Walt. de Bauds Anno 2 Alanus de Goldingham Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Gafr. de
la Le, and Ioh. de la Hay Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Ioh. Aignell Anno 7 Ioh. Ward de
Hoo Anno 8 Rich. Perers, for 4 years. Anno 12 Johan. de Vouret and Rad. Giffard
Anno 13 Idem. Anno 14 Nich Engayn Anno 15 Idem. Anno 16 Adam. Frances Anno 17
Tho. Gobium Anno 18 Rich. de Perers Anno 19 Idem.
EDW. III.
Anno 1 Rich. Perers Anno 2 Will. Baud Anno 3 Rich. de Perers. Anno 4 Idem.
Anno 5 Ioh. de Wanton Anno 6 Ioh. de la Hay and Ioh. de Wanton Anno 7 Ioh. de
la Hay and Adam de Bloy Anno 8 Will. Baud and Adam Bloy Anno 9 Ioh. de
Coggeshall, for 5 years. Anno 14 Idem, and Will. de Wanton Anno 15 Will. At
Moore Anno 16 Hen. Gernet Anno 17 Idem. Anno 18 Ioh. de Cogeshall Anno 19 Idem.
Anno 20 Ioh. de Cogeshall, for 4 years. Anno 24 Pet. de Boxstede Anno 25 Tho.
Lacy Anno 26 Ioh. de Cogeshall Anno 27 Idem. Anno 28 Idem. Anno 29 Hugo. Fitz
Simond Anno 30 Will. de Enefeld Anno 31 Tho. de Chabham Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33
Roger. le Louth Anno 34 Idem. Anno 35 Hugo. Blount Anno 36 Will. de Leyre Anno
37 Guido. de Boys Anno 38 Tho. Fittling Anno 39 Ioh. Iernoun Anno 40 Tho. de
Helpeston Anno 41 Ioh. Oliver Anno 42 Tho. Chardlowe Anno 43 Ioh. Heuxteworth
Anno 44 Idem. Anno 45 Tho. Basingborn Anno 46 Will. Baud Anno 47 Ioh. de
Broumpton Anno 48 Ioh. Filiol Anno 49 Edw. Fitz Simond Anno 50 Ioh. Battle
Anno 51 Rob. Fitz Williams
Richard I.
7 WILL. de LONGO CAMPO CANCELLARIUS DOMINI REGIS.]

This is that insolent Bishop of Ely, our Chroniclers having so much anger at
his pride, and no pity at his downfall. He seems a Riddle to me, who was
LordChancellour of England, (a Norman by birth) and could not speak a word of
Godwin in Ep Elien. Anglicanae linguae omninoignarus.
English. It seems Chancery-suits in that age were penned and pleaded in French.

King John.
1 HUGO. de NEVIL, and JOHAN. de NEVIL.]

Hugh was he who attended King Richard the first, and slew a Lion in the
Holyland; a great Benefactour to Waltham-Abby, in which Church, he was Mat.
Paris Anno (...).
buried. John was his son, to whom Mat. Ad Annum 1245.
Paris gives this testimony, Non ultimus inter Angliae nobiles patris sui
pedetentim seque^s vestigia. These worthy persons in my Ecclesiastical History
I mistook for the Ancestors of (who were but the allies to) the honorable
family of the Nevills, being since informed, that the issue-male of this Hugh
and John is long since extinct.

Edward II.
1 WALTER de BAUD.]

This ill-sounding-surname, is both ancient and honorable. Verst^gan in names
of Contemp.
Some do deduce it from Baden a Marquisate in Germany, and most sure it is,
that they here have flourished 12. Generations, as follows.

1. Sir Weavers Fun Mon. page 602.
Simon Baud or Bauld Knight, died in the Holy Land, 1174. 2. Sir Nicholas Baud
Knight, died in Gallicia in Spain, 1189. 3. Sir Walter Baud Knight, died at
Coringham (in this County,) 1216. 4. Sir William Baud Knight, died at
Coringham, 1270. 5. Sir Walter de Baud Sheriff this year, died at Coringham,
1310. 6. Sir William de Baud died at Coringham, 1343. 7. Sir John de Baud
Knight, died in Gascoigne 1346. 8. Sir William de Baud Knight, died at
Hadham-parva, 1375. thrice Sheriff under King Edward the third. 9. Thomas Baud,
(the first Esquire. of his line) died at Hadham aforesaid 1420. 10 Thomas Baud, the
second Esquire. died at Hadham, 1449. he was Sheriff in the 25. of King Henry the
sixth. 11. Sir Thomas Baud Knight, died in London, 1500. 12. John Baud Esquire.
died at Coringham, 1550.
The Bauds held land in this County, of the Dean and Chapter of Saint Paul's, by
paying a Fee-Buck and Do in their seasons. They were brought (alive, as I take
it) in Procession to the High-altar in the Church, where the Dean and Chapter
met them, apparalled in Copes (embroydered with Bucks and Does, the gift of the
Bauds to their Church) with garlands of Roses on their heads, and then the
Keeper who brought them Stows Survey of London in Faringdonward.
blowed their deaths, which was answered by the Company of Horners in London,
resounding the same. Other ceremonies were used better befitting their Mouths,
who cried out Acts 19. 28.
Great is Diana of the Ephesians, then the Ministers of the Gospel. Some
seemed to excuse it as done in commemoration of the property of that place
Camdens Brit. in Middlesex.
altered to a Christian-church, from a Temple of Diana. I suspect the Bauds
extinct in Essex, and understand them extant in Northamton-shire.

Sheriffs of Essex and Hertford-shire.
Name Place Arms RICH. II. Anno 1 Rob. Goldington Argent, 2 Lions passant
Azure. 2 Ioh. Fitz-Simonds Argent, 3 Escoucheons Gules. 3 Edw. Bensted 4 Ioh.
Seawale S. a Cheveron betwixt 3 Gaddbees Argent. 5 Will. Godmanston 6 Galf. de
Dersham 7 Tho. Battle G. a Griffon Sergriant within a border engrailed Or. 8
Ioh. Walton Argent, a flower de luce G. 9 Galf. Brockhole 10 Ioh. Rigwin 11
Idem. 12 Hen. English 13 Walt. at Lee 14 Galf. Michell 15 Will. Cogeshall, m.
Cogshal Arg. a Cross between 4 Escalops Sable. 16 Adam. Frances 17 Tho.
Cogeshall ut prius 18 Tho. Sampkin 19 Will Bateman Sab. 3 Lions Dormant Argent.
20 Idem. ut prius 21 Idem. ut prius 22 Idem. ut prius HEN. IV. Anno 1 Edw.
Bensted 2 Ioh. Heward, and Will. Marvy 3 Helmingus Legett Ermine, a Lion ramp.
Gules. 4 Tho. Swinborn Gul. 3 boars-heads couped and Crusyle of Crosses Argent.
5 Idem. ut prius 6 Edw. Bensted 7 Gerar, Braibrooke (...). 6 Mascells
conjoined, 3, 2. and 1. Gules. 8 Elming. Legett ut prius 9 Will. Loveney 10
Ioh. Walden 11 Tho. Aston Per Fess Arg. and Sa. in Fess 2 flower de luces,
lying each to other betw. 3 Mullets counterchanged. 12 Will. Cogeshall ut prius
HEN. V. Anno 1 Ioh. Tirrel Heron Arg. 2 Cheverons Az. within a border engrailed
G, 2 Ioh. Hayward, mil. 3 Tho. Bar, mil. 4 Lodow. Johan. 5 Regin. Malyns 6
Ioh. Haward, mil. 7 Rob. Darcy Danbury Argent, 3 Cinquefoiles Gules 8 Lodov
Joh^n. s9 Idem, and Will. Loveny HEN. VI. Anno 1 Ioh. Tirrell ut prius 2 Maur.
Bruyn, mil: S. Okento^ Azure, a Cross Molin^ Or. 3 Ioh. Barley Ermine, 3 Bars
wavey Sable. 4 Ioh. Doreward Bocking 5 Conandus Ask 6 Tho. Tirrell ut prius 7
Ioh. Hotoft 8 Nich. Rikhull 9 Hen. Langley Rickling 10 Nich. Thorley, mil. 11
Ioh. Durward 12 Rob. Whittington 13 Galf. Rokhill 14 Maur. Bruyn, mil. ut prius
15 Edw. Tirrell ut prius 16 Rich. Alread 17 Rob. Whittington 18 Rich.
Whitherton 19 Ioh. Tirrell ut prius 20 Rad. Astley ^1 Nich Morley Arg. a Lion
ramp. S. Crowned 'Or. 22 Ioh. Hende 23 Tho. Tirrell ut prius 24 Tho. Pigot 25
Tho. Baud Coringham Gules, 3 Cheverons Argent. 26 Ioh. Hende, jun. 27 Geo.
Langham Arg. a Fess G. and a Label of 3 points Az. 28 Galf. Rockhill 29 Phil.
Bottiller Wood-hall Gu. a Fess compone A^g. and S. betwixt 6 Crosses croslets
O^, 30 Tho. Barington, ar. Barringto^-h. Arg. 3 Cheverons Gul. a Label of 3
points Azure. 31 Ioh. Godmanston 32 Tho. Cobham, mil. 33 Hum. Bahun 34 Rich.
Both 35 Ioh. H^nde, jun. 36 Lodovi. Jo^n 37 Rad. Darcy ut prius 38 Tho.
Tirrell, mil. ut prius EDW. IV. Anno 1 Tho. Ju^ 2 Tho. Langley, ar. 3 Idem. 4
Ioh. Clay, mil. 5 Rog. Ree, ar. 6 La^. Rainford, mil. 7 Hen. Barley, ar. ut
prius 8 Will. Firlon, mil. 9 Walt. Writell, ar. 10 Rad Bamde, ar. 11 Walt.
Writell, ar. 12 Rog. Ree, mil. 13 Alur. Cornbrugh, ar. 14 Ioh. Sturgion, ar. 15
Rich. Hant, ar. 16 Hen. Langley, ar. 17 Will. Green, ar. Arg. a Cross ingrailed
Gules. 18 Alur. Cornburgh 19 Ioh. Wode 20 Ioh. Sturgion 21 Tho. Tirrell ut
prius 22 Ioh. Fortescu, ar. Azu. a Bend Engrailed Argent Cotissed Or. RICH.
III. Anno 1 Will. Say Quarterly Or and Gules. 2 Ioh. Sturgeon 3 Rob. Percy,
mil. and Ioh. Fo^telcu, mil. ut prius HEN. VII. Anno 1 Ioh. Fortescu, mil. ut
prius 2 Hen. Marny, ar. Gul. a Lion ramp. gardant Arg. 3 Will Pirton, mil.
Ermine. on a Cheveron ingrailed Az. 3 Leopards-heads Or. 4 Hen. Teye, ar. Arg.
a Fess betw. 3 Mar^ets in Chief, and a Chev. in base Az. 5 Ioh Bottiler, ar. ut
prius 6 Rob. Turbervile DORSE. Ermin a Lion ramp. G. Crow^d Or. 7 Ioh.
Berdefeild, ar. 8 Hen. Marny ut prius 9 Rich. Fitz-Lewis, m. Thorndo^ E. Sab. a
Cheveron betwixt 3 Trefoiles Arg. 10 Rob Plummer 11 Will. Pulter Hitching
Argent, a Bend voided Sable. 12 Rob. Newport, ar. Petha^Furnis 13 Tho. Perient,
ar. Diggswell Gules, 3 Cre^sents Argent. 14 Ioh. Verney, mil. Az. on a Cross
Arg. 5 Mullets G. 15 Rog. Wentworth, m. Sa. a Chev. betwixt 3 Leopardsheads Or.
16 Hen. Teye, mil. ut prius 17 Will. Pirton, ar. ut prius 18 Hum. Torrell, ar.
G. 3 Bulls-heads Couped Or. 19 Will. Skipwith, ar. LINCO. Arg. 3 Bars G. in
Chief a Greyhound cursant S. 20 Idem. ut prius 21 Rob. Darcy, ar. ut prius 22
Ioh. Broket, ar. Brocket-ha. Or, a Cross Patonce Sable. 23 Idem. ut prius 24
Hum. Torell, ar. ut prius HEN. VIII. Anno 1 Ioh. Levinthorpe, ar. Arg. a bend
Gobonated G. and S. betw. 2 Cotisses of the second. 2 Will. Litton, ar.
Kebworth Ermin, on a chief indented Az. 3 crowns Ducal Or. 3 Anth. Darcy, ar.
ut prius 4 Edw. Tirrell, ar. ut prius 5 Ioh. Seintler, ar. 6 Will.
Fitz-Williams Lozeng^, Argent and Gules. 7 Ioh Veer, ar. Quarterly G. and Or in
the first a Mullet Argent. 8 Wist. Brown, mil. 9 Tho Tirrell, mil. ut prius 10
Ioh Cut, mil. Arg. on a Bend ingrailed Sa. 3 plates. 11 Ioh. Veer, mil. ut
prius 12 Tho. Bonham, ar. 13 Tho. Teye, mil. ut prius 14 Ioh. Christmas, ar. 15
Hen. Barley, ar. ut prius 16 Ioh. Veer, mil. ut prius 17 Tho Leventhorp, ar. ut
prius 18 Tho. Bonham, ar. 19 Edw. Tirrell, ar. ut prius 20 Egid. Capell, mil.
Hadham G. a Lion ramp. betwixt 3 Crosses Botonie Fitchie Or. 21 Ioh. Bollis,
ar. Wallingto^h. Arg. on a Cheveron betwixt 3 Boars-heads Cooped S. as many
Scallops Or, within a Border Vert B^antee. 22 Ioh. Broket, ar. ut prius 23 Ioh.
Smith, ar. 24 Phil. Butler, mil. ut prius 25 Bri. Tuke, mil. Partee per Fess
indented Az. and G. 3 Lions Passant in Pale Or. 26 Will. West. mil. 27 Tho.
Perient, sen. ar. ut prius 28 Hen. Parker, mil. Arg. a Lion Passant G. between
2 Bars S. ther^n 3 Besants, in ^hief as many Bucks-heads cabosed of the third.
29 Ioh. Rainsford, m. 30 Ioh. Smith, ar. 31 Phil. Butler, mil. ut prius 32 Ioh.
Mordant, mil. BED. SH. Arg. a Cheveron inter 3 Estoiles Sable. 33 Rad. Rowlet,
ar. St. Albansh. 34 Ioh. Bowls, and Ioh. Sewstes ut prius 35 Ioh. Wentwarth,
ar. ut prius 36 Anth. Cook, ar. Gidy-hall. E. Or. a Cheveron Chekee Gu. and Az.
betwixt 3 Cinque-foiles of the last. 37 Rob. Litton, ar. ut prius 38 Ioh.
Coningsby and * South mim. Edr. Broket ut prius * G. 3 Conies Seiant within a
Border ingrailed Argent. EDW. VI. Anno 1 Edw. Broket, ar. ut prius 2 Ioh. Cook,
ar. ut prius 3 Ioh. Gates, mil. High Easter 4 Geor. Norton, mil. 5 Hen.
Tirrell, mil. ut prius 6 Tho. Pope, mil. Partee per Pale Or and Az. on a
Cheveron between 3 Griffinsheads Erazed, 4 flower de luces all Counter-changed.
PHIL. and MAR. Anno 1 Ioh. Wentworth, m. ut prius 2 Edw. Broket, ar. ut prius 3
Will. Harris, ar. and Tho. Sylesden, ar. Or, on a bend Az. 3 Cinquefoils of the
field. 4 Ioh. Botler, mil. ut prius 5 Tho. Pope, mil. ut prius 6 Tho. Mildmay,
ar. Chelmesford Argent, 3 Lions rampant Az. ELIZ. REG. Anno 1 Rad. Rowlet, mil.
2 Edw. Capell, mil. ut prius 3 Tho. Golding, mil. Gul. a cheveron Or enter 3
Besants. 4 Tho. Barington, ar. ut prius 5 Hen. Fortescu, ar. ut prius 6 Will.
Ayliffe, ar. Sab. a Lion ramp. Or. Coller'd Gul. between 4 Crosses Patee o^ the
second. 7 Rob. Chisler, ar. 8 Ioh. Buket, ar.

Sheriffs of this Shire alone.
Name Place Arms ELIZ. REG. 9 Geor. Tuke, esquire. ut prius 10 Tho. Lucas, esquire.
Colchester Arg. a Fess betwixt 6 Annulets Gules. 11 Tho. Golding, kni. ut prius
12 Iam. Altham, esquire. Mark-hall 13 Edw. Barret, esquire. Bel-house 14 Tho. Mildmay,
kni ut prius 15 Arth. Harris, esquire. ut prius 16 Edw. Pirton, esquire. ut prius 17
Ioh. Peter, kni. Writtle Gul. a Bend between 2 Escalops Argent. 18 Wistan.
Brown, esquire. 19 Gab. Pointz, esquire. Barry of eight Or and Gules. 20 Edw.
Huddleston, es. CAMBR. Gules, Frettee Argent. 21 Hen. Capell, esquire. ut prius 22
Tho. Barington, kn. ut prius and Tho. Darcy, esquire. ut prius 23 Ioh. Wentworth ut
prius 24 Thomas Tay, esquire. ut prius 25 Tho. Lucas, kni. ut prius 26 Hen.
Apleton, esquire. Arg. a Fess ingrailed betwixt 3 Apples G. sliped V^rt. 27 Bria.
Darcy, esquire. ut prius 28 Arth. Harris, esquire. ut prius 29 Rob. Wroth, esquire.
Loughton Arg. on a Bend Sa. 3 Leopardsheads erased of the first, crowned Or. 30
Edm. Hudleston, k. ut prius 31 Gabr. Poyns, esquire. ut prius 32 Rad. Wiseman, esquire.
S. a Cheveron Ermine betwixt 3 Cronells of spears Arg. 33 Ric. Warren, esquire. 34
Ioh. Wentworth, es. ut prius 35 Hum. Mildmay, esquire. ut prius 36 Will. Ayloffe,
esquire. Braxted Ut prius. 37 Edw. Saliard, esquire. 38 Geo. Harvey, esquire. 39 Tho.
Mildmay, esquire ut prius 40 Will. Harris, esquire. ut prius 41 Ier. Weston, esquire. Or,
an Eagle displayed Sab. the Head regardant. 42 Tho. Meade, kni. Gu. a Cheveron
Ermine betwixt 3 Trefoiles Arg. 43 Hen. Smith, esquire. 44 Rich. Frank, esquire. 45
Hen. Maynard, kni. and 1. Iac. Easton Arg. a Cheveron Az. betwizt 3 Hands
Gules. JAC. REX. Anno 1 Hen. Maynard, kni. ut prius 2 Tho. Rawlins, esquire. S. 3
swords Barrways blads Ar. hilts Or. 3 Ioh. Sammes, kni. * 4 Gam. Capel, kni. ut
prius * Or a Lion ramp. S. vulnerated in the mouth. 5 Hen. Maxey, kni 6 Rog.
Aple^on. esquire. ut prius Gu. a Fess betwixt 3 Talbotsheads erased Arg. 7 Tho.
Mildmay, kni. ut prius 8 Ioh. Dean, kni. Sable, a Fess Ermine betwixt 3
Chaplets Arg. 9 Tho. Wiseman, kni. ut prius 10 Hen. Leigh, kni. 11 To. Worth,
Mort. and Edrus. Elrington, es.* ut prius * Ar. a fess D^uncette S. (...)
between 5 Cornish-choughs 3 above 2 below. 12 Har. G^imston, kn. Bradfield 13
Will. Smith, esquire. Arg. on a Fess S. 3 Spur-rowels Or. 14 Tho. Lucas, esquire. ut
prius 15 Pau. Bayning, k and b. Bentley 16 Tho. Bendish, bar. Bumsted Arg. a
Chev. betwixt 3 Ramsheads ^rased Azure. 17 Will. Smith, kni. 18 Will. Pert,
esquire. Arg. on a Bend Azu. 3 Mascalls Or. 19 Ste. Soame, kni. 20 Tho. ^ourney,
kni. 21 Caro. Prat, esquire. 2^ Edr. B^telar, esquire. ut prius CHAR. REX. Anno 1 Arth.
Harris, kni. ut prius 2 Hug. Everard, esquire Much-walt. Ar^. a Fess (...) betw. 3
Sta^ G. 3 Tho. Nightingale, ^. Newport-p. Ermine, a Rose Gules. 4 Hen. Mildmay,
kni. Graces Ut prius. 5 Edr. Allen, bar. Hat^eld Pri. Sab. a Cross potent Or. 6
Tho. Bendish, bar. Ut prius. 7 Ioh Me^de, kni. ut prius 8 Hen Smith, esquire. 9
Ric. Saltonstall, kn. Woodham-Mortimere 10 Cran. Harris, kni. Ut prius. 11 Hum.
Mildmay, kni. Danbury Ut prius. 12 Ioh. Lucas, esquire. ut prius 13 Will. Lucking,
bar. Waltham Sable a Fess indented betwixt 2 Leopards-heads Or. 14 Will.
Wiseman, bar. Canfield-h. Ut prius. 15 Marl. Lumley, esquire. Bardfield m. 16 Rob.
Luckin, esquire. ut prius 17 Rob. Smith, esquire. 18 19 Tim. Middleton, esquire 20 Rich.
Everard, bar. ut prius 21 Ric. Harlakenden, e. Azure a Fess Ermine betwixt 3
Lions-heads reased Or. Az. on a Fess Or. a Lion passant G. in Chief 3 Bezantis.
22 Ioh. Pyot, esquire.

Henry VI.
29 PHILIP BOTTILLER.]

He was son to Sir Philip Bottiller Knight, who lies buried in Walton-church
in Hertfordshire, with the following inscription,

Hic jacet corpus Domini Philippi Butler militis, quondam Domini de Woodhall,
and hujus Ecclesie Patroni, qui obiit in Festo Sancti Leonardi, Anno Domini M.
cccc. xxi. and Regis Henrici quinti post conquestum ultimo. Cujus anime
propitietur Deus, Amen. These Butlers are branched from Sir Ralph Butler Baron
of Wem in Shropshire, and his wife heir to William Pantulfe, Lord of Wem, soon
after the entry of the Normans; and still flourish in deserved esteem, at
Wood-hall in Hertford-^hire.

Henry VII.
2 HENRY MARNY, Ar.]

Till disproved with clear evidence to the contrary, this Henry Marny Esquire,
shall pass with me for him who was then Servant, afterward Executor to the
Kings Mother, the Lady Margaret Countess of Richmond. The very same, who
afterward was Knighted, made Chancellor of the Duchy, and Created Lord Marny
by King Henry the eighth, and whose daughter and sole heir Elizabeth, was with
a fair inheritance married to Thomas Howard Viscount Bindon.

14 JOHN CHRISTMAS, Ar.]

Such will not wonder at his Surname, who have read the Romans cognominated
Ja^arius, Aprilis, etc. Yea, Festus Acts 24. 27.
himself is well known in Scripture, probably so called from being born on some
solemn festival, the occasion, no doubt, of this Sheriffs Surname at the first.

If the name be extinct in Essex, it remains in other Counties, and the City
of London, where...... Christmas Esquire (a great promoter of my former and
present endeavors) must not by me be forgotten.

Henry VIII.
6 WILLIAM FITZ-WILLIAMS, Ar.]

I cannot exactly design his habitation, but conceive it not far from Waltham
Abbey, in the South west part of this County; because, he bequeathed Stows
Survey of London page 90.
50. pounds to mend the Highways, betwixt Chigwell and Copers-hall. He was
afterward Knighted by King Henry the eighth, on a worthy occasion, whereof
hereafter, in his Sheriffalty of Northhampton-shire in the 15. of King Henry
the eight. He bequeathed 100. pounds to poor Maids Marriages, 40. pounds, to
the University, etc. and delivering a Catalogue of his Debtors into the hands
of his Executors, he freely forgave all those, over whose names he had written
Idem Ibidem.
Amore Dei remitto.

25 BRIAN TUKE, Knight.]

He was Treasurer of the Chamber to King Henry the eight, (as appears by his
Epitaph) and dying Anno 1536. lies buried with Dame Grissel his wife
(deceasing two years after him) under a fair Tomb in the North Isle of the
Quire of Saint Margarets in Lothbury, London. Lealand gives him this large
commendation, that he was Anglicae linguae eloquentia mirificus. In his book
entitled, Scriptores nostri tempores.
Bale says, that he wrote observations on Chaucer; as also against Polidore
Virgill, for injuring the English, of whom then still alive, he justly and
generously demanded reparations, though since his unresponsable memory can make
us no satisfaction.

Edward VI.
3 Sir JOHN GATES.]

He was descended from Sir Geffry Gates Knight, who, as appears by his Epitaph
in the Church of High-Eastern, bought the Manor of Garnets in that parish of
one Koppenden, Gentleman. This Sir Geffry was six years captain of the Isle of
Wight, and Marshall of Callis, and there kept with the Pikards worschipfull
Warrys: (Reader it is the Language of his Epitaph) And died Anno Dom. 1477.

As for this Sir John Gates Knight, descendant from the said Sir Jeffry, he is
heavily charged with Sacrilege in our Histories, and engaging with John Dudley
Duke of Northumberland in the Title of Queen Jane, he was beheaded the 22. of
August the first of Queen Mary 1553.

Queen Elizabeth.
1 RALPH ROWLET, Knight.]

He married Camdens Eliz. in Anno 1576.
one of the learned daughters of Sir Anthony Cook, Sister to the wives of the
Lord Chancellor Bacon and Treasurer Cecill. His family is now Extinct, one of
his daughters marrying into the then Worshipful (since honorable) family of
the Mainards, and with her devolved a fair inheritance.

12. JAMES ALTHAM, Esquire.]

His Arms (casually omitted in our List) were, Pally of six, Ermin and Azure,
on a Chief Gules, a Lion rampant, Or. His Namesake, and direct Descendent, now
living at Markhall, made Knight of the Bath at the Coronation of King Charles
the second, adds with his accomplished civility to the Honor of his Ancestors.

King James.
1. HENRY MAINARD, Knight.]

He was Father to William Maynard, bred in Saint John's College in Cambridge,
(where he founded a Logic Professor) created Baron of Wicklow in Ireland, and
Easton in this County, whose Son William Lord Maynard has been so noble an
encourager of my Studies, that my Hand deserves to wither, when my Heart
passes him by without a prayer for his good success.

15. PAUL BANNING, Knight. and Bar.]

No doubt the same Person, who afterward was created Viscount Banning of
Sudbury. His Son was bred in Christ-Church, of most hopeful parts (descended
from the Sackvils by the Mother-side) and promising high Performance to his
Country; but alas cut off in the prime of the prime of his life. He left two
Daughters which (though married) left no Issue; so that his large estate will
be divided betwixt the children of his four Sisters, Wives to the Marquess of
Dorchester, Viscount Grandison, the Lord Dacres of the South, and Henry Murrey,
Esquire of the Bedchamber to King Charles.

King Charles
12. JOHN LUCAS, Esq]

This worthy Person equalling his Extraction with his Virtues, was at Oxford,
made Baron by King Charles the first. I understand he has one sole Daughter
(to whom I wish a meet Consort, adequate to her Birth and Estate) seeing the
Barony, began in this Lord, is suspicious in him to determine.

The Battles.
Though none in this County, (the heart of the Eastern Association) yet the
siege [ Anno 1648.] of Colchester must not be forgotten. Know then that the
Remnant of the Royalists routed in Kent, with much difficulty recovered this
County, the Parliliaments Forces pursuing them. March much farther they could
not, such their weariness and want of Accommodation: bid Battle to their
numerous Foes they durst not, which was to run in the Jaws of ruin, wherefore
they resolved to shelter themselves for a time in Colchester.

Reader, pardon a Digression* Winchester Castle was by the Long-Parliament
ordered to be made UNTENABLE; but the over-officious malice of such who
executed the Order (wilfully mistaking the word) made it UNTENANTABLE. To apply
the Distinction to (...); All men beheld it as Tenantable, full of fair
Houses, none as Tenable in an hostile way for any long time, against a great
Army.

But see what Diligence can do: in few days they fortified it even above
imagination. Indeed the lining of the Wall was better than the faceing thereof,
whose Stone outside was ruinous, but the inside was well filled up with Earth,
which they valiantly maintained. Nor was it General Fairfax they feared so
much, as General Famine, (that grand Conqueror of Cities) having too much of
the best Sauce, and too little of the worst Meat. Insomuch, that they were fain
to make Mutton of those Creatures which kill She^p, and Beef of Cattle which
never wore Horns, till they were forced to submit to the worst, (but best they
could get) of Conditions.

Here those two worthy Knights, Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle (the
one eminently a whole Troop of Horse, the other a Company of Foot) were cruelly
sentenced and shot to Death; whose bodies have since had a civil Resurrection,
restored to all possible outward Honor, by public Funeral Solemnities.

The Farewell.
I wish the sad casualties may never return, which lately have happened in this
County. The one 1581. in the Hundred of Stow. Chro^ anno citat.
Dengy, the other 1648. in the Hundred of Rochford and Isle of Foulness (rented
in part by two of my credible Parishoners, who attested it, having paid dear
for the truth thereof,) when an Army of Mice, nesting in Ant-hills, as Conies
in Buroughs, shaved off the grass at the bare roots, which withering to dung
was infectious to Cattle. The March following, numberless flocks of Owls from
all parts flew thither, and destroyed them, which otherwise had ruined the
Country, if continuing another year. Thus, though great the distance betwixt a
Man and a Mouse, the meanest may become formidable to the mightiest creature by
their multitudes; and this may render the punishment of the Philistines more
clearly to our apprehensions, at the same time pestered with 1 Samuel 6. 11.
Mice in their barns, and pained with emerods in their bodies.

GLOUCESTER-SHIRE.
GLOUCESTER-SHIRE has Worcester and Warwickshire on the North, Oxford and
Wilt-shire on the East, Somersetshire on the South, Hereford-shire, with the
River Wye on the West, extending from her South to North Avon 48. miles, but
lessened in her broadest part from East to West, to twenty eight. The Severne
runs through it, entering this County as a River increasing in it to an
Eastuary, and becomes little less than a Sea before it departs out of it.

Some From whom Mr. C^mbden in his Brit. does dissent.
affirm that this County was anciently like the land of Gerar, wherein Genesis 26.
12.
Isaac sowed and reaped an hundred fold (the greatest proportion of increase
which the good ground in the Ma h. 13. 8.
Parable brought fourth.) But the same men seem to insinuate, that this Shire
tired out with its over* fruitfulness, has become barren in these later
times. True it is, as Lions are said to be tamed by watching, not suffering
them to take any sleep; so the most generous and vigorus land, will in time be
imbarrened, when always pinched with the Plough, and not permitted to slumber
at all, and lie fallow some competent time; otherwise with moderate respite and
manuring, some Tillage in this County is as fruitful as in any other place. As
for Pasturage, I have heard it reported from credible persons, that such the
fruitfulness of the land nigh Slimbrige, that in Spring time let it be bit bare
to the roots, a Wand laid along therein over night, will be covered with
new-grown grass by the next morning.

Natural Commodities.
Tobacco.
This lately grew in this County, but now may not. It was first planted about
Winchcomb, and many got great estates thereby, notwithstanding the great care
and cost in planting, replanting, transplanting, watering, snailing, suckering,
topping, cropping, sweating, drying, making and rolling it. But it has been
prohibited of late by Act of Parliament, as hindering our English Plantation in
the West Indies, abating the Revenues of the State in Customs and Impost, and
spoiling much of our good ground, which might be employed for Corn or Cattle.
As for the praise of Tobacco, with the virtues thereof, they may better be
performed by the Pens of such Writers, whose pallates have tasted of the same.

Oak.
England has the best in the World, not for finenesse, but firmness. Indeed
Outlandish Oaks have a smaller grain, and therefore fitter for Wainscot; and
whilst they make the best linings, our English Oak is the substantial outside.

The best in England is in Dean Forest in this County, and most serviceable
for Shipping; so tough, that when it is dry, it is said to be as hard as Iron.
I have Hartlibs Legacy, page 49.
read, that in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, the Spaniard sent an Ambassador
over purposely to get this wood destroyed (by private practices and cunning
contrivances) who had he effected his Embassy, deserved a good reward at his
return. It is suspicious if not timely prevented, carelessness and waste will
gratify the Spaniard, with what then he could not accomplish.

Steel.
It is Eldest Brother of Iron, extracted from the same Oar, differing from it
not in kind, but degree of purity, as being the first running thereof. It is
more hard and brittle (whilst Iron is softer and tougher) useful for the
making of English Knives, Sit^es, Sisers, Shears, etc. but fine edges cannot be
made thereof, as Lancets for letting of blood, Incision Knives, Dissecting
Knives, Razors, etc. I have been informed that Sir Bafil Brook (the great
Steele-maker in this County) his Patent to prohibit the importing of Foreign
Steel, was revoked on this account, because that no Artist could make the
aforesaid Instruments of English Steel, but must have it from Damascus, Spain,
Flanders, etc. As for Iron, though plentiful in this, it may be treated of in
another County with more convenience.

Manufactures.
Clothing.
As good as any in England for finenesse and color, is wrought in this County,
where the Cloathiers have a double advantage. First, plenty of the best Wool
growing therein on Cots wold-Hills; so that whereas Cloathiers in some Counties
fetch their Wool far off, with great cost, it is here but the removing it from
the Backs of the Sheep into their Works Houses. Secondly, they have the benefit
of an excellent water for coloring their Cloth, being the sweet Rivolet of
Strowd, which arising about Branfield, runs crofs this Shire into the Severn.

Now no rational man will deny Occult qualities of perfection in some above
other waters (whereby Spanish Steel non natura sed tinctura, becomes more
tough than ours in England) as the best Reds (a color which always carried
somewhat of Magistracy therein) are died in Strowd water. Hence it is, that
this Shire has afforded many wealthy Cloathiers, whereof some may seem in
their Loomes to have interwoven their own names into the Clothes, called (
Webs-cloath and Clutterbucks) after the names of the first Makers of them, for
many years after.

Mustard.
The best in England (to take no larger compass) is made at Tewksberry in this
County. It is very wholesome for the clearing of the Head moderately taken, and
I believe very few have ever surfeited thereof, because not granted time, but
demanded present payment for the penalty of excess, turning Democritus himself
presently to Heraclit^, as the Columella in bortulo.
Husbandman Poetdoth observe,

Seque lacessenti fletum factura sinapis. It is generally used in England, and
the Jest is well known of two Serving-men, contesting about Superiority; My
Master (says the one) spends more in Mustard, than thine does in Beef;
whereunto the other returned, the more saucy men his followers.

But seriously this should raise our gratitude to God for the plentiful
provisions of Flesh and Fish spent in this Land, when Mustard, a mere
complement to both, amounts to more thousands of pounds by the year than will
be believed.

Wine.
This formerly grew in this County, but now does not, witness the many places
therein still called Vineyards, whereof one most eminent nigh Gloucester, the
palace of the Bishop; and it appears by ancient Records, that some Towns in
this Shire paid Rent-Wines in great proportions; so that England, though it
does not far vinum, is ferax vini, capable (especially in a hot Summer) to
produce it to good perfection. But in later ages this commodity has been
disused, partly because better and cheaper may be procured from beyond the
Seas, and partly because experience proves other Native Liquors more healthful
for our English bodies.

Sider.
We must not forget Sider, anciently a Native of this, since a free Denizon of
all other Counties, made of Apples here grown in hedge-rows (which both fence
and feed) in great abundance. Such J. Minshew in his Dictionary in the word.
who deduce Sider from the Latin Sicera as that from the Hebrew (...)
(signifying any liquor which immoderately taken does intoxicate) make a more
proper allusion therein, than true deduction thereof. The Portugal calls it
Vinho contrafeyto, and surely much Claret and White is vended in England which
grew in no other Grapes than what Apple Trees afford. Some maintain, that the
coldness and windiness (easily correctable with Spice) is recompensed by the
temperate looseness caused by the moderate drinking thereof. But the staple use
of Sider is at Sea, where it quenches thirst better than other liquor, and if
subject to corrupt in hot Countries, quickly purges it self to a pure
constitution.

Buildings.
The Abbey (since Cathedral) Church of Gloncester, is a beautiful building,
advanced by several successive Abbots. It consists of a continued
Window-work, but has the loudest praises from the Whispering-place therein.
Take its manner from that learned Author, who (though it seems never seeing it)
has by his steady aim in Philosophy, better guessed and described it than I,
who have been an ear and eye witness thereof.

Sir Francis Bacon in his Natural Hist. Cent. 2. Numb. 148.
There is a Church at Gloucester (and as I have heard, the like is in some
other places) where, if you speak against a wall, softly, another shall hear
your voice better a good way off, than near hand. Enquire more particular of
the Frame of that Place. I suppose there is some Vault, or Hollow, or Isle
behind the Wall, and some passage to it, toward the farther end of that wall,
against which you speak; so as the voice of him that speaks, slideth along
the wall, and then enters at some passage, and communicates with the Air of
the Hollow; for it is preserved somewhat by the plain wall, but that is too
weak to give a sound Audible, till it has communicated with the back Air.

The Church in all the siege of the City, and our Civil Wars was decently
preserved; which I observe to his commendation, who was the Governor thereof.
Since I have read that by Act of Parliament it was settled on the City to
maintain and repair, and hope their practice has proved precedential to other
places in the same nature.

As for civil structures in this County, our late Wars laid a finger on
Barkley, their arm on Sudeley Castle (seated where the Vailes and VVoulds
meet) and the fair clasp to join them together being in part plucked down. But
their loins have been laid on Cambden-House (one of the newest and neatest in
England; built by Baptist Hicks Viscount Cambden) pressed down to the very
foundation.

Wonders.
There are frequently found (at Alderley in this County) Oysters, Cockles, and
Periwincles of stone. Such, who conceive these were formerly real Shell fish,
brought so far by some accident into the Land, engage themselves in a Sea of
inextricable difficulties. Others more probably account them to be Lusus
Naturae; and know, that as 1 Cor. 1. 15.
The Foolishness of God is wiser than men, and the weakness of God is
stronger than men: so the disportings of the God of Nature are more grave than
the most serious employment of men. For, such riddles are propounded on purpose
to pose those profoundshallow Rabbis, counting themselves of the Cabinet, when
they are scarcely of the Common Council of Nature; so unable to read such
Riddles, that they cannot put the letters thereof together, with any
probability.

The Higre.
Men as little know the cause of the name, as the thing thereby signified. Some
pronounce it the Eagre, as so called from the keenness and fierceness
thereof. It is the confluence or encounter (as supposed) of the salt and fresh
water in Severne, equally terrible with its flashings and noise to the seers
and hearers, and oh how much more then to the feelers thereof. If any demand,
why the Thames has not an Higre as well as the Severne, where we find the same
cause, and therefore why meet we not with the same effects? I re-demand of
them, why is there not an Euripus with the same reciprocation of Tides, as well
about the other Cyclides, as Euboea alone? Thus in cases of this kind, it is
easier to ask ten, than answer one question with satisfaction. But hear how the
Mich. Drayton in his Po^.
Poet describes this Higre;

-- Until they be embraced
In Sabrins Sovereign Arms: with whose tumultuous waves,
Shut up in narrower bounds, the Higre wildy raves;
And frights the straggling flocks, the neighboring shores to fly
A far as from the Main it comes with hideous cry.
And on the angry front, the curled ^oam does bring
The Billows against the banks, when fiercely it does fling,
Hurles up the slimy Ooze, and makes the scaly Brood
Leap madding to the Land, affrighted from the Flood;
Oreturns the toyling Barge, whose Steers-man does not lanch,
And thrusts the furrowing beak into her ireful panch.
As when we happily see a sickly Woman fall
Into a fit of that which we the Mother call;
When from the grieved Womb she feels the pain arise,
Breaks into grievous sighs, with intermixed cries,
Bereaved of her sense; and struggling still with those
That against her rising pain their utmost strength oppose,
Starts, tosses, tumbles, strikes, turns, touses, spurns, and sprauls,
Casting with furious Limbs her holders to the Walls:
But that the horrid pangs torments the grieved so,
One well might muse from whence this sudden strength should grow:
All that I will add is, that had this been known to the Roman Horatius.
Poet, when he thus envied against his Shee-friend,

Tu levior cortice, and improbo Iracundior Adria -- Thou art more light, more
angry than The Cork, and uncouth Adrian. I say, had it been known, he would
have changed Adria into Higrea, the former being a very calm in comparison of
the later.

We will conclude all with that, which at first was a Wonders fellow, until the
strangeness thereof abated by degrees. There is a kind of Bird as yet not known
by any proper name, which comes in great companies, but seldom in this County.
Yet oftener than welcome. In Bulk not much bigger than a Sparrow, which may seem
to carry a Saw, or rather a Sith on his mouth, for with his Bill which is
thwarted crosse-wise at the end, he will shave or cut an Apple in two at one
snap, eating only the kernels thereof, spoiling more than he does devour. They
come about Harvest time, when Apples begin to be ripe; so that these Birds may
be said to drink up many Hogs-heads of Sider, as destroying them in their
Causes, and preventing the making thereof. The like have been seen in Cornwall,
where at first they were taken (says my Carews Survey of Cornwall, fol. 25.
Author) for a forboden token, understand him for a presage of ill success.

Proverbs.
As sure as God's in Gloucester-shire.]

This Proverb is no more fit to be used than a Toad can be wholesome to be eaten,
which can never by Mountebancks be so dieted and corrected, but that still it
remains rank poison. Some I know seek to qualify this Proverb, making God
eminently in this (but not exclusively out of other) Counties; where such the
former fruitfulness thereof, that it is William of Malm^sbury in his Book of
Bishops.
said to return the seed with increase of an hundred fold. Others find a
superstitious sense therein, supposing God by his gracious presence more
peculiarly fixed in this Country, wherein there were more and richer mitred
Abbeys than in any two Shires of England besides* But when all is done, the
best use of this Proverb is totally and finally to banish it out of the mouths
and minds of all mankind.

You are a man of Duresley.]

It is taken for one that breaks his word, and fails in performance of his
promises, ^llel to Fides Graeca, or Fides Punica. Duresly is a Market and
clothing Town in (...) ^ounty, the inhabitants whereof will endeavor to
confute and disprove this (...), to make it false now, whatsoever it was at the
first original thereof.

(...), the worst places, in the midst of epidemical viciousness, have afforded
some exceptions from the wickled rule therein, Titu^. 1. (...).
The Cretians are always liars, was the observation of a Poet, and application
of the Apostle; yet we find some Cretians whom the Holy Spirit allows for
Act^ (...). (...)
Devout men. Thus sure I am, there was a man of Dur^sley, who was a man of men,
Edward Fox by name, a right godly and gracious Prelate, of whom In the (...) of
Prelates.
hereafter. However the men of Duresly have no cause to be offended with my
inserting this Proverb, which if false, let them be angry with the Author, the
first man that made it; if true, let them be angry with the Subject, even
themselves who deserve it.

It is long in coming as Cotswold Barley.]

It is applied to such things as are slow but sure. The Corn in this cold
County on the Wowlds exposed to the winds, bleak and shelterless, is very
backward at the first, but afterward overtakes the forwardest in the County,
if not in the Barn, in the Bushel, both for the quantity and goodness thereof.

He looks as if he had lived on Tewksbury Mustard.]

It is spoken partly of such who always have a sad, severe, and tetrick
countenance.

Si ecastor hic homo Plautus in (...).
Sinapi victitet, Non censeam tam tristem esse posse. Partly on such as are
snappish, captious, and prone to take exceptions, where they are not given,
such as will crispare nasum, in derision of what they slight or neglect.

The Traces have always the wind in their faces.]

This is founded on fond and false Tradition, which reports that ever since
Sir William Tracy was most Active amongst the four Knights, which killed Thomas
Becket; it is imposed on Tracies for miraculous Penance, that whether they go
by Land or by Water, the Wind is ever in their faces. If this were so, it was a
Favor in a hot Summer to the Females of that Family, and would spare them the
use of a Fan. But it is disproved by daily experience, there being extant at
this day in this County two Houses, the one Honorable, the other Worshipful,
growing from the same root; so that we see it is not now, and therefore believe
that it was never true. If any say that after so many Generations this curse at
last is Antiquated, know, that according to Popish Principles, it deserved
rather to be doubted of late, seeing no Gentile Family in England since the
Reformation have more manifested their cordial disaffection to Popery by their
sufferings and writings, as hereafter will appear.

Princes.
I cannot discover any Prince who took his first ^andsel of life in this
County. Let not my unhappiness discourage the industry of others in their
enquiry herein.

Saints.
KENELME, Son of Kenwolfe, King of Mercia, succeeded his Father therein, being
a Child but of seven years old, so that his harmless years had not attained to
any worldly guile, and his virtuous inclination promised great hopes, when
Quenrid his ambitious Sister, caused him to be killed, as standing in her way
to the Crown.

Solomon Eccles. 10. 20
says, Curse not the King (much less kill him) no not in thy thought, for a
Bird in the air shall carry the voice, and that which has wings shall tell the
matter, that is, a discovery shall surely and swiftly be made, by remote,
unsuspected, and improbable means, whereby it is thought the murder of this
infant-King was reve^led.

But I cannot belive what the Golden Legend relates, how a white Dove (which
belike had seen the deed done) got it engrossed in Parchment, and posting to S.
Peter's in Rome, laid it on the high Altar to be read, where in the Saxon
Character it was thus found,

At Clenc in a Cow-pasture Kenelme the Kings child lies beheaded under a
Thorn. Others Engl. Mar y^. in the 17 of July.
say (agreeing in all other particulars) the discovery was made by an Angel,
and for fear they should fall out, it may be thus accommodated, that the Angel
was in a Dove-like apparition. As for his Sister Quenrid, she was so far from
getting the Crown, that she is said to have lost her eyes, which fell out of
her head, and bloodied her Primer (a Woman's Book, as it seems, in that age)
whilst her Brothers Corpse was solemny buried at Winchcomb, and had in holy
veneration.

Martyrs.
JAMES BAYNAM, Esquire, Son to Sir Fox Act. and Mon. page 1027
Alexander Baynam, Knight, was born at -- in this County, bred in learning and
knowledge of the Latin and Greek Tongues. He afterward became a student of the
Law in the Middle Temple, and when a Pleader, was charitable to the poor, in
giving; to the rich, in moderating his Fees; and what was the Crown of all the
rest, a true lover of the Gospel, in the dawning of Reformation.

Saint Paul says, Heb. 9. 27.
It is appointed for all men once to dye, and yet the same Apostle says of
himself, 2 Cor. 11. 28
in deaths often, so many and great his pains and perils. And truly our Baynam
encountered often with death, so that a little Book of Martyrs might be made of
his sufferings.

First, Sir Thomas Moore sent for him to Chelsey, and tying him to a tree in
his Garden, (called by him the Tree of Truth) caused him to be most cruelly
scourged, to make him renounce his Opinion. This not succeding, Sir Thomas
himself saw him cruelly racked in the Tower, till at last he was persuaded to
abjure, and solemnly carried a Torch and a Faggot in the Church of St. Paul's.

Hereby he rather exchanged than escaped the fire, finding such a fire in his
own conscience, he could not be at quiet, till in the Church of St. Augustines,
the next Parochial Church to St. Paul's, (that the Antidote might be brought as
near as he could conveniently to the place of the Poison) he publicly recanted
his Recantation: For which he was afterward kept a fortnight in stocks in the
Bishop of Londons Cole house, with Irons upon him, chained again by Sir Thomas
More to a post two nights, cruelly handled for a seven-night at Fulham,
scourged for a fortnight in the Tower, and at last sent to a second Tree of
Truth, I mean, to the Stake; Whereat he was burned in Smithfield, April 30.
1532.

Here Page 1030.
Mr. Fox reports a passage, which I cannot with credit insert, or omit, but
take it as I find it; When his Arms and Legs were half consumed in the fire,
he spoke these words;

O ^e Papists, behold, ye look for miracles, and here now you may see a
miracle, for in this fire I feel no more pain, than if I were in a Bed of
Down; but it is to me as sweet as a Bed of Roses. Soft and sweet both, to
please the touch and smell, a double wonder. I believe it might be a falsehood,
but no lie in the Author reporting it, who possibly might be abused in his
intelligence. Secondly, it is possible that this good man, feeling so much pain
before, might through Gods goodness have none at his death. Thirdly, this
story may be kept on the deck, to counterpoise the scales, against that of
Father Sand. de Schism. A^g. in his Diary, Anno 1581. month of March.
Briant a Popish Priest, who reported himself cruelly racked in the Tower, and
yet, se nihil quicquam doloris sensisse, That he felt not any pain at all.
Lastly, though our Savior ju^ly taxes those, who were Luke 24. 25.
(...), slow in heart to believe such things as were revealed in the Scripture,
yet neither God nor Man w^ll be offended with the incredulous in such reports,
attested only with Humane suspicious Authority.

Prelates.
TIDEMAN de WINCHCOMBE was born in this County, at the Market Town formerly
famous for a rich Abbey, now for plenty of Poor therein. He was preferred
first Abbot of Benle, then Bishop of Landaffe, and lastly of Worcester by King
Richard the second his importunity to the Pope, notwithstanding one John Green
was fairly elected thereunto. This Tideman was the Kings Physician, and very
well skilled in that Faculty.

Be it observed by the way, that I am daily more confirmed in my opinion, that
till the last two hundred years, Physic in England was not a distinct
profession from Divinity, and the same persons Physicians and Confessors to
Princes. Say not these Functions were inconsistent, the former u^ually
departing, the later commonly coming to dying men; for the several Professions
did not justle, but succeed one another, so that when Potion did end, Unction
did begin. A practice continued by Popish Priests in England at this day,
gaining commodity and concealment by being such Pluralists in their profession,
having the most, best, and last privacy with their Patients. This Tideman died
Anno Dom. 1400.

JOHN CHEDWORTH, was born in this Godwin in the Bishops of Lincoln.
County, and bred in Kings College in Cambridge, being the third Hatche^s M.
S. in Anno 1444.
Scholar that came thereinto, by election from Eaton School, though some (I
confess) for a short time, make him admitted into Merton College in Oxford.
He afterward was the third Provost of Kings College, possessing the place six
years, till at last he was elected Bishop of Lincoln. He was joined in
Commission, by King Henry the sixth, with Bishop Wainfliet of Winchester to
revise and regulate the Statutes of Eaton and Kings Colleges. He sat Bishop
about eighteen years, and dying 1471. lies buried in his own Cathedral, under a
Marble Monument.

JOHN CARPENTER was (as my Goodwyn in the Bishops of Worcest^r.
Author rationally collecteth) born at Westbury in this County, bred in Oriall
College in Oxford, whereof he became Provost, and Chancellor of the
University, thence preferred Prefect of Saint Anthonies in London, and at last
Bishop of Worcester. He was so indulgent to Westbury, the place of his
Nativity, that of a mean he made it a magnificent Convent, more like a Castle
than a College, walling it about with Turrets, and making a stately Gate House
thereunto. He had an humorous intent to style Himself and Successors (in
imitation of Bath and Wells) Bishops of Worcester and VVestbury, which Title
(though running cleverly on the tongues end) never came in request, because
therein Impar conjunctio, the matching of a Collegiate and Cathedral Church
together. He died Anno Dom. 1475 and was buried in his Native Town of
VVestbury. His Tomb since his Death (I will use my Authors Idem. Ibid.
words, hoping their ignorance if alive understands no Latin) A stolidis
quibusdam nebulonibus pudendum in morem mutulatur. As for the College of
VVestbury it is the inheritance of the Right Worshipful and Hospital
Housekeeper, Ralph Sadler, Esquire* and was in these Civil Broils, unhappily burnt
down, though those, who esteemed themselves judicious in war, apprehended
neither necessity thereof, no^ advantage thereby.

THOMAS RUTHAL born at Cicester in this County, bred in Cambridge, where he
commenced Doctor of the Laws, was by King Henry the Seventh for his great
Abilities preferred to be Bishop of Durham, King Henry the Eighth made him of
his Privy Council, notwithstanding the hatred which Cardinal Wolsey bare unto
him.

It happened King Henry employed him as a politic person, to draw up a
Breviate of the State of the Land, which he did, and got it fairly transcribed.
But it fell out that in stead thereof, he, deceived with the likeness of the
cover and binding, presented the King with a Book containing an Inventory of
his own Estate, amounting to an inviduous, and almost incredible sum of
Godwyn in his Catalogue of the Bishops of Dur^m.
One hundred thousand pounds. Wolsey, glad of this mistake, told the King, he
knew now where a mass of money was, in case he needed it. This broke Ruthall
his heart, who had paid the third part of the cost of making the Bridge of
New Castle, over Tyne, and intended many more Benefactions, had not death
(1523.) on this unexpected occasion surprised him.

Since the Reformation.
EDWARD FOX was born in Dr. Hatch^r his Manuscript Catalogue of the Masters and
Fellows of K. Colle^*
Duresley in this County, bred first in Eaton, then in Kings College in
Cambridge, whereof he was chosen Provost, which place he kept until his death.
He was afterward Almoner to King Henry the Eighth. He first brought Doctor
Cranmer to the knowledge of the King, which Doctor first brought the King to
the knowledge of himself, how he stood in matter of marriage with the Widow of
his Brother.

This Doctor Fox was after Bishop of Hereford, and was (says my Godwin in his
Catalogu^ of the Bishops of Her^ford*
Author) Reformationis Ecclesiasticae illius tempore coeptae clanculum fautor.
Let me add, he was the principal pillar of the Reformation, as to the managery
of the Politic and Prudential part thereof; being of more activity, and no
less ability then Cranmer himself. Martin Bucer dedicated unto him his Comment
on the Gospels; yea, this Bishop wrote many Books, whereof that, De differentia
utriusque potestatis was his Masterpiece. He was employed by the King on
several Embassies into France and Germany, and died to the great loss of Gods
Church, May 8. 1538.

Statesmen.
Sir RALPH BUTLER, Knight of the Garter, and Lord Sudeley in this County, was
Lord Treasurer of England about three years, viz. from the seventh of July in
the 22. year of King Henry the Sixth, being the year of our Lord 1544. until
the 25. year of that Kings reign.

This Lord built Sudeley Castle in this County, which of Subjects Castles was
the most handsome Habitation, and of Subjects Habitations the strongest Castle.
King Edward the Fourth ^ent for him with such summons, that this Lord
conjectured (and that truly enough) that it was but a Preface to his
imprisonment: whereupon going to London, and resting himself on a Hill, whence
he did behold his own Castle; It is thou Sudeley, it is thou (said he) and not
I that am a Traitor, and so resigned the same at last into the hand of the
King, to procure his own liberty. So true it is, what Prove. 13 8.
Solomon says, The ransom of a man's life are his riches, but the poor hears
not rebuke. I find not the certain date of his death.

Capital Judges and Writers on the Law.
ANTHONY FITZ-HERBERT, for a long time Justice of the Common Pleas, was, David
Powel in his History of Wales.
as a good Antiquary will have it, born about Dean Forest in this County; but
is by Camb. Brit. in Derby-shire.
another (no whit his inferior) on better evidence referred to Derby-shire,
where formerly we have placed his Nativity.

Yea, I have been informed from excellent hands; the Natives of this County,
that no Capital Judge of the three Great Courts (though many of the Marches)
was ever born in this County: yet are they here as litigious, as in other
places. Sure I am, that Gloucester-shire did breed, if no Judge, yet a
Plaintiff and Defendant of the primest quality, which betwixt them (with many
alternations) traversed the longest suit that ever I read in England; for a
suit was commenced betwixt the Heirs of Sir Thomas Talbot, Viscout Lisle on the
one party, and the heirs of -- -- Lord Barkley on the other, about certain
possessions lying in this County not far from Wotton-under-edge, which suit
begun in the end of King Edward the Fourth, was depending until the beginning
of Camb. Brit. in Gloucestershire.
King James, when (and was it not high time?) it was finally determined.

But the long barrenness of this County in Judges may be recompensed with
fruitfulness at last, the rather because Gloucestershire at this day shows
two eminent ones, Mr. Justice Adkins, and Mr. Justice Hales, which grace the
Court of the Common Pleas with their known ability and integrity.

EDWARD TROTMAN, Son of Edward Trotman, Esquire, was born at Came nigh Duresly
in this County, bred a Student of the Law till he became a Bencher in the Inner
Temple. He wrote an Abridgement of Sir Edward Coke his eleven Volumes of
Reports, for the benefit of those who had not money to purchase, or leisure to
peruse them at large. Yea, such as have both may be profitted thereby: for in
my own profession, and in the Book of Books, even those who are best
acquainted with the Chapters, make also use of the Contents. This Gentleman in
his Title page ingeniously wishes that his Compendium might not prove
Dispendium to the Reader thereof. And I verily believe he has had his desire:
being informed that his endeavors are well esteemed by the Learned in that
profession. Register of the Burial in the Temple.
He was buried in the Temple Church, May 29. Anno Dom. 1643.

Soldiers.
Sir WILLIAM TRACY of Todington in this County, was a Gentleman of high Birth,
State, and Stomach, much in favor with King Henry the second, on whom he was a
daily attendant. One fact has made his Memory, call it famous or infamous,
because he was the first and forwardest of the four Knights, who (at the
encouragement if not command, at leastwise, at the connivance, if not
encouragement of the aforesaid King) Imbrewed their hands in the blood of
Thomas Becket.

In his old age he went into Devon-shire, where he had large possessions, as
may appear by so many Towns bearing his surname.

1. Wollocomb-Tracy. 2. Bovi-Tracy. 3. Nimet-Tracy. 4. Bradford-Tracy, etc.

It is reported that he intended a penitential Pilgrimage to Jerusalem; but
setting to Sea, was ever crossed with adverse Winds. He is conceived to lie
buried in the Parish Church of Mort in Devonshire, dying about the year of our
Lord, 1180.

Seamen.
This is scarcely a Maritine-shire, rather bordering on the Severn than on the
Sea, having therein no considerable Haven, ( Bristol being beheld as a City
entire of it self) and therein eminent Seamen cannot be expected: yet one
Family herein has been most fortunate in such voyages, having their chief Seat
at Lydney, in the Forest of Dean, which has afforded,

WILLIAM WINTER, Knight, and Vice Admiral of England, famous in his Generation
for several See Camb. Eliz in these respective years.
performances.

1. Anno 1559. being then but Machinarum classicarum praefectus (English it as
you please) he frighted the French in Edenborough Frith, assaulting their Fort
in the Island of Inchkeith. 2. Anno 1567. he was sent with Sir Thomas Smith,
with the sound of the Trumpet, and shooting of some Cannons, to demand the
restitution of Callis of the French King. 3. Anno 1568. he conducted a great
Treasure of the Genoan Merchants safely into the Netherlands, in despite of
the French opposing him. 4. Anno 1576. he, with Robert Beale, Clerk of the
Council, was employed into Zeland, to demand the restitution of our Ships,
which they had either taken, or did detain. 5. Anno 1588. he did signal service
in the station appointed him, coming in ( though not in the heat) in the cool
of the day, when the Spanish Fleet was fallen toward the shore of Zeland, and
were sadly sensible of his valor.
I conceive him not to survive long after, because, if in life, he would have
been in action; and if in action, I should have found him in Cambden's
Elizabeth; And therefore from no mention, I conclude no motion, that about this
time he departed.

Besides others of this Family unknown to me, and justly referred to this
County, as their chief habitation: And were the phrase as proper of Men
sailing, as Fishes swimming in the Sea, I should say that Lydney-House has
brought forth a shole of Mariners, So happy have they been in Sea voyages. One
wondering how the English durst be so bold, as to put to Sea in all weathers, it
was returned, that they were provided to sail in all seasons, having both
Winters and Sir George Summers, of whom in Dorset-shire.
Summers on their side. The more the pity that this worthy Family of the
Winters did ever leave the Element of Water, to tamper with Fire, especially in
a destructive way to their King and Country.

Writers.
OSBERNUS CLAUDIANUS, or Osbern of Gloucester, was bred a Benedictine Monk in
the famous Convent in that City. He was learned, says Leland, Praeter iliius
aetatis sortem, above the Standard of that age. He was a good Linguist,
Philosopher, Divine, he used to give clearness to what was obscure, facility to
what was difficult, politeness to what was barbarous. Nor wanted he a becoming
facetiousness in his Dialogues. He wrote many Books, dedicating them to Gilbert
Foliot Bishop of Hereford, as a Comment on the Pentateuch Dialogue-wise, as
also on the Incarnation, Nativity, Passion, and Resurrection of our Savior. He
wrote also a Book called B^le descrip. Brit. Cent. 2. Number. 78. and Pits in Anno
1140.
Pan-Ormia, dedicating the same to Hamelin Abbot of Gloucester.

The Title of this Book minds me of a pretty passage in In his Book Declaris
Oratoribus, otherwise called Brutus, toward, the later end.
Tully. At a public Plea in Rome, Sisenna an Orator who defended his Client,
affirmed, that the crimes laid to his charge, were but Crimina Sputatilica: To
whom Rufius (the Orator who managed the accusation) rejoyned, that he feared
some treachery in so hard a word, quid Sputa sit scio, quid Tilica nescio.

But I am at a worse loss in this uncouth word, though knowing both the parts
thereof. I know what Pan is, All, what Ormia is, a Line or Hook, but of what
subject PanOrmia should treat, is to me unknown. But well fare the heart of J.
Bale, who (I believe out of Leland) renders it a Dictionary, or Vocabulary,
^ooking all words, it seems, within the compass thereof. This Osbern flourished
under King Stephen, Anno 1140.

ROBERT of GLOUCESTER, so called, because a Monk thereof. He is omitted
(whereat I wonder) both by Bale and Pits, except disguised under another Name,
and what I cannot conjecture; they speak truly, who term him a Rhimer, whilst
such speak courteously, who call him a Poet. Indeed such his Language, that he
is dumb in effect to the Readers of our age without an Interpreter, and such a
one will hardly be procured. Antiquaries (amongst whom Mr. Seldom) more value
him for his History than Poetry, his lines being neither strong nor smooth, but
sometimes sharp, as may appear by this Tetrastick, closing with a pinch at the
panch of the Monk^, which coming from the Pen of a Monk is the more remarkable.

In the City of Bangor a great House tho was,
And there vndyr vij. Cells or Portions.
Cellens and there of there Ruler or Governor, sed quaere.
Nas
That C.C.C. Moncks had othur mo
And all by hure travayle lyvede* look now if they do so.
He flourished some Four hundred years since under King Henry the second, and
may be presumed to have continued till the beginning of King John, 1200.

ALAN of TEUXBURY, probably born in this Country, though bred at Canterbury,
where he became first a Monk of Saint Saviors, and afterward Prior thereof.
Very intimate he was with Thomas Becket, having some reputation for his
Learning. In his old age, it seems, he was sent back with honor into his
Native Country, and for certain was made Abbot of Teuxbury, when Stephen
Langton so much endeavored, and at last accomplished the canonizing of Thomas
Becket. Four Bale de scrip. Brit. Cent. 3. Number. 46. and Pits in An. 1200.
Authors were employed ( Becket his Evangelists) to write the History of his
Mock-passion and Miracles. And our Allan made up the Quaternion. He flourished
under King John, Anno 1200.

ALEXANDER of HALES was bred up in the famous Monastery of Hales, founded by
Richard King of the Romans. After his living some time at Oxford, he went over
to Paris, it being fashionable for the Clergy in that (as for the Gentry in
our) age, to travail into France, that Clerk being accounted but half learned,
who had not studied some time in a Foreign University. But, let Paris know,
that generally our English men brought with them more Learning thither, and
lent it there, than they borrowed thence.

As for this our Alexander, as he had the name of that great Conqueror of the
world, so was he a grand Captain and Commander in his kind. For as he did
follow Peter Lombard, so he did lead Thomas Aquinas, and all the rest of the
Schoolmen. He was the first that wrote a Comment on the Sentences, in a great
Volumn, called the Sum of Divinity, at the instance of Pope Innocent the
fourth, to whom he dedicated the same, for this and other of his good services
to the Church of Rome, he received the splendid Title of Doctor Irrefragabilis.
He died Anno Dom. 1245. and was buried in the Franciscan Church in Paris.

THOMAS de la MORE, was, says my Pits de Illust. Ang. script. Anno 1326.
Author, born of a Knightly Family, Patria Gloucestrencis, a
Gloucester-shire-man by his Country; For which his observation I heartily thank
him, who otherwise had been at an utter loss for his Nativity. He thus further
commends him.

Pacis and Armorum vir artibus undique clarus. A man whose fame extended far
For Arts in Peace, and Feats in War.
Indeed he was no Carpet Knight, as who brought his honor with him out of
Scotland on his swords point, being knighted by King Edward the first, for his
no less fortunate than (...) (...) therein. Nor less was his fidelity to his
Son Edward the second, though unable to help him against his numerous enemies.
But though he could not keep him from being deposed, he did him the service
^aithfully to write the manner of his deposition, being a most rare Manuscript
extant in Oxford Library. This worthy Knight flourished Anno Dom. 1326.

THOMAS of HALES came just an hundred years after Alexander of Hales in time;
but more than a thousand degrees behind him in ability, and yet following his
Foot steps at distance. First they were born both in this County, bred
Minorites in Hales Mona stery; whence for a time they went to Oxford, thence to
Paris, where they both proceeded Doctors of Divinity, and applied themselves to
Contravertial Studies, till this Thomas finding himself not so (...) for that
Employment, fell to the promoting positive, or rather fabulous points of
Popery, for the maintenance of Purgatory. He flourished under King Edward the
third, Anno Dom. 1340.

THOMAS NEALE was born at New Coll. Reg. Anno 1540.
Yate in this County, bred first in Winchester, then New College in Oxford*
where he became a great Grecian, Hebritian, and public Professor of the later
in the University. He translated some Rabins into Latin, and dedicated them to
Cardin^l Pole. He is charactered a man Pitseus de Angl. script. page 770.
Naturae mirum in modum tim^dae, Of a very fearful nature, yet always
continuing constant to the Roman persuasion. He was Chaplain, (but not
Domestic, as not mentioned by Mr. Fox) to Bishop Bonner, and resided in
Oxford. In the first of Queen Elizabeth, fearing his Professors place, would
quit him, for prevention he quitted it, and built himself an House over against
Heart hall, retaining the name of Neals House many years after. Papists admire
him for his rare judgment, and Protestants for his strange invention, in first
(...) the improbable lie of Matthew Parker ^is Consecration at the (...) (...)
in (...), since so Mason de M^nst. Ang.
substantially confuted. He was living in Oxford 1576. but when and where (here
o^ beyond the Seas) he died, is to me unknown.

Since the Reformation.
RICHARD TRACY, Esquire, ^orn at Todington in this County was Son to Sir
William Tracy Confessor, of whom before. He succeeded to his (...) (...), in
the defense whereof he wrote Bale de scrip. B^t. Cent. 9. Number. 58.
several Treatises in the English tongue, and (...) mo^markable, which is
entitled, (...) to the Cross. This he (...) (...), having suffered much
himself in his Estate for his (...) reputed (...) (...) also he wrote
prophetically Anno 1550. few years before the beginning of Queen (...) many
being (...), and so (...) armed by his useful (...).

It must not be forgotten, how during my abode in Cambridge on (...) (...)
1626. a Book was ^ound in the belly of a Cod (brought into the (...) (...)
(...) containing therein three (...), whereof the (...) and largest was (...),
(...) to the Cross. It was wrapped about with Canvas^ and (...) (...) (...)
Fish, plundered pl^ndred out of the pocket of some Ship-wracked Seaman. The Wits
of the (...) made themselves merry thereat, one making a long Copy of (...)
(...) on, whereof this Dysti^, I remember;

Tho R^ndolph.
If (...) (...) do bring us Books, then we May hope (...) Bodlyes Library* But
whilst the (...) (...) themselves herewith, the (...) (...) beheld i^ as a sad
(...)* And some, who then little looked for the (...) have (...) found it in
that pl^. This Book was (...) (...), and the Page 18.
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) the Author (...) (...) But no such Book
(...) in Bale, (though ^y accurate to Cent. Octav. Nu^. 71.
give ^s a Catalogue of his Writings. Whereby we (...), it was the same made by
this Richard (...), to which another Treatise was annexed, (...) one to die,
made (...) by our Tracy, who himself (...) about an hundred years since.

Sir THOMAS OVERBURY, Knight, Son to Sir Nicholas Overbury, one of the Judges
of the Marches, was born at Borton on the Hill in this County, bred in Oxford,
and attained to be a most accomplished Gentleman, which the happiness of his
Pen, both in Poetry and Prose does declare. In the later he was the first
writer of Characters of our Nation, so far as I have observed.

But if the great parts of this Gentleman were guilty of Insolency and
Petulancy, which some since have charged on his Memory; we may charitably
presume that his reduced age would have corrected such juvenile extravagancies.

It is questionable, whether Robert Carre Earl of Somerset were more in the
favor of King James, or this Sir Thomas Overbury in the favor of the Earl of
Somerset, until he lost it by dissuading that Lord from keeping company with a
Lady (the Wife of another person of Honor) as neither for his credit here, or
comfort hereafter.

Soon after Sir Thomas was by King James designed Ambassador for Russia. His
false friends persuaded him to decline the employment, as no better than an
Honorable Grave. Better lie some days in the Tower, than more months in a
worse prison. A Ship by Sea, and a barbarous cold Country by land. Besides they
possessed him, that within a small time, the King should be wrought to a good
opinion of him. But he who willingly goes into a prison out of hope to come
easily out of it, may stay therein so long till he be too late convinced of
another judgment.

Whilst Sir Thomas was in the Tower, his Refusal was represented to the King
as an Act of high contempt; as if he valued himself more than the Kings
service. His strict restraint gave the greater liberty to his enemies to
practice his death, which was by poison performed.

Yet was his Blood legally revenged, which cost some a violent, and others a
civil death, as deprived of their Offices. The Earl was soon abated in King
James' affection, (O the short distance betwixt the cooling and quenching of a
Favorite!) being condemned and banished the Court. The death of this Worthy
Knight did happen Anno Dom. 1615.

JOHN SPRINT was bred a Student in Christ Church in Oxford, and was afterward
beneficed at Thornbury in this County, a grave and godly Divine, but for a long
time much disaffected to the Ceremonies of the Church. It happeened that Mr.
Burton, Archdeacon of Gloucester his Collegiate and Contemporary, took him to
task, persuading him seriously to study the point, which he promised, and
performed accordingly. He put

In the one Sc^le In the other The Woe pronounced to such who preach (...) the
Gospel; and dissert their Flocks on pretended scrupulosity. The nature of
Ceremonies when things indifferent are enjoined by lawful Authority.

Weighing both exactly in the balance of his judgment, he found the former to
preponderate, concluding it unlawful for any on such ^count to leave or lose
the exercise of his Mini^erial Function.

Hereupon) he not only conformed for the future, (...) also wrote a Book
(dedicated to Archdeacon Burton) called Cas^der Ang^anus, to persuade others
to conformity. He died, as I am informed, about thirty years ago.

JOHN WORKMAN was born about Lasbury in this County, where his Father was a
servant to Sir Tho. Escourt. He was bred in Oxford, and afterward became for
many years the pio^s and painful Preacher at Gloucester, being conformable to
Church Discipline, both in judgment and practice; and in very deed. It
happened that some pressed super-^nonical Ceremonies, and such
sesqui-Conformists made Mr. Workman turn first but a semiConformist, and then
by degrees to renounce all Conformity.

He was prosecuted by G. G. his (...), for preaching to the disparagement of
the Blessed Virgin Mary, though he pleaded his words were only these, That the
Papists painted her more like a Curtesan, than a modest Maid. Hereupon he was
silenced, and not suffered to teach School; seeing She^ and Lambs differ not
in hind, but age. At last his good Pri^nd Dr. Baud (furnishing him with
instructions) he turned Phy^, and (...) unable to preserv^ his Pattents in
li^e, he could well prepare them for death. He died about the year 1636.

We have put them in Parallels, not so much because living at the same time in
the same County, as because the one from disliking came to approve; the other,
from approving to dislike Conformity; though both, no doubt, did follow the
dictates of their consciences.

RICHARD CAPEL was born, as I am informed, in the City of Gloucester, whereof
his Father was Alderman, and left him a good temporal estate; he was bred
Fellow of Magdalen College in Oxford, where he had many Pupils of good
quality; and among the rest Mr. William Pemble, whose Books he set forth, and
as I remember, finished his imperfect Comment on Zachary.

Leaving the College he was presented by Mr. Stephens to a good benefice in
this County, where he made his excellent Book Of Temptations; full fraught with
practical Piety: so that what judicious person soever reads it, will
experimentally say unto him, as once the Lawyer to our Savior, Master thou
have well spoken: it carries in it such a Truth by the confession confession
his Conscience.

One thing he has irrefragably proved, That there is no Temptation which a man
is subject to, but what might be suggested by our own corruption, without any
injection of Satan. We have an English expression, The Devil he does it, the
Devil he has it, where the addition of Devil amounts only to a strong
denial, equivalent to, he does it not, he has it not. My opinion is, if the
phrase took not the original from, yet is it applyable to our common and
causeless accusing of Satan with our own faults, charging him with those
Temptations, wherein we our selves are always chiefly, and sometimes solely
guilty.

When the reading of the Book of sports on the L^rds day was pressed upon him,
he refused the same, as not comporting with his Conscience, and willingly
resigned his benefice, living afterward on his temporal means, and preaching
gratis in neighboring Congregations. He died Anno Dom. 165 --

Benefactors to the Public.
KATHARINE CLYVEDON, better known by the name of Dame KATHARINE BERKLEY, was
Daughter unto Sir John Clyvedon, richly landed in this County. She was first
married to Sir Peter Le Veale, and after to Thomas third of that Christian
name, Baron of Berkley, whom she survived, living a constant Widow for four and
twenty years; great her In^eritance, augmented with a large Jointure, and yet
she expended the profits thereof in Hospitality and prous ^es; amongst which,
the Patent. 7. Rich. 2. part 2. Memb. 2.
Founding of the fair School of Wootton-under-edge was most remarkable.

I have sometimes wondered with my self, to see the vast Donations which the
Family of the Berkleys bestowed on Mona^eries: So that there was no Religious
House with in twenty-miles of their Castle (besides others at greater distance)
which did not plentifully partake of their Liberality. All these now are lost
and extinct, whilst the endowment of Wootton School does still continue*
whereof I render this private reason to my own thoughts, Because Monks were not
of Gods planting, whilest-teaching of Youth is Iure Divino by a positive
precept, Teach a Child in the Trade of his Youth, and he will remember (...)
when ^e is old: I behold Wootton School as of great Seniority, after
Winchester, but before Eaton in standing. John Smith late of Nibley, Esquire,
was ef^ctually instrumental in recovering the Lands to this School^, which
since has been happy in good School. Masters, as they in pregnant Scholars.
This Lady died March 13. 1385. and is buried by her Husband in Berkley Church,
in a Monument grated about with Iron Bars.

Sir WILLIAM HAMPTON, son to John Hampton, was born at Minchen Hampton in this
County, bred after a Fish-m^nger in London, where he ^ved so well, that he
became Lord Mayor thereof, Anno 1472. He was the first that set up Stocks in
every Ward, for the punishment o^ Vaga^s and S^mpets; on which account I enter
him a public Benefactor. For, an House of Correction is a kind of Almshouse,
it being as charitable a work to reclaim the wicked, as to re^ieve the wanting;
and, were it not for Prisons, all the Land would be but a Prison.

Since the R^formation.
THOMAS BELL born in this County, was twice Mayor of the City of Gloucester,
and raised his estate by Gods blessing on his Industry and Ingenuity, being one
of the first, that brought the trade of Capping into the City. Hereby he got
great wealth, sufficient to maintain the degree of Knighthood, which King Henry
the eight (as I take it) bestowed on him. He bought from the Crown Blackfriars
by the South gate in this City, and reformed the ruins thereof into a
beautiful house for himself, and hard by it erected an Almshouse, and endowed
it with competent Revenues. His Daughter and sole Heir brought a fair Estate
into the Families of Dennis. This Sir Thomas died in the beginning of the reign
of Queen Elizabeth.

EDWARD PALMER, Esquire, (Uncle to Sir Thomas Overbury) was born at Limington
in this County, where his Ancestry had continued ever since the Conquest. Of
his breeding I can give no exact account, for as the growing of Vegetables
toward perfection is insensible; so, (for want of particular information) I
cannot trace his Gradual motions, but find him at last, answering the Character
given by Mr. In his Description of Gloucestershire.
Cambden,

A curious and a diligent Antiquary. Great his store of Coins, Greek and Roman,
in Gold, Silver, and Brass, and greater his skill in them.

His plentiful Estate afforded him opportunity to put forward the ingenuity
impressed in him by nature for the public good, resolving to erect an Academy
in Virginia; in order whereunto he purchased an ^sland, called Palmers Island
unto this day, but in pursuance thereof, was at many thousand pounds expense
(some instruments employed therein not discharging their trust reposed in them,
with corresponding fidelity) he was transplanted to another world, leaving to
posterity the memorial of his worthy but unfinished intentions.

He married one of his own name and neighborhood, the Daughter of Palmers of
Compton Schorfin, Esquire.

Palmero Palmera nobit sic nubilis Amnis, -- Auctior adjunctis Nobilitatis
aquis. By her he had many Children, but most of them desceased, amongst whom,
Muriel married to Michael Rutter of this County, Esquire, inheriting her
Fathers parts and piety, left a perfumed Memory to all the Neighborhood. This
Edward Palmer died at London, about the year, 1625.

HUGH PIRRY was born in Wootton under-edge, a known Market Town in this County,
bred a Merchant in London, whereof he was Sheriff, Anno Dom. 1632. He brought
the best Servant, that ever has, or will come to the Town of Wootton, I mean
the Water, which in his life time, on his own cost, he derived thither, to the
great benefit of the Inhabitants.

He had read, how Job 31. 20.
Job had warmed the poor with the Fleece of his Sheep, and observed what sheep
Job had left, he lost; and what he had laid out, was left him; that wool only
remaining his, which he had expended on the poor. Master Pirry therefore
resolved on pious uses, but prevented by death, bequeathed a thousand pounds
and upwards, for the building and endowing of a fair Almshouse in Wo^on
aforesaid* which is persormed accordingly. God has since visibly blessed him
in his fair posterity, four Daughters, the eldest married to the Lord Fitz
Williams of Northampton, the second to Sir -- of Glamorgan, the third to Sir
Robert Be^wes of Lancaster* and the youngest (the Relict of Viscount Camden's
second son) to Sir William Fermoure of Northamptonshire. He died Anno Dom. 163

Lord Mayors.
Name. Father. Place. Company. Time 1 Will. Hampton. John Hampton. Minchen
Hampto^. Fish-monger. 1472 2 John Brug or Bruges. Thomas Brug or Bruges.
Dymmock. Draper. 1520 3 Leon. Holliday. William Holliday. Redborough. Merchant
Tailor 1605 4 Richard Ven. -- Wotto^ under-edg -- -- 5 Thomas Viner. Thomas
Viner. -- Goldsmiths. 1653

The Names of the Gentry of this County returned by the Commissioners in the
twelfth year of King Henry the sixth.
The Keeper of the Spiritualties of the Bishopric of Worcester, sede vacant.
Commissioners for taking the oaths. James de Berkeley. James Greyndore. Knights
for the Shire. Robert Stanshaw. Knights for the Shire.

Guidonis Whitington Richardi Norman Iohannis Hurtesley Thome Hoke Johannis
Joce Johannis Anne Johannis Panncefote Chivaler Johannis Cassy Edwardi Brugge
Rob. Whitington Willielmi Boteler Willielmi Moryn Johannis Stough^on Roberti
Vobe Johannis Morvan Clementis de Mitton Johannis Moryn Johannis S^ll Willielmi
Pen^ock Johan. Gifford, Chivaler Reginaldi Machyn, Walteri Fr^sh Thome
Sloughter Nicholai Eynesham Radulphi Bottiller, Chivaler. Johannis Grennell
Baldewini Rouse Willielmi Somervile Johannis Harewel Walteri Eode Rob Bushel
Willielmi Ashton Richardi Grevell Willielmi Tracy, jun. Mauricii Berkeley de
Beverston Chev. Iohannis Langley. Egid^i Brugge Iohannis de la Mare Will.
Prelat Iohannis Lym^k Galfred. Hide Johan. Solers Johan. Hampton Thome L^yney
Ioh. Kendale Henrici Clifford Johan. Try Thome Harsefeld Edmundi. Rodebergh
Thome Stanton Thome Sky Richardi Venables Johan. Pol^yn Roberti Volpenne Joh.
Lingescote Ioh. Stanre Thome Ocle Thome Bamvile Roberti Clavile Thome Skey
Johan. Roddely Thome Berkeley de Glaucestria Roberti Frompton Roberti Strong
Richardi ^ichards Mauric^i Berkeley de Ul^y, Chivaler Nicholai Poyntz Joh.
Kemmys Joh. Coderington Nicholai Stanshaw Nicholai Alderley Johan. Blunt Thome
Bradston Johan. Westow ^ohan. Burnel, Junio^is Willielmi Fourde Thome Tanner de
Dorfoleye Iohannis Basset de Naylesworth.
Sheriffs.
HEN. II.
Anno 1 Milo de Gloucester. Anno 2 Walter de Hereford Anno 3 Will. de Bello
Campo Anno 4 Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10
Will. Pypard, for four years. Anno 14 Gilb. Pypard, for four years. Anno 18
Radus filius Stephan. Anno 18 Will. frater ejus. Anno 19 Idem, for fifteen
years.
RICH. I.
Anno 1 W^ll. filius Stephani. Will. Marescallus. Anno 2 Rich. de Muegros. Anno
3 Idem. Anno 4 Will. Marescallus. Anno 4 Nich. de Avenel. Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6
Idem. Anno 7 Herbertus filius Herberti. Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Idem. and Will. de
la Pomeray Anno 10 Herbertus filius Herberti.
Rex JOHAN.
Anno 1 Comes Will. Marescallus. Anno 1 Johan. Avenell. Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3
Will. Marescallus. and Tho. de Rochford. Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Will.
Marescallus and Rich. de Haseburn. Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Rich. de Muegros. Anno 8
Reginal. Pintevolt. Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Gerard. Atia. Anno 10 Rich Burgies.
Anno 11 Engelard. de Cicomato. Anno 11 Rich. Burgies. Anno 12 Idem. for five
years.
HEN. III.
Anno 1 Anno 2 Radus. Musard, for 4. years. Anno 6 Radus. Musard. Petrus
Egeword. Anno 7 Radus Musard. Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Will. Putot,
for 7. years. Anno 17 Hen. de Bada. Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Will. Talbot. Anno 19
Petrus de Egeword. Anno 19 Tho. de Sancto Martino. Anno 20 Idem. Anno 21 W^ll.
Talbot. Anno 22 Thurstan. de Despenser. Anno 23 Idem. Anno 24 Johan. filius
Galfri. Anno 24 Galfri de Derhurst. Anno 25 Johan. filius Galfri. Anno 25
Marsdatus Canoni. Anno 26 Johan. filius Galfri, for five years. Anno 31 Rob. de
Valeram. Anno 31 Galf. de Derherst. Anno 32 Rob. de Valeram Anno 32 Nicus de
Monte Acuto. Anno 33 Rob. Valeram. Anno 33 Reginal. de Eide. Anno 34 Rob.
Valeram. Anno 35 Johan. de Fleminge. Anno 36 Idem. Anno 37 Adam de Hittested,
for four years. Anno 41 Will. de Lesseberowe. Anno 42 Idem. Anno 43 Rob. de
Maysy. Anno 44 Johan. de Brun. Anno 45 Idem. Anno 46 Idem. Anno 47 Matheus
Werill. Anno 48 Idem. Anno 49 Idem. Anno 50 Regin. de Acle and Roger: de Anno
50 Chedney Pet. de Chavent. Anno 51 Idem. for five years.
EDW. I.
Anno 1 Petrus de Chavent. Anno 1 Walt. Bockking Clicus. Anno 2 Reginald. de
Acle. Anno 3 Adam de Buttiller, for 5 years Anno 8 Rich. de Ripariis. Anno 9
Walter de Stuchesley, for four years. Anno 13 Rogerus de Lakington. Anno 14
Idem. Anno 15 Idem. Anno 16 Galfrid. de Mandriacre. Anno 17 Idem. Anno 18 Fulco
de Locy. Anno 19 (...). Anno 20 Fulco de Locy. Anno 20 Tho. de Gardinis. Anno
21 Idem. for six years. Anno 27 Johan. de Langley. Anno 28 Rich. Talebot. Anno
29 Idem. Anno 30 Johan. de Novo Burgo. Anno 31 Tho. de Gardinis, for 5 years
EDW. II.
Anno 1 Johan. Langley. Anno 2 Nich. de Kingston, and Johan. de Aunesley. Anno
3 Idem. Anno 4 Johan. Aunesley, and Johan. de Acton. Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Will.
Mannsel, and Rob. Darcy Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Rich. de la River. for 4. years.
Anno 12 Johan. de Hamp^on, for 4. years. Anno 16 Anno 17 Johan. Besmaunsel and
Will. Tracy. Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Idem.
EDW. III.
Anno 1 Tho. de Rodberg. Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Will. Gamage, and
Tho. Rodbergh. Anno 5 Tho. Berkeley de Cobberly. Anno 6 Idem. Anno 7 Rich. de
Foxcot, for 5. years. Anno 12 Tho. Berkeley de Cuberley Rich. de Foxcot. Anno
13 Tho. de Berkeley. Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15 Walter Dastin. Anno 16 Simon Basset,
for 9. years. Anno 25 Walt. Dastin. and Ph. Mareschall. Anno 26 Johan. de
Weston. Anno 27 Idem. Anno 28 Will. de Ledene. Anno 29 Tho. de Berkeley de
Cobberly, and Will. Ledene. Anno 30 Tho. de Berkely, de Coberl. Anno 31 Rob. de
Herdesle. for 4 years. Anno 35 Thomas Moygne. Anno 36 Idem. Anno 37 Idem. Anno
38 Johan. Tracy, for 5 years. Anno 43 Johan. Points. Anno 44 Idem. Anno 45
Johan. Tracy. Anno 46 Johan. Clifford. Anno 47 Tho. de Ocle. Anno 48 Johan.
Ioce. Anno 49 Nich. de Berkeley. Anno 50 Petrus de Veel. Anno 51 Johan. Ioce.
Anno 51 Petrus de Chavent.
Edw. I.
9. WALT. de STUCHESLY.]

The King directed his Letters to this Sheriff, enjoining him, ^o take an exact
account of the number and names of all the Villages, within the several
Hundreds of the County, with the Persons, the present Possessors thereof, and
return his Collection with speed and safety, into the Exchequer, according to
this Tenor.

Edwardus Dei Gratia, Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, and Dux Aquitaniae,
Vice-Comiti Glouc. salutem. Quia quibusdam certis de causis Certiorari volumus,
qui and quot Hundredi sunt in Balivatua, and Quorum sunt. Et quae and quot
Civitates, Burgi, and Villae, sunt in quolibet Hundredorum illorum, and qui
sunt Domini eorundem. Tibi praecipimus, firmiter injungentes, quod modis, and
v^is omnibus, quibus before ac diligentius poteris, te informs de praemissis.
Ita quod super. proxim* fafr. tentum apud Scaccarium nostrum. Thesaurarium, and
Barons nostros de eodem Scaccario poss is plen^ informare, and tu ipse, in
propria persona tua, sis ad dictum Scaccar. super prox. fafr. tentum ex hac
causa, nisi tunc licentiam a nobis habueris absens esse. Et tunc per illum quem
super perfr. tuum per te mittes ad Scaccar. praedictum Thesaurum and Barons
praedictos de praemissis before facias informare. Ita quod in te, vel in ipso,
quem pro te, ad dictum Sca^ccar. sic mittes defectus aliquis non inveniatur,
per quod ad te graviter capiamus. Et habeas ibi tunc hoc breve. Test meipso
apud Clypston, quinto die Mar^it, An Regni nostri Nono.

In obedience to the Kings command, this Sheriff vigorously prosecuted the
design, and made his Return accordingly on the same token, that, it thus began,

Nulla est Civitas in Comitat. Gloucest.
There is no City in the County of Gloucester.
Whence we collect, that Gloucester in that age (though the seat of a mi^red
Abbey) had not the reputation of a City, until it was made an Episcopal See by
K. Hen. 8. The like Letters were sent to all other Sheriffs in England, and
their Returns made into the Exchequer, where it is a kind of Dooms-day-Book,
junior, but commonly passes under the name of Nomina Villarum. I have by me a
Transcript of so much as concerns Gloucester-shire (the reason why this
Letter is here exemplified) communicated unto me, with other rarities
(advancing this Subject) by my worthy Friend Mr. Smith of Nibley.

It must not be omitted, that though the aforesaid Catalogue of Nomina Villarum
was begun in this year, and a considerable progress made therein, yet (some
unexpressed obstacles retarding) it, was not in all particulars completed,
until 20 years after, as by this passage therein may be demonstrated; Bertona
Regis juxta Gloucester. and ibidem Hund^idum, and Hundr. Margarettae Reginae
Angliae. Now this Margaret Queen of England, Daughter to Philip the Hardy King
of France, and second Wife to this King Edward the First, was not married unto
him, until the 27 of her Husbands reign, Anno 1299.

Edw. III.
5 THO. BERKELEY de COBBERLEY.]

He is commended in our Stows Annals, page 327.
Histories for his civil*usage of K. Edw. 2. when p^isoner at Berkeley Castle,
at this day one of the seats of that right ancient Famiiy.

And right ancient it is indeed, they being descended from Robert Fitz-Harding,
derived from the Kings of Denmark; as appears by an Inscription on the
Cambden in (...) set-shire.
Colledge-Gate at Bristol. Rex Henricus secundus and Dominus Robertus filius
Hardingi filii Regis Daciae, hujus Monasterii primi Fundatores extiterunt.

This Robert was entirely beloved of this King, by whose means his Son Maurice
married the Daughter of the Lord of Berkeley, whereby his posterity retained
the name of Berkeley. Many were their Mansions in this County, amongst which
Cobberley accrued unto them by matching with the Heir of Chandos. Their
services in the Holy War, alluded unto by the Crosses in their Arms, and may
seem to be their Benefactions, (whereof in my Church History) signified by the
Mitre in their Crest.

Of this Family was descended William Lord Berkeley, who was honored by King
Edward the fourth with the Title of Viscount Berkeley, created by K. Rich. 3.
Earl of Nottingham, (and in the right of his Wife, Daughter of Thomas Mowbray)
Duke of Norfolk. Henry the s^venth made him Marquess Berkeley, and Marshal of
England. He died without Issue.

At this day there flourishes many Noble stems sprung thereof, though George
Lord Berkeley, Baron Berkeley, Lord Mowbray, Segrave, Bruce be the top Branch
of this Family. One who has been so signally bountiful in promoting these (and
all other) my weak endeavors, that I deserve to be dumb, if ever I forget to
return him public thanks for the same.

43. JOHN POINTS.]

Remarkable the Antiquity of this Name and Family (still continuing in Knightly
degree in this County) for I read in Dooms-day-Book, Drugo filius Ponz tenet de
Rege Frantone. Ibi december Hide Geldant de hoc Manerio. And again, Walterus
filius Ponz tenet de Rege Let. Ibi december Hide Geldant.

I behold them as the Ancestors of their Family, till I shall be informed to
the contrary, though I confess they were not seated at Acton in this County,
until the days of King Edward the second, when Sir Nicholas Points, married the
Daughter and Heir of Acton, transmitting the same to his posterity.

Sheriffs.
Name. Place. Arms. RICH. II. Anno 1 Tho. Bradwell. 2 Johan. Tracy. Todingto^
Or, a scallop Sab. betw. two Bends, Gules. 3 Radulph. Waleys.* Sodbury 4 Tho.
Bradewell. * Azure, 6. Mullets, Or. 5 Joh. de Thorp. mil. Argent, a Fess
Nebule, Sable, betw. 3. Trefoiles, Gules. 6 Tho. Fitz Nichol. 7 Radus Waleys.
ut prius 8 Tho. Berkeley. Cobberley Gules, a Cheveron betwixt ten Crosses
formee, Argent. 9 Tho. Burgg. 10 Tho. Bradewell. ut prius Azure, three flower
de lys, Ermine. 11 Tho. Berkeley. ut prins 12 Laur. Seabrooke. 13 Tho* Burgg.
ut prius 14 Maur. de Russell. Derham Argent, on a Chief, Gules, 3. Bezants. 15
Hen. de la River. 16 Joh. de Berkeley. ut prius. 17 Gilbertus Denis. Gules, a
Bend ingrailed, Az. betw. 3. Leopards heads, Or, ^essant flower de lis of the
2d 18 Will. Tracy. ut prius 19 Maur. Russel. ut prius 20 Rob. Poyns. Acton
Barry of eight, Or, and Gul. 21 Johan* Berkeley. ut prius 22 Johan. Bronings.
HEN. IV. Anno 1 Hen* de la River. 2 Maur. Russel, and ut prius 2 Rob
Sommerville 3 Rob* Whittington. Gules, a Fess checkee, Or, and Argent. 4 Will.
Beauchamp, m 5 Idem 6 Johan. Grendore. Per pale Or, and Vert, 12. guttees or
drops, counterchanged. 7 Maur. Russel. ut prius. 8 Rob. Whittington. ut prius 9
Rich. Mawrdin. 10 Alex. Clivedon. 11 Will. Wallwine. Gules, a Bend within a
B^rder, Ermine. 12 Joh. Grendore, mil. ut prius HEN. V. Anno 1 Will. Beauchamp
Powkes. 2 John Berkley, mil. ut prius 3 John Grevel. Campden Or, on a Cross
engrailed within the like border, Sab. ten Annulets of the First, with a Mullet
of five points in the Dexter Quarter. 4 Idem. ut prius 5 Will. Tracy. ut prius
6 Will. Bishopeston: 7 Joh. Brugg, arm. ut prius 8 Joh. Willecots. 9 Idem. HEN.
VI. Anno 1 John Panfote. Gules, 3 Lions Rampant, Arg. 2 John Blacket, mil. 3
Steph. Hatfild, mil. 4 Joh. Grevil, arm. ut prius 5 Joh. Panfote. ut prius 6
Guido Whittington ut prius 7 Rob. Andrew. Sab. a Saltire engrailed, Ermin, on a
Chief, Or, 3. flower de lys of the First. 8 Egidius Brigge. * 9 Maur. Berkeley,
mil ut prius 10 Steph. Hatfield. * Arg. on a Cross, Sab. a Leopards head, Or.
11 Joh. Towerton. 12 Cuido Whittington ut prius 13 Joh Panfote. ut prius 4
Maur. Berkeley, mil ut prius 15 Idem. ut prius 16 Joh. Beauchamp, m. 17 Will.
Stafford. Thornb. Or, a Cheveron, Gules. 18 Joh. Stourton, mil. Sable, a Bend
Or, between 3. Fountains prop^r. 19 Idem. ut prius 20 Joh. Bo^iller. 21 Rob.
Leversey, 22 Will. Traey. ut prius 23 Idem. ut prius 24 Will. Gifford. 25 Joh.
Botiller. 26 Hen. Clifford. Frampton Checky, Or and Az. on a bend G. 3 Lioncels
ramp. of the first 27 Joh. Try. * on Severn 28 Joh. Gise. Elmor * Arg. a Bucks
head Gules. 29 Will. Tracy. ut prius Or, abend, Azure. 30 Jac. Clifford. ut
prius Lozengy Varry and Gul. on a Ca^ton, Or, a Mullet of 6. points, Sable. 31
Joh. Vele. * 32 Egidius Brigge. ut prius 33 Joh. Gise. ut prius * Arg. on a
Bend, Sab. three Calves, Or. 34 Wall. Devereux. m. 35 J^h. Bar, mil. Arg. a
Fesse Fules in Chief, three Torteauxes 36 Edw. Hu^gerford, m* 37 Nich. Latymer.
* S. ^ bars Ar. 3 plates in Chi^f 38 Tho. Hungerford. ut prius Gules, a Cross
Patance, Or. EDW. IV. Anno 1 John Grivel, arm. ut prius 2 Maur. Denis. ut prius
3 Idem. ut prius 4 Maur. Berkley, ar. ut prius 5 Ed. Hungerford, m. ut prius 6
Joh. Huggford, at. 7 Joh. Newton, ar 8 Joh. Grivel, mil. ut prius 9 Rob.
Points, mil. ut prius 10 Joh. Cassy, arm. Arg. a Cheveron betwixt three
Griffons heads erased, Gul. 11 Rich. Beauchamp, m 12 Idem. 13 Humph. Forster.
14 Joh. Botiller. mil. 15 Tho. Whitington, a. ut prius 16 Tho. Norton. ar. 17
Rob. Poines. ut prius 18 Tho. Baynam, ar. Or, a (...). betwixt 3. Bull^ heads,
Arg* 19 Edw. Langley. 20 Walt. Denis. ut prius Or, a cross saltire, Gul. 21 Jo.
St. Low, mil. 22 Rob. Poyntz, ar. ut prius RICH. III. Anno 1 Alex. Baynam. ut
prius 2 John Hudleston, ar. 3 Will. Berkley, m. ut prius 3 and Rob. Points. ut
prius HEN. VII. Anno 1 Rob. Poyntz, mil, ut prius 2 John St. Low, mil. 2 John
Welsh, ar. ut prius 3 4 Tho. Moreton. 5 Christ. (...) Tortworth Gul. on a
ch^veron Arg. 3. Bars Gemelle, Sable. 5 Tho. Hungerford, m. ut prius 7 Rich.
Pole, arm. Az. semee de flower de Lize, Or, a Lion rampant, Arg. 8 Rob. Miles.
9 Walt. Denis, mil. ut prius 10 Edw. Berkley. mil. ut prius 11 Joh. Whitington,
a ut prius 12 Rob. Points, mil. ut prius 13 Rich. Pole, ar. ut prius 14 Alex.
Baynam, mil. ut prius 15 Egidius Brugge, m. ut prius 16 Joh. Huddleston, m. 17
Rob. Points, mil. ut prius 18 Alex. Bay nam, mil. ut prius 19 Idem. ut prius 20
Egidius Genel. 21 J^h. ^utiller. ar. 22 Edw. Tame, ar. 23 Joh. Panneffot. ut
prius 24 Anth. Poyntz. ar. ut prius HEN. VIII. Anno 1 Maur. Berkley, mil. ut
prius 2 The. Poyntz, ar. ut prius 3 Christ. Baynam, ar. ut prius 4 Rob. Mor^on,
mil. 5 Will. Tracy, mil. ut prius 6 Will, Kingston, mil Misterden Azure, a
plain cross between 4 L^opards ^eads, Or. 7 Man^. Berkley, mil. ut prius 8
Alex. Baynam, mil. ut prius 9 Christ. Baynam, m. ut prius 10 Ioh. Whittington,
a. ut prius 11 Will. Denis, mil. ut prius 12 Egidius Tame, mil. 13 Tho. Poyntz,
ar. ut prius 14 Tho Berkley, mil. ut prius 15 Antho. Poyntz, mil ut prius 16
Edw. Tame, mil. 17 Edw. Wadham, mil Gules, a (...) betwixt 3. Roses, Arg. 18
Ioh Walsh, mil. ut prius 19 Will. Denis, mil. ut prius 20 Anth. Poyntz, mil. ut
prius 21 Will. Throgmorton a ut prius 22 Ioh. W^lsh, mil. ut prius 23 Edw.
Wadham, mi. ut prius 24 Walter Denis, mil. ut prius 25 Anth. Kingston, ar. ut
prius 26 Rich Legon, mil. Argent, 2 Lions passant, Gul. 27 Ioh. Walsh, mil. ut
prius 28 Ioh. St. Lo* mil. 29 Edw. Tame, mil. 30 Wal^. Den^s, mil. ut prius 31
Nich. Poyntz, mil. ut prius 32 Ioh. Walsh, mil. ut prius 33 ^dw. Wadham, m. ut
prius 34 Edw. Tame, mil. 35 Walt. Denis, mil. ut prius 36 Geo. Baynham, mil. ut
p^ius 37 Nich. Poyntz, mil. ut prius 38 Nich. VV^kes, ar. Az. a Lion (...)
checkque Argent an^ Gules. EDW. VI. Anno 1 Milo Pertrich, mil. Checkee, Ar. and
S. on a bend. G. 3 scallops, Or. 2 A^th. Porter, ar. * Newmark 3 Tho. Briges,
mil. ut prius * Gules, 5. Marlions wings in saltire, Arg. 4 Ant^. Kingston, mil
ut prius 5 Walt. Denis, mil. ut prius 6 Hugo Denis, ar. ut prius PHIL. and MAR.
Anno M 1. An. Hungerford, m ut prius 1. 2. Nich. Wikes, ar, ut prius 2. 3.
Walt. ^enis, mil. ut prius 3. 4. Nich. Pann^fort. ut prius 4. 5. Nich. Brain.
ar. Little De. Az* a Boar^ head G^les, on a Fesse betwixt three Hunters horns,
Arg. 5 6. Th. (...), ^ ut prius ELIZ. REG. Anno 1 Rich. Arnold, mil. 2 Rich.
Tracy, ar. ut prius 3 Nich. Walsh, ar. ut prius 4 Geo. Huntley, ar. (...). Arg.
on a chev. betw. 3 Stags heads couped, Sable, as many Bugles stringed of the
first. 5 Will Read, ar. 6 Rich. Berkley, ar. ut prius 7 Egidius Pole, mil. ut
prius Azure, a Griffon Ramp. Or. 8 Will. Palmer, ar. 9 Will. Hungerford, ar ut
prius 10 Rob. Brane, ar. ut pr^us 11 Nich. Points, mil. ut prius 12 Rich.
Baynam, ar. ut prius 13 Tho. Smith, ar. 14 Ioh. Bigford, ar. 15 Rob. Strange,
ar. 16 Tho. Porter, mil. ut prius 17 Tho. Wye, ar. 18 Walt. Campton, ar
Harthry 19 Tho. Chester. Almondsb 20 Ioh Tracy, mil. ut prius 21 Will. Read,
ar. ut prius ^2 Rich. Pate, ar. 23 Tho. Porter, mil. ut prius ^4 Tho. Baynham,
ar. ut prius 25 Tho. Smith, ar. Nibley Sab. on a Chev. engrailed, betwixt 6
Crosses patee Fitchee Or, 3 flowers de lys Az. each charged on the top with a
plate. 26 An. Hungerford, ar. ut prius 27 Ioh, Higford, ar. Dixton 28 Paul.
Tracy, ar. Stanway 29 Th. Throgmorto^, m. ut prius 30 Hen. Pole, mil. ut prius
31 Tho. Lucy, ar. 32 Will. Dutton, ar. Quarterly Arg. and Gul. in the 2d. and
3d. quarter a Fret, Or. 33 Ioh Poyntz, mil. ut prius 34 Will. Chester, ar. 35
Ioh. Davers. mil, Cinencest Gul. a Chev. inter 3 Mullets, Or. 36 Joseph Benham,
ar. 37 Hen. Winston, mil. 38 Ioh. Chamberlain, a. Prestbury Gul. an
Inescoucheon Arg. an Orle of mullets, Or. 39 Ioh. Hungerford, m ut prius
Cheokey, Or and Sab. a Fesse, Gul. 40 Edw. Winter, mil. Lidney 41 Geo. Huntley.
42 Th. Throgmorto^, m ut prius 43 Will. Dutton, ar. ut prius 44 Tho. Baynham.
ar. ut prius JACOBUS. Anno 1 Hen. Pole, mil. ut prius 2 Egid. Read, ar. ut
prius 3 Tho. Seymer, mil. Button G. 2 wings conjoined, Or, with in a border
gobonated, Arg. 4 Will. Norwood. * Leckha^pt. 5 Tho. Estcourt, mil. Lasbury *
Ermin, ^ cross engrailed, Gu. Anno 6 Rob Woodroff, m Erm. on a Chief indented
G. 3. Stars, Will. Guyes, ar. ut prius 7 Ioh. Tracy, mil. ut prius 8 Paul.
Tracy, ar. ut prius 9 Rob. Bathurst, ar. Lechlade 10 Ioh. Carter, ar. Charlton
11 Will. Kingston, ar. ut prius 12 Rich. Brent, ar. 13 Hen. Fin^h, ar. 14 Radus
C^tton, ar. Az. a Cheveron between three Cotton weeks, Arg. 15 Tho. Chester,
ar. Knolle 16 Rich. Hill, mil. 17 Ph. Langley, ar. Mangotsfi ut prius. 18 Tho.
Baker, mil. 19 Tho. Thynn, mil. Wiltshire Barry of ten, Or and Sable. 20 Tho.
Hodges, ar. Shipron 21 Rich. Rogers, mil. Eastwood 22 Ioh. Dowle, ar. CAROL. I.
Anno 1 Will, Sandys, mil. Misterden 2 Tho. Nicholas, ar Prestbury 3 Will.
Masters, mil Grencest. 4 Rich. Tracy, m. and b. ut prius 5 Hen. Dennis ar.
Paul Chapter ut prius. 6 Radus Dutton, mil. Standish ut prius. 7 Geo. VVinter,
mil. 8 Hen. Poole, a^m. ut prius 9 Egid. Fetiplace, m. Coln Alin Gul. two
Cheverons, Arg. 10 Edw. Stephens, ar. L. Sodbury 11 Will Leigh, ar. 12 Rich
Ducy, Bar. Frowcest. Or, two Lions passant, Gults. 13 Ioh. Poyntz, mil, ut
prius 14 Rob. Codrington, ar Codering ton Arg. a Fes^ imbattled, Sable, between
3. Lions passant, Gu. 15 ^6 17 Fr. Creswick, ar. Bristol ^8 19 12 21 Or, on a
Fess, Gul. 3. chessRooks of the first, as many Martlets in Chief, Sab. 22
Will. Brown, ar. Hasfield

Hen. VIII.
6. WILLIAM KKNGSTON, Mil.]

I read in an industrious Burton in description of Leichestershire, page 320.
Author, that Sir Will. Kingston was created by K. Hen. 8. Knight of the
Garter, which I humbly conceive to be a mistake, having several exact
Catalogues of all admitted into that Order, amongst whom he does not appear;
yet was he Lieutenant of the Tower, and Captain of the Guard to K. Hen. 8. by
whom he was much trusted and employed. Cardinal Wolsey had it given him in
advice, to beware of Lord Howard in his Defensative against Prophesies, fol 130.
Kingston, which he mistook for the Market Town in Surry well known, and
therefore declined going thither, though many miles his nearer way, in passage
to the Court. But at last he found this our Sir Anthony his formidable and
fatal Kingston, when sent to fetch him out of the North, with some of the
Gua^d. And, though he treated the Card. most courteously (saluting him on his
Lord Herbert ut prius.
knees) yet the sight of him went to his heart, dying within few days after.

Edw. VI.
4. ANTHONY KINGSTON, Mil.]

This was that terr^ble Provost Marshal of the Kings Army in the execution of
the Western Rebels, whose memory I find accused by In his life of K. Edw. 6.
Sir John Heywood for his cruelty, and defended by In his Survey of Cornwall.
Mr. Carew. This Sir Anthony, so frightful to all guilty persons, fell himself
into the same fear, in the reign of Q. Mary, on this occasion. Some were said
to have a design to raise war against the Queen, and resolved to provide the
sinews before the bones of war, money before men. In order whereunto their
design was to rob the Exchequer, then furnished with 50000. ^. This being
discovered, mane were accused as Plotters, more as Privy, amongst whom Sir
Anthony Kingston, being sent for to come up, he died (for fear of death, some
suppose) in his Holingshed in the fourth of Q Mary. page 1132.
way to London.

The Farewell.
I congratulate the Felicity of this County in the return of the Episcopal See
to the chief City th^reof; the rather seeing some questioned its Charter, and
would have had it Un Citied, because Un Bishoped in our Civil Wars, though
(with their leave) by the courtesy of England, once a City and ever a City.
May the same hereafter ever remain there to take away all suspicion in that
kind for the future.

HANT-SHIRE has Berk-shire on the North, Surrey and Sussex on the East, the
Sea on the South, Dorcet and Wilt-shire on the West. From North unto South it
extends unto fifty four miles, not stretching above thirty miles from the
East to the West thereof.

A happy Country in the four Elements, if Culinary fire in Courtesy may pass
for one, with plenty of the best wood for the fuel thereof; most pure and
peircing the air of this Shire; and none in England has more plenty of clear
and fresh rivulets of [ troutful] water, not to speak of the friendly Sea
conveniently distanced from London: As for the Earth, it is both fair and
fruitful, and may pass for an Expedient betwixt Pleasure and Profit; where by
mutual consent they are moderately accommodated.

Yet much of the Arable therein is stony ground, though not like that in the
Gospel, where the grain grew up and withered so soon, having no Matthew. 13. 5.
deepness of earth, this bringing plenty of corn to perfection. Indeed, that in
the Parable may be presumed inwardly a rock only faced over with superficial
earth, whereas this has solid earth enough, but abounding with little loose
stones lying above it, which are conceived to keep the Corn the warmer; and
therefore some skillful in Husbandry have maintained, that the taking of them
away, does more hurt than good to the ground.

The South-West part of this County is called the New Forest, not in the same
sense as New College in Oxford, then at the founding the Newest, which since
has gained many Puis nes thereunto; but because the Junior of all Forests in
England, many having been Dis- none In-forrested since the Conquest. True it
is, King Henry the 8th. made a Forest about his Palace of Hampton in Middlesex
by the name of Hamptonforrest; but it never obtained peaceable possession in
public pronunciation, (blame not the people thereabout if in point of Profit
their tongues would not cross their hearts) as this New-Forrest did. Whereof
hereafter.

Natural Commodities.
Red Deer.
Great store of these were lately in New Forest, so called because Newly made
by K. William the Conqueror, Otherwise ten years hence it will be six hundred
years old: Indeed, as Augustus C^sar is said to have said of Herod King of
Judaea, that it was better to be his Hog than his Child: So was it most true
of that King William, that it was better to have been his Stag than his
Subject; the one being by him spared and preserved, the other ruined and
destroyed: Such was the Vastation he made of Towns in this County to make room
for his game. And it is worth our observing the opposition betwixt the
Characters of

K. EDGAR. K. WILLIAM.
Camden's Brit. in Somersetshire.
Templa Deo, Templis Monachos, Monachis dedit agros. Idem in Hant-shire.
Templa adimit Divis, fora Civibus, arva Colonis. And now was the South-West of
this County made a Forest indeed, if as an Sir To. Cotton (under the name of
Mr. Speed in Huntingtonshire.)
Antiquary has observed, a Forest be so called, quia foris est, because it is
set open and abroad. The Stags therein were stately creatures, jealous,
revengeful; insomuch, that I have been credibly informed, that a Stag unable
for the present to master another, who had taken his Hind from him, waited his
opportunity, till his enemy had weakened himself with his wantonness, and then
killed him. Their Flesh may well be good, whose very Horns are accounted
Cordial. Besides, there is a concave in the neck of a green-headed Stag, when
above his first crossing, wherein are many worms some 2. inches in length, very
useful in Physic, and therefore carefully put up by Sir Theodore Mayerne, and
other skilful Physicians. But I believe there be few Stags now in NewForest,
fewer Hearts, and not any Harts-Royal (as escaping the chase of a King) though
in time there may be some again.

Honey.
Although this County affords not such Lakes of Honey, as some P. Jovius de
legatione Muscovitarum, and (...) de (...).
Authors relate found in hollow Trees in Muscovy, nor yields Combs equal to
that which Pliny Not. Hist. lib. 11. cap. 24.
reports seen in Germany, eight foot long, yet produces it plenty of this
necessary and profitable Commodity.

Indeed Hantshire has the worst and best Honey in England, worst, on the Heath
hardly worth five pound the Barrel, best, in the Champian where the same
quantity will well nigh be sold for twice as much. And it is generally
observed, the finer the Wheat and Wool, both which very good in this County,
the purer the Honey of that place.

Honey is useful for many purposes, especially that Honey which is the lowest in
any Vessel. For it is Naturae liquor iste novae cui summa natat faex. Auson.
an old and true rule, the best Oil is in the top; the best Wine in the
middle, and the best Honey in the bottom. It opens Obstructions, clears the
Breast and Lights from those humors which fall from the head, loosneth the
belly, with many other sovereign qualities, too many to be reckoned up in a
Winters day.

However we may observe three degrees, or kinds rather of Honey.

1. Virgin Honey, which is the purest, of a late Swarm which never bred Bees. 2.
Chaste Honey, for so I may term all the rest which is not Sophisticated with any
addition. 3. Harlot Honey, as which is adulterated with Meal, and other trash
mingled therewith.
Of the first and second sort I understand the Counsel of Solomon, My Prove. 24.
13.
Son eat Honey for it is good, good absolutely in the substance, though there
may be excess in the quantity thereof.

Wax.
This is the Cask, where Honey is the Liquour, and being yellow by Nature, is by
Art made white, red and green, which I take to be the dearest colors,
especially, when appendant on Parchment. Wax is good by Day and by Night, when
it affords light, for Sight the clearest, for Smell the sweetest, for Touch
the cleanliest. Useful in Law to seal Instruments, and in Physic, to mollify
Sinews, ripen and dissolve Ulcers, etc. Yea, the Ground and Foundation of all
Cere-cloath (so called from Cera) is made of Wax.

Hoggs.
Hantshire Hoggs, are allowed by all for the best Bacon, being our English
Westphalian, and which well ordered has deceived the most judicious Pallats.
Here the Swine feed in the Forest on plenty of Acorns, ( Men's meat in the
golden, Olim communis pecori cibus atque homini Glans. Auson.
Hogs food in this iron Age,) which going out lean, return home fat, without
either care or cost of their Owners. Nothing but fullness stinteth their feeding
on the Mast falling from the Trees, where also they lodge at liberty, (not pent
up, as in other places, to stacks of Pease) which some assign the reason of the
fineness of their flesh, which though not all Glorre (where no bancks of lean,
can be seen for the Deluge of fat) is no less delicious to the taste, and more
wholesome for the stomach.

Swines-flesh by the way is observed most nutritive of men's bodies, because of
its assimilation thereunto. Yet was the eating thereof forbidden to the Jews,
whereof this Reason may be rendered, (besides the absolute Will of the
Lawgiver,) because in hot countries Men's bodies are subject to the Meastes and
Leprosies, who have their greatest repast on Swines-flesh. For the Climate of
Canaan, was all the year long as hot, as England betwixt May and Michael-mass,
and it is penal for any Butchers with us in that Term to kill any Pork in the
Public Shambles.

As for the Manufacture of Clothing in this County, (diffused throughout the
same) such as deny the goodness of Hant-shire Cloth, and have occasion to wear
it, will be convinced of its true worth by the price which they must pay for it.

The Buildings.
The Cathedral in Winchester yeildeth to none in England for venerable
magnificence. It could not be Opus unius saeculi, perfected by the contributive
endeavors of several successive Bishops, whereof some lie most sumptuously
interred in their Chappel-like-Monuments.

On the walls of the Quire on each side, the dust of the Saxon-Kings, and
ancient Bishops of this Church were decently Intombed (many hundred years
after) by Richard Fox Bishop of this See, till in the beginning of our Civil
Wars, they were barbarously thrown down by the Soldiers.

Josephus reports (what some hardly believe) how Herod took many talents of
Treasure out of the Sepulcher of David; sure I am they met with no such wealth
here in this Mine of Mortality amongst the ashes, which did none any injury,
and therefore why Malice should scratch out that, which did not bite it, is to
me unknown.

As for Civil Structures, Basing, built by the first Marquess of Winchester,
was the greatest of any Subjects House in England, yea larger than most (Eagles
have not the biggest Nests of all Birds) of the Kings Palaces. The Motto Love
Loyalty, was often written in every window thereof, and was well practiced in
it, when for resistance on that account, it was lately levelled to the Ground.

Next Basing, Bramsell, built by the last Lord Zouch in a bleak and barren
place, was a stately Structure, especially before part thereof was defaced with
a casual fire.

The Wonders.
There is an Oak in this County, which by most credible people is generally
reported to put forth green leaves yearly on, or about, Christ-mas day. It
grows nigh Lindhurst in the New Forest, and perchance I could point more
exactly at the position thereof, but am loath to direct some ignorant Zealot,
lest he cut it down under the notion of superstition, and make Timber of this
Oak, as some lately have made Fuel of the Hawthorn at Glassenburie.

Proverbs.
Manners makes a Man, Quoth William Wickham.

This generally was his Motto inscribed frequently on the places of his
Founding, so that it has since acquired a Proverbial Reputation. We commonly
say

In the 1. Church, God makes a Man, as who truly created him. 2. Court, Clothes
make a Man, as which habit and adorn him. 3. Change, Money makes a Man, which
puts him in a solvable condition. 4. Schools, Manners make a Man, as which
complete and accomplish him.

Grant the two middle Expressions, the extravagancy of our Pride and
Covetousness, the first and last must be allowed proportionable to Piety and
Truth. Without manners one is but a Man-beast or Centaure.

Now seeing no man without Manners, no Manners without some Learning, no
Learning without Teaching, no teaching of Youth to that in a Grammar
Free School; of men to that in a College, in an Universitie; How much thanks
does Posterity owe to this VVickham's memory.

Canterbury is the higher Rack, but Winchester is the better Manger,]

W. Edington, Bishop Godwin in the Bishops of Winc hester.
Bishop of Winchester, was the Author of this Expression, rendering this the
reason of his refusal to be removed to Canterbury, though chosen thereunto.
Indeed though Canterbury be Graced with an higher Honor, the Revenues of
Winchester lying entirely, are more advantageous to gather riches thereon. The
Proverb is appliable to such, who prefer a wealthy Privacy, before a less
profitable Dignity.

Yet know that that Manger did once partly maintain that Rack, viz. When John
White Bishop of Winchester was enjoined by Queen Mary, to pay a thousand pound
a year to Cardinal Poole, Archbishop of Canterbury, for the better support of
his Estate.

The Isle of Came. Brit. in the Isle of Wight.
Wight has no Monks, Lawyers, nor Foxes.]

This Speech has more mirth, than Truth in it. That they had Monks I know,
Speeds Cat^ of Religious Houses.
Black ones, at Carisbrook; White ones, at Quarter in this Island. That they
have Lawyers they know, when they pay them their Fees; and that they have Foxes
their Lambs know. However, because perchance they have fewer in proportion to
places of the like extent, (and few or none are often coupled in common
discourse) let not that which was pleasantly spoken be frowardly taken, but
pass as we found it to Posterity.

Princes.
HENRY Eldest Son of King John and his Wife ISABEL, born at Winchester Anno
1208. was one (besides the account of Longaevity) Eminent in his Generation. He
was a most pious King, Son to a profane Father [King John] A very poor King,
brother to a most wealthy [ Richard King of the Romans.] A very weak King,
Father to a most wise Son, Edward the First. The Tragi-Comedie of his life was
Eminent in many particulars.

1. He had scarce half a Kingdom in the beginning of his Reign, Lewis of
France, being brought in to be King by the English in their hot, and cast out
in their cold Blood. 2. He had no part of a Kingdom in the middle of his
Reign, Imbroyled with War with his Barons, Beaten in Battle, Imprisoned, and no
King in effect. 3. He had all the Kingdom in the end of his Reign. For as soon
as Prince Edward began to Man it, This His Son may be accounted his Father, by
whom he attained a comfortable Old Age.
He was not so weak, but that he knew who were wiser then himself, and would be
governed by them, One main cause which procured his Death in Peace, and Burial
in Pomp, In the Abbey of Westminster of his own foundation, Anno Dom. 1273.

ELEANOR tenth Daughter, sixteenth and youngest Child of King Edward the First,
was born at Speeds Chro. Page 565.
Winchester the 6. of May 1306. and died in her Infancy, So that the Epitaph
which I find elsewhere of an Infant of meaner birth may be applied unto her.
(She lies buried at Saint Peter's Westminster, having her Picture upon her
Monument with three of her Brothers.)

ARTHUR, Eldest son to King Henry the Seventh, and Queen Elizabeth, was born,
(being partus Lord Verulam in his Hen. the 7.
octomestris, yet vital and vigorous, contrary to the rules of Physicians) at
Speeds Chro. Page 763.
Winchester the 20. day of September 1486. Some will wonder at his name,
whereof no Alliance, nor English Prince, since the unhappy Arthur Duke of
Britain, supposed to be made away by King John, his cruel Uncle. But because
this Prince by his Fathers side, was, with King Arthur of British extraction,
and because born at Winchester where King Arthur kept his Court, and His
[pretended] Round Table still to be seen, that name was bestowed upon him. He
died at Ludlow, in the sixteenth year of his Age, Anno 1502. and is buried in
the Cathedral of Worcester, more known to Posterity by the Widow he left, the
Lady Katherine Dowager, (and the effects ensuing thereon) then by any of his
own personal performances.

Saints.
EDBURGH eight Daughter of King Edward the Elder and his first by Queen Edgiva
gave when but three years of Age a great Hen. Higgd. and Polick. lib. 6. cap. 4.
Augury of her future Piety, Her Father presenting before her, and leaving to
her choice,

On the one hand the New Testament and a Flowers of the English Saints, Page
570. June the 15.
Challice.

On the other, Jewels, Rings and Bracelets.

She took the New Testament and the Challice (conceive it not because of Massy
Silver, but) acted with the Principal of Infant Piety; Hereupon her Parents
left her to her own disposal, who became a Nun at Winchester after the Order of
Saint Benedict under-going the Austeritic of that Order. It is reported of her,
(Forgive me Reader, though I would not write these things they are so Absurd, I
cannot but write them they are so Absurd;) That she would by night play the
part of a Idem Ibidem.
Pious Thief and steal the Socks of all the other Nuns, and having carefully
washed and anointed them, restore them to their beds sides.

This Saint EDBURG died on the 15. of June 920. Some of her bones being kept at
Winchester, others say The English Martyrologie in the 15. of June.
at Wilton, (So facile the mistakes in Latin betwixt WILTONIA and WINTONIA)
and the rest were translated to Pershore, an Abbey in the Diocese of WORCESTER.

Martyrs.
This County being in the Diocese of Winchester, escaped very well in the
MARIAN DAYS from any visible persecution. Under God it might thank Stephen
Gardener, or rather Gardners policy. This Bishop like a Cunning Hunter
preserved the GAME fair at home, and Killed it in the WALKS of other Keepers:
It was not he, but bloody Bonner, who procured the death of,

JOHN PHILPOT Son of Sir J. Bale Descript. Brit. Cent. 8. number. 89.
Peter Philpot Knight, was born in this County, whose Family had an Ancient
habitation at therein. He proceeded Mr. of Arts in New College in Oxford; And
afterward being Archdeacon of Lincoln, was a Zealous Promoter of the
Protestant Religion. In the first of Queen Mary, being a member of the
Convocation, his heart was hot within: And while he was musing, the fire
kindled, and he spoke with his tongue, which afterward occasioned his
Martyrdom.

If Papists account him a Distracted Man, none will wonder, who consider how
the profane Captains of Israel, called the Son of the Prophet, a 2 King. 9.
11.
mad fellow: And if some vehement expressions fell from him during his
imprisonment, his enemies Cruelty was the Cause thereof. Seeing ill usage, which
once made a dumb beast to Numb. 22. 28.
speak, may make a Sober man Overspeak in his passion. But all his sufferings
are reported by Mr. Fox so perfectly, ( Perfectum est cui nihil addi potest)
that it is presumption for any to hope to make an essential Addition thereunto.
He was Martyred Anno Dom. 1555. December. 18.

KATHARINE GOVVCHES.

GUILLEMINE GILBERT.

PEROTINE MASSEY whose husband, a Minister of Gods word, was for fear fled out
of the Island.

The first of these was the Mother, a poor widow of St. Peter's Port, in the
Isle of Guernsey; the other two her Daughters (but married women) These in the
reign of Queen Mary, were noted to be much absent from the Church; for which
they were presented before Jaques Amy then Dean of the Island, who finding them
to hold opinions against the real presence in the Sacrament of the Altar,
condemned them to be burnt for Heretics, which was done accordingly, July 18.
1556.

Add to these an Infant without a Christian name, and no wonder it is never
named, seeing properly it was never born; but by the force of the flame burst
out of his mothers belly, Perotine Massey aforesaid. This Babe was taken up by
W. House a by-stander, and by the Command of Elier Gosselin the Bailiff
(supreme Officer in the then absence of the Governor of the Island) cast again
into the fire, and therein consumed to Ashes. It seems this bloody Bailiff, was
minded like the Cruel Tyrant, Commanding, Canis pessimi ne catulum esse
relinquendum, though this indeed was no Dog but a Lamb, and that of the first
minute, and therefore too young by the Levitical Law to be sacrificed.

Here was a Spectacle without precedent, a Cruelty built three generations
high, that Grandmother, Mother, and Grandchild, should all suffer in the same
Flame. And know Reader, these Martyrs dying in the Isle of Guernsey, are here
reckoned in Hampshire, because that Island with Jersey (formerly subordinate to
the Archbishop of Constance in Normandy) have since the reign of Queen
Elizabeth, been annexed to the Diocese of Winchester.

Prelates.
William Wickham was born at Wickham in this County, being the Son of John
Perot, and Sibel his wife, (over whose graves he has erected a Chapel at
Titchfield in this County) and bred in the University of Oxford. He was
otherwise called Long, from the height of his stature (as my Godwin in the
Bishops of Winchest.
Author conceives) though since it may be applied to the perpetuity of his
memory, which will last as long as the world endures, for his two fair
Foundations at

OXFORD, WINCHESTER. Begun Those dates are exactly Transcribed out of the
Records of NewColledge.
1379. Finished 1386. Begun 1387. Finished 1393. The Charter of the Foundation
of St. Maries-Colledge in Oxford, was dated the 26. of November, 1379. in his
Manor in Southwarke, since called VVinchester-House. The Scholars entered
thereunto about nine a clock on the 14. day of April in the same year. The
first Stone was laid, March 26. at nine a clock in the morning, in the 69. year
of the age of the Founder.

He died in the 37th. year of his Consecration, and 80th. of his Age, in the
5th. year of the Reign of King Henry the Fourth, and his Benefaction to
Learning is not to be paralleld by any English Subject, in all particulars.

JOHN RUSSELL was born in this County, in the Parish of Register of
New-Colledge, in Anno 1449.
Saint Peter's in the Suburbs of Winchester. He was bred Fellow of
New-Colledge, and when Doctor of Canon Law, was chosen Chancellor of Oxford.
Yea, that Office annual before, was first fixed on Godwin in Catalogue of
Bishops of Lincoln.
him (as in Cambridge on Bishop Fisher) for term of life.

By King EDWARD the Fourth, he was advanced Bishop of Lincoln, and by Richard
the Third J. Philpot in Catalogue of Chancellors, page 65.
Ld. Chancellor of England, having ability enough to serve any, and honesty too
much to please so bad a King. And because he could not bring him to his bent,
when the Lord Hastings was killed, this Bishop (says my Harps field, Hist.
Eccl. Ang. d^cimo quinto saeculo. c. 24.
Author) was for a time imprisoned. He died January the 30. Anno 1490. Leaving
this Character behind him, Vir fuit summa Idem ibid.
pietate, and ex rerum usu oppido quam prudens, doctrina etiam singulari.

WILLIAM WARHAM was born at New-Colledge Register in the year. 1475
Ockley of Worshipful Parentage in this County, bred Fellow and Doctor of the
Laws in New-Colledge, employed by King Henry the Seventh (who never sent
sluggard or fool on his errand) to Margaret Duchess of Burgundy, and by him
advanced Bishop of London, then Archbishop of Canterbury, living therein in
great luster, till eclipsed in power and profit by Thomas Wolsey, Archbishop
of York.

It may be said, that England then had ten Archbishops, if a figure and cipher
amount to so many, or else, if it had but two, they were Archbishop Thomas,
and Archbishop Wolsey, drawing all causes to his Court-legatine, whilst all
other Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions in England kept a constant vacation. This,
Warham bare with much moderation, contenting himself, that, as he had less
honor, so he had less envy, and kept himself cool, whilst Wolsey his
screene, was often scorched with just and general hatred.

In the case of K. Henry His divorce, he was the Prime Godwin in the
Archbishops of Canterbury.
Advocate for Queen Katherine, and carried it so cautiously, that he neither
betrayed the cause of his Client, nor incurred the Kings displeasure. Nor will
any wonder, that an Archbishop of Canterbury did then plead before an
Archbishop of York, seeing the King at the same time was summoned before His
Subject.

He survived VVolsey's ruin, but never recovered his former greatness, blasted
with a PRAEMUNIR^ with the rest of the Clergy, and the heavier, because the
higher in dignity. He is said to have expended thirty thousand pounds in the
repair of his Palaces, the probable reason, why he left no other public
Monuments, though Archbishop twenty eight years, dying Anno Domini 1533.

ROBERT SHERBORN was born in this ^ew Coll. Register in the year 1474.
County, and bred first in Winchester, and then in New Coll. was a great
Scholar, and prudent Man, employed in several Embassies by K. Henry the
seventh, and by him preferred Bishop first of St. David's, then Chichester:
Which Church he decored with many Ornaments and Edifices, especially the
South Side thereof, Where

On the one side On the other The Cambdens Brit. in Sussex.
History of the foundation of the Church, with the Images of the Kings of *
Godwin in his Bishops of Chichester.
England. The Statues of all the Bishops of this See, both those of Selcey, and
of Chichester.

He often inscribed for his Motto, Dilexi decorem domus tuae Domine; I have
loved the beauty of thy House, o Lord: and sometimes Godwin in his Bishops of
Chichester.
Credit operibus, Trust their works. Now although some may like his Alms
better then his Trumpet, Charity will make the most favorable construction
thereof. Being 96. years of age he resigned his Bishopric, and died in the
same year, Anno Dom. 1536.

JOHN WHITE was born in this County of a Sir J. Harrington in the Bishops of
Winchester.
worshipful House, began on the floor, and mounted up to the roof of Spiritual
Dignity in this Diocese. First Scholar in Winchester, then Fellow of
New-colledge in Oxford, then Master of VVinchesterSchool; then Warden of that
College, and at last, (taking Lincoln Bishopric in his passage) Bishop of
Winchester, all composed in Made by Christopher Johnson afterward
Schoolmaster of Winchester.
this Distick.

Me puero Custos, Ludi paulo ante Magister,
VITUS, and hac demum Praesul in Urbe fuit.
I may call the latter a Golden Verse, for it cost this White many an Angel to
make it true, entering into his Bishopric on this condition, to pay to Cardinal
Pole, a yearly Pension of a thousand pounds. Now though this was no better then
Simony, yet the Prelates Pride was so far above his Covetousness, and his
Covetousness so far above his Conscience, that he swallowed it without any
regreet.

He was a tolerable Poet, and Pi^s de ill. Ang. Script. page 763.
wrote an Elegy on the Eucharist to prove the corporal presence, and confute
Peter Martyr; the first and last I believe, who brought controversial Divinity
into Verses. He preached the Funeral Sermon of Queen Mary (or if you will of
public Popery in England) praising Her so beyond all measure, and slighting
Queen Elizabeth without any cause, that he justly incurred Her displeasure.
This cost him deprivation and imprisonment, straiter then others of his Order
(though freer than any Protestant had under Popish Persecutours) until his
death, which happened at London about the year 1560.

Since the Reformation.
THOMAS BILSON was born in the City of N^w College Register, Anno 1565.
Winchester, bred first Scholar in Winchester-School, then (taking New-Colledge
in his passage) Schoolmaster thereof, afterward Warden of the College, and
at last (taking Worcester in his way) Bishop of Winchester. As reverend and
learned a Prelate as England ever afforded, witness his worthy Works, Of the
perpetual Government of Christ's Church, and of Christ's Descent into Hell, not

Ad 1. Patiendum, to Suffer, which was concluded on the Cross with it is John
19. 30.
finished. Nor, 2. Praedicandum, to Preach, useless where his Auditory was all
the forlorn hope. Neither, 3. Liberandum, to Free any, Pardon never coming
after Execution. But, 4. Possidendum, to take possession of Hell which he had
conquered. And 5. Triumphandum, to Triumph, which is most honorable in
Hostico, in the Enemies own Country.

The New Translation of the Bible was by King James his command ultimately
committed to his, See the life of Dr. Smith prefixed to his Sermon.
and Dr. Smiths (Bishop of Gloueester) perusal, who put the completing hand
thereunto. His pious departure out of this life happened 1618.

HENRY COTTON was born at Warblington in this County, being a younger son unto
Sir Richard Cotton, Knight, and privy Councellor to King Edward the Sixth.
Queen (whilst yet but Lady) Elizabeth, being then but twelve years of age was
his God-mother: He was bred in Magdalen College in Oxford, and was by the
Queen preferred Bishop of Salisbury. When she pleasantly said, That formerly
she had blessed many of her God-sons, but now her God-son should bless her:
Reflecting on the Solemnity of Episcopal Benediction. He was consecrated,
November the 12. 1598. at which time William Cotton (of another Family) was
made Bishop of Exeter. The Queen merrily saying, (alluding to the plenty of
clothing in those parts) that she hoped that now she had well Cottoned the
West. By his wife whose name was Patience, he had nineteen children, and died,
May the 7. 1615.

ARTHUR LAKES was born in the Parish New-Colledge Register, Anno 1589. wherein
he was admitted.
of Saint Michael, in the Town of Southampton, bred first in
VVinchester-School, then Fellow of New-Colledge. In his own nature he preferred
the fruitfulness of the Vine, and fatness of the Olive (painfulness in a
private Parish) before the government of the Trees, had not immediate
Providence without his suit and seeking, preferred him successively Warden of
New-Colledge, Prefect of Saint Crosses nigh Winchester, Dean of Worcester,
Bishop of Bath and Wells.

He continued the same in his Rochet, what he was in his Scholars-gown, and
lived a real comment upon Saint Paul's character of a Bishop.

1. Blameless.] Such as hated his Order, could not cast any aspersion upon him.
2. The Husband of one Wife,] He took not that lawful Liberty, but led a single
Life, honoring Matrimony in his brethren, who embraced it. 3. Vigilant,]
Examining Canonically in his own person all those whom he ordained. 4: Sober,
of good behavior.] Such his austerity in diet (from his University-Commons, to
his dying day) that he generally fed but on one (and that no dainty) dish, and
fasted four times a week from supper. 5. Given to Hospitality.] When Master of
Saint Crosses, he increased the allowance of the poor-Brethren, in diet and
otherwise. When Bishop, he kept 50. servants in his Family, not so much for
state or attendance on his Person, but pure charity in regard of their private
need. 6. Apt to teach.] the Living with his pious Sermons, in his Cathedral and
neighboring Parishes; and Posterity with those learned Writings he has left
behind him. 7. Not given to Wine,] His abstemiousness herein was remarkable.
8. No striker, not given to filthy lucre.] He never fouled his fingers with the
least touch of Gehazi's reward, freely preferring desert. 9. One that rules
well his own House.] The rankness of Housekeeping brake not out into any Riot,
and a Chapter was constantly read every Meal, by one kept for that purpose.
Every night (besides Cathedral and Chappel-Prayers) he prayed in his own Person
with his Family in his Dining Room.
In a word, his Intellectuals had such predominancy of his Sensuals, or rather
Grace so ruled in both, that the Man in him being subordinate to the Christian,
he lived a pattern of Piety.

I have read of one Arthur Faunt, a Jesuit, who entering into Orders, renounced
his Christian name, (...) Description of Leichestershire, page 105.
because (forsooth) never Legendary Saint thereof, and assumed that of
Laurence. This gracious Arthur was not so superstitiously scrupulous, (and if
none before) may pass for the first Saint of his name, dying in the fifty ninth
year of his age. Anno Domini, 1602.

Statesmen.
RICHARD RICH Knight, was in the words of my Author J. Philpot in his Car^. of
Chancellors, page 73.
A Gentleman well descended and allied in this County: Bred in the Temple in
the study of our Common Law, and afterward became Solicitor to King Henry the
eighth. His Deposition on Oath upon words spoken to him in the Tower, was the
sharpest evidence to cut off the head of Sir Thomas More. He was under Cromwell
a lesser hammerto knock down Abbeys, most of the Grants of which Lands going
through his hands, no wonder, if some stuck upon his fingers.

Under King Edward the Sixth, he was made Lord Chancellor of England,
dischargeing his place with Prudence and Equity for the term of five years.
Foreseeing he should be outed of his Office, (being of the Anti-faction to Duke
Dudley) to prevent stripping, he politickly put off his Robes of State,
(resigning his Office:) Which done, no danger of catching cold his own
Under-suit was so well lined, having gotten a fair Estate about Lees Abbey in
Essex, whereof he was created Baron. He died in the beginning of the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, being direct Ancestour unto the right Honorable Charles Rich,
now Earl of Warwick.

WILLIAM POWLET (where ever born) had his largest Estate, and highest S. N.
Honor, (Baron of Basing, and Marquess of Winchester) in this County. He was
descended from a younger house of the Powlets of Hinton Saint George in
Sommersetshire, as by the Crescent in his Arms is acknowledged. One Sir Robert
(...) in his (...) (...).
tells us, that he being a younger brother, and having wasted all that was
left him, came to Court on trust, where, upon the bare stock of his wit, he
traffick'd so wisely, and prospered so well, that he got, spent, and left, more
than any Subject since the Conquest.

Indeed he lived at the time of the dissolution (of Abbeys, which was the
harvest of Estates; and it argued idleness, if any Courtier had his Barnes
empty. He was servant to K. Henry the seventh, and for Thirty years together
Treasurer to K. Henry the eighth, Edward the sixth, Qu. Mary, and Qu.
Elizabeth. The (...), in some (...), owed their Crowns to his Counsel: his
policy being the principal (...) of Duke Dudleys Design, to disinherit them.

I behold this Lord (...) like to aged Adoram, so often mentioned in Scripture,
being over the Tribute in the days of K. 2 Samuel 20. 24.
David, all the Reign of 1 King. 4. 6.
K. Solomon, until the first King* 12. 18.
Year of (...). And though our Lord Powlet enjoyed his place not so many years,
yet did he serve more Sovereigns, in more mutable times, being (as he said of
himself) no (...), but an (...).

Herein the Parallel holds not, The honry hairs of Ad^m were sent to the Grave,
by a violent death, Ibidem.
slain by the people in a (...): This Lord had the rare happiness of (...),
setting in his full splendor, having lived 97 years, and seen 103 out of his
body: he dyed, anno Domini 1572.

Sr. THOMAS LAKES was born in the Parish of St. Michael, in the Town of
SouthHampton, and there bred in Grammer-Learning, under Doctor Seravia. By
several under Offices he was at last deservedly preferred Secretary of Estate
to K. James: Incredible his dexterity in dispatch, who at the same time would
indite, write, discourse, more exactly than most men could severally perform
them. Men resembled him to one of the hips-Royal of Qu. Elizabeth, called the
Swift-sure, such his celerity and solidity in all Affairs. No less his
secrecy in concealing, and what was credited to his Counsel was always found
in the same posture it was left in. Add to all these, he was a good man, and a
good man's Brother, Dr. Arthur Lakes, Bishop of Bath-and- Wells. King James (who
always loved what was facile and fluent) was highly pleased with his Latin
Pen, who by practice had made Tullie's phrase his own. He was one of the three
noble hands, who at the Court first led Mr. George Villers into the favor of
King James.

At last he fell, for the faults of others, into the Kings displeasure, being
punished for the Offenses of one of his nearest Relations, and of all them
fined in the starchamber, he was the only person generally pitied for his
suffering: yet even then K. James gave him this public Eulogie in open Court,
That he was a Minister of State fit to serve the greatest Prince in Europe. He
was outed his Secretaries place, which needed him more than he it, having
achieved a fair fortune, which he transmitted to posterity. How long he lived
afterward in a private life, is to me unknown.

Soldiers.
BEAVOIS an English man was Earl of South-Hampton, in the time of the
Conqueror, and being unable to comport with his Oppression, banded against him
with the Fragments of the English men, the strength of Hastings the Dane, and
all the assistance the Welsh could afford. In whose Country a Battle was
fought, near Carcliffe, against the Normans, anno Domini 1070. wherein Three
Nations were conquered by One. Beavois being worsted ( Success depends not on
Valor) fled to Carlisle, (a long step from Carcliffe:) And afterward no
mention what became of him.

This is that Beavois whom the Monks cried up to be such a man, that since it
has been questioned, Whether ever such a man, I mean, whether ever his person
was in rerum natura: So injurious those are, who in the Reports of any man's
performances exceed the bounds of probability.

All I will add is this, that the Sword preserved and showed to be this
Beavoises in Arundel. Castle, is lesser (perchance worn with age) than that of
King Edward the third, kept in Westminster-Church.

Seamen.
Sr. JOHN WALLOP, born in this County, of a most ancient and respected Family,
was directed by his Genius to Sea-service, at what time our Coasts were much
infested with French-Piracies. For, there was a Knight of Malta, passing in our
Chronicles, by the name of Prior John (more proper by his Profession, to be
employed against the Turks, lately so victorious in Hungary) who lived by
pickeering, and undoing many English Merchants.

But our Sr. John made the French pay more than treble Damages, who with Eight
Hundredh Men landed in Normandy, burnt Holinshead, Stow, Ed. Herbert. in this
Year.
One and Twenty Towns, with diverse Ships in the Havens of Traport, Staples,
etc. and safely returned with wealth and Victory.

Methinks the ancient Arms of the Wallhops appear prophetical herein, viz.
argent a Bend-unde Sable, interpreted by my Gwillim, his Display of Heraldry.
page 50.
Author, a wave, or sourge of the Sea, raised by some turbulent flaw of wind
and tempest, prognosticating the activity of that Family, in Marine
Performances.

ROBERT TOMSON, Merchant, was born at Hatkluit, his Voyages, Volume 3. page 437.
Andover in this County, bred much at Bristol in Sea-Imployments. Hence anno
1553. he sailed into Spain, and thence two Years after shipped himself for Nova
Hispania, to make a discovery thereof, on the same token, that in his passage
thither, in a Spanish Ship, a light like a can^le (being nothing else but a
Meteor frequent by Sea and Land) sell on their main Mast, which the Spaniards
on their knees worshipped for St. Elmo, the Advocate of Sailors. He * Idem, page
450.
afterward wrote the Description of New Spain, with the City of Mexico, giving
a good, and the first account thereof, of any Englishman.

During his abode many Months in Mexico, at dinner he let fall some Discourse
against Saint-worship, for which he was imprisoned in the holy-House, and
enjoined solemn Penance by the Archbishop of Mexico, This Tomson, being the
first (reputed) Heretic, which was ever seen in America on a penitential
Scaffold. Hence he was sent into Spain, and after three Years durance in the
Inquisition, discharged. Here a Spanish Merchants Daughter, Mary de la Barrera
by name, fell in love with him, and became his Wife, worth to him in Bars of
Gold and Silver Idem, page 451.
two Thousand five hundred Pounds, besides Jewels of great price. Returning
into England, he lived with great comfort, and credit therein, so that it may
truly be said of him, He had been un^one, if (by the cruelty of his Enemies) he
had not been undone.

Writers.
LAMFRID of Winchester was bred a Benedictine therein, Congregationis
Giribenne, says my Pitz., aetate decima, Number. 149.
Author, wherein I am not ashamed to confess my ignorance. Such his Learning
in those Days, that he got the general name of Doctor Eximius, though his few
works still extant answer not the proportion of so high a Title. He flourished
anno 980.

WOLSTANUS of Winchester, bred a Benedictine, therein attained to the
reputation of a great Scholar. I listen attentively to the words of Libro
secundo, de gestis Reg. Angliae.
VV. Malmsbury, (who could ken a Learned man) giving him this Caracter, Vir
fuit eruditus, homo etiam bonae vitae and castigatae eloquentiae. But it
seems, his Eloquence was confined to Poetry, my Author observing, that
Oratione soluta nunquam polite scripsit. He flourished anno 1000.

JOHN of HIDE, was a Monk in the famous ABBEY of Hide, in the Suburbs of
Winchester, and became a competent Historian, according to the rate of those
times, writing certain Homilies, Pitz. aetat. undecima, Number. 154.
a Book of the Patience of Job, and the Story of his own Convent: He flourished
anno 1284.

JOHN of Basingstoak, so called from a fair Market Town in this Co^nty, where
he was born. We have a double Demonstration of his signal worth, first, because
Robert Grosthead that pious and learned Bishop, (who would not advance any
thing which was under eminency) preferred him Archdeacon of Leicester:
secondly, The Pens of Bale and Pitz Descrip. Brit. Cent. quarta. page 302.
diametrically opposite one to the other, meet both in his commendation. Being
bred first in Oxford, then in Paris, thence he travailed into Athens, (Athens
as yet was Athens, not routed by Turkish Tyranny) where he heard * de scrip.
Brit.
the Learned Lecturs of one Idem
Constantina a Noble Woman, (not fully Twenty Idem.
Years old) of the abstruse Mysteries of Nature. Coming home, he brought back
many precious Books, and had good skill in the Greek Tongue, (whereof he wrote
a GRAMMAR, and is justly reputed the first restorer thereof in England. He was
the Author of many worthy works, and died, Anno 1252. on whom In (...) (...)
(...) (...)*
M. Paris bestows this Eulogy, Vir in trivio and quatrivio ad plenum eruditus.

JOHN of ^ ^ ^ (...).
HIDE, was a Monk in the Famous Abbey of Hide in the Suburbs of Winchester, and
became a competent Historian according to the rate of those times, writing
certain Homilies, a book of the Patience of Job, and the Story of his own
Covent. He flourished, Anno 1284.

WILLIAM ALTON, a Native of a known Market Town in this County was a Dominican
or Preaching Friar, famous even amongst Forreiners for his Sermons and sound
judgment, avouching the Virgin Mary tainted with Original Corruption. He
flourished, Anno 1330.

WILLIAM LILLI^, was born at Bale de Script. Britt. Cent. 8. Numb. 64.
Odiam a Market Town in this County and traveled in his youth as far as
Jerusalem. In his return he stayed at Rhodes and studied Greek, which will seem
strange to some, Rhodes not being Rhodes in that Age (except casually some
great Critic was there) seeing otherwise to find Elegant in Modern Greek
(sowred with long continuance) is as impossible, as to draw good Wine out of a
vessel of Vinegar.

Hence he went to Rome, where he heard John Sulpitius and Pomponius Sabinus
great Masters of Latin in those days. After his Return Dean Collet made him
the first Master of St. Paul's School, which place he commendably discharged for
15. years. Here he made his Latin Grammar, which this great Schoolmaster
modestly submitted to the correction of Erasmus, and therefore such, who will
not take it on the single bond of Lilly, may trust on the security of Erasmus.

Some charge it for surfeiting with variety of examples, who would have had him
only to set down the bare Rules, as best for Childrens remembrance. But they
may know that such, who learnt Grammar in Lillies time, were not School-boyes,
but Schoolmen; I mean arrived at men's Estate. Many since have altered and
bettered his Grammar, and amongst them my worthy Friend Dr. Charles
Scarborough, calculating his short, clear and true Rules for the Meridian of
his own son; which in due time may serve for general use. Stowes Survey of
London, page 370.
Our Lilly died of the plague, and was buried in the Porch of Saint Paul's,
Anno Dom. 1522.

Since the Reformation.
MICHA^ RENEGER, was born in this Bale de Script. Brit. Cent. 9. Number. 78.
County, and bred Fellow in Magdalen-Colledge in Oxford, where he gained great
credit for his skill in Learning and Languages. He wrote a Book in the Defense
of Ministers marriage.

THOMAS STERNHOLD, was born in this Bale de Script. Britt. Cent. 9. Number. 79.
County, and was afterward a servant to King Henry the Eighth. I find him a
Legatee in his Will thus mentioned.

Item, To THOMAS STERNHOLD, Groom of our Robes a hundred Mark.

He was afterward (says my Author) ab intimo cubiculo to King Edward the
Sixth, * Idem Ibidem.
Though I am not satisfied whether thereby he meant Gentleman of his
Privie-Chamber, or Groom of his Bedchamber.

He was a principal instrument of Translating of the Psalms into
English-Meeter; The first twenty six (and seven and thirty in all) being by
him performed. Yet had he other assistance in that work. Many a bitter scoff
has since been past on their endeavors by some Wits, which might have been
better employed. Some have miscalled these their Translations Geneva Gigs, and
which is the worst, Father, (or Mother rather) the Expression on our Virgin
Queen, as falsely as other things have been charged upon her. Some have not
sticked to say, that David has been as much persecuted by bungling
Translators, as by Saul himself. Some have made Libellous verses in abuse of
them, and no wonder if Songs were made on the Translators of the Psalms, seeing
Psalm. 69. 12.
Drunkards made them on David the Author thereof.

But let these Translations be beheld by unpartial eyes, and they will be
allowed to go in Equipage with the best Poems in that age, However it were to
be wished that some bald Rimes therein were bettered, till which time such as
sing them, must endeavor to amend them, by singing them with Understanding
heads, and Gracious hearts, whereby that, which is but bad Meter on Earth, will
be made good Music in Heaven. As for our Thomas Sternhold, it was happy for
him that he died before his good Master, Anno 1549. in the month of August. So
probably preventing much persecution, which would have happened unto him, if
surviving in the Reign of Queen Mary.

DAVID WHITEHEAD, (where born to me unknown) is here placed, Because I find a
worshipful and ancient Family of his Name in this County. He was bred a
Batchelour of Divinity in Oxford, and flying into Germany in the Reign of Queen
Mary, was in high esteem at Franckford with the English Congregation. After his
return, Queen Elizabeth proffered him great preferment. And it seems in the
first of her Reign, the Archbishop of Canterbury, went a wooing to accept
thereof, viz. to

1. JOHN Rinerius in Histor. Benedictinor.
FECKENHAM, refusing it upon a Popish account, because he would not subscribe
to the Queens Supremacy. 2. NICHOLAS WOTTON, Holling sheads Cron. p. 1403.
Doctor of Law, and Dean of Canterbury, refusing it on a politic account,
suspecting the Queens short life, and fearing alterations in the State. 3. This
WHITEHEAD, Heroologia Angliae, p. 173.
who declined it out of his desire of privacy, though some causelessly suspected
him for disaffection to Church Discipline.
For he was by Queen Elizabeth offered the Mastership of the Idem Aut. Ibid.
Hospital of the Savoy, which he might have accepted without any subscription,
but would not, affirming he could live plentifully on the preaching of the
Gospel; a rare example of Moderation. He was a deep Divine, and was chosen one
of the Disputants Primo Elizabethae, against the Popish Bishops. His many
Books, still extant, testify his Learning and Religion.

Queen Elizabeth highly valued his company, the rather because of his
conscientious bluntness, wherein one Repartee may be remembered. The Queen, who
ever was Iniquior in Sacerdotes Maritatos, said unto him, Lord Verulam, In his
Apoph^gms.
Whitehead, I love thee the better, because thou art unmarried, In truth Madam
(said he) I love you the worse because you are unmarried. He died Anno Dom 1571.

NICHOLAS FULLER, was as I have cause to conceive born in this County, and when
a Youth was Amanuensis or Scribe to Dr. Horn Bishop of Winchester; Afterward
he attended ( as Tutor servant) on Sir Henry Wallop to Oxford, and returning
thence was made Minister of Allington nigh Salisbury in Wiltshire, where he had
a Benefice rather then a Living, so small the Revenues thereof. But a contented
mind extends the smallest Parish into a Diocese, and improveth the least
Benefice into a Bishopric.

Here a great Candle was put under a Bushel (or peck rather) so private his
place and employment; here he applied his studies in the Tongues, and was happy
in pitching on (not difficult Trifles, but) useful Difficulties tending to the
understanding of Scripture. He became an excellent Linguist, and his books
found good regard beyond the Seas, where they were reprinted.

DRUSIUS, the Belgian Critic grown old, angry, and jealous that he should be
outshined in his own sphere, foully cast some drops of Ink upon him, which the
other as fairly wiped off again. He charged Master Fuller for being his
Plagiary, taking his best Notes from him without any acknowledgement thereof;
Master Fuller confessed himself always desirous of Drusius his works, but never
able, (such his poverty) to purchase them, and therefore he could not steal out
of those books which his eye never beheld, (And not to be partial to my
namesake) let the world judge whether Fuller his Miscelane be not as good as
Drusius his Wheat.

Bishop Andrews came to him as the Queen of Sheba to Solomon, to pose him with
hard Questions, bringing with him a heap of Knots for the other to Untie, and
departed from him with good satisfaction; he afterward bestowed on him a great
Living in this County which Master Fuller did not long enjoy. He was most
eminent for that Grace which is most worth, (yet costeth the least to keep it)
I mean Humility, who in his Writings does as fairly dissent from, as freely
concur with any man's opinions. He dyed about the year of our Lord, 1626.

THOMAS JAMES, was born in the Isle New College Register, Anno 1593.
of Wight, bred first in Winchester, then at New-Colledge in Oxford, and
afterward proceeded Doctor in Divinity. He was chosen by Sir Thomas Bodley the
Keeper of his inestimable Library in Oxford. And on serious consideration one
will conclude the Library made for him, and him for it, like Tallies they so
fitted one another. Some men live like Mothes in Libraries, not being better
for the books, but the books the worse for them, which they only soil with
their fingers. Not so Dr. James, who made use of Books for his own and the
public good. He knew the age of a Manuscript, by looking upon the face
thereof, and by the form of the Character could conclude the time wherein it
was written.

He was a Member of the Convocation held with the Parliament of Oxford, Primo
Caroli, where he made a Motion, that some might be Commissioned to peruse the
Manuscript Fathers, in all public and private English Libraries, that thereby
the Forgery of foreign Popish Editions might be detected.

I believe his design had formerly been by him pursued for many years as
appears by this passage in Mr. Britt. in Monmouthshire.
Camden,

Tho. James Oxoniensis vir eruditus, and vere (...), qui se totum literis and
libris, involvit, and jam publici boni studio in Angliae, Bibliothecis
excutiendis (Deus opus secundet) id molitur, quod Reipublicae literariae
imprimis erit usui. He never attained higher preferment than the Subdeanary of
Wells, and dying 1628. was buried in the Chapel of New-Colledge in Oxford.

CHARLES BUTLER, was bred Master of Arts in Magdalen-Colledge in Oxford, S. N.
and afterward Beneficed in this County. An excellent Musician, who wrote a
Book of the Principles of Music, in singing and setting with the twofold use
thereof (Ecclesiastical and Civil) and a critical English man, having composed
a Grammar of our Language; He also wrote a Book of Bees, wherein as if he had
been their Secretary, he appears most knowing in the State-Mysteries of their
Commonwealth, whence In the Verses ad Authorem.
one not unhandsomly on his Book.

Aut a consiliis Apibus, Butlere, fuisti;
Aut a consiliis est Apis ipsa tuis.
Butler he will say (who these thy writings sees)
Bees counseled thee, or else thou counselst Bees.
I behold these his Books as the Receptacle of the Leakage and Superfluities of
his Study, and it is no Trespass on Grace for one to walk and take a turn in
the Field of Nature; He was also a pious man, a painful Preacher, and a Solid
Divine. Witness his Excellent Book of the Marriage of Cousin Germans, approved
and commended by Doctor Prideaux as the best ever written on that Subject, I
conjecture he dyed about the year 1640.

Romish Exile Writers.
RICHARD WHITE was born at He writes himself in his Book of Basing-stoak.
Basing-Stoake in this County, bred first in Winchester School, then in New
College in Oxford. In the beginning of Queen Elizabeth leaving the Land, he
lived first at Lovain, then in Padua in Italy, where he proceeded Doctor of the
Laws. Afterward he became Regius Professor thereof at Doway, for the space of
thirty years and more. He wrote many books, and amongst the rest, a British
and English History, which hitherto I have not been so happy as to see, save at
the second hand, as often cited by Mr. Seldom, which makes me believe much
merit therein.

Surely he was better employed in the writing thereof, then in the large
Comment he has made on the Aenigmatical Epitaph set up at Bononia.

Aelia Laelia Crispis, etc. Which many think merely made by a conceited Brain
on design to puzzle Intellects, to create sense by their Ingenuity and Industry
which was never intended therein. For I am clearly of his opinion, who said,
Qui ea scribit legi, quae non vult intelligi, debet negligi.

I have nothing else to observe of this Richard White, save that after he had
successively married two Pitts de Ill. Ang. Scrip. page ^06.
Wives, He was made a Priest by the special dispensation of Pope Clement the
eight, and that he was alive at Doway, 1611.

JOHN PITS was born in this County, nigh the Market Town of Aulton, witness his
words in Pits in the life of William Aulton in anno 1330.
Vicinio cujus Oppidi natus sum ego. Son he was to Henry Pits and Elizabeth his
Wife, Sister to Nicholas Idem in his own life, page 817.
Sanders. It is hard to say whether his hands took more pains in writing, or
feet in traveling, if the List of his Laborious Life be perused, whereby he
will appear a very aged person.

At 11. years of Age he went to the school of Winchester. 11 Seven years he
staid there, until chosen unto New-Colledge. 18 Two years he lived in Oxford,
and then went beyond the Seas. 20 One year he stayed and studied in the
College of Rhemes. 21 Thence going to Rome, he lived 7. years there in the
EnglishColledge, and was ordained Priest. 28 Returning to Rhemes two years he
there taught Rhetoric and Greek. 30 Then lived in Lorrain and in Triers two
years. 32 Three years at Ingolstad in Bavaria, where he was made D. D. 35 Made
Canon of Verdun in Lorrain, and lived there two years. 37 Then for twelve years
he was Confessor to the Duchess of Cleve. 49

Here he wrote many Volumes of several Subjects, one of the Apostolical men,
another of the Kings and Bishops in England, but because he survived not to see
them set forth, He was as good as his word, mecum morientur and sepelientur,
with him they died and were buried. Only that his book is brought to light,
which is Entitled, de Illustribus Angliae Scriptoribus, a Subject formerly
handled by many, so that some stick not to say,

J. Leland is the industrious BE working all. J. Bale is the angry WASP
stinging J. Pits is the idle DRONE stealing

For my part I have made much use of his endeavors to help me with many
Writers, especially with such English Papists, as have been since the
Reformation. Nor will I pay him with railing, from whose pen I have borrowed
much information. Some wonder at his invectiveness: I wonder more, that he
inveigheth so little; and seeing he was sisters son to blackmouth'd Sanders, it
is much that he does not more Avunculize in his bitterness against Protestants.

After the death of Anthonia Duchess of Cleve, he returned the third time into
Lorrain, where the Bishop of Toul, (who formerly had been his Scholar) gave him
the Deanary of Liverdune, a place of good credit and revenue, where quietly he
reposed himself for the remainder of his life for many years, and dying Anno
1616. was there buried.

Benefactors to the Public.
Besides Bishop Wickham (of whom before) who alone may pass for Ten, I meet
with none of grand remark before the Reformation; since it, besides many of
meaner note, I find Two of signal Charity.

Sir WILLIAM DODDINGTON Knight, High Sheriff of this County in the Third of
King James, kept a bountiful House at Bremer therein. Succeeding to an
unexpected Estate, he had the words of David frequent in his mouth; What am I?
or what is my Fathers House? that thou have brought me hitherto. Having a godly
jealousy, that some former Dysasters in his Family had been caused by Gods
displeasure on his Ancestors for holding so many Impropriations, he freely and
fully restored them to the Church, settling them as firmly as Law could devise
to a greater yearly value, than many will believe, or any imitate. Yet was he a
man of Mourning, or son of Affliction all the days of his life. No sooner had
he seen Herbert his eldest son, a most hopeful Gentleman, married to a
considerable Coheir in Somer set-shire, but he beheld him snatched away by an
untimely death. What Tragedies have since happened in his household, is
generally known. All these he bare with Saint-like Patience, Micah. 6. 9.
hearing the Rod, (that is, understanding and obeying it) and him who appointed
it. In a word, God the skilful Lapidary polished him with sharp Instruments,
that he then did glister as a Pearl here, who now shines as a Star in
Heaven. He died about the year of our Lord, 1638.

JOSEPH DIGGONS Esquire, was of Dutch extraction (whose Father was a S. N.
Seaman of Trinity-House) but had his longest Habitation in this County in a
house of his own building at Whetham in the Parish of Lisse. He was bred a
Fellow-Commoner of Clare-hall in Cambridge, and afterward became a Barrester
in the Temple. By his Will he gave to Clare hall (where none knew his Face, nor
remembered his Name, save the Worthy Master Dr. Pask) all his Estate in Land, of
very improveable Rents, to the Value of One Hundred and Thirty Pounds per
annum; for the founding of Fellowships and Scholarships, at the discretion of
the Master and Fellows. He made Mr. Pickering an Attorney of Clements-Inn
(living at Oldham in this County) an Overseer of his Will, who faithfully gave
the College notice thereof, and was very useful and assistant to them in the
settling of the Lands aforesaid. Mr. Diggons died, anno 1658.

Memorable Persons.
We must not forget ONE (better known to me by his Invention than his Name)
who, dwelling at Stockbridge, in this County, made so artificial a Plough, that
by the help of Engines, and some Contrivances, it might be drawn by Dogs, and
managed by one Man, who would plough in one day, well nigh an Acre of the Light
Ground in this County. This Plough I saw (some thirty Years since) at
Stockbridge aforesaid.

But the ^roject was not taking, beheld rather as pretty than profitable,
though in the judgment of Wise Men this Groundwork might have been built upon,
and Invention much improved by the skillful in Mathematics: For I have heard,
that some Politicians are back Friends (how justly I know not) to such
Projects, which (if accomplished) invite the Land to a Loss, the fewer Poor
being thereby set awork, that being the best way of Tillage, which imployeth
most about it, to keep them from stealing and starving. So that it would not be
beneficial to State, might a Plough be drawn by Butterflies, as which would
draw the greater Burden on the Common wealth, to devise other ways for the
Maintenance of the Poor.

The mentioning of these plow (...) Dogs minds me (one Rarity attracteth
another) of other Dogs in this County, more useful for the Commonwealth,
meeting with this Passage in a * Modern Author.

It is reported, that about Portsmouth is a Race of small Dogs, like Beagles,
that they use their to hunt Moles which they hunt as their proper natural Game.

If this be true, I wish the continuance and Increase of the breed of this kind
of Canes Venatici. And though the pleasure be not so much as in hunting of
Hares, the profit is more in destroying those Malignant Pioneers, mischievous
to Grass, more to Grain, most to Gardens.

Lord Majors.
Brittania Baconica in Hantshire, Page 51.
It is no less true the^ strange, that this County, so large in it self, so
near to London, weekly changing Cloth for Money therewith, is (...), I mean,
has not contributed one to this Topic. Such as suspect the truth thereof will
be satisfied on their exact survey of Stow's Survey of London.

The Names of the Gentry in this Shire, returned into the Tower by the
Commissioners in the 12th Year of K. Henry the sixth, anno 1445.

H. Epus Winton, Cardinalis Angliae. Commissioners to take the Oath.
Reginaldus le War, Miles. Johannes Lysle. Knights for the Shire. Johannes
Brewe, de Stapule.

Walter. Sands, Chivaler. Johannes Popham, Chivaler. Johannes Uvedale.
Willielm. Warbleton. Thome Tame. William Fanconer. Roberti Dyngle. Steph.
Popham, Chivaler. Willielm. Brokays. Willielm. Ryngebourne. Walter. Veere.
Johannes Hampton. Johannes Gyffard. Johannes Brinkeley. Petri Condraye.
Johannes Skilling. Thome Ringewood, senior. Willielm. Persh. Johannes Hacket.
Johannes Haymowe. Roberti Fursey. Roberti Tylbourgh. Willielm. Astel. Johannes
Balon. Johannes Bray. Johannes Purbyke. Johannes Catevan. Willielm. Clive.
Willielm. Chellys. Johannes Faukoner. Johannes Mofunt. Willielm. Tested.
Richard. Rumsey. Willielm. Burton. Roberti VVhittehede. Richard. Spicer.
Johannes at Berwe, de Charleford. Johannes Lawrence. Thome Rockley. Thome
Yardly. Thome Benebury. Willielm. Wellis. Johannes Escote. Johannes
Rotherfield. Richard. Parkere. Johannes Kybbyll. Johannes Harbor. Symonis
Almayn. William Farcy. Richard Punchardon. Nicholas Bernard. Nicholas Banestre.
Thome Wait.
It will be worth our enquiry, who this chief Commissioner Henry Bishop of
Winchester was, with his insolent Title of CARDINAL of ENGLAND. I find many
eminent Epithets (but none of the Quorum of St. Paul's Bishops) meeting in his
person, viz. Noble, Rich, Valiant, Politic, and long-lived.

Noble, being Son of JOHN a GAUNT, by KATHARINE SWINFORD (born at Beaufort in
France, whence he had his Name) ^rother to King Henry the Fourth, Uncle to King
Henry the fifth, great Uncle to King Henry the Sixth.

Rich, commonly called the Rich Cardinal. In his time the King and Courtiers
cast a covetous eye on Church-Endowments, but were diverted from longer looking
on them by the Council of Archbishop Chickly, and Coin of this Bishop
Beaufort. The former putting the King upon the War with France, the later
lending him, on good security, twenty thousand Pounds, a Sum sounding high in
those days: He was also called (...), the Cardinal of England, though we had
another (and his Senior) at the same time of the same Order, viz. Thomas
Langley, Bishop of Durham.

Valiant, being the Pope's Legate, (in plain English, the Pope's General)
leading his Army into Bohemia, in which service he behaved himself, fortius
quam Episcopum decebat.

Worldly ^olitick, venting words on his Deathbed to this purpose, That if all
England (some Reporters take a longer Circuit) would preserve his Life, he was
able by his Purse to purchase, or by Policy to procure it.

Long Life, having been Bishop of Lincoln and Winchester fifty Years, yet was
he so far from being weaned from the world, he sucked the hardest (as if he
would have bit off the Nipples thereof) the nearer he was to his Grave, Dying
anno 1447.

He was in his Generation (by a charitable Antiperistasis) fixed betwixt Bishop
Wickham and Wanfleet, but did not equal them in his Benefactions to the
public, though he founded a fair Hospital in Winchester, a work (no doubt)
more acceptable to God, than when he anno 1417 undertook and performed a
dangerous Voyage to Jerusalem.

It is in my apprehension very remarkable, that the 3 aforesaid Bishops of
Winchester, Wickham, Beaufort and Wanfleet sat successively in that See, six
score years, lacking two, not to be paralleled in any other Bishopric.

To take our leave of this great Cardinal, we read of K. 2 Chronicles. 35. 26.
Josiah, Now the rest of the Acts of K. Josiah and his GOODNESS, etc. But as
for this Prelate, the rest of his acts and his GREATNESS we leave to such as
are desirous thereof, to collect them out of our English Hystorians.

Sheriffs of Hantshire.
HEN. II.
Anno 1 Anno 2 Turcinus vic Anno 3 Turcinus vic Anno 4 Anno 5 Turcinus vic Anno
6 Anno 7 Rich. fill. Turcini, for 9 years. Anno 16 Hugo. de Gundevill, for 4
years. Anno 20 Herudus de Stratton. and Hugo. de Gundevill, for 5 years. Anno
25 Hen. de Stratton, and Hugo. de Gundevile Anno 26 Galf. fill. Aze, for 8 years
RICH. I.
Anno 1 Galf. fill. Azon Anno 2 Ogerus fill. Ogeri Anno 3 John de Rebez Anno 4
Will. Briewere Anno 5 Ogerus fill. Ogeri Anno 6 Hugo. de Bosco, for 5 years.
JOH. REG.
Anno 1 Hugo. de Basco Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Will. Briewere, and Rad. de Bray
Anno 4 Galf. fill. Petri, and Will. Stokes Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Rog. fill. Ade,
for 4 years. Anno 10 Walt. Briewere, and Alan. de Bockland Anno 11 Idem. Anno
12 Will. Briewere Anno 13 Hugo. de Nevill, and Galf. de Salvaozins Anno 14
Idem. Anno 15 Idem. Anno 16 Will. de Sto. Johanne Anno 17 Will. Briewere, and
Will. de Sto. Johanne
HEN. III.
Anno 1 Anno 2 Pet. Winton Epis. and Will. de Schorewell, for 7 yearr. Anno 9
Rich. Epis. Saresb. and Bartholomew de Kemes Anno 10 Idem. Anno 11 Rich. Epis.
Saresb. and Gilb. de Staplebrigg Anno 12 Idem. Anno 13 Nich. de Molis, and
Walt. de Romsey Anno 14 Nich. de Molis, and Hen. de Bada Anno 15 Idem. Anno 16
Idem. Anno 17 Pet. Winton Epis. and Rog. Wascelin Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Hen.
fill. Nicholai Anno 20 Hen. fill. Nich. and Rob. de Mara Anno 21 Galf. de Insula
Anno 22 Idem. Anno 23 Idem. Anno 24 Emueus de Lacy Anno 25 Idem. Anno 26 Idem.
Anno 27 Rob. Passelewe, for 6 years. Anno 33 Rob. Passell Anno 34 Hen. Facull,
for 6 years. Anno 40 Hen. de Farneleg Anno 41 Ja. le Savage Anno 42 Joh. le
Jac. Savage Anno 43 Idem. Anno 44 Will. de Wintershull Anno 45 Regin. fill.
Petri, and Joh. de Flemer Anno 46 Idem. Anno 47 Regin. fill. Petri, and Hereward
de Marisco Anno 48 Idem. Anno 49 Joh. de Botele Anno 50 Idem. Anno 51 Gerar. de
Grue Anno 52 Joh. le Botele Anno 53 Idem. Anno 54 Idem. Anno 55 Will. de
Wintershull Anno 56 Idem.
EDW. I.
Anno 1 Will. de Wintershull Anno 2 Hen. de Shote broke Anno 3 John de
Havering, for 4 years. Anno 7 Will. de Braybofe Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Phil. de
Foynil Anno 10 Idem. Anno 11 Idem. Anno 12 Simon. de Winton Anno 13 Idem. Anno
14 Will. de Bremschete, for 4 years. Anno 18 Ingeramus de Waleys Anno 19 Idem.
Anno 20 Rich. Aston Anno 21 Idem. Anno 22 Hugo. de Chickenhull, for 4 years.
Anno 26 Tho. de Warblington, for 4 years. Anno 30 Joh. de Gerbg. Anno 31 Tho.
de Warblington Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Idem. Anno 34 Phil. de Foynil Anno 35
Idem.
EDW. II.
Anno 1 Tho. de Warblington, for 5 years. Anno 6 Ja. de Norton, and Jo. de la
Bech Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Joh. de la Bech Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Idem. Anno 11
Rich. Byflett Anno 12 Rob. de Norton Anno 13 Ja. de Norton Anno 14 Joh. de
Tichburne Anno 15 Null. Tit. Com. in hoc Rotulo Anno 16 Anno 17 Joh. de Scures
Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Idem.
EDW. III.
Anno 1 John de Scures, for 12 years. Anno 13 Rob. Daundelin Anno 14 Rob. de
Popeham, and Rob. de Daundelin Anno 15 Joh. de Palton, and Tho. de Chisenhall
Anno 16 Joh. de Palton Anno 17 Th. de Apsall, for 5 years. Anno 22 Hen. Sturmy
Anno 23 Idem. Anno 24 Idem. Anno 25 Joh. de Winchester, for 4 years. Anno 29
Will. de Overton Anno 30 Joh. de Palton. Anno 31 Walt. de Haywood, for 4 years.
Anno 35 Tho. de Hampton, for 5 years Anno 40 Nich. Woodlocke Anno 41 Rad.
Thurnbarne Anno 42 Idem. Anno 43 Petr. Brugg Anno 44 Joh. Bottiller Anno 45
Idem. Anno 46 Tho. Warner Anno 47 Phil. de Popham Anno 48 Laur. de Sto. Martino
Anno 49 Rich. Pauncefott Anno 50 Theob. de Gorges. Anno 51 Tho. Boklands
Sheriffs of Hantshire.
Name. Place. Arms. RICH. II. Anno 1 Rad. de Norton Vert a Lion rampant Or. 2 John Butteshorne 3 Walt. Ramsey 4 Will. Kingborne 5 Hugo. Crane 6 Joh. Sands
Arg. a Cross ragulee Truncked G. 7 Joh. Shownes 8 Joh. de la Zouch 9 Joh.
Shown 10 Rob. Cholmleigh Gul. 2 (...) in Chief and a Garb in Base proper. 11
Joh. Uvedale Argent, a cross moline Gules. 12 Hen. Popham Arg. on a Cheveron
Gul. 2 Bucksheads cabosed Or. 13 Nic. Dabrichcourt* 14 Phil. Baynard * Ermine 3
Bars Humetts Gules. 15 Rob. Cholmleigh ut prius 16 Rob. Dynlye 17 Rob. Attem^e
18 Johan. Sands, and Tho. Warner ut prius 19 Tho. Warner 20 Joh. Waytes 21
Will. Audley 22 Idem. HEN. IV. Anno 1 John Dovedale 2 John Waterton, and Joh.
Chamfloure 3 John Barkley G. a Cheveron 'twixt 10 Crosses sormee Argent. 4 Edw.
Cawdrey Sab. 10 Bille^s Or. 4, 3, 2, 1. 5 Idem. ut prius 6 Joh. Tichbourne
Varry a Chief Or. 7 Joh. Berkeley, m. ut prius 8 Will. Marshull Sab. 3 Bars
Arg. and a Canton G. 9 Tho. Uvedall ut prius 10 Will. Bremsheete 11 Walt.
Sands, mil. ut prius 12 Will. (...) HEN. V. Anno 1 Tho. Chaucer BARKS. Parted
per pale Arg. and Gul. a Bend Counterchanged. 2 John Uvedale ut prius 3 Will.
Brokes 4 Tho. Wickham, m. 5 Edw. Cowdrey ut prius 6 Will. Bremsbeth 7 ^oh.
Uvedale ut prius 8 Will. Kingborne 9 Idem. HEN. VI. Anno 1 John Uvedale ut
prius 2 Walt. Sands, mil. ut prius 3 John de Boys, m. Ar. a Cheveron S. 'twixt
3 Acorns Gul. on a Canton Az. a pair of ^wings Conjoined Or. 4 Mauric. Brown
SURREY Sab. 3 Lions passant Gardant 'twixt 2 Bends Gemeros Arg. 5 Joh. Uvedale
ut prius 6 Steph. Popham ut prius 7 Will. Brokes 8 Tho. Th^me 9 Joh. Seymoure
Gul. 2 Angels wings paleways in verted Or. 10 Walt. Veere Quarterly Gul. and
Or, in the first a Mullet Arg. 11 Joh. Giffard 12 Joh. Uvedale ut prius 13 Rob.
Domley 14 Will. Brokes 15 Joh. Seymor, mil. ut prius 16 Will. Fauconer Sab. 3
Falcons Close Argent. 17 Tho. Uvedale ut prius 18 Joh. Lisle, mil. Or, a Fess
'twixt 2 Chevbrons S. 19 Steph. Popham, m. ut prius 20 Joh. Rogers 21 Tho.
Them 22 Hen. Trencard DORSE. Per pale Arg. and Az. 3 pallets S. 23 Tho.
Mountgomery Gul. a Cheveron 'twixt 3 flower de lice Or. 24 Tho. Molegues 25
Hen. Brum 26 Tho. Uvedale ut prius 27 Rob. Fenns 28 Rich. Dalingrug 29 Tho.
Warbleton 30 Tho. Uvedale ut prius 31 Tho. Them 32 Joh. Seymor, m. ut prius 33
Joh. Wallop, ar. Argent, a Bend Wave Sable. 34 Mau. Berkeley ut prius 35 Ber.
Brokes 36 Joh. Paulett Arg. 3 Swords in Pile Sab. Hilts Or. 37 Hen. Brum 38
Joh. Philpot Sable, a Bend Ermine. EDW. IV. Anno 1 John Wallop, ar. ut prius 2 John Paulett, ar. ut prius 3 Idem. ut prius 4 Tho. Uvedale ut prius 5 Edw.
Berkeley, ar. ut prius 6 Galf. Gate, mil. 7 Mau. Berkeley, ar. ut prius 8 Joh.
Roger, ar. 9 Joh. Whiteheed 10 Rich. Darel, mil. Az. a Lion rampant Arg.
Crowned Or. 11 Mau. Berkeley, m. ut prius 12 Edw. Berkeley ut prius 13 Joh.
Rogers 14 Carol. Bulkley Sab. 3 Bulls-heads cabossed Arg. 15 Tho. Troys, ar. 16
Edw. Be^keley ut prius 17 Will. Berkeley, ar. ut prius 18 Edw. Hardgill 19 Joh.
Cook 20 Will. Uvedal ut prius 21 Edw. Berkeley ut prius 22 Joh. Brokes RICH.
III. Anno 1 Rob. Pointz Barry of 6 Or and Vert, a Bend Gules. 2 John Roger 3
Rob. Carr, and Edw. Berkeley. ut prius HEN. VII. Anno 1 John Cook 2 Will.
Uvedale ut prius 3 John Tichborne ut prius 4 Joh. Pound, ar. 5 Tho. Troys, ar.
6 Edw. Berkeley, m. ut prius 7 Joh. Paulet, jun. ut prius 8 Will. Uvedale, m.
ut prius 9 Joh. Dudley, ar. 10 Joh. Giffard, ar. 11 Joh. Pounds, ar. 12 Tho.
Troys, ar. 13 Will, Sands, mil. ut prius 14 Dau. Owen, mil. 15 Joh. Paulett,
ar. ut prius 16 Joh. Philpot, ar. ut prius 17 Rich. Wallop, ar. ut prius 18
Joh. Waller, ar. Winch, Cast. Sab. 3 Walnut-leaves Or, 'twixt 2 Bendlets
Argent. 19 Joh. Pound, mil. 20 Joh. Puterham, m. Sab. an Helmet 'twixt 6
Croslets in Pale Argent. 21 Rob. White, ar. Azu. a Fess 'twixt 3 flower d* liz
Or. 22 Joh. Lisle, mil. ut prius 23 Joh. Leigh, mil. 24 Idem. HEN. VIII. Anno 1
Rob. Wallop, ar. ut prius 2 Will. Sands, mil. ut prius 3 Will. Paulett ut
prius 4 Will. Compton, m. Prierseen Ermin on a Bend Sab. 3 Helmets porper. 5
Ar. (...), m. 6 Rich. Norton, ar. ut prius 7 Rob. Wallop, ar. ut prius 8 Joh.
(...), m. Az. a lozenges in Fess Argent. 9 Joh. Lisley, mil. ut prius 10 Will.
Paulett, ar. ut prius 11 Joh. Kaleway 12 Will. Frost 13 Will. Giffard, m. 14
Will. Paulett, ar. ut prius 15 Rob. Wallop, ar. ut prius 16 Pet. Philpor, ar.
ut prius 17 Ant. Willoughby Sable, a Cross engrailed Or. 18 Tho. Lisley, mil.
ut prius 19 Will. Berkeley, m. ut prius 20 Rich. Andrews. ar. 21 Lion. Morres
22 Tho. Lisley, m. ut prius 23 Rich. Pexall, ar. 24 Jo. Kaleway, mil. 25 Jo.
Paulett, ar. ut prius 26 Ant. VVinsore, m. 27 Pet. Philpot, mil. ut prius 28
Will. Berkeley, m. ut prius 29 Tho. Lisley, mil. ut prius 30 Joh. Kingshall,
ar. 31 Ant. VVinsore, m. 32 Rich. Andrews, ar. 33 Joh. Kalevary, m. 34 Regi.
Williams, ar. OXFOR. Az. an Organ-pipe in Bend sinister salterwise surmounted
on another dexter 'twixt 4 Crosses pate Argent. 35 Joh. Kingsmil, ar. Arg.
Croslettee fitched a Chev. Erm. 'twixt 3 Millro^ndes Sa^. and a Chief of the
second. 36 Will. VVacha^, a. 37 Mich. Lister, mil. Ermine, on a Fess Sab. 3
Mullets Or. 38 Geor. Paulett, ar. ut prius EDW. VI. Anno 1 Nich. Tichborn ut
prius 2 Fran. Dawtrey, m. ut prius 3 Mich. Lister, mil. ut prius 4 Nich.
Pexall, m. 5 Joh. S^. Low, mil. 6 Joh. Norton, mil. ut prius PHIL. REG. and
MAR. REG. Anno 1 Nich. Tichborn ut prius 1, 2 John Brain 2, 3 John White, ar.
ut prius 3, 4 Joh. Norton, ar. ut prius 4, 5 Nich. Pexall, m. 5, 6 Oliu.
Wallop, m. ut prius ELIZ. REG. Anno 1 Tho. Pace, ar. 2 Will Pawle^, m. ut
prius 3 John Berkelty, m. ut prius 4 Geor. Mills* ar. SUSSEX. Per Fess Argent,
and Sab. a Pale Counterchanged 3 Bars of the last saliant, Musled Or. 5 Will.
Kingsmil, a. ut prius 6 Rich. Norton, ar. ut prius 7 Rich. Pexall, m. 8 Mil.
Bulkley, ar. ut prius 9 Rob. Oxenbridge Gul. a Lion ramp. double Queeve Or,
withtn a Border Az. charged with an entoir of Escalops Gold. 10 Hen. Seymor, m.
ut prius 11 Joh. VVorsley, ar. Apledercomb Argent, a Cheveron Sab. 'twixt 3
Cornish-choughs proper, 12 Gilb. Wells, ar. 13 Will. Waller, ar. ut prius 14
Will. Jepham, ar. 15 Edw. White, ar. ut prius 16 Edw. Aboroe, ar. 17 Rich.
White, ar. ut prius 18 Walt. Sands, ar. ut prins 19 Jo. Thurnburgh, ^. Arg.
Fretty and a Chief Gules. 20 Hen. Giffard, ar. 21 Ben. Tichburne, a. ut prius
22 Ja. Paget, ar. 23 Hen. Ughtread, ar. 24 Rob. White, ar. ut *prius 25 Tho.
Dabridgcourt ut prius 26 Will. Wright, a. 27 Tho. West, ar. 28 Fra. Relway,
ar. 29 Will. St. John, ar. Arg. on a Chief Gul. 2 Mullets pierced Or. 30 Rich.
Norton, ar. ut prius 31 Edw. Goddard, ar. 32 Rich. Paulett, ar. ut prius 33
Walt. Sands, m. ut prius 34 Joh. Seymor, m. ut prius 35 Nich* Mills, ar. ut
prius 36 VVil. de Uvedal, a. ut. prius 37 Rob. Oxenbridg ut prius 38 Rich.
Norton, ar. ut prius 39 Mar. Styward, ar. 40 Joh. Wh^te, ar. Southwick 41
Will. Wallop, a. ut prius 42 Fran. Palms, ar. Oreton Gul. 3 flower de liz
Arg. a Chief parted Bar ways lozengee counter-lozengee Silver and Azu. ali
within a Border of the first. 43 VVil. Kingsmil, m. ut prius 44 Ben. Tichbourn,
m. ut prius and He. Wallop, m. ut prius JACO. REG. Anno 1 Hen. Wallop, m. ut
prius 2 Will. Abarrow, m. 3 Will. Dodington 4 VVil. Oglander, m. Azu. a
Storke ^etwixt 3 Crosses patee (...) Or. 5 Dan. Norton, m. ut prius 6 Jo^.
Knight, ar. 7 He. Whitehead, m. 8 Tho. Stukeley, m. DEVON. Azure, 3 Pears Or. 9
Will. Sandys, m. ut prius 10 Will. Kingsmil, m. ut prius 11 Rich. Norron, m. ut
prius 12 Joh. Paul^, mil. ut prius 1^ Edw. Richards, ar. 14 Ri. Worseley, m. b.
ut prius 15 Hen. Clarke, mil. 16 Joh. Compton, ar. ut prius 17 Tho. Neele, mil.
18 Tho. Lambert 19 Geor. Philpot, m. 20 Step. Knight, ar. 21 Hen. Hook, ar. 22
Arth. Willmot, ar. CAR. REG. Anno 1 Dan. Norton ut prius 2 Em. Gadder 3 John
Mills, bar. ut prius 4 Fran. Douse, mil. Or a Cheveron Lozengee Arg. and Az.
betwixt 3 Greyhounds current Sable. 5 Hen. Wallop, mil. ut prius 6 Tho. Co^ele
7 Rob. Pain, mil. 8 Tho. Stewkly, m. ut prius 9 Edw. Hooper, ar. 10 Will.
Beonsaw, m. 11 Ric. Whitehead, a. 12 Jo. Button, ar. Ermine a Fess Gules. 13
Joh. Oglander, m. ut prius 14 Jac. Hunt, ar. 15 Rich. Mayor, ar. Gul. an Anchor
Arg. on a Chief Or, 3 Roses of the first. 16 17 Joh. Feilder, ar. 18 19 20 21
22 Rich. Bishop, ar.

The Farewell.
When some five years since I visited Winchester, it grieved me at the heart to
be hold that stately structure so far run to ruin, yea my thoughts then
interpreted those sad Schisms and Gaping Chincks the Heralds of its downfall,
deeming with my self that I discovered (as Physicians in our Bodies do
cadaverosam) faciem ruinosam therein. But it rejoiced me when coming there this
last year to find it so well amended, by the sovereign medicine of Gold or
Silver, charitably applied by *its good Bishop. I wish all Cathedrals in
England, sick of the same distemper, as quick and happy a recovery.

HARTFORD-SHIRE is so called from Hartford the chief Town therein, as Hartford
so termed from the (...)* (...). in this County.
Ford of Hearts, a S^ed in his Map of this County.
Heart Couchant in the waters, being the Arms thereof; Which convinces me that
HEART, not HERTFORD-SHIRE is the Orthography of this County. It has Essex on
the East, Middlesex on the South, Buckingham shire on the West, Bedford and
Cambridge shire on the North thereof. It might be allowed a Square of 20.
miles, save that the Angular Insinuations of other Counties prejudice the
Entireness thereof. I have been informed from an ancient ^stice therein, that
one cannot be so advantagiously placed in any part of this Shire, but that he
may recover another County within the riding of five miles. It is the garden of
England for delight, and men commonly say that such who buy a house in
Hartfordshire pay two years purchase for the air thereof.

It falls short in Fruitfulness of ESSEX adjoining thereunto, to which it was
also annexed, under one Sheriff (and one Eschetor till after the Reign of King
Edward the Third.) And Paynfull In his description of Hartford-shire, Page the
2d.
Norden writes a bold Truth.

For deep feedings, or Sheep pastures, I take notice of few, and those
especially about Knebworth. To speak of the Soil, as indeed it is most
generally, for my part I take it but a barren Country in respect of some other
Shires. Indeed this Forrestie-Ground would willingly bear nothing so well as a
Crop of Wood. But seeing Custom is another Nature, it has for many years been
contented to bring forth good Grain, persuaded thereunto by the Industrious
Husbandman. Surely no County can show so fair a Bunch of Berries, for so they
term the fair Habitations of Gentlemen of remark, which are called Places,
Courts, Halls and Manors in other Shires.

This County affording no peculiar Commodity nor Manufacture, We may safely
proceed to other Observations, when first we have given the due commendation to
the Horses of this Shire.

Their Teames of Horses (often times deservedly advanced from the Cart to the
Coach) are kept in excellent equipage, much alike in color and stature, fat
and fair; such is their care in dressing and well-feeding them. I could name
the place and person, (Reader be not offended with an innocent digression) who
brought his servant with a Warrant before a Justice of Peace for stealing his
grain. The man brought his five horses tailed together along with him,
alleging for himself, That if he were the Thief, these were the Receivers,
and so escaped.

The Buildings.
THEOBALDS, did carry away the credit, built by Sir William, beautified by Sir
Robert Cecil his Son, both Lord Treasurers of England. The last exchanged it
(too wise to do it to his Loss) with King James for Hatfield-house, which King
deceased therein, March 27. 1625. Yea, This House may be said to decease about
its grand Climacterical, some sixty three years from the finishing thereof,
taken down to the ground (for the better partage among the Soldiery) Anno 1651.
and from the seat of a Monarch is now become a little Commonwealth; so many
entire Tenements, like Splinters have flown out of the Materials thereof; Thus
our Fathers saw it built, we behold it unbuilt, and whether our Children shall
see it rebuilt, he only knows who has written Eccles. 3. 5.
There is a time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones together.

Hatfield-house was first the Bishops of Ely, then the Kings, afterward by
exchange the Earls of Salisbury: For Situation, Building, Contrivance,
Prospect, Air, and all accommodations, inferior to none in England. Within a
little mile thereof lies a place called the Vineyard, where nature by the
Midwifery of Art, is delivered of much pleasure; So that the Reader must be a
Seer, before he can understand the perfection thereof. Had this place been in
Graecia, or nigh Rome, where the luxuriant fancies of the Poets, being
subject-bound, improve a Tree into a Grove, a Grove into a Forest, a Brook
into a River, and a Pond into a Lake; I say, had this Vineyard been there, it
had disinherited Tempe of its honor, and hence the Poets would have dated all
their delights as from a Little Paradise, and Staple-place of earthly pleasure.

Medicinal Waters.
One has lately been discovered near Barnet in a Common, as generally sanative
springs are found in such places, as if nature therein intimated her intention,
designing them for public profit, not private employment; it is conceived to
run thorough veins of Alome by the taste thereof. It coagulateth milk, and the
curd thereof is an excellent plaster for any green wounds, besides several
other operations.

But, as Alexander was wont to applaud Achilles, not as the most valiant but
the most fortunate of men, having Homer to trumpet forth his actions: so are
these waters much advantaged with the vicinitie of London, whose Citizens
proclaim the praise thereof. And indeed London in this kind is stately
attended, having Tunbridge, Epsham, Barnet
three Medicinal Waters within one days Journey thereof. The Catalogue of the
Cures done by this Spring, amounts to a great number, in so much that there
is hope, in process of time, the Water rising here will repair the blood shed
hard by, and save as many lives as were lost in the fatal Battle at Barnet
betwixt the two houses of York and Lancaster.

Hartford-shire Proverbs.
HARTFORD-SHIRE Clubs and clouted shoon.]

Some will wonder how this Shire lying so near to London, the Staple of English
Civilitie, should be guilty of so much Rusticalness. But the finest Cloth must
have a List, and the pure Pesants are of as course a thread in this County, as
in any other place. Yet though some may smile at their clownishness, let none
laugh at their Industry, the rather because the high-shoon of the Tenant pays
for the Spanish-Leather-Boots of the Landlord.

HARTFORD-SHIRE Hedge-Hogs.]

Plenty of Hedge-Hogs are found in this High*woodland-County, where too often
they suck the Kine, though the Dayry-maid conne them small thanks for sparing
their pains in milking them. A creature always in his posture of defense,
carrying a Stand of Pikes on his back, so that if as well victualled as armed,
he may hold out a seige against any equal opposition. If this Proverb
contains any further reflection on the People in this County, as therein
taxed for covetousness, and their constant nudling on the Earth; I will not so
understand it, as hoping and believing this to be a false Application.

WARE and WADES-Mill are worth all LONDON.]

This I assure you is a Masterpiece of the Vulgar wits in this County,
wherewith they endeavor to amuse Travelers, as if WARE a
thorough-fare-Market, and WADES-Mill (Part of a Village lying two miles North
thereof,) were so prodigiously rich as to countervail the wealth of LONDON. The
Fallacy lies in the Homonymy of WARE, here not taken for that Town so named,
but appellatively for all vendible Commodities. We will not discompose the wit
of this Proverb, by cavilling that WEAR is the proper name of that Town, (so
called anciently from the Stoppages, which there obstruct the River.) But leave
it as we found it, and proceed.

HARTFORD-SHIRE Kindness.]

This is generally taken in a good and grateful sense for the mutual return of
favors received, It being [belike] observed that the people in this County at
entertainments drink back to them who drank to them, parallel to the Latin
Proverbs, Fricantem refrica; Manus manum lavat; par est de merente been, been
mereri. However sometimes Hartford-shire kindness may prove Hartford-shire
cruelty, and amount to no less then a Monopoly, when this reciprocation of
Favors betwixt themselves is the exclusion of all others from partaking
thereof.

Princes.
WILLIAM, second Son of King Edward the Third, and Philip his wife, took his
Christian-name from his Grandfather, William Earl of Henault, and his Surname
of Hatfield from the place of his Nativity in this County, where he was born
the ninth of his Fathers Reign, Anno Domini 1335. and expired within few days
after. So that what I find written on the late Monument of On Charles Blunt,
son to the Earl of Newport in St. Martins in the Fields.
a Noble Infant, may also serve for his Epitaph.

Vivus nil poteram fari, quin mortuus Infans
Nunc loquor, ut mortis sis memor, atque vale.
Living I could not speak, now dead I tell
Thy duty, think of death, and so farewell.
It is uncertain where he was interred, but most believe him buried at
Westminster.

EDMUND of LANGLEY, Fifth son to King Edward the Third, and Queen Philip, Was
so surnamed from Kings-Langley in this County the place of his Nativity. He was
created Earl of Cambridge, in the Thirty sixth year of the Reign of his
Father, and Duke of York in the ninth year of his Nephew King Richard the
Second. He married Isabel, daughter and Coheir of Peter King of Castile: and
lie buried at Langley together. He had (besides other Children of both Sexes)
to his eldest Son Richard Duke of York; and he died, Anno Dom. 1402.

EDMUND of HADDAM, Reader, I presume thee to be so much a Gentleman, as in
courtesy to allow him a Prince, who was Son to Queen Katherine by Owen
Theodor, her second husband, womb-brother to King Henry the Sixth, and Father
to King Henry the Seventh. That he was born in this County one may well be
confident, seeing there is no Haddam in any Shire of England save As appears
in Villare Anglicanum.
Hartford-shire alone. I confess therein three Villages of that name, but sure
no less then Great Haddam was the place of so eminent a Native. He was
solemnly created Earl of Richmond at Reading, in the 31. of King Henry the
Sixth.

Many good works no doubt he did, when living, whose corpse when buried, saved
from destruction the fair Cathedral of Saint David's. For his Monument in the
midst of the Quire, says my Speed in the Description of Pembrokeshire.
Author, (as the Prebendaries told him) spared their Church from defacing in
the days of King Henry the Eighth. I could wish all King Henry's nearest
relations had after their decease been severally so disposed preservatives from
ruin and rapine, as the corpse of Q. Katherin Dowager did, as some say, save
the Church of Lord Herbert in the life of King Henry the Eighth.
Peterburgh But this ill agrees with that which In the Earl of Richmond.
Brooks reports, viz. That this Earl was buried in Carmarthen; and because
Vincent his professed adversary (finding fault with him always when any,
sometimes when no cause) takes no exception thereat; I the more rely on his
Testimony. Only it is possible that this Earl first enterred in Carmarthen,
might be afterward for the more eminence of Sepulture removed to Saint David's.
He died, Anno Domini, 1456.

Saints.
Saint ALBAN, though (as Acts 22. 25.
Saint Paul) a Roman by privilege, but Britton, by Parentage, was born in this
County (though many hundreds of years before Hartfordshire had its modern Name
and Dimensions) in the City of Verulam, and was martyred for Christianity under
Dioclesian An. 303. The cause and manner whereof, (with the Martyrdom of Saint
Amphibalus hard by Rudborn,) I have so largely related in my Cent. 4. page 17,
etc.
Ecclesiastical History, that, as I will repeat nothing, I can add nothing of
consequence thereto. Except any will conceive this to be remarkable, that good
Liquoras grows naturally out of the ruinous walls of Verulam, an old City,
(the Mother of the New Town of Saint Albans) as a skilful eyewitness Norden in
his description of this County, page 29.
Antiquary and zealous Protestant has observed. Had some Papist taken first
notice hereof, he might probably have made it a Miracle, and assign the
sanctity of this place for the root of this Liquoras.

Martyrs.
It appears by the Maps, that Africa lies partly in the Torrid, and partly
in the Temperate Zone, Nor is the wonder any at all, considering the vastness
thereof, extending it self through many Degrees. More strange it is that this
small County should be partly in a Temperate, viz. the Western part thereof
subjected to the Bishop of Lincoln, and partly in the Torrid Climate, namely
the Eastern Moity belonging to the Dioces of London, which under Bonner was
parched with persecution. Yet not to make this Monster worse then he was,
though many in his Jurisdiction were much molested, and though Tradition points
the very place in Bishops Stortford, where poor people were burnt at the stake,
yet my Book of Martyrs, or Eyes, or both be defective, wherein I cannot recover
the name of any particular person.

Pope.
NICHOLAS Son to Robert Break-spear (a Lay brother in the Abbey of St. Albans)
fetched his Name from Break-speare a place in Camd. Brit. in Middlesex.
Middlesex, but was born at Bale de Scrip. Brit. Cent. Secund. numero. 90. and
Pi^seus in anno 1159.
Abbots-Langley a Town in this County. When a Youth, he was put to such servile
work in St. Albans Abbey, that his ingenious Soul could not comport therewith.
Suing to be admitted into that house, he received the repulse, which in fine
proved no mis-hap, but a happy-miss, unto him; for, going over into France, he
studied so hard and so happily at Paris, that for his worth he was preferred
Abbot of St. Rufus near Valentia, and afterward by Pope Eugenius the Third, was
made Bishop of Alba nigh Rome: Adnatalis soli memoriam, says my Author, that
he, who was refused to be Monachus Albanensis in England, should be Episcopus
Albanensis in Italy. He was employed by the Pope for the conversion of the
Norwegians, and though Bale says (he were not Bale if he were not bitter)
Anti-christiano charactere Norwegios signavit; yet his reducing them from
Paganism to Christianity in the Fundamentals was a worthy work and deserves
true commendation. He was afterward chosen Pope of Rome, by the name of Adrian
the fourth. There is a mystery more then I can fathom in the changing of his
name: Seeing his own font-name was a Papal one; Yet he preferred rather to be
Adrian the fourth, then Nicholas the third. He held his place four years, eight
months, and eight and twenty days: and Anno 1158. as he was drinking, was
choakt with a Fly: Which in the large Territory of St. Peter's patrimony had no
place but his Throat to get into: But since a Fly stopped his Breath, fear shall
stop my Mouth, not to make uncharitable Conclusions from such Casualties.

Cardinal.
BOSO (confessed by all an REM.
Englishman) is not placed in this County out of any certainty, but of pure
Charity, not knowing, where elsewhere with any Probability * Bale de Scrip. Brit.
to dispose him. But seeing he was Nephew to the late named Nicholas, or Pope
Adrian, we have some shadow and pretense to make him of the same County: This
is sure, his Uncle made him Godwin in Cat. of Cardin. Page 164.
Cardinal in the Month of December, 1155. and he was a great Change-Church in
Rome, being successively,

1. Cardinal Deacon of Sts. Cosma and Damiam. 2. Cardinal Priest of St. Crosses
of Jerusalem. 3. Cardin. Pr. of St. Prudentiana. 4. Cardin. Pr. of Pastor.
He was more than Instrumental in making Alexander the third Pope with the
suffrages of 19. Cardinals, who at last clearly carried it against his
Antipope Victor the fourth. This Boso dyed, Anno Dom. 1180.

Prelates.
RICHARD de WARE for this is his true name, as appears in his On his Tomb yet
well to be seen in Westminster Abbey on the Northside of the Tomb of Amer de
Valens Earl of Pembroke.
Epitaph, though some (pretending his honor, but prejudicing the Truth
thereby) surname him Warren. He was made Abbot of Westminster 1260, and twenty
years after Treasurer of England, under King Edward the first. This Richard
going to Rome, brought thence certain Workmen, and rich Purphury. And for the
rest hear my J. Philipot, in his Treasurers of England collected Ann. D^m.
1636. p. 19.
Author.

By whom and whereof he made the rare Pavement to be seen at Westminster,
before the Communion Table, containing the Discourse of the whole World, which
is at this day most Beautiful; a thing of that Singularity, Curiousness and
Rareness, that England has not the like again.

See Readers, what an Enemy Ignorance is to Art. How often have I trampled on
that Pavement, so far from admiring, as not observing it. And since, upon
serious Survey, it will not, in my Eyes, answer this Character of Curiosity,
However I will not add malice to my Ignorance (qualities which too often are
Companions) to disparage what I do not understand, but I take it on the trust
of others more skilful, for a Masterpeece of Art. This Richard dyed on the
second of December, 1283, the 12. of King Edward the first, and lies buried
under the foresaid Pavement.

RALPH BALDOCK So called from the Place of his Nativity (A MoungrelMarket) *
Godwin in his Bishops of London.
in this County, was bred in Merton College in Oxford. One not unlearned, and
who wrote an History of England, which Leland at London did once behold. King
Edward the first much prised and preferred him Bishop of London. He gave two
hundred pounds whilst living, and left more when dead, to repair the East part
of St. Paul's, on the same token, that upon occasion of clearing the Foundation,
an incredible number of Heads of Oxen were found buried in the Ground, alleged
as an argument by Camd. Britt. in Middlesex.
some to prove That anciently a Temple of Diana. Such who object that heads of
Stagges, had been more proper for her, the Goddess of the Game, may first
satisfy us, Whether any Creatures ferae Naturae (as which they could not
certainly compass at all seasons) were usually offered for Sacrifices. This
Ralph dyed July the 24. 1313. Being buried under a Marble Stone in St. Mary's
Chapel in his Cathedral.

JOHN BARNET had his Name and Nativity from a Market Town in this County,
sufficiently known by the Road passing thorough it. He was first by the Pope
preferred 1361. to be Bishop of Worcester, and afterward was translated to
Bath and Wells. Say not this was a Retrograde motion, and Barnet degraded in
point of profit by such a Removal. For though Worcester is the better
Bishopric in our age, in those days Bath and Wells* (before the Revenues
thereof were reformed under King Edward the sixth) was the richer preferment:
Hence he was translated to Ely, and for 6. years was Lord Treasurer of England,
He dyed at Bish. Godw. in Bishops of Ely.
Bishops Hatfield, June 7. 1373. and was buried there on the South-fide of the
high Altar, under a Monument, now miserably defaced by some Sacrilegious
Executioner, who has beheaded the Statue lying thereon.

THOMAS RUDBURNE, no doubt, according to the fashion of those days, took his
Name from Rudburne a Village within four miles from St. Albans. He was bred in
Oxford, and Proctor thereof Anno Godwin in Cat. of Bishops of St. David's.
1402. and Chancellor 1420. An excellent Scholar, and skilful Mathematician;
of a meek and mild temper (though at one time a little tart against the
Wic-livites) which procured him much love with great persons. He was Warden of
Merton College in Oxford, and built the Tower over the College Gate. He wrote
a Bale de Scrip. Brit. Cent. 7 n. 53. and Pits. An. 1419.
Chronicle of England, and was preferred Bishop of St. David's. He flourished
Anno Domini, 1419. though the date of his Death be unknown.

Reader, I cannot satisfy my self, that any Bishop since the Reformation was a
Native of this County, and therefore proceed to another Subject.

Statesmen.
Sir EDWARD WATERHOUSE Knight, was born at Helmsted-bury in this County, of an
ancient and worshipful Family, deriving their descent lineally from Sir Gilbert
VVaterhouse of Kyrton in Low* Lindsey in the County of Lincoln, in the time of
King Henry the third. As for our Sir Edward, his Parents were,

John Waterhouse Esquire, a man of much fidelity and Sageness. Auditor many
years to King Henry the Eighth, of whom he obtained (after a great
entertainment for him in his house) the grant of a Weekly Market for the Town
of Helmsted. Margaret Turner of the ancient house of Blunts-Hall in Suffolk,
and Cannons in Hartfordshire.
The King at his Departure, honored the Children of the said John Waterhouse,
being brought before him, with his praise and encouragement, gave a Benjamins
portion of Dignation to this Edward, foretelling by his Royal Augury, That he
would be the Crown of them all, and a man of great Honor and Wisdom, fit for
the Service of Princes.

It pleased God afterward to second the word of the King, so that the sprouts
of his hopeful youth, only pointed at the growth and greatness of his
honorable age. For, being but twelve years old, he went to Oxford, where for
some years he glistered in the Oratorick and Poetic Sphere, until he addicted
himself to conversation, and observance of State affairs, wherein his great
proficiency commended him to the favor of three principal patrons.

One was Walter Devereux Earl of Essex, who made him his bosome-friend, and the
said Earl, lying on his deathbed, took his leave of him with many kisses, Oh
my Ned (said he) farewell, thou art the faithfullest and friendliest Gentleman
that ever I knew. In testimony of his true affection to the dead Father in his
living Son, this Gentleman is thought to have penned that most judicious and
elegant Epistle (recorded in Holinsheds History page 1266.) and presented it to
the young Earl, conjuring him by the cogent arguments of example and rule, to
patrizate.

His other Patron was Sir Henry Sidney (so often Lord Deputy of Ireland)
whereby he became incorporated into the familiarity of his Son Sir Philip
Sidney, between whom, and Sir Edward, there was so great freindlinesse, that
they were never better pleased then when in one another Companies, or when
they corresponded each with other.

And we find after the Death of that worthy Knight, that he was a
close-concerned Mourner at his Obsequies, as appears at large in the printed
Representation of his Funeral Solemnity.

His third Patron was Sir John Perot Deputy also of Ireland, who so valued his
Counsel, that in state affairs he would do nothing without him. So great his
employment betwixt state and state, that he crossed the seas Thirty seven
times, until deservedly at last he came into a Port of Honor, wherein ^he
sundry years anchored, and found safe harbor. For he received the Honor of
Knighthood, was sworn of her Majesty's Privy Council for Ireland, and
Chancellor of the Exchequer therein.

Now his grateful soul coursing about how to answer the Queens Favor, laid it
self wholly out in Her service, wherein two of his actions most remarkable.
First he was highly instrumental in modelling the Kingdom of Ireland into
shires as now they are; showing himself so great a Lover of the Polity, under
which he was born, that he advanced the Compliance therewith (as commendable
and necessary) in the Dominions annexed thereunto.

His second service was, when many in that Kingdom shrouded themselves from
the Laws, under the Target of power, making force their Tutelary Saint, he set
himself vigorously to suppress them. And when many of the Privy Council
terrified with the greatness of the Earl of Desmond, durst not subscribe the
Instrument, wherein he was proclaimed Traitor, Sir Edward among some others
boldly signed the same (disav^wing his, and all treasons against his Prince and
Country) and the Council did the like, commanding the publication thereof.

As to his private sphere God blessed him, being but a third Brother, above his
other Brethren. Now though he had three Wives, the first a Viliers, the second
a Spilman, the third the Widow of Herlakenden of VVood-church in Kent Esquire,
and though he had so strong a Brain and Body, yet he lived and dyed Childlesse,
entercommoning therein with many Worthies, who are, according to Aelius
Spartianus, either improlifick, or have Children in genitorum vituperium, and
famarum laesuram. God thus denying him the pleasure of posterity, he craved
leave of the Queen to retire himself, and fixed the Residue of his life at
VVood-church in Kent, living there in great honor and repute, as one who had
no design to be popular, and not prudent; rich, and not honest; great, and not
good.

He dyed in the fifty sixth year of his age, the 13. of October 1591. and is
buried at VVood church under a Table Marble-Monument, erected to his memory by
his sorrowful Lady surviving him.

Reader, I doubt not but thou art sensible of the alteration and improvement of
my Language in this Character, owing both my Intelligence and expressions unto
Edward VVaterhouse now of Syon College Esquire, who, to revive the memory of
his Namesake and great Uncle, furnished me with these instructions.

HENRY CARRY Viscount of Falkland in Scotland, and Son to Sir Edw. Carry, was
born at Aldnam in this County. He was a most accomplished Gentleman, and
complete Courtier. By King James he was appointed Lord Deputy of Ireland, and
well discharged his Trust therein. But an unruly Colt will fume and chafe
(though neither switcht nor spurred) merely because backed. The rebellious Irish
will complain only because kept in Subjection, though with never so much
lenity; the occasion why some hard Speeches were passed on his Government. Some
beginning to counterfeit his hand, he used to incorporate the year of his Age,
in a Knot flourished beneath his Name, concealing the Day of his Birth to
himself. Thus by comparing the date of the Month, with his own Birthday
(unknown to such Forgers) he not only discovered many false Writings which were
past, but also deterred dishonest Cheaters from attempting the like for the
future. Being recalled into England, he lived honorably in this County, until
he by a sad casualty brake his Leg on a Stand in Theobalds Park, and soon after
dyed thereof. He married the sole Daughter and Heir of Sir Lawrence Tanfield,
Chief Baron of the Exchequer, by whom he had a fair estate in Oxfordshire. His
Death happened Anno Dom. 1620. being Father to the most accomplished Statesman,
Lucius; Grandfather to the present Henry Lord Falkland, whose pregnant parts
(now clarified from Juvenile Extravagancies) perform much, and promise more
useful service to this Nation.

Soldiers.
Sir HENRY CARRY Son to Sir William Carry, and Mary Bollen, his Wife, was
(wherever S. N.
born) made by Queen Elizabeth, Lord Chamberlain, Baron of Hunsdon in this
County. A Valiant man, and Lover of Men of their hands, very choleric but not
malicious. Once one Mr. Colt chanced to meet him coming from Hunsdon to London,
in the Equipage of a Lord of those days. The Lord on some former grudge gave
him a Box on the Ear; Colt presently returned the principle with Interest, and
thereupon his Servants drawing their Swords swarmed about him. You Rogues (said
the Lord) may not I and my Neighbor change a blow, but you must interpose?
Thus the Quarrel was begun and ended in the same minute.

It was merrily said, that his Latin and his Dissimulation were both alike,
Sir R. Nanton in his Fragment Regal.
and that his custom in swearing, and obscenity in speech, made him seem a
worse Christian than he was, and a better Knight of the Carpet then he could
be. He might have been with the Queen, whatsoever he would himself, but would
be no more then what he was, preferring enough above a Feast in that nature.

He hung at Court on no man's Sleve, but stood on his own Botome till the time
of his death, having a competent estate of his own given him by the Queen. Who
bestowed on him, in the first of her Reign, Hunsdon house in this County, with
four thousand pounds a year (according to the valuation in that age) in fair
Demesnes, Parks, and Lands lying about it. Yet this was rather Restitution than
Liberality in her Majesty: Seeing He had spent as great an estate, (left him by
his father) in her Service or rather Releif during her persecution under Queen
Mary.^

This Lord suppressed the first Northern Commotion, (the sole reason why we
have ranked him under the Title of Soldier) for which, This Letter of Thanks
was solemnly returned unto him.

By the QUEEN.
Right Trusty and Wellbeloved Cousin, We greet you well. And right glad we are,
that it has pleased God to assist you in this your late Service, against that
cankred subtle Traitor Leonard Dacres, whose force being far greater in Number
than yours, we perceive you have overthrown, and how he thereupon was the first
that fled, having (as it seems) a heart readier to show his unloyal falsehood
and malice, than to abide the fight. And though the best we could have desired,
was to have him taken: Yet we thank God that he is in this sort overthrown and
forced to fly o^r Realm, to his like company of Rebels, whom no doubt, God of
his favorable justice will confound with such ends as are meet for them. We
will not now by words express how inwardly glad we are, that you have such
success, whereby both your courage in such an unequal match, your
faithfulness toward us, and your Wisdom is seen to the World, this your Act
being the very first that ever was executed by fight in field, in our time,
against any Rebel: But We mean also in Deed by just Reward, to let the world
see How much we esteem and can consider such a service as this is: And so we
would have your self also thank God heartily, as we doubt not but you do, from
whom all Victories do proceed, and comfort your self with the assurance of our
most favorable acceptance. We have also herewith sent our Letter of Thanks
to Sir John Foster, and would have you namely thank our good faithful Soldiers
of Barwick, in whose worthy service we do repose no small trust.

26. of February. 1569.

Thus far was written by the Secretary of State, but the ensuing Postscript was
all the Queens own hand; The Original being preserved by the Right Honorable
Henry Earl of Monmouth (Grandchild to the Lord Hunsdon) by whose noble favor I
carefully copied it forth as follows,

I doubt much, my Harry, whether that the Victory given me more joyed me, or
that you were by God appointed the Instrument of my Glory, and I assure you for
my Countries good the first might suffice, but for my hearts contentation, the
second more pleases me; It likes me not a little, that with a good testimony
of your faith, there is seen a stout courage of your mind, that more trusted to
the goodness of your Quarrel, th^n to the weakness of your Number. Well, I
can say no more; Beatus est ille servus quem, cum Dominus venerit, inveniet
facientem sua Mandata. And that you may not think that you have done nothing
for your profit (though you have done much for your Honor) I intend to make
this journey, somewhat to increase your Livelihood, that you may not say to
your self, Perditur quod sactum est ingrato.

Your Loving Kinswoman. ELIZABETH REGINA.


Three times was this Lord in Election to be Earl of Wilsthire, a Title which
in some sort belonged unto him, in the right of Mary his Mother, but still some
intervening Accident retarded it. When he lay on his Death bed, The Queen gave
him a gracious visit, causing his Patent for the said Earldom to be drawn, his
Robes to be made, and both to be laid down upon his bed, but this Lord (who
could dissemble neither well nor sick) Madam (said he) Seeing you counted me
not worthy of this honor whilst I was Living, I count my self unworthy of it
now I am Dying. He departed this life Ann. Dom. 1596. and lies buried in a
most magnificent Monument in Westminster Abbey, being the direct Ancestor to
the Earls of Dover and Monmouth.

Physicians.
JOHN GILES, or of St. Giles, was born at Bale and (...). de Scrip. Angl.
St. Albans, probably in the Parish of St. Giles, long since (as some more in
that Town) demolished. He was bred beyond the Seas, where he became so great a
Scholar, that he not only was Physician in ordinary to Philip King of France,
but also Professor of that faculty in Paris and Montpelier. Then waving the
care of Bodies, he took on him the cure of Souls, and was made Doctor of
Divinity. He afterward became a Dominican, and was the first Englishman that
ever entered into that order. In his old age he was famous for his
Divinity-Lectures read in Oxford.

But which most persuades me to a venerable reception of his memory, is what I
read of him in In An. 1253.
Matthew. Paris, how Robert Grosthead, the pious and learned Bishop of Lincoln
being sick on his Deathbed, sent for this Mr. John Giles, learned in Physic
and Divinity, that from him he might receive comfort both for body and soul.
How long this Physician survived his Patient (dying in October. 1253.) is to me
unknown.

JOHN de GATESDEN was undoubtedly born in this County, wherein two Villages,
the Greater and Less of that name; Such who except that they are written
Gadesden, will soon be satisfied in their Sameness from those who know the
Sympathy betwixt T. and D. He was bred in Merton College in Oxford, where he
so profited in the Study of Physic. That a Symphorianus Champerius in his fifth
Tract. de medi Art. script.
Forraigner compiling a Catalogue of men eminent in that faculty, acknowledges
him a Writer of high esteem therein. By Mathaeus Silvaticus in Lexico.
one who has made a List of Learned men, he is styled Johannes Anglicus. I am
informed that lately his Books have been printed in Italy in a Folio; No small
Honor (I assure you) Seeing in Physic the Italians account all Tramountain
Doctors but Apothecaries in comparison of themselves. The first Treatise in his
Book is termed Bale de scrip. Brit. Cent. 5. n. 7. and Pits. in an. 1320.
Rosa Anglica, The English Rose, and I doubt not, but as it is Sweet in the
Title, so it is Sovereign in the matter therein contained. This John flourished
in the year of our Lord 1320.

Writers.
ALEXANDER NEQUAM, or Bad in English, was born in St. Albans. Many conceived
themselves wondrous Witty in making Jests (which indeed made themselves) on his
Surname. Whereof one eminent instance, Nequam had a mind to become a Monk in
St. Albans, the Town of his Nativity, and thus Laconically wrote for leave to
the Abbot thereof.

Si vis, veniam. Sin autem, tu autem. To whom the Abbot returned.

Si bonus sis, venias; Si Nequam, nequaquam. Whereupon Nequam (to discompose
such conceits for the future) altered the Orthography of his Name into Neckam.

Another Pass of wit there was (says my Bish. Godw. in Cat. of the Bish. of
Lincoln
Author) betwixt him, and Philip Repington Bishop of Lincoln, the lat^r sending
the Challenge.

Et niger and nequam cum sis cognomine Nequam, Both black and bad, whilst Bad
the Name to thee. Nigrior esse potes, Nequior esse Nequis. Blacker thou may,
but worse thou can not be.

To whom Nequam rejoyned.

Phi nota foetoris, lippus malus omnibus horis. Stinks are branded with a Phi,
Lippus Latin for Blear-eye. Phi malus and Lippus, totus malus ergo Philippus.
Phi and Lippus bad as either, Then Philippus worse together.

But by the leave of my learned Author, this Nequam must be much younger than *
Bale and Pits. de script. Angl.
our Alexander, or that Philip much older than Bishop Repington, all agreeing
that Alexander Nequam dyed 1227. under King Henry the third, whereas Philip
Repington was made Bishop of Lincoln 1405. under King Henry the fourth.

But leaving Nequam his name, he is known to posterity by the Title of Ingenii
miraculum, being an excellent Philosopher, Rhetorician and Poet, so true it is
what Tully observes, Omnes arts, quae ad humanitatem pertinent, habent
quoddam commune vinculum, and quasi cognatione quadam inter se continentur:
Besides he was a deep Divine, as his Books do evidence. He was Canon of Exeter,
and (upon what occasion I know not) came to be buried at Worcester, with this
Epitaph,

Eclipsim patitur sapientia sol sepelitur:
Cui si par unus, minus esset flebile funus.
Vir been discretus, and in omni more facetus,
Dictus erat Nequam, vitam duxit tamen aequam.
Wisdom's eclipsed, Sky of the Sun bereft,
Yet less the loss if like alive were left.
A man discreet, in manners debonair,
Bad name, black face, but carriage good and fair.
Others Weavers Fun. Mon. in Hartford-shire.
say he was buried at St. Albans, where he found repulse when living, but
repose when dead.

WILLIAM of WARE born in that thorough fair Town twenty miles from London, was
a Franciscan bred first in Oxford, then in Paris. Now because some may slight
the praise of Bale or Pits (as testes domesticos, Englishmen commending
Englishmen) know that John In suo heptu^lo.
pious Mirandula, highly extolleth this de Ware, though miscalling him John, as
ambitious to have him his Namesake. He was Instructor to John Bale de scrip.
Brit. cent. 4. p. 323. and Pits. p. 349.
Duns Scotus.

And if the Scholar to such height did reach,
Then what was he who did that Scholar teach?
He flourished under King Henry the third, Anno 1270. and is supposed to be
buried in Paris.

JOHN MANDEVILE Knight, born at St. Albans in this Weavers Fun. Mon. in this
County.
County, Heir to a fair estate, he applied himself first to the reading of the
Scriptures, then to the study of Physic (wherein he attained to great
perfection) afterward to travel for thirty four years together, and at last
like another Ulysses returning home, was quite grown out of Knowledge of all
his friends. He wrote a Book of his own Itinerary thorough Africa, the East and
North part of Asia, containing variety of Wonders. Now though far Travelers
are suspected in their relations to wander from the Truth, yet all things
improbable are not impossible, and the Readers ignorance is sometimes all the
Writers falsehood. He used to complain of the Church corruptions in his Age,
being wont to say, Bale de scrip. Brit.
Virtus cessat, Ecclesia calcatur, Clerus errat, Demon regnat, Simonia
Dominatur.

He dyed Anno Dom. 1372. buried say some in the Convent of the Williamites, at
Liege in Germany, which St. Albans will not allow, claiming his Burial, as well
as his Birth, where a Ryming Epitaph is appendant on a Pillar near the supposed
place of his Enterment.

NICHOLAS GORHAM a Dominican. We cannot blame the Frenchmen, if desirous to
gain so great a Scholar to be their Countryman; nor must the French blame us,
if loath to lose what is duly and truly our own.

Three things are pretended to countenance his French Nativity, 1. His Long
living (and dying at last) in that Land. 2. The preferment ^e got there, being
Confessor to the King of France, which may seem a Place of too much Privacy to
be conferred on a Forraigner. 3. The great credit and esteem which his Writings
have gained in France, where his Manuscript-works, are extant in many Libraries.

These Pleas are over-ballanced with a like Number to attest his English
Extraction. Ham in Gorham, is notoriously known for no French, but a Saxon
ordinary termination of a Town. 2. Gorham was a Village nigh St. Albans in this
County; where Gorhamberry (the Mannor-house thereof) is extant at this day. The
Register of Merton College in Oxford mentions the admission of this Nicholas
Gorham a student in their Foundation. Add to all these, that Learned Leland and
other English Antiquaries have always challenged him for their Countryman.

Indeed He was an Englishman Francised, who going over into France a young
man, spent the rest of his life there. Many and Learned are his Books, having
Commented almost on all the Scriptures; and give me leave to say, no Hands have
fewer spots of pitch upon them who touched the superstition of that Age he
lived in. He dyed, and was buried at Paris, about the year of our Lord 1400. I
will only add that since we have had another Nicholas of Gorham (though not by
his birth, by his habitation) as famous for a Statesman as the former for a
Divine. I mean Sir Nicholas Bacon, whose dwelling was at Gorham-berry aforesaid.

HUGH LEGATE born in this Pit. de Illust. Ang. Scrlp. an. 1400.
County, bred in Oxford, at last became a Benedictine in the Abbey of St.
Albans. Being much delighted in Meditation, he wholly employed himself in
commentary on,

1. John of See Writers in Middlesex.
Hanwell his Books of Lamentation. 2. Boethius of Consolation.
Thus his Soul may be presumed well poized betwixt plumbum and plumam, a Weight
and a Wing to supresse and support it. He flourished Anno 1400.

JOHN WHETAMSTEAD was born at Wheatamstead in this County, not so famous for
the production of the best Wheat, whence the place has its Name, as for this
John VVhetamsted, who has his Name from that place. He was bred at the Priory
at Tinmouth in Northumberland (a long stride I assure you from the place of his
Birth) to which W^aver Fun. Monum. p. 569
he bequeathed a Challice of Gold. He was afterward Abbot of St. Albans, and
the sixth of that Christian name.

Vast were his expenses in adorning of that Church, exceeding six thousand
pounds.

* Two Criticismes in his Buildings I cannot omit, one, that on the North-side
of his Manusc. Sir R. Cottons Library.
Church (which he enlightened with new VVindowes) he set up the statues of those
Heathen Philosophers, which had testified of the Incarnation of Christ. 2. That
in a little Chapel he set up the similitudes of all the Saints whose Christian
names were John, with his own picture, and this Prayer in a Distick, that
though unworthy he might have a place with his Namesakes in Heaven.

Besides he procured from Humfrey the good Duke of Gloucester, his great Mecenas
who was buried at St. Albans, a suite of Vestments worth 3000. Marks and the
Manor of Pembroke in South Wales. Many are the Books which he left to
posterity, being counted no fewer then fourscore and odd several Treatises, and
dyed about the year 1440.

JOHN BOURCHIER Baron Berners, was Son of John Bourchier Baron Berners AMP.
in the Right of Margery his Wife Daughter of Sir Richard Berners of Mills in
hls Catal. of Honor Page 855.
VVesthorsley in Surrey. Yet had that Honourablo Family of the Berners, an
ancient Habitation at Cambd. Brit. in Hartford sh.
Tharfield in this County, which with some probability insinuates the Birth of
this noble Gentleman therein.

He was a martial man well seen in all Military Discipline, and when Michael
Joseph the Blacksmith lead the Cornish Rebels against King Henry the seventh,
Anno 1496. no man did better service then this Lord in their suppression, for
which he was made chief Governor of Calice.

Having there gotten a repose, who formerly had been a far Traveller, and great
Linguist, He * translated many Books out of French, Spanish, and Italian,
besides Bale de Script. Brit. Cent. 7. n. 1. and Pits. in Anno 532.
some of his own making. I behold his as the second (accounting the Lord
Tiptoft the first) noble hand which since the decay of Learning took a Pen
therein, to be Author of a Book. He dyed on the 16. of March 1532. and is
buried in the great church in Calice. And I have Mills Catal. Page 256.
read that the estate of the Berners is by an Heir-general descended to the
Knyvets of ^shwelthorp in Norfolk.

Since the Reformation.
ROGER HUTCHINSON was born in this Bale de scrip. Brit. Cent. 9. n. 95.
County, and bred Fellow of St. John's College in Cambridge, where he was very
familiar with Mr. Roger Askam, who disdained Intimacy with Dunces. And as this
is euough to speak him Scholar, so it is a sufficient Evidence to an
Intelligent Jury, to prove him Protestant, that being commended by Bale for
writing a book in English of the Image of God; he is wholly omitted, by John
Pits. He flourished Anno Dom. 1550. and probably dyed in the happy Reign of
Edward the sixth, before the following persecution.

THOMAS CARTWRIGHT was born in this Sam. Clerk in his Lives of English
Divines. p. 367.
County, and was admitted in St. John's College in Cambridge Anno 1550. In the
Reign of Queen Mary he left the University (being probably one of those
Scholars, which as Mr. Fox observes went (alias were driven) away from this
College all at one time) and betook himself to the service of a Counselor.
Here he got some skill in the Common Law, which enabled him afterward to fence
the better for himself by the advantage thereof.

In the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, he returned to Cambridge, was chosen Fellow
first of St. John's, then of Trinity: How afterward he was made Margaret
Professor, outed thereof for his Nonconformity, traveled beyond Seas,
returned home, became the Champion of the Presbyterian party, is largely
related in our Ecclesiastical History.

Only I will add that the Non conformists not a greeing which of them (where
there is much choice, there is no choice) should answer Dr. Whitgifts Reply, I
read that Mr. Cartwright at last was chosen Sam. Cleark page 399.
by lot to undertake it. It seems the Brethren concluded it of high and holy
concernment, otherwise I know what Mr. Cartwright has In his Comment on Prove.
1633.
written of the appeal to Lots, Non nisi in rebus gravioribus, and alic^jus
magni momenti ad sortis judicium recurrendumm, maxim, cum per sortem Deus ipse
in judicio sedeat.

One Sam. Cleark page 272.
says for riches he sought them not, and *Sr. G. Paul in his Life of (...) p.
54.
another says, that he dyed rich, and I believe both ^ay true, God sometimes
making Wealth to find them, who seek not for it, seeing many, and great were
his Benefactors. He dyed and was buried in Warwick, where he was Master of the
Hospital. Anno. 1603.

DANIEL DIKE was born at Hempstead in this County, where his Father was a
Minister silenced for his Nonconformity. He was bred in....... College in
Cambridge, and became afterward a profitable Labourer in Gods Vineyard.
Witness (besides his Sermons) his worthy books, whereof that is the
Master-peice which treats of the deceitfulness of man's heart, wherein he
lays down directions for the Discovery thereof. As also how in other Cases one
may be acquainted with his own Condition, seeing many men lose themselves in
the Labyrinths of their own hearts: so much is the Terra incognita therein.
This Book he designed for his pious Patron John Lord Harrington: But alas when
the Child was come to the Birth, there was no strength to bring forth! before
the Book was fully finished, the Author thereof followed his honorable Patron
into a better World; so that his Surviving brother (of whom immediately) set it
forth. And to the Lady Lucy, Countess of Bedford, the Lords Sister, the same
was dedicated. A Book which will be owned for a Truth, whilst men have any
badness, and will be honored for a Treasure, wilst men have any goodness in
them. This Worthy man dyed about the Year 1614.

JEREMIAH DIKE his Younger Brother was bred in Sidney College in Cambridge,
beneficed at Epping in Essex, one of a cheerful Spirit. And know Reader, that
an Ounce of Mirth, with the same degree of Grace, will serve God farther then a
pound of Sadness. He had also a gracious heart, and was very profitable in his
Ministry. He was a Father to some good Books of his own; and a Guardian to
those of his Brother, whose Posthume Works he set forth. He was one peaceable
in Israel. And though no Zelot in the practice of Ceremonies, quietly submitted
to use them. He lived and dyed piously, being buried in his own Parish Church.
Anno Dom. 1620.

ARTHUR CAPEL Esquire, of Had^m in this County, was by King Charles the first
created a Baron. 1641. He served the King with more Valor and Fidelity then
Success, during the Civil Wars, in the Marches of Wales. After the Surrender of
Oxford, he retired to his own house in this Shire, and was in some sort well
cured of the [so then reputed] Disease of Loyalty, when he fell into a Relaps
by going to Colcbester, which cost him his life, beheaded in the Palace Yard in
Westminster 1648.

In his Life time he wrote a book of Meditation (published since his death)
wherein much judicious piety may be discovered. His mortified mind was familiar
with afflictions, which made him to appear with such (...) Resolution on the
Scaffold, where he seemed rather to fright Death, then to be frighted with it.
Hence one not unhappily alluding to his Arms ( a Lion Rampant in a Field Gules
betwixt three Crosses) thus expresses himself.

Thus Lion-like Capel undaunted stood:
Beset with crosses in a Field of Blood.
A Learned Dr. in Physic (present at the opening and embalming of him and Duke
Hambleton) delivered it at a public Lecture, that the Lord Capels was the
least Heart (whilst the Dukes was the greatest) he ever beheld. Which al^o is
very proportionable to the Observation in Philosophy, that the Spirits
contracted in a lesser model, are the cause of the greater courage.

God has since been the Husband to His Widow, (who for her goodness may be a
Pattern to her Sex) and Father to his Children, whom not so much their Birth,
Beauty, and Portions, as Virtues married to the best Bloods, and Estates in the
Land, even when the Royalists were at the lowest condition.

EDWARD SYMONDS born at Cottered in this County, was bred in Peter House in
Cambridge, where he commenced Master of Arts, afterward Minister of Little
Rain in Essex, a man strict in his Life and profitable in his preaching,
wherein he had a plain and piercing faculty. Being sequestered from his Living
for siding with the King, with David 1 Samuel 23. 13. He went wheresoever he
could go, to Worcester, Exeter, Barnstable, France, and lastly returned to
London. He wrote a Book in VINDICATION OF KING CHARLES and was Instrumental in
setting forth his Majesty's book, called (...). Pens were brondished betwixt
him and Mr. Stephen Marshal, though all was fair betwixt them before his Death.
For Mr. Symonds visited him, lying in his bed at Westminster, told him, Had I
taken you for a Wild Beast, I would not have rouzed you in your Den. He was
very conscientious in discharging his calling. Being once requested by me, to
preach for me, he excused himself for want of competent warning, and when I
pleaded, that mine being a Country Parish would be well pleased with his
performance; I can (says he) content them, but not mine own conscience to
preach with so little preparation, he dyed ahout Anno Dom. 1649. and was buried
in St. Peter's Paul's Wharf in London.

Benefactors to the Public.
NICHOLAS DIXON, Parson for thirty years together of Cheshunt in this County.
He was also Clerk of the Pipe-Office belonging to the Exchequer. See we here
why the Officers of that place (as also those of the Chancery) were called
Clerks, because Priests in Orders with Cure of Souls did formerly discharge
those Offices. He was also Under-Treasurer, and at last Baron of the Chequer,
when partly by his own bounty, and partly by Collection of others, He builded
the Parish Church of Cheshunt (and that I assure you is a very fair one) with a
Chancel to the Virgin Mary. Now for an Affidavit for the proof hereof, The
Reader is referred to this his Epitaph inscribed in Cheshunt Chancel, more to
be respected for the truth, then wit thereof.

O miserere Jesu famuli Dixon Nicolai,
^ui brevis hospitium tumulus p^stat satis amplum.
Istud qui Fanum ter denis Rexerat annis
Ad cujus fabricam Bursas proprias, alienas,
Solvit and allexit: quo crevit in ardua Templum.
Pulchrum cancellum, tibi dat, pia Virgo novellum:
Dum laudaris eo, famulo suffragia praestes.
Clericus hic Pipae, subthesaurarius, inde
Baro Scaccarii, se just gessit ubique
Pacem pauperibus dans* Were not that O. thography, Pseudography, which
alters the Original Copy. I had writ ^edat with an S for so it ought to be
written.
cedat divitis iras.
Larga manus relevat quos pauperies fera pressit.
Anno Milleno: C. quater, bis bis deca Christi
Octavo moriens, mutans terrestria caelis,
Octobris Luce ter dena transit ad astra,
Auxiliare prece qui perlegis haec Nicholao,
Ut sibi cum sanctis praestetur vita perennis.
The word Rexerat does intimate that Cheshunt was then a Rectorie or Parsonage,
though since impropriated and made a Vicarage. What a deal of do does this
pitiful Poet make with words at length, and Figures* and Latin, and Greek, to
describe the date of his death? which (if I understand his signs aright) was
October the thirtieth, one thousand four hundred forty eight.

Sir RALPH JOSCELINE, son to Jefferie Josceline was born at S^owes survey of
London, page 569.
Sabridgworth in this County, bred a Draper in London, whereof he was twice
Mayor. Once Anno 1464, and ere the end of that year, was made Knight of the
Bath by King Edward the Fourth, in the Field says my Idem, Ibid.
Author. But seeing there is more of the Carpet then of the Camp in that Order,
it is more probable what Weavers Fun. Mon. p. 550.
another writes, that he was invested Knight of the Bath at the Coronation of
Elizabeth, Queen to the King aforesaid. He was Mayor again, Anno 1476. when he
corrected the Bakers and Victuallers of the City, and by his diligence were the
walls thereof repaired. Walls now a mere complement, serving more for the
dividing then the defending of the City; (...) that as some foreign Cities
cannot be seen for the walls, here the walls cannot be seen for the City. Sad
were the case of London, if not better secured with bones within, then stones
about it. Th^s Sir Ralph died October the 25. Anno 1478. and was buried in the
Church of Sabridgeworth.

JOHN INCENT, son of Robert Incent, and Katharine his wife was born at (...)
Brit. in Hartford shire.
Berkhamsted in this County. He was afterward a Doctor of Law, and advanced
Anno 1543. (when Richard Sampson was preferred Bishop of Coventry and
Lichfield) Dean of Saint Paul's. This John, probably invited by the example of
another John (his mediate predecessor) Collet Dean of Paul's, Founded a fair
Free School in the Town of his Nativity, procuring it confirmed by act of
Parliament, allowing the Master twenty, the Usher ten pounds Per annum. He
died, as I collect, in the beginning of the Reign of King Edward the Sixth.

Sir THOMAS WHITE, son to Thomas White was born at Rixmansworth in this County,
and afterward bred a Merchant-Taylor in London, of which City he was Lord
Mayor An. Dom. 1553. He first built Glocester-Hal, and afterward built and
endowed St. John's College in Oxford the Seminary of many flourishing wits. He
bestowed also a va^ sum of money on several Corporations to be employed
circularly for the benefit of the poor Freemen therein. Ionce intended to have
presented the Reader with an exact particular of his Benefactions, till
seasonably I reversed my Resolution on this consideration. Amongst the Jews it
was an injury for one removed further off in blood to do the Office of a
Kinsman to the childless Widow, until the next of Kin had first disclaimed his
interest therein; as in the Case of Ruth 4. 4.
Ruth most plainly appeared. A son, I am sure is nearer then a Nephew,
therefore it is a more proper performance for one bred in Oxford, to Collect
the particulars of his Bounty (who whither soever he went, left the
Finger-marks of his Charity behind him;) Then for me distanced a degree farthrr
off by my Education in another Universitie.

Since the Reformation.
RICHARD HALE Esquire, was born at Cudicot in this County, and bred a Grocer in
the Ciry of London; Where his industrious Endeavors were so blessed, that in a
little time he got a great Estate. Wherefore in Expression of his Gratitude to
God the giver thereof: He Founded a very fair School, allowing forty pounds a
year to the Master thereof at Hartford in this County. A place very prudently
chosen for such a purpose. First because the prime Town in his Native Shire.
Secondly, great the want of a School in that populous place. And lastly,
because most pure the Air thereof, so that Parents need not fear their
Childrens loss of health for the gaining of Learning. He died Anno Dom. 16 --
0. Whose wealthy Family do still flourish with worth and worship at
Kings-Walden in this County.

EDWARD BASH Knight, was born at Aldnam in this County, in the MannorHouse then
belonging to the noble Family of the Caries, (whereof Francis his Mother
afterward married to George Earl of Rutland was descended He was an hearty
Gentleman, and a good English Housekeeper, keeping a full Table with solid
dishes on it, and welcome guests about it. And one may term him a valiant man,
who durst be Hospital in these dangerous days. Whilst living he was a
Benefactor to Peter-house in Cambridge, wherein he was bred a Fellow Commoner.
And at his death bequeathed more thereunto, the particulars whereof I have not
yet attained. He gave also twenty ponnds per annum, for the maintenance of a
Schoolmaster at Stansted in this County, where he had his constant habitation.
He died Anno Dom. 1605.

Many other Benefactours this Shire has of late afforded, and amongst them one
born in Chessunt Parish, who Founded a School and Almshouse therein, whom we
leave to be reckoned up by the Topographists of this County.

Memorable Persons.
THOMAS WATERHOUSE Priest, was born at Helmsted in ths County. His Will
acquainteth us with the wardrobe of men of his Order, toward the end of the
reign of Probatum fuit hoc Testamentum cor. William Cook Leg. Doct. in cur.
prerog. 17. July 1557.
Q. Mary.

In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, Amen. I
Thomas Waterhouse Priest of the Catholic Faith, whole of body, and of good and
perfect remembrance, do make and ordain my last Will and Testament the 25. day
of May, in the year of our Lord 1557. in manner and form following. First, I
bequeath my Soul to God Almighty the Father of Heaven, my Creator, and unto
Jesus Christ, our Lord and God, my Redeemer. And I will my body be buried in
the Chancel within the Parish Church of Hemelhemsted, near to the place where
my Mother lies. I beque^th to the Parish Church of Quainton, my vestment of
crimson Satin. I bequeath to the Parish Church of great Barkemsted, my
vestment of crimson Velvet. I bequeath to the Parish Church of great Hemelsted,
my Stole and FANON set with Pearl. I bequeath to my cozen John Waterhouse, the
Queens servant my standing cup of silver and gilt, with the cover. I bequeath
to my servant Thomas Ashton, ten pound in money which I promised him. I
bequeath to my PRIEST, Sr. Thomas Barker, my black Gown faced with Taffata,
etc. And ^ ordain and make my brother John Waterhouse, and my cozen Richard
Comb Gentlemen, mine Executors, these being witnesses, etc.

Such as jeer him for his Gallantry, (as one of the Church Triumphant) may
remember that besides his worshipful extraction (which might the better
countenance his Clothes) these were not garments for his Wearing, but Vestments
for his officiating, and according to the opinion of that Age, nothing could be
too costly in that kind.

Lord Mayors.
Name Father Place Company Time. 1 William Cromar John Cromar Aldenham Mercer.
1423. 2 Ralph Joceline Geffrey Joceline Sabridgworth Draper. 1464. 3 William
Martin Walter Martin -- Skinner. 1492. 4 Ralph Ostrich Geffrey Ostrich Hitchin
Fish-monger. 1493. 5 Thomas Bradbury Will. Bradbury Braughin M^rcer. 1509. 6
Thomas White Thomas White Rickmansworth Marchant-Taylor 1553. 7 John Watts
Thomas Watts Buntingford Cl^ath-worker 1606.

Reader, This is one of the Twelve Shires, whose Gentry were not returned by
the Commissioners the Twelfth of Henry the sixth into the Tower.

Sheriffs.
This County had the same with Essex, until the Ninth year of Queen Elizabeth,
when the Distinction betwixt the two Shires did begin, and these following
peculiar to this County.

Name Place. Arms Q. ELIZ. Anno, 9 G. Penruddock, ar. G. a limb of a tree,
ragguled and trunked in Bend Ar. 10. Row. Litton, Ar. Knebworth Erm on a chief
indented Azure, 3 Crowns Or. 11 Hen. Conisby, ar. S. Mims Gules three coneys
Seiant within a Border ingrailed Argent. 12. Will. (...) Ar. 13 Edw. Bash Arm.
Stansted Per Chev. Ar. and G. in Chief 2. Martelets S. in Base a Saltir etc. 14
Georg. Horsey ar. Digswel Azure 3 horses heads couped Or, Brideled Argent. 15
T. Leventhorp. Shingle. hal Argent a Bend Gobonee, S. and G. cotised of the
first 16 Hen. Cock Ar. Brocksbor^ Quarterly Gules and Argent. 17 Johan. Gill.
Ar. VVidjel S. 2 Chev. Ar. each with 3 mull. of the first, on a cant. O. a L.
pass. G 18 Tho. Bowls, Ar. Wallington Ar. on a Chev.'tw. 3 Bores-heads coup.
S. as many scallops O. within a border Vert Bezantee. 19 Edw. Verney, Ar. Az.
on a Cross Ar. 5 mullets G. 20 Phil. Butler, Ar. VVatton Vide the last of Q.
Elizabeth. 21 Char. Morison, ar. Cashobery O, on a chief G. 3 chap. of the
first. 22 Th. Dockwray, ar. Putridge S. a Che. Engr. Ar. betw. 3 plates charged
with as many Pallets G. 23 Joh. Brocket, Ar. Broket-Hal Or. a Cross Patoncee
Sable. 24 Hen. Conisby, ar. ut prius 25 Fran. Haydon, ar. Grove Quarterly Ar.
and Az. a Cross engrailed counter-changed 26 Edw. Bash, Arm. ut prius 27 Hen.
Capel, Arm. Hadham G. a Ly. Ramp. 'tw. 3 crosses Botonie Fitchie Or. 28 Ed.
Pawleter, ar. Wimondly Ar. a Bend voided Sable. 29 T. Leventhorp, ar. and Tho.
Sadler, ar. ut prius Standon Or, a Lion Rampant (...) per Fess Azure and Gules.
30 Joh. Cutts, Miles. CAMB. sh. Ar. on a Bend Engrail. S. 3 Plates. 31 Edw.
Verney, Ar. ut prius 32 Wall. Mildmay, ar. Pesso-bury Argent 3 Lions Rampant
Azure. 33 Th. Hanchet, ar. Hinkworth Sable 3. dexter hands Argent. 34 Arth.
Capel, Ar. ut prius 35 J. Leventhorp, ar. ut prius 36 Row. Litton, Ar. ut prius
37 Th. Sadler, Arm. ut prius 38 R. Coningsby, ar. ut prius 39 Rich. Spencer,
ar. Offley Quarterly Ar. and G. a Fret Or, on a Bend S. 3 Escal. of the first.
40 T. Popeblunt, ar. Barry Formy Nebule of 6. Or, and S. 41 Rob. Chester, ar.
Cakenhatch Per pale Ar. and S. a Chev. (...). 42 Th. Hanchet, ar. ut prius 3
Rams heads eras. within a border engr. roundelly all counterch. 43 The. Bowls,
Ar. ut prius 44 Edw. Denny, mil. and H. Boteler, m. ESSEX. G. a Saltir Ar. 'tw.
12 Crosses Or. Hatfieldwoodhall Gules, a Fess Checky Ar. and S. between 6.
(...) Or. K. JAMES. 1 Hen. Boteler ut prius 2 Geo. Pu^ient, Ar. D^gswel Gules 3
Crescents Ar. 3 Tho. Docwray, ar. ut prius 4 VVa. Mildmay, ar. and Leon. Hide,
Miles. ut prius Albury Or, a Chever. between 3 Lezenges Az. on a chief Gules an
Eagle displayed of the first. 5 J. Leventhorp, ar. ut prius 6 Nich. (...),
Armig. Quick-set 7 Radu. Sadler, ar. ut prius 8 Ric. Anderson, m. Ar. a Chever.
betwixt 3 Crosses Formee Sable. 9 Rob. Boteler Mil. ut prius 10 Johan. VVild
ar. 11 W. Franckland ar. Arg. a Chever. Sable betwixt 3 12 Tho. Dacres, M. and
Tho. Dacres, ar. Chesthunt Torteauxes charged with as many Scallops of the
first. 13 God. Pe^bert. m. and L. Pemberton, (...). Hartdforbury Ar. a Chev.
betw. 3 Buckets S. 14 Tho. News, ar. S. 2 Pallets Ar. a Canton Erm. 15 Edw.
Brisco AbotsLangly Arg. 3 Greyhounds in Pale Sab. 16 Tho. Read, arm. Broket-hal
G. a Saltir betwixt 4 Garbs, Or. 17 Nich. Hide, ar. ut prius 18 R. Pemberton,
ar. ut prius 19 VVil. Hale, Ar. Kings-walden Az. a Chever. counterbattily, Or,
20 Edw. Newport, ar. Pelham 21 Cl. Skudamore, m Gules 3 stirrups leather'd and
buckl'd Or. 22 Rich. Sidley, Ar. Digswell Az. a Fesse Wavy betw. 3 Goats Heads
erased Ar, attired, Or. K CHARLES. Anno. 1 Will. Litton, m. ut prius 2 Joha.
Jenning, m. Hollywell Az. on a Fess G. 3 (...). 3 The. Mide, Bar. ut prius 4
Edw. Gardner, ar. Thunderidge Per pale O, and G. on a F. 2 Mascles betw. 3
Hinds pass. (...). 5 Will. Hoe, Ar. Hoe. Quarterly Sable and Argent. 6 Johan.
Boteler, m. ut prius 7 Rich. Hale, arm. ut prius 8 Hen. Cogshil, ar, 9 Will.
Plomer, ar. Radwell Vert a Chev. betw. 3 Lions heads erased Or, Billited Gules.
10 VV. Prestley, ar. S. a Chever. Ar. charged with 3 Anchors of the field betw.
as many Lions, Or, each issuant out of a Tower of the second. 11 VVil. Leaman
ar. North-hal Az. a Fess betw. 3 Dolphins, Ar. 12 Rad. Freeman, ar. Aspden.
Azure 3 (...) Argent 13 T. Coningsby, (...). ut prius 14 The. Hewet, ar.
Pesso-bury Sable a Cheve, counter battellee betw. 3. Owls Argent. 15 Johan,
Gore, ar. Gilsden Gules a Fess betwixt 3 (...) 16 Atth. Pulter ut prius
Fitchee, Or. 17 18 Joh. Gerrard, Bar. 19 Joh. Gerrard, Bar. 20 Cha. Nodes, Ar.

QUEEN ELIZABETH.
14. GEORGE HORSEY,] The Horseys had a free and competent estate at Digswell in
this County, where they had lived long in good Esteem. It happened that Sir John
Horsey of Clifton in the County of Dorset (whose two daughters were married
into the Families of Mohune and Arnold) wanting an Heir-Male, settled the main
of his estate, which was very great, on Ralph the son of this George Horsey.

His Father advised this Ralph his son (newly augmented with the addition of so
great an Estate) that in case he should have any occasion to sell lands, not to
part with his Hartford-shire Inheritance, which had continued so long in the
Family, but rather to make sale of some Dorset-shire land.

But the young Gentleman ill-advised sold this his Patrimony first of all. For
which the rest of his means probably prospered no whit the better; Not one foot
thereof remaining at this day to his posterity. I write not this to grieve any
of his surviving Relations, but to instruct all in obedience to their Parents
lawful commands.

16. HEN. COCK Arm.] He was afterward knighted and (...) to Q. Elizabeth and
King James, who lay at his house May the second, at his first coming out of
Scotland to London, where so abundant entertainment, that no man of what
condition S^ow Cronicle, p. 822.
soever, but had what his appetite desired, which made the K. at his departure
heartily thank the good Knight for his great expenses. This Sir Henry's
daughter was married to the Lord Delaware.

44. EDWARD DENNY Knight.]: was High Sheriff of this County, when King * Stow
Cron. in 10. Jaco.
James coming from Scotland passed through it, He was attended on by 140 men
sutably apparelled and well mounted, with whom he tendered his service to the
King, presenting also his Majesty with a gallant Horse, rich saddle and
furniture. But before the year of his Shreivalty was expired, King James
created him Baron Denny of Waltham, and another supplied the remainder thereof.

KING JAMES.
2. GORGE PURIENT Arm.] Let me do my best^ devoir, and last office to preserve
the memory of an ancient and now expired family. Digswell I presume was the
place of their living, because of their interments therein, whereof this most
remarkable.

Hic jacent Joannes Perient Armiger, pro corpore Regis Richardi secundi, and
Penerarius ej^sdem Regis. Et Armiger etiam Regis Hen. quarti. Et Armiger etiam
Regis Henrici quinti; and Magister Equitum Johanne filie Regis Navar, and
Reginae Angliae, qui obiit....... and Johanna uxor ejus, quondam capitalis
Domicilla....... que obiit xxiv. Anno Dom. M. ccccxv........

Surely he was a man of merit, being Penon or Ensign-bearer to one Esquire, of
the body to three successive Kings, and Mr. of the Horse to one of their
Queens, to whom his wife was chief Lady of Honor.

THOMAS DACRES Miles and mort.] He was one of the three Sheriffs in this
County, who within the compass of ten years died in their Shrievalties, as by
this Catalogue may appear. He was Grandchild unto Robert Dacres Esqu. one of
the Privy Council to King Henry the Eighth.

THOMAS HOE] This most ancient name (which formerly had Barons thereof) is now
expiring in the Male line. This Gentleman's sole daughter being married
unto....... Kete of London.

THOMAS CONISBY Armiger] When one told him, that his potent adversary had
prevailed to make him Sheriff, I will not (said he) keep a man the more, or a
dog the fewer on that account. The Farewell,

I am sorry to hear that the fair Font of solid Brass, brought out of Scotland
and bestowed by Sir Richard Lea on the Abbey Church in St. Albons is lately
taken away: I could almost wish that the plunderers fingers had found it as hot
as it was when first forged, that so these theives, with their fault, might
have received the deserved punishment thereof.

Had it bin returned to the place whence it was taken, to serve for the same
use, the matter had not bin so much; but by an usual Alchymy, this Brass, is
since turned into Silver. But let us not so much condole the late losing of the
Font, as congratulate our still keeping of Baptism, which if some men might
have their minds, should utterly be denied to all Infants. I wish all Infants
to be christened in this County, and elsewhere, though not so fair a Font, fair
water, and which is the best of all, the full concurrence of Gods Spirit
effectually to complete the Sacrament unto them.

HEREFORD-SHIRE has Worcestershire and Shrop-shire on the North, Gloucester
shire on the East, Monmouth-shire on the South, Brecknock and Radnor-shires on
the West. In form it is almost circular, being from North to South (measured to
the best improvement) 35. miles, though from East to West not altogether so
much.

There cannot be given a more effectual Evidence of the healthful air in this
Shire, then the vigorous vivacity of the inhabitants therein; Many aged folk
which in other countries are properties of the chimneyes, or confined to their
beds, are here found in the field as able (if willing) to work. The ingenious
Sergeant Hoskin gave an intertainment to King James and povided ten aged people
to dance the Morish before him; all of them making up more then a thousand
years, So that what was wanting in one was supplied in another. A nest of
Nestors not to be found in another place.

This County does share as deep as any in the Alphabet of our English
Commodities though exceeding in VV. for VVood, Wheat, Wool, and Water.
Besides this Shire, better answers (as to the sound thereof) the name of
Pomerania, then the Dukedom of Germany so called, being a continued Orchard of
Apple trees, whereof much Sider is made of, the use whereof we have treated of
In the Commodities of Gloucestershire
before.

There is a Tract in this County called Gylden Vale, And if any demand how much
gold is to be found therein know that even as much as in Chrusaroas or, Golden
stream, the river of Damascus so called from the yellowness of their water as
this vail is so named either because gilded with flowers in the spring, or
because being the best of Molds as Gold is of Mettalls.

Here I (...) (...) Master Camden his cautious commendation of this County.

Secunda (...) (...) inter Angliae Provincias acquiescere, haud facile est
contenta.

It is not (...) (...) to be accounted the Second shire for matter of
fruitfulness

But the foresaid Author in his whole book never expresses which is the
first, too politic to adjudge so invidious a pre-eminence. And thus keeping
the uppermost seat empty, such competitour Counties are allowed leave, to put
in their several claims which pretend to the prime place of fertility.

Reader, I am sorry that having not hitherto seen the Cathedral of Hereford, I
must be silent about the building in this County.

Natural Commodities,
Wool.
Such as are ignorant of the qualities thereof may inform themselves therein
from the common Proverbs.

1. White as Revel. 1. 14.
Wool; a Scripture phrase, though there be thereof black by nature. 2. Soft
as Wool, and therefore our Judges anciently in the Parliament House sat on
Wool packs, as well for the easier repose of their age, as to mind them to
maintain this staple commodity in its legal privileges. 3. As warm as Wool.
And one said merrily; Wool must needs be warm, as consisting all of double
letters.
Our English garments from head to foot were formerly made thereof, till the
beginning of the Reign of K. Henry the Eighth, when velvet caps becoming
fashionable for Persons of prime Quality, discomposed the proverb, If his cap
be made of Wool, as formerly comprising all conditions of people how high and
haughty soever.

Great the plenty of Wool in this County and greater Gods Goodness, that
generally our Northern Lands are well stored therewith. Cited by H. Stevens in
his De of Herodotus.
The Friar rather descanted then commented, and his interpretation not so much
false, as improper for the place Dat nivem sicut Lanam, He gives Snow like
Psalm. 147. 16.
Wool, That where most Snow falls those places (if habitable) are best
provided with Wool. It is well his wanton wit 4 Moscovy, Poland, Norway.
went no further, He scatters his hoare frost like ashes; Freezing *
Countries affording most Fuel to burn, so careful is Providence in dispensing
necessaries to mankind. As for the Wool in this County, it is best known to
the honor thereof by the name of Lempster Ore, being absolutely the finest in
this County and indeed in all England, equalling if not exceeding the Apulian
or Tarentine in the South of Italy though it cost not so much charge and
curiosity in the careful keeping thereof. For good Var: de re (...). 2 cap. 2.
Columell. l. 7. c. 4.
Authors, inform us that there the Sheepherds put in effect a Fleece over their
Fleece using to clothe their sheep with skins to preserve their Wool from the
injury of earth, bushes and weather. How well this requiteth their cost I know
not, but am sure no such trouble is used on our sheep here.

Salmons.
A dainty and wholesome fish, and a double riddle in nature; first for its
invisible feeding, no man alive having ever found any meat in the maw thereof.
Secondly, for its strange leaping (or flying rather) so that some will have
them termed Salmons, a saliendo. Being both bow and arrow, it will shoot it
self out of the water an incredible height and length. I might add the
admirable growth thereof, if true what is confidently affirmed, that it
increases from a spawn to a full grown fish within the compass of a year.
Plenty of these in this County, though not in such abundance as in Scotland,
where servants (they say) indent with their Masters, not to be fed therewith
above thrice a week.

Some will say, Why Salmons in Hereford-shire, which are common to other
Counties? It is answered, in other Counties suitably with the Buck, they are
seasonable only in Summer, whereas here with Buck and Do, they are in season
all the year long. This County may say.

Salmo non aestate novus, nec frigore desit Salmon in Summer is not rare,
In Winter, I of them do share.
For the River of Wy affords brumal Salmons, fat and sound, (...) ^hey are sick
and spent in other places.

The Wonders.
There is a little Fountain called Bone-Well nigh Richards Castle in this
County the Water whereof is always full of Bones of little Fishes Camden Brit.
in Herefordshire.
or as others conceive of little Frogs. Seeing it seems such their smalnesse
they are hardly to be distinguished. It adds to the Wonder, because this
Spring can never be emptied of them, but as fast as some are drawn out, others
instantly succeed them.

To this permanent, let us add two transient wonders on the credit of excellent
Quoted by Speed in his Maps of England, in Hereford-shire.
Authors; when a battle was fought in this County, Anno Dom. 1461. betwixt
Jasper E. of Pembrooke, and James Butler Earl of Ormond on the one side, and K.
Edward the Fourth of the other, three Suns appeared together in the Firmament.

Such a triple Sun (one real, two representations) were seen in heaven a little
before the Roman Empire was rent betwixt three Competitours, Galba, Otho, and
Vitellius* as also since, when the Kingdom of Hungary was Cantoned betwixt
John Vayvode, Ferdinand afterward Emperor, and the great Turk; such Meteors
being sometimes prognostics of so many several pretenders at once to the same
Sovereignty.

Inquiring into the natural cause hereof, we find it to be nothing else but the
Image of the Sun represented in an equal, smooth, thick and watery Cloud, not
opposite thereunto, (for then it would make the Rainbow) nor under the Sun,
for then it would make those circles called Crowns or Garlands) but on one or
either side thereof, in a competent or moderate distance. For if it be too far
off, then the beams will be too feeble to be reflected; if too near, the Sun
will disperse it; but in such a middle distance, wherein many Suns may appear,
as a man's face is expressed in all pieces of a broken glass.

To this wonder add a second of This kind of Earthquake is called Brasmatias.
Marcley-Hill, which An. Dom. 1575. rouzed it self Camdens Eliz. An. 1575.
as it were, out of its sleep. Yea, in some sort it might seem to be in labor
for three days together, shaking and roaring all that while, to the great
terror of all that heard or beheld it. It threw down all things that opposed
it, and removed it self into an higher place. The best use we can make of such
accidents, is to fear and not fear thereat, with a reverential awe to God, no
servile dread of the thing it self; Psalm. 46. 2.
Therefore we will not fear though the earth be removed; and though the
Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea.

Proverbs.
Blessed is the Eye,]

That is betwixt Severn and Wye.]

Some will justly question the Truth hereof. True it is, the Eyes of those
Inhabitants are entertained with a pleasant Prospect, yet such, as is equalled
by other places. But it seems this is a prophetical promise of Safety to such
that live secured within those great rivers, as if privileged from Martial
impressions. But alas! Civil War is a vagrant, and will trace all corners,
except they be surrounded with Gyges his ring. Surely some eyes in that place,
besides the Sweet Rivers of Severn and Wye, running by them, have had Salt
Waters flowing from them, since the beginning of our late Distractions.

Camd. B rit. in Hereford-sh.
Lemster bread, and Weabley Ale.]

It seems both these are best in their kinds, though good in other places of
the Land. Thus, though Palestine was universally termed a Deuteronomy. 8. 8.
Land of Wheat, yet the Spirit of God takes signal notice of the Ezekiel. 27. 17.
wheat of Minnith and Pannag, as finer than the rest. Yet is there Wheat in
England, which justleth for pureness with that of Weabley, viz. What grows
about Heston in Middlesex, yiedling so fine flower, that for a long time the
Camd. Brit. in Middlesex.
Manchet for the Kings of England was made thereof, except any will say it is
prized the more for the Vicinity to London.

Saints.
ETHELBERT was King of the East Angles and went to Offa King of Mercia to treat
of a marriage with his Daughter; but Queen Quendred Wife to Offa, more
ambitious of her own unlawful, then her Daughters lawful advancement, practiced
his Death at a Village now called Sutton-Wallis, four miles from Hereford. His
corpse was afterward removed by Milfred (a petit Prince of that Country) to
Hereford, where he obtained the reputation of a Saint and Martyr. His suffering
happened Anno Dom. 793.

THOMAS CANTILUPE was of honorable extraction, whose Father William Lord
Cantilupe had two fair habitations, Abergavenny Castle in Monmouth, and
Harringworth in Northamptonshire, which by an Heir-general of that Family
afterward descended to the Lord Zouch. He was bred in Oxford (whereof at last
he became Chancellor) and was preferred Bishop of Hereford. A charitable man
may believe him a person of Holy Life and great Learning: But no wise man will
credit what Walsingham writes of him, That he was never guilty of any mortal
sin. Going to (others say returning from) Rome, to assert his Church from the
encroachment of Peckam, Archbishop of Canterbury, he dyed at a City in
Tuscany, where his flesh was taken off his Corpse and buried, whilst his bones
were sent for Relics into England, and enshrined at Hereford. Now, though
different dates be assigned of his death, I adhere to Bishop Godwin, noting his
Dissolution 1282.

He was afterward canonized by Pope John the twenty second, and no fewer then
English Mar. October 2.
four hundred twenty five miracles are registered in that Church, reported to be
wrought at his Tomb. I say, just four hundred twenty five, which falls out
sewer by five and twenty then the Prophets of 1 Kin. 18. 19.
Baal, and more by five and twenty then the Prophets of the Groves, in a middle
number betwixt both, and all of them I believe honest and true alike. Yea, it
is recorded in his legend, that by his Eng. Martyr. ut prius.
Prayers were raised from death to life threescore several persons, one and
twenty Lepers healed, and three and twenty blind and dumb men to have received
their sight and speech.

No wonder then what Mr. Brit. in Hereford-shire.
Camden observes, that in process of time, parum abfuit quin pietatis opinione
Regio Martyri Ethelberto praeluxerit; He lacked but little to eclipse the
Luster of Ethelbert, the Royal Saint and Martyr, formerly buried (as is
aforesaid) in the same Cathedral: Indeed it is given to Superstition, always
to be fondest of the youngest Saint. But long since King Henry the eighth has
put a period to all emulations betwixt their memories.

The Bishops of Hereford, so highly honored this Thomas, that (waving their
ancient Arms) they assumed the paternal Coat of Cantilupe (viz. Gules 3
Leopards heads inverted, each with a Flower de Luce in his Mouth, Or,) to be
successively the Arms of their See. This Cantilupe lived the latest of any
Englishman who was canonized, so that blind zeal may even close her Stomach,
and make up her Mouth with the Sweetmeats of his memory.

Martyrs.
Sir JOHN (Son to Sir Thomas) OLDCASTLE was a Native of this County, whereof he
was Sheriff in the seventh of Henry the fourth, Lord Cobham in the right of his
Wife; a right valiant man, but great follower of Wickliffe, so that he lost
his life on that account.

As his body was hanged and burnt in an unusual posture at Tyburne, so his
memory has ever since been in a strange suspense betwixt Malefactor and
Martyr: Papists charging him with Treason against King Henry the fifth, and
heading an Army of more then ten thousand men, though it wanted nine thousand
nine hundred ninety and nine thereof, so far as it appears solidly proved.

But it has ever been the Practice of the Devil and his instruments angry with
Gods Servants for their Religion, to accuse them for Sedition, perceiving
Princes generally more jealous of their own honor then Gods Glory, and most
careful to cut off such as oppose their power or persons; Thus Christ was
accused for Disloyalty to Caesar; and St. Paul, for raifing of Tumults, though
they (as it is plain in the Acts 23. 6.
Text) either raised themselves, or were raised by the Pharisees and Saducees,
Paul's professed Enemies. But I have so worn out the Neb of my Pen in my
Church History, about clearing the Innocence of this worthy Knight, that I have
nothing to add new thereunto. Marian Martyrs this Diocese affords none, such
the Moderation of Robert Parfew the Bishop thereof.

Cardinal.
ADAM de EASTON. We were at a great loss, had we but his bare Surname to
direct us to the place of his Nativity, seeing scarcely one County in England,
which has not one or more Eastons or Three Eatons there are in this County.
Eatons (the same in effect) therein. But thanks be to our Bish. Godwin in his
Catal. of Cardinals, p. 173. out of whom this is collected.
Author, who has fixed his Birth (though but with an ut videtur) in this Shire.

Pretenders to Skill in Palmestry would persuade us, that such, the Table in
whose hands is narrow beneath and broad above, are marked out for Poverty in
their youth, and plenty in their old Age. I will not say, such the Signature in
the hands of our Adam, but sure I am such his success. Mean his birth, homely
his breeding, hard his fare, till by his Industry he was advanced Dr. of
Divinity in Oxford, wherein he became a great Scholar, skilled in Greek and
Hebrew (rare accomplishments in that age) and was very dexterous in all civil
Negotiations. He was afterward made Cardinal, with the Title of St. Cicilie,
by Pope Urban, against whom Clement the seventh was elected and erected by
others.

Fierce the Fight between Bears and Boars, but far fiercer betwixt two
Anti-Popes, giving no Quarter to the opposite party, if brought into their
power. Urban suspecting Treachery in some of his Cardinals, imprisoned seven of
them at once, and putting five of them into Sacks, sunk them into the Sea. Oh
most barbarous Urbanity! Our Adam being the sixth hardly escaped with Life, and
may be said in some sort put into a Sack, (though of a larger size) I mean a
straight Dungeon, where he remained half starved for five years together, till
the Death of Pope Urban. But Pope Boniface, his Successor, restored him to all
his honors and dignities, sent him over into England, to King Richard the
Second with most ample Commendation.

Returning to Rome, he lived there in all plenty and pomp, and dyed September
the seventeenth, 1397. Pity it is so good a Scholar should have so barbarous an
Epitaph, scarce worth our Translation.

Artibus iste Pater famosus in omnibus Adam,
Theologus summus, Cardi que-nalis erat.
Anglia cui patriam, titulum dedit ista Beatae
Ceciliaeque -- morsque suprema polum.
Adam a famous Father in Arts all,
He was a deep Divine, Cardi-and- nall,
Whom England bred, S. Cicilie has given
His Title -- Death at last gave heaven.
He was interred when dead in the Church of St. Cicilie, which entitled him
when alive, though no happiness; an honor, which no other English man (to my
observation) of his Order ever Enjoyed.

Prelates.
JOHN BRETON, alias BRITTON, D^. of the Laws. He meriteth a high place in this
Catalogue; and yet I am at a perfect loss, where to fix his Nativity, and
therefore am forced to my last Refuge, as the S. N.
Marginal Character does confess.

He was a famous Lawyer, living in the Reign of King Edward the First, at whose
Commandment, and by whose Authority he wrote a learned Book of the LAWS of
ENGLAND, the Tenor whereof runs in the Kings name, as if it had been penned
by himself. Take one instance thereof. 12. Chapter.

We will, that all those, who are fourteen years old, shall make Oath that
they shall be sufficient and Loyal unto Us, and that they will be neither
Felons, nor assenting to Felons: and We will, that all be, etc. This Style will
seem nothing strange to those, who have read Justinian his Institutions, which
the Emperor assumed unto himself, though composed by others.

It is no small Argument of the Excellency of this Book, that notwithstanding
the great variation of our Laws since his time, that his work still is in
great and general Repute. Thus a good face conquereth the disadvantage of old
and unfashionable Clothes. He was preferred Bishop of Hereford, in the Reign of
King Henry the Third. And although there be some difference betwixt Authors
about the time, wherein he lived and died (some assigning a latter date) I
confide in Bishop In his Catalogue of the Bishops of Hereford.
Godwin (his Successor in the same See) computing his death to happen May 12.
in the Third of King Edward the First, Anno 1275.

ADAM de ORLTON, was born in the City of Hereford. Godwin in his Catalogue of
Bishops.
Proceeding Doctor of Law, he became afterward Bishop in the place of his
Nativity. This is he so Infamous in History for cutting off the life of King
Edward the Second, with his Ridling Unpointed Answer.

Edwardum Regem occidere nolite timere bonum est.
To kill King Edward you need not to fear it is good.
It is hard to say, which of these two were the Original, and which the
Translation; It being equally probable that the English was Latined, as that
the Latin was Englished by such Authors as relate this transaction.

This minds me of a meaner passage ( sic Canibus Catulos) which to refresh
both the Reader and my self, I shall here insert. A Schoolmaster being shut out
of his School at Christmas came to Composition with his Scholars, and thus
subscribed the Articles tendered unto him;

Aequa est conditio non nego quod petitis. But being readmitted into his house,
He called all his Scholars to account for their Rebellion; they plead
themselves secured by the Act of Oblivion he had signed. He calls for the
Original, and perusing it thus pointed it.

Aequa est Conditio? non; Nego quod petitis. Thus power in all ages will take
the privilege to construe its own Acts to its own advantage. But to return to
de Orlton, he made much bustling in the Land, passing through the Bishoprics
of Worcester and Winchester, and died at last not much lamented, July 18. 1345.

JOHN GRANDESSON was born at Godwin in his Catalogue of the Bishops of Ex^ter.
Ashperton in this County, a person remarkable on several accounts.

For his 1. High Birth, his Father Gilbert being a Baron, and his Mother Sybill
Coheir to the Lord Tregose. 2. Great Learning, being a good Writer of that age,
though Bale says of him that he was Orator animosior quam facundior. 3. High
Preferment attaining to be Bishop of Exeter. 4. Vivacity, sitting Bishop in his
See two and forty years. 5. Stout Stomach Resisting Mepham Archbishop of
Canterbury vi and Armis, when he came to visit his Diocese. 6. Costly
Buildings, Arching the Beautiful Roof of his Cathedral, Building and
endowing a rich College of Saint Mary Otterey.

He was the bettter enabled to do these and other great Benefactions by
persuading all the secular Clergy in his Diocese to make him sole Heir to their
Estates: He died July 15. Anno Domini, 1369.

THOMAS BRADWARDINE Archbishop of Canterbury. See him more properly in Sussex.

RICHARD CLI^FORD Bishop of London. See him more conveniently in Kent.

Since the Reformation.
MILES SMITH, D. D. was born in the City of So Master Stephens his Secretary
informed me.
Hereford, which I observe the rather, because omitted in his Funeral Sermon.
His Father was a Fletcher, and a man of no mean Estate, that Vocation being
more in use formerly, then in our Age. He was bred first in
Brasen-Nose-Colledge, then Chaplain of * Christ-Church in Oxford. A deep
Divine, great Linguist, who had more then a single share in the last
Translation of the Bible, as hereby will appear.

1. More then forty See their names in our Church-Hist.
Grave Divines were employed in several places on that work. 2. When it had
passed their hands, it was revised by a dozen select ones. 3. This done, it was
referred to the final Examination of Bish. Bilston, and Dr. Smith. 4. Doctor
Smith at last was enjoined to make the Preface to the Translation, as a comely
gate to a glorious City, which remains under his own hand in the University
Library in Oxford.
Yet was he never heard to speak of the work with any attribution to himself
more then the rest.

He never sought any preferment he had, and was wont See the preface of his
works written by Mr. Stephens.
merrily to say of himself, that he was Nullius rei praeterquam Librorum
avarus, Covetous of nothing but Books. King James preferred him Bishop of
Gloucester 1612. wherein he behaved himself with such meekness, that in all
matters of doubt, the bias of his inclination did still hang (...). He wrote
all his books with his own hand) in that faculty not being short of the
professors thereof) and being seaventy years of age died and was buried in his
own Cathedral 1624.

Soldiers.
ROBERT DEVEREUX, Son of Walter Devereux Earl of Essex, was born at Thomas
Mils in his Catal. of Honors, page 863.
Nethwood in this County, November the tenth, 1567. Whilst his Father as yet
was only Viscount of Hereford.

He was such a Masterpiece of Court and Camp, and so bright a Light therein,
that we will observe his morning, fore-noon, high-noon, afternoon and night.

His morning began at his first coming to Court, the gates whereof he entered
with four great advantages of Pity, Kindred, Favor, and Merit: Pity, on the
account of his Father lately dead (to say no more) and generally lamented:
Kindred by his Mothers side, Lettice Knowles, near allied to the Queen: Favor
being son in Law to Leicester, and so was a Favorites Favorite at the first
day, though he quickly stood on his own legs without holding: Merit, being of a
Beautiful Personage, Courteous Nature, Noble Descent, Fair (though much
impaired) Fortune.

Fore-noon, when the Queen favorably reflected on him, as a Grandmother on a
Grandchild, making him the wanton to her fond and indulgent affection, as by
this Letter written with her own hand, does appear:

ESSEX,
Your sudden and undutiful departure from our presence, and your place of
Attendance, you may easily conceive how offensive it is and ought to be unto
Us. Our great Favors bestowed upon you without deserts, has drawn you thus to
neglect and forget your Duty: For other Construction we cannot make of these
your strange Actions. Not meaning therefore to tolerate this your disordered
Part; We gave directions to some of Our Privy Council to let you know our
Express Pleasure for your Immediate Repair hitber, which you have not performed
as your Duty does bind you, Increasing thereby greatly your former offense and
undutiful behavior, in departing in such sort without our Privity, having so
special Office of Attendance and Charge near our Person. We do therefore Charge
and Command you forthwith upon the Receipt of these our Letters, all Excuses and
Delays set apart, to make your present and immediate Repair unto Us, to
understand our further Pleasure. Whereof see you fail not, as you will be loath
to incur our Indignation, and will Answer for the contrary at your uttermost
Peril.

The 15. of April 1589.

This letter angry in the first, and loving in the fourth degree, was written
to him (sent by Sir Thomas Gorges) on this occasion. The Earl in pursuance of
his own martial inclination, secretly left the Court to see some service in
France. The Q. passionately loving his Person, grievously complained of his
absence, and often said, We shall have this young fellow knocked on the head, as
foolish Sidney was, by his own forwardness, and was restless till his return.

I behold him in his high-noon, when he brought Victory with him home from
Cadiz and was vertical in the esteem of the Soldiery, and may be said to
awaken the Queens jealousy by his popularitie.

His Afternoon followed when he undertook the Irish action, too knotty service
for his smooth disposition, being fitter for personal performance, then conduct
and managing of martial affairs. And now his enemies work was half done,
having gotten such a Gulf betwixt him and the Queen. For, as Antaeus is said to
have recruited strength; when he touched his Mother Earth: so this Earl,
wrestling with his Enemies, suppressed them, and supported himself by his daily
access to the Queen, which distance now denied him.

His Night approached, when coming over without leave, he was confined by the
Q. to his house, to reclaim, not ruin him. Hither a miscellaneous crew of
swordmen did crowd, tendering him their service some of one persuasion some of
another, some of all, some of no religion. Their specious pretense was to take
evil Counselors from the Queen, though it had been happy if they had been
first taken away from the Earl. What his company said they would do, the
Earl knew; but what would have been done by them, God knows: The Earl
rising, and missing of expected support from the City of London quickly sunck
in the Queens final displeasure, Anno Domini 1600.

He was valiant, liberal to Scholars and Soldiers, nothing distrustful, if
not too confident of fidelity in others. Revengefulness was not bred but put
into his disposition. It Is hard to say, whether such as were his Enemies, or
such as should be his friends, did him more mischief. When one flattered him to
his face for his Valor, no said he, my sins ever made me a coward. In a word,
his failings were neither so foul, nor so many, but that the Character of a
right worthy man most justly belongs to his memory.

Writers.
ROGER of Bale de scri. Brit. Cent. 3. Numb. 13. Anno 1170.
HEREFORD born in that City was bred in the University of Cambridge being one
of the prime Promoters of Learning therein after the Refoundation of the
University by the Abbot of Crowland. He was an excellent Astronomer, and Stars
being made for signs, was a good Interpreter what by these signs were
intended. He wrote a Book of Judicial Astrology, whether to commend or condemn
it, such only can satisfy themselves that have seen his Book. He was also
skilful in all Metals and Minerals and his pretty curiosities made him
acceptable to the Nobility of England flourishing under King Henry the Second,
An. Dom. 1170.

WILLIAM LEMPST^R a Franciscan, and a Dr. of Divinity in Oxford, was born in
that well known Town in this County. He wrote Collations on the Master of the
Sentences, and Questions in Divinity, as In Appendice Ang. Script.
J. Pits. informs me, adding withal,

Haec scripsit, novi, sed non quo tempore novi Well I know these works he wrote
But for the time I know it not.
And I am content (for companies sake) with him to be ignorant of the exact
date thereof.

Since the Reformation.
RICHARD HACKLUIT, was born of an ancient extract in this County, whose Family
has flourished at...... in good esteem, He was bred a Student in Christ
Church, in Oxford, and after was Prebendary of Westminster, His Genius inclined
him to the Study of History, and especially to the Marine part thereof, which
made him keep constant Intelligence with the most noted Seamen of Wapping,
until the day of his Death.

He set forth a large Collection of the English Sea Voyages, Ancient, Middle,
Modern, taken partly out of private Letters, which never were (or without his
care had not been) printed. Partly out of Small Treatises, printed, and since
irrecoverably lost, had not his providence preserved them. For some Pamphlets
are produced, which for their Cheapnesse and Smalnesse men for the present
neglect to buy, presuming they may procure them at their pleasure, which small
Books, their first and last Edition being past, (like some Spirits that appear
but once) cannot afterward with any price or pains be recovered. In a word
many of such useful Tracts of Sea Adventures, which before were scattered as
several Ships, Mr. Hackluit has imbodied into a Fleet, divided into three
Squadrons, so many several Volumes. A Work of great honor to England, it being
possible that many Ports and Islands in America which being base and barren,
bear only a bare name for the present, may prove rich places for the future.
And then these Voyages will be produced and pleaded, as, good Evidence of their
belonging to England, as first discovered and denominated by Englishmen. Mr.
Hackluit dyed in the beginning of King James his Reign, leaving a fair estate
to an unthrift Son, who embezill'd it, on this token, that he vanted, that he
cheated the covetous Usurer, who had given him Spick and Span new money, for
the Old Land of his Great Great Grandfather.

JOHN GVVILLIM was of Welsh extraction, but born in this See J. Davis of
Hereford, challenging him for his Countryman. his Verses on his Display of
Heraldry.
County, and became a Pursuivant of Arms, by the name first of Portsmouth, then
Rougecroixe, but most eminent for his methodical Display of Herauldry,
(confusion being formerly the greatest difficulty therein) showing himself a
good Logician in his exact Divisions, and no bad Philosopher, noting the
natures of all Creatures given in Arms, joining fancy and reason therein.
Besides his Traveling all over the earth in beasts, his Industry diggeth into
the ground in pursuit of the properties of precious stones, diveth into the
Water in Inquest of the qualities of Fishes, flies into the Air after the
Nature of Birds, yea mounteth to the very Skies about stars (but here we must
call them Estoiles) and Planets their use and influence. In a word he has
unmysteried the mystery of Heraldry, inso much, that one of his own Sir W.
Segar in his Verse before his Book.
faculty, thus descanteth (in the Twilight of jest and earnest) on his
performance.

But let me tell you, this will be the harm
In Arming others, you Your self disarm;
Our Art is now Anatomized so,
As who knows not, what we our selves do know?
Our Corn in others Mill is ill apaid.
Sic vos non vobis, may to us be said.
I suspect that his endeavors met not with proportionable reward. He dyed about
the latter end of the Reign of King James.

JOHN DAVIES of Hereford (for so he constantly styled himself) was the greatest
Master of the Pen that England in his age beheld, for

1 Fast-writing, so incredible his expedition. 2 Fair-writing, some minutes
Consultation being required to decide, whether his Lines were written or
printed. 3 Close-writing, A Mystery indeed, and too Dark for my Dim Eyes to
discover. 4 Various-writing, Secretary, Roman, Court, and Text.
The Poetical fiction of Briareus the Giant, who had an hundred hands, found a
Moral in him, who could so cunningly and copiously disguise his aforesaid
Elemental hands, that by mixing he could make them appear an hundred, and if
not so many sorts, so many Degrees of Writing. Yet had he lived longer he would
modestly have acknowledged Mr. Githings (who was his Scholar and also born in
this County) to excel him in that faculty, whilst the other would own, no such
odious Eminency, but rather gratefully * So informed by Master Cox Draper in
London his Executor.
return the credit to his Master again. Sure I am, when two such Transcendent
Pen-masters shall again come to be born in the same shire, they may even serve
fairly to engross the will and testament of the expiring Universe. Our Davies
had also some pretty excursions into Poetry and could flourish matter as well
as Letters, with his Fancy as well as with his Pen. He dyed at London in the
midst of the Reign of King James, and lies buried in St. Giles in the fields.

Romish Exile Writers.
HUMPHRY ELY born in this Pits^tate 17 Numero 1053.
County, was bred in St. John's College in Oxford; Whence flying beyond the
Seas he lived successively at Doway, Rome and Rheams, till at last he settled
himself at Pont-Muss in Lorain, where for twenty years together, he was
Professor of Canon and Civil Law, and dying 1604. Was buried therein with a
double Epitaph.

That in Verse my Judgment commands me not to believe, which here I will take
the boldness to translate.

Albion Haereseos velatur nocte, viator
Desine Mirari, Sol suus hic latitat,
Wonder not, Reader, that with Heresies
England is clouded; Here her SUN he LIES.
The Prose-part my Charity induces me to credit; Inopia ferme laborabat, alios
inopia sublevans; He eased others of Poverty, being himself almost pinched
therewith.

Benefactors to the Public.
JOHN WALTER was born in the City of Hereford. Know, Reader, I could learn
little from the Mr. Richard Henchman of S. Mary (...)
Minister which preached his funeral, less from his acquaintance, least from
his Children. Such his hatred of vain glory, that (as if Charity were
guiltiness) he cleared himself from all suspicion thereof. Yet is our
Intelligence of him though brief, true, as follows;

He was bred in London, and became Clerk of Drapers-hall: Finding the World to
flow fast in upon him, he made a solemn Vow to God, that he would give the
surplusage of his Above Ten Thousand pounds.
estate (whatever it was) to pious uses. Nor was he like to those, who at first
maintained ten thousand pounds too much for any man, which when they have
attained, they then conceive ten times so much too little for themselves; but
after his Cup was filled brim-full, to the aforesaid proportion, he
conscienciously gave every drop of that which over-flowed, to quench the thirst
of people parched with Poverty.

I compare him to Elizabeth in the Gospel, who as if ashamed of her shame (so
then reputed) taken from her hid her self five Luke 1. 24.
Months, (so great her modesty;) such his concealing of his Charity, though
pregnant with good works; and had not the Lanthorn of his body been lately
broken, it is believed the light of his bounty had not yet been discovered. He
built and endowed a fair Alms house in Southwark, another at Newington (both
in Surrey) on which, and other pious uses, he expended well nigh ten thousand
pounds, whereof twenty pounds per annum he gave to Hereford the place of his
Nativity.

His Wife and surviving Daughters were so far from grudging at his gifts, and
accounting that lost to them, which was lent to God, that they much rejoiced
thereat, and deserve to be esteemed joint-givers thereof, because consenting so
freely to his Charity. He dyed in the seventy fourth year of his age, 29.
December, Anno Domini 1656. and was solemnly buried in London.

Memorable Persons.
ROSAMUND, that is says my Ver^egan Decayed Intellig. page 269.
Author Rosemouth (but by allufion termed Rose of the World) was remarkable on
many accounts. First, for her Father Walter Lord Clifford, who had large Lands
about Cliffords-castle in this County. secondly, for her self, being the
Mistress-peice of beauty in that Age. Thirdly, for her Paramour King Henry the
second, to whom she was Concubine. Lastly, fot her Son William Longspee, the
worthy Earl of Salisbury,

King Henry is said to have built a Labyrinth at Woodstock, (which Labyrinth
through length of time has lost it self) to hide this his Mistress from his
jealous Juno, Queen Eleanor. But Zelotypiae nihil impervium, by some device she
got access unto Her, and caused her Death. Rosamund was buried in a little
Nunnery at Godstowe nigh Oxford, with this Epitaph.

Hic jacet in Tumba Rosa mundi non Rosamunda,
Non redolet, sed olet, quae redolere solet.
This Tomb does enclose the worlds fair Rose so sweet and full of favor
And smell she does now, but you may guess how, none of the sweetest savor.
Her Corpse may be said to have done penances after her Death. For Hugh Bishop
of Lincoln, coming as Visitor to this Nunnery, and seeing Rosamund's body lying
in the Quire, under a Silken Hearse, with tapors continual^y burning about it,
thought the Hearse of an Harlot, no proper Object for the Eyes of Virgins to
contemplate on, therefore caused her bones to be scattered abroad. However
after his Departure, those Sisters gathered her bones together again, put them
into a perfumed bag, and enclosed them in lead, where they continued until
outed again in the reign of King Henry the 8.

The Names of the Gentry of this County, returned by the Commissioners in the
Twelfth year of King Henry the Sixth, 1433.
Thomas Bishop of Hereford James de Audley John Skudamore Chival. Knights for
the Shire. Commissioners to take the Oaths. John Russell.

Dom. Gray de Whilton Chiv. VValteri Lucy Chivaler Radulphi de la Bear Chival.
Roberti VVhiteney Chivaler. Johannis Baskervile Chival. ^ohannis Merbury
Armiger. Richardi de la Mare Armig. Tho. Bromwich sen. Armig. Iohannis Brugge
Armigeri Tho. Bromwich jun. Armigeri Iohannis Melborn Armiger. Iohannis Bar
Armigeri Thomae Donton Armigeri Hugonis Mortimer Armigeri Tho. de Lastay
senioris Arm. Iohannis Skudamore Armig. Richardi VVigmore Armig. VVillielmi
Croft Armigeri VValteri Hackluit Armigeri VVillielmi Criketot Armig. Rich.
VValwain de Maid A. Maculmi VValwain Armig W. Walwain de Longford (...).
Nicholai VVallwayn Armig. Thomae Walwain de Stoke Ar. R. Walweyn de Lugwardyn
a. Willielmi Byriton Armigeri Iohannis Stapelton Armigeri VVillielmi Hereford
Armig Richardi Habberhale Armig Iohannis Aberhale Armiger. Iohannis Deverose
Aamiger. Richardi Deverose Armigeri Iohannis De la Bear Armig. VVillielmi de la
Bear Arm. Rogeri Bodenham Armigeri Milonis VVatier Armigeri Radulphi Baskervile
Armig. Thomae de La Hay Arm. jun. Rowlandi Lenthall Chivaler Henrici Oldcastle
Armigeri Henrici Slake Armigeri Richardi ap Harry Armigeri Johannis Dansey
Armigeri Henrici ap Griffith Armig. Rogeri Wiggemore Armig. Hugonis Monyngton
Ar. Iohannis Monyngton Ar. VValteri Monington Ar. Johannis Wise Armig. Wall. ap
Rosser Vanghan A. Johannis Dumbleton Ar. Thomae Parker Armigeri Johannis
Skellwick Ar. Johannis Harper VVillielmi Garnons Thomae Brugge de Leye Thom.
Brugge de Brugge Thomae Smith de Webley Edmundi Gomond Johannis Alton. Johannis
VVellynton Roberti Hunte Armigeri Boberti Bromwich VVillielmi Bromwich R.
Watteis de Bedingwey Richardi Leon Iohanni Goure VVillielmi Smethecote
VVillielmi Hackluit Hugonis Hackluit ^acobi Everard Tho. Brugge de Yuenton
Richardi Upton Iohannis Upton Rogeri Erlyche Iohannis de Ey Egidii Hackluit
Thomae Halle Hugonis VVarton Iohannis Bluwet Iohannis Luntelye Philippi Lyngeyn
Iohannis Bevere VValteri Bradford Iohannis Bradford VValteri Walker Thomae
Morton Iohannis Salisbury Iohannis Walker VVillielmi Rafes Iohannis Sherer
Iohannis VValdb^et Richardi VVindesley Io. Mortimer de Bromyerd Thomae Harlowe
Iohannis Ragon Iohannis Broun Iohannis Smith Thomae Dovile Iohannis Panton jun.
Thomae Petit Thomae Horsenet Richardi VVynne Iohannis VVinter Thomae Loveday
Iohannis Sheref Thomae Everard Johannis Young Thomae Tomkins VVillielmi
Shebrond Will. Waleyn de Bickerton Milonis Skulle Rogeri ^dmonsham Roberti
Priour. Johannis VVatts Richardi Rovenhal Johannis Common Richardi Gambdon
Henrici Common VVillielmi Blanchard VVillielmi Monyngton Johannis Arundell
Thomae Arundell Thomae Myntrick VVillielmi Gray Johannis Brugge de Rosse
Henrici White Richardi Coekes Johannis VVollrich Johannis de Wall. William
Lanke Will. ap Thomas ap L. Will. Gerrard Richardi Trevays Hugonis Cola
Richardi de La Hay Hugonis Hergest Johannis Pu VValteri Puy VVillielmi
Huntington VVillielmi Carwardine Johannis Chabenore Will. Smith de Tiberton
VVillielmi Chamberleyn Howel ap Howel ap Wilmiston Johan. Wiston Johan. Hunt de
Snodhell Thomae Lightfoot Joh. ap Thom. de Dorston Galfredi ap Thomas Johannis
Pychard Thomae Bruyn Georgii Braynton Majoris Civitatis Hereford. VValteri
Mibbe Henrici Chippenham Johannis Fulk Draper Johannis Mey Johannis Fuister
Thomae Hoar Johannis Green Richardi Green Richardi Prat Thomae Bradwardyn
Richardi Russell Richardi Harbor Johannis Orchard Jacobi Orchard Johannis
Dudley Richardi Houghton Rogeri Collyng Johannis Collier Thomae Choppynham
Henrici Cachepolle Thomae Knobelle Hugonis Clerk Thomae Comb Thomae Verbum
Johannis Elynner Io. Heyward de Bodenham To. VVych de Ludwardyn.
Sheriffs of Hereford-Shire.
HEN. II.
Anno 1 Anno 2 Walt. de Hereford, for 5 years. Anno 7 Will. de Bello Campo, f
or 9 years. Anno 16 Idem, and Walt. Clicums. Anno 17 Willielmus de la Lega.
Anno 18 Gilbertus Pypard. Anno 19 Idem. Anno 20 Willielmus de Braiose. Anno 21
Idem. Anno 22 Radulphus Pulcherus, for 7 years. Anno 29 Milo de Mucegros, and
Willielmus Torelle. Anno 30 Willielmus Torelle. Anno 31 Radul. Arden, Anno 32
Idem. Anno 33 Idem.
RICH. I.
Anno 1 Radul. de Arden. Anno 2 Hen. de longo Campo. Anno 3 Willielmus de
Braiosa. Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Hen. de longo Campo, and Willielmus de Braiosa.
Anno 6 Roger. Fitz-Mauricis. Anno 7 Willielmus de Braiosa. Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9
Willielmus de Braiosa, and Williemus de Burchhull. Anno 10 Idem.
JOHAN.
Anno 1 Walter. de Clifford, and Gilbertus Clifford. Anno 2 Willielmus de
Braiosa, and Willielmus Burchull. Anno 3 Hubert. de Burgo, and Rich. de Signs,
for 3 years Anno 6 Willielmus de Cantulum, and Walter. de Puhier. Anno 7 Idem.
Anno 8 Walt. de Clifford, and Osbert. Pil. VVillielmi. Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10
Gerer. de Atria, and Rich. de Burges. Anno 11 Idem. Anno 12 Endebard. de
Cicomato, and Rich. de Burges. Anno 13 Enozelcardus, de Cicomato, and Rich.
Burgeis ( sive Burzeis, for 4 years.
HEN. III.
Anno 1 Walt. de Lascy, and Anno 2 Tho. de Anesey. Anno 3 Walt. de Lascy, and
Warrinus de Grindon. for 3 years. Anno 6 Walt. de Lascy, and Tho. de Anesey.
Anno 7 Walt. de Lascy. Anno 8 Radulph. fill. Nic. and Hen. fill. Nic. frater
ejus, for 3 y. Anno 11 Radul. fill. Nich. and Hen. frat. ejus, and Jo. de East,
for 3 years. Anno 14 Joan. de Fleg. Anno 15 Idem. Anno 16 Johan. de Munemus.
Anno 17 Williel. fi^lus Warrini. Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Amaricus de Sto. Aman.
Anno 20 Amari, de Sto. Amando, and Ricard. de Fardingston. Anno 21 Idem. Anno
22 Amari, de Sto* amando, and Matthew. de Coddray, for 3 years. Anno 25 Amaricus
de Cancel, for 7 years. Anno 32 Waleranus. Anno 33 Waleranus de Bradlegh. Anno
34 Hugo de Kinardell. Anno 35 Hen. de Bradlegh. Anno 36 Idem. Anno 37 Williel.
de Sto* Omero. Anno 38 Idem. Anno 39 Joan. de Brekon (sive Brecon) for 3 years.
Anno 42 Hen. de Penebrige. Anno 43 Idem and Ric. de Baggindin. Anno 44 Robertus
de Meysy. Anno 45 Idem. Anno 46 Robertus de Meysy, and Adam. de Bideford, for 7
years. Anno 53 Barthol. de Buly, and Adam. de Botiler, for 3. years
EDW. I.
Anno 1 Barthol. de Stutely, and Adam de Botiler. Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Joan. de
Ware. Anno 4 Egid. de Berkel, for 3 years Anno 7 Roger. de Burghall. Anno 8
Idem. Anno 9 Rog. de Burg. for 10 years Anno 19 Hen de Solers, for 3. ye. Anno
22 Johan. de Acton, for 6. ye. Anno 28 Milo Picard, for 6 years. Anno 34 Johan.
de Acton. Anno 35 Tho. Rossal.
EDW. II.
Anno 1 Walt. de Halits, for 4 ye. Anno 5 Rog. de Chandos, for 3 ye. Anno 8
Richard. de Baskervil. Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Hugo Hakluit. Anno 11 Idem. Anno 12
Roger. de Elmerugge. Anno 13 Idem. Anno 14 Roger Chandos, for 5 ye.
EDW. III.
Anno 1 Roger. deChandos, for 5 y. Anno 6 Johannes de Rous. Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8
Johan. Mauger. Robert Chandos, and Jo. le Rous Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Rich.
Walwayn, for 7 yea. Anno 17 Johan. Walwayn. Anno 18 Williel. de Radour, for 3
years. Anno 21 Tho Pichard. Anno 22 Joha. Sholle, and Tho. Pichard. Anno 23
Rich. Dansy, and Johan. Sholle. Anno 24 Rich. Dansy. Anno 25 Tho. de Aston.
Anno 26 Rich. de Burges. Anno 27 Idem. Anno 28 Rich. Bregg. Anno 29 Rich. de la
Bear. Anno 30 Tho. At. Bar, and Ric. de la Bear. Anno 31 Ed. Hacklut, for 3
years. Anno 34 Thomas Chandois. Anno 35 Ric. de la. Bear, for 10. yea. Anno 45
Tho. Chandois. Anno 46 Will. Devereux de Rod. Anno 47 Tho. Chandois. Anno 48
Idem. Anno 49 Edw. de Burges. Anno 50 Walter Devereux, and Tho. de la Bear.
Anno 51 Idem.
This County had Sheriffs long before King Henry the Second, as may appear by
the direction of this Writ, in the first of King Henry the First.

Matthew. Paris, Anno Dom. 1100.
Henricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Hugoni de Boelande Vicecomiti, and omnibus
fidelibus suis, tam Francis quam Anglicis in Herefordshire salutem, etc. But
such the uncertainty of their Succession, it will be very well, if we can
continue our Catalogue from the general Era in other Counties.

Edward the Second.
8. RICHARDUS de BASKERVIL.]

This name is of Great Antiquity in these parts, whose Ancestors immediately
after the Conquest, were benefactours to the Abbey of Saint Peter's in Gloucester,
as by the ensuing will appear. Monast. Anglicanum page 113.


1. Bernardus de Baskervile cum semetipso, quando habitum Monachi suscepit
dedit Ecclesiae sancti Petri Glouc. unam Hidam tarrae in Cumba VValterus et
Robertus de Baskervile confirmant tempore Homelini Abbatis. 2. Anno Domini 1109
Robertus de Baskervilla. De Jerusalem Idem. p. 115.
reversus dedit Ecclesiae sancti Petri Gloc. Unam Hidam extramuros quidem
Civitatis, ubi est nunc Hortus Monachorum, Rege Henrico Confirmante, tempore
Petri Abbatis
As these came out of Normandy from a Town so named, so are they extant at this
Day in this County, and have formerly been famous, and fortunate for their
Military Atchievments.

Name Place Arms RICH. 2. Anno * Aza Cross Checky Or and Gules. 1 Rob.
Whitney, ar.* Whitney Ar. on a Cross S. a Leopards head, Or* 2 Sim. de Brugge 3 John VValwayne G. a Bend within a bordure, Erm. 4 Hugo. Carew Or, three Lions
pass. Gardant. S. 5 Sim. de Brugge ut prius 6 ^oh. VValwayne ut prius 7 Rog.
Pauncefort Gules, 3 Lions Rampant, Argent. 8 Tho. de la Bar Kinnersley Azure,
a Bend argent Cotized, Or, twixt 6 Martlets of the same. 9 Nic. Maurdin 10 Tho.
Oldcastle Argent, a Tower triple towred, Sable. 11 Rinardus, sive Kinardus, de
la Bear 12 Tho. de la Bar ut prius 13 Tho. VValwayn ut prius Ar. a Chv.
betwixt 3 Unicorns Sable. 14 Hu. deMonington 15 Tho. Oldcastle ut prius 16
Mascre. de la Ma. 17 Tho. VValwayne ut prius 18 Joh. VValwayne ut prius 19 Tho.
de la Bar ut prius 20 Idem ut prius 21 Tho. Clanowe 22 Idem HEN. 4 Anno 1 John ap. Harry 2 Wil-Lucy, mil. and (...) Haklut miles Yetton. G. (...) Or 3.
Pikes hauriant, Ar. G. 3 Battle-axes, Or, 3 John Bodenham 4 Idem. ut prius
Azure, a Fess betwixt 3 ChesseRooks. Or 5 Idem. ut prius 6 Joh. Merbury 7 Jo.
Oldcastle, mil. ut prius 9 Jo. Skudamore, m. Holm. Lacy. 10 Joh. Smert Gules. 3
Stirrops leathered and Buckled, Or 11 Joh. Bodenham ut prius 12 Will, VValwein
ut prius HEN. 5. Anno 1 Robert VVhitney ut prius 2 Johan. Merbury 3 Johan.
Bodenham ut prius 4 Johan. Brugge ut prius 5 Johan. Russel Arg. a Cheveron
betwixt three Crosses Croslets fitchee Sable. 6 Thom. Holgot 7 Johan. Merbury
(...) Rich. de la Bear 9 Idem HEN. 6. Anno 1 Rich. de la Mare 2 Row Lenthal
Sable, a Bend Lozengee Arg. 3 Guide. Whittington Hampton. G. a Fess Checky Or.
and Az. 4 Johan. Merbury 5 T. de la Hay Jun. 6 To. Whitney, mil. 7 Rye. de la
Mare ut prius 8 Joh. Merbury 9 Jo. Skudemore, m. 10 ut prius 11. R. Whitney,
mil. 12. T. de lay Hay ut prius 13 Tho. Merbury 14 Tho. Mill 15 Rob. VVhitney
ut prius 16 J. Pauncefoote ut prius 17 VValtery Skull * Arg. a (...)....
betwixt (...) Lions Heads (...) of the Field 18 Ric. VValwin ut prius 19 VVil.
Lucy ut prius 20 Idem ut prius 21 Hen. Charleton ut prius 22 Tho. Parker 23
Rad. VValwain ut prius 24 Tho. Mill. 25 Hum. Stafford Or, a Chev. G. a Quarter
Erm. 26 Walt. Devereux VVebley Arg. a Fess. Gules in Chief, three Torteauxes.
27 Walt. Skull, mil. ut prius 28 Joh. Skudemore ut prius 29 Joh. Berry, mil. 30
Tho. Parker, ar. 31 Tho. Cornwayl Er. a Lion Ramp. Gules crowned Or, within a
Border engrailed, S. (...). 32 VVil. Lucy, ar. ut prius 33 Jo. Barry, mil. 34
Walt. Skul, mil ut prius 35 Io. Skudamore, m. ut prius 36 Ioh. Seymor, mil. G.
2 Angels Wings Pale-ways Inverted Or. 37 VV. Catesby, m. Ar. 2 Lions Pass.
(...). Corone, Or. 38 Iam. Baskervill Erdstey Ar. a Cheveron Gules betwixt 3
Heurts Proper. EDW. 4. Anno, 1 Ioh. VVelford 2 Tho. Monington ut prius. 3 Idem
(...) prius 4 Sim. Melburn, ar. 5 Ioh. Baskervill, m. ut prius 6 Ioh. Lingein,
ar. Barry of 6. Or and Az. on a Bend G. 3 Cinque soils Ar. 7 Tho. Cornwall, ar.
ut prius * A. 3. Greyhounds in Pale ^rant Sable, collared Gules. 8 *Wal.
VVigmore 9 VV. Baskervil, m. ut prius * Quarterly, per Fess indented, Az. and
Ar. in the first quarter a Lion Passant Or. 10 *Ric* Cro^t, sen. a. Croft-cast
11 Ric. Croft. sen. m. ut prius 12 Ioh* Lingein, m. ut prius 13 Tho. Monington.
ut prius 14 Iam. Baskervil, m. ut prius 15 Rob VVhitney ^t prius 16 Rich.
Crofts, mil. ut prius 17 R^dulph. Haclu it ut prius 18 I. Mortimer, mil. Barry
of 6. Or, and Az. on a ^hief of the first, 3 Pallet^ inter 2. Esquires bast,
Dexter, and Sini^ter of the second, an In-Escoucheon Argent. 19 R. de la Bear,
m. 20 Simon Melborne 21 Ia. Baskervil, m. ut prius 22 Johan. Mortimer. ut prius
RICH. 3. Anno. 1 Rich. de la Bear m. 2 Tho. Cornwall, m. ut prius 3 Rich.
Crofts, mil. ut prius HEN. 7. Anno, 1 Johan. Mortimer ut prius 2 Johann.
Lingeyn ut prius 3 Roger. Bodenham ut prius 4 Henric. Skudamore ut prius 5 Joh.
Devereux, m. ut prius 6 Tho* Monington ut prius 7 Rich. Greenway 8 Ric. de la
Bear, m. 9 Jo. Mortimer, mil. ut prius 10 Edw. Blunt, ar. Barry Nebule of 6.
Or, and S. 11 Joh. Lingein, mil. nt prius 12 Hen. Harper, ar. A. a Lion ramp.
withinu a Border ingrailed S. 13 ^oh. Lingein, Ar. ut prius 14 Rich. Greenway
ut prius 15 Hen. Mile Arm. 16 Rich. Miners, ar. 17 Joh. Mortimer, m. ut prius
18 T. Cornwaile, m. ut prius 19 Idem. ut prius 20 Edw. Croft, ar. ut prius 21
J. Ling^in jun. m. ut prius 22 R. Cornwaile, Ar. ut prius 23 Rad. Hackluit
Hackluit. ut prius 24 Hen. Mile, Ar. HEN. 8 Anno, 1 Edward. Croft, Ar. ut prius
2 Rich. de la Bear, a. ut prius 3 Th. Moningron, ar. ut prius 4 Hen. Mile, Arm.
5 Edw. Croft, mil. ut prius 6 Th. Cornwaile, m. ut prius 7 Will. Herbert Mil.
Party per pale Az. and G. 3 Lions Ramp. Ar. 8 Joh. Lingein, mil. ut prius 9
Edw. Croft, miles ut prius 10 Rad. Hackluit ut prius 11 Rich. Cornwail ut prius
12 Joh. Lingein, m. ut prius 13 Edw. Croft, mil. ut prius 14 Row. Morton Quart.
G. and Erm. in the 1. and fourth a Goats ^. erased, Ar. 15 Jaco. Baskervile ut
prius 16 Jo. Skudemore, a. ut prius 17 Hen. Vain, Arm. KENT Az. 3 (...)-hand
Gauntlets, Or. 18 Rich. Cornwail ut prius 19 Tho. Baskervil, a. ut prius 20
Tho. Lingein, m. ut prius 21 Edw. Croft, mil. ut prius 22 Ri. Vaughan, m. 23
Ric. Walwein, ar. ut prius 24 T. Monington, a. ut prius 25 Edw. Croft, mil. ut
prius 26 Mic. Lister, Arm. 27 Will. Clinton, ar. and Tho. Clinton, ar. 28 Joh.
Skudamor, a. ut prius 29 Joh. Blount, ar. ut prius 30 J. Packington, ar. Per
Cheveton, S. and Arg. in chief 3 Mullets Or, In base (...) many Garbes ^ules.
31 Mich. Lister, ar. 32 Tho Monington ut prius 33 Rich. Vaughan 34 (...).
Baskervil, m. ut prius 35 Ioh. Skudamore ut prius 36 Joh. Leingein, ar. ut
prius 37 Step. ap Harry, ^. 38 Rog. Bodenham. ut prius EDW. 6. Anno, 1 John
Cornwail, m. ut prius 2 Th. Baskervile, ar. ut prius 3 Joh^n Harley, Ar.
Brampton Or, a Bend cotised Sable. 4 Jac. Baskervile ut prius 5 Jam. Baskervil
ut prius 6 Joh. Skudamore, a. ut prius PHIL. R. and MA. Reginae. Anno, 1 Johan.
Price, miles 2 Tho. Howard, Ar. G. a Bend between 6 Cross Croslets Fitchie Arg.
3 Johan. Baskervil ut prius 4 Tho. VVinston, ar. ut prius 5 Rich. Monington 6
Rog. Bodenham, a. ut prius ELIZ. Reginae. Anno, 1 Geor. Cornwall. m. ut prius 2
Tho. Blount, Ar. ut prius 3 John Harley, Arm. ut prius 4 Joh. Huband, Ar. 5
Geo. ap Harry, Ar. 6 Jam. Baskervil ut prius 7 Jo. Skudamore, ar. KelnChurch 8
Georgius Price, ar. 9 Will. Shelley, ar. SUSSEX. S. a Fess ingrailed between 3
Periwincle Shells, Or. 10 Tho. Clinton, ar. 11 Th. Baskervlle, a. (...) 12
Baskerv^le, a. Baskervil, a. ut prius 13 Joh. Huband, m. 14 Hngo ap Harry 15
Joh. Abrahal, Ar. Azure 3 Porcupines, Or. 16 Jac. VVhitney. m. ut prius 17
George Price, ar. 28 Juc. VVarcomb 29 Tho. Morgan, ar. 20 Wa. Baskervil, a. ut
prius 21 Will. Cecil, ar. Altrinnis Barry of 10. Ar. and Azure on 6
Eschucheons 32 and 1 S. as many L^ons Ramp. of the first. 22 Fran. Blount, ar.
ut prius 23 Ja. Skudamore, a. ut prius 24 Tho. Conisby, a. ut prius 25 Ric.
Walweyn, a. ^angford G. a Bend with a Border Erm. in chief an Hound Passant,
Or. 26 Hu. Baskevile, a. ut prius 37 To. Bodenham, a. ut prius 28 Ja. Whitney,
m. ut prius 29 Jac. Boil,. Arm. Partee per Bend, Embattelled, Argent and
Gules. 30 Joh. Berington, a. Courar 31 Th. Baskervile, a. ut prius 32 Cha.
Brudges, ar. ut prius 33 Will. Rudham. a. Rudham 34 Rich. Tomkins, a. Moniton
Az. a Chever. betwixt 3 Pheasant Cocks Or. 35 To. Bodenham, a. ut prius 36 Tho.
Harley, ar. ut prius 37 Georg. Price, ar. 38 Eustac. Whitney. ut prius 39 Nich.
Garnons, a. Garnons G. 2 Lyo^s passant Or, within a Border Azure. 40 Thomas
Conisby ut prius 41 Will. Dauntsey, a. Brinsop Barry Wavy of 6. pieces Arg. and
Gules. 42 Hen. Vaughan, a. 43 Ja. Skudamore, m. ut prius 44 Rich. Hyatt, Ar.
Sauntield 45 Tho. Harley ut prius JACOB Reg. Anno, 1 Tho. Harley, Ar. ut prius
2 John Blount, Arm. ut prius 3 John Berington, ar. ut prius 4 Jacob. Tomkins,
a. ut prius 5 Will. Rudhal, ar. 6 Joh. Kirle, arm. MuchMarcle Vert a Cheveron
betwixt 3 Flower de Lyces Or. 7 Rich. Hopton, mil. Hopton Gules Seem de Cross
(...) a Lion Rampant Or. 8 Hu. Baskervil, mil. ut prius 9 Hum. Cornwall, a. ut
prius 10 Rob. Kirle, arm. ut prius 11 Joh. Colles, Arm. 12 Fran. Smalman, a.
Kinnesley 13 Rich. Cox, Arm. 14 Row. Skudmor, ^. ut prius 25 Ambro. Elton, ar.
Lidbury Paly of 6 Or and G. on a Bend S. 3 Mullets of the first. 16 Herb.
Westfaling A. a Cross tw. 4 Cheval-traps O. 17 Will. Unet, Ar. Cas^. From
Sable, a Chever on between 3. Lions heads couped, Arg. 18 Edw. Leingein* a. ut
prius 19 Joh. Bridges, ar. 20 Sam. Aubrie, m. Gules a Fess ingrailed A^. 21
Iac. Rodd, Arm. 23 Fran. Pember, ar. Ar. 3 More-cocks proper combed and
jealoped G. a chief Azure. CHAR. Reg. Anno, 1 Egidius Bridges, r. Wilton Argent
on a cross. S. a Leopards head, Or. 2 Fitz Will. Conisby ut prius 3 Will.
Read, Arm. 4 Johan. Kirle, Bar. ut prius 5 Iac. Kirle, armig. ut prius 6 Walop.
Brabazon Eaton G. on a (...) Arg. 3 Martelets of the first. 7 Roger. Dansey,
ar. ut prius 8 Ph. Holman, arm. 9 Ioh. Abrahal, arm. ut prius 10 Will. Sku
damore ut prius 11 Tho. Wigmore, a. S. 3 ^rey-hounds current Arg. 12 Rog.
Vaughan, a. 13 Hen. Lingei^, ^r. ut prius 14 Rob. Whitney, m. ut prius 15 16 17
Isa^cus Seward 18 19 Haec fecit 20 inania 21 Mavors. 22 Amb. Elton, ju. a. ut
prius

K. HENRY the Sixth.
26. WALTER (...).

I have vehement and (to use the Lord Coke his Epithet) necessary presumptions,
to persuade me, that he was the same person, who married Anne, Daughter and
sole heir unto William Lord Ferrers of Chartley, and in her right was
afterward by this King created Lord Ferrers. He was Father to,

1. John Lord Ferrers of Chartley, who married Cecily Sister to Henry
Bourchier, Earl of Essex, and was father to, 2 Walter Devereux Lord Ferrers,
created Viscount Hereford, by King Edward the Sixth, and was Father to, 3 Sir
Richard Devereux Knight, dying before his Father, and Father to, 4 Walter
Devereux, first Earl of Essex of that Family,
Of whom largely hereafter, God willing, in Carmarthen*shire the place of his
Nativity.

EDWARD the Fourth.
14 JAMES BASKERVILE Miles. 18 JOHN MORTIMER Miles. 19 RICHARD de la BER^
Miles.
This Leash of Knights were persons of approved Valor and Loyalty to K. Hen.
the Seventh, by whom (being Knights Bachelours before) they were made Knights
Bannerets in the beginning of his Reign, I confess some difference in the date
and place, Stows Chro page 471.
one assigning the Tower of London, when Jasper was created Duke of Bedford;
Seldom in his Titles of Hon. page 700. ex Manuscripto.
another with ^ar more probability naming Newark, just after the fighting of
the battle of Stoke hard by. Nor does it sound a little to the honor of
Hereford-shire, that amongst the thirteen, then banneretted in the Kings Army,
three fall out to be her Natives.

HENRY the Eighth.
II RICHARDUS CORNV^AIL]

He was a Knight howsoever it comes to pass he is here unadditioned. I read,
how Anno Domini 1523. in the 15. of K. Henry the Eighth, he was a prime person
among those many Knights which attended the Duke of Suffolk into France, at
what time they summoned and took the Town of Roy, and Lord Herbert in the Life
of King Henry the Eighth, page 151.
Sir Richard was sent with four hundred men, to take possession thereof, the
only service of remarke, performed in that expedition.

Queen E^IZABETH.
Reader, let me confess my self to thee. I expected to have found in this
Catalogue of Sheriffs Sr. JAMES CROFTS (knowing he was this Countryman, whose
family flourished Camdens Eliz. in apparatu.
at Crofts Castle) but am defeated, seeing his constant attendance on Court and
Camp privileged him from serving in this Office. This worthy Idem anno 1560.
Knight was accused for complying with Wiat, and notwithstanding his most
solemn Oath in his own defense, he was imprisoned by Queen Mary, convicted of
high Treason, restored by Queen Elizabeth, and made Governor of the Town and
Castle of Barwick.

At the siege of Leith he behaved him most vallantly in repelling the Foe, and
yet when in a second assault the English were worsted, the blame ^ell on him,
(as if he favored the French and maligned the L Gray then General) so that he
was outed of his Government of Barwick. Yet he fell not so into the Queens
final Disfavour, but that she continued him Privy Councellor, and made him
Comptroller of her Household. He was an able man to manage War, and yet an
earnest desirer and advancer of Peace, being one of the Commissioners in 88. to
treat with the Spaniard in Flanders: I conceive he survived not long after. His
ancient Inheritance in this County is lately devolved to Herbert Crofts D.D.
and Dean of Hereford.

40. THOMAS CONISBY Mil.] I have heard from some of this County a precious
Report of his Memory, how he lived in a right worshipful Equipage, and Founded
a place in Hereford for poor people, but to what proportion of Revenue, they
could not inform me.

43. JAMES SKUDAMORE Knight]

He was Father unto Sr. John Skudamore created by King Charles Viscount Slego
in Ireland. This Lord was for some years employed Leiger Ambassador in France,
and during the Tyranny of the Protectorian times, kept his secret Loyalty to
his Sovereign, Hospitality to his Family, and Charity to the Distressed Clergy,
whom he bountifully relieved.

The Farewell.
I am credibly informed, that the Office of the Under-Sheriffe of this County
is more beneficial, than in any other County of the same proportion; his Fees
it seems increasing from the Decrease of the States of the Gentry therein. May
the Obventions of his office hereafter be reduced to a lesser sum. And seeing
God has blessed (as we have formerly observed) this County with so many W's'
we wish the Inhabitants thereof the Continuance and Increase of one more,
WISDOM, expressing it self both in the improving of their spiritual
Concernment, and warily managing their secular Estates.

HUNTINGTON-SHIRE is surrounded with North-hampton, Bedford and
Cambridge-shires, and being small in Extent hardly stretches 20 miles
outright, though measured to the most advantage. The general goodness of the
ground may certainly be collected from the plenty of Convents erected therein
at Saint Neots, Hinching-Brook, Huntington, Sautrie, Saint Ives, Ramsie, etc.
So that the fourth foot at least in this shire was Abbey land belonging to
Monks and Friars, and such weeds we know would ^ot grow but in rich Ground. If
any say that Monks might not choose their own Habitations being confined therein
to the pleasures of their Founders; know there were few Founders that did not
first consult some religious Person in the erection of Convents, and such would
be sure to choose the best for men of their own Profession. Sure I am it would
set all England hard to show in so short a distance, so pleasant a Park as
Waybridge, so ^air a Meadow as Portsholme, and so fruitful a Town for Tillage
as Godmanchester, all three within so many miles in this County.

No peculiar Commodity or Manufacture (save with others equally intercommoning)
appearing in this County, let us proceed.

The Buildings.
KIMBOLTON Castle, This being part of the jointure of Queen Katharine Dowager,
was chosen by her to retire thereunto as neither too near to London to see what
she would not, nor so far off but that she might hear what she desired. Here
she wept out the Remnant of her widdowhood (while her husband was yet alive) in
her devotions. This Castle came afterward by gift to the Wingfields, from them
by sale to the Montagues; Henry late Earl of Manchester sparing no cost which
might add to the beauty thereof.

HINCHING-BROOKE, once a Nunnery and which I am confident will ever be a
Religious house whilst it relates to the truly Noble Edward Montague (Earl of
Sandwich) the owner thereof. It shows one of the Magnificent rooms which is
to be beheld in our Nation.

We must not forget the House and Chapel in little Godding (the inheritance of
Master Ferrer) which lately made a great Noise In the beginning of the long
Parliament.
all over England. Here three Numerous female families (all from one
Grandmother) lived together in a strict discipline of devotion. They rise at
midnight to Prayers, and other people most complained thereof, whose heads I
dare say never ak't for want of sleep. Sure I am, strangers by them were
entertained, poor people were relieved, their Children instructed to read,
whilst their own Needles were employed in learned and pious work to bind
Bibles: Whereof one most exactly done was presented to King Charles. But their
society was beheld by some as an Embrio Nunnery ^uspecting that there was a
Pope Ioane therein, which causeless Cavil afterward confuted it self, when
all the younger of those Virgins, practiced the Precept of St. Paul, to marry,
bear Children, and guide their 1 Timothy 5. 14.
houses.

Medicinal Waters.
There is an Obscure Village in this County near St. Neots called Haile-weston
whose very name Sounds something of sanativeness therein, so much may the
Adding of what is no Letter, alter the meaning of a Word, for.

1. Aile Signifies a Sore or Hurt, with complaining the effect thereof. 2
Hail, (having an affinity with Gamden's Brit. in Dorsetshire.
Heile the Saxon Idol for Esculapius) Imports a cure, or Medicine to a
Malady.
Now in the aforesaid Village there be two Fountaine-lets which are not far
asunder.

1. One sweet, conceived good to help the dimness of the eyes. 2 The other in a
manner salt, esteemed sovereign against the Scabs and Leprosy.
What says St. James 3. 11.
James; Does a Fountain send forth at the same Place sweet Water and bitter?
meaning in an Ordinary way, without Miracle. Now although these different
Waters flow from several Fountains; Yet seeing they are so near together, it
may justly be advanced to the Reputation of a Wonder.

Proverbs.
This is the way to BEGGARS BUSH.]

It is spoken of such who use dissolute and improvident courses which tend to
poverty, Beggars Bush being a tree notoriously known, on the left hand of
London road from Huntington to Caxton. I have heard, how King James, being in
progress in these parts, with Sir Francis Bacon the Lord Chancellor, and
having heard that morning, how Sir Francis had prodigiously rewarded a mean man
for a small present, Sir Francis (said He) you will quickly come to beggars
bush, and I may even go along with you, if both be so bountiful.

RAMSEY the I. Speed, (or Sir Robert Cotton rather) in the description of
Huntingtonshire.
Rich-]

This was the Cresus or Croessus of all our English Abbeys. For having (but
sixty Monks to maintain therein, the Revenues thereof according to the
standard of those times amounted unto Camdens Brit. in Hunting tonshire.
Seven Thousand pounds a year, which in proportion was a hundred pound for
every Monk, and a thousand for their Abbot. Yet at the dissolution of
Monasteries, the Income of this Abbey was reckoned but at Speeds Catalogue of
Relig^ous Houses* folio 809.
One thousand nine hundred eighty three pounds by the year, whereby it plainly
appears how much the Revenues were under rated in those valuations.

But how soon is Crassus made Codrus, and Ramsey the Rich, become Ramsey the
Poor. The wealth of the Town, relative with the Abbey, was dissolved therewith,
and more the Mendicants since in Ramsey than the Monks were before. However now
there is great hope that Ramsey after the two extremes of Wealth and Want, will
at last be fixed in a comfortable mediocrity, the wish of Proverbs 30. 8.
Agur being granted unto him, give me neither poverty nor riches, especially
since it is lately erected (or rather restored) to the Dignity of a
Market Town. And surely the convenient situation thereof since the draining of
the Fens, does advantage it to be a Staple-place for the sale of fat and lean
Cattle.

Saints.
ELFLED, daughter of Ethelwold Earl of East Angles (Founder of the Monastery of
Ramsey in this County) was preferred Abbess of Ramsey, and confirmed by K.
Edgar therein. She is reported to excel in austerity and holiness of life. When
her Steward complained unto her, that she had exhausted her coffers with the
profuseness of her Charity, she with her prayers presently recruited them to
their former fullness. When her candle, as she read the Lesson, casually went
out, there came such a brightness from the R. Buckland in Vitis Sanctarum
Mulier. Anglic. page 242.
Fingers of her right hand, that it enlightened the whole Quire; which is as
true as the New Lights to which our modern Sectaries do pretend, the one having
Miracles, the other Revelations at their fingers-ends. She died Anno Dom. 992.
being buried in the LadyChurch at Ramsey with high veneration.

Prelates.
WILLIAM de VVHITLESEY, no printed Author mentioning the Place of his birth
and breeding. He was placed by us in this County, finding Whitlesey a Town
therein (so memorable for the Mere) and presuming that this William did follow
suit M. S^. Sc^. Cant. in the Masters ^f Peter H.
with the best of his Cote in that age, surnamed from the places of their
Nativity* Mr. Parker (I tell you my story and my stories-man) an industrious
Antiquary, collecteth out of the Records of the Church of Ely, that (after the
resignation of Ralph de Holbeach) William de Whitlesey Archdeacon of
Huntington, 1340. was admitted third Master of Peter-House in Cambridge. Yet
has he left more signal Testimony of his affection to Oxford, which he freed
Antiquit. Brit. page 254.
from the jurisdiction of the Bishop of Lincoln, allowing the Scholars leave
to choose their own Chancellor.

He was Kinsman to Simon Islip Archbishop of Canterbury, who made him Vicar
General, Dean of the Arches, and successively he was preferred Bishop of
Rochester, Worcester, London, Archbishop of Canterbury. An excellent Scholar,
an eloquent Preacher, and his last Sermon most remarkable to the Convocation on
this Text, Veritas John 8. 2.
liberabit vos, The truth shall make you free. It seems by the story, that in
his Sermon he had a (...) reflection on the privileges of the Clergy, as
exempted by preaching the truth from payment of Taxes, save with their own free
consent. But all would not serve their turn, for in the contemporary Parliament
the Clergy unwillingly-willing granted a yearly Tenth to supply the pressing
occasions of King Edward the Third. This William died Anno Dom. 1375.

Since the Reformation.
FRANCIS WHITE was born at St. Neots in this County, (and not in Lancashire as
I and others have been By Master Holmes his Secretary, being himself deceived
without intent to deceive.
misinformed) witness the Admission book of CaiusColledge and the Testimony
of his brothers Mr. White, Druggist in Lumbardstreet.
son still alive. The Father to this Francis was a Minister and had 5 sons who
were Divines and two of them most eminent in their generation. Of these, this
Francis was bred in Caius-Colledge, on the same Token, That when he was Bishop
of Ely (and came to consecrate the Chapel of Peter-House) he received an
Entertainment at that College, where with a short speech he encouraged the
young students to ply their books by his own Example, who from a poor Scholar
in that house by Gods blessing on his Industry, was brought to that preferment.

By the Lord Gray of Grobie he was presented to Broughton Ashby in
Leicestershire, and thence (why should a Candle be put under a bushel?) he was
brought to be Lecturer of St. Paul's in London, and Parson of St. Peter's in
Cornhil; whence he was successively preferred, first Deane, then Bishop of
Carlisle, after Bishop of Norwich, and at last of Ely.

He had several solemn Disputations with Popish Priests and Jesuits (Father
Fisher and others) and came off with such good success, that he reduced many
seduced Romanists to our Church. He often chose Daniel Featly D. D. his
assistant in such disputes; so that I may call this Prelate and his Doctor,
Jonathan and his Armor-bearer (being confident that the Doctor, if alive,
would not be displeased with the comparison as any disparagement unto him)
jointly victorious over the Romish Philistines. He died Anno. 163* leaving some
of his learned works to Posterity.

Writers.
The Candid Reader is here requested to forgive and amend what in them is of
casual transposition.

HENRY SALTRY was born in this J. Bale and J. Pitz. De script. Brit.
County, and became a Cistertian Monk in the Monastery of Saltry, then newly
founded by Simon Saint Liz, Earl of Huntington. He was also instructed by one
Florentian an Irish Bishop. He wrote a profitable book for his own Religion in
the maintenance of Purgatory, which made him esteemed in that superstitious
age. He flourished Anno Dom. 1140.

GREGORY of HUNTINGTON, so called from the place of his Nativity, was bred a
Benedictine Monk in Ramsey, Where he became Pitz. De script. Brit. Cent. 4
Number. 22.
Prior or Vice-Abbot, a place which he deserved, being one of the most Learned
men of that age for his great skill in Languages.

For he was through-paced in three Tongues, Latin, Greek (as appears by his
many Comments on those Grammarians) and Hebrew, which last he learned by his
constant conversing with the Jews in England.

But now the fatal time did approach, wherein the Jews (full loath I assure
you) must leave the Land, and many precious books behind them. Our Gregory
partly by love, partly by the Kings power (both together will go far in driving
a bargain) purchased many of those rarities to dispose them in his Convent of
Ramsey; which as it exceeded other English Monasteries for a Library, so for
Vide infra Jo. Young in the Writers since the Reformation.
Hebrew books that Monastery exceeded it self. After this Gregory had been
Prior of Ramsey no fewer then 38 Pitz. de Ang. scrip. in Anno 1255.
years, flourishing under King Henry the Third. He died in the Reign of K.
Edward the First about 1280.

HUGH of Saint N^OTS was born in that well known Market Town, bred a Carmelite
in Hitching in Hartfordshire. Hence he went to study in Cambridge, where for
his worth, the Degree of Doctorship was by the University Bale de script. Brit.
Cent 5. Number. 28.
gratis, (quare whither without paying of Fees, or keeping of Acts) conferred
upon him. To him Bale, (though that be the best Bale which has the least of
Bale, and most of Leland therein) gives this Testimony, that living in the
Egyptian Darkness, he sought after the light of Truth, adding that he was
Piscis in Palude nihil trahens de Sapore Palustri, a Fish in the ^enns, drawing
nothing of the mud thereof, which is a rarity indeed. Many his Sermons; and he
wrotea Comment on Saint Luke. He died 1340. and was buried at Hitching.

WILLIAM RAMSEY was born in this County famous for the richest Benedictines
Abbey in England, yet here he would not stay but went to Crowland, where he
prospered so well that he became Abbot thereof. He was a Bale Cent. 3. Numb. 9.
Natural Poet, and therefore no wonder, if faults be found in the feet of his
verses. For it is given to thorough-pacedNaggs, that amble naturally, to trip
much whilst artificial pacers go surest on foot. He wrote the life of St.
Guthlake, St. Neots. St. Edmond. the King, etc. all in verse.

But that which may seem a wonder indeed is this, that being a Poet, he paid
the vast debts of others, even forty thousand Pittz. de script. Britt. Anno
1180.
Mark for the engagement of his Covent, and all within the compass of eighteen
Months, wherein he was Abbot of Crowland. But it renders it the more
credible, because it was done by the assistance of King Henry the Second, who
to expiate the blood of Becket was contented to be melted into Coin, and was
prodigiously bountiful to some Churches. Our William died 1180.

HENRY of HUNTINGTON I. Bale de scrip. Britt. Cent. 2. Number. 92. and Pitz. in
Anno, 1148
Son to one Nicholas, where born, unknown, was first a Canon of the Church of
Lincoln, where he became acquainted with one Albine of Angiers born in France,
but Fellow-Canon with him of the same Church. This Albine he afterward in his
writings modestly owned for his Master, having gained much learning from him.

He was afterward Chaplain to Alexander that Great Bishop of Lincoln,
(Magnificent unto Madness) who made him Archdeacon of Huntington, whence he
took his D^nomination. A Town which has received more Honor from him than
ever it can return to him, seeing Huntington had never been mentioned in the
mouths, nor passed under the Pens of so many foreigners, but for the worthy
History of the Saxon Kings, written by this Henry. Let me add, that considering
the sottishness of Superstition in the age, he lived in, he is less smoohted
therewith, than any of his contemporaries, and being a secular Priest does now
and then abate the pride of Monastical pretended perfection. He flourished
under King Stephen in the year of our Lord, 1248. and is probably conjectured
to die about the year 1260.

ROGER of St. IVES was born at that noted Town of this County, being omitted by
Bale but remembered by Anno 1420.
Pits (though seldom sounding when the other is silent) for his activity
against the Lollards, and Sir John Old-Castle, against whom he wrote a book,
flourishing in the year 1420.

Since the Reformation.
JOHN YOUNG was a Monk in Ramsey Abbey at the dissolution thereof. Now by the
AMP.
same proportion that a penny saved is a penny gained, the preserver of books
is a Mate for the Compiler of them. Learned Leland looks on this ^ong, as a
Benefactor to posterity in that he saved many Hebrew books of the Noble Library
of Ramsey.

Say not such preserving was purloyning, because those books belonged to the
King seeing no conscience need to scruple such a nicety: Books (though so
precious that nothing was worth them) being in that juncture of time counted
worth nothing. Never such a Massacre of good Authors, some few only escaping
to bring tidings of the Destruction of the rest.

Seeing this Young is inserted by De script. Britt, Cent. 9. Number. 9.
Bale, and omitted by Pits, I collect him to savor of the Reformation. As for
such who confound him with John Young, many years after Master of Pembrook-Hall,
they are confuted by the different dates assigned unto them, this being his
Senior 30 years, as flourishing, Anno Dom. 1520.

JOHN WHITE, brother to Francis White Bishop of Ely, was born at Saint Neots in
this County, bred in Caius College in Cambridge, wherein he commenced Master
of Arts. He did not continue long in the University, but the University
continued long in him; so that he may be said to have carried Cambridge with
him into Lancashire, (so hard and constant in his study) when he was presented
Vicar of Eccles therein. Afterward Sir John Crofts a Suffolk Knight, being
informed of his abilities and pitying his remote living on no plentiful
Benefice, called him into the South, and was the occasion that King James took
cognizance of his worth, making him his Chaplain in Ordinary. It was now but
the third month of his attendance at Court, when he sickned at London in
Lumbard-street, dyed and was buried in the Church of S. Mary So I am informed
by his son Mr. White a Druggist, living in ^bard-street.
Woolnoth 1615. without any other Monuments, save what his learned works have
left to posterity, which all whohave either learning, piety, or Ingenuity, do,
yea must most highly commend.

Sir ROBERT COTTON Knight and Baronet son to John Cotton Esquire was born at
Cunnington in this County descended by the Bruces from the blood Royal of
Scotland. He was bred in Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge where when a youth; He
discovered his inclination to the study of Antiquity (they must Spring early
who would sprout high in that knowledge) and afterward attained to such
eminency, that sure I am he had no Superior if any his equal in the skill
thereof.

But that which rendered him deservedly to the praise of present and future
times, yea the wonder of our own and foreign Nations, was his collection of
his Library in Westminster, equally famous for

1. Rarity, having so many Manuscript Originals, or else copies so exactly
Transcribed, that, Reader, I must confess he must have more skill then I have
to distinguish them. 2. Variety, He that beholds their number, would admire
they should be rare, and he that considers their rarity will more admire at
their number. 3. Method, Some Libraries are labyrinths, not for the multitude,
but confusion of Volumes, where a stranger seeking for a book may quickly loose
himself, whereas these are so exactly methodized (under the heads of the twelve
Roman Emperors) that it is harder for one to miss then to hit any Author he
desires.
But what adds a luster to all the rest is the favorable access thereunto,
for such as bring any competency of skill with them, and leave thankfulness
behind them. Some Antiquaries are so jealous of their books, as if every hand
which touches wo^ld ravish them, whereas here no such suspicion of ingenious
persons. And here give me leave to register my self amongst the meanest of
those who through the favor of Sir Thomas Cotton (inheriting as well the
courtesy as estate of his Father Sir Robert) have had admittance into that
worthy treasury.

Yea, most true it is what one says, That the grandest Antiquaries have here
fetched their materials.

-- Weavers funeral Monuments in the Preface.
Omnis ab illo
Et Camdene tua, and Seldeni gloria crevit,
Camden to him, to him does Seldom owe,
Their Glory, what they got from him did grow.
I have heard that there was a design driven on in the Popes Conclave after the
death of Sir Robert, to compass this Library to be added to that in Rome,
which if so, what a Vatican had there been within the Vatican, by the accession
thereof. But blessed be God the Project did miscarry to the honor of our
Nation, and advantage of the Protestant Religion.

For therein are contained many privaties of Princes, and transactions of
State, insomuch that I have been informed, that the Fountains have been fain to
fetch water from the stream; and the Secretaries of State, and Clerks of the
Council, glad from hence to borrow back again many Originals, which being lost
by casualty or negligence of Officers, have here been recovered and preserved
He was a man of a public spirit, it being his principal endeavor in all
Parliaments (wherein he served so often) That the prerogative and privilege
might run in their due channel, and in truth he did cleave the pin betwixt the
Sovereign and the Subject. He was wont to say, That he himself had the least
share in himself, whilst his Country and Friends had the greatest interest in
him. He died at his house in Westminster, May the 6. Anno Domini, 1631. in the
61. year of his Age, though one may truly say, his age was adequate to the
continuance of the ^reation, such was his exact skill in all antiquity. By
Elizabeth daughter and co-heire of William Brocas Esquire, he had only one
son, Sir Thomas now living, who by Margaret daughter to the Lord William Howard
(Grandchild to Thomas Duke of Norfolk has one son John Cotton Esquire, and
two daughters Lucie and Francis. The Opera posthuma of this worthy Knight, are
lately set forth in one Volume to the great profit of posterity.

STEPHEN MARSHALL was born at God-Manchester in this County, and bred a
Batchellour of Arts in Emanuel College in Cambridge. Thence he went very early
a Reaper in Gods Harvest, yet not before he had well sharpened his Sickle for
that service. He became Minister at Finchfield in Essex, and after many years
discontinuance, came up to Cambridge to take the degree of Batchelour of
Divinity, where he performed his exercise with general applause.

In the late long lasting Parliament, no man was more gracious with the
principal Members thereof. He was their Trumpet, by whom they sounded their
solemn Fasts, preaching more public Sermons on that occasion, then any four
of his Function. In their Sickness he was their Confessor in their Assembly
their Counselor, in their Treaties their Chaplain, in their Disputations
their Champion.

He was of so supple a soul that he brake not a joint, yea, sprained not a
Sinew in all the alteration of times; and his friends put all on the account,
not of his unconstancy, but prudence, who in his own practice (as they
conceive) Reconciled the various Lections of Saint Paul's Romans 12. 11
precept, serving the Lord, and the Times. (...)


And although some severely censure him for deserting his Principles, yet he is
said on his deathbed to have given full ^tisfaction to such who formerly
suspected his sincerity to the Presbyterian Discipline, dying Anno Dom. 1655.
He was solemnly buried in the ^bbey at Westminster.

Exi^-Romish-Writers.
RICHARD BROUGHTON was born at Great In the preface of his Church History.
Steuckley in this County, bred at Rhemes in France, where he received the
Order of Priesthood, and was sent over into England for the propagation of his
party. Here he gave so signal testimony and fidelity to the cause, that he was
(before many others) preferred. Pits de Script. Aug. page 815.
Assistant to the English Archpriest.

He wrote many books, and is most esteemed by those of his own Religion, for
his English Ecclesiastical History from the first planting of the Gospel, to
the coming in of the Saxons. But in plain truth, there is little milk, no
cream and almost all whey therein, being farced with Legendary stuff, taken
from Authors, some of condemned, most of suspected credit. If by the Levitical
Deuteronomy. 23. 2.
Law, a bastard should not enter into the congregation of the Lord (understand
it, to bear Office therein) to the tenth generation: it is pity, that
adulterated Authors being an illegitimate offspring should be admitted to
bear rule in Church History. This Broughton was living in the latter end of the
Reign of King James.

Benefactors to the Public.
AMBROSE Son to John Nicholas was born at Needenworth in this County, whence he
went to London and was bound apprentice to a Salter, thriving so well in his
Trade that Anno 1576. he became Lord Mayor of London. He founded Twelve Alms
houses in Mungwel-street in that City, indowing them with Competent maintenance.

Sir WOLSTAN (Son to Thomas Dixie) was born at Catworth in this County, *
Reckoned by Mr. Stow in his Survey of London.
bred a Skinner in London whereof he became Lord Mayor Anno 1585. He was a man
made up of deeds of Charity the particulars whereof are too long to recite. He
gave 600. pound to Emanuel College in Cambridge to the founding of a
Fellowship; Erected a Free School at Bosworth in Leicestershire and Endowed it;
where his family flourish at this day in a worshipful Estate.

RICHARD FISH^OURN was born in the Town of Huntington; cut out of no mean
Quarry, being a Gentleman by his Extraction. Leaving a Court life (as more
pleasant then profitable) He became servant to Sir Raptist Hicks, afterward
Viscount Camden, and by Gods blessing on his industry attained a great Estate;
whereof he gave two thousand pounds for the buying out of Impropriations in the
Northern parts, and settling a preaching Ministry where most want *thereof, he
bequeathed as much to the Company of Mercers, whereof he was free, and the same
sum to Huntington the place of his Nativity, with One thousand marks to
Christ-Church Hospital. The whole sum of his benefactions amounted to ten
thousand seven hundred pounds and upwards, briefly summed up in his Funeral
Sermon (commonly called Corona Charitatis) preached by Master Nathaniel Shute,
wherein (to use his Expression) He supped up many things with a very short
breath, contracting his Deeds of Charity to avoid tediousness.

Nor must it be forgotten how this Gentleman lying on his deathbed, when (men
are presumed to speak with unmasked consciences) did profess that to his
knowledge he had got no part of his goods unjustly. No man of his Quality won
more Love in health, Prayers in sickness, and Lamentation at his Funeral;
dying a single man, and buried in Mercers Chapel, May the 10. 1625.

Memorable Persons.
Sir OLIVER CROMWELL Knight, son of Sir Henry Cromwell, Knight of
Hinching-brooke in this County, is Remarkable to Posterity on a fourfold
account. First, For his hospitality and prodigious entertainment of King James
and his Court. Secondly, for his upright dealing in bargain and sale with all
chapmen, so that no man, whosoever purchased Land of him, was put to charge of
three pence to make good his Title; Yet he sold excellent penniworths, insomuch
that Sir John Leamon (once Lord Mayor of London) who bought the fair Manor of
Warboise in this County of him, affirmed; That it was the cheapest Land that
ever he bought, and yet the dearest that ever Sir Oliver Cromwell sold.
Thirdly, for his Loyalty, always beholding the Usurpation and Tyranny of his
Nephew, God-Son, and NAMESAKE with Hatred and Contempt. Lastly, for his
Vivacity, who survived to be the oldest Gentleman in England, who was a Knight;
Though not the oldest Knight who was a Gentleman; seeing Sir George Dalston,
younger in years (yet still alive,) was Knighted some days before him. Sir
Oliver died, Anno Dom. 1654.

The Names of the Gentry of this County, returned by the Commissioners, in the
Twelfth year of King Henry the Sixth.
William Bishop of Lincoln, Commissioners. John de Tiptofte, Chivaler, Roger
Hunt, Knights for the Shire. William Waton. Knights for the Shire.

Abbatis de Ramsey Abbatis de Sautrey Prioris de Huntington Prioris de S. Neoto
Prioris de Stonle Archidiaconi Eliensis Rectoris de Somerham Prebendaii,
Ecclesiae Lincolniens. Domini de Leighton, Rectoris Ecclesiae de Bluntesham
Vicarii Ecclesiae de Gurmecest. Vicarii Ecclesiae de S. Neoto Rect. Ecclesiae
de Ripped. Abbatis Nicholai Stivecle Militis Roberti Stonham armigeri Everardi
Digby armigeri Radulphi Stivecle armigeri Thomae Devyll armigeri Thomae
Nesenham armigeri Henrici Hethe. Johannis Bayons armigeri Rogeri Lowthe Edwardi
Parker Walteri Taillard Iohannis Eyr Iohannis Bekeswell Willielmi Castle
Willielmi Waldesheefe Thomae Freman Ioannis Donold Walteri Mayll Roberti
Boteler de Alyngton Roberti Boteler de Hilton Iohannis Kirkeby Iohannis Sankyn
Roberti Langton Reginaldi Rokesden Iohannis Pulter Roberti Wene Iohannis
Sampson de Somersh Thomae Clerevax Radulphi Pakynton VVillielmi Est Richardi
Est Roberti Creweker VVillielmi Master Iohannis Morys VVillielmi Druell de
VVeresle Radulphi Ioce Iohannis Devyll de Chescerton Iohannis Cokerham Richardi
B^singham I. Cokeyn Parker de Kimbolton Richardi Burgham Richardi Parker de
Bukden Thomae Alcumbury VVillielmi Boteler de VVeresle Will. Iudde d^ Sancto
Ivone VVillielmi VVassingle VVillielmi VVardale VVillielmi Colles Laurentii
Merton Thomae Judde Willielmi Boteler de Ramsey Thomae Barboure de Eadem Thomae
Read Thomae Irlle Willielmi Holland Williel. Smith de Alcumbury Williel.
Hayward de Buckworth Richardi Boton Iohannis Cross senioris Edmundi Fairstede
Willielmi Erythe Willi. Skinner de Brampton Willielmi West Thomae Daniel
Willielmi Daniel Iohannis Harbor Thomae Parker de S. Neoto Edm. Faillour de
Kymbolton Thomae Bowelas Willielmi ^eete Willielmi Talers Thomae Aungevin
Walteri Godegamen Iohannis Cage Johannis Manypeny Johannis Copgray clerici
Willielmi Arneburgh Henrici Attehill Johannis Charwalton Edmundi Ulfe Willielmi
Hare Johannis Dare Willielmi Sturdivale Richard Brigge Mich. Carleton Ballivi
ejusde^ Ville Huntington Georgei Giddyng Iohannis Chikson Iohannis Pecke Thome
Charwalton Iohannis Abbotesle
I meet with this uncomfortable passage in Mr. Speeds (or rather in Sir Robert
Cottons) description of this Shire.

Thus as this City, so the old families have been here with time out worn, few
only (of the many former) now remaining, whose Sirnames before the Reign of
the last Henry were in this Shire of any eminency. Let others render a reason,
why the ancient families in this County (more in proportion then else where)
are so decayed. This seems a probable cause why many new ones are seated
herein, because Huntington-shire being generally Abby-land, (as is aforesaid)
after the Dissolution many new purchasers planted themselves therein.

Sheriffs of this Shire alone.
Names Place Arms K. CHARLES 12 Tho. Cotton Bar. Cu^nington Azure an Eagle
displaid Arg. 13 Ioh. Hewet. Bar. Waresly S. a Cheveron Counter-Battellee
between 3 Owls, Argent. 14 Tho. Lake* Knight Stoughton * S. a Bend betwixt 6
Cross Cros^ets fitchie Arg. 15 Will. Armyn ar. Orton Erm. a Salt. engrailed G.
on a chief of the 2. a Lion Passant, Or. 16 Will. Leman VVarbois Az. a Fess
betwixt 3 Dolphins. Ar. 17 Rich. Stone mil. Stuckly Arg. 3. Cinque foils S. a
Chief Az.

Cambridge-shire and this County may pass for the Emblem of Man and Wife who
have long lived lovingly together, till at last upon some small disgust they
part Bed and Board and live asunder: Even from the time of King Henry the
Second, these two * Camdens Brit. in Cambridge-shire,
shires were united under one Sheriff, (as Originally they had one Earl of the
Royal blood of Scotland) Till in the Twelfth of King Charles, (on what Mutual
distaste I know not, they were divided.

But the best part of the Emblem is still behind: As such separated persons
do on second thoughts some times return together again, as most for their
Comfort, Convenience, Credit and Conscience; so these two Counties (after six
years Division) have been reunited under the same Sheriff, and so continue to
this day.

The Farewell.
Much of this Counties profit depends on the Northern road crossing the body
thereof from God Mondchester to Wainsforde-Bridge. A Road which in the winter
is the ready way, leading not only to trouble but Danger; Insomuch that here it
coms to pass, (what war caused in the days of Judges 5. 6.
Shamgar) The high ways are un employed and Travelers walk through by-ways,
to the present prejudice and future undoing of all ancient Stages. And indeed
though STIF-CLAY (commonly called Stukley) be the name but of one or two
Villages in the midst, yet their Nature is extensive all over the County,
consisting of a deep Clay, giving much annoyance to Passengers May a mean man's
motion be heard? Let the repayring of bad places in that High way, (which is
now the Parish,) be made the County Charge, whereby the burden will become the
less (born by more backs) and the benefit the more, when the ways thereby
shall effectually be mended and maintained.

KENT, In the Saxon Heptarchie was an entire Kingdom by it self, an honor
which no other sole County attained unto. It has the Thames on the North, the
Sea on the East and South, Sussex and Surrey on the West. From East to West it
expatiateth it self into fifty three miles: But from North to South expandeth
not above twenty six miles. It differs not more from other Shires then from
it self, such the variety thereof. In some parts of it; Health and Wealth are
at many miles distance, which in other parts are reconciled to live under the
same Roof; I mean abide in one place together. Nor is the wonder great, if
places differ so much which lie in this Shire far asunder, when I have Hartlibs
Leg. page 170.
read, that there is a farm within a mile of Graves-End, where the cattle
always drinking at one common Pond in the Yard; if they graze on one side of
the House, the butter is yellow, sweet and good; but if on the other, white,
sowrish, and naught. Yet needs there no Oedipus to unriddle the same, seeing
one side lies on the chalk, and has much Tre-foile; the other on the Gravel
abounding only with Couch-grass.

A considerable part of this County is called the VVealde, that is, a
VVood-land ground, the Inhabitants whereof are called the VVealdish-man. And
here, Reader, I humbly submita small Criticisme of mine to thy censure. I read
in M. In his Chron. page 845. parag. 30.
Speed in VVyats Rebellion how Sir Henry Isley and the two Knevets conducted
five hundred Welsh men into Rochester. I much admired how so many
Cambro-Britans should straggle into Kent, the rather because that Rising was
peculiar to that County alone; since I conceive these Welsh men should be
Wealdisk-men, viz. such who had their habitation in the woodie side of this
shire.

However, the goodness of the soil generally may be guessed from the greatness
of the Kentish breed, where both the Cattle and the Poultry are allowed the
largest of the land, A Giant-Ox fed in Rumney-Marsh was some 6 years since to
be seen in London, so high, that one of ordinary stature could hardly reach to
the top of his back.

Here let me observe a slip of the penn in Industrious Master Speed. The Air,
says he, of Kent is both wholesome and temperate (which is confessed most
true, but mark what follows) as seated nearest to the Equinoctial, and
farthest from the Northern Pole. But let his own general Map be appealed to as
judge, being therein both true and unpartial, and it will appear that some part
of Devonshire lies South of Kent well nigh a whole Degree, or threescore
miles. Thus we see other men's, other men see our mistakes; so necessary is
mutual Candor and Charity, because he who forgivet h to day may have need to be
forgiven to morrow. And yet I deny not but that Kent of all English Counties is
nearest to France, not because Southern-most, but because the Sea interposed is
there the Narrowest.

Natural Commodities.
Cherries.
These were fetched out of Flanders, and first planted in this County by King
Henry the Eighth, in whose time they spread into thirty two pa^rishes; and were
sold at great rates. I have Hartlibs Legacy page 15.
read that one of the Orchards of this primitive plantation consisting but of
thirty acres produced fruit of one year sold for one thousand pounds; plenty
it seems of Cherries in that garden, meeting with a scarcity of them in all
other places.

No English fruit is Dearer then those at first, Cheaper at last, pleasanter at
all times; nor is it less wholesome then delicious. And it is much that of so
many feeding so freely on them, so few are found to surfeit. Their several
sorts do ripen so successively that they continue in season well nigh a
quarter of a year. It is incredible how many Cherries one Tree in this County
did bear in a plentiful year. I mean not how many pound (being the fruit of
other trees) have been weighed thereon (the Common fallacy of the word bear
amongst the Country folk) but simply how many did naturally grow thereupon.

We leave the wholsomness of this fruit both for Food and Physic to be praised
by others, having hitherto not met with any discommending it. As for the
outlandish Proverb, He that eats Cherries with Noblemen, shall have his eyes
spurted out with the stones, It fixes no fault in the Fruit, the Expression
being merely Metaphorical, wherein the folly of such is taxed, who associate
themselves equal in expense with others in higher dignity and estate till they
be loosers at last, and well laughed at for their pains.

Saint-Foine.
SAINT-FOINE or Holy-hay; Superstition may seem in the name, but I assure you
there is nothing but good husbandry in the sowing thereof, as being found to be
a great Fertilizer of Barren-ground; It is otherwise called Polygala, which I
may English much Milk, as causing the Cattle to give abundance thereof. Some
call it the small clover Grass, and it prospers best in the worst ground.

It was first fetched out of France from about Paris, and since is sown in
diverse places in England, but especially in Cobham-Park in this County, where
it thriveth extraordinary well on dry chalky banks where nothing else will
grow. If it prospers not equally in other dry places, it is justly to be
imputed to some error in the managing thereof, as that the ground was not well
prepared or made fine enough, that the seed was too sparing, or else old and
decayed, that cattle cropped it the first year, etc. It will last but seven
years, by which time the native grass of England will prevail over this
Foreigner, if it be not sown again.

Trouts.
We have treated of this Fish before, In Bark-shire.
and confess this repetition had been a breach of the Fundamental Laws,
premised to this Book, were it not also an addition; Kent affording Trouts at a
Town called Forditch nigh Canterbury, differing from all others in many
considerables.

1. Greatness, many of them being in bigness near to a Salmon. 2. Color,
cutting white (as others do red) when best in season. 3. Cunning, only one of
By Sir George Hastings, Mr. Waltham in his complete Angler page 94.
them being ever caught with an Angle; whereas other Trouts are easily tickled
into taking and fla^tered into their destruction. 4. Abode, remaining nine
months in the Sea, and three in the fresh water.
They observe their coming up thereinto almost to a day and the men of Forditch
observe them as exactly, whom they catch with nets, and other devices.

Weld or Would.
Know, Reader, that I borrow my Orthographie hereof (if it be so) from the
Dyers themselves. This is a little seed sown in this County some forty years
since (when first it was brought into England) with Barley, the growth whereof
it does not hinder in any degree. For, when the barley is mowed down in
Harvest, then this Weld or Would first peeps out of the Earth, where it grows,
till the May following when it is gathered; And thus Husbandmen with one
sowing reap two Crops: yet so as it takes up their ground for two years.

The use hereof is for the dying of the best Yellow. It has some times been so
low as at four pounds a Load, (which contains fifteen hundred weight) and
sometimes so dear that it was worth fifteen pounds, betwixt which prices it has
its constant motion; and now is in the Equator betwixt both, worth seven
pounds ten shillings. It was first sown in this County and since in Northfolk
and in other places.

Madder.
This is very useful for Dyers, for making of Redds and Violets. It is a Weed
whose root only is useful for dying, (whilst the leaves only of Woade are
serviceable for that purpose) and there are three kinds thereof.

1. Crop-Madder worth betwixt 4. and 5. l. the hundred. 1. Umber-Owe betwixt 3.
and 4. l. 3. Pipe or Fat-Madder about 1. l. 10. s.

Some two years since this was sown by Sir Nicholas Crispe at Debtford, and I
hope will have good success; first because it grows in Zeland in the same (if
not a more Northern) Latitude. Secondly, because wild-Madder grows here in
abundance; and why may not Tame Madder if Cicurated by Art. Lastly because as
good as any grew some thirty years since at Barn-Elms in Surrey, though it quit
not Cost through some Error in the first Planter thereof, which now we hope
will be rectified.

Flax.
I am informed by such who should know, that no County in England sends better
or more to London. Yet does not our whole Land afford the tenth part of what is
spent therein: so that we are fain to fetch it from Flanders, France, yea as
far as Egypt it self. It may seem strange, that our Soil, kindly for that
seed, the use whereof and profit thereby so great, yet so little care is taken
for the planting thereof, which well husbanded would find linen for the rich,
and living for the poor. Many would never be indicted Spinsters, were they
Spinsters indeed, nor come to so public and shameful punishments, if painfully
employed in that Vocation.

When a Spider is found upon our clothes, we use to say, some money is coming
toward us. The Moral is this, such who imitate the industry of that
contemptible creature ( which takes hold with her hands, and is in Kings Prove.
30. 28.
Palaces) may by Gods blessing weave themselves into wealth and procure a
plentiful estate.

Manufactures.
Though clothing (whereof we have spoken before) be diffused through many
Shires of England, yet is it as vigorously applied here as in any other place,
and Kentish cloth at the present keeps up the credit thereof as high as ever
before.

Thread.
I place this the last, because the least of Manufactures, Thread being counted
a thing so inconsiderable: Abraham said to the King Genesis 14. 23.
of Sodom, that he would take nothing from a Thread to a Shoe latchet; That is,
nothing at all. It seems this Hebrew Proverb surrounded the Universe, beginning
at a Thread, a contemptible thing, and after the incircling of all things more
precious, ended where it begun at a Shoe-latchet as mean as Thread in valuation.

But though one Thread be little worth, many together prove useful and
profitable, and some thousand of pounds are sent yearly over out of England to
buy that Commodity: My Hartlib in his Legacy, page 32.
Author tells me, that Thread is only made (I understand him out of London)
at Maidstone in this County, where well nigh a hundred hands are employed about
it. I believe a thousand might be occupied in the same work, and many idle
women who now only spin Street-thread (going tatling about with tales,) might
procure, if set at work a comfortable livelihood thereby.

The Buildings.
The Cathedral of Rotchester is low and little proportional to the Revenews
thereof. Yet has it, (though no Magnificence) a venerable aspect of Antiquity
therein The King has (besides other) three fair Palaces in this Shire,
Greenwich with a pleasant medlay prospect of City, Country, Water and Land,
Eltham not altogether so wholesome, and Otford, which Archbishop Warham did so
enlarge and adorn with Building, that Cranmer his Successor was in some sort
forced to Camden Brit. in Kent.
exchange it with King Henry the Eighth on no gainful conditions. To lesson the
Clergy to content themselves with Decency without sumptuousness, lest it awaken
Envy, and in fine they prove loosers thereby.

COBHAM, the House of the late Duke of Richmond, and..... the fair Mansion of
Sir Edward Hales Baronet (adequate to his large Estate) when finished, will
carry away the credit from all the buildings in this County.

The Wonders.
A mavelous accident happened August 4. 1585. in the Hamlet of Villare
Cantianum, page 136.
Mottingham (pertaining to Eltham in this County) in a Field, which belongs
to Sir Percival Heart. Betimes in the morning the ground began to sink, so much
that three great Elm-trees were suddenly swallowed into the Pit; the tops
falling downward into the hole: and before ten of the Clock they were so
overwhelmed, that no part of them might be discerned, the Concave being
suddenly filled with water. The compass of the hole was about 80. yards, and
so profound, that a sounding-line of fifty Fathoms could hardly find or feel
any bottom. Ten yards distance from that place, there was another piece of
ground sunk in like manner, near the Highway, and so nigh a dwellinghouse,
that the Inhabitants were greatly terrified therewith.

The Navy Royal.
It may be justly accounted a WONDER of Art; and know the Ships are properly
here handled, because the most, best and biggest of them have their Birth
(built at Woolwich) and Winter abode nigh Chattam in the River of Medway in
this County. Indeed before the Reign of Q. Elizabeth the ships Royal were so
few, they deserved not the name of a Fleet, when our Kings hired Vessels from
Hamborough, Lubeck, yea, Genoa it self. But such who in stead of their own
servants use chair folk in their houses, shall find their work worse done, and
yet pay dearer for it.

Queen ELIZABETH, sensible of this mischief, erected a Navy-Royal (continued
and increased by her successors) of the best ships Europe ever beheld. Indeed
much is in the matter, the excellency of our English-Oake; more in the making,
the cunning of our shipwrights; most in the manning, the courage of our Seamen,
and yet all to Gods blessing who so often has crowned them with success.

If that man who has versatile ingenium be thereby much advantaged for the
working of his own fortune; Our ships, so active to turn and wind at pleasure,
must needs be more useful than the Spanish* Gallions, whose unwieldiness fixes
them almost in one posture, and makes them the stedier marks for their
enemies. As for Flemish bottoms, though they are finer built, yet as the
slender Barbe is not so fit to charge with, they are found not so useful in
fight. The great SOVEREIGN built at Dulwich, a Leigership for State is the
greatest Ship our Island ever saw. But great Medals are made for some grand
solemnity, whilst lesser Coin are more current and passable in payment.

I am credibly informed, that that Mystery of Ship-Wrights for some descents
has been preserved successively in Families, of whom the Petts about Chattam
are of singular regard; Good success have they with their skill, and carefully
keep so precious a pearl, lest otherwise amongst many Friends some Foes attain
unto it. It is no Monopoly which concealeth that from common enemies, the
concealing whereof, is for the common good. May this Mystery of ship-making in
England never be lost till this floting world be arrived at its own Haven, the
End and Dissolution thereof.

I know what will be objected by Foreigners, to take off the luster of our
Navy-Royal, viz. That (though the Model of our great Ships primitively were our
own yet, we fetched the first Mold and Pattern of our Frigots from the
Dunkerks, when in the days of the Duke of Bukcingham (then Admiral) we took
some Frigots from them, two of which still survive in his Majesty's Navy by the
name of the Providence, and Expedition.

All this is confessed, and honest men, may lawfully learn something from
thieves for their own better defense. But it is added, we have Improved our
Patterns, and the Transscript does at this day exceed the Original: witness
some of the swiftest Dunkirks and Ostenders, whose wings in a fair flight have
failed them, overtaken by our Frigots, and they still remain the Monuments
thereof in our Navy.

Not to disgrace our Neigbouring Nations, but vindicate our selves, in these
nine following particulars, The Navy-Royal exceeds all Kingdoms and States in
Europe.

1. Swift sailing.
Which will appear by a comparative Induction of all other Nations.

First for the Portugal his Carvils and Caracts whereof few now remain (the
charges of maintaining them far exceeding the profit they bring in) they were
the veriest Dr ones on the Sea, the rather because formerly their Seeling was
damned up with a certain kind of mortar to dead the shot, a fashion now by them
disused.

The Frenchh (ow dexterous soever in Land-battles) are Left Handed in
Sea Fights, whose best ships are of Dutch Building.

The Dutch build their ships so sloaty and boyant they have little hold in the
Water in comparison of ours, which keep the better Wind and so out sail them.

The Spanish-Pride has infected their ships with Loftiness which makes them
but the fairer marks to our shot.

Besides the wind has so much power of them, in bad weather, so that it
drives them two Leagues for one of ours to the Lee-ward, which is very
dangerous upon a Leeshore.

Indeed the Turkish Frigots especially some 36 of Algier formed and built much
near the English mode, and manned by Renegadoes, many of them English, being
already too nimble heeld for the Dutch, may hereafter prove mischievous to us,
if not seasonably prevented.

2. Strength.
I confine this only to the Timber whereof they are made, our English Oak being
the best in the World. True it is (to our shame and sorrow be it written and
read) the Dutch of late have built them some ships of English Oak, which
(through the Negligence or Covetousness of some Great ones) was bought here and
transported hence. But the best is, that as Bishop Latimer once said to one who
had preached his Sermon, that he had gotten his fidle-stick but not his rosin
so the Hollanders with our Timber did not buy also our Art of ship-Building.

Now the ships of other Countries are generally made of Fir and other such
slight wood whereby it comes to pass, that, as in the Battle in the Forest of
Ephraim (wherein Absolon was slain,) the Wood devoured more People that Day
then the Sword, the splinters 2 Samuel 18. 8.
of so brittle Timber, kill more than the shot in a Sea fight.

3. Comelyness.
Our Friggots are built so neat and snug made long and low: so that (as the
Make of some Women's Bodies hansomely concealeth their pregnancy or Great Belly)
their Contrivance hides their bigness without suspicion, the Enemy not
expecting thirty, when (to his cost) he has found sixty Pieces of Ordnance in
them. Our Masts stand generally very upright whereas those of the Spaniards
hang over their Poop as if they were ready to drop by the Board, their Deckes
are unequal, having many Risings and fallings, whereas ours are even. Their
ports some higher in a Tire then others, ours drawn upon an Equal Line. Their
Cables bad, (besides subject to rot in these Countries) because bought at the
second hand, whereas we make our best markets, fetching our Cordage from the
Fountain thereof.

4. Force.
Besides the strength inherent in the structure (where of before) this is
accessory consisting in the Weight and number of their Guns, Those of the

Sixth 10. 12. 14. 16. 18. 20. Fifth 22. 26. 28. 30. Fourth Rates carrying 38.
40. 44. 48. 50. Ordinance mounted. Third 50. 54. 56. 60. Second 60. 64. 70.

The Royal-Soveraign being one of the first rates when she is fitted for the
Seas, carries one hundred and four Pieces of Ordnance mounted.

5. Seamen.
Courageous and skilful. For the first we remember the Proverb of Solomon; Let
an other praise thee, not thy own mouth, a stranger, not thy own lips. The
Spaniards with sad shrug and Dutch with a sorrowful shaking of their heads give
a tacit assent hereunto.

Skillful. Indeed Navigation is much improved especially since Saint Paul's
time, insomuch, that, when a man goes bunglingly about any work in a ship, I
have heard our Englishmen say; such a man is one of Saint Paul's Mariners. For
though no doubt they were as ingenious as any in that Age to decline a Tempest,
yet modern experience affords fairer fences against foul Weather.

6. Advantageous Weapons.
Besides Guns of all sorts and sizes from the Pistol to whole Cannon, they have
Round-double-head-Bur-spike-Crow-Bar-Case-Chain shot. I join them together
because (though different Instruments of death) they all concur in doing
Execution. If they be VVind-ward of a ship, they have Arrows made to shoot out
of a bow with fire-workes at the end, which if striking unto the Enemies Sails
will stick there I fire them, and the ship if they lie board and board they
throw hand-Granadoes with stinck-pots into the ship which make so noisome a
smell that the Enemy is forced to thrust their heads out of the Ports for air.

7. Provision.
1. Wholesome, our English Beef and Pork keeping sweet and sound longer then any
Flesh of other Countries, even twenty six months to the East and West Indies.

2. More plentiful, than any Prince or State in all Europe allows. The
Seamen having two Beef, two Pork, and three Fish-dayes; besides every Seaman
is always well stored with Hooks to catch Fish, with which our Seas do abound.
Insomuch that many times six will diet on four men's allowance, and so save the
rest therewith to buy fresh meat, when landing, where it may be procured. I
speak not this that hereafter their allowance from the King should be the
less, but that their Loyalty to him, and thankfulness to God may be the more.

8. Accommodation.
Every one of his Majesty's Ships and Friggot-Officers have a distinct Cabin
for themselves, for which the Dutch, French and Portugals do envy them, who for
the most partlye sub dio under ship-decks.

9. Government.
Few offenses comparatively to other Fleets are therein committed, and fewer
escape punishment. The Offender, if the fault be small, is tried by a
Court-Marshal, consisting of the Officers of the Ship, if great, by a Council
of War, wherein only Commanders and the Judge Advocate. If any sleep in their
watches it is pain of death. After 8 a clock none save the Captain, Lieutenant,
and Master, may presume to burn a candle. No smoking of Tobacco (save for the
privileged aforesaid) at any time, but in one particular place of the ship,
and that over a Tub of water. Preaching they have lately had twice aweek,
Praying twice aday: but my Intelligencer could never hear, that the Lords
Supper for so^e years was administered aboard of any ship, an Omission which I
hope hereafter will be amended.

But never did this Navy appear more triumphant, then when in May last it
brought over our Gracious Sovereign being almost becalmed (such the fear of the
winds to offend with over-roughness,) the prognostic of his Majesty's
peaceable Reign.

The Farwell.
Being to tak our leave of these our wooden walls, first I wish that they may
conquer with their Mast and Sails without their Gunnes, that their very
appearnace may fright their foes into Submission.

But if in point of Honor or safety they be necessitated to engage, may they
always keep the Wind of the Enemy, that their shot may fly with the greater
force, and that the smoke of their Powder pursuing the F^e may drive him to
fire at hazard. May their Gunner be in all places of the ship, to see where he
can make a shot with the best advantage, their Carpenter and his Crew be
always in the Hold presently to drive in a wooden plug (whereas a shot comes
betwixt wind and water) and to clap a board with Tar and Camels Hair upon it
till the dispute be over. Their Surgeon and his assistants be in the same
place (out of danger of shot) to dress the wounded. Their Captain to be in the
uppermost, the Lieuetenant in every part of the Ship to encourage the Seamen.
The Chaplain at his Devotions, to importune Heaven for success and encouraging
all his by his good Council, if Time will permit.

Medicinal Waters.
TUNBRIDGE - WATER.]

It is usual for Providence when intending a Benefit to Mankind to send some
signal chance on the Errand to bring the first Tidings thereof; most visible in
the News of Medicinal-Waters.

The first Discovery of this Water (though variously reported) is believed from
a Footman to a Dutch Lord, who passed this way, and drinking thereof found it
in taste very like to that at the Spaw in Germany.

Indeed, there is a great Symbolizing betwixt them in many concurrences, and I
believe it is as Sovereign as the other, save that it is true of Things as of
Persons, Major e longinquo Reverentia. Surely it runs thorough some
Iron-Mine, because so good for Splenitick distempers. But I leave the full
Relation to such, who having experimentally found the Virtue of it can set
their Seal of Probatum est unto the commendation thereof.

Proverbs.
A KENTISH Yeoman]

It passes for a plain Man of a plentiful estate, Yeomen in this County,
bearing away the Bell for wealth from all of their rank in England.

Yeomen contracted for Yemen-mein are so called, says a great Verstegan in his
restoring of decayed Intelligence.
Antiquary from Gemein, (G in the beginning is usually turned into Y as Gate
into Yate) which signifies Common in old Dutch, so that Yeoman is a Commoner,
one undignified with any title of Gentility. A condition of People almost
peculiar to England, seeing in France, Italy and Spain, (like a lame Dye which
has no points betwixt Duce and Cinque) no medium between Gentlemen and
Pesants. Whereas amongst us the Yeomen, Ingenui, or Legales Homines, are in
effect the Basis of all the Nation, formerly most mounting the subsidyBook in
Peace with their purses, and the Muster Roll in war with their Persons. Kent as
we have said affords the richest in this kind whence the Rhyme.

A Knight of CALES, and a Gentleman of WALES, and a Lord of the North
Country.
A Yeoman of KENT with his yearly Rent will buy them out all Three.
CALES Knights were made in that voyage by Robert Earl of Essex anno Dom. 1596
to the number os sixty, whereof (though many of great birth and estate) some
were of low fortunes, and therefore Queen Elizabeth was half offended with the
Earl for making Knighthood so common. Of the numerousness of Welsh Gentlemen
we shall have cause to speak hereafter. Northern Lairds are such who in
Scotland hold Lands in chief of the King, whereof some have no great Revenue,
so that a Kentish Yeoman (by the help of an Hyperbole) may countervail, etc.

Yet such Yeomen refuse to have the Title of Master put upon them, contenting
themselves without any addition of Gentility, and this minds me of a Passage
in my memory. One immoderately boasted, that there was not one of his name in
all England, but that he was a Gentleman, to whom one in the company retnrned,
I am sorry, Sir, you have never a good man of your name.

Sure I am in Kent there is many a hospital Yeoman of great ability, who though
no Gentleman by Descent and Title, is one by his Means and state, let me also
add by his courteous carriage, though constantly called but Goodman, to which
Name he desires to answer in all respects.

A Man of KENT.]

This may relate either to the Liberty, or to the courage of this County-men.
Liberty, the tenure of Villanage (so frequent elsewhere) being here utterly
unknown, and the bodies of all Kentish persons being of free condition. In so
much that it is holden Fitz. Herbert 15. in Title of Villanage.
sufficient for one to avoid the Objection of bondage, to say that his Father
was born in Kent. Now seeing servi non sunt viri quia non sui sur is, A
bondman is no man, because not his own man; the Kentish for their Freedom
have achieved to themselves the name of Men.

Others refer it to their courage, which from the time of King Canutus has
purchased unto them the precedence of marching in our English Armies to lead
the Van.

JOANNES Sarisbur. De egregiae Thus cited, for hitherto I have not read the
Original by Mr. Seldom in his Notes on Poliolbion, page 303.
Curial. 6* cap. 16. Ob egregiae virtutis meritum, quod potenter and patenter
exercuit, Cantia nostra primae Cohortis honorem, and primos congressus Hostium,
usque in omnibus diem in omnibus praeliis obtinet. For the de^ert of their
worthy valor, which they so powerfully and publicly expressed. Our Kent
obtains even unto this day the honor of the first Regiment, and first
assaulting the Enemy in all Battails.

Our Author lived in the Reign of Henry the Second, and whether Kentish-men
retain this Privilege unto this day (wherein many things are turned
upside-down, and then no wonder it also forward and backward) is to me unknown.

Neither in KENT nor Christendom.]

This seems a very insolent expression, and as unequal a division. Surely the
first Anthour thereof had small skill in even distribution to measure an Inch
against an Ell; yea to weigh a grain against a pound. But know Reader, that
this home-Proverb is calculated only for the elevation of our own Country, and
ought to be restrained to English-Christendome, whereof Kent was first
converted to the Faith. So then Kent and Christendom, (parallel to Rome and
Italy) is as much as the First cut, and all the Loaf besides. I know there
passes a report, that Henry the fourth King of France, mustering his Soldiers
at the siege of a City, found more Kentish-men therein, than Forraigners of all
Christendom beside, which (being but seventy years since) is by some made the
Original of this Proverb, which was more ancient in use; and therefore I adhere
to the former Interpretation, always provided,

-- Si quid novisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti; Si non; his utere mecum.
If thou know better, it to me impart;
If not, use these of mine with all my heart.
For mine own part I write nothing but animo revocandi, ready to retract it
when better evidence shall be brought unto me. Nor will I oppose such who
understand it for Periphrasis of NOWHERE; Kent being the best place of
England, Christendom of the World.

KENTISH Long-TAILES.]

Let me premise, that those are much mistaken, who first found this Proverb on
a Miracle of Austin the Monk, which is thus reported. It happened in an English
Village where Saint Austin was preaching, that the Pagans therein did beat and
abuse both him and his associats, opprobriously tying Fish-tails to their
backside. In revenge whereof an impudent Author relates, Reader, you and I
must blush for him, who has not the modesty to blush for himself) how such
Appendants grew to the hind-parts of all that Hierome^ Porter in the Flowers of
the lives of the Saints, p. 515.
Generation. I say they are much mistaken, for the Scaene of this Lying Wonder
was not laid in any Part of Kent, but pretended many miles off, nigh Cerne in
Dorsetshire.

To come closer to the sense of this Proverb, I conceive it first of outlandish
extraction, and cast by forraigners as a note of disgrace on all the English,
though it chances to stick only on the Kentish at this Day. For when there
happened in Palestine a difference betwixt Robert brother of Saint Lewis King
of France and our William Longspee Earl of Salisbury, hear how the Frenchman
insulted over our nation.

MATTHEW PARIS. Anno Dom. 1250. page 790.
O timidorum caudatoru^ formidolositas! quam beatus, quam mundus praesens foret
exercitus, si a caudis purgaretur and caudatis. O the cowardliness of these
fearful Longtails! How happy, how clean would this our arm ie be, were it but
purged from tails and Long-tailes.

That the English were nicked by this speech appears by the reply of the Earl
of Salisbury following still the metaphor; The son of my father shall press
thither to day, whither you shall not dare to approach his horse tail.

Some will have the English so called from wearing a pouch or poake,) a bag to
carry their baggage in) behind their backs, whilst probably the proud
Monsieurs had their Lacquies for that purpose. In proof whereof they produce
ancient pictures of the English Drapery and Armory, wherein such conveyances
do appear. If so, it was neither sin nor shame for the common sort of people
to carry their own necessaries, and it matters not much whether the pocket be
made on either side, or wholly behind.

If any demand how this nickname (cut off from the rest of England) continues
still entaild on Kent? The best conjecture is, because that county lies
nearest to France, and the French are beheld as the firstfounders of this
aspersion. But if any will have the Kentish so called from drawing and dragging
boughs of trees behind them, which afterward they advanced above their heads
and so partly cozened partly threatened King William the Conqueror to continue
their ancient customs, I say, if any will impute it to this original, I will
not oppose.

KENTISH Gavel* Kind]

It is a custom in this County, whereby the lands are divided equally among
all the sons, and in default of them, amongst the daughters; that is, Give all
kind, kind signifying a Child in the low Dutch. This practice, as it appears
in Tacitus, was derived to our Saxons from the ancient Germans

Teutonibus priscis patrios succedit in agros
Mascula stirps omnis, ne foret ulla potens.
Amongst the old Teuch lest one o'retop his breed,
To his Sire's land does every son succeed.
It appears that in the eighteenth year of King Henry the sixth, there were
not above forty persons in Kent, but all their land was held in this tenure.
But on the petition of diverse Gentlemen this custom was altered by Act of
Parliament in the 31. of King Henry the eighth, and Kentish-lands for the most
part reduced to an uniformitie with the rest in England.

DOVER-COURT, All speakers and no hearers]

There is a Village in Essex not far from Harwich called Dover-Court formerly
famous for a Rood burnt in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. But I take it
here to be taken for some Tumultuous Court kept at Dover, the Consluence of
many Blustering Seamen, who are not easily ordered into awful attention. The
Proverb is applied to such irregular conferences, wherein the People are all
Tongue and no Ears, parallel to the Latin Proverb, Cyclopum Respublica, being
thus charactered that therein (...).

The Father to the Bough]

The Son to the Plough.]

That is, though the Father be executed for his Offense the Son shall
nevertheless succeed to his Inheritance.

In this County if a W. Lambert his perambulation of Kent. page 550. and 551.
Tenant in Fee-simple of Lands in Gavel-kind commit Felony, and suffer the
judgment of Death therefore, the Prince shall have all his Chattels for a
forfeiture. But as touching the Land, he shall neither have the Escheat of it,
though it be immediately holden of himself, nor the Day, year and Wast, if it
be holden of any other; for in that case the Heir, notwithstanding the offense
of his Ancestor, shall enter immediately and enjoy the lands after the same
Customs and services by which they were holden before, In assurance whereof
the former Proverb is become Current in this County. But this Rule holds in
case of Felony and of Murder only, and not in case of Treason, nor
(peradventure) in Piracy, and other Felonies made by Statutes of later times,
because the custom cannot take hold of that which then was not in being. It
holds moreover, in case where the offender is justiced by Order of Law, and
not where he withdraws himself after the fault committed, and will not abide
his lawful trial.

TENTERDENS Steeple is the Cause of the Breac^ in Goodwyn Sands.]

It is used Commonly in derision of such, who being demanded to render a reason
of some inportant Accident assign Non causam pro causa, or a Ridiculous and
improbable cause thereof, and hereon a story depends.

When the Vicinage in Kent met to consult about the Inundation of Goodwyn sands
and what might be the Cause thereof, an Old man imputed it to the building of
Tenterden Steeple in this County; for those sands (said he) were firm Lands
before that steeple was built which ever since were overflown with Seawater.
Hereupon all heartily laughed at his unlogical Reason, making that the effect
in Nature which was only the consequent in time; not flowing from but following
after the building of that steeple.

But One story is good till another is heard. Though this be all whereon this
Proverb is G. Sandys on on his notes of the 13. of Ovids Metamorph. p. 282.
generally grounded I met since with a * supplement thereunto. It is this. Time
out of mind money was constantly collected out of this County to fence the East
bancks thereof against the eruption of the Seas. And such Sums were deposited
in the hands of the Bishop of Rochester. But because the Sea had been very
quiet for many years, without any encroachings; The Bishop commuted that money
to the building of a Steeple and endowing of a Church in Tenterden. By this
diversion of the Collection for the maintenance of the Banks, the Sea
afterward brake in upon Goodwyn Sands. And now the old man had told a rational
tale, had he found but the due favor to finish it. And thus sometimes, that is
causelessly accounted ignorance in the speaker which is nothing but impatience
in the Auditors unwilling to attend the end of the discourse.

A Jack of Dover]

I find the first mention of this Proverb in our English Ennius, Chaucer, in
his Proeme to the Cook.

And many a Jack of Dover he had sold
Which had been two times hot and two times cold.
This is no Fallacy but good Policy in an household, to lengthen out the
Provision thereof, and though less toothsome may be wholesome enough: But what
is no false Logic in a Family is false Ethics in an Inn, or Cooks-shop, to
make the abused Guest to pay after the rate of New and Fresh for meat at the
second and third hand.

Parallel to this is the Latin Proverb crambe bis cocta, crambe being a kind
of Colewort, which (with vinegar) being raw is good, boiled better, twice
boiled noisome to the Palate and nauceous to the stomach.

Both Proverbs are appliable to such who grate the ears of their Auditors with
ungrateful Tautologies, of what is worthless in it selse, tolerable as once
uttered in the notion of Novelty; but abominable if repeated for the
tediousness thereof.

Princes.
JOHN of ELTHAM Second Son to King Edward the Second by Isabell his Queen was
born at Eltham in this County. He was afterward created Earl of Cornwall. A
spritely Gentleman, and who would have given greater evidence of abilities, if
not prevented by death in the prime of his age. He dyed in Scotland in the
tenth year of the reign of King Edward the Third.

Be it observed that hitherto the younger Sons to our English Kings, were never
advanced Higher than Earls. Thus Richard Second son to King John never had
higher English Honor then the Earl of Cornwel, though at the same time he
were King of the Romans: But this John of Eltham was the last Son of an English
King, who dyed a plain Earl, the Title of Duke coming a^erwards into fashion.
Hence it was that all the younger Sons of Kings, were from this time forwards
Created Dukes, except expiring in their infancy.

BRIDGET of ELTHAM fourth Daughter of K Edward the fourth and Elizabeth his Q.
was born at Eltham in this County. Observing her three eldest Sisters not over
happy in their husbands, she resolved to wed a Monastical life and (no whit
ambitious) of the place of an Abbess, became an ordinary votary in the Nunnery
at Dartford in this County, founded by K. Edward the 3. The time of her death
is uncertain, but this is certain, that her dissolution happened some competent
time before the dissolution of that Nunnerie.

EDMUND youngest Son to King Henry the 7. and Elizabeth his Queen. (bearing *
Vincent in his Discovery of Brook his errors, p. 481.
the name of his Grandfather Edmund of Haddam) was born at Greenwich in this
County 1495. He was by his Father created Duke of Somerset, and he dyed before
he was full five years of age at Bishops Hatfield in Hartford* shire, which
then was the Nursery for the Kings Children: Little notice generally is taken
of this Prince, and no wonder, for.

Who only act short parts in Infant age,
Are soon forgot, they e're came on the Stage.
He died Anno Dom. 1500. in the 15. year of his Fathers Reign, and lies buried
(without any Monument) in Westminster.

HENRY the Eighth, second son of King Henry the Seventh, was born at Greenwich.
A Prince who some praise to the Skies, others depresse to the Pit, whilst the
third (and truer) sort embrace a middle way betwixt both.

Extreme. Mean. Extreme. Some carry him up as the Paragon of Princes. The great
advancer of Gods Glory and true Religion, and the most Magnificent that ever
sat on the Throne. Master Fox in his Acts and Monuments, is sometimes very
superlative in his Commendation; And so are most Protestant Authors who wrote
under his Reign. Polidor Virgil has an Expression of him to this Effect,
Princeps in quo aequali quasi temperamento magnae inerantVirtutes ac non minora
vitia. A Prince in whom great Virtues and no less Vices, were in a manner
equally contemperated. Sir Walter Rawleigh in his Preface to his great History,
whose words may better be read there than Transcribed thence, makes him the
truest Map of Tyranny. Insomuch, that King James (who could not abide that any
under a King, should speak against a King) was much offended thereat. And those
words worst became the writer so much advanced by the daughter of the said K.
Henry.

For mine own part, I humbly conceive, God effected more by his work, as the
Instrument, than he was directed by Gods Word as the Principal. Indeed he was a
Man of an Uncomptrolable spirit, carrying a MANDAMUs in his mouth, sufficiently
sealed when he put his hand to his Hilt. He awed all into Obedience, which some
impute to his skilfulnesse to Rule, others ascribe to his Subjects ignorance to
resist.

Let one pleasant passage (for Recreation) have its Pass amongst much serious
Matter. A company of little boys were by their Schoolmaster not many years
since appointed to act the Play of King Henry the Eighth, and one who had no
presence but (an absence rather) as of a whyning voice, puiling spirit,
Consumptionish body was appointed to personate K. Henry himself, only because
he had the richest Clothes and his parents the best people of the parish: but
when he had spoke his speech rather like a Mouse then a Man, one of his fellow
Actors told him; If you speak not HOH with a better spirit your Parliament will
not grant you a penny of Money.

But it is vain to Glean in the stubble seeing the Lord Herbert has so largely
wrote the life of this King that nothing of moment can be added thereunto. He
dyed January 28, 1546.

MARY eldest Daughter to King Henry the Eighth and Q. Katharine of Spain was
born at Greenwich the 18. of February 1518. She did partake of both her parents
in her person and properties, having from her Father a broad face, big voice,
and undaunted spirit; from her Mother a swarthy complexion, and a mind wholly
devoted to the Romish Religion. She attained the crown by complying with the
Gentry of Norfolk and Suffolk, promising them to continue Religion as
established by K. Edward the 6. after the breach of which promise she never
prospered. For first she lost the hearts of her subjects, then her hopes of a
Child, then the company (not to say affection) of her husband, then the City of
Calais, then her mirth, then her health, then her life, which ended on the. 17.
of November, 1558.

Queen ELIZABETH Second Daughter to King Henry the Eighth was born at
Greenwich: September. 7. 1533. She was Heir only to the eminences of her Father,
his Learning, Bounty, Courage and Success; Besides Grace and true goodness,
wherein she was Daughter to her Mother.

Her Learning appears in her two Latin speeches to the University, and a third
little better then Ex tempore to the Poland Ambassador. Her bounty was better
then her Fathers, less flowing from Humor, and more founded on Merit, and
ordered with Moderation; seeing that*s the best Liberality that so enricheth
the Receiver that it does not impoverish the Giver.

Her Courage was undaunted, never making her self so cheap to her Favorites,
but that she still valued her own Authority, whereof this an eminent instance;

A prime Officer with a White staff (whose name I purposely forbear) coming
into her presence, the Queen willed him to confer such a place now void on one
of her servants whom she commended unto him. Pleases your Highness, Madam,
says the Lord, The disposal thereof pertains to me by virtue of this white
staff conferred upon me. True, said the Queen; yet I never gave you your
office so absolutely, but I still reserved my self of the Quorum: But of the
Quarum, Madam, returned the Lord, presuming on the favor of her Highness.

Hereat the Queen in some passion snatching the staff out of his hand; you
shall acknowledge me, said She, of the Quorum Quarum Quorum before you have it
again. The Lord waited Stafflesse almost a day (which seemed ^o long unto him
as if the Sun stood still) before the same was reconferred upon him.

Her success was admirable, keeping the King of Spain at Arms. End all her
Reign. She was well skilled in the Queen-craft; and by her policy and
prosperity she was much beloved by her people insomuch that since it has been
said, That Queen Elizabeth might lawfully do that, which King James might not.
For although the Laws were equally the rule to them both, yet her popularity
sugared many bitter things, her subjects thanking her for taking those Taxes
which they refused to pay to her Successor. She died at Richmond March 24. Anno
Domini 1602.

MARY; Daughter to King James and Anne of Denmark his Queen, was born at Stow
his Chronicle, page 862.
Greenwich April 8. about eleven a clock at night, and soon after baptized with
greater state, than the memory of any then alive in England could recover. King
James was wont pleasantly to say, that he would not pray to the Virgin Mary,
but he would pray for the Virgin Mary; meaning his own Daughter. But it seems
his prayers prevailed not ( Divine Providence having otherwise determined it)
for her long life, who expired in her infancy, and lies buried at Westminster.

SOPHIA, youngest daughter to King James and Queen Anne, was born at Stow in
his Survey of London, (continued by How) p. 512.
Greenwich the 22. day of June 1606. and departed this life three days after.
This Royal Babe lies buried nigh Queen Elizabeth, in the North part of the
Chapel of King Henry the Seventh, represented sleeping in her Cradle,
wherewith vulgar eyes, especially of the Weaker sex, are more affected (as
level to their Cognizance, more capable of what is pretty, than what is
pompous)* than with all the magnificent Monuments in Westminster.

CHARLES eldest Son of King Charles and Q. Mary, was born at Greenwich Anno
1629. A fright of his Mother is generally reported to have accelerated, or
rather antedated his nativity. The Popish Priests belonging to the Queen stood
ready, watching to snatch the Royal Babe to their superstitious baptism; but
the tender care of King Charles did out* vigil their watchfullness, commanding
Doctor Web (His next Chaplain in attendance) to Christen it according to the
Church of England. This done, within few hours he expired, and lies buried at
Westminster.

Saints.
EALPHAGE born of good parentage, had his education during his youth in
Glocestershire, then he became a Monk at Glastenbury. But, that place not
sufficiently suiting the severity of his solitary soul, removing thence he
built himself a Hut at Bath, which small Cel in process of time (the longest
line proceeds from a little point at first) proved the beautiful Priory in
that place. Hence by Dunstan he was preferred Bishop of Winchester continuing
therein twenty two years; And at last became Bishop of Canterbury.

It happens that the cruel Danes seizing on that City put it under
Decimation. Start not, loyal reader, at the word, if in the late Tyranny of the
times thou thy self have been * Godwin in his Catalogue of Archbishops of
Canterbury.
against all right and reason Decimated in thy Purse, as now the poor Citizens
of Canterbury were in their Persons. For the Danes, under pretense of Tribute
detained,

Saved the tenth part of the Citizens alive amounting unto eight hundred and
four Destroyed the other nine parts, no fewer than seven thousand two hundred
and thirty six.

As for Archbishop Alphage, they demanded of him a greater sum, than he
could pay or procure, whose wealth consisted chie^y in his Piety, no current
Coin with the Pagan Danes; So that after seven months imprisonment they
barbarously murdered him near Greenwich about the year 1013.

His Corpse was first buried in Saint Paul's, and then removed by the command of
King Canutus to Canterbury. Impudent Monks have almost as much wronged his
memory, as the Danes did his Person, farcing his life with such abominable
lies, that thereby the very truth therein is rendered suspected.

AGELNOTH Son to Count Agelmar, was a Weaver Fun. Sermon. p. 301.
Calendred Saint in this County being Elected Archbishop of Canterbury from
being Dean over the Canons in that Convent.

This is the first time I find the Dignity of Decanus or Dean in England so
called from (...), Ten, having (it seems at the first) Inspection just over
that Number, though since * Cowel's Interp. in the word Dean.
an Heteroclite in England, as, either over fewer, but Six in Norwich, Bristol,
etc. or many more in other Cathedrals.

He was so pious in his Life, that he was commonly called the GOOD. And here
one may justly wonder, God having two Grand Epithets OPTIMUS and MAXIMUS most
give the former the go-by, and strive only for the latter, to be the Greatest,
though Greatness without Goodness is both Destructive to him that has it,
and Dangerous to all others about him.

Going to Rome to get his Pall from the Pope, by him he was courteously
entertained, and deserved his welcome, who gave him (says my Weaver ut prius.
Author) for the Arm of Saint Augustine Bishop of Hippo) one hundred Talents of
Silver, and one Talent of Gold, citing Bishop Godwin for his author; But indeed
that Bishop though reporting the hundred Talents of Silver, mentions not at
all that of Gold.

Perchance Mr. Weaver had lately read (still obversing his fancy) how 2 Chr.
36. 3.
Pharaoh K. of Egypt having taken away King Jehoahash, condemned the land in An
Hundred Talents of Silver, and A Talent of Gold; and to me it is a double
wonder; First, that this Archbishop would give; Secondly, that he could give,
living in a harraged Land, (wherein so much Misery and little Money) so vast a
sum.

However this minds me of a passage in Saint Augustine speaking of the
Relics of the deceased, Si tamen Martyrum, if so they be of Martyrs; and let
me choose the words of this Father on this Father, Si tamen Augustini, If this
were the arm of Saint Augustine and not of some other Ordinary (not to say
Infamous) person.

Well, were one as good a Mathematician, as He, who collected the Stature of
Hercules from the length of his Foot, it were easy to proportion the Price of
Saint Augustines whole body, from this valuation of his arm. And now having so
dearly bought it, let him dispose thereof as he pleases, and let no man grudge
if he gave it to Coventry rather than Canterbury.

He expended much in repairing (or rather renewing) of his Cathedral of
Canterbury lately destroyed by the Danes, assisted therein by the bounty of
King Canutus, who at the instance and by the advice of this Prelate, did many
worthy works. Our Agelnoth, after he had set 17. years in his See, died October
29. in the year 1038.

Martyrs.
WILLIAM WHITE was born in this Bale de script. Brit. page 564.
County, and entering into Orders, became a great maintainer of the Opinions of
Wicliffe. He was the first married Priest in England, since the Popes solemn
prohibition thereof. I find Johan his wife, commended for her modesty and
patience, and that she was Idem Ibidem.
conjux talidigna marito. Indeed she shared very deep in her husbands
sufferings, hardly coming off with her life at the last. For he, though leaving
his living (as unsafe to hold) still kept his calling, and preached about all
the Eastern parts of the Land. The same mouth which commanded the Disciples in
time of Peace, Luke 10. 7.
Go not from house to house, so to avoid the censure of Levity, advised them
also, when Matt. 10. 23.
ye are persecuted in one City fly to another, so to provide for their own
security. Such the constant practice of this W. White, who was as a Partridge
daily on the wing, removing from place to place. At last he was seized on at
Norwich, by William Alnwick the cruel Bishop thereof, and charged with 30
Articles, for which he was condemned and burnt at Norwich in September Fox Acts
and Monuments.
1428. He was the Protomartyr of all born in this County, and had not five
before him in all England, who suffered merely for Religion, without any
mixture of matter of State charged upon them.

As for MARIAN Martyrs, we meet with many in this County though not to be
charged on Cardinal Pool Archbishop of Canterbury further then his bare
permission thereof.

It is observed of Bears, that they love to kill their own Prey, and (except
forced by Famine) will not feed on what was dead before. Such a Bear was bloody
Bonner, who was all for the quick and not for the dead, whilst clean contrary
Cardinal Pool let the living alone, and vented his spleen only on the dead
(whom he could wrong, but not hurt) burning the bones of Martin Bucer and
Paulus Phagius at Cambridge. Such Martyrs therefore, as suffered in this Shire,
were either by the cruelty of Griffin Bishop of Rochester, or of Thornton
Suffragan of Dover.

Confessors.
SIMON FISH Esquire, was born in this J. Bale in his Book titled Scriptores
nostri temporis, page 102.
County, bred a Lawyer in Graies-Inn London. Here he acted that part in a
Tragedy, wherein the pride of Cardinal Wolsey was personated, and wherewith
that Prelate was so offended, that Fish was fain to fly, and live two years
beyond the Seas. There he made, and thence sent over into England, a small but
sharp Treatise, called The Supplication of Beggars, termed by Acts and
Monuments. p. 1014.
Master Fox a Libel, understand him a little Book; Otherwise prizing and
praising it for a Masterpiece of Wit-learning and Religion, discovering the
Superstition of that age. This by Queen Anna Bollen was presented to King Henry
the Eighth, who therewith was so highly affected, that he sent for the Author
home, and favored him in great proportion.

However, many nets were laid by the Popish party against him, especially by
Sir Thomas More his implacable Enemy, yet Fish had the happiness to escape the
hands of Men, and to fall into the hand of God more immediately, Dying of the
Plague, 1531. and lies buried at St. Dunstan in London.

Sir JAM. HALES was born, did live and was richly landed in this county, one of
the Justices of the Common Pleas, a man of most signal Integrity. When the rest
of the Judges (frighted at the frowns of the Duke of Northumberland) subscribed
the disinheriting of the Lady Mary, and Lady Elizabeth, he only refused, as
against both Law and Conscience.

Yet afterward in the first of Queen Mary he fell into the displeasure of
Bishop Gardener, (which like Juniper coals once kindled hardly quenched) for
urging the observation of some Laws of King Edward the Sixth. For this he was
imprisoned, hardly used, and so threatened by his Keeper, that he endeavored to
have killed himself, which being after let at liberty he afterward effected,
drowning himself in a small water near his house, fear and melancholy so much
prevailing upon him; Mr. Fox concludes the sad Poem of his final estate with
this Distich.

Cu^ nihil ipse vides, propria quin labe laboret,
Tu tua fac cures, caetera mitte Deo.
Seeing naught thou ^eest but faling in the best,
Mind thy own matters and leave God the rest.
We must look on his foul Deed with anger, and yet with pity on the doer
thereof, Frown on the one, and weep for the other. For seeing he had led a
right godly life, and had suffered so much on the account of his Conscience, I
hope that his station in this place, will not be cavilled at by any charitable
persons. He died Anno Dom. 1555.

Cardinals.
JOHN KEMP son to Thomas, Grandchild to Sir John Kemp Nephew to Sir Roger Kemp
both Knights, was born at Wie in this County, (where he built a fair College
for Seculars) bred also in Merton College in Oxford, successively Bishop of
Rochester, Chichester and London; afterward Archbishop of York and
Canterbury, Cardinal first by the Title of Saint Balbine, then of Saint Rufine
in Rome; all his preferments are comprehended in the old following Made by
Thomas Kemp his Kins-man Bishop of London.
verse.

Bis Primas, ter Praesul erat, ^is Cardine functus. He had another honor to
make up the Distich, being twice Lord Chancellor of England, so that I may add;

Et dixit Legem bis Cancellari us Anglis. Such are mistaken, who report him the
first raiser of his Family to a Knightly degree, which he found in that
Equipage, as is aforesaid, though he left it much improved in Estate by his
bounty, and some of his name and blood flourish in Kent at this day. He died a
very old man, March the 22. Anno 1453.

RICHARD CLIFFORD. His Nativity may bear some debate Herefordshire pretending
unto him. But because Robert Clifford was his Villare Gant. p. 24.
brother (in the first of King Henry the Fourth High Sheriff of this County,
and richly landed therein) I adjudge him a Cantian and assign Bobbing as the
most probable place of his birth. His worth preferred him Bishop of London
1407. and he was sent by King Henry the Fourth as his Ambassador to the
Council of Constance. I could hold my hand from ranking him under the Topic of
Cardinals, confident that no ingenious person would take exception thereat. For
first he was one in Merit and Desert. Secondly, in general Desire and
Designation. Thirdly, (though no actual Cardinal) he acted as a All collected
out of Godwin his Bishops of London.
Cardinal when joined to their Conclave to see fair play amongst them at the
choosing of a new Pope. Yea some mentioned him for the place, who (counting it
more credit to make, than be a Pope) first nominated Cardinal Columna, and he
clearly carried it by the name of Martin. During his abode at Constance he
preached a Latin Sermon before the Emperor and Pope. He answered his name de
clivo forti, or of the strong Rock indeed, viz. Lord be thou my strong Rock.
Ps. 31. 3.
David's; being a most pious person, returning home he lived in good esteem,
with Prince and People, until his death, which happened 1421. being buried nigh
the present Monument of Sr. Christopher Hatton.

Prelates.
RALPH of MAYDENSTAN. I presume this the ancient Orthography of Maydston (a
noted Town in this County) the rather, because I met with no other place in
England, offering in sound or syllables thereunto. An Tho. Wike in his chron.
of Osney.
Author gives him this short but thick commendation;

Vir magnae literaturae and in Theologia Nominatissimus. Insomuch that in the
Reign of King Henry the Third 1234. He was preferred Bishop of Hereford.

This Prelate bought of one Mount-hault a Nobleman, a fair house in, and the
Patronage of St. Mary Mount-hault (commonly, but corruptly called Mount-haw) in
London, leaving both to his successors in the Sea of Hereford. Know Reader,
that all English Bishops in that age had Palaces in London for their
convenience, wherein they resided and kept great Hospitality during their
attendance in Parliament.

Now, although the Schoolmen generally hold, that Episcopacy is Apex
consummatae Religionis, then which Nihil amplius, Nothing higher or holyer in
this life; and though many Friars have been preferred Bishops as a progressive
motion both in Dignity and Sanctity: Yet our Ralph was of a different judgment
herein. This made him in the year 1239. turn his Godwin in the Bishops of
Hereford.
Miter into a Coule, and become a Franciscan, first at Oxford, then at
Gloucester, where he died about the year 1244.

HENRY de WINGHAM (a well known Town in this County) was by K. Henry the Third,
preferred Chancellor both of England and Gascony, Dean both of Godwin in the
Bishop of London.
Totten-Hall (quaere where this place is) and Saint Martins, and twice
Ambassador into France.

It happened that one Ethelmar, wom-brother to King Henry the Third was then
Bishop of Winchester. A person who properly comes not under my pen; First, for
his Foreign nativity. Secondly, (so much as he was English) he was an UNWORTHY,
wanting Godwin in the bishops of Winchester.
Age, Ability, and Orders to qualify him in that place.

Hereupon the Monks of Winchester endeavoring to eject him chose Wingham a man
of Merit (and Might in the Court) to be their Bishop, which honor he wisely
refused, fearing to incur the Kings displeasure. It was not long before his
Modesty and Discretion were rewarded with a peaceable (in sted of that
litigious) Bishopric, when chosen to London 1259. But he enjoyed his See not
full two years dying July 13. 1261. And was buried in his own Cathedral.

HENRY of SANDWICH, Archdeacon of Oxford, was consecrated Bishop of London
1263. He took part with the seditious Barons against King Henry the Third, for
which he was deservedly So was also his Countreyman Benedict of Gravesend
Bishop of Lincoln, otherwise not to be remembered.
excommunicated by Othobon the Popes Legate. Going to Rome it cost him well
nigh an Apprenticeship of Patience, dancing attendance almost seven years
before he could gain his Absolution. Godwin in his Catalogue of the bishops of
London.
Which obtained, he returned home, and dying September 16. 1273. was buried in
his own Church of St. Paul's.

RICHARD of GRAVES-END Arch Deacon of Northampton was (after Fulk Lovel had
freely refused it) Consecrated [at Coventry] Bishop of London, Anno 1282. He
was the first Founder of a Covent of Carmelites at Maldon in Essex, and dying
at Fulham 1303. was buried in his own Cathedral.

SIMON MEPHAM was born at Mepham in this County. W. Lambert in his
perambulation of Kent.
He was bred in Merton-Golledge in Oxford; he was a good Scholar, as those
days went, chosen by the Monk of Cant. approved by King Edward the Third, and
consecrated by the command of the Pope, Archbishop of Cant. He is only Famous
for two things, his expensive suit with the Moncks of Canterbury, wherein at
last he got the better, though it cost seven hundred pounds in the Court of
Rome. Secondly, his magnificent Visitation in person of the Dioceses South of
Thames, till he was resisted by Grandison Bishop of Exeter. This aff^ont did
half break Mephams heart; and the Pope siding with the Bishop against him,
brake the other half thereof, hastening his death, which happened Anno Dommini,
1333.

HAYMO of HITHE was born therein, a small Town on the Seaside, Hithe in old
English signifying a Landing place, as Queen-Hithe, Garlick-Hithe, etc. in
London. He was made Bishop of Rochester in the Twelfth of King Edward the
Secondto whom he was Confessor. I believe him Owner of good temporal means;
First, because he made so much building on a mean Bishopric, erecting the
great Hall and fair Frontispice at his Palace in Halling, and repairing all the
rooms thereof, not forgeting the Town of his Nativity, where he erected and
endowed the Godwin in his Bishops of Rochester.
Hospital of Saint Bartholomew for ten poor people. Secondly, because in his
old age he lived on his own Estate, resigning his Bishopric, which the
charitable conceive done not out of Discontent but Defire of retirement to
compose himself the better for his Dissolution, which happened about the year
1355.

JOHN of SHEPEY, Prior of Rochester, succeeded Haymo aforesaid in the same See,
and for some time was Treasurer of England. His death happened Anno Domini 1360.

WILLIAM READ. I place him in this County with confidence, having clearly
conquered all suspicions to the contrary: First, because of his Name then
flourishing at Read in Villare Cantianum p. 321
Marden in this County: Secondly, because the Provost-place of WinghamColledge
therein was his first public preferment. To which I may add that he was bred
Fellow of Merton-Colledge (abounding with Cantians, since a Bishop in Kent, was
Founder thereof) and he merited much of that Foundation, not only building a
fair Library therein, but furnishing it with books, and Astronomical Tables of
his own making, which (they say) are still to be Godwin in the Bishops of
Chichester.
seen therein with his lively picture inserted.

In his reduced age he applied himself to Divinity, and by King Edward the
Third was preferred Bishop of Chichester. Retaining his Mathematical
Impressions he commendably expressed them in Architecture, erecting a Castle
Egregii operis, says my Baleus.
Author, at Amberley in Sussex. His death happened, Anno Dom. 1385.

THOMAS KEMP, brothers son to John Kemp Archbishop of Canterbury, was born of a
Knightly Family in this County, bred in Oxford, whereof he became Proctor Anno
1437. By Papal provision he was made Bishop of London, Consecrated by his Uncle
at York-House (now White Hall) and sat in his See Godwin in his Bishops of
London.
forty years from the Twenty eighth of Henry the Sixth, till the Fifth of
Henry the Seventh, so that he saw the wars between Lancaster and York begun,
continued, concluded; and the two Roses tied together in one Roy^l Posie. I
know not whether his benefactions were adequate to his long possessing of so
wealthy a place, finding him to have curiously arched and leaded the Divinity
Schools in Oxford, and built the Cross nigh the Church of St. Paul's as it
stood in our memories, but lately demolished, though guilty of no other
Superstition, save accommodating the Preacher and some about him with
convenient places. Me thinks, though Idle Crosses standing only for show were
published for offenders, this useful one, which did such service, might have
been spared: but all is Fish, which comes to the Net of Sacrilege. This Bishop
died, Anno Dom. 1489.

JAMES GOLDWELL was born at Great Chart in this County, bred in
AllSouls-Colledge in Oxford, promoted first to be Dean of Salisbury and
Secretary to King Edward the Fourth, and at last made Bishop of Norwich. He not
only repaired the Church at Great Chart where he was born, but also founded a
Weavers Fun. Mo^. p. 296.
Chapel on the Southside thereof, where his picture is in the East-window,
with his Rebus, [viz. a GoldenWell] in every Quarry of the same. He died, Anno
Dom. 1498.

THOMAS GOLDWELL was born at Goldwell in the Parish of Great Chart in this
County, where his Family had long flourished, till Villare Cantianum, p. 145.
lately alienated. He was by Queen Mary preferred Bishop of Saint David's, and
as a Volunteer quitted the Land in the First of Queen Elizabeth. Going to Rome
he made a deal of do to do just nothing; prevailing by much importunity with
the Pope to procure large Indulgencies for such who superstitiously were in
Pilgrimage to, and offered at the Well of Saint Winifrid in his Diocese. The
obscurity of his death denies us the exact date thereof.

Reader, I am sensible how imperfect my list is of the Bishops in this County:
The rather because I have heard from my worthy friend and excellent Historian
Mr. Fisher, Fellow of Merton-Col. that this his native shire of Kent had twelve
Bishops at one time, whilst I can hardly make up twelve Bishops at all times
before the Reformation. But my defects will be perfectly supplied by such who
shall Topographically treat of this subject in relation to this County alone.

Since the Reformation.
JOHN POYNET was born in this Bishop God win in his Bishops of Winchester. ^
J. Bale de Script. Brit. cent. 8. Numb. 62.
County; bred (say some) in Kings-Colledge in Cambridge. Sure I am he was none
of the Foundation therein, because not appearing in Master Hatcher his exact
Manuscript Catalogue. a Bale is rather to be believed herein, making him to be
brought up in Queens College in the same University.

But where ever he had his Education, he arrived at admirable Learning, being
an exact Grecian and most expert Mathematician. He presented King Henry the 8.
with a Horologium (which I might English Dial, Clock or watch, save that it is
epitheted Bishop Godwin, ut prius.
Sciotericum) observing the shadow of the Sun, and therein showing not only the
hours, but days of the Month, change of the Moon, ebbing and flowing of the
Sea, etc. I confess the modern mystery of Watch-making is much completed (men
never being more curious to divide, more careless to employ their time) but
surely this was accounted a masterpiece in that age.

His Sermons so indeared him to King Edward 6. that he preferred him (whilst as
yet scarce thirty six years of age) to the Bishopric of Rochester, then of
Winchester. But alas! these honors soon got were as soon lost, being forced to
fly into high Germany in the first of Queen Mary. Where before he was fully
forty, and before he had finished his Book begun against Thomas Martin in
defense of Ministers marriage, he died at Strasburg the 2. August 1556. And was
buried there with great Lamentation.

RICHARD FLETCHER was born in this So his near relation informed me.
County, Brother to Doctor Giles Fletcher the Civilian and Ambassador in
Russia, and bred in Bennet College in Cambridge. He was afterward Dean of
Peterborough at what time Mary Queen of Scots was beheaded at Fotheringhay, to
whom he made says my Author Gamdens Eliz. Anno 1589.
Verbosam Orationem a Wordy speech of her past, present and future condition,
wherein he took more pains that he received thanks from her who therein was
most concerned.

Hence he was preferred Bishop of Peterborough, and at last of London; my Idem
im Anno 1596.
Author says he was Presul Splendidus, and indeed he was of a comely presence
and Queen Elizabeth knew full well.

Gratior est pulcro veniens e corpore virtus
The Jewel virtue is more Graced
When in a proper person Cased.
Which made her always on an equality of Desert to reflect favorably on such
who were of Graceful countenance, and stature.

In one respect this Bishop may well be resembled to John Peckham Archbishop of
Canterbury, of whom I find this Character,

Bishop Godwyn in his Catalogue of the Arch-^. of Cant. and the life of J.
Pe^kham.
Quanquam gestu and incessu, saepeetiami n Sermon gloriosus videretur and
elatus; animo tamen fuit benignissimo and perquam comi. Although he seemed a
boaster, and puffed up both in gesture and ga^e, and sometimes in his speech
also: yet was he of a loving disposition and exceeding courteous.

Such a one was Bishop Fletcher, whose pride was rather on him, than in him, as
only gate and gesture-deep, not sinking to his heart, though causelessly
condemned for a proud man, as who was a good Hypocrite and far more humble than
he appeared.

He married a Lady of this County, Sir Richard Baker in his Ch^on.
who one commends for very virtuous, which i^ so, the more happy she in her
self, though unhappy that the world did not believe it. Sure I am, that Queen
Elizabeth (who hardly held the second matches of Bishops excusable) accounted
his marriage a trespass on his gravity, whereupon he fell into her deep
displeasure. Hereof this Bishop was sadly sensible, and seeking to lose his
sorrow in a mist of smoke, died of the Cambdens Eliz. in Anno 1596.
immoderate taking thereof, June the fifteenth, 1596.

BRIAN DUPPA, D. D. the worthy Bishop of Winchester was born at Lewsham in in
this County: staying for farther instructions, I am forced to defer his life
to our Additions.

Statesmen.
Sir EDWARD POYNINGS, Knight, was in martial performances inferior to none of
his age, and a Native of this County, as from the Catalogue of the Sheriffs
therein may be collected. We will insist only on his Irish Action, being
employed by King* Henry the seventh to conjure down the last walking Spirit of
the House of York, which haunted that King, I mean Perkin Warbeck.

Having ferreted him out of Ireland, he seriously set him self to reclaim that
barbarous Nation to civility, and in order thereunto passed an Act in
Parliament, whereby all the Statutes made in England before that time, were
enacted, established, and made of force in Ireland. He caused also another Law
to be made, that no Act should be propounded in any Parliament in Ireland, till
first it had been transmitted into England, approved there by the King, and
returned thence under his broad Seal.

Now though this Act seems prima facie, prejudicial to the liberty of the
Irish Subjects, yet was it made at the request of the Commons upon just and
important cause, being so sensible of the oppression, and Laws imposed by
private Lords, for their particular ends, that they rather referred themselves
to the Kings Justice, than to the merciless mercy of so many Masters.

Also to conform Ireland to England, he procured the passing of an Act; that
the Irish Barons should appear in Parliament in their Robes, which put a face
of Grandeur and State on their Convention. And indeed formalities are more than
Formalities in matters of this nature, essential to beget a veneration in
barbarous people, who carry much of their Brain in their Eyes.

He thriftily improved the Kings Revenues, and obtained a Subsidy of twenty six
shillings eight pence, payable yearly for five years, out of every six score
Acres manured. The worst was, the burden fell on their backs, whose Islands
were most industrious, whereby the Sovereign became not more wealthy, but the
Subjects more lazy, the mischief being as apparent as the remedy impossible.
Many more large Laws of his making found but narrow performance, viz. only
within the Pale. Nor was Henry the seventh (though in title) in tr^th Lord of
all Ireland, but by the favor of a Figure, and large Synechdeche, of a part
for the whole. These things thus ordered, Sir Edward was recalled in to
England, created a Baron, and dying in the beginning of King Henry the eight,
left a numerous natural, but no legitimate issue.

Sir ANTHONY St. LEDGER, is rationally reputed a Kentish man (though he had also
a Devonshire Relation) as will appear to such who peruse the Sheriffs of this
County. He was properly the first Viceroy of Ireland, seeing shadows cannot be
before their substance, and in his Deputy-ship Henry the eight (in the 33. year
of his reign) assumed the Title of King and Supreme Head of the Church of
Ireland.

To him all the Irish Nobility made their solemn submission, falling down at
his feet upon their knees, laying aside their Girdles, Skeines and Caps. This
was the fourth solemn submission of the Irish to the Kings of England, and most
true it is, such seeming submissions have been the bane of their serious
subjection. For out of the Pale our Kings had not power either to Punish or
Protect, where those Irish Lords (notwithstanding their Complemental Loyalty)
made their list the law to such whom they could overpower. He caused also
certain Ordinances of State to be made, not altogether agreeable with the Rules
of the Law of England, a satisfactory reason hereof, being given in the In the
Council Book of Ireland, in the 33 of King Hen. 8.
Preamble to them.

Quia nondum sic sapiunt leges and Jura, ut secundum ea jam immediate, vivere
and regi possint. Because the [ Irish] as yet do not so savor the Laws [of
England] as immediately to live after, and be ruled by them.

Thus the greatest Statesmen must sometimes say, by your leave to such as are
under them, not acting always according to their own ability, but others
capacity.

He seized all the Abbey Lands in Ireland for the Kings use, a flower of the
Crown which alone had made a Posey, if continued thereunto. But alas the
Revenues of Abbey Lands are as (...) as their buildings, nothing more than the
rubbish thereof remaining in the Kings Exchequer. He made a Law, that no
Children should be admitted to Church livings, which imports the frequency of
that abuse in former times. He persuaded O Neile, O Brian, etc. to go over into
England to surrender their lands into the Kings hands, promising they should
receive them again from him by Letters Patents, with the Addition of Earls,
which was done accordingly. At his desire the King conferred on them Houses
nigh Dublin, that residing there, they might suck in Civility with the Court
air. These things thus settled he returned into England, and died (as I take it)
in the reign of King Edward the sixth.

Sir HENRY SIDNRY, was son to Sir William Sidney of Pensherst in this County,
who by his own worth, was advanced into the favor of Queen Elizabeth (never a
whit the less for marrying Mary Dudley, sister to Robert Earl of Leicester;)
he was by her made Knight of the Garter, Lord President of Wales, and for
eleven years ( off and on) Deputy of Ireland.

Now, though generally the Irish are querelous of their Deputies (what Patient
for the present will praise his Surgeon, who soundly searches his sore?)
yet Sir Henry left a good memory, and the monuments of a good Governor behind
him.

1. He Sir John Davis in his discovery of Ireland. page 251.
made Annaly a Territory in Loynsteresse by the Sept of Offerralles, one entire
Shire by it self, called the County of Longford; he likewise divided the
Province of ^onaght into six Counties. 2. In a Parliament held the eleventh of
Elizabeth, he abolished the pretended and usurped Captain-ships, and all
extortions incident thereunto. 3. He caused an Act to pass, whereby the Lord
Deputy was authorized to accept the surrenders of the Irish Se^gniories, and to
re-grant estates unto them, to hold of the Crown by English Tenures and
Services. 4. Because the inferior sort of the Irish were poor, and not
Ames^able by Law, he provided, that five of the best persons of every Sept,
should bring in all the persons of their surname, to be justified by the Law.
5. A Law was made, that for the civil education of the youth, there should be
one Free School at least, in every Diocese. 6. To acquaint the people of
Mounster and Conaght with the English Government again (disused amongst them
for two hundred years) he instituted two Presidency Courts in those two
Provinces. 7. To augment the Revenues of the Crown, he resumed and vested
therein (by the power of the same Parliament) more than half the Province of
Ulster, upon the attainder of Shane O Neale. 8. He raised Customs upon the
principal Commodities of the Kingdom, and reformed the abuses of the Exchequer
by many good instructions from England. 9. He established the Composition of
the Pale, in lieu of Purveyance and Sesse of Soldiers.
It must not be forgotten, that he caused the Statutes of Ireland unto his own
time, to be printed, and so (says my J. Wareus de script. Hibern. page 136.
Author) ex umbra in solemn eduxit, he brought them out of the shadow into the
sunshine. Whereas formerly they were only in Manuscript; a sad case, that men
should be obliged to the observation of those Laws, scarce ever seen by one in
an hundred subjected thereunto.

Being to leave Ireland, Anno 1578. and now ready to go up into his Ship, he
took his Camb. Eliz Anno 1578.
leave thereof with the words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 114. 1.
When Israel came out of Egypt, and Jacob from a strange people; rejoicing in
heart, that, he came with a clear conscience from that dangerous employment. He
died at Worcester, May the fifth, 1586. and his Corpse being brought to
Pensherst, were there solemnly interred amongst his Ancestors. I will close his
Life with this Encomium which I find in a Worthy Doctor Powel in his Hist. of
(...). Epist. to the Reader.
Author: His disposition was rather to seek after the Antiquities, and the
Weal-Publick of those Countries which he governed, than to obtain lands and
revenues within the same; for I know not one foot of Land that he had, either
in Wales or Ireland.

Sir PHILIP SIDNEY. Reader, I am resolved not to part him from his Father, such
the Sympathy betwixt them, living and dying both within the compass of the same
year. Otherwise, this Knight in relation to my Book, may be termed an
Ubiquitary, and appear amongst Statesmen, Soldiers, Lawyers, Writers, yea
Princes themselves, being (though not elected) in election to be King of
Poland, Fragment. regal. in his Charact.
which place he declined, preferring rather to be a Subject to Queen Elizabeth,
than a Sovereign beyond the Seas.

He was born at Pensherst in this County, son to Sir Henry Sidney (of whom
before) and Sisters Son to Robert Earl of Leicester, bred in Christ's Church in
Oxford. Such his appetite to Learning, that he could never be fed fast enough
therewith; and so quick and strong his digestion, that he soon turned it into
wholesome nourishment, and thrived healthfully thereon.

His homebred abilities travel perfected with foreign accomplishments, and a
sweet Nature set a gloss upon both. He was so essential to the English Court,
that it seemed maimed without his company, being a complete Master of Matter
and Language, as his Arcadia does evidence.

I confess I have heard some of modern pretended Wits cavil thereat, merely
because they made it not themselves: such who say, that his Book, is the
occasion that many precious hours are otherwise spent no better, must
acknowledge it also the cause, that many idle hours are otherwise spent no
worse, than in reading thereof.

At last, leaving the Court, he followed the Camp, being made Governor of
Flushing, under his Uncle Earl of Leicester. But the Walls of that City (though
high and strong) could not confine the activity of his mind, which must into
the Field, and before Zutphen was unfortunately slain with a shot, in a small
skirmish, which we may sadly term a great battle, considering our heavy loss
therein. His Corpse being brought over into England, was buried in the Quire of
St. Paul's with general lamentation.

Sir FRANCIS WALSINGHAM, Knight, was born in this County, wherein his Family
long flourished at Chiselhurst, though I Camb. Brit. in Norfolk.
read, that originally they fetch their name from Walsingham in Norfolk. He was
bred in Kings College in Cambridge, and gave the King of ^pain his Bible to
the Library thereof. As a traveller many years beyond the (...) he learnt
experience, as an Agent he practiced it there, and after his return, a
Secretary of State: he taught it to many Emisaries employed under him.

None alive did better ken the Secretary Craft, to get Counsels out of others,
and keep them in himself. M^rvellous his ^agacity in examining suspected
persons, either to make them confess the truth, or confound themselves by
denying it to their detection. Cunning his hands, who could unpick the Cabinets
in the Popes Conclave; quick his ears, who could hear at London, what was
whispered at Rome; And numerous the spies and eyes of this Argus dispersed in
all places.

The Jesuits being out-shot in their own Bow, complained, that he
out-equivocated their equivocation, having a mental reservation deeper and
farther than theirs. They tax him for making Heaven ^ow too much to Earth,
oft-times borrowing a point of conscience, with full intent never to pay it
again, whom others excused by Reasons of State, and dangers of the times.
Indeed his Simulation (which all allow lawful) was as like to Dissimulation
(condemned by all good men) as two things could be, which were not the same.

He thought that Gold might, but Intelligence could not be bought too dear; The
cause that so great a States man left so small an estate, and so public a
person was so privately buried in Saint Paul's, Anno Dom. 1590. His only
Daughter Frances was successively matched to three matchless men, Sir Phili
Sidney, Robert Earl of Essex, and Richard Earl of Clanricard.

Capital Judges and Writers on the Law.
Sir JOHN FINEUX, was by all probability born at Swinkfield in this County (as
I am informed from my good friend Mr. Thomas Fineux, a descendant from him) a
place ( In his Remains, page 118.
says Mr. Cambden,) bestowed on his Ancestor by T. Criol, a great Lord in
Kent, about the reign of King Edward the second. I learned from the same
Gentleman, that he was eight and twenty years of age, before he betook him to
the study of the Law, that he followed that profession twenty eight years
before he was made a Judge, and that he continued a Judge for twenty eight
years, whereby it appears, that he lived fourscore and four years. This last
exactly agrees with In his Glossary Ve^bo Justiciarius.
Sir Henry Spelman, making him continue Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench,
from the eleventh of King Henry the seventh, until the seventeenth of King
Henry the eight.

He was a great Benefactor unto Saint Augustines in Canterbury, whose Prior
William Mallaham thus highly commends him in a Will. Somner in his Antiq. of
Cant.
Manuscript Instrument,

Vir prudentissimus, genere insignis, Justitia praeclarus, pietate refertus,
Humanitate splendidus and charitate foecundus, etc. Now though some will say,
his Convent may well afford him good words, who gave them good deeds; yet I
believe this Character of him, can in no part be disproved. He died about the
year 1526. and lies buried in Christ Church in Canterbury; who had a fair
habitation in this City, and another in Herne in this County, where his Motto
still remains in each window, Misericordias Domini cantabo in Aeternum.

Sir ROGER MANWOOD, born at Lambert in his perambulation of Kent, page 131.
Sandwich in this County, applied himself from his youth, to the study of the
Common Law; wherein he attained to such eminency, that by Queen Elizabeth he
was preferred second Justice of the Common Pleas, in which place he gave such
proof of his ability and integrity, that not long after in Sir Hen. Spelman in
Gloss. Verbo Justiciarius.
Hillary Term, in the 21. of Queen Elizabeth, he was made chief Baron of the
Exchequer, discharging that office to his (...) Commendation, full fourteen
years, till the day of his death. He was much employed in matters of State, and
was one of the Commissioners who sat on the Trial of the Queen of Scots. His
Book on the Forest Laws is a piece highly prized by men of his Profession. In
Vacation time his most constant habitation was at Saint Stephens in Canterbury,
where, says my Camb. Brit. in Kent.
Author, the poor inhabitants were much beholding to his bounteous liberality.
He erected and endowed a fair Free School at Sandwich, the place of his
Nativity, and died in the 35. of Queen Elizabeth, Anno Dom. 1593.

Sir HENRY FINCH, Knight, was born in this County of Right Worshipful
Extraction, (their ancient surname being Herbert) a Family which had and has
an hereditary happiness of Eminency in the study of the Laws. He was Sergeant
at Law to King James, and wrote a Book of the Law, in great esteem with men of
his own profession* yet were not his studies confined thereunto, witness his
Book of The calling of the Jews; and all ingenious persons which dissent from
his judgment will allow him learnedly to have maintained an error, though he
was brought into some trouble by King James, conceiving that on his principles
he advanced and extended the Jewish Commonwealth, to the depressing and
contracting of Christian Princes free Monarchies. He was father unto Sir John
Finch, Lord Chief Justice, and for a time Lord Keeper, and Baron of Foreditch,
who is still alive.

Soldiers.
Kent has so carried away the credit, in all ages, for Manhood, that the
leading of the Front, or Vanguard (so called from Avant-guard, or Go on
guard, because first in marching) in former times has simply and absolutely
belonged unto them; I say absolutely, for I find two other Shires contending
for that place. The best is, it is but a Book-Combate, betwixt learned Writers,
otherwise if real, such a division were enough to rout an Army, without other
Enemy. But let us see how all may be peaceably composed.

It is probable, that the Michael Cornubiensis, see Cornwall, title Soldiers.
Cornish-men led the Van in the days of King Arthur, who being a Native of
Cornwall, had most cause to trust his own Countrymen. But I behold this as a
temporary honor, which outlasted not his life who bestowed it.

The men of Archenfeld in Hereford-shire, claimed by custom to lead the Camb.
Brit. in Herefordshire.
Vanguard, but surely this privilege was Topical, and confined to the Welsh
Wars, with which the aforesaid men, as Borderers were best acquainted.

As for Kent, Cantia nostra primae cohortis honorem, and primos congressus
hostium usque in Hodiernum diem in omnibus praeliis obtinet, says my Joan.
Sarisb. de nugis curial. 6. cap. 18.
Author.

Reader, It may rationally be concluded that the ensuing Topic had been as
large in this as in any County in England, seeing it is bounded by the Sea on
the East and South sides thereof, had not the Author departed this life before
the finishing of the same.

Seamen.
WILLIAM ADAMS, was (as his own Purchase his Pilgrims.
Pen reports) born at Gillingham in this County, and take the brief account
of his Life, being the first Englishman, who effectully discovered Japan.

Twelve years he lived at home with his Parents. Twelve years he was Apprentice
and Servant to Nich. Diggins, a brave Seaman, for some time he was Master of
one of the Queens Ships. Ten years he served the English Company of Barbary
Merchants. Fourteen years (as I collect it) he was employed by the Dutch in
India.
For he began his Voyage 1598. Pilot to their Fleet of five Sail, to conduct
them to Japan; and in order to the settlement of Trade endured many miseries.
He who reads them will concur with Cato, and repent that ever he went thither
by Sea, whither one might go by Land. But Japan being an Island, and
unaccessible, save by Sea, our Adams his discretion was not to be blamed, but
industry to be commended in his adventures. He died at Firando in Japan about
1612.

Civilians.
NICHOLAS WOTTON, Son to Sir Robert, was born at Bockton-Malherb in this
County, a place so named (as it seems) from some noxious and malignant herbs,
growing therein. What the natural plants there may be, I know not, sure the
moral ones, are excellent, which has produced so many of the Honorable Family
of the Wottons; Of whom this Nicholas, Doctor of Civil Laws bred in Oxford, may
be termed a Center of Remarkables, so many met in his person.

1. He was Dean of the two Metropolitan Churches of Canterbury and York. 2. He
was the first Dean of those Cathedrals. 3. He was Privy Councellor to four
successive Sovereigns, King Henry the eight, King Edward the sixth, Queen Mary,
Queen Elizabeth. 4. He was employed, Thirteen several times in Embassies to
foreign Princes.
Now because there are some of so diffident Natures, that they will believe no
total sum, except they peruse the particulars, let them satisfy themselves
with what follows.

Five times to Charles the fifth Emperor. Once to Philip his Son, King of Spain.
Once to Francis the first, King of France. Once to Mary Queen of Hungary,
Governess of the Netherlands. Twice to William Duke of Clive. Once to renew the
peace between England, France, and Scotland, Anno Dom. 1540. Again to the same
purpose at Cambra, 1549. Once sent Commissioner with others to Edinbourgh in
Scotland, 1560.
We must not forget how in the first of Queen Elizabeth, the Archbishopric of
Canterbury was Hollinsheads Chron. page 1403.
proffered unto, and refused by him. He died January the twenty sixth, Anno
Dom. 1566. being about seventy years of age, and was buried in Canterbury.

GILES FLETCHER, (brother of Richard Fletcher, Bishop of London) was born in
this County, as I am credibly From the mou^h of Mr. R^msey, Minister of Rougham
in Norfolk, who m^rried the Widow of Mr. Giles Fletcher Son to this Doctor.
informed. He was bred first in Eaton, then in Kings College in Cambridge;
where he became Doctor of Law. A most excellent Poet, (a quality hereditary to
his two Sons, Giles and Phineas) Commissioner into Scotland, Germany, and the
Low Countries for Queen Elizabeth, and her Ambassador into Russia, Secretary to
the City of London, and Master of the Court of Requests.

His Russian Embassy to settle the English Merchandise was his masterpiece,
to Theodor Juanowich Duke of Muscovia. He came thither in a dangerous juncture
of time, viz. in the end of the year 1588. First, some forraigners (I will not
say they were the Hollanders) envying the free Trade of the English, had done
them bad offices. Secondly, a false report was generally believed that the
Spanish Armado had worsted the English Fleet; and the Duke of Muscovy (who
measured his favor to the English, by the possibility he apprehended of their
returning it) grew very sparing of his smiles, not to say free of his frowns on
our Merchants residing there.

However our Doctor demeaned himself in his Embassy with such cautiousness,
that he not only escaped the Dukes fury, but also procured many privileges for
our English Merchants, exemplified in Mr. Hackluit. Returning home, and being
safely arrived * In his Volumne of Engl sh Navigation, page 473.
at London, he sent for his intimate friend Mr. Wayland, Prebendary of S.
Paul's, and Senior Fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge (Tutor to my Father,
from whose mouth I received this report) with whom he heartily expressed his
thankfulness to God for his safe return from so-great a danger; for the Poets
cannot fancy Ulrsses more glad to be come out of the Den of Polyphemus, than
he was to be rid out of the power of such a barbarous Prince, who counting
himself by a proud and voluntary mistake, Emperor of all Nations, cared not
for the Law of all Nations; and who was so habited in blood, that had he cut
off this Ambassadors head, he and his friends might have sought their own
amends; but the question is, where he would have found it?

He afterward set forth a Book, called, The Russian Commonwealth, expressing
the Government or Tyranny rather thereof; wherein, says my Camb. in his Eliz.
Anno 1583. when he was Agent in Muscovy, as afterward Ambassador.
Author, are many things most observable. But Queen Elizabeth indulging the
reputation of the Duke of Muscovy as a confederate Prince, permitted not the
public printing of that, which such who have private Copies, know to set the
valuation thereon. I cannot attain the certain date of his death.

Physicians.
ROBERT FLOID, who by himself is latined Robertus de Fluctibus, was born in
this County, and that of a Knightly Family, as I am informed, bred (as I take
it) in Oxford, and beyond the Seas. A deep Philosopher, and great Physician,
who at last fixed his habitation in Fan-Church-Street, London. He was of the
Order of the Rosa-Crucians, and I must confess my self ignorant of the first
Founder and Sanctions thereof, perchance none know it, but those that are of
it. Sure I am, that a Rose is the sweetest of Flowers, and a Cross accounted
the sacredest of forms or figures, so that much of eminency must be imported in
their composition.

His Books written in Latin are great, many and mystical. The last some impute
to his Charity, clouding his high matter with dark language, left otherwise the
luster thereof should dazzle the understanding of the Reader. The same phrases
he used to his Patients, and seeing conceit is very contributive to the well
working of Physic, their fancy or faith-natural was much advanced by his
elevated expressions.

His works are for the English to slight or admire, for French and Forraigners
to understand and use: not that I account them more judicious than our own
Countrymen, but more inquiring into such difficulties. The truth is, here at
home his Books are beheld not so good as Crystal, which (some say) are prized
as precious pearls beyond the Seas. But I conclude all with the Character,
which my worthy (though concealed) Friend thus wrote upon him. Lucubrationibus
quas solebat edere profusissimas semper visus est plus sumere laboris, quam
Populares nostri volebant fructum, quia hunc fere negligebant, prae tedio
legendi, and prejudicio quodam oleam perdendi operamque, ob CABALAM, quam
scripta ejus dicebantur olere magis quam PERIPATUM, and ob ferventius hominis
ingenium, in quo plerique requirebant Judicium. He died on the eighth of
September, Anno Dom. 1637.

WILLIAM HARVEY, Son of Thomas Harvey, was born at Folkston in this County. His
Father had a Week of Sons; whereof this William bred to learning, was the
eldest; his other brethren being bound Apprentices in London, and all at last
ended in effect in Merchants. They got great Estates, and made their Father the
Treasurer thereof, who being as skilful to purchase Land, as they to gain
Money* kept, employed, and improved their gainings to their great advantage; so
that he survived to see the meanest of them, of far greater estate than himself.

Our William was bred in Caius College in Cambridge, where he proceeded Doctor
of Physic. Five years also he studied at Padua, making a good Composition of
Foreign and Domestic learning: So that afterward he was (for many years)
Physician to King Charles the First. And not only Doctor Medecinae, but Doctor
Medicorum.

For this was he that first found out the Circulation of the Blood; an opinion
which entered into the World with great disadvantages. For first, none will be
acquainted with strangers at the first sight, as persons generally suspected;
as if to be unknown, were part of being guilty. Secondly, the Grandees of this
Profession were of the opposite judgment, heavy enough without any Argument to
overlay (and so to stifle) any Infant opinion by their Authority.

But, Truth, though it may be questioned for a Vagrant, carries a Passport
along with it for its own vindication. Such have since shaken friendly hands
with Doctor Harvey, which at first tilted Pens against him. And amongst the
rest Riolanus that learned Physician, if not Ambabus ulnis, with one Arm at the
least does embrace his opinion, and partly consent thereunto.

This Doctor, though living a Bachelor, may be said to have left three hopeful
Sons to posterity; his Books,

1. De circulatione sanguinis, which I may call his Son and Heir; the Doctor
living to see it at full age, and generally received. 2. De generatione, as yet
in its minority; but, I assure you growing up apace into public credit. 3. De
Ovo, as yet in the nonage thereof, but infants may be men in due time.
It must not be forgotten, that this Doctor had made a good progress, to lay
down a Practice of Physic, conformable to his Thesis, of the Circulation of
Blood; but was plundered of his Papers in our Civil War: Unhappy dissentions,
which not only murdered many then alive; but may be said by this, (call it
mischief or mischante) to have destroyed more not yet born, whose Diseases
might have been either prevented or removed, if his worthy pains had come forth
into the Public: And I charitably presume, that grateful posterity will
acknowledge the improvements of this opinion, as Superstructures on his
Foundation; and thankfully pay the fruit to his memory, who watered, planted,
(not to say made) the root of this discovery.

He has since been a second Linaore and great Benefactor to the College of
Physicians in London, where his Statue stands with this Inscription.

GULIELMO HARVEO VIRO Monumentis suis immortali Hoc insuper Coll. Med. London.
posuit. Qui enim Sanguin. motum (Ut and Animal. ortum) dedit Meruit esse Stator
perpetuus. He died in the eightieth year of his Age, June 3. Anno Dom. 1657.

Writers.
JOHN of KENT, so called, because born in this J. Pits in Ang. Scrip. 1248.
County; after he had studied at home with good proficiency, went over into
France, where he became Canon in the Church of Saint Mary's in Angiers. But
afterward being weary of worldly wealth, he quitted that place, and turned a
Franciscan Friar, and by Pope Innocent the fourth, he was sent a joint* Legate
into England. He flourished in the year of our Lord, 1248.

HAIMO of FEVERSHAM, both had his first breath at, and fetched his name from
Feversham in this County. When a man, he left the land, and repairing to Paris,
applied his studies so effectually, that Leland says he was inter
Aristotelicos, Aristotelissimus.

He became a Franciscan in the Church of Saint Dennis it* self, and returning
into England, was elected Provincial of his Order. Afterward he was called to
reside in Rome for his advice, where quitting his Provincialship to his
Successor, he was chosen General of the Franciscans. Surely he had much real,
or reputed merit, being so highly prized by the Italians, who generally do as
much undervalue us English, as they overadmire themselves. Speculum honestatis,
the Glass of honesty, ^aith Pitz. in Ang. script Anno 1260.
one, was the title given unto him, though dark and false this Glass, if Bale
may be believed, who taxes him for being an Inquisitor after, and Bale de
scrip. Cent. 4 Number. 27.
Persecutor of good people, especially when employed by the Pope into Grecia.
Lying on his Deathbed, at Anagnia in Italy, the Pope in person came to visit
him, which was no small honor unto him, but all would not prolong his life,
which he ended Anno 1260. Having first, at the command of Pope Alexander the
fourth, corrected and amended the Roman Breviary.

SIMON STOCK was born in this Bale de s^rip. Brit. Cent. 4. Number. 7. and (...).
in Anno 1265.
County, and when but twelve years of Age, went into the Woods (whereof this
Shire then afforded plenty) and became a Hermit. This Christian Diogenes had
for his Tub, the Stock of a hollow Tree, whence he fetched his name, and
(abating his Sex) was like the Nymphs called Hama-druides, which were the
properties of Oak Trees. Here he had (says Leland) Water for his Nectar, and
wild Fruits for his Ambrosia. One may admire how this man here met with
Learning, except by Inspiration, and except Books (as at the Original) were
written on Barks of Trees, where with he conversed: yet the University of
Oxford would force a Bachelor of Divinity-ship upon him: and many are the
superstitious writings he left to posterity.

Reader, behold here how the Roaring Lion has translated himself into a
Mimical Ape, endeavoring a mock Parallel betwixt this Simon and Simeon in the
Gospel.

Old Simeon had a Luke 2. 26.
Revelation that he should not die till he had seen our Savior come in the
Flesh. This Simon aged 80. years, had a Bale Ib.
Revelation, that before his death, he should behold a holy Order of Carmelites
come out of Syria, which fell out accordingly.

At their arrival in England, our Simon quitted his Oak, and advanced forward
to meet them, as of whom, though he had no sight, he had a vision before, which
is probably as true, as that he was fed seven years with Manna in Mount Carmel.
He was chosen the General Governor of their Order all over Europe: and died in
the hundred year of his age, Anno Dom. 1265. and was buried at Bordeaux in
France.

THOMAS HASHLWOOD. I find the name very ancient in a worshipful Family in AMP.
Northamptonshire, and profess not only my inclination but propensity, to
gain him for the credit of my Native Country. But that needs not to be (and I
ought not to make it) rich with the wrong of others. Indeed I find a Haselwood
(Transposition makes no Mutation) in Suffolk, and another in Northumberland:
but their vast distance from the Monastery of Leeds in this County, wherein our
Haselwood was bred an Augustinian Friar, (with some other insinuations, too
long to report) prevail with me to fix him in this place. He was an excellent
Scholar himself, and a fortunate Schoolmaster to teach others, and became a
faithful and painful Historian. Bale De script. Brit. Cent. 5 Number. 20.
(out of William Botiner, an industrious Collector of Antiquities) assigns
him to flourish under King Edward the second, 1321. but Funeral Monvments, page
206.
Mr. Weaver light on a Manuscript of his making in Sir Robert Cottons Library,
wherein he particularly speaks of the Achievements of Edward the black Prince,
which I here thought fit to exemplify.

Edwardus filius Edw. 3. primogenitus, Princeps Walliae fortunatissimus, and
miles in bello audacissimus, inter validissima bella gesta militaria, magnifice
ab eodem peracta, Johannem Regem Franciae apud Poyteizes debellavit, and
pluribus, tam nobilibus quam aliis, de dicto regno captis, and interfectis,
eundem Regem captivavit, and ipsum potenter in Angliam ductum Patri suo
praesentavit. Henricum etiam intrusorem Hispaniae, potentissime in bello
devicit, and Petrum Hispaniae Regem, dudum a regno suo expulsum, potenti
virtute in regnum-suum restituit. Unde propter ingentem sibi probitatem, and
actus ipsius triumphales, memoratum Principem, inter regales Regum memorias,
dignum duximus commendandum. Thus have I (not killed two Birds with one bolt,
but) revived two men's memories with one Record, presenting the Reader
(according to my In our Description of Oxsordshire, in in this Princes life.
promise) with the Character of this Prin^, and Style of this Writer, speaking
him (in my conjecture) to have lived about the reign of King Richard the second.

Since the Reformation.
Sir THOMAS WIAT, Knight, commonly called the Elder, to distingish him from Sir
Thomas Wiat (raiser of the Rebellion (so all call it) for it did not succeed)
in the reign of Queen Mary, was born at Allyngton Castle in this County, which
afterward he repaired with most beautiful buildings. He was servant to King
Henry the eight, and fell (as I have heard) into his disfavour, about the
business of Queen Anna Bollen, till by his innocence, industry, and discretion,
he extricated himself.

He was one of admirable ingenuity, and truly answered his Anagram, Wiat, A
Wit. In Brit. in Kent.
Cambden says he was,

Eques auratus splendide doctus. It is evidence enough of his Protestant
Inclination, because he translated David's Psalms into English meter; and though
he be lost both to Bale and Pits in the Catalogue of Writers, yet he is
plentifully found by In suis Noe-uiis.
Leland, giving him this large Commendation.

Bella suum merito jactet Florenti^ Dantem
Regia Petrarchae carmina Roma probat,
His non inferior Patrio Sermon Viattus
Eloquii secum qui decus omne tulit.
Let Florence fair her Dantes justly boast,
And Royal Rome her Petrarchs numbered feet,
In English Wiat both of them does coast:
In whom all graceful eloquence does meet.
This Knight being sent Ambassador by King Henry the eight, to Charles the
fifth Emperor, then residing in Spain; before he took shipping, died of the
Pestilence in the Wevers Fun. Mon. page 853.
West Country, Anno 1541.

LEONARD DIGGS, Esquire, was born in this County, one of excellent Learning,
and deep judgment. His mind most inclined him to Mathematics, and he was the
best Architect in that age for all manner of buildings, for convenience,
pleasure, state, strength, being excellent at fortifications. Lest his learning
should die with him, for the public profit he Printed his Tectonicon,
Prognostic general, Stratiotick, about the ordering of an Army, and other
works. He flourished Anno Dom. 1556. and died, I believe, about the beginning
of the reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Nothing else have I to observe of his name, save that heredita^y learning may
seem to run in the veins of his family, witness, Sir Dudley Diggs of Chilham
Castle in this County, made Master of the Rolls, 1636. whose abilities will not
be forgotten whilst our age has any remembrance. This Knight had a younger
son, Fellow of All Souls in Oxford, who in the beginning of our Civil Wars,
wrote so subtle and solid a Treatise, of the difference betwixt King and
Parliament, that such Royalists, who have since handled that Controversy, have
written plura non plus; yea, aliter rather than alia of that subject.

THOMAS CHARNOCK, was born in the Isle of Thanet in this County, as by his own
In his Breviary, page 298
words does appear. He discovers in himself a modest Pride; modest stiling
himself (and truly enough) the uNLETTERED SCHOLAR; Pride, thus immoderately
boasting of his Book discovering the mysteries of the Philosophers Stone,

For satisfying the minds of the Students in this Art,
Then thou art worthy as many Books as will lie in a Cart.
However herein he is to be commended, that he ingeniously confesses the
Persons, (viz. William Byrd Prior of Bath, and Sir James a Priest of Sarisbury)
who imparted their skill unto him.

This Charnock in the pursuance of the said Stone (which so many do touch; few
catch, and none keep) met with two very sad disasters: One on New Years day
(the omen worse than the accident) Anno 1555. when his work unhappily fell on
fire. The other three years after, when a Gentleman, long owing him a grudge,
paid him to purpose, and pressed him a Soldier for the relieving of Calice.
Whence we observe two things, first, that this Charnock was no man of estate,
seeing seldom, if ever a Subsidy man, is pressed for a Soldier. Secondly, that
though he practiced Theatrum Chymicum, Brit. page, 476.
Surgery, yet he was not free of that Society, who by the Statute 32 Hen. 8.
are exempted from bearing armor.

But the spite of the spite was, that this was done within In his Breviary of
Philosophy, cap. 4.
a Month (according to his own computation, which none con confute) of the time
wherein certainly he had been made master of so great a treasure. Such
miscarriages, frequent in this kind, the friends of this Art, impute to the
envy of evil spirits maligning mankind so much happiness, the foes thereof
conceive that Chemists pretend (yea, sometimes cause) such casualties to save
their credits thereby. He was fifty years old Anno 1574. and the time of his
death is unknown.

FRANCIS THIN was born in this County, and from his infancy had an ingenuous
inclination to the Study of Antiquity, and especially of Pedignees. Herein he
made such proficiency, that he was prefer ROBERT GLOVER, Son to Thomas Glover,
and Mildred his Wife, was born at Out of his Epitaph on his Monument.
Ashford in this County. He addicted himself to the Study of Heraldry, and in
the reward of his pains was first made a Pursuivant Porcul THO. MILLES Sisters
Son to Robert Glover aforesaid, was born at Ashford in this County, and
following his Uncles direction, applied himself to be eminent in the
Genealogies of our English Nobility. JOHN PHILPOT, was born at Faulkston in
this County, and from his childhood had a genius enclining him to the love of
Antiquity. He first was made a Pursuivant Extraordinary, by the Title of
Blanch-Lion, then red toward the end of the reign of Q. Elizabeth, to be an
Herald, by the Title of Lancaster. A Gentleman painful, and well deserving, not
only of his own Office, but all the English Nation. Whosoever shall peruse the
Voluminous Works of Raphael Hollinshed, will find how much he was assisted
therein by the help of Mr. Thin, seeing the Shoulders of Atlas himself may
be weary, if sometime not beholding to Hercules to relieve him. He died 15.
lis, and then Somerset Herald. When the Earl of Derby was sent into France to
carry the Garter to K. Henry the third, Weavers Fun. Mon.
Mr. Glover attended the Embassage, and was, as he deserved, well rewarded for
his pains. He by himself in Latin began a Book, called the Catalogue of
Honor of our English Nobility, with their Arms and Matches. Being the first
Work in that kind; He therein traced untrodden paths, and therefore no wonder
if such Ralph Brook, York; Augustine Vincent, Windsor Herald.
who since succeeded him in that subject, have found a nearer way, and exceed
him in Acurateness therein. Being old rather in experience than years, he died
not 46. years old, Anno 1583. and lies buried under a comely Monument in Saint
Giles without Creplegate, London, on the South Wall of the Quire. Let Brit. in
his description of (...).
Mr. Cambdens commendation pass for his Epitaph, Artis Heraldicae
studiosissimus, peritissimusque, qui in foecialium Collegio Somerseti titulum
gessit, Robertus Gloverus. If the expression were as properly predicated of a
Nephew, as of the next Brother, one might say, he raised up seed unto his Uncle
Glover, in setting forth his Catalogue of Honor, in English, as more useful
therein, because chiefly of our National concernment. He was employed on a
message of Importance from Q. Elizabeth unto Henry the fourth King of France,
be ing then in Normandy, which trust he discharged with great fidelity, and
incredible scelerity, being returned home with a satisfactory answer to her
Highness before she could believe him arrived there. In memory of which
service, he had given him for the Crest of his Arms, a Chappeau with Wings, to
denote the Mercuriousnesse of this Messenger. He died Anno 16. in Ordinary, by
name of RoughDragon, and afterward Somerset Herald. He made very pertinent
Additions to the second Edition of Mr. Cambdens Remains, and deserved highly
well of the City of London, proving in a learned and ingenious Book, that Gentry
does not abate with Apprentiship, but only sleeps during the time of their
Indentures, and awaketh again when they are expired. Nor did he contribute a
little to the setting forth of his Uncles Catalogue of Honor. He died Anno
1645. and was buried in Bennet Pauls-wharf.

THOMAS PLAYFERD was born in this County, as some of his nearest Relations have
informed me. He was bred Fellow of Saint John's College in Cambridge, and
chosen 1597. to succeed Peter Barrow in the place of Margaret Professor. His
fluency in the Latin tongue seemed a wonder to many, though since such who
have seen the Sun admire no more at the Moon, Doctor Collins not succeeding him
so much in age, as exceeding him in eloquence.

The counsel of the Apostle is good, (...). His Foe-Friends commending of him,
and his own conceiting of himself made too deep an impression on his
Intellectuals. It added to his Distemper, that when his re^election to his
place (after his last two years end) was put into the Regent-House, a great
Doctor said DETUR DIGNIORI. However he held his Professor-ship until the day of
his death, 1609. and lies buried with an Hyperbolical Epitaph in S. Botolphs
in Cambridge.

JOHN BOIS, D. D. was descended of a right ancient and numerous Family in this
County, deriving themselves from J. de Bosco, entering England with William the
Conqueror, and since dispersed into Villare Cantianum, page 25^.
eight Branches extant at this day in their several seats. Our John was bred
Fellow of Clare-Hall in Cambridge, and afterward preferred Dean of Canterbury,
famous to posterity for his Postils in defense of our Liturgy. So pious his
life, that his adversaries were offended that they could not be offended
therewith. A great Prelate in the Church did bear him no great good will for
mutual animosities betwixt them, whilst Gremials in the University; the reason
perchance, that he got no higher preferment, and died (as I conjecture) about
the year 1625.

Benefactors to the Public.
Sir JOHN PHILPOT was born in this County, where his Family has long resided
at Upton-Court, in the Parish of Sibbertswood. He was bred a Citizen and Grocer
in London, whereof he became Mayor, 1378.

In the second of King Richard the second our English Seas wanted scouring,
overrun with the rust of Piracies, but chiefly with a Canker fretting into
them, one John Mercer a Scot, with his fifteen Spanish Ships. To repress whose
insolence, our Philpot on his own cost set forth a Fleet, a project more
proportionable to the Treasury of a Prince, than the purse of a private
subject. His success was as happy as his undertaking honorable, and Mercer
brought his Wares to a bad Market, being taken Stows Chro. page 281.
with all his Ships and rich plunder therein.

Two years after he conveyed an English Army into Britain, in ships of his own
hiring, and with his own money released more than 1000. Arms there, which the
Soldiers formerly engaged for their victuals. But this industry of Philpot
interpretatively taxed the laziness of others, the Nobility accusing him (
Drones account all Bees pragmatical) to the King, for acting without a
Commission. Yea, in that ungrateful age, under a Child-King, Pro tantorum
sumptuum praemio, veniam vix obtinuit. However, he, who whilst living, was the
scourge of the Scots, the fright of the French, the delight of the Commons, the
darling of the Merchants, and the hatred of some envious Lords, was at his
death lamented, and afterward beloved of all, when his memory was restored to
its due esteem.

WILLIAM SEVENOCK was born at Sevenock in this County. In allusion whereunto he
gave Stows Survey of London.
Seven Acorns for his Arms, which if they grow as fast in the field of
Heraldry, as in the Common field, may be presumed to be Oaks at this day. For
it is more than 200. years since this William (bred a Grocer at London) became
Anno 1419. Lord Mayor thereof. He founded at Sevenock a fair Free School for
poor peoples Children, and an Alms House for Idem page 88.
twenty men and women, which at this day is well maintained.

Since the Reformation.
Sir ANDREW JUD, Son of John Jud was born at Tunbridge in this County, bred a
Skinner in London, whereof he became Lord Mayor Anno 1551. He built Alms Houses
nigh Saint Ellens in London, and a stately Free School at Tunbridge in (...),
submitting it to the care of the Company of Skinners. This fair School has
been twice founded in effect, seeing the defense and maintenance whereof has
cost the Company of Skinners in suits of Law, and otherwise, Dr. willet in his
Catalogue of good wor^s since the Reformation.
four thousand pounds, So careful have they been (though to their own great
charge) to see the Will of the Dead performed.

WILLIAM LAMB, Esquire, sometime a Gentleman of the Chapel to King Henry the
eighth, and in great favor with him, was born at (...) Survey of London, page
93.
Sutton-Valens in this County, where he erected an Almshouse, and a well
endowed School. He was a person wholly composed of goodness and bounty, and
was as general and discreet a Benefactor as any that age produced. Anno 1557.
he began, and within five months finished the fair Conduit at Holborn-Bridge,
and carried the water in pipes of Lead more than two thousand yards at his own
cost, amounting to Fifteen hundred pound. The total sum of his several gifts
moderately estimated exceeded six thousand pounds. He lies buried with his good
works in Saint Faiths Church under Saint Paul's; where this Inscription, set up
(it seems by himself in his life time) is fixed on a Brass plate to a Pillar.

O Lamb of God which sin did take away
And (as a Lamb) wast offered up for sin.
Where I (poor Lamb) went from thy flock astray,
Yet thou (good Lord) vouchsafe thy Lamb to win
Home to thy Fold, and hold thy Lamb therein,
That at the day, when Goats and Lambs shall sever,
Of thy choice Lambs, Lamb may be one for ever.
The exact time of his death, I cannot meet with, but by proportion I
conjecture it to be about 1580.

FRANCES SIDNEY, Daughter of Sir William, Sister to Sir Henry (Lord Deputy of
Ireland, and President of Wales) Aunt to the renowned Sir Philip Sidney, was
born (and probably at Pensherst the ancient seat of the Sidneys) in this
County. A Lady endowed with many Virtues, signally charitable, expending much
in large Benefactions to the Public. She bestowed on the Abbey Church of
Westminster a salary of twenty pounds per annum for a Divinity Lecture; and
founded Sidney Sussex College in Cambridge, of which largely in my
Church History. She was Relict of Thomas Ratcliff, the third Earl of Sussex.
This worthy Lady died Childless (unless such Learned Persons who received
their Breeding in her Foundation may be termed her Issue) on the ninth day of
May, Anno 1588. as appears by her On her Monument in Westminster Abb^.
Epitaph.

Sir FRANCIS NETHERSOLE, Knight, born at Nethersole in this County, was bred
Fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge, and afterward became Orator of the
University. Hence he was preferred to be Ambassador to the Princes of the
Union, and Secretary to the Lady Elizabeth, Queen of (...); it is hard to say
whether he was more remarkable for his doings or sufferings in her behalf. He
married Lucy eldest Daughter of Sir Henry Goodyear of Polesworth in
Warwick-(...), by whose encouragement (being free of himself to any good
design) he has founded and endowed a very fair School at Polesworth aforesaid,
and is still living.

Memorable Persons.
SIMON, Son of William Lynch, Gent. was born at Groves in the Parish of Staple
in this County, December. 9. 1562. But see more of his Character under this Title
in Essex, where his Life and death were better known.

MARY WATERS was born at Lenham in this County, and how abundantly entitled to
Memorability, the ensuing Epitaph in Markeshall Church in Essex will
sufficiently discover.

Here lies the Body of Mary Waters, the Daughter and Coheir of Robert Waters
of Lenham in Kent, Esquire, wife of Robert Honywood of Charing in Kent,
Esquire, her only Husband, who had at her decease lawfully descended from her,
Three hundred sixty seven Children; sixteen of her own body, one hundred and
fourteen Grandchildren, two hundred twenty eight in the third Generation, and
nine in the fourth. She lived a most pious life, and in a Christian manner died
here at Markeshall, in the ninety third year of her age, and in the forty
fourth year of her Widowhood, the eleventh of May, 1620. Thus she had a Child
for every day in the (though Leap) year, and one over. Here we may observe,
that (generally) the highest in Honor, do not spread the broadest in
posterity. For time was, when all the Earls in England (and those then
seventeen in number) had not, put together, so many Sons and Daughters, as one
of them had, viz. Cambden in his Eliz. Anno ^89.
Edward Somerset, Earl of Worcester. And yet of both Sexes he never had but *
thirteen. But to return to Mistress Waters, she since has been much
out-stript in Mills in his Catalogue of Honor, page 10 6.
point of See Memo^able Persons ^n Buckinghamshire.
fruitfulness, by one still surviving; and therefore this worthy Matrone (in
my mind) is more memorable on another account, viz. for patient weathering out
the tempest of a troubled conscience, whereon a remarkable story depends:
Being much afflicted in mind, many Ministers repaired to her, and amongst the
rest, Reverend Mr. John Fox, than whom no more happy an instrument to set the
joints of a broken spirit. All his counsels proved ineffectual, insomuch that
in the agony of her soul, having a Venice-glass in her hand, she brake forth
into this expression, I am as surely damned as this glass is broken, which she
immediately threw with violence to the ground.

Here happened a wonder, the glass rebounded again, and was taken up whole and
entire. I confess it is possible (though difficult) so casually to throw as
brittle a substance, that lighting on the edges it may be preserved; but
happening. immediately in that juncture of time, it seemed little less than
miraculous.

However the Gentlewoman took no comfort thereat (as some have reported, and
more have believed) but continued a great time after (short is long to people
in pain) in her former disconsolate condition without any amendment. Until at
last, God, the great Clock-keeper of Time, who finds out the fittest minutes
for his own mercies, suddenly shot comfort like lightning into her soul; which
once entered, ever remained therein; (God does no palliate cures, what he heals
it holds) so that she led the remainder of her life in spiritual gladness.
This she her self told to the Reverend father Thomas Morton Bishop of Duresme,
from whose mouth I have received this relation.

In the days of Queen Mary she used to visit the Prisons, and to comfort and
relieve the Confessors therein. She was present at the burning of Mr. Bradford
in Smithfield, and resolved to see the end of his suffering, though so great
the press of people, that her shoes were trodden off, and she forced thereby
to go barefoot from Smithfield to Saint Martins, before she could furnish her
self with a new pair for her money. Her dissolution happened as is aforesaid,
Anno 1620.

NICHOLAS WOOD was born at Halingborne in this County, being a Landed man, and
a true Labourer. He was afflicted with a Disease called Boulimia, or Caninus
Apetitus; insomuch that he would devour at one meal, what was provided for
Sands in his Nores on the eighth Book of Ovids Metamorph. page 162.
twenty men, eat a whole Hog at a sitting, and at another time thirty dozen of
Pigeons; whilst others make mirth at his malady. Let us raise our gratitude to
the goodness of God, especially when he gives us appetite enough for our meat,
and yet meat too much for our appetite; whereas this painful man spent all his
estate to provide Provant for his belly, and died very poor about the year 1630.

We will conclude this Topic of Memorable Persons with a blanck mention of
him, whose name hitherto I cannot exactly attain, being an Ingenuous Hartib.
his Legacy, page 6.
Yeoman in this County, who has two Ploughs fastened together so finely, that
he plougheth two furrows at once, one under another, and so stirs up the
Land twelve or fourteen Inches deep, which in so deep ground is very good.
Scholars know that Hen-dia-duo is a very thrifty Figure in Rhetoric, and how
advantageous the improvement of this device of a Twinne-Plough may be to
posterity, I leave to the skilful in Husbandry to consider.

Lord Mayors.
Name. Father. Place. Company. Time 1. Will. Sevenock. William Rumshed.
Sevenock. Grocer. 1418 2. Thomas Hill. William Hill. Hillstone. Grocer. 1484 3.
Rich. Chawry. William Chawry. Westram. Salter. 1494 4. Andrew Jud. John Jud.
Tonbridge. Skinner. 1550 4. John Rivers. Richard Rivers. Pensherst. Grocer.
1573 6. Edw. Osburne. Richard Osburne. Ashford. Clothworker. 1583 7. Tho.
Polloccil. William Polloccil. Footseary. Draper. 1584 8. William Row. Thomas
Row. Pensherst. Iron^ Monger. 1592 9. Cuthbert Aket. Thomas Aket. Dertford.
Draper. 1626

The Names of the Gentry of this County returned by the Commissioners in the
twelfth year of King Henry the sixth.
Henry Archbishop of Canterbury. Commissioners to take the Oaths. Robert de
Poynyngs, Knight. Richard Widvile. Kights for the Shire. John Perye. Kights for
the Shire.

Will. Prioris Ecclesiae Christi Canter. Prioris de Rouchester Abbatis Sancte
Radgundis. Abbatis de Langedon Abbatis de Boxle. Abbatis de Lesnes. Prioris
Sancti Georgii Cartur. Prioris de Ledes. Prioris de Tunbregge Prioris de
Bilsington. Prioris de Horton. Rogeri Heron magistri (...)* de Maydston. Thome
Ward Rectoris Ecclesiae de Wroham. Thome Mome Recto^ ris Ecclesiae de Dele
Henrici Benwortham Rectoris Ecclesiae de Bourne. (...) Ashton Prepositi Coll*
de Wingham. Will. Palmer Rectoris Eccl. de Smerden. Rich. Corden. Archidiaconi
Roffensis Johannis Gladwyn magistri Collegii de Cobham. Will. Lyef Rectoris
Ecclesie de Heriettesham. Johan. Corwel magistri de Stood. Rob. Rectoris
Ecclesiae de Redelegh. Fratris Andree Birchford Mil. de Swynfeld magistri Hosp.
de Osprenge. Simonis Chepynden Rectoris Ecclesiae de Wornesel. Johannis Petthe
mil. Rogeri Chamberleyn, mil. Galfridi Louther. Johannis Darsel. Willihelmi
(...). Willielmi Cheyney. Willielmi Clifford. Edwardi Gilfford. Rogeri (...).
Thome Brown. Reignaldi Peckham. Johannis Seyntleger. Johannis Bamburgh.
Lodewici Clifford. Willielmi Garnel. Johannis Cheyney. Thome Walsingham.
Willielmi Warner. Johannis Dennis de VVelle. Valentini Baret. Willielmi
Manston. (...) Berton. Johannis Isaac. Thome Ballard. Willielmi Sepuans.
Willielmi Pikhill. Thome Sepuans. Johannis Greneford. Edmundi Hardes. Johannis
Digges. Edwardi Lymsey. Johannis Shyngleton Richardi Bamme. Richardi Chiche.
Roberti Shandeford. Willielmi Frogenale. Richardi Comb. Thome Betenham.
Johannis Kelsham. Edmundi Pashele. Henrici Horn de Apledre. Thome Achier.
Johannis (...) de Hoo. Roberti Watten. Stephani Cossington. Willielmi Channz.
Rogeri Honyngton. Johannis Horn de Lenham. Walteri Colepepar. Nicholai
Colepepar. Willielmi Burys. Willelmi Gullby. Johannis Norton. Johannis Feerby
de Paulstrey. Iohannis Erhithe. Stephani Norton. Willielmi Kereby. Rogeri
Appulton. Roberti Mollyngton. Willielmi Isle de Son^. Willielmi Hodestle. Thome
Hardes. Iohannis Oxenden. Thome Brokhill de Saltwode. Nichola^ Brokhill de
Saltwode. Adomari Dig. Willielmi Bertyn. Edwardi Seint John. Richardi Malman.
Roberti Cappes. Iohannis Vinche. Richardi Horn de Westwell. Will. Lane de
Cantnaria. Will. Chilton de eadem. Will. Benet de eadem Will. Bellington de
eadem. Ioh. Rose de eadem. Will. Osborn de eadem. Roberti Stopingdon de eadem.
Gilberti Germayn. Thome Normayne de Cant. Johannes Foochunt de eadem. Will.
Bryan de eadem. Richardi Curteler de eadem. Richardi Prat de eadem. Edmundi
VVykes de eadem. Will. Baker de eadem. Rogeri Manston. Iohannis Hetesle. Thome
Salisbury. Iohannis Carleton. Iohannis Gotysle. Iohannis Dandylion. Will.
Isaak. Thome Apuldrefeld. Will. Steveday. Iohannis Moyne. Iohannis Gerwinton.
Iohannis Feneaux. Will. Sutton de Northburne. Stephani Monyn. Iohannis Broke de
Snaxton. Iohannis Petit de Char^ham. Will. Valence. Tho. Hollys de Godmarsham.
Iohannis Rolling. Nicholai Hame. Roberti Yerde. Richardi Bruyn. Will. Brokman.
Guidonis Elys. Thome Simond de Hertley. Iohannis May. Thome Horden. Thome
Burgeys. Iohannis Gold. Johannes Hoigges. Thome Springet. Rogeri Twisden.
Iohannis Hoar. Iohannis Derby. Will. Collings de Thameto. Walteri Gore. Thome
Champion. Johan. Chamberlain. Hen. Hicks de Rouchestre. Will. Sidenore.
Radulfi Towke. Iohannis Wareve de VVy. Will. Goldwell de Godyinton. Will.
Goldwell de Chart. Richardi Sprot. Thome Chiterynden. Will. Enfynge. Will.
Spert. Roberti Tropham de Wingham. Roberti Goodebarne. Thome Bevesle. Will.
Iuenet. Iohannis Iuenet. Johannes Brenchesle s^n. Iohannis Brenchesle jun.
Laur. Betleston de Bydynden. Johan. Pitlesden de Tynderdi. Thome Hames de
eadem. Thome Berkynden. Thome Gosebourne. Will. Gosebourne. Iohannis Edyngham.
Richardi Edyngham. Hugonis Godwyn. Peteri Colepeper. Walt. Baker de Maidston.
Steph. Colney de eadem. Laur. Stonstreet de eadem. Will. Enton. Thome Mellere
de Lenham. Caur. Mellere de eadem. Hen. Boycote. Will. Had. Robert Purse.
^ehannis Laurence. Robert Norton. Rich. Dawdemere. Will. Roger. Thome Grymston.
Iohannis Tuttesham. Galfrid Young. Simonis Goldsmith. Ioh. Croweche de
Wateringbery. Ioh. Reve. Ioh. Westbery. Thome Stydolf. Tho. Hills de
Brenchesle. Laur. Hills. Ioh. Slyhand. Will. Woadlond de VVest-gate. Ioh.
Philpot de eadem. Thome Tenham de Thaneto. Thome Pawlyn de Thaneto. Ioh. Roger
de VVhitstaple. Iohannis Salmon de VVhitstaple. Will. Hall de Eastrey. Thome
Hunt de Crud deswode. Will. Licheffeld de Norbourn. Henrici Bynton. Add
Chanceler. Thome Newman de Chistlet. Richardi Bomoure de eadem. Thome Causant
de eadem. Will. Philip de Hierne. Thome Loucher. Roberti Lovelass. Thome
Cadbery. Thome Rokesle. Roberte Virle. Ioh. Rose de Shorham. Will. Holden de
Hunten. Ioh. Rolff de VVrotham. Iohannis Swan de Southfleet. Iohannis Mellere
de VVimelingwelde. Iohannis Eythorst de Tenbam. Will. Blosme de Tenderden.
Iacobi Budde de VVhitresham. Richardi Combre. VVillielmi Wotton de Denton.
Iohannis Biunham. Roberti Hothe de Ryvere. Thome Willok de Wy. Will. VVillok
de Wy. Iohannis At Cambre de Bokton Aluph. Iohannis Sandre de Bokton Aluph.
Iohannis Colman de Eastwell. Io. Walter de Eastewl. Tho. Richard de Wy. Thome
Cartere de Crundale. Will. Lucas de Essheford. Rich. At Sole Kenington.
Iohannis Roberd de eadem. Iohannis Sandre de Conybrohe. Thome Chapman. Iohannis
Ely. Will. Ixning. Nicholai Roger de Mersham. Nichol ai Kenet. Johannis Weston.
Henrici Tepynden. Barthol. At Boure. Will. Bregges de Ore. Reginalai
D^ylonde. Nicholai Dane. Richardi Langedon. Stephani Hoigge. (...) Harry.
^illielmi Iden. Johannis H^wet de Chertham. Willielmi Egerden. Johannis Bertlot
de Cantuaria. Johannis Lynde de eadem. Rob. Becket de eadem Johan. Edle de ead.
Ioh. Edmond de ead. Johan. Osburn de ea. Johan. Pikerel de ea. Lau^. Winter de
ead. Will. At Wode de ea. Thome Cherch de ea. Johan. Bronns de ea. Rob. Pycot
de eadem. Rich. Galding de ead. Thome Pollard de ea. Johan. Pende de ead. Thome
Mott de ead. Thome Lamsyn de ea. Joh. Malling de ead. Joh. Cosyn de ead. Joh.
Bertholt de ead. David Marryes de eadem. Ade Body de eadem. Henrici Piers de
ead. Johannis Robart de Cranebroke. Willielmi Heart de (...). Richardi Fawconer.
Johannis Bakke. Johannis Bereham. Johannis Bettenham Iohannis Watte de
Hankherst. Will. Bernes de ead. Richardi Hodingfold Nicholai Piers. Willielmi
Piers de Molash. Richardi Monyn. Willielmi Cobham. Johannis Baily de Hoo.
Roberti Reynold. Henrici Row. Richardi Groucherst de Horsmonden. Johannis Jud.
Walteri Fletcher de Tunbridge. Johannis Picot de ea. ^illielmi Randolf de
eadem. Rich. Johnson de ea. Simonis Fitz^aufe. Thome Harbor de Wrotham.
Willielmi Menyware. Iohannis Row. Richardi Ruxton. Stephani At Bourn de
Gontherst. Will. Robert de ead. Ioh. Thorp de Gillingham. Io. Spencer de Melton
Ioh. Spencer de eadem, jun. Io. Petyge de Gravesend. Ioh. Pete de eadem. Will.
Doget de ead. Roberti Baker de ead. Johan. Igelynden de Bydinden. Richardi
Smith de Shorn. Michaelis at Dean. Richardi Lewte. Iohannis Bottiler de
Clyne. Thome Gardon de ea. Thome Peverel de Cukston. Ioh. Chamber de ead. Will.
Holton de Heo. Simonis Walsh de Creye. Iohannis Mayor de Rokesle. Thome Shelley
de Farnburgh. Ioh. Mellere de Orpington. Ioh. Shelley de Bixle. Willielmi Bery.
Iohannis Bery. Thome Cr^ssel. Johan. Manning de Codeham. Roberti Merfyn.
Roberti Chesman de Greenwich. Philippi Dene de Wolwich. Radulphi Langle de
Beconham. Will Wolty de eadem. Ioh. Smith de Sevenock. Ioh. Cartere de
Nemesing. Tho. Palmer de Otford. Nicholai At Bore de Bradest. Rog. Wodeward
de^ea. Willielmi Rothel. Roberti Allyn. Iohannis Knolls. Richardi Rokesle.
Iohannis Steynour. Radulfi Stanhall de Westerham. Rich. Young de eadem. Rich.
Paris de eadem Thome Martin de ^donbregge. Thome Penny. Iohannis Dennet de
Edonbregge. Willielmi Kirketon de Fankham. Iohannis Crepehegge Iohannis Hellis
de Dernthe. Johan. Chympeham. Rob. Coats de Stone. Roberti Stonestrete de
Ivechesch. Johan. Hogelyn de ea. Iohannis Lowys. Petri Thurban. Thome
Beausrere. Steph. Ive de Hope, sen. Willielmi Newland de Brokland. Hen. Aleyne
de ead. Willielmi Wolbale. Iohannis Creking. Stephani VVyndy. Henrici Dobil.
Simonis Odierne. Roberti Hollynden. de Stelling. Will. Bray de eadem. Petri
Neal de Elmestede. Steph. Gibbe de Stonting. Rich. Shotwater de eadem. Rogeri
Hincle de Elham. Andree VVodehil de eadem. Nicolai Campion. Will. At Berne
de Lymyne. Iohannis Cartere de Abyndon. Rich. Knight, de Stelling. Will. Kenet
de Bonington. Iacobi Skappe. Iacobi Godefray. Ioh. Baker de Caldham. Roberti
Dolyte* Roberti Woughelite. Ioh. Chilton de Newington. Tho. Chylton de ead.
Thome Turnour de Rouchester. Ioh. ^ust de eadem Ioh. Houchon de ead. Stephani
Riviel. Warini Wade. Thome Groveherst. Will. Berford de Newington. Iohannis
Grendon de Upcherche. Iohannis Hethe de Bakchild. Rich. Groveherst de
Syndingbourn. Ioh. Sonkyn de ead. P. Haidon de Borden. Thome Waryn de Lenham.
Rich. Dene de Hedecrone. Walteri Terold. Hugonis Brent.
Sheriffs.
HEN. II.
Anno 1 Rualons. Anno 2 Radul. Picot, for six years. Anno 8 Hugo de Dovera, for
seven years. Anno 15 Gerv. de Cornhilla, for six years. Anno 21 Gervat. and
Rob. fill. Bernardi. Anno 22 Rob. filius Bernardi, for eight years. Anno 30
Will. filius Nigelli. Anno 31 Alanus de Valoigns. for four years.
RICH. I.
Anno 1 Regnal. de Cornhill, for six y^ars. Anno 7 Will. de sancta Mardalia.
Walt. filius Dermand. Anno 8 Reginald. de Cornhill. Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Idem.
Rex JOHAN.
Anno 1 Reginald. de Cornhill, for eleven years. Anno 12 Johan Fitz Vinon and
Reginald. de Cornhil, for six years.
HEN. III.
Anno 1 Hubert. de Burgo. Hugo de Windlesore, for seven years. Anno 8 Hub. and
Roger de Grimston, for three years. Anno 11 Huber. de Burozo and Will. de
Brito, for six years. Anno 17 Bartholomeus de Criol, for six years. Anno 24
Hum^. de Boh. Comes Essex Anno 25 ^dem. Anno 26 Petrus de Sabaudia and Bertram
de Criol. Anno 27 (...) de Criol and Johan. de Cobham. Anno 28 John de Cobham,
for five years. Anno 33 Reginald. de Cobham, for eight years. Walterus de
Bersted. Anno 41 Reginaldus de Cobham. Anno 42 Fritho. Poysorer. Anno 43 Idem.
Anno 44 Johannis de Cobham. Anno 45 them. Anno 46 ^dem. Anno 47. Rob. Walerand.
Tho. de la Wey. Anno 48 Rogerus de Layburne. Anno 49 Idem. Anno 50 Rog. and
Hen. de Burn, for three years. Anno 53 Steph. de Penecester, and Henricus de
Ledes, for three years. Anno 56 Henricus Malemeins.
EDW. I.
Anno 1 Hen. Malemenis Mort. Anno 2 Will. de Hents. Anno 3 Will. de Valoigns,
for four years. Anno 7 Robertus de Schochon. Anno 8 Robertus de Schochon. Anno
9 Idem. Anno 10 Idem. Anno 11 Petrus de Huntinfend. Anno 12 Idem. Anno 13 Idem.
Anno 14 Hamo. de Gatton. Anno 15 Will. de Chelesend. Anno 16 Idem. Anno 17
Idem. Anno 18 Will. de Brimshete. Anno 19 Idem. Anno 20 Johan. de Northwod.
Anno 21 Johannes and Johannes and Burn. Anno 22 Johan. de Burn. Anno 23 Idem.
Anno 24 Idem. Anno 25 Will. Trussel. Anno 26 Idem. Anno 27. Hen. de
Apuldrefeld. Anno 28 Johan. de Northwod. Anno 29 Hen. de Cobham. Anno 30 Idem.
Anno 31 Warresius de Valoynes. Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Johan. de Northwod. Anno
34 Idem. Anno 35 Will. de Cosington. Anno 36 Galfridus Colepepar, for four
years.
EDW. II.
Anno 1 Henricus de Cobham. Anno 2 Johan. de Blound, for five years. Anno 7
Will. de Basings and Johannes de H^ulo, jun. Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Hen. de
Cobham. Anno 10 Johannes de Malemeyns de Hoo. Anno 11 Idem. Johannes de
Fremingham. Anno 12 Johan. and Hen. de Sardenne. Anno 13 Hen. and Will.
Septuans. Anno 14 Null. Tit. Com. in hoc Rotulo. Anno 15 Will. Stevens and Radus
Savage. Anno 16 Null. Tit. Com. in Rotulo. Anno 17 Johannes de Shelvinge. Anno
18 Johannes de Fremingham. Anno 19 Idem.
EDW. III.
Anno 1 Radulph de Sancto Laur. Anno 2 Will. de Orlaston. Anno 3 Johannes de
Shelvingges and Will. de Orlaston. Anno 4 Johannes de Bourne, Johannes de
Shelvingges. Anno 5 Johannes de Bourne. Anno 6 Tho. de Brockhull, Laur. de
Sancto Laur. Anno 7 Tho. de Brockhull. Anno 8 Steph. de Cobham. Anno 9 Idem.
Anno 10 Idem. Anno 11 Tho. de Brockhull. Anno 12 W^ll. Morants. Anno 13 Idem.
Anno 14 Henrici de Valoyns. Anno 15 Johannes de Mereworth. Anno 16 Johannes de
Widleston, Jo* hannes de Mereworth. Anno 17 Johannes de Widleston, for four
years. Anno 21 Williel. de L^ngele. Anno 22 Johannes de Fremingham, Anno 23
VVilliel. de Langele, Arnaldus S^nvage. Anno 24 N^l. Tit. Com. in hoc Rotulo.
Anno 25 Will. de Langele. Anno 26 Jacob. Lapin. Anno 27 Will. de Apelderfeld.
Anno 28 J^cobi. Lapin. Anno 29 Reginal. de Duk, sive Dyk. Anno 30 Gilb. de
Helles. Anno 31 Will. de Apelderfeld. Anno 32 Radus Fremingh^m. Anno 33
Williel. Wakenade. Anno 34 Will. de Apelderfeld. Anno 35 Idem. Anno 36 Idem.
Anno 37 Willielmi Pimpe. Anno 38 Will. de (...). Anno 39 J^hannes Colepepar.
Anno 40 ^dem. Anno 41 Ricus At Les. Anno 42 Johannes de Brockhull. Anno 43
Johannes Colepepar. Anno 44 Will de Apelderfeld. Anno 45 Williel. Pimp. Anno 46
Johannes (...) Anno 47 (...). Colepepar Anno 48 Rob. Notingham Anno 49 Williel.
Pimpe Anno 50 Nic. Art Crouch Anno 51 Henrici Apulder^eld.
Henry III.
I HUBERT de BURGO, and HUGO de WINDLESORE.]

This is that Hubert so famous in our Chronicles, late Lord Chamberlain unto
King John and Lord Chief Justice of England. In this year of his (...), he not
only valiantly defended the Castle of Dover, against Lewis the French Kings
Son, but also in a naval confl^ct overthrew a new supply of Soldiers sent to
him for his assistance. I behold this Hugo joined with him (as the shadow to
the substance) as his Undersheriff, acting the affairs of the County in his
absence.

II HUBERT de BUROZO, and WILL. de BRITO.]

This year Anno 1227. Hugo de Burgo (of whom immediately before) was in the
month of Februa^y, by the King made Earl of Kent, and for a farther reward,
had granted unto him the third penny of all the Kings profits arising in the
said County, and Hubert de Burozo succeeded him in his Office. But I humbly
conceive him the same Burozo is but our English Burrou^h, barbarously
latinized, and the same with Burgo.
person, who was both Comes and Vice-Comes of Kent at the same time, a
conjuction often precedented in other Counties. The rather, because this Hubert
lived many years after, till at last he got the Kings ill will, for doing him
so many good Offices, not dying till the twenty seventh year of his Reign, Anno
1243.

Edw. I.
20 JOHAN. de NORTHWOD.]

This was a right Ancient Family in this County, for I find in the Church of
Minster in Shepy this Inscription,

Hic jacent Rogerus Norwod and Boan uxor ejus, sepulti ante Conquestum.
Possibly they might be buried here before the Conquest, but the late Character
of the Letter does prove it a more modern Inscription. The chief R^sidence of
the Norwods, was a house of their own name in the Parish of Milton-Chu^ch,
where they have many fair Monuments, but with defaced Epitaphs. One of their
Heirs was married into the Family of the Nortons, of whom In the fifth of King
Henry the eight.
hereafter.

Sheriffs.
Name. Place. Arms. RICH. II. Anno 1 Tho. de Cobham. Roundall G. on a Chev.
Or, 3 Cress. Sa. 2 Jo. de Fremingham Freming 3 (...) c de Peckham Y^ldham Sab.
a chev. Or, between 3. cross Croslets Fitchee Arg. 4 Will. Septuans Milton 5
Arnald. S^vage Bobbing Arg. 6. Lionc^ls 3, 2, and 1. Sab. 6 Tho. Brockhul
Cale-Hill Gul. a Cross ingraild between 12. cross-croslets Fitche Ar 7 8 Rob.
Corby Boughton 9 Arnold. Savage ut prius 11 Radus Seintleger (...) (...).
Fretee Arg. a Chief Gul. 11 (...). de Gulde^ord Hempsted O^, a Saltyr betwixt 4
Martlets Sable. 12 Jacobus Peckham ut prius 13 Will. Burcestre ^antshire 14
Rich. de Berham Berham Arg. 3. B^ars Sable, 2. and 1. (...) Or. 15 ^ho. Chich
Dungeon 16 Will. Barry Sev^ngton Az. 3 Lions rampant, within a border, Arg. 17
Joh. Fremingham 18 Tho. Colepeper Pepenbnry Arg. a Bend engrailed Gules. ^9
Will. Haut Waddenhal Or, a Cross engrailed Gules. 20 Tho. Seintleger ut prius
21 Nich. Potyne Queen-Co. 12 Joh Botiller. Gravency A^g. on a Chief Sab. 3.
Cups covered Or. HEN. IV. Anno 1 R b C^ifford Bobbing Checkee Or, and Azure, a
Fess within a border, Gul. 2 Tho. Lodelow Joh Diggs (...) Digs Cou. (...), on a
Cross, Arg. 5. Eaglets displayed, Sable. 3 Tho. Hyach 4 Rich Cliderow G
ldstanton. Arg. on a Cheveron, Gules, b^twixt (...) Spread-Eagles, Sable, 5
Annulets, Or. 5 6 Valent Baret Lenham 7 (...). (...) 8 Edw. Haut. ut prius 9
Will. Snayth Ar. 4. (...) G. on a chief, S. a bar (...) of the first. 10
Reginald. Pimpe Pimps Co. 11 Joh Darel Cale-Hil. Az. a Lion rampant Or, crowned
Argent. 12 Will. Notebeame HEN. V. Anno 1 Will. Clifford ut prius 2 Rob.
Clifford. ut prius 3 Will. Langley 4 Will Darel ^t prius 5 Joh Darel ut prius 6
Rich. Cliderow ut prius 7 Joh Burgh 8 Will. Haut Hautsburn. ut (...) 9 10 Joh.
Darel. ut prius HEN. VI. Anno 1 (...) Darel. ut prius 2 Will (...) (...).
Azure, 6. Lions rampant, Argent, a Canton Erm. 3 John Rykeld Eastlingha^. 4
Will. Clifford ut p^ius 5 Will. Culpeper Preston ut prius. 6 Tho. Ellis Burton
(...), on a Cross S. 5. Cressants A. 7 Will. Scot Braborne AMP. 8 Joh. Peach
Lullingston 9 Joh. Seintleger ut prius 10 Edward Gulfort Ha^den ut prius. 11
Will. Burys B^omeley 12 Rich Wo^veile. Northa^p. Arg. a Fess and Canton, Gul.
13 Will. Clifford ut prius 14 Will. Manston Manston 15 Jacobus Fienis K^msing
Az 3. Lions rampant, Or. 16 Rich W^ller Grome-Br. Sab. 3. V Vallnut-leaves, Or,
between 2. Benlets, Argent. 17 Edw Gul^eford ut prius 18 Gervasius Clifton
Brabourn. Sable, Semi de cinque Foyles, a Lion rampant, Argent. 19 Joh. Yeard
Denton 20 Joh Wa^ner Vote^crey 21 Will. Mareys (...) Sable, 3 Lions pass. in
Bend, double cotised, Argent. 22 Tho. Brown Surrey 23 Will. Crowmer Tunstal
Arg. a Cheveron (...) three Ravens, Sable. 24 Joh. (...) Feversham 25 Will.
(...) Sundridge E^min, a Fesse Gules. 26 Will. Kene Well. Hal 27 Steph. (...).
ut prius 28 Hen. Crowmer ut prius 29 Garvasius Clifton. ut prius 30 Rob. Horn
Horns place 31 Tho Ballard Ho^ton 32 Joh (...). Repton 33 Joh (...), mil. ut
prius 34 (...). Belkn^p, arm. The Moat 35 Alex Eden, arm. Westwell 36 Joh
G^ldeford, ar. ut prius 37 (...). Clifton, mil. ut prius 38 T^o. Brown mil and
ut prius Joh. Scot, ar. Vicis. vic. Scots-Hal ut prius. EDW. IV. Anno 1 John
Isaac, ar. Howlets 2 Will. Peach, mil. 3 Idem. 4 Joh. Diggs, ar* ut prius 5
Alex. Clifford, ar. ut prius 6 Will. Haut, mil. ut prius 7 ^oh. Colepeper,
mil. ut prius 8 (...). Se^ntleger, ar. ut prius 9 Hen. F^rrers, ar. Warw shire
10 Joh. Bromston, ar. Preston 11 Rich Colepeper, ar. Oxenhoath ut prius. 12 Ja
Peckham, ar. ut prius 13 Joh. Fogge, mil. 14 Joh. Isley, ar. ut prius 15 Will
Haut, mil. ut prius 16 (...). Green, ar. Scadbury Gules, across (...) Ermin,
within a border Gobony Arg. and Sable. 17 Will. Cheyney, ar. ut prius 18 Rich.
Haut, ar. ut prius 19 Rich. Lee, ar. Delce 20 Ioh. Fogge, mil. 21 Geo. Brown,
mil. ut prius 22 Rich. Haut, ar. ut prius RICH. III. Anno 1 Will. Haut, mil. ut
prius 2 Ioh. Banne. Grench 3 Rich Brakenbury, mil The Moat and Will. Cheyney.
ut prius HEN. VII. Anno 1 Will. Cheyney. ut prius 2 Ioh. Pymp, ar. ut prius 3
Hen. F^rrers, mil. ut prius. 4 Walt. Roberts. Glastenb. 5 Will, Boleyn, mil.
Norfolk Argene, a Cheveron (...), inter three Bulls heads (...) Sable, armed Or.
6 Will. Scot, mil. ut prius 7 Ioh. Darel, ar. ut prius 8 Tho. Kemp, ar.
Ollantie 9 Rich. (...), mil. Halden ut prius 10 Ioh. Peach, ar. 11 Ioh. Diggs,
ar. ut prius 12 (...). Walsingham, ar. Scadbury Pally of 6. Arg. and Sab. (...)
Fesse Gules. 13 (...) w Clifford, ar. ut prius 14 Rob Wotton, ar. Bocton Arg. a
Saltire engrailed, Sab. 15 Alex. Colepeper, ar. ut prius 16 Tho. Eden, ar. 17
Will. (...), mil. ut prins 18 Rad. Seintleger. ut prius 19 Will. Crowmer, ar.
ut prius 20 Ioh. Langley, ar. Knowlton 21 Tho K^mp. mil. 22 Alex Colepeper, ar.
ut prius 23 Henry Vain. Tonbridg (...), 3 Gantlets (...), Or. 24 Reginald.
Peckham. ut prius. HEN. VIII. 1 Will. Growmer, mil. ut prius 2 Iacobus Diggs,
a^. ut prius 3 Tho. Boleyn, mil. ut prius 4 Tho. Kemp, mil. 5 Io. Norton, mil.
Northwood 6 Alex. Colepeper, ar. ut prius 7 Tho. Cheyney, ar. ut prius 8 Will.
Scot, mil. ut pr^us 9 Tho. Boleyn, mil. ut prius 10 Ioh. Crisps, ar. Quekes 11
Ioh. Wiltshire, mil. Stone 12 Ioh. Roper, ar. Eltham. Party per Fesse, Az. and
Or, a pale counterchanged, three Row. Bucks-heads erased of the second. 13 Rob.
Sonds, ar. * Town place 14 Ioh. F^gge, mil. 15 Geo. Guldeford, mil. ut prius 16
Will. Haut, mil. ut prius * Ar. 3 Black Mores heads couped prop. bet. 2 (...)
S. 17 Hen, V^ne, ar. ut prius 18 W ll Whetnal, ar. Hex^al Vert, a Bend Ermin.
(...) (...) Scot, mil. ut prius 20 Will Kemp, ar. 21 Edw (...), mil. ut prius
2^ Will. Waller, mil. ut prius 23 R^ch. Clement, mil. Ightham 24 VVi^l.
Finch, mil. East-well Arg. a Cheveron between 3. Griffins passant Sable. 25
Tho. Roberth, ar. Glastenb. 26 Tho. Ponings, mil. O^tenhang. Barry of 6. Or and
V^rt, a Bend, Gules. 27 Edw. VVo^ton. mil. ut prius 28 Tho (...). mil. (...) 29
Will. Hau^, mil. ut prius 30 Will Sidney, mil Pensher^t Or, a Pheon Azure. 31
Anth. Seintleger, m. ut prius 3^ Anth. Sonds, ar. ut prius 33 Reginald Sco^.
mil. ut prius 34 Henry Iseley, mil. ut prius 35 Humph. Style, mil. Langley-pa
Sable, a Fesse engrailed Frettee between 3. Flowers de Lis, Or. 36 Ioh. Fogge,
mil. 37 Percival Heart, mil. Lullingst. 38 Hen. (...), at. EDW. VI. Anno Az. a
Fesse (...) (...). 3 goats heads erased Arg. (...) Or. 1 (...) Sidley, ar.
Scadbury 2 G^o. Harper, mil. Sutton Sab. a Lion rampant within a border
engrailed, Gules. 3 Tho. Culpeper, ar. ut prius 4 Tho. What, mil. 5 Hen sley,
mil. ut prius 6 Ioh. Guldeford, mil. ut prius PHIL. and MAR. Anno M. ^ Rob.
Southwel, m. Merworth M. 1. and ^. Will. Roper, ar. ut prius 2 and 3 Tho. Kemp.
mil. 3 and 4 4 and 5 Geo. Vane, ar. ut prius 5 and 6 (...) Wotton, ar. ut prius
ELIZ. REG. Anno 1 Nich. Crisps, ar. 2 Warh. Seintleger, ar. ut prius 3 Ioh.
Tufton, ar. Hothfield S. an Eagle displayed Erm. a border Arg. 4 Ri^h. Baker,
ar. * Sisingherst 5 Tho. Walsingham, ar ut prius * Az. a Fesse Or, between
three Swans beads erased, beaked, Gules, 6 Tho. Kemp, mil. 7 Ioh. Mayney, ar.
Will. Isley, ar. ut prius 8 Ioh. Sidley, ar. Southfleet 9 Will. C^owmer, ar. ut
prius 10 Ioh. Brown, ar. Browns pla. Az. a Chev. betw. 3 escalops Or, within a
border engrailed, G. 11 Edw. Isaac, ar. Patricks-b. 12 Ioh. Leonard, ar.
Chevinin. Or, on a Fesse Gules, 3 flower de Lis of the first. 13 Walter Main,
sen. ar Spilsil 14 Tho Vane, sen. mil. Badsel ut prius 15 Tho. Willoughby, ar
Bore place O^, Frette Azure. 16 (...) Hales, mil. Woodch. Gules, 3 Arrows, Or,
headed and feathered, Argent. 17 Ioh. Tufron, ar. ut prius 18 Tho. Scot, mil.
ut prius 19 Edw. Boys, ar. Fredville Or, a Griffin Sergreant, Sable, within two
Borders, Gules. 20 Tho. Wotton, ar. ut prius 21 Tho. Copinger, ar. Tho. Vane,
ar. ut prius Bendy of six, Or, and Gul. on a F^sse, Azure, three plates. 22
Tho. Sonds, ar. ut prius 23 Geo. Heart, mil. ut prius 24 Rich. Baker, mil. ut
prius 25 Just. Champneys, ar. Hall-plac Per pale, Arg. and Sab. a Lion rampant
within a border engrailed counterchanged. 26 Nich. Sonds, ar. ut prius 27
Will. Cromer, ar. ut prius 28 Iacobus Hales, mil. ut prius 29. Ioh. Fineux,
ar. Haw-Co. Vert, a Cheveron between 3. E^glets displayed, Or. 30 Rich Hardres,
ar. 31 Will. Sidley, ar. ut prius 32 Tho. Willoughby, ar. ut prius 33 Sampson
Leonard, ar ut prius 34 Rob. Bing, ar. W o^ham Quarterly S. and Ar. a Lion ra.
in the first quarter of the sec. 35 Mich. Sond, ar. * Throughley 36 Edw
Wotton, mil. ut prins * ut prius 37 Tho Palmer, ar. 38 Moilo Finch, mil.
Eastwell Arg. a Chev. betwixt 3 Criffins passant, Sable. 39 Tho. Kemp, ar. 40
Martin Ba^nham, ar. S. a Cross eng. bet. 4 Cress. (...). 41 Rog. Twisden, ar.
East Peckh. Gyrony (...) four, Arg. and Gul. a Saltire between as many croslets
all counterchanged. 42 Ioh. Smith, ar. Ostenhang. 43 Tho. Scot, ar. ut prius 44
Petr. Manwood, ar. St. Steph 45 Ia. Crome^, mil. ut prius JACOBUS. Anno 1
Jacob. Cromer, mil. ut prius 2 Tho. B^ker, mil. ut prius 3 Moilus Finch, mil.
ut prius 4 Nort. Knatchbul, mil Mersham Azure 3 Croslets Fitchee between 2
Bendlets, Or. 5 Rob. Edolph, mil. Hinx-hill 6 Edw. Hales, mil. ut prius 7
Will. VVithens, m South end 8 N chapter Gilborn, mil. Charing 9 Max Dallison, mil.
Halling Gules, 3 cr^ssents, Or, a Canton Ermin. 10 Will. Steed, mil Steed hill
11 An^h. Awcher, mil. Hautsbourn Sab. 3 Bars, and as many cinquesoils in Chief,
Or. 12 Edw Filmer, mil. E. Sutton 13 Edwin Sandis, mil. Northborn Or, a Fess
Dancy, bet. 3 cros^. G. 14 Will. Beswick, ar. Spelmo^den Gul. 6 B^sants, a
(...) Or. 15 Gabr. Livesey, ar. Hollingbor. Ar. a Lion ramp Gul. between 3
trefoils, Ve^t. 16 Tho. Norton, mil. Bobbing 17 Edw Scot, ar. ut prius 18 John
Sidley Bar. ut prius 19 Tho. Roberts, mil. and b. Glastenb. 20 George Fane,
mil. ut prius 21 Ioh Hayward, mil. Hollingbor. 22 Tho. Hamond, mil. Brasted
Arg. ^n a Cheveron engrailed betwixt 3 martlets Sable, as many cinque foils,
Or. CAROL. I. Anno 1 Isa. Sidley, m. and bar. G^. Chart. ut prius. 2 Basilius
Dixwel, ar. Folkston Ar. a Che. G bet. 3 flow. de lys S 3 ^ dw. Engham, mil.
Goodnesto^. Arg. a Chev. Sab. betw. 3 Ogresses, a Chief, Gules. 4 Will.
Campion, m Combwel 5 Rich. Brown, ar. Singleton ut prius. 6 Rob. Lewkner, mil.
Acris Azure, three Cheverons, Arg. 7 Nich. Miller, ar. Crouch 8 Tho. Style,
bar. Watringb ut prius. 9 Ioh. Baker, bar. ut prius 10 Edw. Chute, ar.
Surrende^ 11 VVil. Culpeper, bar. ut prius 12 Geo. Sands, mil. ut prius 13 Tho.
Hendley, mil Courshorn 14 Edw. Masters, mil. E. Langdo^ 15 David Polhill, ar.
Otford 16 Jacob. Hugeson, ar. Lingsted 17 VVil Brokman, m. Joh. Honywood, m.
Bithborow Evington 18 19 20 Ioh. Rayney, bar. 21 Edw Monins, bar. Waldersha^e
Court. Azure, a Lion passant betwixt 3 Escalops, Or. 22 Ioh. Hendon* mil.

Richard the Second.
5. ARNOLD SAVAGE.]

He was a Knight, and the third Constable of Queenborough-Castle. He lies
buried in Bobbing Church, with this Inscription,

Orate specialiter pro animabus Arnoldi Savage, qui obiit in vigil. Sancti
Andreae Apost. Anno 1410. and Domine Joanne uxoris ejus quae fuit fill. etc. The
rest is defaced.

16. GULIELMUS BARRY.]

In the Parish Church of Senington in this County, I meet with these two
sepulchral Inscriptions,

Orate pro anima Isabelle quondam uxoris Willielmi Barry, Militis.
Hic jacet Joanna B^rry quondam uxor Willielmi B^rry, Militis.
There is in the same Church a Monument, whereupon a man armed is pourtrayed,
the Inscription thereon being altogether perished, which in all probability, by
the report of the Parishioners, was made to the memory of Sir William Barry
aforesaid.

Henry the Fourth.
6 VALENTINE BARRET.]

He lies buried in the Parish Church of Lenham in this County, under a
Gravestone, thus inscribed,

Hic jacet Valentine Barret, Arm. qui obiit November. 10. 1440. and Cecilia uxor
ejus, quae obiit, Martii 2. 1440. quorum animabus -- Henry the Sixth.
7. WILLIAM SCOT.]

He lies buried in Brabo^ne Church, with this Epitaph,

Hic jacet Willielmus Scot de Braborne Arm. qui obiit 5. Febr. 1433. cujus anim
-- Sis testis Christ quod non jacet hic lapis iste,
Corpus ut ornetur sed spiritus ut memoretur.
Quisquis eris qui transieris sic perlege, plora,
Sum quod eris fueramqu^ quod es, pro me precor ora.
His Family afterward fixed at Scots Hall in this County, where they flourish
at this day in great reputation.

9. JOHN SEINTLEGER.]

I find him entombed in Ulcombe Church, where this is written on his Grave,
Here lies John Seintleger, Esquire and Margery his Wife, sole Daughter and Heir of
James Donnet, 1442. Wonder not that there is no mention in this Catalogue of
Sir Thomas Seintleger, a Native and potent person in this County, who married
Anne the Relict of Henry Holland D. of Exeter, the Sister of King Edward the
Fourth, by whom he had Anne, Mother to Thomas Manners, first Earl of Rutland.
For the said Sir Thomas Seintleger was not to be confided in under King Henry
the Sixth; and afterward, when Brother-in-law to King Edward the Fourth, was
above the Office of the Sherivalty.

16. RICHARDUS WALLER.]

This is that renowned * Soldier, who in the time of Henry the Fifth, took
Charles Villare ^anum, page 320
Duke of Orleans, General of the French Army, Prisoner at the Battle of
Agin-Court, brought him over into England, and held him in honorable restraint
or custody at GromeBridge, which a Manuscript in the Heralds Office notes to be
twenty four years: In the time of which his recess, he newly erected the house
at Grome-Bridge upon the old Foundation, and was a Benefactor to the repair of
Spelherst Church, where his Arms ^emain in stone-work over the Church porch:
but lest such a signal piece of service might be entombed in the Sepulcher of
unthankful forgetfulness, the Prince assigned to this Ri^hard Waller and his
Heirs for ever, an additional Crest, viz. the Arms or Escoucheon of France,
hanging by a Label on an Oak, with this Motto affixed, Haec Fructus Virtutis.
From this Richard, Sir William Waller is lineally descended.

23. WILLIELMUS CROWMER.]

This year happened the barbarous Rebellion of Jack Cade in Kent. This Sheriff,
unable with the posse Comitatus, to resist their numerousness, was taken by
them, and by those wild Justicers committed to the Fleet in London; because, as
they said (and it must be so if they said it) he was guilty of extortion in his
Office. Not long after, these Reformers sent for him out of the Fleet, made him
to be brought to Mile-end, where, without any legal proceedings, they caused
his head to be Stows Chro. page 391.
smitten off, and set upon a long pole on London bridge, next to the Lord Say
aforesaid, whose Daughter he had married.

38 JOHN SCOT, Arm. Et vicissem Vic.]

I understand it thus, that his Undersheriff supplied his place, whilst he
was busied in higher affairs. He was knighted, much trusted and employed by
King Edward the Fourth. I read in a Inter Bundel. Ind^nt. de Guerra a ud Pelles
W. st.
Record,

Johannes Scot, Miles, cum C. C. Soldariis ex mandato Domini Regis apud
Sandwicum pro salva custodia ejusdem. The aforesaid King, in the twelfth year
of his reign, sent this Sir John (being one of his Privy Council, and Knight
Marshall o^ Calis) with others, on an Embassy, to the Dukes of Burgundy and
Britain, to bring back the Earls of Pembroke and Richmona, whose escape much
perplexed this Kings suspicious thoughts. But see his honorable Epitaph in the
Church of Braborne.

Hic jacet magnificus ac insignis Miles Joha^nes Scot quondam Regis domus,
invictissimi Principis Edwardi quarti, Control. and nobilissima integerrimaque
Agnes uxor ejus. Qui quidem Johannes obiit Anno 1485. die men's. October. 17.
Richard the Third.
3. RICHARDUS BRAKENBURY, Mil. and WILLIELMUS CHENEY.]

The former was of an ancient extraction in the North. I behold him as nearly
allied (if not Brother) to Sir Robert Brakenbury, Constable of the Tower, who
dipped his fingers so deep in the blood of King Edward the Fifth and his
Brother. It concerned King ^ichard, in those suspicious times, to appoint his
Confident: Sheriff of this important County; but he was soon un-Sheriffed by
the Kings death, and another of more true Integrity substituted in his room.

Henry the Seventh.
5. WILL. BOLEYN, Mil.]

He was Son to Sir Ieffery Boleyne, Lord Mayor of London, by his Wife, who was
Daughter and coheir to Thomas Lord Hoo and Hastings. This Sir William was
made Knight of the Bath at the Coronation of King Richard the Third. He married
one of the Daughters and Coheirs of Thomas Butler, Earl of Ormond, by whom
(besides four Daughters married into the Worshipful and Wealthy Families of
Shelton, Calthrop, Clear, and Sackvil) he had Sir Tho. Boleyn, Earl of
Wilsthire, of whom hereafter.

10. JOH: PEACH, Arm.

This year Perkin VVarbeck landed at Sandwich in this County, with a power of
all Nations, contemptible not in their number or courage, but nature and
fortune, to be feared, as well of Friends as Enemies, as fitter to spoil a
coast, than recover a country. Sheriff Peach (knighted this year for his good
service) with the Kentish Gentry, acquitted themselves so valiant and vigilant,
that Perkin sh^unk his horns back again into the shell of his ships. About 150.
of his men being taken, and brought up by this Stows Ann it is, page 480.
Sheriff to London, some were executed there, the rest on the Sea Coasts of
Kent, and the neighboring Counties, for Sea-marks to teach Perkin's people to
avoid such dangerous shoars.

Henry the Eighth.
5 JOH. NORTON, Mil.]

He was one of the Captains, who in the beginning of the Reign of King Henry
the eight went over with the 1500. Archers, under the conduct of Sir Edward
Poynings, to assist Margaret, Duchess of Savoy (Daughter to Maximillian the
Emperor, and Governesse of the Low Countries) against the incursions of the
Duke of Guelders; where this Sir John was knighted by Charles, young Prince of
Castile, and afterward Emperor. He lies buried in Milton Church, having this
written on his Monument; Pray for the souls of Sir John Norton, Knight, and
Dame Joane his Wife, one of the Daughters and Heirs of John Norwood, Esquire who
died Febr. 8. 1534.

7. THOMAS CHEYNEY, Arm.]

He was afterward knighted by King Henry the Eighth, and was a spriteful
Gentleman, living and dying in great honor and estimation; a Favorite and
Privy Counselor to four successive Kings and Queens, in the greatest ^urn of
times England ever beheld; as by this his Epitaph in Minster Church, in the
Isle of Shepey will appear.

Hic jacet Dominus Thomas Cheyney, inclitissimi ordinis Garterii Miles,
Guarduanus quinque Portuum, ac Thesaurarius Hospitii Henrici octavi, ac Edwardi
sexti, Regum; Reginaeque Mariae ac Elizabethae, ac eorum in secretis
Consiliarius, qui obiit -- mensis Decembris, Anno Dom. M.D.L.IX. ac Reg.
Reginae Eliz. primo.

11. JOHN WILTSHIRE, Mil.]

He was Controller of the Town and Marches of Calis, Anno 21. of King Henry the
Seventh. He founded a fair Chapel in the Parish of Stone, wherein he lies
entombed with this Inscription,

Here lies the bodies of Sir John Wiltshire, Knight, and of Dame Margaret his
Wife; which Sir John died 28. December. 1526. And Margaret died -- of --

Bridget his sole Daughter and Heir was married to Sir Richard VVingfield,
Knight of the Garter, of whom formerly in Cambridge-shire.

12. JOHN ROPER, Arm.]

All the memorial I find of him, is this Inscription in the Church of Eltham,
Pray for the soul of Dame Margery Roper, late Wife of John Roper, Esquire,
Daughter and one of the Heirs of John Tattersall, Esquire, who died Febr. 2.
1518. Probably she got the addition of Dame (being Wife but to an Esquire) by
some immediate Courtattendance on Katharine first Wife to King Henry the Eighth.

King James.
3. MOILE FINCH, Mil.]

This worthy Knight married Elizabeth, sole Daughter and Heir to Sir Thomas
Heneage, Vice Chamberlain to Queen Elizabeth, and Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster. She in her Widowhood, by the special favor of King James was
honored Vicoun^ess Maidston, (unprecedented, save by Mary Beaumont, or
Villers, extraordinarily created Countess of Buckingham.
One, for this hundred years) and afterward by the great Grace of King Charles
the First, created Countess of VVinchelsey, both Honors being entailed on the
Issue-male of her Body; to which her Grandchild, the Right Honorable Heneage
(lately gone Ambassador to Constantinople) does succeed.

The Farewell.
Having already insisted on the Courage of the Kentish-men, and shown how in
former Ages, the leading of the Vanguard was entrusted unto their magnanimity,
we shall conclude our Description of this Shire, praying that they may have an
accession of Loyalty unto their Courage, (not that the Natives of Kent have
acquitted themselves less Loyal, than those of other Shires) but seeing the one
will not suffer them to be idle, the other may guide them to expend their
Ability for Gods glory, the defense of his Majesty, and maintenance of true
Religion.

CANTERBURY.
CANTERBURY is a right ancient City, and whilst the Saxon H^ptar chy
flourished, was the chief seat of the Kings of Kent. Here Thomas Becket had his
death, Edward surnamed the Black Prince and King Henry the Fourth their
Interment. The Metropolitan Dignity first conferred by Gregory the Great on
London, was for the Honor of Augustine afterward bestowed on this Camb. Brit.
de Cant.
City. It is much commended by William of Malmesbury for its pleasant
situation, being surrounded with a fertile soil, well wooded, and commodiously
watered by the River Stoure, from whence it is By Mr. Somner in his Description
of Canterbury, page 37.
said to have had its name Durwhern, in British, a swift River. It is happy in
the vicinity of the Sea, which affords plenty of good Fish.

Buildings.
CHRIST CHURCH, First dedicated, and (after 300. years intermission to Saint
Thomas Becket) restored to the honor of our Savior, is a stately structure,
being the performance of several successive Archbishops. It is much adorned
with glass Windows. Here they will tell you of a foraign Ambassador, who
proffered a vast price to transport the East Window of the Quire beyond the
Seas. Yet Artists who commend the Colors, condemn the Figures therein, as
wherein proportion is not exactly observed.

According to the Maxim, Pictures are the Books, painted windows were in the
time of Popery the Library of Lay men; and after the Conquest grew in general
use in England. It is much suspected Aneyling of Glass (which answers to
Dying in grain in Drapery) especially of Yellow, is lost in our age, as to the
perfection thereof. Anciently Colors were so incorporated in Windows, that
both of them lasted and faded together: Whereas our modern Painting (being
rather on than in the Glass) is fixed so faintly, that it often changes, and
sometimes falls away. Now, though some being only for the innocent White, are
equal enemies to the painting of Windows as Faces, conceiving the one as great
a Pander to superstition, as the other to wantonness; Yet others of as much
zeal and more knowledge, allow the Historical uses of them in Churches.

Proverbs.
Canterbury-Tales.]

So Chaucer calls his Book, being a collection of several Tales, pretended to
be told by Pilgrims in their passage to the Shrine of Saint Thomas in
Canterbury. But since that time Canterbury-Tales are parallel to Fabulae
Milestae, which are Charactered, Nec verae, nec verisimiles, merely made to
mar precious time, and please fanciful people. Such are the many miracles of
Thomas Becket; some helpful (though but narrow, as only for private
convenience) as when perceiving his old Palace at Otford to want water, he
struck his staff into the dry ground (still called Saint Thomas his well)
whence water runs plentifully to serve that house (lately rebuilt) unto
this day. Others spightful: as when (because a Smith dwelling in that Town had
clogged his Horse) he ordered, that Lambert in his Perambulation of Kent; page
37.
no Smith afterward should thrive within that Parish. But he, who shall go
about seriously to confute these Tales, is as very a Fool, as he was somewhat
else, who first impudently invented and vented them.

Prelates.
STEPHEN LANGTON. Here we are at a perfect loss for the place of his birth, S.
N.
his surname affording us so much direction, in effect it is none at all.
Inopes nos copia fecit, finding no fewer than twelve Langtons (though none very
near to this place) which makes us fly to our marginal refuge herein. Stephen,
born in England, was bred in Paris, where he became one of the greatest
Scholars of the Christian world, in his age. He was afterward consecrated
Cardinal of Saint Chrysogone, and then by Papal power intruded Archbishop of
Canterbury, in defiance of all opposition which King John could make against
him.

Many are his learned Works, writing Comments on all the Old, and on some of
the New Testament. He was the Bale de scrip. Brit. Cent. 3. Number. 87. and Math.
Panker in the Life of Langton.
first that divided the whole Bible into Chapters, as Robert Stephens a
Frenchman, that curious Critic and painful Printer, so ne six score years
since, first subdivided into Verses.

A worthy Work, making Scripture more managable in men's memories, and the
passages therein the sooner to be turned to, as any person who is ^ooner found
out in the most populous City, if methodized into Streets and Houses with
signs, to which the Figures affixed do fitly allude.

Say not this was a presumption, incurring the curse denounced to such, who
add to Scripture, it being no Addition but an Illustration thereof. Besides,
God set the first pattern to men's industry herein, seeing the distinction of
some Verses may be said to be Jure Divino, as those in the Lamentations and
elsewhere, which are Alphabetically modelled.

As causless their complaint, who cavil at the inequality of Chapters, the
eighth of the first of Kings, being sixty six, the last of Malachy but six
verses, seeing the entireness of the sense is the standard of their length, or
shortness. It is confessed some few Chapters end, and others begin obruptly:
and yet, it is questionable, whether the ateration thereof would prove
advantageous, seeing the reforming of a small fault, with a great change, does
often hurt more than amend: and such alterations would discompose Millions of
Quotations, in excellent Authors conformed to the aforesaid received divisions.

Here it must not be concealed, that notwithstanding this general tradition of
Langtons chaptering the Bible, some learned men make that design of far
ancienter date, and particularly that able Antiquary In Glossario v^rbo
Heptateuchus.
Sir Henry Spelman. This I am confident of, that Stephen Langton did something
much material in order thereunto, and the Improver is usually called the
Inventor, by a complemental mistake.

However, though I believe Langton well employed in dividing the Bible, he was
ill bus^ed in rending asunder the Church and Kingdom of England, reducing King
John to sad extremities. He died, and was buried at Canterbury Anno Dom. 1228.

Soldiers.
WILLIAM PRUDE, Esquire, (vulgarly called Proud) was born in this City, where
his stock have continued for some hundreds of years, bred a Soldier in the Low
Countries, where he attained to be Lieutenant Colonel. He was slain July 12.
1632. at the siege of Mastrich. His body (which I assure you was no usual
honor) was brought over into England, and buried in the Cathedral of
Canterbury, in Saint Michaels Chapel on the South side of the Quire, with this
Inscription on his Monument;

Stand Soldiers; ere you march (by way of charge)
Take an example here, that may enlarge
Your minds to noble Action* Here in peace
Rests one whose Life was War, whose rich increase
Of Fame and Honor from his Valor grew,
Unbegg'd, unbought, for what he won he drew
By just desert: having in service been
A Soldier, till near sixty from sixteen
Years of his active Life, continually
Fearless of Death; yet still prepared to die
In his Religious Thoughts: for *amidst all harms
He bare as much of Piety as Arms.
Now Soldiers on, and fear not to intrude
The Gates of Death by the example of this Prude.
He married Mary Daughter of Sir Adam Sprackling, Knight, and had Issue by her
four Sons and three Daughters; to whose memory his surviving Son Searles Prude
has erected this Monument.

Writers.
OSBERN of CANTERBURY, so called, because there he had his first birth, or best
Being, as Chanter of the Cathedral Church therein. An admirable Musician, which
quality endeared him (though an Englishman) to Lankfrank, the Lordly Lombard,
and Archbishop of Canterbury. He was the English Genesis 4. 22.
Jubal, as to the curiosity thereof in our Churches. An Art, which never any
spoke against who understood it; otherwise Apollo is in a sad case, if Midas
his ears must be his Judges. However in Divine Service all Music ought to be
tuned to edification (that all who hear may understand it) otherwise it may
tend to delight not devotion, and true zeal cannot be raised where knowledge is
depressed. This Osbern wrote the life of Saint Dunstan in pure Latin,
according to that age, flourishing under William the Conqueror, Anno 1070.

SIMON LANGTON, was by his Brother Stephen Langton the Archbishop, preferred
S. N.
Archdeacon of Canterbury; who, Carne and sanguine revelante (says the Somner
in his Catalogue of the Archdeacons of Cant.
Record) made the place much better, both to him and his successors, in revenue
and jurisdiction. A troublesome man he was, and, on his Brothers score, a great
adversary to King John, even after that King had altered his Copy, and became,
of a fierce Foe, a Son-Servant to the Pope, by resigning his Crown unto him.
But our Simon could not knock off when he should, having contracted such an
habit of hatred against K. John, that he could not depose it, though commanded
under the pain of excommunication. This caused him to trudge to the Court of
Rome, where he found little favor. For, such who will be the Popes white
Boys, must watchfully observe his signals, and not only charge when he
charge, but retreat when he retreateth. This Simon (beside others) wrote a
Book of the penitence of Magdalene, in relation (it seems) to himself, though
she found more favor in the Court of Heaven, than he at Rome. He died Anno
Dom. 12 --

Benefactors to the Public.
JOHN EASDAY, was Alderman and Mayor of this City, Anno 1585. He found the
Walls thereof much ruined, and being a man but of an Somner in his Survey of
Cant. page 15.
indifferent estate, began the reparation thereof at Ridingate, and therein
proceeded so far as his name is inscribed on the Wall; whose exemplary
endeavors have since met with some to commend, none to imitate them.

THOMAS NEVILE, born in this City of most honorable extraction, as his name is
enough to notify and avouch. He was bred in Cambridge, and Master first of Mag
dalen, then of Trinity College, and Dean of Canterbury. He was the first
Clergy man (sent by Archbishop Whitgift) who carried to King James tidings of
the English Crown; and it is questionable whether he brought thither or thence
more welcome news (especially to the Clergy) acquainting them with the Kings
full Sir George Paul in the Life of ArchBishop Whitgift.
intentions to maintain Church Discipline, as he found it established.

But the main matter commending his memory is his magnificency to Trinity
College, whose Court he reduced to a spacious and beautiful Quadrangle. Indeed
he plucked down as good building as any erected, but such as was irregular
intercepting the sight, disturbing the intended uniformity of the Court,
whereby the beauty at this day is much advanced. For as the Intuitive knowledge
is more perfect, than that which insinuates it self into the Soul Gradually by
discourse, so more beautiful the prospect of that Building, which is all
visible at one view, than what discovers it self to the sight by parcels and
degrees. Nor was this Doctor like those Poets, good only at Translation, and
bad at Invention, all for altering, nothing for adding of his own, who
contributed to this College (I will not say a Widows Mite, but) a Batchelours
Bounty: a stately new Court of his own expense, which cost him three thousand
pounds and upwards. Much enfeebled with the Palsy, he died an aged man Anno
Dom. 161 --

The Farewell.
I am heartily sorry that the many laudable endeavors for the scouring and
enlargement of the River Stoure (advantageous for this City) have been so often
defeated, and the Contributions given by well-disposed Benefactors (amongst
whom Mr. Rose, once an Alderman of Canterbury gave three hundred pounds) have
missed their ends, praying that their future enterprises in this kind may be
crowned with success.

For the rest I refer the Reader to the pains of my worthy Friend Mr. William
Somner, who has written justum volumen of the Antiquities of this City. I am
sorry to see him Subject-bound (betrayed thereto by his own modesty) seeing
otherwise, not the City, but Diocese of Canterbury had been more adaequate to
his abilities. I hope others, by his example will undertake their respective
Counties; It being now with our age, the third and last time of asking the
Banes, whether or no we may be wedded to skill in this kind, seeing now use, or
for ever hold your Pens, all Church Monuments leading to knowledge in that
nature, being daily irrecoverably imbezeled.

LANCASHIRE.
LANCASHIRE: Has the Irish Sea on the West, Yorkshire on the East, Cheshire
(parted with the River Mersey) on the South, Cumberland and Westmerland on the
North. It rangeth in length from Mersey to Wenander-Mere, full fifty five
miles, though the Broadest part thereof exceeds not One and thirty. The Air
thereof is Subtle and Piercing, (being free from Foggs saving in the Mosses)
the Effects whereof are found in the fair Complections and firm Constitutions
of the Natives therein, whose bodies are as able as their minds willing for any
laborious Employment. Their Soil is tolerably fruitful of all things necessary
for humane Sustenance: And, as that Youth cannot be counted a D^nce, though he
be Ignorant, if he be Docible, because his lack of Learning is to be scored on
the want of a Teacher; So Sterilitie cannot properly be imputed to some places
in this County, where little Grain does grow, because capable thereof (as
daily experience does avouch) if it were husbanded accordingly.

This Shire, though sufficiently thick of people, is exceedingly thin of
Parishes, as by perusing this parallel will plainly appear,

Rutland has in it, Parishes Forty Cambd. Brit. in Rutland.
eight. Lancashire has in it, Parishes Thirty Idem in Lancashire.
six.

See here how Rutland being scarce a Fifth part of Lancashire in greatness,
has Speed (I think mistaken) says but 28.
a fourth part of Parishes more therein.

But, as it was a fine Sight to behold Sir Tho. More, when Stapleton in his
Life.
Lord Chancellor of England, every morning in term time, humbly ask blessing
in Westminster Hall of Sir John More his Father, then a pusnie Judge: so may
one see in this Shire some Chapels, exceeding their Mother-Churches in fairness
of Structure and numerousnesse of people, yet owning their filial relation and
still continuing their dutiful dependence on their Parents. But for Numerosity
of Chapels, surely the Church of Manchester, exceeds all the rest, which
(though anciently called, but Villa de Manchester) is for Wealth and Greatness
corrival with some Cities in England, having no less then Nine Chapels, which
before these our civil Wars, were reputed to have five hundred communicants a
piece. Insomuch that some Clergy men, who have confulted Gods Honor with their
own credit and profit, could not better desire for themselves, than to have a
Lincolnshire Church, as best built, a Lancashire Parish, as largest bounded,
and a London Audience, as consisting of most intelligent people.

The people, generally devout, are, (as I am informed) Northward and by the
West Popishly (...); which in the other parts (intended by Antiperistasis) are
zealous * 2 Samuel 3. 1.
Protestants. Hence is it, that many Subtle Papists, and Jesuits have been
born and bred in this County, which have met with their Matches (to say no
more) in the Natives of the same County; So that thereby it has come to pass,
that the house of Saul has waxed weaker and weaker, and the house of David
stronger and stronger.

Natural Commodities.
Oats.
If any ask why this Grain growing commonly all over England, is here entered
as an Eminent Commodity of Lancashire? Let him know, that here is the most and
best of that kind; yea Wheat and Barlie may seem but the adopted, whilst Oats
are the Natural Issue of this County; so inclined is its genius to the
production thereof. Say not Oats are Horse-graine, and fitter for a Stable
then a Table. For, besides that the Meal thereof is the distinguishing form of
Gruel or Broth from Water, most hearty and wholesome Bread is made thereof, Yea
anciently North of Humber, no other was eaten by People of the Primest Quality.
For we read, how William the Conqueror bestowed the Manor of Castle Bitham
in Lincolnshire, upon Stephen Earl of Albemarle and Holderness, chiefly for
this consideration, that thence he might have Cambd. Brit. in Lancashire.
wheaten bread to feed his Infant Son, Oaten bread being then the Diet of
Holderness and the Counties lying beyond it.

Allume.
I am informed that Allume is found at Houghton in this County, within the
Inheritance of Sir Richard Houghton, and that enough for the use of this and
the neighboring Shires, though not for Transportarion. But because far greater
plenty is afforded in Yorkshire, the larger mention of this Mineral is
referred to that place.

Oxen.
The fairest in England are bred (or if you will, made) in this County, with
goodly heads, the Tips of whose horns are sometimes distanced five foot
afunder. Horns, are a commodity not to be slighted, seeing I cannot call to
mind any other substance, so hard, that it will not break, so solid, that it
will hold liquor within it, and yet so clear, that light will pass through it.
No Mechanic Trade, but has some Utensils made thereof, and even now I recruit
my pen with Ink from a Vessel of the same. Yea it is useful cap-a-pe, from
Combs to shooing-horns. What shall I speak of the many gardens made of horns,
to garnish houses? I mean artificial flowers of all colors. And besides what
is spent in England, many thousand weight are shaven down into leaves for
Lanthorns and sent over daily into France. In a word the very Shavings of Horn
are profitable, sold by the Sack, and sent many miles from London for the
manuring of ground. No wonder then that the Horners are an ancient corporation,
though why they and the Stows Survey of London, page 638.
Bottle-makers were formerly united into one company, passes my skill to
conjecture. The best horns in all England: and freest to work without Flaws,
are what are brought out of this County to London, the shop-general of English
Industry.

The Manufactures.
Fustians.
These anciently were creditable wearing in England, for persons of the primest
quality, finding the Knight in Chaucer in his Prologue.
Chaucer thus habited.

Of Fustian he weared a Gippon
All besmottred with his Haubergion.
But it seems they were all Foreign Commodities, as may appear by their modern
names.

1. Jen Fustians, which I conceive so called from Jen a City in Saxony. 2.
Ausburgh Fustians made in that famous City in Swevia. 3. Millaine Fustians,
brought over hither out of Lumbardy.
These retain their old names at this day, though these several sorts are made
in this County, whose Inhabitants buying the Cotton, Wool, or Yarne, coming
from beyond the Sea, make it here into Fustians, to the good employment of the
Poor and great improvement of the Rich therein, serving mean people for their
out-(...), and their betters for the Lineings of their garments. Bolton is the
staple-place for this commodity, being brought thither from all parts of the
County.

As for Manchester, the Cottons thereof carry away the credit in our Nation,
and so they did an hundred and fifty years ago. For when learned In his
Ilinerary.
Leland on the cost of King Henry the Eighth, with his Guide travailed
Lancashire, he called Manchester, the fairest and quickest Town in this County,
and sure I am, it has lost neither spruceness nor spirits since that time.

Other Commodities made in Manchester are so small in themselves and various in
their kinds, they will fill the shop of an Haberdasher of small wares, being
therefore too many for me to reckon up, or remember, it will be the safest way
to wrap them all together in some Manchester-Tickin, and to fasten them with
the Pinns (to prevent their falling out and scattering) or tie them with the
Tape, and also, (because sure bind sure find) to bind them about with points
and (...) all made in the same place.

The Buildings.
MANCHESTER, a Collegiate as well as a Parochial Church, is a great ornament to
this County, The Quire thereof, though but small is exceeding beautiful, and
for Woodwork an excellent piece of Artifice.

The Wonders.
About Camdens Br. in Lanc^shire.
VViggin and elsewhere in this County, men go a Fishing with spades, and
Mathooks, more likely one would think to catch Moles then Fishes with such
Instruments. First, they pierce the Turffie ground, and under it meet with a
black and deadish water, and in it small Fishes do swim. Surely these Pisces
Fossiles or subterranean Fishes must needs be unwholesome, the rather because
an unctuous matter is found about them. Let them be thankful to God in the
first place, who need not such meat to feed upon. And next them let those be
thankful, which have such meat to seed upon, when they need it.

Proverbs.
[Lancashire fair Women.] I believe that the God of nature, having given fair
complections to the Women in this County, Art may save her pains, (not to say
her sins,) in endeavoring to better them. But let the Females of this County
know, that though in the Old Testament express notice be taken of the beauty of
many Women,

Genesis 12. 11.
Sarah, Genesis 24. 16.
Rebekah, Genesis 29. 17.
Rachel, 1 Samuel 25. 3.
(...), 2 Samuel 13. 1.
Thamar, 1 King. 1. 4.
Abishag, Ester 2. 7.
Esther; yet in the New Testament no mention is made at all of the fairness of
any Woman; not because they wanted, but because Grace is chief Gospel-beauty,
Elizabeth's Luke 1. 6.
unblameableness, the Virgin Mary's Luke 2. 19.
pon^ering Gods word; the Canaanitish Woman's Mat. 15. 28.
faith; Mary Magdalens John 12. 3.
charity; Lydia her Acts 16. 4.
attention to Paul's Preaching; these soul-piercing Perfections, are far ^etter
than skin-deep Fairness.

It is Came. Brit. in Lancashire.
written upon a Wall in Rome.
RIBCHESTER was as rich as any Town in Christendom.
And why on a Wall? Indeed the Italians have a Proverb, A wall is the fools
paper, whereon they scribble their Fancies. (...) not to be overcurious in
examining hereof, we suppose some Monumental Wall in Rome, as a Register,
whereon the names of principal Places were inscribed, then subjected to the
Roman Empire: and probably, this Ribchester anciently was some eminent Colony
(as by pieces of Coins and Colu^s there daily dug out does appear.) However
at this day it is not so much as a Mercate Town, but whether decayed by age, or
destroyed by accident, is uncertain.

Here Reader give me leave, the Historian must not devour the Divine in me, so
as to debar me from spiritual Reflections, What says S.* Paul? We have here no
continuing City: and no wonder, seeing Mortal Men are the Efficient, Moldring
Buildings the Material, and Mutable Laws the formal cause thereof. And yet S.
Paul was as well stocked with Cities as any man alive: having three, which in
some sort he might call his own; Acts 22. 3.
Tarsus, where he was born, * Jerusalem where he was bred at the feet of
Gamaliel, and Acts 22. 27.
Rome, whereby he received the Privilege of Freedom: all which he waved as
nothing worth, because of no abiding and continuance.

Martyrs.
JOHN ROGERS was born in this J. Bale, descrip. Brit. cent. 8. n. 83. and Fox,
Act. and Monum.
County, and bred in the University of Cambridge, a very able Linguist and
General Scholar. He was first a Zealous Papist, till his eyes being opened, he
detested all Superstition, and went beyond *Seas, to VVitenberg, where (some
years after Tyndal) he translated the Bible, from Genesis till the Revelation,
comparing it with the Original: coming to England he presented it in a fair
Volumne to King Henry the (...) prefixing a Dedicatory Epistle, and subscribing
himself (those dangerous days required a Disguise) under the name of J. Bale.
ut pri.
Thomas Matthew.

And now Reader that is unriddled unto me which has pusled me for some Years;
for I find, that K. James, in the Sea my Church History, 10th Book, 17th Cen^.
page 47.
Instructions which he gave to the Translators of the Bible enjoined them to
(...) the former Translations of,

1. Tindal, 2. Matthews, 3. Coverdale, 4. (...), 5. Geneva.
Now at last I understand who this Matthews was (though unsatisfied still in
VVhitchurch) believing his Book never publicly printed, but remaining a
Manuscript in the Kings Library.

Yet this present could not procure Mr. Rogers his security, who it seems for
fear of the 6 Articles was fain to fly again beyond Seas, and returning in the
Reign of King Edward the six^ became a Preacher of London. He and Mr. Hooper
were the two greatest Sticklers against Ceremonies, though otherwise allowing
of Episcopal Government. He was the first Martyr, who suffered in Smithfield,
in Queen Mary's days, and led all the rest, of whom we may truly say, that if
they had not be^n flesh and blood* they could not have been burnt: and if they
had been no more then flesh and blood they would not have been burnt.

The Non-Conformists account it no small Credit unto them, that one of their
Opinion, (as who would not flinch from the faith) was chosen by Divine
Providence, the first to encounter the fire. Such may remember, that no Army is
all FRONT, and that as constant did come behind as went before. Had those of
an opposite judgment been called first, they had come first to the stake; and
in due time the defenders of Ceremonies were as substantial in their
Sufferings. This John Rogers was martyred, Febr. 4. 1555.

Fox, Acts and Mon.
JOHN BRADFORD was born at * Manchester, in this County, and bred first a
Lawyer in the Inns of Court, and for a time did solicit Suits for Sr. John
Harrington* afterward (says my * Author, ex Rixoso Causidico mitissimus
Christi Apostolus: going J. Bale, Descr. Brit. cent. 8. numb. 87.
to Cambridg a man in maturity, and ability, the University by special Grace
bestowed on him the Degree of Master of Art: and so may he be said to Commence,
not only per saltum, but per volatum, The Jesuit does causlesly urge this his
short standing for an Argument of his little understanding; whereas he had
always been a hard Student from his youth: and his Writings and his Disputings
give a sufficient Testimony of his Learning.

It is a demonstration to me, that he was of a sweet temper, Because In his
Exam. of J. Fox his Mareyrs.
Parsons who will hardly afford a good Word to a Protestant, says, that he
seemed to be of a more soft and mild nature than many of his fellow (...)
Indeed he was a most holy and mortified man, who secretly in his closet would
so weep for his sins, one would have thought he would never have smiled
again: and then appearing in public, he would be so harmlesly pleasant, one
would think he had never wept before: But Mr. Fox his pains have given the pens
of all Posterity a Writ of ease, to meddle no more with this Martyr, who
suffered Anno Dom. 1555.

GEORGE MARSH was born at Fox, Acts and Monum. page 1561.
Dean in this County, bred a good Scholar in a Grammer-School, and then lived
in the honest condition of a Farmer: after the death of his wife he went to
Idem, ibid.
Cambridge, where he followed his Studies very close, and afterward solemnly
entering into Orders, became a profitable Preacher and Curate to Mr. Lawrence
Sanders, the worthy Martyr, Causlesly therefore does In his Exam. of ^oxes Mart.
Parsons asperse him, that he of a Farmer turned a Preacher, as if he had done
it immediately (with many of our Age leaping from the plough to the pulpit)
concealing his Academical breeding, such is the Charity of his jesuitical
reservation.

As little is his Charity for condemning him for answering (...) and fearfully
at first, to such who examined him about the Sacrament of the Altar, seeing the
said Marsh condemned himself for doing it, as therein too much consulting
carnal Respects to save his life, as appears in Mr. Fox, whence the Jesuit
fetches all his Information. But Marsh made amends for all these failings with
his final constancy, being both burnt and scalded to death (having a barrel of
pitch placed over his head, an accent of cruelty peculiar to him alone) when he
was martyred at VVestchester, Apr. 24. 1555.

Cardinals.
WILLIAM ALAN was born in this County (says my Pitz. p. 792.
Author) nobilibus parentibus, of (...) Parentage. He was bred in Oriel
College, in the University of Oxford, and became Head of S^. Mary's Hall
therein, Then going beyond the Seas he became Kings (...) at (...), Cannon of
Cambray, and Rhemes, and at last by Pope Sixtus Quint us made Cardinal priest
of Martins in Rome, 1587. and deserved his Red Hat by his good Service the year
after against his Native Country. But hear what Different Characters two
Authors of several persuasions bestow upon him.

PITZEU* (...) ANO. Script. page. 792. GODWIN in his Catalogue of Cardinals,
page 479. He was somewhat* above an ordinary man in Stature, comely of
Countenance, composed in his Ga^e, affable in all Meetings; and for the Gifts
of his Mind, Pious, Learned, Prudent, Grave, and though of Great Authority,
Humble, modest, meek, patient, peaceable, in a word, beautified and adorned
with all kinds of Virtues. He was the last of our English Cardinals, in time,
and first in wickedness, deserving not to be counted among English men, who, as
another Herostratus, to atchieve himself a name amongst the Grandees of Earth,
endeavored to fire the Church of England, the Noblest (without envy be it
spoken) in the Christian World, so that his memory deserves to be buried in
oblivion.

He collected the English Exil^s into a Body, and united them in a COLLEGE,
first at Doway, then at Rhemes, so great an Advancer, that we may behold him as
Founder of that Seminary. He ^yed at Rome, Anno 1594. and preferred rather to
be buried in the English School, than in the Church of St. Martins, which gave
him the Title of Cardinal.

Prelates.
HUGH OLDHAM, born in this County, at Oldham, a Village some fix miles from
Manchester, bred in Queens College in Cambridge, was no ill Scholar, and a
good Man, most pious according to and above the Devotion of the Age he lived
in; he was afterward Bishop of Exeter, a Foe to a Monkish Superstition, and a
Friend to University Learning. Brazen-Nose College in Oxford, and
Corpus-Christi College therein will for ever bear witness of his bounty, to
advance Religion, and Learning. Besides the Town of Manchester have good cause
to remember him, who founded and endowed a School therein, with large Revenue,
appointing the Warden of the College therein, Caput Scholae.

This Bishop, having a tough contest with the Abbot of Tavestock, was
excommunicated for refusing to stand to the decision of the Court of Rome. He
had formerly built a Chapel, in the South side of his Cathedral, and dying
excommunicate (on the aforesaid account) was Buried, not in the very Church,
but brink thereof, and body of the Wall. He dyed Anno Dom. 1520.

JAMES STANLEY, D. D. brother of Thomas, Earl of Darby, was born in this
County, and was by K. Henry the seventh (his kinsman by marriage (preferred
Bishop of Ely, 1506. a man more memorable than commendable, who never resided
at his own Cathedral. I can partly excuse his living all the Summer with the
Earl his Brother, in this County, but must condemn his living all the Winter at
his Godwin, in his Bishops of Ely, and Cambdens Br. in the Description of
Huntington.
Manor at Somersham, in Huntingtonshire, with one who was not his sister, and
wanted nothing to make her his Wife save marriage. However if Jehu allowed a
Burial to his most professed Enemy, on this account, that she was 2 King. 9. 34.
a Kings Daughter, none I hope will grudge his memory a room in this Book, were
it only because he was an Earls Brother. He dyed Anno 1515.

HENRY STANDISH was, as I have just cause to conclude, extracted from the
Standishes of Standish in this County, bred a Franoiscan, and Dr. of Divinity
in Cambridge, and afterward made Bishop of S. Asaph. I neither believe him so
Good as Pitz does character him, pietate and doctrina clarum, nor so bad as
Bale does decry him, making him a doteing Fool. Sure I am, there was Impar
congressus, betwixt him and Erasmus, as unequal a Contest, as betwixt a Child
and Man, not to say, Dwarf and (...). This Stand^ is said to have fallen down
on his knees before King Henry* the Eighth, petitioning him to continue
Religion, established by his Ancesters, and (...) into Ma^ers of Divinity, he
cited the Bale, de script. Brit. cent. 9. number. 3.
Col^s for the Corinthians, which being but a Memory-mistake in an Aged Person,
needed not to have exposed him so much, as it did, to the laughter of the
Standers by. After he had sat 16 years, Bishop of St. (...), he died very
aged, 1535.

JOHN CHRISTOPHERSON was born in this Bale, Pitz. and Bish. Godwin, in the
Bishops of Chichester.
County, bred first in Pembrook Hall, then Fellow of St. John's; and afterward
Master of Trinity College in Cambridge: an excellent Scholar, and Linguist
especially. I have seen a Greek Tragedy, made and written by his own hand, (so
curiously that it seemed printed) and presented to K. Henry the eight: He no
less eleganly (if faithfullly) translated Philo and (...) into Latin: Besides
his own benefaction to the Masters Lodgings and (...), he was highly
instrumental in moving Queen Mary to her magnificent bounty to Trinity
College. In the visitation of Cambridge, he was very active in burning the
bones of (...), being then Elect Bishop of Chichester, scarcely continuing a
year in that Place.

All expected, that at his first coming into his Diocese, he should demean
himself very favorably. For why should not the Poets Observation of Princes be
true also of Prelates.

-- Mitissima sors est
Regnorum sub Rege novo --
Subjects commonly do find
New made Sovereigns most kind.
But he had not so much mercy as Nero, to begin courteously, having no sooner
put on his Episcopal Ring, but presently he washed his hands in the blood of
poor Martyrs, whereof in due * Place. In the First of Qu. Elizabeth he was
deprived, and See Martyrs in Suffex.
kept in some restraint, wherein he dyed, about the Year 1560.

Since the Reformation.
JAMES PILKINTON, D.D. was the third Son of James Pilkinton of Parkers Scel.
Cant. M. S. in the Masters of S. John's.
Rivington, in this County, Esquire. a Right ancient Family, being informed by my
good Friend Master William Ryley, Norrey, and this Countryman, that the
Pilkintons were Gentlemen of repute in this Shire, before the Others make this
of far later Date.
conquest, when the chief of them, then sought for, was fain to disguise
himself, a Thresher in a barn. Hereupon partly alluding to the (...) of the
flail (falling sometime on the one, sometime on the other side) partly to
himself embracing the safest condition for the present, he gave for the Motto
of his Arms, Now thus, Now thus.

This James, bred fellow of St. John's in Cambridge, was in the First of Qu.
Mary forced to fly into Germany, where he wrote a Comment Bale, de script.
Brit. pagina penult.
on Ecclesiastes, and both the Epistles of St. Peter: after his return, in the
First of Qu. Elizabeth, he was chosen Master of St. John's, and March the 2d
1560. was consecrated Bishop of Durham.

Nine Years after the Northern Rebels came to Durham, and first tore the Bible,
then the Came. Eliz. in Anno 1569.
English Liturgy in pieces. Unhappy (though most innocent) Book, equally odious
to opposite parties; such who account the Papists Heretics esteeming it
popish, whilst the Papists themselves account it heretical. The Bishop had
fared no better than the book, could he have been come by. But when the
Rebellion was suppressed* the Bishop commenced a Suit against Qu. Elizabeth for
the Lands and Goods of the Rebels attainted in the Bishopric, as forfeited to
him by his Charter, and had Came. Brit. in By. of Durham.
prevailed, if the Parliament had not itnerposed, and on special consideration
pro hoc tempore adjudged them to the Queen. He dyed Anno Dom. 1576.

EDWIN SANDYS was born at Conisby in this County; whose good actings, great
sufferings, pious life, and peaceable death, 1588. are plentifully related in
our Church. History.

RICHARD BARNES was borne at Ou^ of a Manuscript of the Great Antiquary, Mr.
Dodesworth.
Bold near Warrington in this County, bred in Brasen-Nose College, in Oxford,
and afterward advanced Suffragan Bishop of Nottingham, thence he was preferred
to Carlisle, 1570. and seven years after to Durham. He was himself One of a good
nature, (as by the sequel will appear) but abused by his Credulity and
affection to his Brother John Barnes, Chancellor of his Diocese.

Bishop Carleton in the Life of Mr. Gilp^.
A Man, of whom it is hard to say, whether he was more Lustful, or more
Covetous: who, where as he should have been the man who ought to have reformed
many Enormities in the Diocese, was indeed the Author of them, permitting base
and dishonest Persons to escape scot-free for a piece of money, so that the
Bishop had a very ill report every where.

By the suggestion of this ill instrument, the Patriarchall man Mr. Gilpin,
fell into this Bishops Displeasure, and by him was suspended from his Benefice.

But the good Bishop afterward restored him; and visiting him at his house,
took him aside into the Parlour, and thus accosted him;

Father Gilpin, Item Ibidem.
I acknowledge you are fitter to be Bishop of Durham, then my self to be Parson
of this Church of yours: I ask forgiveness for Errors passed; forgive me
Father; I know you have hatched up some Chickens that now seek to pick out your
Eyes, but so long as I shall live Bishop of Durham, be secure, no man shall
injure you. This Bishop sat about Eleven years in his See, and dyed a very
aged man, a little before the Spanish Invasion, Anno Dom. 1588.

JOHN WOOLTON was born at Wiggin in this County, of honest Parents, and
worshipful by his mothers side. He was bred a short time in Oxford, and in the
reign * Godwin in his Catalogue of the Bishops of Exeter.
of Queen Mary, attended his Uncle Alexander Nowell in his flight beyond the
Seas. Returning into England, he was made first Cannon Residentiary, and after,
Anno 1579. Bishop of Exeter, being an earnest assertor of Conformity against
opposers thereof. He met (whilst living) with many hard speeches, but after his
death (when men's memories are beheld generally in their true colors) he was
restored to his deserved esteem, even by those who formerly had been his
adversaries. He indicted Letters full of Wisdom and Piety, becoming the
strength of one in health, not two hours before his death, which happened March
the 13. Anno 1593. It is a part, though not of his Praise, of his happiness,
that his Daughter was married to Francis Godwin Bishop of Hereford, whose
Learned pen has deserved so well of the Church of England.

MATTHEW HUTTON. I have given a large account of him formerly, in my
Ecclesiastical History. However having since received an exact A^narie (as I
may so say) from his nearest relation, of his life, I will here insert an
Abridgement thereof.

1. Being Son to Matthew Hutton of Priest* Hutton in this County, he was born
Anno Dom. 1529. 2. He came to Cambridge in the 17. year of his age, Anno 1546.
the 38. of K. Henry the Eighth. 3. co^menced. Bach. of Arts, 1551 Mr. 1555 4.
Chosen Margaret Professor of Divinity, December 15. Anno 1561. in the 4. of
Queen Elizabeth. 5. In the same year commenced Bachelour of Divinity. 6.
Elected Master of Pembroke-hall May the 12. and the same year September the
fifth, admitted Regius Professor, Anno 1562. 7. Answered a public Act before
Q. Eliz. and Her court at Cambridg. A. 1564 8. Married in the same year
Katharine Fulmetby (Neice to Thomas Goodrick late Bishop of Ely) who died soon
after. 9. Made Dean of York, Anno 1567. 10. Married for his second Wife Beatrix
Fincham, Daughter to Sir Thomas Fincham of the Isle of Ely 11. Resigned his
Mastership of Pembroke-hall, and his Professors place to Dr. Whitgift April
12. A. 1567. 12. Married Frances, Wid. of Martin Bows, son of Sir Martin
Bows, Alderman of London, Nov. 20. 1583. 13. Chosen Bishop of Durham, June 9.
Anno Dom. 1589. 14. Confirmed by the Dean and Chapter July 26. 15. Consecrated
by John Archbishop of York, July 27. 16. Translated to York, and consecrated
at Lambeth, anno 1594. the Thirty seventh of Queen Elizabeth, by John
Archbishop of Canterbury, and others March 24. 17. He dyed in January, anno
1605. in the seventie sixth year of his age.
He gave an hundred marks to Trinity college in Cambridge, and founded an
Hospital at Wareton in this County. In a word, he was a learned Prelate, lived
a pious man, and left a precious memory.

MARTIN HETON was born in this County (as by his Epitaph on his Monument lately
set up by his Daughters in the Church of Ely may appear) and bred first a
Student then a Canon of Christs-church, on whom Queen Elizabeth bestowed the
Bishopric of Ely, after 20. years vacancie thereof. Now although his memory
grows under the suspicion of Simoniacal compliance, yet this due the
Inhabitants of Ely do unto him, that they acknowledge him the best House*
keeper in that See* within man's Remembrance. He dyed July 14. 1609. leaving two
Daughters married in those Knightly Families of Fish and Filmer.

RICHARD BANCROFT was born at......... in this So I find in the Manuscript of
Mr. Dodsworth and so Mr. Richard Line (this Archbishops servant lately
deceased) did inform me.
County, bred in Jesus College in Cambridge, and was afterward by Queen
Elizabeth made Bishop of London, by King James Arch bishop of Canterbury.
Indeed he was in effect Archbishop whilst Bishop, to whom Doctor Whitgift in
his decrepite age remitted the managing of matters, so that he was the Soul of
the high Commission.

A great Statesman he was, and Grand Champion of Church Discipline, having well
hardened the hands of his Soul, which was no more then needed for him, who was
to meddle with Nettles and Briars, and met with much opposition. No wonder if
those who were silenced by him in the Church, were loud against him in other
places.

David speaks of Psalm. 140. 3.
poison under men's lips. This Bishop tasted plentifully thereof from the mouths
of his Enemies, till at last, (as Mithridates) he was so habited to poisons,
they became food unto him. Once a Gentleman coming to visit him, presented him
a Lyebell, which he found pasted on his Door, who nothing moved thereat; Cast
it (said he) to an hundred more which lie here on a heap in my Chamber.

Many a Lyebell, [Lye] (because false) [ Bell] because loud) was made upon him.
The aspersion of coveteousnesse, though cast, does not stick on his memory;
being confuted by the estate which he left, small in proportion to his great
preferment.

He cancelled his first Will, wherein he had bequeathed much to the Church,
which gave the occasion for scurrilous pens to pass on him;

He who never repented of doing Ill,
Repented that once he made a good Will.
Whereas indeed, suspecting an Impression of popular violence on Cathedralls,
and fearing an alienation of what was bequeathed unto them, he thought fit to
cancel his own, to prevent others cancelling his Testament.

This partly appears by his second Will, wherein he gave the Library at (...)
(the Result of his own, and three Predecessors Collections) to the University
of Cambridge (which now they possess) in case the Archi episcopal See should
be extinct.

How came such a jealousy into his mind? What fear of a Storm when the Sun
shined, the Sky clear, no appearance of Clouds? Surely his skill was more then
ordinary in the Complexion of the Commonwealth, who did foresee, what
afterward (for a time) came to pass. This clause providentially inserted,
secured this Library in Cambridge, during the vacancy of the Archi-episcopal
See; and so prevented the embeselling, at the least the dismembring thereof, in
our late civil distempers. He dyed Anno Dom. 1610. and lies buried at the
Church in Lambeth. * Sir James VVare de pr^sulibus Lageniae. page 40.


THOMAS JONES was born in this County, bred Master of Arts in Cambridge, but
commenced Doctor of Divinity in the University in Dublin. He was first
Chancellor then Dean of St. Patricks in that City, and thence was made Bishop
of Mead, Anno 1584. and the next Month appointed by Queen Elizabeth one of her
Privy Council in Ireland. Hence he was translated to be Archbishop of Dublin,
An. 1605. and at the same time was by King James made Chancellor of Ireland,
which office he discharged Thirteen years, dying April 10. 1619.

As he was a good Officer for the King, he was no bad one for himself, laying
the Foundation of so fair an estate, that Sir Roger Jones his Son, was by King
Charles created Viscount Renelaugh. Thus whilst the Sons of the Clergy men in
England never * The other Viscount Ely son to Archbishop Lo^ius.
mounted above the degree of Knighthood, Two of the Clergy men in Ireland
attained to the dignity of Peerage: I say no more, but good success have they
with their honor in their persons and posterity.

RICHARD PARR was born in this Mr. James Chaloner in his (...) of the Isle of
Man. page 7.
County, bred Fellow of Brazen-nose College in Oxford: whilst he continued in
the University, he was very painful in reading the Arts to young Scholars, and
afterward having cure of Souls, no less industrious in the Ministry.

He was afterward preferred to be Bishop of Man, by the Earl of Derby, Lord
thereof: for the Lords of that Island have been so absolute Patrons of that
Bishopric, that no lease made by the Bishop, is valid in Law, without their
confirmation. This Prelate excellently discharged his Place, and died anno
Domini, 16 --

Soldiers.
Sr. WILLIAM MOLINEUX, Knight. of Sefton in this County: He was at the Battle of
Navarret, in Spain, made Knight Banneret by Edward the Black Prince, Anno 1367.
under whose command he served in those Wars, as also for a long time, in the
Wars of France. From whence returning homewards, he dyed at Weavers Funeral
Monuments, Page 234.
Canterbury, Anno 1372. on whom was written this Epitaph.

Miles Honorificus MOLINEUX subjacet intus;
T^rtius Edwardus dilexit hunc ut amicus:
Fortia qui gessit, Gallos, Navaros que repressit,
Sic cum recessit, morte feriente decessit,
Anno Milleno trecento septuageno,
Atque his junge duo: sic perit omnis homo^.
His Monument is not extant at this day, and it is pity that so good a Sword
did not light on a better Pen; and that Pallas (so much honored by him in her
Military relation) did not more assist in his Epitaph in her Poetical capacity.

Sr. WILLIAM MOLINEUX, junior, Knight, descendant from the former, flourished
under K. Henry the eighth, being a man of great command in this County,
bringing the considerable strength thereof to the seasonable succor of the
Duke of Norfolk, with whom he performed signal service in Flodden-Field.

It is confes^ed on all sides, that the Scots lost the Day, by not keeping
their Ranks, but not agreed on the cause thereof. Bucanan (who commonly makes
the too much * Paulus Jovius
Courage of his Countrymen the cause of their being conquered) imputes it to
their indiscreet pursuing of the English, routed at the first. Others say, they
did not break their Ranks, but they were broken, unable to endure the
Lancashire Archers, and so forced to sunder themselves. In this Battle the
Scotch King, and chiefest Gentry were slain; the English loosing scarce any, of
the Sc^ts scarce any but of prime note. The King afterward wrote his
gratulatory Letter, to Sr. Soows Chro. page 495.
William Molin^ux, in form following:

Trusty and Welbeloved, We greet you well, and understand as well by the Report
of Our Right Trus^y Cousin and Counselor, the Duke of Norfolk, as otherwise,
what acceptable servi^e You amongst others lately did unto us, by your valiant
towardness in the assisting of Our said Cousin, against our great Enemy, the
late King of Scots; and how courageously you as a very hearty loving Servant,
acquitted your self for the overthrow of the said late King, and distressing of
his malice and power, to our great Honor, and the advancing of your no little
Fame and praise: For which We have good cause to favor and thank you, and so
we full heartily do; and assured may you be, that We shall in such effectual
wise remember your said service in any your Reasonable Pursuits, as you shall
have cause to think the same Rightwell employed to your comfort and weal
hereafter. Given under our Signet, at our Castle at Windsore, the 27 of
November.

It appears by our Author, that the like Letters, mutatis mutandis, were sent
unto Sr. Edward Stanley, and some other men of principal note, in Lancashire
and Cheshire. I have nothing more to observe, save that these two worthy Sr.
Williams were Ancestors unto the truly Honorable the Lord Molineux, Viscount
Marybourgh in Ireland, lately deceased.

Writers.
HUGH of MANCHESTER was, says my Author, when Adolescens [a youth] * Pitz, de
scrip. in anno 1294.
a Dominican, but when Juvenis [a young man] he changed his Copy, and turned a
Franciscan. Say not he degraded himself, choosing a later order then he left*
for it seems that amongst them the last is counted the best, as of a more
refined perfection. He was a great scholar, and highly esteemed in that age,
for his severity and discretion.

An Imposter happened at this time, pretending himself first blind, then Bale,
de scri. Brit. Cen^. 4. Number. 62.
cured at the Tomb of King Henry the Third, so to get coin to himself, and
credit to the dead King. But our Hugh discovered the cheat* and Writing a Book
De (...) Diliriis, Dedicated it to King Edward the First, who kindly accepted
thereof, preferring that his Fathers memory should appear to posterity, with
his true face, (...) painted with such false miracles. This Hugh with another
Franciscan, was employed by the same King to Philip, King of France, to demand
such Lands as he detained from him in Aquitain. Such who object, that sitter
men than Friars might have been found for that service, consider not how in
that Age such mortified men were presumed the most proper Persons, peaceably to
compremise differences between the greatest Princes. This Embassy was
undertaken Anno Dom. 1294.

RICHARD ULVERSTON was born in this Bale, de scrip. Brit. 1430.
County, at Ulverston, a well-known Market in Loyns^ay-Hundred: A great Leland.
Antiquary (ambitious of all Learned Men's acquaintance) complained, that he
knew him not so well as he desired, He was bred in Oxford, and wrote a Book
entitled the Articles of Faith, or the Creed of the Church, this lay latent a
good while, till John Stanberry Bishop of Hereford rescued it from the Moaths,
some Thirty Years after the Authors death, and bestowed a double Light upon
it; one in producing it into the Public, the other illustrating it with a
Commentary he wrote thereon. Say not, this was false Her^ldry, but true.
Humility, to see a Bishop commenting (which is not usual) on the Book of a
Priest, Bale concludes all thus*

* longum
Non doctrina potest obscuro carcere claudi.
-- -- no^ will Worth
Long be confined, but make its own way forth.
The Time and Place of his Death are equally uncertain; but by probability
about 1434. under the Reign of King Henry the sixth.

THOMAS Bale, de scrip. Brit. cent. 8. Numb. 47.
PENKETH, so was his true name (though wrested by some Latinists into
Pen^hettus, and miswritten Penthy, and Penker, by some English) taken from a
Village in this County. He was bred an Augustinian in Warrington, and a Doctor
of Divinity in Oxford, a deep Scotist, and of so great a memory, that Ambrosius
(...) and Jocobus Bergomensis.
Foreiners (amongst whom he lived) report of him, that had all the Books of
Scotus been lost, he could easily have restored every word of them. He was
called to be Professor at Padua, and returning into England, became Provincial
of his Order.

But his last act stained his former life, who promoted the bastardizing of the
Issue of K. Edward the 4th. and as Dr. Shaw ushered, his Flattery held up the
train of the Usurper's Praises, in a Sermon at St. Paul's, in preaching whereof,
he who had formerly forfeited his Honesty, lost his* Voice, a proper punishment
for a Parasite. His Disgrace had Speeds Chron. page 717.
some influence on his Order, which then vertical and numerous, ^ayly (...) in
England, to their Dissolution. This Thomas dyed, and was buried in London, 1487.

JOHN STANDISH. Short mention shall serve him, who might have been left out
without loss. He was Nephew to Henry Standish, Bishop of St. Asaph, of no mean
Family in this County. One would suspect him ^ot the same Man, called by Pale a
scurrillous Fool, and admired by pit^ for piety and learning, jealous lest
another man should be more wise to Salvation than himself: he wrote a Book
against the Translation of Scripture into English* and presented it to the
Parliament. His death happened seasonably for his own safety, 1556. a little
before the Death of Queen Mary.

Since the Reformation.
THOMAS LEAVER was born in this Bale. de scri. Brit. Cent. 9. number. 86.
County, where his Family and Name still remains, at two Villages, called
Leaver at this day. He was bred Fellow and Batchelour of Divinity o^ St. John's
College in Cambridge, whereof he was chosen Master, 1552. He was also
preferred Master of Sherburn-House, or Hospital in the Bishopric, a Place it
seems of good profit and credit, as founded by Hugh Pudsey, Bishop of Durham,
and Earl of Northumberland.

In the beginning of Queen Mary he was forced to fly beyond the Seas, and
became the principal Pastor (for they had three other) of the English Exiles
at Arrow in Switzerland, which Congregation I behold, as the least, so the
freest from Factions of any in that age of our Nation. He was, says my Idem,
ut prius.
Author, Virtutum in omni mansuetudine seminator, and besides some Sermons, and
a Comment on the Lords Prayer, he wrote a Book entitled, The Right Path way to
Christ.

After the death of Queen Elizabeth coming over into England, he took a Journey
to Durham, to visit his old Hospital of Sherburne, and falling sick by the
way, dyed Parker, in his Skellet. (...). M.S. in the Masters of S^. John.
at Ware, anno 1558. in that very juncture of time, when what Church-Preferment
he pleased courted his Acceptance thereof. I find two more of his Name, Ralph
Leaver, and John Leaver (probably his Kinsmen) Exiles for their Conscience in
Germany, in the Reign of Queen Mary.

WILLIAM WHITACRE was borne at Holme in this County, whose Life has been
formerly twice In my Holy-State, and Church History
written by me. He dyed anno 1596.

ALEXANDER NOWELL was born 1510. of a Knightly Family at Read See the Latin
Life of his Nephew Dr. Whitaker, near the beginning.
in this County, and at In his Epitaph, on his Mon. in Paul's.
thirteen Years of age being admitted into Brasen-nose College in Oxford,
studied thirteen Years therein. Then he became Schoolmaster of Westminster.

It happened in the first of Queen Mary he was fishing upon the Thames, an
Exercise wherein he so much delighted, insomuch that his Picture kept in
Brazen-nose College, is drawn with his lines, hooks, and other ^ackling, lying
in a round on one hand, and his Angles of several sorts, on the other. But
whilst Nowel was catching of Fishes, Bonner was catching of Nowel, and
understanding who he was, designed him to the Shambles, whither he had
certainly been sent, had not Mr. Francis Bowyer then Merchant, afterward
Sheriff of London, safely conveyed him beyond the Seas.

Without offense it may be remembered, that leaving a Bottle of Ale (when
fishing) in the Grass; he found it some days after, no Bottle, but a Gun,
such the sound at the opening thereof: And this is believed (Casualty is Mother
of more Inventions than Industry) the Original of bottled-Ale in England.

Returning the first of Queen Elizabeth he was made Dean of St. Paul's, and for
his meek Spirit, deep Learning, Prudence, and Piety, the then Parliament and
Convocation both, chose, enjoined and trusted him to be the man to make a (...)
for public use, such a one as should stand as a Rule, for Faith and Manners to
their Posterity.

(...) (by the way) is an ancient Church* Ordinance, as appears by Luke 1. 4^*
(...).
Theophilus and Acts 18. 25^* (...).
Apollos, both exercised (...). It remained in state during the ^rimitive
Church, and did not decline till Popery began to increase* For, (...)
Catechizing continued, it had made the Laity more wise in Religion, than would
well have stood with the interest of the Church of Rome. It was therefore outed
by School Divinity, and then a fruitful Olive was cut down, to have a b^amble
set in the room thereof. In the first Reformation Protestants revived this
Ordinance, and by the use thereof Religion ^ot the speed, and great ground of
Superstition; till the Jesuits sensible thereof have since outshot us in our
own bow, most careful to catechize their Novices, whilst English Protestants
(for I will not condemn Foreig^ Churches) grew negligent therein. What is the
Reason that so much ^loth so soon changes color* even because it was never
well (...): and why do men so often change their Opinions? even because they
were never well catechized.

He was Confessor to Queen Elizabeth, constantly preaching the First and Last
Lent-Sermons before Her. He gave two Hundred Pounds per annum to maintain
thirteen Scholars in brazen. Nose College. He died being Ninety Years of age,
not decayed in sight, Febru. 13. 1601.

JOHN DEE, where born I cannot recover, was a man of much motion, and is S. N.
mentioned in this place, where he had his (though last) best fixation. He was
bred (as I believe) in Oxford, and there Doctorated, but in what faculty I
cannot determine.

He was a most excellent Mathematiti an and Astrologer, well skilled in Magic,
as the Ancients did, the Lord In his Advancement of Learning.
Bacon does, and all may accept the sense thereof, viz. in the lawful knowledge
of Natural Philosophy.

This exposed him, anno 1583. amongst his Ignorant Neighbors, where he then
lived, at Mortclack in Surrey, to the suspicion of a Conjurer: the cause I
conceive, that his Library was then seized on, wherein were Theatrum Chemicum
page 480.
four thousand Books, and seven hundred of them Manuscripts. This Indignity
joined with the former Scandal, moved him to leave the Land, and go over with
Sr. Edward Kelly, into Bohemia, as hereafter shall be more See Sir Edw. Kellys
life in Worcestershire.
fully related.

Returning to Mortclack, 1592. the same Scandal of being a Conjurer, haunted
him again: Two Years after Viz. 1594. he was under a kind of Restraint, which
caused him to write to the Lady Scydemore, to move Queen Elizabeth, either,
that he might declare his case to the Counsel, or have liberty under the broad
Seal to depart the Land. Next year he wrote an apologetical Letter to
Archbishop Whitgift, which it seems found good reception: yea, at last he gave
such satisfaction of the lawfulness and usefulness of his Studies* that the
Queen (besides many considerable New Years Gifts sent unto him) presented him
Warden of Manchester in this County, 1596. where he had many contests and
suits with the Fellows of that College.

The last mention I find of him, is in Mr. Camden, to whom he presented an
ancient Roman Inscription, found about Manchester, and Mr. In his Brit. in
Lancashire,
Camden in his requital, presented him with this Commendation.

Hanc mihi descripsit, qui vidit, Cl. Mathematicus, J. Dee, collegij
Manchestrensis custos. And indeed all the books he has left behind him, speak
him a learned, as those, de Usu Globi Terrestris. De Nubium, Solis, Lunae, ac
Planetarum distantiis, etc. an aged man, being dedicated to King Edward the
Sixth, and he dying about the beginning of King James.

ROGER FENTON, D. D. Fellow of Pembroke-Hall in Cambridge, was born in this
County, as appears by his Epitaph, in St. Stephens Wallbrook, London, being
the painful, pious, learned and beloved Minister thereof. Little is left of
him in print, save a sollid Treatise against Usury. Great was his intimacy with
Dr. Nicholas (...), being Contemporaries, Collegiates, and City-Ministers
together, with some (...) in their Sirnames, but more sympathy in their Natures.

Once my own Father gave Dr. Fenton a visit, who excused himself from
entertaining him any longer; Mr* Fuller (said he) hear how the passing bell
towls (...) this very Instant, for my Dear Friend, Dr. Felton, now a dying; I
must to my Study, it (...) mutually agreed upon betwixt us in our healths, that
the Surviver of us should (...) the others Funerall-Sermon. But see a strange
change, God, to whom belongs the Psalm. 68. 20.
(...) from death, was pleased (with the Patriarch Genesis 48. 14.
Jacob blessing his (...)) wittingly to guide his hands (...), reaching out
death to the living, and life to the dying, So that Dr. Felton recovered, and
not only performed that last office to his Friend Dr. Fenton, but also survived
him more than ten years, and dyed Bishop of (...)* Roger Fenton dyed in the
fiftieth Year of his age, anno Dom. 1615. buried in his own Church, under a
Monument made at the expense of the Parish.

ROBERT BOITON was born at Blackborne in this County, on Whit sunday (...)*
(...) Year, as infamous for the Massacre of many Protestants in France, so for
the (...) of some eminent in England. His Parents having a narrow Estate,
struggled with their necessities, to give him liberal Education; and he was
bred first in (...)* then in Brazen-nose College in Oxford. He had Isocrates
his six Marks, or Properties of a good Scholar,

(...), See the Particulars justified in his life at large, written by my
worthy Friend Edw. Bagshaw. Esquire.
(...). His want of means, proved an advancement unto him: For, (...) having
whence to buy Books, he borrowed the best Authors of his Tutor, read over,
abridged into Note-books, and returned them. He was as able to express himself,
in Latin, or Greek, as English; and that Stylo Imperatorio. He was chosen one
of the Disputants before King James, at his first coming to the University, and
performed it with great applause.

Thus far I have followed my Author mentioned in the Margin, but now must
depart from him a little in one particular. Though Mr. Boltons parents were not
overflowing with wealth, they had a competent Estate (as I am informed by
credible intelligence) wherein their Family had comfortably continued long time
in good repute.

Sr. Angustine Nicholls presented him to the Rectory of Broughton in
Northamptonshire, sending him his Presentation unexspectedly, from his Chamber
in Sergeants ^nn, where D. King Bishop of London, being accidentally present,
thanked the Judge for his good choice, but told him withal, that he had
deprived the University of a singular Ornament. Besides his constant Preaching
he has left behind him many useful Books, the Witnesses of his Piety and
Learning, and dyed in the 59th Year of his age, December 17. 1631.

JOHN WEEVER was born at * in this County, bred in Queens College in
Cambridge, under Dr. John Person his worthy Tutor. He was very industrious in
the Study of Antiquity, and composed a useful Book of Funeral Monuments, in
the Diocese of Canterbury, Rochester, London, and Norwich: He dyed in London
in the fifty sixth Year of his age, and was Buried in St. James Clerken-well,
where he appointed this Epitaph for himself,

Lancashire gave me Breath,
And Cambridge Education.
Middlesex gave we Death,
And this Church my Humation.
And Christ to me has given
A place with him in Heaven.
The certain date of his Death I cannot attain, but by Proportion I collect it
to be about the Year of our Lord, 1634.

RALPH CUDVVORTH, D. D. the second Son of Ralph Cudworth, of Wernith-hall near
Manchester Esquire; Chief Lord of Ouldham, was bred Fellow of Emanuel-colledge
in Cambridge. A most excellent preacher, who continued and finished some
imperfect works of Mr. Perkins, and after his Decease supplied his place in St.
Andrews in Cambridge. He was at last presented by the College to the parish of
Auler in Somersetshire, Anno 163..

LAWRENCE CHADERTON was born at Chaderton in this County, of ancient, and
wealthy Parentage, but much nuzled up in Popish Superstition. He was intended
for a Lawyer, and in order thereunto, brought up some time in the Inns of
Court, till he changed his profession, and admitted himself in Christ's College
in Cambridge. His Father hearing that he had altered his place, studies, and
Religion, sent him a Poke with a groat therein, for him to go a begging
therewith, disinheriting him of that fair estate, which otherwise had descended
upon him. But God who takes men up when their Fathers and Mothers forsake
them, provided him a comfortable subsistence, when chosen Fellow of the
College. He was for many years Lecturer at St. Clements in (...), with great
profit to his Auditors, afterward made by the Founder first Master of Emanuel.
He was chosen by the Non-Conformists to be one of their four Representatives in
Hampton Court conference, and was afterward employed one of the Translators of
the Bible. He had a plain but effectual way of Preaching. It happened that he
visiting (...) friends, preached in this his Native Country, where the Word of
God (as in the days of Samuel) was very precious. And concluded his Sermon
which was of two hours continuance at least, with words to this effect. That he
would no longer trespass upon their Patience. Whereupon all the Auditory cried
out, (wonder not if hungry people craved more meat) for God (...) Sir Go on go
on. Herea^ Mr. Chaderton was surprised into a longer Discourse, beyond his
expectation, in Satisfaction of their importunity, and (though on a sudden)
performed it to their contentment and his commendation. Thus, constant
Preachers, like good house keepers, can never be taken so unprovided, but that,
(though they make not a plentiful Feast) they can give wholesome food at a short
warning.

He commenced Dr. in Divinity, when Frederick Prince Palatine (who married the
Lady Elizabeth) came to Cambridge. What is said of Mount Caucasus, that it was
never seen without Snow on the Top, was true of this Reverend Father, whom
none of our Fathers generation knew in the Universitie, before he was gray
headed, yet he never used Spectacles till the day of his death, being Ninety
four years of age.

He was not disheartened with that common saying, he that resigneth his place
before his death, buryeth himself alive, but put off his Clothes long before he
went to bed, divested himself of the Master-ship of Emanuel College, that so
he might see a worthy successor in his life time. The blessing which befell
Job. 42. 15.
Job, was in some sort appliable unto him, he saw his Successors to the fourth
generation. I mean Doctor Presson, and after his Death Doctor Sancroft, and
after his death Doctor Holesworth, who preached his Funeral Sermon Anno 1640.
about the Ninety fourth year of his age.

GEORGE WALKER was born at Hauxhead in Fournifells, of Religious Parents. Being
visited when a child, with the Small-poxe, and the standers by expecting his
dissolution, he started up out of a Trance, with this ejaculation, Lord take me
not away till I have showed forth thy praises, which made his Parents devote
him to the Ministry after his recovery.

He was bred B. D. in St. John's College in Cambridge, where he attained to be
well skilled in the Oriental Tongues, an excellent Logician and Divine, Mr.
Foster (formerly his Tutor) resigned unto him his living of St. John the
Evangelist, London, wherein Mr. Walker continued the painful Preacher well nigh
forty years, refusing higher preferment often proffered him. Dr. Felton (the
same morning he was elected Bishop of Ely) made him his Chaplain, and Dr.
Featly chose him his second in one of his Disputations against Father Fisher,
yea Mr. Walker alone had many encounters with the subtillest of the Jesuitical
party.

He was a man of an holy life, humble heart, and bountiful hand, who deserved
well of Sion College Library, and by his example and persuasion, advanced
about a thousand pounds toward the maintenance of preaching-Ministers in this
his Native County. He ever wrote all his Sermons, though making no other use of
his Notes in the Pulpit, than keeping them in his pocket, being wont to say,
that he thought he should be out if he had them not about him. His Sermons
since printed, against the profanation of the Sabbath, and other practices and
opinions, procured him much trouble, and two years Imprisonment, till he was
released by the Parliament. He dyed in the seventy year of his Age, Anno Dom.
1651.

Romish Exile Writers.
EDWARD RISHTON was born in this * County, and bred some short time Pitz. de
Ang. Scrip. page 787.
in Oxford, till he fled over to Doway, where he was made Master of Arts. Hence
he removed to Rome, and having studied Divinity four years in the English
College there, was ordained Priest 1580. Then was he sent over into England to
gain Proselites, in prosecution whereof, he was taken and kept Prisoner three
years. Yet was the Severity of the State so merciful unto him, as to spare his
Life, and only condemn him to Banishment.

He was carried over into France, whence he went to the University of Pontmuss
in Loraine, to plye his Studies. During his abode there, the place was infected
with the Plague. Here Rishton for^ate the Physicians Rule, Cit^, Procul, Long,
Tarde, fly away soon, live away far, s^ay away long, come again slowly. For he
remained so long in the Town, till he carried away the infection with him, and
going thence, dyed at St. Manhow, 1585. I presume no Ingenuous Papist will be
censorious on our Painful Munster, Learned Junius, Godly Greenham, all dying of
the Pestilence, seeing the most conscientious of their own Persuasion subject
to the same, and indeed neither Love nor Hatred can be collected from such
Casualties.

THOMAS WORTHINGTON was born in this * County, of a Gentile Family, Pitz. de
Ang. scrip. Etate 17. page 808.
was bred in the English College at Doway, where he proceeded Bachelour in
Divinity, and a little before the Eighty Eight was sent over into England as an
Harvinger for the Spanish Invasion, to prepare his Party thereunto. Here he was
caught and cast into the Tower of London: yet found such favor, that he
escaped with his life, being banished beyond the Seas.

At Triers he commenced Doctor in Divinity, and in process of time, was made
President of the English College at Rhemes. When after long expectation the
Old Testament came out in English at Rhemes (permitted with some cautions for
our Lay-Catholicks to read) this Worthington wrote his notes thereupon, which
few Protestants have seen, and fewer have regarded. He was alive in 1611. but
how long after is to me unknown.

If not the same, (which for his vivaciousness is improbable) there was a
Father * See his one foot out of the Snare.
Worthington, certainly his Kinsman and Countryman, very busy to promote the
Catholic cause in England, about the beginning of King Charles. He Dining some
thirty years since, with a Person of Honor in this Land, (at whose Table I
have often eaten) was very obstreperous in arguing the case for
Transubstantiation, and the Ubiquitariness of Christ's body; Suppose (said he)
Christ were here. To whom, the Noble Master of the House (who till then was
silent) returned, If you were away, I believe he would be here. Worthington
perceiving his Room more welcome then his Company, embraced the next
opportunity of Departure.

ANDERTON whose christian name I cannot recover, was born in * In the life of
Mr. Bolton.
this County, and brought up at Blackborne School therein, and (as I have been
informed) he was bred in Christ's College in Cambridge, where for his Eloquence
he was commonly called Golden Mouth Anderton; afterward he went beyond the
Seas, and became a Popish priest, and one of the learned amongst them.

This is he, who improving himself on the poverty of Mr. Robert Bolton,
sometimes his School-Fellow, (but then not fixed in his Religion, and Fellow of
Brazenose college) persuaded him to be reconciled to the Church of Rome, and
go over with him to the English Seminary, promising him gold enough, a good
argument to allure an unstable mind to popery, and they both appointed ^
meeting. But it pleased the God of Heaven, who holds both an Hourglass and
reed in his hand; to measure both time and place, so to order the matter, that
though Mr. Bolton came, Mr. Anderton came not accordingly. So that Rome lost,
and England gained an able Instrument. But now I have lost J. Pitz to guide me,
and therefore it is time to knock off, having no direction for the date of his
Death.

Benefactors to the public.
WILLIAM SMITH was born at * Farmeworth in this County, bred Fellow in Bish.
Godwin in the Bishops of Lincoln.
Pembroke hall in Cambridge, and at last by King Henry the Eighth, preferred
Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry. That Politic Prince to ease and honor his
Native Country of Wales, erected a Court of Presidency, conformable to the
Parliaments of France, in the Marshes thereof, and made this Bishop first
President, those Parts lying partly in his Diocese. He discharged the place
with singular Integrity, and general contentment, retaining that Office till
the day of his Death, when he was removed to be Bishop of Lincoln.

A good name is an Ointment poured out, says Solomon, and this man wheresoever
he went, may be followed by the perfume of charity he left behind him.

1. At Lichfield he founded an Hospital for a Master, two priests, and ten poor
people. 2. In the same place he founded a School, procuring from King Henry the
seventh, that the Hospital of Downholl in Cheshire, with the Lands there unto
belonging, should be bestowed upon it. Say not this was Robbing the Spittle, or
at the best Robbing Peter to pay Paul, seeing we may presume so charitable a
Prelate, would do nothing unjust, though at this distance of time we cannot
clear the particulars of his proceedings.
At Farmeworth where he was born, he founded a school, allowing ten pounds
annually (in that age no mean salary) for the Master thereof.

The University of Oxford discreetly chose him ( Oxford being in his Diocese
of Lincoln) their Chancellor, and lost nothing thereby, for he proved a more
loving Nephew than Son, so bountiful to his Aunt Oxford, that therein he
founded Brazen Nosecolledge but dyed 1513, before his Foundation was finished.

Both these Notes were taken out of a Manuscript of Mr. Roger D^worth.
Molineux a famous preacher about Henry the Eigths time, descended of the house
of Sefton in the County of Lancaster, builded the Church at Sefton anew, and
houses for Schools about the Churchyard; and made the great Wall about
Magdalen College in Oxford.

EDWARD HALSALL in the County of Lancaster Esquire, sometimes Chamberlain of
the Exchequer at Chester, founded a Free School in Halstall, and endowed it
with competent Revenue, for the maintenance of a Schoolmaster there for ever.
When this party lived, I cannot as yet recover.

THOMAS WEST was younger Brother to the Lord De la Ware, and Parson of
Manchester; On whom the Barony was devolved, his Brother dying Issuelesse; The
Pope allowed him to marry for the Continuance of so honorable a Family, upon
condition that he would build a College for such a number of priests (fellows
under a Warden) as the Bishops of Durham and Lichfield should think fit, which
he did accordingly in Manchester. The Endowment of this collegiate and
parochial church, were the Gleabe and Tithes of the parsonage of that parish,
and besides them, scarce any other considerable Revenue.

I say the Gleab, esteemed about 800. Acres of that County (half as much more
as the statute) Measure; Besides a considerable part of the Town commonly
called the Deans Gate, corruptly for St Dionise Gate, (to whom with the Virgin
Mary, and St. George, Manchester Church was dedicated) built upon the
Gleab-Land belonging to the Church. As for the Tithes of the Parish, they lie
in two and thirty Hamblets, wherewith the Collegiats were to be maintained,
which were, one Warden and four Fellows; The integrated and incorporate Rector
unto whom the parsonage was appropriated. There were also two Chaplains,
Singing-men, Queristers, and Organists.

This College has passed many Dissolutions and refoundations. But was lately
dissolved, and the Lands thereof sold by the late Act for Sale of Dean and
Chapters Lands: Some skilful in the Gospel much bemoaning it, and some learned
in the Law, conceiving, That being but the Gleab of that Rectory, it came not
within the compass of that Act: but blessed be God it since has reverted to
its former Condition.

Since the Reformation.
JOHN SMITH was born at......... in this County, bred in Magdalen C^ll. in
Cambridge. Whereof he became Fellow and Proctor of the University, when past
Sixty years of age, when the Prevaricators gave him this Homonyous Salute Ave
Pater.

This man could not fidle, could not Tune himself to be pleasant and plausible
to all Companies: but He could, and did make that little Coll. great; wherein
he had his Education.

The Poets fain how Bachus, by reason of his Mother Semyles her untimely death,
was taken out of his Mothers Womb, and sewed into the thigh of Jupiter his
Father, where he was bred until the full time of his Nativity. A Fiction which
finds a Moral in this Magdalen Coll. Whose Mother may be said to decease
before the Infant was fit to be borne, and that Mr. Smith performed the rest of
the Parents part thereunto.

Indeed Ed. Stafford Duke of Buckingham, the first founder thereof, gave it
little more than a Name. The Lord Audley bestowed on it a new name, with little
buildings and less Indowment, Magnificent Dr. Nevil for a Time was Mr.
thereof, but (according to the fashion of the World the rich shall still have
more) his affections were all for Trinity Coll. to which he was after removed.

Only Mr. Smith by his long life and thrifty living, by what he gave to, and
what he saved for the College, so Improved the Condition thereof, that though
he left it Lateritium as he found it, yet what he found poor and empty he left
rich and full of Scholars.

Nor must we forget his painfulnesse, when with Dr. Gouge he solicited the
Suit called Magdalen College Case, Nor yet his Patience, when he lay so long
in the Fleet, for refusing to submit to an Order of Chancery (fearing their
cause would be prejudiced thereby) so that he may be called the Confessor of
the College, from inconsiderable Income. He raised by his carfulness
considerable profit to the Fellows of that house, and by observing the
Statutes, brought the College into such Reputation for Learning, That yearly
it afforded one or more Eminent scholars. In a word, he was a true servant to
the College all his life and at his Death, to which he bequeathed all he had,
six hundred pounds at least, and dyed Anno. Dom. 163...

GEORGE CLARKE Haberdasher, a plain honest man, just, temperate and ^ugal: And
according to his understanding, (which in the Worlds esteem was not great)
devout, a daily frequenter of the Prayers in the College Church, and the
Hearer of Sermons there. Not long before the breaking forth of our civil
dissentions; dying without issue, he made the Poor his Heir; and did give them
one hundred pounds per annum, in good lands lying in a place called Crompsall,
within a Mile from Manchester; I have not yet attained the certain Date of his
Death.

HUMPHREY CHETHAM, third Son of Henry Chetham of Crompsall Gentleman, is
thought (on just ground) to descend from Sir Jeffrey Chetham of Chetham, (a man
of much Remark in former days) and some old Writings in the hands of
Worshipful persons, not far remote from the place, do evidence as much, but the
said Sir Geffrey falling in troublesome times into the Kings Displeasure; his
Family (in effect) was long since ruinated.

But it seems his Posterity was unwilling to fly far from their old (though
destroyed) Nest, and got themselves a handsome habitation at Crompsall hard by,
where James, elder Brother of this Humphrey Chetham, did reside. The younger
Brethren George, Humphrey, and Ralph, betook themselves to the Trading of this
County, dealing in Manchester commodities, sent up to London; And Humphrey
signally improved himself in piety and outward prosperity. He was a diligent
Reader of the Scriptures and of the Works of sound Divines, a Respecter of such
Ministers, which he accounted truly godly, upright, sober, discreet and
sincere. He was HighSheriffe of this County, 1635. discharging the place with
great Honor. Insomuch that very good Gentlemen of Birth and Estate did wear
his Cloth at the Assize, to testify their unfeigned affection to him, and two
John Huntley and H. Wrigley Esquires.
of them of the same profession with himself, have since been Sheriffs of the
County.

Grudge not Reader, to go through so long a Porch, for I assure thee it leads
unto a fair Palace; to as great a Masterpiece of Bounty, as our age has
afforded. This Mr. Chetham by his Will bearing Date the 16. of January 1651.
gave 7000. l. to buy a Fee-simple estate of 420. l. for ever, for the Education
of forty poor Children in Manchester at School, from about 6. till 14. years of
age, when they are to be bound out Apprentizes. They must be the Children of
poor but honest Parents, no bastards, nor diseased at the time wherein they are
chosen, not lame or blind, in regard the Town of Manchester has ample means
already (if so employed) for the maintenance of such Impotents. Indeed, he
intended it for a Seminary of Religion and Ingenuity, where the aforesaid Boys
were to have Diet, Lodging, Apparel and Instruction. He gave a 1000. l. for
Books to a Library, and a 100. l. to prepare a place for them. He bequeathed
200. l. to buy Books, (such as he himself delighted in) for the Churches of
Manchester, Bolton, and other Chapels thereabouts; He gave the Remainder of his
Estate (Debts and Legacies first paid) to the Increase of the books in the
Library.

Now as the Loaves in the Gospel, multiplied in the breaking, So Mr. Chethams
Estate did not shrink but swell in the calling of it in; Insomuch, That the
aforesaid Surplusage, is known to be the better part of Two thousand pounds.
Dying a Bachelour, he appointed George Chetham Esquire, Citizen and Grocer of
London (whereof he was chosen Alderman 1656. and fined for the same) and Edward
Chetham Gent. Executors of his Will and Testament: God send us more such men,
That we may dazzle the Eyes of the Papists, with the light of Protestant good
works. And know Reader I am beholding for my exact Information herein, to my
worthy friend Mr. Johnson, late Preacher of the Temple, and one of the Feoffees
appointed by Mr Chetham for the uses aforesaid.

Memorable Persons.
Sir EDMUND de TRAFFORD Knights, Sir THOMAS de ASHTON Knights,
were persons of high esteem, as anciently descended, and richly reveneued in
this County, how great their skill was in Chemistry, will appear by the
following Patent (faithfully transcribed with mine own hand, out of the
Original in the Tower) granted unto them by King Henry the sixth, in the four
and twentieth year of his Reign.

REX
omnibus ad quos, etc. Salutem. Pat. 24. of Heb. 6. Me mb. 14.

Sciatis, quod cum dilecti and fideles nostri, Edmundus de Trafford Miles, and
Thomas Ashton Miles, Nobis per quandam supplicationem monstraverint, quod
quamvis ipsi super certis metallis, per Artem sive Scientiam Philosophiae
operari vellent, metalla imperfecta de suo proprio genere transfer, and tunc
ea per dictam Artem sive Scientiam, in Aurum sive Argentum perfectum
transubstantiare, ad omnimodas probationes and examinationes, sicut aliquod
aurum sive argentum in aliqua Minera crescens, expectandum and indurandum, ut
dicunt; Nihilominus certae personae illis malevolentes, et malignantes,
supponant ipsos per Artem illicitam operari, and sic ipsos in probatione dictae
Artis sive Scientiae impedire et perturbare p^ssunt. Nos praemissa
considerantes, ac conclusionem dictae operationis, sive Scientiae scire
volentes, de gratia nostra speciali concessimus and licentiam dedimus iisdem
Edmundo and Thomae, and ipsorum servientibus, quod ipsi Artem sive Scientiam
praedictam, operari and probare possint licite and impune, absque impetione
nostra vel Officiariorum nostrorum quorumcunque; aliquo Statuto, Actu,
Ordinatione, sive Provisione in contrarium facto ordinat. sive provis. non
obstante.

In cujus, etc. T. R.
apud Westmond. septimo die Aprilis.

The King
to all unto whom, etc. Greeting.
Know ye, that whereas our beloved and loyal Edmund de Trafford Knight, and
Thomas (...) Knight, have by a certain Petition shown unto Us, that although
they were willing by the Art or Science of Philosophy, to work upon certain
metalls, to translate imperfect metalls from their own kind, and then to
transubstantiate them by the said Art or Science, as they say; into perfect
Gold or Silver, unto all manner of proofs and trialls, to be expected and
endured, as an^ Gold or Silver growing in any Mine, Notwithstanding certain
persons ill willing, and maligning them, conceive them to work by unlawful Art,
and so may hinder and disturb them in the trial of the said Art and Science.
We considering the premises, and willing to know the conclusion of the said
Working or Science, of Our special grace have granted and given leave to the
same Edmund and Thomas, and to their Servants, that they may work and try the
aforesaid Art and Science, lawfully and freely, without any hinderance of Ours,
or of Our Officers whatsoever, Any Statute, Act, Ordinance, or Provision, made,
ordained, or provided to the contrary notwithstanding.

In witness whereof, the King at Westminster, the 7. day of April.

Mr....... KIDSON. Reader, I presume not now to direct thee, who my self am at
a loss, and Grope for a Guide* Leland in his Itinerary, speaking of Warton a
Village in this County, observes, that Mr. Kidson was born there, a passage
which never had fallen from his Pen, had he not been one of signal Remark. Who
this Mr. Kidson was, where he lived, what he did, where he dyed, I shall be
thankful to such as give me Satisfaction.

RICHARD ROTHVVELL was born at or near Mr. Clark in his Lives of modern divines
p. 450.
Bolton in the Mores, in this County. Taking the Ministry (after his education
in Cambridge) upon him, he disposed his temporal estate to his friend to live
of the Gospel. I remit the Reader to his Life extant at large in Print,
wherein this most remarkable, viz. his dispossessing of John Fox near
Nottingham of a Devil, there passing betwixt them a large Discourse, by way of
Question and Answer. I know that such Confabulations are common in the Church
of Rome, to whose Exorcists, Satan's Language is as Familiar as Erasmus his
Dialogues are well known to men, or those of Corderius to Schoolboys. But such
accidents amongst Protestants are very rare, and therefore the more to be
observed. There are I confess, more Thomases then my self, much given to
mistrust (whose faith will be at a stand herein) However finding it atteste^ by
an honest and * able Mr. Stanly Gower Minist. of Dorchester, who penned his
Life full of many observables.
person, I dare not deny the truth thereof. All I will say, is this, That is
the best belief, which is neither over forward, nor over-froward, which, as it
will not run it self out of breath with too much speed, will not be like a
(...) horse, which no force can make to go farther. He dyed at Mansfield in
Nottingham-shire, 1627. in the 64* year of his age. No^ could I write less of
him, whom Idem Ibidem.
one terms Orbis Terra* rum Anglicarum Oculum, The Eye of our English World,
and my Book would seem (...) and blind, if passing him over in Silence.

Lord Mayors.
Name. Father. Place. Company. Time. 1 Nicholas Mossey Edward Mossey Hough
Clothworker 1599. 2 James Pemberton. James Pemberton Eccleston^ Goldsmith 1611.

Reader, Lancashire is one of the 12. pretermitted Counties, the Names of whose
Gentry, were not returned into the Tower, in the Twelfth year of K. Henry the
Sixth.

Sheriffs.
Name. Place. Arms. Reginae Elizab. Anno, 1 Johan. Talbot, ar. Arg. 3 Lions
Rampant, Purpre* 2 Rob. (...), (...). 3 John (...), m. Atherton (...) 3
Falcons, Or. 4 Joh. Southworth 5 Tho. Hesketh, m. Arg. on a Bend S. 3 Garbs,
Or. 6 Tho. Houghton, a. Houghton (...) 3. Bars Argent. 7 Edw. Trafford, ar.
Tr^fford Argent a Griffin Ramp. Gules. 8 Ric. Mollineux, m Sheff^on (...) a
Cross Moline, Or. 9 Tho. Laugnton, m. Arg. 3 (...) Gules. 10 Edw. Holland, ar.
Az. a L. R. sem. de Fluer de L. Ar. 11 Joh. Preston, arm. Arg. 2 bars, ou a
Cant. Gules, a 12 Tho. ^utler, arm. Cinque foil, Or. 13 Edw. Trafford, a. ut
prius 14 Fran* Holt, arm. Arg. on a Bend Engrailed S. 3 Flower de Luce of the
first. 15 Rich. Holland, a. ut prius 16 Will. Boothe, ar. Arg. 3 (...) heads
Erased and Erected S. 17 Fran* Holt, arm. ut prius 18 Rich. Bold, arm. Argent a
(...) Rampant S. Io-zeenge* of the Field and Sables. 19 Ro^. Dalton, ar. 20
Johan* (...) (...) Party per Pale (...), Az. and Or 6 Martlets counter changed
Arg. a Mullet Sable. 21 Rad* Ashton* ar.* 22 Edw. Trafford, m. ut prius 23 Joh.
Byron miles Argent 3. Bendlets Gules. 24 (...). Holland, ut prius 25 Joh.
Atherton, ar. ut prius 26 Edwar. Trafford, ut prius 27 Tho. Preston, ar. ut
prius 28 Richard. Asheton ut prius 29 Johan. Fleetwood ut prius 30 Tho. Talbot,
ar. ut prius 31 Rich. Mollineux ut prius 32 Rich. Bold, ar. ut prius 33 Jac.
Asheton, ar. ut prius 34 Edw. Fitton, ar. Az. on a Bend Arg. 3. Garbs O. 35
Richard. Asheton ut prius 36 Radulp. Asheton ut prius 37 Tho. Talbot, arm. ut
prius 38 (...). Holland ut prius 39 Rich. Molleneux ut prius 40 Richard.
Asheton ut prius 41 Rich. Houghton ut prius 42 Robert. Hesketh ut prius 43 Cut.
Halsall, m. Arg. 3. Griffins Heads Erazed. A 44 Edward. Trafford ut prius K.
James. Anno, 1 Nic. Moseley, mil. S. a Chev. betw. 3 Pick* axes, arg 2 Thom.
Baker, mil. 3 Edw. Fleetwood, a. ut prius 4 Rich. Ashton, mil. ut prius 5 Rob,
(...), ar. ut prius 6 Edw. Trafford, m. ut prius 7 Roger. Nowell, a. Arg. 3.
Cups covered S. 8 Johan. Fleming, a. 9 Cut. Halsall, m. ut prius 10 Rob.
Bindlose, a. Borwick Quarterly per Fess indented G. and on a Bend, Or. 11 Rich.
Shi^born, a. 12 Edw. Stanley, ar. Arg. on a ^end Az. 3. Stags heads caboshed,
Or. 13 Rolan* Moseley, a ut prius 14 Edw. Trafford, m. ut prius 15 Ric. (...)
S. 3 Weavers Shuttles, Argent. 16 Leonar. Ashawe, a 17 Edw. Moore, ar. Vert.
ten Trefoiles 4. 3. 2. and 1. Argent. 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 K. CHARLES.
Courteous Reader, do not behold these Vacuities, as the Effect of my Laziness.
Nor will I excuse my self, by accusing of others. The rather because, In
gratuitisnulla est Jnjusticia, it was no wrong in any to deny, what was bounty
in them to bestow, on me. But know all my Industry and Importunity could not
procure the seasonable sight of the Records of this County (not kep^ a^ the
rest in the Exchequer but in a proper place by themselves) thereby to supply
the Beginning and Finishing of this our Catalogue. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13
14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22

The Batails.
At Preston in Andernesse, August 17. 1648. Duke Hambleton resolving to play an
Aftergame of Loyalty, entered England with an Army more numerous then well
Disciplined. Most beheld him as one rather cunning than wise, yet rather wise,
than valiant. However he had Officers who did Ken the War-craft, as well as any
of our Age. He would accept of no English Assistance, so to engrosse all the
work and wages to himself. Some suspect his Officers trust was undermined, (or
over-moneyed rather) whilst others are confident, they were betrayed by none
save their own security. Indeed the common Soldiers were persuaded that the
conquest would be easy, rather to be possessed then purchased, their Van and
Rear were many miles asunder, and they met the resistance of Major General
Lambert, before they expected it. H^ at Preston gave the Scotch Army such a
Blow, as settled or stund it, though it reeled on some miles more Southward into
Staffordshire, where at Ulceter, the Duke was taken prisoner By ^ollonel Wait.
, and utterly defeated.

As for the Defeat of James Earl of Derby in this County, at the end of August,
anno 1651. it amounted not to a Battle; which properly is the Engagement of two
formed Armies. Whereas the forces of the Earl, were s^attered before fully
(...) red, to a firm consistency. Yet this had been a Battle, if not prevented
by the Vigilance of Coll. Lilburn and others, whose seasonable Service to the
Parliament, was not so great in it self, as in the most considerable
consequences thereof.

The Farewell.
I am informed that Pillyn-Mos is the Fountain of Fuel [Turfe] in this
County, and is conceived inexhaustible by the Vicinage. May it prove so. But if
it should chance to fail, may Gods Grace (which the vulgar in their profane
Proverb unequally yoke therewith) I say may Gods Grace never be drained to
those that stand in need thereof.

And because this County may be called the Cockpit of Conseience, wherein
constant Combats betwixt Religion and Superstition, may the Contest betwixt
them prove like the Morning Twilight, wherein (after some equal Conflict
betwixt them) the Light gains the final Conquest of the Darkness.

One word more to this Shire and I have done. Let me be the Remembrancer, that
Hugh of Manchester in this County Vide supra page 14. Titulo Writers.
wrote a Book in the Reign of K. Edward the first. Entitled,

De Fanaticorum Deliriis.
Of the Doteages of Fanatics.
At which time an Impostor had almost made Elianor the Queen mother mad; by
reporting * Bale de scrip. Brit. cent. 4. N. 62. and Pitz. De Ang. Script. Anno
1294.
the Posthume-miracles done by her Husband King Henry the Third, till this our
Hugh settled her judgment aright. I could wish some worthy Divine (with such
Lancashire does abound) would resume this Subject, and show how Ancient and
Modern Fanatics, though differing much in their wild Fancies and Opinions,
meet together in a mutual madness and distraction.

LEIGESTERSHIRE.
LEICHESTERSHIRE. This County is (though not exquisitely) circular in the form,
whilst Leicester the Shire-Town is almost the exact Center thereof, and the
River Soar, Diameterlike, divides it into two equal halfes. Having Lincoln,
and Rutland-shire on the East, Darby and Nottingham-Shire on the North,
Warwickshire on the West, and Northamptonshire on the South. It extends
from North to South thirty and three miles (measured from the utmost Angle) but
exceeds not twenty seven in the Breadth thereof. Burton in his Description of
Leichestershire. page 2.


Here (...) avoid all offense we (...) collect the Quality of this Soil from a
* Native thereof. Who may be presumed exact in this Quadri-Partition.

South-West. North* West. North* East. South-East Rich ground plentiful in Corn
and Pasture, but wanting Wood, forceing the Inhabitants to make use of Straw,
Cowe^* etc. For the most part, Hard and Barren, yielding Fruit not without
labor and expense, but well stored with Wood and Pit-cole. Good Soil, apt to
bear Corn and Grass and sufficiently provided with Fuel. Much* like the last
for fruitfulness, and of the two, better furnished with Fuel.

However these four Quarters being put together into the Body of one Shire,
competently supply their mutual defects.

Natural Commodities.
Beans.
Plenty of these in this County, especially about Barton in the Beans, in the
Hundred of Sparkhen-Hoe, where they appear like a Forest toward the time of
Harvest. Wherefore the Scouts of Charles Duke of Burgundy, who mistook a Field
full of high Phil. Comincus lib. 1. cap. 11..
thistles, near unto Paris, for the Army of the King of France, with their
lances held upright, might here commit the like mistake with more probability.
Though Beans be generally beheld, but as horse and hog-graine, yet were they
man's * meat, even in the 2 Samuel 17. 28 and Ezekiel. 49.
plentiful Country of Canaan, called (...) Pholl in the Hebrew, whence some
deduce the word Pulse, though none dare affirm that Daniel his Pulse was made
thereof. But more of this In the Proverb, of Beanbelly Leicestershire.
Grain hereafter.

Cole.
These are dug up plentifully at Cole-Orton, in the Hundred of West Goscot.
I say Cole-Orton, for there is another Village called Cold-Orton in this Shire.
An addition, which no less truly than sadly would be prefixed to most Towns in
this County, if not warmed in VVinter with this under-ground-fewell, that
above-ground is so much decayed.

I confess (...), a Treasure of Coals, passes both in the Greek and Latin
Proverb, for a frustrated Expectation, and his hopes fall very low, who,
looking for Gold, either in Specie or in Oar^, lights only on a heap of
Coals, which anciently used to be buried in the Earth, for boundaries or Austin
de civitate lib. 21. c. 4.
limits of lands. However such Mines of Coals as these, without any help of
Alcumy, are quickly turned into Gold and Silver, sold at good rates to the
Countries round about.

Manufactures in this County are not to be expected, for where the Husbandmans
Acre-Staffe, and the Shepheards-hook are as in this County in Stay, there they
engross all to themselves, and command Manufactures to observe their distance
from them.

The Buildings.
This County afordeth no Cathedralls, and as for the Parish-Churches therein,
they may take the Eye, not ravish the admiration of the beholder. Bottsford, is
one of the primest, very fair and large, with a high Spire Steeple. At the
Suppression of Abbeys, many ancient Monument, of the Albanies and Rosses, were
removed hither out of the Priory of Beaver, by the command of Thomas Earl of
Rutland, and pity it was, that his commendable care was not imitated in other
places.

As for ci^il Structures, there is a seeming parity betwixt many fair Houses in
this Shire, only something Monarchical (above the ordinary Aristocracy of
Fabrics) apppears in the height, strength and workmanship of the Stone Tower,
built by William Lord Hastings at Ashby de la-Zouch. Also the fair, large, and
beautiful palace, built at Broadgate, by Thomas Gray Marquess of Dorset,
challenges the pre-eminence above the rest.

The Wonders.
There is a Village in this County named Charleton, surnamed Curley, and all
that are born therein, have an harsh and wratling kind of Speech, uttering
their words with much difficulty and wharling in the Throat, and cannot well
pronounce the Letter R. Surely this proceeds not from any natural
imperfection in the Parents (whence probably the Tribual Judge. 12. 6.
Lisping of the Ephramites did arise) because their children born in other
places, are not haunted with that Infirmity. Rather it is to be imputed to some
occult quality in the Elements of that Place. Thus a learned Author Jo. Bodin
Method. Hist. cap. 5.
informs us, that some Families at Labloin in Guyen in France, do naturally
stut and stammer, which he takes to proceed from the nature of the Waters.

As for the inability distinctly to pronounce R. it is a catching disease in
other Counties. I knew an Mr. Ios. Mede.
Essex man, as great a Scholar as any in our age, who could not for his life
utter, Carolus Rex Britanniae without stammering. The best was, the King had
from him in his hearty prayers, what he wanted in his plain pronunciation.

My Father has told me, that in his time, a Fellow of Trinity College,
probably a Native of Charleton in this County, sensible of his own imperfection
herein, made a Speech of competent length with select words both to his Mouth
and for his Matter, without any R. therein, to show that Men may speak without
being beholding to the Dogs Letter.

Proverbs.
Bean-belly Leichestershire.] So called from the great plenty of that grain
growing therein. Yea, those in the neighboring Counties, use to say merrily,
Shake a Leichestershire Yeoman by the Collar, and you shall hear the Beans
rattle in his belly; But those Yeomen smile at what is said to rattle in their
bellies, whilst they know good silver ringeth in their Pockets.

Indeed I read a Latin Proverb, A Fabis abstineto, Forbear beans; whereof some
make a civil interpretation, meddle not with matters of State, because
anciently men cast in a Bean, when they gave their Suffrages in public
elections; others expound it physically, because Beans are windy and discompose
the tranquillity of men's minds, by their slatuous evaporation; the reason
assigned for the general report that Pythagoras prohibited the eating of them
to his Scholars. Yet an excellent (...) apud A. Gellium lib. 4. cap. 11.
Author informs me, that Pythagoras had his repast on Beans more than on any
kind of pulse.

However nothing will put Leichestershire men out of conceit of their beloved
Beans, the rather because their plenty argues the goodness of their ground.
For, whereas lean land will serve for puling pease and faint fetches, it must
be a strong and fruitful soil indeed, where the masculine Beans are produced.

If Bever have Burtons Description of Leicester-(...). pa^. 2.
a capp,]
You Churles of the Vale look to that.]
That is, when the Clouds (as he expounds it) hang over the Towers of the
Castle, it is a prognostic of much rain and moisture, to the much indamaging
of that fruitful Vale, lying in the three Counties of Leicester, Lincoln, and
Nottingham. But alas, though the cap may be there still, the head (or the crown
thereof) I am sure is not there, [I mean Beaver Castle it self] being lately
demolished in our Civil Wars, though I hear some part thereof is in rebuilding.
I wish the Workmen good success, though I suspect the second Edition (to use a
Scholars Metaphor) of this Castle, will not be ^o full and fair as the former.

Princes.
JANE GRAY, Her life is wri^ten at large in my Holy State.
eldest Daughter of HENRY GRAY, Duke of Suffolk, by Francis (...), Eldest
Daughter to Mary, second Sister to King Henry the eighth, was born at
Broadgates, near unto Leicester.

No Lady which led so many pious, lived so few pleasant Days, whose soul was
never out of the Nonage of Afflictions, till Death made her of full years to
inherit Happiness; so severe her Education.

VVhilest a child, her Father's, was to her an House of Correction, nor did
she write Woman, sooner than she did subscribe Wife, and in Obedience to her
Parents, was unfortunately matched to the L. Guilford Dudley; yet he was a
goodly, and (for ought I ^ind to the contrary) a Godly Gentleman, whose worst
fault was, that he was Son to an ambitious Father.

She was proclaimed but never crowned Queen, living in the Tower, which Place,
though it has a double capacity, of a Palace, and a Prison, yet appeared to
her chiefly in the later Relation.

For She was longer a Captive than a Queen therein, taking no contentment all
the time, save what she found in God, and a clear Conscience.

Her Family, by snatching at a Crown which was not, lost a Coronet, which was
their own, much degraded in Degree, and more in Estate. I would give in an
Inventory of the vast Wealth they then possessed, but am loath to grieve her
surviving Relations with a List of the Lands lost by her Fathers attainture.
She suffered on Tower Hill, (...) on the twelfth of February.

KATHARINE GRAY was second Daughter to Henry Duke of Suffolk. It Is pity to part
the Sisters, that their Memories may mutually condole and comfort one another.
She was born in the same place, and (when her Father was in height) married to
Henry Lord Herbert, Son and Heir to the Earl of Pembroke; bu^ the politic old
Earl, perceiving the case altered, and what was the high way to Honor, turned
into the ready road to Ruin, got pardon from Queen Mary, and brake the marriage
quite off.

This Heraclita, or Lady of Lamentation thus repudiated, was seldom seen with
dry eyes for some years together, sighing out her sorrowful condition; so that
though the Roses in her Cheeks looked very wan and pale, it was not for want of
watering. Afterward Edward Seymour Earl of Hertford married her privately
without the Queens License, and concealed till her pregnancy discovered it.

Indeed our English Proverb, It is good to be near a kin to Land, holds in
private patrimonies, not Titles to Crowns, where such Aliances has created to
many much molestation. Queen Elizabeth beheld her with a jealous Eye, unwilling
she should match either Foreign Prince or English Peer, but follow the pattern
she set her of constant Virginity.

For their Presumption, this Earl was fined fifteen thousand pounds, imprisoned
with his Lady in the Tower, and severely forbidden her company. But Love and
Money will find or force a passage. By bribing the Keeper he bought (what was
his own) his Wifes Embraces, and had by her a surviving Son Edward, Ancestor to
the Right Honorable the Duke of Somerset, She dyed January 26. a Prisoner in
the Tower 1567. after nine years durance therein.

MARY GRAY the youngest Daughter, frighted with the Infelicity of her two Elder
Sisters, Jane and this Katharine, forgot her Honor to remember her Safety, and
married one whom she could love, and none need fear, Martin Kayes of Kent Esquire.
who was a Judge at Court (but only of Doubtful casts at Dice, being
Se^jeant-Porter) and died without Issue, the 20. of April 1578.

Martyrs.
HUGH LATIMER was born at Thurcaston in this County, what his Father was, and
how qualified for his State, take from his own mouth, in his first Sermon
before Fox acts and Monuments.
King Edward, being confident the Reader will not repent his pains in perusing
it. * Page 32.


My Father was a Yeoman, and had no Lands of his own; only he had a Farm of
three or four Pounds a Year at the uttermost, and hereupon he tilled so much as
kept half a dozen men, he had walk for an Hundred Sheep, and my Mother milked
thiry Kine, he was able, and did find the King an HARNESS with himself, and
his Horse, whilst he came unto the Place, that he should receive the Kings
Wages. I can remember I buckled his Harness when he went to Black Heath Field.
He kept me to School, or else I had not been able to have Preached before the
Kings Majesty now. He married my Sisters with Five Pounds, or twenty Nobles a
piece: so that he brought them up in Godliness and Fear of God: He kept
Hospitallity for his Poor Neighbors, and some Alms: He gave to the Poor, and
all this did he of the same Farm, where he that now has it, pays sixteen
pounds by the Year and more, and is not able to do any thing for his Prince,
for himself, nor for his Children, or give a Cup of Drink to the Poor. He was
bred in Christ's College, in Cambridg, and converted under God by Mr. Bilney,
from a Violent Papist to a Zealous Protestant. He was afterward made Bishop of
Worcester, and four Years after outed, for refusing to subscribe the six
Articles: How he was martyred at Oxford 1555. is notoriously known.

Let me add this Appendix to his Memory, when the Contest was in the House of
Lords, in the Reign of K. Henry the Eighth, about the giving all Abbey Lands to
the King* There was a Division betwixt the Bishops of the Old and New Learning;
for by those Names they were distinguished. Those of the Old Learning
unwillingly willing* were contented, that the King should make a Resumption of
all those Abbeys which his Ancestors had founded, leaving the rest to continue
according to the Intention of their Founders. The Bishops of the new Learning
were more pliable to the Kings Desires, Only Latimer was dissenting, earnestly
urging, that two Abbeys at the least, in every Diocese of considerable
Revenues, might be preserved for the Maintenance of Learned men therein. Thus
swimming a good while against the stream, he was at last carried away with the
Current.

Eminent Prelates before the Reformation.
GILBERT SEGRAVE Born at Segrave in this County, was bred in Oxford, where he
attained to great Learning, as the Books written by him do declare. The first
Preferment I find conferred on him was, The Provosts place of St. Sepulchers in
York, and the occasion how he obtained it is remakable.

The Pope had formerly bestowed it on his near Kinsman, which argues the good
value thereof, seeing neither Eagles, nor Eagles Birds do feed on Flies. This
Kinsman of the Popes lying on his death bed, was troubled in Bishop Godw. in
vita T. Corbridge.
Conscience (which speak^eth loudest when men begin to be speechless, and all
Sores pain most when nere night) that he had undertaken such a Cure of Souls
upon him, who never was in England, nor understood English, and therefore
requested the Pope his Kinsman, that after his Death the Place might be
bestowed on some Learned Englishman, that so his own absence and negligence
might in some sort be repaired by the Residence and diligence of his Successor,
And this Segrave to his great Credit, was found the fittest Person for that
Performance. He was afterward preferred Bishop of London sitting in that See
not full four years, dying Anno Dom. 1317.

WALTER DE LANGTON was born at VVest-langton in this County. He was highly in
favor with King Edward the first, under whom he was Bishop of Coventry and
Liechfield, and Treasurer of England. He granted him also Liberty of free (...)
Description of this County. page 257.
Warren in West and Thorpe Langton in this County the Patrimoniall inheritance
of this Prelate. With his own innocence and friends assistance, at long
sailing he weathered out the Tempest of the Popes displeasure.

Longer did he groan under the undeserved Anger of King Edward the second,
chiefly, because this Bishop sharply reproved him when as yet but Prince for
his Godwin in the Bishops of (...) and Wells
Debauchery.

See here the great difference betwixt youth, some hopefully, some desperately
riotous. Of the former was Henry the fifth, who when King, is said to have
rewarded and advanced such, who had reproved and punished him when Prince. Of
the latter was King Edward, not only wild but mad in his vitiousnesse. But our
Langton at length, was brought says my T. Walsingham
Author in Regis Semigratiam into the Kings half favor, let me add and in
populi sesquegratiam, and into the peoples favor and half, who highly loved
and honored him.

His tragicomical life, had a peaceable end in Plenty and Prosperity, He found
his Cathedral of Li^hfield mean, and left it magnificent, and it will appear by
the instance of our Langton, Josseline of Wells and others, that Bishops
continuing unremoved in their See, have atcheived greater matters then those
who have been often translated, though to richer Bishoprics. Indeed prodigious
was his bounty in building and endowing his Cathedral, wherein he continued
almost 25. years, and dying 1321. was buried in the Chapel of St. Mary of his
own erection.

ROGERDE Bishop Godwin writes him Mortivall.
MARTIVAL Son and Heir of Sir Aukitell de Martivall Knight. (who gave for his Arms
Argent a Cinque foil Sable) was born at Nowsley in this County. He was first
Archdeacon of Leicester, then Dean of Lincoln, and at last consecrated Bishop
of Salisbury, in the Reign of King Edward the Second 1315. Now seeing Bishop
Godwin, has nothing more of him save his Name and Date, it is charity further
to inform Posterity that he was the last heir male of his house, and founded a
College at (...) in the Description of this County. Page 211.
Nowsley, temp. Edw. 1. for a Warden and certain Brethren, which in the 24. of
Hen. 6. was valued to dispend yearly (besides all charges) 6. l. 13. 5. 4. d.
His estate descended to Joyce de Martivall his Sister, married unto Sir Ralph
Hastings lineal Ancestor to the now Earl of Huntington. As for the Manor of
Nowsley as it came by the mother, so it went away with her Daughter, into the
Family of the Herons; and by her Daughter into the Family of the Hazleriggs,
who at this day are the Possessors thereof. This Bishop dyed in the midst of
Lent, 1329.

ROBERT WIVIL was born of worthy and wealthy parentage at B^rton in his
Description of Leicesler shire. page 269. *
Stanton Wivil in this County, at the Instance of Philippa Queen to King Edward
the Third, the Pope, Anno 1329. preferred him Bishop of Salisbury. It is hard
to say whether he were more Dunce or Dwarf, more unlearned or unhansome,
insomuch that T. Walsingham tells us, that had the Pope ever seen him (as no
doubt he felt him in his large Fees) he would never have conferred the Place
upon him.

He sat Bishop more then 45. years, and impleaded William Mountague Earl of
Salisbury in a Writ of Right for the Castle of Salisbury. The Earl chose the
Trial by Battle, which the Bishop accepted of, and both produced their
Champions into the Place. The Combatant for the Bishop coming forth all clad in
white, with the bishops own Go^win in the Bishops of Salisbury. (...) ut prius.
Arms ( viz.) ( Gules Fretty Varee, * a Chief Or) empailed no doubt with them
of his See on his Surcote.

Some highly commended the Zeal of the Bishop asserting the Rights of his
Church, whilst others condemned this in him, as a unprelatical act, God
allowing Duells no competent Deciders of such Differences. And moderate men to
find out an expedient, said, he did this not as a Bishop but Baron; the best
was, the matter was taken up by the Kings interposing, and the Bishop with
2500. Marks, bought of the Earl the quiet possession of the Castle, and dyed
Anno D^m. 1375. being buried under a Marble Stone about the middle of the Quire.

Since the Reformation.
JOSEPH HAL^ was born at Ashby De La Zouch, in this County, where his Father
under the Earl of Huntington, was Governor or Bailey of the Town. So soon
almost as Emanuel College was admitted into Cambridge, he was admitted into
that College, within few years after the first foundation thereof. He passed
all his degrees with great applause* First noted in the University, for his
ingenuous maintaining, (be it Truth, or Paradox) that Mundus senescit, The
World grows old. Yet, in some sort, his position confuteth his position, the
wit and quickness whereof did argue an increase, rather than a decay of parts
in this latter age.

He was first beneficed by Sir R. Drury at Hallsted in Suffolk, and thence
removed by Edward Lord Denny, (afterward Earl of Norwich) to Waltham Abbey in
Essex. Here I must pay the Tribute of my Gratitude to his memory, as building
upon his foundation, beholding my self, as his great Grandchild in that place,
three degrees from him in succession: But oh, how many from him in ability! His
little Catechism has done great good in that populous parish, and I could
wish that Ordinance more generally used all over England.

Being Doctor of Divinity, he was sent over by K. James to the Synod of Dort,
whence only indisposition of body forced him to return before the rest of his
Colleagues. He was preferred first Dean of Worcester, then Bishop of Exeter,
then Bishop of Exeter, then Bishop of no place; surviving to see his sacred
function buried before his eyes. He may be said to have dyed with his pen in
his hand, whose Writing and Living expired together. He was commonly called our
English Sir H. Wotton in his Letter to Dr. Collins.
Seneca, for the pureness, plainness, and fullness of his style. Not unhappy
at Controversies, more happy at Comments, very good in his Characters, better
in his Sermons, best of all in his Meditations. Nor will it be amiss to
transcribe the following passage out of his Will.

In the name of God, Amen. I Joseph Hall, D.D. not worthy to be called Bishop
of Norwich, etc. First, I bequeath my soul, etc. my body I leave to be interred
without any funeral * (...) R. Richard.
pomp, at the Discretion of my Executors, with this only monition, that I do
not hold Gods House a meet Repository for the dead bodies of the greatest
Saints. He dyed September the 8. Anno Dom. 1656. and was buried at Hyhem near
Norwich.

Statesmen.
GEORGE VILLIERS was born at Brooksby in this County, (...) son to his father
Sir George Villiers and second son to his Mother Mary Beaumont. Being debarred
(by his late Nativity) from his fathers lands, he was happy in his Mothers
love, maintaining him in France, till he returned one of the compleatest
Courtiers in Christendom, his body and behavior mutually gracing one another.

Sir Tho. Lake may be said to have ushered him to the English Court, whilst
the Lady Lucy Countess of Bedford led him by the one hand, and William Earl of
Pembroke by the other, supplying him with a support far above his patrimonial
income. The truth is, Sommersets growing daily more wearisome, made Villiers
hourly more welcome to K. James.

Soon after he was knighted, created successively Baron Viscount Villiers,
Earl, Marquess, Duke of Buckingham, and to bind all his honors the better
together, the noble Garter was bestowed upon him. And now Offices at Court,
(not being already void) were voided for him. The Earl of Worcester was
persuaded to part with his place of Master of the horse, as the Earl of
Nottingham with his Office of Admiral, and both conferred on the Duke.

He had a numerous and beautiful female kindred, so that there was hardly a
noble Stock in England into which one of these his Cients was not grafted. Most
of his Neices were matched with little more portion then their Uncles smiles,
the forerunner of some good Office or Honor to follow on their Husbands. Thus
with the same act did he both gratify his kindred, and fortify himself with
noble alliance.

It is seldom seen that two Kings, (father and Son) tread successively in the
same Tract as to a Favorite; but here King Charles, had as high a kindness for
the Duke as K. James. Thenceforward he became the Plenipotentiary in the
English Court, some of the Scottish Nobility making room for him, by their
seasonable departure out of this Life. The Earl of Bristoll was justled out,
the Bishop of Lincoln cast flat on the Floor, the Earls of Pembroke and
Carlisle content to shine beneath him, Holland behind him, none even with, much
less before him.

But it is generally given to him, who is the little God at the Court, to be
the great Devil in the Country. The Commonalty hated him with a perfect
hatred, and all miscarriages in Church and (...), at Home, Abroad, at Sea and
Land were (...) on his want of Wisdom, Valor or Loyalty.

John ^elton a melancholy malecontented Gentleman, and a sullen Soldier,
apprehending himself injured, could find no other way to revenge his conceived
wrongs, then by writing them with a point of a Knife in the heart of the Duke,
whom he stabbed at Portsmouth. Anno Dom. 1620. It is hard to say how many of
this Nation were guilty of this murder, either by public praising or private
approving thereof.

His person from head to foot could not be charged with any blemish, save that
some Hypercriticks conceived his Brows somewhat over pendulous, a cloud which
in the judgment of others was by the beams of his Eyes sufficiently dispelled.
The Reader is remitted for the rest of his Character, to the exquisite Epitaph
on his magnificent Monument, in the Chapel of Henry the Seventh.

Capital Judges.
Sir ROBERT BELKNAP. Being bred in the Study of the Laws, he became A M P.
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas October the 8. in the 48. of King Edward the
third, and so continued till the general Rout of the Judges, in the
wonder-working Parliament the eleventh of Richard the second, when he was
displaced on this occasion.

The King had a mind to make away certain Lords, viz. His Uncle the Duke of
Gloucester, the Earls of Arundel, Warwick, Darby, Nottingham, etc. Who in the
former Parliament had been appointed Governors of the Kingdom. For this
purpose he called all the Judges before him to Nottingham, where the Kings many
Questions in fine were resolved into this, Whether he might by His Regal power
revoke what was acted in Parliament. To this all the Judges, Sir William
Skipwith alone excepted, answered affirmatively and subscribed it.

This Belknap underwrote unwillingly, as foreseeing the danger, and putting to
his seal said these words,

There wants nothing but an hurdle an horse and an halter, to carry me where I
may suffer the Death I deserve; for if I had not done this, I should have dyed
for it, and because I have done it, I deserve death for betraying the Lords.
Yet, it had been more for his credit and conscience, to have adventured a
Martyrdom in the defense of the Laws, then to hazard the death of a
Malefactor in the breach thereof. But Judges are but men, and most desire to
decline that danger, which they apprehend nearest unto them.

In the next Parliament, all the Judges were arrested in Westminster Hall of
high treason; when there was a Vacation in Term time, till their places were
resupplied. Sir R. Tresilian, Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, was executed.
The rest thus named and reckoned up in the printed Anno 11. R. 2. cap. 4.
Statutes, Robert Belknap, John Holt, John Cray, William Burgh, Roger Fulthorp,
all Judges and Knights, with J. Locktan Sergeant at Law, had their lands (save
what were intailed) with their goods and chattels, forfeited to the King, their
persons being banished, and they by the importunate intercession of the Queen,
hardly escaping with their lives. Belknap is placed in this County, only
because I find a worshipful family of his name fixed therein, whereof one was
High Sheriff in the 17. of K. Henry the 7. Provided this be no prejudice to
Sussex, the same Cambd. Brit. in Sussex.
Name being very ancient therein.

Sir ROBERT CATELIN, descended from the ancient Family of the Catelins of
Raunds in Northampton shire, (as does appear by the Heralds visitation) was
born at So I have learned by his relations.
Biby in this County. He was bred in the Study of the Municipal Laws, profiting
so well therein, that in the first of Q. Elizabeth, he was made Lord Chief
Justice of the Kings Bench. His Name has some allusion to the Roman L. Catel
na.
Senator, who was the Incendiary of that State, though in Nature far different,
as who by his Wisdom and Gravity was a great support to his Nation.

One point of Law I have learned from him, at the Trial of Thomas Duke of
Norfolk, who pleaded out of Bracton, that the Testimonies of Foreigners (the
most pungent that were brought against him) were of no Validity. Here Sir
Robert delivered it for Law, that in case of Treason they might be given in for
evidence, and that it rested in the Breast of the Camd. Eliz. Anno 1572.
Peers, whether or no to afford credit unto them.

He had one (as what man has not many) Fancy, that he had a prejudice against
all those, who write their Names with an alias, and took exceptions at one in
this respect, saying, that no honest man had a double name, or came in with an
alias. The party asked him * Idem in his Remains page 147.
what exceptions his Lordship could take, at Jesus Christ, alias Jesus of
Nazareth.

He dyed in the Sixteenth year of Queen Elizabeth, and his Coat of Arms, viz.
[Party per Cheveron Azure and Or, 3 Lions passant Guardant counterchanged; a
Chief Pearl] is quartered by the Right Honorable the Lord Spencer, Earl of
Sunderland, this Judges Daughter and Sole Heir being married to his Ancestor.

Some forty years since a Gentleman of his name and kindred, had a Cause in the
Upper-Bench, to whom the Chief Justice therein said, Your Kinsman was my
Predecessor in the Court and a great Lawyer, My Lord (replied the Gentleman)
he was a very honest man, for he left a small estate: But indeed, though his
estate was not considerable, compared to his Successors then present, it was in
it self of a good valuation.

Writers.
WILLIAM DE LEICESTER otherwise called William de Montibus (which I would
willingly English William of the Woulds) was born in Leicester in this County,
bred in Oxford, where he was Doctor and Professor of Divinity, so eminent for
his Learning that he was known to and much beloved by the Pitz. de Aug. Script.
p. 285.
Nobility of the land. He was also known by the name of Idem ibidem.
Mr. William an evidence I assure you sufficient to avouch his Majesterialty in
all Learning.

He was removed to Lincoln, and became first Canon, then Chancelour of the
Church. Boston of Bury reckons up many and Learned Books of his making. He
flourished under King John 1210. and lies buried at Lincoln.

RICHARD BELGRAVE was born says J. De Script. Brit. in A. 1320
Pitz at Chichester in Sussex, but at Belgrave in Leichestershire says Mr.
William Burton, whom I rather believe, because *In hisdescription of Leicest.
page 40.
he wrote a particular Description of this County. Now surely the more is the
exactness of the Author, the less the extent of his Subject, especially making
it his Set-work (what was Pits his by-work) to observe the Natives of this
Shire: But both agree him to be a Carmelite, bred in Cambridge, an excellent
Divine and good Schoolman, more Learned then eloquent. He wrote one Book of
Theological Determinations, and another of Ordinary Questions, flourishing in
the year 1220- under King Edward the Second.

ROBERT DE LEICESTER was born therein, but bred in Oxford a Franciscan Friar.
He was one of those who brought preaching into Fashion in that age, and was
much esteemed for his faculty therein, by most of the Nobility. But Robert
Mascall Bishop of Hereford, (as pious and learned as any in that age) had an
extraordinary * Understand it after the death of ^. of Leicester.
affection for him. Our Leicestrian Robert appears also a good Chronologer,
having written judiciously of the Hebrew and Roman Computation. In his reduced
age, he retired to Leichfield, where he dyed and was buried in the Monastery of
the Franciscans * Pitz. de Ang. Script. hoc An.
1348.

THOMAS RATCLIF born at Ratcliffe in this County, was bred an Augustinian in
Leicester, where he was Ordinis sui (...) Cent. 6. number. 14.
Episcopus, strain the Word no higher then to overseer of his order. He had
Ingenium fecundum and amplum, and pity it was, that he had, Vitae institutum
sterile and angustum. However to enlarge his Soul, he wrote diverse Books and
flourished anno 1360.

BARTHOLOMEW CULIE was born at Radoliffe-Culie in this County, as the exact
Describer Burton in his Description of (...)-shire. page 229.
thereof avoucheth. And therefore Pitz commits a double mistake about this
One Writer, first calling him Conway, then making him a Welshman by his
Nativity. How hard is it to commit one, and but one Error? This Bartholomew *
In Appendice.
was an excellent Philosopher, and wrote a Book of Generation and Corruption,
and although J. Pitz. confesses himself ignorant of the time he lived in, my
Author assures me that he flourished under King Edward the third.

WILLIAM DE LUBBENHAM was born at Lubbenham in this County, brought up in
Oxford, a good Leland de Script. 265.
Philosopher and a Divine, was after a White Friar, or Carmelite in Coventry,
and after became Provincial of the Order, which place he kept till he dyed. He
wrote upon Aristotle's Posteriors, and one Book of ordinary Questions. He dyed
in the White Friars in Coventry 1361. in the 36. year of K. Edward the Third.

JEFFERY DE HARBY was born at Harby in this County and bred in Oxford, where he
became Provincial of the Augustines, and Confessor to K. Edward the Third.
Wonder not when meeting with so many Confessors to that King, presuming he had
but one at one time, Conscience not standing on State and variety in that kind.
For know King Edward reigned 50. years, and Confessors being aged, before
admitted to their place, his Vivaciousnesse did wear out many of them. Besides,
living much beyond the Seas, it is probable that he had his Foreign and his
Home Confessors. Our Jeffery was also of his Privy Counsel, being as prudent to
advise in matters politic, as pious in spiritual concernments. Such as admired
he was not preferred to some wealthy Bishopric, must consider that he was
ambitious and covetous to be poor, and wrote a violent Book in the praise and
perfection thereof against Armachanus. Dying in London, he was buried in the
Church of the Augustines, about the Year 1361.

WILLIAM DE FOLVIL was born at Ashbye-Folvil in this County, and therefore when
De Scrip. Brit. cent. 6 number. 72.
Bale calls him Lincolniensem, understand him not by County, but by Diocese.
He was bred a Franciscan in the University of Cambridge, and engaged himself a
great Master of defense in that doughty quarrel pro pueris induendis, that
children under the age of 18. might be admitted into Monastical orders. For
whereas this was then complained of as a great and general grievance; that by
such preproperous Couling of Boys, and vailing of Girls, Parents were cozened
out of their children, and children cozened out of themselves, doing in their
Minority they knew not what, and repenting in their maturity, not knowing what
to do, our Folvil with more passion then reason, maintained the legality
thereof. He dyed and was buried in Bale de Scrip. Brit. page 491.
Stamford, anno 1384.

HENRY DE KNIGHTON was born at Knighton in this County, sometime Abbot of
Leicester, who wrote his History from William the Conqueror, to the time of
King Richard the Second, in whose Reign he dyed.

It seems Lelandus non vidit omnia, nor his shadow Bale, nor his shadow Pits,
all three confessing that the History of this Knighton never came to their
hands. Whereas of late, it has been fairly printed with other Historians, on
the commendable cost of Cornelius Be. Thus it is some comfort and contentment
to such, whom Nature has denied to be Mothers, that they may be dry Nurses,
and dandle Babes in their Laps, whom they cannot bear in their Wombs. And thus
this Industrious Stationer (though no Father) has been Foster Father to many
worthy Books, to the great profit of posterity.

WILLIAM WOODFORD. I cannot fix his Nativity with any certainty, because so
many Woods and Fords, (and would the former did continue as well as the latter)
and consequently so many Towns called Woodfords in England. He is placed here,
because his Surname in this age., flourished in great Eminency in this Burton
in his Description of Leicestershire. page 23.
County. He was bred a Franciscan, and though Bilious Bale gives him the
Character of De scrip. Brit. Cent. 7. number. 33.
Indocte Doctus, we learn from Leland, that he was one of profound Learning,
and Thomas Waldensis owneth and calls him Magistrum suum, His Master. * Libro
de Sacrament. c. 50.


Indeed Woodford set him the first Copy of Railing against Wickliffe, being
deputed by T. Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury to confute, publicly in
Writing, his Opinions. He dyed and was buried at Colchester 1397.

THOMAS LANGTON was born at West-Langton in this County, bred a Carmelite in
London, but first brought up in Oxford. He wrote a Book of their own ordinary
Acts; another called The Trial of Henry Crump Doctor in Divinity; another Book
against the Errors of the said Doctor Crump. Reader, We are beholden to my
Burton in his Description of this Shire. page 157.
Author, for retriving this Writers memory, which otherwise appears not in
Leland, Bale, or Pits. He flourished under K. Henry the fourth, anno Dom. 1400.

ROBERT DE HARBY was born at Harby in this County, bred a Carmelite in their
Covent at Lincoln. He seems to be a Doctor in Pitz. de Ang. Script. A. 1450.
Divinity, and surely was a great Adorer of the Virgin Mary, writing many
Sermons of her Festivities. He flourished 1450.

RICHARD TURPIN was born at Knaptoft in this County, very lately (if not still)
in the possession of that ancient Family, and was one of the Gentlemen of the
English Garrison of Calis in France, in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.
Such Soldiers * Burton in his Description of Leicestershire. ^. 153.
generally in time of War had too much, in time of Peace to little work, to
employ themselves therein. Commendable therefore the Industry of this Richard,
who spent his spare hours in writing of a Chronicle of his time. He dyed Anno
Domini 1541. in the * Weavers Fun. Men. page 682.
(...) fifth year of the aforesaid Kings reign. This I observe the rather, that
the Reader may not run with me on the rock of the same mistake, who in my
apprehension confounded him with Richard Turpin the Herald, first Blew-mantle,
and then created Winsor in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth.

Writers Since the Reformation.
HENRY SMITH. Commonly called Silver-tongued Smith, Preacher at St. Clemen^s
Danes. But I refer the Reader to his Life writ by me at large, and preposed to
his Printed Sermons.

JOHN DUPORT D. D. Son to Tho. Duport Esquire, was born at Shepshed in this
County, bred fellow, then Master of Jesus College in Cambridge, once Proctour,
and thrice Vice-chancelour of that University. He was one of the Translators of
the Bible, and a Reverend man in his Generation, who bestowed the perpetual
Advowsance of the Rectory of Harston on the College. Men generally in
Scripture are notified by their Fathers, seldom by their Sons, as Simon Mark
15. 21.
of Cyrene father of Alexander and Rufus, Persons [no doubt] of signal worth in
that Age. Thus this Doctor is remarkable for his Son (by Rachel Daughter to
Richard Cox Bishop of Ely) James Duport D.D. Fellow of Trinity College, and
lately Greek Professor, happy in the Education of many hopeful Pupils of
Worship and Honor, as they more happy in so able a Tutor. His Father D. John
Duport deceased 1617.

WILLIAM BURTON Esquire, son of Ralph Burton of Lindley in this County, (who
had a more ancient Inheritance belonging to his name at Falde in Staffordshire)
a place remarkable, because no Description o^ Leicester-sh. page 174.
Adder, Snake, or Lizard, (common in the Confines) were ever seen therein* as
if it were a Land-Island and an Ireland in England* This William was born at
Lindley, August 24. 1575. bred in Brazen-nose College, and wrote an
Alphabetical Description of the Towns and Villages in this County, with the
Arms Idem p. 68.
and Pedegrees of the most ancient Gentry therein. The sparks of his Ingenuity
herein, have since set fire on Mr. Dugdale, my worthy Friend, to do the like to
Warwickshire (lately under one Sheriff with Leichestershire) and I hope in
process of time they may inflame many others into imitation, that so (give me
leave to match an English and Greek word together) the County Graphy of our
Land may be completed.

ROBERT BURTON, his younger Brother, born Febr. 8. 1575. afterward Student of
Christs-Church Oxon, and Batchellor of Divinity. He wrote an excellent Book
(commonly called, Democritus Junior) of the Anatomy of Melancholy (none to the
Native, to describe a Country) wherein he has piled up variety of much
excellent Learning. On whose Tomb is this Epitaph.

Paucis notus, paucioribus `ignotus;
Hic jacet Democritus junior,
Cui vitam-pariter and mortem
Dedit Melancholia.
Scarce any Book of Philology in our Land has in so short a time passed so
many Impressions. He died Rector of Segrave (presented by his Patron George
Lord Berkeley) in this County, about 1636.

RICHARD VINES was born at Blazon in this County, and bred in Magdalen College
in Cambridge, where he commenced Master of Arts. Now although many healthful
souls in their age, break out in their youth, he was never given to any
extravagancy. Hence he was chosen Schoolmaster of Hinckley in this County, a
Profession wherein many a good Minister has been (and it is pity that any but
a good man should be) employed. Entering the Ministry, after other intermediate
places (such as are his Censurers would be his Compurgators, if privy to the
weighty causes of his just removal) he was fixed at last at S. Lawrence Jury in
Lon^on.

An excellent Preacher, skillful to cut out Doctrines in their true shape,
naturally raised, to sew them up with strong stitches; substantially proved,
and set them on with advantage on such backs, who should wear them effectually
applied.

He was one (yea, I may say one of sevenscore in the Assembly.) The Champion of
their Party, therefore called their Luther, much employed in their Treaties at
Uxbridge and Isle of Wight. His Majesty, though of a different Judgment,
valued him for his Ingenuity, seldom speaking unto him without touching (if
not moving) his Hat. Which by Master Vines was returned (though otherwise blunt
and unobservant) with most respectfull Language and Gestures; which I will not
say was done by all his fellow Divines there present.

He was most charitably moderate to such as dissented from him, though most
constant to his own Principles; witness his forsaking of his Mastership of
Pembroke-Hall for refusing of the Engagement. Such who charged him with
covetuousness, are confuted with the small Estate he left to his Wife and
Children.

It seems that the sand in his hourglass (though sticking high on each side)
was but hollow in the middle, for it sunk down on sudden. Visible decays
appeared in him a year before his death, though rather in his Limbs than Parts,
Spirits than Spirit. But alas, the best Mind cannot make good Music where the
Instrument of the Body is out of tune; his speech grew very low. Not a week
before his death, preaching in S. Gregory's, a rude fellow cried out unto him,
Lift up your voice, for I cannot hear you; to whom Mr. Vines returned, Lift you
up your ears, for I can speak no louder.

Indeed his strength was much spent by his former pains, so that some suppose
had he wrought less he had lived longer. He was buried Febr. the 7. 1655. in
his own Parish Church, where Mr Jacome modestly and learnedly performed his
Funeral Sermon. Much lamented, as by many others, so by his own Parish, where
he piously endeavored to make them all of one piece who were of different
colors, and to unite their Judgments who dissented in Affections.

JOHN CLEVELAND was born in this County at Hinckley (where his Father was
Vic^r) and bred therein under Mr. Ricard Vines his Schoolmaster; he was
afterward Scholar of Christ's, then Fellow of S. John's in Cambridge, and during
the late Civil Wars was much conversant in the Garrison of Newark, where (as I
am informed) he had the place of Advocate General.

A General Artist, Pure Latinist, Exquisite Orator, and (which was his
Masterpiece) Eminent Poet. His Epithetes were pregnant with Metaphors,
carrying in them a difficult plainness, difficult at the hearing, plain at the
considering thereof. His lofty Fancy may seem to stride from the top of one
Mountain to the top of another, so making to it self a constant Level and
Champian of continued Elevations.

Such who have Clevelandized, endeavoring to imitate his Masculine Style,
could never go beyond the Hermophrodite, still betraying the weaker Sex in
their deficient conceits. Some distinguish between the Vein and Strain of
Poetry, making the former to flow with facility, the latter pressed with pains,
and forced with industry. Master Cleveland's Poems do partake of both, and are
not to be the less valued by the Reader, because most studied by the Writer
thereof. As for his Anagram John Cleveland Heliconean Dew.

The difficult trifle I confess, is rather well endeavored then exactly
performed. He dyed on Thursday morning the 29 of April 1658. at his Chamber in
Greys Inn, from whence his Body was brought to Hunsdon House, and on Saturday
being May day, was buried at College Hill Church, Mr. John Pearson his good
friend preaching his Funeral Sermon. He rendered this reason why he cautiously
declined all commending of the party deceased, because such praising of him
would not be adequate to any expectation in that Auditory, seeing such who knew
him not, would suspect it far above, whilst such who were acquainted with him,
did know it much beneath his due desert. The self same consideration, shall put
a period to my pen, in his present Character, only this I will add, that never
so eminent a Poet, was Interred with fewer (if any remarkable) Elegies upon him.

I read in an excellent Thuanus de Obit. virorum Illustrium anno 1602.
Author, how one Joannes Passerativus, professor of the Latin Tongue in the
University of Paris, being no bad Poet, (but Morose and conceited of himself)
forbad by his dying words, under an Imprecation, That his Hearse should be
burdened with bad funeral Verses, Whereupon out of fear to offend his Ghost,
very few Verses were made upon him, too much the modesty and charity of Mr.
Cleveland, by any such Injunction to obstruct his friends, expressing their
affection to his memory. Be it rather imputed to the Royal party, at that
juncture of time generally in restraint, so that their fancies may seem in some
sort to sympathize with the confining of their persons, and both in due season
may be enlarged.

Of such Verses as came to my hand these were not the worst, made by my good
Mr. Edward Martin of London.
Friend since deceased.

Ye Muses do not me deny
I ever was your Votary,
And tell me seeing you do daigne,
T'inspire and feed the hungry brain,
With what choice cates? with what choice fair?
Ye Cleevelands fancy still repair.
Fond man, say they, why do thou question thus?
Ask rather with what Nectar he feeds us.
But I am informed, that there is a Book intended by the Poets of our age, in
the Honor of his Memory, who was so eminent a Member of their Society.

Beefactors to the Public.
Sir JOHN POULTNEY Knight, was born in this County at (...) Description of
Leichestershire, page 191.
Poultney, in the Parish of Misterton, bred in the City of London, and became
four times Lord Mayor thereof. He built a Stow Survey of London, page 81.
College to the Honor of Jesus and Corpus Christi, for a Master and seven
Chaplains in St. Laurence Church in Candleweek-Street in London, in the 20. of
Edward the Third, which Church was after denominated of him St. Laurence
Poultney. He built the Parish Church of Alhallows the less in Thames Street,
and the Monastery of White Friars in Coventry, and a fair Chapel on the North
Side of St. Paul's in London, where he lies buried, who dyed 1349. the 24. year
of Edward the third, he was a great Benefactour to the Hospital of St. Giles by
Holborn, and gave many great Legacies to the relief of Prisoners and the Poor.

Since the Reformation.
READER, If any demand of me the Names of the Natives of this County,
Benefactors to the Public Since the Reformation, all my Answer is, Non sum
Informatus, and let the Court judge whether this be the fault of the Council or
of the Client, and I doubt not but the next age will supply the defects hereof.
Only postliminio, I have by the help of my good Mr. Rawlins one of the L.
Majors Court.
friend, at last recovered one who may keep possession of the place, till
others be added unto him.

ROBERT SMITH Citizen, and Merchant-Taylor of London, was born at Mercate
Harborough in this County, and became Comptroller of the Chamber of London, and
one of the four Attorneys in the Majors Court. A painful person in his place,
witness the many remaining Monuments of his Industry whilst he acted in his
Office, betwixt the years 1609. and 1617. Nor was his Piety any whit beneath
his painfulness, who delivered to the Chamberlain of London, seven hundred and
fifty pounds to purchase Lands for the Maintenance of a Lecturer in the Town of
his Nativity, as also for several other pious uses, as in the Settlement of
those Lands are particularly expressed. He dyed as I collect, about 1618.

Memorable Persons.
Know Reader, that by an unavoidable mischance, the two first following
persons, who should have been entered under the Topic of Soldiers are (with no
disgrace I conceive) remembered in this place.

EDMOND APPLEBIE Knight, was son to John Applebie Esquire, and born at Great
Applebie, whence their Family fetched their name, and where at this day They
had An. 1607.
(I hope) they have their habitation. He was a mighty man of Arms, who served
at the Battle of Cressy, the 20. of K. Edward the Third, where he took
Mounsieur Robert d'n * (...) Leichestershire. (...). 14.
Mailarte a Nobleman of France Prisoner. Now know though the pens of our
homebred Historians may be suspected of partiality, yet English atcheivements
acknowledged by French Authors, such as Froizard is, who takes signal notice
thereof; commands belief. Afterward in the Eight year of Richard the Second
he went into France, with John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster, to treat of a peace
betwixt both Kingdoms. Lastly in the Ninth of Richard the second, he
accompanied the said Duke, and the Lady Constance his Wife, Daughter and Coheir
of Peter King of Castile, in his Voyage into Castile, who then went over with a
great power to invest himself in the said Kingdom, which by Descent belonged
to his Wife, and was then usurped by Henry base Brother unto King Peter.

JOHN HERDVVICKE Esquire born at Lindley in this County, was a very Low Man
(stature is no standard of stoutnesse) but of great Valor, Courage, and
Strength, This is he, though the Tradition goes by an unknown name, by whose
good conduct, * Burton in Leichestershire. page 174.
Henry Earl of Richmond, afterward King Henry the seventh, in the Battle of
Bosworth, got the advantage of Ground, Wind, and Sun, each singly considerable
but little less then an Army in themselves, when all put together. Besides he
assisted him with the service of many men and great horses. He dyed One
Thousand Five Hundred and Eleven, leaving six Daughters and Coheirs, and was
buried at Noneaton in Warwickshire.

JOHN Burton in Loicester-shire. page 254.
POULTNEY born in Little Shepey was herein remarkable, that in his sleep he did
usually rise out of his bed, dress him, open the Doors, walk round about the
Fields, and return to his Bed not wakened; sometimes he would rise in his
sleep, take a ^taff, Fork, or any other kind of VVeapon that was next his hand,
and therewith lay about him, now striking, now defending himself, as if he were
then encountered or charged with an adversary, not knowing (being awaked) what
had passed. He afterward went to Sea with that famous but unfortunate Sir Hugh
Willoughby Knight, and was (together with all the Fleet) frozen to death in the
North East passage, about NOVA ZEMBLA.

HENRY NOEL Esquire I will incur the Readers deserved displeasure, if he appear not
most memorable in his Generation. He was younger Son to Sir Andrew Noel of
Dalby in this County, who for Person, Parentage, Grace, Gesture, Valor, and
many other excellent parts, (amongst which, Skill in Music) was of the first
rank in the Court. And though his Lands and Livclyhood were small, having
nothing known certain, but his Annuity and Pension, as Gentleman to Queen
Elizabeth, yet in state, pomp, magnificence and expenses, did ever equalize the
Barons of great worth. If any demand whence this proceeded, the Spanish Proverb
answers him,

That which comes from above, let no man question. Being challenged by an
Italian Gentleman to play at Baloun, he so heat his blood, that falling into a
Fever he dyed thereof, and by Her Majesty's appointment, was buried in the
Abbey of Westminster, and Chapel of St. Andrew, anno 1596.

Lord Majors.
Name. Father. Place. Company. Time. 1 Geffrey Fielding He was Privy Councelour
to K. H. 6. and K. E.
William Fielding Lutterworth Mercer 1452 2 William Heriot John Heriot Segrave
Draper 1481 3 Robert Billesdon Alex Bilsesdon Queeningsborough Haberdasher 1483
4 Christoph. Draper John Draper Melton-Mowbray Ironmonger 1566 5 George Bolles
Thomas Bolles Newbold Grocer 1117

Sheriffs of Leicester and Warwickshire.
HEN. II.
Anno, 1 Geffrey Clinton Anno, 2 Robert Fitz Hugh. Anno, 3 Robert Fitz Hugh.
Anno, 4 William de Bello Campo and Robert Fitz Hardulph. Anno, 5 ^ertram de
Bulmer, and Raph Basset. Anno, 6 Raph Basset. Anno, 7 W. Basset for Raph his
Br. Anno, 8 Robert Fitz Geffrey. and William Basset. Anno, 9 Willam Basset.
Anno, 10 Rap. Glanvil and W. Basset. Anno, 11 William Basset for 5 years Anno,
16 Bert. de Verdun for 10. Anno, 26 Raph de Glanvil, and Bertram de Berder.
Anno, 27 Raph de Glanvil, and Bert. de Perdun, Arn. de Burton Arn. de Barton,
and Adam de Aldedelega. Anno, 28 Raph de Glanvil, Adam de Aldedelega, Bertram
de Verdun, A. de Barton. Anno, 29 Idem Anno, 30 Raph de Glanvil, and Bertram de
Verdun. Anno, 31 Raph de Glanvil, and Michael Belet. Anno, 32 Idem Anno, 33
Idem
RICH. I.
Anno 1 Michael Belet. Anno 2 Hugh Bishop of Coventry. Anno 3 Hugh ^ardolph,
and Hugh Clarke. Anno 4 Hugh Bp. Coventry, Gilbert de Segrave, and Reginald
Basset. Anno 5 Reginald Basset. Anno 6 Regin. Basset, and Gilbert. Segrave.
Anno 7 Regin. Basset, Williel. Aubein, and Gilb. Segrave. Anno 8 Regin. Basset.
Anno 9 Regin. Basset, Williel. Aubein, and Gilbert ^egrave. Anno 10 Rob.
Harecourt.
King JOHN.
Anno 1 Regin. Basset. Anno 2 Robert. Harecourt. Anno 3 Rob. Harecourt, and
Godfry de L^ege. Anno 4 William de Cantelupe, Robert. de Poyer. Anno 5 Robert.
Poyer. Anno 6 Hugh Chaucomber, for 4 years. Anno 10 Robert. Roppest. Anno 11
Idem. Anno 12 William de Cantelupe, Rob. Poyer. Anno 13 Rob. Poyer for 5 years.
HEN. III.
Anno 2 Will. de Cantelupe, and Phil. Kniton. Anno 3 Philip de Kniton. Anno 4
Idem. Anno 5 Will. de Cantelupe, and Will. de Luditon. Anno 6 Will. de Luditon.
Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 John Russell, and John Winterborne. Anno 9 Rob. Lupus. Anno
10 Idem. Anno 11 Idem. Anno 12 Will. Stutewill, and Will. Ascellis. Anno 13
Will. Ascellis. Anno 14 Stephen de Segrave, and Will. Edmonds. Anno 15 Will.
Edmonds. Anno 16 Idem. Anno 17 Steph. de Segrave, Joh. de Riparas. Anno 18 Raph
Bray. Anno 19 Raph. Fitz Nichol. Raph. Brewedon. Anno 20 Raph. and Will. Erleg.
Anno 21 Will. de Lucy. Anno 22 Idem. Anno 23 Hugh Pollier, and Philip Ascett.
Anno 24 Hugh Pollier for 8 years. Anno 32 Baldwin Paunton. Anno 33 Idem. Anno
34 Philip Murmuny. Anno 35 Idem. Anno 36 Idem. Anno 37 Will. Maunsel, for 4 y.
Anno 41 Alan Swinford. Anno 42 Anketill Martivaus. Anno 43 Idem. Anno 44 Will.
Bagot, for 12 years. Anno 56 Will. Morteyn, and Will. Bagot.
EDW. I.
Anno 1 William Mortimer. Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 William Hanelin.
Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Idem. Anno 7 Tho. de Hasele, and Robert Verdon. Anno 8
Robert Verdon, and Osb. Bereford, for 5 years. Anno 13 Rob. Verdon, Osbert
Bereford and Tho. Farendon. Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15 Tho. Farendon, and Foulk
Lucy. Anno 16 Foulk Lucy. Anno 17 William Bonvill. Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19
Stephen Baber. Anno 20 Idem. Anno 21 Steph. Baber, and Will. de Castello. Anno
22 Will. de Castello, for 5 years. Anno 27 John Broughton. Anno 28 Idem. Anno
29 Philip Gayton. Anno 30 Idem. Anno 31 John Deane, and Richard Herehus. Anno
32 Idem. Anno 33 Idem. Anno 34 Richard Whitnere. Anno 35 Idem.
EDW. II.
Anno 1 John Deane, and Geffrey Segrave. Anno 2 Richard Herthull. Anno 3 Idem.
Anno 4 John Deane. Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 John Olney. Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 William
Trussell. Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Walter Beauchamp. Anno 11 Walt. Beauchamp, and
Will. Nevill. Anno 12 Ralph Beler. Anno 13 William Nevill. Anno 14 Thomas le
Rous. Anno 15 Idem. Anno 16 Anno 17 Hen. Nottingham, Rob. Morin, and Oliver
Walleis. Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Idem.
EDW. III.
Anno 1 Roger Aylesbury. Anno 2 Thomas Blancfront. Anno 3 Robert Burdet. Anno 4
Rob. Burdet, and Roger la Zouch. Anno 5 Roger Aylesbury. Anno 6 Idem. Anno 7
Hen. Hockley, and Roger la Zouch. Anno 8 Roger la Zouch, for 7 years. Anno 15
William Peito. Anno 16 Robert Bereford. Anno 17 John Wallis. Anno 18 Idem. Anno
19 Tho. Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick, for 25 years. Anno 44 John Peach. Anno 45
William Catesby. Anno 46 Richard Harthull. Anno 47 Roger Hillary. Anno 4^ John
Boyvill. Anno 49 John Burdet. Anno 50 William Breton. Anno 51 Richard
Harthull.
Sheriffs of Leicester and Warwick.
Name. Place. Arms. RICHARDVS II. Anno, 1 Roger Per^wich 2 (...). de Bermingham
Per Pale indented Arg. and Sab. 3 Williel. Flamuil Aston L. Argent a Manch
Azure. 4 Thomas. Ralegh (...) Arg. Seem of Croslets G. a Cross Moline Sable. 5
T. de Bermingham ut prius 6 Willielm. Baggot 7 Idem. 8 Joh. Bermingham ut prius
9 Jo. Calveleigh, m. Ar. a Fess G. betw. 3. Calves S. 10 Johannes Parker Olney.
(...). 11 Richardus Ashby Az. a Cheveron Ermin betwixt three Leopards heads,
Or. 12 Williel. Flamuil ut prius 13 Ado. de Lichfeld 14 Rob. de (...). Sable a
Fret Argent. 15 Johann. Mallory Swinford. (...) Or 3 Ly^ns Passant Gardant S.
16 Th. de Woodford Sproxt. L. Sable, 3 Leopards heads Feasant Gules, 3 Fleur de
Luces Arg. 17 Thomas Ondeby 18 Robertus Veer Quarterly G. and O. a Mullet, Ar.
AMP. 19 Henricus Nevill 20 Robert. Goushul 21 (...). Eynefford 22 Ado. de
Lichfeld HEN. IV. Anno, 1 Johan. Berkely, m. (...) G. a Cheveron 'twixt 10
Cinquefoils Arg. 2 Hen. N^vill, mil. ut prius 3 Alex. Trussel, mil. Ar. fretty
G. on every point a Bez. 4 Johannes Blaket Nowesly. (...) Azure a B^nd cotized,
between (...) Cross Croslets Fitchee Or. 5 Idem. ut prius 6 ^on. Berkley, mil.
ut prius 7 Thomas Lucy Charlcot. W G. seem de Croslets 3 Lucies Horient Arg. 8
Johannes Parr Arg. 2 bars Az. a border ingrailed Sable. 9 Hen. Nevill, mil. ut
prius 10 Will. Brokesby Undee Arg. and S. a Canton G. 11 Robert^s Castle
Withibroke Gules, 2 bars and a Castle in a Canton Argeut. 12 Barth. Brokesby.
ut prius HEN. V. Anno, 1 Tho. Crewe, arm. 2 Rich. Hastings, m. Argent a Manch
Sable. 3 Tho. Burdet, mil. Newton-B. Az. on. 2 bars O. 6. Martlets G. 4
Johannes Malbory ut prius 5 Will. Bishopston or. 3 bends S. a Can^on Ermin. 6
Johann. Salveyn 7 B^rth. Brookesby ut prius 8 Tho. Ardington and Tho.
Maureward. C. Orton. L. Az. a Fess Arg. betw. 3 Cinquefoils Or. HEN. VI. Anno,
1 Rich. Hastings, m. ut pri^s 2 Humph. Stafford Huncote. l Or a Cheveron G. and
a quarter E^min. 3 Johann. Mallory ut prius 4 Richar. Cloddale 5 Rich.
Hastings. m. ut prius 6 Thomas Stanley Arg. on a Bend Az. 3 Bucks-h.O. 7
Willielmus Payto Chesterto^. Barry of 6 Pieces Ar. and G. per 8 Nichol.
Ruggeley pale Indented and counterchanged 9 Humphr. Stafford ut prius 10 W.
Mountford, m Bendee of 10 Pieces, Or and Az. 11 Rich. Hastings, m. ut prius 12
Thom. Foulhurst 13 Thom. Ardin^on 14 Willielmus. Lucy ut prius 15 Will. Payto,
mil. ut prius 16 Rob^tus Ardern Ermin a Fess Checky Or and Az. 17 Hum.
Stafford, m. Grafton 18 Laurent. Berkley ut prius 19 Thomas Ashby Lowedby. ut
prius. 20 VVil. Mountford ut prius 21 W. Bermingham and Lawr. Sherrard ut prius
Staplef^rd. (...) 22 Idem. ut prius Arg. a Cheveron G. betwixt 3. Torteauxes.
23 Rob. Harecourt Bosworth. L Or 2 bars Gules. 24 Tho. Erdington B^ow. L.
Argent 2 Lions passant Or. 25 Th. Everingham Gules a Lion Rampant Vary, corone
Or. 26 Tho. Porter, a. and Will. Purefoy, ar. Drayton. L. S. 3 Pair of Gantlets
clipping 27 Will. Purefey ut prius ( or joined together) Argent. 28 VVillielm.
Lucy ut prius 29 W. Mountford, m ut prius 30 Rob. Motun, m. Pekleton L. Argent
a Cinquesoile Azure. 31 W. Be^mingham ut prius 32 Leonar. Hastings Kerby. L.
Arms ut prius 33 Thomas Berkley ut prius 34 Williel. Hastings ut prius 35 Tho.
Walsh, ar. Wanlip. L G.2 bars gemews, a bend Arg. 36 Tho. Maston, ar. 37 H.
Filongley, ar. Filonley. W 38 Edm. Mountford. ut prius EDW. IV Anno, 1 Tho.
Ferrers, ar. AMP. 2 John Grevil, arm. Sab. a bordure and cross engrailed Or,
thereon 5 Pellets. 3 Idem. ut prius 4 Will. Harecourt ut prius 5 Joh. Huggford,
a. 6 Th. Throgmorton Cought. W. 7 Rad. Woodford, a Knipton. L. Gules, on a
Cheveron Argent 3. bars gemellee Sable. 8 Edw. Rawleigh, m ut prius 9 Tho.
Ferrers, mil. ut prius 10 Joh. Grevil, mil. ut prius 11 Sim. Mountford ut prius
12 Will. Motum, a ut prius 13 Joh. Higgford, a. ut prius 14 Joh. Grevil, mil.
ut prius 15 Will. Lucy, ar. ut prius 16 VV. Trussell, m. Elms^horp. (...) 17
Johan. Branfitz 18 Joh. Grevill, mil. ut prius 19 Thom. Poultney Misterton.
(...). Arg. a Fess Indented G. in chief. 3 Leopards heads Sable. 20 Rich.
Boughton L^ford. W. Sable 3 Cressants Or. 21 Thomas Cokesey 22 Edward Felding
(...). w Ar. on a Fess Az. 3 Lozenges O RICH. III. Anno, 1 Thom. Entwysel Arg.
on a be^ Sable 3 Martlets of the field. 2 Humph. Beaufort Guies^lif. w Ermin on
a bend Az 3 Cinquefoils Or. 3 R. Broughton, a. and R. Throgmorton ut prius ut
prius HENRICUS VII. Anno, 1 Joh^nnes Digby Azure a Flower de Luce Arg 2
Henricus Lisle Or. a Fess (...) 2 Chev. Sab. 3 R. Throgmorton ut prius 4 VVil.
Lucy, miles ut prius 5 Tho. Brereton, ar. Argent 2 bars Sable. 6 Johan.
Villars, ar. Brokesby. L Arg. on a Cross G. 5 Escalops, O. 7 R. Throgmorton ut
prius 8 Thom. Pulney, m. ut prius 9 Rad. Sherley, m. (...) L. Paly of 6. Or.
and Azure a Canton Ermin. 10 Johan. Villars, a. ut prius 11 Ed. Rawleigh, m. ut
prius 12 VV. Brokesbury 13 Tho. Nevill, ar. ut prius 14 Rich. Pudsey, m. 15
Joh. Villars, ar. ut prius 16 Tho. Hasilrig, a. Nouselee. L Arg. a Cheveron
betwixt 3 Hasel leavesvert. 17 Edw. Belknap, a. 18 Nich. Mallory, a. ut prius
19 Henricus Lysle, a ut prius 20 Nich. Brom, ar. 21 H. Willoughby Or, on 2
bars Gules, 3 Water-bouguets Argent. 22 Edw. Raleigh, m. ut prius 23 Tho.
Trussel, ar. ut prius 24 Will. Skevington Skevington Arg. 3 Bulls heads erased
Sable. HEN. VIII. Anno, 1 Simon Digby, ar. ut prius 2 Johan. Aston, m. 3 Mau.
Berkley, ar. ut prius 4 Will. Turpin, ar. Knaptost L. G. on a Bend Arg. 3 Lions
heads Erased Sable. 5 Edw. Ferers, mil. AMP. 6 Johan. Digby, m. ut prius 7
Will. Skevington ut prius 8 M^. Berkley, m. ut prius 9 Simon Digby, ar. ut
prius 10 Edw. Ferrers, m. ut prius 11 Hen. Willougby ut prius 12 Edw. Digby,
ar. ut prius 13 Will. Skevington ut prius 14 Will. Brown, ar. 15 Edw. Conway,
ar. Ragley. W. S on a Bend betw. 2 Gotises, Ar. a Rose G. betw. 2 Annulets of
the First. 16 Tho. Lucy, miles. ut prius 17 H. Willoughby, m ut prius 18 G.
Throgmort. (...) ut prius 19 Tho. Pu^tney, m. ut prius 20 Rog. Ratclisse, m.
Argent a bend engrailed Sable. 21 Rich. Verney. ar. W. Az. on a Cross Arg. 5
Mullets G. 22 Christ. Villars, a. ut prius 23 Johan. Villars, m. ut prius 24
Joh. Harrington ut prius 25 Johan. Audley, a. 26 Regin. Digby, ar. ut prius 27
W. Broughton, a. 28 VVal^. Smith, ar. 29 Johan. Villars, m. ut prius 30 Tho.
Nevill, ar. Gules a Saltyre Ermine. 31 Johan. Digby, ar. ut prius 32 Rich.
Catesby, a. Ar. 2 Lions passant S. Corone, O 33 Rog. VVigston, a. Wolston. W 34
Fulco. Grevil, m. Beachamp. w Sab. a bo^der and cross engrailed Or thereon 5.
Pellets. 35 G. Throgmorton utp rius 36 Regin. Digby, a. ut prius 37 Rich.
Catesby, m. ut prius 38 Fran. Poultney, and Will. Leigh, ar. ut prius G. a
Cross ingrailed Ar. in the first Quarter a Lozenge, Or. ut prius EDW. VI.
Anno, 1 Fulco. Grevill, m. ut prius 2 Ambro. Cave, m. Azure Frettee Argent. 3
Rich. Munnar, m. 4 Edw. Hastings, m. ut prius 5 VV. VVigeston, a. ut prius 6
Tho. Nevill, miles ut prius PHIL. Rex. and M. R. Anno, 1 R. Throgmorton ut
prius 2 Tho. Hastings, m. ut prius 3 Edw. Grevill, m. ut prius 4 Fran. Shirley,
ar. ut prius 5 VV. Wigeston, m. ut prius 6 Bran. Cave, arm. ut prius ELIZAB.
Reginae. Anno, 1 Tho. Lucy, arm. ut prius 2 Will. Skeffington ut prius 3 Tho.
Nevill, mil. ut prius 4 Rich. Verney, m. ut prius 5 Johan Fisher, ar.
Pa^ington. Per Bend G. O. a Griffin Ramp. counterch. within a board. Vary. 6
Williel. Devereux Ar. a F. G. in chief 3 Torte^es. 7 Geor. Turpin, m. ut prius
8 Fran. Smith, ar. Ashby. L. Arg. a Cross G. betw. 4. Peacocks proper.

The Reader, may perceive some (not considerable) difference, betwixt this our
Catalogue, and the Printed one, set forth by Mr. Burton in his Description of
this Shire. I will neither condemn his no^ commend my own, but leave both to
the examination of others.

King RICHARD the Second.
16. THOMAS DE WOODFORD.]

He was the eldest Son of Sir Robert de Woodford a wealthy Knight, who dying
before his Father, left five sons, viz. John, Walter, Humphrey, Ralph and John.
Sir Robert their Grandfather, out of design to perpetuate his posterity,
(adventured in five bottoms) made all his Grandchildren in effect elder
brothers, dividing his vast estate amongst them; an equal unequal partition to
be injurious to the Heir (without his demerit) that he might be bountiful to
his other brethren: but it thrived accordingly. For that great Family (which
had long continued in great account and estate) by reason of this * Division,
in short space utterly decayed, not any part of Burton in descrip. of this
County Page 264.
their lands (thus disposed) now in the tenure of the Name, and some of the
Male Heirs descended from the five brethren, now living in a low condition; and
no wonder, they soon made a Hand of all, where the Thumb was weakened, to
strengthen the Four fingers.

HENRY the Fifth.
3. THOMAS BURDET Miles.]

The Samenesse of Name and Nearness of Kindred, gives me here a just occasion
to insist on a memorable Passage, concerning Thomas Burdet Esquire Grandchild and
Heir to Sir Thomas here named. When as King Edward the Fourth (in his absence)
had killed a fat White Buck in his Park at Arrow in Warwickshire, which he
greatly esteemed; upon the first hearing of it, wished the Bucks head and horns
in his belly, that moved the King to kill it. Upon the misconstruing of which
words, he was accused of Treason, attainted, and beheaded, 18. E. 4. 1477. and
was buried in the Gray Friars in London.

Thus far our English Chronicles with joint consent agree in the same Tune, but
I meet with one Burton in the Description of Leicester-sh. Page 201.
Author, reaching one Note higher then all the rest, adding as follows, These
words spoken and so wrested, were the color of his death, but the true cause
was the hard conceit and opinion, which the King had of him, for that he had
ever been a faithful friend, and true Counselor, to George Duke of Clarence
his brother, between whom there had been bitter Enmity.

Whatsoever was the cause of such severity against him, Burdet patiently and
cheerfully took his Death, affirming he had a Bird in his breast (his own
Innocence) that sung comfort unto him.

HENRY the Sixth.
2. HUMPHREY STAFFORD.]

Being afterward Knighted, he was by King Henry the Sixth, made Governor of
Callice, and coming over into England, was slain by Jack Cade: but God has a
blessing for those whom Rebels curse. Sir Humphrey Stafford his Grandchild
fixed himself at Blatherwick in Northamptonshire, where his posterity does
flourish to this day.

34. WILLIAM HASTINGS.]

The Reader needs not my dim Candle to direct him to this illustrious
person. He was son to Sir Leonard Hastings (Sheriff two years before) and was
he whom King Edward the third, or rather Edward Plantagenet (because more in
his humane then Royal capacity) so delighted in, that he made him his Lord
Chamberlain, Baron Hastings of Ashby de la Zouch, etc. As he loved the King
very well, so after this Kings death, he is charged to have loved Jane Shore
too well, and Richard Duke of Gloucester, perceiving him to obstruct the way to
his ambitious designs, ordered his removal, causing him to be beheaded 1. Edw.
5. As when living he was dear, so being dead his corpse are near to Edw. 4.
Buried under a very fair Monument in Windsor Chapel. He was Grandfather to
George Hastings first Earl of Huntington.

EDWARD the Sixth.
4. EDWARD HASTINGS Miles.]

Queen Mary, much delighting in his Devotion, created him Baron of
Loughborough. He founded and endowed a handsome hospital at Stoke Pogeis in
Buckingham-shire, whither (after the Queens death) weary of the World he
retired himself, and therein dyed without issue.

The foresaid (and that a very Fair) Town of Loughborough, has since again
afforded the Title of a Baron to a younger branch of the same honorable
Family, Henry Hastings second-Son to Henry (second of that Christian Name) Earl
of Huntington, who by his Virtues does add to the dignity of his Extraction.

Queen ELIZABETH.
5. JOHN FISHER Armiger.]

His Father Thomas Fisher alias Hawkins, being a Colonel under the Duke of
Somerset in Mr. Dugdale in the description of Warw. page 365.
Musleborough Field, behaved himself right valiantly, and took a Scotch man
Prisoner, who gave a Griffin for his Arms: Whereupon the said Duke conferred on
him the Arms of his Captive, to be born within a Border Varrey, in relation to
a prime Coat which the said Duke (the Granter thereof) quartered as descended
from the Lord Beauchamps of Hatch.

Sheriffs of Leichestershire alone.
Name. Place. Arms. ELIZAB. Reginae. Anno, 9 Geo. Sherard, ar. Stapleford
Argent a Cheveron Gules betwixt three Torteauxes. 10 Hen. Poole, arm. 11 Brian.
Cave, arm. Azure Frettee Argent. 12 Jac. Harington, m P^leton. Sable a Fret
Argent. 13 Geo. Hastings, m. Argent a Maunch Sable. 14 Fr. Hastings, ar. The
same with due difference. 15 Edw. Leigh, arm. G. a Cross ingrailed Ar. in the
first Quarter a Lozenge, O. 16 Geo^. Turpin, m. Knaptoft. G. on a bend Argent
3. Lions heads Erazed Sable. 17 Rog. Ville^s, ar. Ar. on a Cross G. 5 Escalops,
O 18 Tho. Skevington Skevingt. Arg. 3. Bulls heads erased S. 19 Nic. Beaumont,
a. Coleorton Az. seem de flewer de Liz. A Lion Rampant Or. 20 Tho. Ashby, arm.
A Chev. Erm. tw. 3. Leop. heads. 21 Tho. Cave, arm. ut prius 22 Fran. Hastings,
a. ut prius 23 Geor. Purefey, a. Drayton 24 Brian. Cave, a. Engersby ut prius
with due difference. 25 Andr. Noell, a. Dalby Or, fretty Gules a Canton Ermin
26 Hen. Iurvile, a. Aston Gules 3 Gheverons varry. 27 Will. Turpin, ar. ut
prius 28 A^h. Faunt, ar. Foston A^. Crus ule Fitche, a L. Ramp. G with due
difference. 29 Will. Cave, arm. Pikwell 30 Tho. Skeffington ut prius Belgrave
Belgrave G. a Chev. Er. twixt 3 Mascles, A ut prius with due difference. 31
Edw. Turvile, a. Thurlston 32 Geor. (...), a. ut prius 33 Geor. Villers, ar.
Brokesby Arms ut prius 34 Thom. Cave, ar. ut prius 35 Will. Turpin, ar. ut
prius 36 Hen. Beaumont ut prius 37 Williel. Cave, ar. ut prius 38 Henri. Cave,
ar. ut prius 39 Will. Skipwith, a Cotes. Arg. 3 bars Gules in chief a Grey^ound
cursant Sable. 40 Will. Digby, ar. Welby Azure a Fleur de Liz Argent. 41 T.
Sk^ffington, a. ut prius 42 Rog. Smith, arm. Withcock Gules on a Gheveron Or,
betw. 3 Bezaunts 3 Croslets formy Fitchee. 43 Georg. Ashby, ar. Quenby 44 Tho.
Humfreys. Swepston JACOB. R. Anno, 1 Will. Faunt, mil. Faufton Arms ut prius 2
Will. Noell, arm. Wellsbor. Arms ut prius 3 Basil. Brook, miles Lubbenham 4
Tho. Nevill, mil. Holt Gules a Saltyre Ermin 5 Hen. Hastings, m. Leicester Arms
ut prius 6 Will. Villers, a^. Brokesby 7 Joh. Plummer. ar. Marston Ermin a Bend
Varry cotised S. 8 T. Beaumont, mil. Coleorton 9 Brian. Cave, mil. Engersby 10
(...). Hasilrig, m. Nowsley Argent a Cheveron betwixt 3. Hasel leaves vert. 11
Tho. Stavely, ar. Barry of 8 Ar. and Gules, over all. a Flower de Luce Sable.
12 Wolstan. Dixy, m Bosworth Az. a Lion Rampant and chief Or. 13 Will. Faunt,
m. ut prius 14 VV. Holford, m. Welham 15 Edw. Hartop, ar. Buckminster S. a
cheveron twixt 3 Otters Ar. 16 VV. Gerveis, a. and Peatling VVil. Roberts, m.
Sutton Per Pale Ar. and G. a Lion Ramp. S. 17 Johan. Cave, arm. Pikwell 18
Alex. Cave, mil. Bagrave 19 Richard. Holford Wistowe 20 Geo. (...), ar. 21
Johan. Bale, mil. Carleton- Curley. Per Pale Vert and G. an Eagle displayed Arg
beaked and armed, O 22 Hen. Shirley, m. Stanton. Paly of 6. Or, and Az. a
canton Erm. K. CHARLES. Anno, 1 Tho. Hartoppe, m. ut prius 2 Nathan. Lary, ar.
3 Georg. Aisby, ar. 4 Er. de la Fontain, m G. a Bend Or in the Sinister chief a
cinque foil Ermin. 5 W. VVollaston, a. Sable 3 Mullets pierced Argent. 6 Joh.
Banbrigge, a. Lockinton Arg. a cheveron Embateled betw. 3 Battle-axes Sable. 7
Johann. Brokesby ut prius 8 Joh. St. John, m. Arg. on a chief G. 2 Mullets Or.
9 Tho Bu^ton M. B. (...) S. a Chev. betw. 3 owls Argent (...). Or. 10 Fran.
Sanders, a. Partee p. Chapter Ar. and S. 3 E^eph. beads counterch. 11 Joh.
Poultney, ar. (...) Arg. a Fess indented G. 3. Leop. heads in chief Sable. 12
Hen. Skipwith, m ut prius 13 Rich. Roberts, m. 14 Joh. Wha^ton, ar. 15 Will.
Holford, ar. 16 Johan. Pate, arm. 17 Arch. Palmer, ar. 18 19 20 21 Johan.
Stafford, a. 22 Will. Hewit, arm. Sable a Chever. counterbattellee, betwixt 3
owls Argent

Queen ELIZABETH.
14. FRANCIS HASTINGS.]

I believe him the same Person with Sir Francis Hastings fourth Son to Francis,
second. Earl of Huntington of that Surname, to whose many children Mr. In his
Eliz. anno 1560.
Cambden gives this commendation, that they agreed together in brotherly love
though not in religion, some Protestants, others Papists, all zealous in their
perswafion. Our Sir Francis wrote a Learned Book in the defense of our Religion
(rather carped at then confuted by Parsons in his three Conversions) and was an
Eminent Benefactor to Emmanuel College: But if I be mistaken in the Man, and
these prove two different persons, the Reader will excuse me for taking
occasion by this his Namesake and near Kinsman, of entering here the Memorial of
so worthy a Gentleman.

28. ANTHONY FAUNT Esquire.]

He was a Gentleman of a Comely person and great Valor (Son unto William Faunt
Apprentice of the Law of the Inner Temple, one of great Learning and Wisdom)
And had in the low Countries served under William Prince of Orange, where he
gained much martial experience. Returning into his Country he underwent some
Offices therein with good esteem, being this year chosen Sheriff of the Shire.
In the next year, (which was 1588.) He was chosen Lieutenant General of all the
Forces of this Shire to resist the Spanish Invasion. But his Election being
crossed by Henry Earl of Huntington (Lord Leiutenant of the County,) he fell into
so deep a Fit of Melancholy Burton in (...). p. 105.
, that he dyed soon after.

39. WILLIAM SKIPVVITH Esq]

He was afterward deservedly Knighted, being a Person of much Valor, judgment,
Learning and VVisdome, dexterous at the making fit and acute Idem p, 77.
Epigrams, Poesies, Mottoes, and Devises, but chiefly at Impresses, neither so
apparent that every Rustic might understand them, nor so obscure that they
needed an Oedipus to interpret them.

The Farewell.
Being now to take my leave of this County, it is needless to wish it a Friday
Market (the Leap-day therein, and it is strange there should be none in so
spacious a Shire) presuming that defect supplied in the Vicinage; Rather I wish
that the Leprosy may never return into this County, but if it should return (we
carry the seeds of all sins in our Souls, sicknesses in our Bodies) I desire
that the Lands may also (without prejudice to any) return to the Hospital of
Burton Lazars in this Shire, if not entire, yet in such a proportion as may
comfortably maintain the Lepers therein.

LINCOLNE-SHIRE. This County in Fashion, is like a bended Bow, the Sea making
the Back, the Rivers Welland and Humber, the two horns thereof, whiles Trent
hangs down from the latter like a broken string, as being somewhat of the
Shortest. Such persecute the Metaphor too much, who compare the River Witham,
(whose Current is crooked) unto the Arrow crossing the middle thereof.

It extends 60. Miles from South to North, not above 40. in the middle and
broadest part thereof. Being too Volluminous to be managed entire is divided
into three parts, each of them corrival in quantity with some smaller Shires)
Holland on the South-East, Kesteven on the South-West, and Lindley on the North
to them both.

Holland, that is, Hoyland or Hayland, from the plenty of Hay growing therein,
may seem the Reflection of the opposite Holland in the Neatherlands, with which
it Sympathyzed in the Fruitfulness, low and wet Situation. Here the
Brakishnesse of the Water, and the Grossness of the Air, is recompensed by
the Goodness of the Earth, abounding with Deries and Pasture. And as God has
(to use the * Apostles phrase) 1 Cor. 12. 24.
tempered the body together, not making it all Eye or all Ear (Nonsense that
the Whole should be but One sense.) but assigning each Member the proper office
thereof, so the same Providence, has so wisely blended the Benefits of this
County, that take Collective Lincolne-shire and it is Defective in Nothing.

Natural Commodities.
Pikes.
They are found plentifully in this Shire, being the Fresh-Water-Wolves, and
therefore an old pond-pike, is a dish of more State than Profit to the Owners,
seeing a Pikes belly, is a little Fishpond, where lesser of all sorts have been
contained. Sir Francis In his History of Life and Death.
Bacon allows it (Though Tyrants generally be short-lived) the Surviver of
all Fresh-water-Fish, attaining to forty years, and some beyond the Seas have
trebled that term. The Flesh thereof must needs be fine and wholesome, if it be
true what is affirmed, that in some sort it cheweth the Cud, and yet the less
and middle size Pikes, are preferred for Sweetness before those that are
greater. It breeds but once Mr. Walton in his Complete Angler, p. 197.
(whilst other Fishes do often) in a year; such the providence of Nature
preventing their more multiplying, least the Waters should not afford Subjects
enough * Idem p. 199.
for their Tyranny. For want of other Fish* they will feed one on another; y^a
what is four footed shall be Fish with them, if it once come to their jaws
(biteing sometimes for cruelty and revenge, as well as for hunger) and because
we have publicly professed, that to delight, as well as to inform is our aim
in this Book, let the ensuing story (though unwarranted with a cited Author)
find the Readers acceptance.

A Cub-Foxe, drinking out of the River Arnus in Italy, had his head seized on
by a mighty Pike, so that neither could free themselves, but were ingrapled
together. In this contest a young man runs into the water, takes them out both
alive, and carries them to the Duke of Florence; whose palace was hard by. The
Porter would not admit him, without promising of sharing his full half in what
the Duke should give him. To which he (hopeless otherwise of entrance)
condescended. The Duke highly affected with the Rarity, was in giving him a
good reward, which the other refused, desiring his Highness would appoint one
of his Guard, to give him an hundred Lashes, that so his Porter might have
fifty, according to his composition. And here my Intelligence leaves me how
much farther the jest was followed.

But to return to our English Pikes, wherein this County is eminent, especially
in that River which runs by Lincoln, whence grew this Proverb.

[ Witham Pike
England has nene like.]
And hence it is that Mr. Polyolbiondon 25 Part. 111.
Drayton makes this River Poetizing in her praises, always concluding them,

Thus to her Proper Song, The Burden still she bare:
Yet for my dainty Pikes I am without compare.
I have done with these Pikes, when I have observed, (if I mistake not) a great
mistake in Mr. Stow, affirming that Pickrels were brought over (as no Natives
of our Land) into England, at the same time with Carps, and both about the
beginning * In his Chronicle, p. 948.
of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth. Now if Pickrels be the deminatives of
Pikes, (as Jacks of Pickrels) which none I conceive will deny, they were here
many hundred years since, and probably of the same Seniority with the Rivers of
England. For I find in the Bill of Fare, made at the Prodigious Feast at the
Installing of George Nevil Archbishop of York, Anno 466, that there was spent
three hundred Bish. Godwin in his Catal. of the Bishops of York.
Lupi Fluviatiles, that is, River Pikes, at that Entertainment. Now seeing all
are children before they are men, and Pikes Pickrels at the first, Pickrels
were more anciently in England then that Author affirms them.

Wild-foule.
Lincolnshire may be termed the Aviary of England for the Wild-foule therein,
Remarkable for their,

1. Plenty, So that sometimes in the Month of August, three thousand Mallards
with Birds of that kind, have been caught at one Draught, so large and strong
their Nets, and the like must be the Readers belief. 2. Variety, No man (no not
Gesmar himself) being able to give them their proper names, except one had
gotten Adam his Nomenclator of Creatures. 3. Deliciousness, Wild-foule being
more dainty and digestable then Tame of the same kind, as spending their
Grossie humors with their Activity and constant Motion in Flying.
Now as the Eagle is called Jovis Ales, so here they have a Bird which is
called the Kings Bird, namely Knuts, sent for hither out of Denmark, at the
charge, and for the use of Knut or Kanutus King of England. If the plenty of
Birds have since been drained with the Fenns in this County, what Lincolnshire
lacks in her former, Foul, is supplied in Flesh (more Mutton and Beef) and a
large First makes amends for a less second Cours^. But amongst all Birds we
must not forget,

Dotterells.
This is Avis (...), a Mirthmaking Bird, so ridiculoussy Mimical, that he is
easily caught (or rather catches himself) by his over-Active imitation. There
is a sort of Apes in India, caught by the Natives thereof after this manner:
They dress a little Boy in his Sight, undresse him again, leave all the Child's
apparel behind them in the place, and then depart a competent distance. The Ape
presently atti^eth himself in the same garments, till the Child's Clothes become
his Chains, putting off his Feet by putting on his Shoos, not able to run to
any purpose, and so is soon taken.

The same Humor, otherwise persued, betrayeth the Dotterells. As the Fowler
stretches forth his Arms and Legs, going toward the Bird, the Bird extends
his Legs and Wings approaching the Fowler, till surprised in the Net. But it is
observed, that the Foolisher the Fowl or Fish, [Woodcocks, Dotterels,
^odsheads, etc.] the Finer, the Flesh thereof.

Feathers.
It is Pity to part Lancashire Ticking (lately spoken of) and Lincolnshire
Feathers making so good Beds together. I cannot find the first beginning of
Feather-Beds, the Latin word Pulvinar for a Cusheon, Pillowe, or Bolster,
shows, that the Entrals of such Utensils amongst the Romans, were made but of
Dust, and our English plain Proverb, De Puerperis, they are in the Straw; shows
Feather-Beds to be of no ancient use amongst the Common sort of our Nation, and
Beds of Down (the Cream of Feathers) are more Modern then they. The Feathers of
this County are very good) though not so soft as such as are imported from
Bardeaux in France) and although a Feather passes for the Emblem of Lightness
it self, they are heavy enough in their Prises to such as buy any Quantity, and
daily grow Dearer.



Pippins.
With these we will close the Stomach of the Reader, being concluded most
cordial by Physicians; some conceive them to be of not above a hundred years
seniority in England: However they thrive best, and prove biggest (not Kentish
excepted) in this County, particularly in Holland, and about Kirton therein,
whence they have acquired addition of Kirton Pippins, a wholesome and delicious
Apple, and I am informed, that Pippins graffed on a Pippin stock, are called
Renates, bettered in their generous Nature by such double extraction.

Fleet-Hounds.
In Latin called PETRONII, or Petrunculi, from Petra a Rock, either because
their Feet are sound and solid, (and therefore named (...), by Xenophon) or
from the hard and rocky ground, whereon they were accustomed to hunt. These
with much certainty of scent, and quickness of feet, will run down a Hare in a
short time.

Janus Ulitius a Dutchman, some 15 years since came into England, and though a
man of the Gown) employed in public affairs) for Diversion, he went down into
this County, to spend one Winter, where conversing with some young Gentlemen,
he hunted twice a Week with so great content, that the season (otherwise
unpleasant) was past before he perceived how it went. Hear him expressing
himself, sed and Petrunculi illi, qui vestigiis eorum non minus celeriter quam
sagaciter instant haud facile trihorio minus leporem aliquem defatigant, ut in
Lincolniensi montium aequijugi tractu aliquoties ipse vidi, and yet I assure
you the Hares in this County on Ancaster-Heath, do (though lesser) far exceed
in swiftness and subtilty of Doubling those of the Vallyes and Plains.

Such a Petronius or Fleet-hound, is two Hounds in Effect.

Sed premit Inventas, non inventura Latentes.

Illa feras, quae Petroniis been Gloria constat.

To the Petronian, both the praise is due,

Quickly to find, and nimbly to pursue.

Greyhounds.
In Latin termed VELTRAGA, or VERTRAGUS, or VERTAGUS, derived it seems from the
Dutch Word, VELT a Field, and RACH or BRACH a Dog, and of how high esteem the
former, and these, were amongst the Ancients, the Reader may infer from the old
Burgundian Law. Siquis Canem Veltraum, aut Segutium vel Petrunculum
praesumpserit involare, jubemus ut convictus coram omni populo posteriora
ipsius osculetur.

Martial speaking of these Greyhounds, thus expresses himself,

Non sibi sed Domino venatur Vertragus acer.
Illaesum Leporem, qui tibi dente feret.
For's Master, not Himself does Greyhound toil,
Whose Teeth to thee return the unhurt spoil.
I have no more to observe of these Greyhounds, save that they are so called
(being otherwise of all Colors) because originally employed in the Hunting of
Grays, that is, Brocks and Badgers.

Mas-Tiffes.
Known to the Romans by the name of Molossi, from Molossia a County in Epirus,
whence the fiercest in that kind were fetched at first, before better were
brought out of Britain.

Gratius an Ancient Poet, Contemporary with Virgil, writing his Cynegeticon or
Poem of Hunting, gives great praise to our English Mastiffes, highly
commending their Valor, only taxing them, that they are not handsomely made.

Haec una est Catulis jactura Britannis.

The British Whelps no blemish know,
But that they are not shaped for show.
Which thing is nothing in my mind, seeing beauty is no whit material to a
Soldier.

This County breeds choice Mastiffes for the Bull and Bear, and the sport is
much affected therein, especially about Stamford, whereof hereafter. What
remains concerning Mastiffes is referred to the same Topic in Somersetshire.

Thus the three kinds of ancient hunting, which distinctly require fleetnesse,
scent, and strength, are completely performed in this County, by a Breed
therein, which are answerably qualified. This I have inserted, because as to my
Native Country in general, so to this here in particular, I would not willingly
do less right, then what a Stranger has done thereunto.

Reader, pardon this true but ( abortive) Notation casually come in before the
due Time thereof.
Before we come to Catalogue the Worthies of this County, it is observable,
that as it equalled other Shires in all ages, so it went beyond it self in one
generation, viz. in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, when it had Natives thereof.

1. Edward Clinton Lord Admiral. 2. William Cecil Lord Treasurer. 3 Sir Edmund
Anderson Lord Chief Justice. 4. John Whitgift Archbishop of Canterbury. 5.
Peregrine Bartu Lord General in France. 6. Tho. Wilson Dr. of Law, and
Secretary of State.
All Here I mention not Sir Tho. Heneage at the same time a grand Favorite, and
Privy Councellor to Queen Elizabeth.
Countrymen and Contemporaries. Thus Sea and Land, Church and Camp, Sword and
Mace, Gospel and Law, were stored with prime Officers out of this County. Nor
must it be forgotten, though born in the same Shire, they were utterly
unrelated in Kindred, and raised themselves independently (as to any mutual
assistance) by Gods Blessing, the Queens favor, and their own deserts.

The Buildings.
Here the complaint of the Prophet takes no place, taxing men to live in
Ceeled Palaces whilst the Temple of God lay wast, No County affording worse
Houses, or better Churches. It adds to the Wonder, that seeing in this soft
County, a Diamond is as soon found as a Flint, their Churches are built of
Pollished Stones, no Natives but Naturalized by importation from foreign parts.

I hope the Inhabitants of this Shire, will endeavor to disprove the old
Proverb, [the nearer to the Church, the further from God.] because they have
substituted a better in the room thereof, viz. The further from stone, the
better the Churches.

As for the Cathedral of Lincoln, whose Floor is higher then the Roof of many
Churches, it is a magnificent Structure, proportionable to the Amplitude of the
Diocese. This I dare boldly say, that no Diocese in Christendom, affords
two such Rivers, viz. [Thames and Trent] for the Southern and Northern Bounds,
and two such Universities, Cambridge and Oxford, both in the Content thereof,
before Ely, Peterborough, and Oxford.
three smaller Bishoprics were carved out of it.

Amongst the Houses of the Nobility, I take signal notice of two. One I may
call a Premeditate Building, viz. Tattershall (belonging to the Right
Honorable the Earl of Lincoln) advanced by degrees at several times, to the
Modern Magnificence thereof. But Grimsthorp I may term an Ex tempore Structure,
set up on a sudden by Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, to entertain King Henry
the Eighth, in his Progress into these parts. The Hall therein was fitted to a
fair Suit of Hangings, which the Duke had by his Wife Mary the French Queen,
and is now in the possession of the Right Honorable Montague Earl of Lindsey.

The Wonders.
At Fishtoft in this County, no Mice or Rats are found, insomuch, that Barns
built party per pale, in this and the next Parish, on one side are annoyed, on
the other side (being Fishtoft Moiety) are secured from this Vermin. Surely no
Piper (what is notoriously known of Hamell in Westphalia) did ever give them
this Mice-Delivery by his Music.

It is easier to conjure up many, then allay one difficulty, other places in
England affording the like. At one of the Rodings in Essex, no Hogs will root.
In another Common no Mole will cast. In Linley in Burton in his Doscription of
Leichestershire.
Leicestershire, no Snakes are found. I believe they overshoot the Mark, who
make it a Miracle, they undershoot it who make it Magic, they come the nearest
to Truth, who impute it to occult Qualities. If some men will swound at some
meat, yea but smelling it unseen by their disaffection thereunto, why may not
whole species and kinds of creatures have some antipathetical places, though
the reason thereof cannot be rendered? Surely as Sampson at his Marriage
propounded a Riddle to his Companions to try their Wits thereon, so God
offers such Aenigmaes in nature, partly that men may make use of their
admiring as well as of their understanding, partly that Philosophers may be
tanght their distance betwixt themselves, who are but the Lovers, and God, who
is the Giver of Wisdom.

Let it also pass (for this once) for a wonder, that some seven score years
since, nigh Harlaxton in this Shire, there was found (turned up by one
ploughing the ground) a Golden Camd, Brit, in this County.
Helmet of Antic fashion, I say Cassis non aurata sed aurea, a Helmet not
guilt but of Massive Gold, studded with precious stones, probable of some Prime
Roman Commander. Whence I observe; First, that though no Edge-Tool to offend
may be made of Gold and Silver, Yet defensive Weapons may thereof be
compounded. Secondly, that the Poetical Fiction of Glaucus his Golden Arms is
founded on History. For (not to speak of Solomon his Golden Sheilds) Great
Commanders made use of Arms of that Metal, if not for strength, for state and
Ornament. Lastly, it was presented to Queen Katharine, first Wife to King Henry
the Eighth, who though not knowing to use it as a Helmet, knew how to employ it
as made of Gold and Rich Jewels.

Proverbs.
Lincolne-shire Bagpipes.]

I behold these as most ancient, because a very simple sort of Music, being
little more then the Oaten Pipe improved with a Bag, wherein the imprisoned
wind pleads melodiously for the Enlargement thereof. It is incredible with
what agility it inspireth the heavy heels of the Country Clowns, overgrown with
hair and rudeness, probably the groundwork of the poetical fiction of dancing
Satyrs. This Bagpipe in the judgment of the Rural Midas's, carries away the
credit from the Harp of Apollo himself, and most persons approve the Blunt
Bagpipe above the Edge Tool Instruments of Drums and Trumpets in our Civil
dissentions.

As loud as Tom of Lincoln.]

This Shire carries away the Bell for round-ringing, from all in England,
though other places may surpass it for Changes, more pleasant for the Variety
thereof; seeing it may be demonstrated that twelve Bells will afford more
changes than there have been hours since the Creation. Tom of Lincoln, may be
called the Stentor (fifty lesser-bells may be made out of him) of all in this
County. Expect not of me to enter into the discourse of popish baptizing and
naming of Bells, many charging it on them for a profane, and they confessing
enough to make it a superstitious action.

All the Carts that come to Crowland are shod with Silver.]

Venice and Crowland, Sic Canibus Catulos, may count their Carts alike; that
being sited in the Sea, this in a Morasse and Fenny ground, so that an horse
can hardly come to it. But, whether this place since the draining of the Fenns,
has acquired more firmness than formerly, is to me unknown.

Mr. John Cleveland.
It Is height makes Grantham Steeple stand awry.]

This Steeple seems crooked unto the beholders (and I believe will ever do so,
until our age erect the like by it for height and workmanship) though some
conceive the slenderness at such a distance is all the obliquity thereof.
Eminency exposes the uprightest persons to exception, and such who cannot find
faults in them, will find faults at them, envying their advancement.

As mad as the Baiting Bull of Stamford.]

Take the Original hereof. William Earl Warren Lord of this Town in the time of
King John, standing upon the Castle Walls of Stamford, saw two Bulls fighting
for a Cow in the Meadow, till all the Butchers Dogs, great and small, persued
one of the Bulls (being madded with Noise and Multitude) clean through the
Town. This Sight so pleased the said Earl, that he R. Butcher in his Survey of
Stamfora. p. 40.
gave all those Meadows (called the Castle Meadows) where first the Bull Duel
began, for a Common to the Butchers of the Town (after the first Grass was
eaten) on condition that they find a Mad Bull, the day Six weeks before
Christmas day, for the continuance of that sport every year. Some think that
the Men must be mad as well as the Bull, who can take delight in so dangerous a
WastTime; whereby that no more Mischief is done, not man's care; but Gods
Providence is to be praised.

He looks as the Devil over See the Proverbs in Oxsordshire.
Lincoln.]

Lincoln Minster is one of the statelyest Structures in Christendom. The
South Side of it meets the Travelers thereunto, twenty miles of, so that their
Eyes are there many hours before their Feet.

The Devil is the Map of Malice, and his Envy (as Gods mercy) is over all his
works. It grieves him what ever is given to God, crying out with that
Flesh-Divel, Ut quid haec perditio? Matthew. 26. 8.
What needs this wast? On which account he is supposed to have overlooked this
Church, when first finished with a torve and tetrick countenance, as maligning
men's costly devotion, and that they should be so expensive in Gods service:
But, it is suspicious, that some who account themselves Saints, behold such
fabrics with little better looks.

He was born at Heywood in his Epigrams cent. 5. number. 19.
Little Wittham.]

This Village in this County by Orthography is Witham, near which a River of
the same name does rise. But such nominal Proverbs take the advantage of all
manner of Spelling as due unto them. It is applied to such people as are not
overstock'd with acuteness. The best is, all men are bound to be honest, but
not to be witty.

Grantham Gruel, Nine Grits, and a Gallon of Water.]

Gruel (though homely) is wholesome Spoon-meat, Physic for the Sick, and food
for persons in health, Water is the Matter, Grits the Form thereof, giving the
being thereunto. Now Gruel thus imperfectly mixed, is Wash rather, which one
will have little heart to eat, and get as little heart thereby. The Proverb is
appliable to those who in their Speeches or Actions multiply what is
superfluous, or (at best) less necessary, either wholly omitting or less
regarding the Essentials thereof.

They held together as the Men of Though this Proverb be frequent in this
Shire, Marham is in Norfolk.
Marham when they lost their Common.]

Some understand it Ironically, that is, they were divided with several
Factions, which Proverb, Mutato Nomine, is used in other Counties. Yea long
since Eglogue. the first.
Virgil said the same in effect of the Men of Mantua, when they lost their
Lands to the Soldiers of Augustus.

-- En quo Discordia Cives,
Perduxit miseros? En queis consevimus Agros?
See Townsmen what we by our Jars are grown
And see for whom we have our Tillage sown.
Indeed when a Common Danger calls for a Union against a General Enemy, for any
then to prosecute their Personal Quarrels, and Private Grudges, is a Folly
always observed, often reproved, sometimes confessed, but seldom Reformed.

Others use this Proverb, only as an expression of ill Success, when men
strive to no purpose, though Plotting and Practicing together; to the utmost of
their power, being finally foiled in their undertakings.

Princes.
HENRY eldest [surviving] Son of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, was born at
the Castle of Bullingbrook in this County, and bred (according to the
Discipline of those days) in Camp and Court, in both which he proved a good
proficient. By Nature, he was made more to command then obey, being ambitious,
choleric, and withal courageous, cunning to catch, careful to keep, and
industrious to improve all advantages.

Being netled with some injuries received from King Richard the second he
complotted with a good party of the Nobility to depose him. Miscarriages in his
Government, (many by mi^managing, more by the missucceeding of matters) exposed
him to just Exception, besides his own Debauchery, and how easily is a
dissolute Government dissolved.

Having by the Murder of King Richard atcheived the Government to himself, he
reigned with much difficulty and opposition. Though his Father was a great
Patron, He was a great Persecutor of the Wickliffites, though not so much out
of hatred to them, as Love to himself, thereby to be ingratiated with the
Clergy, then Potent in the Land.

When Duke, he wore on his Head, an Antic Hood, which he cast not off when
King, so that his Picture is generally known by the Crown superadded thereon.
Lying on his Deathbed, he was rather querulous then penitent, much complaining
of his Sufferings in keeping, nothing bewayling his sin in getting the Crown.
Fire and Faggot was first kindled in his Reign in England to burn (pardon the
Prolepsis) poor Protestants, and happy had it been, had they been quenched at
his Death, which happened Anno Dom. 1413.

This Henry was the only Prince born in this Connty since the Conquest, though
a good Author by mistake, entituleth this County to another, an ancienter
Henry: Yet so that he gives him with one hand to it in his Book of Maps, and
takes him away with the other in his Chronicle.

J. Speed in his Description of Lincolne-sh. Parag. 7. J. Speed in his
Chronicle in the life of W. (...). Page 436. This Shire triumphs in the
Births of Beaucleark K. Henry the first, whom Selby brought forth. Henry,
Fourth and Youngest Son of King William was born at Selby in YorkShire.

I believe Mr. Speed the Chronocler, before Mr. Speed the Chorographer, because
therein concurring with other Authors. Besides, consult the Alphabetical Index
of his Map, and there is no Selby in this Shire, we have therefore placed King
Henry the First in Yorkshire, and thought fit to enter this observation not to
reprove others, but least I be reproved my self.

Saints.
Here I make no mention of St. Botolph, because there is no Constat (though
very much Probability) of his English Nativity, who lived at, and gave the name
to Botolphs Town (corruptly Boston) in this County.

GILBERT DE SEMPRINGHAM, There born in this County, was Bale de scrip. (...).
cent. 3. n. 25. and Camd. Brit. in Lincolnshire.
of noble extraction, Joceline his Father being a Knight, to whom he was eldest
Son, and Heir to a great Estate. In Body he was very deformed, but of subtle
wit and great courage. Traveling over into France, there he got good Learning,
and obtained leave from the Pope, to be Founder of those Epicoene, and
Hermaphrodite Convents, wherein Monks and Nuns lived together, as under one
Roof, but with partitions betwixt them.

Sure it was to him a comfort and credit, (which is confidently related by
credible Authors) to see 13. Convents, 700. Monks, 1100. Nuns (Women
out-superstition Men) of his order, being aged, one hundred and six years. He
appointed the fair Convent at Sempringham (his own rich Inheritance) to be
mother, and prime residence of his new erected order. He dyed anno 1189.

HUGH was a Child, Jo. Capg. in SS. Ang. Matthew. West. and Paris. ann. 1255.
born and living in Lincoln, who by the impious Jews was stolen from his
Parents, and in Derision of Christ and Christianity (to keep their cruel hands
in ure) by them crucified, being about Nine years old. Thus he lost his Life,
but got a Saintship thereby, and some afterward persuaded themselves that they
got their cures at his Shrine in Lincoln.

However this made up the measure of the Sins of the Jews in England, for which
not long after they were ejected the land, or (which is the truer) unwillingly
willing they departed themselves. And whilst they retain their old manners, may
they never return, especially in this Giddy and unsettled age, for fear more
Christians fall sick of Judaisme, then Jews recover in Christianity. This Hugh
was martyred Anno Dom. 1255. on the 27. of July.

Martyrs.
ANNE ASKEVVE, Daughter of Sir William Askewe Knight, was born at Kelsey in
this County, of her Piety and Patience, when first wracked in the Tower, then
burnt in Smithfield, I have largely treated in my Church History. She went to
Heaven in a Chariot of Fire. July 16. 1546.

Cardinals.
ROBERT SOMMERCOT. There are two Villages North and South Sommercot AMP.
in this (...) (and to my notice no where else in England) fromone of which I
presume he took his Nativity and Name: Yet because De Scrip. Brit. cent. 4.
number. 2.
Bale affirms Lawrence Sommercot his Brother or Kinsman, born in the South of
England, we have affixed our Note of Dubitation. But out of doubt it is, he was
a right learned man, to whom In an. 1241. page 576.
Matthew Paris gives this short but thick commendation, viz. Vir fuit
discretus, and circumspectus, omnibus amabilis merito and gratiosus. By Pope
Gregory the Ninth, he was made Cardinal of St. Stephens, anno 1231.

He was a true Lover of his Countrymen, and could not abide to hear them
abused, the cause that his choler was twice raised, when the Pope said in his
Presence, that there was not a faithful man in England, though wisely he
repressed his Passion.

After this Pope Gregory's death, he was the foremost of the (...) Elects for
the Papacy, * Idem in an. 1240. p. 524. and 542.
and on fair play, the most probable person to carry the place, but he was
double barred: First, because an honest man as any in that age. Secondly,
because an Englishman, the Italians desiring to Monopolize the choice to
themselves. Hereupon in the Holy Conclave (the better place the better deed) he
was made away by poison; to make room for Celestine to succeed him, who sat
that skittish place but a short time, dying 17. days after our Somercots death,
which happened anno Dom. 1241.

Prelates.
WILLIAM of GANESBOROUGH, was born in that Fair Market Town, which performs
more to the Eye, then Fame has reported to the Ear thereof. He was bred a
Franciscan in Oxford, and became the Twenty fifth Lecturer of his Order. He was
afterward sent over by King Edward the first, with Hugh of Manchester, to
Philip King of France, to demand reparation for some Damages in Aquitaine.

He was a mighty Champion of the Popes Infallibility, avowing that what David
indulged to his Son Adonijah, never saying unto him, 1 King. 1.
why did thou so? ought to be rendered by all to his Holiness, being not to
be called to an account, though causing the Damnation of thousands.

I remember when I was in Cambridge, some thirty years since, there was a
Flying, though false report, that Pope Urban the Eight, was cooped up by his
Cardinals, in the Castle of St. Angelo. Hereupon a waggish Scholar said, jam
(...) est, Papa non potest errare, it was then true (according to their
received Intelligence) that the Pope could not straggle or wander.

But our Ganesborough stoutly defended it in the literal sense against all
opposers, for which his good service, Pope Boniface the Eight preferred him
Bishop of Worcester, where he sat 6. years, and dyed 1308.

WILLIAM AYRMIN, was descended of an ancient Family in this County, still
extant in great Eminency of Estate at Osgodby therein. He was for some time,
Keeper of the Seal, and Vice Chancellor to King Edward the Second, at what
time anno 1319. the following misfortune befell him, and take the Original
thereof out of an Anonymal Croniclering Manuscript.

Episcopus Eborum, Episcopus Eliae, Thesaurarius, Abbas Beatae Mariae Eborum,
Abbas de Selbie, Decanus Eborum, Dominus Willielmus Arymanee Vice-Cancellarius
Angliae, ac Dominus Johannes Dabeham, cum 8000. ferme hominum, tam equitum,
quam peditum, and Civibus properanter Civitatem egredientes, quoddam flumen
Swale nuncupatum sparcis cuneis transeuntes, and indispositis seu potius
confusis ordinibus, cum Adversariis congressi sunt. Scoti siquidem in Mart
gnari amplitudinem eorum exercitus caute regentes, in nostris agminibus
strictis audacter irruerunt; nostrorum denique in brevi laceratis cuneis atque
dissipatis, corruerunt ex nostris, tam in ore gladii quam aquarum scopulis
suffocati, plusquam 4000. and capti sunt Domini Johannes de Papeham, and
Dominus Willielmus de Arymanee, ut praefertur, de Cancellaria, etc. The
Archbishop of York, the bishop of Ely, Lord Treasurer, the Abbot of St. Mary's
in York, the Abbot of Selby, the Dean of York, Mr. William Arymane
Vice-Chancelour, and Mr. John Dabehame, with almost 8000. Men as well Horse as
Foot, and Citizens hastily going out of the City, passing over a certain River
called Swale, with scattered parties, Fashioned in Form of a Wedge.
and with disordered, or rather confused Ranks, encountered the Enemy. The
Scotch cunning in War, waryly ruling the greatness of their Army, boldly
rushed on our Men with well ordered Troops, and afterward in short time having
broken, and scattered ou^ Parties, there fell of our Men, with the mouth of the
Sword, and chok'd with the Water, more then 4000. and Mr. John de Pabehame, and
Mr. William Arymane of the Chancery, as aforesaid, were taken Prisoners.

Afterward recovering his Liberty he was made Chancelour of England, and
bishop of Norwich, in the 18. year of King Edward the Second. He gave two
hundred pounds to buy Land to maintain priests to say Mass for his Soul. He
dyed anno Dom. 1337. at Charing Cross nigh London, when he had been eleven
years bishop. I am credibly informed, that he bestowed the Manor of Silk
Willoughby in this County, on his Family, which with other Fair Lands is
possessed by them at this day.

WILLIAM WAYNFLET, was born at Waynflet in this County, whence he took his
Denomination, according to the custom of Clergymen in that age: For otherwise
he was eldest Son to Richard Pattin, an ancient Esquire in this County, and I
understand, that at this day they remain at Barsloe in Darbyshire, descended
from the said Knight. But of this worthy Prelate, Founder of Magdalen-colledge
in Oxford, abundantly in my Church History.

WILLIAM LYNVVOOD, was born at Harpsfield in his History.
Lynwood in this County, and proceeded Doctor of the Laws (probably rather by
Incorporation then constant Education) in Oxford, long living a Commoner in
Gunvil Hall in Cambridge. He was Chancellor to the Arch^bishop of Canterbury,
Keeper of the Privy Seal to King Henry the Sixth, and was employed in several
Embassies into Spain and Portugal. He wrote a learned Comment on the English
provincial Constitutions, from Stephen Langhton to Archbishop Chichley, and his
pains at last was rewarded with the Bishopric of St. David's, where he dyed
1446.

WILLIAM ASCOUGH, was descended of a worshipful and very ancient Family now
living at Kelsey in this County, the variation of a Letter importing nothing to
the contrary. I have seen at Sarisbury, his Arms, with allusion to the Arms of
that House, and some Episcopal addition. Such likeness is with me a better
Evidence then the samenesse, knowing, that the Clergy in that age delighted to
disguise their Coats from their Paternal bearing. He was bred Doctor of the
Laws, a very able man in his profession, became Bishop of Sarum, confessor to
King Henry the Sixth, and was the first (as T. Gascoigne relates) of Bishops,
who discharged that Office, as then conceived beneath the place. Some will say,
if King Henry answered the character commonly received of his Sanctity, his
Confessor had a very easy performance. Not so, for always the most
conscientious are the most scrupulous in the confession of their sins, and the
particular enumeration of the circumstances thereof.

It happened, that I. Cade with his cursed crew (many of them being the
Tennants of this Bishop) fell fowl on this Prelate, at Edington in this shire,
Bishop Godwin says, Illi quam ob causam infensi non hab^o compertum. He could
not tell why they should be so incensed against him. But I conceive, it was
because he was learned, pious and rich, three capital crimes in a Clergyman.
They plundered his Carriages, taking ten thousand marks (a Mine of Money in
that age) from him, and then to secure their Riot and Felony, by murder and
high treason, dragged him as he was Officiating from the High Altar. And
although they regarded difference of place no more, then a Wolf is concerned
whether he kills a Lamb in the Fold or Field, yet they brought him out of the
Church to a Hill hard by, and there barbarously murdered Him, and tore his
bloody Shirt in pieces, and left his stripped body stark naked in the place.

Sic concussa cadit Populari MITRA Tumultu,
Protegat optamus nunc DIADEMA Deus.
By Peoples fury MITRE thus cast down,
We pray henceforward God preserve the CROWN.
This his Massacre happened June 29. 1450. when he had sat almost twelve years
in the Sea of Sarisbury.

RICHARD FOX, was born at Grantham in this County, as the Fellows of his
Foundation in Oxford have informed me. Such who make it their only argument to
prove his Birth at Grantham, because he therein erected a fair Free School, may
on the same Reason conclude him born at Tanton in Sommerset shire, where he
also founded a goodly Grammar School. But what shall I say? Ubique nascitur qui
Orbi nascitur, he may be said to be born every where, who with Fox was born for
the public and general good.

He was very instrumental in bringing King Henry the Seventh to the Crown, who
afterward well rewarded him for the same. That politic Prince, (though he
could go alone as well as any King in Europe, yet) for the more state, in
matters of Moment he leaned principally on the Shoulders of two prime Prelates,
having Archbishop Morton for his Right, and this Fox, for his left Supporter,
whom at last he made Bishop of Winchester. He was bred first in Cambridge,
where he was President of Pembrokehall (and gave Hangings thereunto with a Fox
woven therein) and afterward in Oxford, where he founded the fair College of
Corpus Christi (allowing per annum to it, 401. l. 8. s. 11. d.) which since
has been the Nursery of so many eminent Scholars. He expended much Money in
Beautifying his Cathedral in Winchester, and methodically disposed the Bodies
of the Saxon Kings and Bishops (dispersedly buried in this Church) in decent
Tombs erected by him on the Walls on each side the Quire, which some Soldiers
(to show their Spleen at once against Crowns and Miters) valiantly fighting
against the Dust of the dead, have since barbarously demolished. Twenty seven
years he sat Bishop of this See till he was stark blind with age. All thought
him to dye to soon, one only excepted, who conceived him to live too long, viz.
Thomas Wolsey, who gaped for his Bishopric, and endeavored to render him to
the Displeasure of K. Henry the Eigth, whose Malice this Bishop though blind
discovered, and in some measure defeated. He dyed anno Domini 1528. and lies
buried in his own Cathedral.

Since the Reformation.
THOMAS GOODRICH was Son of Edward Goodrich, and Jane his Wife of Kirby in this
County, as appears by the Yorkshire Visitation of Heralds, in which County
the Allies of this Bishop seated themselves, and flourish at this day. He was
bred in the University of Cambridge D. D. say some, of Law say others, in my
opinion more probable, because frequently employed in so many Embassies to
Foreign Princes, and at last made by King Henry the Eighth Bishop of Ely
(wherein he continued above tweney years) and by King Edward the Sixth, Lord
Chancellor of England. Nor will it be amiss to insert and translate this
Distick made upon him;

Et Bonus and Dives, been junctus and optimus Ordo:
Praecedit Bonitas pone sequuntur Opes.
Both Good and Rich, well joined, best ranked indeed:
For Grace goes first, and next does Wealth succeed.
I find Sir John Heywood the Life of King Edw. the Sixth.
one Pen ^pirting Ink upon him (which is usual in his Writings) speaking to
this effect, that if he had ability enough, he had not too much to discharge
his Office. I behold him as one well inclined to the protestant Religion, and
after his Resignation of the Chancellors place, to Stephen Gardener, his Death
was very seasonable for his own Safety. * Peruse Sir Henry Spelmans Glossary,
in Verbo Chancellariorum.
May 10. 1554, In the first of Queen Mary, whilst as yet, no great Violence was
used to Protestants.

JOHN WHITGIFT was born at Grimsby in this County, successively bred in Queens,
Pembroke-hall, Peter-house and Trinity College in Cambridge, Master of the
Later, Bishop of Worcester, and Arch bishop of Canterbury. But I have largely
written his life in my Ecclesiastical History, and may truly say with him, who
constantly returned to all Inquirers, Nil novi novi, I can make no new addition
thereunto; only since I met with this Camdens Remains, p. 184.
Anagram,

Joannes Whitegifteus.
Non vi egit, favet Jhesus.
Indeed, he was far from Violence, and his politic patience was blessed in a
high proportion, he dyed anno 1603. Feb. 29.

JOHN STILL D. D. was born at Grantham in this County, and bred first Fellow of
Christ's, then Master of St. John's, and afterward of Trinity College in
Cambridge, where I have read in the Register this commendation of him, that he
was (...), nec Collegio gravis aut onorosus. He was one of a venerable
presence, no less famous for a preacher; then a Disputant. Finding his own
Strength, he did not stick to warn such as he disputed with in their own
arguments, to take heed to their Answers, like a perfect Fencer, that will tell
aforehand in what Button he will give his Venew. When toward the end of the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, there was an [unsucceeding] motion of a Diet or
meeting which should have been in Germany, for composing of matters of
Religion; Sir John Harrington in his Continuation of Bishop Godwins Ca^. of
Bishops.
Doctor Still was chosen for Cambridge, and Doctor Humfred for Oxford, to
oppose all comers for the defense of the English Church.

Anno 1592. being then the second time Vice-chancelour of Cambridge, he was
consecrated Bishop of Bath and Wells, and defeated all causeless suspicion of
Symoniacal compliance, coming clearly thereunto, without the least scandal to
his person or loss to the place. In his days God opened the bosom of the
Earth, Mendip Hills affording great store of Lead, wherewith and with his own
providence (which is a constant Mine of Wealth) he raised a great estate, and
laid the Foundation of three Families, leaving to each of them a considerable
Revenue in a Worshipful condition. He gave five hundred pounds for the building
of an Almes-house in the City of Wells, and dying February 26. 1607. lies
buried in his own Cathedral under a neat Tomb of Alabaster.

MARTIN FOTHERBY D. D. was born at Great Grimsby in this County, of a good
Family, as appears by his Epitaph on his Monument, in the Church of
Allhallows Lumbard street London. He was bred Fellow of Trinity-colledge in
Cambridge, and became afterward one and twenty years Prebendary of Canterbury,
then he was preferred by King James Bishop of Salisbury; He dyed in his
calling, having begun to put in print an excellent book against Atheists most
useful for our age, wherein their sin so abounds. His Death happened March
11. 1619. not two full years after his Consecration.

Statesmen.
EDWARD FINES Lord Clinton, Knight of the Garter, was Lord Admiral of England,
for more then thirty years, a Wise, Valiant and Fortunate Gentleman. The
Masterpeice of his service was in Mustleborough Field, in the Reign of King
Edward the * Sir John Heyward in the Reign of K. Edward the Sixth. page 15.
Sixth, and the Battle against the Scots. Some will wonder, what a Fish should
do on dry Land, what use of an Admiral in a Land fight. But know, the English
kept themselves close to the shore, under the shelter of their ships, and
whilst their Arrows could do little, their spears less, their swords nothing,
against the Scots (who * Idem. p. 31.
appeared like a hedge of Steel, so well armed and closed together) the great
Ordnance from their ships, at first did all, making such destruction in the
Scottish army, that though some may call it a Land-fight, it was first a
Victory from the sea, and then but an Execution on the Land.

By Queen Elizabeth (who honored her honors by bestowing them sparingly) he
was created Earl of Lincoln May 4. 1574. and indeed he had breadth to his
height, a proportionable estate, chiefly in this County, to support his
Dignity, being one of those, who besides his paternal Inheritance, had much
increased his estate. He dyed January the sixteenth, 1585. and lies buried at
Windsor, in a private chapel under a stately Monument, which Elizabeth his
third Wife, Daughter to the Earl of Kildare, erected in his Remembrance.

THOMAS WILSON, Doctor of Laws, was born in this Bale de Scrip. Brit. Cent. 9.
County, bred Fellow of Kings-Colledge in Cambridge, and afterward was Tutor
in the same University, to Henry and Charles Brandons, successively Dukes of
Suffolk. Hard shift he made to conceal himself in the Reign of Queen Mary.
Under Queen Elizabeth he was made Master of the Hospital of St. Katharines,
nigh the Tower of London, upon the same Token that he took down the Quire,
which, my Stows Survey of London, in Tower-street Ward.
Author says (allow him a little Hyperbole, was as great as the Quire at St.
Paul's. I am loath to believe it done out of Covetousness, to gain by the
materials thereof, but would rather conceive it so run to Ruin, that it was
past repairing. He at last became Secretary of State to Q. Elizabeth for four
years together. It argues his ability for the place, because he was put into
it; Seeing in those active times, under so judicious a Queen, weakness might
despair to be employed in such an office. He dyed anno dom. 15..

THOMAS Lord BURGE or BOROU^H, Son to William Lord Burge, Grandson to Thomas
Lord Burge, (created Baron by King Henry the Eight) was born in his Fathers
Fair Camd. Brit. in this County.
house at Gainsborough in this County.

His first public appearing was, when he was sent Ambassador into Scotland,
anno 1593. to excuse Bothwell his lurking in England, to advise the speedy
suppressing of the Spanish Faction, and to advance an effectual association of
the Protestants in that Kingdom for their Kings defense, which was done
accordingly.

Now when Sir William Russel Lord Deputy of Ireland was recalled, this Lord
Tho. Burgh, was substituted in his room, anno 1597. Mr. Camden does thus
character him.

In his Eliz. anno. 1597.
Vir acer, and animi plenus, ^ed nullis fere castrorum rudimentis.

But where there is the stock of Valor with an able brain, Experience will
soon be graffed upon it. It was first thought fit, to make a Months Truce with
Tyrone, which cessation like a Damm, made their mutual animosities for the
present swell higher, and when removed for the future, run the fiercer. The
Lord Deputy (the Truce expired) straightly besieged the Fort of Blackwater the
only Receptacle of the Rebels in those parts (I mean besides their Woods and
Bogs) and the Key of the County of Tyrone. This Fort he took by Force, and
presently followed a bloody Battle, wherein the English paid dear for their
Victory, loosing many worthy men, and amongst them two that were Foster
brothers [Fratres Collactanei] to the Earl of Kildare, who so laid this loss
to his heart, (amongst the Irish, Foster brethren are loved above the Sons of
their fathers) that he dyed soon after. Tyrons credit now lay a bleeding, when
to stanch it, he rebesieged Blackwater, and the Lord Deputy, whilst indevouring
to relieve it was struck with untimely death, before he had continued a whole
year in his place. All I will add is this, that it brake the heart of Valiant
Sir John Norris (who had promised the Deputies place unto himself, as due to
his deserts) when this Lord Burgh was superinduced into that Office. His Relict
Lady (famous for her Charity, and skill in Surgery) lived long in
Westminster, and dyed very aged some twenty years since.

WILLIAM CECIL. Know Reader, before I go farther, something must be premised
concerning his position in this Topic. Georgic. l. 1.
Virgil was profane in his flattery to Augustus Caesar, profering him his free
choice after his death, to be ^anked amongst what heathen Gods he pleased, so
that he might take his place either amongst those of the Land, which had the
oversight of Men and Cities, or the Sea-Gods, commanding in the Ocean; or the
Skye-Gods, and become a new Constellation therein. But without the least
adulation, we are bound to profer this worthy Peer his own election; whether he
will be pleased to repose himself under Benefactors to the Public, all England
in that age being beholden to his bounty (as well as the poor in Standford, for
whom he erected a fair Bead-house) acknowledging under God and the Queen, their
prosperity the fruit of his prudence. Or else he may rest himself under the
title of Lawyers, being long bred in the Inns of Court, and more learned in our
MunicipalLaw, then many who made it their sole profession. However, for the
present, we lodge this English Nestor (for wisdom and vivacitie) under the
notion of Statesmen, being Secretary and Lord-Treasurer for above thirty
years together. Having In my HolyState.
formerly written his life at large, it will be enough here to observe, that he
was born at Bourn in this County, being son to Richard Cecil Esquire (of the Robes
to King Henry the eighth, and a Legatee in his Will) and Jane his Wife, of whom
hereafter. He was in his age Moderator Aulae, steering the Court at his
pleasure, and whilst the Earl of Leichester would endure no equal, and Sussex
no superior therein, he by siding with neither, served himself with both.

Incredible was the kindness which Queen Elizabeth had for him, or rather for
her self in him, being sensible that he was so able a Minister of State. Coming
once to visit him being sick of the Gout at Burley house in the Strand, and
being much heightened with her Head Attire (then in fashion) the Lords Servant
who conducted her through the door, May your Highness (said he) be pleased to
stoop, the Queen returned, For your Masters sake I will stoop, but not for the
King of Spains. This worthy Patriot departed this life in the seventy seventh
year of his Age, August the 4th. 1598.

Capital Judges.
Sr. WILLIAM de SKIPVVITH, was bred in the study of the Laws, profiting REM.
so well therein, that he was made, in Trinity Term, Lord Chief Baron of the
Exchequer, in the thirty fifth, Sr. Hen. Spelmans Glos. tit. Justitiarius.
continuing therein until the fortieth, of the Reign of King Edward the third.
I meet not with any thing memorable of him in our English Histories; except
this may pass for a thing remarkable, that, at the importunity of John of Gaunt
Duke of Lancaster, this Sr. William condemned William Bishop Godwin in the
Bishops of Winchester.
Wichkam, Bish. of Winchester, of Crimes rather powerfully objected then
plainly proved against him; whereupon the Bishops Temporalls were taken from
him, and he denied access within twenty miles of the Kings Court.

I confess there is a Village in the East riding of Yorkshire, called SKIPWITH,
but I have no assurance of this Judge his Nativity therein: though ready to
remove him thither, upon clearer information.

Sr. WILLIAM SKIPVVITH Junior. He was inferior to the former in AMP.
place (whom I behold as a Puisne Judge) but herein remarkable to all
posterity; That he would not complie, neither for the importunity of King
Richard the second, nor the example of his fellow See Sr. Robert Belknap. Title
Lawyers. in Leicestershire. Sr. Hen. Spel. in Glos. verbo Justitiarius.
Judges, in the 10th. year of that Kings Reign) to allow, that the King by his
own power might rescinde an Act of Parliament. Solus inter impios mansit
integer Gulielmus Skipwith * Miles Clarus ideo apud Posteros. And * shined the
brighter for living in the midst of a crooked Generation, bowed with fear and
favor into Corruption.

I know well, that the Collar of S. S. S. (or Esses) worn about the necks of
Judges (and other persons of Honor) is wreathed into that form, whence it
receives its name. Chiefly from Sanctus Simon Simplicius, an uncorrupted Judge
in the Primitive Times. May I move that every fourth link thereof, when worn,
may mind them of this SKIPVVITH, so upright in his judgment in a matter of the
highest importance.

Having no certainty of his Nativity, I place him in this County, where his
name at Ormesby has flourished ever since his time, in a very worshipful
equipage.

Sr. WILLIAM HUSE^ Knight was born, as I have cause to believe, in this AMP.
County, where his name and Family flourish in a right worshipful equipage.
He was bred in the study of our Municipall Law, and attained to such eminency
therein, that by King Edward the fourth, in the one Spelmans Glossarie, page
417.
and twentieth of his Reign, he was made Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench.

King HENRY the seventh (who in point of policy was only directed by himself)
in point of Law, was chiefly ruled by this Lord Verulam in the lise of King
Henry the 7th. page 242.
Judge, especially in this question of importance. It happened that in his first
Parliament, many Members thereof were returned, who (being formerly of this
Kings party) were attainted, and thereby not legal to sit in Parliament, being
disabled in the highest degree, it being incongruous that they should make Laws
for others, who themselves were not Inlawed. The King not a little troubled
therewith, remitted it as a case in Law to the Judges. The Judges assembled in
the Exchequer Chamber, agreed all with Sr. William Husee, (their Speaker to
the King) upon this Grave and safe opinion, mixed with Law and convenience,
that the Knights and Burgesses attainted by the course of Law, should forbear
to come into the House, till a Law were passed for the reversall of their
attainders, which was done accordingly. When at the same time it was incidently
moved in their Consultation, what should be done for the King himself, who
likewise was attainted? the rest unanimously agreed with Sr. William Husee,
that the Crown takes away all defects, and stops in blood, and that by the
Assumption thereof the fountain was cleared from all attainders and
Corruptions. He died in Spelmans Glossarie ut prius.
Trinity Term, in the tenth year of King Henry the 7th.

Sr. EDMUND ANDERSON Knight, was born a younger brother of a Gentile extract at
Flixborough in this County and bred in the Inner Temple. I have been informed
that his Father left him 1000 l. for his portion, which this our Sr. Edmund
multiplied into many, by his great proficiency in the Common Law, being made in
the twenty fourth of Queen Elizabeth Chief Justice of the Common Pleas.

When Secretary Davison was sentenced in the Star Chamber for the business of
the Cambden Eliz. Anno. 1587.
Queen of Scots, Judge Anderson said of him, that therein he had done * justum
non just, and so acquitting him of all malice, censured him, with the rest,
for his indiscretion.

When H. ^uff was arraigned about the Rising of the Earl of Essex, and when Sr.
Edward Coke the Queens Solicitor opposed him, and the other answered
Syllogistically, our Anderson (sitting there as Judge of Law not Logic)
checked both Pleader and Prisoner ob stolidos Syllogismos for Idem Anno. 1600.
their foolish Syllogismes, appointing the former to press the Statute of King
Edward the third. His stern countenance well became his place, being a great
promoter of the established Church Discipline, and very severe against all
Brownists when he met them in his Circuit. He dyed in the third of King James,
leaving great Estates to several sons, of whom I behold Sr. Francis Anderson of
Euworth in Bedfordshire the eldest, whose son Sr. John, by a second Wife Audrey
Butler (Niece to the Duke of Buckingham) and afterward married to the Lord
Dunsmore in Warwickshire) was (according to some conditions in his Patent) to
succeed his Father in Law in that honor, if surviving him. This I thought fit
to insert, to vindicate his memory from obl^vion, who being an hopeful
Gentleman (my fellow Colleague in Sidney College) was taken away in the prime
of his youth.

Soldiers.
Sr. FREDERICK TILNEY Knight had his chief Residence at Hacluit in his first
Vollum (...) Sea Voyages.
Bostone in this County. He was a man of mighty stature and strength, above the
Proportion of ordinary persons. He attended King Richard the first. Anno Dom.
1190. to the Seidge of Acon in the Holy Land, where his Atcheivements were
such, that he struk terror into the Infidels. Returning home in safety he lived
and died at Terington nigh Tilney in Norfolk, where the measure of his
incredible stature was for many (...) preserved. Sixteen Weaver in his Funeral
Mon. in Norfolk. page 817.
Knights flourished from him successively in the Male line, till at last their
Heir general being married to the Duke of Norfolk, put a period to the Luster
of that ancient family.

PEREGRINE BERTY, Lord Willoughby, Son of Richard Berty, and Katharine S. N.
Duchess of Suffolk. Reader, I crave a dispensation, that I may with thy good
leave, trespass on the Premised Laws of this Book, his name speaking his
foraign Nativity, born nigh Hidleberg in the Palatinate. Indeed I am loath to
omit so worthy a Person. Our Histories fully report his valiant Atcheivements
in France and the Netherlands, and how at last he was made Governor of
Berwick. He could not brook the Obsequiousness and Assiduity of the Court, and
was wont to say that he was none of the Reptilia, which could creep on the
ground, the Camp was his proper Element, being a great Soldier, and having a
suitable magnanimity.

When one sent him an insulting Challenge, whilst he lay sick of the Gout, he
returned this Answer, that, although he was lame of his hands and feet, yet he
would m^et him with a piece of a Rapier in his teeth.

Once he took a Gennet, managed for the War, which was intended for a present
to the King of Spain, and was desired by a Trumpeter from the General to
restore it, offering this Lord 1000 l. down for him, or 100 l. per annum during
his life at his own choice. This Lord returned, that if it had been any
COMMANDER, he FREELY would have sent him back, but being but an HORSE, he loved
him as well as the King of Spain himself, and would keep him. Here I will
insert a Letter of Queen Elizabeth, written to him with her own hand, and
Reader deal in matters of this nature, as when Venison is set before thee, eat
the one and read the other, never asking whence either came, though I profess,
I came honestly by a Copy thereof, from the Original.

Good Peregrine,
we are not a little glad that by your Journey you have received such good
fruit of amendment; specially when we consider how great vexation it is to a
mind devoted to actions of honor, to be restrained by any indisposition of
body, from following those Courses, which to your own Reputation and our great
satisfaction you have formerly performed. And, therefore as we must now (out of
our desire of your well doing) chiefly enjoyne you to an especial care to
increase and continue your health, which must give life to all your best
endeavors; so we must next as seriously recommend to you this Consideration.
That in these times when there is such appearance, that we shall have the
trial of our best and noble Subjects, you seem not to affect the satisfaction
of your own private Contentation, beyond the attending on that which nature and
duty challenges from all persons of your quality and Profession. For if
necessarily (your health of body being recovered) you should Elloigne your self
by residence there from those employments, whereof we shall have too good
store; You shall not so much amend the state of your body, as happily you shall
call in question the reputation of your mind and Judgment, even in the opinion
of those that love you, and are best acquainted with your disposition and
discretion.

Interpret this our plaineness we pray you to our extraordinary estimation of
you, for it is not Common with us to deal so freely with many; and believe that
you shall ever find us both ready and willing in all occasions to yield you the
fruits of that interest, which your endeavors have purchased for you in our
opinion and estimation. Not doubting, but when you have with moderation made
trial of the success of these your sundry Peregrinations, you will find as
great Comfort to spend your days at home as heretofore you have done; of which
we do wish you full measure, howsoever you shall have cause of abode or return.
Given under our Signet at our Manor of Nonesuch the seventh of October. 1594 in
the 37 year of our Reign.

Your most loving Sovereign E. R.


It appears by the Premises, that it was written to this Lord when he was at
the Spaw in Lukeland, for the Recovery of his health, when a second English
Invasion of the Spaniard was (I will not say feared, but) expected. Now though
this Lord was born beyond the Seas accidentally (his Parents flying persecution
in the Reign of Queen Mary) yet must he justly be reputed this Country man,
where his Ancestors had flourished so many years, and where he was Baron
Willoughby in right of his Mother. He dyed Anno Dom. 1601. and lies buried
under a stately Monument at Eresby in this County.

Sir EDVVARE HARVVOOD was born^nigh Bourn in this County, a valiant Soldier
and a gracious man. Such who object, that he was extremely wild in his youth,
put me in mind of the return which one made to an ill natured man in a
Company, who with much bitterness had aggravated the Debauched youth of an aged
and right Godly Divine: You have proved (said he) with much pains what all knew
before, that Paul was a great Persecutor before he was converted.

I have read of a bird, which has a Face like, and yet will prey upon a man;
who coming to the water to drink, and finding there by reflection, that he had
killed one like himself, pineth away by degrees, and never afterward enjoys
it self. Such in some sort the condition of Sir Edward. This accident, that he
had killed one in a private quarrel, put a period to his carnal mirth, and was
a covering to his eyes all the days of his life. No possible provocations
could afterward tempt him to a Duel: and no wonder if one's conscience
loathed that whereof he had surfeited. He refused all challenges with more
honor than others accepted them; it being well known, that he would set his
foot as far in the face of his Enemy, as any man alive. He was one of the four
standing Colonels in the LowCountries, and was shot at the Seige of Mastricht,
Anno Dom. 1632. Death was so civil to him as to allow him leave to rise up on
his knees, and to cry Lord have mercy upon me. Thus a long death-prayer after
short piety is not so good, as a short prayer after a long pious conversation.

Seamen.
JOB HARTOP was (as himself In his Travells inserted in Hackluits Voyages, last
part. page 487.
affirms) born at Bourn in this County, and went Anno 1568. (early days I
assure you for the English in those parts) with Sir John Hawkins, his General,
to make discoveries in New Spain. This Job was chief Gunner in her Majesty's
Ship called the Jesus of Lubeck, being the Queens by no other title, but as
hired for her money, who in the beginning of her Reign, before her Navy-Royall
was erected, had her Ships from the Hans-Townes.

Long and dangerous was his journey, eight of his men at Cape-Verd being
killed, and the General himself wounded with poisoned Arrows, but was cured by
a Negro drawing out the poison with a Clove of Idem ibid.
Garlic, enough to make nice noses dispense with the valiant smell for the
sanative virtue thereof.

He wrote a treatise of his Voyage, and is the first I met with, who mentions
that strange tree, which may be termed The Tree of Food, affording a liquor
which is both Meat and Drink; The Tree of Raiment, yielding Needles wherewith,
and Thread whereof Mantles are made; The Tree of Harbor, Tiles to cover houses
being made out of the solid parts thereof, so that it bears a self
sufficiency for man's maintenance.

Job was his name, and patience was with him, so that he may pass amongst the
Confessors of this County. For, being with some other by this General, for want
of provisions left on land, after many miseries they came to Mexico, and he
continued a Prisoner twenty three years, viz: Two years in Mexico, one year in
the Contractation-House in Civil, another in the Inquisition-House in Triana,
twelve years in the Galleys, four years (with the Cross of St. Andrew on his
back) in the Everlasting-Prison, and three years a drudge to Hernando de Soria,
to so high a sum did the Inventorie of his sufferings amount.

So much of his patience, now see the end which the Lord made with him. Whilst
enslaved to the aforesaid Hervando, he was sent to Sea in a Flemish, which was
afterward taken by an English ship, called the Galeon-Dudley, and so was he
safely landed at Portsmouth, December. the second, 1590. And I believe lived not
long after.

Sir WILLIAM MOUNSON Knight, was extracted of an Ancient Family in this Shire,
and was from his youth bred in Sea-Service, wherein he attained to Great
Perfection. Queen Elizabeth having cleared Ireland of the Spanish Forces, and
desiring carefully to prevent a Relapse, altered the Scaene of the War, from
Ireland to Spain, from Defending to Invading.

Sir Richard Leveson was Admiral, our Sir William Vice Admiral, Anno 1602.

These without drawing a Sword Killed Trading quite on the Coasts of Portugal,
no Vessels daring to go in or out of their Harbors.

They had Intelligence of a Caract ready to land in Sisimbria, which was of
1600 Tun, richly laden out of the East Indies, and resolved to assault it,
though it seemed placed in an Invincible Posture. Of it self it was a Giant in
Comparison to our Pigmy Ships, and had in her three hundred Spanish Gentlemen;
the Marquess de Sancta Cruce lay hard by with thirteen Ships, and all were
secured under the Command of a Strong and well fortified Castle. But nothing is
Impossible to Mars valor and Gods blessing thereon. After a ^aire dispute
(which lasted for some hours) with Sillogismes of fire and sword, the Caract
was Conquered, the wealth taken therein amounting to the value of Ten Hundred
(...) (...) (...) (...) (...).
Thousand Crowns of Portugal Account. But though the Goods gotten therein
might be valued, the Good gained thereby was Inestimable, for henceforward they
beheld the English with admiring eyes, and quitted their thoughts of Invasion.
This worthy Knight dyed about the midst of the Reign of King James.

Writers.
This County has afforded many, partly, because so large in it self, partly,
because abounding with so many Monasteries (whereof two Mitred ones Crowland
and Bardney) the Seminaries of many Learned men. Not to speak of the Cathedral
of Lincoln and Embrio University of Stamford, wherein many had their Education.
Wherefore to pass by Faelix Crowlandensis, Kimbertus Lindesius and others, all
of them not affording so much true History, as will fill a hollow quill
therewith, we take notice of some principal ones and begin with,

GILBERT of HOLLAND. He took his name, not as others from a single Town, but a
great part of ground, the third part of this Tripartite County, which in my
apprehension argues his Diligence in preaching thereabouts. But quitting his
Native Land, he was invited by the famous St. Bernard to go to, and live with
him at Clarvaulx in Burgundy, where he became his Scholar.

Some will prize a Crum of Foreign Praise, before a Loaf of English
commendation, as subject to partiality to their own Countrymen. Let such hear
how Abbot Trithemius the German commends our Gilbert, Vir erat in Scripturis
Divinis Studiosus and egregie doctus, ingenio subtilis and clarus eloquio.

The Poets feig^, that Hercules for a time supplied the place of wearied Atlas
in supporting the Heavens; so our Gilbert was frequently substitute to St.
Bernard, continuing his Sermons where the other brake ^ff, from those words in
lectulo meo per noctes, etc. unto the end of the book, being forty six Sermons,
in style scarce discernable from St. Bernards. He flourished anno Dom. 1200.
and was buried at Gistreaux in France.

ROGER of CROULAND, was bred a Benedictine Monk therein, and afterward became
Abbot of Friskney in this County. He was the seventh man in order, who wrote
the Life of Thomas Becket. Some will say his six elder Brethren left his Pen
but a pitiful portion, to whom it was impossible to present the Reader with any
remarkable Novelty in so trite a subject. But know, that the pretended miracles
of Becket daily multiplying, the last Writer, had the most matter in that kind.
He divided his book into seven Volumes, and was full fifteen years in making of
it, from the last of King Richard the first, to the fourteenth of King John.
But whether this Elephantine Birth answered that proportion of time in the
performance thereof, let others decide. He flourished anno Domini 1214.

ELIASDE TREKINGHAM, was born in this County, at a Village so called, as by the
sequents will appear.

Page 865.
Ingulphus relates, that in the year of our Lord 870. in the Month of
September, Count Algar with others, bid battle to the Danes in Kesteven, a
Third part of this County, and worsted them, killing three of their Kings, whom
the Danes buried in a Village therein, formerly called Laundon, but after
Trekingham. Nor do I know any place, to which the same name on the like
accident can be applied, except it be Alcaser in Africa, where anno 1578.
Sebastian the Portugal and two other Morish Kings were killed in one Battle.

I confess no such place as Trekingham appears at this day in any Catalogue
of English Towns. Whence I conclude it either a Parish some years since
depoulated, or never but a Churchlesse Village. This Bale de Scrip. Brit. cent.
4. number. 31.
Elias was a Monk of Peterborough, Doctor of Divinity in Oxford, a Learned man
and great Lover of History, writing himself a Chronicle from the year of our
Lord 626, till 1270. at what time it is probable he deceased. * Pitz. de Scrip.
Angl. page 35. Anno 1270.


HUGO KIRKSTED, was born at that well known Town in this County, being bred a
Benedictine-Cistercian-Bernardine. A Cistercian is a Reformed Benedictine, a
Bernardine is a Reformed Cistercian, so that our Hugh may charitably be
presumed Pure, as twice Refined. He consulted one Serlo an aged man, and one of
his own Order, and they both clubbing their pains and brains together made a
Chronicle of the Cistercians from their first coming into England, anno 1131.
(when Walter de Espeke founded their first Abbey at Rivaax in Yorkshire) Our
Hugh did write, Serlo did indict, being almost Bale de Scrip. Brit. cent. 3.
number. 81.
an hundred years old, so that his Memory was a perfect Chronicle of all
remarkable Passages, from the Beginning of his Order. Our Hugo flourished anno
Domini 1220.

WILLIAM LIDLINGTON was born, say some, at that Village in Cambridge-shire, at
a Village so named in this County say others, with whom I concur, because he
had his Education at Stamford. He was by profession a Carmelite, and became the
Fifth Provincial of his Order in England. Monasteries being multiplied in that
age, Gerardus a Frenchman, Master General of the Carmelites, in a Synod at
Narbone, deputed two English Provincials of that Order, to the great grievance
of our Lidlington, refusing to subscribe to the Decisions of that Synod. His
stubbornness cost him an Excommunication from Pope Clement the Fifth, and four
years Penance of banishment from his Native Country. Mean time our Lidlington
living at Paris acquired great credit * Bale de scrip. Brit. Cent. 4. n. 79.
unto himself by his Lectures and Disputations. At last he was preferred
Provincial of the Carmelites in Palestine (whence from Mount Carmel he fetched
their Original) and he himself best knew whether the Depth of his profit
answered the Height of his Honor therein, which I suspect, the rather, because
returning into England he dyed and was buried at Stanford, anno Dom. 1309.

NICHOLAS STANFORD. He was born at that well-known Town (once offering to be an
University) and bred a Bernardine therein. The Eulogy given him by Learned
Leland ought not to be measured by the Yard but weighed in the balance.
Admirabar hominem ejus aetatis tam argute, tam solido, tamque significanter
potuisse scribere, I admired much that a man of his age, could write, so
smartly, so solidly, so significantly: Understand him not, that one so infirm
with age or decrepit in years, but that one living in so ignorant and
superstitious a generation could write so tercely; flourishing (as may be
collected) about the year of our Lord 1310.

JOHN BLOXHAM was born at that Town in this County, and bred a Carmelite in
Chester. I confess it is a common expression of the Country folk in this
County, when they intend to character a dull, heavy, blundering person, to say
of him, he was born at Bloxham; but indeed our John (though there first
incradled) had acuteness enough, and some will say activity too much for a
Friar. He advantagiously fixed himself at Chester, a City in England, nere
Ireland, and not far from Scotland, much conducing to his ease, who was supreme
prefect of his Order, through those three Bale de scrip. Brit. cent. 5. p. 399.
Nations, for two years and a half. For afterward he quitted that place, so
great was his employment under King Edward the second and third, in several
Embassies into Scotland and Ireland, flourishing anno 1334.

JOHN HORNBY was born in this Pitz. de Ang. Script. number. 636.
County, bred a Carmelite D. D. in Cambridge. In his time happened a tough
contest betwixt the Dominicans and Carmelites about Priority.

Plaintiff. Judges. Defendant. Dominican. Carmelite. John Stock (or Stake
rather, so sharp, and poinant his pen) left marks in the Backs of his
Adversaries. John Donwick the Chancellor, and the Doctors of the University.
John Hornby who by his preaching and writing did vindicate the seniority of his
Order.

But our Hornby with his Carmelites clearly carried away the Conquest of
precedence, and got it confirmed under the authentic seal of the University.

However, the Dominicans desisted not to justle with them for the upper hand
until Henry the Eight made them friends by thrusting both out of the Land. Our
Hornby flourished anno Domini 1374, and was buried at his Convent in Boston.

BOSTON of BURY, for so he is generally called. I shall endeavor to restore *
Bale de scrip. Brit. Cent. 7. n. 48. and Pits. in Anno 3410.
him first to his true name, then to his native country. Some presume Boston
to be his Christian, of Bury, his Surname. But seeing Boston is no Font-name,
and Godfathers were conscientious in those days (I appeal to all English
Antiquaries) in imposing if not Scripture or Saints names: yet such as were
commonly known (the christianizing of Sirnames to baptized Infants being of
more modern devise) we cannot concur with their judgment herein. And now thanks
be to Doctor John Caius, who in the Catalogue of his Authors cited in the
Defense of the Antiquity of Cambridge, calls him John Boston of Bury, being
born at and taking his Surname from Boston in this County (which was customary
for the Clergymen in those days) though he lived a Monk in Bury. Thus in point
of Nativities, Suffolk has not lost, but Lincolnshire has recovered a Writer
belonging unto it.

He Traveled all over England, and exactly perused the Library in all
Monastaries, whereby he was enabled to write a Catalogue of Ecclesiastical
Writers, as well Foreign as English extant in his age. Such his acuratness, as
not only to tell the Initiall words in Every of their Books, but also to point
at the place in each Library, where they are to be had. John Leland owes as
much to this John Boston, as John Bale does to him, and John Pits to them both.
His Manuscript was never Printed, nor was it my happiness to see it, but I have
often heard the late Reverend Archbishop of Armagh rejoice in this, that he
had, if not the first, the best Copy thereof in Europe. Learned Sir James WARE
transcribed these Verses out of it, which because they conduce to the clearing
of his Nativity, I have here Inserted, Requesting the Reader not to measure his
Prose by his Poetry, though he dedicated it to no meaner then Henry the fourth,
King of England.

Qui legis hunc Librum, Scriptorum, Rex Miserere,
Dum scripsit vere, non fecit, (ut aestimo) pigrum.
Si tibi displiceat, veniat tua Gratia grandis
Quam cunctis pandis, haec sibi sufficiat.
Scriptoris nomen Botolphi Villa vocatur;
Qui condemnatur nisi gratum det Deus Omen.
Sure it is, that his Writings are Esteemed the Rarity of Rarities, by the
lovers of Antiquitys, which I speak in Humble Advice to the Reader, if
possessed thereof to keep, and value them, if not, not to despise his Books, if
on any Reasonable price they may be procured. This John Boston flourished Anno
Dom. 1410.

LAURENCE HOLEBECK, was born says my Bale de Scrip. Brit. Cent. 7.
Author Apud Girvios, that is amongst the Fenlanders. I confess, such people
with their Stilts do stride over much ground, the parcells of several Shires,
Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridg, Huntington, Northampton, Lincolnshire, But I have
fixed him right in this County, where Holebeck is not far from Crowland in
Holland.

He was bred a Monk in the Abbey of Ramsey, and was very well skilled in the
Hebrew Tongue according to the rate of that Age. For the Englishmen were so
great strangers in that Language, that even the Priests amongst them, in the
Reign of King Henry the Eight, as In his Dialogue. Per Religi. Er.
Erasmus reports, Isti quicquid non intelligunt, Haebraicum vocant, counted
all things Hebrew, which they did not understand, and so they reputed a Tablet
which he wrote up in Walsingham in great Roman Letters, out of the Rode of
Common Cognizance. Holebeck made an Hebrew Dictionary, which was counted very
exact according to those days. I. Pitz, does heavyly complain of Robert
Wakefeild, (the first Hebrew Professor in Cambridg) that he purloined this
Dictionary to his private use, whereon all I will observe is this.

It is resolved in the Law, that the taking of another man's Sheep is Felony,
whilst the taking away of a Sheep-Pasture is but a Trespass, the party
pretending a right thereunto. Thus I know many men, so Conscientious, that they
will not take twenty lines together from any Author (without acknowledging it
in the Margin) conceiving it to be the fault of a Plagearie. Yet the same
Critics repute it no great guilt to seize a whole Manuscript, if they can
conveniently make themselves the Masters, though not Owners thereof, in which
Act none can excuse them, though we have had too many Precedents hereof. This
Laurence died Anno Dom. 1410.

BERTRAM FITZALIN. Finding him charactered Illustri Bale de Scrip. Briti Cent.
7. Number. 64.
stemmate oriundus, I should have suspected him a Sussex man and Allied to the
Earls of Arundell, had not Pitz de An. Script. Anno 1424.
another Author positively informed me he was patria Lincolniensis, bred B. D.
in Oxford, and then lived a Carmelite in the City of Lincoln. Here he built a
fair Library on his and his friends cost, and furnished it with books, some of
his own making, but more purchased. He lived well beloved, and dyed much
lamented the seventeenth of March, 1424.

Writers since the Reformation.
EDMUND SHEFFEILD (descended from Robert Sheffeild, Recorder of London, Stow's
Survey of London page 574.
Knighted by King Henry the Seventh. 1496 for his good Service against the
Rebels at Black Heath) was born at Butterwick in the Isle of Axholm in this
Country, and was by King Edward the sixth Created Baron thereof. Great his
Skill in Music who wrote a Book of Sonnets according to the Italian fashion.
He may seem Swan like to have sung his own Funeral, being soon after Slain (or
Murdered rather) in a skirmish against the Rebels in Norwich; first unhorsed
and cast into a ditch, and then Slaughtered by a Butcher, who denied him
Quarter, 1449. He was direct Anchester, to the hopeful Earl of Moulgrave.

PETER MORVVING was born in this Bale de scriptor. sui temporis.
County, and bred fellow of Magdalen College in Oxford. Here I cannot but smile
at the great Praise which De Angl. Script. page 757.
I Pitz bestows upon him.

Vir omni Latini sermonis elegantia belle instructus, and qui scripta quaedam,
tum versu, tum Prosa terse, nitideque composuisse perhibetur.

It plainly appears he mistook him for one of his own persuasion, and would
have retracted this Caracter, and beshrewed his own fingers for writing it, had
he known him to have been a most P. Morvinus, voluntarium in Germania Exilium,
turpi in (...) remansioni, praetulit. Dr. Humfred in vita Juelli. page 73.
Cordial Protestant. Nor would he have afforded him the Phrase of Claruit sub
Philippo et Maria; who under their Reigns, was forced for his Conscience, to
fly into Germany, where he supported himself by Preaching to the English
Exiles. I find not what became of him after his return into England in the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

ANTHONY GILBY was born in this County, I. Bale.
and bred in Christ's College in Cambridge, where he attained to great skill in
the three learned languages. But which gave him the greatest Reputation with
Protestants, was, that in the Reign of Queen Mary he had been an Exile at
Geneva, for his Conscience. Returning into England, he became a feirce, fiery
and furious opposer of the Church Discipline established in England, as in our
Ecclesiastical History may appear. The certain date of his death is to me
unknown.

JOHN FOX was born at Boston in this County, and bred Fellow in Magdalen
College in Oxford. He fled beyond the Seas in the Reign of Queen Mary, where he
set forth the first and least edition of the Book of Martyrs, in Latin, and
afterward returning into England, enlarged and twice revised the same in our
own language.

The story is sufficiently known of the two Invita Aesopi.
Servants, whereof the one told his Master, he would do every thing, the other
(which was even Esop himself,) said he could do nothing, rendering this reason,
because his former fellow servant would leave him nothing to do. But in good
earnest, as to the particular subject of our English Martyrs, Mr. Fox has done
every thing, (leaving posterity nothing to work upon) and to those who say, he
has overdone something, we have returned our answer In our Description of
Bark-shire, under the title of Confessors.
before.

He was one of Prodigious Charity to the poor, seeing nothing could bound his
bounty but want of money to give away: but I have largely written of his life
and death in my Church History.

THOMAS SPARKS D. D. was born at South So am I informed by his Grandchild and
Heir.
Sommercot in this County, bred in Oxford, and afterward became Minister of
Bleachley in Buckingham-shire. An Impropriation which the Lord Gray of Wilton
(whose dwelling was at Whaddon hard-by) Restored to the Church. He was a solid
Divine and Learned man, as by his Works still extant does appear. At first he
was a Nonconformist, and therefore was chosen by that party as one of their
Champions in the Conference of Hampton Court. Yet was he wholly silent in that
Disputation, not for any want of Ability, but because (as afterward it did
appear) he was Convinced in his Conscience at that Conference of the
lawfullness of Ceremonies, so that some accounted him King James's Convert
herein. He afterward set forth a book of Unity and Uniformity, and died about
the year of our Lord, 1610.

Doctor TIGHE was born at Deeping in this County, bred (as I take it) in the
University of Oxford. He afterward became Arch Deacon of Middlesex, and
Minister of Alhallowes Barking London. He was an excellent Textuary and
profound Linguist, the reason why he was employed by King James in translating
of the Bible. He dyed (as I am informed by his Nephew) Living at Tenterbury in
Kent.
about the year of our Lord, 1620. leaving to John Tighe his Son, of Carby in
this County, Esquire, an Estate of one thousand pounds a year, and none I hope
have cause to envy or repine thereat.

FINES MORISON Brother to Sir Richard Morison, Lord President of Munster, was
born in this County of worshipful extraction, and bred a fellow in Peter-house
in Cambridge. He began his Travels May the first, 1591 over a great part of
Christendom and no small share of Turkey, even to Jerusalem, and afterward
Printed his Observations in a large book, which for the truth thereof is in
good Reputation, For of so great a Traveller, he had nothing of a Traveller in
him, as to stretch in his reports. At last he was Secretary to Charles Blunt
Deputy of Ireland, saw and wrote the Conflicts with, and Conquest of Tyrone, a
discourse which deserves credit, because the Writers cye guide his pen, and
the privacy of his place acquainted him with many secret passages of
Importance. He dyed about the year of our Lord, 1614.

Benefactors to the Public.
Having formerly presented the Reader with two Eminent ones, Bishop Wainfleit
Founder of New College, and Bishop Fox, Founder of Corpus Christi in Oxford,
He, (if but of an ordinary appetite) will be plentifully feasted therewith, so
that we may proceed to those, who were,

Since the Reformation.
WILLIAM RATCLIFF, Esquire And four R. Butcher in his survey of Stamford. page 82.
times Alderman of the Town of Stamford, died Anno Dom. 1530. Gave all his
Messuages, Lands and Tenements in the Town, to the Maintenance of a Free School
therein, which Lands for the present yield thirty pounds per Annum or
there-abouts, to a Schoolmaster and Usher. I am informed that an Augmentation
was since given to their stipend by William Cecil, Lord Treasurer, but it seems
that since some Intervening accident has hindered it from taking the true
effect.

JANE CECIL, Wife to Richard Cecil, Esquire, and co-heire to the worshipful
Families of Camdens Eliz. in Anno 15.
Ekington and Wallcot, was born in this County, and lived the maine of her life
therein. Job speaking of parents deceased, His Sons (says he) Job. 14. 21.
come to honor, and he knows it not: but God gave this good woman so long a
life (abating but little of an hundred years) that she knew the preferment of
her Son William ^ecil, for many years in her life, Lord Treasurer of England. I
say, she knew it and saw it, and joyed at it, and was thankful to God for it;
for well may we conclude her gratitude to God from her Charity to man. At her
own charges, Anno 1561. She Leded and Richard Butcher in his Survey of
Stamford, page 33.
Paved the Friday Market Cross in Stamford: Besides fifty pound given to the
Poor, and many other Benefactions. Her last Will was made Anno Dom. 1588. But
she survived some time after, and lies buried in the same Vault with her Son,
in St. Martins in Stamford.

GEORGE TRIGG Gentleman, was as I collect a Native of this County, he AMP.
gave Anno Dom. 1586 four hundred pounds Idem, page 33. and 38.
to be lent out for ever, upon good security, without Interest, to Poor young
Trads-men and Artificers in Stamford. He also bestowed a Tenement upon the
Parson and Poor of St. John's in the same Town.

RICHARD SUTTON, Esquire, was born at Knaith in this County, bred a Soldier in
his Youth, and was somewhat of Play Master by his place, much money therefore
passing through, some did lawfully stick on his fingers, which became the
bottom of his future Estate. He was afterward a Merchant in London, and gained
great Wealth therein. Such who charge him with Purblindness in his soul,
looking too close on the earth, do themselves acquit him from Oppression, that
though Tenax, he was not Rapax, not Guilty of Covetousness, but Parcimony.

Indeed, there was a Merchant his Comrage; whose name I will Conceal (except
the great Estate he left does discover it) with whom he had Company in Common,
but their Charges were several to themselves, when his friend in Travel
called for two Faggots, Mr. Sutton called for one, when his friend for half a
pint of Wine, Mr. Sutton for a Gill, under-spending him a Moity; at last, Mr.
Sutton hearing of his friends death, and that he left but fifty thousand pounds
Estate. I thought (said ^e) he would dye no Rich man, who made such needless
expenses.

Indeed, Mr. Suttons Estate doubled his, and he bestowed it all on
CharterHouse, or Suttons Hospital. This is the Master-peice of Protestant
English Charity, designed in his life, Completed after his death; Begun,
Continued and finished with Buildings and Endowments, Sin^ Causa Socia, soly at
his Charges. Wherein Mr. Sutton appears peerless in all Christendom, on an
equal Standart and Valuation of Revenue. As for the Canker of Popish Malice
endeavoring to fret this fair Flower, we have returned plentiful Answers to
their Cavells in our Ecclesiastical History. Mr. Sutton died Anno Dom. 1611.

ROBERT JOHNSON was born at Stamford, whereof Maurice his Father had been
chief Magistrate. He was bred in Cambridge, and entering into the Ministry, he
was beneficed at Luffenham in Rutland, at what time that little County was at a
great loss for the education of the Children therein, and Mr. Johnson
endeavored a remedy thereof.

He had a rare faculty in requesting of others into his own desire, and with
his arguments could surprise a Miser into charity. He effectually moved those
of the Vicinage, to contribute to the building and endowing of Schools, Money
or Money worth Stones, Timber, Carriage, etc. not flighting the smalest gift,
especially, if proportionable to the Givers Estate. Hereby finding none, he
left as many Free Schools in Rutland, as there were Market Towns therein. One
at Oakeham, another at Uppingham well faced with buildings and lined with
endowments.

Hitherto he was only a Nurse to the Charity of others, erecting the Schools
aforesaid, as my Camd. Brit. in Rutland E stipe collaticia.
Author observes, who afterward proved a fruitful parent in his own person,
becoming a considerable Benefactor to Emanuel and Sidney Colleges in
Cambridge. And though never dignified higher then Archdeacon of Leicester, he
left an Estate of one thousand pounds per Annum, which descended to his
posterity. He dyed about the year of our Lord 1616.

FRANCES WRAY, Daughter to Sir Chichester Wray Lord chief Justice, was born at
Glentworth in this County and married first unto Sir George St. Paul of this
County, and afterward to Robert Rich first Earl of Warwick of that Surname.
She was a Pious Lady, much devoted to charitable actions, though I am not
perfectly instructed in the particulars of her Benefactions. Only I am sure
Magdalen College in Cambridge, has tasted largely of her Liberality, who dyed
in the beginning of the Reign of King Charles.

Memorable Persons.
JAMES YORK a Blacksmith of Lincoln, and an excellent Workman in his
Profession. Insomuch that if Pegasus himself would wear shoes, this man alone
is fit to make them, contriving them so thin and light, as that they would be
no burden to him. But he is a Servant as well of Apollo as Vulcan, turning his
Stiddy into a Study, having lately set forth a Book of Heraldry called the
Union of Honor, containing the Arms of the English Nobility, and the Gentry of
Lincolne-shire. And although there be some mistakes (no hand so steady as
always to hit the Nail on the head) yet is it of singular use and
industriously performed: being set forth Anno 1640.

Lord Majors.
Name. Father. Place. Company. Time. 1 John Stockton Richard Stockton Bratoft
Mercer 1470. 2 Nicholas Aldwin Richard Aldwin Spalding Mercer 1499. 3 William
Rennington Robert Rennington Bostone Fishmonger 1500. 4 William Forman William
Forman Gainsborough Haberdasher 1538. 5 Henry Hoberthorn Christ. Hoberthorn
Waddingworth Merchant-Tay. 1546. 6 Henry Amcoates William Amcoates Astrap
Fishmonger 1548. 7 John Langley Robert Langley Althrope Goldsmith 1576. 8 John
Allot Richard Allot Limbergh Fishmonger 1590. 9 Nicholas Raynton Robert Raynton
Highington Haberdasher 1632.

The Names of the Gentry of this County returned by the Commissioners in the
twelfth year of King Henry the sixth.
William Bishop of Lincoln. Commissioners. Lion de Wells Chivaler. Thomas
Meres. Knights of the Shire. Patricius Skipwith. Knights of the Shire.

Johannis Willoughby militis Roberti Ros militis Humfridi Littelbery armig.
Phillippi Tilney armigeri Johannis Copuldik armig. Richardi Laund armigeri
Willielmi Branch armig. Richardi Pynchebek Richardi Welby Richardi
Benynington Willielmi Goding de Boston Gilberti Haltoft Will. Hughbert de
Doning. Will. Quadring de Tofte Johan. Pawlyn de Frampton Will. VValcote de
Spaldyng Thom. Overton de Swynshed Hug. Dandison de VVrangle Roberti Hughson de
Boston Rich. Whiteb. de Gosberkirk Ioh. Docking de VVhaploade Will. Calowe de
Holbetch Will. ^awode de Whaploade Nich. Gyomer de Sutton de Holand Godf.
Hilton Militis Iohannis Busshe militis Nicholai Bowel militis Philippi Dymmok
militis Iohannis Gra Militis Iohannis Pygot armigeri Iohannis Boys armigeri
Galfridi Painell armigeri Maunceri Marmeon armig. Willielmi Eton armigeri
Iohannis Markham Iohannis Trenthall Gent. Thom. Holme Gent. Ioh. Saltby de
Gunwardby Thomae Repynghale Iohannis Hesill de Carleton Iohannis Leek de
Grantham Will. Mapulbeck de Cranth. Ioh. Chevercourt de Stannf. Nich. Mason de
Blankeney Ioh. Chapeleyn de Sleford Thomae Sleford de Kirkeby Ioh. Hardyng de
Kime Ioh. Wykes armigeri de Kisteven Hugonis Midleton militis Rogeri Wentworth
armigeri Roberti Auncell de Grymesby Willielmi Bleseby de Bleseby Thomae Fereby
de Burten Iohannis Ufflete de Halton Iohannis Thoresby de Croxby Andreae
Godehand de Whalesby Iohannis Tomlinson de Wotton Roberti Morley armigeri
Iohannis Abbot de Hatclif Iohannis Smith de Elkington Abbatis de Neusom
Iohannis Teleby Canonici ejusdem Abbatis Iohannis Cawode de Oxeomb Iohannis
Langton de Somercotes William Marshall de Somercotes Roberti Pigot do parva
Grymesby Thomae Spaldyng de Claxby Ioh. Hamond Parsone de Whalesby Iohannis
Boucher de Tynton Richardi Alesby de Hatclif clerici Rogeri Glaston parsone de
Alesby Roberti Lackwode de VVhalesby Iohannis Nundye de VVhalesby Chapellani.
Sheriffs of Lincolne-Shire.
HEN. II.
Anno, 1 Rainerus de Bada Anno, 2 Jordanus de Blossevilla Anno, 3 Walterus de
Amundevel, for seven years Anno, 10 Petrus de Gossa Anno, 11 Idem Anno, 12
Willielmus de Insula Anno, 13 Aluredus de Poiltona Anno, 14 Philippus de Kime
Anno, 15 Idem Anno, 16 Walterus de Grimesby Anno, 17 Idem Anno, 18 Walt. and
Al. de Poilton Anno, 19 Walt. and Al. de Poilton Anno, 20 Idem Anno, 21 Idem
Anno, 22 Drogo Filius Radulphi Anno, 23 Idem Anno, 24 Will. Basset for 7 years
Anno, 31 Nigel. Fillius Alexandri Anno, 32 Idem Anno, 33 Idem
RICH. I.
Anno, 1 Nigellus Filius Alex. Anno, 2 Gerardus de Camvill Roger. de Stikewald
Anno, 3 Gerardus de Camvill Anno, 4 Gerard. and Roger Stikelralde. Anno, 5 Idem
Anno, 6 Gerardus and Eustacius de Hedenham Anno, 7 Simond Kimmeo and Petrus de
Trihanton Anno, 8 Sim. de Kime and Pet^us de Beckering et Robertus de Trihanton
Anno, 9 Idem Anno, 10 Philip. Filius Roberti
JOH. REX.
Anno, 1 Robertus de Tateshall Anno, 2 Ger. de Cemvill and Hugo Fillius Ricardi
for six years Anno, 8 Thomas de Muleton Anno, 9 Idem Anno, 10 Idem Anno, 11
Huber. de Burgo and Alex. Ormesby (ut Custos) Anno, 12 Huber. Alex. (ut Custos)
Anno, 13 Hubertus de Burozo and Robertus de Aoziulver Anno, 14 Hub. de Burozo
et Rob. Aquilum Anno, 15 Hubertus de Burgo and Rob. Aquilum Alex. de Puncton
Anno, 16 Idem Anno, 17 Johannis Marescallus.
HEN. III.
Auno, 1 Willi. Comes Saresb. and Willi. Filius Warner. Auno, 2 Willi. Comes
Sarisb. and Johan. Bonet for five years Auno, 7 Steph. de Segne and Radulphus
Filius Regin. Auno, 8 Idem Auno, 9 Hugo Lincoln Episcopus and Rad. Filius
Regin. Auno, 10 Hugo Episcop. and Rad. Auno, 11 Radulp. Filius Regin. Auno, 12
Idem Auno, 13 Idem Auno, 14 Robertus de Rokefeld Auno, 15 Walt. de Cuerame and
Willielmus de Curum Auno, 16 Walt. and Willielmus Auno, 17 Phil. de Ascellus
Auno, 18 Philippus Auno, 19 Philippus Auno, 20 Philippus Auno, 21 Robertus
Lupus, for four years Auno, 25 Radulphus Basset for 5 years Auno, 30 Willielmus
de Derleg Auno, 31 Willi. Filius de Curzim for five years Auno, 36 Gilbertus de
Cheile for four years Auno, 40 Roger. Beler and Roger. and Haeres Ejusdem Auno,
41 Williel. de Leverton Auno, 42 Joh. de Cockerington. Auno, 43 Will. de
Angleby, and Williel. de Notingham. Auno, 44 Hamo Hauteyn Auno, 45 Idem Auno,
46 Willielmus de Gray Auno, 47 Idem Auno, 48 Idem Auno, 49 Will. and Rich. de
Gray, Fill. ejus haeres, et Will. de Notingham Clericus Auno, 50 Will. and Rich.
Will. and Ja. Panton Auno, 51 Idem Auno, 52 Jacobus Panton for four years Auno,
56 Tho. de Bolton
EDW. I.
Anno, 1 Thomas Anno, 2 Thomas Anno, 3 Richardus de Harington Anno, 4 Nicholaus
de Rye Anno, 5 Idem Anno, 6 Idem Anno, 7 Adamus de Sancto Laudo Anno, 8 Idem
Anno, 9 Idem Anno, 10 Radulphus de Arnehall Anno, 11 Rad. de Arnehall, and
Walt. de Stuchesle Anno, 12 Idem Anno, 13 Idem Anno, 14 Robertus de Cadworth
for five years Anno, 19 Johan. Dyne Anno, 20 Idem Anno, 21 Johan. and Radulphus
de Trihampton Anno, 22 Robertus le Venur. for four years Anno, 26 Rad. de
Paynell et Rich. de Draycot Anno, 27 Idem Anno, 28 Ricardus de Howell Anno, 29
Hugo de Bussey Anno, 30 Idem Anno, 31 Tho. Fill. Eustarchi Anno, 32 Idem and
Johan. Nevill Anno, 33 Thom. de Burnham for five years.
EDW. II.
Anno, 1 Radulphus Paynell Anno, 2 Idem Anno, 3 Thom. de Burnham Anno, 4 Johan.
de Nevill and Rad. de Rye Anno, 5 Idem Anno, 6 Johannes Anno, 7 Johannes Anno,
8 Tho de Tittele, and Joh. de Nevill Anno, 9 Idem Anno, 10 Johan. de Nevill,
and Robertus Stannton. Anno, 11 Robertus de Stannton Anno, 12 Robertus and
Simon de Landerthorpe Anno, 13 Johan. de Bella fide for four years Anno, 17
Simon le Chamberlain Anno, 18 Simon and Riginaldus Donington Anno, 19 Idem
EDW. III.
Anno, 1 Tho. de Novo Mercato Anno, 2 Simon Kinardsley Anno, 3 Tho. de Novo
Mercato Anno, 4 Tho. de Novo Mercato Anno, 5 Rad. de Santo Laudo and Tho. de
novo Mer. Anno, 6 Reginal de Donington, and Rad. de Santo Laudo Anno, 7 Idem
Anno, 8 Johan de Trehampton Anno, 9 Idem Anno, 10 Rad. de Santo Laudo and
Regin. de Donington Anno, 11 Johan. de Bolingbroke, and Joh. de Trehampton
Anno, 12 Gilbertus de Beaved Anno, 13 Idem Anno, 14 Willielmus Disney, and
Gilbertus de Leddred Anno, 15 Idem Anno, 16 Willielmus Franuke Anno, 17
Johannes de Hundon Anno, 18 Saierus de Rochford Anno, 19 Idem Anno, 20 Johan.
de Trehampton Anno, 21 Idem Anno, 22 Anno, 23 Saierus de Rochford, for six
years Anno, 29 Tho. Fulvetby and Sajerus de Rochf, for 4 years Anno, 33 Edw. de
Cormil. Anno, 34 Idem Anno, 35 Johan. de Boys Anno, 36 Idem Anno, 37 Will.
Haudley for 6 years Anno, 43 Tho. de Fulvetby for four years Anno, 47
Willielmus Bussy Anno, 48 Johannes Hode Anno, 49 Tho. de Kidale Anno, 50
Kogerus Beler Anno, 51 Radulphus Paynell
Sheriffs.
Name. Place. Arms. RICHARD. II. Anno, 1 Thom. de Kydale Ferribie Sable, a
Saltyr Raguled Argent. 2 Will. de Spaygne 3 Johann. Ponger 4 Tho. Thimorby
Irenham Arg. 3 Pallets, and 4 Mullets in Bend S. 5 Will. de Belesby Bele^bye
Ar^a Chev. 'twix^ 3 steel Gads. S 6 Johannes Pong^r 7 Johannes Bussy Hather
Argent 3 Bars Sable. 8 Williel. Spaygne 9 Johannes Bussy ut prius 10 Philip. de
Tilney Boston Ar. a Cheveron 'twixt 3 Griffins h^ads erased Gules. 11 Will. de
Belesby ut prius 12 Anketin. M^llore 13 Walter. Taylboys Arg. a Cross Salt. and
chief G on the last, 3 Escallops of the first. 14 Johannes Bussy ut prius 15
Johann. Rochford Quarterly O^ and G. 12 Bezants on a Border Sable. 16 Henr. de
Recford 17 Joh. Cupuldicke Haringto^ Ar. a Chapter 'twixt 3 Croses. crossed G. 18
Johann. Skipwith Or^sbye A^g. 3 bars G. in chief a Greyh^und cursant Sable. 19
Johann. VValch Grimsbye G. 2 bars Gemelles a bend Arg. 20 Rogerus Wel^y S. a
Fess 'twixt 3 Flour de L. Ar. 21 Henricus. Bidford and Joh. Litelbury, m. Ar. 2
Lions P^ssant Gardant, G. HEN. 4. Anno, 1 Jo. Cobeldikes, m. ut prius 2 John
Rochford, m. and Tho. Swynford. ut prius 3 Ger. Soi^hil, mil. Redborne G. an
Eagle displayed Argent. 4 T. Wilough^y, m. Eresby Az. a Fret of eight Pieces,
Or* 5 6 Thomas Hanlay 7 Henr. Redford, m. 8 Rad. Rochford, m. ut prius 9 T.
Chauworth, m. Azure, two Chevtrons, Or. 10 Johan. Rochford ut prius 11 Joh. de
Waterton Waterton Barry of 6. Ermin and Gules 3. Cressants Sable. 12 Rob.
Waterton, ut prius HEN. 5. Anno, 1 Thomas Clarell 2 Robertus Hilton Arg. 2 bars
Az. over all a Flour de Luce, Or. 3 T. Cumberworth, m Cumberw. 4 Nicholas
Tournay Cainby Arg. a Chev. 'twixt 3 Bulls passant, Sable, Armed, Or. 5 Joh.
Normanvile 6 Thom. Chaworth ut prius 7 Rich. Haunsard S. Kelsey Gules, three
Mullets Argent. 8 Robertus Roos Melton G. three Water-bougets Argent. 9 Rob.
and Tho. Clarel HEN. 6. Anno, 1 Wall. Talboyes, m. ut prius 2 Johann. Haytfeld 3
Robertus Hilliard 4 Johannis Talboys ut prius 5 Will. Cupuldicke ut prius 6
Henricus Retsord 7 Hamo Sutton Willought Argent a Quarter Sable, a Crescent
Gules. 8 Will. Rither, mil. 9 T. Cumberworth, m 10 Rob. Roos, miles ut prius 11
Johan. Pigott, ar. Dodin^to^ Sable three Pickaxes Argent. 12 Tho. Darcy, arm.
Norton Az. crusuly 3 Cinque soiles Arg. 13 Johan. Cunstable Halsham Quarterly
G. and Vaire a bend, O 14 Robert. Roos, m. ut prius 15 Thom. Meres, ar. Kirton
Gules a Fesse 'twixt 3 Waterbougets Ermin. 16 Philippus Tilney, ut prius 17 H.
Willoughby, m. ut prius 18 Johannes Nevil AMP. 19 Nichol. Bower, m. 20 Rog.
Pedwardyn Burt. Ped. 21 Johannes Sothil ut prius 22 Thomas Moigne Sab. a Fess
Dancette, betwixt 6. Annulets Or. 23 24 Johan. Harington Argent a Fret Sable.
25 Thomas Meres ut prius 26 Nicholaus. Bowet 27 Manc. Marmyon, m Scrivelby
Varry Az. and Arg. a Bend G. 28 Brian. Stapleton Arg. a Lion Rampant Sable. 29
Will. Rither, mil. 30 Nich. Bowet, m. 31 Johannes Nevil ut prius 32 Rich.
Waterton ut prius 33 Hen. Retford, m. 34 Joh. Tempest, m. Arg. a Bend 'twixt 6.
Martlets S. 35 Ioh. Harington, a. utprius 36 Ric. Waterton, a. ut prius 37 W.
Skipwith, mil. ut prius 38 Joh. Marmyon, a. ut prius EDW. 4. Anno, 1 John
Burgh, arm. Gainsbor. Az. 3. Flower de Luces Ermin. 2 Tho. Blound, ar. 3 4
VVil. Skipwith, m. ut prius 5 Brian. Stapleton, m ut prius 6 Joh. Wichcote, a.
Harpswell Ermin, two Boares Gules. 7 Rob. Cunstable, m ut prius 8 Thomas Meres
ut prius 9 Ri. Fitz Williams, m Maple-th. Lozengee Argent and Gules. 10 Rich.
Tempest, m. ut prius 11 Richard. Welby ut prius 12 L. Thornburgh, a. 13 Thomas
Kyme Freisney G. a Cheveron betwixt 9 Crosses crossed Or. 14 Joh. Villers, arm.
Leicest. sh. A. on a Cross G. 5 Escallops, Or. 15 Th. Wimbech, ar. 16 Rob.
Markham, m Sidebroke. Az. in Chief Or, a Lion Issuant G. and Border Argent. 17
Tho. Bolles, arm. Haugh. Az. 3 Cups Arg. holding as many Boars Heads Erected,
Or. 18 Willielm. Brown AMP. 19 Tho. Tempest, ar. ut prius 20 Joh. Bushy, mil.
ut prius 21 Rob. Talboys, m. ut prius 22 Will. Tirwhit, ar. Kettleby Gules, 3
Puits, Or. RICH. III. Anno, 1 Thomas Knight 2 Rob. Dymock, m. Sable 2 Lions
passant Guardant Argent crowned, Or. 3 Thomas Meres. ut prius HENRIC. VII.
Anno, 1 Thom. Pinchbeck 2 Brian. Standford 3 Johan. Copuldick ut prius 4 Tho.
Tempest, m. ut prius 5 Oliv. St. John, m. Arg. on a chief G. 2 M^llets, Or,
peirced. 6 H. Willoughby, m. ut prius 7 Thomas VVelby ut prius 8 Johan.
Skipwith, ut prius 9 Johan. Husee. Sleford Or, a Plain cross Vert. 10 VV.
Shiriolli, m. 11 Georg. Taylboys, ut prius 12 Mance. Marmyon ut prius 13 Tho.
Knight, ar. 14 Th. Dalaland, m. Ashbi^. 15 Will. Ascue, ar. Kelsey. S. a Fesse
O. betwixt 3 Asses, pass. Argent, Main'd of the second. 16 Will Tirwhit, m ut
prius 17 H. Willoughby, m ut prius 18 Rob. Dimmock, m ut prius 19 Leon. Percy,
arm. Or. a Lion Rampant Azure. 20 Will. Ascu, mil. ut prius 21 Milo Bushy,
mil. ut prius 22 Rob. Sutton, arm. ut prius 23 24 Will. Ascugh, m. ut pr^us
HEN. VIII. Anno, 1 Rob. Dymock, m. ut prius 2 Thomas Parr, m. Northam. Argent,
2 Bars Azure a Border engrailed Sable. 3 Edw. Guldeford, a. KENT. Or, a Saltyr
enter 4 Martlets Sable. 4 Tho. Cheyne, mil. 5 Mar. Constab. j. m. ut prius 6 G.
Fitz williams, a. ut prius 7 Leo. Dymmock, m. ut prius 8 Will. Hansard, m. ut
prius 9 Will, ^rwhi, m. ut prius 10 Th. Burgh, jun. m. ut prius 11 Rob.
Tirwhit, m. (...) prius 12 Will. ^skue, mil. ut prius 13 Franc. ^rown, ar. 14
Andr. Billesby, m ut prius 15 Rob. Tirwhit, m. ut prius 16 Thom. Burgh, m. ut
prius 17 Gilb. Taylboy^, m ut prius 18 Will. Skipwith, a. ut prius 19 Th.
Portington, a. 20 G. Fitz williams, a ut prius 21 Andr. B^esby, m. ut prius 22
Will. Hussy, m. ut prius 23 Will. Disney, ar. Nort. D s. Argent on a Fesse* G.
3 Flower de Lucies, Or. 24 Joh. Markham, m. ut prius 25 G Fi zwilliam^, m ut
prius 26 Joh. Goodrick, ar. Argent on a Fesse Gules, 'twixt 2 Lions passant
Guardant S. a Flower de Luce 'tween 2 cressants, Or. 27 Edw. Dymock, 2. utprius
28 Will. Titwhit, m. ut prius 29 Jo. Harrington, m ut prius 30 W. Newenham, m
31 Will. Sandon, m. Or, a Chief Azure. 32 Rob. Tirwhit, m. ut prius 33 Tho.
Dymock, ar. ut prius 34 Rob. Hussy, mil. ut prius 35 Will. Sandon, ar. ut
prius 36 Franc. Ascugh, m. ut prius 37 Will. Dallison, ar. Laugh^on. G. 3
Cressants Or, a Cant. E^m. 38 Andr. Nowel, ar. Or, Fretly Gules, a Canton Erm.
EDW. VI. Anno, 1 Edw. Dymock, m. ut prius 2 John Copledick, m. ut prius 3 Fran.
Ayscough, m. ut prius 4 Richard. Bolles, (...). ut prius 5 Ric. Thimolby m. ut
prius 6 Will. Skipwith, m. ut prius R. Phil. and Mar. Reg. Anno, 1 Fran.
Ascough, m. and W. Mounson, ar. ut prius S. Carlton Or, 2 Cheverons, Gules. 2
and 3 E. Dymock, m. ut prius 3 and 4 Nic. Disney, a. ut prius 4 and 5 T.
Li^lebery, a. ut prius 5 and 6 W. Thorold, a. Blanc^ney Sab. 3 Goats Salient
Argent. ELIZAB. Reg. Anno, 1 Rob. Tirwhit, mil. ut prius 2 Ric. Thimolby, m. ut
prius 3 Rich. Welby, arm. ut prius 4 Adlerdus VVelby, a ut prius 5 VVil.
Skipwith, m. ut prius 6 Rich. Berty, arm. Grimsthorp. Arg. 3 Battering Rams in
Pale barry Az. armed and garnished O. 7 Tho. St. Pole, arm. Snarsord. Arg. a
Lion Rampant bica^de Gules, crowned Or. 8 Rich. Disney, arm. ut prius 9 Joh.
Copledick, ar. ut prius 10 Johan. Carr, arm. Sleford. G. on a Ch* veron Arg. 3
Mullets Sable. 11 Rich. Bolles, arm. ut prius 12 Tho. Quadring, a. Erm. a Fesse
engrailed Gules. 13 Anthon. Tharold, ut prius 14 VVil. Hunston, a. Sable 4
Fusils, Ermin a Border Engrailed Argent. 15 Rob. Savill, arm. Arg. on a Bend S.
3 Owls of the 1. 16 Andr. Gedney, a. B. Enderb. Argent. 2 Luc^es Salt^ways Az.
17 VVil. Metham, a. Bulling* ^. Quaterly Az. and Arg. on the first a F^owe de
^ce Or. 18 G. Hennage, ar. Haynton. Or, a Greyhound current S. 'twixt 3
Leopards Heads Az. a board. G 19 Joh. Mounson, ar. ut prius 20 Franc. Manby, a.
Elsham. Arg. a Lion Ramp. S. in an O^le of Escallops G. 21 Tho. St. Pole, ar.
ut prius 22 W. Fitzwilliams, a* ut prius 23 Rob. Carr, jun. a. ut prius 24
Daniel Disney, a. ut prius 25 Edw. Tirwhit, ar. ut prius 26 Edw. Dymock, m. ut
prius 27 VVil. Hennage, a ut prius 28 Barth. Armyn, ar. Osgodbie. Erm a Saltyre
engrailed G. on a chief of the second, a Lion pas. O. 29 Edw. Ascough, a. ut
prius 30 G^o. St. Pole, ar. ut prius 31 Joh. Markham, a. ut prius 32 Johan.
Savile, ar. Dod^ngto^. Arg. on a Bend S. 3 Owls of the 1. 33 Carolus Huss* y,
a. ut prius 34 Nic. Sanderson, a. Filling^a^. Pally of 6. Arg. and Az. on a
Bend Sable 3 Anulets Or. 35 Valent. Brown, ar Croft. 36 Will. VVr^y, ar.
Glentwor. Azure on a chief Or. 3 Martlets Gules. 37 Phi^ip. Tirwhit, a. ut
prius 38 Johan. Meres, ar. ut prius 39 Tho. Mounson, m. ut prius 40 VV.
Hennage, m. ut prius 41 Rob. ^rwhit, ar ut prius 42 Th. Grantham, a. Goltho.
Ermin a Crisfin sergreant his Tail nowed G. 43 Rog. Dallison, ar. ut prius 44
Will. Pelham, a. and Will. Armyn, m. Broklesbie ut prius Az. 3 Pellicans
Argent. JACOB. Rex. Anno, 1 Will. Armyn, m. ut prius 2 Edw. Marbury, m.
Girsby. Arg. on a Fesse engrailed Az. 3 Garbs, O. 3 Rich. Amcots, mil. Arg. a
Castle twixt 3 Cups covered Azure. 4 Will. VVelby, m. ut prius 5 Gerv.
Helwish, m. Wortetly. Or a Fesse Azure and Bend Gules. 6 Rich. Ogle, miles
Pinchbeck Arg. a Fesse 'twixt two Cressants Jess. and as many Flower de L. G. 7
Johan. Read, m. VVrangle G. on a Bend Arg. 3 shovelers S. Beaked, Or. 8 Joh.
Hatcher, m. Carebye. 9 Rob. Ti^whit, arm. Camerin. ut prius. 10 Joh. Langton,
m. Langton. Quarterly Sab. and O. a Bend Ar. 11 Nic. Sanderson, m ut prius 12
Ed. Carr, m* and b. ut prius 13 Joha. Thorold, m. ut prius 14 Franc. South,
mil. Kelstern. Arg. 2 Bars G. in cheis a Mull. S. 15 Anth. Thorold, a. ut prius
16 Edwar. Huss* y* m. ut prius 17 Joh. Buck, miles Hanby Barry Bendy O. and Az.
a Cant. Er. 18 Tho. Tailor, ar. Dodingto^. 19 Ric. Hickson, ar. Ropsley. 20
Geo. Southco^, m. Bliburgh. 21 Tho. Midlecot, m. Boston 22 Will. Lister, ar.
Coleby. Erm. on a Fesse S. 3 Mullets Arg. CAROLUS I. Anno, 1 Jo. Wray, m. and
b. ut prius 2 Johan. Bolles, ar. Scampton ut prius with a Flower de Luce for
difference. 3 Jac. Brampton, ar. Touse. 4 Geor. Hennage, m. ut prius 5 VVil.
Armyn, bar. ut prius 6 Dan* Deligne, m. Harlaxon. Or, a B^nd Gules a chief
Checky Argent and Azure. 7 Edw. Ascough, m. ut prius 8 VV. Thorold, m. ut prius
9 Jervas. Scroop, m. Cokering- A^ure a Bend Or. 10 VV. Nor^o^, m. and b ton. 11
VVil. Pelham, m. ut prius 12 Edw. Hussy, mil. ut prius 13 Anthonius Irby, m
Boston. Arg. a Fret of 8. pieces S. on a Canton G. a Chaplet O. 14 Tho.
Grantham, a. ut prius 15 Joh. Brownlew, a. Belton. O. an Escocheon, and Orle of
Martlets Sable. 16 Tho. Trollop, a. Vert 3 Bucks pas. Arg. mained and unguled
O. a border Argent. 20 Thoma Lister, ar. ut prius 22 Joh. Hobson, ar. Sab. a
Cinquefoi^ Arg. a chief checquy O. and Az.

RICHARD the Second.
19. JOHN WALCH.]

Proportion of time and place, evidence him the same person, of whom I read, in
the Eighth year of the Reign of this King, anno 1385* Stows chron. On St.
Andrews day, there was a combat fought in the Lists at Westminster, betwixt an
English Esquire named John Walch of Grimesby, and one of Navar, called Mortileto de
Vilenos, who had accused him of Treason to the King and Realm. In which combat
the Navarois was overcome, and afterward hanged for his false accusation.

HENRY the Fourth.
2. JOHN ROCHFORD Miles.]

The same no doubt with him who was Sheriff in the 15. of K. Richard the
Second. I confess there was a Knightly Family of this Camd. Brit. in Essex.
Name at Rochford in Essex, who gave for their Arms Argent, a Lion Rampant
Sable, langued, armed and crowned Gules; quartered at this day by the Lord
Rochford Earl of Dover, by the Butlers and Bollons descended from them. But I
behold this Lincolnshire Knight, of another Family, and different Arms,
quartered by the Earl of Moulgrave, whence I collect his heir matched into that
Family.

Consent of time and other circumstances, argue him the same with Sir John
Rochford, whom De scrip. Brit. Cent. 7. n. 41.
Bale makes to flourish under King Henry the Fourth, commending him for his
noble birth, great learning, large travail through France and Italy, and worthy
pains in translating Josephus his Antiquities, Polychronicon, and other good
Authors into English.

RICHARD the Third.
2. RO^ERT DIMOCK Miles.]

This Sir Robert Dimock at the Coronation of King Henry the Seventh, came on
horse back into Westminster Hall, where the King dined, and casting his
Gauntlet on the Ground, challenged any who durst Question the Kings right to
the Crown.

King Henry being pleased to dissemble himself a stranger to that Ceremony,
demanded of a stander by, what that Knight said? to whom the party returned, He
challenges any man to fight with him, who dares deny your Highness to be the
lawful K. of England. If he will not fight with such a one (said the King) I
will. And so sat down to dinner.

HENRY the Seventh.
9. JOHN HUSEE.]

This was undoubtedly the same person, whom King Henry the Eigth afterward
created, the first and last Baron Husee of Sleford, who engaging himself
against the King, with the rebellious Commons, anno 1537, was justly beheaded,
and saw that honor begun and ended in his own person.

HENRY the Eighth.
16. THOMAS BURGE Miles.]

He was honorably descended from the Heir General of the Lord Cobham of
Sterbury in Camd. Brit. in Surry.
Surry, and was few years after created Baron Burge, or Burough by King Henry
the Eigth. His Grandchild Thomas Lord Burge Deputy of Ireland, and Knight of
the Garter, (of whom In this Shire Title Statesmen.
before) left no Issue Male nor plentiful Estate, only four Daughters,
Elizabeth married to Sir George Brook, Frances to the ancient Family of
Copinger in Suffolk, Anna, Wife to Sir Drue Drury, and Katharine married
to..... Knivet of Norfolk, Mother to Sir John Knivet Knight of the Bath, at the
last Installment, so that the honor which could not conveniently be divided,
was here determined.

King CHARLES.
9. JERVASIUS SCROOP Miles.]

He engaged with his Majesty in Edge-hill-fight, where he received twenty six
wounds, and was left on the ground amongst the dead. Next day his Son Adrian
obtained leave from the King to find and fetch off his Fathers Corpse, and his
hopes pretended no higher then to a decent Interment thereof.

Hearty seeking makes happy finding. Indeed, some more commendedthe affection,
than the judgment of the Young Gentleman, conceiving such a search in vain,
amongst many naked bodies, with wounds disguised from themselves, and where
pale Death had confounded all complexions together.

However he having some general hint of the place where his Father fell, did
light upon his body, which had some heat left therein. This heat was with
rubbing, within few Minutes, improved into motion; that motion, within some
hours into sense; that sense, within a day into speech; that speech within
certain Weeks, into a perfect recovery, living more then ten years after, a
Monument of Gods mercy and his Sons affection.

He always after carried his Arm in a Scarf, and loss of blood made him look
very pale, as a Messenger come from the Grave, to advise the Living to prepare
for Death. The effect of his Story, I received from his own mouth, in
Lincolne-colledge.

The Farewell.
It is vain to wish the same Success to every Husband man in this Shire, as he
had, who some seven score years since at Harlaxton in this County, found an
Helmet of Gold as he was Plowing in the Field.

Besides, in Treasure Trove, the least share falls to him who first finds it.
But this I not only heartily wish, but certainly promise to all such who
industriously attend Tillage in this County (or else where) that thereby they
shall find (though not gold in specie, yet) what is gold worth, and may quickly
be commuted into it, great plenty of good grain, the same which Prove. 28. 19.
Solomon foretold, He that tilleth his Land shall have Plenty of Bread.

IT is in effect but the Suburbs at large of London, replenished with the
retyring houses of the Gentry and Citizens thereof, besides many Palaces of
Noblemen, and three [lately] Royal Mansions. Wherefore much measure cannot be
expected of so fine ware; The cause why this County is so small, scarce
extending East and West to 18 miles in length, and not exceeding North and
South 12 in the breadth thereof.

It has Hertford-shire on the North, Buckingham-shire on the West, Essex
parted with Ley on the East, Kent and Surrey (severed by the Thames) on the
South. The air generally is most healtful, especially about High-Gate, where
the expert Inhabitants report, that diverse that have been long visited with
sickness, not John Norden Speculum Brit. page 22.
curable by Physic, have in short time recovered, by that sweet salutary air.

Natural Commodities.
Wheat.
The best in England grows in the Vale lying South of Harrow-the-Hill nigh
Hessen, (where providence for the present has fixed my habitation) so that the
Camdens Brit. in Middlesex.
Kings bread was formerly made of the fine flower thereof.

Hence it was, that Queen Elizabeth received no Composition money from the
Villages thereabouts, but took her Wheat in kind for her own Pastry and
Bake-house.

There is an obscure Village hereabouts called Perivale, which my Norden in his
spec. Brit. page 11.
Author will have more truly termed Purevale (an Honor I assure you unknown to
the Inhabitants thereof) because of the cleerness of the Corn growing therein,
though the Purity thereof is much subject to be humbled with the Mildew,
whereof In the Farewell to this County.
hereafter.

Tamarisk.
It has not more affinity in sound with Tamarind, then sympathy in extraction
(both originally Arabic) general similitude, in leaves and operation, only
Tamarind in England is an annual, (dying at the approach of Winter) whilst
Tamarisk lasts many years. It was first brought over by Bishop Grindal out of
Switzerland (where he was exile under Queen Mary) and planted in his Garden at
Fulham in this County, where the soil being moist and Fenny, well complied
with the nature of this Plant, which since is removed, and thriveth well in
many other places. Yet it grows not up to be Timber, as in Arabia, though
often to that substance that Cups of great size are made thereof; Dioscorides,
says, it is good for the Toothache, (as what is not, and yet indeed what is
good for it?) but it is especially used for mollifying the hardness, and
opening the stopping of the Belly.

Manufactures.
Leather.
This, though common to all Counties, is entered under the Manufactures of
Middlesex, because London therein, is the Staple-place of Slaughter; and the
Hides of beasts there bought, are generally tanned about Enfield in this County.

A word of the antiquity and usefulness of this commodity. Adams first suit was
of leaves, his second of Leather. Hereof Girdles, Shoes, and many utensils (not
to speak of whole houses of Leather, I mean Coaches) are made. Yea, I have read
how Frederick the second Emperor of Germany, distressed to pay his Army, made
Monetam Coriaceam, Coin of Leather, making it current by his Proclamation, and
afterward when his Soldiers repayed it into his Exchequer, they received so
much silver in lieu thereof.

Many good-laws are made (and still one wanting to enforce the keeping of them)
for the making of this Merchantable commodity, and yet still much unsaleable
leather is sold in our Markets.

The Lord Treasurer Barleigh (who always consulted Artificers in their own Art)
was indoctrinated by a Cobbler in the true Tanning of Leather: This Cobbler
taking a slice of Bread, tosted it by degrees at some distance from the fire,
turning many times till it became brown and hard on both sides. This my Lord
(says he) we good Fellows call a Tanned Tossed, done so well that it will last
many mornings draughts, and Leather thus leisurely tanned and turned many times
in the Fat, will prove serviceable, which otherwise will quickly fleet and rag
out. And although that great Statesman caused Statutes to be made according to
his instructions, complaints in this kind daily continue and increase. Surely
were all of that Occupation as honest as Simon the Tanner (the entertainer of
Simon Peter in Joppa) they would be more conscientious in their calling. Let me
add, what experience avoweth true, though it be hard to assign the true cause
thereof, that when Wheat is dear, Leather always is cheap, and when Leather is
dear then Wheat is cheap.

The Buildings.
HAMPTON COURT was built by that pompous Prelate. Cardinal Woolsey, one so
magnificent in his expenses, that whosoever considers either of these three,
would admire that he had any thing for the other two left unto him, viz.

His
House-building. Housekeeping. House-furnishing.
He bestowed it on King Henry the eight, who for the greater grace thereof,
erected it (Princes can conferr dignities on Houses as well as persons) to be
an honor, increasing it with buildings till it became more like a small City,
than a House. Now whereas other royal Palaces ( Holdenby, Oatlands, Richmond,
Theobalds) have lately found their fatal period, Hampton Court has a happiness
to continue in its former estate.

Non equidem invideo, miror magis, undique totis
Usque adeo spoliatur agris.
I envy not, its happy lot, but rather thereat wonder;
There Is such a rout, our Land throughout, of Palaces by Plunder.
Let me add, that Henry the Eight enforrested the grounds hereabouts (the last
of that kind in England) though they never attained the full reputation of a
Forest, in common discourse.

OSTERLY HOUSE (now Sir William Wallers) must not be forgotten, built in a Park
by Sir Thomas Gresham, who here magnificently entertained and lodged Queen
Elizabeth. Her Majesty found fault with the Court of this House as too great,
affirming, That it would appear more handsome, if divided with a Wall in the
middle.

What does Sir Thomas, but in the nightime sends for workmen to London (money
commands all things) who so speedily and silently apply their business, That
the next morning discovered that Court double, which the night had left single
before. It is questionable whether the Queen next day was more contented with
the conformity to her fancy, or more pleased with the surprise and sudden
performance thereof. Whilst her Courtiers disported themselves with their
several expressions, some avowing it was no wonder he could so soon change a
Building, who could Build a Change; others (reflecting on some known
differences in this Knights Family) affirmed, That any house is easier divided
than united.

Proverbs.
A Middlesex Clown.]

Some English words, innocent and in-offensive in their primitive Nation, are
bowed by Custom to a disgraceful sense, as Villain originally nothing but a
Dweller in a Village and Tiller of the Ground thereabouts. Churl in Saxon
Coorel a strong See, Sir Henry Spelmans Glossary.
stout Husbandman. Clown from Colonus, one that plougheth the ground, (without
which neither King nor Kingdom can be maintained) of which Middlesex has many
of great Estates.

But some endeavor to fix the Jgnominious sense upon them, as if more arrant
Rusticks then those of their condition elsewhere; partly, because Nobility and
Gentry are respectively observed (according to their degree) by People far
distant from London, less regarded by these Middlesexians (frequency breeds
familiarity) because abounding thereabouts, partly, because the multitude of
Gentry here ( contraries are mutual Commentaries) discover the Clownishness of
others, and render it more Conspicuous. However to my own knowledge, there are
some of the Yeomantry in this County, as completely Civil as any in England.

He that is a low Ebb at Newgate, may soon be a Flote at Tieburne.] * John
H^iwood in his 26th Epigram upon Proverbs.


I allow not this Satyricall Proverb as it makes mirth on men in Misery, whom a
mere man may pity for suffering, and a good man ought to pity them for
deserving it. Tieburne, some will have it so called from Tie and Burn, because
the poor Lollords for whom this (instrument of Cruelty to them, though of
Justice to Malefactors) was first set up, had their necks tied to the Beam,
and their lower parts burnt in the fire; Others will ^ave it called from Two
and Burn that is two Rivolets which it seems meet near to the place. But
whencesoever it be called, may all endeavor to keep themselves from it, though
one may justly be Confident, that more souls have gone to Heaven from that
place, then from all the Churches and Churchyards in England.

When Tottenham-Wood is all on fire,
Then Tottenham-Street is naught but mire.]
I find this Proverb in the Description Cap. 3.
of Tottenham, written by Mr. William Bedwell, one of the most learned
Translators of the Bible. And seeing so grave a Divine stooped to solow a
subject, I hope I may be admitted to follow him therein. He thus expounds the
Proverb. When Tottenham-Wood, of many hundred-Acres, on the top of an high hill
in the West End of the Parish, has a foggie mist hanging and hovering over it
in manner of a smoke, then generally foul weather follows, so that it serves
the Inhabitants instead of a Prognostication. I am confident as much mire now,
as formerly in Tottenham-Street, but question, whether so much wood now as
anciently on Tottenham-hill?

Tottenham is turned French.]

I find this in the same place of the same Author, but quoting it out of Mr.
Heiwood. It seems about the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the eigth,
French Mechanics swarmed in England, to the great prejudice of English
Artisans, which caused the insurrection in London on ill May Day, Anno Dom.
1517. Nor was the City only, but Country Villages for four miles about filled
with French fashions, and infections. The Proverb is applied to such, who
contemning the custom of their own Country, make themselves more ridiculous,
by affecting foreign humors and habits.

Princes.
EDWARD sole surviving Son of King Henry the eight, and Jane his Wife, was
born at Hampton* Court in this County, Anno Dom. 1537. He succeeded his Father
in the Kingdom, and was most eminent in his Generation, seeing the Kings of
England fall under a five-fold division.

1. Visibly Vicious, given over to dissoluteness and debauchery, as King
Edward the second. 2. Potius extra vitia, quam cum virtutibus, Rather free from
Vice then fraught with Virtue, as King Henry the third. 3. In quibus aequali
temperamento, magnae virtutes inerant nec minora vitia, In whom Vices and
Virtues were so equally matched, it was hard to decide which got the Mastery,
as in King Henry the eight. 4 Whose good qualities beat their bad ones quite
out of distance of Competition, as in King Edward the first. 5 Whose Virtues
were so resplendent, no faults (humane frailties excepted) appeared in them, as
in this King Edward.
He died July 5. 1553. and pity it is, that he who deserved the best, should
have no monument erected to his memory, indeed a brass Altar of excellent
workmanship, under which he was buried (I will not say sacrificed with an
untimely death by the treachery of others) did formerly supply the place of his
Tomb, which since is abolished under the notion of superstition.

Guess the goodness of his head and heart* by the following letters written to
Barnaby Fitz-Patrick (Gentleman of his Bedchamber, and brought up with him,
copyed out from the Originalls, by the Reverend Archbishop of Armagh, and
bestowed upon me. Say not they are but of narrow and personal concernment,
seeing they are sprinkled with some passages of the Public. Neither object
them written by a Child, seeing he had more man in him than any of his Age.
Besides, Epistles are the calmest communicating truth to Posterity, presenting
History unto us in her night cloths, with a true face of things, though not in
so fine a dress as in other kinds of writings.

EDWARD,

We have received your Letters of the eighth of this present month, whereby we
understand how you are well entertained, for which we are right glad* and also
how you have been once to go on Pilgrimage: For which cause we have thought
good to Advertise you, that hereafter if any such chance happen, you shall
desire leave to go to Mr. Pickering or to Paris for your business, And if that
will not serve to declare to some man of Estimation, with whom you are best
acquainted, that as you are loath to offend the French King, because you have
been so favorably used, so with safe con^cience you cannot do any such thing
being brought up with me, and bound to obey my Laws. Also that you had
Commandment from me to the Contrary, yet if you be vehemently procured, you may
go as waiting on the King, not as intending to the abuse, nor willingly seeing
the Ceremonies, and so you look on the Mass. But in the mean season regard the
Scripture or some good Book, and give no reverence to the Mass at all.
Furthermore remember when you may conveniently be absent from the Court to
tarry with Sir William Pickering to be instructed by him how to use your self*
For Women, as far forth as you may avoid their Company: Yet if the French King
command you, you may some time Dance, so measure be your mean, else apply your
self to Riding, Shooting, Tennis, or such honest games, not forgetting some
times (when you have leisure) your learning, chiefly reading of the Scriptures.
This I write, not doubting but you would have done, though I had not written
but to spur you on; your exchange of 1200 Crowns you shall receive either
monthly or quarterly by Bartholomew Campaignes Factor in Paris. He has warrant
to receive it by, here, and has written to his Factors to deliver it you
there; we have signed your Bill for wages of the Chamber which Fitzwilliams
has, likewise we have sent a Letter into Ireland to our Deputy, that he shall
take Surrender of your Fathers Lands, and to make again other Letters Patent,
that those Lands shall be to him, you, and your Heirs lawfully begotten for
ever, adjoining thereunto two religious Houses you spoke for,

Thus fare you well, from Westminster the 20 of December, 1551.

Mr. BARNABY,
I have of late sent you a Letter from Bartholmew Campaigne for your payment by
the French Ambassadors Packet. I doubt not but your good nature shall
profitably and Wisely receive the Kings Majesty's Letter to you, Fatherly of a
Child, Comfortably of your Sovereign Lord, and most wisely of so young a
Prince: And so I beseech you that you will think wheresoever you go, you carry
with you a Demonstration of the Kings Majesty, coming a Latere Suo, and bred up
in Learning and Manners with him, with your conservation and modesty, let me
therefore believe the good reports of the King to be true, and let them
perceive what the King is when one brought up with him, Habeat Virtutis tam
Clarum Specimen. This I write boldly as one, that in you wills our Masters
honor and credit; and I pray you use me as one that loves you in plain
terms.

Scribled in have, from Westminster the 22 of December. 1551. Yours to use and
have W. Cecill.


To the KINGS MAJESTY,
According to my bounden Duty, I most humbly thank your Highness for your
gracious Letters of the 20 of December, lamenting nothing but that I am not
able by any means, nor cannot deserve any thing of the goodness your Highness
has showed toward me. And as for the avoiding of the company of the Ladies, I
will assure your Highness, I will not come into their Company, unless I do wait
upon the French King. As for the Letter your Majesty has granted my Father for
the assurance of his Lands, I thank your Highness, most humbly confessing my
self as much bound to you as a Subject to his Sovereign for the same.

As for such simple news as is here, I thought good to certify your Majesty.
It did happen that a certain Saint standing in a blind corner of the Street,
where my Lord Admiral lay, was broken in the nightime, when my Lord was
here, which the French men did think to have been done by the Englishmen, and
the Englishmen did think it to have been done by some Frenchmen, of spite
because the Englishmen lay in that street, and now since that time they have
prepared another Saint, which they call our Lady of Silver, because the French
King that dead is, made her once of clean Silver, and afterward was stolen,
like as she has been diverse times, both stolen and broken in the same place,
which Lady was at this present Sunday being the 27 of this month, set up with
a solemn procession, in the which procession came first in the morning, diverse
Priests of diverse Churches, with Crosses and Banners, and passed by the place
where she should stand, then afterward about a 11 of the Clock came the Legate
of Rome, in whose company came first before him sixty black Canons of our Ladies
Church, then came after them one that carried the Legates Hat in such sort as
they carry the great Seal in England; then came the Master of Paris next to the
Cardinal which carried the Image that should be set up; then came the Legate
himself all in red, and with a white Surpless, still blessing, accompanied with
the Bishop of Caers; and after him came the four Presidents of the Town, with
all the Council of the Town; also there went before, and came behind, diverse
Officers of the Town with Tip-Staves, and so they have set her up with great
solemnity, and defended her with a double grate, to the intent she should be no
more stolen nor broken; and the poor people lie still in the foul streets
worshi ping her. Further, as I am credibly informed, the Legate that lies
here, does give Pardons and Bulls daily, and one of the Kings Treasures
stands by, and receives the money to the Kings use; other news I have none,
December. the 28.

The meanest and most obliged of your Subjects Bernaby Fitz-Patrick.


EDWARD,

We have received your Letters of the 28 of December. whereby we perceive your
Constancy, both in avoiding all kind of Vices, and also in following all things
of Activity or otherwise, that be honest and meet for a Gentleman, of the which
we are not a little glad, nothing doubting your Continuance therein. We
understand also by certain Letters you sent to the Earl of Pembroke and Mr.
Vice-Chamberlaine, that you have some lack of Muletts, and that you desire to
have sent to you some of ours, whereupon we have considered, that our Muletts
being old and lame, will do you but little service, and at least less, then
good ones bought there. For which cause we have willed Bartholomew Champagne,
to deliver you 300 Crowns by Exchange for the buying of your two Muletts over
and besides your former allowance. Here we have little news at this present,
but only that the challenge you heard of before your going was very well
accomplished. At T^lt there came eighteen Defendants, at Tournay twenty, at
Barriers they fought eight to eight, a Twelfth night: This last Christmas has
been well and merrily past. Afterward there was run a Match at Tilt six to six
which was very well run; also because of the Lord Riches Sickness, the Bishop
of Ely was made Chancellor of England during the Parliament. Of late there
has been such a Tide here as has overflown all Meadows and Marshes. All the
Isle of Dogs, all Plumsted Marsh, all Shippey, Foulness in Essex, and all the
Sea Coast was quite drowned. We hear that it has done no less harm in
Flanders, Holland and Zealand, but much more, for Towns and Cities have been
there drowned. We are advertised out of Almaine, that Duke Morice is turned
from the Emperor, and he with the Protestants levieth men to deliver the old
Duke of Sax, and the Land grave out of Prison. The cause of our slowness in
writing this Letter, has been lack of Messengers, else we had written before
time. Now shortly we will prove how ye have profited in the French tongue, for
within a while we will write to you in French.

Thus we make an end, wishing you as much good as our selves. At Westminster
the 25 of Jannuary, 1551.

EDWARD,

We have received your Letters, dated at Paris the twelfth of this instant, and
also Mr. Pickerings Letter written to our trusty well beloved Cousen the Duke
of Northumberland on your behalf. Whereby we perceive both the great
preparation for the Wars, which the French King our Brother makes. And also
how that you are ill furnished of all things, meet to go such a Journey, so
that he thinks that your Costs will not be born under 300. l. whereupon we
have given order to Bartholomew Campagine for to deliver you in Paris 800
French Crowns over and besides all moneys sent you heretofore; and besides your
diet. Also, whereas you seem to find a lack for the moylettis, there was
appointed to you 300 French Crowns for the buying of the same, because they
could not well be transported. Also order is given for your Horses to be
carried over to you with diligence, which we trust shall like you well. We
have no more to you, but to will you not to live too sumptiously as an
Ambassador, but so as your proportion of living may serve you, we mean because
we know many will resort to you* and desire to serve you. I told you how many I
thought convenient you should keep. After you have ordered your things at Paris
go to the Court, and learn to have more Intelligence if you can, and after to
the Wars to learn somewhat to serve us. News from hence I shall write you when
you send us some, in the mean season none but that (thanks be to God) all is
well for the present.

Fare you well from Westminster the 25 of February, 1551.

EDWARD,

We have received your Letters of the second and fifteenth of April. Whereby
we perceive then you were at Nancy, ready to go together with Mr. Pickering to
the French Camp, and to the intent you might be better instructed (...) to use
your self in these Wars, we have thought good to advertise you of our pleasure
therein. First we would wish you, as much as you may conveniently, to be in the
French Kings presence, or at least in some part of his Army, where you shall
perceive most business to be, and that for two Causes: One is because you may
have more experience in the Wars, and see things that might stand you in stead
another day. The other is, because you might be more profitable in the
Language. For our Ambassador who may not wear harness cannot well come to
those places of danger, nor seem so to serve the French King as you may, whom
we sent thither for that purpose. It shall be best for you therefore hereafter,
as much as you may to be with the French King, and so you shall be more
acceptable to him, and do your self much good. We doubt not also but of such
things as you see there done, you will not fail^ to advertise us as you have
well begun in your last letters, for thereby shall we Judge of your diligence
in learning, and seeing things that be there done; we shall be nothing wearied
with often advertising, nor with reciting of particularity of things, and to
the intent we would see how you profit in the French, we would be glad to
receive some letters from you in the French tongue, and we would write to you
again therein. We have a little been troubled with the small Pox, which has
l^tted us to write hitherto; ^ut now we have shaken that quite away.

Thus fare you well, at Greenwich the third of May Anno 1552.

EDWARD,

We have received your Letters, dated at Rhemes the fourth of this instant, by
which we understand, how the French King does mean now to set forth a new Army
to resist the Emperor, and that for that cause you think you cannot yet ask
leave to return without suspicion till this bray do cease. In which thing we
like your opinion very well, and the rather because you may peradventure see
more things in this short journey (if so be it, that the Emperor does march
toward you) then you have seen all the while you have been there.
Nevertheless as soon as his business is once over past, you with Mr.
Pickerings advice may take some occasion to ask leave for this VVinter to come
home* because you think there shall few things more be done, then have been
already, in such manner and form as we have written in our former Letters. We
pray you also to advertise for how long time you have received your Diets.
Bartholomew Campaigne has been paid six VVeeks agon, till the last of
September, and we would be very glad to know whether you have received so much
at his Factors hands. More we have not to advertise you, and therefore we
commit you to God.

From Hampton Court the 7. of October anno Dom. 1552.

Martyrs.
Smithfield near London, being Bonners Shambles, and the Bone-fire General of
England, no wonder if some sparks thereof were driven thence into the Vicenage,
at Barnet, Izlington, and Stratford Bow, where more then twenty persons were
Martyred, as in Mr. Fox does appear. Nor must we forget Mr. John Denley burnt
at Uxbridge, who began to sing a Psalm at the Stake, and Dr. Story (there
present) caused a prickley Fox Acts, and Mon. p. 1685.
faggot to be hu^led in his face, which so hurt him, that he bled therewith. Now
the singing Plin. Not. Hist.
Nightingale needed no Thorn but only the sleeping one, to awake it. We may
believe that this Martyrs Prick-song indeed, made good melody in the Ears of
the God of Heaven.

Prelates.
RICHARD NORTHALL, was says my Bale de scrip. Brit. c. 7. n. 6.
Author born in this County, adding moreover Praetoris Londinensis, ejusdem
cognominis ut fertur filius, But take Praetor, either for Major or Sheriff, and
no such man appears in Stow, his exact survay of London, so that one may
thence safely conclude the Negative, no such person in those places, though
probably he might hold some other eminent office in that City.

By the way, the applying the names of Roman As Praetor, Quaestor, Cen. sor,
Tribunus, etc.
Magistrates to our English Officers, wherein every one follows their own
fancy in assigning the correspondency, has cau^ed much uncertainty in matters
of this nature. But we willingly believe this Robert of wealthy extraction,
though he became a Carmelite, and afterward Chaplain to King Richard the
second, who for his good Preaching preferred him Bishop of Ossory, for a time
J. VVaraeus descrip. Hibern. page 127.
Chancelour of Ireland, and at last Archbishop of Dublin. He wrote a Set of
Sermons for the whole year, lived much beloved for his learning and virtues,
and died no less lamented, Anno Dom. 1397 on the 20 day of July.

Since the Reformation.
WILLIAM WICKHAM, born at Dr. Hatchers Manuscript of the Fellows of Kings
Co^ledge in Cambridge.
Enfield in this County, bred in Kings-Colledge, was Bishop first of Lincoln,
then of Winchester, where he may be termed William Wickham junior in
distinction of his namesake and predecessor; one equal to any of his Order in
piety and painfullnesse (though little of him extant in print) superior to all
in patience, dying Anno 1596 of the Strangury, when he had not made water for
G^dwin in his Catalogue of the Bishops of Winchester.
fourteen days together. This minds me of an usual prayer amongst the modern
Jews (had they no worse customs their company would be welcome unto us)
praising God as well for their vents of ejection, as mouths for the admission
of nourishment.

Soldiers.
FALCATIUs, or FULKE de BRENT, was a Middlesex-man by his Nativity, whose
family so flourished th^rein in former ages (remaining in a meaner condition to
this day) that an Norden in his Descript. of Middlesex.
Antiquarie will have the rivolet Brent, which denominateth Brentford, so named
from them, which is preposterous in my opinion, believing them rather named
from the rivolet.

This FULK was a Minion to King John, whose dangers indeared Martial-men unto
him, who the more to oblige his fidelity, gave him in marriage Margaret the
Daughter of Warrin Fitz- Gerald his Chamberlain, late Wife to Baldwin de
Rivers, many muttering thereat, and the Lady her self (it seems) not well
satisfied therewith, as beneath her deserts. Hereupon our Mat. Westminster.
Author,

Lex connectit eos, amor and concordia lecti,
Sed lex qualis? amor qualis? co^cordia qualis?
Lex exlex, amor exosus, concordia discors.
Now both of them being brought into a Bed,
By law, and love, and concord joined are:
What law? what love? what concord did them wed?
Law lawless, loathed love, concord which did jarr.
This Fulke was highly in favor with King Henry the third; who by the valor
of this his General, obtained the great Victory at Lincoln.

But afterward, when the Land was settled in peace, Fulke found himself less
respected, set by, and not set by, hung up like the Axe, when it has hew'n all
the hard timber, on the wall unregarded. He endeavored therefore to embroile
the Nation in a new War, and, like a dishonest Surgeon, wilfully to blister
the sound flesh into a sore, to gain by the cureing thereof. This not
succeeding (all being weary of civil war) he presuming on the Kings Lenity,
and his own merit (accounting himself too high to come under the roof of any
Law) committed many outrages of felonies and murders. He was esteemed too bad
to live, such his present desperateness, yet too good to be put to death, such
his former deserts; and therefore (as an expedient between both) he was
condemned to perpetual banishment. He went to Rome (none had more need to
confess his faults) where he lived Mat. Paris in Anno 1226.
obscurely, died miferably, and was buried ignobly, Anno 1226.

Sir RALPH SADLIER, Son of Sadlier, Esquire, was born at Hackney in this
County, where he was heir to a fair Inheritance. He first was Servant to the
Lord Cromwell, and by him advanced into the service of King Henry the eighth. A
Prince judicious in men and meat, (and seldom deceived in either) who made him
chief Secretary of State. He was much knowing, (and therefore most employed)
in the Scotch affairs, much complicated with State Intricacies, which he knew
well to unfold. It is seldom seen that the Pen and Sword, Goun and Corselet,
meet eminently as here, in the same person. For in the Battle of Muscleborow,
he or^ered and brought up our scattered Troops, (next degree to a rout) (...)
them to fight by his own example, and so for his valor was made a Knight
Bannaret. Of these two kinds, one by way of encouragement made before, the
other by way of R^ward, (...) a Field (...), more safe, and no less honorable
in my Opinion. Sir Ralph was of the second sort and the last which survived in
England of that Order. Yet was he little in stature, tall not in person but
performance. Queen Eliz. made him Chance^our of the Duchy. During his last
Embassy in Scotland, his house at Standon in Her^forashire, was built by his
Steward in his absence far greater then himself desired, so that he never joyed
therein, and died soon after, Anno 1587. in the 80 year of his age. How^ver it
has been often filled with good Company, and they feasted with great cheer by
the Hereditary Hospitality therein.

I must not forget, how when this Knight attended his Master the Lord Cromwell
at Rome, (before the English renounced the Papal power) a ^ardon was granted
(not by his own, but a Servants procuring,) for the Sins of that Fami^y, for
three immediate Generations, (expiring in R. Sadlier Esquire, lately dead)
which was extant, (but lately lost o^ displaced) amongst their Records, and
though no use was made thereof, much mirth was made therewith.

Capital Judges and Writers on the Law.
Sir THOMAS FROVVICK Knight, was born at Elinge in this County, son to Thomas
Frowick Esquire; By his Wife, who was Daughter and Heir to Sir John Sturgeon,
Knight, (giving for his Arms, Azure three Sturgeons, Or, under a fret Gules)
bred in the study of our Municipal Law, wherein he attained to such eminency,
that he was made Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, on the 39 of
September, in the 18 year of the Reign of King Henry the seventh.

Four years he sat in his place, accounted the Oracle of Law in his Age,
though one of the youngest men that ever enjoyed that Office. He is reported to
have dyed florida juventute, before full forty years old, and lies buried with
Joane his Wife, in the Church of Finchley in this County, the Circumscription
about his Monument being defaced; only we understand that his death happened on
the seventeenth of October, 1506. He left a large Estate to his two Daughters,
whereof Elah the Eldest was married to Sir John Spelman (one of the Justices of
the Kings Bench) Grandfather to Sir Henry that Renowned Knight.

Sir WILLIAM STAMFORD, Knight, was of Staffordian extraction, Robert his
Grandfather living at Rowley in that County. But William his Father was a
Merchant in London, and purchased Lands at Hadley in Middlesex, where Sir
William was born August 22. 1509.

He was bred to the study of our Municipal Laws, attaining so much eminence
therein, that he was preferred one of the Judges of the Common Pleas; His most
learned Book of the Pleas of the Crown, has made him for ever famous amongst
men of his own profession. There is a Spirit of Retraction of one to his native
Country, which made him purchase Lands, and his son settle himself again in
Staffordshire; this worthy Judge died August 28, and was buried at Hadley in
this Shire, in the last year of the Reign of Queen Mary, 1558.

Writers.
JOHN ACTON. I find no fewer then seventeen Actons in England, so called as I
conceive Originally from Ache, in Saxon an Oak, wherewith anciently no doubt
those Towns were well stored. But I behold the place nigh London, as the
Paramount * Bale descrip. Brit. c. 4. n. 66.
Acton amongst them.

Our John was bred Doctor of the Laws in Oxford, and afterward became Canon of
Lincoln, being very able in his own faculty. He wrote Bale de scrip. Brit. c.
5. n. 13.
a learned Comment on the Ecclesiastical Constitutions of Otho and Ottob one
(both Cardinals and Legates to the Pope in England) and flourished under King
Edward the First, Anno 1290.

RALPH ACTON was bred in the University of Oxford, where he attained (says my
Author Idem Ibidem.
) Magisterium Theologicum, and as I understand Magister in Theologia is a
Doctor in Divinity, so Doctor in Artibus is a Master of Arts. This is reported
to his eternal Commendation

Evangelium regni Dei fervore non modico praedicabat in medijs Romanarum
Superstitionum Tenebris.

And though sometimes his tongue lisped with the Siboleth of the superstition of
that age, yet generally he uttered much precious truth in those dangerous days,
and flourished under King Edward the second, Anno 1320.

ROGER TVVIFORD. I find eleven Towns so named in England, (probably AMP.
from the confluence of two fords thereabouts) and two in this County. He was
bred an Augustinian Friar, studied in both Universities, and became a Doctor in
Divinity. In his declining age he applied himself to the reading of the
Scripture and the Fathers, and became a painful and profitable Preacher. I
find him not fixed in any one place, who is charactered, Bale de scrip. Brit.
c. 7. n. 17.
Concionum propalator per Dioecesin Norvicensem, an Itinerant (no Errant)
Preacher through the Diocese of Norwich. He was commonly called GOODLU^K (and
Good-Luck have he with his honor) because he brought good success to others
(and consequently his own welcome) with him whithersoever he went, which made
all Places and Persons Ambitious and Covetous of his presence. He flourished
about the year of our Lord, 1390.

ROBERT HOVVNSLOVV was born in this County at Hownslow, a Village well known
for the Road through, and the Heath besides it. He was a Friar of the * Bale de
Scrip. Brit. and Pitzeus
Order of the Holy Trinity, which chiefly employed themselves for the
redemption of Captives. Indeed Locusts generally were the devourers of all
food, yet one kind of Locusts were themselves wholesome, though course food,
whereon John Baptist had his common repast; Thus Friars (I confess) generally
were the Pests of the places they lived in, but to give this order their due,
much good did redound from their endeavors. For this Robert being their
Provincial for England, Scotland and Ireland, rich people by him were
affectionately exhorted, their Alms industriously collected, such collections
carefully preserved, till they could be securely transmitted, and thereby the
liberty of many Christian Captives effectually procured. He wrote also many
Synodall sermons, and Epistles of confequence to several persons of quality,
to stir up their liberality. He flourished (says Pitseus) Anno Dom. 1430. a
most remarkable year by our foresaid Author, assigned either for the
flourishing, or for the Funerals of eleven famous writers, (yet so, as our
Robert is dux gregis, and leads all the rest) all Contemporaries, whereas
otherwise, for two or three eminent persons to light on the same year, is a
fair proportion through all his book, De illustribus Angliae scriptoribus.

Since the Reformation.
WILLIAM GOUGE Born at Stratford-Bow in this County, bred in Kings College in
Cambridge, where he was not once absent from public service morning These
Memoires are extracted out of the Sermon preached at his Funeral.
and evening the space of nine years together. He read fifteen Chapters in the
Bible everyday, and was afterward Minister of Blackfryers in London. He never
took a journey merely for pleasure in all his Life; he preached so long, till
it was a greater difficulty for him to go up into the Pulpit, then either to
make or preach a Sermon, and dyed aged seventy nine years, leaving the examples
of his humility, faith, patience, etc. to the imitation of posterity, being
buried in his own Church, December 16. 1653.

Benefactors to the Public.
A namelesse HERMIT (dwelling in the Hermitage where now the School is) *
Norden in his sec. Brit. p. 22.
on his own cost, caused Gravel to be dug in the Top of Hygate-hill (where
now is a fair Pond of Water) and therewith made a Causway from Hygate to
Islington; a two handed Charity, providing water on the Hill, where it was
wanting, and cleanesse in the Vale, which before (especially in Winter) was
passed with much molestation.

Since the Reformation.
ALICE Daughter of Thomas VVilkes, was a poor Maid born in Islington, where her
Cap was casually shot through with an Stows Survey of London.
arrow without any hurt to her head. She afterward was thrice married to
Wealthy Husbands (whereof Justice Owen the last) and built at Islington near to
the place of her Deliverance, a proper Almshouse by her well endowed. This
Lady expended to charitable uses here and elsewhere, what amounted to the full
sum of two thousand three hundred pounds and upwards, and lies buried as I
take it in Islington.

Sir JULIUS CAESAR Knight, was born in this County, his Father having a house
J. Norden in Description of Middlesex.
nigh unto Tottenham. His Father was a Doctor of Physic to Queen Elizabeth,
and descended of the ancient Family of the Dalmarii in Italy. This his Son was
bred in Oxford, and after other intermediate preferments, was advanced
Chancelour of the Duchy of Lancaster, and sworn a privy Counselor on Sunday
the 6. of July 1607. * Stow his Annals.
and afterward was preferred Master of the Rouls.

A person of prodigious bounty to all of worth or want, so that he might seem
to be Almoner General of the Nation. The Story is well known of a Gentleman,
who once borrowing his Coach, (which was as well known to poor people as any
Hospital in England) was so Rendevouzed about with Beggars in London that it
cost him all the money in his purse to satisfy their importunity, so that he
might have hired Twenty Coaches on the same Terms. Sir Francis Bacon Lord
Verulam was Judicious in his Election, when perceiving his Dissolution to
approach, he made his last bed in effect in the house of Sr. Julius.

He continued more then 20 years Master of the Rolls, and though heaved at by
some Expectants, sat still in his place well poyzed therein, with his Gravity
and Integrity. Vir tantarum Elemosynarum non movebitur, a man of so great alms
and Prayers (made by him and for him) shall not be removed. Nor was it without
a prosperous Omen, that his chief House in Hartford shire was called Benington,
that is, Villa Benigna the bountiful Village, as one Norden in Hertfordshire.
Author will have it, or as Camd. Brit. in Hertfordshire.
another Villa beneficii the Town of Good Turns, from the River so named
running by it. What shall I speak of his Arms, viz. Gules 3 Roses Argent on a
Chief of the first, so many Roses of the Second, embleming the fragancy of the
Memory he has left behind him. * So blazoned by Peacham in his practice of
Blazonry page 186.


His Monument in great St. Hellens London, being out of the road of ordinary
fancies, was thus designed by himself.

The ensuing Description is contrived in Form of a Deed, and imitateth Ruffled
Parchment, in Allusion to his Office, as Master of the Rolls.

Omnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos hoc praesens Scriptum pervenerit. Sciatis,
me Iulium Dalmare alias Caesarem Militem: Utriusque Doctorem; Elizabethae
Reginae Supremae Curiae Admiralitatis judicem; and unum e Magistris libellorum,
Iacobo Regi a Privalis Concilliis, Cancellarium Scaccarii Scriniorum Magistrum
haec praesenti Charta mea confirmasse me Annuente Divino Numine naturae debitum
libenter solviturum, quam primum Deo placuerit. In cujus rei memoriam, Manum
meam, and Sigillum apposui. Datum 27. Februarii 1635.

Julius Caesar

Here his Seal or Coat of Arms is affixed; and beneath them is written
Irrotulatur Coelo.

He dyed the Twenty Eigth Day of April, Anno Domini 1636, in the Seventy Ninth
of his Age.

Memorable Persons.
PETER FABEL. I shall probably offend the Gravity of some to insert, and
certainly curiosity of others to omit him. Some make him a Friar, others a Lay
Gentleman, all a conceited person, who with his merry Devises, deceived the
Devil, who by grace may be resisted, not deceived by Wit. If a Grave Bishop in
his At the Funeral of King James.
Sermon speaking of BRUTE his coming into this Land, said it was but a Bruit, I
hope I may say without offense, that this Fabel was but a fable, supposed to
live in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth.

........ TRESTRAM was a Gardener by his Occupation, living at Branford in this
County. This man anno Dom. 1609. fell into a most violent Inflammation of the
Lungs, accompanied with a Terrible Fever, Shortness of Breath, Stitch of both
Sides, Dry Cough, and an unquenchable Thirst. Dr. Theod. From his own Letter
Printed in Dt. Hakewill his Apology, page 242.
Deodate being his Neighbor (then Physician to Prince Henry and the Lady
Elizabeth) beholding him of a Ruddy and Sanguine Complexion, adventured to let
him blood, though he was of Threescore and sixteen years of age.

Once he let him Blood about Twenty Ounces, by which Evacuation (his Blood
being extremely putrified) he felt ease for three hours, but afterward all his
accidents returned as violent as before.

Next Morning he repeated the Bleeding in the same quantity, whereby the
Patient only found a Momentary Ease, his pain returning as violent as before.

The third day Remembering the Rule of Hypocrates, that blood must be let to the
changing of the Color, he adventured again on as copious a Phlebotemy as
before whereby the Sickman found an extraordinary ease, who in three days had
lost more then Sixty Ounces of Blood.

This Trestram survived eight years after, and dyed anno 1619. a most eminent
Instance against those who endeavor to prove the decay of the World, because
men cannot spare so much by Bloodletting as in former ages.

Lord Majors.
Name. Father. Place. Company Time. 1 Henry Frowicke Henry Frowicke Totenham
Mercer 1435. 2 William Marrow Stephen Marrow Stebunheath Mercer 1455. 3 William
Hallin Nicholas Hallin Fullham Fishmonger 1459. 4 Humphrey Heyford Roger
Heyford Stratford Bow Goldsmith 1470. 5 Christopher Askew. John Askew Edmonton
Draper 1533. 6 John Lion Thomas Lion Peryfare Grocer 1554. 7 Thomas Curteis
John Curteis Enfield Fishmonger 1557. 8 John Jolles Thomas Jolles Strafford
Bow Draper 1615.

The Names of the Gentry of this County, returned by the Commissioners in the
Twelfth year of King Henry the Sixth 1433.
Richard Bishop of London. Commissioners to take the Oaths. The Prior of the
Hospital of St. John's of Jerusalem. John Ash Knights for the Shire. Richard
Maideston Knights for the Shire.

Johannis Harpeden Militis Thomae a Chaleton Militis Johannis Boys Militis
Henrici Somer Iohannis Frampton Thomae Hasele Thomae b Frowyk Simonis Camp
Alexandri Anne Willielmi c Wroth Iohannis Chichele Roberti Warner d Iohannis
Shordyche Edmundi Bibbesworth Walteri Grene Thomae Holgyll Thomae Malton
Iohannis Drayton Willielmi Swanlond Willielmi Norton Iohannis Barnvile Richardi
Richmond Roberti Oliver Willielmi Bray Roberti Foster Henrici Filingsley
Iohannis Bronn Roberti Charyngworth Richardi Skarburgh Richardi Bronn Iohannis
e Elryngton VVillielmi Brokherst Iohannis Danyell.
What is generally true of the Gentry in all Counties, that being in continuo
fluxu, Labitur, and labetur, in omne volubilis aevum, is most true in this
County, where the Stream thereof runs most rapid, to make more speedy room
for Succession; so that the Gentry in Middlesex, seem Sojourners, rather then
Inhabitants therein. Is it not strange, that of the thirty three forenamed
Families, not three of them were extant in the Shire, one hundred and sixty
years after, viz. anno Dom. 1593. as appears by the alphabetical Collection,
set forth by Mr. In his (...) Brit. page 42.
Norden in that year. I impute the brevity (as I may term it) of such Gentry in
this County, to the Vicinity of London to them, or rather of them to it, and
hope, that Worshipful Families now fixed in Middlesex, will hereafter have
longer continuance.

THOMAE a CHALETON Militis.] I can hardly believe him of the same Family ( R.
being slipped out in the Writing thereof) with Thomas Carleton, who dyed anno
Domini 1447. being buried under a much defaced Monument in EdmontonChurch, and
whom the Inhabitants deliver by Tradition, to have been a man of great command
in this County.

THOMAE b FROVVYK] He was Owner of Gunners-Bury in the Parish of Great Eling,
wherein he lies buried, and was Father of famous Judge Frowyk of whom before.

WILLIELMI c WROTH] Ancestor to Sir Henry VVrot^, still living at Durance,
whose great Grandfather Sir Thomas Wroth, fled over for his Religion into
Germany, in the Reign of Queen Mary; and it is observable, that he, who then
went away for his Conscience, has alone of all this Catalogne, his name
remaining in this County. As for William Wroth mentioned in this Catalogue,
he was Son to Will. Wroth Esquire, who dyed the 20. of Ex bundello
Inquisitionum Anno 2. Regis Hen. 5. number. 4. in Turre Land.
March, the Ninth of Henry the Fourth, who was the Son of John Wroth, who
married Maud sole Daughter unto Thomas Durand, by whom the house of Durands was
devolved unto him.

JOHN SHORDYCHE.] So called from Shorditch on the North of Bishops Gate, in
London, whereof he was Owner, as also of the Manor of Hackney. I say Shorditch
so named here (in the twelfth of King Henry the Sixth) and some hundred years
before, quasi Shorditch, or the Ditch that was the Sewer or public Drain to
the NorthEast part of the City. Hereby appears the Vanity of their Conceits
who will have it so called from Jane Shore (the Minion of Edward the Fourth)
reported to dye here pitifully (as much pitied though not relieved) in the
Reign of King Richard the Third.

Reader, Be pleased to take notice, that though Mr. Norden in his Survey of
this County, passes over this Surname in Silence, yet the Progeny of this John
Shorditch has still a confiderable estate at Icknam therein.

JOHANNIS e ELRYNGTON] These had an house sometimes at Idem page 37.
Neusdon in this County, but are since extinct, and the last that I find of the
name was John Elryngton, Filycer of the City of London, and Keeper of the
Records of the Common Pleas, who dying 1504. is buried with an Inscription in
Hackney Church.

The Sheriffs.
Some perchance may expect, that in conformity to other Counties, I should here
insert the Sheriffs of Middlesex, reserving those of London to the Descr^ption
of that City. These proceed on an old vulgar error, that the Sheriffs aforesaid
have their several Jurisdictions divided accordingly. Whereas indeed both are
jointly and equally Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, having not only
concurrent but united power in all places. Nor know I any difference betwixt
them, save that he, who is first chosen takes place, and he who lives the
nearest to the Tower, has the Poultrie, the other VVood street-Counter,
assigned to his Service. But more of them in London.

All I will add is this, the Gentry in Middlesex have herein a privilege above
any County in England, that they are not Eligible (except also they be Freemen
of London) to be Sheriffs of this Shire, which does cut off from them the
occasion of much expenses.

The Battles.
Brandford Fight 1642. November the 12.
It began on the South west side of the Town near Zion house: some execution
being done by Great Guns, and a Boat on the Thames with many therein sunk, and
Capt. Quarles (an active Citizen on the Parliament side) drowned before he
could recover the Shore.

Soon was the Scene of this Tragedy removed to the North of the Town, near
Acton, and the Kings Forces fell fiercely on the Regiment of Colonel Denzil
Hollis then present in Parliament, and put them to the Worst.

Here the Welsh under Sir....... Salisbury their Leader, made true the Greek
Proverb, (...), he that Flies will fight again. (...) These who showed swift
heels at Edgehill ^attle, use as stout Arms [as any] in this Fight. For
formerly they were little better then Naked, whereas since they had recovered
armor to fence their bodies, and Resolutions to arm their Minds.

Next day being Sunday, marched out the Militia of London, but both Armies may
be said to have kept the Sabbath, faceing each other without any considerable
action. It is incredible how many Cart Loads of Victuals were carried out from
London, enough to have feasted their Soldiers for some days, and fed them for
some Weeks. In the Evening the Kings Forces drew off toward Kings Town.

The Number of the slain on both sides amounted not to a thousand, and the
Reputation of the Victory on the Kings Side, was more then the effect thereof,
for then the Royalists did Nose and Beard the Populous City of London, and did
Triumphare (though not In) sub Hostico. Indeed the accession of Citizens to the
King answered not Rational expectation, Wealth though Loyal being always
Fearful, and Loath to hazard a certain Estate.

This is most sure, that many Scores of Prisoners taken by the King, were by
him freely dismissed without other Ransom, then a strict Oath to serve no more
against him. Now what Oath office is kept in London; I know not, nor what Pope
therein had power to dispense with so sacred an Obligation. But these met with
such Confessors, who seemingly satisfied them in the Violation of this Oath, so
that some Weeks after they appeared on the same side as fierce as before.

The Farewell.
This County is much infested with the Mildew. That it is, I know to my Cost,
but could not purchase the knowledge what it is, much less how it might be
prevented at the same Price, though having diligently enquired into the Name
and Nature thereof.

Some will have it called Mildew, quasi Maldew, or Illdew, others Meldew or
Honydew, as being very sweet (oh how lushious and noxious is Flattery!) with
the Astringency thereof, causing an Atrophy a Consumption in the Grain. His
Etymology was peculiar to himself who would have it termed Mildew, because it
grindeth the Grain aforehand, making it to dwindle away almost to nothing.

It falls (be it Mist or Dew) when Corn is almost ripe for the Sicle, and
antidateth the Harvest (not before it is welcome but) before it is wished by
the Husbandman, Grain being rather withered then ripened thereby. If after the
fall a good Rain or strong wind comes, it washes and wipeth it off, so that
no mischief is done: Otherwise the hot Sun arising, seals (to use the
Husbandmans Phrase) the Mildew upon the Straw, and so intercepteth the
Nourishment betwixt the Root and the Ear, especially if it falls not on the
Hoase (which is but another case, and has another Tunicle under it) but on the
stripped Straw near to the top of the Stalk.

Grain growing under Hedges (where the wind has least power) is most subject
thereunto, though Wheat of all Grain is most, Bearded Wheat of Wheat is
least liable unto it: Not that the Hawnes thereof are Spears to fright the
Mildew from it, but advantageous Gutters to slide it away the sooner, which
sticks on notted or pollard Wheat.

Inland Counties, Northamptonshire, Bedford-shire, etc. complain the least,
Maritime the most of Mildew which insinuates the Vapors of the Sea to be
causall thereof. Some hold, that seeing it falls from the Skies, Earth has no
guard for Heavens blow, save prayer, which in this very case is prescribed by
1 Kings 8. 37.
Solomon. But others conceive, that humane may be subordinate to Spiritual
means, to prevent not the falling but the hurting of this Dew in such a degree,
and hopefully expect the Remedy from the Ingenuity of the next Generation.

I am the rather confirmed in my Hopes, because a help has been found out
against the smooting of Wheat, at leastwise in some good proportion, I say the
smooting of Wheat which makes it a Negro, as Mildew makes it a Dwarf, viz. by
mingling the seed with Lyme as your Husbandmen will inform you.

And for my Vale to this County, I heartily desire, that either God would of
his Goodness spare the Fruits of the Earth, from so hurtful a Casualty, or put
it into the Minds of Men (if it may stand with his Will) to find out some
defensitive in some part, to abate the Malignity thereof.

LONDON. It is the second City in Christendom for greatness, and the first
for good Government; There is no civilized part of the World but it has heard
thereof, though many with this mistake, that they conceive London to be the
Country, and England but the City therein.

Some have suspected the declining of the Luster thereof, because of late it
vergeth so much VVestward, increasing in Buildings in Convent Garden, etc. But
by their Favor (to disprove their Fear) it will be found to Burnish round
about, to every point of the compass, with new Structures daily added
thereunto.

It owes its greatness under Gods Divine providence, to the well conditioned
River of Thames, which does not (as some Tyrant Rivers in Europe) abuse its
strength in a destructive way, but imployeth its greatness in goodness, to be
beneficial for commerce, by the Reciprocation of the Tide therein. Hence it was
that when K. James offended with the City, threatened to remove his Court to
another place, the Lord Mayor [boldly enough] returned that he might remove his
Court at his pleasure, but could not remove the River of Thames.

In his Adage Rh^dii Sacrificium.
Erasmus will have London so called, from Lindus a City of Rhodes, averring a
great resemblance betwixt the Language and Customs of the Britains and
Grecians. But Mr. Camden (who no doubt knew of it) honors not this his
Etymology with the least mention thereof. As improbable in my apprehension, is
the deduction from Ludstown, Town being a Saxon, no British Termination) and
that it was so termed from Lan Dian a Temple of Diana (standing where now St.
Paul's does) is most likely in my opinion.

Manufactures.
Natural Commodities are not to be expected to grow in this place, which is
only the Field of Art, and Shop General of England, Cheapsiae being called the
best Garden only by Metaphore, seeing otherwise nothing but Stones are found
therein. As for London Manufactures they are so many, I shall certainly loose
my self in this Labyrinth if offering to enter: in leaving therefore all
intermediate Inventions to others; I will only insist on the Needle and the
Engine, as the least and greatest Instruments employed therein.

Needles.
The Use hereof is right ancient, though sewing was before Needles. For we Genesis
3. 7.
read that our first parents made themselves Aprons by sewing Fig leaves
together, either fastening them with some Glutinous Matter, or with some sharp
thing joining them together.

A Pin is a Blind Needle, a Needle a Pin with an Eye. What Nails do in solid,
Needles do in supple Bodies, putting them together; only they remain not there
formally but vertually, in the Thread which they leave behind them. It is the
woman's Pencil and Embroidery [Vestis acu picta] is the masterpeice thereof. I
say Embroydery much used in former, neglected in our age, wherein modern
Gallants (affecting Variety of suits) desire, that their Clothes should be
known by them, and not as Our Ancestors, They by their clothes, one suit of
state serving them for several solemnities.

This Industrious Instrument, Needle, quasi Ne idle, (as some will have it)
maintains many millions. Yea, he who desires a Blessing on the Plough and
the Needle, (including that in the card and compass) comprehends most
Employments at home, and abroad, by land and by sea.

All I will add is this, that the first fine spanish Needles in England, were
made in the Reign of Queen Mary, in Cheapside by a Negro, but such his Envy,
that he would teach his Art to none, so that it dyed with him. More charitable
was Elias Crowse a German, who coming over into England, about the Eigth of
Queen Elizabeth, first taught us the Making of spanish Needles, and since we
have taught our selves the using of them.

The Engine.
This general Word* (...) to all Machins or Instruments, use in this City has
confined to signify that which is used to quench Scare-fires therein. One Mr.
Jones a Merchant (living in Austin Friars) fetched the first Form thereof from
Norenberge, and obtained a Patent of King James that none should be made
without his Approbation.

Two were begun but not finished in his Life time, who dyed in the great Plague
Primo Caroli primi; since which Time, William Buroughs City-Founder, now
living in ^bury, has so completed this Instrument, that his additions, amount
to a new Invention, having made it more secure from breaking, and easy to be
cleansed, so that with the striking out of a Wedge, it will cleanse it self,
and be fit to work again in Four Minutes.

Since, the aforesaid (...) has made about threescore of these Engines for
City and Country. The Cooper, Carpenter, Smith, Founder, Brasier and Turner
contribute their skills to the (...) o^ it* Yet may the price thereof be
compassed for thirty five pounds.

It has gained, because it has saved many pounds, and (which is unvaluable)
many Lives of men in this City. The best (though not the Biggest) was lately in
the Church of ^t. James Clarken-well, as has many Times been experimented. A
good Musician makes a good Instrument, and it was a poor Blew Cap (better known
by his Work then Name) who played so w^ll thereon, that (though not with the
left handed Gibeonites to hit the Mark within a Hairs Breadth) he could hit
within the scantling of a Shilling: since a Newer at St Bridgets Church is a
better, and no wonder if the Younger out active those who are more ancient; All
wished this Engine may be brought forth once a Quarter to be scoured, oyled,
and trimmed, but not to be used. But if there be an occasion thereof, may it
effectually perform that, for which it was intended.

The Buildings.
St. Paul's.
This is the only Cathedral in Christendom Dedicated solely to that Saint:
Great the Pillars (little Legs would bow under so big a body) and small the
Windows thereof, Darkness in those days being conceived to raise Devotion,
besides it made artificial Lights to appear with the more Solemnity. It may be
called the Mother Church indeed, having one Babe in her Body St. Faiths, and
another in her Arms St. Gregory's. Surely such, who repair to Divine Service in
St. Faiths, may there be well minded of their Mortality, being living People,
surrounded with the Antiperistasis of the Dead both above and beneath them. For
the present I behold St. Paul's Church, as one struck with the Dead Palsy on
one side, the East part and Quire thereof being quick and alive, well
maintained and repaired, whilst the West part is ruinous and ready to fall
down. Little hopes it will be repaired in its old Decays, which is decayed in
its new Reparations, and being formerly an Ornament, is now an Eyesore to the
City; not to say unto the Citizens in general, some being offended that it is
in so bad, and others that it is in no worse Condition.

The Repairing of this Church was a worthy Monument of the Piety and Charity of
Archbishop Laud, not only procuring the Bounty of others, but expending his
own Estate thereon. We despair not but that his Majesty's Zeal in commending
this work to their care, will in due time meet with the Forward Bounty of the
Citizens. It is no sin to wish, that those who have plundered the Cloak and
Cover of St. Paul's (not left behind by, but) violently taken from him, might be
compelled to make him a new one of their own Cost, at leastwise to contribute
more then ordinary proportions thereunto.

As for the Parochial Churches in London they have all either cast their skins
with the Snake, or renewed their Bills with the Eagle, having at the least
their Fronts beautified, if not their bodies rebuilt. Amongst which St Clements
Eastcheap, is not to be forgotten, the Monument of the Bounty of Baldwin Hamey
Doctor in Physic. So that what is written in a modest challenge to the Papist
on the Entry into the New built Church of St. Giles in the Fields, may be
inscribed on the Rest. (...) Viator! Anne Bonis operibus effoetum est HOC
seculum?

The Bridge.
The Middle thereof is properly in none, the two ends in two Counties Middlesex
and Surrey. Such who only see it beneath where it is a Bridge, cannot suspect
it should be a Street, and such who behold it above where it is a Street,
cannot believe it is a Bridge, It was made with great cost, and is maintained
with daily charge against the Batery and Assault of the Tide: The sad Riddle is
generally known to all, which happened here some twenty years since, when a
lamentable fire could not be quenched, because there was such store of Water,
hindering all access thereunto.

The Exchange.
This was built by Sir Thomas Gresham Knight, anno Domini 1571. in Imitation of
that at Antwerp, but so that the Copy exceeds the Original, Queen Elizabeth
named it the Royal burse, but it is commonly called the Exchang^ or Change,
because by Bargains (...) ven there, Wares are changed for Wares, and Wares for
money, and money for money. Yet because much of Mutability is imported in the
word Change, it may be a fit Remembrancer to Merchants meeting here, not to
build their hopes of perpetuity on what is so subject to Vicissitude and
Alteration. Well may this place be termed the Change, where poor men so soon
become rich by Good Success, and Richmen Poor by Losses and Casualties
unexpected.

The Tower.
This to wave the Fable of Julius Caesar, was first founded by King William
the Conqueror, finished by William Rufus* encompassed with a Ditch by William
Longcamp Bishop of Ely, enlarged by King Henry the Third, fortified by King
Edward the Fourth, beautified by King Richard the Third, repaired by King Henry
the Eighth, since whose time no considerable addition thereunto. The Mortar
thereof (to make it bel^ke the more tenacious) was, says my Fit-Stevens in his
Description of London.
Author, tempered with the blood of Beasts, and this Tower was built to secure
London in both senses, to (...) or defend it, as occasion should require. It is
a Palace, a Prison, a Liberty, a Town, a Castle, and what not? most remarkable
for the Armory, Mint, Wardrobe and [formerly] the Unicorns-Horn therein.

Armory.
I place this before the Mint, because of Solon his Speech to Croesus that he
that has the best Steel will command all his Gold and Silver. Here many justly
admire at the prodigeous greatness of some ancient Corslets. If Tully, seeing
a little man wearing a long Sword, said pleasantly, that he was alligatus
gladio, tied to his Sword, surely at the Sight hereof he would conclude Wearers
imprisoned in their arms. This has put men on many Conjectures, some
collecting hence the Strength and Stature of the Former ages, far above ours.
Others parrallel them with the Shields left by Alexander to lie in India,
purposely to possess posterity with an untruth, about the proportion of the
persons of his Soldiers. If I may interpose my conjecture (and if he may speak
of John of Gaunt, who never fought in his armor) I conceive those Arms so
signally great, not made to march in (as too ponderous for any under a Giant)
but to stand therein in a breach where they might be serviceable.

Nor can a general diminution of Men's strength be justly inferred from the
Disproportion of Arms in our and former ages. I say General Diminution, seeing
all ages even in the same Country have produced some of greater some of (...)
Dimensions. For if we compare the common Armor used Three hundred years since
(and yet extant in the Tower) with ours of Modern use, no such sensible
difference will be found betwixt them, as should argue an Universal decay. It
is confessed that their Arrows exceeded ours both in bigness and length. But a
Dr. Hac will in his Apology page (...).
learned Author (...) this rather to their continual practice in shooting from
their Infancy, then to their strength and Stature: so that it is rather Difuse,
then disability in our age, that we cannot shoot the like, and since the
Invention of Guns, the Light use we make of Arrows, have made them the lighter
in the making.

Mint.
Many of these anciently in most Cities and some Towns. These afterward (as so
many Spangles in one piece of Gold) were united in the Tower.

Of late it was much employed to coin the Plate of our Nation, to make
State-mony, whence one said,

Caesaris Effigies nulla est, sed imaginis Expers,
Crux duplex super est dira, gemensque Lyra.
And Another,

May their Success, like to their Coin appear,
Send double Crosses for their Single Cheer.
Sure I am, their Coin, goes under a general suspicion of being as bad as
their Cause. But I hope hereafter, when the Question is asked of our Coiners,
Whose Image and Superscription is this? it will be returned the Caesar's of
England.

Wardrobe.
This was not that for the Kings wearing apparel, or live^es of Servants kept
elsewhere in an House so called, in the Parish of St. Andrews Ward robe, but
for Vests or Robes of State, with rich Carpets, Canopies and Hangings to be
used on great Solemnities. Here lately was a rich piece It now hangs in the
Painted Chamber.
of Arras, presenting the Sea Fight in eighty eighth, and having the living
portractures of the chiefest Commanders, wrought in the borders thereof. On the
same token, that a Lord Verulam in his (...).
Captain, who highly prized his own service, missing his picture therein,
complained of the injury to his friend, professing of himself that he merited a
place there, as well as some therein remembered, seeing he was engaged in the
middle of the Fight. Be content (quoth his friend) thou have been an old
Pirate, and art reserved for another hanging.

There were also kept in this place, the ancient Clothes of our English Kings,
which they wore on great Festivals; so that this Ward robe was in effect a
Library for Antiquaries, therein to read the Mode and Fashion of Garments in
all ages. These King James, in the beginning of his Reign, gave to the Earl of
Dunbar, by whom they were sold, resold, and re-re-resold at as many hands
almost as Briarius had, some gaining vast Estates thereby.

The Unicorns-Horn.
Amongst the many precious rarities in the Tower, this (as another in
Windsor-Castle) was in my memory, shown to people. It belongs not to me to
enquire, what is become of them, but rather to discuss,

1. Whether there be such a creature as an Unicorn. 2. What kind of Animal it
is? 3. What the fashion and color of his Horn. 4. What the use and effect. of
his Horn.
For the first, they produce a weak proof, who allege them to be the
Supporters of the Scottish-arms, and of the arms of some English Gentlemen,
particularly of the Family of Paris in Cambridge-shire; seeing most Heralds
wear the addition of Painters, and the Fancy of Painters pretends to the
privilege of a lawless Liberty. But, besides that it is uncivil to give the
lie to a common Tradition, the former existence of such a creature (and surely
no Species is wholly lost) is cleared from several places of Scripture, Number.
23. 22.
God has as it were the strength of an Unicorn. Job. 39. 9.
Will the Unicorn be willing to serve thee? Psalm. 22. 10.
My Horn shall thou exalt like the Horn of an Unicorn, etc. True it is, the
Word in the (...) (...) Reem.
Original imports nothing of any Horn therein (as does the Latin Unicornis,
and the Greek Monoceros) Yet I am confident it is right rendered, because it is
so rendered. Such was the Learning and Piety of the persons employed in that
Translation.

Proceed we now to the second Quaere about the kind thereof. Surely it is
distinct from the Rhinoceros (carrying a Horn not on his Forehead but on his
Nose) because the Exaltation of his Horn is not considerable, as not bunching
forth much above a Foot in the prominency thereof. He is commonly pictured,
bodyed like a Buck, with a Horn advanced out of his Forehead, some two Yards in
proportion, and this his Picture confuteth his Picture, seeing generally he is
held to be no Beast of Prey, but which feeds on the grass, and if so, his
Mouth cannot meet with the Ground; the Interposition of his Horn so fancifully
fixed, making so great distance betwixt them.

The plain Truth is, I, who first questioned whether there were any Unicorns,
am since convin^ed that there are so many sorts of them, The Indian Ox, the
Indian Ass, the O^yx, etc. famous for carrying one Horn, but which is the
prize in this Lottery I cannot decide, seeing none alive in our Land have seen
a four footed Beast of that kind, and Julius Scaliger says truly,

Ex libris colligere quae prodider unt Authors long est periculosissimum;
Rerum ipsarum cognitio vera e rebus ipsis est.

OLAUS WORM, One no less a curious Inquirer into the Mysteries, then careful
preserver of the Rarities of Nature, Physician at this day to the King of
Denmark, in a Learned Work which he lately set forth endeavors to prove all
under a general mistake, who fancy a Unicorn a four footed Beast, proving the
same to be a Fish in the Northern Seas, of 22. Foot in Length, a long horn in
his Forehead (no more cumbersome in the portage, then Ears are to other Beasts)
with which Horn he tilteth at his prey, and having pierced it through, does
afterward feed upon it.

If it be objected to the contrary, that in (...). 34. 7.
Scripture he is ranked amongst the Qua^; And the Unicorns shall come down with
them, and the Bullocks with the Bulls, and their Land shall be soaked with
blood, and their Dust made Fat with Fatness; It will be answered, that
Unicorns there are not real, but metaphorical (rendered appellatively Robusti in
some Translations) importing that strong Enemies both by Water and Land, shall
invade Idumaea to the utter destruction thereof.

Come we now to the fashion and color of the Horn, conceiving it no
considerable controversy concerning the length and bigness thereof, quantity
not varying the kind in such cases. Some are plain, as that in St. Marks in
Venice; others wreathed about, as that at St. Dyonis near Paris, with
anfractuous spires, and cocleary turnings about it, which probably is the
effect of age, those Wreaths being but the wrinkles of most vivacious Unicorns.
The same may be said of the color, white, when newly taken from his Head;
Yellow, like that lately in the Tower of some hundred years seniority, but
whether or no it will ever turn black, as that of Aelians and Plinies
Description, let others decide.

The last Quaere remains of the virtue of this Horn, which some exalt so high,
that it is not only antidotal to several Venomes, and substances destructive by
their qualities, which we can command our selves to believe; but also that it
resists poisons which kill by second qualities, that is, by corrosion of
parts; wherein I concur with my learned Tho. Brown Dr. of Physic in his
Enquiries into vulgar Errors B. 3. cap. 23.
Author, and doubt such exceed the properties of its nature, and the promises
of experiment will not secure the adventure; and I believe few Mountebanks will
be so daring as to poison themselves on the Security of such an Alexipharmacon.

I have done Reader with this Subject, when I have told thee that two of my
worthy friends (yea, the Friends to Mankind by their general generosity) Dr.
Baldwin Hamey and Sir Francis Prugean, the one had the Horn it self (which to
my dim eyes at some distance seemed like a Taper of wreathed Wax) the other
has the Socket (as I may term it) of the Fish, into which this Horn was fixed.
I have heard, that upon Experiment, a great cure against poison has been done
with some Grains the^erof; and it is improbable that the Vigor of the vigor
of Nature, should extrude that so specious to Sight, which is not also
Sovereign to Service. Since I am informed that the same Dr. Hamey, has parted
with the Propriety thereof to the College of Physicians, and they have
solemnly presented this Unicorns Horn to his Majesty, to supply the place of
that in the Tower, which our Civil wars have embeseled.

Proverbs.
A London Jury, hang half and save half.]

Some affirm this of an Essex, others of a Middlesex Jury, and my Charity
believes it equally true, that is, equally untrue of all three: What gave first
occasion to this Libelling Proverb I know not; this I know, reports of this
Nature, like round bodies, down Precepices, once m^ved move themselves, and a
Mouse may stir what a man cannot stay in this kind. The best is, though none
can hinder a Slanderer from speaking, they may hinder them from speaking Truth.

This Proverb would fain suggest to credulous people, as if Londoners
frequently impannelled on Juries, and loaded with multiplicity of matters, aim
more at dispatch then Justice, and to make quick Riddance (though no have to
hang true men) acquit half and condemn half. Thus ^hey divide themselves in
aequilibrio, betwixt Justice and mercy, though it were meet the latter should
have the more advantage, and the Beam break on the pitiful side. Others extend
this Proverb also to their arbitrations betwixt party and party; as if not
minding the merits of the cause, they cleave the thing controverted into equal
moities betwixt Plainuff and Defendant.

The falsnesse of these Suggestions will appear to such, who by perusing
History do discover the London Jurors most conscientious in proceeding secundum
allegata and probata, always inclining to the merciful side in saving life,
when they can find any cause or color for the same, and amongst many thousands
take two most memorable Instances.

The first, Sir Nicholas Throgmorton, who on the 17 of April 1554. was (in the
Reign of Queen Mary) arraigned for High Treason in Guildhall, before Sir Thomas
White Lord Mayor, the Earls of Shrewsbury and Derby, Sir Thomas Bromley Lord
Chief Justice, etc. Mr. Edward Griffin the Attorney General, pressed the
Prisoner very sorely for his Correspondency with the Carews in the West, and
his being privy to the Rising of Sir Thomas Wyat. Sir Nicholas pleaded many
hours for himself, no less stoutly then wisely, yet with due submission to the
Conrt, till at last his Jury passed upon him, whose names ad perpetuam rei
memoriam are here inserted.

Hollingshead chron. p. 1105.
1. Wheston. 2. Lucar. 3. Young. 4. Martin. 5. Beswike. 6. Barscarfeld. 7.
Kightleie. 8. Low. 9. Painter. 10. Banks. 11. Calthrop. 12. Cater.

These acquitted the Prisoner, and though much menaced by the Court, stood
stoutly to their Verdict, for which they were all imprisoned, five Idem p. 1126.
of them fined, and paid 260. l. a piece, the rest lower Sums, and after their
discharge from durance, commanded to attend the Council Table at an Stows
chron. page 624. who says, they were fined 500. l. a piece
hours warning.

The other is of a person who was lately arraigned in Guildhall, and whom I
list not to name, partly because he is easily guessed, partly because he was of
so turbulent a Spirit, that his Name would set all my Book at dissension. He
being charged with what concerned his Life, was by an uncorrupted Jury, though
heavily pressed to the contrary, clearly acquitted, and one passage (omitted in
his printed Trial) I must here insert.

Speaking his Farewell to the Jury now ready to depart the Bar, he requested
them to remember a Statute in the Reign of King Henry the Seventh, as making
much in his behalf. Sirrah, said one Judge on the Bench to this Prisoner, I
know that Statute better then you do; to whom he calmly replied, I believe you
Sir, but I desire that these Gentlemen of the Jury should understand it but as
well as I do; and so it seems they did, for his life was saved thereby.

A Fool will not part with his Bawble for the Tower of London.]

This Tower anciently was (and in part still is) the Magazine of Englands
Wealth. There the Silver, the Mint of Money, and there the Brass and Iron to
defend it, the Armory and Storehouse of Ordnance; yet Fools so dote on their
darling Fancies, that they prize them above all this Treasure. But alas! Quod
scribimus, and Legimus, and ridemus, hoc facimus; We do our selves what we
deride in others. Every one is addicted to some vanity or other, which he will
not part with on any conditions, so weak and wilful we are by nature. He that
will not freely and sadly confess that he is much a Fool, is all a Fool.

London Lick Penny.]

The Countryman coming up hither by his own experience will easily expound the
meaning thereof. The best is, it is also London Get Penny, to those who live
here, and carefully follow their Vocations.

London Cockneys.]

Let us observe first the antiquity of this Proverb, then the meaning; Lastly,
the Application thereof to Londoners. It is more then four hundred years old;
for when Hugh Bigot, added artificial fortifications to the natural strength of
his Castle at Bungey in Suffolk, he gave out this Rhyme, therein vaunting it
for impregnable;

Were I in my Castle of Bungey,
Upon the River of Waveney,
I would ne care for the King of Camd. Brit. in Suffolk.
Cockeney.
Meaning thereby King Henry the Second, then peaceably possessed of London
whilst some other places did resist him, though afterward he so humbled this
Hugh, that he was fain with large sums of money, and pledges for his Loyalty,
to redeem this his Castle from being razed to the Ground.

I meet with a double sense of this word Cockeney, some taking it for,

1. One coaks'd or cockered, made a wanton or Nestle-cock of, delicately bred
and brought up, so that when grown Men or Women, they can endure no hardship,
nor comport with pains taking. 2. One utterly ignorant of Husbandry, and
Huswifery, such as is practiced in the Country, so that they may be persuaded
any thing about Rural Commodities, and the Original thereof, and the Tale of
the Citizens Son, who knew not the Language of Cock, but called it Neighing is
commonly known.
Here I take no Notice of his Minshews Diction. in the word Cockney.
Fancy who will have it called Cockney by Transposition, quasi Incoct, raw and
rude, as forced and far fetched.

The Name is generally fixed on such who are born within the Sound of Bow-Bell,
and are tender enough, and sufficiently ignorant in Country businesses. One
merrily persuaded a She Citizen, that seeing Malt did not grow, the good
Huswifes in the Country did spin it; I knew as much said the Cockney, for one
may see the Threads hang out at the ends thereof. However, be it known unto all
people, that as there are delicate and silly Folk in the Country; so are there
as hardy men and skilful Huswives in the City, no disparagement to any of what
place soever.

Ane ill word meets another, and it were at the Bridge of London.]

This is a Scottish Proverb by David Ferauson Minist^r at (...).
Proverb, and indeed a Scottish Text needs a Scottish Comment thereon. However,
I thus guess at the meaning thereof; London Bridge is notoriously known for a
narrow pass, and numerous passengers, so that people meeting thereon, a
Quarrel will quickly be engendered, if one of them has not the wit or patience,
to step into a Shop, if on foot; if on Horseback to stay in the void places.
Thus Words quickly inflame a difference, except one of the parties have the
Discretion of silence, yiedling or departure.

Billings-gate Language.]

Billings was formerly a Gate, though now rather portus then porta, being the
prime Landing place, and Market for some Sea Commodities. Now, although as
fashionable people live there, as elsewhere in the City, yet much rude folk
repair thither, so that one may term this the Esculine Gate of London, from the
dross and dregs of the baser people flocking thither. Here one may hear
Linguas jurgatrices; yea shrewd words are sometimes improved into smart blows
betwixt them. I doubt not, but that Rome, Venice, Paris, and all populous
Cities have their Billings-gate Language, in those places where rude people
make their Rendezvous.

Kirbies Castle, and Megses Glory.

Spinolas Pleasure, and Fishers Folly.]

These were four houses about the City, built by Citizens, large and sumptuous
above their Estates, whose Memories are likely longer to continue by this
Rhyme, then by their own pompous buildings.

The first of these is so uncastelled, the Glory of the second so obscured,
that very few know (and it were needless to tell them) where these houses were
fixed.

As for Spinola (a Genoan made Free-Denizon) the Master and Fellows of a
College in Cambridge, know too well what he was, by their expensive Suit known
to posterity, by Magdalen College Case. If his own Country (I mean the
Italian) curse did overtake him, and if the Plague of Building did light upon
him, few I believe did pity him.

As for the last, it was built by Jasper Fisher, Free of the Goldsmiths, one of
the six Clerks in Chancery, and a Justice of Peace, who, being a Man of no
great Wealth (as indebted to many) built here a Beautiful house, with Gardens
of pleasure, and * Stows Survey p. 175.
Bouling Alleys about it, called Devonshire House at this Day.

However, it seems this was an ancient Vanity, even in the Days of King David,
* Psalm. 49. 11.
Their inward thought is, that their Houses shall continue for ever, and their
dwelling places to all Generations: They call their Lands after their own names.

He will follow him like a St. Anthonies pig.]

St. Anthony is notoriously know for the Patron of Hogs, having a pig for his
page in all pictur^s, though for what reason unknown, except, because being an
Hermit, and having a Cell or hole, dug in the earth, and having his general
repast on roots, he and hogs did in some sort entercommon both in their diet
and lodging.

There was a fair Hospital built to the honor of St. Anthony, in Bennets Fink
in this City. The Protectors and Proctors whereof claimed a privilege to
themselves, to garble the Live Pigs in the Markets of the City, and such as
they found starved, or otherwise unwholsom for man's sustenance, they would slit
in the ear, tie a Stows Survey of London, page 190.
Bell about their Necks, and let them loose about the City.

None durst hurt or take them up (having this Livery of St. Anthony upon them)
but many would give them bread, and feed them in their passage, whom they used
to follow whining after them. But, if such Pigs proved fat, and well liking (as
often they did) the Officers of St. Anthonies Hospital would seize on them for
their own use.

The Proverb is appliable to such, who have servile saleable souls, who for a
small reward, will lack-wey many Miles, pressing their Patrons with their
unwelcome importunity.

He was born within the Sound of Bow-Bell.]

This is the Periphrasis of a Londoner at large, born within the Suburbs
thereof; the Sound of this Bell exceeding the extent of the Lord Majors Mace.
It is called Bow-bell, because hanging in the Steeple of Bow-Church, and
Bow-Church because built on Bows or Arches. Stows Survey of London. page 269.
John Dun Mercer, gave 1472, two Tenements to maintain the ringing of this Bell
nightly at Nine a clock, which sounded to Servants a Retreat from their Work,
and a March to their Supper and Bed; and therefore conceived by some Masters to
ring too soon, by most Apprentices too late. William Copland the Kings Merchant
about the Year 1520. gave a bigger Bell for the same purpose, and had the
hansel thereof himself, being first rang as a Knell at his Burial.

-- St. Peter's in the Poor.
Where no Tavern Alehouse or Sign at the Door.]
Under Correction I conceive it called in the Poor, because the Augustinian
Friars professing wilful poverty, for some hundred of years, possessed more
than a Moiety thereof. But as one gave for his Motto Malim dives esse quam
haberi; this Parish may say Malim pauper vocari quam esse, which ever was (not
to say is) one of the richest in London, which their Signlesse houses do
avouch, being a Sign of the eminency of their Inhabitants, ubi quisque sui
ipsius index, sufficiently notified and distinguished by themselves.

How ancient the use of Signs in this City on private houses is to me unknown,
sure I am, it was generally used in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth,
Witness that dear jest of a well meaning Citizen, who lost his life in those
dangerous times for saying he would leave the Crown to his Son.

I suspect this Proverb is lately a little discomposed, and that some public
houses for entertainment have stepped or crept into this Parish.

To dine with Duke Humphrey.]

This Proverb has altered the original meaning thereof. For first it signified
aliena vivere quadra, to eat by the bounty, or feed by the favor of another
man. For Humphrey Duke of Gloucester (commonly called the good Duke) was so
hospital, that every man of Fashion, otherwise unprovided, was welcome to Dine
with him. It not being so proper for Strangers to sup in those days, with the
greatest House keepers. The said Duke was so bountiful, that his Stows Survey
of London. page 75.
Alms-dish of Silver, was very massy when empty (what then when full;) which
Alms-dish came afterward into the possession of the Duke of Somerset, who sent
it to the Lord Rivers, to sell the same to furnish himself for a Sea-voyage.

But after the Death of good Duke Humphrey, (when many of his former Alms-men
were at a loss for a meals meat) this Proverb did alter its Copy, to Dine with
Duke Humphrey, importing, to be Dinnerlesse.

A general mistake fixed this sense, namely, that Duke Humphrey was buried in
the Body of St. Paul's Church, where many men chaw their meat with feet, and
walk away the want of a Dinner; whereas indeed that noble person interred in
St. Paul's, was Sir Idem p. 368.
John Beauchamp Constable of Dover, Warden of the Cinque Ports, Knight of the
Garter, Son to Guy Earl of Warwick, and Brother to Thomas Earl of Warwick,
whilst Duke Humphrey was honorably buried in St. Albans.

I will use you as bad as a Jew.]

I am sure I have carried the Child home, and laid it at the Fathers House,
having traced this Proverb by the Tract from England in General to London,
thence to the Old Jury, whence it had its first Original; that poor Nation
(especially on ShroveTuesday) being intollerably abused by the English, whilst
they lived in the Land.

I could wish, that wheresoever the Jews live, they may not find so much
courtesy as to confirm them in their false, yet not so much Cruelty as to
discourage them from the true Religion; till which time I can bemone their
Misery, condemn the Christians Cruelty, and admire Gods justice in both.

See we it here now fulfilled, which God long since Deuteronomy. 28. 37. 1 Kings 9. 7.
Jer. 24. 9.
frequently foretold, and threatened, namely that he would make the Jews become
a Proverb, if continuing Rebellious against him. I pass not for the Flouts of
profane Pagans, scoffing at the Jews Religion, Juven. Sat.
Credat Judaeus Apella, but to behold them thus Proverbiascere, for their
Rebellions against God, minds me of the performance of Gods Threatening unto
them.

Good manners to except my Lord Mayor of London.]

This is a corrective for such, whose expressions are of the largest size, and
too general in their extent, parallel to the Logic Maxim; Primum in unoquoque
genere est excipiendum, as too high to come under the Roof of comparison. In
some cases it is not civil to fill up all the room in our speeches of our
selves, but to leave an upper place void, as a blank reserved for our betters.

I have dined as well as my Lord Mayor of London.]

That this Proverb may not cross the former, know, that as well is not taken
for as dubiously or daintily, on Variety of Costly Dishes, in which kinds, the
Lord Mayor is Paramount for Magnificence. For (not to speak of his solemn
Invitations, as when Henry Pickard, Lord Mayor 1357. did in one day entertain a
Stows Survey of London, page 87.
Mess of Kings, Edward King of England, John King of France, David King of
Scots, and the King of Cyprus, besides Edward Prince of Wales, and many prime
Noblemen of the Land) his daily Dinners, are Feasts both for Plenty, Guests
and Attendants. But the Proverb has its modest meaning, I have dined as well,
that is, as comfortable, as contentedly, according to the Rule; Satis est quod
sufficit, enough is as good as a Feast, and better then a Surfeit, and indeed
Nature is contented with a little, and Grace with less.

As old as Paul's Steeple.]

Different are the Dates of the Age thereof, because it had two births or
beginnings. For if we count it from the time wherein it was originally
co-founded by K. Ethelbert, with the Body of the Church, Anno six hundred and
ten, then it is above a thousand and forty years of Age. But if we reckon it
from the year 1087. when burnt with Lightning from Heaven, and afterward
rebuilt by the Bishops of London; it is not above five hundred years old. And
though this Proverb falls far short of the Latin ones, Antiquius Arcadibus,
Antiquius Saturno: yet serves it sufficiently to be returned to such, who
pretend those things to be Novell, which are known to be stale, old, and almost
antiquated.

He is only fit for Ruffians-Hall.]

A Ruffian is the same with a Swaggerer, so called, because endeavoring to make
that Side to swag or weigh down, whereon he ingageth. The same also with
Swash-Buckler, from swashing, or making a noise on Bucklers. West-Smith-field
(now the HorseMarket) was formerly called Continuer of Stows Annals page 1024.
Ruffians-Hall, where such men met casually and otherwise, to try Masteries
with Sword and Buckler. More were frighted then hurt, hurt then killed
therewith, it being accounted unmanly to strike beneath the Knee, because in
effect it was as one armed against a naked man. But since that desperate
Traitor Rowland York Camd. Eliz. in Anno. 1587.
first used thrusting with Rapiers, Swords and Bucklers are disused, and the
Proverb only appliable to quarrelsome people (not tame, but wild Barretters)
who delight in brawls and blows.

A Loyal heart may be landed under Traitors Bridge.]

This is a Bridge under which is an Entrance into the Tower (over against Pink
Gate) formerly fatal to those who landed there, there being a muttering that
such never came forth alive, as dying (to say no worse) therein, without any
Legal Trial. The Proverb imports, that passive Innocence overpowered with
Adversaries, may be accused without cause, and disposed at the pleasure of
others; it being true of all Prisoners, what our Savior said to and of St.
Joh. 21. 18.
Peter, Another shall carry thee whither thou would not.

Queen Elizabeth may be a proof hereof, who in the Reign of Queen Mary her
Sister, first stayed and denied to Land at those Stairs, where all Traitors and
Offenders customably used to Land, till a Lord (which my Fox Acts and
Monuments, page 2092.
Author would not, and I cannot name) told her she should not choose, and so
she was forced accordingly.

To cast water into the Thames.]

That is, to give to them w^o had plenty before; which notwithstanding is the
dole general of the World. Yet let not Thames be proud of his full and fair
stream, seeing Water may be wanting therein, as it was Anno 1158. the Fourth of
William Rufus, when men might walk over Stows Chron. in An. notato.
dryshod; and again Idem in Anno notato.
Anno 1582. a strong Wind lying West and by South, which forced out the Fresh
and kept back the Salt Water.

He must take him a House in J. Heywood in his Epigrams number. 69.
Turn-again Lane.]

This in old Records is called Stows Survey of London, page 427.
Wind-again Lane, and lies in the Parish of St. Sepulchers, going down to
Fleet-Dike, which men must turn again the same way they came, for there it is
stopped. The Proverb is applied to those, who sensible that they embrace
destructive courses, must seasonably alter their manners, which they may do
without any shame to themselves; it is better to come back through Turn-again
(though a narrow and obscure) Lane, then to go (on an ill account) straight
forwards in a fair street hard by, whence, Vestigia nulla retrorsum, as leading
Westward to Execution.

He may whet his Knife on the Threshold of the Fleet.]

The Fleet is a place notoriousl^ known for a Prison, to which many are
committed for their contempts, more for their debts. So called it is from a
Brook running by, as that (of Tygris in Armenia) from its former Fleetnesse,
though now it creeps flow enough, not so much for age; as the injection of
City excrements wherewith it is so obstructed.

The Proverb is appliable to those who never owed ought, or else having run
into debt have crept out of it, so that now they may defy danger and arrests,
yea may triumphare in Hostico, laugh in the Face of the Sergeants. Surely the
Threshold of the Fleet so used, sets a good edge on the Knife, and a better
on the Wearer thereof, acting him with a Spirit free from all engagements.

All goes down Gutter-lane.

There is a small Lane (inhabited anciently by Gold-beaters) leading out of
Cheapside, East of Foster-lane, which Orthography presents to the Reader by the
name of Stows Survey of London. Page 338.
Guthurun-Lane, from him the once Owner thereof. But common people (we must
speak with the volge and think with the wise) call it Guttur Lane, pleading for
their mispronouncing it, that the narrow form thereof is like the Throat or
Gullet, and such a one would have pleased Apitius the Epicure, who wished to
himself Tricubitale Guttur.

The Proverb is appliable to those who spend all in Drunkenness and Gluttony,
mere Belly-Gods, whom the Arist. moral. l. 3.
Philosopher called (...): I confess the word both in sound and sense, has
some affinity with that of St. Paul's of the Tit. 1. 12.
Gretians, (...), Idle-bellyes, save that our Gastrimargi are far worse, so
named from the mere madness and distraction of their appetite.

As Lame as St. Giles Criple-gate.]

St. Giles was by ^irth an Athenian, of noble Extraction and great Estate, but
quitted all for a solitary Life. He was visited with a Lamenesse (whether
natural or casual I know not) but the Tradition goes, that he desired not to be
healed thereof for his greater mortification: if so, his Judgment differed
from all the good Lamemen in the Gospel, importunate for ease from their
infirmity. He is accounted the Patron of Criples; and whereas Churches
dedicated to other Saints of better Footmanship, get the speed of him and come
into the City, generally Lame St. Giles laggeth behind in the Suburbs, as in
London, Cambridge, Salisbury, etc.

Criplegate was so called before the Stows Survey of London. page 32.
Conquest, from Criples begging of Passengers therein. And indeed they may
prescribe for their Custom, ever since the Lameman begged an Alms of ^eter and
John at the beautiful Gate of the Temple. * Acts 3. 2.


This Proverb may seem guilty of false Herauldry, Lamenesse on Lamenesse, and
in common Discourse, is spoken rather merrily then mournfully of such, who for
some light hurt, lagg behind, and sometimes is applied to those, who out of
Laziness (none so lame as they that will not go) counterfeit Infirmity.

You are all for the Hoistings, or Hustings.]

It is spoken of those who by Pride or Passion are mounted or elated to a pitch
above the due proportion of their Birth, Quality, or Estate; such as are all in
Altitudinibus, so that Common persons know not how to behave themselves unto
them. It comes from Hustings, the Principal and highest Court in London, (as
also in Winchester, Lincoln, York, etc.) so called from the French word
Haulser, to raise or lift up.

The mention of the Hustings, a Court so called, minds me of another Court,
called the Court of Hall-mote, and I am resolved to run the hazard of the
Reader's anger with this my Digression, to rectify a mistake in some, and
prevent it in others.

Sir Edward Coke, Institut. 4. part. cap. 9.

This is derived of Hall and Mote, as much as to say, the Hall Court, id est,
Conventus Civium in Aulam Publicam; Every Company in London having a Hall
wherein they kept their Courts, and this Court anciently called Hall-Mote, or
Folk-Mote.

With whom verbatim concurreth (who would not willingly dissent from him in
point of Common Law) the Learned Doctor Cowel in his Interpreter.

But let all take heed that they confound not this Court, with another more
Ancient, (and more proper for the cognizance of the Pen of a Divine) viz.
Haly-Mote Court, being a Court derived from Haly, which is Holy, and Mote a
Meeting, being an Assembly kept before the Lord Mayor and Sheriffs, for the
Regulation of the Company of the Bakers in London, (wherein the Staff of
Bread, and therein the Life of the poor is so much concerned) formerly kept on
the Lords Day, (whence it took its Name) before the Feast of St. Thomas. But a
Court of Common Council (...). the 15th. 1609. altered that Court, until the
Thursday before St. Thomas's Day, as since by a later act of the same Council,
it is Removed unto the Monday before the said Festival. The Ancient Title of
this Court ran as follows;

Curia Sancti-Motus tenta in Guilhaldea Civitatis London. coram Majore, and
Vicecomitibus Civitatis London. Die Dominico proximo ante Festum St. Thomae
Apostoli, ad horam sextam, ante Meridiem ejusdem Diei, secundum Consuetudinem
Civitatis London.

Such who are Learned in the Laws, and are pleased to reflect on the Name of
my Author Mr. Richard Smith still living, quondam Seneschallus Curiae
Sancti-Motus antedi^.
and Worthy Friend on the Margin, will not in the least Degree suspect the
Truth hereof.

Before I come to enroll the List of the Worthies of this City, I premise the
words Londinas and Londinensis, as some have curiously stated their Senses,
according to whose fancy,

1. Londinas signifies one born in London wheresoever he does live. 2.
Londinensis one living in wheresoever he was born.

Could this be made a truth, this distinction would be very serviceable to me
in this work; but it will not hold water, finding on due enquiry, that by the
best Critics, both are used promiscuously for an^, either born, or living in
that City, save, that Londinas (answering to the Question Cujas) signifies
Persons alone, whilst Londinensis imports either Persons or Things relating
to that City, as Turris Londinensis, Pons Londinensis, etc.

Princes.
KATHERINE third Daughter of K. Henry the third, and Q. Eleanor, was born at
Speeds Chronicle, page 551.
London, Anno Dom. 1252. November the 25th. being St. Katherins day, whose name
was therefore given unto her at the Font, by Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury,
her Uncle and Godfather. She dyed in her very Infancy, on whom we will presume
to bestow this Epitaph.

Wak't from the womb, she on this world did peep,
Dislik tit, closed her eyes, fell fast asleep.
She lies interred at Westminster, in the space betwixt the Chapels of King
Edward and St. Bennet.

JOAN Eldest Daughter, and third child of K. Edward the second, and Q. Isabel,
was born in the Speeds Chro. page 576.
Tower of London, about the year 1316. She was afterward married to David the
second, K. of Scotland, continuing his wife twenty eight years. This was she (
Others apply it to Joan Daughter to K. John, wife to Alexander the 2. King of
Scotland.
as I conceive) who was commonly called Joan Make-Peace; (and we know Blessed
are the peace makers) improving her power (though sometimes with small
success) to do good offices betwixt the two Kingdoms. Coming into England to
visit her Brother K. Edward the third, she deceased here without issue, Anno
1357. and lies buried in Gray-Friers London.

It will not be amiss in Reference to her Name, here to observe, that Joan
(which is Feminine to John) was a frequent name in the Royal Family of England,
as also amongst Foreign Princes; and no wonder, seeing we find a worthy woman
of that name, Luke the 8. 3.
Benefactresse to our Savior himself. However, seeing in later times it has
been counted but a Course and homely name, and some Proverbs of Contempt have
been cast thereon: it has since been m ollified into Jane, (sounding finer it
seems to an English ear) though this modern name will hardly be found in any
English writer three hundred years ago.

KATHERINE, youngest Daughter to K. Henry the 7. and Elizabeth his Queen, was
born in the Tower of London, on the 2 day of February, Anno Dom. 1503.
deceasing few days after.

It is a sad (and probably too true an) account, of an Ancient man, which is
given in his Epitaph,

Camdens Remains.
Here lies the man was born, and cried,
Lived sixty years, fell sick, and died.
What was a bad Character of his aged unprofitablenesse, is a good one of this
infant Ladies innocence, of whom we know nothing, save that she sucked, fell
sick and deceased. Only let me add, she was the last Princess born in the
Tower; our English Kings hereafter removing their residence to Bridewel and
White Hall, and using the Tower not so much as a Palace for the State, as
Prison for the strength thereof.

ANNA BOLLEN, Daughter of the Lord Thomas Bollen Earl of Wiltshire, was (as A M
P.
some of her Honorable relations still surviving do conjecture) born in
London, and became second Wife to K. Henry 8th. Indeed he passionately affected
her, when but a Lords Daughter, but did not marry her till she was a Princess;
Created by him Marchioness of Pembroke, partly to make her the more
proportionable Match, and partly to try how she would become a ^oronet, before
she wore a Crown.

The Papists much disparage her memory (malice will lie, or must be dumb)
making all her Wit to consist in Boldness, her Beauty in a French garb and her
Modesty in a Cunning ^oynesse; whereas indeed she was a Lady accomplished in
Body, (was it likely K. Henry would love what was not lovely?) and Virtuous in
Mind, and, whilst a Favorite of the Kings, a Favourer of all good men, and
great Promoter of the Gospel. The Inconstancy of her husbands affections, is
conceived by most moderate men, (what else soever was pretended) her chiefest
crime, and cause of her death, which happened Anno 1536.

KATHERINE HOWARD, Daughter to the Lord Edmond Howard, son to Thomas A M P.
Duke of Norfolk, was (though her father had large lands and houses in many
places) probably born in London, and at last became fifth wife to K. Henry the
eighth. Such as desire to know the names, number and success of all six, may
conceive K. Henry thus speaking on his death bed,

Three Kates, two Nans, and one dear Jane I wedded,
One Spanish, one Dutch, and four English Wives,
From two I was divorced, two I beheaded,
One died in childbed, and one me survives.
Of this Katherine Howard little is reported, and yet too much, if all be true,
of her incontinency, which cost her her life. The greatest good the Land got by
this match, was a general leave to marry Cousin-Germans, formerly prohibited by
the Canon, and hereafter permitted by the Common Law; A door of lawful liberty
left open by God in Scripture, shut by the Pope for his private profit, opened
again by the King, first, for his own admittance, (this Katherine being
Cousin-German to Anna Bollen, his former Wife) and then for the service of such
Subjects, as would follow him upon the like occasion. This Lady was beheaded
Anno Domini 1540.

Saints.
Not to speak of St. Sedd born in this City, Hierom Porter, Lives of the
Saints, page 25.
and afterward Bishop thereof, of whom we find nothing reported, save that he
was very instrumental to the converting of the Mercians; we begin with

WULSINE who was born in this Hierom ^ter, in his flowers of the lives of Engl.
Saints. Janury 8.
City, of worthy Parents, breeding him up in the Devotion of that age; and
became a Benedictine Monk, till at last by his fast friend St. Dunstan, he was
preferred, first Abbot of Westminster, whence he was afterward removed to be
Bishop of Sherburne in Dorsetshire. A mighty Champion he was for a Monastical
life, and therefore could not be quiet till he had driven all the secular
priests out of Sherburne, and substituted Monks in their room. I read not of
any Miracle done by him either whilst living, or when dead, save, that in the
juncture of both, he is said with St. Stephen to have seen Heavens opened, etc.
He had contracted great intimacy with one Egeline, a virtuous Knight, who died
on the same day with him, and he enjoined his Monks that they should both be
buried in one Grave; their joint death happened January the 8th. Anno 985.

THOMAS BECKET, son to Gilbert Becket Merchant, and Maud his wife, was born in
this City, in the place where now Mercers-Chappel is erected. I have, Reader,
been so prodigal in the large description of his life, in my Ecclesiastical
History, that I have no new observable left to present you with. Only when I
consider of the multitude of vows, made by superstitious Pilgrims to his Sbrine
(where the stones were hallowed with their bended knees) I much admire at their
Will Worship, no vows appearing in Scripture but what were made to God alone.
And therefore most impudent is the attempt of those Papists, tampering to
corrupt Holy Writ, in favor of such vows, reading in the Vulgar Latin, Prove.
20. 25.

Ruina est homini devotare Sanctos, and post vota retractare. Instead of Ruina
est homini devorare Sancta, and post vota retractare. It is a snare to a man
who often makes vows to Saints, and after vows retracteth them. It is a
snare to a man who devoureth that which is holy, and after vows to make
enquiry.

This Becket was slain (as is notoriously known) on Innocents-day, in his own
Church of Canterbury, 1170.

Martyrs.
WILLIAM SAUTRE, alias Chatris, Parish Priest of the Church of St. Osiths
London, was the first Englishman that was put to death by fire, for maintaining
the opinions of Wicliffe.

In the Primitive times (pardon Reader, no impertinent digression) such the
lenity and tenderness of the Fathers of the Church, toward Heretics, that,
contenting themselves with condemning their blasphemous opinions, they
proceeded to no penalty on their persons. Yea, in after ages, when the
Christian Augustine Epist. 68.
Emperor would have punished the furious Donatists with a pecunlary mulct, the
Holy men of those times so earnestly interceded, as to procure the remission.
And St. Augustine himself, who was most zealous in his writing against those
Donatists, Epist. 127. and Retract. lib. 2. cap. 5.
professes he had rather be himself slain by them, than by detecting them, be
any cause they should undergo the punishment of death. Whereas henceforward in
England, many were brought to the fire by the Bishops, and others of the
Clergy, whose opinions were neither so blasphemous, nor deportment so inhumane
as ancient Heretics.

I confess not only simple heresy was charged on this Sautre, but also a
relapse thereinto after abjuration, in which case such is the charity of the
Canon Law, that such a person is, De (...). cap. 9. and tit. cod. cap. 4. in
Sexto.
seculari judicio sine ulla penitus audientia relinquendus, not affording any
audience to one relapsed, though he should revoke his opinions. Quite contrary
to the charitable Judgment of St. Chrysostom who sticked not to say, Socrates
de Chrysostomo, lib. 6. cap. (...). lat. 19.
(...); If thou fall a thousand times, and repent thee of thy folly, come
boldly into the Church.

There is some difference amongst Authors, about the legal proceedings against
this Sautre, by what power he was condemned to dye:

Hypodigma Neustriae Anno 1401. pa. 158.
Walsingham will have him die during the sitting of the Parliament secundo
Henrici quarti, by virtue of the Law then made against Heretics. Others will
have him put to death, not by any Statute Law then made, but as convicted in a
Provincial Council of the Archbishop of Canterbury.

The latter seems most true, because the Writ De Haeretico comburendo, (sent
down by the advice of the Lords Temporal, to the Mayor of London, to cause his
execution) bare date the 26 of February; whereas it was ordered in that Rot.
Parl 2 H. 4. number. 116.
Parliament, that the penal Statutes made therein, should not take effect till
after VVhitsontide.

But, by what power soever it was done, poor Sautre was burnt in Smithfield,
about the 28 of February, 1400. One criticisme of cruelty and hypocrisy is
most remarkable. The close of the Archbishops sentence of degradation, when
Sautre was committed over to the Secular Fox Acts and Monuments, page 517.
Court, ends with this expression,

Beseeching the Court aforesaid, that they will receive favorably the said
William unto them thus recommitted.

We are much beholding to Baronius, for the better understanding this passage,
Tom. 4. Anno 386. number. 23.
informing us that it was ever fashionable with their Clergy to this day, that
when they consigne an Heretic over to the Secular for execution, they
effectually intercede that he may not be punished with death. For, it appears
in Prosper, that 4 Bishops were excommunicated An. 392. for being accusers of
Priscilian (the first Heretic who was confuted with steel) that age conceiving
all tendency to cruelty, utterly inconsistent with Clerical profession. And
hence it was, thinks the aforesaid Baronius, that this custom was taken up, of
the Clergie's mock-mercy, in their dissembled mediation for condemned
Heretics. I say dissembled: for, if the Lay, having them in his power, shall
defer the doing of it more than ordinary, it is the constant tenet of the
Canonists, (relying on a Bull of Alexander the 4th. 1260.) he is to be
compelled unto it by spiritual censures.

We have been the larger upon this Sautre's death, because he was the English
Protestant (pardon the Prolepsis) Proto-martyr. But every son must not look to
be an heir, we will be shorter on the rest in this City, contenting our selves
with their bare names, except some extraordinary matter present it self to our
observation.

JOHN BADBY was an Artificer in Black Friars in London, condemned, and burned
in Smithfield, about 1401. Henry Prince of Wales (afterward King Henry the
5th.) happened to be present at his execution, who not only promised him
pardon on his recantation, but also a stipend out of the Kings Treasury,
sufficient for his support; all which Badby refused. He was put into an empty
Tun, (a ceremony of cruelty peculiar to him alone) and the fire put therein.

At the first feeling thereof, he cried Fox Acts and Monuments, page ^22.
Mercy, Mercy, begging it of the God of heaven, which Noble Prince Henry
mistook for a kind of Revocation of his Opinions, and presently caused the fire
round about him to be quenched, renewing his promises unto him with advantage,
which Badby refused the second time, and was Martyred.

But Reader, I will engage no deeper in this copious subject, lest I lose my
self in the Labyrinth thereof. * Joseph left off to Number the Corn in Egypt,
for it was without Genesis 41. 49.
number; the cause alone of my desisting in this subject. Yea, Bloody Bonner
had murdered many more, had not that Hydropical Humor which quenched the life
of Queen Mary, extinguished also the Fires in Smithfield.

Prelates.
Here in this City we are at a greater loss, as to this Topic, than in any
Shire in England: for in vain it is for any man to name himself Thomas of
London, John of London, etc. such Sirnames not reaching their end, nor
attaining their intention, viz. (...) diversifie the Person, the laxity of so
populous a place leaving them as unspecified as it found them. We therefore
have cause to believe, that many Clergymen both Bishops and Writers born in
this City, did not follow suit with others of their Coat, to be named from the
Place of their Nativity, but from their Fathers, the Reason why we can give so
slender an account of them as follows.

SIMON OF GAUNT, was born in this City, 1. Bale, 1. Pitz. and Bish. Godwin in
the Bishops of Salisbnry.
(his Mother being an English Woman, his Father a Flemming) and being bred in
good literature, became so famous, that by King Edward the first he was
preferred Bishop of Salisbury, 1298. He gave the first leave to the Citizens
thereof, to fortify that place with a deed Ditch, partly remaining, and a
strong wall wholly demolished at this day. Now seeing good Laws are the best
walls of any foundation, no less was his care for the Church, than City of
Salisbury, making good Statutes, whereby it was ordered even unto our age. He
dyed about the year 1315.

JOHN KITE, was born in Godwin in the Bishops of Carlisle.
London, bred in Oxford, sent Ambassador into Spain, made a Grecian titulary
Arch bishop, (receiving thence as much profit, as men shear wool from hogs) and
at last the real Bishop of Carlisle: yet is his Epitaph in the Church of
Stepney neither good English, Latin, Spanish or Greek, but a barbarous
confusion, as follows,

Under this Stone closyd and marmorate Lveth John (...), Londoner naciste.
Increasing invirtues rose to hyghestate In the fourth Edwards chapel by his
young life
Since which the Seuinth Henry's service primatife
Proceeding still in virtuous efficase
To be in favor with this our Kings grase.
With Wit endewyed chosen to be Legate,
Sent into Spain, where he right joyfully
Combined both Princes in pease most amate.
In Greece Archbishop elected worthily
And last of Carlyel ruling postorally:
Keeping nobyl household with great hospitality.
On thousand fyve hundred thirty and seuyn
Inuyterate with carys consumed with Age,
The nineteeth of Jun reckonyd full even
Passed to Heauyn from worldly Pylgramage,
Of whose Soul good peopul of Cherite
Prey, as ye would be preyd for, for thus must you lie;
Ie^u mercy, Lady help.
These, if made 300 years ago, had been excusable, but such midnight verses are
abominable, made, as it appears, in the dawning of good learning and pure
language. Yet because some love Poetry, either very good or very bad, that if
they cannot learn from it, they may laugh at it, they are here inserted.

WILLLIAM KNIGHT, was born in this Register of that College in anno 1493.
City, bred Fellow of New-colledge in Oxford, on the same token, that there
have been ten of his Surname, Fellows of that Foundation. He proceeded Doctor
of Law, and a noble Lord Herbert in the Life of Hen. 8. p. 216.
Pen makes him Secretary to King Henry the Eighth. Sure it is, he was the first
Person employed to the Pope, to motion to him the matter of his Divorce;
advertizing the King, by his weekly dispatches, how slowly his Cause, (though
spurred with English Gold) crept on in the Court of Rome. After his return, the
King rewarded his Industry, Fidelity and Ability, with bestowing the Bishopric
of Bath and Wells upon him.

In Wells) with the assistance of Dean Woolman) he built a stately covered
Cross in the Marketplace, for the glor^ of God, and convenience of poor
people, to secure them from the weather, adding this Inscription; Laus Deo, Pax
Vivis, Requies Defunctis. He dyed September 29. Anno 1547.

NICOLAS HEATH, was born, and had his childhood in the City of London, being
noted for one of St. Stows Survey of London.
Anthonies Pigs therein, (so were the Scholars of that School commonly called,
as those of St. Paul's, Paul's pigeons) and bred first in * Idem Ibidem.
Rich. Hall in the Life of Bishop Fisher.
Christs-Colledge, then Fellow of Clare-hall in Cambridge* By K. Henry the
eighth (to whom he was Almoner) he was preferred Bishop first of Rochester,
then of Worcester: deprived by K. Edward the Sixth, restored by Q. Mary, who
advanced him Archbishop of York, and Lord Chancelour of England. A moderate
man, who would not let the least spark of persecution be kindled in his
Diocese, if any in his Province.

In the Conference at Westminster betwixt Papists and Protestants, primo
Elizabethae he was a kind of Moderatour, but interposed little. Infected b^ his
Fellow-PrisonerPopish-Prelates, he could not be persuaded to take the Oath of
Supremacy, for which he was deprived. He led a pious and private life on his
own lands; at Cobham in Surrey, whither Q. Elizabeth came often to visit him,
and dyed about the year of our Lord 1566.

Since the Reformation.
JOHN YOUNG D. D. was borne in So am I informed by Sir John Young his
Grandchild
Cheapside, and bred in Pembroke-Hall in Cambridge, whereof he became Master;
hence he was preferred Rector of St. Giles Cripple* gate, and at last Bishop of
Rochester. A constant preacher, and to whose Judgment Q. Elizabeth ascribed
much in Church matters.

Better Bishoprics were often offered to, and as often refused by him;
particularly, when Norwich was proferred him, by one who affirmed it to be a
higher Seat: Bishop Young pleasantly returned; Yea, but it is a harder, and not
so easy for an old man, since the Cushion was taken away from it; Meaning,
since Dr. Scambler had scambled away the Revenues thereof. He dyed Anno Dom.
1605. and lies buried at Bromly Church in Kent, where his son most solemnly
and sumptuously interred him, though he enjoined all possible privacy, and on
his deathbed forbad all funeral expenses. But in such cases it may become the
Charity and Affection of the survivers, to do what beseemes not so well the
modesty and discretion of the dying to desire.

WILLIAM COTTON D. D. was bon in this City, (though his infancy was much
conversant about Finchley in Middlesex) as his Edward Cotton D. D. his son.
nearest relation has informed me. He was bred in Queens College in
Cambridge, preferred by Queen Elizabeth, Archdeacon of Lewis, and Canon
Residentiary of St. Paul's. Hence he was advanced and consecrated Bishop of
Ex^ter, November the 12. 1598.

During his sitting there, Mr. Snape a second Cartwright (not for abilities but
activity) came out of Gersey, and plentifully sowed the Seeds of nonconformity
in his Diocese, which the vigilance of this stout and prudent Prelate, plucked
up by the roots, before they could come* to perfection.

In his old age he was Apoplectical, which malady deprived him of his Speech
some days before his death; so that he could only say Amen, Amen, often
reiterated. Hereupon some scandalous Tongues broached this jeer, that he lived
like a Bishop, and dyed like a Clark, and yet let such men know, that no dying
person can use any one word more expressive; Whether it be an invocation of his
help in whom all the promises are Amen; or whether it be a submission to the
Divine providence in all, by way of approbation of former, or option of future
things.

I will only add and translate his Epitaph transcribed from his Monument.

A Paulo ad Petrum Pia te Regina vocavit: Whom the Queen from Paul to Peter did
remove: Cum Petro and Paulo Coeli Rex arce locavit. Him God with Paul, and
Peter placed above.

He lies buried in the North-side of the Quire of Exeter, but his Monument is
distanced from the place of his Interment, in a North-East Chapel. His Death
happened Anno Domini 1621.

LANCELOT ANDREVVS D. D. was born in this City in Tower street, his Father
being a Seaman of good repute belonging to Trinity House. He was bred Scholar,
Fellow and Master of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge.

He was an unimitable Preacher in his way, and such Plagiaries who have stolen
his Sermons could never steal his Preaching, and could make nothing of that
whereof he made all things as he desired. Pious and pleasant Bishop Felton (his
Contemporary and Colleague) indevoured in vain in his Sermon to assimulate his
style, and therefore said merrily of himself; I had almost marred my own
natural Trot by endeavoring to imitate his artificial Amble. But I have spoken
largely of this peerlesse Prelate in my ChurchHistory. He dyed Anno Dom. 1626.

THOMAS DOVE D. D. was born in this City, as a Mr. Thursby.
Credible person of his nearest Relation has informed me, bred a Tanquam,
(which is a Fellows Fellow) in Pembroke-Hall in Cambridge. He afterward
became an eminent Preacher, and his Sermons substantial in themselves, were
advantaged by his comely person and graceful elocution. Q. Elizabeth highly See
more of him in my Church. History.
affected, and Anno 1589. preferred him Dean of Norwich, advancing him eleven
years after to the Bishopric of Peterborough. He departed this life 1630. in
the thirtieth year of his Bishopric, on the thirtieth of August, who kept a
good house whilst he lived, and yet raised a Family to Knightly degree.

JOHN HOWSON D. D. was born in St. So am I informed by his own Daughter the
Widow of famous Master Farnaby, since remarried to Mr. Cole in Suf^olk.
Frides Parish in this City, bred a Scholar in St. Paul's School, whence going
to Oxford, he became a Student and Canon of Christ-Church, and afterward was
consecrated Bishop of Oxford, May 9. 1619. being his H. Holland in his Printed
Additions to Bishop Godw.
Birthday in his Climacterical, then entering upon the 63 year of his age.

His Learned book, in what case a Divorce is lawful, with his Sermons against
Sacrilege, and stating of the Popes supremacy, in 4 Sermons, enjoined on him
by King James, (to clear his causeless aspersion of favoring Popery) and
never since replied unto by the Romish party, have made him famous to all
posterity. He was afterward removed to the Bishopric of Durham, but continued
not long therein; for he dyed in the 75 year of his Age, 6th of February, Anno
Domini 1631. and was buried in St. Paul's in London.

JOHN DAVENANT D. D. born in Watling-street, was son to John Davenant a Wealthy
Citizen, whose father was of Davenants lands in Essex. When an Infant newly
able to go, he fell down a high pair of stairs, and rising up at the bottom
smiled, without having any harm; God and his good Angels keeping him for
further service in the Church.

When a child, he would rather own his own frowardness, than another
flattery, and when soothed up by the servants, that not John but some other of
his brothers did cry; He would rather appear in his own face, than wear their
disguise; returning, that it was none of his brothers, but John only cried.

He was bred first Fellow-Commoner, then Fellow, then Margaret Profeslor, then
Master of Queens* ^lledge in Cambridge. At a public Election, he gave his
negative voice against a near Kinsman, and a most excellent M. John ^ore
(aft^rwards kn^ghted) of Gilesden in Hertfordshire.
Scholar; Cosen (said he) I will satisfy your father, that you have worth, but
not want enough to be one of our Society.

Returning from the Synod of Dort, he was elected Bishop of Sarum, 1621.

After his Consecration being to perform some personal Service to King James at
Newmarket,, he refused to ride on the Lords Day, and came (though a Day later
to the Court) no less welcome to the King, not only accepting his excuse, but
also commending his seasonable forbearance.

Taking his leave of the College, and of one John Rolfe, an ancient servant
thereof, he desired him to pray for him. And when the other modestly returned,
that he rather needed his Lordships Prayers: Yea John (said he) and I need
thine too, being now to enter into a Calling wherein I shall meet with many and
great Temptations. Paefuit qui profuit, was the Motto written in most of his
Books, the sense whereof he practiced in his Conversation.

He was humble in himself, and (the Consequence thereof) charitable to others.
Indeed once invited by Bishop Field, and not well pleased with some Roisting
Company there, he embraced the next opportunity of departure after Dinner. And
when Bishop Field, proferred to light him with a Candle down Stairs, My Lord,
my Lord (said he) let us lighten others by our unblameable Conversation, for
which Speech some since have severely censured him, how justly I interpose not.
But let others unrelated unto him write his Character, whose Pen cannot be
suspected of Flattery, which he when living did hate, and dead did not need.

We read of the Patriarch Israel that the time drew nigh, that he Genesis 47. 29.
must dye; Must, a necessity of it. Such a decree attended this Bis^op happy to
dye, before his Order (for a time) dyed, April 1641. and with a solemn Funeral
he was Buried in his own ^dral, Dr. Nicholas (now Dean of St. Paul's) preaching
an excellent Sermon ^t his In* terment.

MATTHEW WREN D. D. was born in this City (not far from Cheap Side) but
descended (as appears by his Arms) from the worshipful Family of the Wrens in
Northumberland. He was bred Fellow of Pembroke-hall in Cambridge where he kept
the extraordinary Philosophy Act before King James. I say kept it with no less
praise to himself, then pleasure to the King, where if men should forget, even
Dogs would remember his seasonable distinction, what the Kings hounds could
perform above others, by virtue of their prerogative.

He afterward became an excellent Preacher, and two of his Sermons in the
University were most remarkable; one preached before the Judges on this Text;
Amos 5. 24.
And let Judgment run down like waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream;
at what time the draining of the Fens was designed, suspected detrimental to
the Univer^ity: The other when newly returned from attending Prince Charles
into Spain, on the words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 42. 7.
abyssus abyssum invocat, one depth calls another.

He was afterward preferred Master of Peterhouse, Dean of Windsor, Bishop of
Norwich and Ely: Some in the Long Parliament fell so heavily on him, that he
was imprisoned in the Tower almost fifteen years, and his cause never heard.
Surely had the imposers been the sufferers hereof, they would have cried it up
for a high piece of injustice. But as St. Acts 16. 39.
Paul had the credit to be brought with entreaties out of Prison, by those who
sent him thither: so this Prelate has had the honor, that the same
Parliamentary power (though not constituted of the same persons) which
committed him, caused his Enlargement, still living 1661.

Statesmen.
The Sum hereof is taken out of his Printed Life (rare to be had) written by
a Nephew of his, more fairly and unpartially then any would expect from so near
a relation.
Sir THOMAS MORE was, Anno Domini 1480 born in Milkstreet London, (the (...)
that ever shined in that Via lactea) sole Son to Sir John More Knight, one of
the Justices of the Kings Bench.

Some have reported him of mean parentage, merely from a mistake of a modest
word, in an Epitaph of his own making on his Monument in Chelsey Church.

Where Nobilis is taken not in the civil but Common Law sense, which allows
none Noble under the degree of Barons. Thus men cannot be too wary what they
inscribe on Tombs, which may prove a Record (though not in Law, in History) to
posterity.

He was bred first in the Family of Archbishop Morton, then in Canterbury
College (now taken into Christ Church) in Oxford, where he profited more in
two, then many in ten years continuance.

Thence he removed to an Inn of Chancery called New Inn, and from thence to
Lincolns Inn, where he became a double Reader. Then did his worth prefer him to
be Judge in the Sheriff of Londons Court, whilst a Pleader in others. And
although he only chose such causes which appeared just to his Conscience, and
never took Fee of Widow, Orphane or poor person; he gained in those days four
hundred pounds per annum.

Being made a Member of the House of Commons, he opposed King Henry the
Seventh, about money for the Marriage of his Daughter Margaret: Whereat the
King was much discontented, when a Courtier told him, that a beardlesse Boy
(beard was never the true Standard of brains) had obstructed his desires. Which
King being as certain, but more secret then his son in his revenge, made More
the mark of his Displeasure, who to decline his anger had traveled beyond the
Seas, had not the Kings going into another World stopped his journey.

King Henry the Eighth coming to the Crown, and desirous to ingratiate himself
by preferring popular and deserving persons, Knighted Sir Thomas, and made him
Chancelour of the Duchy of Lancaster, the Kings personal patrimony.

Finding him faithful in lesser matters (according to the method of the
Gospel) he made him in effect Ruler of all, when Lord Chancelour of England; a
place wherein he demeaned himself with great integrity, and with no less
expedition. In testimony of the later, it is recorded, that calling for the
next cause, it was returned unto him, there are no more to be heard, all Suits
in that Court depending, and ready for hearing, being finally determined.
Whereon a Rhythmer.

When More some years had Chancellor been,
^o more suits did remain,
The same shall never more be seen,
Till More be there again.
Falling into the Kings displeasure for not complying with him about the Queens
divorce, he seasonably resigned his Chancellours Place, and retired to his
House in Chelsey, chiefly employing himself in writing against those who were
reputed Heretics. And yet it is observed to his Credit (by his great friend
Erasmus) that whilst he was Lord Chancellor no Protestant was put to death,
and it appears by some passages in his Utopia, that it was against his mind
that any should lose their Lives for their Consciences.

He rather soyled his Fingers then dirtied his hands in the matter of the holy
Maid of Kent, and well wiped it off again. But his refusing (or rather not
accepting) the Oath of Supremacy, stuck by him, for which he was 16. Months
imprisoned in the Tower, bearing his afflictions with remarkable patience He
was wont to say that his natural temper was so tender*, that he could not
endure a philip; But a supernatural Principle (we see) can countermand, yea
help natural imperfections.

In his time (as till our Memory) Tower Prisoners were not dyet^d on their own,
but on the Kings charges; The Lieutenant of the Tower providing their Fare for
them. And when the Lieutenant said that he was sorry that Commons were no
better, I like (said Sir Thomas) Your Diet very well, and if I dislike it, I
pray turn me out of Doors.

Not long after he was beheaded on Tower hill, 153.. He left not above one
hundred pounds a year Estate, perfectly hating Covetousness as may appear by
his refusing of four or five Mr. More in the Lif^ of his Grandfather.
thousand pounds offered him by the Clergy. Among his Latin Books his Utopia
bears the Bell, containing the Idea of a complete Commonwealth in an
Imaginary Island (but pretended to be lately discovered in America) and that so
lively * Page 405.
counterfeited, that many at the reading thereof mistook it for a real truth.
Insomuch, that many great Learned men, as Budeus, and Johannes Paludanus, upon
a fervent zeal, wished that some excellent Idem p. 359.
Divines might be sent thither to preach Christ's Gospel; yea, there were here
amongst us at home sundry good men and Learned Divines, very desirous to
undertake the Voyage to bring the People to the Faith of Christ, whose manners
they did so well like.

By his only Son Mr. John More, he had five Grandchildren, Thomas and Augustine
born in his Life time, who proved zealous Romanists; Edward, Thomas and
Bartholomew (born after his Death) were firm Protestants, and Thomas a married
Minister of the Church of England.

MARGARET MORE. Excuse me Reader, for placing a Lady among Men and Learned
Statesmen. The Reason is, because of her (...) affection to her Father, from
whom she would not willingly be parted (and for me shall not be) either living
or dead.

She was born in Bucklers-bury in London at her Fathers house therein, and
attained to that Skill in all Learning and Languages, that she became the
miracle of her age. Foreigners took such notice hereof, that Erasmus has
dedicated some Epistles unto her. No Woman that could speak so well, did speak
so little: Whose Secrecy was such, that her Father entrusted her with his most
important Affairs.

Such was her skill in the Fathers, that she corrected a depraved place in St.
Cyprian, for whereas it was

corruptly written she amended it Nisi vos sinceritatis. This is acknowledged by
J. Costerus, and Pamelion on that place.
Nervos sinceritatis.

Yea she translated Eusebius out of Greek, but it was never printed, because I.
Christopherson had done it so exactly before.

She was married to William Roper of Eltham in Kent Esquire, one of a bountiful
heart and plentiful Estate. When her Fathers head was set up on London Bridge,
it being suspected it would be cast into the Thames, to make room for diverse
others (then suffering for denying the Kings Supremacy) she bought the head,
and kept it for a Relic (which some called affection, others religion, others
Superstition in her) for which she was questioned before the Council, and for
some short time imprisoned, until she had buried it; and how long she her self
survived afterward, is to me unknown.

THOMAS WRIOTHESLEY Knight of the Garter, was born in The house of his Nativity
is called Gartercourt.
Barbican, Son to William Wriothesley York Herald, and Grandchild to John
VVriothesley (descended from an heir general of the ancient Family of the
Dunsterviles) King of Arms. He was bred in the University of Cambridge; and if
any make a doubt thereof, it is cleared by the passage of Mr. Ascams Letter
unto him, writing in the behalf of the University when he was Lord Chancellor,
^ Page 200.


Quamobrem Academia cum omni literarum ratione, ad te unum conversa (Cui uni
quam universis aliis se chariorem intelligit) partim tibi ut alumno suo, cum
authoritate imperat: partim, ut patrono summo, demisse and humiliter supplicat,
etc.

He afterward effectually applied his Studies in our municipal Law, wherein he
attained to great eminency. He was by King Henry the Eighth, created Baron of
Titchborne at Hampton Court, January the first, 1543. and in the next year
about the beginning of May by the said King made Chancellor of England. But in
the first of King Edward the Sixth, he was removed from that place (because a
conscienciously Rigorous Romanist) though in some reparation he was advanced to
be Earl of Southampton. He dyed at his House called Lincolns place in Holborn,
1550. the 30. of July, and lies buried at St. Andrews in Holborn.

WILLIAM PAGET Knight, was born Out of the Heralds Visitation of Stafford-sh.
in this City of honest Parents, who gave him pious and learned education,
whereby he was enabled to work out his own advancement; Privy-Councellour to 4
successive princes, which, though of different persuasions, agreed all in this,
to make much of an able and trusty Minister of State.

1. King Henry the Eighth made him his Secretary, and employed him Ambassador
to Chapter the Emperor and Francis King of France. 2. King Edward the Sixth made
him Chancellor of the Duchy, Comptroller of his Household, and created him
Baron of Beaudesert. 3. Queen Mary made him ^eeper of her privy Seal. 4. Queen
Elizabeth dispensed with his attendance at Court, in favor to his great Age,
and highly respected him.
Indeed Duke Dudley in the days of King Edward ignominiously took from him the
Garter of the Order; quarrelling, that by his extraction he was not qualified
for the same. Bur if all be true which is reported of this Dukes See Edmund
Dudley in our Description of Stafford-sh.
Parentage, he of all men was most unfit to be active in such an employment.
But no wonder if his Pride wrongfully snatched a Garter from a Subject, whose
Ambition endeavored to deprive two Princes of a Crown. This was restored unto
him by Queen Mary, and that with Ceremony and all solemn accents of honor, as
to a ^md. Eliz. anno 1563.
person, who by his prudence had merited much of the Nation. He dyed very old,
anno 1563, and his Corpse (as I remember) are buried in Lichfield, and not in
the Vault under the Church of Drayton in Middlesex where the rest of that
Family, I cannot say lie (as whose Coffins are erected) but are very completely
reposed in a peculiar posture, which I meet not with elsewhere; the horror of
a Vault, being much abated with the Lightness and Sweetness thereof.

THOMAS WENTVVORTH, was born (his Mother coming casually to London) in Chancery
Lane in the Parish of St. Register of St. Dunstans.
Dunstans in the West. Yet no reason Yorkshire should be deprived of the honor
of him, whose Ancestors long flourished in great esteem at
VVent-worth-VVoodhouse in that County.

He was bred in St. John's College in Cambridge, and afterward became a
Champion Patriot on all occasions. He might seem to have a casting voice in the
House of Commons; for where he was pleased to dispose his Yea or Nay, there
went the affirmative or negative. It was not long before the Court gained him
from the Country, and then Honors and Offices were heaped on him; created
Baron and Viscount Wentworth, Earl of Strafford and Lord Deputy of Ireland.

When he went over into Ireland, all will confess, he laid down to himself
this noble foundation; vigorously to endeavor the Reduction of the Irish to
perfect obedience to the King, and profit to the Exchequer. But many do deny
the Superstructure (which he built thereon) was done by legal line and Plummet.

A Parliament was called in England, and many Crimes were by prime persons of
England, Scotland and Ireland, charged upon him. He fenced skilfully for his
Life, and his Grand-guard was this, that (though confessing some Misdemeanors)
all proved against him amounted not to Treason.

And indeed Number cannot create a new kind, so that many Trespasses cannot
make a Riot, many Riots one Treason, no more then many Frogs can make one Toad.
But here the D^stinction of Acumulative and Constructive* Treason was coined,
and caused his Destruction.

Yet his Adversaries politickly brake off the Edge of the Axe, which cut off
his head, by providing his Condemnation should not pass into Precedent to
Posterity, so that his Death was remarkable but not exemplary. Happy had it
been, if (as it made no Precedent on Earth so) no Remembrance thereof had been
kept in Heaven.

Some hours before his Suffering he fell fast asleep, alleged by his friends,
as an Evidence of the Clearness of his Conscience, and hardly to be
paralleled, save in St. Acts 12. 6.
Peter, in a dead sleep, the Night before he was to dye, condemned by Herod.
His death happened, 1641.

He has an eternal Monument in the matchless Meditations of King Charles the
First, and an everlasting Epitaph in that weighty Character * there given him,
(...) Med. 2. page 6.


I looked upon my Lord of Strafford as a Gentleman, whose abilites might make a
Prince rather afraid than ashamed, in the greatest Affairs of State, etc.

God alone can revive the dead, all that Princes can perform, is to honor
their Memory and Posterity, as our Gracious Sovereign King Charles has made
his worthy Son Knight of the Garter.

LYONEL CRANFIELD Son to Randal Cranfield Citizen, and Martha his Wife,
Daughter to the Lady Dennis of Gloucester-shire, (who by her will, which I have
perused, bequeathed a fair estate unto her) was born in Bassing-hall street,
and * Register of the Parish of St. Michael Bassinghall.
bred a Merchant, much conversant in the Custom House.

He may be said to have been his own Tutor, and his own University: King James
being highly affected with the clear, brief, strong, yea and profitable sense
he spoke, preferred him Lord Treasurer 1621. Baron of Cranfield, and Earl of
Middlesex. Under him it began to be young flood, in the Exchequer (wherein
there was a very low Ebb when he entered on that Office (and he possessed his
Treasurers place some four years, till he fell into the Duke of Bucks (the best
of Friends, and worst of Foes) displeasure. Some say this Lord, who rose
chiefly by the Duke (whose near Kinswoman he married) endeavored to stand
without, yea in some cases (for the Kings profit) against him, which
Independency and opposition that Duke would not endure. Flaws may soon be
found, and easily be made Breaches, in great Officers, who being active in many
cannot be exact in all matters.

However this Lord by losing his Office, saved himself, departing from his
Treasurers place, which in that age was hard to keep: Insomuch, that one
asking, what was good to preserve Life? was answered, Get to be Lord Treasurer
of England, for they never do dye in their place, which indeed was true for
four Successions.

Retiring to his magnificent House at Copt-hall, he there enjoyed himself
contentedly, entertained his friends bountifully, neighbors hospitably, poor
charitably. He was a proper person, of comely presence, cheerful, yet grave
countenance, and surely a solid and wise man. And though their Soul be the
fattest, who only suck the sweet Milk, they are the healthfullest, who (to use
the Latin Phrase) have tasted of both the Breasts of fortune. He dyed as I
collect anno 1644, and lies interred in a stately Monument in the Abbey at
Westminster.

Writers on the Law.
FLETA or FLEET. We have spoken formerly of the Fleet as a Prison, but here it
imports a person disguised under that name, who, it seems being committed to
the Fleet, therein wrote a Book of the Common Laws of England, and other
Antiquities. There is some difference concerning the Time, when this Learned
Book of Fleta was set forth, but it may be demonstrated done before the
fourteenth of the Reign of King Edward the Third: for he says Lib* 1. cap. 30
that it is no Murder except it be proved that the Party slain was English and
no Stranger, whereas this was altered in the fourteenth year of the said
Sratutes 14. Edw. 3. cap. 4.
King, when the killing of any (though a Forreigner living under the Kings
protection) out of prepensed Malice, was made Murder.

Cowels Interp. de verbo Fleta.
He seems to have lived about the End of King Edward the Second, and
beginning of King Edward the Third. Seeing in that Juncture of Time, two Kings
in effect were in being, the Father in right, the Son in might, a small
contempt might cause a confinement to that place, and as Loyal ubjects be
within it as without it. Sure it is, that (notwithstanding the confinement of
the Author) his Book has had a good passage, and is reputed Law to posterity.

CHRISTOPHER St. GERMAN. Reader wipe thine eyes, and let mine smart, if thou
read not what richly deserves thine observation; seeing he was a person
remarkable for his Gentility, Piety, Chastity, Charity, Ability, Industry and
Vivacity.

1. Gentility; descended from a right ancient Family, born (as I have cause to
believe) in London, and bred in the Inner Temple in the Study of our Laws. 2.
Piety; he carried Saint in his nature (as well as in his Surname) constantly
reading and expounding every night to his Family, a Chapter in the Bible. 3.
Chastity; living and dying unmarried without the least spot on his Reputation.
4. Charity; giving consilia and auxilia to all his Bale de scrip. Brit. c. 8.
n. 75.
People gratis.

Indeed I read of a Company of ^hysicians in Athens, called (...), because they
would take no Money of their Patients, and our St. German, was of their
Judgment as to his Clients.

5. Ability; being excellently skilled in Civil, Caxon and Common Law; so that
it was hard to say wherein he excelled. Add to these his skill in scripture,
witness his Book called The Doctor and Student: where the former vics Divinity
with the L^w of the later. 6. Industry; he wrote several works wherein he
plainly appears not only a Favourer of, but Champion for the Reformation. 7
Vivacity; L^ving to be above eighty years old, and dying anno Dom. 1593. was
buried at St. Alphage London, near Criplegate.
WILLIAM RASTAL, was born in this City (Sisters Son to Sir Thomas More) and was
bred in the Study of our Common Law, and whoever reads this passage in Pitz.,
will thence conclude him one of the two Chief Justices of England,

Pitz. de Ang. Script. Aetat. 16. anno 1565.

Factus est Civilium and Criminalium causarum alter ex duobus per Angliam
supremis Judicibus;

whereas in deed he was but one of the Justices of the Kings Bench: yet his
Ability and Integrity, did capacitate him for higher preferment, being also a
person of Industry. He wrote the Life and set forth the Works of his Uncle
More, made a Collection of, and Comment on the statutes of England.

Great was his Zeal to the Ro^ish Religion* flying into Flanders, with the
changing of his Country (under King Edward the Sixth) he changed the nature of
his Studies, but then wrote worse Books on a better subject, I mean Divinity.
He undertook Bishop Juel, as much his over match in Divinity, as Rastal was
his, in the common Law. The Papists are much pleased with him, for helping
their cause (as they conceive) and we are not angry with him, who has not hurt
ours in any degree.

He dyed at Lovain 1565. and lies buried with his Wife in the same Tomb, and
this Epitaph may be bestowed on him.

Rastallus tumulo cum conjuge dormit in uno,
Unius carnis Pulvis and unus erit.
Know that Winifrid Clement his Wife, was one of the greatest Female Scholars,
an exact Grecian, and (the Crown of all) most pious according to her persuasion.

Soldiers.
No City in Europe has bred more (if not too many of late) and indeed we had
had better T^adesmen if worse Souldiets. I dare not adventure into so large a
Subject, and will instance but in one (to keep possession for the rest)
submitting my self to the Readers censure, whether the Parties merit, or my
private Relation puts me on his Memorial.

Sir THOMAS ROPER Son of Thomas Roper Servant to Queen Elizabeth, was born in
Friday Street in London, whose Grandfather was a younger Son of the House of
Heanour in Derby shire. Indeed Furneaux was the ancient name of that Family,
until Richard Furneaux married Isald the Daughter of..... Roper of Beighton in
the County of Derby Esquire, and on that Consideration was bound to assume the
name of Dugdale in his (...) of Warwickshire illust ated, p. 212.
Roper by Indenture, Dated the S^venth of Henry the Sixth. This Sir Thomas
Going over into the Low Countries became Page to Sir John Norrice, and was
Captain of a Foot Company at sixteen years of age: what afterward his Martial
performances were, to avoid all suspicion of Flattery (to which my Relation may
incline me) I have transcribed the rest out of the Original of his Patent.

Cum Thomas Roper Eques auratus, e Secretioribus Concilliariis nostris in regno
nostro Hyberniae, jampridem nobis Bellicae virtutis Splendore clarus
innotuerit; Utpote qui quam plurimis rebus per eum in nuperrimo bello hujus
Regni fortiter gestis, praeclarum Nomen and Strenui Militis, and prudentis
Ducis reportavit: Cujus virtus praecipue in recessu in Provincia nostra
Conaciae prope Le Boil emicuit, ubi paucissimis admodum equestribus ingentes
equitum turmas per Regni Meditullia hostiliter grassantes fortiter aggressus:
Ita prudentia sua singulari receptui cecinit, ut non modo, and se, and suos,
sed etiam totum exercitum ab ingenti periculo Liberavit, hostesque quam
plurimos ruinae tradidit.

Qui etiam, cum Provincia nostra Ultoniae bello deflagaverat, ob exploratam
animi fortitudin^m ab honoratissimo Comite Essexiae exercitus tunc imperatore,
unius ex omnibus designatus fuit ad Duellum eum Makal, uno ex fortissimis
Tyronentium agminum ducibus suscipiendum, nisi praedictus Makal duello
praedicto se exponere remisset.

Cumque etiam praedictus Thomas Roper, in nuperrimo Bello apud Breast in Regno
Gallie se maximis periculis objiciendo and sanguinem suum effundendo
Fortitudinem suam invictam demonstravit: Qui etiam in expeditione Portugalenci
se fortiter ac honorifice (...) ac etiam apud Bergen in Belgio cum per Hispanos
obsideretur invictissimae fortitudinis juvenem in defensione ejusdem se
praebuit.

Qui etiam in expugnationis Kinsalensis die primus (...) juxta (...) propissime
constitutus fuerat, Hispanesque ex eo oppido sepius eodem die (...), fortissime
felicissimeque, and ad maximam totius exercitus (...) (...) and profligavit.

Sciatis igitur quod nos intuitu praemissorum Dominum Thomam Roper millitem,
etc.

Whereas Thomas Roper Knight, one of our Privy Counselors of our Kingdom of
Ireland, long since has been known unto us famous, with the Splendour of his
Warlike virtue; As who by the many Achievements valiantly performed by him in
the late War of this Kingdom, has gained the eminent Repute both of a stout
Soldier, and a disc^eet Commander; whose Valor chiefly appeared in his
Retreat near Le Boil in ^ur Province of Conaught, where with very few horse he
undantedly charged great Troops of the Horse of the Enemy, who in a Hostile
manner forraged the very Bowels of the Kingdom, and by his Wisdom made such a
singular retreat, that he not only saved himself and his men, but also
delivered the whole Army from great danger, and slew very many of his Enemies.

Who also when our Province of Ulster was all on Fire with war, being one out
of many, was for the tried resolution of his mind, chosen by the Right
Honorable the E. of Essex, then General of the Army, to undertake a Duel with
Makal, one or the stoutest Captains in the Army of Tyrone, had not the said
Makal declined to expose himself to the appointed Duel.

And also when the aforesaid Thomas Raper, in the late war in the Kingdom of
France at Breast, by exposing himself to the greatest perils, and sheding of his
own blood, demonstrated his courage to be unconquerable. Who also i^ the voyage
to Portugal, behaved himself valiantly and honorably; as also at Bergen in the
Nether-lands, when it was besiedged by the Spaniards, approved himself a young
man of (...) valor in the defense thereof. Who also in the day wherein Kinsale
was assaulted, was placed in the first rank, nearest of all unto the Town, and
with no less success then valor, to the great safety of the whole army beat
back and put to flight the Spaniards, who in the same day made several sallies
out of the Tow^.

Know therefore, that We in (...) of the premises have appointed the aforesaid
Thomas Roper Knight, etc.

Then follows his Patent, wherein King Charles in the third of his reign
created him Baron of Bauntree, and Viscount (...) in Ireland.

I will only add from exact intelligence, that he was a principal means to
break the hearts of Irish Rebels; for whereas formerly the English were loaded
with their own cloths, so that their slipping into Bogs did make them, and the
slopping of their breeches did keep them prisoners therein; he first being then
a Commander put himself into Irish Trouzes, and was imitated first by all his
Officers, then Soldiers, so that thus habited they made the more effectual
execution on their enemies. He died at (...) Rest, Anno Dom. 164.. and was
buried with Anne his wife (daughter to Sir Henry (...),) in Saint John's Church
in Dublin.

Seamen.
I behold these Sea men as the Sea it ^elf, and suspect, if I launch far
therein, I s^all see land no more: Besides, I know there be many laws made
against Forestalers, and would be loath to fall under that penalty; for
preventing the pains of some able person a (...) of the Trinity-(...), who may
write a just tract thereof.

Civilians.
Sir HENRY MARTIN Knight, was born in this City, where his Father left him
forty pounds a year, and he used merrily to say, that if his Father had left
him (...), he would never have been a Scholar, but lived on his Lands; whereas
this being (though a large encouragement, but) a scant maintenance, he plied
his book for a better livelihood. He was bred a Fellow in New college in
Oxford, and by the advice of Bishop Andrews addressed himself to the Study of
the Civil Law.

By the advice of the said Bishop, Master Martin had weekly transmitted unto
him from some Proctors at Lambeth, the Brief heads of the most Important causes
which were to be tried in the high Commission, Then with some of his familiar
friends in that faculty they privately pleaded those Causes amongst themselves,
acting in their Chamber what was done in the Court. But Mr. Martin, making it
his work, exceeded the rest in amplifying and agravating any fault moving of
anger and indignation against the guilt thereof, or else in extenuating and
excusing it, procure pity, obtain pardon, or at least prevail for a lighter
punishment. Some years he spent in this personated pleading, to enable himself
against he was really called to that Profession.

Hence it was that afterward he became so eminent an Advocate in the high
Commission, that no cause could come amiss to him. For he was not to make new
armor, but only to put it on and buckle it, not to invent but apply arguments
to his Cliant. He was at last Knighted and made Judge of the Prerogative for
Probate of Wills, and also of the Admiraltry in causes concerning foreign
traffic; so that as King James said pleasantly; He was a mighty Monarch in his
Jurisdiction over Land and Sea, the Living and dead. He died very aged and
wealthy, Anno Dom. 1642.

Physicians.
RICHARDUS ANGLICUS was certainly a man of Merit, being eminently REM.
so denominated by Foraigners, (amongst whom he conversed) from his Country,
and he who had our Nation for his Name, cannot have less then London for his
Lodging in this our Catalogue of Worthies. He is said to have studied first in
Oxford, then in Paris, where he so profited in the faculty of Physic, that he
is counted by Simphorianus In tractatu q uinto de ejus Artis Scriptoribus.
Champerius (a stranger to our Nation, and therefore free from Flattery,) one
of the most eminent Writers in that Profession. Now, because he was the first
English man, whom I find famous in that Calling, may the Reader be pleased with
a Receipt of the several names of the Books, left by him to posterity.

1. Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 3. Number. 92. and Pits. in Anno 1230.
A Tractate of (...). 2. Of the Ru^es of Urins. 3. Of the Signs of Diseases. 4.
Of Prognostic Signs. 5. Of Letting Blood. 6. Of Anatomy according to ^alen. 7.
Of Feavors. 8. A Correction of Alchymy. 9. A Mirour of Alchymy. 10. Of Physic.
11. Repressive. 12. Of the Signs of Feavors.
Leland reports, that besides these, he writ other works, which the Envy of
time has denied unto us. He flourished about the year of our Lord 1230.

JOHN (...) was born in this City, (...) de script. Brit. Cent. 8. Number. 38.
bred Fellow of Baliol-colledge in Oxford, where he contracted familiarity with
his Colleague and Mecaenas, I. Tiptoft Earl of Worcester. He afterward
traveled into Italy, and at Ferrara was a constant auditor of Gwarinus an old
man, and famous Philosopher. Hitherto our Phreas made use only of his ears,
hereafter of his tongue, when of Hearer he turned a Teacher; and see the stairs
whereby he ascended.

1. He read Physic at Ferrara, concerning Medicinal herbs. 2. Then at
Florence, well esteemed by the Duke thereof. 3. Then at Padua, (beneath
Florence in beauty, above it in learning,) an University where he proceeded
Doctor of Physic. 4. Then at Rome, where he was gracious with Pope Paul the
second, dedicating unto him many books translated out of Greek.
The Pope rewarded him with the Bishopric of Bath and Wells, dying before his
consecration, Idem ibidem.
poisoned (as is vehemently suspected) by some, who maligned his merit;

Heu mihi quod nullis livor medicabilis herbis!

Solomon himself, who wrote of all Simples, from the 1 King. 4. 33.
Cedar in Lebanus, to the Hysop on the Wall, could find no defensative against
it; which made him cry out Prove. 22. 4.
But who can stand before envy? No wonder therefore, if our Phreas (though a
skilful Botanist) found men's malice mortal unto him. He died at Rome Anno
Domini 1465. and Lelands commendation of him may serve for his Epitaph, if but,
Hic jacet Johannes Phreas be prefixed before it; qui primus Anglorum erat, qui
propulsa barbary, patriam honesto labor bonis literis restituit.

ANDREW BOARD Doctor of Physic, was (I conceive) bred in Oxford, because I
find his book called the Breviary of Health examined by that University. He was
Physician to King Henry the eighth, and was esteemed a great Scholar in that
age. I am confident his book was the first written of that faculty in English,
and dedicated to the College of Physicians in London. Take a taste out of the
beginning of his Dedicatory Epistle,

Egregious Doctors and Masters of the Eximious and Arcane Science of Physic,
of your Urbanity exasperate not your selves against me for making this little
volume of Physic, etc.

Indeed his book contains plain matter under hard words, and was accounted such
a Jewel in that age, (things whilst the first are esteemed the best in all
kinds,) that it was Printed, Cum privilegio ad imprimendum solum, for William
Midleton, Anno 1548. He died as I collect in the reign of Queen Mary.

Writers.
Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 2. Number. 8.
NOT^ELMUS of LONDON. Having casually let slip his forelock, I mean his
Episcopal Capacity, (being successively Bishop of London, and Archbishop of
Canterbury,) under which he ought to be entered, we are fain to lay hold on his
hind-part, (that his memory may not escape us) taking notice of him as a
Writer. In his Age shined a Constellation of three learned men, Bid, Alcuinus,
and our Nothelme, whom the two former by their letters invited to writ (a
performance proper for his Pen) the gests of Gregory the Great, and the
Disciples sent by him with Austin the Monk, for the Conversion of Britain.
Nothelme the more effectually to enable himself for this work, went to Rome,
obtained leave from Pope Gregory the second, to peruse his Records; then sent
his completed collections to Bid, to be inserted in his Church history. Bid
in gratitude, (according to the courteous custom of the learned exchange,)
dedicated to him his thirty questions on the Books of Kings. His death happened
Anno Domini 739.

WILLIAM FITZ-STEPHENS was descended says Leland of Norman Nobility, but born
in this City, and bred a Monk in Canterbury. He wrote many learned works, and
one in Latin of the description of London, since commendably (because rare to
come by) translated and added to the Survey of London.

Say not that London then, was but the Suburbs to the London now, for the
bigness and populousness thereof; seeing in Fitz Stephens time, it accounted
thirteen Conventual and an hundred and six and thirty Parochial Churches, not
producing so many at this day* so that it seems though there be more Bodies of
Men, there be fewer Houses of God therein.

As for the populousness thereof in his time, it was able to set forth sixty
thousand Foot, which I believe it may treble in our time. It could also then
raise twenty thousand Horsemen, which would pose it at this day to perform. But
as railing Rabshekah made Jerusalem weaker, [not able to set two thousand
Riders on horses] so possibly Fitz-Stephens might make London stronger then it
was. I hope one may safely wish this City may be better in holiness, as bigger
in houses, then it was when Fitz-Stephens flourished 1190.

ALBRICIUS of LONDON. Leland makes him a Native of this City, and signally
learned, though little is extant of his writings, save a work of the Original
of Heathen Gods. Herein he shows how mankind having by error and ignorance,
left and lost the true God, multiplied Deities, that a Mock-infinite (viz. what
was but Indefinite in number) should supply his place, who was Infinite in
Nature. Albricius flourished Anno Domini 1217.

WILLIAM SENGHAM born of mean, but honest Parents, being one of a REM.
meek nature, and quick wit, was brought up in learning, wherein he attained to
great perfection. He wrote many books and one de fide and Legibus, wherein De
script. Brit. Cent. 4. Number. 17.
Bale highly praises this passage,

There is no other law for the Salvation of men, besides the Gospel of Christ
our Lord.

Now although this be but a plain expression of the common truth, yet was it
beheld as an Oracle in that ignorant age. Thus a beam of noonday might it be
seen at midnight, would shine as the Sun it self; besides, these words were
uttered in that age, when impudent Friars began to obtrud on the world a fifth
forged Gospel, (consisting of superstitious ceremonies and) called Aeternum
Evangelium, which did much mischief in the Church amongst credulous men. This
William is supposed by some an Augustinian Friar, who flourished Anno Dom. 1260.

LAURENTIUS ANGLICUS was certainly an Englishman, and probably REM.
a Londoner, but brought up and living most of his time in Paris, where he was
Master of the College, which had an Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 4. Number. 30.
Englishman for the sign thereof. Hence I collect it for building little
better then our ordinary Inns for entertainment, where probably our Country men
had their lodgings for nothing. This Laurence, being a learned and pious
person, stoutly opposed that mock Gospel commonly called See more hereof in the
life of John Driton in Sussex.
Evangelium Aeternum, with the Mendicant Friars the Champions thereof. He wrote
a smart book contra Pseudo-Praedicatores; but afterward being frightened with
the Popes thunderboults, and the Friars threatenings, he cowardly recanted. But
what says Pro. 24. 16.
Solomon A just man falls seven times, [the Vulgar Latin adds in die, in
one day,] and rises again, as we hope this Laurence did, who flourished Anno
Dom. 1260.

Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 5. Number. 12.
NICHOLAS LYRA was (as Barnabas a Jew-Cypriot, and Saul a Jew-Gilician a
Jew-English man, the first by Nation, the second by Nativity. He had the
R^bbins at his Fingers ends, but conversed so long with, that at last he was
converted by some Franciscans to be a Christian; and I behold Nicholas
[Conquerour of his People] as his Font-name then given him, as predictory of
those Victories he afterward got, by his disputings and writings, over his own
Countrymen. Nor does the Church of God more complain of Nicholas, that
Proselite of Antioch, (the last of the seven Deacons, and first founder of the
Nicholaitans whom God hated,) then it does commend our Nicholas, who vigorously
confuted the Jews; who expect the rising of the Sun in the afternoon, waiting
for Messiah still to come.

I read, how some fifty years before, Henry the third, founded a house called
Domus Conversorum, (where now the Office of the Rolls is kept in
Chancery Lane,) where Converted Jews were accommodated with Lodging, and a
small Salary. But I believe Lyra made no use thereof, contenting himself to
live first in Oxford, then in Paris a Franciscan Friar, and wrote Comments on
all the Old and New Testament, whereof so different the Editions, that I am
certainly informed, one is so bad, one can hardly give too little; and one so
good, one can hardly give too much for it. Though sometimes he may be wide of
the Mark, and this Harp be out of Tune, yet uncharitable their censure of Lyra
Delirat, whilst In his Comment on the 2. and again on the 9. chap. of Genesis
Luther highly praises him* because his wanton wit did not gad after empty
Allegories, but with the good housekeeper stays at home, keeping himself close
to the Text in his literal interpretations. Now though there were many Jewish
Synagogues in England, (at York, Cambridge, Northampton, etc.) yet the Old Jury
in London, equalling all the rest in numerousness, Lyra his birth is here
assigned with best assurance, though dying in Paris about the year 1340.

BANKINUS of LONDON, not Bancks of London, (who taught his Horse reason to
perform feats above belief,) but one of hgher Parts, and worse employed. Being
an Augustinian Friar he set himself wholly to suppress the poor Wicklevicks,
and being ready to dispute against them in a public Council, was taken off in
his full speed with the following accident, worthy of the Readers observation;

Bale de Script. Brit. Cent. 6. Number. 97.
Sed terrae*motus justissima summi Dei vindicta, subito exortus, diruptis
Passim domorum edificitis, immanes eorum impetus fregit, ac vires infirmavit.
But an Earthquake by the just revenge of the most high God, suddenly arising,
by breaking asunder the buildings of the houses, brake their cruel assaults,
and weakened their forces.

This if literally true, deserved a downright (and not only so slenting a)
mention. But hitherto meeting it in no other Author; I begin to suspect it meant
Metaphorically of some consternation of mind, wherewith God's restraining grace
charmed the adversaries of the truth. Bankinus flourished under King Richard
the second, Anno 1382.

ROBERT IVORY was, says Leland, none of the meanest Natives of this City, a
Carmelite and President General of his Order, D. D. in Cambridge. He wrote
several Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 6. Number. 96.
books, and Prece and Precio, procured many more, wherewith he adorned the
Library of White-Fryars in Fleet Street. He dyed November the fifth, 1392.

JULIANA BARNES was born ex antiqua and illustri domo. Understand it not REM.
in the sense wherein the same was said of a certain Pope, born in a ruinous
Cottage, where the Sun did shine through the Rotten Walls and Roof thereof. But
indeed she was descended of a respective Family, though I, not able to find the
place, am fain to use my Marginal Mark of greatest uncertainty.

She was the Diana of her Age for Hunting and Hawking, skilful also in Fishing,
and wrote three Bale Cent. 8. Number 33.
books of these Exercises, commending the practice thereof to the Gentry of
England.

The City of Leyden is scited in the very bottom of the Low Countries, so that
the water settled their, would be soon subject to putrefaction, were it not by
Engines forced up that it might fall, and so by constant motion kept from
corruption. Idleness will betray Noble men's minds to the same mischief, if some
ingenious industry be not used for their employment.

Our Julian also wrote a book of Heraldry. Say not the needle is the most proper
pen for the woman, and that she ought to meddle with making no Coats, save such
as Dorcas made for the widows, seeing their Sex may be not only pardoned, but
praised for such lawful diversions. No Gentleman will severely censure the
faults in her (...), but rather imitate De art (...) liber Hype^Criticus,
capite sexto.
Julius Scaliger who passing his verdict on all Poets, and coming to do the
like on Sulpitia a Roman Poetress (living under Domitian) thus courteously
concludes, Ut tam (...) Heroinae ratio habeatur, non ausim objicere ei judicii
severitatem. She flourished Anno Domini 1460. under King Henry the sixth.

ROBERT FABIAN was born and bred in this Bale Cent. 8. Number. 62. and J. (...).
Anno 1512.
City, whereof he became Sheriff 1493. Treating his Guests with good cheer and
welcome, he doubled his dishes with pleasant discourse, being an excellent
Historian, witness two Chronicles of his own writing.

1. From Brutus to the death of King Henry the second. 2. From the first of K.
Richard, to the death of K. Henry the seventh.
He was also an excellent Poet, both in Latin, French and English.

A Modern Sir John Suckling.
Master wit, in the contest betwixt the Poets of our age, for the Laurel makes
Apollo to adjudge it to an Alderman of London, because to have most wealth was
a sign of most wit. But had the Scene of this competition been laid seven score
years since, and the same remitted to the umpirage of Apollo, in sober sadness
he would have given the Laurel to this our Alderman.

As for his Histories, if the whole strain of them does (...), it must be
indulged to him that followed the genius of his own education. He died at
London 1512. and was buried in the Church of All-hallows, where he has a
Exemplified in Stow's Surv. page 214.
tedious and barbarous Epitaph, as commonly ( Reader, I should be glad to have
my observation confuted,) who has worse Poetry then Poets on their Monuments?
After his death, Cardinal Wolsey caused * Bale ut prius.
so many Copies of his Book as he could come by to be burnt, because therein he
had opened the Coffers of the Church too wide, and made too clear discovery of
the Revenues of the Clergy.

THOMAS LUPSET was born in this Bal^ and Pits.
City, and was related to most English and some foreign learned eminencies of
his age.

1. Bred a child in the house of Dean ^olet. 2. Under W. Lilly in St. Paul's
School. 3. Sent to Oxford, where he became Greek Professor. 4 Resigns his place
to his friend Ludovicus Vives. 5. Travailed into Italy, and at Padua was
familiar with C. Pole. 6. Was known unto Erasmus, who gives him this
Character; Hujus ingenio nihil gratius, nihil amantius. 7. Intended Divinity,
diverted by Cardinal Woolsy. 8. At Paris was Tutor to Th. Winter, a ward to the
Cardinal. 9. Returning into England, was known to King Henry the eight. 10.
Began to grow into his favor, when cut off with a Consumption 1532. in the
prime of his life.
He died in London, and lies buried in the Church of Saint Alphage nigh
Cripplegate, without a monument.

Since the Reformation.
JOHN RASTALL was a Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 8. Number. 74.
Citizen and Printer of London, by marriage a kin to Sir Thomas More, and when
the said Sir Thomas and Bishop Fisher wrote in defense of Purgatory, to prove
it by Scripture, Rastall undertook to maintain it by reason. Surely, he that
buy's the two former books, deserves to have this last given him to make him a
saver. Some will say, the former two endeavored to prove the fire, and Rastall
the smoke of Purgatory. But to pass by his works in Divinity, he (...) a good
Mathematician, and made a Comedy of Europe, Asia and Africa, which, my Base ut
prius.
Author says, was very witty, and very large; and I can believe the later,
seeing he had three parts of the world for his subject; and how long would it
have been had America been added. He wrote a book against John Frith, but
afterwerds (convinced with his adversaries arguements) recanted it of his own
accord; the cause why we have placed him since the Reformation. He wrote a book
of the terms of Law, and made an Index to Justice Fitz Herbert; yea, I behold
this John as father to Rastall the famous Lawyer, of whom In this City, Ti^le,
Writers on the Law.
before. He died and was buried at London 1536.

EDWARD HALL. We may trace him from his cradle to his coffin, as follows.

1. He was a Citizen of Lond^n by his Stow his Survay page 92.
birth. 2. He was bred a Scholar at Eaton. 3. Thence he removed and was one of
the Ha^chers M. S. of K. Col.
Foundation of Kings-colledge. 4. Thence he went to Gray's Inn, and studied the
Municipal-law. 5. He became common Sergeant of London, for the well discharging
whereof he, 6 Was advanced to be one of the Judges in the Sheriffs Court. 7.
Wrote an elegant history of the wars of York and Lancaster, from K. Henry the
fourth, till the end of King Henry the Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 9.
eight. 8. Died a very aged man 1547.
He was as by some passages in his book may appear, in that age well affected
to the Reformation. He lies buried in the Church of Saint Sithes (contracted I
think for * Stows Survay p. 276.
Saint Osiths) where I cannot recover any Epitaph upon him.

WILLIAM FULKE D. D. was born in this Parker in his Scheliton Cant.
City, bred first Fellow of Saint John's, then Master of Pembroke hall in
Cambridge. His studies were suitable to his years, when young, a good
Philosopher, witness his book of Meteors; afterward his endeavors ascended
from the middle region of the air, to the highest heavens, when he b^came a
pious and solid Divine.

Now the Romanists, seeing they could no longer blindfold their Laity from
the Scriptures, resolved to fit them with false spectacles, and set forth the
Rhemish Translation; which by Doctor Fulke was learnedly confuted, though he
never attained any great prefer^ent in the Church.

Here it is worth our pains to peruse the immediate succession of Masters in
Pembroke-hall, because unparalled in any English Foundation.

Edm. Grindall, Archp. of Cant. Mat. Hutton, Archp. of York. Jo. Whitgift,
Archp. of Cant. Jo. Young, (...). of Rochester. William Fulke, D. D. Lanc.
Andrews, Bp. of Winchester. Sam. Harsnet, Archp. of York. Nic. Felton, Bp. of
Eely.
Here, though all the rest were Episcopated, Doctor Fulke was but Doctor Fulke
still, though a man of great merit. This proceeded not from any disaffection in
him to the Hierarchy (as some would fain suggest) but principally from his
love of privacy, and place of Margaret-Professour, wherein he died Anno Dom.
1589.

EDMOND SPENCER born in this Camb. Eliz. in Anno 1598.
City, was brought up in Pembroke-hall in Cambridge, where he became an
excellent Scholar, but especially most haypy in English Poetry, as his works do
declare. In which the many Chaucerisms used (for I will not say affected by
him) are thought by the ignorant to be blemishes, known by the learned to be
beauties to his book; which notwithstanding had been more salable, if more
conformed to our modern language.

There passes a story commonly told and believed, that Spencer presenting his
Poems to Queen Elizabeth: She highly affected therewith, commanded the Lord
Cecil Her Treasurer, to give him an hundred pound; and when the Treasurer (a
good Steward of the Queens money) alleged that sum was too much, then give him
(quoth the Queen) what is reason; to which the Lord consented, but was so
busied, bel^ke, about matters of higher concernment, that Spencer received no
reward; Whereupon he presented this petition in a small piece of paper to the
Queen in her Progress,

I was promised on a time,
To have reason for my rhyme;
From that time unto this season,
I received nor rhyme nor reason.
Hereupon the Queen gave strict order (not without some check to her Treasurer)
for the present payment of the hundred pounds, she first intended unto him.

He afterward went over into Ireland, Secretary to the Lord Gray, Lord Deputy
thereof; and though that his office under his Lord was lucrative, yet got he no
estate, but says my Camd. El^z. in Anno 1598.
Author, P^culiari Poetis fato semper cum paupertate conflictatus est. So that
it fared little better with him, then with William Xilander the German, (a most
excellent Linguist, Antiquary, Philosopher and Mathematician,) who was so poor,
that (as Obi^ Virourm doct. An. 1576.
Thuanus says) he was thought, fami non famae scribere.

Returning into England, he was robbed by the Rebels of that little he had, and
dying for grief in great want, Anno 1598. was honorably buried nigh Chaucer in
Westminster, where this Distick concludes his Epitaph on h^s monument,

Anglica te vivo vixit plausitque poesis,
Nunc moritura timet te moriente mori.
Whilst h^iu did live, lived English poetry,
Which fears, now thou art dead, that she shall die.
Nor must we forget, that the expense of his funeral and monument, was defrayed
at the sole charge of Robert, first of that name, Earl of Essex.

JOHN STOW son of Thomas Stow, who died Anno 1559. grandchild to Thomas Stow,
who died 1526. (both Citizens of London, and buried in Saint Michaels in
Cornhill) was born in this City, bred at learning no higher then a good
Gramar-scholar, yet he became a painful, faithful, and (the result of both)
useful Historian.

Here, to prevent mistake by the homonymie of names, I request the Reader to
take special notice of three brace of English writers,

1. Sir Thomas (commonly with the addition of De la) More, who lived under, and
wrote the life of King Edward the second. 1. John Leland, bred in Oxford, the
most exquisite Grammarian of his age, who flourished Anno 1428. 1. John Stow, a
Benedictine Monk of Norwich, Anno 1440. who wrote various Collections, much
cited by Caius in his history of Cambridge. 2. Sir Thomas More, the witty and
learned Chancellor of England. 2. John Leland, bred in Cambridge, the most,
eminent Antiquary under K. Henry the eight. 2. John Stow, this Londiner, and
Historian.

I confess, I have heard him often accused, that (as learned Guicciardine is
charged for telling magnarum rerum minutias) he reports res in se minutas,
toys and trifles, being such a Smell-feast, that he cannot pass by Guild Hall,
but his pen must taste of the good cheer therein. However this must be indulged
to his education; so hard it is for a Citizen to write an History, but that the
fur of his gown will be felt therein. Sure I am, our most elegant Historians
who have wrote since his time (Sir Francis Bacon, Master Camden, etc.) though
throwing away the basket, have taken the fruit, though not mentioning his name,
making use of his endeavors. Let me add of John Stow, that (however he kept
tune) he kept time very well, no Author being more accurate in the notation
thereof.

Besides his Chronicle of England, he has a large Survey of London, and I
believe no City in Christendom, Rome alone excepted, has so great a volume
extant thereof. Plato was used to say, that many good laws were made, but still
one was wanting, viz. a law to put all those good laws in execution. Thus the
Citizens of London have erected many fair monuments to perpetuate their
memories, but still there wanted a monument to continue the memory of their
monuments (subject by time, and otherwise to be defaced) which at last by John
Stow was industriously performed.

He died in the eightieth year of his age April 5. 1605. and is buried at the
upper end of the North-Isle of the Quire In his own Survey of London (continued
after his death) page 152.
of Saint Andrews-Undershaft. His Chronicle since continued by another, whose
additions are the lively emblem of the times he writes of, as far short of
Master Stow in goodness, as our age is of the integrity and charity of those
which went before it.

GILES FLETCHER was born in this So was I informed by Mr. Jo. Rainsey who
married his Relict.
City, son to Giles Fletcher Dr. in law, and Ambassador into Russia, of whom
formerly in Kent. From Westminster-school he was chosen first Scholar, then
Fellow of Trinity college in Cambridge. One equally beloved of the Muses and
the Graces, having a sanctified wit, witness his worthy Poem entitled Christ's
Victory, made by him being but Bachelour of Arts, discovering the Piety of a
Saint, and Divinity of a Doctor. He afterward applied himself to
SchoolDivinity, (cross to the grain of his Genius, as some conceive) and
attained to good skill therein. When he preached at Saint Mary's, his prayer
before his Sermon usually consisted of one entire Allegory, not driven, but led
on, most proper in all particulars. He was at last (by exchange of his living)
settled in Suffolk, which has the best and worst air in England, best about
Bury, and worst on the Seaside, where Master Fleticher was beneficed. His
clownish and low parted Parishoners, (having nothing but their shoos high about
them,) valued not their Pastor according to his worth, which disposed him to
melancholy, and hastened his dissolution. I behold the life of this learned
Poet, like those half-verses in Virgils Aeneids, broken off in the middle,
seeing he might have doubled his days according to the ordinary course of
nature; whose death happened about the year 162. He had another brother Phineas
Fletcher Fellow of Kings-colledge in Cambridge, and beneficed also in Norfolk,
a most excellent Poet, witness his Purple Island, and several other pieces of
great ingenuity.

JOHN DONE was born in this City of wealthy parentage, extracted out of Wales,
one of an excellent wit, large travail, and choice experience. After many
vicissitudes in his youth, his reduced age was honored with the Doctorship of
Divinity, and Denary of Saint Paul's.

Should I endeavor to deliver his exact character, (who willingly would not
do any wrong) should do a fourfold injury.

1. To his worthy memory, whose merit my pen is unable to express. 2. To my
self, in undertaking what I am not sufficient to perform. 3. To the Reader,
first in raising, then in frustrating his expectation. 4. To my deservedly
honored friend Master Isaac Walton, by whom his life is so learnedly written.
It is enough for me to observe he died March 31. Anno Dom. 1631. and lies
buried in Saint Paul's under an ingenious and choice monument, neither so costly
as to occasion envy, nor so common as to cause contempt.

Romish Exile Writers.
JOHN HEIWOOD was born in Pi^z de Ang. Script. Anno 1556.
London, and was most familiar with Sir Thomas More, whom he much resembled in
quickness of parts, both undervaluing their friend to their jest, and having
Ingenium non edentulum, sed mordax. I may safely write of him, what he
pleasantly In his 5 hun. of Epig. number. 100.
writes of himself, that he applied mirth more then thrift, many mad plays, and
did few good works. He has printed many English proverbial Epigrams, and his
Monumenta Literaria are said to be non tam labor condita, quam lepore condita.
He was highly in favor with Queen Mary, and after her death, fled for Religion
beyond the seas. It is much, that one so Fancyful should be so conscientious.
He lived, and (for ought I find) died at Mechlin about the year 1566. Gasper
Heiwood his son, was a great Jesuit, and executed here in Q. Elizabeth's reign.

MAURICE CHAMNEE most probably born in this City, was bred a Friar in
Charter House, now called Suttons Hospital. He was imprisoned for refusing the
Oath of Supremacy, with 18. of his Order, all which lost their lives for their
obstinacy, whilst our Maurice (like Jobs messenger) only escaped alone to tell
of his fellows misfortune, and write the history of the execution. Some of
Chamnee's party, report to his praise, that Pitz. in Anno 1581.
Martyrdom was only wanting to him, and not he to Martyrdom. Others more
truly tax him, for warping to the Will of King Henry the eighth, not so much to
decline his own death, as to preserve his Covent from destruction, who sped in
the first, and failed in the latter. However fearing some afterclaps, he fled
beyond the Seas, passing the rest of his life in the Low Countries, dying Anno
Dom. 1581.

EDMUND CAMPIAN was born in this Pitz. de script. Ang. in Anno 1581.
City, and bred Fellow in Saint Johns-colledge in Oxford, where he became
Proctor Anno 1568. when Queen Elizabeth visited that University, being made
Deacon by the Protestant Church; he afterward renounced that Order, and fled
beyond the Seas. A man of excellent parts, though he who rod post to tell him
so, might come too late to bring him tidings thereof, being such a valuer of
himself, that he swelled every drop of his ability into a bubble by his vain
ostentation. And indeed few who were reputed Scholars, had more of Latin, or
less of Greek, then he had.

He was sent over with Father Parsons into England, to reduce it to the Church
of Rome; to this purpose he set forth his Ten Reasons so purely for Latin, so
plainly and pithily penned, that they were very taking, and fetched over many (
Neuters before) to his persuasion.

It was not long before he was caught by the Setters of the Secretary
Walsingham, and brought to the Tower, where one of his own Religion says that
he was Idem ibidem.
exquisitissimis cruciatibus tortus, racked with most exquisite torments.

Yet the In the Princes report of the first days conference fol. 1.
Lieutenant of the Tower truly told him, that he had rather seen then felt the
rack, being so favorably used therein, that being taken off, he did presently
go to his lodging without help, and used his hands in writing. Besides, (as
Campian confessed) he was not examined upon any point of Religion, but only
upon matters of State. Some days after he was engaged in four solemn
disputations, to make good that bold challenge he had made against all
Protestants.

Place. Auditors. Time. Opposers. Questions. Campians answer. The Chapel in
the Tower. The Lieutenant of the Tower, Mr. Bele, Clerk of the Counsel withmany
Protestants and Papists. 1581 August 31 Alexander Nowell Dean of Paul's. 1.
Whether the Protestants had cut off many goodly and principal parts of
Scripture from the body thereof? Affirmative Septem. 18 William Day Dean of
Windsor. 2. Whether the Catholic Church be not properly invisible? Negative 23
William Fulk D. D. 3. Whether Christ be in the Sacrament Substantially, very
God and Man in his Natural Body? Affirmative 27 Roger Goad D. D. 4. Whether
after the Consecration the Bred and Wine are Transubstantiated? Negative
William Fulk D. D. 5. Whether the Scriptures contain sufficient Doctrine for
our Salvation? Roger Goad D. D. 6. Whether Faith only justifyeth? John Walker
William Clarke

An Camb. in his Eliz. An. 1580.
Authentic Author gives this unpartial account of Campian in his Disputation,
ad disputandum productus expectationem concitatam aegre sustinuit, and in plain
truth, no man did ever boast more when he put on his Armor, or had cause to
boast less when he put it off. Within few days, the Queen was necessitated for
her own security to make him the subject of severity, by whose laws he was
executed in the following December.

Benefactors to the Public.
THOMAS POPE Knight, was born in this City, as my worthy friend Doctor Seth
Ward the Head, and others of the Society of Trinity college in Oxford have
informed me. I behold him as fortunae suae fabrum, the Smith (who by Gods
blessing) hammered out his own fortune without any Patrimonial advantage.
Indeed he lived in an Age which one may call the harvest of wealth, wherein any
that would work might get good wages at the dissolution of Abbyes.

Herein he was much employed, being under the Lord Cromwell, an instrument of
the second magnitude, and lost nothing by his activity therein; however by all
the Printed books of that age he appears one of a candid carriage, and in
this respect stands sole and single by himself. That of the Abbey Lands which he
received, he refounded a considerable proportion for the building and endowing
of Trinitycolledge in Oxford. He died as I collect about the beginning of the
reign of Queen Elizabeth.

There are in Oxford shire many descendants from him continuing in a worshipful
Estate, on the same token, that King James came in Progress to the house of Sir
(...) Pope Knight, when his Lady was lately delivered of a daughter, which Babe
was presented to King James with this Paper of Verses in her hand, which
because they pleased the King I hope they will not displease the Reader;

See this little Mistress here,
Did never sit in Peter's chair;
Or a triple Crown did wear,
And yet she is a Pope.
No Benefice she ever sold,
Nor did dispense with sins for Gold,
She hardly is a Sevenight Old,
And yet she is a Pope.
No King her feet did ever kiss,
Or had from her worse look then this;
Nor did she ever hope,
To saint one with a Rope.
And yet she is a Pope.
A female Pope you will say, A second Joan,
No sure she is Pope Innocent or none.
I behold the Earl of Down in Ireland (but living in Oxford shire) the chief of
the Family.

THOMAS CURSON born in Alhallows Lumbard street, Armorour, dwelt without
Bishop-gate. It happened that a Stage Player borrowed a rusty Musket, which had
lien long Ledger in his Shop: now though his part was Comical he therewith acted
an unexpected Tragedy, killing one of the standers by, the Gun casually going
off on the Stage, which he suspected not to be Charged.

O the difference of diverse men's in the tenderness of there Consciences! some
are scarce touched with a wound, whilst others are wounded with a touch
therein. This poor Armourer was highly afflicted therewith, though done against
his will, yea without his knowledge, in his absence, by another, out of mere
chance. Hereupon he resolved to give all his Estate to pious uses, no sooner
had he gotten a round sum, but presently he posted with it in his Apron to the
Court of Aldermen, and was in pain till by their direction he had settled it for
the relief of poor in his own and other John Cheston George Carter
Parishes, and disposed of some hundreds of pounds accordingly, as I am
credibly informed by the then Churchwardens of the said Parish. Thus as he
conceived himself casually (though at great distance) to have occasioned the
death of one, he was the immediate and direct cause of giving a comfortable
living to many, he dyed Anno Domini 16.

EDWARD ALLIN was born in the aforesaid Parish near Devonshire-house, where now
is the sign of the Pie. He was bred a Stage Player, a Calling which many have
condemned, more have questioned, some few have excused, and far fewer
conscientious people have commended. He was the Roscius of our age, so acting
to the life, that he made any part (especially a Majestck one) to become him.
He got a very great Estate, and in his old age following Christ's Council, (on
what forcible motive belongs not to me to enquire) He made friends of his
unrighteous Mammon. Building therewith a fair College at Dulwich in Kent, for
the relief of poor people.

Some I confess count it built on a foundred foundation, seeing in a spiritual
sense none is good and lawful money save what is honestly and industrously
gotten; but perchance such who condemn Master Allin herein, have as bad
Shillings in the bottom of their own bags if search were made therein; sure I
am, no Hospital is tied with better or stricter laws, that it may not Sagg from
the intention of the Founder. The poor of his native Parish Saint Buttolph
^ishopgate have a privilege to be provided for therein before others. Thus he
who out-acted others in his life, out did himfelf before his death, which
happened Anno Domini 16.

WILLIAM PLAT was born in this City (as his Heir has informed me) son to Sir
Hugh Plat, grandson to Richard Plat Alderman of London. He was a
FellowCommo^er b^ed in Saint John's college in Cambridge, and by his Will
bequeathed thereunto Lands to maintain Fellows and Scholars, (Fellows at
thirty, Scholars at ten pounds per annum) so many as the Estate would extend
unto.

But this general and doubtful settlement was liable to long and great suits
betwixt the College and the Heirs of the said William, until Anno 1656. the
same were happily compoled betwixt the College and John Plat Clerk, (Heir to
the foresaid William) when a settlement was made by mutual consent of four
Scholars at ten, and two Fellows at fifty pounds per annum. Here I mention not
thirty pounds yearly given by him to the poor of Hornsey and High-gate, with a
Lecture founded therein. This William Plat died Anno 1637.

ALEXANDER STRANGE son to a Doctor in Law, was born in So was I inform^d by his
car^ful Ex^cutors.
London, bred in Peter-house in Cambridge, where he commenced Bachelour of
Divinity, and afterward for So read I in his Epitaph in the Chapel.
forty six years was Vicar of Layston, and Prebend of Saint Paul's, where his
Prebenda submersa the Corpse whereof were drowned in, the Sea afforded him but a
noble year.

Now, because Layston Church stood alone in the fields, and inconveniently for
such who were to repair thereunto, he built at Buntingford (a thorow-road
market, mostly in his Parish, a neat and strong Chapel e stipe collatitia,
from the bounty others gave, and he gathered.) Wherefore having laid the
foundation, before well furnished for the finishing thereof, he gave for his
Motto,

Beg hard or beggard. None could tax him (with the Scribes and Pharisees) for
binding heavy burdens and * Mat. 23. 4.
grievous to be born, and laying them on other men's shoulders, whilst he
himself would not move them with one of his fingers. First, because the
burdens were not heavy, being light in the particulars, though weighty in the
total sum. Secondly, he bound them on none, but professed himself bound unto
them, if pleased to take them up for a public good. Thirdly, he put his, and
that a bountiful hand unto them, purchasing land out of his own purse to pay
for the daily reparation thereof. He also promoted the building of a
Free School in the said place, to which some sisters worsh^pfully born in the
same Town, wealthily and honorably married, were the Foundresses, yet so as it
will still be thankful to contributors thereunto for better accommodation.

This Master Strange being no less prosperous then painful in compounding all
differences among his neighbors, being a man of peace went to eternal peace
December 8. in the eightieth year of his age 1650.

To the Reader.
Pauperis est numerare, They have but few who have but a number. It passes my
power to compute the Benefactors Natives of this City, whose names are entered
in fair Tables (the Counterpart of the Original no doubt kept in heaven,) in
their respective Parishes; so that in this City it is as easy to find a Steeple
without a Bell hanging in it, as a Vestry without such a Memorial fixed to it:
Thither I refer the Reader for his better satisfaction, and proceed to the

Lord Mayors.
Name Father Place Company Time 1 John Rainwell Robert Rainwell London
^ish-monger 1426 2 Nicholas Wotton Thomas Wotton London Draper 1430 3 Robert
Large Thomas Large London Mercer 1439 4 Stephen Foster Robert Foster London
Fish-monger 1454 5 Ralph Varney Ralph Varney London Mercer 1465 6 John Tate
John Tate London Mercer 1473 7 Bartholom James Edward James London Draper 1479
8 John Percivall Roger Percivall London Merchant-Taylor 1498 9 Richard Haddon
William Haddon London Mercer 1506 10 William Brown John Brown London Mercer
1507 11 Henry Kebble George Kebble London Grocer 1510 12 William Brown John
Brown London Mercer 1513 13 George Monox Not named Lon^on Draper 1514 14 Thomas
Seymer Iohe Seymor London Mercer 1526 15 William Holleis William Holleis London
Baker 1539 16 George ^arn George Barn London Haberdasher 1552 17 William Garret
John Garret London Grocer 1555 18 William Chester John Chester London Draper
1560 19 Thomas Row Robert Row London Merchant-Taylor 1568 20 William ^llen
William Allen London Mercer 1571 21 James Hawes Thomas Hawes London
Cloath-worker 1574 22 Nichol Woodrofe David Woodrofe London Haberdasher 1579 23
John Branche ^ohn Branche London Draper 1580 24 Thomas Blanke Thomas Blank
London Haderdasher 1582 25 George Barn George Barn London Haberdasher 1586 26
Martin Calthrop Martin Calthrop London Draper 1588 27 John Garret William
Garret London Haberdasher 1601 28 Thomas Low Simon Low London Haberdasher 160^
29 Henry Row Thomas Row London Mercer 1607 30 John Swinnerton Thomas
Swinnerton London Merchant-Taylor 1612 31 Sebastan Harvey James Harvey London
Iron-Monger 1618 32 William Cockain William Cockain London Skinner 1619 33
Martin Lumley James Lumley London Draper 1623 34 John Goare Gerrard Goare
London Merchant-Taylor 1624 35 Robert Ducy Henry Ducy London Merchant-Taylor
1630 36 Robert Titchborn........ Titchborn London Skinner 1656

Sheriffs of London and Middlesex.
HEN. II.
Anno 1 Quatuor Vic. Anno 2 Gervasius, and Johan. Anno 3 Gervasius, and Johan.
filius Radulphi. Anno 4 Anno 5 Remiencus fili. Berigarii, and socii ejus. Anno
6 Anno 7 Johan. filius Radulphi. Anno 8 Eri saldus Sutarius, and vital, Clicus.
Anno 9 Remiencus filius Boringarii, and Will. fill. Isabell, for 7 years. Anno
16 Johan. Bievinitte, and Bald. Clicus Anno 17 Rad. Orificus, and Rad. Vinter.
Andre. Buckerol, Adlord. Crispus, David de Cornhill, and Rog. Blundus, for 4
years. Anno 21 Bricknerus de Haverhil, and Pet. fill. Walter. Anno 22 Idem. Anno
23 Will. fill. Isab Anno 24 Waleran. Johan. filius Nigelli. Anno 25 Will. fill.
Isab. and Arnulphus Buxell. Anno 26 Will. and Regin. le Viell. Anno 27 Idem.
Anno 28 Idem. Anno 29 Will. and fill. Isab. for 6 years.
RICH. I.
Anno 1 Henri. de Cornhill and Rich. fill. Renner. Anno 2 Rich filius Renner ut
supra. Anno 3 Will and Hen. fill. Renner. Anno 4 Nichol. Duke, and Pet. Neveley.
Anno 5 Rog. Duke, and Rich. fill. Alwin. Anno 6 Will. fill. Isabel, and Will.
fill. Arnold. Anno 7 Rob. Besont, and Joh. de Josue. Anno 8 Gerard. de Anteloch,
and Rob. Durant. Anno 9 Rog. Blunt, and Nicol. Ducket. Anno 10 Constant. fill.
Arnold. and Rob. le Beau.
K. JOHN.
Anno 1 Arnold. fill. Arnold. and Rich. fill. Barthol. Anno 2 Rog. Dorset, and
Jacob. Bartholomew. Anno 3 Walter. filius Alic. and Simon. de Aldermanbury.
Anno 4 Norman. Blundell, and Johan. de Eely. Anno 5 Walt. Broune, and Will.
Chamberlain. Anno 6 Tho Haverel, and Hamon. Brond. Anno 7 Johan Walgrave, and
Rich. de Winchester. Anno 8 Johan. Holihand, and Edm. fill. Gerard. Anno 9 Rog.
Winchester, and Edm. Hard I. e. Anno 10 Petrus Duke, and Tho. Neal. Anno 11
Petr. le Josue, and Will. Blound. Anno 12 Adam. Whiteley, and Step. le Grass.
Anno 13 Johan. fill. Pet. and Joh. Garland. Anno 14 Randolp. Eyland, and
Constan. Josue. Anno 15 Martin. fill. Alic. and Petr. Bate. Anno 16 Solom.
Basinge, and Hug. Basinge. Anno 17 Joh. Travers, and Audre. Newland.
HEN. III.
Anno 1 Benedict. Seinturer, and Will. Bluntivers. Anno 2 Tho. Bockerel, and
Rad. Holyland. Anno 3 Johan. Veil, and Johan. le Spicer. Anno 4 Rich.
Wimbledon, and Johan. Veil. Anno 5 Rich. Renger. and Johan. Veil. Anno 6
Rich. Renger, and Tho. Lambart. Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Johan. Travars, and And.
Bockerell. Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Rog. Duke, and Martin. fill. Will. Anno 11 Idem.
Anno 12 Steph. Bokerel, and Hen. Cocham. Anno 13 Idem. Anno 14 Will.
Winchester, and Rob. fill. Johan. Anno 15 Rich Walter. and Johan. de Woborne.
Anno 16 Micha. de S. Helen, and Walter. de Enfeild. Anno 17 Hen. de Edmonton,
and Gerard. Bat. Anno 18 Sim. fill. Mar. and Rog. Blunt. Anno 19 Rad. Ashwy, and
Johan. Norman. Anno 20 Gerard. Bat. and Rich. vel Rob. Hardle. Anno 21 Hen.
Cobham, and Jordan. de Coventry. Anno 22 Johan. Toloson, and Gervasius. Anno 23
Johan. Codras, and Joh. Wilhall. Anno 24 Reymond. Bongey, and Rad. Ashwy. Anno
25 Johan. Gisors, and Mich. Tony. Anno 26 Tho. Duresme Johan. Voil. Anno 27
Johan. fill. Joh. and Rad. Ashwy. Anno 28 Hugo. Blunt. and Adam. Basing. Anno 29
Rad. Foster, and Nich. Bat. Anno 30 Rob. de Cornhill, and Adam. de Bewley. Anno
31 Simon. fill. Mar. and Laurent. Frowick. Anno 32 Johan. Voile, and Nic. Bat.
Anno 33 Nich. fill. Josue, and Galf. Winchester. Anno 34 Rich. Hardell, and Joh.
Toloson. Anno 35 Humf. Bat. Will. fill. Richardi. Anno 36 Laur. Frowick, and
Nic. Bat. Anno 37 Will. Duresme, and Tho. Wimborne. Anno 38 Johan. Northamton,
and Rich. Picard. Anno 39 Rad. Ashwy, and Rob. Limon. Anno 40 Steph. Do, and
Hen. Walmond. Anno 41 Mich. Bocherel, and Joh. Minor. Anno 42 Rich. Otwell, and
Will. Ashwy. Anno 43 Rob. Cornhill, and Joh. Adrian. Anno 44 Idem. Anno 45
Adam. Brouning, and Hen. Coventry. Anno 46 Johan. Northampton, and Rich.
Picard. Anno 47 Johan. Tailor, and Rich. Walbrook. Anno 48 Rob. de Mount.
Piter. Osbert. de Suffolk. Anno 49 Greg. Rokesley, and Tho. de Detford. Anno 50
Edward. Blunt, and Petr. Anger. Anno 51 Johan. Hind, and Johan. Walraven. Anno
52 Johan. Adrian, and Lucas. de Baten-Court. Anno 53 Walter. Harvy, et Will.
Duresme Anno 54 Tho. Baseing, et Rob. Cornhill Anno 55 Walt. Potter, and Phil.
Tailor Anno 56 Greg. Rokesley, and Hen. Walleys Anno 57 Rich. Paris, and Johan.
de Wodeley
EDW. I.
Anno 1 Johan. Horn, and Walt. Potter Anno 2 Nico. Winchester, and Hen.
Coventry Anno 3 Lucas de Batencourt, and Hen. Frowick Anno 4 Johan. Horn, and
Rad. Blunt Anno 5 Rob. de Arer, and Rad. le Fewre. Anno 6 Johan. Adrian, and
Walt. Langley Anno 7 Rob. Baseing, and Will. le Meyre Anno 8 Tho. Fox, and Rad.
Delamore Anno 9 Will. Farenden, and Nich. Winchester Anno 10 Will. le Meyre,
and Rich. Chigwell Anno 11 Rad. Blunt, and Ankerin de Betavill Anno 12 Johan.
Goodcheap, and Martin. Box Anno 13 Steph. Cornhill, and Rob. Rokesley Anno 14
Walt. Blunt, and Johan. Wade Anno 15 Tho. Cross, and Gualt. Hawteyne Anno 16 W.
Hereford, and Tho. Stanes Anno 17 W. Beta^ne Johan. de Canter. Anno 18 Fulke of
St. Edmond, and Salom. Langford Anno 19 Tho. Roman, and W. de Leyre Anno 20
Rad. Blunt, and Hamond. Box Anno 21 Hen. Boll vel Bolle, and Elias Russel Anno
22 Rob. Rokesley jun. and Mort. Aubery Anno 23 Hen. Box, and Rich. Gloucester
Anno 24 Johan. Dunstable, and Adam. de Halingbury. Anno 25 Tho. de Suffolk, and
Adam. de Fulham Anno 26 Rich. Re^ham, and Tho. Sely Anno 27 Johan. Armenter,
and Hen. Fingrith Anno 28 Lucas de Havering, and Rich. Champnes Anno 29 Rob.
Callor, and Pet. de Bescant Anno 30 Hugo Pourte, and Sim. Paris Anno 31 W.
Combmartin, and Johan. de Burford Anno 32 Rog. Paris, and Johan. de Lincoln
Anno 33 Will. Cawson, and Regin. Thunderley Anno 34 Galf and Sim. Billet
EDW. II.
Anno 1 Nico. Pigot, and Nigebrury Anno 2 W. Baseing, and Jam. Butteler Anno 3
Rog. le Palmer, and Jacobus de Saint Edmons Anno 4 Sim. Cooper, and Petr.
Blackney Anno 5 Sim. Metwood, and Rich. Wilford Anno 6 Johan. Lambin, and Will.
Lutkin Anno 7 Rob. Gurden, and Hugo. Garton Anno 8 Steph. Abingdon, and Hamond
Chigwell Anno 9 Hamond Goodcheap, and Willielm. Bodeleigh Anno 10 Will. Caston,
and Rad. Balancer Anno 11 Johan. Prior, and Will. Furneux Anno 12 Johan.
Pointell, and Joh. Dalling Anno 13 Sim. de Abington, and Johan* Preston Anno 14
Rena. and Will. Prodham Anno 15 Rich. Constantine, and Rich. de Hackney Anno 16
Johan. Grantham, and Rich. de Ely Anno 17 Adam. de Sarisbury, and Johannis de
Oxford Anno 18 Benet. de Fulham, and Johan. Cawson Anno 19 Gilb. Mordon, and
Joh. Causton Anno 20 Rich. Rothing, and Rog. Chauntclere
EDW. III.
Anno 1 Hen. Darcy, and Johan. Haughton Anno 2 Sim. Frances, and Hen.
Combmartim Anno 3 Rich. Lazar, and Will. Gisors Anno 4 Rob. of Eley, and Tho.
Wharwood Anno 5 Johan. Mocking, and And. Auberey Anno 6 Nico. Pike, and Johan.
Husband Anno 7 Johan. Hamond, and Will. Hansard Anno 8 Johan. Kingstone, and
Walt. Turk Anno 9 Walt. Mordon, and Rich. Upton Anno 10 Johan. Clarke, Will.
Curtes Anno 11 Walt. Neale, and Nic. Crane Anno 12 Will. de Pomfrett, and Hugo
Marbler Anno 13 Will. Thorney, and Rog. Frosham Anno 14 Adam Lucas, and Barth.
Morris Anno 15 Rich. de Barkeinge, and Johan. de Rokesley Anno 16 Johan.
Loufkin, and Rich. Killingbery Anno 17 Johan. Steward, and Joh. Aylesham Anno
18 Geffred. Witchingham, and Tho. Leg Anno 19 Edmund Hemenhall, and Johan. de
Gloucester Anno 20 Joh. Croyden, and Will. Clopton Anno 21 Adam Brapson, et
Rich. Fas, vel Bas Anno 22 Hen. Picard, et Sim. Dolseby Anno 23 Adam. de Bury,
and Rad. de Lynn. Anno 24 Johan. Notte, and Will. de Worcester. Anno 25 Johan.
Wroth, and Gilb. de Stenineshorpe. Anno 26 Johan. Peache, and Joh. Stotley.
Anno 27 Will. Would vel Wild, and Johan. Little. Anno 28 Will. Nottingham, and
Rich. Smelt. Anno 29 Walt. vel Tho. Forster, and Tho. Brandon. Anno 30 Rich.
Nottingham, and Tho. Dolsell. Anno 31 Stephan. Candish, and Barth. Frostlinge.
Anno 32 Johan. Barnes, and Johan. Buris. Anno 33 Sim. de Bennington, and Johan.
de Chichester. Anno 34 Johan. Dennis, et Walt. Berny. Anno 35 Will. Holbech, et
Jacob. Tame. Anno 36 Johan. de S. Alban. et Jacob. Andrew. Anno 37 Rich. de
Croyen, et Johan. Hiltoft. Anno 38 Johan. de Metford, et Simon. de Mordon. Anno
39 Johan. Bukylsworth, et Johan. vel Tho. Ireland. Anno 40 Johan. Ward, et Tho.
de Lee. Anno 41 Johan. Turnegold, et Will. Dickman. Anno 42 Rob. Girdeler, et
Adam. Wimondham. Anno 43 Johan. Piell, et Hugo. Holdich. Anno 44 Will.
Walworth, et Rob. Gayton. Anno 45 Adam. Staple, et Rob. Hatfeild. Anno 46
Johan. Philpot, et Nich. Brembar. Anno 47 Johan. Aubery, et Johan. Fished. Anno
48 Rich. Lions, et Will. Woodhouse. Anno 49 Johan. Hadley, et Will. Newport.
Anno 50 Johan. Northampton, et Rob. Land.
King JOHN.
5 WALTER BROWN.]

This is he who with Rosia his Wife founded the Hospital of Saint Mary without
Bishopsgate, commonly called Saint Mary Spittle.

HENRY the Third.
31 SIMON. FITZ-MARY.]

He founded the Hospital of Mary, called Bethlehem (corruptly Bedlam) without
Bishops-gate.

Sheriffs of London and Middlesex.
Name. Arms. RICH. II. Anno 1 Andr. Pikeman 1 Nich. de Twiford Arg. two bars,
and on a Canton Sab. a Buckle of the first. 2 Johan. Bosham 2 Tho. Cornwallis 3
Johan. Helesdon 3 Will. Barret 4 Walt. Doget 4 Will. Knightcott 5 Johan. Hende
Arg. on a Cheveron Az. 3 Escalop shells of the field, on a Chief of the second,
a Lion passant of the first. 5 Johan. Rote 6 Adam. Bam Erm. on a Chief indented
S. an Annulet between 2 trefoils Arg. 6 Johan. Sely 7 Johan. More Argent, a
Fess Dauncetle Gul. and Sab. between 3 Mullets of 6 points pierced of the
third. 7 Simon. Winchcombe 8 Nich. Exon Gules, a Cross between 12 Croslets
fitched Or. 8 Johan. Fresh Vert, a Fess ingraled Or in Chief an annulet Sable.
9 Johan. Churchman 9 Johan. Organ 10 Will. Moore 10 Will. Stanndon Sable, on a
Cheveron between 3 Lionsheads erased Arg. 7 Cloves proper. 11 Hugo. Tastolfe 11
Will. Venour Gules, on a Fess Or, 5 Escallops 3 and 2, Sable. 12 Tho. Austen 12
Adam. Carleille 13 Johan Lovey 13 Johan. Walcott Arg. on a Fess Sab. 3 Escalops
Or. 14 Tho. Vynant 14 Johan. Francis Ermine, on a Canton Sab. a harp Arg. 15
Johan. Chadworth Arg. on a Bend S. 3 Trefoils of the first. 15 Hen. Vauner 16
Gilb. Muchfeld 16 Tho. Newton 17 Urogo. Barentme S. 3 Eagle^s Arg. in the midst
an annulet Or. 17 Rich. Whittington Gul. a Fess compony Or and Az. in the
dexter Canton an annulet. 18 Will. Brampton 18 Tho. Knoll Azure, semy of
Croslets and a Cross recercilte Or. 19 Will. Shiringham 19 Roger. Ellis 20 Tho.
Wilford 20 Will. Panker 21 Johan. Woodcoke Or, on a Bend Gules, 3 Crosses
bottony fitched at foot of the first. 21 Will. Askham Gules, a Fess Or, between
3 Dolphins Najant Argent. 22 Johan. Warmer 22 Johan. Wade HEN. IV. Anno 1 Will.
Walderne Arg. a Bend between 3 Griffons-heads erazed Sable. 1 Will. Hide 2
Will. Gnote 2 Johan. Wakeley 3 Rob. Chichley Or, a Cheveron ingrailed between 3
Cinquefoiles Gul. 3 Rich. Merlaw Quarterly Gules, and Sable, an Orle of
Martlets of the second. 4 Tho. Polle 4 Tho. Fawkoner Pally of 6 Arg. and Sab.
on a bend Vert 3 trefoils of the first. 5 Tho. Polle 5 Tho. Fawkoner Ut prius.
6 Hen. Barton Ermin. a Saltire Sab. voided of the field. 6 Will. Crowmer
Argent, a Cheveron ingrailed between 3 Choughs proper. 7 Nich. Wotton Arg. a
Saltire ingrailed Sable. 7 Galf. Brook 8 Hen. Haltoh 8 Hen. Pounfrayt 9 Will.
Norton 9 Tho. Dukes 10 Johan. Law 10 Will. Chichley Arms before. 11 Johan.
Penn 11 Tho. Pike 12 Johan. Raynwell Per pale indented Argent and Sable, a
Cheveron Gules. 12 Walt. Cotton HEN. V. Anno 1 Johan. Sutton 1 Johan. Michell 2
Johan. Michell Sab. a Cheveron between 3 Escalops Or. 2 Tho. Aleyn 3 Will.
Cambrigg Azu. a Cross patonce between 4 Swans Arg. 3 Adam. Everard 4 Johan.
Coventre Arg. on a Cheveron S. between 3 columbines proper a Bezant. 4 Rob.
Widington 5 Hen. Read 5 Johan. Gedney Arg. on a Fess Azu. 3 Eaglets displayed
Or, between as many Leopards-heads (...) 6 Johan. Parvies Or a fess vert, over
all a Saltire Gules. 6 Rad. B^rton 7 Johan. Botiller 7 Rob. Whitingham 8 Johan.
Wells Lozengy Or and Ermin. a Lion rampant Gules. 8 Johan. Botiller 9 Will.
Weston 9 Rich. Gosselin HEN. VI. Anno 1 Will. Eastfield Sab. a Cheveron between
3 Boys heads Arg. Crined Or. 1 Rob. Tatersall 2 Tho. Wadeford 2 Nich. James 3
Johan. Bithwater 3 Sim. Se^man 4 Will. Milreth 4 Johan. Brockle Checkee Or and
vert. a Chief Argent 5 Rob. Arnold 5 Johan. Higham 6 Rob. Otteley Argent, 3
Lions-heads Erazed within a border ingrailed Sable. 6 Hen. Frow^cke 7 Johan.
Abbot 7 Tho. Duffhous 8 Will. Rus 8 Rad. Holland 9 Rob. Large Arg. a Bend
Azure, between 3 Mullets ^ules. 9 Walt. Chichley Or a Cheveron betwixt 3
Cinquefoils Gu. 10 Steph. Brown Arg. 2 Cheverons S. on a Canton Ermin. an
Annulet of the second. 10 Johan. Hatherley 11 Johan. Padesley Arg. 3 flower
deliz. Az. charged on the middle with Annulets Or. 11 Johan. Olyney G. Besanty
2 flanches S. on each a Lion ramp. Gardant Argent. 12 Tho. Chalton Azu. a Lion
rampant regardant Arg. Crowned Or. 12 Johan. Linge 13 Tho. Brunewell 13 Simon.
Air G. a porcupine saliant Arg. quitted and chained about the neck Or. 14 Rob.
Clopton Gul. a fess Ermin. between 6 Mascles Or. 14 Tho. Chatworth Ermin. 3
pyles Sab. on a Canton Or, a flower deliz Azu. 15 Will. Gregory Per pale Or and
Azu. 2 Lions rampant Indorsed and regardant counterchanged. 15 Tho. Marsted 16
Will. Chapman 16 Will. Halys 17 Hugo. Dike 17 Nich. Yoo, sive Goo* 18 Rob.
Markhall 18 Phil. Malpas 19 Johan. Sutton 19 Will. Wettenhall 20 Will. Combs
20 Rich. Rich 21 Tho. Beaumond 21 Rich. Norden 22 Johan. Norman Or, 3 Bars Gul.
on a Chief Arg. as many flower deliz Sable. 22 Nich. Wyfor^ 23 Steph. Foster
Sa. a Cheveron ingrailed Ermin, between 3 Pheons Arg. 23 Hugo. Which Ar. on a
Cheveron Gu. 5 plates between 3 caterfoils sliped Vert. 24 Johan. Darby 24
Galf. Felding Arg. on a Fess Az. 3 Lozenges Or. 25 Rob. Horn 25 Galf. Bullen
Arg. a Cheveron Gul. between 3 Bullsheads couped Sab. armed Or. 26 Will. Abram
26 Tho. Scot Arg. a Cheveron between 3 Gridirons Sable. 27 Will. Catlowe 27
Will. Marrowe Az. a fess ingrailed Or, between 3 maidenheads, Arg. crined of
the second. 28 Tho. Caning 28 Will. Hulyn Arg. a Cheveron Az. within a border
ingrailed Sable. 29 Will. Dear 29 Johan. Middleton 30 Math. Philip Sable, semy
of flower de liz Or a Lion rampant Ermin, crowned Gold. 30 Chri. Marter 31
Rich. Lee Azure, on a fess between 2 cotises Or 3 Leopards-heads Gul. 31 Rich.
Allyn Az. a pale ingrailed Ermin. 32 Johan. Walden 32 Tho. Cook Or, a
Cheveron compony G. and Az. betw. 3 cinquefoils of the third. 33 Will.
Tayllour 33 Johan. Field 34 Johan. Young Lozengie Or and Arg. on a bend Azu. 2
Ebeckes-heads Erased of the first. 34 Tho. Oldgrave Az. a Cheveron ingrailed
Ermin, between 3 Owls Or. 35 Johan. Styward 35 Rad. Varny Az. on a cross Arg. 5
Mullets Or. 36 Tho. Reyner 36 Will. Edward Arg. a fess between 6 Martlets
Sable. ^ 37 Rad. Jocelin Az. a wreath Arg. and Sab. adorned wit 4 Horse-bells
Or. 37 Rich. Nedeham 38 Johan. Stocker 38 Johan. Plommer EDW. IV. Anno 1 Johan.
Lambard 1 Rich. Fleming 2 Geor. Ireland 2 Johan. Lock 3 Will. Hampton Gul. a
fess Checky Or and Az. within a border Arg. 3 Bar^h. James Az. on a Cheveron
between 3 Lions pass. Gardant Or, as many Escalops Sable. 4 Rob. Basset 4 Tho.
Muschamp 5 Johan. Tate Per fess Or and Gules, a pale counterchanged between 3
Cornish choughs. 5 Johan. Stone 6 Hen. Wever, mil. 6 Will. Constantin 7 Johan.
Brown Az. a Cheveron between 3 Escalops Or, within a border ingrailed. 7 Johan.
Stockton G. a Cheveron vary Arg. and S. between 3 Mullets Silver. 8 Hum.
Hayford Arg. a Cheveron S. between 3 Roe-bucks tripping Gules. 8 Tho.
Stalbroock 8 Will. Heriot Per pale Ermin. and Erminess 3 Cressants
counterchanged. 8 Simon. Smith 10 Rob. Drope Arg. gutte de poix on a Chief G. a
Lion passant Gardant Or. 10 Rich. Gardener Per fess Arg. and Sab. a pale
counterchanged between 3 Griffons-heads Erased of the field. 11 Johan. Crosbey
11 Johan. VVard^ 12 Johan. Shelley 12 Johan. Aley^ 13 Tho. Bledlowe 13 Johan.
Brown 14 Will. Stocker 14 Rob. Billesdon Az. a bend cotised Or, in the
sinister Chief an Eagles-head Erased of the second. 15 Tho. Hill S. a Chev.
Erm. betw. 3 Lions passantGua. 15 Edw. Shaw Arg. a Chev. between 3 losinges
Ermines within a Border Gules. 16 Rob. Colwich 16 Hugo. Brice Argent, fretty
Gul. a plain Cross of the first, within a Border Azure, verdoy of Cinquefoils
Or. 17 Rich. Rawson 17 Will. Horn 18 Hen. Collet S. on a Cheveron between 3
Hinds triping Arg. as many Annulets of the first. 18 Johan. Stocker 19 Rob.
Harding 19 Rob. Byfeld 20 Tho. Ilam 20 Johan. Ward 21 Will. Bacon 21 Tho.
Daniell Arms before. 22 Rob. Tate 22 Rich. Chawry Arg. on a Cheveron S^.
between 3 Birds Az. as many Annulets of the first. RICH III. Anno 1 Johan.
Matthew Gyrouny of 6 S. and Gul. a Lion ramp. Or, within a border Az^. charged
with Crosses pattee Gold. 1 Will. Wh^te S. on a Chev ro^ between 3 Ewers Arg.
as many Martlets Gul. 2 Tho. Northland 2 Mill. Marten Or, 2 Bars Gul. on the
first, an E^chion Ermin. 3 Rad. Astry ^arry wavy Arg. and Az. on a Chief Gul. 3
Bezants. 3 Tho. Breteyn HEN. VII. Anno 1 Johan. Tate Arms before. 1 Johan.
Swan 2 Johan. Percivall Per Cheveron G. and Az. 3 Greyhounds heads ^rased
Argent. 2 Hugo. Clopton Paly of 4 Or and Azure, a Lion rampant Counterchanged.
3 Tho. Frukell 3 Will. Remington Gyrouny of 8 Ermin. and Az. a Dolphin naiant
Or. 4 Rad. Tilney Ar. a Cheveron between 3 Gri^-heads Erased Gul. 4 Will.
Isacke 5 Will. Capell Gu. a Lion ramp. 'twixt 3 Crosses Botony Fitchy Or. 5
Johan. Brook 6 Hen. Coote 6 Hugo. Pemberton 7 Tho. Wood 7 Will. Borne Per pale
indented Or. and Ar. a Cheveron be^en 3 Escalopshells Gul. 8 Will. Welbeck 8
Will. Purches A^g. a Lion rampant Azu. wherion a fess S. charged with 3
Besants. 9 Rob. Fabian 9 Johan. Winger Arg. on a Cheveron between 3 Mascles S.
as many Besants. 10 Nich. Alwyn Arg. a Fess nubilee Az. between 2 Lions passant
Sable. 10 Johan. Warner 11 Tho. Knesworth Ermin. a Cheveron wavy Gul. between 3
Greyhounds passant. 11 He^. Somer 12 Johan. Shawe Arms before. 12 Rich.
Haddon Or, a man's Leg Couped at the Thigh Az. 13 Barth. Read Per pale G. and S.
a Croslet Botony fitched at Base between 4 flower de liz Or. 13 Tho. VVindew 14
Tho. Burdbery Sa. a Cheveron Ermin. between 3 round Buckles Arg. the tongs
pendant. 14 Steph. Jenings Arg. a Cheveron G. betwixt 3 Plomets S. 15 ^ac.
VVilford 15 Rich. Brond 16 Johan. Hawes 16 Will. Stead 17 Laur. Aylemer, mil.
17 Hen. Hedde 18 Hen. Kebill Argent, a Cheveron ingrailed Gul. on a Chief Azu.
3 Mullets Or. 18 Nich. Nynis 19 Chri. Hawes 19 Tho. Grannger 20 Rog. Acheley
Gules, on a fess ingrailed between 3 Griffons-heads erased Or, as many Crosses
patty sitched Sable. 20 Will. Brown Arms before. 21 Rich. Shore 21 Rog. ^rove
22 Will. Coppinger Bendy of 6 Arg. and G. on a fess vert 3 Plats within a
border of the second. 22 Will. Fitz-VVill. 23 Will. Botiler Arg. on a fess
compone G. and Az. betwixt 6 Croslets of the third 3 Annulets Or. 23 Johan.
Kirkby 24 Tho. Exmewe Arg. a Cheveron check G. and Sil. between 3
Escalopshells S. within a berder of the second ennurny of Leopards-heads, and
entoir of annulets Or. 24 Rich Smith HEN. VIII. Anno 1 Georg. Monox Arg. on a
Cheveron S. between 3 Hollyleaves proper as many besants, on a Chief G. a Bird
between 2 Anchors Or, 1 Johan. Doget 2 Johan. Wilborne 2 Johan. Rest 3 Nich.
Shelton 3 Tho. Mirfin 4 Rob. Fenrother 4 Rob. Aldernes 5 Johan. Brugges Arg. on
a Cross Sa. a Leopards-head Or. 5 Rog. Basford Sab. 3 dancing Bears Or. 6 Jac.
Yarford 6 Johan. Mundy 7 Hen. Warly 7 Rob. Baily 8 Tho. Seymor Sable, a fess
imbatiled with 3 Ogresses 'twixt as many wings Arg. 8 Johan. Thirston 9 Tho.
Baldry 9 Rad. Simonds 10 Johan. Aleyn 10 Jacob. Spens 11 Johan. Wikenson 11
Nich. Pertrich (...) Argent and Sab. on a bend, G. 3 (...) O. 12 Johan. Kime
Gul. a Cheveron ^etwixt 9 Cross Cro^s Or. 12 Johan. Skevington Arg. 3
Bulls-heads erased Sable. 13 Johan. Bretton 13 Tho. Pargiton 14 Johan. Rudston
14 Johan. Champnes Per pale Ar. and S. a Lion ramp. (...) a border ingrailed
Counterchanged* 15 Mich. English * * S. 3 Lions passant Arg. 15 Johan. Junis 16
Rad. Dodmer 16 Will. Roche 17 Johan. Counton 17 Chri. Askew 18 Steph. Peacocke
18 Nich. Lambard 19 Johan. Hardy 19 Will. Howles 20 Rad. Warren 20 Johan. Long
21 Mich. Dormer Azu. 10 Billets 4, 3, 2, and 1. Or, in a Chief of the second, a
Lion issuant Sa. arm. and Langued Gul. 21 Walt. Champion 22 Will. Dauntsey 22
Rich. Cophin 23 Rich. Gresham 23 Edw. Altam 24 Rich. Reynolds 24 Johan. Prise
25 Will. Forman 25 Tho. Kitson, mil. 26 Nich. Lawson 26 Will. Denham 27 Hum.
Munmoth 27 Johan. Cotes 28 Rob. Paget 28 Will Bowyer 29 Johan. Gresham 29 Tho.
Lewyn 30 Will. Wilkinson 30 Nich. Gibson Azu. 3 storks rising proper. 31
Johan. Fairy 31 Tho. Huntlowe 32 Mart. Bows 32 Will. Louton 33 Roland. Hill,
mil. 33 Hen. Suckley 34 Hen. Hoberthorne 34 Hen. Amco^s Arg. a Castle betwixt 3
cups covered Az. 35 Rich. Tolus 35 Johan. Dobes 36 Johan. Wilford 36 And. Judde
37 Georg. Barnes 37 Rad. Aleyn 38 Rich. Jerveys 38 Tho. Curtys EDW. VI. Anno 1
Rob. Chertesey 1 Tho. White 2 Will. Lock 2 Johan. Ayliffe 3 Johan. York 3 Rich.
Turk 4 Agust. Hind 4 Johan. Lion 5 Johan. Lambert 5 Johan. Cooper 6 Johan.
Maynard Arg. a Ch^ron Azu. betwixt 3 Hands Gules. 6 Will. Gerrard REX. PHIL.
and MAR. REGI. Anno 1 Tho. Offley Arg. on a Cross Az. Formee ^rt. a Lion
passant Or. betwixt 4 Cornish Choughes proper. 1 Will Hewet 2 David. Woodroffe
2 Will. Chester 3 Tho. Leigh 3 Johan. Macham 4 Will. Harpur 4 Johan. White 5
Rich. Mallary 5 Jaco. Altham 6 Johan. Hales 6 Rich. Champion REG. ELIZAB. Anno
1 Tho. Lodge 1 Rog. Martin 2 Chri. Diaper 2 Tho. Roo 3 Alex. Avenon Argent, a
Cheveron Gul. `twixt 3 Heur^s proper. 3 Hum. Baskervill 4 Will. Allen 4 Rich.
Chamberlain 5 Edw. Bauckes 5 Rowland. Haward 6 Edw. Jackman 6 Lion. Ducket
Azure, 2 Bars Dancette Or, in Chief 3 Bezants. 7 Johan. Rivers 7 Jacob. H^wys 8
Amb. Nicolas 8 Johan. Langley Sab. a Cheveron E^mine, `twixt 3 Ramsheads Erazed
Argent. 9 Thomas Ramsey 9 Will. Bond 10 Johan. C^ ffe 10 Jacob. Bacon 11 Hen.
Becher 11 Will. Dane 12 Fran. Barnham 12 Will. Box 13 Johan. Milles 13 Johan.
Branch 14 Rich. Pipe Azu. Crusuly, 2 Pypes Or. 14 Nich. Woodroffe 15 Jacob.
Harvy 15 Tho. Pullyson 16 Tho. Blancke 16 Anth. Gamage 17 Edw. Osborn 17
Walstans. Dixe 18 Will. Kimpton 18 Georg. Barn 19 Nich. Backhouse 19 Fran.
Bowyer Or, a Bend Vary betwixt 2 cotises Gul. 20 Georg. Bond 20 Tho. Starkey
21 Mart. Caltherpe Check Or and Azure, a Fess Ermin. 21 Johan. Heart 22 Rod.
Woodcoke 22 Johan. Allott 23 Rich. M^rtin 23 Will. Web 24 Will. Row Argent,
on a Cheveron Azure, between 3 tresoils parted per pale Gul. and Vert, as many
Bezants. 24 Cutb. Buckell 25 Will. Masham 25 Johan. Spencer 26 Steph. Slany 26
Hen. Willingsley 27 Anth. Ratli^ 27 Hen. Prannell 28 Rob. House 28 Will. Elkin
29 Johan. Catcher 29 Tho. Skynner Arg. on a Cross Az. Formy fleury a Lion
Passant Or between 4 Cornish Coughes Proper. 30 Hugo. Offeley 30 Rich.
Saltenstall 31 Rich. Gourney Gul. a Cheveron, betwixt 3 Mallets Or. 31 Steph.
Soame Sable, a Cheveron `twixt 2 Mallets Ar. 32 Nich. Mouseley 32 Rich. Brook
33 Will. Rider Azure, 3 ^rescents Or. 33 Benedic. Barnham 34 Johan. Gerrard 34
Rob. Tailor 35 Pavel. Banning 35 Pet. Haughton 36 Rob. Lee 36 Tho. Benett 37
Tho. Low 37 Leon. Holliday 38 Johan. Watts 38 Ricard. Goddard 39 Hen. Row 39
Johan. Moore 40 Edw. Holmenden 40 Rob. Hampson 41 Rog. Clarke 41 Hum. Welde 42
The. Cambell 42 Will. Craven Argent, a Fess betwixt 6 Cress Cro^s fitchy Gules.
43 Hen. Anderson Argent, a Cheveron betwixt 3 Cross Croslets Sable. 43 Will.
Glover JACOB. REX. Anno 1 Jam. Pemberton Arg. a Cheveron betw. 3 Buckets Sable.
1 Johan. Swynnerton Argent, a Cross Formee Flurt Sable. 2 Will. Rumney 2 Tho.
Middleton 3 Tho. Hayes, mil. Ermin. 3 Leopards-heads Erased Gules 3 Oliver.
Style, arm. 4 Clem. Scudamore Gules, 3 Stirrups leathered and buckled, Or. 4
Johan. Jolles, mil. 5 Will. L^man 5 Johan. Leman Azure, a F^ss betwixt 3
Dolphins Arg. 6 Galf. Elwis 6 Nich. Style 7 Georg. Booles Az. 3 Cups Arg.
holding as many Boresheads erected Or. 7 Rich. Far^ington 8 Rich. Pyott 8 Fran.
Jones 9 Edw. Barkham Argent, 3 Pallets Gules, over all a Cheveron. 9 Georg.
Smithes 10 Edw. Rotheram 10 Alex. Prescot 11 Tho. Bennett 11 Hen. Jay 12 Pet.
Proby 12 Mart. Lumley 13 Will. Gore G. a Fess betw. 3 Cros^ets Fitc^ee Or. 13
Johan. Gore G. a Fess betw. 3 Cros^ets Fitc^ee Or. 14 Allanus Cotton 14 Cu^.
Harbert 15 Will. Holeday 15 Rob. Johnson 16 Rich. Herve 16 Hugo. Hamersley 17
Rich. Deane 17 Jacob. Cambell 18 Edrus. Allen 18 Rob. Ducy Or, 2 Lions Passant
Gules. 19 Geor. Whitmore Vert, Fretty Or. 19 Nich. Ranton 20 Johan. Hodges 20
Hum. Handford, m. 21 Tho. Moulson 21 Rad. Freeman Azure, 3 Lozinges, Argent. 22
Roland. Heylinge 22 Rob. Parkhurst CAR. REX. Anno 1 Johan. Poole 1 Chri.
C^ithenowe 2 Edrus. Bromfeild 2 Rich. Fenn 3 Maur. Abbot, mil. 3 Hen. Garway*
Arg. a Pile surmounted by a Fess, between 4 Leopards-heads Gules. 4 Rowland
Backhouse 4 Will. Acton, m. and bar. 5 Edmund. Wright 5 Humphi. Smith 6 Arthur
Abdey Or, 2 Chevorons betwixt 3 Cinque-folis Sable. 6 Rob. Cambell * Ar. on a
Cheveron S. between 3 Pellets, each charged with a Martlet of the field, as
many Mascles O^. 7 Sam. Cranmer 7 Hen. Prat * 8 Hugo. Perry 8 Hen. Andrews 9
Gilb. Harrison 9 Rich. Gurney Paly Counter-paly of 6 Pieces per Fess Or. and
A^. 10 Joh. Highlord Sab. a Bend Flory, Argent. 10 Joh. Cordell 11 Tho. Soame
11 Joh. Gaire 12 Will. Abell 12 Jac. Gerrard 13 Tho. Atkin 13 Edw. Rudge 14
Isaac. Pennington 14 Joh. Woolaston Sab. 3 Mullets pierced Argent. 15 Tho.
Adams Ermme, 3 Catts Azure. 15 Johan. Warner Or, a Cheveron betwixt 3
boars-heads Eras. Sable. 16 Johan. Towse 16 Abram. Reynardson Arg. 2 Cheverons
Engrailed and a Canton G. whereon a Mascle of the field. 17 Georg. Garret, mil.
17 Georg. Clarke Arg. on a Bend Gules, between 3 Ogresses as many Swans proper.
18 Johan. Langham Argent 3 Bears-heads erazed Sa. musled Or. 18 Tho. Andrews
Arg. on a Cheveron ^ngrailed betwixt 3 Tersoils Vert, as many Mullets Or. 19
Johan. Fouke Vert. a Flower de luce Argent. 19 Jacob. Bunce 20 Will. Gibbs 20
Rich. Chambers 21 Johan. Kendrick 21 Tho. Foot Arg. a Cheveron, and in the
Dexterpoint a Trefoyle Sable. 22 Tho. Cullum 22 Simon. Edmunds

The Reader (whom I presume no less charitable then judicious) will not be
offended with the many naked blanks or arme-less spaces, annexed to these
Sheriffs. He that thinks the Sheriffs of London as cognoscible Persons
(especially so long since) as these of other Counties, may with equal truth
maintain the springs of rivers as easily discernable as their Channels. For the
Sheriffs of Counties were men of known and grown Estates, equally eminent for
the roots whence they sprang, as for the branches springing from them; whereas
many Sheriffs of London (like those plants which the Gardiners term Annual,
lasting but a year) appear only eminent during their Sherifalty, and afterward
no motion or mention of them, especially of such as died before their
Mayoralty, the true reason why we could attain but so few Arms with any
assurance.

HENRY the Sixth.
18. PHILLIPUS MALPAS.]

He Stow's Survey of London page 88.
gave by his Testament 125l. to relief of poor Prisoners, and every year for
five years 400. Shirts and Smocks, 40. pair of Sheets, 150. gowns of Freeze to
the Poor. To 500. poor people in London, every one 6. Shillings 8. Pence; to
poor Maids Marriages, 100. Marks; to Highways, 100. Marks; 20. Marks the year
to a Graduate to Preach; 20. Pounds unto Preachers at the Spittle on the three
Easter holy days, etc.

20. RICHARD RICH.]

He was a Mercer, and founded Almes-houses at Idem p. 89.
Hodsden in Hartford-shire, which no doubt were by him competently endowed,
though now the Almes-houses are as poor as the Almes-folk, the one needing
repairing, as much as the other relieving.

EDWARD the Fourth.
17. RICARD RAWSON.]

He Idem ibidem.
gave by Testament large Legacies to the Prisoners, Hospitals, and Lazerhouses.
To other poor, to Highways, to the Water-conduits, besides to poor Maids
Marriages 340. pounds, and his Executors to build a large house in the
Churchyard of Saint Mary's Spittle, wherein the Mayor and his Brethren do use
to sit, and hear the Sermons in Easter holy days.

20. THOMAS ILAM.]

He newly builded the great Stow's Surv. of London p. 89.
Conduit in the Cheap, of his own charges, to the great convenience of the City.

HENRY the Seventh.
18. HENRY KEBL^.]

He gave to Highways Idem ibidem.
200. pounds, to poor Maids Marriages 100. Marks, etc. to 7. Almes-men in
London 6. pence the Week for ever. He was when living a great Benefactor to the
building of Alder-Mary-Church, and by his Testament gave 1000. pounds toward
the finishing thereof, how barbarously he was afterward requited, and his body
cast out of the grave, we have First book in the chap. of Churches.
formerly largely bemoaned and with just indignation.

HENRY the Eighth.
1. GEORGE MONOX.]

He re-edified the decayed Stow's Surv. of London p. 90.
Parish Church of Waltamstow or Walthamstow in Essex, he founded there a
Free School, and Almes-houses for thirteen Almes-people, he made also a Cawsey
of Timber over the Marshes from Walthamstow to Lock-bridge.

The Farewell.
And now, being to take my Farewell of this great City, I cannot forget the
verse, which I find amongst others, in Master Camden's commendation thereof.

Urbs pietate potens, numeroso cive superba. Potent in piety, in her people
proud.

But see the Romish charity, who confine all piety to Popery. The Index
Expurgato^ius, Printed at Madrid by Jews Sanchez 1612. commands the forepart
of the verse, concerning their piety to be expunged, letting the latter moity
of their pride to remain.

May I in this particular be the humble Remembrancer of the City, (without the
least intrenching on his place, who worthily discharges that office,) to cross
and consute that peevish and partial Index. Let it be their endeavors, to
delete out of their hearts, all high conceits of their populousness, and
effectually to express grace and goodness in their conversations.

Nor let the City of London ever forget quantillum interfuit inter maximam
Civitatem et nullam; How little distance there lately was betwixt the greatest
City and none at all, if Gates and Bars (as it is generally received) be the
essential difference of a City. But God who can produce light out of darkness
can make the plucking d^wn of the Gates, to be the setting up of the City.
Wherefore though the Eleventh day of March, be generally beheld as the first
day of Spring, London may date her Spring from the Eleventh day of February
1659. when she effectually felt the vernal heat after a long Winter of woe and
misery.

I heartily wish this honorable City what ever may conduce to the continuance
and increase of the happiness thereof. Especially that the river of Thames, the
lif^ of London (as which Eases, Adorneth, Inricheth, Feeds and Fortifieth
it,) may have its Channel constantly continued: The Millers Riddle,

If I have Water, I will drink Wine;
But if I have no Water, I must drink Water.
is appliable to this City; so long as Thames-water continues, Londoners may
Wine it; but should it fail, they must drink water indeed, and some perchance
brackish too, as made of their tears.

I will not pry too nearly and narrowly into the fancy of our Bella in his
ruins of Rome translated by Spencer.
Poet, speaking of the ruins of old Rome,

Ne ought save Tiber hasting to his fall,
O Worlds inconstancy! Remains of all:
That, which is firm does flit and fall away,
And that is flitting does abide and stay.
And yet by his leave, greater rivers then Tiber have in process of time had
their streams by casualties or neglect, partly drained, wholly dried, or
otherwise diverted. My humble request therefore to the Officers of the City is,
effectually to own their concernment in the river of Thames, in clearing and
cleansing it from Sholes, Sands, and other obstructing encroachments, that they
may leave it as well to posterity, as they found it from their fathers.

WESTMINSTER.
WESTMINSTER is the greatest City in England next London, not only in
Position, but by the Dimensions thereof. For let it be taken (as truly it
ought) extensively with the Liberty of Lancaster from Temple Bar, and it
fills as much ground (not to say contains more reasonable souls) then any
City in the Land. But as a proper man seems a Dwarf, when placed next to a
Giant; such the infelicity of Westminster, whose due greatness, devoured by the
vicinity of London, is insensible in the eyes of the Beholders.

It was anciently called Thorney, and afterward Westminster, for distinction
from Saint Paul's, called in ancient times Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 2. p.
173. in vita Gilberti Westmonasteriensis.
Eastminster.

The Buildings.
The Abbey Church is beheld as a rare structure, with so small and slender
Pillars (greatest legs argue not the strongest Man) to support so weighty a
fabric, built by King Henry the third, and afterward much enlarged and
beautified by the Abbots thereof.

Adjoining to it, is the Chapel of King Henry the seventh, which Leland calls
the Miracle of the World. Indeed let the Italians deride our English, and
condemn them for Gothish Buildings, This they must admire, and may here take
notes of Architecture (if their pride would permit them) to perfect theirs
accordingly.

In this Chapel the founder thereof, with his Queen lies interred, under a
Monument of solid Or Copper rather.
Brass, most richly gilded, and Artificialy carved. Some, slight it for the
cheapness, because it cost but a thousand Godwin in his. Annals of K. Henry 8.
Anno 1.
pounds in the making thereof. Such do not consider it, as the work of so
thrifty a Prince, who would make a little money go far; besides, that it was
just at the turning of the Tide (as one may term it) of money, which flowed
after the finding out of the West Indies, though ebbing before.

Amongst the civil structures, Westminster Hall is eminent, erected by King W.
Rufus, for the Hall to his own Court, built with copwebless beams, conceived of
Irishwood. Sure I am, we then had no command in that Island, as first subdued
by King Henry the second. It is one of the greatest rooms in Christendom, and
indeed it needs to be of good capacity, to receive so many Plantiffes and
Defendants, being at such mutual distance of affection.

Next is White Hall, the Palace of ou^ English Kings, which one termed a good
Hypocrite, promising less then it performs, and more convenient within then
comely without, to which the Nursery of Saint James's was an appendant.

As for the houses of Noblemen all along the Strand, I desire to be excused
from commending some, lest it should by caviling Spirits be implicitly
interpreted a dispraise of the rest. Besides, I am ignorant under what name to
commend them to posterity; so many houses daily new-dipt, assume to themselves
new names, according to the alteration of their Owners. I conclude them
therefore all best, and best of all, whilst they continue in the hands of their
present possessors.

Proverbs.
As sure as Exchequer pay.]

All know, that the Exchequer was formerly the Treasury of the Kings of
England, kept in this City, the pleading part on the one side, and the paying
part on the other side of Westminster Hall. This Proverb was in the prime
thereof, in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, who maintained her Exchequer to the
height, that her Ex^hequer might ma^tain her. The pay thereof was sure inwards,
nothing being remitted which was due there to the Queen; and sure outward,
nothing being detained which was due thence from the Queen, full and speedy
payment being made thereof. This Proverb began to be crossed about the end of the
reign of King James, when the credit of the Exchequer began to decay, and no
wonder if the streams issuing thence were shallow, when the fountain to feed
them was so low, the revenues of the Crown being much abated.

There is no redemption from Hell.]

There is a place partly under, partly by the Exchequer Court commonly called
Hell; I could wish it had another name, seeing it is ill jesting with edge
tools, especially with such as are sharpened by Scripture. I am informed that
formerly this place was appointed a prison for the Kings debtors, who never
were freed thence, until they had paid their uttermost due demanded of them:
If so, it was no Hell but might be termed Purgatory according to the Popish
erroneous persuasion. But since this Proverb is applied to moneys paid into the
Exchequer, which thence are irrecoverable, upon what plea or pretense
whatsoever.

As long as Megg of Westminster.]

This is applied to persons very tall, especially if they have Hop-pole-heighth
wanting breadth proportionable thereunto. That such a giant woman ever was in
Westminster, cannot be proved by any good witness, (I pass not for a late lying
Pamphlet) though some in proof thereof produce her Gravestone on the
South Side of the Cloistures, which (I confess) is as long an large and entire
Marble, as ever I beheld. But be it known, that no woman in that age was
interred in the Cloistures, appropriated to the Sepultures of the Abbot and his
Monks. Besides, I have read in the Records of that Abbey of an infectious year,
wherein many Monks dyed of the Plague, and were all buried in one Grave,
probably in this place under this Marble Monument. If there be any truth in the
Proverb, it rather relates to a great Gun, lying in the Tower, commonly called
long Megg, and in troublesome times, (perchance upon ill May day in the reign
of King Henry the eighth,) brought to Westminster, where for a good time it
continued. But this Nut (perchance) de^erves not the Cracking.

Princes.
EDWARD the first was born in Westminster, being a Prince placed by the posture
of his nativity, betwixt a weak Father, and a wilful Son. Yet he needed no such
advantage for foils to set forth his (...) worth. He was surnamed Longshanks,
his step being another man's stride, and was very high in stature. And though
oftimes such who are built four stories high are observed to have little in
their cock-loft, yet was he a most judicious man in all his undertakings,
equally wise to plot, as valiant to perform, and (which under Divine Providence
was the result of both,) happy in success at Sea, at Land, at Home, Abroad, in
War, in Peace. He was so fortunate with his Sword at the beginning of his
reign, that he awed all his enemies with his Scabbard, before the end thereof.
In a word he was a Prince of so much merit that nothing under a Chronicle can
make his complete Character.

EDWARD sole ^on to King Henry the sixth, and Margaret his Queen, was S^eeds
Chronicle p. 684.
born at Westminster on the 13 day of Octo. 1453. Now when his Father's party
was totally and finally routed in the battle at Teuks-bury, this Prince being
taken prisoner, presented to King Edward the fourth, and demanded by him, on
what design he came over into England, returned this answer, That he came to
recover the Crown, which his Ancestos for three desents had no less rightfully
then peaceably possessed.

An answer for the truth, befitting the Son of so holy a Father as King Henry
the sixth, and for the boldness thereof, becoming the Son of so haughty a
Mother as Queen Margaret. But presently King Edward dashed him on the mouth
with his (...), and his Brother Richard Crook-back stabbed him to the heart with
his dagger. A barbarous murder, without countenance of justice in a legal, or
valor in a military way. And his blood then shed was punished not long after.

Here I am not ashamed to make this observation. That England had successively
three Edwards, all Princes of Wales, sole or eldest sons to actual Kings; Two
dying violent, all untimely deaths, in their minority, before they were
possessed of the Crown, viz.

1 Edward Son to Henry 6. stabbed In the Seventeenth years of his age. 2 Edward
Edward 4. stifled Tenth 3 Edward Richard 3. pined away Eleventh

The murder of the second may justly be conceived the punishment of the murder
of the first, and the untimely death of the last, (of whom more in In title of
Princes.
Yorkshire,) a judgment for the murder of the two former.

EDWARD eldest son of Edward the fourth and Elizabeth his Queen, was born in
the Sanctuary of Westminster, November 4. 1471. His tender years are too soft,
for a solid character to be fixed on him. No hurt we find done by him, but too
much on him, being murdered in the Tower by the procurement of his Uncle
Protector. Thus was he born in a spiritual, and killed in a temporal Prison. He
is commonly called King Edward the fifth, though his head was asked, but never
married to the English Crown; and therefore in all the Pictures made of him, a
distance interposed, forbids the banes betwixt them.

ELIZABETH eldest daughter of King Edward the fourth and Elizabeth his Queen
was born in Speeds Cron. p. 703.
Westminster on the eleventh of February 1466. She was afterward married to
King Henry the seventh, and so the two Houses of York and Lancaster, united
first hopefully in their Bed, and a^terwards more happily in their Issue.
Besides her dutifulness to her husband, and fruitfulness in her children,
little can be extracted of her personal character. She dyed (though not in
Child bearing) in Childbed, being safely delivered on Candlemas day, Anno
1503* of the Lady Katharine, and afterward falling sick, languished until the
eleventh of February, and then died in the thirty seventh year of her age, on
the day of her Idem.
nativity. She lies buried with her husband in the Chapel of his erection,
and has an equal share with him in the use and honor of that his most
magnificent monument.

CECILY second daughter to King Edward the fourth, by Elizabeth his Queen, A M
P.
bearing the name of Cecily Duchess of York, her grand* mother and god mother,
was born at Westminster. In her Childhood mention was made of a marriage
betwixt her and James (son to James the third) Prince of Scotland. But that
Motion died with her father, Heaven (wherein marriages are made) reserving that
place for Margaret her eldest sisters eldest daughter.

She long led a single life, but little respected of King Henry the seventh her
brother in law. That politic King knowing, that if he had none, or no
surviving Issue by his Queen, then the right of the Crown rested in this
Cecily, sought to suppress her from popularity, or any public appearance. He
neither preferred her to any (...) Prince, nor disposed of her to any prime
Peer of England, till at last this Lady wedded her self to a Linconshire Lord,
John Baron Wells, whom King Henry advanced Viscount and no higher. After his
death, my ( Speeds Chro. in the end of the reign of K. Edward the fourth.
) Author says, she was re-married, not mentioning her ( Some say his name was
Kyme.
) husbands name, whence I conclude him an obscure person, and this Lady rather
married then matched, such the distance betwixt their degrees. Probably this
Cecily, consulting her comfort, more then her credit did it of design, so to be
beneath the jealousy of King Henry the seventh. She left no children, and the
date of her death is uncertain.

CHARLES the second (son to King Charles the first of Blessed Memory) (and
Mary, youngest daughter to Henry the fourth King of France,) was born at Saint
James's May 29. 1630. Great was the general rejoicing thereat. The University
of Oxford congratulated his birth with printed Poems, and it was taken ill,
though causelessly, by some, that Cambridge did not do the like: for then the
Wits of the University were sadly distracted into several Counties, by reason
of the plague therein. And I remember, Cambridge modestly excused herself in
their Poem made the year after, at the birth of the Lady Mary, and it will not
be amiss to insert and translate one Tetrastick, made by my worthy Master Booth
of C. C. C*
friend,

Quod fuit ad nixus Academia muta priores,
(...) (...) Carolus, aegra fuit.
Spe veniente nova si tunc tacuisset amores,
Non tantum morbo digna, sed illa mori.
Prince Charles forgive me, that my silent quill,
Joy'd not thy birth, alas sore sick was I.
New hopes now come, had I been silent still,
I should deserve both to be sick and die.
His birth was accompanied with two notable accidents in the heavens. The star
Venus was visible all day long, as sometime it falls out near her greatest
Elongation. And two day^ after there was an Eclipse of the Sun, about eleven
digits, observed by the greatest Bambridge and Gassendus.
Mathematicians.

And now Reader, give me leave to be silent my self, and present thee with the
expressions of a most ingenious Hamond L'estrange in the reign of King Charles
the first p. 112.
Gentleman;

To behold this babe, heaven it self seemed to open one Eye more then ordinary.
-- Such Asterisks and Celelestial Signatures affixt to times so remarkable as
this, usually are (...), prophetically hinting and pointing out somewhat future
of eminent contingency.

Yea such have since been the occurrences in the life of this pious Prince,
that rightly considered they will appear (not only eminent above the common
standard of actions, but) full of miracle and amazement.

He was on the 1. of January 1650. at Scoon Crowned King of Scotland; Being
before invaded by an Army under the conduct of O. C. Soon after quitting that
Kingdom he marched for England, and on the 3. of September 1651. nigh See
Battles in Worcestershire.
Worcester was fought, and lost the day, though he (to use my Doctor Heylin in
his life of K. Charles p. 155.
Authors expression) acted beyond the expectation of his friends, and to the
great applause of his very enemies. Narrow search was made after his person,
yea a thousand pounds (a bait his politic enemies made sure would have been
bit at,) promised to such who should betray him. Yet God (whose Angels ^ were
his Lifeguard) miraculously preserving him out of the hands of his enemies, he
safely passed over into France to the Queen his mother.

During his continuance beyond the Seas, great were the proffers tendered unto
him if forsaking the Protestant Religion; but alas! as soon might the impotent
waves remove the most sturdy rocks, as they once unfix him; such his constancy,
whom neither the frowns of his afflictions, nor smiles of secular advantages,
could make to warp from his first principles.

At length his piety and Patience were rewarded by God, with a happy
restitution to his undoubted Dominions, and he after a long and tedious exile,
landed at Dover, May 25. 1660. to the great joy of his three Kingdoms.

A Prince whose virtues I should injure, if endeavoring their contraction
within so narrow a scantling. And yet, I cannot pass over that, wherein he so
much resembles the King of Heaven, (whose Vicegerent he is) I mean his
merciful disposition, doing good unto those who spightfully used and persecuted
him.

And now it is my hearty prayer, that God who appeared so wonderful in his
Restoration, would continue still Gracious to us in his Preservation,
confounding the plots of his adversaries, that upon him and his posterity the
Crown may flourish forever.

MARY eldest daughter of King Charles the first and Queen Mary, was born at
Saint James's November 4. 1631. When her royal father out of his paternal love,
began to cast about for a fitting confort, this Peerless Princess (though
tender in years, rich in piety and wisdom,) made it her humble request, she
might be matched as well in her religion as affection; which happened
answerable to her desires. For not long after, a marriage, treated betwixt her
and Count William of Nassau, eldest son to Henry Prince of Orange, was
concluded, and this royal pair wedded accordingly May 2. 1641. The February
following, having at Dover taken her leave of the King her Father (the last
time she ever saw him on earth,) she embarked for, and within few days landed
in Holland.

His Majesty's affairs in England daily growing worse and worse, at length the
sad news of his horrid murder arrived at her ears: this was seconded with the
loss of her husband the Prince of Orange, who deceased October 8. 1650. Yet
such her signal patience that she underwent the weight of so many heavy
afflictions (sufficient to break the back of a mean Christian) with a courage
far surpassing the weakness of her sex. But amidst these her calamities God was
pleased to remember mercy, blessing her the November ensuing with a hopeful son.

The complexion of the times being altered in England, she came over to
congratulate the happiness of her Brother his miraculous restitution. When
behold sickness arrests this royal Princess no bail being found by physic to
defer the execution of her death, which happened 1660. On the 31. of December
following, she was honorably [though privately] interred at Westminster in the
Chapel of King Henry the seventh, and no eye so dry but willingly afforded a
tear to bemoan the loss of so worthy a Princess.

JAMES third son of King Charles and Queen Mary, October was 13. 1633. born at
Saint James's. He was commonly styled Duke of York, though not solemnly created
until January 27. 1643. At the rendition of Oxford he was taken Prisoner, and
some two years after, through the assistance of one Colonel Bamfield, made his
escape, landing safe in Holland. Hence he went for France, where he so
prudently deported himself, that he soon gained the favor and honor of the
whole Court. Yea, such was this Princes valor and prowess, that before arrived
at the age of one and twenty years, he was made Leiutenant General of the
Forces of the King of France, a thing which sounds highly to the esteem of this
Duke, being a sufficient argument as well of his Policy as Magnanimity; seeing
a wise head is equally required warily to consult, as a stout heart resolutely
to act, for the due performance of that office.

This trust he discharged to the admiration of all, atchieving so many Noble
and Heroic exploits, which rendered him renow'd throughout the Christian world.
Yet such the bafeness and ingratitude of the French, that concluding a Peace
with O. C. the Usurper of England, they wholly forgot his former services, and
consented to the expulsion of this Prince and his royal brothers out of that
Kingdom.

(...) valor cannot long lie neglected, soon was he courted by Don John de
Austria into Flanders, where in the action at Dunkirk, he far surpassed his
former deeds, often forgetting that he was a Prince to show himself a true
soldier, such his hazarding his person, (really worth ten thousand of them) to
the great molestation of his true friends.

Since God out of his infinite love to the English, has safely returned this
Duke to his native Country, where that he may long live, to be the joy and
delight of the whole Nation, I shall constantly beg of God in my daily
devotions.

ELIZABETH second daughter of King Charles the first and Queen Mary, was born
at Saint James's Anno 1635. on the 28. day of December. She proved a Lady of
parts above her age, the quickness of her mind making recompense for the
weakness of her body. For the remainder of her life I will my hold peace, and
listen to my good friend Master Now Cle^k of Stationershall, then an attendant
of the Lady.
John Buroughs thus expressing himself in a letter unto me.

The Princess Elizabeth with her Brother Henry Duke of Gloucester, being by
order of parliament to be removed to Carisbroke-castle in the Isle of Wight,
(where his Most Excellent Majesty was lately a Prisoner) were accordingly
received by Mr. Anthony Mild may from the Earl and Countess of Leceister. at
Penshurst in Kent, and began their unwilling journey on Friday 9. of August
1650. On the 16. of the same Month they were first lodged in Carisbroke-castle
aforesaid.

The Princess being of a melancholy temper, (as affected above her age with the
sad condition of her Family,) fell sick about the beginning of September
following, and continu^ (...) for three or four days, having only the Advice
of Doctor Bignall a worthy and able (...) of Newport. After very many rare
ejaculatory expressions, abundantly demonstrating her unparalelled Piety, to
the eternal honor of her own memory, and the astonishment of those who waited
on her, she took leave of the world on Sunday the eighth of the same September.

Her body being embalmed, was carefully disposed of in a Coffin of Lead, and on
the four (...) twentieth of the said Month, was brought (in a Borrowed Coach)
from the Castle to the Town of Newport, attended thither with her few late
Servants. At the end of the (...), the Corpse were met and waited on by the
Mayor and Aldermen thereof in their formalities to the Church, where about the
middle of the East part of the Chancel in Saint Thomas (...) Chapel, her
Highness was interred in a small Vault purposely made, with an Inscription of
the date of her death engraved on her Coffin.

The (...) of Norway, where a Winters day is hardly an hour of clear light, are
the (...) of wing of any Foul under the firmament, nature teaching them to
bestir themselves, to lengthen the shortness of the time with their swiftness.
Such the active piety of this Lady improving the little life alloted her, in
running the way of Gods Commande^.

(...) third daughter to King Charles the first and Queen Mary, was born at
(...) James's, March 17. Anno Domini 1637. She was a very pregnant Lady above
(...), and died in her infancy when not full four years old. Being minded by
those Mistress Conant a Rocker to whom she spoke it.
(...) her, to call upon God even when the pangs of death were upon her, I am
not able, says she, to say my long prayer, (meaning the Lords-prayer) but I
will say my short one, Lighten mine eyes, O Lord, lest I sleep the sleep of
death; this done, the little lamb Psalm. 13. 3.
gave up the ghost.

KATHARINE fourth daughter to King Charles the first and Queen Mary, was born
at White hall, (the Queen Mother then being at Saint James's) and survived not
above half an hour after her baptizing. So that it is charity to mention her
whose memory is likely to be lost, so short her continuance in this life. The
rather because her name is not entered as it ought, into the Register of Saint
Martins in the fields, as indeed none of the Kings children save Prince
Charles, though they were born in that Parish: And hereupon a story depends.

I am credibly informed, that at the birth of every child of the King, born at
Whitehall or Saint James's, full five pounds were ever faithfully paid to some
unfaithful receivers thereof, to record the names of such children in the
Register of Saint Martins. But the money being emb^iled (we know by some, God
knows by whom,) no memorial is entered of them. Sad, that bounty should betray
any to such baseness, and that which was intended to make them the more
solemnly remembered, should occasion that they should be more silently forgotten.

Say not, let the children of mean persons be written down in Registers, Kings
children are Registers to themselves, or all England is a Register to them. For
sure I am, this common confidence has been the cause, that we have been so
often at a loss, about the nativities and other properties of those of Royal
extraction.

CHARLES STUART son to the Illustrious James Stuart Duke of York, by Anne
daughter to the Right Honorable Edward Hide Earl of Clarendon, and Lord
Chancellor of England, and Frances his Lady, descended of the Ancient Family
of the Aylesburies, High-sheriffs for many years together of Bedford and
Buckinghamshire, in the reign of King Edward the second See our list of
Sheriffs in that County.
and third, was born at Worcester-house 22. day of October 1660. and christened
by the Right Reverend Father in God Gilbert L. Bishop of London, his Majesty
and George Duke of Albemarle being his Godfathers, and Mary the Queen Mother
his God-mother: He was declared Duke of Cambridge, a title which to the great
honor of that University for these four hundred years, has been only
conferred either on foreign Princes, or persons of the Royal Blood. This
Princely infant dyed May 5. 1661.

Saints.
Saint WULSY being a man reputed when living, (and reported when dead) of great
virtue, and innocence; Math. ^est ad An. Dom. 958.
Was by Saint Dunstan, created the first Abbot of Westminster, where he lived
many years very exemplary for his conversation, until his death, which
happened Anno Dom. 960. Then was his body buried in the same Monastery, and the
26. day of September was kept by the Citizens of London, with great Veneration
of his miracle-working memory.

Martyrs.
I meet with none in this City, and in my mean Judgment it is most observable
that London having two Pages (as I may term them) attending it, viz.
Westminster and Southwark, both joined to it in buildings, should be so
different from it in condition; in London we have no room to hold Martyrs, in
the other two no Martyrs to take up any room.

Inquiring the cause thereof, we find these three places (though contiguous not
to say continued) in the reign of Queen Mary under three several jurisdictions;
London under bloody Bonner who made havoc of all he could come at: Southwark
under politic Gardner, who took wit in his anger, of whom Vide Martyrs in
Hantshire.
formerly: This Westminster under John Fecknam Abbot thereof, with power
Episcopal, a man cruel to none, courteous and charitable to all who needed his
help or liberality.

Confessors.
Rain (which Country People say goes by Planets,) goes by Providence. * I
Amos 4. 7.
caused it to rain upon one City, and caused it not to rain upon another.
Persecution observes the same method, ordered by the same power and pleasure.
A shower of blood fell upon London, whilst Westminster the next City did
escape. So that I find neither Martyr nor Confessor therein. Meeting with none
before, let us proceed to

Prelates since the Reformation.
RICHARD NEILE was born in Kings-street in this City, and was bred in Saint
Johns-colledge in Cambridge, he was afterward Vicar of Chesthunt in the County
of Hartford, presented thereunto by the honorable family of the Cecills; he
was the first and last Native of this City, who became the Dean, and so the
supreme magistrate thereof. Through many Bishoprics of Coventry and Lichfield,
Durham and Winchester, he was at last preferred Archbishop of York, being also
Privy Counselor to King James and King Charles. He died Anno Domini 16.

JOHN WARNER D. D. was born in the Parish of Saint So informed from his own
mouth.
Clements Danes, within the Precincts of this City, bred in Magdalen-colledge
in Oxford, at last preferred Bishop of Rochester.

This worthy Bishop perceiving the want of a fixed Font in the Cathedral Church
of Canterbury, bestowed one upon it, whether more curious or costly, my Author
W. Somner in the Antiquity of Cant. p. 181.
could not decide it, being both ways so excellent and exquisite. A gift the
more remarkable, because the Idem ibidem.
first, which has been offered by any private hand to that Church of later
times. But I suspect now this Font it self is washed away in the deluge of our
late wars under the notion of superstition.

God has given him a great Estate, and a liberal heart to make use of it.
Keeping good Hospitality in the Christmas at Brumley, as he fed many Poor, so
he freed himself from much trouble; being absent when the rest of the Bishops
subscribed their Protest in Parliament, whereby he enjoyed liberty in the
restraint of others of his Order. He was an able and active advocate for
Episcopacy, in the House of Lords speaking for them as long as he had any voice
left him, and then willing to have made signs in their just defense, if it
might have been permitted him.

But it is now high time for me to put out my Candle when Daylight shines so
bright, I mean to desist from charactering of persons who are so perfectly
known to so many alive. I will only add, this eminent Prelate has since seen
the happy restitution of his order, enjoying again his former dignity, who now
is (and long may be) living 1661.

Statesmen.
Sir FRANCIS BACON Knight, youngest son to Sir Nicholas Bacon Lord Keeper, was
born in York-house Anno 1560. For being demanded his age by Queen Elizabeth, he
returned, that he was two years younger then her Majesty's reign. He was bred
in Trinity-colledge in Cambridge, and there first fell into a dislike of
Aristotle's Philosophy, as Barren and Jejune, inabling some to dispute, more to
wrangle, few to find out truth, and none, if confining themselves to his
Principles.

Hence it was that afterward he traded so largely in experiments, so that as
Socrates is said to be the first, who stooped Towering Speculations into
Practical Morality: Sir Francis was one of the first, who reduced Notional to
Real and Scientifical Philosophy.

He was afterward bred in Gray's Inn in the Study of our Municipal Law,
attaining to great Eminency, but no Preferment therein, during the reign of
Queen Elizabeth; Imputable to the envy of a great Person, who hindered his
rising, for fear to be hindered by him if risen, and Eclipsed in his own
profession. Thus the strongest wing of merit cannot mount, if a stronger weight
of malice does depress it. Yet was he even then Favorite to a Favorite, I mean,
the Earl of Essex, and more true to him, then the Earl was to himself. For
finding him to prefer destructive before displeasing Counsel, Sir Francis
fairly for sook, not h^s person, (whom his pity attended to the grave) but
practices, and herein was not the worse friend, for being the better subject.

By K. James he was made his Solicitor, and afterward his Attorney, (then
privileged contrary to custom to ^it a member in Dom. Com.) and at last Lord
Chancellor of * See his life written by Dr. Rawleigh
England. His abilities were a clear con^utation of two vulgar errors errors,
(libells on learned men) First, that Judgment, Wit, Fancy, and Memory, cannot
eminently be in conjunction in the same person, whereas our Knight was a rich
Cabinet, filled with all four, besides a golden key to open it, Elocution.
Secondly, That he who is something in all, is nothing in any one Art, whereas
he was singular in singulis, and being In- at- all came off with credit.

Such as condemn him for pride, if in his place, with the fifth part of his
parts, had been ten times prouder themselves; he had been a better Master if he
had been a worse, being too bountiful to his servants, and either too confident
of their honesty, or too conniving at their falsehood. The story is told to his
advantage, that he had two Servants, one in all causes Patron to the Plantiffe,
(whom his charity presumed always injured,) the other to the Defendant,
(pitying him as compelled to Law,) but taking bribes of both, with this
condition, to restore the money received if the Cause went against them? Their
Lord ignorant hereof, always did unpartial Justice, whilst his men (making
people pay for what was given them) by compact shared the money betwixt them,
which cost their Master the loss of his office.

Leading a private life, he much delighted to study in the shade of
solitariness, and many useful discoveries in Nature were made by him, so that
he may be said to have left nothing to his Executors and all to his Heirs,
under which notion the learned of all ages may be beheld. His vast bounty to
such who brought him presents from great persons occasioned his want
afterward, who in rewarding them so remembered that he had been Lord
Chancellor, that he forgot that he was but the Lord Verulam.

A Viscountry that began and ended in him dying issu'less, it being remarkable,
that though we have had two Earls (of several Lord Burgh of Ireland, and Lord
Henry Jermyn.
families) of Saint Albans, yet was there no Lord Verulam, as if it were
referved for that ancient Roman Colony to be buried in its own reverend ruins
and in this peerless Lords everlasting memory, much admired by English, more by
outlandish men; Distance diminishing his faults to be invisible to foreign
eyes, whilst we beheld his perfections abated with his failings.

He died Anno Domini 1626. in the house of the Earl of Arundel at High-gate,
and was buried in Saint Michaels Church in Saint Albans, Master Mutis his
grateful servant erecting a Monument for him. Since I have read that his grave
being occasionally opened, his scull, (the relic of civil veneration) was by
one King a Doctor of Physic made the object of scorn and contempt, but he, who
then derided the dead, is since become the laughing stock of the living.

Writers.
SULCARD of WESTMINSTER was an Englishman by birth, bred a Benedictine Monk.
He was one of an excellent wit, meek disposition, candid behavior, and in
great esteem with Bale de scripti Brit. Cent. 2. Number. 55.
King Edward the Con^essor. What Progress he made in learning, may easily be
collected from what is recorded in an old Manuscript,

In Westmonasterio vixerunt simul Abbas, Eadwinus and Sulcardus Coenobita: Sed
Sulchardus doctrina major erat.

He flourished Anno Domini 1070. under King William the Conqueror.

GILBERT of WESTMINSTER bred first Monkc then Abbot thereof. He gave himself to
the study of humane learning, then of Divinity, and through the guidance of
Anselme Archbishop of Canterbury attained to great knowledge in the
Scriptures. Afterward he studied in France, visited Rome, in his return from
whence he is reported to have had a disputation with a learned Jew, which
afterward he reduced into the form of a Dialogue, and making it public he
dedicated it to Saint Anselme. He dyed Anno 1117. and was buried in Westminster.

MATTHEW of WESTMINSTER was bred a Monk therein, and as accomplished a Scholar
as any of his age. Observable is the grand difference betwixt our English
history, as he found it and as he left it. He found it like Polyphemus when his
eye was bored out, a big and bulky body, but blind. Memorable actions were
either presented without any date which little informed, or too many dates
which more distracted the Reader. Our Matthew reduced such confused sounds to an
Articulate and intelligible voice, regulating them by a double directory of
time, viz. the beginnings and deaths of all the Kings of England and Arch
bishops of Canterbury. He wrote one History from the beginning of the world to
Christ; a second, from Christ's Nativity to the Norman Conquest; a third; from
thence to the beginning of King Edward the second, augmenting it a^terwards
with the addition of his life and King Edward the thirds. He named his book
Flores Historiarum, and if sometimes (for it is but seldom) he presents a
flower less fragrant, or blasted bud, the judicious Reader is not tied to take
what he tenders, but may select for his own ease a Nosegay out of the choicest
flowers thereof. He dyed about the year 1368.

Since the Reformation.
BENJAMIN JOHNSON was born in this City. Though I cannot with all my
industrious inquiry find him in his cradle, I can fetch him from his long
coats. When a little child he lived in Harts-horn-lane near Charing Cross,
where his Mother married a Bricklayer for her Second husband.

He was first bred in a private school in Saint Martins Church, then in
Westminster school, witness his own Epigram 14.
Epigram;

Camden, most reverend Head, to whom I owe
All that I am in Arts, all that I know.
How nothing's that, to whom my Country owes
The great renown and Name wherewith she goes, etc.
He was Statutably admitted into Saint Johns-colledge in Cambridge, (as many
years after incorporated a honorary Member of Christ-church in Oxford) where he
continued but few weeks for want of further maintenance, being fain to return
to the trade of his father in law. And let not them blush that have, but those
that have not a lawful calling. He helped in the building of the new structure
os Lincoln's Inn, when having a Trowell in his hand, he had a book in his pocket.

Some gentlemen pitying that his parts should be buried under the rubbish of so
mean a Calling, did by their bounty manumise him freely to follow his own
ingenuous inclinations. Indeed his parts were not so ready to run of themselves
as able to answer the spur, so that it may be truly said of him, that he had an
Elaborate wit wrought out by his own industry. He would sit silent in learned
company, and suck in (besides wine) their several humors into his observation.
What was ore in others, he was able to refine to himself.

He was paramount in the Dramatique part of Poetry, and taught the Stage an
exact conformity to the laws of Comedians. His Comedies were above the Volge,
(which are only tickled with down right obscenity) and took not so well at the
first stroke as at the rebound, when beheld the second time; yea they will
endure reading, and that with due commendation, so long as either ingenuity or
learning are fashionable in our Nation. If his later be not so spriteful and
vigorous as his first pieces, all that are old will, and all that desire to be
old, should excuse him therein.

He was not very happy in his children, and most happy in those which died
first, though none lived to survive him. This he bestowed as part of an Epitaph
on his eldest son, dying in infancy.

Epigram 45.
Rest in soft peace and Asked, say here does lie,
Ben Johnson his best piece of Poetry.
He dyed Anno Domini 1638. And was buried about the Belfry in the Abby-church
at Westminster.

Masters of Music.
CHRISTOPHER TIE Doctor of Music, flourished in the reign of King S. N.
Henry the eight and King Edward the sixth, to whom he was one of the Gentlemen
of their Chapel, and probably the Organist. Music, which received a grievous
wound in England at the disolution of Abbyes, was much beholding to him for her
recovery; such his excellent skill and piety, that he kept it up in credit at
Court and in all Cathedrals during his life. He translated the Acts of the
Apostles into verse, and let us take a taste of his Poetry,

In the former treatise to thee
Dear friend Theophilus;
I have written the verity
Of the Lord Christ Jesus.
Which he to do and eke to teach;
Began until the day;
In which the Spirit up did him fetch
To dwell above for Aye.
After that he had power to do
Even by the Holy Ghost;
Commandments then he gave unto
His chosen least and most.
To whom also himself did show
From death thus to revive:
By tokens plain unto his few
Even forty days alive.
Speaking of Gods kingdom with heart
Choosing together them;
Commanding them not to depart
From that Jerusalem.
But still to wait on the promise
Of his Father the Lord;
Of which ye have heard me ere this
Unto you make record.
Pass we now from his Poetry (being Music in words) to his Music, (being
Poetry in sounds) who set an excellent Composition of Music of four parts, to
the several Chapters of his aforementioned Poetry, dedicating the same to King
Edward the sixth, a little before the death of that good Prince, and Printed it
Anno Domini 1553. He also did compose many excellent Services and Anthems of
four and five parts which were used in Cathedrals many years after his death,
the certain date whereof I cannot attain.

JOHN DOULAND was (as I have most cause to believe) born in this City; sure I
am he had his longest life and best livelihood therein, being Servant in the
Chapel to Queen Elizabeth and King James. He was the rarest Musician that his
Age did behold: Having travailed beyond the Seas, and compounded English with
Foreign Skill in that faculty, it is questionable whether he excelled in Vocal
or Instrumental Music, A cheerful Person he was passing his days in lawful
meriment, truly answering the Anagram made of him,

By Ralph Sadler Esquire of Standon in Hartfordshire who was with him at
Copenhaguen.
JOHANNES DOULANDUS Christian the fourth K. of Denmark coming over into
England, requested him of K. James who unwillingly willing parted with him.
Many years he lived (as I am credibly informed) in the Danish Court, in great
favor and plenty, generally employed to entertain such English Persons of
quality as came thither. I cannot confidently avouch his death at Denmark, but
believe it more probably then their assertion, who report him returned and
dying in England about the year 1615.

Benefactors to the Public.
JAMES PALMER B. D. was born in this City and bred in Magdalen-colledge in
Cambridge; The Company of Carpenters in London, gave him an exhibition toward
his maintenance there, or lent it him rather; For since, his bounty has repaid
them the Principle with plentiful consideration. He was afterward for many
years the constant Preacher of Saint Bridgets in Fleetstreet, the only Church
preferment he enjoyed: I perceive thus craft and cruelty may raise a quick and
great, but plain frugallity (especially if vivacious) will advance a better and
surer estate. Though sequestered in these times; what he had formerly gained in
his place, he has since bestowed in building and endowing, over against the
New Chapel in Westminster, a fair Almes-house for twelve poor people; besides
this, many and great have his gifts been to Ministers poor widows, and wonder
not Reader, if they be unknown to me, which were unknown to his own left hand,
all this he did in his life time. O it gives the best light when one carries
his Lant-horn before him! The surest way that ones Will shall be performed, is
to see it performed. Yea, I may say, that his poor people in his Almes-house
are in some sort provided for, not only from head to foot, but also from body
to soul, he constantly preaching to them twice a week. He dyed Anno 1659.

Memorable Persons.
EDMOND DOUBLEDAY Esquire, was of a tall and proper person, and lived in S. N.
this City. Nor had this large case a little jewel, this long body a lazy
soul, whose activity and valor was adequate to his strength and greatness,
whereof he gave this eminent testimony.

When Sir Thomas Knevet was sent November 4. 1605. by King James to search the
Cellar beneath the Parliament House, with very few, for the more privacy, to
attend him, he took Master Doubleday with him. Here they found Gui Faux with
his dark-lant-horn, in the dead of the night, providing for the death of many
the next morning. He was newly come out of the Devils Closset, (so I may fitly
term the inward room where the powder lay, and the train was to be laid,) into
the outward part of the Cellar; Faux beginning to bussel, Master Doubleday
instantly ordered him at his pleasure, up with his heels, and there with the
Traitor lay the Treason flat along the floor, by Gods goodness detected,
defeated. Faux vowed (and though he was a false Traitor, herein I do believe
him,) that had he been in the inner room, he would have blown up himself and
all the company therein. Thus it is pleasant music to hear disarmed malice
threaten, when it cannot strike. Master Doubleday lived many years after
deservedly loved and respected, and died about the year of our Lord 1618.

The Farewell.
Seeing the well-being (yea being) of this City consists in the Kings Court
and in the Courts of Justice, I congratulate the happy return of the one,
praying for the long continuance of the other; yea, may the Lawyers in
Westminster Hall never again plead in their Armor, (as they did in the time of
Wyats rebellion,) but in their peaceable Gowns and Legal Formalities. Nor does
this Wish only extend to the Weal of Westminster, but all England. For no such
dearth in a Land, as what is caused from a drought of Justice therein. For if
judgment do not run down as Amos 5. 24.
Waters, and righteousness as a mighty Stream, Injustice like an Ocean will
drown all with its inundation.

NOR FOLK has the German Ocean on the North and East thereof, Suffolk severed
by the river Waveny on the South Side, Cambridge-shire parted by the river
Ouse, and a small part of Lincoln shire on the West; it extends full 50.
miles from East to West, but from North to South stretches not above thirty
miles.

All England may be carved out of Norfolk, represented therein, not only to
the kind but degree thereof. Here are Fens and Heaths, and Light and Deep, and
Sand and Clay-ground, and Meddows and Pasture, and Arable and Woody, and
[generally] woodless land, so grateful is this Shire with the variety thereof.
Thus, as in many men, though perchance this or that part may justly be cavelled
at, yet all put together, complete a proper person: so Norfolk collectively
taken has a sufficient result of pleasure and profit, that being supplied in
one part which is defective in another.

This County has the most Churches of any in England, (six hundred and sixty,)
and, though the poorest Livings, yet (by some occult quallity of their good
husbandry, and Gods blessing thereon,) the richest Clergymen. Nor can there be
given a greater demonstration of the wealth and populousness of this County,
than, that in the late Act for an Assessment upon England, at the rate of sixty
thousand pounds by the Month, for three Months, Norfolk with the City of
Norwich, is rated at three thousand two hundred sixty six pounds, thirteen
shillings, and four pence, the highest proportion of any Shire in England. And,
though Norfolk has little cause to please and less to pride it self in so dear
purchased pre-eminence, yet it cannot but account it a credit, to see it self
not undervalued.

Natural Commodities.
It shareth plentifully in all English Commodities, and abounds with the best
and most.

Rabbits.
These are an Army of natural Pioners, whence men have learned cuniculos agere,
the Art of undermining. They thrive best on barren ground, and grow fattest in
the hardest frosts. Their flesh is fine and wholesome. If Scotish-men tax our
language as improper, and smile at our wing of a Rabbit, let us laugh at their
shoulder of a Capon.

Their skins were formerly much used, when furs were in fashion, till of late
our Citizens, of Romans are turned Grecians, have laid down their grave gowns,
and took up their light cloaks; men generally disliking all habits, though
emblemes of honor, if also badges of age.

Their rich or silver-hair-skins, formerly so dear, are now levelled in prices
with other colors, yea, are lower then black in estimation, because their wool
is most used in making of hats, commonly (for the more credit) called
Half-Beavers, though many of them hardly amount to the proportion of
Semi-Demi-Castors.

Herrings.
Great store and very good of these are caught nigh Yarmouth, where once every
year on the Feast of Saint Michael, is a Fair held for the sale of fish, and
such the plenty of Herrings there constantly vented, that incredible the sum
which is raised thereby. Indeed, the fishing for Herrings is a most gainful
trade, fish though contemptable in it self, considerable in its company,
swiming in such shoals, that what the Whale has in bigness the Herring has in
number. (It may well mind such who excel in strength and valor, not to boast
or be proud thereof, seeing the greatest courage may be soon pressed to death
under unequal number.) Yea, Red-herrings in England mostly eaten for sauce to
quicken the Appetite, serve in Holland and elsewhere for food to satisfy hunger.

I will conclude the Natural Commodities of this County, with this memorable
passage, which I have read in a modern Hartlibs Legacy p. 97.
Author;

The Lord F. W. assured me of a Gentleman in Norfolk, that made above 10000l.
sterling. of a piece of ground not forty yards square, and yet there was neither
Mineral nor Metal in it. He after told me, it was only a sort of fine clay,
for the making a choice sort of earthen ware; which some that knew it, seeing
him dig up, discovered the value of it, and sending it into Holland, received
so much money for it.

My belief tireth in coming up to the top of this story, suspecting the
addition of a cipher. But if it were so, how much would it have enriched us, if
those mockChina-dishes had been made in England.

Manufactures,
Worsteds.
These first took their name from Camd. Brit. in this County.
Worsted a Village in this County, originally it is nothing but Woollen-thred
spun very fine, and for the more strength twisted together: But O! it
surpassesh my skill to name the several stuffs (being VVorsted disguised with
VVeaving and Coloring) made thereof.

It argues the usefulness and public profit of this commodity, (which first
found a general repute in England toward the end of the reign of King Henry the
sixth) that there are no fewer then fourteen Statutes now in force in the well
ordering thereof to Merchantable proof; And appointing which of them may, which
may not be Transported. Not to speak of four Wardens Statutes 7. Edward 4. c.
3.
of VVorsted Weavers to be chosen yearly within the City of Norwish, and other
four out of the County of Northfolk, with their solemn Oath, Office and
Authority.

As for worsted Stockins they were first made in England Anno 1564. by St^w's
Chro. p. 869.
William Rider an ingenious Apprentice living against Saint Magnus Church at
the foot of London Bridge: This William chancing to see a pair of knit worsted
Stockins in the Lodging of an Italian Merchant, who had brought them from
Man^ua, borrowed them, and making the like by that pattern, presented them to
William Earl of Pembroke who first wore them in England.

Proverbs.
Norfolk dumplings.]

This cannot be verified of any dwarfish, or diminutive stature of people in
this County, being as tall of their bodies, and as tall of their arms too, I
assure you, as any in England. But it relates to the fare they commonly feed
on, so generally called. I wish, much good may it do them, and that their
bodies thereby may be enabled for all natural, civil and spiritual performances.

Norfolk VViles.]

Such the skill of the common people hereof in our Common Law, wherein they are
so versed, ut si nihil sit Came. Brit. in Norfolk.
litium, lites tamen ex juris apicibus serere callent. If I must go to Law, I
wish them rather of my Counsel then my Adversaries. For whereas pedibus
ambulando is accounted but a vexatious Suit in other Counties, here (where men
are said to study Law as following the Plough tail) some would persuade us,
that they will enter an action for their neighbors horse but looking over
their hedge. Now, although we listen to this but as a jeer, yet give me leave
to observe two parts in VViles.

VVittiness which all must commend. Wickedness condemn.

Sure I am, that in Number. 25. 18. Ephesians. 6. 11. Josh. 9. 4.
Scripture a VVile always male audit, is taken in an evil sense, as wherein the
simplicity of the Dove is stung to death by the subtilty of the Serpent. But no
more hereof least Norfolk-men commence a Suit against me, though I verily
believe many therein are of as peaceable dispositions as any in other places.

A Yarmouth Capon.]

That is a red-herring. No news for creatures to be thus disguised under other
names, seeing Critics by a Libyon bear, sub pelle Libystidis ursae, understand
a Lion, no Bears being found in the land of Libya. And I believe few capons
(save what have more fins then feathers) are bred in Yarmouth. But to
countenance this expression, I understand that the Italian Friars (when
disposed to eat flesh on Fridays) call a Capon, piscem e corte, a fish out of
the Coop.

He is arrested by the Baily of Marshland.]

The air of Marshland in this County is none of the wholesomest, being
surrounded with the Sea and Fens on all sides. Hence it is that strangers
coming hither, are clapped on the back with an ague, which sometimes lasts them
longer then a Stuff Suit. The best is when such prisoners have paid the
Bailiffs Fees and Garnish, and with time and patience have weathered out the
brunt of that disease, they become habited to the air of the Country, and
arrive in health at a very great age.

Princes.
I meet with no Prince since the Conquest taking his first breath in this
County, probably, because so remote from the principal place of Royal Residence.

Prelates.
GILBERT BERKELEY was Godwin in his Catalogue of the Bishops of Norwich.
born in this County, but descended from the ancient Barons of that name, as
appears by his Arms. He was consecrated Bishop of Bath and Wells in the
first of Queen Elizabeth, and sat therein 22. years. He died of a Lethargy
being 80. years of age 1581. and is buried on the North-side of the
Communion Table of his own Cathedral.

JOHN AYLMER Brother to Sir Robert Aylmer Knight, was born, at Aylmerhall in
the Parish of Tilsely in this County, as his nearest surviving relations have
informed me, from whom I have received the following information.

When he was but a Child going toward school, Henry Gray Duke of Suffolk having
some discourse with, took so much liking unto him, that after he had been bred
some years in the University of Cambridge, he made him his Chaplain, and
committed his daughter the Lady Jane Gray to his tuition.

In the reign of Queen Mary he fled over beyond Sea, and was little less then
miraculously saved from the Searchers of the Ship, by the ingenuity of a
Merchant who put him into a great Wine-but which had a partition in the middle,
so that Master Aylmer sat in the hind part, whilst the Searchers drank of the
Wine which they saw drawn out of the head or other end thereof.

Returning into England he was made Archdeacon of Lincoln, and at last Bishop
of London. He was happy in a meet Yoke Fellow, having a gracious Matron to his
wife, by whom he had many children, and one son to which Archbishop Whitgift
was Godfather, and named him Tob-el, that is, The Lord is good, in memorial of
a great deliverance bestowed on this child's mother. For when she was cast out
of her Coach in London, (by a Mastiff casually seizing upon the Horses) she
received no harm at all, though very near to the time of her Travail.

Bishop Aylmer was well learned in the Languages, a ready Disputant, and deep
Divine. He was eighteen years Bishop of London, and dying Anno 1594. in the 73.
year of his age, had this for part of his Epitaph, which Bishop Vaugham
(sometimes his Chaplain, afterward his Successor) made upon him.

Ter senos Annos Praesul, semul Exul and idem
Bis Pugil in causa religionis erat.
Eighteen years Bishop, and once Banished hence
And twice a Champion in the Truths defense.
I understand it thus, once a Champion in suffering, when an Exile for
religion, and again in doing, when chosen one of the disputants at Westminster
against the Popish Bishops Primo Elizabethae; except any expound it thus: once
Champion of the Doctrine against Papists, and afterward against the Discipline
of the Non-Confromists, none more stoutly opposing or more foully belibelled of
them.

God blessed him with a great estate, the main whereof he left unto Samuel
Aylmer his eldest son, ( High Sheriff of Suffolk in the reign of King Charles)
and amongst his youngest sons (all well provided for) Doctor Aylmer Rector of
Haddam in Hartfordshire, was one of the most learned and reverend Divines in
his generation.

JOHN TOWERS was born in this County, bred Fellow of Queens-colledge in
Cambridge; and became Chaplain to William Earl of Northampton, who bestowed on
him the Benefice of Castle-Ashby in Northamptonshire. He was preferred Dean
and at last Bishop of Peterborough.

He was a good actor when he was young, and a great sufferour when he was old,
dying (about the year 1650.) rich only in Children and Patience. Nothing but
sin is a shame in it self, and poverty as poverty (especially since our Savior
has sanctified, it by suffering it) is no disgrace.

Capital Judges and Writers on the Law.
RALPH DE-HENGHAM so named from a fair Market Town in this County, was made
Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench in Michaelmas term in the Sir H. Spelman
in the Gossary page 416.
second year of King Edward the first, when the King was newly returned from
the Holy Land. He sat 16. years in that place (saving that one Winborne was
for a Viz. Anno regis 10. and 13.
year or two interposed) and at the general purging and garbling of the Judges,
which happened in the 18. year of the aforesaid King, when all the Judges
(except two, John de Tho. Walsingham An. 1290.
Metingham and Elias de Bekingham,) were cast out by the Parliament for their
corruption, fined, banished and imprisoned, then this Ralph was merced in seven
thousand marks, for bribery, and ejected out of his place.

Some will say, let him wither in silence, why do you mention him amongst the
Worthies of our Nation? I answer, Penitence is the second part of Innocence,
and we find this Ralph after his fine paid, made Chief Justice of the 6. Sept.
1. Ed. 11. inter Part. Par. 1. Memb. 21.
Common Pleas, sub recipiscendi fiducia, under the confidence generally
conceived of his amendment. He died the next, being the 19. Anno Domini 1292.
year of the reign of King Edward the first, he lies buried in the Church of
Saint Paul, where he has or had this Epitaph,

Per versus patet hos Anglorum quod jacet hic flos
Legum, qui tuta dictavit vera statuta.
Ex Hengham dictus Radulphus vir benedictus.
One must charitably believe that he played a good after-game of integrity, and
if enjoying longer life, he would have given a clearer testimony thereof.

WILLIAM PASTON Esquire. son of Clement Paston, Esquire. and Beatrix his wife, (sister
and heir to Jeffry Sommerton Esquire.) was born at Paston in this County. He was
learned in the laws of this Realm and first was Sergeant to King Henry the
sixth, and was after by him preferred second Judge of the Common Pleas. I
confess having confined our Catalogue to Capital Judges or Writers on the Law,
he falls not under our method in the strictness thereof. But I appeal to the
Reader himself, whether he would not have been highly offended with me, had I
in silence passed over a person so deserving his observation.

He was highly in favor with King Henry the sixth, who allowed him, besides
the ordinary salary assigned to other Judges, one hundred and ten marks,
(Reader behold the Standard of money in that age and admire) with two Gowns to
be taken yearly out of the Exchequer, as by the ensuing letters Patents will
appear;

Henricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae, and Dominus Hiberniae, Omnibus
ad quos Praesentes literae pervenerint, Salutem: Sciatis quod de gratia nostra
speciali, and ut dilectus, and fidelis noster Willielmus Paston unus Justiti.
nostrorum de com. Banco Statum suum decentius manu tenere, and expensas, quas
ipsum in officio pradicto facere oportebit, sustinere valeat; concessimus ei
centum and december marcas percipiendum singulis annis ad scaccarium nostrum, ad
terminos Pasche and Sancti Michaelis per equales Portiones; and duas robas per
annum percipiendum, unam videlicet cum Pellura ad festum Natalis Domini, and
aliam cum Limra ad festum Pentecostes, ultra feodum consuetum, quamdiu ipsum
Stare contigerit in officio supradicto. In cujus rei Testimonium has literas
nostras fieri fecimus patentes, test meipso apud Westminst. XV. die Octobris
anno regni nostri octavo.

What Pellura is I understand, Furr, but what Limra is (if rightly written) I
would willingly learn from another, though some are confident it is Taffata.

I wonder the less at these noble favors conferred on the said William Paston
Judge, for I find him in grace with the two former Kings, being made Sergeant
by King Henry the fourth, and of ^is counsel for the Duchy of Lancaster, and
in the reign of King Henry the fifth, he was in such esteem with Sir John
Falstofe Knight, that he appointed him one of his Feoffees, whom he enabled by
a writing under his hand to recover debts from the Executors of King Henry the
fifth.

This William Paston married Agnes daughter and heir of Sir Edmond Berrey, by
which marriage the Pastons rightly quarter at this day the several Coats of
Hetherset, Wachesham, Craven, Gerbredge, Hemgrave and Kerdeston, and received
both advancement in blood and accession in estate. This said William Paston
died at London, August 14. 1444. and lies buried in Norwich; so that his corpse
by a peculiar exception do straggle from the Sepulture of their Ancestors, who
from VVolstan de Paston (who three years after the Conquest Out of the book of
Will. Botyner, fol. 20. sometimes Herald to Sir John Falstofe, written in the
reign of King Henry 6. and contains all the ancient Gentry of this County.
came into England to William Earl of Glandwill,) were all interred at Paston.
He lest rich revenues to John Paston Esquire, his eldest son, who married
Margaret daughter and heir of John Mautby; and no mean Estate to William his
second surviving son, who married Anne daughter to Edmond Duke of Somerset.

Sir EDWARD COKE Knight, son of Robert Coke Esquire, and of VVinefred Knightly
his wife, was born at Mileham in this County; bred, when ten years of age, at
Norwich-school, and thence removed to Trinity-colledge in Cambridge. After four
years continuance there, he was admitted into Cliffords-Inn-London, and the
year following entered a Studient of the Municipal-law in the Inner Temple.
Such his proficiency therein, that at the end of six years (exceeding early in
that strict age) he was called to the Bar, and soon after for three years
chosen Reader in Lyons-Inn. Here his learned Lectures so spread forth his fame,
that crowds of Clients sued to him for his counsel, and his own suit was the
sooner granted, when tendering his affections in order to marriage, unto Briget
daughter and Coheir of John Paston Esquire.

She was afterward his incomparable wife, whose Portion moderately estimated,
Viis and modis, amounted unto thirty thousand pounds, her virtues not falling
under valuation, and she enriched her husband with ten children.

Then began preferment to press upon him, the City of Norwich choosing him
Recorder, the County of Norfolk their Knight to Parliament, the Queen her
Speaker therein, as also successively her Solicitor and Attorney. King James
honored him with Knighthood, and made him Chief Justice, first of the
Common Pleas, then of the King's Bench. Thus beginning on a good bottom left
him by his father, marrying a wife of extraordinary wealth, having at the first
great and gainful practice, afterward many and profitable Offices, being
provident to choose good penny-worths in purchases, leading a thrifty life,
living to a great age, during flourishing and peaceable times, (born as much
after the Persecution under Queen Mary, as dying before our Civil Wars) no
wonder if he advanced a fair estate, so that all his sons might seem elder
brethren, by the large possessions left unto them.

Some falsely character him a back-friend to the Church and Clergy, being a
grand benefactour to the Church of Norwich, who gratefully under their public
seal honored him with the ensuing testimony,

Edwardus Coke Armiger, saepius and in multis difficillimis negotiis Ecclesiae
nostrae auxiliatus est, and nuper eandem contra Templorum Helluones, qui
dominia, maneria and haereditamenta nostra devorare sub titulo obscuro (
Concelatum dicunt) sponte sua nobis insciis, and sine mercede ulla legittime
tutatus est; atque eandem suam nostri defensionem, in perpetuam tantaerei
memoriam, quam posterorum, (si opus fuerit) magna cum industria and scriptis
redegit, and nostrae Ecclesiae donavit.

As for the many Benefices in his own Patronage, he freely gave them to worthy
men, being wont to say in his Law-language, that he would have Church Livings
pass by Livery and Seisin, not Bargain and Sale.

Five sorts of people he used to fore-design to misery and poverty; Chemists,
Monopolizers, Concelers, Promoters, and Rythming Poets. For three things he
would give God solemn thanks; that he never gave his body to physic, nor his
heart to cruelty, nor his hand to corruption. In three things he did much
applaud his own success; in his fair fortune with his wife, in his happy study
of the laws, and in his free coming by all his Offices, nec prece, nec pretio,
neither begging, nor bribing for preferment.

His parts were admirable, he had a deep judgment, faithful memory, active
fancy; and the jewel of his mind was put into a fair case, a beautiful body,
with a comely countenance; a case, which he did wipe and keep clean, delighting
in good clothes, well worn, and being wont to say, that the outward neatness
of our bodies, might be a Monitor of purity to our souls.

In his pleadings, discourse and judgments, he declined all Circumlocutions,
usually saying, The matter lies in a little room. In all places, callings and
jurisdictions, he commended modesty and sobriety within their boundaries,
saying, If a River swells beyond its Banks, it loses its own Channel.

If any adverse party crossed him, he would patiently reply, If another
punishes me, I will not punish my self. In the highest Term of business he
made Vacation to himself at his Table, and would never be persuaded privately
to retract, what he had publicly adjudged, professing, he was a Judge in a
Court, and not in a Chamber. He was wont to say, No wise man would do that in
prosperity, whereof he should repent in adversity. He gave for his Motto,
Prudens qui Patiens, and his practice was accordingly, especially, after he
fell into the disfavor of King James.

The cause hereof the Reader may find in our English Chronicles, whilst we
behold, how he employed himself when retired to a private life, when he did
frui suo infortunio, and improved his loss to his advantage. He triumphed in
his own innocence, that he had done nothing illegally, calling to mind the
Motto which he gave in his rings when made Sergeant, Lex est tutissima Cassis,
The Law is the safest Helmet.

And now he had leisure to peruse what formerly he had written, even thirty
books with his own hand, most pleasing himself with a Manual, which he called
his Vade mecum, from whence at one view he took a prospect of his life passed,
having noted therein most remarkables. His most learned and laborious works on
the Laws, will last to be admired by the judicious posterity whilst ^ame has a
trumpet left her, and any breath to blow therein. His judgment lately passed
for an Oracle in Law, and if since, the credit thereof has causelessly been
questioned, the wonder is not great. If the Prophet himself, living in an
incredulous age, found ^ause to complain, Isa. 53. 1.
Who has believed our Report? it need not seem strange, that our licentious
times have afforded some, to shake the authenticalness of the Reports of any
earthly Judge.

He constantly had prayers said in his own house, and charitably relieved the
poor with his constant alms. The foundation of Suttous-hospital (when indeed
but a foundation) had been ruined before it was raised, and crushed by some
Courtiers in the hatching thereof, had not his great care preserved the same.
The Free School at Thetford was supported in its being by his assistance, and
he founded a School on his own cost at Godwick in this County.

It must not be forgotten, that Doctor Whitgift (afterward Archbishop of
Canterbury) was his Tutor, who sent unto his Puple, when the Queens Attorney, a
fair New Testament with this message; He had now studied Common Law enough, let
him hereafter study the Law of God.

Let me add to this, that when he was under a cloud at Court, and outed of his
Judges place, the lands belonging to the Church of Norwich, which formerly he
had so industriously recovered and settled thereon, were again called into
question, being begged by a Peer, who shall pass nameless. Sir Edward desired
him to desist, telling him, that otherwise he would put on his Gown and Cap,
and come into Westminster Hall once again, and plead there in any Court in
Justification of what he had done. He died at Stoke Poges in Buckingham-shire,
on Wednesday the 3. of September being the 83. year of his age, whose last
words were, Thy Kingdom come, Thy will be done.

Sir THOMAS RICHARDSON Knight, was born at Mulbarton in this County, his father
being Minister thereof. He was bred in the study of our Municipal-law, and
became the Kings Sergeant therein. Afterward, on the 28. of November 1626. he
was sworn Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, that place having been void ten
months before.

But coming now to our own times, it is safest for me to break off. Virgil, I
remember, put a period to his Eclogue with

Et Hylax in limine latrat
-- We Will Verfifie no more,
For do but hark, Hylax does bark, at the entrance of the Door.
Seeing many will be ready to carp, it is safest for me to be silent, whilst
his Brass Monument on the South Side of Westminster Abbey, thus entertaineth
the Reader;

Deo Om. Thomae Richardsoni Iceni Equitis Aurati Humanum Depositum. Ille Juris
Municip. omnes gradus exantlavit Conventus tertii ordinis ann. Jacobi Regis 21,
and 22. Prolocutor extitit; Fori civilis (Communium Placitorum vocant) Supremum
Magistratum quinquennium gessit; Ad summum tandem primarii per Angliam judicis
Tribunal A Rege Carolo evectus: expiravit Anno aetatis 66. salutis MDCXXXIIII.
Tho. Richardson fill. unicus Eques Aur. Baro Scotiae designatus Patri
incomparabili posuit.

This Judge married for his second Lady Elizabeth Beaumont, the sister (as I
take it) of Mary Countess of Buckingham, and the Relict of........ Ashburnham
Knight. She was by King Charles Created Baroness of Craumount in Scotland, and
(though issueless by the Judge) the Honor descended to his Grandchild.

Soldiers.
ROBERT VENILE Knight, one I confess whose name I never heard of, till meeting
with this memorable Note in a Modern Sir Rich. Baker Chron. 3. Ed. 3. p, 181.
Historian;

And here must not be forgotten, Robert Venile Knight, a Norfolk man; who when
the Scots and English were ready to give battle, a certain stout Champion of
great stature, commonly called Tournboll, coming out of the Scots Army, and
challenging any English man to meet him in a single combat; this Robert Venile
accepts the challenge, and marching toward the Champion, and meeting by the
way a certain black Mastife dog, which waited on the Champion, he suddenly with
his sword cut him off at the loins, and afterward did more to the Champion
himself, cutting his head from off his shoulders.

This put me with blushing enough (that one so eminent in himself should be
altogether to me obscure,) upon the inquiry after this valiant Knight, but all
my industry could not retrive him in any author, so that he seems to me a kin
to those spirits, who appear but once, and finally vanish away.

Sir OLIVER HINGHAM was born, richly landed, and* buried in Hingham, an eminent
Market Town in this County. A right valiant man, whom King Edward the third
left Governor of Aquitain in France, an honorable, but difficult place, being
to make good a great Country with a few men, against a fierce and numerous
enemy. Yet he gave a good account of his trust. When the French lay before
Bordeaux, the Citizens thereof, to abuse the enemies hopes, set open their
gates, displaying the Golden-lilies, the French-armes on their Towers, as if
they were theirs; the French were no sooner securely entered, but brave Oliver,
Captain of this City, and Warden of the whole Country for King Edward, gave
them such an Holinshead and Stow.
entertainment, that they drank not so much Claret Wine in the City, as they
left Blood behi nd them. This happened in the thirteenth year of the reign of
King Edward the third.

This Sir Oliver lived many years after, and was made Knight of the Garter, and
lies buried at Hingham under a fair tomb of freestone curiously wrought, with
his resemblance in his Coat Armor (having a Crowned Veavers Fnu. Mon. p. 817.
Owl out of an Ivy-bush for his Crest) lying upon a Rock, beholding Sun, Moon,
and Stars, (because a great Travailer) all lively set forth in metal, with four
and twenty mourners about his monument.

JOHN FASTOLFE Knight, was a native of this County, as I have just cause to
believe, though some have made him a Frenchman, merely, because he was Baron
of Sineginle in France, on which account they may rob England of many other
Worthies. He was a Ward (and that the last) to John Duke of Bedford, a
sufficient evidence to such who understand time and place to prove him of
English extraction. To avouch him by many arguments valiant, is to maintain
that the sun is bright, though since the Stage has been over bold with his
memory, making him a Thrasonical Puff, and emblem of Mock-valour.

True it is Sir John Oldcastle did first bear the brunt of the one, being made
the make-sport in all plays for a coward. It is easily known out of what purse
this black penny came. The Papists ^ailing on him for a Heretic, and therefore
he must also be a coward, though indeed he was a man of arms, every inch of
him, and as valiant as any in his age.

Now as I am glad that Sir John Oldcastle is put out, so I am sorry that Sir
John Fastolfe is put in, to relieve his memory in this base service, to be the
anvil for every dull wit to strike upon. Nor is our Comedian excusable, by some
alteration of his name, writing him Sir John Falstafe, (and making him the
property of pleasure for King Henry the fifth, to abuse) seeing the vicinity of
sounds entrench on the memory of that worthy Knight, and few do heed the
inconsiderable difference in spelling of their name. He was made Knight of the
Garter by King Henry the sixth, and died about the second year of his reign.

Sir CLEMENT PASTON Knight, fourth son to Sir William Paston, son to Sir John
Paston, a famous Soldier, and favorite to King Edward the fourth, (sent by him
with the Lord Scales to conduct the Lady Margaret, the sister of the King, to
her husband Charles Duke of Burgundy,) son to William Paston the Judge, was
born at Paston in this County. When a youth he was at the burning of Conquest
in France, and afterward by King Henry the eight was made Captain of one of
his ships of war, and in a Sea Fight took a French Gally, and therein the
Admiral of France prisoner, called the Baron of Blancard, whom he brought into
England, and kept at Castor nigh rarmouth, till he had paid 7000. crowns for
his ransom, besides the spoil of the Galley, wherein he had a cup and two
snakes of gold, which were the Admirals, and which Sir Clement used during his
life on Festivals, and at his death bequeathed them to his family for a
monument. He received diverse wounds, and was left for dead at
Muscleburough-field in Scotland. When Sir Thomas Wyatt in the reign of Queen
Mary, was worsted at Ludgate, and desired for the more civil usage to render
himself to a Gentleman, he submitted himself (says our Historian) to Sir
Clement Paston. He served at New Haven, having command of some ships of Queen
Elizabeth, and was pensioner to two Kings, and two Queens successively. So rare
was his happiness, that he spent his old age honorably, quietly and in good
housekeeping in this County, where at Oxnit, he built a goodly house for
hospitality, and a hospital hard by, for six poor serving-men, retainers to his
name and family, allowing them convenient maintenance. He died Anno Domini 15..
and lies buried in a fair tomb in the Church at Oxnit.

Seamen.
No County in England does carry a top and top gallant more high in Maritime
performances, then Norfolk. Witness the proportion of Yarmouth alone in the
ensuing Catalogue of Ships, used by King Edward the third against Calis.

The South-fleet Ships 493. The North-fleet Ships 217. Ships of London 25.
Ships of Yarmouth 43. The Mariners thereof 9630. The Mariners thereof 4521.
Mariners of London 662. Mariners of Yarmouth 1950. or 1075.

Know Reader, I cannot with all my diligence and interest recover the Original
of this Catalogue, as extant not in the Tower, (where by my friends favor I
could do something) but in the Kings great Wardrobe in London, out of which it
is cited by our Hackluit in his English Voyages, Vol. 1. p. 118. etc.
Author. But our times (I fear) have brushed it away with the rest of the
Wardrobe. However give me leave to make some Annotations thereon.

1. These Ships, as by their great number appears, were small vessels: Yet as
good as any in that age of England; and better (witness their victories) then
any in France. 2. The Proportion may seem strange that Yarmouth should afford,
well nigh, twice as many Ships and Mariners, as London it self. 3. Except it
was that the King spared London, at this time, as the sure reserve for his
Navy, on all occasions. 4. Or except there be a mistake in the numbers,
(figures in Writing, as well as figures in Rethorick may, with a small dash,
have their Meiosis made an Hyperbole.) And the various Lections in the Mariners
of Yarmouth does something shake (though not shatter) the credit of the
account. 5. The numbers may be very true, Yarmouth in that age being so
populous a place, that (though but one Parish) a lamentable Plague in one year
did sweep thence Camd. Brit. in Norfolk.
7000 men to the grave.
Thus, though the Church (and that very large) could never hold their Living,
the Church yard could contain the Dead. Seeing persons alive will not be
pressed in their Pews so close, as Corpse may be crowded together in their
Graves. But let us proceed to the particular Sea men of this County, and let
none be offended if a Friar be put in the front before all the rest, viz.

NICHOLAS of LYNNE Bale de scrip. Brit. Cent. 6. Number. 25.
born in that Town, bred in Oxford, and is generally accounted a Franciscan
Friar. But my Idem ibidem.
Author, being a Carmelite himself, makes him one of his own Order. And all
acknowledge him an excellent Musician, Mathematician, and Astrologer.

It is reported of him, how in the year 1330. being the thirty year of the
reign of King Edward the third, he sailed, with others, to the most Northern
Islands in the world. Then leaving his company, and taking his Astrolabe, he,
by the help of ArtMagick, (so Mathematicians are nicknamed by the ignorant)
went as far as the Pole it self, where he discovered four In-draughts of the
Ocean, from the four opposite Quarters of the World, from which many did
conceive, as well the flowing of the Sea, as blasts of the Winds to have their
Original. Were these things true, and had they been known to the Ancients, as
it would have spared Philosophers much pains, in disputing the Moon the cause
of the Motion of the Tide in the Sea, so had it spoiled In the 2. of his Aeneid.
Virgil his fancy, in making the Country of Aeolia the only Magazene of the
winds.

Sure I am, Gerardus Mercator has so graced the fancy of this Friar, that he
made his description of the Countries about the Artick Pole, conformable to
this his imaginary discovery, preferring to fill that his Map with a Fiction,
then otherwise to leave it altogether empty. But the other Parts of his book
have more solid and substantial truths, or else weak were the Shoulders of his
Atlas to support the world therewith.

But to return to Friar Nicholas. Dr. John Dee.
One tells us he wrote a book of his discoveries, and entitled it Inventio
Fortunata. Sure it is, he was highly honored by our learned * Chaucer, witness
his testimony of him, styling Freere N. Linne, A reverend Clerk. But all his
learning could not sense him from death, which happened about the year 1360.
and he was buried in Linne, the Town of his nativity.

PETER READ what he was, his ensuing Epitaph on his Monument in the South-Isle
in Saint Peter's Church in Norwich will fully acquaint you,

Here under lies the Corpse of Peter Read Esquire, who has worthily served not
only his Prince and Country, but also the Emperor Charles the fifth, both at
his Conquest of Barbary, and his Siege at Tunis, as also in other places. Who
had given him by the said Emperor for his valiant deeds the order of Barbary.
Who died the 29. day of December in the year of our Lord God 1566.

We place him among Sea men because finding first his mention in Nol. p. 99.
Hakluit's voyages, and Salt Water is the proper Element of the Pen of that
Author.

Secondly, because his service was performed at Tunis, a Port-town in a Sea
expedition. Now, although we confess it follows not, that he was born in or
about Norwich, because buried therein; (Vast oftimes the distance betwixt the
Cradles and Coffins of far-travaillers,) yet let none dislike his placing here,
but such who can disprove it, and depose the negative, that elsewhere he had
his nativity.

It is observable that this Sir Peter, Kinghted by the Emperor, as appears in
his Epitaph, (let me add Anno 1538.) is only styled, not less modestly then
truly Esquire. upon his Monument. I confess some maintain that though higher
honors ( Baron, Count, etc.) are only local to be owned by the person
receiving them, in that place where they are given him: Yet that Knighthood
given by a Sovereign Prince is universal and passes current, through all
Christendom. But others, their equals, as stiffly deny it, and one who is their
superior, (I mean Queen Elizabeth) who in the case of See it dicuss'd at large
in Camd. Eliz.
Count Arundle, would not admit of any foreign honor conferred on her
Subjects, avowing that her sheep should only be known by her own Mark.

Writers.
JOHN BACONTHORPE was born in a Bale script. Brit. Cent. 5. Number. 1.
Village so called in this County, bred a Carmelite in the Convent of Blackney,
and afterward studied first in Oxford, then in Paris, one remarkable on many
accounts. First for the Dwarfishness of his stature,

Scalpellum calami atramentum charta libellus,

His Penknife, Pen, Ink-horn, one sheet of Paper, and any of his books would
amount to his full height. As for all the books of his own making, put
together, their burden were more then his body could bear.

Secondly, for his high spirit in his low body. Indeed his soul had but a small
Diocese to visit, and therefore might the better attend the effectual informing
thereof. I have heard it delivered by a learned Doctor in Physic, (at the
Anatomy lecture in London) who a little before had been present at the
Emboweling and and Embalming of Duke Hamilton and the Lord Capel, that the
heart of the former was the largest, the latter the least he had ever beheld,
inferring hence, that contracted spirits act with the greatest vigorousness.

Thirdly, for his high title, wherewith he was generally termed the resolute
Doctor. Two sorts of people he equally disliked, Scepticks who are of none; and
unconstant people who are [successively] of all opinions, and whilst others
turned about like the Wheel, he was as fixed as the Axletree in his own
judgment. Yet this his resoluteness was not attended with censuring of such
who were of another Opinion, where equal probability on either side allowed a
latitude to dissent.

He groaped after more light then he saw, saw more than he durst speak of,
spoke of more then he was thanked for by those of his superstitions Order,
amongst whom (says Bale) neither before, nor after, arose the like for
learning and religion. Most agree in the time of his death, Anno 1346. though
dissenting in the place of his burial, assigning Blackney, Norwich, London, the
several places of his Interment.

JOHN GOLTON born at Tirington in this County, was Chaplain to William Bateman
Bishop of Norwich, and first Master (by the appointment of the Founder) of
Parker in his Skeletos Cantabrigiensis.
Gonvil-hall in Cambridge. Leland allows him a man plus quam mediocriter doctus
and bonus, for which good qualities King So sairh Pitz. but mistaken, for it
was K. Richard the second p. 382.
Henry the fourth advanced him Archbishop of Armagh and Primate of Ireland. He
was employed to the Court of Rome in the heavy schism betwixt Pope Urban the
sixth and Clement the seventh, which occasioned his writing of his learned
treatise, De causa Schismatis; and because, knowing the cause conduces little
to the cure without applying the remedy, he wrote another book De Remediis
ejusdem. It seems he resigned his Archbishopric somewhat before his death,
J. Wareus de script. Hib. p. 129.
which happened in the year of our Lord 1404.

ALAN of LYNNE was Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 7. Number. 54.
born in that famous Mart-town in this County, and brought up in the University
of Cambridge, where he proceeded Doctor of Divinity, and afterward became a
Carmelite in the Town of his nativity. Great his diligence in reading many and
voluminous Authors, and no less his desire, that others with him should reap
the fruit of his industry, to which end he made Indexes of the many Writers he
perused.

An Index is a necessary implement, and no impediment of a book, except in the
same sense wherein the Carriages of an Army are termed Impedimenta. Without
this, a large Author is but a labyrinth without a clue to direct the Reader
therein. I confess, there is a lazy kind of learning, which is only Indical;
when Scholars (like adders which only bite the horse heels) nibble but at the
Tables, which are calces librorum, neglecting the body of the book. But, though
the idle deserve no Crutches, (let not a staff be used by them, but on them,)
pity it is the weary should be denied the benefit thereof, and industrious
Scholars prohibited the accommodation of an Index, most used by those who most
pretend to contemn it.

To return to our Alan, his Herculean labor in this kind does plainly appear
to me, who find it such a toil and trouble, to make but an Index of the Indexes
he had made of the Authors following.

1 Aegidius 2 Alcuinus 3 Ambrosius 4 Anselmus 5 Aquinas 6 Augustinus 7
Baconthorpe 8 Basil 9 Bid 10 Belethus. Bles. 11 Bernard 12 Berthorius 13
Cassianus 14 Cassiodorus 15 Chrysostom 16 Cyril 17 Damascen 18 Gerard. Laodic.
19 Gilbert 20 Gorham 21 Gregory 22 Haymo 23 Hierome 24 Hilary 25 Hugo 26
Josephus 27 Neckam 28 Origin 29 Pamph. Eusebius 30 Phil. Ribot 31 Raban 32
Remigius 33 Richard
All these De script. Brit. p. 553.
I. Bale, professes himself to have seen in the Carmelites Library at Norwich,
acknowledging many more which he saw not.

Now, although it be a just and general complaint, that Indexes for the most
part are Heteroclites, I mean, either redundant, in what is needless, or
defective, in what is needful; yet the Collections of this Alan were allowed
very complete. He flourished Anno 1420. and was buried at Lynne in the Convent
of Carmelites.

WILLIAM WELLS was born (says De Ang. script. p. 609.
Pitz.) at Wells, the Cathedral See in Somersetshire, wherein no doubt he is
mistaken: For, (be it reported to any indifferent judgment, that) seeing this
William had his constant converse in this County, (living and dying an
Augustinian in his Covent at Lynne,) and seeing there is a Wells no mean
Market Town in this Shire, with more probability he may be made to owe his
nativity and name to Norfolk. He was for twenty years Provincial of his Order
in England, Doctor of Divinity in Cambridge, an industrious man and good
writer; abate only the Siboleth of Barbarism, the fault of the age he lived
in. He died and was buried at Lynne 1421.

JOHN THORPE was born in a Village so called in this County, bred a Carmelite
at Norwich, and Doctor at Cambridge. Logic was his Masterpiece; and this
Dedalus wrote a book entitled the Labyrinth of Sophismes, and another called
the Rule of Consequences, for which he got the title of Bale de script. Brit.
Cent. 7. Number. 100.
Doctor Ingeniosus. This minds me of a Prognosticating Distick on the
Physiognomies of two children,

Hic erit Ingenuus non Ingeniosus, at ille
Ingeniosus erit, non erit Ingenuus
The later of these characters agrees with our Thorpe, who had a pound of wit
for a dram of good nature, being of a cruel disposition, and a violent
persecutor of William White, and other godly Wickliffites. He died Anno Domini
1440. and lies buried at Norwich.

His name causes me to remember his Namesake of modern times lately deceased,
even Mr. John Thorpe B. D. and Fellow of Queens-colledge in Cambridge, my ever
honored Tutor, not so much beneath him in Logic, as above him in the skill of
Divinity and an Holy conversation.

JOHN SKELETON is placed in this County, on a double probability. First, A M P.
because an ancient family of his name, is eminently known long fixed therein.
Secondly, because he was beneficed at Dis a Market Town in Norfolk. He usually
styled himself (and that Nemine contradicente, for ought I find) the Kings
Orator and Poet Laureat. We need go no further for a testimony of his learning
than to Erasmus, styling him in his letter to King Henry the eight,
Britannicarum Literarum Lumen and Decus.

Indeed he had seholarship enough, and wit too much; seeing Pitz. de Ang.
script. in Anno 1529.
one says truly of him, Ejus sermo salsus in mordacem, risus in opprobrium,
jocus in amaritudinem. Yet was his Satirical wit unhappy to light on three Noli
me tangere's, viz. the rod of a Schoolmaster, the Couls of Friars, and the Cap
of a Cardinal. The first gave him a lash, the second deprived him of his
livelihood, the third almost outed him of his life.

William Lilly was the Schoolmaster, whom he fell foul with, though gaining
nothing thereby, as may appear by his return. And this I will do for W. Lilly,
(though often beaten for his sake) endeavor to translate his answer;

Quid me Sceltone front sic aperta
Carpis, vipereo potens veneno?
Quid versus trutina meos iniqua
Libras? dicere vera number licebit?
Doctrinae, tibi dum parare famam,
Et Doctus fieri studes Poeta,
Doctrinam nec habes, nec es Poeta.
With face so bold, and teeth so sharp
Of Vipers venom, why do carp?
Why are my verses by thee weighed
In a false scale? may truth be said?
Whilst thou to get the more esteem
A learned Poet fain would seem:
Skeleton thou art, let all men know it,
Neither l^arned, nor a Poet.
The Dominican Friars were the next he contested with, whose vitiousness lay
pat enough for his hand; but such foul Lubbers fell heavy on all which found
fault with them. These instigated Nix Bishop of Norwich, to call him to account
for keeping a Concubine, which cost him (as it seems) a suspension from his
benefice.

But Cardinal Wolsey (impar congressus betwixt a poor Poet and so potent a
Prelate) being inveighed against by his pen, and charged with too much truth,
so persecuted him, that he was forced to take Sanctuary at Westminster, where
Abbot Islip used him with much respect. In this restraint he died June 21.
1529. and is buried in Saint Margarets Chapel with this Epitaph,

J. Sceltonus Vates Pierius hic situs est.

The word Vates being Poet or Prophet, minds me of this dying Skeltons
prediction, foretelling the ruin of Cardinal Wolsey. Surely, one unskilled in
prophecies, if well versed in Solomon's Proverbs, might have prognosticated as
much, that, Pride goes before a fall.

We must not forget, how being charged by some on his deathbed, for begetting
many children on the aforesaid Concubine; he protested, that in his Conscience
he kept her in the notion of a wife, though such his cowardliness that he would
rather confess adultery, (then accounted but a venial;) than own marriage
esteemed a capital crime in that age.

Since the Reformation.
JOHN BARRET was born of an honest family at J. Bale in his book entitled
Script. nostri temporis.
Linne in this County, bred a Carmelite of White-Friars in Cambridge, when
learning ran low, and degrees high in that University. For many usurped
scarlets, qualified only with ignorance and impudence, (properties seldom
parted) so that a Scholar could scarcely be seen for Doctors, till the
University sensible of the mischief thereby, appointed Doctor Cranmer
(afterward Archbishop of Canterbury) to be the Poser-general of all
Candidates in Divinity, amongst whom he stopped Barret for insufficiency.

Back goes Barret to Linne, turns over a new, yea many new leaves, plying his
book to purpose, whose former ignorance proceeded from want of pains, not
parts; and in short time became a tolerable, a good, an excellent, and
admirable scholar, and Commencing Doctor with due applause, lived many years a
painful Preacher in Norwich, always making honorable mention of Fox Acts and
Mon. in the life of Archbishop Cranmer.
Doctor Cranmer, as the means of his happyness. Indeed he had been ever, if not
once, a dunce, who if not debarred had never deserved his Degree. Bale says
that in the reign of Q. Mary, he returned to his vomit, and became a great
Papist. But his praises are better to be believed then his invectives, and
seeing Wood not growing crooked, but warping with weight, may be straightned
again, we charitably believe that though complying in times of persecution, he
returned to the truth in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, in the beginning whereof
he died.

EDMOND GOURNEY born in this County, was bred in Queens and BennetColledge in
Cambridge, where he Commenced Bachelour of Divinity, and afterward was
beneficed in this Shire. An excellent scholar, who could be humorous and would
be serious, as he was himself disposed; his humors were never profane toward
God, or injurious toward his Neighbors, which premised, none have cause to be
displeased if in his fancies he pleased himself.

Coming to me in Cambridge when I was studying, he demanded of me, the subject
whereon I studied, I told him I was Collecting the Witnesses of the truth of
the Protestant Religion through all ages even in the depth of Popery,
conceiving it feasible though difficult to evidence them.

It is a needless pains (said he) for I know that I am descended from Adam,
though I cannot prove my pedigree from him. And yet Reader, be pleased to take
notice he was born of as good a family as any in Norfolk. His book against
Transubstantiation, and another on the second Commandment, are learnedly and
judiciously written, he died in the beginning of our Civil Wars.

Benefactors to the Public.
GODFREY BOLLEN Knight, Son of Jeffrey Bollen, was born at Stow's Surv. p. 567.
Salle in this County. Being but a second brother he was sent into the City to
acquire wealth, ad aedificandum domum antiquam. Unto whose achievements fell
in both the blood and inheritance of his eldest Fragmenta regalia.
brother for want of Issue Male. By which accumulation he attained great
wealth, and Anno Domini 1457. was Lord Mayor of London. By his Testament made
in the next year, he gave liberally to the Prisoners, Hospitals, and ( Viz. the
Donation of Sir Simon Air.
) Lazer-houses. Besides, ( Stow's Surv. p. 89.
) he gave one thousand pounds (the greatest sum I meet with in that age to
pious uses,) to poor Householders in London: and two hundred pounds to those in
Norfolk. But it was the height of his and our happiness that he was
Great-grand-father by the Mothers side to Queen Elizabeth.

JAMES HOBART was born in this County, though I dare not say at Halleshall,
which he left to his posterity. He was Atturney-general, and of the
Privy-counsel to King Henry the seventh, by him dubbed Knight at such time as
he Created Henry his Son Prince of Wales. This worthy Patriot (besides his many
benefactions to his Parish Church in London,) built a fair Bridge over the
river Camd. Brit. in Norfolk.
VVaveny, betwixt this County and Suffolk, and a firm Cause-way thereby, with
many other works of charity, so that the three houses of his issue, planted in
this County, with fair possessions, may be presumed to prosper the better, for
the piety of this their Ancestour.

ANDREW PERNE was born at Parker in his Sceletos Cantab* in Manuscript.
Bilny, bred in Peter-house, whereof he was Fellow and Master, as also Proctor
and Vice Chancellor of Cambridge and Dean of Ely. Very bountiful he was to his
College wherein he founded a Fellowship and Scholarships. Besides many rare
Some have questioned whither the M. S. were of his gift.
Manuscripts he acquired to their Library. But his memory ought most to be
honored (Saving Gods living Temples, is better then building dead Colleges)
on this account, because in the days of Queen Mary, he was the Skrene to keep
off the fire of Persecution, from the faces and whole bodies of many a poor
Protestant, so that by his means no Gremial of the University was martyred
therein.

I know he is much taxed for altering his Religion four times in twelve years,
(from the last of King Henry the eight, to the first of Queen Elizabeth,) a
Papist, a Protestant, a Papist, a Protestant; but still Andrew Perne. However
be it known, that though he was a Bending Willow, he was no Smarting Willow,
guilty of Compliance not Cruelty, yea preserving many who otherwise had been
persecuted.

He was of a very facetious nature, excellent at Blunt-sharp Jests, and
perchance sometimes too tart in true ones. One instance of many; This Dean
chanced to call a Clergyman fool, (who indeed was little better) who returned
that he would complain thereof to the Lord Bishop of Ely. Do (says the Dean)
when you please, and my Lord Bishop will Confirm you.

Yet was Doctor Perne himself at last heart-broken with a Jest, (as I have been
most credibly informed from excellent hands,) on this occasion. He was at Court
with his Pupil Archbishop Whitgift in a rainy afternoon, when the Queen was
(I dare not say wilfully) but really resolved to ride abroad, contrary to the
mind of her Ladies, who were on hors-back (Coaches as yet being not common) to
attend her. Now one Clod the Queens Jester was employed by the Courtiers to
laugh the Queen out of so inconvenient a Journey. Heaven (says he) Madam
diswades you, it is cold and wet; and Earth diswades you, it is moist and
dirty. Heaven diswades you, this heavenly minded man Archbishop Whitgift; and
Earth diswades you, your fool Clod, such a lump of clay as my self. And if
neither will prevail with you, here is one that is neither Heaven nor Earth,
but hangs betwixt both, Doctor Perne, and he also diswades you. Hereat the
Queen and the Courtiers laughed heartily, whilst the Doctor looked sadly, and
going over with his Grace to Lambeth, soon saw the last of his life.

Since the Reformation.
Sir THOMAS GRESHAM was born in this County, bred a Mercer and Merchant in the
City of London, where God so blessed his endeavors that he became the
Wealthiest Citizen in England of his age, and the founder of two stately
Fabrics, the Old Exchange a kind of College for Merchants, and
Gresham-Colledge a kind of Exchange for Scholars.

I have learned from Goldsmiths, that Vessels made of Silver and Guilt, are
constantly Burnished; seldom or never those few which are made of Massy Gold,
whose real intrinsic worth disdaineth to borrow any Foyl from Art. Let lesser
Donations be amplified with rhetorical Praises. Nothing need be said of this
worthy Knights gifts, but his gifts, and take them truly copied from the
Original of his Will, as follows,

First, concerning the building in London called the Royal Exchange, with all
Shops, Cellars, Vaults, Tenements thereunto belonging; I will, and dispose one
moity to the Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens of London, upon confidence that
they perform the payments, and other intents hereafter limited.

The other moity of the said buildings, to the Wardens and Commonalty of the
Mystery of Mercers, of the City of London, upon trust that they perform the
payments, and other intents hereafter mentioned.

I Will and Dispose, that they the said Mayor and Commonalty, do give and
distribute for the sustentation, maintenance, and finding four Persons, from
time to time to be chosen, nominated, and appointed by the said Mayor, etc. to
read the Lectures of Divinity, Astronomy, Music, and Geometry, within mine own
dwelling house in the Parish of Saint Hellens. I give and dispose, out of this
moity, two hundred pouuds to be paid to the four Readres sufficiently learned,
fifty pounds to each yearly.

I likewise give the said Mayor, etc. fifty three pounds to be yearly
distributed in manner following,

Unto eight Almes-folks, whom the said Mayor, etc. shall appoint to inhabit my
eight Almes-houses in the Parish of St. Peter's Poor, the sum of six pounds,
thirteen shillings, four pence, to each of them to be paid at four usual
terms, etc.

I likewise Dispose out of this moity, fifty pounds yearly, to be distributed
by the said Mayor, etc. To the Prisoners in Newgate, Lud-gate, the
King's Bench, the Marshalsey, the Counter in Wood-street; ten pounds to each
prison, to be paid among the poor thereof.

The other moity of the said building disposed to the Mercers, I Will and
Dispose, out of it, to be by them paid one hundred and fifty pounds to the
finding, etc. three persons to be by the Wardens, etc. chosen, nominated, and
appointed to read the Lectures of Law, Physic, and Rhetoric.

That the said Mercers shall out of their moity, yearly expend one hundred
pounds at four several Dinners, for the whole Company of the said Corporation,
in the Mercers-hall in London, on every Quarter day.

That they shall distribute to the several Hospitals of Christ-church, Saint
Bartholomews, the Spittle at Bedlam, the Hospital for the poor in Southwark,
and the Poultry-Counter, fifty pounds yearly in money or other provisions ten
pounds,

My Mansion house with the Gardens, Stables, etc. I give to the Mayor and
Commonalty of London, and also to the Wardens and Commonalty of the Mystery of
Mercery, to have and to hold in Common, upon trust and confidence that they
observe, perform, and keep my Will, and true meaning hereafter expressed.

My Will, Intent, and Meaning is, that the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and
their Successors, and that the said Wardens and Commonalty of the Mercers,
shall permit and suffer seven persons, by them from time to time to be elected
and appointed as aforesaid, to meet and sufficiently learned to read the said
seven Lectures, to have the occupation of all my said Mansion house, Gardens,
etc. for them and every of them there to inhabit, study, and daily to read the
said several Lectures. And my Will is, that none shall be chosen to read any of
the said Lectures, so long as he shall be married, neither shall receive any
Fee or Stipend appointed for the reading of the said Lectures.

Moreover, I Will and Dispose, that the said Mayor, and Commonalty, and
Mercers, shall enjoy the said Royal Exchange, etc. for ever, severally by such
moities as is before expressed; provided, they do in the term of fifty years
provide and obtain sufficient and lawful Dispensations and Licenses, warrant
and authority, upon trust and confidence, and to the intent that they shall
severally for ever maintain and perform the payment, charges, and all other
intents and meanings thereof, before limited and expressed, according to the
intent and true meaning of these presents.

And that I do require and charge the said Corporations and chief Governors
thereof, with circumspect diligence, and without long delay, to procure and see
to be done, and obtained such Licenses as they will answer for the same before
Almigbty God, for if they, or any of them, should neglect to obtain such
Licenses, no Prince nor Counsel in any degree, will deny or defeat the same;
and if conveniently by my Will or other Conveyance, I might assure it, I would
not leave it to be done after my Death. Then the same shall revert to my Heirs,
whereas I do mean, the same to the Commonweal, and then their default thereof,
shall be to the reproach and condemnation of the said Corporation before God.
etc.

This worthy Knight completed his second change, I mean of a mortal life for a
Blessed Eternity, on the 21. of November 1579. and lies buried in the Parish
Church of Saint Hellens.

Sir WILLIAM PASTON Knight, son and heir to Erasmus Paston of Paston Esquire,
is justly recounted a Public Benefactour. True it is, the family whence he was
extracted, were always forward in deeds of Charity. according to the devotion
of the days they lived in. Witness their ^ountiful donations to the Abbys of
Saint Bennet in the Holme, and Bromholme in this County, after the Reformation;
they had not (with too many) less heat, because more light, but continued the
stream though they changed the Channel of charity. This Sir William erected a
very fair school, with thirty pounds per annum, for the maintenance thereof at
Northwalsam in this County, a deed no doubt acceptable to the God of heaven.

Solomon says, Teach a Child in the trade of his youth. But alas! it is above
the reach of poor parents to teach their Children, lacking learning to do it
themselves, and livelihood to hire others, save where such good persons as this
worthy Knight, have made provision for them. This Sir William married Francis
the daughter of Sir Tho. Clear of Stokesby, and was Great-grand-father to Sir
William Paston the bountiful promoter of all my weak endeavors.

HENRY HOWARD youngest son of Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey, and brother to
Thomas Howard last Duke of Norfolk, was bo^ at The Continuer of Stows Annals
page 1012.
Shotesham in this County. He was bred a serious student for many years in
Kings college in Cambridge, then in Trinity-hall, Cowels Epist. Ded. to his
Institutions.
going the ordinary path and pace to the degree of Mastership, without any
honorary advantage. Here he became a great and general Scholar, witness his
large and learned work entitled, A D^pensative against the poison of supposed
Prophesies, and dedicated to Sir Francis Walsingham. His fortune left him by
his Father, was not great, and he lived privately all the reign of Queen
Elizabeth, till King James advanced him in honor and wealth.

Here, for variety sake, and the better to methodize our matter, we will make
use of a distinction common in the Custom House, about bills of lading,
Inwards and Outward, observing what greatness were imported and conferred on
him, what gratitude was exported and performed by him.

Inwards. Outward. 1. King James Created him Baron of Marnehill in Dorset
shire. 2. Earl of Northampton. 3. Lord Privy Seal. 4. Lord Warden of the Cinque
Ports. 5. Knight of the Garter. 6. Cambridge chose him her Chancellor.
1. He founded and endowed an Hospital for twelve poor women and a Governor,
at Rising in this County. 2. Another for twelve poor men and a Governor, at
Clun in Shropshire. 3. Another at Greenwich in Kent, for a Governor and twenty
poor men, of whom eight are to be chosen out of Shotesham, the place of his
nativity.


He died the 15. of June 1614. and was buried in the ancient Chapel of the
Castle of Dover.

Memorable Persons.
-- SHARNBORN, born at, and Lord of Sharnborn a considerable Manor in this
County. This Manner William the Conqueror, out of the plenitude of his power
conferred on one Warren a Norman Soldier.

But Sharnborn was not so tame, as silently to set down, and suffer a stranger
peaceably to possess his inheritance, which his English Ancestors for many
years had enjoyed, but fairly traversed his Title, (I will not say in
Westminster Hall, as of later erection in the reign of King Rufus) but in that
public place, where Pleas were held in that age.

Surely none but a Norfolk-man, durst go to Law with the Conqueror, and
question the validity of his Donations. Yea brave Sharnborn got the better of
the Suit, and the Kings grant was adjudged void. This is pertinently pressed by
many to prove that King William (though in Name) was in very deed no
Conqueror, but came in by composition to keep the Laws of England.

Now as I am heartily sorrowful that Sharnborn possessed ever since, (almost
600. years) by that name and family, should in our age be sold, and aliened
from it, (whose heir males are just now extinct) so am I cordially glad that it
is bought by a worthy person, Francis Ash Esquire, which, with some limitation
has freely settled it (being of good yearly value) on Emanuel-colledge, and may
they as long enjoy it as the former owners, if before that term, the Day of
Judgment put not a Period to all earthly possessions.

Lord Mayors.
Name Father Place Company Time 1 Godfry Bullen Geffrey Bullen Salle Probably
Mercer 1457 2 Bartholomew Read Robert Read Crowmer Goldsmith 1502 3 Richard
Gresham John Gresham Holt Mercer 1537 4 John Gresham John Gresham Holt Mercer
1547 5 Thomas Cambell Robert Cambell Fullsam Iron-Monger 1609 6 John Leman John
Leman Gillingham Fish-Monger 1616 7 Edward Barkham Edward Barkham South-Akere
Draper 1621

The names of the Gentry of this County returned by the Commissioners in the
twelfth year of King Henry the sixth 1433.
William Bishop of Norwich. Commissioners to take the Oaths. John de Morley
Chivaler. Robert Cliffton, mil. Knights for the shire. John Roys. Knights for
the shire.

Abbatis de Langle Abbatis de Creek Abbatis de Wendelyng Abbatis de Derham
Prioris Sancte fidis Prioris de VValsyngham Prioris de Tetford Prioris de Linne
Prioris de Yernemouth Prioris de Ingham Prioris de Cokysforde Prioris de Westar
Prioris de Penteneye Prioris de Castelacre Prioris de Bromhill Prioris de
Ghildham Prioris de Wyrmingheye Prioris de Bokynham Prioris de Bromholm Prioris
de Hyking Prioris de Petreston Prioris de Flycham Prioris de Baeston Johan.
Clyfton, mil. Briani Stapulton, mil. Tho. Kerdeston Hen. Inglose, mil. Tho.
Tudenham, mil. Rog. Harsick, mil. Hen. Richford, mil. Johan. Curson, mil. Henry
Gray Williel^i Calthorp Johan. Fitz-Rauf de Moris Thomae Willoughby Oliveri
Groos Thomae Chaumbir Edmundi Winter Nich. Apilyerde Will. Apilyerde Nicholai
Castle Edmundi Stapulton Thomae Pigot Henrici Walpole Thomae Trusbute Willielmi
Byllingford Willielmi Daubeney Thomae Astele Radulphi Lampet Iohannis
Woodehouse Johan. Berney de Redham Ioh. Berney de Wythingham Georgii Holkham
VVillielmi Yelverton Edmundi VVychyngham Johan. Heydon Will. Gray de Merston
VVillielmi Raimis Thomae Dengayne Iohannis Clepisby Iohannis Strange Richardi
Gogh Christopheri Strange Henrici Catte Iohannis Bakon Henrici Nottyngham
Henrici Sharyngton Roberti Martham VVillielmi Bellingford VValteri Aslak Thomae
Lovell Thomae Shuldham Simonis Fincham Will. Walton Thomae Derham Roberti
Godard Thomae Kervile Hen. Stormer Johan. Hamond Georg. Hethe Johan. Fox de
Castelacro Nich. Bokkyng Nich. Stonwell Will. Spynk Thomae Chelton Johan.
Bekkeswell Johan. Rysele Roberti Popyngeay Johan. Wentworth Walt. Eton Will.
Thurleton Will. Tweyth Edmundi Sekford Johan. Michell Thomae Boys Johan. Dory
Johan. Bacheler Thomae Selors Thomae Brigge Thomae Gurney Will. Brampton
Johan. Clare Johan. Austyn Johan. Bolle Roberti Brom Johan. Knight Galfridi
Gray Johan. Bullok Johan. Brustbon Simonis Godknap Robert. Padyrys Robert.
Blogge Rich. Church Ade Mundforth Johan. Gigges Will. Dyton Galfridi
Craneweys Edmundi Massingham Osberti Mundford Tho. Fyssher Johan. Seche Will.
Thakker Will. Harbor Johan. Crane Johan. Holdernese Leonardi Claxton Tho.
Fannyngham Tho. (...) Johan. Thursby Johan. VVesinham Rich. Frank Nich. Frank
Johan. VVythe Johan. Parlementer Will. VVythe Rad. Brecham Roberti VValsyngham
Will. Kirton Johan. Stannton Johan. Miryoll Johan. Syff Tho. Spicer Tho.
Salysbury Johan. VVaryn Johan. Warner Rich. Lychour Johan. Bury Johan.
Brekerope Edmundi Goldyng Johan. Tylney Andr. Swanton Will. Kellowe Johan.
Abbot Johan. Frewill Will. Stapulton Johan. Wait Johan. Gybbon Rober.
Brandon Nich. VVythe Johan. Nicolasson Johan. Andrewe Alexan. Draper Tho.
Midleton Johan. Thorn Will. Sylk Simon. Body Nich. Benpre Edmund. Bonet Tho.
Feltwell Rad. Midylton Rich. Baker Johan. Howard Johan. Eye Rich Deye Rich.
Billingforth Johan. Tremche Will. Bullman Will. Candelere Will. Stokker Johan.
Bosse Johan. Sturmy Will. Fyrsk Johan. Parker Sen. Hetersite Rog. Scot Johan.
Joye Hen. Warner Tho. Manning Rich. Cans Tho. Norwold Johan. Bredeman Georg.
Palgrave Johan. Read. Will. Ede Tho. Gyle Tho. Candeler Tho. Stywarp Johan.
VValpell Tho. Canon Johan. Mortoft Rich. Vewtre Johan. Alcok Will. James
Johan. Tylls Rog. Brook Johan. Be Will. Tanerham Rich. Baret Johan. Loumour
Tho. VValisch Galf. Brewster Will. Newegate Johan. Man Pet. Hokkeham Will.
Seyne Johan. Monk Johan. Jews Johan. Seforth Tho. Colles Johan. Chapman
Edmund. Clerk Tho. Bertram Rob. Norwich Johan. Sweyn Johan. Puttok Tho. Trunch
Johan. Wynse Johan. Byrston Tho. Stipoard Rich. Cordy Johan. Web Rich. VVode
Johan. Spark Johan. At Mere Johan. Ely Johan. Dany Edmund. Wode Tho.
Richeforth Johan. Dawes Alani. Twykke Simon. Cook Nich. Park. Johan. Leg
Rich. Henke Rob. Ling Tho. Monnsewes Tho. Yekesworth Johan. Trench Johan.
Elyngham Johan. Bettys Johan. Porter Johan. Bemys Johan. Molitis Edw. Wylnby
Will. Moletis Tho. Holley Nich. Holley Robert. Holley Simon. Dykone Johan.
Westhaw Edmund. Parker Galf. Fox Johan. Draper Johan. Homerston Hen. Aphagh
Will. At Hagh Hugo. Bedenham Will. Prentys Johan. VVatterden Tho. Burgh
Johan. Doggyng Geor. VVyton Will. Sparkam Johan. Baily Hen. Thursby Johan.
Mersch Galf. Cobbe Denis VVellys Tho. Moket Edmund. Cole Will. Cole Johan.
Scorowr Johan. Reppes Walt. VVedurby Johan. Brechinham Will. Pain Alex. Pain
Johan. Brygg Johan. Cross Steph. Silvestre Bob. Teyser Tho. Bowde Johan.
Swayn, jun. Johan. Grenede Folsham Rob. Kervyle Simon. Tyller Johan. Arnald
Rich. Carleton Edmund. Michell Johan. VVodesende Will. Stubbe Johan. Lawyes
Hen. Lesingham Johan. Jucewode Nich. Rake Will. Fox Johan. Green Will.
Dallyng Nich. VVaterman Will. Norwhich Johan. Tasburgh Johan. Brampton Robert.
Brese Edmund. Ade Tho. Pie Rich. Read Johan. Gerard Johan. Dam Johan. Bernard
Johan. L^ford Tho. Sto^agh Rich. Ballord Tho. Walsham Johan. Spany Johan. Penny
Johan. Hastynges Rich. Stotevyle Tho. Arnald Robert. Elys Will. Granour Rich.
Elys Johan. Berhyng Rog. Hoddes Will. Baily Johan. Crancle Nich. Baxter Robert.
Dooke Nich. Pykeryng Robert. Kent Tho. Unphrny Walt. Heylot Tho. Rycheman
Johan. Howard Johan. Levoth Johan. Annsell Robert. Fyllisson Rog. Calleston
Tho. Halle Robert. Martham Galf. Wall Johan. Pan Johan. Cobald Johan.
Phelipp Johan. Merschgate Robert. Cupper Tho. Air Johan. Cobbe Rich. Flykke
Robert. Heyloth Johan. Mannyng Simon. Falsham Robert. Hendy Lauren. Oky
Radulph. Bronnyng Johan. Pepyr Tho. Martyn Johan. Roche Johan. Span Oliv. Kevet
Johan. Deynes Johan. Holler Johan. Fuller Johan. Puttok Edmund. Rysyng Robert.
At Lee Johan. Broune de Weveton Johan. Meleman Tho. Bridge Thom. Roose Gals.
Bolayn Will. Blonnevyse Edmund. Yonghousbond Edmund. Godewyn Tho. Twytwell
Rich. Holdyche Johan. Holtman Robert. Randes Tho. Glaveyn Robert. Wyrmegey Tho.
Person Robert. VVylly Johan. Maynard Johan. de Pulham VVillielm. Arnald de
Crommer Robert. Russell Johan. VVodewane Ade Williamson, and Robert. Cravell
Sheriffs of Norfolk and Suffolk.
HEN. II.
Anno 1 Rich. Basset, and Alberi. de Veer Anno 2 Will. de Nova Villa, and Will
de Jeaxmeto Anno 3 Will. de Caisuei, sive Caisuer Anno 4 Anno 5 Will. Anno 6
Anno 7 Anno 8 Anno 9 Will. de Chaisu Anno 10 Oggerus Dapifer, for 6 years. Anno
16 Barth. Glanvill, and Vinar. Capellanus, and Will. Bardull, for 6 years. Anno
22 Vinar. Capellanus, for 11 years. Anno 33 Vin. pro dimid. Anno and Will. fill.
Hervei dimid.
RICH. I.
Anno 1 Will. filius Hervei Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Rob. filius Rog. and Pet. de
Edichfeld Anno 4 Rob. filius Rog. and Sam. de Salia Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Idem.
Anno 7 Osber. de Longo Campo Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Rob filius Rog.
and Rich. de Gosfeld
JOH. REG.
Anno 1 Rob. filius Rog. and Rich. de Gosfeld Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Pet. de
Mealton Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Alex. de Dunham, and Alex. Banister
Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Johan. de Cornheard, for 4 years. Anno 12 Walt. de
Huntingfeld, and Will. Esturmi Anno 13 Idem. Anno 14 Rob. fill. Rog. and Will.
filius Rosicke Anno 15 Will. sive Walt. de Huntingfeld, Will. Escurmi Anno 16
Johan. fill. Rob. and Rob. de Kent Anno 17 Johan. filius Rob. filius Rogeri
HEN. III.
Anno 1 Anno 2 Hubert. de Burge Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Hu. and Ric.
de Frefingfeld. Anno 6 Hubert. and Rich. Ducket Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Hub. and
Tho. Ingoldethorpe Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Hugo. Rufus Anno 11 Idem. Anno 12 Herb.
de Alencum, for 5 years. Anno 17 Rob. de Brivas Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Tho. de
Heningham Anno 20 Idem. Anno 21 Tho. Ingoldesthorpe Anno 22 Idem. Anno 23 Rob.
de Broyons Anno 24 Johan. de Ulecott Anno 25 Idem. Anno 26 Hen. de Heketon, and
Hamo. Passeleve Anno 27 Idem. Anno 28 Hamo. Passeleve, for 6 years. Anno 34
Rob. de Savage, for 6 years. Anno 40 Will. de Swyneford Anno 41 Idem. Anno 42
Idem. Anno 43 Hamo. Hanteyn Anno 44 Hamo. and Hen. de Stanho Anno 45 Idem. Anno
46 Phil. Marnium, and Will. de Hekam Anno 47 Nich. Espigornel, for 5 years.
Anno 52 Rob. de Norton Anno 53 Idem. Anno 54 Idem. Anno 55 Will. Giffard Anno
56 Idem.
EDW. I.
Anno 1 Will. Giffard Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Rob. filius Johannis Anno 4 Walt. de
Shelfhaugre Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Walt. Granimt Anno 7 Johan. Brito, and Will. de
Bedham Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Will. de Doing Anno 11 Idem. Anno 12
Will. de Rochinger, for 6 years. Anno 18 Rich. de Belhus Anno 19 Will. de
Nedham Anno 20 Idem. Anno 21 Idem. Anno 22 Will. de Gerbe Anno 23 Idem. Anno 24
Idem. Anno 25 Will. de Rideston Anno 26 Idem. Anno 27 Will. de Sutton Anno 28
Idem. Anno 29 Will. de Ailton Anno 30 Rob. Hereward, for 5 years. Anno 35 Egid.
de Mumpinzon
EDW. II.
Anno 1 Tho. de Sancto Omero Anno 2 Hen. de Seagrave Anno 3 Rob. Baygnard Anno
4 Idem. Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Rob. and Alex. de Claveringe Anno 7 Rich. de
Claveringe Anno 8 Rich. de Retham Anno 9 Rich. and Alex. de Claveringe Anno 10
Johan. de Fitton, and Will. de Rungeton Anno 11 Johan. Howard Anno 12 Johan.
Seafoule Anno 13 Johan. Howard, and Edw. Hemingne Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15 Idem.
Anno 16 Anno 17 Egid. de Wachesham Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Idem.
EDW. III.
Anno 1 Tho. de Lindringham, and Rob. de Walkefare Anno 2 Johan. de Londham
Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Rog. de (...) Anno 6 Rog. de Bourne, and Rog.
de Kird^ston Anno 7 Rog. de Bourne, and Edw. de Baconsthorpe Anno 8 Johan. de
Cailly Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Rob. de Causton Anno 11 Idem. Anno 12 Johan. de
Harsike Anno 13 Rob. Causton, and Joh. Harsike Anno 14 Rob. Anno 15 Tho.
Belisforde Anno 16 Edw. de Creting Anno 17 Idem. Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Johan.
Haward Anno 20 Will. de Midleton Anno 21 Idem. Anno 22 Idem. Anno 23 Johan. de
Colby Anno 24 Idem. Anno 25 Will. de Midleton Anno 26 Idem. Anno 27 Edw. de
Creting Anno 28 Idem. Anno 29 Tho. de Mareux Anno 30 Guido Seynclere Anno 31
Idem. Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Johan. de Battlesden Anno 34 Idem. Anno 35 Tho. de
Sancto Omero for 4 years. Anno 39 Rog. Gyney Anno 40 Will. de Clear Anno 41
Tho. Morieux Anno 42 Idem. Anno 43 Rog. Holdich Anno 44 Idem. Anno 45 Edw. de
Thopre Anno 46 Rob. Bacon Anno 47 Johan. Mantby Anno 48 Johan. Mantby Anno 49
Will. de Kirdeston Anno 50 Oliver. de Calthrope Anno 51 Johan. de Brows.
HENRY the Second.
16 BARTH. GLANVILL, and VINAR. CAPELLANUS.]

It may seem strange that this Vinar. Capellanus, that is, Vini. the Chaplain,
should be Sheriff so many years together. One would have sought for a person of
his Profession, rather in the Pulpit, then in the Shire-hall. But in that age
Men in Orders did not only engross places of Judicature, but also such as had
Military and Martial relation, whereof the Sheriffs place in some sort may seem
to partake. Sure I am, that under the reign of King Charles, one pricked
Sheriff of Rutland escaped, by pleading that he was a Deacon. But now all this
is said, this (...). the Chaplain may still be a Layman, seeing in England
Multi Clerici sunt Laici, many Clerks by Name, are no Clerks by Profession.
Chaplain may be his Surname, and the same with de Capella or Capell, a right
ancient name I assure you.

Sheriffs of Norfolk and Suffolk.
Name. Place. Arms. RICH. II. Anno 1 Johan. Harsikes Or, a Chief indented
Sable. 2 Steph. de Hales 3 John de Mantby 4 Will. Winter Checkey, Or and Sab. a
Fess Arg. 5 Will. de (...) 6 Joh. de Volveston 7 Joh. Tudenham 8 Andr.
Cavendish Cavendish Sab. 3 Bucks-heads cabosed Arg. attired Or. 9 Rad. Bigot,
mil. Party per pale, Or and Vert, a Lion ramp. G. 10 Galf. Michell 11 Tho.
Corsonn Ermin. a Bend compone Arg. and Sable. 12 Idem. ut prius 13 Hugo.
Fastolfe Quarterly Or. and Az. on a Bend Gul. 3 Escalops Arg. 14 Rob. Carbonell
15 Johan. Knivett Bucknha^ Arg. a Bend within a Border Engrailed Sab. 16 Will.
Winter ut prius 17 Will. Argente, m. Gules, 3 Cups covered Argent. 18 Gilb.
Debenham S. a Bend'twixt 2 Crescents Or. 19 Tho. Corsonn ut prius 20 Idem. ut
prius 21 Will. Rees Arg. 3 (...)-heads Gul. a Chief Or. 22 Idem. ut prius HEN.
IV. Anno 1 John Gournay Pale-wayes of 6 Pieces Or and Azure. 2 John Heningham
Edw. Oldhall Quarterly, Or and G. a Border Sab. charged with Escallop-shels
Arg. 3 John Inglesthorpe Gul. a Cross ingrailed Argent. 4 Rob. Ramsey Gul. 3
Rams-heads Cabosed Arg. 5 Idem. ut prius 6 Nic. Winchingha^ 7 Rob. Berney, mil.
Parkhal R. Per Pale Gul. and Ermin. a Cross engrailed Ermin. 8 Will. Rees ut
prius 9 Rad. Ramsey ut prius 10 Oliver. Groose Quarterly Arg. and Az. on a Bend
Sab. 3 Martlets Or. 11 Rob. Berney, mil. ut prius 12 Tho. Lovell Arg. a Ch^v.
Az. 'twixt 3 Squirrels Seiant Gul. HEN. V. Anno 1 Edw. Oldhall 2 Ioh.
Heaveningha^ ut prius 3 John Spencer Quarterly, Arg. and G. a Bend S. in the 2.
and 3. a Fret Or. 4 And. Botiller Gul. a Fess Componee Arg. and S. 'twixt 6
Crosses Patee Fitche 5 Edw. Winter ut prius 6 Oliv. Groos ut prius Argent. 7
Joh. Fitz-(...) Gules, a Fess Vairee 8 9 Idem. HEN. VI. Anno 1 Rob. Cliston, m.
Sab. semi of Cinque-foils and a Lion ramp. Arg. within a Border of the first,
charged with Verdoy of Trefoyles of the second. 2 John Shardlow Ar. a Chev. G.
'twixt 3 Croslets Az. 3 Bri. Stapilton Az. a Lion ramp. queve fourchee Or. 4
Oliver. Groose ut prius 5 Johan. Tirrey 6 Gilb. Debenham ut prius 7 Hen. Drury,
ar. Halsted S. Arg. on a Chief Vert the letter Tau 'twixt 2 Mullets pierced Or.
8 Hen. Dray, ar. Az. a Fess 'twixt 2 Cheverons Or. 9 Joh. Shardlow, m. ut prius
10 Joh. Ropley 11 Tho. Thudenha^, m. 12 Hen. Gray, ar. ut prius 13 Joh.
Fitz-Rauf ut prius 14 Tho. Chamber 15 Johan. Hopton Ermine on 2 Bars Sab. 6
Mullets Or. 16 Joh. Heaveningha^ ut prius 17 Tho. Brewes Az. semy of Croslets
and a Lion rampant Or. 18 Milo Stapilton ut prius 19 Ro^. Chamberlain 20 Will.
Calthrop^ Check Or and Az. a Fess Ermin. 21 Tho. Brewes ut prius 22 Joh. Fitz
Rauf ut prius 23 Joh. Hopton, ar. ut prius 24 Will. Tirrel Arg^ 2 Cheverons
Azu. within a Border engrailed Gul. 25 Tho. Daniel 26 Phil. Wentworth Sable, a
(...) betwixt 3 Leopards-heads Or. 27 Egid. Sto. Lo, ar. 28 Johan. Gray ut
prius 29 Johan. Germin Rushbroke S. a Cressant 'twixt 2 Mullets Ar. 30 Johan.
Clopton Suf. Sab. a bend Arg. 'twixt 2 Cotisses dauncette Or. 31 Tho.
Sharnbrone 32 Joh. Denston 33 Joh. Wingfeld Letheringham Arg. on a Bend Gul.
Cotised Sa. 3 Wings of the first. 34 Joh. Clopton, ar. ut prius 35 Rich. Both,
ar. Arg. 3 Boars-heads erased Sable' Tusked Or. 36 ^gid. Sto. Lo, ar. 37 Will.
Calthorpe ut prius 38 Phil. Wentworth ut prius EDW. IV. Anno 1 Tho. Hayward, m
2 Tho. Mountgo^ery Gu. a Cheveron betwixt 3 flower de (...) O 3 Idem. ut prius
4 Will. Calthrope, ar. ut prius 5 Alex. Cressener 6 Will. Hopton, ar. ut prius 7
Tho. Mountgo^ery ut prius 8 Joh. Twyer 9 Rog. Ree, ar. 10 Joh. Heveningha^ ut
prius 11 Will. Knivett, at. ut prius 12 Joh. Wingfeld, m. ut prius 13 Rog. Ree,
mil. 14 Rob. Radliff^ 15 Joh. Hasting, ar. Or a Maunch Gules. 16 Will.
Calthorp, m. ut prius 17 Tho. Howard, mi. Gul. a Bend'twixt 6 Cro^ets fitchee
Argent. 18 Rob. Radliffe, ar. 19 Will. Hopton, ar. ut prius 20 Will. Knivett,
mi. ut prius 21 Alex. Cressener 22 Hen. Wenthworth ut prius RICH. III. Anno 1 John Wingfeild. ar. ut prius 2 Rad. Willoughby Rich. Pole Per Pale Or and Sab.
a Saltire Engrailed Counterchanged. 3 Johan. Paston Arg. 6 Flower de luces Az.
a Chief indented Or. HEN. VII. Anno 1 Johan. Paston ut prius 2 E^m. Bedingfeld
Ermin. an Eagle displayed Gul. 3 Rad. Shelton, m^. Az. a Cross Or. 4 Rob.
Lovell ut prius 5 Simon. Wiseman Sab. a Cheveron Ermin. 'twixt 3 Cronells of a
Tiltspear Arg. 6 Phil. Jews, ar. 7 Rob. Brandon, (...). Barry of 10 Arg. and
Gul. over all a Lion rampant Or, Crowned per pale Arg. of the second. 8 Joh.
Wingfeld, m. ut prius 9 Will. Carewe, m. 10 Rob. Southwell 11 Rog. Le Strange,
a. Hunstanto^ Gul. 2 Lions passant Argent. 12 Rob. Curson, mil. ut prius 13
Edw. Arundell, m. 14 Phil. Calthrope, m. ut prius 15 Will. Bolein, mil. Arg. a
Cheveron 'twixt 3 Bullsheads Sab. armed Or. 16 Hum. Catesby, ar. 17 Rob. Clear,
mil. Arg. on a Fess Az. 3 Eagles Or. 18 Edw. Jeney, mil. 19 Idem. 20 Johan.
Shelton ut prius 21 Idem. ut prius 22 Phil. Both, mil. ut prius 23 Rob.
Brandon, m. ut prius 24 Idem. ut prius HEN. VIII. Anno 1 Ric. Wentworth ut
prius 2 John Hevingham ut prius 3 Rog. Townesend Raynham Az. a Cheveron Ermin.
'twixt 3 Scallops Arg. 4 Lio. Talmarsh, ar. Helmingham Argent, a Fret Sable. 5
Tho. Gibbon, ar. Or, a Lion rampant Sab. debrused with a Bend Gul. charged with
3 Escallops Arg. 6 Joh. Heydon, m. Quarterly Arg. and Gul. a Cross 7 Ant.
Wingfeld, m. ut prius Engrailed counterchanged. 8 Ric. Wentworth, m. ut prius 9
Will. Paston, ar. ut prius 10 Rog. Townsend, a. ut prius 11 Joh. Heydon, mil.
ut prius 12 Hum. Wingfeld, a. ut prius 13 Th. Bedingfeld, m. ut prius 14 Joh.
Shelton, mil. ut prius 15 Joh. Heveningha^ ut prius 16 Ioh. Heydon, mil, ut
prius 17 Rog. Towsend ut prius 18 Fran. Lovell, ar. ut prius 19 Phil. Filvey,
mil. 20 Will. Paston, mil. ut prius 21 Edw. Bedingfeld, ut prius 22 Tho.
Jermyn, ar. ut prius 23 Hen. Fermour, m. 24 Tho. LeStrange, m. ut prius 25 Tho.
Lush, or Rush 26 Rich. Southwell 27 Walt. Hubard, m. Blickling S. an Estoile
with 8 Points 'twixt 2 Flanches Ermin. 28 Will. Drury, mil. ut prius 29 Edm.
Windham Cowtherk Az. a Cheveron betwixt 3 Lionsheads Erased Or. 30 Fran.
Lovell, mil. ut prius 31 Edw. Knivett, m. ut prius 32 Will. Fermoure, m. 33
Tho. Jermyn, mil. ut prius 34 Johan. (...), m. ut prius 35 Fran. Lovell, mil.
ut prius 36 Will. Drury, mil. ut prius 37 Edw. VVindha^, m. ut prius 38 Hen.
Hubbard, ar. ut prius EDW. VI. Anno 1 John Robsart, mil. Vert a Lion (...) Or,
Valned in the Shoulder. 2 Nich. Le Strange ut prius 3 Edm. VVindha^, m. ut
prius 4 Will. VValgrave Party per pale Arg. and Gules. 5 Joh. Robsat, mil. ut
prius 6 Tho. Cornwallis Brom S. Sable Guttee Arg. on a Fess of the second, 3
Cornish Choughs of the first. PHILLIP. and MARI. Anno 1 Tho. VVoodhouse
Kimberly No. S. a Cheveron betwixt 3 Cinquefoils Ermin. 1,2 John Shelton, mil.
ut prius 2,3 John Sulyard, ar. SUFFOL. Arg. a Cheveron Gul. 'twist 3 Pheons
Sable, 3,4 Chri. Heydon, m. ut prius 4,5 Hen. Doly, mil. Gul. 3 Bucks-heads
Cabosed Arg. 5,6 Amb. Jermyn, ar. ut prius ELIZAB. REG. Anno. 1 John Apleyard,
ar. SUFFOL. Az. a Cheveron Or, 'twixt 3 Owls Arg. 2 Rob. VVingfeld, a. ut prius
3 Tho. Tindall, mil. 4 Will. Buts, mil. 5 Tho. VVoodhouse ut prius 6 Owin.
Hopton, m. ut prius 7 Will. Paston, m. ut prius 8 Lion. Talling, ar. 9 Edw.
C^re, ar. ut prius 10 Will. VValgrave ut prius 11 Chri. Heydon, m. ut prius 12
Edw. VVitipole 13 Rad. Shelton, ar. ut prius 14 Amb. Jermyn, m. ut prius 15
Hen. Doly, ar. ut prius 16 Tho. Felton, ar. Playford G. 2 Lions passant Ermin.
Crowned Or.

HENRY the Seventh.
14 PHILLIP CALTHROPE, Miles.]

He was a very grave Gentleman, (and lived to a great age) yet withal of a very
merry, and pleasant conceit, whereof take this instance.

He sent as much cloth of fine French-tauney, as would make him a Gown, to a
Tailor in Norwich. It happened, one John Drakes a Shoo-maker coming into the
Shop, liked it so well, that he went and bought of the same as much for
himself, enjoining the Tailor to make it of the same fashion. The Knight being
informed hereof, commanded the Tailor to cut his gown as full of holes, as his
Sheers could make, which purged J. Drakes of his proud humor, that he would
never be of the Gentleman's fashion again.

HENRY the Eight.
29 EDMUND WINDHAM.]

He was a Gentleman of a fair Estate in this County, great Birth and Aliance,
(whose Grand mother, was daughter to John Howard Duke of Northfolk,) but it
seems somewhat given to his Passion. This caused him (in the 33. of this Kings
reign) to strike Master Clear, a Gentleman of his own County, in the Kings
Tennis Court. For this he was araigned in the great Hall at Greenwich, before
Master Gage, Comptroler of the Kings Household, and other Justices, and one
Quest of Gentlemen, another of Yeomen passed upon him, to enquire of the same
stripe, by whom he was found guilty, and had Judgment to lose his right hand.
Then was he brought in to solemn execution, by Sir Willian Pickering Knight
Martial, and confessing his fault, desired that the King of mercy would be
pleased to take his left hand, and spare his right; for therewith (said he) I
may hereafter be able to do his Grace service. The King informed hereof by his
Justices, granted his full Pardon, neither to lose Hand, Land, nor Goods, but
restored him to his liberty. See more of him in the third of King Edward the
sixth.

EDWARD the Sixth.
3 EDMUND WINDHAM, Mil.]

Of him before in the twenty ninth of King Henry the eight, he now made good
his former promise to the Son, which he made to his Father, of using his
right hand in the service of his Sovereign. For in this year Kets Rebellion
began in this Couuty, which this Sheriff endeavored, withal his power and
policy to suppress, till at last it proved a task beyond his strength to
perform.

Queen MARY.
1 THOMAS WOODHOUSE, Mil.]

Though he be the first of his Surname, whom we meet in our Catalogue, I find
many of his family anciently employed in State Affairs. In a
Manuscript-collection (extant in the Library of Sir Thomas Cotton) of persons
summoned to Parliament, by King Edward the third, I read,

1. Rex dilecto Clerico suo Roberto de Woodhouse, Archidiacono de Richmund,
Thesaurario salutem. Negotia nos and statum regni contingentia, etc. vobis
mandamus firmiter injungentes, quod omnibus aliis praetermissis, etc. 2. John
Woodhouse, Esquire was servant, and one of the Stow's Chro. p. 362.
Executors to King Henry the fifth. 3. Sir William VVoodhouse, (near related
to our Sheriff) was Sir John Hayward in the life of Edw. 6. p. 15.
Vice Admiral of our English fleet at Musoleburrough-field. 4. Philip
VVoodhouse, Esquire was very active at the taking of Cadiz, and Camdens Eliz. Anno
1596.
Knighted there for his good service, by the Earl of Essex.
And ever since there has been a Military inclination in this family, which
has manifested it self on several occasions.

Sheriffs of Norfolk alone.
Name. Place. Arms. ELIZ. REG. Anno 17 Tho. Townsend, ar. Rainham Az. a
Cheveron Ermine, betwixt 3 Escallops Arg. 18 Drugo. Drury, ar. Arg. on a Chief
Vert the letter Tau betwixt 2 Mullets pierced Or. 19 Hen. Weston, mil. 20
Basing. Gaudy, ar. Vert, a Tortois passant Argent. 21 Tho. Knivett, mi. Arg. a
Bend within a border engrailed Sab. 22 Edw. Clear, mil. Argent, on a Fefs Azu.
3 Eaglets Or. 23 Arth. Heven ngha^ Quarterly Or and G. a Border Sab. charged
with Escallop-shels Arg. 24 Will. Paston, mil. Arg. 6 Flower de luces Az. a
Chief indented Or. 25 Will. Heydon, m. Quarterly Ar. and G. a Cross ingrailed
counterchanged. 26 Hen. Woodhouse Kimberly Sab. a Cheveron' (...) 3 Cinque^oils
Ermin. 27 Tho. Hogan, ar. Hen. Hogan, ar. ut prius Arg. a Cheveron ingrailed
vary. Or and Gul. '(...) 3 Hurts each charged with 3 Lions legs erased Argent.
28 Nath. Bacon, ar. SUFFOL. Gul. on a Chief Arg. 3 Mullets Sable. 29 Clem.
Paston, ar. ut prius 30 ^oh. Peiton, mil. Sable, a Cross ingrailed Or. 31 Rob.
Southwell 32 Hen. Dolney, ar. 33 Milo. Corbett, ar. (...) Or, a Raven Proper.
34 Hen. Gaudy, ar. ut pri s 35 B^sing. Gaudy, m. ut prius 36 Phil. Woodhouse ut
prius 37 Tho. Clear, ar. ut prius 38 Hum. Guibon, ar. Or, a Lion rampant Sab.
debrused with a Bend Gul. charged with 3 Escallops Arg. 39 Nich. Bacon, mil. ut
prius 40 Clem. Spelman, m. Sab. Platee proper, 2 Flaunches Argent. 41 Nath.
Bacon, ar. ut prius 42 Ric. Jenkinson, ar. Or, 2 Bars Gemells Gul. '(...) 3
Boars-heads and Necks Erased S. 43 Basen. Gaudy, m. ut prius 44 Ar^h. Hemingham
ut prius 45 Edm. Doyley, and 1. Jac. Gul. 3 Bucks-heads cabosed Arg. JAC. REG.
Anno 1 Edm. Doyley, ar. ut prius 2 Hen. Spelman, m. ut prius 3 Rad. Hare, mil.
Gul. 2 Bars* and a Chief indented Or. 4 Le'Stran. Mordant Arg. a Cheveron
betwixt 3 Estoils Sable. 5 Hen. Gaudy, mil. ut prius 6 Hamo. Le Strange
Hunstanto^ Gul. 2 Lions Passant Argent. 7 Tho. Barney, mil. Parkhal R. Per Pale
Gul. and Ermin. a Cross engrailed Ermin. 8 Chri. Gaudy, mil. ut prius 9 Tho.
Corbet, ar. ut prius 10 Tho. Lewer, mil. 11 Jac. Calthrope, m. Checkee Or and
Azu. a Fess Erm. 12 Joh. Heveningham ut prius 13 Ric. Jenkinson, ar. ut prius
14 Aug. Palgrave, m. Azu. a Lion Passant Argent. 15 Anth. Drury, mil. ut prius
16 Tho. Holland, m. Az. semy of Flower de luce a lion ramp. Guardant Arg. 17
Hen. Beddingfeld Ermin. an Eagle desplayed Gul. 18 Tho. Heirne, mil. 19 Will.
Yelverto^, ba. Arg. 3 Lion cells rampant Gul. a Chief of the second. 20 Rich.
Berney, bar. ut prius 21 Le'Stran. Mordant ut prius 22. Tho. Woodhouse ut prius
CAR. REG. Anno 1 Tho. Holle, arm. Or, on a Cheveron S. 3 Unicornsheads Erased
Argent. 2 Car. LeGroose, m. Quarterly, Arg. and Azu. on a Bend S* 3 (...) Or. 3
Fran. Gaudy, ar. ut prius 4 Rob. Gaudy, mil. ut prius 5 Rog. Townsend, b. ut
prius 6 Fran. Mapes, ar. 7 Tho. Pettus, ar. Recheath Gul. a fess Arg. '(...) 3
(...) Or. 8 Jo. Hobart, m. and b. Blickling Sab. an Estoil with 8 points 'twixt
2 Flanches Ermin. 9 Will. Heveningha^ ut prius 10 Joh. Wentworth ut prius 11
Edr. Barkham, m. Arg. 3 Pallets Gul. over all a Cheveron. 12 Will. Paston, ar.
ut prius 13 Edr. Asteley, ar. 14 August. Holt, (...). ut prius 15 16 17 Tho.
Guibon, m. ut prius 18 Joh. Coke, ar. Party per Pale Gul. and Azu. 3 Eagles
displayed Argent. 19 20 Valen. Pell, mil. 21 22 Tho. Barney, ar. ut prius

Queen ELIZABETH.
18 DRUGO DRURY, Arm.]

This Sir Dru being afterward Knighted, was joined in Commission with Sir
Amias Paulet, to keep Mary Queen of Scots, and discharged his dangerous trust
therein. It moves me not, that I find both these Knights branded for Camd.
Eliz. Anno 1584.
Puritans, being confident, that Nickname, in relation to them both, was first
pronounced through a Popish mouth, causlesly offended at their Religion.

King CHARLES.
5 ROGER. TOWNSEND Baronet.]

He was a religious Gentleman, expending his soul in piety and charity, a lover
of God, his Service, and Servants, A grave Mr. Bolton in his funeral Notes on
Judge Nichols.
Divine says most truly, that encroachments on the Church, are like breaches
of the Seas, a thousand to one if they ever return. But this worthy Knight may
be said to have turned the tide, restoring Impropriations to the Church, to
some hundreds in yearly valuation. He married Mary, daughter and coheir of
Horatio Lord Vere of Tilbury, by whom he had Sir Horace, who for his worth was
deservedly Created a Baron at the Coronation of King Charles the second.

The Farewell.
And now being to take my leave of this County, I wish the inhabitants thereof
may make good use of their so many Churches, and cross that pestilent Proverb,
The nigher to the Church, the farther from God, substituting another (which
will be a happy change) in the room thereof, viz. The more the Churches, the
more sincere the Devotion.

NORWICH is (as you please) either a City in an Orchard, or an Orchard in a
City, so equally are Houses and Trees blendid in it, so that the pleasure of
the Country, and populousness of the City meet here together. Yet in this
mixture, the inhabitants participate, nothing of the rusticalness of the one,
but altogether of the urbanity and civility of the other.

Natural Commodities.
Flowers.
The Dutch brought hither with them, not only their profitable crafts, but
pleasurable cur^osities. They were the first who advanced the use and
reputation of Flowers in this City. A Flower is the best complexioned grass,
(as a Pearl is the best colored clay,) and daily it wears Gods Livery, for
Mar. 6. 30.
He cloatheth the Grass in the Field. Solomon himself is out-braved therewith,
as whose gallantry only was adopted, and on him, theirs innate and in them. In
the morning (when it grows up) it is a Lecture of Divine Providence; In the
evening, (when it is cut down withered) it is a Lecture of Humane Mortality.

Single flowers are observed much sweeter then the double ones, ( poor may be
more fragrant in Gods nostrils then the rich) and let Florists assign the cause
thereof, whether because the Sun does not so much dry the Intricacies of such
flowers which are Duplicated.

Great the Art in meliorating of flowers, and the Rose of Roses [Rosa Mundi]
had its first being in this City. As Jacob used an ingenious Genesis 3. 37.
invention to make Laban's cattle speckled or ring-straked, so, much the skill
in making Tulips feathered and variegated, with stripes of diverse colors.

In my judgment those flowers carry it clearly, which acquit themselves to a
double sense, sight and smell, for though in some thing it may be true, Optime
quae minime olent, yet in flowers (besides a negation of an ill) the position
of a good sent, is justly required.

Manufactures.
Stuffs.
It is an ill wind which blows no man good, even Storms bring VVrecks to the
Admiral. The cruelty of Duke D'Alva, as it blew the Dutch out off their own,
brought them into this City, and with them their Manufactures, which the
English quickly learned from them, until Norwich became the Staple of such
Commodities for the whole Land. For the nimble wooffe its artificial dancing in
several postures about the standing warpe, produces infinite varieties in this
kind.

Expect not I should reckon up their several names, because daily increasing,
and many of them are binominous, as which, when they begin to tire in sale, are
quickened with a new name. In my childhood there was one called Stand-far-of,
(the emblem of Hypocrisy) which seemed pretty at competent distance, but
discovered its coursness, when nearer to the eye. Also Perpetuano, so called
from the lasting thereof, (though but a counterfeit of the clothes of the
Israelites, which endured in the VVillderness 40. Deur. 29. 5.
years,) Satinisco, Bombicino, Italiano, etc. Comineus says, that a Favorite
must have an handsome name, which his Prince may easily call on all occasions;
so a pretty pleasing name, complying with the Buyers fancy, much befriendeth a
Stuff in the sale thereof.

By these means Norwich has beaten Sudbury out of distance in the race of
Trading. Indeed in the starting, (the South having the better of the North, and
Bury or City, being before Which or Vicus a Village,) Sudbury had the
advantage, but now Norwich is come first to their Mark.

The Buildings.
The Cathedral therein is large and spacious, though the roof in the Cloisters
be most commended. When some twenty years since, I was there, the top of the
Steeple was blown down, and an Officer of the Churce told me, That the wind had
done them much wrong, but they meant not to put it up, whether the wrong or the
steeple, he did not declare.

Amongst private houses, the Duke of Norfolks palace is the greatest I ever saw
in a City out of London. Here a covered Bowling-alley (the first I believe of
that kind in England,) on the same token, that when Thomas, last Duke of
Norfolk, was taxed for aspiring (by marriage of the Q to the Crown of
Scotland,) he protested to Queen Elizabeth, that, when he was in his
Bowling-alley at Camdens Eliz. Anno 1569.
Norwich, he accounted himself as a King in Scotland.

As for the Bishops Palace, it was formerly a very fair structure, but lately
unleaded, and new covered with tyle by the purchasers thereof. Whereon a wag
not unwittily,

Thus Palaces are altered, we saw
John Leyden, now Wat Tyler, next Jack Straw.
Indeed there be many thatched houses in the City, so that Luther (if summoned
by the Emperor to appear in this place) would have altered his expression, and
said instead of Tyles of the house, that if every Straw on the roof of the
houses were a Devil, notwithstanding he would make his appearance. However,
such thatch is so artificially done (even sometimes on their Chancels) that it
is no eyesore at all to the City.

Physicians.
JOHN GOSLIN born in this Parker Sceletos Cantabr. manusc.
City, was first Fellow, and afterward Master of Caius-colledge in Cambridge,
Proctor of the University, and twice Vice Chancellor thereof: a general
Scholar, eloquent Latinist, a rare Physician, in which faculty he was Regius
Professor. A strict man in keeping, and Magistrate in pressing the Statutes of
College and University, and a severe punisher of the infringers thereof. And
here, courteous Reader, let me insert this pleasant passage (seeing Cato
himself may sometimes smile) without offense.

I remember when this Doctor was last Vice Chancellor, it was highly penal for
any Scholar to appear in boots, as having more of the Gallant, then Civil
Student therein. Now a Scholar undertook for a small wager, much beneath the
penalty, to address himself ocreated unto the Vice Chancellor, which was
beheld by others as a desperate adventure. Carrying his state in his Urinal, he
craved his advise for an hereditary numness in his legs, (and something of
truth therein) which made him in his habit to trespass on the Universities
Statutes, to keep them warm. The Vicechancellour pitying instead of pun^shing
him, prefcribed him his best receipts, and so by this fraus honesta, he
effected his desires.

This Doctor was a worthy Benefactour to Katharine-hall (to which he had no
relalion, save what his bounty created,) bestowing thereon the fair Bull-inn,
of considerable value. If he who gives a nights lodging to a servant of God,
shall not lose his reward, certainly he that bestows Inn and all upon the
sons of the Prophets, shall find full compensation. The rather, because that
Hall pent formerly for lack of ground, and complaining with the sons 2 King. 6.
1.
of the Prophets, -- the place where we dwell, is too strait for us; may now
say with Genesis 26. (...)
Isaac, The Lord has made room for us; by this convenient addition. He died in
his Vice Chancellor ship Anno 1625.

JOHN CAIUS born in this City, son to Robert Caius, was bred Fellow in Gonvile
hall in Cambridge. Hence he travailed into Italy, where he studied much and
wrote several learned Treatises. Returned home, became Physician to Queen Mary,
and improved Gunvile-hall into a College. He bestowed good land on, erected
fair buildings in, bequeathed thrifty statutes to, produced a proper Coat of
Arms for, and imposed a new name on this Foundation, Gonvile and Caius
College. He wrote an excellent book of the Antiquity of Cambridge. When King
James passed thorough this College, the Master thereof presented him A Caius
de antiquate Cantabridgiae, fairly bound; to whom the King said, What shall I
do with this book, give me rather Caius de Canibus, a work of the same Author
very highly praised, but very hardly procured. Few men might have had a longer,
none ever had a shorter Epitaph,

FUI CAIUS. Writers since the Reformation.
ROBERT WATSON born in this City, was excellently well skilled in the Laws, and
(says Bale) a Dispensatione sive Administratione domestica, (English it as you
please) to Arcsh-bishop Cranmer. Bale de scrip. Brit. Cent. 9. Number. 81.
Being imprisoned for his Religion, he often disputed during his Restraint with
several Papists, concerning Transubstantiation, and at length having gained his
enlargement, wrote a Treatise in elegant Latin, (dedicating the same to such
who with him suffered banishment for their Religion,) wherein he relates the
accidents of his life. I cannot attain to any certainty in the date of his
death.

Benefactors to the Public.
WILLIAM BAITMAN was born in this (...). Catalogue of the Bishops of Norwich.
City, bred in Cambridge, and afterward became first Archdeacon; and then by
King Edward the third made Bishop of this his Native See. One of an high spirit
to maintain the profit and privileges of his place, and I charitably presume
him watchful over his sheep, (souls subjected to his charge) because he was so
careful of his Deer, for the stealing whereof, he enjoined Idem ibidem.
penance to Robert Lord Morley, and making him perform them, in the Cathedral
of Norwich, notwithstanding the Kings threatening Letters to the contrary.

This Prelate in his travails beyond the Seas, perceiving that our English
Commonlaw was Outlawed in those parts, and apprehending the absolute necessity
that the English should have skill in the Cannon and Civil-laws, (for the
managing of foreign Negotiations) erected a College in Cambridge, called
Trinity-hall, for the Study thereof. As he was Father to Trinity, he was
Foster-father to Gonvil-hall, in the same University, removing it to a more
convenient place, building, and settling the Revenues thereof, according to the
Will of the Founder. King Edward the third, resolving to follow his Title to
the Crown of France, sent this Bishop to the Pope, to acquaint him with his
intentions, in which Embassage he died at Avenion 1354.

Since the Reformation.
THOMAS LEG was born in this Ex Annalibus Coll. Gonv. and Caii.
City, bred first Fellow in Trinity, then Jesus-colledge in Cambridge, until he
was chosen by Doctor Caius (then surviving) the nineteenth In scelet C^nt. he
is accounted but the 17.
Master of Gonvil-hall, and the second of Gonvil and Caius-colledge. He was
Doctor of the Law, and Arches, one of the Masters of the Chancery, twice
Vice Chancellor of the University, and thirty four years Master of his
College therein. There needs no other testimony for to avouch his great
learning, then the Character given him by J. Lipsius, in his (hitherto
unprinted) Epistle,

In Antiquitatis studio, tam egregie, versatus es, ut id de Teipso potes quod
de se Apollo Enni.

A me omnes Cantabrigienses consilium expetunt in literis incerti, quos, ego,
mea open, ex incertis certos, compotesque consilii dimitto.

This Doctor, though himself a serious man, used to recreate himself with
delightful studies, observing gravity in his very pleasures. He composed a
Tragedy of the Destruction of Jerusalem, and having at last refined it to the
purity of the Public Standard some Plageary filched it from him, just as it
was to be acted. He formerly had made a Tragedy of the life of King Richard the
third, presented with great Applause (Queen Elizabeth I suppose being a
beholder thereof) in Saint Johns-colledge-hall. On the same token that John
Palmer (afterward Dean of Peterburough) who acted King Richard therein, had
his head so possessed with a Princelike humor, that ever after, he did what then
he acted, in his Prodigal Expenses, so that (the Cost of a Sovereign ill
befiting the Purse of a Subject,) he died Poor in Prison, notwithstanding his
great preferment.

Great the bounty of Doctor Leg unto his College, bequeathing 600. pounds for
the building the East-part thereof; besides, several lesser liberalities. Yea,
be it remembered, that after Thomas Bacon, fifteenth Master of the College, had
been a Malefactor thereunto, leaving it much indebted, the four succeeding
Masters (ill examples avoided do good) Doctor Caius, Leg, Branthwaite,
Gosling, (all natives of Norwich) were signal Benefactours, though Masters of,
but Stewards for the House; making it, for the main, their Heir, at their
decease. Doctor Leg died July 12. 1607. in the 72. year of his age.

The Farewell.
I heartily wish that this City may long flourish in its full luster. In
tendency whereunto may the Thatch of all their houses by Divine Providence, be
effectually secured from the merciless Element of fire, (as which knows not
to be a King, but must be a Tyrant,) whose furious raging is seldom bounded,
unless by the want of fuel to feed on. Yea, may their Straw in due time
advance into Tyle, that thereby their houses may for the future be better
fenced against an other Element, I mean the injury of Wind and Rain.

NORTHAMPTONSHIRE being a long narrow Inland County, is stretched from
North-east to South-west, and bordereth on more Counties then any other in
England, being nine in number, viz.

On the East. On the West. On the North. On the South. 1. Cambridgeshire 3.
Warwickshire 4. Lincolnshire 7. Bedfordshire 2. Huntingtonshire 5. Rutland 8.
Buckinghamshire 6. Leicestershire 9. Oxfordshire.

It is as fruitful and populous as any in England, insomuch that sixteen
several Towns with their Churches have at one view been discovered therein, by
my eyes, Other men have discovered two and thirty.
which I confess none of the best, and God grant that those who are sharper
sighted, may hereafter never see fewer.

Sure I am there is as little wast ground in this, as in any County in England,
(no Mosses, Mears, Fells, Heaths, (Whitering, but a Beauty spot,) which
elsewhere fill so many Shires with much emptiness,) Northamptonshire being an
Apple, without Core to be cut out, or Rind to be pared away.

Northamptonshire challenges that all the Rivers running through, or by it,
are its Natives, as bred in it, (which argues the elevation, and height of the
ground thereof,) which I believe no other County in England can say. Besides,
it lends two considerable Rivers Avon to Warwick, and Cherwell to Oxfordshire.

The language of the common people is generally the best of any Shire in
England. A proof whereof, when a Boy, I received from a hand-labouring-man
herein, which since has convinced my Judgment: We speak I believe (said he)
as good English any Shire in England, because, though in the singing Psalms,
some words are used to make the Meeter unknown to us; yet the last translation
of the Bible, which no doubt was done by those learned men in the best English,
agrees perfectly with the common speech of our Country.

Know Reader, that Doctor Bowl my worthy friend, and most skilful
Botonographist, has taken notice of a Heath in this County nigh to Stamford,
whereof he gives this Phytologia B^itannica p. 82.
commendation, as fine a place for variety of rare Plants, as ever I beheld.
Who I am sure has seen in this kind, as much, both here, and beyond the Seas,
as any of his age and profession.

Natural Commodities.
Now though this Shire shares as largely as any in those profits which are
general to England, Grass, Corn, Cattle, etc. Yet it is most eminent for

Saltpeter.
In latin Sal Petrae, rather so called, because exudat e petris, it usually
sweats out of rocks, then, because it is wrought up at the last to a rocky or a
stony consistency. Some conceive it utterly unknown to the ancients, which
learned Hoffman will not allow, only it was disguised unto them, under the
name of Sal nitrum, though our modern use was unknown unto them, that Pulvis
nitrosus, or Gunpowder might be made thereof. It is (...) what will easily
take fire, the best Test of the goodness thereof.

But, why is Saltpeter (common to all Counties) insisted on in
Northamptonshire? Because, most thereof is found in Dove-houses, and most
Dove-houses in this great Corn County. Yet are not those Emblemes of innocence,
guilty in any degree of those destructions, which are made by that, which is
made thereof. All that I will add of Saltpeter, is this, I have read in a
learned Dr. Jorden of MineralBaths c. 11.
Writer that Salt-peter-men, when they have extracted Saltpeter out of a floor
of earth one year, within three or four years after, they find more generated
there, and do work it over again.

Pigeons.
These of all fowls, live most sociably in a Commonwealth together, seeing
their government is not, as Bees, Monarchical. They are generally reported
without gall, understand it, their gall is not sequestered into a distinct
vessel, as in other creatures. Otherwise we find the effects thereof in their
animosities among themselves, (whose Bills can peck as well as kiss) as also
(if their Crops be not clearly drawn,) in the bitterness of their flesh. They
are most swift in flight, and the steerage of their Tails conduces much to
their steady mounting upright. An envious man, having caught his neighbors
Pigeons in a Net, feeding on his Stack, plucked off their Tails and let them
go. Which, though they could fly forward home, yet were soon after found dead
in the Dove coat, famished for want of food, as unable to fly up
perpendicularly, and so out at the Lover.

Pigeons, against their wills, keep one Lent for seven weeks in the year,
betwixt the going out of the old, and growing up of the new grain. Probably,
our English would be found as docible and ingenious, as the Turkish Pigeons,
which carry letters from Aleppo to Babylon, if trained up accordingly. But such
practices, by these Wingposts, would spoil many a Foot-post, living honestly by
that painful vocation.

I find a grievous Indictment drawn up against the poor Pigeons for felony, as
the grand plunderers of grain in this Land. My Sam. Hartlib. of Husband. his
Legacy p. 227.
Author computing six and twenty thousand Dove-houses in England and Wales, and
allowing five hundred pair in each House, four bushels yearly for each pair,
has mounted the annual wast they make to an incredible sum. And, if the moity
of his proportions hold true, Doves may be accounted the causers of dearth, and
justly answer their Etimology in Hebrew Jonah, which is deduced from a root,
signifying to spoil or to destroy. The Advocates for Pigeons plead, that they
pick up such loose corn, which otherwise would be lost, and uselesly trodden
into the earth; that probably Divine Providence, which feeds the fowls, by
some natural instinct directs them to such grain, which would be barren and
fruitless, that their dung, incredibly fruitful for the manuring of ground,
abundantly recompenseth the spoil done by them.

However, if Pigeons be guilty of so great stealth, they satisfy the law for
the same, being generally killed for man's meat, and a corrected-pigeon (let
blood under both wings) is both pleasant and wholesome nourishment.

The Manufactures.
This County can boast of none worth naming, whereof this the reason,
sufficient the fruitfulness thereof in Corn, Grass, (and what not necessary for
nature?) for it is plentiful subsistence. The Elder Brother who has the
inheritance of his own to maintain him, need not to be bound an Apprentice, let
the younger turn Tradesman, and enlarge his narrow portion by his inaustry. It
is enough for Northamptonshire to sell their Wool, whilst that other Countries
make cloth thereof. I speak not this (though it be my Native ^ountry) to
praise Northamptonshire men for not using, but that Northamptonshire men may
praise God for not needing Manufactures. However the Town of Northampton may be
said to stand chiefly on other men's Legs, where (if not the best) the most and
cheapest boots and stockens are bought in England.

I am credibly informed by a good friend, that the Manufacture of Clothing
has by prudent and able persons, been endeavored effectually (understand me
in design not success) in this County, and yet (though fine their Wool) their
Cloth ran so coarse, it could not be sold without loss; Thus God has innated
every Country with a Peculiar Genius, and when Art crosses Nature, neither
succeed, but both exceed, where both concur.

Buildings.
As Saint Peter has the Primacy of all the other Apostles, so the Cathedral
dedicated unto him in this County, challenges the Precedence of all in
England, for a Majestic Western Front of Columel-work. But alas! This has
lately felt the misfortune of other Fabrics in this kind. Yea, as in a
Gangrean, one member is cut off to preserve the rest, so I understand the
Cloisters of this Cathedral were lately plucked down to repair the Body
thereof; and am heartily glad God in his mercy has restored the only remedy
(I mean its lands) for the Cure thereof.

As for Civil Structures, Holdenby-house lately carried away the credit, built
by Sir Christopher Hatton, and accounted by him the last Monument of his Youth.
If Florence be said to be a City, so fine that it ought not to be shown, but on
Holy Days; Holdenby was a House, which should not have been shown, but on
Christmas Day. But alas! Holedenby-house is taken away, being the Emblem of
human happiness, both in the beauty and brittleness, short flourishing, and
soon fading thereof. Thus one demolishing Hammer, can undo more in a day, then
ten edifying Axes can advance in a Month.

Next is Burleigh-house nigh Stamford, built by William Lord Cecil. Who so
seriously compares the [late] state of Holdenby and Burleigh, will dispute
with himself, whither the Offices of the Lord Chancellor or Treasurer of
England be of greater Revenues, seeing Holedenby may be said to show the Seal,
and Burleigh the Purse, in their respective magnificence, proportionable to the
power and plenty of the two great* Officers that built them.

Withorpe must not be forgot, (the least of Noble Houses, and best of Lodges,)
seeming but a dim reflection of Burleigh, whence it is but a Mile distant. It
was built by Thomas Cecil Earl of Exeter, to retire to (as he pleasantly said)
out of the dust, whilst his great House of Burleigh was a sweeping.

Castle Ashby the Noble Mansion of the Earl of Northampton succeeds, most
beautiful before, a casual fire deformed part thereof. But seeing fire is so
furious a plunderer, that it gives whatsoever it takes not away, the
condition of this house is not so much to be condoled, as congratulated.
Besides these, there be many others, no County in England, yiedling more Noble
men; no Noble men in England, having fairer habitations. And although the
Freestone whereof they be built, keeps not so long the white innocence, as
Brick does the blushing modesty thereof; yet when the fresh luster is abated,
the full state thereof does still remain.

The Wonders.
There is within the Demeasnes of Boughton, (the Barony of the Right Honorable
Edward Lord Mountague,) a Spring which is conceived to turn wood into stone.
The truth is this, the coldness of the water incrustateth wood (or what else
falls into it) on every side with a stony matter, yet so that it does not
transubstantiate wood into stone. For the wood remains entire within, until
at last wholly consumed, which gives occasion to the former erroneous relation.
The like is reported of a Well in Candia with the same mistake, that Quicquid
incidit lapidescit. But I have seen in Sidney-colledge in Cambridge, a Skull
brought thence, which was candied over with stone within and without, yet so as
the bone remained entire in the middle, as by a casual breach thereof did
appear. This Skull was sent for by King Charles, (and whilst I lived in the
house) by him safely again returned to the College, being a Prince as desirous
in such cases to preserve others propriety, as to satisfy his own curiosity.

Medicinal Waters.
Wellingborough-well.
Some may conceive it called Wellingborough, from a sovereign Well therein
anciently known, afterward obstructed with obscurity, and re-discovered in our
days. But Master Camden does mar their mart, avouching the ancient name
thereof Wedlingburough. However thirty years since a water herein grew very
famous, insomuch that Queen Mary lay many weeks thereat. What benefit her
Majesty received by the Spring here, I know not, this I know, that the Spring
received benefit from her Majesty, and the Town got credit and profit thereby.
But it seems all waters of this kind have (though far from the Sea) their
ebbing and flowing, I mean in esteem. It was then full tide with
Wellingburough-well, which ever since has abated, and now I believe is at low
water in its reputation.

Proverbs.
The Mayor of Northampton opens Oysters with his Dagger.]

This Town being 80 miles from the Sea, Sea fish may be presumed stale therein.
Yet have I heard that Oysters (put up with care, and carried in the cool,) were
weekly brought fresh and good to Althrope, the house of the Lord Spencer at
equal distance. Sweeter no doubt then those Oysters commonly carried over the
Alps, well nigh 300. miles from Venice to Viena, and there ^eputed (far
fetched and deer bought) daintes to great persons, though sometimes very
valiant their savor. Nor is this a wonder, seeing Plinny tell us, that our
English Oysters did Romany culinis servire, Serve the Kitchings of Rome;
Pickled as some suppose, though others believe them preserved by an ingenious
contrivance, ( Epicures bear their brains in there bowels,) and some conceive
them carried in their shells. But seeing one of their own Emperors gave for
his Motto; Bonus odor h^stis, melior Civis occisi; Good is the smell of an
Enemy, but better the smell of a Citizen of Rome, killed. I say unto such a
RomanNose, stinking may be better then sweet Oysters, and to their Palates
we'll leave them.

He that must eat a buttered Faggot, let him go to Northampton.]

Because it is the dearest Town in England for fuel, where no Coals can come by
Water, and little Wood does grow on Land. Camden says of this County in
general, that it is, Silvis, nisi in ulteriori and citeriori part, minus
laetus. And if so when he wrote, fifty years since, surely it is less woody in
our age.

What reformation of late has been made in men's judgments and manners, I know
not, sure I am, that deformation has been great in trees and timber: who
verily believe, that the clearing of many dark places, where formerly plenty of
wood, is all the new light this age produced.

Pity it is no better provision is made for the preservation of woods, whose
want will be soonest for our fire, but will be saddest for our water, when our
naval walls shall be decayed. Say not, that want of wood will put posterity, on
witty inventions for that supply, seeing he is neither pious nor prudent
parent, who spends his patrimony, on design that the industry and ingenuity of
his son may be quick'ned thereby.

Princes.
ELIZABETH daughter of Sir Richard Woodevill, by the Lady Jaquet his wife,
(formerly the relict of John Duke of Bedford,) was born at Grafton Honor in
this County, in proof whereof many strong The (...) had formerly for four
generations lived at Grafton, as appears by the L^gerbook of Pipwell-Abbey.
presumptions may be produced. Sure I am, if this Grafton saw her not first a
child, it beheld her first a Queen, when married to King Edward the fourth.

This Elizabeth was widow to Sir John Gray, who lost his life for the house of
Lancaster; and Petitioned King Edward to take off the sequestration from her
Joynter.

Beauty is a good solicitress of an equal suit, especially where youth is to be
the judge thereof. The King fell much inamored with her feature, whilst the
Lady put her self into a chaste posture, and kept a discreet distance, neither
forward to accept, nor froward to decline his favonr.

She confessed her self too worthless to be his wife, yet pleaded too worthy to
be his wanton, till at last the King was content to take her upon her own
terms, though a widow and his Subject.

She got more greatness then joy, height then happiness by her marriage; her
husband keeping company with others for his pleasure, her for posterity: Nor
was it long before the tempest of his lust drove him to another Shore, which
had a greater share in his affections.

This Lady lived to see the death of her husdand, murder of her two sons,
restraint of her self, and rest of her children. And though her condition was
altered and bettered, by the marriage of her eldest daughter to King Henry the
seventh, yet that cunning King, (who always weighed his love in the balance of
policy) was not over dutiful to her, nor over-loving to her daughter. She dyed
Anno Domini 14...

But her memory is most remarkable to posterity for finishing Queens-colledge
in Cambridge, (wherein I had my first breding, and for it, and all therein,
shall ever have an unfeigned affection) begun by Queen Margaret, (wife to King
Henry the sixth) an implacable enemy to her husband, so that the two houses of
Lancaster and York had their first amity in that Foundation, a comfortable
presage that in process of time they should be publicly and effectually united.

RICHARD PLANTAGENET son to Richart Plantagenet Duke of York, was born at
Fothinghay castle in this County. He was somewhat rumpled in his Mothers womb,
(which caused his crooked back) otherwise handsome enough for a Soldier. Ajax
and Ulysses, Valor and Eloquence, met in his person, having as well a tongue
to flatter, as an arm to fight.

He compassed the Crown by cruelty, and the killing of his Nephews, the two
Sons of King Edward the fourth. When King, he made good Laws, which never
procured him the peoples love, as who beheld vice for his native color, and
virtue for his painted complexion, on design to make himself popular.

He lost the Crown and his life in the battle of Bosworth, where it may be
verified of him, what Livy says of Hannibal, when beaten by Scipio, that in
that fight he performed all the offices of a wise General, and valiant
Soldier, only fortune did not befriend him.

If any except that King Richard in this battle was too prodigal of his own
person, engaging it too far for a General; his condition did excuse him herein,
with whom it was all one, to dye, as too survive Success. His memory has since
met with a Modern George Buck. Esquire.
Pen, who has not only purged, but praised it to the height, and pity it is,
that so able an Advocate, had not a more meriting person to his Client. He was
slain Anno Domini 1435.

KATHARINE PAR daughter to Sir Thomas Par, and last wife to King Henry the
eighth, may probably be presumed a Native of this Shire. However to prevent
cavils, we resign her over to Westmerland, where (God willing) we shall meet
with her character.

Saints.
WERBURGH was daughter to Wolpher Prince of Mercia, who had his chief Camd^ns
Brit. in this County.
Palace of Residence at Wedon in the Street in this County, which place her
father bestowed on her for her Portion. She was bred a Nun, under Saint Audery
her Aunt, and Abbess at Ely, until such time that she was able, of herself, to
go alone without leading, in a Monastical life. Returning to Wedon, she turned
that place which had been her fathers Palase, into a Monastery.

Besides Wedon, she had the inspection of two other Monasteries, Trekingham in
Lincolnshire, and Hamburge, noted by my The English Martyrology. In the third
day of Feb.
Author, near Ely in Cambridgeshire, though no such place appear in any modern
Maps or Catalogue. She parted herself, whilst living, successively betwixt
these three places. But on her deathbed, commanded her body to be buried at
Hamburge, when contrary to her Will, it was carried to the Monastery of
Trekingham, and the gates thereof fast locked, and carefully watched, to keep
so great a Treasure.

Reader, if the day be as long with thee, when thou read, as it was with me,
when I wrote the ensuing story, time may the better be afforded, for the
perusal thereof. My Idem ibidem.
Author proceeds.

Eut see a wonder. [It were well if we could see, whereas now, by his leave, we
do but hear it,] They, which were appointed to watch the same, fell into a deep
sleep, so as the people of Hamburge coming in the night for the Body, the
gates, both of the Monastery and Church, were opened themselves without men's
hands, and taking it away without any resistance, they interred it at Hamburge,
as before her death she requested.

Wonder not they were so ambitious for her body, for as Werburgh was her name,
which by a R. Verstegan p. 212.
great Antiquary is interpreted, the Keeper or Conserver of a Burgh or Town, so
all presumed she would prove a Tutelary Patroness to the place which possessed
her body, seeing Cujus miracula in sugandis hinc anseribus, scriptores creduli
decantarunt.
some have reported, that she has miraculously driven away all Geese from
Wedon, that they shall destroy no grain th^reabout. If this be true, then as a
certain Jupiter amongst the Heathens, was called Camd. Brit. in Northampt.
Jupiter (...) Jupiter the flie-flapper, who drove away those offensive
Insects, let this Saint hereafter be termed Werburga (...), the chaser away of
noisome Geese, which spoil grain, grass, and water, where they come. She died
Anno Domini 675. her body was afterward taken * Apud Pausioniam in Eliacis.
up, and translated to Chester, where Hugh Lupus, somewhat after the Conquest,
built the fair Monastery of Saint Werburghs to her memory, converted into a
Cathedral by King Henry the eight.

Martyrs.
This County affords no Marian Martyrs, thanks be to a good and Gracious God,
a meek and moderate man, David Pool Bishop of Peterburough, whom I here mention
the more willingly, not knowing where to fix his Nativity. However

Unus Homo nobis.

One Martyr we had, not chargable on the Bishop, but his bloody Archdeacons
account, John Gurd of Syrsam a Shoo-maker burnt in Fox Acts and Monn. Anno 1557.
Northampton.

As for Augustine Dudley Parson of Castor, though some of his familly credibly
informed me, that he was Martyred, yet on enquiry, his fufferings amounted not
to loss of life, and therefore the less wonder, that they escaped the drag-net
of Master Fox's diligence.

Cardinals.
HENRY CHICHLEY was born at Higham Ferrers in this County, and by the Author of
Antiquitates Britanicae, is avouched made Cardinal by the title of Saint
Eusebius. But, because this appears not in his Epitaph on his Tomb, (wherein
an exact inventory of all his dignities) the truth thereof is justly suspected,
and I reserve his character to be ranked amongst the Benefactors to the
Public.

Prelates.
RICARD of NORTHAMPTON. ADAM of NORTHAMPTON.
We compound them for several reasons. First, because natives of the same Town.
Secondly, both going over into Ireland, there became Bishops of the same See.
Thirdly, because the history of them is, single, so slender it cannot subsist
alone, though twisted together; it is posible that their memories may support
one the other. For we have nothing more of them, then the dates of their
Consecrations and Deaths. The former Consecrated Sir James Ware de Praesulibus
Lagentiae page 58.
Bishop of Fernose October the 13. 1282. dyed Anno 1304. The later Consecrated
1322. died Idem p. 59.
October the 29. 1346. having first seen his Cathedral Church burnt and
destroyed by the Rebels.

WILLIAM le ZOUCH son to -- Lord Zouch, was born at Haringworth in this County,
as a Dr. Richard Zouch Professor of Law in Oxsord.
branch of thar Honorable Family still alive, and Critical in their Pedigrees,
has credably informed me. From Dean he became Archbishop of York 1342.

King Edward the third, going over to France, committed the North to the care
of this Prelate. Soon after David King of Scots, with a great Army invaded it;
he promised himself Cesars success, to Come and Conquer, See and Subdue. The
rather, because he believed, that he flower of the English Chivalry being gone
into France, only Priests and Peasants were left behind. Our Archbishop with
such forces as he could suddenly provide, bid him Battle at Durham, on Saint
Lukes Eve, whereon the Scotch King found such a fast, he had little list to
feast the day following, being routed and taken Prisoner. Hence a Poet of that
age,

Est pater invictus, sicco de stipite dictus.

Zouch in French signifying the dry stump of a stick. However his honorable
Family flourished as a Green Tree for many years, till withered in our memory,
when Edward the last Lord Zouch, dyed without Issue male, in the beginning of
King Charles.

To return to our Prelate, he began a beautiful Chapel on the South Side of
his Cathedral, intending to be interred therein. But dying before the finishing
thereof, was buried before the Altar of Saint Edmund 1352.

ROBERT BRAYBROOKE was born at a Village in this County, well known for the
carkase of a Castle therein. He was Consecrated Bishop of London, January 5.
1381. and afterward for six Months, was Chancellor of England. He dyed 1404.
being buried under a Marble-stone in the Chapel of Saint Mary. Which is all we
can recover of this Prelate, and, if it be enough to satisfy the Readers
hunger, he need not leave any thing for manners in the dish.

LIONELL WYDEVILL, or WOODVILL was born at Grafton (since called Grafton honor)
in this County, bred in the University of Oxford, whereof, for a time he was
Chancellor, then made Bishop of Sarisbury 1482. As he was at first preferred,
so his memory is still supported from sinking in Silence, rather by the
Buttresses of his great relations, then the foundation of his own deserts. For
he was Son to Jaquet Duchess of Bedford, and Richard Wydevill E. of Rivers,
Brother to Elizabeth Q. of England, Brother in-law to King Edward the fourth,
Uncle to King Edward the fi^t, and Father (say some) to Stephen Gardener Bishop
of Winchester. Heart-broken with grief, with the Tragedies he beheld in his own
family, caused by the cruelty of King Richard the third, he died about the year
of our Lord 1484.

Since the Reformation.
JAMES MONTA^UE son to Sir Edward Montague Knight, was born at Boughton in this
County, bred in Christs-colledge in Cambridge. He was afterward Master, or
rather Nursing father to Sidney-colledge. For he found it in Bonds to pay 20.
Marks per annum to Trinity-colledge, for the ground whereon it is built, and
left it free, assigning it a rent for the discharge thereof. When the Kings
Ditch in Cambridge made to defend it by its Strength, did in his time offend it
with its Stenche, he expended a hundred marks to bring running water into it,
to the great convenience of the University. He was afterward Bishop first of
Bath and Wells, then of Winchester, being highly in favor with King James,
who did ken a man of merit, as well as any Prince in Christendom. He
translated the works of King James into Latin, and improved his greatness to
do good offices therewith. He died Anno Domini 1618. and lies buried within
his fair Monument, within his fairer Monument, I mean a goodly Tomb, in the
Church of Bath, which owes its well being and beauty to his Munificence.

FRANCIS GODWIN son to Thomas Godwin Bishop of Bath and Wells, was born at
Witness himself in his Cat. of Landas.
Hanningham in this County, bred in Christs-church in Oxford Doctor of
Divinity, and Sub-Dean of Exeter. He was born in the fourth year of the reign
of Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1561. and in the fortieth year of his age 1601. by her
Majesty made Bishop of Landaffe. A bishopric better proportioned to his
modesty then merits, as which was much impaired by his predecessor, so that one
did t^uly say, A Anthony Kitchen who mard this See with selling and letting
long leases.
bad Kitching did for ever spoil the good Meat of the Bishops of Landaffe. He
was a good Man, grave Divine, skilful Mathematician, pure Latinist, and
incomparable Historian. The Church of Landaffe was much beholding to him; yea,
the whole Church of England; yea, the whole Church Militant; yea, many now in
the Church Triumphant had had their memories utterly lost on Earth, if not
preserved by his painful endeavors in his Catalogue of English Bishops. I am
sorry to see that some have since made so bad use of his good labors, who have
lighted their Candles from his Torch, thereby merely to discover the faults of
our Bishops, that their Personal failings may be an argument against the
Prelatical function. He was translated by King James to the Bishopric of
Hereford, and died very aged in the reign of King Charles Anno Domini 162.

JOHN OWEN was born at Burton- Latimers in this County, his father being the
worthy and grave Minister thereof. He was bred a Fellow in Jesus-colledge in
Cambridge, where he commenced Doctor of Divinity, and was Chaplain to King
Charles, whilst he was a Prince. A modest man who would not own the worth he
had in himself, and therefore others are the more engaged to give him his due
esteem.

In the vacancy of the Bishop wrick of Saint Asaff, King Charles, being much
troubled with two Competitours, advanced Doctor Owen (not thinking thereof) as
an expedient to end the Contest. Indeed his Majesty was mistaken in his birth,
accounting him a Welch-man, but not in his worth, seeing he deserved a far
better preferment. Besides he was, though not Ortus, oriundus e Wallia, and by
his father (being a Welchman) he was related to all the best families in
North Wales. He outlived his Vote in Parliament, and survived to see all
contempt cast on his Order, which he bare with much moderation, and dyed Anno
Dom. 164..

ROBERT SKINNER D. D. was born at Pisford in this County, where his father was
Minister, bred Fellow of Trinity-colledge in Oxford, afterward an eminent
Preacher in London, and Dean of............ Hence he was preferred Bishop of
Bristol, and afterward of Oxford, and is still, and long may he be, living.

Statesmen.
Sir CHRISTOPHER HATTON was born (I collect at Holdenby) in this County, of a
family rather ancient then wealthy, yet of no mean estate. He rather took a
bate, then made a meal at the Inns of Court, whilst he studied the Laws
therein. He came afterward to the Court in a mask, where the Queen first took
notice of him, loving him well for his handsome dancing, better for his proper
person, and best of all for his great abilities. His parts were far above his
learning, which mutually so assisted each other, that no manifest want did
appear, and the Queen at last preferred him Lord Chancellor of England.

The Gown-men grudging hereat, conceived his advancement their injury, that one
not thoroughly bred in the Laws, should be preferred to the place; How could he
cure diseases unacquainted with their causes, who might easily mistake the
Justice of the Common Law for Rigor, not knowing the true reason thereof.
Hereupon it was, that some sullen Sergeants at the first refused to plead
before him, until, partly by his power, but more by his prudence, he had
convinced them of their errors, and his abilities. Indeed he had one Sir
Richard Swale Doctor of the Civil-laws (and that Law some say is very
sufficient to dictate equity) his servant-friend, whose advice he followed in
all matters of moment.

A scandal is raised, that he was popishly affected, and I cannot blame the
Romanists, if desirous to countenan^e their cause with so considerable a
person. Yet most ^ue it is that his zeal for the discipline of the Church of
England gave the first being and life to this report.

Fragmenta Regalia in his Character.
One says, that he was a mere Vegetable of the Court that sprung up at night,
and sunk again at his noon, though indeed he was of longer continuance. Yet it
brake his heart, that the Queen (which seldom gave boons, and never forgave
due debts,) rigorously demanded the present payment of some arrears, which Sir
Christopher did not hope to have remitted, but did only desire to be forborne;
failing herein in his expectation, it went to his heart, and cast him into a
mortal disease. The Queen afterward did endeavor what she could to recover
him, bringing as some say cordial broaths unto him with her own hands, but all
would not do. Thus no Pullies can draw up a heart once cast down, though a
Queen her self should set her hand thereunto. He dyed Anno Domini 1591. and is
buried under a stately monument in the Q^ire of Saint Paul's.

Sir WILLIAM FITZ-WILLIAMS born at Milton in this County, married the sister of
Sir Henry Sidney Lord Deputy of Ireland. Yea, he himself was Guil. FitzWilliams
jam quintum Hiberni^ Prorex. Camd. Eliz. An. 1587.
five times Lord Deputy of that Kingdom, a sufficient evidence of his honesty
and ability, seeing Queen Elizabeth never trusted twice, where she was once
deceived in a Minister of State. She so preserved him in the power of his
place, that sending over Walter Earl of Essex (a person higher in honor) to be
Governor of Ulster, it was ordered, that the Earl should take his Commission
from the Lord Idem Anno 1573.
Deputy.

An intelligent Sir Joh^ Davis in his discove^es of Ireland, page 257.
pen allows him serviceable, toward the reduction of that Kingdom, in two
eminent particulars. First, in raising a composition in Mounster, then in
settling the possessions of the Lords and Tenants in Monahan, one of the last
acts of State (tending to the reformation of the civil government) performed in
the reign of Queen Elizabeth. His vigilance was most conspicuous in the
Eighty-eight, when the routed Armado in its return, did look, dared not to land
in Ireland, except against their wills driven by tempest, when they found the
shore worse then the sea unto them. I confess, some Camden Anno 1588.
impute the Irish Rebellion, which afterward brake out to this Deputies
severity, in imprisoning suspected persons for concealing Spanish goods, though
this only gave the Irish a mantle for their intended wickedness. He died Anno
Domini 15...

Sir ISAAC WAKE was born in this County, whose father Arthur Wake So am I
informed from Mr. George Wake late Fellow of Magdalen-colledge in Oxford, and
his near kinsman.
Clerk was Parson of Billing, Master of the Hospital of Saint John's in
Northampton, and Canon of Christs-church, and son to John Wake of
Sancy-forrest Esquire, of a most ancient and honorable family. He was bred
Fellow of Merton-colledge in Oxford, Proctour and Orator of that University,
he was afterward Secretary to Sir Dudley Carleton Secretary of State, and from
his, was advanced into the Kings Service, and employed Ambassador to Venice,
where he neglected his own commodity, to attend his Majesty's employment, the
reason that he died rich only to his own Conscience. Coming from Venice he was
appointed Leiger for France, and designed Secretary of State, had not death
prevented him at Paris. He was accomplished with all qualifications requisite
for public Employment, Learning, Languages, Experience, Abilities; and what
not?

King Charles hearing of his death, commanded his Corpse to be decently brought
from Paris into England, allowing the expenses for his Funeral, and enjoining
his nearest relations to attend the performance thereof. These accordingly met
his body at Bulloin in France, and saw it solemnly conveyed into England, where
it was interred in the Chapel of the Castle of Dover, Anno Dom. 16...

Capital Judges and Writers on the Law.
MARTIN de PATESHULL. Let him remain here, till any shall show AMP.
me a Town called Pateshulle, in any other County of England; which village in
this Shire, gave the name, and afforded the habitation to that ancient Camd.
Brit. in Northamptonshire.
family. Though a Clergyman, he was in the Sir Hen. Soelmans Gloss. verbo
Justitiarius.
first of King Henry the third, made Justice of the Lower-^ench or
Common Pleas, wherein he continued for twelve years and upwards, as appears
by the date of his death, out of an excellent Florilegus in An. 1226. being the
14. of Hen. 3.
Author,

Eodem anno obiit Martinus de Pateshulle, Decanus St. Pauli London. 18. Call.
December. vir mirae prudentiae, and Legum Regni peritissimus.

He was the fourth Dean of Saint Paul's, as reckoned up in Bishop Godwin his
Catalogue. In that age we see, Clergy men were not only trusted with the
spirit, (I mean the equity) but also with the letter of the Law, being Judges
in those Courts, wherein were the most strictest proceedings.

Sir THOMAS de BILLING was born in this County, (where two Villages, his
namesakes, near Northampton,) and had his habitation in great state at Ashwell
in this Shire. He was made Chief Justice of the King's Bench in the Sir Hen.
Spelman ut prius.
sixth, and so continued till the one and twentieth of Edward the fourth, whose
lands (and those very large) have since by the Camd. B^it. in Northamptonshire.
Lovels descended to the Shirlies. Nothing else have I to observe of him, save,
that he married for his second wife Stows Surv. of London page 519.
Mary the daughter and heir of Robert Nesenham of Conington in Huntingtonshire,
the Relict of William Cotton, (whose issue possess her inheritance at this
day,) and she lies entombed in Westminster.

Sir WILLIAM CATESBYE was born in this County, where his family long flourished
at Asby Saint Ledger. He was first advanced by William Lord Hastinges, by whose
countenance he came to the notice, then favor of Richard the third, though ill
requiting it, when betraying him, who caused his preferment. Take his character
( transcribing in this kind, is safer then inditing) from an Sir T. More
Printing the continuation of J. (...) Chron fol. 56.
Author above exception.

This Catesbye was a man well learned in the Laws of this Land, and surely
great pity it was that he had not had more truth, or less wit.

If any object, that being neither Lord Chief Justice, Chief-Baron, nor any
Writer on the Law. He falls not under my Pen, by the Charter of Method
prefixed to this Catalogue, know that though formerly none, he was eminently
all Officers, in every Court of Judicature, all the Judges shaking at his
displeasure. Witness the Libel which Collingborn made, and which cost him his
life for the same.

The Ratli^fe.
Rat, and the Catesby.
Cat, and Lovel the Dog,
Do govern all England under the K. Rich. the third who gave a Boar for his
Crest.
Hog.
The time of his death is uncertain, but, because we find him not molested in
the reign of King Henry the seventh, (which had he survived, surely had
happened) it is probable he died before his Patron and Preferrer, King Richard
the third.

Sir RICHARD EMPSON. It is pity to part them, seeing Empson may be called the
Catesbye to King Henry the seventh, as Catesbye the Empson to King Richard the
third; both Countrymen, eminent for having, odious for abusing their skill in
Law; active for the Prince, injurious to the people. This Sir Richard was
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, and from a Sieve-makers son, (at
Towceter in this County where he was born) came to sift the estates of the most
wealthy men in England.

For King Henry the seventh, vexed that he had refused Columbus his profer,
(whereby the West Indies being found out fortunately, fell to Ferdinand King
of Spain,) resolved to discover Indies in England, and to this purpose made
Empson Promotor General, to press the Penal-Statutes all over the land.

Empowered hereby, this prolling Knight did grind the faces of rich and poor,
bringing the grist thereof to the King, and keeping the toll thereof to
himself, whereby he advanced a vast estate, which now, with his name, is
reduced to nothing. He united the two houses of York and Lancaster in the Kings
Coffers, taking no notice of parties or persons, for their former good service,
but making all equally obnoxious to fines and forfeitures. But in the beginning
of the reign of King Henry the eight, he was arraigned, condemed and beheaded,
August the 17. 1510. Say not that Princes, if sacrificing their Ministers to
popular fury, will want persons faithfully to serve them, seeing such exemplary
justice will rather fright Officers from false disserving them; for in fine, no
real profit can redoun to the Sovereign, which resulteth from the ruin of his
Subjects.

I must not forget how there was an old man in Warwickshire, accounted very
judicious in Judicial Astrology, of whom Sir Richard Empson (then in his prime)
did scoffingly demand, When the Sun would Change, to whom the old man replied,
Even when such a wicked Camdens remains.
Lawyer as you go to Heaven. But we leave him to stand and fall to his own
Master, and proceed.

EDWARD MONTAGUE son of Thomas Montague, born at Brigstocke in this County, was
bred in the Inner Temple, in the study of the Laws, until his ability and
integrity, advanced him Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench, in the thirtieth
of Henry the eight. He gave for his Motto, Equitas Justiae Norma. And although
equity seems rather to resent of the Chancery, then the King's Bench, yet the
best justice will be wormwood without a mixture thereof. In his Times, though
the golden showers of Abby-lands rained amongst great men, it was long before
he would open his lap (scrupling the acception of such gifts) and at last
received but little in proportion to others of that age.

In the thirty seventh of King Henry the eight, he was made Chief Justice of
the Common Pleas, a descent in honor, but ascent in profit, it being given to
old age, rather to be thrifty then ambitious.

In drawing up the Will of King Edward the sixth, and settling the Crown on the
Lady Jane, for a time, he swam against the tide and torrent of Duke Dudley,
till at last, he was carried away with the stream, as in our Church History, is
largely related.

Outed of his Judges Office in the first of Queen Mary, he returned into
Northamptonshire, and what contentment he could not find in Westminster Hall,
his Hospital-hall at Boughton afforded unto him. He died Anno 1556. and lies
buried in the ParishChurch of VVeekely.

Sir AUGUSTINE NICOLLS Son to Thomas Nicolls, Sergeant at Law, was born at
Eckton in this County. Now, though according to the rigor of our Fundamental
Premises, he comes not within our Cognizance under this Title, yet his merit
will justify us in presenting his Character.

He was bred in the study of the Common Law, wherein he attained to such
knowledge, that Queen Elizabeth made him a, King James his own, Sergeant;
whence he was freely preferred one of the Judges of the Common Pleas. I say
freely, King James commonly calling him the Judge that would give no money. Not
to speak of his moral qualifications, and subordinate abilities; He was
renowned for his special Judiciary Endowments; Patience to hear both parties
all they could say, a happy memory, a singular sagacity to search into the
material circumstances, exemplary integrity, even to the rejection of
gratuities after judgment given.

His forbearing to travail on the Lords* day, wrought a reformation on some of
his own Order. He loved plain and profitable Preaching, being wont to say, I
know not what you call Puritanical Sermons, but they come nearest to my
Conscience.

The speech of Caesar is commonly known, Oportet Imperatorem stantem mori,
which Bishop Jewel altered and applied to himself, Decet Episcopum
concionante^ mori; of this man it may be said, Judex mortuus est jura dans,
dying in his calling, as he went the Northern Circuit, and has a fair Monument
in Kendall-church in Westmerland.

Sir ROBERT DALLINGTON Knight, was born at Geddington in this County, bred a
Bible-clerk (as I justly collect) in Bennet-colledge, and after became a
Schoolmaster in Northfolk. Here having gained some money, he travailed over
all France and Italy, being exact in his observations, and was after his return
Secretary to Francis Earl of Rutland. He had an excellent wit and judgment,
witness his most acurate Aporismes on Tacitus. At last he was Knighted and
preferred Master of the Charter House, where the Dr. Gray.
Schoolmaster at his first entering, wellcomed him with a Speech in Latin
verse, spoken by a Schoolboy, but sure he was more then a Boy who indicted it.
It is hard to say, whether Sir Robert was more pleased or displeased with the
last Distick therein,

Partem oneris vestri minima^ ne despice, curam
Nec Pueros itcrum tedeat esse tuam.
Do not the least part of your trust disdain,
Nor grudge of Boys to take the care again.
He lived to be a very aged man past seventy six, and died Anno Domini 162.*

JOHN FLETCHER Son of Richard Fletcher D. D. was (as by proportion of time is
collectible) born in this County, before his Father was Bishop of Bristol or
London, and whilst as yet he was Dean of Peterborough. He had an excellent wit,
which the back-friends to Stage Plays will say, was neither idle, nor well
employed. For he and Francis Beaumont Esquire, like Castor and Pollux, (most
happy when in conjunction) raised the English, to equal the Athenian and Roman
Theater; Beaumont bringing the ballast of judgment, Fletcher the sail of
fantasy, both compounding a Poet to admiration.

Meeting once in a Tavern, to contrive the rude draught of a Tragedy, Fletcher
undertook to kill the King therein, whose words being overheard by a listener
(though his Loyalty not to be blamed herein) he was accused of High Treason,
till the mistake soon appearing, that the plot was only against a Drammatick
and Scenical King, all wound off in merriment.

Nor could it be laid to Fletcher's charge, what Ovid Metam. lib. 13.
Ajax does to Ulysses.

Nihil hic Diomede remoto.
When Diomede was gone,
He could do naught alone.
For surviving his partner, he wrote good Comedies himself, though inferior to
the former; and no wonder, if a single thread was not so strong as a twisted
one. He died (as I am informed) in London of the plague in the first of King
Charles, 1625.

Sir HENRY MONTAGUE Knight, third son to Sir Edward Montague Knight,
grandchild to Sir Edward Montague Knight, Lord Chief Justice of the
King's Bench, was born at Boughton in this County. One skilful in mysterious
arts, beholding him when a Schoolboy, foretold that by the pregnancy of his
parts, he would raise himself above the rest of his family, which came to pass
accordingly. He was bred first in Christs-colledge in Cambridge, then in the
Middle Temple, where he attained to great learning in the Laws, and passed
through many preferments, viz.

1. Sergeant at Law. 2. Knighted by King James, July 22. 1602. 3. Recorder of
London. 4. Lord Chief Justice of the KingsBench, November 18. 1616. 5. Lord
Treasurer of England, December. 16. 1620. 6. Baron of Kimbolton. 7. Viscount
Mandevile. 8. President of the Council, Septem. 29. 1621. 9. Earl of
Manchester. 10. Lord Privy Seal.
He wisely perceiving, that Courtiers were but as counters in the hands of
Princes, raised and depressed in valuation at pleasure, was contented rather to
be set for a smaller sum, then to be quite put up into the box. Thus in point
of place and preferment, being pleased to be what the King would have him,
(according to his Motto, Movendo non mutando me,) he became almost what he
would be himself, finaly advanced to an Office of great honor. When Lord
Privy Seal, he brought the Court of Requests into such repute, that what
formerly was called the Almes-basket of the Chancery, had in his time well nigh
as much meat in, and guests about it, (I mean Suits and Clients) as the
Chancery it self. His meditations on Life and Death, written in the time of his
health, may be presumed to have left good impressions on his own soul,
preparatory for his dissolution, which happened 164..

Writers.
JOHN of NORTHAMPTON, in Latin Johannes Avonius, was born in the Town of
Northampton, in ipso Insulae umbilico, (says Cen. 5. Number. 75.
Bale) and is not mistaken in his proportion. This minds me of a village in
this County, sufficiently known, commonly called Navesby, whose Orthography
Critics will have Navelsby, as in the middle of England. This John became a
Carmelite in his native Town, and so addicted himself to the Study of
Mathematics, that he became one of the most eminent in that age, for practical
experiments. He was Author of a work which he called The Philosophers Ring.
This was not like The Philosophers Stone, a thing merely imaginary, nor yet was
it a work of the Cyclopedy of Arts, (as the sound may seem to import,) but it
was in plain truth a perpetual Almanac. I say Almanac, which word though many
make of Arabic extraction, a great Vestegan of decayed intelligence, p. 58.
Antiquary will have it derived from the Dutch, Al-mon-aght, that is to say,
Al-mon-heed, the regard or observation of all Moons. However this work of John
was beheld as a Masterpiece of that age, and since commented upon by other
Writers. He flourished Anno Domini 1340.

ROBERT HOLCOT was born in a Camden. Brit. in No^thamptonshire.
Village of this County so named, bred in the University of Oxford, and
afterward became a Dominican in Northampton. A deep Scholar, and yet commended
to be prudent in Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 5. Number. 8.
rebus agendis, and accounted one of the greatest Schoolmen in that age. Nor,
was he only a Candle, or domestic light, confined within the walls of his own
Country, but his learning was a public Luminary to all Christendom, as
appears by the praise which De script. Eccles. sol. 136.
Trithemius bestows upon him;

Vir in Divinis Scripturis eruditissimus, and secularium literarum non ignarus;
ingenio praestans, and clarus eloquio, declamator quoque sermonem egregius
Scripsit multa praeclara opuscula, quibus nomen suum posteris notificavit.

He died at Northampton of the plague Anno 1349, before he had finished his
Lectures on the seventh of Ecclesiastes. I say of the plague, which at that
time so raged in England, that our Stows Ann. p. 245.
Chroniclers affirm, scarce a tenth person of all sorts was left alive.
Insomuch, that the Churches and Churchyards in London not sussicing for their
interments, a new Churchyard was Consecrated in West-smithfield, wherein Idem
ibidem.
fifty thousand were buried, who at that time died of the pestilence.

ROBERT DODFORD was born in a Village so called in this County, (where the
Wirlyes, Gentlemen of good account, have long had their habitation) so named as
I take it, from a Ford over the river Avon, and Dods Water-weeds, (commonly
called by children Cats Tales) growing thereabouts. He was bred a Benedictine
Monk in the Abbey of Ramsey, and applied himself to the Study of the Bale de
script. Brit. Cent. 4. Number. 41.
Hebrew Tongue, wherewith the Library (of which he was Keeper) in that Convent
did much abound. He wrote Postills on the Proverbs, and other Sermons, which
the envy of time has intercepted from us. He is said to have flourished about
the year 1370. by Bale, though Pitz, (on what account I know not) makes him
more ancient by an hundred years.

PETER PATESHULL was no doubt born in that Village not far from Northampton,
bred a Augustinian in Oxford, however falling afterward into some dislike of
his Order, he procured from Walter Dysse (Legate, to Pope Urbane the sixth) a
Dispensation to relinquish it, and was made the Popes Honorary Chaplain.
Afterward, by often reading the works of Wickliffe (but especially his Idem
Cent. 7. Number. 2.
book of Real Universals) he became of his judgment, and after the death of
Wickliffe, preached and promoted his doctrine; he wrote an Exposition of the
Prophecy of Hildegardes, (a Stinging Comment on a Netling Text,) and so taxed
the pride and lasiness of all Friars, that his book was burnt by command from
the Pope, and the Writer thereof had been burnt also, had he no^ seasonably
secured himself by his flight be^ond the Seas.

This minds me of a passage of a Friar, who burned a book of Peter Ramus,
after the death of the Author thereof, and then, and there used this Distick,
in some imitation of Ovid,

Parve nec invideo (sine me) Liber ibis in Ignem, Hei mihi quod Domino non
licet ire tuo.
Small Book, thy fate I envy not,
(Without me) feel the Flame;
O had it been thy Masters lot,
He might have felt the Same.
But our Pateshull was out of retch in Bohemia, betwixt which and England, a
great intercourse in that age, since King Richard the second had married a
Sister of Wincelaus King of Bohemia. We behold him as an advancer of
Wicklivisme in that Country, for which John Husse and Hierome of Prague were
afterward condemned. He flourished in the year of our Lord 1390.

Since the Reformation.
ROBERT CROWLEY was born in this Idem Cent. 9. Number. 80.
County, bred Master of Arts in Magdalen-colledge in Oxford. It happened that
one Miles Hogheard, whom De Ang. script. 1556.
Pitz makes a learned Writer, and intituleth him, Virum doctum, ptum, and in
fide Catholica mire zelosum, (though in Master Fox it appears by his own
confession, that he was but an Hosier in London,) wrote railing books against
the poor Protestants. Our Crowley took him to task, and confuted him in several
Treatises. Under Queen Mary he fled over to Frankford, and returning, under
Queen Elizabeth was made Vicar of Saint Giles without Cripple gate London,
where he lies buried under a fair plated stone in the ^hancel. He died Stows
Su^v. of London p. 313.
on the 18. of June 1588.

EUSEBIUS PAGET was born at ^ranford in this County, ^as Master Ephraim Paget,
^is aged son, late Minister of St. Edmond the King Lombard street, has
informed me. He was admitted at twelve years of age into Oxford, where, when a
boy, he As his said son related to me.
brake his right-arme with carrying the Pax, though surely some casualty beside
so light a weight concurred thereunto. He was commonly called the golden
Sophister, and yet he proved no leaden Graduate. Many years he was a painful
Minister in London, and was Author of that excellent book called the History of
the Bible, and Ca^echisme of The forty short questions, which has done as
much good to nn* book learned people, as any of that kind. The certain date of
his death I cannot attain.

JOHN PRESTON D. D. was born at Heyford in this County, bred in Queenscolledge
in Cambridge, whose life (interwoven much with Church and State matters) is so
well written by his Pupil Master Thomas Ball, that all additions thereunto,
may seem carrying of Coals to New Castle. However, seeing he who carries
Char-coal, (a different kind from the native Coal of that place,) may meet with
a Chapman there, on the same confidence a word or two of this Doctor.

Before he Commenced Master of Arts, he was so far from Eminency, as but a
little above Contempt; Thus the most generous Wines are the most muddy, before
they are fine. Soon after his skill in Philosophy, rendered him to the general
respect of the University.

He was the greatest Pupil-monger in England in man's memory, having sixteen
Fellow-Commoners (most heirs to fair estates) admitted in one year in
Queens-colledge, and provided convenient accommodations for them. As William
the Popular Earl of Nassaw, was said to have won a Subject from the King of
Spain, to his own party, every time he put off his Hat; so was it commonly said
in the College, that every time, when Master Preston plucked off his Hat, to
Doctor Davenant the ColledgeMaster, he gained a Chamber or Study for one of his
Pupils. Amongst whom one Chambers a Londoner, (who dyed very young) was very
eminent for his learning.

Being chosen Master of Emanuell-colledge, he removed thither with most of his
Pupills, and I remember, when it was much admired, where all these should find
lodgings in that College, which was so full already, Oh! (said one) Master
Preston will carry Chambers along with him.

The Party called Puritan, then being most active in Parliament, and Doctor
Preston most powerful with them, the Duke rather used, then loved him, to work
that Party to his compliance. Some thought the Doctor was unwilling to do it,
and no wonder he effected not, what he affected not; others thought he was
unable, that Party being so diffusive, and then, in their designs (as since in
their practices) divided. However, whilst any hope, none but Doctor Preston
with the Duke, set by and extolled, and afterward, set by and neglected, when
found useless to the intended purpose. In a word, my worthy friend fitly calls
him, the Court Coment, blazing for a time, and faiding soon afterward.

He was a perfect Politician, and used (lapwing like) to flutter most on that
place, which was furthest from his Eggs, exact at the concealing of his
intentions, with that simulation, which some make to lie in the Marches of
things lawful and unlawful. He had perfect command of his passion, with the
Caspian Sea, never ebbing nor flowing, and would not alter his composed pase
for all the whipping, which Satirical w^ts bestowed upon him. He never had
wife, or cure of souls, and leaving a plentiful, no invidious estate, died
Anno Domini 1628. July 20. Pass we now from one, who was all judgment and
gravity, to an other, ( place and time making the connection) who was all wit
and festivity, viz.

THOMAS RANDOLPH born at Houghton in this County, was first bred in
Westminster-school, then Fellow in Trinity-colledge in Cambridge. The Muses may
seem not only to have smiled, but to have been tickled at his nativity, such
the festivity of his Poems of all sorts. But my declining age being
superannuated, to meddle with such ludicrous matters, configneth the censure
and commendation of his Poems (as also of his Countryman Peter Haulsted, born
at Oundle in this County,) to younger Pens, for whom it is most proper. Master
Randolph died Anno Dom. 163.

NICHOLAS ESTWICK B. D. was born at Harowden (the Baronny of the Lord Vaux) in
this County. A solid Protestant, to counterpoise Kellison a violent Papist, and
native of the same Village. He was bred Fellow of Christs-colledge in
Cambridge, being there beheld as a pious and judicious Divine, always cheerful
without the least levity, and grave without any morosness. He was afterward
presented by the Lord Montague, Parson of Warton, where he lived a painful
Preacher 40. years, less then a Deacon in his humility, and more then an Arch
bishop in his own contentment. Hence he was [unwillingly willing] preferred by
the Earl of Rutland to Botsworth in Lecestershire, where he had hardly inned
one harvest, before, like a ripe Sheaf, he was brought into the Barn of the
grave. Thus though young Trees are meliorated with transplanting, yet old ones
seldom live, and never flourish after their removal. Let his works witness the
rest of his worth, some of whose books are published, others prepared for the
Press, and I wish them a happy nativity, for the public good. Coming to take
his Farewell of his friends, he Preached on the Fore-noon, of the Lord's Day,
sickned on the Afternoon, and was buried with his wife, in the same grave, in
Warton Chancell, the week following 1657.

Romish Exile Writers.
MATTHEW KELLISON was born in this Pitz. p. 811.
County at Harrowden, his father being a Servant and Tenant of the Lord Vaux,
in whose family his infancy did suck in the Romish Persuasions. He afterward
went beyond the Seas, and was very much in motion.

1. He first fixed himself at the College of Rhemes in France. 2. Thence
removed to the English-colledge at Rome, where he studied in Philosophy and
Divinity. 3. Returned to Rhemes, where he took the Degree of Doctor. 4. Removed
to Doway, where for many years he read School Divinity. 5. Re-returned to
Rhemes, where he became Kings Professor, and Rector of the University.
So much for the travails of his Feet; now for the labors of his Hands, (the
pains of his Pen) those of his own opinion can give the best account of them.
He wrote a book to King James; which his Majesty never saw, and another against
Sutliff, with many more, and was living 1611.

Benefactors to the Public.
HENRY CHICHELY Son of Thomas and Agnes Chichely, was born at Higham-Ferrers in
this County, bred in Oxford, and designed by Wickham himself (yet surviving) to
be one of the Fellows of New-colledge; he afterward became Chaplain to R.
Metford Bishop of Sarum, who made him Archdeacon, which he exchanged for the
Chancelours place of that Cathedral. This Bishop at his death made him his
chief Executor, and bequeathed him a fair gilt Cup for a Legacy. By King Henry
the fourth, he was sent to the Council of Risa, 1409. and by the Popes own
hands was Consecrated Bishop of Saint David's at Vienna, and thence was advanced
Archbishop of Canterbury, by King Henry the fifth.

During his reign in the Parliament at Leicester, a shrude thrust was made at
all Abbeys, not with a R^bated point, but with sharps indeed, which this
Archbishop as a skilful Fencer fairly put by, though others will say he
guarded that blow with a silver Buckler; the Clergy paying to the King, vast
sums of money, to maintain his Wars in France, and so made a foreign diversion
for such active spirits, which otherwise in all probability would have
Antidated the dissolution of Monasteries.

Under King Henry the sixth he sat sure in his See, though often affronted by
the rich Cardinal Beaufort of Winchester, whom he discreetly thanked for many
injuries. A Cardinals Cap was proferred to, and declined by him, some putting
the refusal on the account of his humility, others of his pride, (loath to be
junior to the foresaid Cardinal) others of his policy, unwilling to be more
engaged to the Court of Rome. Indeed he was thorough-paced in all Spiritual
Popery which concerned religion; (which made him so cruel against the
VVicklevites,) but in secular Popery, (as I may term it, touching the interest
of Princes) he did not so much as rack, and was a zealous assertor of the
English Liberties against Romish Usurpation.

Great his zeal to promote learning, as appears by three Colleges erected and
endowed at his expense and procurement.

1. One with an Hospital for the poor at Higham-Ferrers the place of his
Nativity. 2. Saint Bernards in Oxford, afterward altered and bettered by Sir
Thomas White into Saint John's college. 3. All Souls in Oxford, the fruitful
Nursery of so many Learned Men.
He continued in his Archbishopric (longer then any of his Predecessors for
500. years) full 29. years, and died April 12. 1443.

WILLIAM LAXTON Son to John Laxton of Oundle in this County, was bred a Grocer
in London, where he so prospered by his painful endeavors, that he was chosen
Lord Mayor, Anno Domini 1544. He founded a fair School and Almeshouse at Oundle
in this County, with convenient maintenance, well maintained at this day, by
the Worshipful Company of Grocers, and has been to my knowledge the Nursery of
many Scholars, most eminent in the University. These Latin Verses are
inscribed in the Front of the building.

Oundellae natus, Londini parta labor,
Laxtonus posuit Senibus p^erisque levamen.
At Oundle born, what he did get
In London with great pain,
Laxton to young and old has set
A comfort to remain.
He died Anno Domini 1556. the 29. of July, and lies buried under a fair Tomb
in the Chancel of Saint Antonies London.

Since the Reformation.
NICHOLAS LATHAM was born at So says the Inscription on his Monument.
Brigtock in this County, and afterward became Minister of Al-saints Church in
Barn-wells. This man had no considerable Estate left him from his father, nor
eminent addition of wealth from his friends, nor enjoyed any Dignity in the
Church of England, nor ever held more then one moderate Benefice. And yet by
Gods blessing on his vivacious frugality he got so great an Estate, that he
told a friend he could have left his son, had he had one, land to the value of
five hundred pounds by the year. But though he had no Issue, yet making the
Poor his heirs, he left the far greatest part of his Estate to pious uses;
Founded several small Schools with salaries in Country Villages, and Founded a
most beautiful Almes-house at Oundale in this County; and I could wish that all
houses of the like nature, were but continued and ordered, so well as this is,
according to the Will of the Founder. He died Anno Domini 1620. and lies
buried in the Chancel of his own Parish, having lived 72. years.

EDWARD MONTAGUE Baron of Boughton, and eldest son to Sir Edward Montague
Knight, was born in this County, a Pious, Peaceable, and Hospitable Patriot. It
was not the least part of his outward happiness, that having no male issue by
his first wife, and marrying when past fifty years of age, he lived to see his
son enriched with hopeful children. I behold him, as bountiful 2 Samuel 19. 35.
Barsillai, superannuated for courtly pleasures, and therefore preferring to
live honorably in his own Country, wherein he was generally beloved, so that
popularity may be said to have affected him, who never affected it. For in
evidence of the vanity thereof, he used to say, Do the common sort of people
nineteen courtesies together, and yet you may loose their love, if you do but
go over the style before them. He was a bountiful Benefactor to
Sidney-colledge, and builded and endowed an Almes-house at VVeekley in this
County.

Psalm. 73. 4.
To have no bands in their death, is an outward favor many Wicked have, many
Godly men want, amongst whom, this good Lord, who dyed in restraint in the
Savoy, on the account of his Loyalty to his Sovereign. Let none grudge him the
enjoying of his judgment, a purchase he so dearly bought, and truly paid for,
whose death happened in the year of our Lord, 164..

Memorable Persons.
There is a Memorial entered on the Wall of the Cathedral of Peterburough, for
one, who being Sexton thereof, interred two Queens therein, [ Katharine
Dowager, and Mary of Scotland,] more then fifty years interceeding betwixt
their several sepultures: This vivacious Sexton also buried two generations, or
the people in that place twice over. Thus having built many houses (so I find
Graves frequently called Domus Aeternales) for others, some (as it was fitting)
performed this last office unto him. Thus though Sextons often meet with bad
savours arising from Corpse too much, (or rather too little) corrupted, yet is
the instance of his long life aleadged, by such who maintain, that the smelling
to perfect mold made of men's consumed bodies is a preservative of life.

Lord Mayors.
Name Father Place Company Time 1 John Rest Will. Rest Peterborouh Grocer 1516
2 Will. Laxton John Laxton Yongdell Grocer 1544 3 Ralph Freeman Will. Freeman
Northampton Clothworker 1633

Reader, this is one of the twelve Counties, whose Gentry were not returned
into the Tower in the reign of King Henry the sixth.

Sheriffs of Northampton.
HEN. II.
Anno 1 Rich. Basset, and Albrus de Vere Anno 2 Simon. filius Petri Anno 3
Idem. Anno 4 Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Hugo. Gubion Anno 9 Idem.
Anno 10 Simon. filius Petri, and Hugo. Gubion Anno 11 Simon. for 5 years. Anno
16 Rob. filius Gawini, for 5 years. Anno 21 Hugo. de Gundevill Anno 22 Idem.
Anno 23 Idem. Anno 24 Tho filius Bernardi, for 6 years. Anno 30 Tho. and Rad.
Morin Anno 31 Galfr. filius Petri Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Idem.
RICH. I.
Anno 1 Gal. filius Petri Anno 2 Rich. Engaigne Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Gal. filius
Petri, and Rob. filius Radulp. Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Gal. and Simon. de Patishull
Anno 7 Simon. de Patishull, for 4 years.
JOH. REG.
Anno 1 Simon. Patishull, for 5 years. Anno 6 Rob. de Sancei, and Hen. filius
Petri. Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Pet. de Stores, and Gilb. Groc. Anno 9 Wall. de
Preston, and Joh. de Ulcot. ut Custos Anno 10 Walt. de Preston ut Custos Anno
11 Rob. de Braybrook ut Custos Anno 12 Rob. ut Custos Anno 13 Rob. and Hen.
fill. ejus. Anno 14 Hen. Braybrook ut Custos Anno 15 Rob. and Hen. ut Custos
Anno 16 Hen. de Braybrook ut Custos Anno 17 Idem.
HEN. III.
Anno 1 Falc. de Breantre, and Rad. de Bray, for 8 years. Anno 9 Rad. de
Trublevil, and Rad. Washingbury, for 4 years. Anno 13 Stehp. de Segne, and
Will. de Marawast, for 6 years. Anno 19 Hen. de Rada, for 5 years. Anno 25
Will. de Coleworth Anno 26 Idem. Anno 27 Alan. de Maidwell, for 6 years. Anno
33 Simon. de Thorp Anno 34 Idem. Anno 35 Rob. Bassett Anno 36 Idem. Anno 37
Will. de Insula. Anno 38 Hugo. de Manneby Anno 39 Idem. Anno 40 Will. de Insula
Anno 41 Hugo. de Manneby Anno 42 Idem. Anno 43 Eustacius de Watford Anno 44
Simon. de Patishull Anno 45 Idem. Anno 46 Idem. Anno 47 Alanus de Tash Anno 48
Alanus de Insh Anno 49 Idem. Anno 50 Idem. Anno 51 Warin. de Basingburn, and
Joh. de Oxenden Clic. Anno 52 Joh. de Moyne, and Nich. de Maunden. Anno 53
Idem. Anno 54 Idem. Anno 55 Will. de Boyvill
EDW. I.
Anno 1 Will. de Bowvill Anno 2 Gilb. de Kirkby, for 5 years. Anno 7 Tho. de
Arden Anno 8 Rob. de Band Anno 9 Rob. de Band in Charta quidem Asp. H. for 9
years. Anno 18 Joh. Druell, for 12 years. Anno 30 Rob. de Veer Anno 31 Joh. de
Ashton, for 5 years.
EDW. II.
Anno 1 Anno 2 Almaric. de Nodardus, and Simon. de Greenhull Anno 3 John de
Willoughby Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Gal. de Bradden Anno 7 Tho. Wale
Anno 8 Eustac. de Barnby Anno 9 Joh. de Ashton Anno 10 Joh. de Hoby Anno 11
Joh. de Honby Anno 12 Joh. and Egid. de Cugelio Anno 13 Joh. de Honby Egid. de
Cugelio, and Joh. de Wittebur Egid. de Cugegio, and Joh. de Wittlebur Anno 14
Hum. de Basingburne, and Joh. Sto. Mauro Anno 15 Hum. Basingburne Anno 16 Anno
17 Joh. de Sto. Mauro, and Joh. Daundelin Anno 18 Joh. and Joh. Anno 19 Joh.
Daudelin
EDW. III.
Anno 1 Will. de Sto. Mauro, and Simon. de Lanshall Anno 2 Will. de Sto. Mauro
Anno 3 Tho. Wake Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Tho. de Buckton Anno 6 Idem. Anno 7 Will.
Lovell, for 4 years. Anno 11 Tho. Wake Anno 12 Idem. Anno 13 Tho. Wake de
Blisworth Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15 Idem. Anno 16 Tho. de Babenham Anno 17 Tho. de
Buckton Anno 18 Rob. Pandeley Anno 19 Idem. Anno 20 Idem. Anno 21 Walt. Parles
Anno 22 Idem. Anno 23 Rich. Blundel Anno 24 Idem. Anno 25 Pet. Mallore Anno 26
Walt. Parles Anno 27 Idem. Anno 28 Idem. Anno 29 Joh. de Kaynes, for 4 years.
Anno 33 Andre. Landwath Anno 34 Walt. Parles Anno 35 Rich. Wydevill, for 8
years. Anno 43 Tho. de Preston Anno 44 Idem. Anno 45 Rich. Wydenell Anno 46
Rob. Hotot Anno 47 Simon. Ward Anno 48 Joh. Karnell Anno 49 Tho. de Preston
Anno 50 Rob. Poterleyn Anno 51 Joh. Karnell
Sheriffs of Northamptonshire.
Name. Place. Arms. RICH. II. Anno 1 Tho. de Pre^ton Preston 2 John Lions 3 John Paveley Erm. on a Fess Az. 3 Cross. Patee Or. 4 Joh. Widevill Gra^ton Arg.
a Fess and Canton Gules. 5 Johan. Lions 6 To. At Chau^bre Argent, 3.
Cheverons Sable. 7 Nich. Litlinges 8 Rog. Chaumbre ut prius 9 Joh. Widevill ut
prius 10 Joh. Paveley ut prius 11 To. de la Chau^bre ut prius 12 Rad. Parles 13
Joh. Paveley, mi. ut prius 14 Joh. Widevill ut prius 15 Joh. Tindall Deane Arg.
a Fess indented, and 3 Cressants in chief Gul. 16 Joh. Mallore Winewick Or, 3
Lions passant gardant Sab. 17 Johan. Mulsho Erm. on a Bend Sa. 3 Goats-heads
erased Arg. armed Or. 18 Idem. ut prius 19 Idem. ut prius 20 Joh. Warwick
Checkee, Or and Azu. a Cheveron Ermin. 21 Joh. Mulsho ut prius 22 Idem. ut
prius HEN. IV. Anno 1 John Warwick ut prius 2 John* Cope, and Canons Ashby Arg.
on a Cheveron Az. 'twixt 3 Roses G. slipped and leaved Ver. 3 flower de liz.
Or. Joh. Ch^wood Warkworth Quarterly Arg. and Gul. 4 Crosses patee
counterchanged. 3 Egid. Malorye 4 Warin. Lucyen 5 Idem. 6 Rich. Wedenhall 7
Tho. Widevill ut prius 8 Rad. Grene Gr^s-norto^ Az^. 3 Bucks trippan^ Or. 9
Rad. Parles 10 Tho. Mulsho ut prius 11 Tho. Widevill ut prius 12 Mat. Swetenham
HEN. V. Anno 1 Tho. Wake Blisworth Or, 2 bars and 3 Torteauxes in chief Gules.
2 Rad. Grene ut prius 3 Tho. Widevill ut prius 4 Tho. Grene, mil. ut prius 5
Joh. Manutell 6 Tho. Wake ut prius 7 Tho. Pilkinton Arg. a Cross pattance
voided Gu. 8 Tho. Wodevill ut prius 9 Idem. ut prius HEN. VI. Anno 1 Tho.
Wodevill ut prius 2 Tho. Holland Brackley Az. semide flower de liz. a Lion
rampant gardant Arg. 3 Johan. Wakerley 4 Joh. Catesby Catesby A. 2 Lions
passant Sab. Corone Or. 5 Tho. Chaumbre ut prius 6 Johan. Kivett 7 Tho.
Widevill Grafton 8 Geor. Longvill ^. Billinge Gules, a Fess indented 'twixt 6
Cross Croslets Arg. 9 Will. Branuspatch 10 Joh. Colpeper Arg. a bend engrailed
Gules. 11 Tho. Chaumbre ut prius 12 Tho. Wodevill ut prius 13 Tho. Wake ut
prius 14 Joh. Holland, mi. ut prius 15 Will. Vaux Harrowdo^ Checkee Arg. and
Gul. on a Chev. Az. 3 Roses Or. 16 Rich. Widevill ut prius 17 Tho. Chaumbre ut
prius 18 Eustat. Burnby Arg. 2 Bars a Lion passant Guard. in Chief Gul. 19 Tho.
Holland ut prius 20 Tho. Green, mil. ut prius 21 Will. Catesby ut prius 22 Joh.
Marbnry 23 Hen. Green Drayton Argent, a Cross engrailed Gules. 24 Walt.
Mauntell 25 Tho. Wake ut prius 26 Joh. Holland, m. ut prius 27 Eustat. Burnby
ut prius 28 Will. Vaux ut prius 29 Tho. Wake ut prius 30 Will. Catesby, ar.
Ashby S leg. Ut prius. 31 Nich. Griffin, ar. Dingly Sab. a Griffin sergeant
Argent. 32 Will. Vaux ut prius 33 Tho. Green, mil. ut prius 34 Will. Catesby,
m. ut prius 35 Nich. Griffin, ar. ut prius 36 Tho. G^een, ar. ut prius 37 Rob.
Olney, Catesby 38 Will. Miuntell, ar. EDW. IV. Anno 1 Will. Fairsax, ar. Arg.
3 Bars Gemelles Gul. over all a Lion rampant Sable. 2 Tho. Walker, ar. 3
Idem. 4 VValr. Mountell 5 Hen. Green, ar. Draiton Ut prius. 6 Hen. Hudleston
Gules, Frettee Argent. 7 Rad. Hastings Argent. a Maunch Sable. 8 Rog.
Salisbury, ar. Gul. a Lion rampant Arg. crowned betwixt 3 Cressents Or. 9
Guido. VValston 10 Will. Newenham 11 Rad. Hastings ut prius 12 Joh. Hulcot 13
Hen. Hudleston ut prius 14 Rich. Griffin, ar. ut prius 15 Ric. Knightley, ar.
Fawsley Quarterly Ermin. and Or 3 Pales Gules. 16 Nullus Tile. jun. in hoc
Rotulo. 17 Rog. Salsbury ut prius 18 Will. Chaumbre ut prius 19 Will. Catesby,
m, ut prius 20 Will. Newenham. 21 Rob. Pemberton, a. Rushden A^g. a Cheveron
betwixt 3 Buckets Sab. Handled and Hooped Or. 22 Tho. Lovell Astwell Barry
Nebuly of 6 Or and Gules. RICH. III. Anno 1 Rob. VVittelbury 2 Rog. Wake, ar.
ut prius 3 Rich. Burton, ar. Az. a Fess'twixt 3 Talbots heads erased Or. HEN.
VII. Anno 1 Hen. Veer, ar. Addin to^ Quarterly Gu. and Or, in the first a
Mullet Argent. 2 Rich. Knightlev ut prius 3 Guido. VVolston 4 David. Phillipps
5 Tho. Haliswood Ar. on a Cheveron Gu. 3 Lozenges Ermin. betwixt 3 Oulets Sab.
on a Chief Az. 3 Nut-trees Or. 6 Tho. Lovel, ar. ut prius 7 Guide. Walston, m. 8
Rob. VVitlebury 9 Joh. Danvers, ar. Gul. a Cheveron Argent, 'twixt 3 Mullets of
6 points Or. 10 Joh. Dyve, ar. Haddon Partee per pale Arg. and Gul. a Fess
Azure. 11 Nich. Vaux, mil. ut prius 12 Will. Hertwell 13 Will. Salisbury, ar.
ut prius 14 Hum. Catesby, ar. ut prius 15 Rich. Burton, ar. ut prius 16 Fulc.
Wod^hull, a. 17 Nich. Vaux, mil. ut prius 18 Tho. Andrews, ar. Harlston Gules,
a Saltire Or, surmounted with another Vert. 19 Joh. Dyve, ar. ut prius 20 Nich.
Griffin, mil. ut prius 21 Tho. Lovell, ar. ut prius 22 Joh. Tresham, ar.
Rushton Partee per Saltire Sa. and Or, 6 Trefoils of the second. 23 Tho.
Cheyne, mil. Checky Or and Az. a Fess Gules, Fretty Ermin. 24 Joh. Mulshow, ar.
ut prius HEN. VIII. Anno 1 Tho. Parre, mil. Gree^s Norto^ Arg. 2 Bars Az. a
border engrailed Sable. 2 Ric. Knightley, m. ut prius 3 John Spew, ar. 4 Rad.
Lane, ar. Horton Partee per Pale Az. and Gul. 3 saltires Argent. 5 Joh.
Catesby, ar. ut prius 6 Rob. Matthew, ar. Braden 7 Nich. VVodehull 8 Nich. Vaux,
mil. ut prius 9 Will. Parre, mil. ut prius 10 Will. Gascoighne Arg. on a Pale
Sable, a Lucieshead erased Or. 11 Tho. Lucy. mil. Gul. Crusuly Or 3 lucies
Hauriant Argent. 12 Joh. Mulshow, ar. ut prius 13 Will. Parre, mil. Horton 14
Joh. Clarke, mil. See our observations on the 21. year. 15 Will. Fitz. Will. sen.
Milton Lozengy Arg. and Gules. 16 Tho. Tresham, ar. ut prius 17 Walt. M^ntel,
m. 18 Hum. Stafford, m. Or, a Ch^veron Gu. and a quarter Ermin. 19 Nich. Odell,
ar. 20 Will. Fitz. Will. m. ut prius 21 Joh. Clarke, mil. Stamford Azure,
Fretee Argent. 22 Rich. Cave, ar. Azure, a Fess Ermin. betwixt six
Seameaves-heads Erased Argent. 23 Will. Spencer, m. and David: Sissill, ar.
Althorp Stamford Barry of 10 Arg. and Azu. on 6 Escucheons Sab. as many Lions
rampant of the first. 24 David. Cecill, ar. ut prius 25 Will. Parr, mil. ut
prius 26 Tho. Griffin, mil. ut prius 27 Joh. Clarke, mil. ut prius 28 Will.
N^nha^ 29 Will. Parr, mil. ut prius 30 Anth. Catesby, ar ut prius 31 Tho.
Tresham. m. ut prius 32 Will. Newenham. 33 Rob. Kikeman, m. 34 Rich. Catesby,
m. ut prius 35 Tho. Brudenell, ar. Dean Arg. a Cheveron Gul. betwixt 3 Caps Az.
turned up Ermin. 36 Tho. Griffin, mil. 37 Joh. Cope, ar. ut, prius 38 Tho.
Cave, ar. ut prius EDW. VI. Anno 1 Hum. Stafford, m. ut prius 2 Tho. Tresham,
m. ut prius 3 Rich. Catesby, m. ut prius 4 Tho. Andrews, ar. ut prius 5 Joh.
Spencer, ar. ut prius 6 Tho. Lovell, ar. ut prius PHILLIP. and MARI. Anno 1
Tho. Cave, mil. ut prius 1,2 Val. Knightley, m. ut prius 2,3 Tho. Tresham, m.
ut prius 3,4 Tho. Andrews, m. ut prius 4,5 Joh. Fermor, mil. Arg. a Fess S.
'twixt 3 Leopardsheads Erased Gules. 5,6 Joh. Spencer. mil. ut prius ELIZAB.
REG. Anno 1 E^w. Montague, ar. Boughton Arg. 3 Fusils in Fess, Gul. a border
Sable. 2 Tho. Lovell, ar. Astwell Barry Nebule of six Or and Gul. 3 Tho.
Spencer, ar. Althrop Arg. a fess Ermin. 'twixt 6 Seamaves-heads erased Arg. 4
Tho. Catesby, ar. Ashby St. leg Arg. 2 Lions passant Sab. Corone Or. 5 Rob.
Lane, mil. Horton Partee per pale Azu. and Gul. 3 Saltyrs Argent. 6 Edm.
Brudenel, ar. Deane Argent, a Cheveron Gul. betwixt three Caps Azure, turned up
Ermin. 7 Hum. Stafford, m. Blatherwick Or, a Cheveron Gul. and a quarter Ermin.
8 Edw Elmes, ar. Lilford Ermin. 2 Bars Sab. each charged with 5 Elme-leaves
transposed Or. 9 Ric. Knightley, m. Fawesly Quarterly Erm. and Or, 3 Pales G.
10 Tho. Andrews, ar. Cherwello^ Gul. a Cross Or surmounted of another Vert. 11
Will. Sanders, ar. * 12 Ed. Mountague, m. ut prius * Partee per pale Sab. and
Arg. 3 13 Joh. Spencer, mil. ut prius Elephants-heads Counterchanged. 14 Tho.
Lovel, ar. ut prius 15 Tho. Tresham, ar. Rushton Part per Saltyre Sab. and Or
6 Tre^oils of the second. 16 Edm. Onley, ar. 17 Rog. Cave, ar. Stanford Azure,
Frettee Argent. 18 Tho. Brook, ar. Gr. Okely Or, on a Fess Azu. 3 Scallops of
the first. 19 Edm. Brudnell, m. ut prius 20 Tho. Cecil, mil. Burghley Barry of
10 Arg. and Azu. on 6 Eeuscheons Sable, as many Lions rampant of the first. 21
Will. Chauncy, ar. Edgecorte Or, 3 Cheveronels engrailed Gul. 22 Rich.
Knightly, m. ut prius 23 Joh. Isham, ar. Longport Gul. a fess and 3 Piles in
chief Wavee, in Point Argent. 24 Edw. Griffin, ar. Dingley Sab. a Griffin
surgeant Argent. 25 Joh. Spencer, mil. ut prius 26 Eusebius. Isham, ar. ut prius
27 Barth. Tate, ar. 28 Tho. Andrews, ar. ut prius 29 Edw. Saunders, ar. ut
prius 30 Ed. Mountague, m. ut prius 31 G^or. Farmer, mi. Easton Arg. a fess
Sab. 'twixt 3 Leopards-heads erased Gul. 32 Joh. Spencer, mi. ut prius 33 Edw.
Watson, ar. Rockingha^ Argent, on a Cheveron engrailed Az. 'twixt 3 Martlets S.
as many Crescents Or. 34 Anth. Mildmav, ar. Apethorp Arg. 3 Lions rampant
Azure. 35 Thob. Chauncy, ar. ut prius 36 Joh. Read, ar. Gul. on a bend Arg. 3
shovellers Sab. beaked Or. 37 Edw. Mountagne ut prius 38 Tho. Molsho, ar.
Thingdon Ermi^. o^ a Bend Sab. 3 Goatsheads erased Arg. armed Or. 39 Rich.
Chetwood, a. 40 Eras. Draydon, ar. Can. Ashby Az. a Lion ramp. in chief a Globe
'twixt 2 Stars Or. 41 Will. Brown, ar. 42 Ed. Mountague, ar. ut prius 43 Rob.
Spencer* mil. Quarterly Arg. and Gul. the second and third charged with a Fret
Or, over all on a Bend Sab. 3 Escalops of the first. 44 Geo. Sherley, ar. *
Astwell 45 Will. Tate, ar. and 1. Jac. JAC. REG. * Paly of 6 Or and Azu. a
Canton Ermin. Anno 1 Will. Tate, ar. 2 Art. Fhrogkmorto^ Gul. on a Cheveron
Arg. 3 bars geme^ee Sable. 3 John Freeman, ar. Gr. Billing 4 Will. Samuel, m.
5 Will. Fitz-Will. m. Milton Lozengee Arg. and Gules. 6 Tho. Elmes, ar. G^s
Norto Ut prius. 7 Will. Saunders, ut prius 8 Tho. Tresham, m. Newton Ut prius.
9. Joh. Isham, mil. ut prius 10 Euse. Andrews, m. ut prius 11 Joh. Wise Man,
ar. Sa. a Cheveron betwixt 3 Cronells [or Spear Burs] Arg. 12 Will. VVillmer,
a. Sywell 13 God. Chibnall, ar. Orlebere 14 Tho. Brook, mil. ut prius 15 Hat.
Farmer, mil. ut prius 16 Sim. Norwich, mil. Branton 17 Eras. Dryden, bar. ut
prius 18 Lodi. Pemberto^, m. Rushton Arg. a Cheveron 'twixt 3 Buckets Sab.
Handled and Hooped Or. 19 Joh. Hanbury, mil. Kelmarsh 20 Mose. Troyoll, ar. 21
Edw. Shugburgh, a. Nazeby Sab. a Cheveron betwixt 3 Mullets Arg. 22 VVil.
Chauncy, m ut prius CAR. REG. Anno 1 Ric. Knightley, ar. ut prius 2 John
Davers, mil. Gul. a Cheveron inter 3 Mullets Or. 3 John VVorley, ar. Dodford 4
Hen. Robinson, m. Cransley 5 Tho. Elmes, ar. ut prius 6 Fran. Nicholls, ar.
Faxton 7 Joh. Hewett, bar. He^ington Sab. a Cheveron Counter-battille betwixt 3
Owls Arg. 8 Lo. Watson, m. and b. ut prius 9 Rich. Samwell, m. 10 Joh. Driden,
bar. ut prius 11 Caro. Cokaine, ar. Rushton Argent, 3 Cocks Gules. 12 Rob.
Banaster, m. Argent, a Cross Patee Sable. 13 Joh. Handbury, m. ut prius 14
Phil. Hollman, ar. 15 Chri. Yelverto^, m. Easton Arg. 3 Lioncels rampant Gul. a
Chief of the second. 16 Anth. Haslewood 17 Will. Wilmer, m. 18 19 Edr. Farmer,
ar. ut prius 20 Idem. 21 22 Will. Ward, ar. Azure, a Cross patee Or.

HENRY the Sixth.
16 RICHARD WIDEWILL, alias WODEVILL.]

He was a vigorous Knight, and married Jaquet Duchess of Bedford, of most
ancient extraction in this County, which (as it appears in the leigder Book of
Sipwell Abbey) had flourished four generations before him at Grafton-honor in
this County. Malicious therefore the cavil of Richard Duke of York, (which the
Stage Poet has got by the end,) affirming, that they were made noble, who were
not worth a Noble, when this Knight was by his Son-in-law King Edward the
fourth, Created Earl of Rivers; and although his Issue-male failed in the next
generation, yet am I confident, that besides the apparent Royal loine, an
ordinary Herald, may with little pains, derive all the ancient Nobility of
England from his six daughters, most honorably married.

23 HENRY GREEN.]

He was a very wealthy man (but of a different family from those of
Greens-Norton, as appears by his Arms,) who first built the fair House of
Draiton in this County. He had one sole daughter and heir Constance, married to
John Stafford Earl of Wiltshire, to whom she bare Edward Stafford Earl of
Wiltshire, who died without Issue; so that her large inheritance devolved unto
the family of the Veers; of whom In the 1 of K. Henry
anon.

HENRY the Seventh.
1 HENRY VEER, Ar.]

He was son to Richard Veer Esquire, of Addington, by Isabel his wife, sister
and [at last] sole heir to Henry Green of Drayton Esquire, of whom In 23. of
Henry 6.
formerly. This Henry was afterward Knighted, and dying without Issue-male,
Elizabeth his daughter and co* heir was married to John first Lord Mordant, to
whom she brought Draiton-house in this County, and other fair lands, as the
partage of her portion.

NICHOLAS VAUX, Mil.]

He was a jolly Gentleman, both for Camp and Court, a great Reveller, good as
well in a March as a Masque, being Governor of Guines in Picardie, whom King
Hen. the eight, for his Loyalty and Valor, Created Baron of Harouden in this
County, Ancestor to Edward Lord Vaux now living.

This Sir Nicholas, when young, was the greatest Gallant of the English-Court;
no Knight, at the marriage of Prince Arthur, appearing in so costly an
equipage; when he wore a gown of purple velvet, pight with pieces of gold, so
thick and massive, that it was valued (besides the silk and furs) at Stows
Chro. p. 483.
a thousand pounds, and the next day wore a Colar of S. S. which weighed (as
Goldsmiths reported) eight hundred pounds of nobles.

Some will wonder, that Empson and Dudley (the Royal Promoters then in prime)
did not catch him by the Collar, or pick an hole in his Gown, upon the breach
of some rusty penal sumptuary Statute; the rather, because lately the Earl of
Oxford was heavily fined for supernumerous attendance. But know, that King
Henry could better bear with (...)* then greatness in his Subjects, especially,
when such expense cost himself nothing, and conduced much to the solemnity of
his Sons Nuptials. Besides, such plate, as wrought, employed Artizans, as
massive, retained its intrinsecal value, with little loss, either of the
owners, or Commonwealth.

HENRY the Eight.
1 THOMAS PAR, Mil.]

His former residence was at Kendal-Castle in Westmerland, whence he removed
into this Country, having married Maud, one of the daughters and coheirs of
Sir Thomas Green of Mills in Cat. of Honor p. 1026.
Green-Norton. He was father to Queen Katharine Par, (which rendereth a
probability of her nativity in this County) and to William Marquess of
Northampton; of whom hereafter.

15 WILLIAM FITZ-WILLIAMS Sen. Mil.]

This must be the person of whom I read this memorable passage, in Page 89.
Stows Survey of London.

Sir William Fitz-Williams the elder, being a Merchant-Taylor, and servant
sometime to Cardinal Wolsey, was chosen Alderman of Bread-street-Ward in
London, Anno 1506. Going afterward to dwell at Milton in Northamptonshire, in
the fall of the Cardinal, his former Master, he gave him kind entertainment
there, at his house in the Country. For which deed, being called before the
King, and demanded how he durst entertain so great an Enemy to the State; his
Answer was that he had not contemptuously or wilfully done it, but only,
because he had been his Master, and (partly) the means of his greatest
fortunes. The King was so well pleased with his Answer, that saying, himself
had few such servants, immediately Knighted him, and afterward made him a
Privy Counselor.

But we have formerly spoken of the benefactions of this worthy Knight in the
County of Essex, whereof he was Sheriff in the sixth of King Henry the eight.
17 WILLIAM PAR, Mil.]

I have cause to be confident, that this was he who being Uncle and Lord
Chamberlain to Queen Katharine Par, was afterward by King Henry the eight,
Created Baron Par of Horton. Left two daughters only, married into the
Families of Tressame and Lane. The Reader is requested to distinguish him from
his Namesake Nephew, Sheriff in the 25. of this Kings reign; of whom
hereafter.

21 JOHN CLARKE, Mil.]

I find there was one Sir John Clarke Knight, who in the fifth of Henry the
eight, at the Siege of Terrowane took prisoner Lewis de Orleans, Duke of
Longevile, and Marquess of Rotueline. This Sir John bare, for his paternal
Coat, Argent on a Bend Gules, three Swans proper, between as many Pellets.

But afterward, in memory of his service aforesaid, by special Gwil. d^spla.
Herald page 2 Edition. (...).
command from the King, his Coat armor was rewarded with a Canton Sinister
Azure, and thereupon a Demi-ramme mounting Argent, armed Or, between two
Flowers de lices in Chief of the last, over all a Batune dexter-ways Argent, as
being the Arms of the Duke his prisoner, and by Martial-law belonging to him.

He lies buried in the next County, viz. in the Church of Tame in Oxfordshire,
where his Coat and cause thereof is expressed on his Monument. If this be not
the same with Sir John Clarke our Sheriff, I am utterly at a loss, and desire
some others courteous direction.

All I will add is this; If any demand why this Knight did only give a
parcel, and not the entire Arms of the Duke his prisoner, a learned Camd. in
rem.
Antiquary returns this satisfactory answer, That he who ^aketh a Christian
Captive is to give but part of his Arms, (to mind him of charitable moderation
in using his success) intimating withal, that one taking a Pagan prisoner, may
justify the bearing of his whole Coat by the laws of Armory.

I must not conceal that I have read in a most excellent Manuscript, ( viz.)
the View of Staffordshire, made by Sampson Erderswicke Esquire; That one
William Stamford in that County, had good land given him therein, for taking
the Duke of Longevile prisoner, August the 16. in the fifth of King Henry the
eight. History will not allow two Dukes of Longevile Captives, and yet I have a
belief for them both, that Sir John Clarke, and William Stamford were causae
sociae of his Captivity, and the King remunerated them both, the former with an
addition of honor, the later with an accession of Estate.

23 WILLIAM SPENCER, Miles, and DAVID SISILL, Arm.]

24 DAVID CECILL, Arm.]

Sir William Spencer dying [it seems] in his Sherivalty, David Sissill supplied
the remainder of that, and was Sheriff the next year. This David had three
times been Alderman R. Butcher in S^rvey of S^amsord p. 43.
of Stamford, (part whereof called Saint Martins is in this County,) viz. 1504.
1515. and 1526. and now twice Sheriff of the County, which proves him a person
both of Birth, Brains, and Estate; seeing in that age, in this County so
plentiful of capable persons, none were advanced to that office, except
Esquires at least of much merit. The different spelling of his name is easily
answered, the one being according to his extraction, of the Sitsilts of
Alterynnis in Herefordshire, the other according to the vulgar pronunciation.
All I will add is this, that his Grandchild William Cecil, (afterward Baron
of Burghley, and Lord Treasurer of England) being born Camd. El^z. in Anno 1598.
Anno 1521. was just ten years of age, in the Sherivalty of this David his
Grandfather.

25 WILLIAM PAR, Mil.]

He was son to Sir Thomas Par, of whom before. Ten years after, viz. in the 35.
year of his reign, King Henry the eight (having newly married his Sister Queen
Katharine Par,) made him Lord Par of Kendall, and Earl of Essex, in right of
Anne Bourcher his wife.

King Edward the sixth, Created him Marquess of Northampton. Under Queen Mary,
he was condemned for siding with Queen Jane, but pardoned his life, and
restored to his lands, as by Queen Elizabeth to his honor. Much was he given
to Music and Poetry, and wanted not personal valor, not unskillful, though
unsuccessful in Military Conduct, as in the employment against Ket. He died
Anno Domini 1571. without Issue.

Queen MARY.
1 THOMAS TRESSAM, Mil.]

He was a person of great command in this County, and was zealous (against the
Court Faction) in proclaiming and promoting Q. Mary to the Crown; She therefore
in gratitude, made him the first and last Lord Prior, of the re-erected Order
of Saint John's of Jerusalem. Dying without Issue, and being buried in Rushton
Church, his large lands descended to his Kinsman and Heir Thomas Tressam; of
whom hereafter.

Queen ELIZABETH.
6 EDMUND BRUDENELL, Arm.]

This is that worthy person, of whom (afterward Knighted) Master Brit in
Northhamptonshire.
Camden enters this honorable memorial,

Equibus Edmundus Brudenel Eques auratus, non ita pridem defunctus, venerandae
antiquitatis summis fuit cultor, and admirator.

He may seem to have entailed his learned and liberal inclinations and
abilities, on his (though not son) heir, Thomas Lord Brudenell of Stoughton,
then whom none of our Nobility, more able in the English Antiquities.

15 THOMAS TRESSAM, Arm.]

The Queen Knighted him in the 18. year of her reign at Kenelworth. Hard to say
whether greater his delight, or skill in buildings, though more forward in
beginning, then fortunate in finishing his fabrics. Amongst which the
Market-house at Rothwell, adorned with the arms of the Gentry of the County,
was highly commendable. Having many daughters, and being a great housekeeper,
he matched most of them into Honorable, the rest of them into Worshipful and
Wealthy Families. He was zealous in the Romish persuasion, (though as yet not
convicted) which afterward cost him a long confinement, in Wisbich-Castle.

20 THOMAS CECILL, Mil.]

He was eldest son to Sir William Cecill, then Baron of Burghley, who would not
have him by favor excused from serving his Country. He afterward was Earl of
Exeter, and married Dorothy one of the Coheirs of the Lord Latimer. These
jointly bestowed one hundred and eight pounds per annum, on Clare-hall in
Cambridge.

24 THOMAS ANDREWS, Arm.]

He Camd. Eliz. Anno 1587.
attended the Execution of the Queen of Scots, at Fotheringhay-Castle,
demeaning himself with much gravity, to his great commendation.

34 ANTHONY MILEMAY, Esquire.]

He was son to Sir Walter, Privy-Councellor, and Founder of Emanuel-colledge,
this Anthony was by Queen Elizabeth Knighted, and sent over into France on an
Embassy, upon the same token, he was at Geneva the same time; (Reader I have it
from uncontrolable intelligence) when Theodore Beza, their Minister, was
convented before their Consistory, and publicly checqu'd for peaching too
eloquently; He pleaded, that what they called eloquence in him, was not
affected, but natural, and promised to endeavor more plainness for the future.
Sir Anthony, by Grace Coheir to Sir Henry Sherington, had one daughter Mary,
married to Sir Francis Fane, afterward Earl of Westmerland.

43 ROBERT SPENCER, Mil.]

He was the fifth Camdens B^it. in Northamp.
Knight of his Family, in an immediate succession, well allied and extracted,
being a branch descended from the Spencers Earls of Gloucester and Guill.
Displ^y of Heraldry. page 274. first Edit.
Winchester. By King James in the first of his reign, he was Created Baron
Spencer of VVormeleiton in the County of Warwick. He was a good Patriot, of a
quick and clear spirit, as by one passage may appear.

Speaking in Parliament of the valor of their English ancestors, in defending
the liberties of the Nation. Your ancestors, (said the Earl of Arundel) were
keeping of sheep, (that Lord and his predecessors being known for the greatest
Sheep-masters in England,) when those liberties were defended. If they were in
keeping of sheep (returned the other) Yours were then in plotting of Treason.
Whose Wilson in the life of King James.
animosities for the present cost both of them a confinement, yet so that
afterward the Upper House Ordered reparations to this Lord Spencer, as first,
(and causelessly) provoked.

This Lord was also he, who, in the first of King James, was sent (with Sir
William Dethick principal King of Arms,) to Frederick Duke of VVirtenberge,
elected into the Order of the Garter; to present, and invest him with the robes
and ornaments thereof, which were accordingly, with great solemnity, performed
in the Cathedral Stows Chron. page 128.
of Studgard.

King JAMES.
2 ARTHUR THROGKMORTON, Mil.]

He was son to that eminent Knight, Sir Nicholas Throgkmorton, (of whom in
Warwick* shire) and his Sister was married to Sir Walter Raleigh. This Sir
Arthur was a most ingenious Gentleman, and dying without Issue-male, his large
estate was parted amongst his four daughters married to the Lord Dacres, the
Lord Wotton, Sir Peter Temple of Stow Baronet, and Sir Edward Partridge.

3 JOHN FREEMAN, Arm.]

He died without Issue, and was a most bountiful Benefactour to Clare* hall in
Cambridge, giving two thousand pounds to the founding of Fellowships, and
Scholarships therein.

12 WILLIAM WILLMER, Arm.]

He was the first Pensioner, as Doctor James Mountague the first Master, and
Sir John Brewerton first Scholar of the House in Sidney-colledge, being all
three of them, (but in several proportions) Benefactours to that Foundation.

22 WILLIAM CHAUNCY, Mil.]

These have been very (but I know not how) ancient in this County, but far
antienter in Yorkshire. For I meet with this Inscriptiou on a Monument at
Sabridgeworth in Hertfordshire.

Hic jacent Johannes Chancy, Ar. filius and here is Johannis Chancy, Ar. filii
and heredis Willielmi Chancy, Mil. quondam Baronis de Shorpenbek in Com. Ebor.
and Anna uxor ejus una filiarum Johannis Leventhorpe, Ar. qui quidem Johannes
obiit VII. Maii MCCCCLXXIX. and Annaii December. MCCCCLXXVII. quorum animabus.

It appears to me by a well proved pedigree, that Henry Chancy Esquire. of
Yardlebury in Hertfordshire, is the direct descendant from the aforesaid John
Chancy, whose Epitaph we have inserted.

King CHARLES.
7 JOHN HEWET, Baronet]

He had not one foot of land, nor house (hiring Hemington of the Lord
Mountague) in the whole County, though several The 9. of Edw. 2. Lincoln 4.
Edw. 3, 9, 5. Edw. 3, 4.
Statutes have provided, that the Sheriff should have sufficient land in the
same Shire, to answer the King and his people. The best is, this Baronet had a
very fair estate elsewhere. And as our English proverb says, What is lost in
the Hundred, will be found in the Shire: so what was lost in the Shire, would
be found in the Land. However, this was generally beheld as an injury; that,
because he had offended a great Courtier, the Sherivalty was by power imposed
upon him.

The Farewell.
The worst I wish this my Native County is, that Nine (a River which some will
have so termed from Nine Tributary Rivolets) were Ten, I mean made navigable,
from Peterburg, to Northampton. A design which has always met with many
back-friends, as private profit is (though a secret) a Sworn enemy to the
general good.

Sure I am the Hollanders, (the best copy of thrift in Christendom) teach
their little ditches to bear Boats. Not that their waters are more docible in
this kind, then ours, but they are the more Ingenious and Industrious
Schoolmaster, of the lesson of public advantage making every place in their
Province, to have access unto every place therein, by such cheap transportation.

NORTHUMBERLAND has the Bishopric of Durham (separated by the river Dervent
running into Tine) on the South, Cumberland on the South-west, the German Ocean
on the East, and Scotland on the North and West; parted with the river Tweed,
Cheviothills, and elsewhere, (whilst our Hostility with the Scots) Mutuo Metu,
with Mutual Fear, now turned into Mutual Faith, both Nations knowing their own,
and neither willing to invade the bounds of others.

It is somewhat of a Pyramidal Form, whose Basis objected to the South,
extends above 40. whilst the shaft thereof narrowing Northward ascends to
full 50. miles. Nature has not been over indulgent to this County in the
fruitfulness thereof, yet it is daily improved, since (to use the Isai. 2. 4.
Prophets expression) they have beat their Swords into Plough-shares, and
Spears into Pruning Hooks; and surely such Plough-shares make the best furrows,
and such comfortable Pruning Hooks cut with the best edge.

It must not be forgotten, how before the uniting of England and Scotland,
there lay much wast ground in the Northern part of this County, formerly
disavowed (at lestwise not owned by any,) only to Stows Chro. p^g. 819.
avoid the charges of the common defense. But afterward, so great, sudden, and
good the alteration, that the Borders becoming safe, and peaceable, many
Gentlemen inhabiting therabouts, finding the ancient wast ground to become very
fruitful, in the fourth of King James put in their claims, and began to
contend in Law about their Bounds, challenging their Hereditary right therein.

The Buildings.
One cannot rationally expect fair Fabrics here, where the Vicinity of the
Scots made them to build, not for state but strength. Here it was the rule with
ancient Architects, what was firm, that was fair, so that it may be said of the
Houses of the Gentry herein, Quot mantiones, tot munitiones, as either being
all Castles or Castle-like able to resist (though no solemn siege) a tumultary
incursion.

Before we come to the Worthies of this County, be it premised, that
Northumland is generally taken in a double acception; First as a County, (whose
bounds we have foreassigned,) and secondly, as a Kingdom, extending from
Humber to Edenborough-frith, and so taking in the Southern-part of Scotland.
Here then we have an opportunity to cry quits with Demster, the Scottish
Historian, and to repair our selves of him for challenging so many Englishmen
to be Scots. Should we bring all them in for Northumberlanders which were born
betwixt Berwick and Edenborough, whose nativities we may in the rigor of right
justify to be English, if born therein, whilst the tract of ground was
subjected to the Saxon Heptarchy. But because we will have an unquestionable
title to what we claim to be ours, we are content to confine our selves to
Northumberland in the County-Capacity thereof.

Proverbs.
To carry Coals to Newcastle.]

That is to do, what was done before, or to busy ones self in a needless
employment. Parallel to the Latin, Aquam mari infundere, Sidera Coelo addere,
Noctuas Athenas; To carry Owls to Athenes, which place was plentifully
furnished before with foul of that feather.

From Berwick to Dover three hundred miles over.]

That is, from one end of the land to the other. Semnable the Scripture
expression, From Dan to Ber-sheba. Such the Latin Proverbs, A carceribus ad
metam; A capite ad calcem, when one charge thorough an employment, from the
beginning to the end thereof.

To take Hectors cloak.]

That is, to deceive a friend who confideth on his faithfulness; and hereon a
story does depend. When Thomas Piercy Earl of Northumberland, Anno 1569. was
routed in the Rebellion which he had raised against Queen Elizabeth, he hid
himself in the house of one Hector Armestrong of Harlaw in this County, having
confidence he would be true to him, who notwithstanding for money betrayed him
to the Regent of Scotland. It was observed that Hector, being before a rich
man, fell poor of a sudden, and so hated generally, that he never durst go
abroad, insomuch, that the Proverb to take Bishop Carleton in Thankful Rem. c.
2.
Hectors cloak, is continued to this day among them, when they would express a
man that betrayeth his friend, who trusted him.

We will not lose a Scot.]

That is, we will lose nothing, how inconsiderable soever, which we can save,
or recover. Parallel to the Scripture expression, We will not leave an Hooffe
behind us. This Proverb began in the English borders, when, during the enmity
betwixt the two Nations, they had little esteem of, and less affection for a
Scotch-man, and is now happily superseded, since the Union of England and
Scotland into Great Britain.

A Scottish mist may wet an Englishman to the skin.]

That is, small mischeifs in the beginning, if not seasonably prevented may
prove very dangerous. This limitary Proverb has its original in these parts,
where mists may be said to have their fountain North, but fall South of Tweed,
arising in Scotland, and driven by the winds into England, where they often
prove a sweeping and soaking rain. Sure I am our late Civil War began there,
which since has wet many an Englishman in his own hearts blood, and whether
at last the Scotch have escaped dry that is best known to themselves.

A Scotish-man, and a Newcastle-grind-stone, travail all the world over.]

The Scots (Gentry especially) when young, leave their Native land, (hard their
hap, if losers by their exchange) and travail into foreign parts, most for
maintenance, many for accomplishment. Now no ship sets safe to sea without a
Carpenter, no Carpenter is able without his tools, no tools useful without a
Grind-stone, no Grind-stone so good as those of Newcastle. Some indeed are
fetched from Spain, but of so soft a grit, that they are not fit for many
purposes. Hence it is that these Grind-stones, though mostly in motion, may be
said fixed to ships as most necessary thereunto.

If they come, they come not;]

And

If they come not, they come.]

We must fetch an Oedipus from this County, to expound this riddling Proverb,
customary in the wars betwixt the Crowns of England and Scotland. For the
cattle of people living hereabout, turned into the common pasture, did by
instinct and custom return home at night, except violently intercepted by the
Free-booters, and Borderers, who living between two Kingdoms, owned no King,
whilst Vivitur ex rapto, Catch who catch may. Hence many in these parts, who
had an herd of kine in the morning, had not a cow-tail at night, and alternatly
proved rich and poor, by the trade aforesaid. If therefore these Borderers
came, their cattle came not; if they came not, their cattle surely returned.
Now although a sprigg of these Borderers has lately been revived (disguised
under the new name of Moss-Troopers) yet the union of the two Kingdoms, has,
for the main, knocked this Proverb out of joint, never (I hope) to be wholly set
again.

Scottish Proverbs current in this County.
Scottish Prove. by David Fergusson Minister at Dunfermline. Litera L*
Lang or ye cut Falkland-wood with a penknife.]

It is spoken of such who embrace unproportionable, and improbable means, to
effect the ends propounded to themselves, to as much purpose as to lave the sea
with a cockle shell. Falkland was one of the King of Scotland his Royal Palaces
in Fife, having a bo^ny wood (whereof great want in the South of this Land,
where one can hardly find a stick to beat a dog) about it, so that an axe is
proper, and no penknife (fit only to fell a forest of feathers with the
timber of quills therein) for such employment.

He is an Idem Lit. H.
Aberdeens man, taking his word again.]

It seems the men of that Town, a fair Haven in the County of Mar, have
formerly been taxed for breach of promise. I hope it true (if ever of either)
only of the old Aberdeen, now much decayed, and famous only for
Salmon-fishing. If of the new, then I believe it of the Townes-men, not
Scholars living in the University, founded by Bishop Elfinston. However, we
have Prove. in Glocest^rshire, You are a man of Duresly.
formerly observed, what is to be believed in such satirical Proverbs.

He was born in August.]

At the first hearing thereof I took it for a fortunate person, that month
beginning the return of profit, for the pains of the year past. I know amongst
the Latins some months were counted more unhappy then others, witness the by
word Mense Maio nubunt male. But since I perceive a man may miss his mark, as
well by over, as under shooting it. And one may be too serious in interpreting
such common speeches. For I am informed by a Scottish man, that it is only the
Periphrasis of a licorish person, and such said to be born in August, whose
Tongues will be the Tasters of every thing they can come by, though not
belonging to them.

A Yule feast may be quat at Pasche.]

That is Christmas-cheer may be digested, and the party hungry again at Easter.
No happiness is so lasting but in short time we must forego, and may forget it.
The Northern parts call Christmas-Yule, (hence the Yule-block, Yule-oakes,
Yule-songs, etc.) though much difference about the cause there. Some more
enemies to the ceremony, then cheer of Christmas, to render that Festival the
more offensive, make the word of Paganish extraction, deriving it from Julus
the son of Aeneas. An Etymology fetched far from England, and farther from
truth.

But to omit many forced and feigned deductions, that worthy Dr. Henry Hammond.
Doctor hits the mark, bringing it from the Latin Jubilo (a word as ancient as
Varro) signifying the rural shouting for joy, so that it is a name general for
festivals, as Lammas Yule, etc. though Christmas be so called without any
addition, as the Feast (...) above all others. It is more then probable, that
the Latins, borrowed their Jubilo from the Hebrew (...) the long sound of the
trumpet, whence their Jubilee got the name. And seeing Christs*birth was a
freeing us from the slavery of sin, I see not how Yule can be cavill'd at in
that signification.

Saints.
Saint EBBA was born in Northumberland, being daughter to Edilfrid the King
thereof: When her father was taken prisoner, she got hold of a boat in Humber,
and passing along the raging Ocean, she safely landed at a place in Merch in
Scotland, which is called the Promontory of Saint Ebb unto this day.

Becoming Prioress of Coldingham in that Country, to preserve her own and
fellowNuns chastity from the Pagan Danes, She cut off her own Nose, and
persuaded the rest to do the like; that their beauty might be no bait, whilst
their deformity did secure their virginity. Sure I am, that since, more have
lost their Noses in prosecution of their Wantonness, then in preservation of
their Chastity. As for the Danes, being offended that these Nuns would not be
the objects of their lusts, they made them the subjects of their fury, burning
them and their Monastery together.

But such the reputed holiness of Saint Ebb, that many Churches, commonly
called Camd. Brit. page 745.
Saint Tabbs, are in North-England dedicated unto her, and her memory is
continued in the name of Ebb-Chester, a little Village in the Bishopric of
Durham. She flourished about the year 630.

Prelates since the Reformation.
GEORGE CARLETON was born in this County (nigh the Borders of Scotland) at
Norham, his father being the Keeper of the Important Castle therein; bred in
Merton-colledge in Oxford. Hear what our English Camd. Brit. in Northumberl.
page 816.
Antiquary says of him, Whom I have loved in regard of his singular knowledge
in Divinity, which he professes; and in other more delightful Literature, and
am loved again of him, etc. He was one of the four Divines sent by King James
to the Synod of Dort, each of them there observed in their respective
Eminencies. In Carletono praelucebat Episcopalis gravitas, in Davenantio
subactum Judicium; in Wardo multa lectio; in Hallo expedita concionatio. Doctor
Carleton was then Bishop of Landaffe, and afterward of Chichester. His good
affections appear in his Treatise, entitled, A thankful Remembrance of Gods
mercy. Solid Judgment in his Confutation of Judicial Astrology, and clear
invention in other Juvenile exercises. Indeed when young, he was grave in his
manners, so when old he was youthful in his parts, even unto his death, which
happened in the first of King Charles.

VALENTINE CARRY was born at Parker in his Sceletos Cantab. M. S.
Barwick (which though North of Tweed is reduced to this County,) extracted
from the Carys Barons of Hunsdon. He was first Scholar of Saint Johns-colledge
in Cambridge, then Fellow of Christs-colledge, afterward of Saint John's again,
and at last Master of Christs-colledge, so that I meet not with any his Peer
herein, thus bounded and rebounded betwixt two foundations. But the best is,
they both had one and the same Foundress, Margaret Countess of Richmond. He was
Vice-chancelour of Cambridge, Anno 1612. Dean of Saint Paul's, and at last
Bishop of Exeter. A complete Gentleman and excellent Scholar. He once
unexpectedly owned my nearest Relation in the high commission court, when in
some distress, for which courtesy, I, as heir to him, who received the favor,
here publicly pay this my due thanks unto his memory.

Though some contest happened betwixt him and the City of Exeter; yet I am
credibly informed when that City was visited with the Sickness, he was
bountiful above expectation, in relieving the poor thereof. He died Anno Domini
1626. and lies buried under a plain stone in the Church Survey of London p. 776.
of Sain Paul's, London. Though he has another Monument of Memorial in the
Church of Exeter.

RICHARD HOLEWORTH D. D. was born at Newcastle in this County, preferred Fellow
of Saint Johns-colledge in Cambridge, Rector of Saint Peter's in the Poor of
London, Archdeacon of Huntington, and at last Master of Emanuel-colledge.

During his continuance in London, he did Dominari in concionibus, and although
it be truly observed, that the People in London, honor their Pastors (as John
Baptist) (...) for an hour, (or short time,) yet this Doctor had his hour
measured him by a large glass, continuing in public esteem till the beginning
of these Civil Wars; when the times turned, and he standing still, was left to
the censure of factious innovatours.

Most candid his disposition, and if he had the infirmity of ingenious Persons
to be Choleric, he prevented others checking it in him, by checking it first
in himself.

He suffered long imprisonment in Ely-house and the Tower, for a Sermon he made
when Vicechancellour of Cambridge, and at last restored to his Liberty, waited
on his Majesty in the Isle of Weight. He is here entered amongst the Bishops,
because proffered Bristol, but refused it; and such who know least of his mind,
are most bold to conjecture the cause of it. He slighted not the smalness
thereof, because such his Manners, Loyalty, and Conscience, that he would have
thanked his Sovereign for an injury, much more for a smaller courtesy.
Wherefore such only shoot by the aim of their own fancies, who report him to
have said he would not wear a Bristol stone.

Sure I am that England had, if any more able, none more zealous to assert
Episcopacy; and let that suffice us, that he esteemed the acceptance thereof in
that juncture of time, unsafe and unseasonable for himself; he afterward took
the Deanary of Worcester, though he received no profit, the place received
honor from him, being the last who was entitled (and indeed it was no more)
with that dignity.

Pity it is so learned a person left no monuments (save a Sermon) to Posterity,
for I behold that Posthume-work as none of his, named by the Transcriber, the
Valley of Vision, a Isai. 22. 1, 5.
Scripture expression, but here mis-placed. Valley it is indeed, not for the
fruitfulness but lowness thereof, (especially if compared to the high parts of
the pretended Author,) but little vision therein. This I conceived my self in
Credit and Conscience concerned to observe, because I was surprised to Preface
to the Book, and will take the blame, rather then clear my self, when my
innocence is complicated with the accusing of others.

Dying about the year 1650. he was buried in his own Parish Church in Saint
Peter's Broad-street, his ancient friend Doctor Jefferies of Pembrook-hall
taking for his Psalm. 102. 11.
Text. My days are like a shadow that decline. Thomas Rich and Richard Abdi
Esquires, his Executors and worthy friends, ordering his funeral with great
solemnities and lamentation.

Soldiers.
To speak of this County in general, it breeds most hardy men. He who deduced
the Merches, (so truly called from Mercke a limitary bound) from frequent
marching, and warlike expeditions therein, missed the word, but hit the matter.
These Borderers have been embroyled in several Battles agtinst the Scotch,
witness the Battle of Chevy-chase, whereof Sir Philip In his defense of Poesy.
Sidney is pleased to make this mention. Certainly I must confess my own
barbarousness, I never heard the old song of Percy and Douglas, that I found
not my heart moved more then with a Trumpet, and yet it is sung but by some
blind Crowder, with no rougher voice then rude style, which being so evil
apparelled in the dust and ^bweb of that uncivil age, what would it work
trimmed in the gorgeous eloquence of Pindar?

True it is, the story is not true in the letter and latitude thereof, no Earl
of Northumberland being ever killed in Chevy-chase, as by the perusal of the
ensuing Catalogue will appear.

1 Henry Percy the first Earl, lost his life in a battle against King Henry the
fourth, Anno Domini 1408. 2. Henry Percy his Grandchild, the second Earl, was
slain on the side of King Henry the sixth, against King Edward the fourth, Anno
1455. 3. Henry his Son taking part with K. Henry the sixth, was slain at
Touton-field, in the first of King Edward the fourth. 4. Henry his Son,
promoting a Tax for the King, was killed, in a tumultuous rout at Cockledge,
eighteen miles from York, in the fourth of King Henry the seventh. 5. Henry his
Son, died a natural death, in the eighteenth of King Henry the eight. 6. Henry
his Son, died peaceably at Hackney near London, the nine and twentieth of King
Henry the eight; in whose reign the Scene is laid for the aforesaid Trajedy in
Chevy-chase.
This I thought fit to have said, partly, to undeceive people, least long
possession might create a Title in their belief to the prejudice of truth;
partly, that the noble Family of the Percy's, (what need a good head of hair
wear a Perriwig,) for birth and valor equal to any subjects in Christendom,
should not be beholding to an untruth to commend their martial Achievement.
Yet though there be more fancy in the vernish, there is much faith in the
groundwork of this relation, presenting a fourfold truth to posterity. First,
that on light causes, heavy quarrels have happened, betwixt the Scotch and
English in the Borders. Secondly, that the Percy's with other Families in this
County, (mentioned in this Ballade,) were most remarkable therein. Thirdly,
that generally the English got the better in these broils. Lastly, that for the
most part they were Victories without Triumphs, wherein the Conqueror might
sigh for his Conquest, so dear the price thereof.

Physicians.
WILLIAM TURNER was born at Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 8. Number. 95.
Morpeth in this County, bred in the University of Cambridge, where he became
an excellent Latinist, Grecian, Orator, and Poet. He was very zealous in the
Protestant Religion, writing many books in the defense thereof, and much
molested for the same by Bishop Gardner and others; he was kept long in
durance, and escaping at last by Gods Providence, fled over beyond Sea. At
Ferrara in Italy he Commenced Doctor of Physic, there gaining his degree with
general applause. He wrote a great Idem ut priw.
Herball, and a book of Physic for the English Gentry, as also several
Treatises of Plants, Fishes, Stones, Metals, etc. He went afterward into
Germany, where he lived in great Credit and Practice, and as I conjecture died
there in the reign of Queen Mary. Reader, I conceive him worthy of thy special
notice, because he was both a Confessor and Physician; qualifications which
meet not every day in the same Person.

THOMAS GIBSON. It is pity to part him from the former, because symbolising in
many particulars of concernment.

Both 1. Born in this County, and in the same Town of Bale de script. Brit.
Cent. 8. Number. 54.
Morpeth. 2. Flourishing atthe self same time. 3. Physicians by Profession, and
it is said of this Thomas, that he did aegritudinum sanationes Idem ibidem.
incredibiles, Incredible cures of Diseases. 4. Writing of the same Subject, of
the nature of Herbs. 5. Professed enemies to Popery.

This Thomas wrote many other Books, and one Entitled, The Treasons of the
Prelates since the Conquest, which work had it come to the hand of a modern
Master Will. Spring.
Author, happily it might have much helped him in that Subject. He was alive
in the last of Queen Mary, and Bale sends forth a hearty Prayer for the
continuance of his he^th and happiness.

Writers.
RALPH FRESBOURNE was born in this Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 4. ^ Number. 1. and
Pitz. in Anno 1274.
County, bred a Soldier, Scholar, Travailer, (being a man of great estate) and
at last turned a Friar. He attended Richard, Earl of Cornwall, and King of the
Romans, into the Holy Land. Here he came acquainted with the Friars living on
Mount Carmel, which were then much molested with the inrodes of Pagans. Our
Ralph, pitying their condition, and much taken with their sanctity and (as some
say) miracles, brought them over with him into England, and built them an house
at Holme nigh Alnwick in Northumberland, In loco Carmelo Syriae non dissimili,
says my Bale ^t prius.
Author, In a place not unlike to Carmel in Syria. * Isai. 37. 24.
Thus pence are like shillings, and as Carmel had an Hill, with the river
Kishon running under it, a The Lord V^ssey was so great a benefactour to this
Covent, that by some he is reputed the founder thereof.
Forest beside it, and the Mid-land-Sea some three miles from it* so this had
the river Alne, a Park adjoining, and the German-Sea at the same distance.

But Northumberland was but a cold Carmel for these Friars, who soon got
themselves warmer nests in Kent, Essex, London, and where not? Multiplying more
in England, then in any other Country, as Fastorum lib. 8.
Mantuan observes, and has not ill expressed.

Cur apud Anglorum populos ita creverit, audi:
Anglicus in Syrias veniens exercitus olim,
Achonem Tyrii positam prope litora ponti,
Quae prius occurrit, subit is oppresserat armis.
Hear, why that they so much in England thrived:
When the English erst in Palestine arrived,
The City Acon on the shore of Tire,
As next at hand, with arms did soon acquire.
And after some verses interposed.

Ista duces tanta intuiti miracula, secum
In patriam duxere viros, quibus arma negabant,
In laribus sedem Assyri^: and templa domosque
Construxere novas. Pauc is it a f^ruit annis
Relligio, quasi virga solo depact a feraci,
Et veluti palms robur translata recepit.
The Captains seeing so great wonders wrought,
These Friars with them into England brought,
What war denied at home, they here anew
Churches and Houses built. In years but few
Increasing twig-like set by happy band,
Or tree transplanted to a fruitful land.
This Ralph wrote Books of pious exhortations and Epistles, and after he had
been fourteen years provincial of his own Order, died and was buried at Holme
aforesaid, Anno Domini 1274.

JOHANNES SCOTUS. We have formerly asserted the very Scociety of this Scotus
his nativity to belong to England, and have answered the objections to the
contrary. He was Camdens Brit. in Northumb.
born at Dunston, a village in the Parish of Emildon in this County, as
appears by a writing in a book of his in Merton-colledge, wherein he was
bred. He was a Franciscan by Order, and of such nimble and solid parts, that he
got the title of Doctor subtilis.

Hitherto all Schoolmen were (like the world before the building of Genesis 11. 1.
Babel) of one language, and of one speech, agreeing together in their
opinions, which hereafter were divided into two Reg^ments, or Armies rather, of
Thomists and Scotists, under their several Generals opposing one another.
Scotus was a great stickler against the Thomists for that sinful opinion, that
the Virgin Mary was conceived without sin; which if so, how came she to Luke 1.
47.
rejoice in God her Savior? He read the Sentences thrice over in his solemn
Lectures, once at Oxford, again at Paris, and last at Colen, where he died, or
was killed rather, because falling into a strong fit of an Apoplexy, he was
interred whilst yet Camdens Brit. in Northum^.
alive, as afterward did appear. Small amends were made for his hasty burial,
with an handsome monument erected over him, at the cost of his Order,
(otherwise whether as Scot, Scholar, or Franciscan, he had little wealth of his
own,) in the Quire before the High Altar. On his Monument are inscribed the
names of Pitz de Illust. Ang. Script. page, 393.
fifteen Franciscans, viz. three Popes, and two Cardinals on the top, and ten
Doctors (whereof six English) on the sides thereof, all his Contemporaries, as
I conceive. He died Anno Dom. 1308.

Benefactors to the Public.
STEPHEN BROWN Grocer, son of John Brown, was born at Newcaste upon Tine in
this County, afterward Knighted and made Lord Mayor of London Stows Surv. of
London page 564.
1438. In which year happened a great and general famine, caused much by
unseasonable weather, but more by some ( Huckstering Husbandmen) who properly
may be termed Knaves in grain, insomuch, that wheat was sold for three
shillings a bushel, (intolerable according to the standard of those times,)
and poor people were forced to make bread of fern roots. But this Sir Stephen
Brown, sent certain ships to Dantz, whose seasonable return with Rye, suddenly
sunk grain to reasonable rates, whereby many a languishing life was preserved.
He is beheld one of the first Merchants who in want of Corn, showed the
Londoners the way to the Barn-door, I mean, into Spruseland, prompted by
charity, (not covetousness) to this his Adventure. He may be said that since
his death, he has often relieved the City on the like occasion, because as
Lib. ^ono (...). 70.
Symmachus well observes, Author est, bonorum sequentium qui bonum relinquit
exemplum.

ROBERT WOODLARKE was born says my John Scot in his tables of Cambridge.
Author at Wakerly in this County. True it is, in my late Church History I have
challenged him for Northamptonshire.

Because there is no Consult. Speeds Alphabetical tables, and villare
Anglicanum.
VVakerly in Northumberland.
Because there is a VVakerly in Northamptonshire.
But on second thoughts, I resige him clear to this County, loath to higgle for
a letter or two (misprinted perchance) in the name of a Town. This VVoodlarke
was the last of the first Original Fellows, and third Provost of Kings-colledge
in Cambridge. He bought three tenements in Miln-street, and (by a Mortmain
procured from King Edward the fourth,) erected of them a small College, by the
name of Saint Katharines-hall.

As is the man, so is his strength, great matters cannot be expected from so
private a person, who never attained to any Prelatical preferment, who was
bountiful to his Foundation to the utmost of his ability. Herein he stands
alone, without any to accompany him, being the first and last who was Master of
one College, and at the same time Founder of another. This his Zoar has since
met with many worthy Benefactours, who have advanced it to be considerable both
in buildings and revenues. The date of his death I cannot with any certainty
affix.

Memorable Persons.
MACHELL VIVAN is a Scotish-man by his birth, but because beneficed in this
County so many years, shall (by the Readers leave) pass for an Englishman, so
far, as to be here inserted. The rather, because he will minister to the
present and future ages, just matter of admiration, as by the perusing of the
ensuing letter, from my credible friend, well know in London, (where his
surviving Father, was not long since the Prime Magistrate thereof,) will appear.

There is an acquaintance of mine, and a friend of yours, who certified me, of
your desire of being satisfied of the truth of that relation I made, concerning
the old Minister in the North. It fortuned in my journey to Scotland, I lay at
Alnwick in Northumberland, one Sunday by the way; and understanding from the
Host of the house where I lodged, that this Minister lived within three miles
of that place, I took my horse after dinner, and rid thither, to hear him
preach, for my own satisfaction. I found him in the Desk, where he read unto
us, some part of the Common Prayer, some of Holy David's Psalms, and two
Chapters, one out of the Old, the other out of the New Testament, without the
use of Spectacles. The Bible, out of which he read the Chapters, was a very
small Printed Bible. He went afterward into his Pulpit, where he prayed and
preached to us about an hour and half. His Text was, Seek you the Kingdom of
God, and all things shall be added unto you. In my poor judgment, he made an
excellent good Sermon, and went cleaverly through, without the help of any
Notes. After Sermon, I went with him to his house, where I proposed these
several following Questions to him. Whether it was true, the book reported of
him concerning his hair? whether or no he had a new set of Teeth come? whether
or no his Eyesight ever failed him? and whether in any measure he found his
strength renewed unto him? He answered me distinctly to all these, and told me,
he understood the News-book reported his hair to become a dark brown again, but
that is false, he took his Cap off, and showed me it. It is come again like a
child's, but rather flaxen, then either brown or gray. For his Teeth, he has
three come within these two years, not yet to their perfection; while he bred
them he was very ill. Forty years since he could not read the biggest Print
without Spectacles, and now (he blesses God) there is no Print so small, no
written hand so small, but he can read it without them. For his Strength, he
thinks himself as strong now, as he has been these twenty years. Not long
since he walked to Alnwick to dinner and back again, six North-country miles.
He is now an hundred and ten years of age, and ever since last May, a hearty
body, very cheerful, but stoops very much. He had five children, after he was
eighty years of age, four of them lusty lasses, now living with him, the other
died lately, his wife yet hardly fifty years of age. He writes himself Machell
Vivan, he is a Scotish-man, born near Aberdeen. I forget the Towns name where
he is now Pastor, he has been there fifty years.

Your assured loving friend, Thomas Atkin.
Windsor 28. Septem. 1657.

A most strange accident! For waving the Poetical fiction of Aeson his
Re-juvenescency in Medeas Bath, it will hardly be paired. To begin with
Scripture, Caleb (or All-heart) his professing himself as able for any action
at eighty, as Josh. 4. 11.
forty years before, speaks no renovation, but continuation of his strength.
And whereas Psam. 103. 5.
David says, that his youth was renewed as an Eagles, he is to be understood
in a Metapborical, yea Spiritual sense, of the vigorousness, and sprightfulness
of grace in his heart, seeing otherwise his great debilitation does appear at 1
King. 1. 1.
seventy years, scarce a moity of this man's a age. As for the many miracles,
wrought by our Savior, though extending to the cleansings of Leapers, Curing
Diseases, Casting out Devils, yea, Reviving the Dead, yet they never
countermanded nature in this kind, by recruiting the strength of an aged
person. As for humane History, I meet not with any to mate him in all
particulars. The nearest that treads on his heels, is the Countess of
Desmond, married in the reign of King Edward the fourth, and yet alive Anno
1589. and many years since, when she was well known to Sir Walter Raleigh, and
to all the Nobles and Gentlemen in Mounster. But chiefly to the Earls (for
there was a succession of them worn out by her vivacity) of Desmond, from whose
expectation she detained her jointer. The Lord Bacon casts up her age to be
an hundred and forty at least, adding withal, Ter per vices dentisse, That
she recovered her Teeth, after her casting them three several times.

All I will add is this, had this happened in foreign parts, addicted to
Popery, near the shrine of some Saint, superstition with her sickle, might have
reaped a great harvest thereby.

........ ANDERSON a Townsman and Merchant of Newcastle, talking with a friend
on Newcastle-bridge, and fingering his ring, before he was aware let it fall
into the river, and was much troubled with the loss thereof, until the same
was found in a fish caught in the river, and restored Vox Piscis Printed Anno
1626. page 13.
unto him. The same is reported by Herodotus in his third book, of Polycrates a
petty King, and the Minion of fortune, and may be an instance of the recurrency
of remarkable accidents, according to Eccles. 1. 9.
Solomon's observation, There is no new thing under the sun.

The names of the Gentry of this County returned by the Commissioners in the
twelfth year of King Henry the sixth 1433.
Thomas Bishop of Dur^am, Commissioners to take the Oaths. Ralph Earl of
Westmerland. Thomas Lilborn, Knights for the Shire. John Carington. Knights
for the Shire.

Rob. Umfravile, mil. Rad. Gray, mil. Rob. Ogle, senior. mil. Rob. Ogle, jun.
mil. Johan. Bertram, mil. Will. Elmeden, mil. Johan. Midleton, mil. Will.
Svynbarn, mil. Johan Manners, mil. Math. Whitfeld, mil. Will. Carnaby Johan.
Fenwyk Johan. Midelton Tho. Ilderton Rob. Raymes Tho. Haggerston Rob. Manners
Laur. Acton Tho. Gray de Norton Tho. Blekensop Row. Thirwall Ric.
Fetherstanhalgh Gilb. Rotherford Will. Muschaunce Gilb. Eryngton Will.
Clenell Johan. Heron de Netherton Tho. Reed de Redesdale Roger. Ushere Tho.
Midleton Joh. Ellerington Joh. Park Rich. Lilburne Tho. Elwick Joh. Eryngton
Nic. Heron de Meldon Joh. Trewyk Joh. Chestre Lion. Chestre Joh. Horsley de
Horsley Jaco. Buk de Morpath
Observations.
The Fable is sufficiently known of the contest betwixt the Wind and the Sun,
which first should force the Travailer to put off his clothes. The Wind made
him wrap them the closer about him, whilst the heat of the Sun, soon made him
to part with them.

This is moralized in our English Gentry, such who live Southward near London,
(which for the ^stre thereof I may fitly call the Sun of our Nation,) in the
warmth of wealth, and plean^ ^f pleasures, quickly strip and disrobe themselves
of their Estates and Inheritance; whilst the Gentry living in this County, in
the Confines of Scotland, in the VVind of War, (daily Alarumed with their
blustering enemies) buckle their Estates (as their armor) the closer unto
them; and since have no less thriftily defended their patrimony in Peace, then
formerly they valiantly maintained it in War.

The Commissioners of this County did not over weary themselves in working,
when they returned these persons, presenting no underwood, yea, no standels,
but only tymber-oaks, men of great wealth and worship in this Shire, as appears
by the thinness of their number, but one and twenty.

Sheriffs of Northumberland.
HEN. II.
Anno 1 Odardus Anno 2 Will. de Vesci Milo Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Anno 5 Idem.
Anno 6 Anno 7 Will. de Vesci Milo, for 9 years. Anno 16 Rog. Statevill, for 15
years. Anno 31 Rog. de Glanvill, for 3 years.
RICH. I.
Anno 1 Rog. de Glanvill Anno 2 Will. de Stutevill, and Regin. Basset Anno 3
Null. Tit. Com. in hoc Rotulo Anno 4 Anno 5 Anno 6 Hug. Bardoph. for 4 years.
Anno 10 Idem, and Ob. fill. Will.
JOH. REG.
Anno 1 Hugo. Bardolfe Anno 2 Will. Stutevill, and Joh. Laleman Anno 3 Rob.
filius Rog. and Rad. de Furnell, for 3 years. Anno 6 Anno 7 Anno 8 Rob. filius
Rog. and Rob. de Kent Anno 9 Rob. filius Rog. and Ang. de Corvo Anno 10 Rob.
filius Rog. and Tho. Haltem Anno 11 Rob. filius Rog. and Will. de Blunvill Anno
12 Idem. Anno 13 Idem. Anno 14 Anno 15 Idem. Anno 16 Aimericus Archid. Dunelm,
and Phil. (...) Anno 17 Phil. de Ulecot, and Will. de Stratton
HEN. III.
Anno 1 Phil. de Ulcot, for 4 years. Anno 5 Rob. de Wittester alias (Wirceser)
Anno 6 Idem. Anno 7 Will. Briewere, jun. and Rog. Langford Anno 8 Will.
Briever, jun. ut Custos, and Tho. de Tetleburn Anno 9 Joh. filius Rob. and
Will. Coniers, for 3 years. Anno 12 Joh. filius Rob. Anno 13 Bri. fill. Alani,
and Hug. de Magneby, for 3 years. Anno 16 Bri. fill. Alani, and Joh. de Mersley,
for 4 years. Anno 20 Rich. Anno 21 Hu. de Bolebet, and Alan. de Kirkby, for 7
years. Anno 28 Hug. de Bolebet, and Rob. de Camho, for 3 years. Anno 31 Will.
Heyrun, for 11 years. Anno 42 Joh. de Plesset Anno 43 Idem. Anno 44 Tho. filius
Mich. Anno 45 Idem. Anno 46 Adam. de Gesenor, and Hug. de Hereford Clicus. Anno
47 Adam. de Cresenor, and Joh. Lidegreynes, for 5 years. Anno 52 Wischardus de
Charny Anno 53 Idem. Anno 54 Rich. de Charny, for 3 years.
EDW. I.
Anno 1 Rob. de Hampton, for 3 years. Anno 4 Joh. de Lichegreynes, for 3 years.
Anno 7 Walt. de Cannblion Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Tho. de Dyneleston, for 8 years,
Anno 17 Rich. Knoul. for 5 years. Anno 22 Hu. Gobium, for 3 years. Anno 25 Joh.
de Kirkby Anno 26 Rob. de Balliclo Anno 27 Idem. Anno 28 Rog. Mynot Anno 29
Idem. Anno 30 Joh. de Camblion Anno 31 Lucas Talboys Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Joh.
de Creppinge, and Joh. de Sheffeld, for 3 years.
EDW. II.
Anno 1 Rob. de Fandon Anno 2 Guide. Charroum Anno 3 Johan. de Cannton Anno 4
Idem. Anno 5 Will. de Felton, and Joh. de Cannton, for 3 years.
EDW. III.
Anno 1 John de Insula, and Joh. de Fenwick Anno 2 John de Littlebourne, for 5
years. Anno 7 Anno 8 Rog. Mauduit Anno 9 Hob. Dardins, for 3 years. Anno 12
Will. Felton, for 6 years. Anno 18 Rob. Bertram, and Rob. de Fenwicke Anno 19
Idem. Anno 20 Rob. Reyms Anno 21 Idem. Anno 22 Johan. Clifford Anno 23 Idem.
Anno 24 Anno 25 Joh. Coupeland, for 3 years. Anno 28 Anno 29 Anno 30 Anno 31
Alan. de Strocker Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Hen. de Strocker Anno 34 Idem. Anno 35
Johan. Heronn Anno 36 Rog. de Widrington Anno 37 Rich. de Horsele Anno 38 Hen.
de Strocher, for 5 years. Anno 43 Rich. de Horsele, for 3 years. Anno 46 Rob.
Umfravil Anno 47 Tho. Surtis Anno 48 Johan. Fenwicke Anno 49 Barthram.
Monboucher Anno 50 Tho. de Ilderton Anno 51 Rob. Umfravil
EDWARD the third.
25. JOHN COUPELAND.]

This was he, who five years ago, ( viz. in the 20. of this Kings reign) took
David Bruce, King of Scotland prisoner, in the battle at Nevils-Cross.
Buchanan, an Author not always to be credited, in the concernments of his own
Nation, (seldom allowing victory to the English valor, but either to their
treachery, or unequal numbers,) reports, how Coupeland, having disarmed his
Royal Prisoner, Duos Rerum Scoticarum lib. 9. fol. 89. page 2.
pugno dentes excussit, which I will not English, as confident never done by
Englishman, our Chronicles taking no notice of such a cruelty, but that he
treated him with strictness, beseeming a Prisoner; and respect, becoming a
Prince; until he had surrendered him to King Edward, who rewarded him with
Knighthood; and lest his honor, without means to support it, should seem
burdensome to him, and contemptible to others, He gave him five hundred pounds
per annum, to be paid four hundred out of the Customs of London, the other out
of those of Berwick, until such time as lands of the same value, were settled on
him, and his heirs for ever.

Sheriffs of Northumberland.
Name. Place. Arms. RICH. II. Anno 1 Bert. Monboucher 2 Tho. Surties 3 B^rt.
Monboucher 4 Idem. 5 Adom. de Atholl G. on a Cheveron Or, 3 Estoiles S. 6 Rob.
de Clifford Checky Or and Azu. a Fess Gules. 7 Johan. Heronn 8 Hen. de Percy,
Com. Morthumb. Alnwick Or, a Lion rampant Azure. 9 Idem. ut prius 10 Idem. ut
prius 11 Idem. ut prius 12 R^d. de Eure Quarterly Or and Gul. on a Bend Sab. 3
Escalops Argent. 13 Idem. ut prius 14 Joh. de Filton, m. 15 Hen. de Percy Com.
Northumb. ut prius 16 Idem. ut prius 17 18 19 20 Hen. de Percy ut prius 21
Idem. ut prius 22 Joh. de Fenwick Fenwick Per pale Gul. and Arg. 6 Martlets
counterchanged. HEN. IV. Anno 1 Hen. de Percy fill. Com. Northumb. ut prius 2
Ger. Heron, m. and Rob. Umfravill Argent, a Fess betwixt 6 Cinquefoiles Gules.
3 John Milford, m. 4 Joh. Clavering, m. Quarterly Or and Gul. a bend Sa. 5 6
Rob. Umfravill, m. ut prius 7 Rob. Lisle, mil. Or a Fess betwixt 2 Cheverons S.
8 Rob. Herbotell 9 Tho. Gray Gul. a Lion ramp. within a Border engraild Arg. 10
Rob. Tempest Arg. a bend betwixt 6 Martlets S. 11 Joh. Widrington Quarterly
Arg. and Gu. a bend Sab. 12 Joh. Bertram Or, an Orle Azure. HEN. V. Anno 1 John
Maveres Or, 2 Bars Az. a Chief Gules. 2 Edw. Hastings, m. Argent, a Maunch
Sable. 3 Rob. Lisle ut prius 4 Joh. W^derington ut prius 5 Rob. Ogle Arg. a
Fess betwixt 3 Cressants G. 6 Edw. Hastings ut prius 7 Will. Elmeden 8 Tho.
Surtis 9 Idem. HEN. VI. Anno 1 John Bertram, m. ut prius 2 John Midleton 3 John
Bertram, mil. ut prius 4 Joh. Widerington ut prius 5 Will. Lamb^on 6 Hen.
Fenwick, ar. ut prius 7 Will. Carnaby, ar. 8 Joh. Woderington ut prius 9 Joh.
Bertram ut prius 10 Rog. Woderington ut prius 11 Joh. Midleton 12 Math.
Whitfeld Argent, a bend betwixt 2 (...) engrailed Sable. 13 Joh. Bertram. m. ut
prius 14 Rog. Woderington ut prius 15 Will. Eure, mil. ut prius 16 Rob. Ogle,
mil. ut prius 17 Joh. Bertram ut prius 18 Rob. Herbotell, m. 19 Joh. Heron
Gawby 20 Idem. 21 Rog. Woderington ut prius 22 Joh. Heron 23 Rob. Claxston 24
Will. Haringe 25 Tho. Wellden 26 Bertr. Herbotell 27 Tho. Nevill, mil. Gules a
Saltire Argent. 28 To. de Woderingto^ ut prius 29 Rog. Thornton 30 Joh.
Heronford 31 Rob. Mitford 32 Joh. Burcester 33 Rob. Mavers, ar. ut prius 34
Rad. Gray, mil. Chillingham Gules, a Lion rampant within a Border engrailed
Argent. 35 Joh. Heron, mil. 36 Rog. Thornton 37 Will. Bertram ut prius 38 Rad.
Gray, mil. ut prius EDW. IV. Anno 1 John Midleton, mil. 2 Georg. Lumley, m. 3
Idem. 4 Rob. Maures, mil. ut prius 5 Ger. Woderington ut prius 6 Will. Bows,
m^. E^min. 3 Bows bent Gules. 7 Joh. Nevill. mil. ut prius 8 Geor. Lumley, m. 9
Idem. 10 Idem. 11 Idem. 12 Joh. Woderington ut prius 13 Idem. ut prius 14 Idem.
ut prius 15 Hen. Com. North. ut prius 16 Idem. ut prius 17 Idem. ut prius 18
Idem. ut prius 19 Idem. ut prius 20 Idem. ut prius 21 Idem. ut prius 22 RICH.
III. Anno 1 Hen. Com. North. ut prius 2 Rad. Herbotle, m. subvic. 3 Hen. Com.
North. ut prius 4 Rob. Maneret, m. HEN. VII. Anno 1 Hen. Com. North. ut prius 2
Idem. ut prius 3 Idem. ut prius 4 Nullus Ti^. Com. 5 in hoc Rotulo. 6 7 8 9
Rog. Fenwick, ar. ut prius 10 11 12 Rob. Gray Horton Ut prius. 13 Geor.
Taylboys, m. Argent, a Cross Saltire, and Chief Gules on the last, 3 Escallops
of the first. 14 15 16 17 Edw. Radcliff, m. Arg. a Bend engrailed Sable. 18 19
Rad. Eure, mil. ut prius 20 21 Tho. Ilderton, m. 22 23 Nich. Ridley, ar. 24
HEN. VIII. Anno Nich. Ridley, ar. 2 Idem. 3 Idem. 4 5 6 7 Rad. Fenwick, ar. ut
prius 8 9 10 Chri. Thirkill, ar. 11 Georg. Skeleton, ar. 12 Chri. Dacre, mil.
Gules, 3 Escallops Argent. 13 Will. Elleker, ar. Argent, a Fess betwixt 3
Waterbougets Gules. 14 15 16 Will. Elleker, m. ut prius 17 Will. Heron, mil. 18
Will. Eure, mil. ut prius 19 Cut. Ratcliffe, ar. ut prius 20 21 22 Recorda
Manca. 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 Joh. Woderington ut prius 33 Leon.
Cornaby, m. Ermin. 2 Bars Vert. 34 Joh. de Lavale, m. Arg. 2 Bars Azu. over all
a flower de liz Or. 35 Tho. Hilton, mil. 36 Joh. Collingwood 37 Tho. Hilton,
mil. ut prius 38 Joh. Horsley, ar. EDW. VI. Auno 1 John de Lavele, m. ut prius
2 Tho. Hilton, mil. ut prius 3 John Foster, mil. Arg. a Cheveron Vert 'twixt 3
Hunters-horns Sable. 4 Joh. Gray, mil. ut prius 5 Rob. Collingwood 6 Joh.
Witherington ut prius PHILLIP. and MARI. Anno 1 John de Lavele, m. ut prius 1,
2 2, 3 3, 4 4, 5 5, 6 Geo. R^tcliffe, m. ut prius ELIZAB. REG. Anno 1 John
Witherington ut prius 2 Alb. (...) Fetherston* Gul. a Cheveron betwixt 3
Feathers Argent. 3 Rob. Lawson, ar. Haugh 4 Hen. Percy, mil. ut prius 5 Rad.
Gray, mil. ut prius 6 Tho. Foster, ar. ut prius 7 Joh. de Lavele, ar. ut prius
8 Georg. Heron, ar. 9 Cut. Carnaby, ar. 10 Cut. Collingwood 11 Rob. Raydes, ar.
12 Nich. Ridley, ar. 13 Joh. deLavele, m. Geor. Heron, m* ut prius 14 Tho.
Foster, ar. ut prius 15 Cut. Caneyby, ar. 16 Tho. Gray, mil. ut prius 17 Rob.
de Lavele, m. ut prius 18 Rob. Midleton, ar. 19 Fran. Russell, mil. Arg. a Lion
rampant Gul. on a Chief Sable, 3 Escallops of the first. 20 Will. Fenwicke, ar.
ut prius 21 Hen. Witheringto^ ut prius 22 Cut. Colingwood 23 Joh. Heron, ar. 24
Rad. Gray. ar, ut prius 25 Rob. de Lavele, ar. ut prius 26 Jam. Ogle. ar. ut
prius 27 Rich. Radley, ar. 28 Rob. Cl^uding, ar. 29 Hen. Anderson, ar. 30 Idem.
31 Will. Fenwick, ar. ut prius 32 Ale. F^therston, ar. ut prius 33 Rad. Gray.
ar. ut prius 34 Rob. de Lavele, ar. ut prius 35 Rad. Gray, ar. ut prius 36 Tho.
Bradford, ar. 37 Idem. 38 Geor. Musch^mpe Or, 3 Bars Gules. 39 Edw. Gray. ar.
ut prius 40 Idem. ut prius 41 Tho. Midleton, ar. 42 Ge. Muschamp, ar. ut prius
43 Edw. Talbot, ar. Arg. 3 Lions ramp. Purpure. 44 Nich. Foster, ar. Argent, a
Ch^veron Vert 'twixt 3 Hunters-horns Sable. 45 Will. Selby, jun. ar. and 1
Jacob. JACO. REG. Anno 1 Will. Selby, jun. ar. 2 Rad. de Lavale, ar. ut prius 3
Hen. Witheringto^ ut prius 4 Will. Selby, mil. 5 Geor. Selby. mil. 6 Rad. de
Lavale, m. ut prius 7 Edw. Talbot, ar. ut prius 8 Joh. de Lavale, ar. ut prius
9 Rad. Gray, mil. ut prius 10 Claud. Foster, ar. ut prius 11 Rad. Seldy, mil.
12 Joh. Clavering, m. Quarterly Or and Gul. a Bend S. 13 Hen. Anderson, m. 14
Will. Selby, mil. 15 Rob. Brandlinge 16 Tho. Midleton, ar. 17 Joh. Fenwicke, m.
ut prius 18 Mat. Foster, ar. ut prius 19 Rad. de Lavale, m. ut prius 20 Will.
Muschampe ut prius 21 Joh. Clavering, m. ut prius 22 Joh. de Lavale, m. Ermine
2 Bars Vert. CAR. REG. Anno 1 Cutb. Heron, ar. 2 Fran. Bradling, ar. 3 4 Tho.
Swinborn, m. and duobus Tumid. 5 6 Rob. Bradling, ar. 7 Nic. Towneley, ar. 8
Nich. Tempest, m. ut prius 9 Tho. Midleton, ar. 10 11 Will. Carniby, m. 12
Will. Witheringto^ Quarterlr Arg. and Gul. a Bend S. 13 Rob. Bewick, ar. 14 15
16 Ingratum bello 17 debemus Inane. 18 19 20 21 22

The Reader is sensible of more blanks and interruptions, in these Sheriffs,
then in any other Catalogue, whereof this reason may be assigned; because the
Sheriffs of Northumberland never accounted to the Kings Majesty in his
Exchequer, (from which accounts the most perfect List is made) until the third
year of King Edward the sixth Yea, they assumed such liberty to themselves, as
to siese the issues and profits of their Baylwick, and convert them to their
own use, with all other Debts, Fines, and Amercements, within the said County,
and all Emoluments accrueing from Alienations, Intrusions, Wards, Marriages,
Reliefs, and the like.

This, though it tended much unto the detriment, and loss of the Crown, was for
many years connived at, chiefly to encourage the Sheriffs in their dangerous
office, who in effect, lay constant Perdues against the neighboring Scots. But
after that, their care was much lessened, by settling the Lord-Wardens of the
Marches, it was inacted in the third Anno 2. and 3 Edwardi 6. cap. 34.
of King Edward the ^ixth, that the Sheriffs of Northumberland should be
accountable for their office, as others, in the Exchequer.

Queen ELIZABETH.
19 FRANCIS RUSSELL, Mil.]

He was son to Francis, and father to Edward Earl of Bedford. He married Julian
daughter (whom In Caral. of Honou. p. 440.
Mills calls Elionar, and makes her coheir) to Sir John Foster aforesaid,
which occasioned his residence in these parts. It happened on a Truce-day, June
27. 1585. that the English meant to treat, whilst the Scots meant to fight,
being three thousand to three hundred. Now, though it was agreed betwixt them,
(to use the words of the Limitary-laws) that they should not hurt each other
with word, deed, or look, they fell on the English, in which tumult this worthy
Knight lost his life. And, because seldom single funerals happen in great
Families, his Father died the same week in the South of England.

The Farewell.
Being now to take our leave of Northnmberland, I remember what I have read of
Sir Robert Umfrevile, a native of this County, how he was commonly called Stows
Chro. page 338.
Robin Mendmarket, so much he improved trading hereabouts, in the reign of King
Henry the fonrth. It will not be amiss to wish this County more Mendmarkets,
that the general complaint of the decay of traffic may be removed. I confess
the Knight bettered the Markets, by selling therein the plentiful plunder which
he had taken from the Scots, but I desire it done by some ingenious, and not
injurious design, that none may have just cause to complain.

NOTTINGHAM-SHIRE.
NOTTINGHAM-SHIRE has Yorkshire on the North, Lincolnshire on the East,
Leichestershire on the South, and Derby shire on the West: Nor can I call to
mind any County besides this, bounded with four, and but four, Shires, (and
those toward the four cardinal points) without any parcels of other Shires
interposed. The pleasantness thereof may be collected from the plenty of
Noblemen, many having their Barronies, and more their Residence, therein: It
is divided into two parts, the Sand and the Clay, which so supply the defects
one of another, that what either Half does afford, the whole County does enjoy.

Natural Commodities.
Glycyrize or Liquoris.
England affords hereof the best in the world for some uses, this County the
first and best in England: Great the use thereof in Physic, it being found
very pectoral and sovereign for several diseases. A stick hereof is commonly
the spoon prescribed to Patients, to use in any Lingences or Loaches: If (as
Aeneas his men were forced to eat their own Trenchers) these chance to eat
their Spoons, their danger is none at all. But Liquoris formerly dear and
scarce, is now grown cheap and common, because growing in all Counties. Thus
plenty will make the most precious thing a drug, as silver was nothing
respected in Jerusalem in the days of Solomon.

Wonders.
We must not forget how two Airs of Lannards were lately found in Sherwood
Forest. These Hawks are the natives of Saxony, and it seems, being old and
past flying at the game, were let or did set themselves loose, where meeting
with Lanerets, enlarged on the same terms, they did breed together, and proved
as excellent in their kind, when managed, as any which were brought out of
Germany.

Proverbs.
Many talk of Robin Hood, who never shot in his Bow.]

That is, many discourse (or prate rather) of matters wherein they have no
skill or experience. This Proverb is now extended all over England, though
originally of Nottingham-shire extraction, where Robin Hood did principally
reside in Sherwood Forest. He was an Arch robber, and withal an excellent
Archer; though surely the Draytons Poly-Olbion, song 26. p. (...)*
Poet gives a twang to the loose of his Arrow, making him shoot one a
cloth-yard long, at full forty score mark, for compass never higher than the
breast, and within less than a foot of the mark. But herein our Author has
verified the Proverb, talking at large of Robin Hood, in whose Bow he never
shot.

One may justly wonder that this Archer did not at last hit the mark, I mean,
come to the Gallows for his many robberies, but see more hereof in the
Memorable Persons of this County.

To s^ll Robin Hoods penny-worths.]

It is spoken of things sold under half their value; or if you will, half sold
half given. Robin Hood came lightly by his ware, and lightly parted therewith;
so that he could afford the length of his Bow for a yard of Velvet.
Whithersoever he came, he carried a Fair along with him, Chapmen crowding to
buy his stolen Commodities. But seeing The receiver is as bad as the thief,
and such buyers are as bad as receivers, the cheap Penny-worths of plundered
goods may in fine prove dear enough to their Consciences.

As wise as a man of Gotham.]

It passes publicly for the Periphrasis of a Fool, and an hundred Fopperies
are feigned and fathered on the Town-folk of Gotham, a Village in this County.
Here two things may be observed:

1. Men in all Ages have made themselves merry with singling out some place,
and fixing the staple of stupidity and stolidity therein. Thus the Phrygians
were accounted the fools of all Asia, and the Anvils of other men's wits to work
upon, sero sapiunt Phryges, Phryx nisi ictus non sapit. In Grecia take a single
City, and then Abdera in Thracia carried it away for Dull-heads,

-- Martial. l. 10.
Abderitanae pectora plebis habes.

But for a whole Country commend us to the Boetians for Block-heads, and
Baeotium ingcnium is notoriously known. In Germany auris Baetava is taken by
the Id^m l. 6.
Poet for a dull Ear, which has no skill in witty conceits.

2. These places thus generally slighted and scoffed at, afforded some as
witty and wise persons as the world produced: Thus Plutarch himself (says A
l^g. Beotium ^genium.
Erasmus) was a Baeotian, and Erasmus a Batavian or Hollander, and therefore
(his own copyhold being touched in the Proverb) he expounds auris Batava a
grave and severe Ear.

But to return to Gotham, it does breed as wise people, as any which causelessly
laugh at their simplicity. Sure I am, Mr. William de Gotham, fifth Master of
Michael-house in Cambridge, Anno 1336. and twice Chancellor of the University,
was as grave a Governor as that Age did afford. And Gotham is a goodly large
Lordship, where the ancient and right well respected Family of St. Andrews have
flourished some hundreds of years, till of late the name is extinct in, and
lands divided betwixt, Female coheirs, matched unto very worshipful persons.

The little Butters of Bees, p. 17.
Smith of Nottingham,
Who does the work that no man can.
England has afforded many rare workmen in this kind, whereof he may seem an
Apprentice to Vulcan, and inferior only to his Master, (in making the
invisible Net) who made a Lock and Key, with a Chain of ten links, which a Flea
could draw. But what this little Smith and great workman was, and when he
lived, I know not; and have cause to suspect, that this of Nottingham is a
periphrasis of Nemo, Ou It Is, or a person who never was: And the Proverb, by way
of Sarcasm, is applied to such, who being conceited of their own skill, pretend
to the atchieving of impossibilities.

Martyrs.
I meet with none within this County, either before or in the Marian days,
imputing the later to the mild temper of Nicholas Heath, Archbishop of York,
and Diocesan thereof. Yet find we a Martyr, though not in this, yet of this,
County; as a Native thereof here following.

THOMAS CRANMER was born at Fox his Acts and Monuments, p. 1859
Arse lackton (Speed calls it Astackton) in this County, and being bred in
Jesus college in Cambridge became Archbishop of Canterbury; and at last (after
some intermediate failings) valiantly suffered for the Truth at Oxford, An.
Dom. 1556. March 22.

Two hungry meals (says our English Proverb) makes the third a glutt^n. This
may also be inverted, Two glutton meals require the third an hungry one,
fasting being then necessary lest Nature be surcharged. If the Reader has
formerly perused Mr. Fox his Acts and Monuments, and my Ecclesiastical History,
Cranmer his story is so largely related in those two books, there is danger of
his surfeit if I should not now be short and sparing therein: only one
memorable passage omitted by Mr. Fox (and that is a wonder) I must here insert
out of an excellent Bishop Godwin in his Catalogue of the Archbishops of (...),
p. 206.
Author.

After his whole body was reduced into ashes, his heart was found entire and
untouched. Which is justly alleged as an argument of his cordial integrity to
the truth, though fear too much and too often prevailed on his outward actions:
So that what the Holy Spirit recor^eth of King 2 Chronicles. 15. 17.
Asa, was true of him, -- Nevertheless the heart of Asa was perfect all his
days, though good man he was guilty of many and great imperfections.

The like to this of Cranmer is reported of Zuinglius, Quod cadavere flammis ab
hostibus tradito, cor exuri non potuerit, His foes making this a sign of the
obduration and hardness of his heart, his friends of the sincerity thereof. And
thus says my moderate and learned Thuanus Obit. doct. vir. Anno 153^.
Author, Adeo turbat is odio aut amore animis, ut fit in religionis
dissensionibus, pro se quisque omnia superstitiose interpretatur, Their minds
being so disturbed with hatred or love, as it comes to pass in dissentions of
Religion, every one interprets all things superstitiously for his own
advantage. The best is, our Religion, wherein it differs from Romish Errors,
has better demonstration for the truth thereof, than those Topical and Osier
accidents, liable to be bent on either side, according to men's fancies and
affections.

Prelates since the Reformation.
WILLIAM CHAPEL was born at Lexington in this County, and bred a Fellow in
Christ's college in Cambridge, where he was remarkable for the strictness of his
Conversation. No one Tutor in our memory bred more and better Pupils, so exact
his care in their Education. He was a most subtle Disputant, equally excellent
with the Sword and the Shield, to reply or answer. He was chosen Provost of
Trinity college in Dublin, and afterward Bishop of Cork and Rosse: Frighted
with the Rebellion in Ireland he came over into England, where he rather
exchanged than eased his condition, such the wofulness of our civil wars. He
dyed Anno 1649. and parted his Estate almost equally betwixt his own Kindred
and distressed Ministers, his charity not impairing his duty, and his duty not
prejudicing his charity.

Capital Judges.
Sir JOHN MARKHAM, descended of an ancient Family, was born at Markham in this
County, and brought up in the Municipal Law, till being Knighted by Edward the
Fourth, he was made Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, in the place of Sir
John Fortescue. These I may call the two Chief Justices of the Chief Justices,
for their signal integrity: For though the one of them favored the House of
Lancaster, the other of York, in the Titles to the ^rown; both of them favored
the House of Justice in matters betwixt party and party.

It happened that Fabian p. 497 and Ho^inshed p. 670 and Stow in the 12. of
Edward the 4.
Sir Thomas Cook, late Lord Mayor of London, one of vast wealth, was cast
before hand at the Court, (where the Lord Rivers, and the rest of the Queens
Kindred, had pre-devoured his Estate) and was only for Formalities sake to be
condemned in Guild Hall, by extraordinary Commissioners in Oyer and Terminer,
whereof Sir John Markham was not the meanest. The Fact for which he was
arraigned, was for lending money to Margaret the Wife of King Henry the Sixth:
this he denied, and the single testimony of one Haukins, tortured on the Rack,
was produced against him.

Judge Markham directed the jury (as it was his place, and no partiality in
point of Law to do) to find it only Misprision of treason; whereby Sir Thomas
saved his lands though heavily fined, and life though long imprisoned. The King
was highly displeased at him, and vowed he should never sit on the Bench any
more. And here I hope it will not trespass on the grave character of this
Judge, to insert a modern and pleasant passage, being privy my self to the
truth thereof.

A Lady would traverse a suit of Law against the will of her husband, who was
contented to buy his quiet by giving her her will therein, though otherwise
persuaded in his judgment the cause would go against her.

This Lady dwelling in the Shire-town, invited the judge to dinner, and (though
thrifty enough of her self) treated him with s^mptuous entertainment. Dinner
being done, and the cause being called, the judge clearly gave it against her:
And when in passion she vowed never to invite any Judge again; Nay, Wife (said
he) vow never to invite a just Judge any more.

Well, King Edward was so vexed, that Sir John Markham was outed of his
Chief-justice-ship, and lived privately but plentifully the remainder of his
life, having fair lands by Margaret his wife, ( daughter and coheir of Sir
Simon Leke of Cotham in this County) besides the Estate acquired by his
Practice and paternal Inheritance.

Seamen.
EDWARD FENTON (Brother to Sir Jeffrey Fenton, of whom Title of Writers.
hereafter) was born in this County, whose nature inclined him wholly to
Sea-service; and disdaining to go in a trodden path, he was ambitious to
discover unknown passages. His Achievements in this nature are related at
large in Mr. Hackluit, and excellently contracted in an Epitaph on his Monument
in Depthford Church in Kent, erected by the Right Honorable Roger Earl of
Cork, who married his Brothers daughter.

Memoriae perenni Edwardi Fenton, Reginae Elizabethae olim pro corpore
Armigeri, Jano O-Neal, ac post eum Comite Desmoniae, in Hibernia turbantibus,
fortissimi Taxiarchi, qui post lustratum improbo ausu, Septentrionalis Plagae
Apochryphum mare, and excussas variis peregrinationibus inertis Naturae
latebras, Anno 1588. in celebri contra Hispanos Naumachia, meruit Navis
Praetoriae Navarchus. Obiit Anno Domini 1603.

Some days after the death of Queen Elizabeth. Observe by the way how God set
up a generation of military men, both by Sea and Land, which began and expired
with the Reign of Queen Elizabeih, like a suit of clothes made for her, and
worn out with her: For Providence designing a peaceable Prince to succeed her,
(in whose time martial men would be rendered useless) so ordered the matter,
that they all almost attended their Mistress, before or after, within some
short distance, unto her grave.

Writers.
WILLIAM MANSFEILD (named no doubt from, and) born at that noted Market Town in
this County, was bred a Dominican, and for his skill in Logicks, Ethics,
Physics, and Metaphysics in his Age highly applauded. And because some prize
a Dram of Foreign before a pound of Homebred praise, know that In quarto
libro suorum praedicatorum.
Leander Bononiensis (though mistaking his Name Massettus) gives him the
Appellation of Inclytus Theologi^ Professor. He defended Thomas Aquinas against
Henricus Gandavensis, (though both of them were dead long before) and got great
Credit thereby. Bale, (who is not usually so civil in his expressions) Script.
Brit. cent. 5. number. 2.
says that he did strew branches of Palms before Christ's Ass, which if so,
was (I assure you) no bad employment. He flourished, Anno Dom. 1320.

WILLIAM NOTTINGHAM was first Prebendary, then Chanter of York, bred an
Augustinian, and fourteen years the Provincial of his Order. Resigning which
place, he went on some great employment to Rome, and returning thence by Genoa,
fell sick and recovered of the Plague, being therein a Monument of Divine Mercy
to prove that disease (though in it self Mortale) not always Mortiferum.

Amongst the many Books he wrote, his Concordance on the Evangelists was most
remarkable, which I behold as a Leading-piece in that kind, though since it
has met with many to follow it; A worthy work to show the Harmony betwixt
those four Writers, though it has met with many to decry the design, being
accounted by

Some Impossible. Others Unnecessary. As if there were Contradictions herein
past reconciling, whose opinion cannot be reconciled with Piety; seeing the
four Gospels are Indicted by one and the same Spirit of Unity and Verity, of
Truth and Concord, whilst in two sentences really contrary, one must be false
of necessity. As if it were nothing but the reconciling of those who never fell
out. Whereas indeed, there are many seeming oppositions therein to raise the
reputation thereof. Intellecta ab omnibus sunt neglecta a plurimis, and some
necessary difficulty becomes Scripture, to quicken our prayers, pains, and
patience to understand it.

Script. Brit. cent. 5. number. 44.
Bale gives him this Lukewarm (call it hot, because coming from his mouth)
commendation, non omnino impius in voluminibus, quae composuit. He dyed, and
was buried at Lecester. Anno Dom. 1336.

ROBERT WORSOP was born (says Script. Bri^. cent. 5. number. 76
Bale) in the County, mistaken for the Di^cese of York, seeing Worsop is
notoriously known to be in Nottingham-shire. He was bred an Augustinian in the
convent of Tick-Hill not far from Doncaster, where he wrote many Books, the one
called the Entrance of the Sentences. Bale says, that at last he was made a
Bishop, not naming his Diocese, and no such Prelate appearing in our English
Catalogue it rendereth it suspicious, that either he was some Suffragan, or
some Titulary Bishop in Greece. He dyed, and was buried at Tick Hill, about the
year 1360.

Since the Reformation.
Sir JEFFREY FENTON Knight, born in this County, was for twenty seven * J.
Waraeus de script. Hib. p. 137.
years Privy-Counsellour in Ireland to Queen Elizabeth and King James. He
translated the History of Francis Guicciardine out of Italian into English, and
Dedicated it to Queen Elizabeth, he deceased at Dublin October 19. 1608. and
lies buried in St. Patricks Church under the same Tomb with his Father-in Law
Dr. Robert Weston, sometimes Chancellor of Ireland.

JOHN PLOUGH was born in this Bale in his book termed Scriptor^s nostri
temporis, p. 111.
County, a pious and learned Minister of the Word; who for his conscience fled
over into Basil in the Reign of Queen Mary.

It happened that a Book came over into the hands of the English Exiles,
written against the Marriage of Ministers, by one Miles Hoggard, a silly Hosier
in London, but highly opinioned of his learning. It was debated amongst the
English, whether this Book should be passed over with neglect, or answered. And
here the Reader is requested to pardon this digression, as proper enough for my
profession. Solomon has two Prove. ^6. 4. 5.
Proverbs, the one immediately succeeding, yet seemingly crossing the other,

Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou also be like unto him.
Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own conceit.

Some Mr. Cartwright upon the place.
will have the first precept given to Magistrates (who are not to make their
Authoitry cheap, by engaging against fools) and the later to belong to all
Christians. O there is distinguish that an answer according to his folly may be
twofold; by way of complying with it, which may not; and confuting of it which
ought to be done. Most make a difference between the railing fool and the
reasoning fool: the former to be ordered, as Hezekiah did 2 Kings 18. 36.
Rabshakeh, Answer him not a word. But if he be a reasoning fool, who will
offer to argue conceited of himself, take him off his speed, with a short and
seasonable return.

Such a fool this Hoggard was adjudged, whom John Plough undertook to answer,
and cut his comb so close, that the other appeared no more. He dyed in the
beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

WILLIAM BRIGHTMAN was born in Nottingham (where some of his brethren were
lately alive) bred Fellow of Queen College in Cambridge, and aftewards
beneficed at Haunes in Bedfordshire. No lover of Conformity, yet no hater of
Conformists; being charitable to such, who in judgment dissented from him. His
Memory is most remarkable for his Comment on the Revelation, by some
Protestants approved, praised, admired; by others slighted, contemned,
condemned.

Pro. 1. His very name Brightman imports something of illumination and
clearness therein. 2. He makes many hard places to be plain, and mysteries to
be histories, by his Comment. 3. He foretold many things forty years ago, which
we see performed in our days.
Con. 1. Names are casual, and even Lucian himself, as bad as he was, had as
much of light and luster in his name. 2. He makes many plain places hard, and
histories to be mysteries by his mis-interpretation; expounding the seven Asian
Churches, then literally extant, to be Germany, France, England, etc. 3.
Shooting so many Arrows, no wonder if foam few, rather by hap than aim, hit the
mark.


Sure I am that Time and Mr. Brightman will expound the hardest places in the
Revelation, but what credit is to be given to the later alone, I will not
engage.

Such who dislike Mr. Brightmans writing, could not but commend his Angelical
living, who had so much of Heaven in his heart. Walking thorough the vineyard
of this world, he plucked and eat a few grapes, but put up none in his Vessel,
using wealth as if he used it not.

His Clay-cottage did crack and fall down in the same minute, so sudden was his
death: But he who dyed daily, could on no day be said to dye suddenly, being
always prepared for his dissolution, which happened Anno Dom. 16 --.

Memorable Persons.
ROBERT HOOD was (if not by birth) by his chiefest abode this Countryman. His
words are taken out of John Major. See his Brit. in North Riding in Yorkshire.
Cambden calls him praedonem mitissimum, the gentlest thief that ever was: and
know, Reader, he is entered into our Catalogue, not for his thievery but for
his gentleness. Take the character of his (though not good) less bad behavior
from the pen of our Draytons Poly-Olbion, song 26. p. 123.
Poet:

From wealthy Abbots chests, and Churles abundant store,
What oftentimes he took, he shared amongst the poor:
No lordly Bishop came in lusty Robins way,
To him before he went, but for his Pass must pay:
The widow in distress he graciously relieved,
And remedied the wrongs of many a Virgin grieved.
But who made him a Judge? or gave him a Commission to take where it might best
be spared, and give where it was most wanted? His principal residence was in
Shirewood Forest in this County, though he had another haunt (he is no Fox
that has but one hole) near the Sea in the North Riding in Yorkshire, where
Robin Hoods Bay still retains his name: Not that he was any Pirat, but a
Land-thief, who retreated to those unsuspected parts for his security.

One may wonder how he escaped the hand of Justice, dying in his bed, for ought
is found to the contrary: But it was because he was rather a merry than a
mischievous thief, (complementing passengers out of their purses) never
murdering any but Deer, and this popular Robber feasted the Vicinage with his
Venison. He played his pranks in the reign of King Richard the First, about the
year of our Lord 1100.

THOMAS MAGNUS. He was an exposed child, left by his mother in the Parish of
Newark. What the Ovid. Met.
Poet says of the father of Cadmus (commanding his son to find his lost sister
Europa, or else never to return) that he was,

Facto piu^ and sceleratus eodem.
Expressing in one act a mind,
Which was both cruel, and was kind.
may be applied to the mother of this and all such Foundlings. Now it happened
that some York shire Clothiers coming in the dark, (very early or late) did
light on this child, and resolved to pay both for his nursing and education,
the charge whereof would not be great, equally divided betwixt them, according
to the Proverb,

Multorum manibus grande levatur onus.
An heavy work is light to do,
When many hands are put thereto.
First then they took order he should be baptized in Newark by the name of
Thomas, (probably the best person in their company) and because all of them had
Interest alike in him, for his Surname they assigned him Amang-us, which is
amongst us in the Northern pronunciation.

They were very careful in his breeding. I confess, Aristotle urges it as an
argument against the breeding of children in common, that the care of all will
effectually be the care of none, and so the children be neglected. Not so here,
where this Thomas, though he had a Commonwealth of Foster-fathers, was very
well brought up in learning, and became an excellent scholar and Statesman,
being employed in many foreign Embassies. Then took he on him the name of
Cambdens Remains, p. 146.
Dr. Magnus, (and was famous thereby both at home and beyond the Seas) on which
account he might claim kindred with Pompeius Magnus, Carolus Magnus, and
Albertus Magnus, and whom not, who was Great for arts, arms, or otherwise? It
sounds much in his commendation, that he forgot not his gratitude to the Town
of his Nativity, where he erected a fair school, with other Benefactions. He
flourished (as I take it) under King Henry the Eight.

Lord Mayors.
I cannot on my best inquiry recover any Native of this County who ever
attained to this place of Magistracy; but am informed, that now the feet of one
do tread near unto the Thr^shold of that Door of Honor, and doubt not but when
he has first entered and opened the way, there will be others soon found to
follow him.

The Names of the Gentry of this County returned by the Commissioners in the
twelfth year of King Henry the sixth.
John Archbishop of York Commissioners to take the Oaths. Humfrey Earl of
Stafford Richard Stanhop One of the Knights for the Shire.

Tho. Cheworth, chiv. Johan. Zouche, chiv. Will. Plumton, chiv. Hug. Welughby,
chiv. Roberti Strelley, chiv. Hen. Perponnt, chiv. Rob. Ma^kam, chiv. Gerv.
Cl^ston, chiv. Will. Meryng, chiv. Hug. (...), chiv. Ioh. Cokfeld armig.
Radulphi Makerell Thome Nevyll Roberti Brewce Thome Stanton Rad. Leek Richardi
Sutton Thome Stanhope Iacobi Stanhope Thome Curson Willielmi Byrton Henrici
Perponnt Hugonis Hercy Iohannis Wastnes Iohannis Gaitford Gorgii Clay Iohannis
Husse Iohannis Hiklinge Ioh. Harbor de Leek Thome Stannton de Sutton Roberti
Doyle Rogeri Perponnt Thome Hercy Richardi Bevercotes Reberti Moresby Roberti
Morewode Iohannis Clifton Roberti Dunham Iohannis Serlby Willielmi Wilbram
Thome Genel^y Thome Sch^feld Thome Anne Iohannis Rolley Iohannis at Vikars
Willielmi Boson Edm. Nornamuyle Richardi Gatford Iohannis Becard Willielmi
Remston Richardi Strelly Thome Meryng Willielmi Lassels Iohannis Powerr
Willielmi Powerr Ioh. Le^k de Halom Thome Okere Philippi Barley Thome Warberton
Iohannis Alferton Willielmi Alferton, filius ejus Richardi Ranchestere de
Wirssope Iohannis White de Colyngam Iohannis Glouseter de Carcoston Richardi
Walfeld de Newerk Roberti Kelom de Newerk Willielmi Skrynishire de Muskham
Roberti Garnon de Muskham Ioh. Kelom de Kelom Rob. Darley de Thorp Thome
Columboll de Thorp Riginaldi Shawe de Estwayte Gervasii Bampton de Beston
Iohannis Mathewe de Sterroppe Willielmi Crecy de Markham Petri Creci de Markham
Roberti Forsett de Grynley Will. Lord de Retford Roberti Wytham de Orston
Radulphi ^tuffin de Mansfeld Wodhous Iohannis Brannspath de Ragnell Ioh.
Brannspath filius ejus de Ragnell Tho. Brannspath de Ragnell Rad. Bar de
Ragnell Iohannis Crostes de Ragnell Iohannis Melton de Mormanton Willielmi
Clerk de Gedlynge Radulphi Wilbram de VVestmerkham Galfridi Botelere de
VVelhagh Rob. Norton de Kirton Iohannis Milnere de Allerton Will. Haley de
Sutton Johan. Morehagh de Mansfeld Ioh. Arnall de Arnall Johan. Spondon de
Newerk Johan. Dennett de Newerk Hugonis Garnon de Muskham Johan. Crumwell de
Charleton Rob. Crumwell filius ejus, de eadem Willielmi Daynell de Egmanton
Edm. Berkyn de Allerton Henrici Payser de Clypston Simonis Caldewell de Laxton
Roberti Bliton de Cannton Rob. Waryn deWanton Williel. Drapour de Welhagh
Iohannis Carleton de Blithe Tho. Bagley de Blithe Walteri Carleton de Carleton
Will. Hogekyngson de Misterton Ioh. Darnall de Misterton Williel. Lyndrike de
Stockwith Willielmi Browet de Walkryngham Richardi Caxton de Tuxford Iohannis
Parlethorpe de Laxton Tho. Grengorge de Allerton.
Sheriffs.
This County had the same Sheriffs with Derby-shire until the tenth year of
Queen Elizabeth, wherein they were divided, and since which time these were the
particular Sheriffs of this Shire.

Name. Place. Arms. ELIZ. REG. Anno 10 Tho. Cowper, ar. Azure a Tortois
erected Or. 11 Ioh. Biron, ar. * Gules, a Saltyr Ermin^. 12 Ioh. Nevil, ar.
Grove Az. in a Chief Or, a Lion issuant G. and (...) Arg. 13 Rob. Markham, ar.
14 Gerv. Clifton, mil. Clifton Sable semi de cinque-soils, a Lion ramp. Arg. 15
Will. Hollis, mil. b Houghton 16 Th. Stanhope, mil. c Shelford b Ermine 2.
Piles sable. 17 Hen. Perpoynt, ar. d Holme c Quarterly Ermine and Gul. 18 Geo.
Chaworth, ar. e Wiverton d Arg. a Lion ramp. sable in an Orb of cinque-soils
Gul. 19 Tho. Markham, ar. ut prius 20 Ioh. Biron, ar. e Azure, two cheverons,
Or. 21 Fra. Willoughby, m. Or, on 2. bars Gul. 3. Waterbougets arg. 22 G^o.
Nevil, ar. ut prius 23 Will. Sutton, ar. Arundel Arg. a quarter S. a crescent
G. 24 Fran. Molineux, ar. Teversha. Az. a cross moline quater pierce^ Or. 25
Rob. Markham, ar. ut prius 26 Brian Lasles, ar. Argent 3. Chaplets Gules. 27
Ioh. Sydenham, ar. Some. shi. Sab. 3. Rams argent. 28 Geo. Chaworth, m ut prius
29 Tho. Stanhope, mil. ut prius 30 Fra. Willoughby, m. ut prius 31 Ioh. Biron,
mil. 32 Th. Thornhough, ar 33 Ioh. Hollis, ar. ut prius 34 Ioh. Basset, ar. Or,
3. Piles G. a Canton Erm 35 Fra. Willoughby, ar. ut prius 36 Will. Sutton, ar.
ut prius 37 Rich Whalley, ar. 38 Ioh. Biron, m^l. 39 Ioh. Thorold, ar. Sable,
3. Goats salient Gules. 40 H^n. Chaworth, ar. ut prius 41 Brian Las^els, ar. ut
prius 42 Edw. No^^^ ar. Az. a Lion passant Or betwixt 3. Flower (...) arg. 43
Hen. Perpoint, ar. ut prius 44 Rog. Ascough, mil. Sable. a Fess Or, between 3.
Asses passant, arg. JACOB. Anno 1 Will. Reyner, mil. 2 Gab. Armstrong, ar. G.
3. right hands coped and armed bar-wayes proper. 3 Will. Sutton, mil. ut prius
4 Will. Cowper, ar. ut prius 5 Io. Thornhough, ar. 6 Hen. Sachererell, ar Arg.
on a Saltyre 5. Waterbougets of the first. 7 Ioh. Molineux, ar. ut prius 8 Ger.
Clifton, mil. ut prius 9 Ioh. Molineux, mil. ut prius 10 Ioh. Biron, mil. 11
Geo. Perkins, mil. 12 To. Williamson, ar. Eastmark. Or, a Cheveron Gules
betwixt 3. Tresoils, Sab. 13 Rob. Perpoynt, ar. ut prius 14 Geo. Lassels, mil.
ut prius 15 Io. Thornhough, m. 16 Tho. Barton, ar. 17 Will. Reason, ar. 18 Tho.
Hutchinson, m 19 Ioh. White, mil. 20 Ioh. Digby, ar. Azure, a Flower de luce,
Arg. 21 Math. Palms, ar. Gul. 3. flower de luces, Arg. a Chie^ Varry. 22 Edw.
Goldinge and (...). Markham, ar. CAROL, I. ut prius Gules, a Cheveron Or,
betwixt 3. Besants. Anno 1 Timothy Pusey, ar. 2 Fran. Williamson. ut prius 3 Tho.
Hewet, mil. Sab. a Chev. counter-Battilee betwixt 3. Owls, Arg. 4 Jer. Teresy,
ar. 5 Ith. Perkins, ar. 6 Rob. Sutton, ar. ut prius 7 Tho. White, ar. 8 Tho.
Bolles, ar. Az. 3. Cups Arg. holding as many Boars heads erected, Or 9 Ioh.
Melish, ar.* 10 Ioh. Biron, mil. * Az. 2. Swans Arg. betwixt as many Flanches
Ermine. 11 Har. Wasteneys, b. Hendon 12 Geo. Lassels, mil. ut prius Sab. a Lion
ramp. Arg. collered, Gules. 13 Fra. Thorohaugh, m 14 Ioh. Chaworth, ar. ut
prius 15 Tho. Williamson, ar. ut prius 16 Gilb. Edw. Nevil, ar. ut prius

Q. Elizadeth.
15. WILLIAM HOLLIS, Mil.]

This was that steady and constant Housekeeper, who for his hospitality and
other eminent virtues, was commonly called The good Sir William: A most
honorable title, seeing of Gods two grand Epithets, Optimus, Maximus, the
former is embraced by too few, the later affected by too many. This Sir William
was son to Sir William Hollis, Lord Mayor of the City of London, father to John
Hollis Lord Houghton of Houghton created Earl of Clare in the 22. of King
Charles the First; and Grandfather to the Right Honorable John the present
Earl of Clare.

K. James.
13. ROBERT PERPOINT, Armig.]

He was afterward created Baron Perpoint and Viscount Newark, and afterward
in the fourth of King Charles the first, Earl of Kingston upon Hull. One
descended of right ancient and noble extraction, whose Ancestors coming over
with the Conqueror, first fixed at Hurst-^erpoint in Sussex, thence removed
into this County. I find this remarkable passage recorded of Henry de Perpoint,
who flourished in those parts in the beginning of King Edward the First.

Claus. 8 Edvardi 1. membrana tertia in dorso in Tur. Londin.
Memorandum, quod Henricus de (...) die Lunae in (...) Octab. Sancti Michaelis,
venit in (...) apud Lincol^iam, and public dixit quod sigillum suum amisit,
and protestabatur quod si aliquod instrumentum cum sigillo illo post tempus
illud inveniretur consignatum, illud nullius esse valoris vel momenti.
Memorand. That Henry de (...) on Monday the day after the Octaves of St.
Michael, came into the Chancery at Lincoln, and said publicly that he had lost
his Seal, and protested that if any instrument were found sealed with that Seal
after that time, the same should be of no value or effect. He appears a
person of prime quality, that great prejudice might arise by the false use of
his true Seal, if found by a dishonest person, so that so solemn a protest was
conceived necessary for the prevention thereof.

Robert Perpoint, a Descendent from this Henry, was by King Edward the third
summoned as a Com^. Brit. in Nottingham-sh.
Baron to Parliament, but died (as I am informed) before he sat therein, which
hindered the honor of Peerage from descending to his posterity.

But this Robert Perpoint was Robert the younger, in distinction from his
Name-sakeAncestor, who lived in great dignity under King Edward the Third, as
by the following Record will appear.

Claus. 49 Hon. 3. in dorso memb. 6.
Rex Priori S. Johannis Jerusalem in Anglia salutem. Cum dilectus and fidelis
noster Robertus de Petroponte, qui fidei nostrae and Edwardi primogent^i nostri
hactenus constanter adhaesit, in conflictu habito apud Jews captus esset ab
inimicis nostris and detentus in prisona Hugonis le Despenser, donec per
septingentas marcas finem fecisset* cum eodem pro ^edemptione sua, unde
Walerandus de Munceaus se praefato Hugoni pro praedicto Roberto obligavit per
quandam chartam de feoffamento, and scripta obligatoria inter ipsos confecta,
quae vobis liberata fuerant custodienda, ut dicitur: Nos ipsorum Roberti and
Walerandi indempnitatt prospicere, and eidem Roberto gratiam facere volentes
specialem: vobis mandamus, firmiter injungentes, quod cartas and scripta
praedicta eidem Roberto and Walerando, vel eorum alteri, sine morae dispendio
deliberari faciatis; and nos inde versus vos servabimus indempnes. In cujus,
etc.

Test Rege apud Westmonasterium 15. die Octobris.

The King to the Prior of St. John Jerusalem in England greeting. Whereas our
beloved and faithful Robert Perpoint, who hitherto has constantly adhered to
our trust, and of our first born Edward, was taken by our enemies in a skirmish
at Jews, and kept in the prison of Hugh le Dispenser, until by seven hundred
marks he had made an end with him for his ransoming, whereupon Walerand of
Munceaus bound himself to the forenamed Hugh for the foresaid Robert by a
certain charter of feoffment, and obligatory writings made betwixt them, which
as is said were delivered to you to be kept: We, willing to provide for the
safety of the said Robert and Walerand, and to do a special favor to the same
Robert, do command you firmly injoyning, that ye cause the foresaid charters
and writings without any delay to be delivered to the same Robert and Walerand,
or to one of them; and we shall thenceforth save you harmless.

Witness the King at Westminster the 15. day of October.

Whosoever seriously considers how much the Mark, and how little the Silver of
our Land was in that Age, will conclude seven hundred marks a ransom more
proportionable for a Prince than private person. The best was, that was not
paid in effect, which by command from the King was restored again.

The Farewell.
There is in this County a small Market Town called Blithe, which my John
Norden in his Description of Hart-ford-shire, voce Benington.
Author will have so named a jucunditate, from the mirth and good fellowship of
the Inhabitants therein. If so, I desire that both the name and the thing may
be extended all over the Shire, as being confident that an Ounce of mirth, with
the same degree of grace, will serve God more and more acceptably than a pound
of sorrow.

OXFORDSHIRE has Bark-shire (divided first by the Isis, then by the Thames)
on the South, Gloucestershire on the West, Buckingham-shire on the East,
Warwick and Northampton Shires on the North. It abounds with all things
necessary for man's life; and I understand, that Hunters and Falconers are no
where better pleased. Nor needs there more pregnant proof of plenty in this
place, than that lately Oxford was for some years together a Court, a Garrison,
and an University; during which time it was well furnished with provisions on
reasonable rates.

Natural Commodities.
Fallow Deer.
And why of these in Oxford shire? why not rather in Northamptonshire, where
there be the most, or in York shire, where there be the greatest Parks in
England? It is because John Rous of Warwick tells me, that at Woodstock in
this County was the most ancient Park in the whole Land, encompassed with a
Stone-wall by King Henry the First.

Let us premise a line or two concerning Parks, the case, before we come to wha
it is contained therein.

1. The word Parcus appears in Varro, (derivd no doubt a parcendo, to spare or
save) for a place wherein such Cattle are preserved. 2. There is mention once
or twice in Camb. Brit. in Oxfordshire.
Doomsday Book of Parcus silvestris bestiarum, which proves Parks in England
before the Conquest. 3. Probably such ancient Parks (to keep J. Rous in credit
and countenance) were only paled, and Woodstock the first that was walled
about. 4. Parks are since so multiplied, that there be Idem ibid.
more in England than in all Europe besides.
The Deer therein, when living, raise the stomachs of Gentlemen with their
sport; and, when dead, allay them again with their flesh. The fat of Venison is
conceived to be (but I would not have Deer-stealers hear it) of all flesh the
most vigorous nourishment, especially if attended with that essential addition
which Virgil coupleth therewith,

Implentur veteris Bacchi, pinguisque ferinae,

[Old Wine did their thirst allay, fat Venison hunger.]

But Deer are daily diminished in England, since the Gentry are necessitated
into thrift, and forced to turn their pleasure into profit, Jam seges est ubi
Parcus erat; and since the sale of Bucks has become ordinary, I believe, in
pro^ess of time the best stored Park will be found in a Cooks shop in London.

Wood.
Plenty hereof does, more has grown in this County, being daily diminished.
And indeed the Woods therein are put to too hard a task in their daily duty,
(viz. To find fuel and timber for all the houses in, and many out of, the
Shire;) and they cannot hold out, if not seasonably relieved by Pit-cole found
here, or Sea-cole brought hither. This minds me of a passage wherein Oxford was
much concerned; When Shot-over Woods (being bestowed by King Charles the First
on a Person of Honor) were likely to be cut down, the University by Letters
labored their preservation, wherein this among many other pathetical
expressions, That Oxford was one of the eyes of the Land, and Shot-over Woods
the hair of the Eyelids; the loss whereof must needs prejudice the sight, with
too much moisture flowing therein. This retrenched that designed for the
present; but in what case those Woods stand at this day, is to me unknown.

Buildings.
The Colleges in Oxford, advantaged by the vicinity of fair Freestone, do for
the gen^rality of their structure carry away the credit from all in
Christendom, and equal any for the largness of their endowments.

It is not the least part of Oxfords happiness, that a moity of her Founders
were Prelates, (whereas ^bridge has but three Episcopal Foundations,
Peter-house, Trinityhall, and Jesus) who had an experimental knowledge, what
belonged to the necessities and conveniences of Scholars, and therefore have
accommodated them accordingly; principally in providing them the patronages of
many good Benefices, whereby the Fellows of those Colleges are plentifully
maintained, after their leaving of the University.

Of the Colleges University is the oldest, Pembroke the youngest, Christ-church
the greatest, Lincol^ (by many reputed) the least, Magdalen the neatest, Wadham
the most uniform, New-college the strongest, and Jesus college (no fault but
its unhappiness) the poorest; and if I knew which was the richest, I would not
tell, seeing concealment in this kind is the safest. H^-college is most proper
for Southern, Exeter for Western, Queens for Northern, Brazen-nose for
North-western men, St. John's for Londoners, Jesus for Wels^men; and at other
Colleges almost indifferently for men of all Countries. Merton has been most
famous for Schoolmen, Corpus Chresti (formerly called (...) Gollegium) for
Linguists, Christ-church for Poets, All Souls for Orators, Newcollege for
Civilians, Brazen-nose for Disputants, Queens college for Metaphysicians, (...)
for a la^e series of Regius Professor's; Magdalen for ancient, St. John's for
modern Prelates: and all eminent in some one kind or other. And if any of these
Colleges were transported into foreign parts, it would alter its kind, (or
degree at least) and presently of a College proceed an University, as equal to
most, and superior to many, (...) beyond the Seas.

Before I conclude with these Colleges, I must confess how much I was posed
with a passage which I met within the Epistles of Erasmus, writing to his
familiar friend Lud^vicus Vives, then residing in Oxford, in collegio Apum, in
the College of Bees, according to his direction of his Letter: I knew all
Colleges may metaphorically be rermed the Colleges of Bees, wherein the
industrious Scholars live under the rule of one Master: In which respect In
Epistola ad Rusticum monachum.
St. Hierom advised Rusticus the Monk to busy himself in making Bee-^ives,
that from thence he might learn, Monasteriorum ordinem and Regiam disciplinam,
the order of Monasteries and discipline of Kingly government. But why any one
College should be so signally called, and which it was, I was at a loss; till
at last seasonably satisfied that it was Corpus Christi: whereon no unpleasant
story does depend*

In the year Butler of Bees, p. 23.
1630. the Leads over Vives his Study being decayed, were taken up and new
cast, by which occasion the Stall was taken, and with it an incredible mass of
Honey. But the Bees, as presaging their intended and imminent destruction
(whereas they were never known to have swarmed before) did that Spring (to
preserve their famous kind) send down a fair swarm into the Presidents Garden:
The which in the y^ 1633 yielded two Swarms, one whereof pitched in the Garden
for the President, the other they (...) up as a new Colony into their old
Habitation, there to continue the memory of this (...) Doctor, as the
University styled him in a Letter to the ^ardinal.

It seems the^ Bees were Aborigines, from the first building of the College,
being called Collegium Apum in the Founders Statutes, and so is John Claym^d,
the first President thereof, saluted by I^ c^stigationem Chrysostom.
conciuncularum defato.
Eras^.

The Library.
If the Schools may be resembled to the Ring, the Library may the better be
compared to the Diamond therein: not so much for the bunching forth beyond the
rest, as the preciousness thereof, in some respects equalling any in Europe,
and in most kinds exceeding all in England, yet our Land has been ever (...),
much given to the love of Books, and let us Fleet the Cream of a few of the
primest Libraries in all ages.

In the infancy of Christianity, that at York bare away the Bell, founded by
ArchBishop Egbert (and so highly praised by Alevinus in his Epistle to Charles
the Great) but long since abolished.

Before the dissolution of Abbeys, when all Cathedr^s and Convents had their
Libraries, that at Ramsey was the greatest R^bbin, spoke the most and best
Hebrew, abounding in Jewish, and not defective in other Books.

In that age of Lay Libraries (as I may term them, as belonging to the City) I
behold that pertaining to Guild Hall as a principal, ^ounded by Richard
Wh^ington, whence three Stow in his Survey of London.
Cart loads of choice Manuscripts were carried in the reign of King Edward the
sixth on the promise of [never performed Restitution.]

Since the Reformation, that of Benet in Cambridge has for Manuscripts
exceeded any (thank the cost and care of Matthew Parker) Colleg^ate Library in
England.

Of late Cambridge Library, augmented with the Arch-Episcopal Library of
Lambeth, is grown the second in the Land.

As for private Libraries of Subjects, that of Treasurer Burlies was the best
for the use of a Statesman, the Lord Lumlies for an Historian, the late Earl
of Arundels for an Herald, Sir Robert Cottons for an Antiquary, and Archbishop
Ushers for a Divine. Many other excellent Libraries there were o^ particular
persons, Lord Brudnels, Lord Hat tons, etc. routed by our Civil Wars, and many
Books which escaped the execution are fled, [transported] into France, Flanders,
and other foreign parts.

To return to Oxford Library (which stands like Di^ amongst her Nymphs, and)
surpasses all the rest for rarity and multitude of Books; so that if any be
wanting on any Subject, it is because the world does not afford them. This
Library was ^ounded by Humphrey the Good Duke of Glo^ster; confounded in the
reign of Edward the sixth, by those who I list not to name; re-founded by
worthy Sir Thomas Bodley, and the bounty of daily Benefactors.

As for the Kings Houses in this County Woodstock is justly to be preferred,
where the Wood and Water Nymphs might equally be pleased in its ^uation. Queen
Elizabeth had a great affection for this place, as one of her best
R^membrancers of her condition, when a prisoner here (in none of the best
lodgings) in the raig^ of her Sister. Here she escaped a dangerous fire, but
whether casual or intentional God knows. Here hearing a Milk-maid merrily
singing in the Park, she desired exchange of Estates, preferring the poorest
liberty before the richest res^raint. At this day it is a fair, wa^ formerly a
fairer fabric, if the Labyrinth built here by King Henry the second, answered
the Character of Curiosity given it by Authors. But long since the Labyrinth
(time without the help of Ariadne her Clue of Silk, can unravel and display
this most intricate building) is vanished away.

Nor must E^on hard by be forgotten, which though some sullen Soul may recount
amongst the costly tri^es, the more ingenious do behold as Arts pretty Comment,
as Natures pleasant Text, both so intermingled, that Art in some sort may seem
^tural, and Nature artificial therein. It was made by Thomas B^shel, Es^
sometimes servant to Francis Bacon Lord Vor^am. Now because men's expectations
are generally tired with the tedious growing of wood, here he set hedges of
full growth (which thrived ^ll well) so that where the former left no plants,
the following year found trees grown to their full perfection. In a word, a
melancholy mind may hear feast it self to a surfeit with variety of
entertainments. But Rarities of this nature are never sufficiently described
till beheld.

Proverbs.
You were born at Hogs-Norton.]

This is a Village, properly called Hoch-Norton, whose inhabitants (it seems
formerly) were so rustical in their behavior, that boarish and clownish people
are said born at Hogs-Norton. To take a Burford-bait.]

This it seems is a bait, not to stay the stomach, but to lose the wit thereby,
as resolved at last into drunkenness. If the fair Market of Burford in this
County be so much guilty of this foul sin, it is high time to damn the words
of this Proverb, and higher to detest the practice thereof. Otherwise
Burford-bait may have an hook therein, to choke such souls as swallow it,
without their sincere and seasonable repentance.

Banbury Zeal, Cheese, and Cakes.]

I admire to find these joined together in so learned an Author as Mr. Cambden,
affirming * Brit. in Oxfordshire, pa^ 376.
that Town famed for these three things, Quam male convenient? and though Zeal
be deservedly put first, how inconsistent is it with his gravity and goodness,
to couple a spiritual grace with matters of corporeal repast: so that if spoken
in earnest, it has more of a profane than pious Pen; if in jest, more of a
Libeller than Historian.

But to qualify the man, no such words are extant in the Latin Cambden, where
only we read, Nunc autem con^iciendo caseo oppidum notissimum castrum ostendit,
etc.

Secondly, it being in the English translated by Philemon Holland, was at the
first (as I have been credibly informed) a litteral mistake of the Printers
(though not confessed in the Errata) set forth in Anno Dom. 1608. Zeal being
put for Veal in that place.

But what casual in that, may be suspected wilful in the next and last Edition,
Anno 1637. where the error is continued out of design to nick the Town of
Banbury, as reputed then a place of precise people, and not over-conformable in
their carriage. Sure I am that Banbury had a gracious, learned, and painful Mr.
William Whaley, of whom hereaster in this County.
Minister, and this Town need not be ashamed of, nor grieved at what Scoffers
say or write thereof; only let them add Knowledge to their Zeal, and then the
more of Zeal the better their condition.

He looks as the Devil over Lincoln.]

Some fetch the original of this Proverb from a stone picture of the Devil,
which does (or lately did) overlook Lincoln College. Surely, the Architect
intended it no farther than for an ordinary Antic, though beholders have since
applied those ugly looks to envious persons, repining at the prosperity of
their neighbors, and jealous to be overtopt by their vicinity.

The Latins have many Proverbs parallel hereunto, to express the ill aspects
of malevolent spectators, as, Cyclopicus Obtutus, and the Cyclops, we know,
were deformed at the best (envy makes a good face look ill, and a bad, look
worse) Vultus Titanicus, Vultus Scythicus, Limis oculis os oblique inspicere,
Thynni more videre, To look like a Thuny, a Fish, which, as Aristotle says,
has but one eye, and that, as some will have it, on the left side; so full is
malice of sinister acceptions.

To return to our English Proverb, it is conceived of more antiquity than
either of the forenamed Colleges, though the secundary sense thereof lighted
not unhappily, and that it related originally to the Cathedral Church in V^d.
su^rain Lincoln shire.
Lincoln.

Testons are gone to J. Heywood in his five hundred Epigrams, number. 63
Oxford to study in Brazen-nose.]

This Proverb began about the end of the reign of King Henry the eighth, and
happily ended about the middle of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, so that it
continued in use not full fifty years.

This the occasion thereof* King Henry the eighth, as his In-comes, so his
Outgoings were greater than any English Kings since the Conquest. And it
belongs not to me to question the cause of either. Sure it is, as he was always
taking, he was always wanting; and the Shower of Abby-Lands being soon over,
his drought for money was as great as ever before. This made him resolve on the
debasing thereof, Testons especially (a Coin worth six pence, corruptly called
Tester,) so that their intrinsic value was not worth above three shillings
four pence the ounce, to the present profit of the Sovereign, and future loss
of the Subjects. Yea, so allayed they were with Copper (which common people
confound with Brass) and looked so red therewith, that (as my Author says) they
Idem. number. 64
blushed sor shame, as conscious of their own corruption.

King Edward the sixth, and Queen Mary earnestly endeavored the reduction of
money to the true Standard (and indeed the Coin of their stamping is not bad in
its self) but could not compass the calling in of all base money, partly
through the shortness of their Raigns, and partly through the difficulty of the
design. This by politic degrees was effected by Queen Elizabeth, with no great
prejudice to the then present age, and grand advantage to all posterity, as is
justly mentioned on her Monument in Westminster.

Send Verdingales to Heywood in his five Hundred Epigrams, Number. 55.
Broad-Gates in Oxford.]

This will acquaint us with the Female Habit of former Ages, used not only by
the gadding Dinahs of that age, but by most sober Sarahs of the same, so cogent
is a common custom. With these Verdingales the Gowns of Women beneath their
w^stes were pent-housed out far beyond their bodies, so that posterity will
wonder to what purpose those Bucklers of Past-board were employed.

Some deduce the name from the Belgic Verd guard (derived they say from Virg, a
Virgin, and Garder, to keep and preserve) as used to secure modesty, and keep
wantons at distance. Others more truly fetch it from Virtue and Galle, because
the scab and bane thereof, the first inventress thereof being known for a light
House-wife, who under the pretense of modesty, sought to cover her shame, and
the fruits of her wantonness.

These by degrees grew so great, that their wearers could not enter (except
going sidelong) at any ordinary door, which gave the occasion to this Proverb.
But these Verdingales have been disused this forty years, whether because
Women were convinced in their consciences of the va^ity of this, or allured in
their fancies with the novelty of other fashions, I will not determine.

Chronica si penses, cum pugnent Oxonienses,
Post aliquot me^ses volat ira per Angliginenses
Mark the Chronicles aright*
When Oxford Scholars fall to fight,
Before many months expired
England will with wa^ be fired.
I confess Oxoniensis may import the broils betwixt the Townsmen of Oxford, or
Towns men and Scholars; but I conceive it properly to intend the contests
betwixt Scholars and Scholars, which were observed predictional, as if their
animosities were the Index of the Volume of the Land. Such who have time may
exactly trace the truth hereof through our English Histories. Sure I am, there
were shrewd bickerings betwixt the Southern and Northern men in Oxford in the
reign of King Henry the third, not long before the bloody War of the Barons did
begin. The like happened twice under King Richard the second, which seemed to
be the Van-curreer of the fatal fights betwixt Lancaster and York. However this
observation holds not negatively, all being peaceable in that place, and no
broils at Oxford, sounding the al^rum to our late civil dissentions.

Princes.
RICHARD Son to King Henry the second, and Queen Eleanor (was the sixth King
since the Conquest, but second Native of England) born in the City of Oxford,
Anno 1157. Whilst a Prince he was undutiful to his Father, or to qualify the
matter, overdutiful to his Mother, whose domestic quarrels he always espoused.
To expia^e his offense when King, he with Philip King of France undertook a
voyage to the Holy Land, where thorough the Treachery of Templary cowardice of
the Greeks, diversity of the Climate, distance of the place, and differences
betwixt Christian Princes, much time was spent, a mass of money expended, many
lives lost, some honor achieved, but little profit produced. Going to
Palestine, he suffered shipwreck, and many mischiefs on the coasts of Cyprus;
coming for England through Germany, he was tossed with a worse Land-Tempest, being
(in pursuance of an old grudge betwixt them) taken prisoner by Leopaldu^ Duke
of Austria. Yet this Coeur de Lion, or Lion-hearted King (for so was he
commonly called) was no less Lion (though now in a Grate) than when at liberty,
abating nothing of his high spirit in his behavior. The Duke did not
undervalue this his Royal Prisoner, prizing his person at ten years purchase,
according to the [then] yearly revenue of the English Crown. This ransom of an
hundred thousand pounds being paid, he came home; first reformed himself, and
then mended many abuses in the Land, and had done more, had not an unfortunate
Arrow shot out of a besieged Castle in France, put a period to his life, Anno
Dom. 1199.

EDMUND, youngest Son to King Edward the first by Queen Margaret, was born at
Woodstock, Aug. 5. 1301. he was afterward created Earl of Kent, and was Tutor
to his Nephew King Edward the third. In whose reign falling into the tempest of
false, injurious and wicked envy, he was beheaded, for that he never dissembled
his natural brotherly affection toward his Brother deposed, and went about when
he was (God wot) murdered before (not knowing so much) to enlarge him out of
prison, persuaded thereunto by such as covertly practiced his destruction. He
suffered at Winchester the ninteenth of March, in the fourth of Edward the
third.

EDWARD, Eldest Son of King Edward the third, was born at Woodstock in this
County, and bred under his Father (never abler Teacher met with an apter
Scholar) in Marshal Discipline. He was afterward termed the Black Prince, not
so called from his complexion, which was fair enough (save when Sunburned in
his Spanish expedition) nor from his conditions, which were courteous (the
constant attender of Valor;) but from his achievements dismal and black, as
they appeared to the eyes of his enemies, whom he constantly overcame.

But grant him black in himself, he had the fairest Lady to his Wife this Land
and that age did afford, viz. Joane Countess of Salisbury and Kent, which
though formerly twice a Widow, was the third time married unto him. This is she
whose Ga^ter (which now flourishes again) has lasted longer than all the
Wardrobes of the Kings and Queens in England since the Conquest, continued in
the Knighthood of that Order.

This Prince died before his Father at Canterbury in the 46. year of his age,
Anno Dom. 1376. whose Maiden success attended him to the grave, as never foiled
in any undertakings. Had he survived to old age, in all probabilities the Wars
between York and Lancaster had been ended before begun, I mean, prevented in
him, being a person of merit and spirit, and in Seniority before any suspicion
of such divisions. He left two Sons, Edward who died at seven years of age, and
Richard, afterward King, second of that name, both born in France, and
therefore not coming within the compass of our Catalogue.

THOMAS of Woodstock, youngest Son of King Edward the third, and Queen
Philippa, was surnamed of Woodstock, from the place of his Nativity. He was
afterward Earl of Buckingham and Duke of Gloucester, created by his Nephew King
Richard the second, who summoned him to the Parliament, by the Title of the
Kings loving Uncle. He married Isabel one of the Coheirs of Humphrey Bohun
Earl of Essex, in whose right he became Constable of England; a dangerous
place, when it met with an unruly manager thereof.

But this Thomas was only guilty of ill tempered Loyalty, loving the King well,
but his own humors better, rather wilful than hurtful; and presuming on the old
maxim, Patruus est loco Parentis, An Uncle is in the place of a Father. He
observed the King too nearly, and checked him too sharply; whereupon he was
conveyed to Calis, and there strangled. By whose death King Richard being freed
from the causeless fear of an Uncle, became exposed to the cunning Plots of his
Cousin German, Henry Duke of Lancaster, who at last deposed him. This Thomas
founded a fair College at Playsie in Essex, where his body was first buried
with all Solemnity, and afterward translated to Westminster.

ANNE BEAUCHAMP was born at Mr. Dugdale in his Illustration of Warwickshire,
page 334.
Cavesham in this County. Let her pass for a Princess (though not formally)
reductively, seeing so much of History depends on her, as,

Elevated. Depressed. 1. Being Daughter (and in fine sole Heir) to Richard
Beaucamp, that most Martial Earl of Warwick. 2. Married to Richard Nevil Earl
of Sarisbury and Warwick, commonly called the Make-King, and may not she then
by a courteous proportion be termed the MakeQueen? 3. In her own and Husbands
right, she was possessed of one hundred and fourteen Manors in several Shires.
4. Isabell, her eldest daughter, was married to George Duke of Clarence, and
Anne, her younger, to Edward Prince of Wales, son of Henry the sixth, and
afterward to King Richard the third.
1. Her Husband being killed at Barnet fight, all her land by Act of Parliament
was settled on her two Daughters, as if she had been dead in Nature. 2. Being
attainted (on her Husbands score) she was forced to fly to the Sanctuary at
Beauly in Hant-shire. 3. Hence she got her self privately into the North, and
there lived a long time in a mean condition. 4. Her want was increased after
the death of her two daughters, who may be presumed formerly to have secretly
supplied her.


I am not certainly informed when a full period was put by death to these her
sad calamities.

Saints.
St. FRIDESWIDE was born in the City of Oxford, being daughter to Didan the
Duke thereof. It happened that one Algarus, a noble young man, solicited her
to yield to his lust, from whom she miraculously escaped, he being of a sudden
struck Pol. V^. l. 5. hist. Breviar. sec. usum Sarum. M. S. Rob. Buck.
blind. If so, she had better success than as good a Virgin, the daughter to a
greater and better father, I mean Thamar daughter of King David, not so
strangely 2 Samuel 13. 14
secured from the lust of her brother.

She was afterward made Abbess of a Monastery, erected by her father in the
same City, which since is become part of Christ-church, where her body lies
buried.

It happened in the first of Queen Elizabeth, that the Scholars of Oxford took
up the body of the wife of Peter Martyr, who formerly had been disgracefully
buried in a dunghill, and interred it in the Tomb with the dust of St.
Frideswide. Sand^rs de sol. Angl. l. 3. p. 344.
Sanders adds, that they wrote this Inscription, (which he calls Impium
Epitaphium) Hic requiescit Religio cum ^uperstitione: though the words being
capable of a favorable sense on his side, he need not have been so angry.
However we will rub up our old Poetry, and bestow another upon them:

In tumulo fuerat Petri quae Martyris uxor,
Hic cum Frideswida virgin jure jacet.
Virginis intactae nihilum cum cedat honori,
Conjugis in thalamo non temerata fides.
Si facer Angligenis cultus mutetur, (at absit!)
Ossa suum ^ervent mutua tuta locum.
Intom'd with Frideswide, deemed a Sainted maid,
The Wife of Peter Martyr here is laid.
And reason good, for Women chaste in mind,
The best of Virgins come no whit behind.
Should Popery return, (which God forefend!)
Their blended dust each other would de^end.
Yet was there more than eight hundred years betwixt their several deaths,
Saint Frideswide dying Anno 739. and is remembered in the Romish Calendar on the
nineteenth day of October.

St. EDWOLD was younger Gul. Malm^. J. de Pont. Angl. hac d^e. M^rbert in fest.
S.S.
Brother to St. Edmund King of the East Angles, so cruelly martyred by the
Danes, and after his death that Kingdom not only descended to him by right;
but also by his Subjects importunity was pressed upon him. But he declined
both, preferring rather a sollitary life and heavenly contemplation. In
pursuance whereof he retired to Dorcester in this County, and to a Monastery
called Cornhouse therein, where he was interred, and had in great veneration
for his reputed miracles after his death, which happened Anno Dom. 871.

St. EDWARD the CONFESSOR was born at Speed* Chro. in the life of this King.
I slip in this County, and became afterward King of England, sitting on the
Throne for many years, with much peace and prosperity. Famous for the first
founding of Westminster Abbey, and many other worthy a^hievements.

By Bale he is called Edvardus simplex, which may signify either shallow or
single; but (in what sense soever he gave it) we take it in the later. Sole and
single he lived and dyed, never carnally conversing with St. Edith his Queen:
which is beheld by different persons according to their different judgments,
(colored eyes make colored objects) some pitying him for defect or natural
Impotence; others condemning him as affecting singelness, for want of Conjugal
affection; others applauding it as an high p^ece of (...) and perfection. Sure
I am, it opened a door for foreign Competitors, and occasioned the Conquest of
this Nation. He dyed Anno Dom. 1065. and lies buried in Westminster Abbey.

Cardinals.
ROBERT PULLEN or Bishop Godwin in h^ Catalogue of Cardina's.
Pullain or Pulley or Puley or Bullen or Pully, for thus variously S. N.
is he found written. Thus the same name passing many mouths seems in some sort
to be declined into several Cases, whereas indeed it still remains one and
the same word, though differently spelled and pronounced.

In his youth ^e studied at Paris, whence he came over into England in the
reign of King Henry the First, when learning ran very low in Oxford, the
university there being first much affl^cted by Herald the Dane, afterward
almost extinguished by the cruelty of ^he Conqueror. Our Pullen improved his
utmost power with the King and Prelates for the restoring thereof, and by his J
Bale and J. Pits de script. B^it.
praying, preaching, and public reading, gave a great advancement thereunto.
Remarkable is his character in the Chronicle of Ci^ed by Mr. (...) in
Oxsord-shire.
Osny, Robertus Pulenius scriptur as divin as quae in Anglia obsolverant apud
Oxoniam legere c^pit, Robert Pullen began to read at Oxford the holy scriptures
which were grown out of fashion in England.

The fame of his le^rning commended him beyond the Seas, and it is remarkable,
that whereas it is usual with Popes (in policy to unravel what such weaved who
were before them) three successive Popes continued their love to, and increased
honors upon him:

1. Innocent courteously sent for him to Rome. 2. Celestine created him
Cardinal of St. Eusebius, Anno 1144. 3. Lucius the second made him Chancellor
of the Church of Rome.
He lived at Rome in great respect, and although the certain date of his death
cannot be collected, it happened about the year of our Lord, 1150.

THOMAS JOYCE or Jorce, a (...). script. (...). cent. 4. number. 89. and Pits in
Anno 1311.
Dominican, proceeded Doctor of Divinity in Oxford, S. N.
and living there he became Provincial of his Order, both of England and Wales.
From this place without ever having any other preferment, Pope Clement the
fifth created him Cardinal of St. Sabine; though some conceive he wanted
breadth proportionable to such an height of dignity, having no other revenue to
maintain it, Cardinals being accounted Kings fellow, in that Age. Others admire
at the contradiction betwixt Friars p^ofession and practice, that persons so
low should be so high, so poor so rich; which makes the same men to (...), that
so chaste might be so wanton.

He is remarkable on this account, that he had Idem ut prius.
six brethren all Dominicans. I will not listen to their compa^ison, who
resemble them to the seven sons of Acts 15. 14.
Sceva, which were Exorcists; but may term them a week of brethren, whereof
this Rubricated Cardinal was the Dominical letter. There want not those who
conceive great virtue in the youngest son of these seven, and that his Touch
was able to cure the Popes Evil. This Thomas, as he had for the most time lived
in Oxford, so his Corpse by his own desire were buried in his Convent therein.
He flourished Anno Dom. 1310.

Prelates.
HERBERT LOSING was born in Godwins (...) of the Bishops of Norwich, page ^8.
Oxford, his father being an Abbot, seeing wives in that Age were not forbidden
the Clergy, though possibly his father turned Abbot of Winchester in his old
age, his son purchasing that preferment for him. But this Herbert bought a
better for himself, giving nineteen hundred pounds to King William Rufus for
the Bishopric of Thetford. Hence the Verse was made,

Filius est Praesul, pater Abbas, Simon uterque. Meaning that both of them were
guilty of Simony, a fashionable sin in the reign of that King, preferring more
for their gifts than their endowments.

Reader, pardon a digression: I am confident there is one, and but one, sin
frequent in the former Age, both with Clergy and Laity, which in our days our
Land is not guilty of, and may find many compurgators of her innocence therein:
I mean the sin of Simony, seeing none in our Age will give any thing for Church
livings; partly because the persons presented thereunto have no assurance to
keep them, partly because of the uncertainty of Tithes for their maintenance.
But whether this our Age has not added in sa^rilege what it wants in simony,
is above my place to discuss, and more above my power to decide.

To return to our Herbert, whose character hitherto cannot entitle him to any
room in our Catalogue of Worthies; but know that afterward he went to Rome,
(no such clean wash^ing as in the water of Tyber) and thence returned as free
from fault as when first born. Thus cleansed from the Leprosy of simony he
came back into England, removed his Bishopric from Thetford to Norwich, laid
the first stone, and in effect finished the fair Cathedral therein, and built
five beautiful Parish Churches. He dyed Anno Dom. 1119. See more of his
character, on just occasion, in Suffolk under the title of Prelates.

OWEN OGLETHORP was (says my Bishop Godwin in his Bishops of Carlisle.
Author) born of good parentage, and I A M P.
conjecture a Native of this County, finding Owen Oglethorp his Kinsm^n twice
HighSheriff thereof in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. He was President of
Magaalen College in Oxford, Dean of Windsor, and at last made Bishop of Carlisle
by Queen Mary. A good natured man, and when single by himself very pliable to
please Queen Elizabeth, whom he crowned Queen, which the rest of his Order
refused to do: but when in conjunction with other Popish Bishops, such
principles of stubbornness were distilled into him, that it cost him his (...).
However an Sir John Harrington in his Addition to Bishop Godwin.
Author tells me, that the Queen had still a favor for him, intending his
restitution either to his own or a better Bishopric, upon the promise of his
general conformity, had he not dyed suddenly of an Apoplexy, 1559.

Since the Reformation.
JOHN UNDERHILL was born in the City of (...) of New-college, Anno 1563.
Oxford, sirst bred in New college, and afterward Rector of Lincoln-college in
that University; Chaplain to Queen Elizabeth, and esteemed a good Preacher in
those days.

The Bishopric of Oxford had now been void 22. years; and some suspected that
so long a Vacancy would at last terminate in a Nullity, and that See be
dissolved. The ^ause that Church was so long a widow, was the want of a
competent Estate to prefer her: At last the Queen 1589. appointed John
underhill Bishop thereof. An ingenious Sir John Harrington in the Bishops of
Oxsord.
Pen (but whose accusative suggestions are not always to be believed) hinteth
a suspicion, as if he gave part of the (...) portion this Church had to a great
Courtier, which made the match betwixt them. He dyed 1592. and lies buried in
the middle Quire of Christ's Church.

JOHN BANCROFT was born at Ascot in this County, and was advanced by Archbishop
Bancroft his Uncle, from a Student in Christ-church, to be Master of
universitycollege in Oxford. Here it cost him much pains and expense in a long
suit to recover and settle the ancient Lands of that Foundation. Afterward he
was made Bishop of Oxford, and during his sitting in that See he renewed no
Leases, but let them run out for the advantage of his successor. He obtained
the Royalty of Shot-over for, and annexed the Vicari^ge of Cudsden to, his
Bishopric; where he built a fair Palace and a Chapel, expending on both about
three thousand five hundred pounds; Cujus munificentiae (said the Oxford Orator
of him to the King at Woodstock) debemus, quod incerti Laris Mitra, surrexerit
e pulvere in Palatium. But now by a retrograde motion that fair building, e
Palatio recidit in pulverem, being burnt down to the ground in the late wars,
but for what advantage, as I do not know, so I list not to enquire. This Bishop
dyed Anno Dom. 1640.

States=Men.
Sir DUDLEY CARLETON Knight, was born in this County, bred a Student in
Christ-church in Oxford. He afterward was related as a Secretary to Sir Ralph
Winwood Ambassador in the Low Countries, when K. James resigned the cautionary
Towns to the States. Here he added so great experience to his former learning,
that afterward our King employed him for twenty years together Ambassador in
Venice, Savoy, and the united Provinces; Anne Garrard his Lady (coheir to
George Garrard, Esquire) accompanying him in all his travels, as is expressed in
her Epitaph in Westminster Abbey.

He was by King Charles the first created Baron of Imbercourt in Surrey, and
afterward Viscount Dorchester, marying for his second wife the daughter of Sir
Henry Glenham, the Relict of Paul Viscount Banning, who survived him. He
succeeded the Lord Conway, (when preferred President of the Council) in the
Secretary-ship of State, being sworn at White Hall, December. 14. 1628. He dyed
without issue Anno Dom. 163.. assigning his burial (as appears on her Tomb)
with his first wife, which no doubt was performed accordingly.

Soldiers.
Of the NORRISES and the KNOWLLS.

No County in England can present such a brace of Families contemporaries, with
such a bunch of Brethren on either, for eminent achievements. So great their
states and stomachs, that they often justled together: and no wonder if
Oxfordshire wanted room for them, when all England could not hold them
together. Let them be considered root and branch, first severally, then
conjunctively.

Father. Mother. Father. Mother. Henry Lord Norris (descended from the
Viscounts Lovels) whose father dyed in a manner Martyr for the Queens mother,
executed about the business of Anna Bullen. Margaret, one of the daughters and
heirs of John Lord Williams of Tame, Keeper of Queen Elizabeth whilst in
restraint under her sister, and civil unto her in those dangerous days. Sir
Francis Knowlls Treasurer to the Q. household, and Knight of the Garter, (who
had been an exile in Germany under Q. Mary) deriving himself from Sir Robert
Knowlls that conquering Commander in France. -- Carry, sister to Henry Lord
Hunsdon, and Cousingerman to Queen Elizabeth, having Mary Bullen for her
mother. Thus Queen Elizabeth beheld them both, not only with gracious but
grateful eyes. Ricot in this County was their chief habitation. Thus the
Husband was allied to the Queen in conscience, (Fellow Sufferers for the
Protestant cause) the Wife in kindred. Grays in this County was their chief
dwelling. Their Issue.
1. William, Marshall of Barwick, who dyed in Ireland, and was father to
Francis afterward Earl of Bark-shire. 2. Sir John, who had Cambdens E^z. in
Anno 1578.
three horses in one day killed under him in a Battle against the Scots. But
more of him hereafter. 3. Sir Thomas, President of Munster. Being hurt in a
Fight, and counting it a scratch rather then a wound, he scorned to have it
plaistered; as if the Balsom of his body would cure it self: but it rancled,
festred, gangreen'd, and he dyed thereof. 4. Sir Henry, who dyed about the same
time in the same manner. 5. Maximilian, who was slain in the war of Britain. 6.
Sir Edward, who lead the Front at the taking of the Groyn; and fought so
valiantly at the Siege of Ostend. Of all six he only survived his Parents.
Their Issue.
1. Sir Henry, whose daughter and sole heir was married to the Lord Paget. 2.
Sir William, Treasurer of the household to K. James, by whom he was created
Baron Knowlls, May 3. 1603. Viscount Wallingford, 1616. and by K. Charles 1. in
the first of his reign Earl of Banbury. 3. Sir R. father to Sir Robert Knowlls
of Greys, now living. 4. Sir Francis, who was living at, and chosen a Member of
the late Long Parliament; since dead, aged 99. 5. Sir Thomas, a Commander in
the Low Countries. 6. Lettice, though of the weaker sex, may well be recounted
with her brethren, as the strongest pillar of the Family. Second wife she was
to R. Dudley, Earl of Leicester, and (by a former husband) mother to R.
Devereux Earl of Essex; both prime Favorites in their Generations.


The Norrises were all, Martis pulli, men of the sword, and never out of
military employment. The Knowlls were rather valiant men than any great
soldiers, as little experienced in war. Queen Elizabeth loved the Knowlls for
themselves, the Norrises for themselves and herself, being sensible that she
needed such martial men for her service. The Norrises got more honor abroad,
the Knowlls more profit at home, conversing constantly at Court; and no wonder
if they were the warmest, who sat next to the Fire.

There was once a Challenge passed betwixt them at certain Fragmenta R^galia in
Knowlls.
Exercises, to be tried between the two Fraternities, the Queen and their aged
Fathers being to be the Spectators and Judges, till it quickly became a ^at
quarrel betwixt them. Thus, though at the first they may be said to have fenced
with rebated Rapiers and swords buttoned up, in merriment only to try their
skill and strength, they soon fell to it at sharps indeed, seeking for many
years together to supplant one another, such the heart-smoking, and then
heart-burning betwixt them. And although their inclinations kept them asunder,
the one Brotherhood coming seldom to Court, the other seldomer to Camp; yet
the Knowlls are suspected to have done the Norrises bad offices, which at last
did tend to their mutual hurt; so that it had been happy for both, had these
their contests been seasonably turned into a cordial compliance.

Sir JOHN NORRIS must be resumed, that we may pay a greater Tribute of respect
to his memory. He was a most accomplished General, both for a charge, which is
the Sword; and a retreat, which is the Shield, of War. By the later he
purchased to himself immortal praise, when in France he brought off a small
hand-full of English from a great arm-full of enemies; fighting as he
retreated, and retreating as he fought; so that always his Rear affronted the
Enemy. A retreat worth ten victories got by surprise, which speak rather the
fortune, than either the valor or discretion of a General.

He was afterward sent over with a great Command into Ireland, where his
success neither answered to his own care, nor others expectation. Indeed
hitherto Sir John had fought with right-handed enemies in France and the
Netherlands, who was now to fight with left handed foes, for so may the
Wilde-Irish well be termed, (so that this great Master of Defense was now to
seek a new guard) who could lie on the coldest earth, swim through the deepest
water, run over what was neither earth nor water, I mean, bogs and marshes. He
found it far harder to find out than fight his enemies, they so secured
themselves in Fastnesses. Supplies, sown thick in promises, came up thin in
performances; so slowly were succors sent unto him.

At last a great Lord was made Lieutenant of Ireland, of an opposite party to
Sir John; there being Animosities in the Court of Queen Elizabeth, (as well as
of later Princes) though her general good success rendered them the less to the
public notice of posterity. It grieved Sir John to the heart, to see one of an
opposite Faction should be brought over his head, in so much that some conceive
his working soul broke the cask of his body, as wanting a vent for his grief
and anger; for going up into his Chamber, at the first hearing of the News he
suddenly dyed, Anno Dom. 1597.

Queen Elizabeth used to call the Lady Margaret, his mother, her own Crew,
being (as it seems) black in complexion, (a color which no whit unbecame the
faces of her Martial issue;) and upon the news of his death sent this Letter
unto her, which I have transcribed from an Auth^ntick Copy.

To the Lady Norris.
22 Sept. 1597. My own Crow:
Harm not your self for bootless help, but show a good example to comfort your
dolorous Yoke Fellow. Although We have deferred long to represent to you Our
gri^d thoughts, because We liked full ill to yield you the first reflection of
misfortune, whom We have always rather sought to cherish and comfort; yet
knowing now, that Necessity must bring it to your ear, and Nature consequently
must move both grief and passion in your heart; We resolved no longer to
smother, neither Our care for your sorrow, or the sympathy of Our grief for
your loss. Wherein, if it be true, That society in sorrow works diminution, We
do assure you by this true messenger of Our Mind, that Nature can have stirred
no more dolorous affection in you as a Mother for a dear Son, than gratefulness
and memory of his service past, has wrought m^s his Sovereign, apprehension of
Our miss for so worthy a Servant. But now that Natures common work is done, and
he that was born to dye has paid his tribute, let that Christian discretion
stay the flux of your immoderate grieving, which has instructed you both by
Example and Knowledge, that nothing in this kind has happened, but by GODS
Divine Providence. And let these lines from your loving and gracious Sovereign
serve to assure you, that there shall ever appear the lively character of Our
Estimation of him that was, in Our gracious care of you and yours that are
left, in valuing rightly all their faithful and honest endeavors. More at this
time We will not write of this unpleasant subject, but have dispatched this
Gent. to visit both your Lord and you, and to condole with you in the true
sense of your love, and to pray that the world may see, what time cures in a
weak mind, that Discretion and Moderation helps in you in this accident,
where there is so just cause to demonstrate true Patience and Moderation.

Your gracious and loving Sovereign, E. R.


Now, though^ nothing more consolatory and pathetical could be written from a
Prince, yet his death went so near to the heart of the Lord, his ancient
father, that he dyed soon after.

Writers.
JOHN HANVILE took his name (as I conceive) from Hanwell a Village in this A M
P.
County, (now the habitation of the ancient Family of the Copes) seeing none
other in England, both in sound and spelling, draws nearer to his Surname. He
proceeded Master of Arts in Oxford, then studied in Paris, and traveled over
most parts in Christendom. He is commonly called Bale de script. Brit. cent. 3.
nu^. 49.
Archithrenius, or Prince of lamentation, being another Jeremy and man of
mourning. He wrote a book, wherein he bemoned the errors and vices of his own
Age; and himself deserved to live in a better: Yet this doleful Dove could peck
as well as groan, and sometimes was Idem ibid.
satirical enough in his passion, there being but a narrow ^age betwixt grief
and anger; and bitterness is a quality common to them both. He flourished under
King John, Anno 1200. and after his return from his travels, is conceived by
some to have lived and dyed a Benedictine of St. Albans.

JOHN of OXFORD was no doubt so named from his birth in that City; otherwise
had he only had his Education or eminent learning therein, there were hundreds
John's of Oxford as well as himself. Hector Boethius In the Preface of his
History to James King of Scotland.
surnamed him a Vado Boum, and owneth him the next Historian to Jeffrey
Monmouth in age and industry. He was a great Anti-Becketist, as many more in
that Age of greater learning (except stubornness be made the standard thereof)
than Becket himself: Being Bale de script. Bri^. cent. 3. number 42.
Dean of old Sar^m, and Chaplain to King Henry the second, he was by him
employed with others, to give an account to the Pope (but I question whether he
would take it) of the Kings carriage in the business of Becket. He was
preferred Anno 1175. Bishop of Norwich, where he repaired his Bishop Godwin in
the By shop^ o^ Norwich.
Cathedral, lately defaced with fire, built a fair Almes-house, and
Trinity-church in Ipswich. His death happened Anno Dom. 1200.

ROBERT BACON, B^le de scrip. Brit. cent. 4. number. 4. and P^ts in Anno 1248
first Scholar of, afterward a familiar Friend to, St. Edmund Archbishop of
Canterbury, was bred a Doctor of Divinity in Oxford, and when aged became S. N.
a Dominican or preaching Friar; and for his Sermons he was highly esteemed by
King Henry the third. He was M. Paris An 1233. p. 386.
Lepidus and Cynicus, and a most professed enemy to Peter Roach Bishop of
Winchester.

Mat^hew Paris Anno 12^8. p 747.
gives him and another (viz. Richard de Fishakle) this praise, Quibus non erant
majores, imo nec pares (ut creditur) viventes in Theologia, and aliis
scientiis: and I listen the rather to his commendation, because being himself a
Benedictine Monk, he had an antipathy against all Friars. I behold this Robert
Bacon as the senior of all the Bacons, which like tributary streams disembogued
themselves, with all the credit of their actions, into Roger Bacon, who in
process of time has monopolized the honor of all his Sirname-sakes in Oxford.
Our Robert dyed Anno Dom 1248.

ROBERT of OXFORD was not only an Admirer, but Adorer of Thomas Aquinas his
contemporary; accounting his Opinions Oracles, as if it were a venial sin to
doubt of, and a mortal to deny any of them. Mean time the Bishop of Paris, with
the consent of the Masters of Sorbonne, (the great Champions of liberty in this
kind) granted a license to any Scholar, Opinari de opinionibus, to guess freely
(and by consequence to discuss in Disputations) any man's Opinions, which as yet
by a general Council were not decided matters of faith. Our Rober^, much
offended thereat, Bale de script. Brit. cent. 4.
wrote not only against Henricus Gandavensis and Aegi^ius Romanus, but also
the whole College of Sorbonne: an act beheld of many as of more boldness than
brains, for a private person to perform. He flourished under King Henry the
third, Anno Dom. 1270.

JEFFREY CHAUCER was by most probability born at Woodstock in this County,
though other places lay stiff claim to his Nativity.

Berk-shires title. Londons title. Oxford shires title. Leland confesses it
likely that he was born in Barochensi provincia, and In his Brit. in Berk-shire.
Mr. Cambden avoweth that Dunington-castle nigh unto Newburie was anciently his
Inheritance. There was lately an old Oak standing in the Park called Chaucers
Oak. The Author of his life, set forth 1602. proves him born in London, out
of these his own words in the Testament of love: Also in the City of London,
that is to m^e ^ot dear and sweet, in which I was forth grown; and more
kindly love have I to that place than to any other in yerth, (as every kindly
creature has full appetite to that place of his kindly ingendure. Besides, Mr.
Cambden praises Mr. Edmund Spencer the Londoner for the best Poet, In his
Elizabeth, An. 1598.
Ne Chaucero quidem concive excepto, Chaucer himself his fellow-citizen not
being excepted. Leland adds a probability of his birth in Oxfordshire, and
In his Brit. in Oxfordshire
Cambden says of Woodstock, Cu^ nihil habeat quod ostentet, H^merum nostrum
Anglicum, Galfredum Chaucerum alumnum suum fuisse gloriatur. Besides, D^ Ang.
script. Anno 1400.
^. Pits is positive that his father was a Knight, and that he was born at
Woodstock. And Queen Elizabeth passed a fair stone-house next to her Palace in
that Town, unto the Tenant by the name of Chaucers house, whereby it is also
known at this day.

Now, what is to be done to decide the difference herein? Indeed Appion the
Grammarian would have Homer (concerning whose Birthplace there was so much
controversy) raised ab Inferis, that he might give a true account of the place
of his Nativity. However our Chaucer is placed he^e, (having just grounds for
the same) until stronger reasons are brought to remove him.

He was a terse and elegant Po^t, (the Homer of his Age) and so refined our
English Tongue, Bale d^ (...). (...). (...). 7 number. 14.
Ut inter expolitas gentium linguas potuit recte quidem connumerari. His skill
in Mathematics was great, (being instructed therein by Joannes Sombus and
Nicholas of Linn) which he evidenceth in his book De Sphaera. He being
Contemporary with Gower, was living Anno Dom. 1402.

Since the Reformation.
THOMAS LYDYATE. Now I find the old sentence to be true, Difficile fugitivas
mortuorum memorias retrahere, seeing all my industry and inquiry can retrive
very little of this worthy person; and the Reader, I hope, will not be angry
with me, who am so much grieved with my self for the same. Indeed contradicting
qualities met in him, Eminency and Obscurity; the former for his Learning, the
later for his Living. All that we can recover of him is as follows* He was
born at New-college Reg. in Anno 1593.
Alkerton in this County, bred first in Winchester school, then in New college
in Oxford, being admitted therein June 22. 1593. An admirable Mathematician,
witness these his learned Works left to posterity:

1. De variis Annorum Formis. 2. De natura Coeli and condition Elementorum. 3.
Praelectio Astronomica. 4. De origin Fontium. 5. Disquisitio Phisiologica. 6.
Explicatio and additameutnm Arg. temp. not. and ministerii Christi.
In handling of these subjects, it seems, he crossed Scalliger, who was highly
offended thereat, conceiving himself such a Prince of Learning, it was high
Treason for any to doubt of, much more deny, his opinion: Yea, he conceited his
own Judgment so canonical, that it was Heresy for any inferior person to
differ from the same. Shall Scalliger write a book of the Emendation of Times,
and should any presume to write one of the Emendation of Scalliger? especially
one no public Professor, and so private a person as Lydyate? However this
great Bugbear Critic, finding it more easy to contemn the person, than
confute the arguments of his Adversary, slighted Lydyate as inconsiderable,
jeering him for a Prophet, who indeed somewhat traded in the Apocalyptical
Divinity.

Learned men of unbiassed judgments will maintain, that Lydyate had the best in
that Contest, but here it came to pass what Eccle^. 9. 16.
Solomon had long before observed, Nevertheless the poor man's wisdom is
despised, and his words are not heard.

He never attained higher Church-preferment than the Rectory of Alkerton the
Town of his Nativity, and deserted that (as I have cause to suspect) before his
death. Impute his low condition to these causes,

1. The nature of his Studies, which being Mathematical and Speculative,
brought not, (...), Grist to the mill. 2. The nature of his Nature, being
ambitious of Privity and Concealment. 3. The death of Prince Henry, (whose
Library Keeper he was) and in whose Grave Lydyates hopes were interred. 4. His
disaffection to Church Discipline, and Ceremonies used therein: though such
wrong his memory, who represent him an Anabaptist.
His modesty was as great as his want, which he would not make known to any.
Sir William Boswell, well understanding his worth, was a great friend unto him;
and so was Bishop Williams. He dyed about Westminster, as I take it, in the
year of our Lord, 1644. Happy had it been for posterity, if on his deathbed he
could have bequeathed his Learning to any surviving Relation.

Sir RICHARD BAKER Knight, was a Native of this County, and High Sheriff
thereof in the 18. of King James, Anno Dom. 1621. His youth he spent in
learning, the benefit whereof he reaped in his old age, when his Estate
thorough Surety-ship (as I have heard him complain) was very much impaired: But
God may smile on them, on whom the World does frown; whereof his pious old age
was a memorable instance, when the storm on his Estate forced him to fly for
shelter to his studies and devotions. He wrote an Exposition on the Lords
prayer, which is corrival with the best Comments which professed Divines have
written on that subject. He wrote a Chronicle on our English Kings, embracing a
method peculiar to himself, digesting Observables under several heads, very
useful for the Reader. This reverend Knight left this troublesome world about
the beginning of our Civil wars.

WILLIAM WHATELEY was born in Banbury, (whereof his father was twice Mayor) and
bred in Christs-college in Cambridge. He became afterward Minister in the Town
of his Nativity; and though generally people do not respect a Prophet or
Preacher when a Man, whom they knew whilst a Child; yet he met there with
deserved reverence to his Person and Profession. Indeed he was a good Linguist,
Philoso* pher, Mathematician, Divine; and (though a Poetical Satirical Pen is
pleased to pass a jeer upon him) free from Faction. He first became known to
the world by his book called the Bride-bushe, which some say has been more
condemned than confuted, as maintaining a Position rather odious than untrue:
But others hold that blows given from so near a Relation to so near a Relation,
cannot be given so lightly, but they will be taken most heavily. Other good
Works of his have been set forth since his death, which happened in the 56.
year of his age, Anno Dom. 1639.

JOHN BALLE The substance of his Character is taken out of his life written by
Mr. Samuel Clarke.
was born at Casfigton (four miles North-west of Oxford) in this County, an
obscure Village, only illustrated by his Nativity. He proceeded Bachelor of
Arts in Brazen-nose college in Oxford, (his Parents purse being not able to
maintain him longer) and went into Cheshire, until at last he was beneficed at
Whitmore in the County of Stafford. He was an excellent School man and
Schoolmaster, (qualities seldom meeting in the same man) a painful Preacher,
and a profitable Writer, and his Treatise of Faith cannot sufficiently be
commended. Indeed he lived by faith, having but small means to maintain him,
(but 20* pounds yearly Salary, besides what he got by teaching and boording his
Scholars) and yet was wont to say he had enough, enough, enough: Thus
contentment consists not in heaping on more fuel, but in taking away some
fire. He had an holy facetiousness in his discourse, when his friend having had
a fall from his horse, and said that he never had the like deliverance; Yea,
(said Mr. Balle) and an hundred times when you never fell; accounting Gods
preserving us from, equal to his rescuing us out of, dangers. He had an humble
heart free from passion, and though somewhat disaffected to Ceremonies and
Church Discipline, confuted such as conceived the corruptions therein ground
enough for a separation. He hated all New Lights and pretended Inspirations
besides Scripture; and when one asked him whether he at any time had experience
thereof in his own heart, No (said he) I bless God, and if I should ever have
such fantasies, I hope God would give me grace to resist them. Notwithstanding
his small means he lived himself comfortably, relieved others charitably, left
his children competently, and dyed piously October the 20. Anno Dom. 1640.

WILLIAM CHILLINGWORTH was born in the City of Oxford, so that by the benefit
of his birth he fell from the lap of his mother into the arms of the Muses. He
was bred in Trinity college in this University; an acute and subtle Disputant,
but unsettled in judgment, which made him go beyond the Seas, and in some sort
was conciled to the Church of Rome: but, whether because he found not the
respect he expected, (which some shrewdly suggest) or because his Conscience
could not close with all the Romish corruptions, (which more charitably
believe) he returned into England, and in testimony of his true conversion
wrote a book entitled, The Religion of Protestants a safe way to salvation,
against Mr. Knot the Jesuit: I will not say, Malo nodo malus quaerendus est
cuneus, but affirm no person better qualified than this Author, with all
necessary accomplishments to encounter a Jesuit. It is commonly reported that
Dr. Prideaux compared his book to a Lamprey, fit for food if the venomous
string were taken out of the back thereof: a passage in my opinion inconsistent
with the Doctors approbation, prefixed in the beginning of his book. This
William Chillingworth was taken prisoner by the Parliament Forces at Arundel
castle, and not surprised and slain in his studi^es, as Archimedes at the
sacking of Syracuse, (as some have given it out) but was safely conducted to
Chichester, where notwithstanding hard usage hastened his dissolution.

DANIEL FEATLY D. D. was born in (or very near to) the City of Oxford, his
father being a servant of Corpus-Christi college, and this his son Fellow
thereof. Here he had the honor to make the Speech in the College, at the
Funeral of Dr. Reynalds.

Some men may be said to have mutinous parts, which will not obey the commands
of him who is the owner of them: Not so this Doctor, who was perfect Master of
his own Learning. He did not, as Quintilian says of some, Occultis thesaur is
incumbere; but his learning was, in numerato, for his present using thereof. He
was as good in the Schools as in the Pulpit, and very happy in his Disputes
with Papists; for in the Conference with F. Fisher, (when Fisher was caught in
his own Net) though Dr. White did wisely cast that Net, Dr. Featly did help
strongly to draw it to the shore.

It seems, though he was in, yet he was not of, the late Assembly of Divines;
as whose body was with them, whilst his heart was at Oxford: Yea, he
discovered so much in a Letter to the Archbishop of Armagh, which being
intercepted he was proceeded against as a Spy, and closely imprisoned, though
finding some favor at last, he dyed in the Prison College at Chelsey, Anno
Dom. 1643. His Wifes son has since communicated to me his Pocket-Manual of his
memorable observations, all with his own hand; but alas to be read by none but
the writer thereof.

JOHN WHITE (descended from the Whites in Hant-shire) was born at Where his
father held a Lease from New-college.
StantonSt. John's in this County, bred first in Winchester, then New-college in
Oxford, whereof he was Fellow; and fixed at last a Minister at Dorchester in
Dorcet-shire well nigh forty years. A grave man, yet without moroseness, as who
would willingly contribute his shot of facetiousness on any just occasion. A
constant Preacher, so that in the course of his Ministry he expounded the
Scripture all over, and half over again; having an excellent faculty in the
clear and solid interpreting thereof. A good Governor, by whose wisdom the Town
of Dorchester (notwithstanding a casual merciless fire) was much enriched;
Knowledge causing Piety, Piety breeding Industry, and Industry procuring Plenty
unto it. A beggar was not then to be seen in the Town, all able Poor being set
on work, and impotent maintained by the profit of a public Brew house, and
other collections.

He absolutely commanded his own Passions, and the purses of his Parishioners,
whom he could wind up to what height he pleased on important occasions. He was
free from covetousness, if not trespassing on the contrary: and had a
Patriarchal influence both in Old and New England, yet toward the end of his
days Factions and fond Opinions crept in his flock; a new generation arose,
which either did not know, or would not acknowledge this good man; disloyal
persons, which would not pay the due respect to the Crown of his old age,
whereof he was sadly and silently sensible.

He was chosen one of the Assembly of Divines, and his judgment was much relied
on therein. He married the sister of Dr. Burges, the great Nonconformist, (who
afterward being reclaimed wrote in the defense of Ceremonies) by whom he left
four sons, and dyed quietly at Dorchester, Anno Dom. 164..

I hope that Eccles. 9. 15
Solomon's observation of the poor wise man, who saved the little City, [ Yet no
man remembered him] will not be verified of this Town, in relation to this their
deceased Pastor, whom I hope they will not, I am sure they should not, forget,
as a person so much meriting of them in all considerations. His Comment on some
part of Genesis is lately set forth, and more daily expected.

Benefactors to the Public since the Reformation.
THOMAS TISDALL, of Glimpton in this County, Esquire; deceasing Anno 1610.
bequeathed five thousand pounds to George Abbot then Bishop of London, John
Bennet Knight, and Henry Array Doctor of Divinity, to purchase Lands for the
maintenance of seven Fellows and six Scholars: which money deposited in so
careful hands, was as advantagiously expended for the purchase of two hundred
and fifty pounds per annum. It fell then under consideration, that it was pity
so great a bounty ( substantial enough to stand of it self) should be Some
intentions there were to have made it an addition to Baliol College.
adjected to a former Foundation; whereupon a new College (formerly called
Broad-gates-hall in Oxford) was erected therewith by the name of
Pembroke-College, which since has met with some considerable Benefactors. May
this the youngest College in England have the happiness of a youngest child,
who commonly have in their mothers love, what they lack in the land of their
father.

We must not forget, that the aforesaid Thomas Tisdall gave many other
charitable Legasies, and deserved very well of Abington-school, founding an
Usher therein.

Memorable Persons.
ANNE GREEN, a person unmarried, was indicted, arraigned, cast, condemned and
executed, for killing her child, at the Assizes at Oxford, December. 14. 1650.
After some hours her body being taken down, and prepared for dissection in the
Anatomyschools, some heat was found therein, which by the care of the Doctors
was improved into her perfect recovery. Charitable people interpret her so
miraculous preservation a Compurgator of her innocence. Thus she intended for a
dead, continues a living Anatomy of divine Providence, and a monument of the
wonderful contrivances thereof. If Hippolytus, revived only by Poetical
fancies, was surnamed Virbius, because twice a man; why may not Mulierbia, by
as good proportion, be applied to her? who since is married, and lives in this
County in good reputation.

Lord Mayors.
Name. Father. Place. Company. Time. 1. John Norman John Norman Banbury Draper
1453 2. Thomas Pargitor John Pargitor Chippingnorton Salter 1530 3. Michael
Dormer Jeffrey Dormer Tame Mercer 1541

The Names of the Gentry of this County returned by the Commissioners in the
twelfth year of King Henry the sixth.
William Bishop of Lincoln William de Lovell, chiv. Commissioners to take the
Oaths. Stephen Haytfeld Knights for the Shire. Richard Quatermayns Knights for
the Shire.

Tho. Wikeham, chiv. Lodowici Grevill Iohannis Wisham Johan. Banufo Humphridi
Hay Iohannis Tyso Will. Thomlyns Thome Andrey Thome at Mill Iohannis Benet
Rad. Archer Ioh. Archer Thome Wills Iohannis Perysson Ioh. Cross de Sibford
Thome Eburton Thome Kynch Willielmi Brise Willielmi Dandy Richardi Stanes
Iohannis Wallrond Iohannis Daypoll Iohannis Fabian Will. Page Iohannis Mose
Williel. Seton Iohannis Pytte Thome Helmeden Tho. Schools Thome Sperehawke
Thome Gascoine Thome Clear Ioh. Goldwell Williel. Goldwell Iohannis White Thome
Lynne Will. Smith de Bloxham Thome Chedworth Willielmi Haliwell Ioh. Chedworth
Ioh. de Berford Robert: Q^inaton Richardi at Mill Willielmi Mason Willielmi
almer Thome Tymmes Ioh. Cross de Drayton Alexandri Byfeld Job. Andrew de
Bodycote Thome Serchesden Theme Feteplace, ar. Tho. Hastyng, ar. Will.
wallweyn, ar. Ioh. Hille ar. Ioh. Lcmilt Thome Mayor Iohannis Hood Will. Gayte
Iohannis Martyn Thome Martyn ^ill. Fycheler Will. Brayn Nicholai Wenne Iohannis
Leche Will. Leche Richardi Fremantle Roberti Carpenter ^icardi Colas ^ill.
Coteler Richardi Coteler Iohannis Punter Henrici Suthwik I^hannis Fawlour
Iohannis Mos^er Ioh Wynchelcombe Will. Style Thome Vyncent ^ohannis Bcdyll
Iohannis Trilling Thome Marshall Iohannis Walker Will. walker Simonis Walker
Thome Brys Thome Mede Ioh. Freman de Pole Thome Chalkele Ioh. Godef^llawe
Iohannis Abraham Iohannis Turfray Richardi Howkyn Rob. Bocher de Witteney
Iohannis Rous Stephani Cornewaill Iohannis Iurdan Iohannis Bronne Iohannis
Willeney W^llielmi Fellawe Iohannis Pere Johan. Bray Richardi Wellwe Willielmi
Wynn Will. Whittington Willielmi Dagbill Will. Dustelyng Iohannis Danvers Thome
Mason Johan. Ayl^sworth Johan. Waver Hen^ici Frebody Richardi Ha^pour Will.
Shitford Roberti Shitford Hugonis Culworthe Ioh. Danus ^dynton Richardi
Touchestre Thome Blexham Rogere Predy Will. Drynkwater Thome VVykham de
Swalelyf Will. VVillingham Roberti Campden VValteri Snappe Richardi Ru^e Thome
Spycer Ioh. Draper Thome Penny Thome Harys Iohannis Flore Will. Rothe Ioh.
Etterton Will. VVitteney Will. Wych Ioh. Potter Ioh. Fletewell Richardi Eton
Ioh. ^arner Will. Standell Richardi Sclaytey de Shorldbury Ioh. Folk Tho.
Takle Bail Thome Abbatis de Eynesham Richardi Walkestede, chiv. Ioh. Blount,
ar. Will. Marmyon Thome Halle Ioh. Lydier Will. Berkingham Will. Rash Ioh.
Whighthill Roberti Croxford Thome Carwell Thome Yerman Ioh. Somerton Will.
Somerton Roberti Hare Court Simonis Somerton Thome Harlyngrigge Will.
Horncastle Ioh. Yerman Ioh. Colles Ioh. Bourman de Dadyngton Thome Magon Thome
Pricket Thome Pebworth Walteri Jouster Rogeri Jouster Ioh. Cobwell Ioh. Bingham
Ioh. Tymmes Will. Friar Thome Maykyn Richardi Tanner de Wod^stock Willielmi
Weller Ioh. Swift Richardi Stevenes Richardi Marchall Richardi Chapman Thome
Snareston Ioh. Bridde Richardi Aston Will. Parsons Thome Pain Ioh. Nethercote
Stephani Humpton Will. Romney Ioh. Romney Roberti Rye Will. Swift Will. Harryes
Ioh. Tanner de Eynesham Will. Madle Thome Millward Ioh. Fisher Ioh. Web Edm.
Rammesby Iacobi Howes Iac. Bocher de Stunsfeld Ioh. Megre Ioh. Have de Barton
Phillippi Friar Ioh. Friar Ioh. Stowe Ioh. Knight Ioh. Kemster Will. Kemster
Rob. Quaynaton Rob. More, ar. Rob. Alkerton Ioh. Chorleton Ioh. Eburton, jun.
Ioh. Eburton, sen. Thome Eburton Ioh. Young Ioh. Balle Thome Balle Ioh.
Eureshawe Galfridi Crewe Will. Tommys Will. Ayltan Ioh. Stokes Ioh. Wall Will.
Smith de Chepyng Norton Iohannis Howes Thome Howes Willielmi Hide Rogeri Milton
Iohannis Stacy Richardi Gurgan Iohannis Halle Iohannis Sampson Willielmi
Sampson Thome Churchehill Thome Cogeyn Willielmi Cogeyn Richardi Bury Willielmi
Houchyns Iohannis Channdyt Willielmi Bag Will. Rollandright Thome Fayreford
Ioh. Martyn Thome Tackle Will. Weller Ioh. Maynard Richardi Couper de Eastan
Will. Wrench o h. Halle de ShorIthamton Willielmi Tunford Iohannis Tunford
Iohannis Parkyns Rob. Raynald Ioh. Mucy Will. Carter de Overnorton Tho. Balle
de parva Rowlan-right Ioh. Hammond Ioh. Halle Ioh. Pain Ioh. Shawe Ioh. Silver
Ioh. Brewes Tho. Spillesby Ioh. Salman Ioh. Potter, jun. Prioris de Burcestre
Ioh. Langeston Rogeri Power Will. Anderne Ioh. Aston Ioh. Cornwaile Richardi
Purcell Iacobi Samwell Rich. Fitz*water Tho. Wyonb^ssh Ioh. Togood Rich. Togood
Ioh. Spear Ioh. Shoue Nicholai Norris Thome Chapman Willielmi Durbare Thome
Hoggys Thome Gurdon Tho. Markham Iohannis Lile Iohannis Sylvester Iohannis
Balegh Iohannis Chantclere Ioh. Huntingdon Will. Baldyngton Johan. Burdon
Iohannis Fellipps de Overfayford Iohaunis Fellipps de Netherfayford Ioh. Smith
de Mellington Thome Smith de eadem Johan. Notebene de Fencote Will. Fitz water
Ioh. Felmersham Iohannis Abbatis de Oseneye Iohannis Abbatis de Them Edm.
Prioris sancti Frideswide Tho. Baldington, jun. Tho. Baldington, sen. Ioh.
Iacket Thome Wells Thome Long Ioh. Else Rob. Crakeall Willielmi Tyller Ioh.
Dog Andree Sparewe Will. Loy, sen. Ioh. Chamberleyn Ioh. Shrovcbury Roberti
Reve Ioh. Friday Ioh. Mayhon Ioh. Hamond Will. Halfeknight Hugonis Benet de
Them Will. Collyngrig Thome Credy Ioh. Savage bailey Ioh. Clifton Abbatis
Dorcacestr. Ioh. Harpeden, chiv. Hug. Wolf, chiv. Thome Chancer, ar. Rich.
Drayton, ar. Rich. Restold, ar. Petri Feteplace, ar. Will. Wikham, ar. Ioh.
Fitz-Elys, ar. Reg. Barantyn, ar, Will. Lynde, ar. Rob. Simeon, ar. Drugonis
Barantyn Ioh. Bedford Edmundi Forster Rich. Gilot Thome Chibenhurst Thome at
Hide Rogeri Radle Petri Shotesbroke Iohannis Hide Will. Ravenyng Willielmi
Board Williel. Skyrmet Iohannis Elmes Thome Vine Ioh. Hertilpole Tho. Clerk
bailey Ioh. Bailey de Puriton Iohannis Badley Will. Bosenhe Thome Bartelot Rich.
Calday Iohannis Crips Williel. North Iohannis at Water Roberti at Water
Rich. Forster Thome Denton Thome at Well de Garsingden Iohannis Holt Nicholai
Neuby Ioh. Thomley Will. Bele Iohannis Low Rob. Hye Ioh. Bullery Ioh. Fitz
Aleyn Ioh. Waly by clerici Thome Tretherf^t Tho. Balingdon, sen. Ioh. Smith
Ioh. Skynner Rich. English Rob. Powlegh Nich. at Water Iohannis Hawe Thome
Dodde Thome Bartelet Will. Padenale Ade Hastyng Ioh. (...) Tho Baker de
Watlington Richardi Hurry Ioh. Tours Thome Muttyng Thome Deven Ioh. Martyn
Will. Somer Ioh. Romsey Ioh. Young Will. Caturmayn ^ill. Hervey Hen. Benefeld
Will. North Nicholai Wotton de Kingston Ioh. Temple Ioh. Fynamour Rich. Malpas
Ioh. Boure Rob. Gorewey Ioh. Stafford Rich. Saddock Ioh. at Lee Will.
Derenden.
The Commissioners in this County appear over-diligent in discharging their
trust: For, whereas those in other Shires flitted only the Cream of their
Gentry, it is suspicious that here they made use of much thin Milk, as may be
collected from their numerousness in a County of so small content. I could wish
they had spent part of their pains on some other places, seeing we have so
little of great, and nothing of some Shires in this kind. But I see nothing
will here fall out adequate to our desires in all particulars, but still we
shall conceive our selves to have cause to complain, of something redundant and
something defective.

Sheriffs.
Although Oxford and Berk-shires be divided by the Thames, and in the Saxon
Heptarchy were under two different Kingdoms, Oxfordshire belonging to Mercia,
and Berk-shire to the West Saxons; yet after the Conquest they were united
under one Sheriff, until the nineth year of Queen Elizabeth, as by their
Catalogue formerly presented in Berk-shire does plainly appear: Since that year
for the more effectual discharge of the Office, and greater ease of the
Subjects, each have had several Sheriffs, and Oxfordshire as follows:

Name. Place. Arms. ELIZ. REG. Anno 9 Ric. Fines, mil. Broughto^. Azure, 3.
Lions rampant, Or. 10 Hum. Ashfeld, ar. 11 Will. Taverner, ar. Water E. 12 Tho.
Gibbons, ar. 13 Ric. Waynman, m: Tame Pa. Quarterly G. and Az. a Cross Patonce,
Or. 14 Ioh. Danvers, ar. G. a Chev. inter 3. Mullets, O. 15 Hen. Rainford, ar.
16 Will. Babington, m. Ar. ten Torteauxes, (...)-3. 2. and 1. 17 Mich. Molyns,
ar. 18 Rob. Doyle, mil. and Ioh. Coop, ar. ut infra ut infra 19 Will. Hawtry,
ar. 20 Ric. Corbet, ar. Or, a Raven proper. 21 Edm. Bray, ar. 22 Ric.
Hudleston, ar. Gul. Frettee Arg. 23 Tho. Denton, ar. 24 Anth. Cope, ar. Hanwell
Arg. on a Chev. Az. betwixt 3. 25 Ric. Fines. ar. ut prius Roses, G. slipped
and leaved, 26 On. Ogletho^p, ar. a Newingt. Vert, 3. Flower de luces, Or. 27
Ioh. Doyle, ar. b a Arg. a Chev. varry Or and 28 Idem. ut prius Vert, betwixt
3. Boys heads 29 Mich. Blount, ar. c Maph Du. sable cut of G. 30 Ioh. Danvers,
ar. ut prius b Or, two Bends, Arg. 31 Will. Clarke, ar. c Barry Formy Neb^le of
6. 32 Will. Spencer, ar. d Yardingt. Or and Sable. 33 Anth. Cope, mil. ut prius
d Quarterly Ar. and G. a Fret. 34 To. Chamblayn, a. e Or. on a Bend sab. 3.
Escalops of the first. 35 Fran. Stonard, ar. f Stonard 36 Ric. Fenys, mil. ut
prius e Gul. a Cheveron Arg. betwixt three Escalops, Or. 37 Oni. Oglethorpe, ar
ut prius 38 Will. Freer, ar. g Water E. f Az. two Bars Dancettee Or, a Chief
Arg. 39 Gorg. Broom, ar. 40 Mich. Blount, ar. ut prius g Gul. two Flanches Or,
three VVheat-ears erect in Fess counterchanged. 41 Fran. Curson, ar. 42 Will.
Green, ar. 43 Will. Pope, ar. Wiscot Per pale, Or and Az. on a chev. betw. 3.
Griffins heads erazed, 4. Flower de luces, all counterchanged. 44 Ric. Farmer,
mil.* * Arg. a Fess sab. twixt three Leopards heads erazed, Gul. JACOB. Anno 1
Anth. Cope, mil. ut prius 2 Gorg. Tipping, ar. 3 Iac. Harrington, m. Sable, a
Fret. Arg. 4 Tho. Temple, mil. Buckin Arg. on two Bars sab. 6. 5 Roland. Lacy,
mil. Martlets, Or. 6 Hen. Samborne, ar. 7 Mich. Dormer, mil. Az. ten billets,
4. 3. 2. and 1. 8 Been. Winchco^be, a Or in a Chief of the second, a Lion
issuant sable. 9 Tho. Moyle, ar. Gul. a Mule passant, Arg. 10 Will. Clerk,
mil. 11 Hen. Lee, bar. Dichley Arg. a Fess betw. 3. cressants, S. 12 Edw.
Dunch, ar. S. a chev. betw. 3. Towers, Arg. 13 Tho. Read, ar. G. a saltire
twixt 4. Garbs, O. 14 Th. Spencer, m. and b. ut prius 15 Ioh. Curson, mil. 16
Edw. Fenner, ar. 17 Will. Cope, m. and b. ut prius 18 Ric. Baker, mil. 19 Fra.
Stoner, mil. ut prius 20 ^owlan. Lacy, ar. 21 Will. Aishcombe, m 22 Walt.
Dunch, ar. ut prius CAROL. I. Anno 1 Ric. Blount, mil. ut prius 2 Ric.
Lovelace, mil. modo dom. Lovelace and Cope Doyley, mil. Berk-shire ut prius
Gul. a Chief indented sable, 3. Martlets, Or. 3 Ric. Wenman, mil. modo dom.
Wenman ut prius ut prius 4 Rob. Dormer, mil. ut prius 5 Will. Cobb, mil.
Adderbury 6 Ioh. Lacy, mil. 7 Ioh. Harborne, ar. 8 Tho. Coghill, ar. modo
Miles. Ble^hing. Gules, on a Cheveron Arg. 3. Ogresses, a Chief sable. 9 Ioh.
Mellor, mil. 10 Pet. Wentworth Miles Baranit. Sable, a Cheveron betwixt 3.
Leopards heads, Or. 11 Fran. Norris, mil. Quarterly Arg. and G^a. a Fret, or
with a Fess Az. 12 Will. Walter, ar.* Saresden * Az. 3. Eagles displayed, Arg
13 T. Peniston, m. and b. Arg. 3. Cornish-choughs prop. 14 Ioh. Doyly, ar. ut
prius 15 Rad. Warcoppe, ar. 16 Ric. Libb, ar. 17 Tho. Tippin, ar. 18 19 20 21
22 23 24

Q. Elizabeth.
11. WILLIAM TAVERNER, Arm.]

This was he, who in the year of his Sherivalty came to Oxford, and went up
into the Pulpit at St. Mary's with a sword by his side, and a gold chain about
his neck; where he made a Sermon (or an Oration rather) to the University, the
stuff, or rather bombace whereof we have set down in our Ecclesiastical
History. Now though this was an odd act wherein his zeal was conceived by most
to trespass on his discretion, yet was it born the better in those darker days
from a person well-affected in Religion, and abhorring to invade the
Ministerial Function.

18. ROBERT DOYLE, Mil.]

This year (if I mistake not) were the black Assizes at Oxford, wherein
(contrary to the common course) the Prisoners caused the death of the Judge,
(Chief-Baron Bell) the Sheriff, some of the Lawyers, many of the Justices, and
most of the Jury; besides other persons of Quality there present. It was
generally imputed to the stench of the prisoners clothes and bodies: for
whereas other offensive smells are open enemies, and violently assaulting the
brain warn men in some sort to avoid or resist them; a Gaolstench trecherously
pretends alliance, (as made of man-sweat) and so insinuates it self with the
less suspicion and more danger into the spirits.

31. WILLIAM CLARKE, Arm.]

He was son, or (if the same with Sir William Clarke, Sheriff in the 10. of K.
James) grandchild to Sir John Clarke of Northamptonshire in the 21. of K.
Henry the eight, whose Arms, with the honorable augmentation, and the worthy
cause thereof, are there largely described.

36. RICHARD PENYS, Mil.]

He was a worthy Gentleman, and bred Fellow (being the Founders Kinsman) of
Newcollege in Oxford. He was also lineally descended from James Lord Say and
Seal, Tresurer of England, in the reign of K. Henry the sixth, and in
consideration thereof was 1. Jacobi created Lord Say and Seal. He dyed Anno
Dom. 1612. William Fenys, his eldest son, was since created Viscount Say and
Seal, and is still alive.

K. Charles I.
3. RICHARD WENMAN, Mil.]

This worthy Knight was by K. Charles the first created, first Baron Wenman of
Chilmaynam in the County of Dublin, and then Viscount Wenman, of Tuant in the
County of Galloway, both in the Kingdom of Ireland, by Letters Patents dated at
Cambrey the 25. of July 1628. 4 Caroli.

The Farewell.
As for the poorer sort of Husbandmen in this County, I wish there may be more
Sir Henry Kebles for their sakes: This Knight (though a Native of London, and
Lord Mayor thereof) had such an affection for this and Warwickshire, that he
singled out an hundred and fifty of the poorest Husbandmen therein, and gave
each of them a new Stows Survey of London, p. 89
Plough-share and a new Coulter of Iron; and in my mind that is the most
charitable Charity, which inableth decayed industry to follow its Vocation.

RUTLAND-SHIRE is by a double Diminutive called by Mr. Cambden, Angliae
Provinciola minima. Indeed it is but the Pestel of a Lark, which is better than
a quarter of some bigger bird, having the most cleanly profit in it: No place
so fair for the Rider, being more fruitful for the Abider therein.

Ban^shing the fable of King Rott, and their fond conceit, who will have
Rutland so called from Roet, the French word for a Wheel, from the rotundity
thereof, (being in form almost exactly orbicular) it is so termed, quasi
Red-land; for as if Nature kept a Dye-vat herein, a reddish tincture
discoloureth the earth, stones, yea the very flieces of the sheep feeding
therein. If the Rabbis observation be true, who distinguish betwixt Arets, the
general element of the earth; and Adamah, red ground, from which Adam was taken
and named; making the later the former refined: Rutlands soil on the same
reason may lay claim to more than ordinary purity and perfection.

Buildings.
Burgley on the Hill belonged formerly to the Lords Harrington, but since so
beautified with buildings by the Duke of Buckingham, that it was inferior to
few for the House, superior to all for the Stable; where horses (if their
pabulum so plenty as their stabulum stately) were the best accommodated in
England. But alas, what says Menedemus to Chremas in the Comedy? Filium unicum
adolescentulum habeo. Ah quid dixi habere me? immo habui: so may Rutland say, I
have; yea I had one most magnificent house: this Burgley being since demolished
in our Civil war, so just was the Poets ancient Invective,

(...) Mars, Mars, bane of men, slaughter-stain'd, spoiler of houses.

But when we have first sufficiently bemoned the loss of so many worthy men in
our late war, if then we have still any sorrow left, and tears to spare, we
will spend them in lamenting the razing and ruining of so many stately
structures.

Wonders.
How it will appear to the Reader I know not, but it is wonderful in my
apprehension, that this County, so pleasant, so fruitful, almost in the middle
of England, had not one absolute or entire Abbey therein; producing only two
small appurtenances (of inconsiderable value) to Convents in other Counties,
viz.

Okehame, under the custody of the Priory of St. Anne by Coventry, founded by
William Dalby, for two Chaplains and twelve poor; receiving in all one and
twenty pounds per annum.

Brook, a Cell to Killingworth, founded by Walkeline de Ferrers Baron of
Okeham, for black Canons, valued at the dissolution at forty three pounds
thirteen shillings and four pence.

The like cannot be paralleled in England, choose so great a parcel of good
ground where you please. Show me so fair a bunch of sweet grapes, which had no
more flies to suck them: Nor can I conjecture any competent cause thereof,
except because Edward the Confessor by his Will gave all Rutland to Westminster
Church, which though rescinded by King William the Conqueror, yet other
Convents perchance might be scrupulous to accept, what once belonged to another
Foundation.

Proverbs.
Rutland Raddleman.]

I meet in an Draytons Poly-olbion.
Author with this blazon, as he terms it, of Rutland-shire, though I can
scarcely recover the meaning thereof*

Rad here is the same with red, (only more broadly pronounced) as Radcliffe de
rubro clivo Redcliffe: Raddleman then is a Reddleman, a Trade (and that a poor
one) only in this County, whence men bring on their backs a pack of red stone
or Oker, which they sell to their neighboring Countries for the marking of
sheep, well nigh as ^scernable (and far less hurtful to the wool) as
Pitch-brands made on their flieces.

Saints.
St. Tibba. Because this County is Princeless, I mean affords no Royal
Nativities, we begin with Saints, and here almost we are at a loss, finding but
one worshipped therein, and probably a Native thereof. But seriously peruse, I
pray, the words of our Camb. Brit. in Rutlandshire, p. 526.
Author, speaking of Rihall a Village in this County,

Where, when superstition had so bewitched our Anchestours, that the multitude
of their pety Saints had well near taken quite away the true God, one Tibba, a
pety Saint or Goddess, reputed to be the tutelar patroness of Hawking, was of
Fowlers and Falconers worshipped as a second Diana.

This Saint of Falconers does stive so high into the air, that my Industry
cannot fly home after the same, so as to give a good account thereof to the
Reader. All that I can retrive of her is digested into these following
particulars:

1. She was a Female, whose sex ( dubious in the English) is cleared in the
Latin Cambden, Tibba minorum gentium Though it be Diva in his first and quarto
edi^ion, yet it is Sancta in his last, I mean in the text whereon I rely,
though Diva again in the Margin.
Sancta. 2. Though gentium may import something of Heathenism, Sancta carries
it clear for Christianity; that she was no Pagan Deity amongst the Britons,
(who were not our Ancestors but Predecessors) but a Popish she-Saint amongst
the Saxons. 3. She could not be St. Ebba, a Virgin Saint of whom formerly in
Northumberland, whom the Country People nickname Tabbs for St. Ebbs. 4. My
best inquiry making use of mine own and friends industry, perusing Authors
Caesar. Baron. Not. in Martyriolog. Romans Fran. Ha^aeus de vitis Sanct. ^rent.
Sur. Carthusian. Pel. de (...) (...)* catal. Sanct. etc.
proper to this purpose, cannot meet with this Tibb with all our industry.
But I will trouble my self and the Reader no longer with this Saint, which if
she will not be found, even for me let her be lost; only observe, after that
superstition had appointed Saints to all Vocations, (St. Luke to Painters, St.
Crispin to Shoomakers, etc.) she then began to appoint Patrons to Recreations;
and surely Falconers [generally] according to the Popish principles, if any
need a Saint, both to protect them in their despe^are Riding, and pray for a
pardon for their profane oaths in their passions.

A Postscript.
(...) at last we have found it. She was no Pagan Deity but a Saxon Saint, as
plainly appears, because the passage concerning her is commanded to be
expunged out of Cambden by the Printed at Madrid by Jews Sanchez A^no 1612.
Index expurgatorius, bearing a Pique thereat, as grating against their
superstitious practice. The same no doubt with Tibba, Virgin and Anchoress* who
living at M. S. de vitis sanct. Mul^er. Angl. p. 177.
Dormundcaster, dyed with the reputation of holiness about the year 660.
However, Reader, I am not ashamed to suffer my former doubts and disquisitions
still to stand, though since arrived at better information.

Benefactors to the Public.
WILLIAM BROWN Esquire twice Alderman of Stamford, Merchant of the Staple, was (as
I am credibly informed) extracted from the ancient Family of Brownes of
T^llThorp in this County. He built on his own proper cost the beautiful
Steeple, with a great part of the Church, of All Saints in Stamford, and lies
therein with his wife buried in a Chapel proper to his Family. He also erected
Anno 1493. the old Bead-house in that Town, for a Warden, Confrater, twelve
poor old men, with a Nurse-woman to attend them: To this he gave the Manor of
Swayfeld (seven miles from Stamford) worth four hundred pounds per annum,
besides diverse Lands and Tenements elsewhere. I am loath to insert, and loath to
omit, what follows in my Mr. Richard Butcher in his Survey of Stamford, p. 39.
Author, viz. That the pious and liberal gift is much abused by the avarice and
mis-imployment of the Governors thereof: and charitably do presume, that such
faults (if any) are since, or will be, suddenly amended.

Since the Reformation.
JOHN HARINGTON the elder, son to Sir James Harington, was born at Exton in
this County, where their ancient Family had long flourished. A bountiful
Housekeeper, dividing his hospitality between Rutland and Warwickshire, where
he had a fair habitation. He was one of the Executors to the Lady Frances
Sidney, and a grand Benefactor to the College of her founding in Cambridge.
King James created him Baron of Exton, and his Lady, a prudent woman, had the
Princess Elizabeth committed to her government: When the said Princess was
married to Frederick Prince Palatine, this Lord (with Henry Martin Doctor of
the Laws) was sent over to the Palatinate, to see her Highness settled at
Hidleburgh, and some formalities about her Dowry and Jointure performed. This
done, (as if God had designed this for his last work) he sickned on the first
day of his return, and dyed at Worms in Germany, on St. Bartholomews day Anno
Dom. 1613. The Lord John his son (of whom in Warwickshire) did not survive him
a year; both of them signally eminent, the one a pattern for all good fathers,
the other for all gracious sons; and pity it is the last had not issue to be a
president to all grandchildren: but God thought it fit, that here the
Male-issue of that honorable Family should expire.

Memorable Persons.
-- JEFFEREY was born in the Parish of Okeham in this County, where his father
was a very proper man, broad-shouldered and chested, though his son never
arived at a full Ell in stature. And here we may observe Lib. 7. cap. 16
Pliny his observation not true, (...),

In plenum autem cuncto mortalium generi ^inorem staturam indies fieri,
propemodum observatur, rarosque patribus proceriores, etc.

It seems that Families sometimes are chequered, as in brains so in bulk, that
no certainty can be concluded from such alternations.

His father, who kept and ordered the baiting Bulls for George Duke of
Buckingham, (a place, you will say, requiring a robustious body to manage it)
presented him at Burleigh on the Hill to the Duchess of Buckingham, being then
nine years of age, and scarce a foot and half in height, as I am informed by
credible John Armstrong of Ches^bunt.
persons then and there present, and still alive. Instantly Jefferey was
heightened (not in stature, but) in condition, from one degree above rags into
Silk and Satin, and two tall men to attend him.

He was without any deformity wholly proportionable, whereas often Dwarfs,
Pigm^es in one part, are Giants in another. And yet, though the least that
England ever saw, he was a proper person compared to him, of whom Lib. 6. fab.
19.
Sabinus does write, in his Comment upon the Metamorphosis:

Vidit Italia nuper virum justa aetate, non majorem cubito, circumferri in
cavea Psittaci, cujus viri meminit in suis scriptis Hieronymus Cardanus.

There was lately to be seen in Italy a man of a ripe age not above a cubit
high, carried about in a Parrets cage, of whom Hierome Cardan in his Writings
makes mention.

It was not long before he was presented in a cold baked Pie to King Charles
and Queen Mary at an entertainment, and ever after lived (whiles the Court
lived) in great plenty therein, wanting nothing but humility, (high mind in a
low body) which made him that he did not know himself, and would not know his
father, and which by the Kings command caused justly his sound correction. He
was, though a Dwarf no Dastard, a Captain of horse in the Kings Army in these
late civil wars, and afterward went over to wait on the Queen in France.

Here being provoked by Mr. Crofts, who accounted him the object, not of his
anger but contempt, he showed to all, that Habet musca suum splenum, and they
must be little indeed that cannot do mischief, especially seeing a Pistol is a
pure leveller, and puts both Dwarf and Giant into equal capacity to kill and to
be killd: For the shooting the same Mr. Crofts he was imprisoned. And so I take
my leave of Jefferey, the least man of the least County in England.

The Names of the Gentry of this County returned by the Commissioners in the
twelfth year of King Henry the sixth.
William Bishop of Lincoln Commissioners to take the Oaths. William de Souche
de Harringworth, chiv. Thomas Grenham Knights for the Shire. William Beaufo
Knights for the Shire.

Johannes Basinges de Empyngham, mil. Johannes Colepepar* de Exton, mil.
Henricus Plesington de Burley, mil. Robertus Brown de Wodehead, ar. Robertus
Davis de Tykencoat, ar. Johannes Brown de Tygh. ar. Johannes Plesington de
Wissenden, ar. Thomas Flore de Oakham, ar. Franciscus Clerk de Stoke-dry, ar.
Johannes Chycelden de Brameston, ar. Johannes Sapcoat de Keton, merchant
Robertus Whitwell de eadem, gentleman Johannes Clerk de Wissenden, merch.
Willielmus Lewis de Oakham, merch. Johannes Brigge de eadem, merch. Ioh. Basset
de North Luffenham, gent. Iacobus Palmer de eadem, gent. Johannes Palmer de
eadem, gent. Willielmi Sheffeild de Seyton, gent. Johannes Sadington de eadem,
gent. Rob. Sousex de Market Overton, gent. Johannes Vow de Whitwell, gent.
Willielmus Pochon de Wissenden, gent. Willi^lmus Swafeld de Braunston, gent.
Henricus Breton de Keton, gent. Willi^lmus Uffing^on de Pilton, gent. Thomas
Luffenham de Winge.
Sheriffs.
It remains now that we give in a List of the Sheriffs of this Shire; and
here Rutland conceives it to sound to her credit, that whereas other Shires
ten times bigger than this, (viz. Norfolk and Suffolk) had but one Sheriff
betwixt them; this little County never took-hands to hold with a partner, but
had always an entire Sheriff to it self; though anciently the same person
(generally honorable) discharged the Office for many years together, as by the
ensuing Catalogue will appear.

SHERIFFS From the year of King To the year of King Richard de Humet Tenth of
Henry 2. Six and twenty of Henry 2. William Molduit six and twentieth of Henry
2. first of Richard 1. Anna Brigg dispensat. first of Richard 1. second of
Richard 1. William Albeney and William Fresney second of Richard 1. nineth of
Richard 1. William Albevine solus nineth of Richard 1. first of King John
Benedic de Haversham first of King John second of King John Robert Malduit
second of King John fifth of King John Ralph Normanvill fifth of King John
twelfth of King John Robert de Braibro and Henry filius ejus twelfth of King
John second of Henry 3. Alan Basset second of Henry 3. twelfth of Henry 3.
Jeffrey de Rokingham twelfth of Henry 3. thirty eight of Henry 3. Ralph de
Greneham thirty eight of Henry 3. forty third of Henry 3. Anketyn de Markinall
forty third of Henry 3. first of Edward 1. Peter Wakervill and William Bovile
first of Edward 1. nineth of Edward 1. Alberic de Whitleber nineth of Edward 1.
seventeenth of Edward 1. Edmund Earl of Cornwall seventeenth of Edward 1.
twenty nineth of Edward 1. John Burley twenty nineth of Edward 1. thirtieth of
Edward 1. Marg. widow to Edmund Earl of Cornwall thirtieth of Edward 1. sixth
of Edward 2. Marg. widow of Pierce Gavester Earl of Cornwall sixth of Edward 2.
nineth of Edward 2. Hugo de Audley nineth of Edward 2. seventeenth of Edward 2.
Edmund Earl of Kent brother to the King seventeenth of Edward 2. first of
Edward 3. Hugo de Audley Earl of Gloucester first of Edward 3. twenty second of
Edward 3. William de Bohun Earl of Northampton twenty second of Edward 3.
thirty third of Edward 3. William Wade thirty third of Edward 3. thirty eight
of Edward 3. Humphrey de Bohun thirty eight of Edward 3. forty seventh of
Edward 3. John de Witlesbrough forty seventh of Edward 3. forty nineth of
Edward 3. Simon Ward forty nineth of Edward 3. first of Richard 2.

Sheriffs.
Name. Place. Arms. RICH. II. Anno 1 Ioh Wittlebury 2 Tho de Burton Azure, a
Fess betwixt 3 Talbots heads erazed, Or. 3 Ioh. Basings 4 Will. Moorwood 5 Ioh.
de Wittlesbury 6 Will. Flore Okeham Ermins, a Cinque-foil, Erm. 7 Walt. Skarle
8 Ioh. de Calveley 9 Rob. de Veer Quarterly Gules and Or in the first, a
Mullet, Arg. 10 Idem ut prius. 11 Ioh. Wittebury 12 Walt. Skarles 13 Edw. comes
Rutland for eight years. Quarterly France and Engl. a Label Arg. charged with
9. Tortea^es. ^1 Tho. Ondeley 22 Idem. HEN. IV. RECORDA MANCA, All this Kings
reign. HEN. V. Anno 1 Tho. Ondeley 2 Iac. Bellers Party per pale, G. and S. a
Lion ramp. Arg. crowned, Or. 3 Ioh. Boyvill* 4 Tho. Burton, mil. ut prius *
Gul. a Fess Or, between 3. Saltires hu^t, Arg. 5 Rob. Brown 6 Rob. Chisdden 7
Ioh. Pensax 8 The. Burton, mil. ut prius 9 Idem. ut prius HEN. VI. Anno 1 Tho.
Burton ut prius 2 Ioh. Ondeby 3 Ioh. Davies, mil. Tickenco. 4 Ioh. Colepeper
Exton Arg. a bend engrailed, Gul. 5 Hen. Plesington, m. Burley Azure, a cross
Pa^e betwixt 4. Martlets, Arg. 6 Tho. Burton, mil. ut prius 7 Ioh. Denis 8 Ioh.
Colepeper ut prius 9 Tho. Flore ut prius 10 Hen. Plesington, m. ut prius 11
Ioh. Boyvile ut prius 12 Will. Beaufo Ermine, on a bend Azure, 3. ^inque-foils,
Or. 13 Rob. Davies and Ioh. Pilton 14 Ioh. Branspath 15 Hugo. Boyvile ut prius
16 Laur. Sherard Arg. a Cheveron Gul. betwixt 3. Torteauxes. 17 Will. Beaufo ut
prius 18 Tho. Burton ut prius 19 Hen. Plesington, m. ut prius 20 Tho. Flore ut
prius 21 Will. Beaufo ut prius 22 Tho. Barkeley Gules, a Cheveron betwixt ten
Cinque-foils, Arg. 23 Ioh. Basings, mil. 24 Will. Walker 25 Ioh. Boyvile ut
prius 26 Will. Haselden 27 Hugo Boyvile ut prius 28 Rob. Fenne Arg. on a Fess
Az. 3 escalopshels of the first, a Bordure engrailed as the second. 29 Tho.
(...) ut prius 30 Will H^on 31 Rob. Sherard ut prius 32 Rob. (...) ut prius 33
(...). (...) ut prius 34 Will. Haselden 35 Tho. Flore, ar. ut prius 36 Tho.
Dale 37 Rob. Fenne ut prius 38 Everard. Digby Dry-stoke Azure, a Flower de lys,
Arg. EDW. IV. Anno 1 Ioh. Francis 2 Tho. Palmer 3 Idem. 4 Will Greenham, ar* 5
Tho. Flore, ar. ut prius 6 Ric. Sopcotts, mil. Sab. 3. Dovecoats, Arg. 7 Will.
Brown Tolethorp Sable, 3. Mallets, Arg. 8 Galfr. Sherard ut prius 9 Ioh. Dale,
ar. 10 Tho. Flore, ar. ut prius 11 Brian. Talbot, ar. 12 Tho. Berkley, mil. ut
prius 13 Will. Haselden 14 Ioh. Pilton, ar. 15 Will. Brown ut prius 16 Ioh.
Sapcote ut prius 17 David. Malpas Arg. a Cross patee, Az. 18 Hen. Mackworth
Normant. Per pale inde^ed Erm. and S. a Chev. Gul. (...), Or. 19 Ioh. Pilton 20
Galfr. Sherard ut prius 21 Will. Palmer 22 David. Malpas ut prius RICH. III.
Anno 1 Will. Brown Stamford ut prius 2 Galf. Sherard ut prius 3 Ioh. Pilton
HEN. VII. Anno 1 Everard. Digby Martinth. Arg. on a Fess Azure, 3 Lozenges, Or.
2 Will. Brown ut prius 3 David. Malpas ut prins 4 Maur. Berkley ut prius 5
Iho. Sapcots ut prius 6 Ioh. Digby, mil. ut prius 7 Rob. Harrington, a. Sable,
a Frettee, Arg. 8 Christoph. Brown ut prius 9 Ioh. Pilton 10 Tho. Sherard ut
prius 11 Tho. Sapcots, ar. ut prius 12 Geo. Mackworth ut prius 13 Rob.
Harrington, a. ut prius 14 Everard. Digby, ar. ut prius 15 Ioh. Chisleden 16
Christ. Brown, ar. ut prius 17 Ioh. Digby ut prius 18 Ioh. Harrington ut prius
19 Maur. Berkley ut prius 20 Will. Pole 21 Tho. Sherard ut prius 22 Ric.
Flower, ar. ut prius 23 Ioh. Coly, ar. 24 Ever. Feilding, mil. Martins T.
Argent on a Fess Az. three Fusils, O^. HEN. VIII. Anno. 1 Christ. Brown, ar.
ut prius 2 Edw. Sapcote ut prius 3 Geo. Mackworth, ar. ut prius 4 Ioh.
Harrington, ar. ut prius 5 Everard. Digby, ar. ut prius 6 Tho. Brokesby, ar. 7
Ioh. Caldecott 8 Ioh. Harrington ut prius 9 Ion. Digby, mil. ut prius 10
Everard. Digby, ar. ut prius 11 Will. F^ilding, ar. ut prius 12 Io. Harington,
ju. a* ut prius 13 Io. Harington, se. ar. ut prius 14 Geo. Mackworth, ar. ut
prius 15 Ioh. Digby, mil. ut prius 16 F^n. B^owne, ar. ut prius 17 Ioh.
^aldecot, ar. 18 Will. Filding, ar. ut prius 19 Edw. Sapcors ut prius ^0
Ever^rd. Digby, m. ut prius 21 Edw. Ca^esby, ar. Argent, two Lions passant S.
crowned, Or. ^2 Geo Mackworth, ar. ut prius 23 Edw. Sap^ots, ar. ut prius 24
Ev^rard. Digby, m. ut prius 25 Ioh. H^rington, ar. ut prius 26 Geo. Mackworth,
ar. ut prius 27 Edw. Sapcots, ar. ut prius ^8 Andr. Nowell, ar. B^ooke Or,
sr^ttee Gul. a Canton Erm. 29 Ti^. Burdenell, ar. ut in^a 30 Fra. Mackworth,
ar. ut prius 3^ Rich. Cecell, ar. Barry often Arg. and Az. on 6. Escutcheons
Sable, as many Lions rampant of the first. 32 Ioh. Harington, m. ut prius 33
Kenelm. Digby, ar. ut prius 34 Edw. (...), ar. ut prius 35 Fra. Mackworth, ar.
ut prius 36 G^o. Sherard, ar. ut prius 37 Anch. Brown, ar. ut prius 38 Edw.
Sapcots, m^l. ut prius EDW. VI. Anno 1 Anth. Colly, ar. ^ Simon. D^gby, ar. ut*
prius. 3 Kenelm. Digby, ar. u^ prius. 4 Andr. Noell, ar. ut prius. 5 Anth.
Colly, ar. 6 Ioh. Harington, m ut prius. Iac. Harington, ar. ut prius MAR. REG.
Anno 1 Kenelm. Digby, ar. ut prius 2 Simon. Digby, ar. ut prius 3 Fra.
Mackworth, ar. ut prius 4 Andr. N^ll, ar. ut prius 5 Anth. Brown, ar. ut prius
6 Edw. Brudenell, ar. Arg. a Cheveron G. betwixt 3 Capps Az. turned up Erm.
ELIZ. REG. Anno 1 Anth. Colly, ar. 2 Iac. Harington, mil* ut prius 3 Kenelm.
Digby, ar. ut prius 4 Geo. Sherard, ar. ut prius 5 Will. Caldecot, ar. 6 G^o.
Mackworth, ar. ut prius 7 Ioh. Flower, ar. ut prius 8 Iac. Harington, m. ut
prius 9 Kenelm. Digby, ar. ut prius 10 Anth. Colly, ar. 11 Ioh. Flower, ar. ut
prius 12 Maur. Berkley, ar. ut prius 13 Anth. Brown ut prius 14 Geo.
Mackworth, ar. ut prius 15 Tho. Cony, ar. Sab. a Bar and two Barrulets twixt 3.
Conies current Arg. 16 Rob. Sapcots, ar. ut prius 17 Will. Caldecot, ar. 18
Anth* ^olly, ar. 19 Ioh. Flower, ar. ut prius 20 Iac. Harington, mil. ut prius
21 Mich. Ca^esby, ar. ut prius 22 Geo. Mackworth, ar. ut prius 23 Will.
Feilding, ar. ut prius 24 Roger. Smith* ar. Leicest sh Gules on a Cheveron Or,
betwixt 3. B^zants, 3. Croslets sormee fi^chee. 25 Anth. Colley, ar. 26 Tho.
Coney, ar. ut prius 27 Kenelm. Digby ut p^s 28 Iac. Harington, m. ut prius 29
Andr. Nowell, mil. ut prius 30 Geo. Sheffeild, ar. Seaton Arg. a Cheveron twixt
three Garbes, Gules. 31 Rob. Sapcots, ar. ut prius 32 Hen. Harenten, ar. ut
priu^ 33 Will. Feilding, ar. ut prius 34 Roger. Smith, ar. ut prius 35 Iac.
Harington, m. ut prius 36 Ioh. Harington, m. ut prius 37 Andr. Nowell, mil. ut
prius 38 Will. Feilding, ar. ut prius 39 Hen. Ferrers, ar. Arg. on a Bend Gul.
cotized* Sab. 3 Horshooes, Arg. 40 Ioh. Harington, m. ut prius 41 Tho.
Mackworth, ar ut prius 42 Andr. Nowell, mil. ut prius 43 Iac. Harington, m. ut
prius 44 Ioh. Harington, m. ut prius JACOB. Anno 1 Will. Bodendin, ar. 2 Will.
Boulstred, m. 3 Basil. Feilding, ar. ut prius 4 Hen. Barkley, ar. ut prius 5
Guido. Palms, 6 Edw. Nowell, mil. ut prius 7 Tho. Mackworth, ar. ut prius 8
Will. Halford, ar. Leicest. sh Arg. a Grey^ound passant on a Chief Sab. 3
Flower de liz. of the field. 9 Ioh. Elmes, ar.* North H. 10 Rob. Lane, mil. 11
Anth. Andrews, ar. * Erm. 2 bars Sab. each charged with 5. Elm leaves
transposed, Or. 12 Fran. Bodinden, ar. 13 Ed. Noell, m. and bar. ut prius 14
Rich. Cony, mil. ut prius 15 Guido. Palms, m. 16 Abr. Johnson, ar. 17 Rich.
Halford, ar. ut prius 18 Anth. Colley, ar. 19 Ed. Haringto^, m. and b
Ridlingto^ ut prius 20 Rob. Lane, mil. 21 Rob. Tredway, ar. 22 Ioh. Osborne,
ar. Quarterly Erm. and Azure, a cross Or. CAROL. I. Anno 1 Guido. Palms, m. 2
Will. Gibson, mil. 3 He^. Mackworth, ar ut prius 4 Ever. Fawkener, ar. 5 Ioh.
Huggeford, ar. 6 Ioh. Wingfeild, mil. Arg. a bend Gul. cotized Sab. 3 Wings of
the first. 7 Ric. Hal ford, ar. ut prius 8 Anth. Colley, mil. 9 Ric. Hickson,
ar. 10 Fran. Bodington, m. 11 Hen. Mynne, mil. 12 Edw. Ha^rington, mil. and
bar. ut prius 13 Edw. Andrews, ar. 14 Ioh. Barker, ar. 15 Tho. Levett, ar. 16
Rob. Horsman, ar. Stretton 17 Tho. Wait, ar. 18 19 20 21 22 Abel Barker

Henry VII.
16. CHRISTOPHER BROWN, Arm.]

This Sheriff came over with King Henry the seventh, and assisted him against
Richard the third (...) for which good service King Henry the eight granted to
Francis Brown (son of our Sheriff) of Council to the Lady Margaret, the
following Patent:

HEnricus octavus Dei gracia Angliae, Franciaerex, fidei defensor, and dominus
(...), omnibus ad quos praesentes Litterae pervenient, salutem. Sciatis quod
no^ de gratia nostra speciali con^essimus pro nobis and heredibus nostris,
quantum in nobis est, dilecto nostro Francisco Brown armigero, quod ipse ad
totam vitam suam non ponatur, impanellet. nec juret. in Assisis juratis
inquisitionibus attinctis seu aliis recognitionibus aut juratis quibuscunque,
licet ille seu eorum aliquis tangant nos vel heredes nostros, ac licet nos vel
heredes nostri soli aut conjunctim cum aliis sit una pars. Concessimus etiam,
ac per presents conced mus eidem Francisco, quod ipse de cetero non fiat
Vicecomes nec Escaetor nostri vel heredum nostrorum in aliquo comitatu regni
nostri Angliae: Et quod ipse ad offic. vic. Escaetoris superius recitat.
habend. exercend. faciend. recipiend. aut occupand. ullo modo per nos vel
heredes nostros assignet. ordinet. seu compellet. aut aliqualit. artet. ullo
modo nec ad ascend. jurat. super aliqua triatione, arrainatione alicujus
Assisae coram quibuscunque justic. nostris vel heredum nostrorum ad Assisis
capiend. assign. aut aliis justic. quibuscunque; and quod non ponatur nec
impanelletur in aliqua magna Assisa infra regni nostri Angliae inter parts
quascunqne contra voluntatem suam licet nos vel heredi nostri sit una pars. Et
ulterius de habundanciori gratia nostra concessimus praefato Francisco, quod si
ipse ad aliqua officia superdict. seu aliquod praemissorum eligat. ipseque and
officia superdict. recusavit, extunc idem Franciscus aliquem contemptum
dep^rdit. poenam fortisfitur. aut aliquos exutos fines, redemptiones seu
amerciament. quaecunque occasion omissionis sive non omissionis aut alicujus
eorundem nullatenus incurrat fortisfaciat aut perdet; sed quod praesens carta
nostra de exemptione coram quibuscunque justic. nostris and hered. nostr. ac in
quocunque loco aut curia de record. per totum regnum nostrum praedict. super
demonstratione ejusdem chartae nostrae, absque aliquo brevi praecept. seu
mandat. aut aliquo alio superinde habend. seu persequend. vel aliqua
proclamatione faciend. praefato Francisco allocetur. Concessimus etiam, and per
praesentes concedimus eidem Francisco, quod ipse de cetero durante vita sua in
praesentia nostra aut hered. nostrorum, aut in praesentia alicujus, sive
aliquorum magnatum, dominorum spiritualium vel temporalium, aut aliquorum
aliorum regni nostri, quorumcunque quibuscunque temporibus futuris pilio sit
coopertus capite, and non exuat aut deponat pilium suum a capite suo occasion
vel causa quacunque contra voluntatem aut placitum suum; and ideo vobis omnibus
and singulis, aut quibuscunque Justic. Judicibus, Vicomitibus, Escaetoribus,
Coronatoribus, Majoribus, praepositis Balivis and aliis officiariis and
ministris nostris and hered* nostr^rum firmiter injungendo mandamus, quod ipsum
Franciscum contra hanc concessionem nostr. and contra tenorem exegent. aut
effect. praesent. non vexetis, perturb. molest. in aliquo seu gravetis. In
cujus reitestim. has literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes. Test meipso apud
Westminster. sexto die Julii, anno regni nostri decimo octavo.

Per ipsum Regem and de dat. praedict. authoritate Parliamenti.

Tolethorpe (the chief place of residence at this* day of Christopher Brown
Esquire, who has born the office of Sheriff in this County, 1647.) was by Deed
conveyed unto John Brown from Thomas Burton Knight, in the fiftieth year of
King Edward the third.

I meet with a Brown Lord Mayor of London, 1479. the son of John Brown of
Oakham.

The Farewell.
Let not the Inhabitants of Rutland complain, that they are pinned up within
the confines of a narrow County; seeing the goodness thereof equals any Shire
in England for fertility of ground: But rather let them thank God, who has
cast their lot into so pleasant a place, giving them a goodly heritage.

SHROP-SHIRE has Cheshire on the North, Staffordshire on the East; Worcester,
Hereford and Radnorshires on the South: Montgomery and Denbighshires on the
West. The length thereof from North to South is 34 Miles, and the general
breadth thereof about 26 Miles. I behold it really (though not so Reputed) the
biggest Lund-lock-shire in England. For although (according to Mr. Speeds
mea-suring) it gathers but one hundred thirty four miles (short of
Wiltshireby five) in Circumference; Yet though less in compass, it may be more
in Content, as less angular in my eye, and more approaching to a Circle, the
form of greatest capacity. A large and lovely County generally fair and
fruitful, affording Grass, Grain, and all things necessary for Man's
sustenance, but chiefly abounding with

Natural Commodities.
Iron.
It is the most impure of all Metals hardly meltable (but with Additaments) yea
malleable and ductible with difficulty. Not like that at Damascus, which they
refine in such sort, that it will melt at a Bellovius.
Lamp, and yet so tough that it will hardly break.

Some impute the grossness of our English Iron to our water, not so proper
for that purpose, as in Spain, and other parts, and the Poet tells us of
Turnus his Sword.

Virg. Aeneid. 12.
Ensem quem Dauno igni potens Deus ipse parenti
Fecerat, and Stygia candentem extinxerat unda.
Sword which god Vulcan did for Daunus fix,
And quenched it when fiery hot in Stix.
However many Vtensils are made of the Iron of this County, to the great profit
of the Owners, and no loss (I hope) of the Commonwealth.

Coal.
One may observe a threefold difference in our English-Coale. 1 Sea-coale,
brought from Newcastle. 2 Land-coale, at Mendip, Bedworth, etc. and carted into
other Counties. 3 What one may call River or Fresh-water-Coale, dug out in
this County, at such a distance from Severne, that they are easily ported by
Boat into other Shires.

O ifthis COAL could be so charcked as to make Iron melt out of the Stone, as
it makes it in Smiths Forges to be wrought in the Bars.

But Rome was not built all in one day, and a NEW WORLD of Experiments is left
to the discovery of Posterity.

Manufactures.
This County can boast of no one, her ORIGINAL, but may be glad of one to her
DERIVATIVE: viz. the VVelsh-Freeses brought to Oswastre, the staple of that
commodity, as See the Majors of London in this County.
hereafter shall be observed.

The Buildings.
No County in England has such a heap of Castles together, insomuch that
Shropshire may seem on the West, divided from Wales with a Wall of
continued Castles. It is much that Mr. Speed which allows but one hundred See
his Map General of England.
eighty six in all England, accounts two and thirty in this See his
description of Shropshire.
County. But as Great Guns so useful in the side of a ship, are useless in
the middle thereof, so these Castles formerly serviceable, whilst Shropshire
was the verge of English Dominions, are now neglected, this Shire being almost
in the midst of England, since Wales was peaceably annexed thereunto. As for
the Houses of the Gentry of this County, as many of them are fair and handsome,
so none amount to an extraordinary Eminence.

Medicinal Waters.
There is a Spring at Pitch-ford, in this Shire, which has an oily unctuous
matter swimming upon the water thereof. Indeed it is not in such plenty as in a
River near to Agricola de natura, etc. lib. 1. cap. 7.
Solos in Cilicia, so full of that liquid substance, that such as wash therein,
seem anointed with Oil: nor so abundant, as in the Springs near the Cape of S.
Helen, wherewith (as Josephus Acosta reports) men use to pitch their Ropes and
Tackling. I know not whether the sanative virtue thereof has been
experimented, but am sure, that if it be Bitumen, it is good to comfort the
Nerves, supple the Joints, dry up Rheumes, cure Palsies and Contractions. I
have nothing more to say of Bitumen, but that great the affinity thereof is
with Sulphur, save that Sulphur has ingression into Metal, and Bitumen none
at all. Here I purposely pass by D. Jorden of mineral Bathes' page 26.
Okenyate in this County, where are Alum springs, whereof the Dyers of
Shrewsbury make use instead of Alum.

Proverbs.
He that fetches a Wife from Shrewsbury, must carry her into Staffordshire, or
else shall live in Cumberland.

The Staple-wit of this vulgar Proverb consisting solely in similitude of
sound, is scarce worth the inserting. Know then that (notwithstanding the
literal allusion) Shrewsbury affords as many meek Wives, as any place of
the same proportion: Besides, a Profitable Shrew well may content a reasonable
man, the Poets faining Juno, chas^e and thrifty, qualities which commonly
attenda shrewd nature. One being demanded; How much shrewishness may be
allowed in a Wife? Even so much (said he) as of Hops in Ale, Whereof a small
quantity makes it both last the longer in it self, and taste the better to
the owner thereof.

The Case is altered quoth PLOWDEN.] This Proverb refers its original to
Edmund Plowden, an eminent Native and great Lawyer of this County, though very
various the relations of the occasion thereof. Some relate it to Plowden his
faint pleading at the first for his Client, till spurred on with a better Fee:
which some will say, bears no proportion with the ensuing Character of his
Integrity. Others refer it to his altering of his Judgment upon the Emergencie
of new matter formerly undiscovered: It being not Constancy but Obstinacy to
persist in an old error, when convinced to the contrary by clear and new
Information. Some tell it thus, That, Plowden being of the Romish persuasion,
some Setters trapanned him (pardon the prolepsis) to hear Mass: But afterward
Plowden understanding, that the pretender to Officiate was no Priest, but a
mere Layman (on design to make a discovering) Oh! The case is altered quoth
Plowden: No Priest, no Mass. As for other meaner Origination of this Proverb,
I have neither List nor Leisure to attend unto them.

Princes.
RICHARD PLANTAGENET, second Son to Edward the fourth, and Elizabeth his Queen,
was born at Stows Chro. page 703.
Shrewsbury 1472. He was created by his Father Duke of York, and affianced to
Anne, Daughter and Heir to John Mowbray Duke of Norfolk. But before the
nuptials were solemnized, his cruel ^ncle, the Duke of Gloucester, married him to
a grave in the Tower of London. The obscurity of his burial gave the advantage
to the report, that he lived in Perkin Warbeck, one of the Idols which put
politic King Henry the seventh to some danger, and more trouble, before he
could finally suppress him.

GEORGE PLANTAGENET, youngest son to Edward the fourth, and Elizabeth his
Queen, was born at Idem Ibid.
Shrewsbury. He was like Plautus his Solsticial Flower, Qui repentino ortus,
repentino occidit, dying in the infancy of his infancy. Some vainly conceive
(such conjectures may be safely shot, when no body can see, whether they hit or
miss the mark) that, had this George survived, he would have secured the lives
of his two elder Brethren, whose ^ncle Duke Richard durst not cut through the
threefold Cable of Royal Issue. A vain surmise, seeing when Tyrants hands are
once washed in blood, two or three are all one with their cruelty.

Saints.
MILBURGH daughter to Meroaldus Prince of Mercia, had the fair Manor of
Wenlock in this County, given to her by her Father for her portion. She,
quitting all wordly wealth, bestowed her Inheritance on the Poor, and answered
her name of Milburgh, which (as an Verstegan page 266.
Antiquary interprets) is Good, or Gracious to Town and City. Living a
Virgin, she built a Monastery, in the same place, and departed this life about
the year 664.

Four hundred years after, in the Reign of William the Conqueror, her Corpse
(discovered by Miracles wrought thereby) were taken up sound and uncorrupted,
to the admiration of the beholders, (says my The English Martyrology, on the
13 day of February.
Author) and surely had I seen the same, I would have contributed my share of
wondering thereunto. This I am sure of, that as good a Saint, Lazarus by name,
by the confession of his own Sister did John 11. 39.
stink when but four days buried. Her Relicts inshrined at Wenlock, remained
their in great state, till routed in the reign of King Henry the Eighth.

OSWALD was King of Northumberland, who, after many fortunate battles fought,
was vanquished and slain at last by Penda, the Pagan King of the Mercians, at a
place in this County called after his name Oswaldstre (now a famous Market Town
in the Marches) thereby procuring to his memory the reputation of Saint and
Martyr.

Be pleased, Reader, to take notice, that all battles of this nature, though
they were quarrels or armed-suits, commenced on a civil or temporal account for
the extending or defending their Dominions; yet were they conceived (in that
age especially) to have a mixture of much Piety and Church-concernment therein,
because fought against Infidels, and so conducing consequentially to the
propagation of the Faith; the reason that all Kings killed in such service,
achieved to themselves the veneration of Saints and Martyrs. Say not that King
1 Samuel 31. 3.
Saul might be Sainted on the same account, mortally wounded in a pitched field
fought against the Uncircumcised Philistines; both because in fine he slew
himself, and his former life was known to be notoriously wicked. Whereas our
Oswald was always pious, and exceedingly charitable to the Poor.

His arm cut off, it seems, from the rest of his body, remained, said Bid,
whole and incorrupt, kept in a silver Case in S. Peter's Church at Bamborough,
whilst his Corpse was first buried at Peterborough, and afterward (in the
Danish persecution) translated to English Martyrology. page 165.
Bergen in Flanders, where it still remains.

The fifth of August was in our Calendar consecrated to his memory, save that
the Thanksgiving for the defeating of Gowries-Conspiracy, made bold to justle
him out, all the reign of king James. His death happened Anno Domini 635.

Confessors.
This County afforded none, as the word is reconfined in our Preface. But if it
be a little enlarged, it brings within the compass thereof,

THAMAS GATAKER Narrative of the life o^ Th. Gataker junior, after the Sermon
preached at his Funeral.
younger son of William Gataker, was a branch of an Ancient Family, so firmly
planted by Divine providence at Gatacre-Hall in this County, that they have
flourished the owners thereof, by an noninterrupted succcession, from the time
of King Edward the Confessor. This Thomas being designed a Student for the Law,
was brought up in the Temple, where in the reign of Queen Mary he was often
present at the examination of persecuted people. Their hard usage made him pity
their persons, and admirable patience to approve their opinions. This was no
sooner perceived by his Parents (being of the Old persuasion) but instantly
they sent him over to Lovain in the Low Countries, to win him to a compliance
to the Popish Religion, and for his better encouragement settled on him an
estate of One hundred pound per annum, old Rent. All would not do. Whereupon
his Father recalled him home, and revoked his own grant; to which his Son did
submit, as unwilling to oppose the pleasure of his Parents, though no such
Revocation could take effect without his free consent. He afterward diverted
his mind from the most profitable, to the most necessary Study; from Law, to
Divinity: and finding Friends to breed him in Oxford, he became the profitable
Pastor of S. Edmonds in Lumbard-street, London, where he died Anno leaving
Thomas Gataker his Learned Son, ( Vide Learned Writers in London.
of whom formerly) heir to his Pains and Piety.

Prelates.
ROBERT of SHREWSBURY was in the reign of King John (but I dare not say by him)
preferred Bishop of Bangor 1197. Afterward the King, waging war with Leoline
Prince of Wales, took this Bishop prisoner in his own Cathedral Church, and
enjoined him to pay B. Godwin, in his Bishops of Bangor.
Three hundred Hawks for his ransom. Say not that it was improper that a Man
of Peace should be ransomed with Birds of Prey, seeing the Bishop had learnt
the Rule, Redime te captum quam queas minimo. Besides 300 Hawks will not seem
so inconsiderable a matter, to him that has read, how in the reign of King
Charles an English Noble Man (taken prisoner at the I Will H. le Strange in the
History of K. Charles.
Ree) was ransomed for a Brace of Greyhounds.

Such who admire where the Bishop on a sudden should furnish himself with a
stock of such Fowl, will abate of their wonder, when they remember that about
this time the Men of Norway (whence we have the best Hawks) under Magnus their
General, had possessed themselves of the Neighboring Island of Camdens Brit.
Anglesea.
Anglesea. Besides he might stock himself out of the Aryes of Pembrook-shire,
where Idem in Pembrook-shire.
Perigrines did plentifully breed. How ever, this Bishop appears something
humerous by one passage in his Will, wherein he gave order that his Body should
be buried in the middle of the Market place B. Godwin in Bishops of Bangor.
of Shrewsbury. Impute it not to his profaness and contempt of Consecrated
ground, but either to his humility accounting himself unworthy thereof, or to
his prudential foresight, that the fury of Soldiers (during the intestine War
betwixt the English and Welsh) would fall fiercest on Churches, as the fairest
market, and men, preferring their profit before their Piety, would preserve
their Marketplaces, though their Churches were destroyed. He died Anno 1215.

ROBERT BURNEL, was son to Robert, and brother to Hugh Lord Burnel, whose Prime
Seat was at Acton-Burnel-Castle in this County. He was by King Edward the First
preferred Bishop of Bath and VVell^s, and first Treasurer, then Chancellor of
England. He was well versed in the Welsh affairs, and much used in managing
them; and that he might the more effectually attend such employment, caused the
Camdens Brit. in Salop.
Court of Chancery to be kept at Bristol. He got great Wealth wherewith he
enriched his kindred, and is supposed to have rebuilt the decayed Castle of
Acton-Burnel on his own expense. And to decline envy for his secular structures
left to his heirs, he built for his Successors the beautiful Hall at Wells,
the biggest room of any Bishops Palace in England, plucked down by Sir John
Gabos (afterward executed for Treason) in the reign of King Edward the Sixth.

English and Welsh affairs being settled to the Kings contentment, he employed
Bishop Burnel in some business about Scotland, in the Marches whereof he died,
Anno Domini 1292. and his body, solemnly brought many miles, was buried in his
own Cathedral.

WALTER de WENLOCK Abbot of Westminster, was, no doubt, so named from his
Nativity in a Market Town in this County. I admire much that Matthew of
Westminster writes him William de VVenlock, and that a Monk of Westminster
should (though not miscall) mis-name the Abbot thereof. He was Treasurer
Register of Westminster Abbey.
of England to King Edward the First betwixt the twelfth and fourteenth year of
his reign, and enjoyed his Abbots Office six and twenty years lacking six
days. He died on Christmasse day at his Manor of Periford in Gloucestershire
1307, and was buried in his Church at Westminster, besides the High-Altar
before the Presbutery, without the South door of King Edward's Shrine, where
Abbas VValterus non fuit Aus^erus is part of his Epitaph.

RALPH of SHREWSBURY, born therein, was in the third of King Edward the Third
preferred Bishop of Bath and Wells. Being consecrated without the Popes
privity (a daring adventure in those days) he paid a large sum to expiate his
presumption therein. He was a good Benefactor to his Cathedral, and bestowed on
them a Chest Portcullis-like, barred with iron, able to hold out a siege in the
view of such as beheld it. But, what is of proof against Sacrilege? Some
Thieves (with what Engines, unknown) in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, Godwin in
the Bishops of of Bath and Wells.
forced it open.

But this Bishop is most memorable for erecting and endowing a spacious
structure for the Vicars-Choral of his Cathedral to inhabit together, which in
an old Picture is thus presented.

The Vicars humble petition on their knees.

Per vicos positi villae, Pater alme, rogamus,
Ut simul uniti, te dante domos, maneamus.
To us dispersed in the streets, good Father, give,
A place where we together all my live.
The gracious answer of the Bishop, sitting.

Vestra petunt merita quod sint concessa petita,
Ut maneatis ita, loca fecimus haec stabilita.
Your merits crave that what you crave, be yielded,
That so you may remain, this place we have builded.
Having now made such a Palace (as I may term it) for his Vicars, he was (in
observation of a proportionable distance) necessitated in some sort to enlarge
the Bishops Seat, which he beautified and fortified Castle-wise, with great
expense. He much ingratiated himself with the Country people by disforasting
Mendip, Beef better pleasing the Husbandmans palate than Venison. He sat
Bishop thirty four years, and dying August 14. 1363. lies buried in his
Cathedral, where his Statue is done to the life, Godwin, Ibid.
Vivos viventes vultus vividissime exprimens, says my Author.

ROBERT MASCAL, Was bred (says Bale in) and born (says De Illust. Ang.
script. page 591.
Pitz positively) at Ludlow in this County, where he became a Carmelite.
Afterward he studied in Oxford, and became so famous for his Learning and
Piety, that he was made Confessor to Henry the Fourth, and Counselor to Henry
the Fifth, Promoted by the former Bishop of Hereford. He was one of the Three
English Prelates which went to (and one of the Two which returned alive from)
the Council of Constance. He died 1416 being buried in the Godwin in Bishops.
Church of White-Friers in London, to which he had been an eminent Benefactor.

RICHARD TALBOTE was born of Honorable Parentage in this County, as Iacob^s
Wareus, de Praesulibus Lageniae. page: 28.
Brother unto John Talbote, the first Earl of Shrewsbury. Being bred in
Learning, he was consecrated Archbishop of Dublin in Ireland 1417. He sat two
and thirty years in that See (being all that time a Privy Counselor to King
Henry the Fifth and Sixth) twice Chief Justice, and once Chancellor of Ireland.

He deserved well of his Church (founding six petty Canons, and as many
Choristers therein) yea, generally of all Ireland, writing Idem de script.
Hibernia. page 131.
a Book against James Earl of Ormond, wherein he detected his abuses during his
Lieutenancy in Ireland. He died August the 15. 1449. and lies buried in Saint
Patricks in Dublin under a marble stone, whereon an E^itaph is written not
worthy the inserting.

The said Richard was unanimously chosen Archbishop of Armagh, a higher place,
but refused to remove, wisely preferring Safety, above either Honor or Profit.

GEORGE DAY was born in this Parker in his Skellitos Cantabrigiensis, in the
Provosts of Kings College.
County, and successively Scholar, Fellow and Provost of Kings College in
Cambridge. Which he retained with the Bishopric of Chichester, to which he was
consecrated 1543. A most pertinacious Papist, who though he had made some kind
of Recantation in a Sermon (as I find it entered in king Edward the Sixth his
own Diary) yet either the same was not satisfactory; or else he relapsed into
his errors again, for which he was deprived under the said king, and restored
again by Queen Mary. He died Anno Dom. 1556.

Prelates since the Reformation.
WILLIAM DAY was brother to the aforesaid George Day. I find no great
difference betwixt their age, seeing

Mr. Hatcher in his Manuscript. Catalogue, of Fellows of Kings College.
George Day was admitted in Kings College, Anno 1538.

William Day was admitted in the same College Anno 1545.

Yet was there more than forty years betwixt the dates of their deaths.

George Day died very young Bishop of Chichester, Anno Dom. 1556.

William Day died very old Bishop of Winchester, Anno 1596.

But not so great was the difference betwixt their Vivacity, as distance
betwixt their Opinions: the former being a Rigid Papist, the later a Zealous
Protestant. Who requesting of his Brother some Money to buy Books therewith,
and other necessaries, was returned with this denial B. Godwin in the Catal. of
the Bishops of Winchester.
That he thought it not fit to spend the goods of the Church on him who was an
enemy of the Church.

However, this William found the words of Solomon true, Prove. 18. 24.
And there is a friend who is nearer than a Brother; not wanting those who
supplied his necessities: He was Proctor of Cambridge, 1558, and afterward was
made by Queen Elizabeth (who highly esteemed him for his Learning and Religion)
Provost of Eton and Dean of Windsor, two fair preferments (parted with Thames,
but) united in his person; The Bishopric of Winchester he enjoyed scarcely a
whole year, and dyed as aforesaid, 1596.

Statesmen.
Sir THOMAS BROMLEY, was borne at Bromley in this County, of a right ancient
Family, I assure you; bred in the Inner Temple, and General Solicitor to Queen
Elizabeth. He afterward succeeded Sir Nicholas Bacon, in the Dignity of Lord
Chancellor, April 25. 1579.

Now although it was difficult to come after Sir Nicholas Bacon, and not to
come after him: Yet such was Sir Thomas his Learning and Integrity (being
charactred by my Camden in his Eliz. Anno 1587.
Authors, Virjuris prudentia insignis:) That Court was not sensible of any
considerable alteration. He possessed his place about nine years, dying Anno
1587, not being 60 years Idem Ibid.
old. Hereby the pregnancie of his parts do appear, seeing by proportion of
time he was made the Queens Solicitor before he was 40, and Lord Chancellor
before he was 50 years old. Learning in Law may seem to run in the veins of
that name, which since had a Baron of the Exchequer of his Alliance.

Sir CLEMENT EDMONDS was born at So his near Kinsman informed me.
Shrawardine in this County, and bred Fellow in All Souls College in Oxford,
being generally skilled in all Arts and Sciences. Witness his faithful
Translations of, and learned Illustrations on, Caesar's Commentaries. Say not
that Comment on Commentary was false Heraldry, seeing it is so worthy a work,
that the Author thereof may pass for an eminent instance to what perfection of
Theorie they may attain in matter of War, who were not acquainted with the
Practick part thereof, being only once employed by Queen Elizabeth, with a
dispatch to Sir Francis Vere which occasioned his presence at the Battle at
Newport: For he does so smartly discuss pro and con, and seriously decide many
Martial Controversies, that his judgment therein is praised by the best
Military Masters.

King James taking notice of his Abilities, made him Clerk of the Council, and
Knighted him: And he was at last preferred Secretary of State, in the vacancy
of that place, but, prevented by Death, acted not therein. He died Anno 16..
and lies buried at Preston in Northamptonshire, where he purchased a fair
Estate, which his Grandchilde does possess at this day.

Capital Judges and Writers on the Law.
EDMUND PLOWDEN, was borne at Plowden in this County, one who excellently
deserved of our Municipall Law, in his learned Writings thereon: but consult
his ensuing Epitaph, which will give a more perfect account of him.

Conditur in hoc Tumulo corpus Edmundi Plowden Armigeri. Claris ortus
Parentibus, apud Plowden in Comitatu Salop. natus est; a pueritia in literarum
studio liberaliter est educatus, in provectiore vero aetate Legibus, and juris
prudentiae operam dedit. Senex jam factus, and annum aetatis suae agens 67.
Mundo valedicens, in Christo Jesu sancte obdormivit, die sexto mensis Februar.
Anno Domini, 1584.

I have rather inserted this Epitaph inscribed on his Monument on the North
side of the East end of the Quire of Temple Church in London, because it has
escaped (but by what casualty I cannot conjecture) Master Stow in his Survey of
London. We must add a few words out of the Character Mr. His Elizabeth. An.
1584.
Camden gives of him.

Vitae integritate inter homines suae professionis nulli secundus.

And how excellent a medly is made, when honesty and ability meet in a man of
his Profession! Nor must we forget how he was Treasurer for the Honorable
Society of the Middle Temple, Anno 1572. when their magnificent Hall was
builded: He being a great advancer thereof.

Sir JOHN WALTER, son to Edmund Walter, Chief Justice of South Wales, was born
at Ludlow in this County, and bred a Student of our Common-Laws, wherein he
atteined to great Learning, so that he became, when a Pleader, eminent; when a
Judge, more eminent; when no Judge, most eminent.

1 Pleader.] The Character that Learned James Thuanus, Obiit Doct. Vir. in Anno
1565. in vita Joan. (...).
gives of Christopher Thuanus his Father, being an Advocate of the Civil Law,
and afterward a Senator of Paris, is exactly agreeable to this Worthy Knight;

Ut bonos a calumniatoribus, tenuiores a potentioribus, doctos ab ignorantibus
opprimi non pateretur.

That he fuffered not good men to be born down by slanderers, poor men by more
potent, Learned men by the ignorant.

2 Judge.] Who (as when ascending the Bench, entering into a new temper) was
most passionate as Sir John, most patient as Judge Walter; and great his
gravity in that place. When Judge Denham, his most upright and worthy Associate
in the Western Circuit once said unto him, My Lord, you are not merry; Merry
enough (returned the other) for a Judge.

3 No Judge.] Being outed of his place, when Chief Baron of the Exchequer,
about the Illegality of the Loan, as I take it.

He was a grand Benefactor (though I know not the just proportion) to Jesus
College in Oxford, and died Anno Stow Surv. of Lon. in the Rem. page 910.
1630. in the Parish of the Savoy, bequeathing 20 l. to the Poor thereof.

EDWARD LITLETON born at So am I informed by his two Su^viving Brothers, the
one a Sergeant at Law, the other a Dr. in Divinity.
Mounslow in this County, was the eldest son to Sir Edward Littleton, one of
the Justices of the Marches, and Chief Justice of NorthWales. He was bred in
Christ-Church in Oxford, where he proceeded Bachelor of Arts, and afterward
one of the Justices of North Wales, Recorder of London, and Solicitor to king
Charles. From these places he was preferred to be Chief Justice of the
CommonPleas, when he was made Privy Counselor; thence advanced to be Lord
Keeper and Baron of Mounslow, the place of his Nativity. He died in Oxford and
was buried in Christ Church, Anno 1645.

Soldiers.
Sir JOHN TALBOT was born (as all concurring indications do avouch) at
BlackMere in this County, the then flourishing (now ruined) House, devolved to
his Family by marying the Heir of the Lord Strange of Black-Mere. Many
Honorable Titles deservedly met in him, who was,

1 Lord Talbot, and Strange, by his Paternal extraction. 2 Lord Furnival and
Verdon, by marriage with Joan, the daughter of Thomas de Nevil. 3 Earl of
Shrewsbury in England, and Weisford in Ireland, by creation of King Henry the
Sixth.
This is that terrible Talbot, so famous for his Sword, or rather whose Sword
was so famous for his arm that used it. A Sword with bad Sum Talboti pro
vincere inimicos meos.
Latin upon it, but good Steel within it, which constantly conquered where it
came, insomuch that the bare fame of his approach, frighted the French from the
Siege of Bordeaux. Being victorious for twenty four years together, success
failed him at last, charging the enemy near Castilion on unequal terms, where
he with his Son the Lord Lisle were slain with a shot July 17. 1453. Hence
forward we may say, Good night to the English in France, whose victories were
buried with the body of this Earl, and his body enterred at White-Church in
this County.

Sir JOHN TALBOT, son to Sir John Talbot aforesaid, and Vicount Lisle in right
of his Mother. Though he was slain with his Father, yet their ashes must not be
so hudled together, but that he must have a distinct commemoration of his
valor. The rather, because a Noble Sir Walter R^leigh in Histor. of the World.
lib. 5. page 455.
Pen has hinted a parallel, betwixt him and Paulus Aemilius the Roman General,
which others may improve.

1 Aemilius was overpowred by the forces of Hannibal and Asdrubal to the loss
of the day. 2 Corn. Lentulus entreated Aemilius (sitting all bloodied upon a
stone) to rise and save himself, offering him his horse and other assistance. 3
Aemilius refused the proffer, adding withal, That he would not again come
under the judgment of the people of Rome.
1 The same sad success attended the two Talbots, in fight against the French.
2 The Father advised the son, by escape to reserve himself for future fortune.
3 His son craved to be excused, and would not on any terms be persuaded to
forsake his father.
In two considerables Talbot far surpassed Aemilius, for Aemilius was old,
grievously, if not mortally wounded: our Lord in the flower of his youth,
unhurt, easily able to escape. Aemilius accountable for the overthrow
received, the other no ways answerable for that daye's misfortune, being (as
we have said) the 17 of July 1453.

Learned Writers.
ROBERT of SHREWSBURY. Take, Reader a taste of the different Spirits of Writers
concerning his Character.

Leland's Text. Eadem opera, and religionem celebrabat, and literas. With the
same endeavor He plied both Religion and Learning.

Script. Brit. Cent. 2. number. 76
Bale his Comment. Per religionem fortassis Monachatum intelligit, per literas
Sophistica praestigia.

It may be he means Monkery by Religion and by Learning Sophistical fallacies.

I confess he might have employed his pains better. But Bale proceeds, de
Consultis Ruthenis, consulting (not the Russians, as the word sounds to all
Critics) but the Men of Ruthin in Wales. He wrote the Life and Miracles of S.
Winfride, flourished Anno 1140.

DAVID of CHIRBURY, a Carmelite, was so named from his Native place in the West
of this County, bordering on Mountgomery-shire. A small Village I confess, yet
which formerly denominated a whole hundred, and at this day is the Barony of
the Lord Herbert. He was, says Leland, (whom I take at the second hand on the
trust of John In Appendice Ilus Ang. scrip. page 832.
Pits) Theologiae cognitione clarus. And going over into Ireland, was there
made Episcopus Dormorensis, Bishop of Drummore, as I take it, He is said Idem
Ibid.
to have wrote some Books, though not mentioned in Bale, and (which is to me a
wonder) no notice taken of him by that Judicious Knight Sr. James In his Book,
de Scriptoribus Hibernicis.
Ware. So that it seems his Writings were either few, or obscure. Returning
into England he died, and was buried in his Native County at Ludlow, in the
Convent of the Carmelites, Anno Dom. 1420.

Since the Reformation.
ROBERT LANGELAND, forgive me, Reader, though placing him (who lived one
hundred and fifty years before) since the Reformation: For I conceive that the
Morning Star belongs rather to the Day, then to the Night. On which account
this Robert (regulated in our Book not according to the Age he was in, but
Judgment he was of,) may by Prolepsis be termed a Protestant.

He was born at Bale de script. Brit. cent. 6. number. 37.
Mortimers-Clibery in this County eight miles from Malvern-Hills: was bred a
Priest, and one of the first followers of J. Wickliffe, wanting neither Wit,
nor Learning, as appears by his Book called, The vision of Pierce Plowgh-man,
and hear what Character a most Learned Mr. Seldom in his notes on Poliolbion.
page 109.
Antiquary gives thereof.

It is written in a kind of English meeter, which for discovery of the
infecting corruptions of those times, I prefer before many of the more
seemingly serious Invectives, as well for Invention as Judgment.

There is a Book first set forth by Tindal, since, exemplied by Mr. Acts and
Monuments. page 398.
Fox, called The Prayer and complaint of the Plowghman, which though differing
in title and written in prose, yet be of the same subject at the same time, in
the same Language, I must refer it to the same Author: and let us observe a
few of his strange words with their significations.

1 Behotef 1 Promises 2 Binemen 2 Take away 3 Blive 3 Quickly 4 Fulleden for 4
Baptized 5 Feile times 5 Often times 6 Forward. 6 Covenant. 7 Heryeth 7
Worshipeth 8 Homelich 8 Household 9 Lesew 9 Pasture 10 Leude-men 10 Laymen 11
Nele 11 Will not 12 Nemeth for 12 Takes 13 Seggen 13 Do say 14 Swevens 14
Dreams 15 Sith 15 Afterward. 16 Thralles 16 Bondmen.

It Is observeable that Pitzaeus (generally a perfect Plagiary out of Bale)
passes this Langland over in silence: and why? because he wrote in oppositum
to the Papal Interest: Thus the most Light fingered Thieves will let that
alone, which is too hot for them. He flourished under King Edward the Third,
Anno Dom. 1369.

THOMAS CHURCHYARD was born in the Town of Shr^wesbury, as himself does affirm
in his Book made in Verse of the Worthiness of Wales, taking Shropshire within
the compass, making (to use his own expression) Wales the Park, and the Marches
to be the Pale thereof. Though some conceive him to be as much beneath a Poet,
as above a Rbimer, in my opinion his Verses may go abreast with any of that
age, writing in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth. It seems by this his Epitaph
in Mr. Camdens Remains, that he died not guilty of much Wealth.

Come Alecto lend me thy Torch,
To find a Churchyard in a Church Porch:
Poverty and Poetry his Tomb does enclose,
Wherefore good neighbors be merry in Prose.
His death, according to the most probable conjecture, may be presumed about
the eleventh year of the Queens Reign Anno Dom. 1570.

THOMAS HOLLAND D. D. was born in this Herologia Anglica, page 238.
County, in finibus and limitibus Cambriae, in the confines and Marches of
Wales, bred in Exeter College in Oxford, and at last became Rector thereof. He
did not with some only sip of Learning, or at the best but drink thereof: but
was Mersus in Libris, Drowned in his Books, so that the Scholar in him almost
devoured all other Relations. He was, says the Author, of his Funeral Sermon
so familiar with the Fathers, as if he himself had been a Father. This quality
commended him to succeed Dr. Lawrence Humphrid, in the place of Regius
Professor, which place he discharged with good credit for twenty years
together. When he went forth of his College on any journey for any long
continuance, he always took this solemn Valediction of the Fellows.

Idem ibid.
I commend you to the love of God, and to the hatred of Popery and
Superstition.

His extemporaries were often better than his praemeditations, so that he might
have been said to have been out, if he had not been out. He died in March Anno
Dom. 1612. and was buried in Oxford with great solemnity and lamentation.

ABRAHAM WHELOCK was born in White-church Parish in this County, bred Fellow of
Clare-Hall, Library Keeper, Arabic Professor, and Minister of St. Sepulchers
in Cambridge. Admirable his industry, and no less his Knowledge in the Oriental
tongues, so that he might serve for an Interpreter to the Queen of Sheba coming
to Solomon, and the Wise Men of the East who came to Herod, such his skill in
the Arabi^ and Persian Language. Amongst the Western Tongues he was well versed
in the Saxon, witness his fair and true Edition of Bid.

He translated the New Testament into Persian, and printed it, hoping in time
it might tend to the conversion of that Country to Christianity. Such as laugh
at his design as ridiculous, might well forbear their mirth, and seeing they
expended neither penny of cost nor hour of pains therein, might let another
enjoy his own inclination. True it is he that sets an acorn, sees it not a
timber-oak, which others may behold, and if such Testaments be conveyed into
Persia, another age may admire what this does deride. He died, as I take it,
Anno Dom. 1654.

Benefactors to the Public.
Sir ROGER ACHLEY born at Survey of London, p. 577.
Stanwardine in this County. He beheld the whole City of London as one Family,
and himself the Major 1511 (for the time being) the Master thereof. He observed
that poor people, who never have more than they need, will sometimes need more
than they have. This Joseph collected from the present plenty, that a future
famine would follow, as in this kind, a Lank constantly attends a Bank.
Wherefore he prepared Leaden Hall, (therefore called the Common Garner) and
stored up much Corn therein, for which he deserved the praise of the Rich, and
the blessing of the Poor.

Since the Reformation.
Sir ROWLAND HILL, son of Richard Hill, was born at Stows Survey of London, p.
584.
Hodnet in this County, bred a Mercer in London, whereof he was Lord Major
1549. Being sensible that God had given him a great estate, he expressed his
gratitude unto him

In Giving maintenance to a fair* School at Drayton in this County, which he
built and endowed, besides six hundred pounds to Christ-Church-Hospital, and
other benefactions.

In D. Willet, in his Ca^al. of Protestant Char.
Forgiving at his death all his Tenants in his Manors of Aldersy and Sponely,
a years Rent. Also enjoining his Heirs, to make them new Leases of one and
twenty years, for two years Rent.

As for the Cause-wayes he caused to be made, and Bridges built (two of stone
containing Stows Survey of London, page 90.
eighteen arches in them both) seeing hitherto it has not been my hap to go
over them, I leave his piety to be praised by such passengers, who have
received safety, ease, and cleaness, by such conveniences. He died Anno Dom.
15..

A note to the Reader.
I have heard the natives of this County confess and complain of a comparative
dearth (in proportion to other Shires) of Benefactors to the public. But sure,
Shropshire is like to the Mulberry, which puts forth his leaves last of all
Trees, but then makes such speed, (as sensible of his slowness with an
ingenious shame) that it overtaketh those trees in Fruit, which in Leaves
started long before it. As this Shire of late has done affording two of the
same surname still surviving, who have dipped their hands so deep in charitable
mortar.

Sir Dubbed by K. Charles the II at the Hague, when sent thithera Commissioner
for the City of London.
THOMAS ADAMS, Knight. was born at Wem in this County, bred a Draper in London,
where God so blessed his honest industry, that he became Lord Major thereof
164.. A man, who has drunk of the bitter waters of Meribah without making a
bad face thereat, cheerfully submitting himself to Gods pleasure in all
conditions.

He gave the house of his nativity, to be a Free School (that others might have
their breeding, where he had his birth) and has liberally endowed it. He
lives in due honor and esteem and, I hope, will live to see many years, seeing
there is no better Collurium or Eye Salve to quicken and continue ones sight,
than in his life time to behold a building erected for the public profit.

WILLIAM ADAMS Esquire. was born at Newport in this County, bred by Trade a
Haberdasher in London, where God so blessed his endeavors, that he fined for
Alderman in that City. God had given him an heart and hand proportionable to
his estate, having founded in the Town of his nativity a School-house in the
form following.

1 The building is of Brick, with Windows of free stone, wherein the School is
Threescore and ten in length, and two and twenty foot in breadth and height. 2
Over it a fair Library furnished with plenty and choice Books.

At the South end, the lodgings of the Schoolmaster, whose salary is sixty; On
the North the Ushers, whose stipend is thirty pounds per annum.

3 Before the front of the School a stately Crupto-porticus, or fair walk all
the length of the School, with Pillars erected, and on the top thereof a leaden
Tarras, with Railes, and Barristers. 4 Two Almshouses for poor people, at
convenient distance from the School, with competent maintenance. 5 Two Gardens
a piece, for Schoolmaster and Usher, with well nigh two Acres of ground for a
place for the Scholars to play in. 6 The Rent for the maintenance thereof
deposed in the hands of Trustees, a year before, that in case of casualty there
may be no complaint. 7 More intended for the settlement of exhibitions to
Scholars chosen hence to the University, as God hereafter shall direct the
founder. But who for the present can hold from praising so pious a performance.
Come Momus, who delight do take,
Where none are found, there faults to make:
And count'st that cost, and care, and pain,
Not spent on thee, all spent in vain.
See this bright structure, till that smart
Blind thy blear-eyes, and grieve thy heart.
Some Cottage-Schools are built so low,
The Muses there must grovelling go.
Here, whilst Apollo's sharp does sound,
The Sisters Nine may dance around;
And Architects may take from hence
The Pattern of magnificence.
Then grieve not, Adams, in thy mind,
'Cause you have left no Child behind:
Unbred! unborn, is better rather
If so, you are a second Father
To all bred in this School so fair,
And each of them thy Son and Heir.
Long may this Worthy person live to see his intentions finished and
completed, to his own contentment.

Memorable Persons.
THOMAS PARRE, son of John Parre, born at Alberbury in the Parish of Winnington
in this County, lived to be above one hundred and fifty years of age, verifying
his Anagram

Thomas Parre.
Most rare hap.
He was born in the reign of King Edward the Fourth, one thousand four hundred
eighty three, and two months before his death was brought up by Thomas Earl
of Arundel (a great lover of Antiquities in all kinds) to Westminster. He slept
away most of his time, and is thus charactered by an eye witness of him

From head to heel his body had all over,
A quick-set, thick-set natural hairy cover.
Change of Air and Diet (better in it self, but worse for him) with the trouble
of many Visitants or Spectators rather are conceived to have accelerated his
death, which happened Westminster, November the 15, 1634, and was buried in the
Abbey-Church, all present at his burial, doing homage to this our aged Thomas
de Temporibus.

Lords Majors.
Name Father Place Company. Time 1 Roger Acheley Thomas Acheley Stanwardine
Draper 1511 2 Rowland Hill Thomas Hill Hodnet Mercer 1549 3 Thomas Lee Roger
Lee Wellington Mercer 1558 4 Thomas Lodge William Lodge Cresset Grocer 1562 5
Rowland Heyward George Heyward Bridge North Clothworker 1570 6 Robert Lee
Humphry Lee Bridge North Merchant Tailor 1602 7 John Swinnerton Tho. Swinnerton
Oswestry Merchant Tailor 1612 8 Francis Jones John Jones Glaverley Haberdasher
1620 9 Peter Probey Not Recorded White-church Grocer 1622 10 Allen Cotton Ralph
Cotton White-church Draper 1625 11 George Whitmore Will. Whitmore Charley
Haberdasher 1631 12 Thomas Adams Thomas Adams Wem Draper 164.

See we here a Jury of Lords Majors born in this (which I believe will hardly
be paallel'd in a greater) County. All [no doubt] Honestmen, and true.

The Names of the Gentry of this County, returned by the Commissioners in the
twelfth year of Henry the Sixth 1433.
A] William, Bishop of Coven. and Leichf. Commissioners to take the Oaths. B]
John de Talbot, Knight. C] Richard Laken, Knights for the Shire. William
Boerley.

Willielmi Malory, Militis Johannis Fitz-Piers Willielmi Lodelowe Thomae
Hopton, de Hopton Richardi Archer Johannis Wynnesbury Thomae Corbet, de Ley
Thomae Corbet, de Morton Johannis Bruyn, senioris Thomae Charleton Richardi
Peshale Thomae Newport Georgii Hankeston Johannis Brugge Thomae Banastre
Hugonis Harnage Leonardi Stepulton Hugonis Cresset Johannis Skryven Willielmi
Poynour Richardi Neuport Richardi Horde Nicholai Sandford Griffin Kynaston
Johanuis Bruyn, junioris Hugonis Stepulton Simonis Hadington Alani Wetenhull
Richardi Sonford Johannis Otley Edwardi Leighton, de Mershe Edmundi Plowden
Thomae Mardford Rogeri Bromley Richardi Lee Humfridi Cotes VVillielmi Leighton
Richardi Horton Willielmi Welascote Richardi Husee Johannis Wenlok Willielmi
Mersheton Walteri Codour Ricdardi Gerii VVillielmi Bourden.
A] This William was William Hieworth, Bishop of Coventry and Leichfield, of
whom Wilts Prela:
here after.

B] Sir John Talbot, (though here only additioned Knight) was the Lord Talbot,
and eight years after created Earl of Shrewsbury, of whom Vide Soldiers in
this County.
before.

C] Richard Laken, the same Family with Lacon, whose Seat was at VVillily in
this County, augmented both in Blood and Estate by the Matches with the Heirs of

1 Camb. Brit. in Salop.
Harley. 2 Peshal. 3 Passilew. 4 Blunt of Kinlet.

My hopes are according to my desires that this Ancient Family is still extant
in this County, though I suspect shrewdly shattered in Estate.

The Commissioners of this Shire were neither altogether Idle, nor very
Industrious: having made but a short and slender return, only of 45 principal
persons therein.

Sheriffs of Shropshire.
HEN. II.
Anno 1 Anno 2 Will. filius Alani, for 5 years together. Anno 7 Guido
Extraneus, for 5 years together. Anno 12 Gaufrid. de Ver, for 4 years together.
Anno 16 Gaufrid. de Ver, and Will. Clericus. Anno 17 Guido Extraneus, for 9
years together. Anno 26 Hugo Pantulfe, for 8 years together.
RICH. I.
Anno 1 Will. filius Alani, and Reginal. de Hesden. Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Will.
filius Alani, and Will. de Hadlega. Anno 4 Will. filius Alani, for 4 years
together. Anno 8 Will. filius Alani, and Reginald. de Hedinge. Anno 9 Will.
filius Alani, and Wido. filius Roberti. Anno 10 Will. filius Alani Masculum.
JOHANNES.
Anno 1 Will. filius Alani, and VVarrus de VVililegh. Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3
Will. filius Alani, and Reiner de Lea. Anno 4 G. filius Petri, and Richardus,
de Ambresleg. Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Thomas de Erolitto and Robertus de Alta Ripa.
Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Thomas de Erdington, for 9 years together.
HEN. III.
Anno 1 Anno 2 Ranul. Com. Cestriae, and Hen. de Aldetheleg. Anno 3 Idem. Anno
4 Idem. Anno 5 Ranul. Com. Cestriae, and Philippus Kinton. Anno 6 Idem. Anno 7
Idem. Anno 8 Ranul. Com. Cestriae. Anno 9 Johannes Bovet. Anno 10 Idem. Anno 11
Hen. de Aldithle. Anno 12 Idem. Anno 13 Idem. Anno 14 Hen. de Aldithle, and
Will. de Bromley. Anno 15 Idem. Anno 16 Idem. Anno 17 Petr. Rival. and Rob. de
Hay, for 4 years together. Anno 21 Johannes Extraneus, and Robertus de Acton.
Anno 22 Johannes Extraneus, for 11 years together. Anno 33 Thomas Corbet Anno
34 Idem. Anno 35 Robertus de Grendon, for 5 years together. Anno 40 Hugo Acover
Anno 41 Idem. Anno 42 Willielmus Bagod Anno 43 Idem. Anno 44 Idem. Anno 45
Jacobus de Audeley, for 7 years together. Anno 52 VValterus de Hopton Anno 53
Idem.
EDW. I.
Anno 1 Roger. de Mortuo Mari. Anno 2 Idem Anno 3 Idem Anno 4 Bago de Knovile
Anno 5 Idem Anno 6 Idem. Anno 7 Rogerus Sprengehuse, for 8 years together. Anno
15 Dominus de Ramesley Anno 16 Idem. Anno 17 Robertus Corbet Anno 18 Will. de
Tickley, ( ^ive Tittle) for 6 years together. Anno 24 Radulphus de Schirle.
Anno 25 Idem Anno 26 Idem. Anno 27 Tho. Corbet Anno 28 Idem. Anno 29 Richardus
de Harleigh. Anno 30 Idem Anno 31 Walter de Beysin Anno 32 Idem Anno 33
Johannes de Acton Anno 34 Johannes de Dene Anno 35 Idem
EDW. II.
Anno 1 Rogerus Trumvine Anno 2 Johannes Extraneus, and Hugo de Crofts. Hugo de
Crofts Anno 4 Idem Anno 5 Hugo de Audeley Anno 6 Idem Anno 7 Idem Anno 8 Will.
de Mere. Anno 9 Rogerus de Cheyney Anno 10 Rogerus Trumwine Anno 11 Idem. Anno
12 Robertus de Grendon Anno 13 Null. Tit. Vicom. in hoc Rot. Anno 14 Nec in hoc.
Anno 15 Johannes de Swinerton Anno 16 Idem. Anno 17 Hen. de Bishburne Anno 18
Idem Anno 19 Idem
EDW. III.
Anno 1 John de Hinckley, and Hen. de Bishburn Anno 2 Idem Anno 3 Johannes
Hinckley Anno 4 Idem Anno 5 Henricus de Bishburn Anno 6 Idem Anno 7 Richardus
de Peshal Anno 8 Idem Anno 9 Johannes de Hinckley Anno 10 Simon de Ruggeley
Anno 11 Richardus de Peshal Anno 12 Idem Anno 13 Simon de Ruggeley Anno 14 Idem
Anno 15 Adam de ^eshal Anno 16 Thomas de Swinerton Anno 17 Idem Anno 18
Johannes de Aston Anno 19 Richardus Com. Arundel, for 31 years together. Anno
50 Richardus Peshall Anno 51 Petrus de Careswel.
Name. Place Arms. RICH. II. Anno 1 Brian. de Cornwel Burford Ar. a Lion ramp.
Gu. crowned Or, a border Sa. Beazante. 2 Johannes Ludlow Hodnet Argent, a Lion
rampant, Sable. 3 John de Drayton Drayton 4 Rogerus Hord Ar. on a Chief Or, a
Raven proper. 5 Johannes Shery 6 Edw. de Acton Aldenham Gu. 2 Lions passant
Arg, betwixt 9 croslets, Or. 7 Ioh. de Stepulton Argent, a Lion rampant, Sable.
8 Edw. ac Acton ut prius 9 Nich. de Sandford Sandford Parteper Cheveron, Sable
and Er. 2 Boarsheads coupee in chief, Or. 10 Robert. de Lee Lee-hall Gu. a Fess
componee, Or, and Az. betwixt 8 Billets Argent. 11 Ioh. * Mowetho Alias *
Mowellio, quaere. 12 Rob. de Ludlow ut prius 13 Edw. de Acton ut prius 14 Ioh.
de Stepulton ut prius 15 Will. Huggeford 16 Hen. de Winesbury Az. on a Bend,
betwixt 2 cotises, Or, 3 Lions Gules. 17 Ioh. de Eyton Eyton Or, a Fret, Azure.
18 Thomas de Lee ut prius 19 Will. VVorthie 20 Will. Huggeford 21 Adamus de
Peshal Argent, a Cross formee, fleury, Sable, on a Canton, Gules, a Wolfs-head
erased of the field. 22 Idem. ut prius HEN. IV. Anno 1 Io. Cornwall, Mil. ut
prius 2 Will. Huggeford, and Johan. Daras 3 Will. Banaster VVem Argent, a
Cross Patee Sable. 4 Tho. Newport Arcol Argent, a Cheveron, Gules, betwixt 3
Leopards heads Sable. 5 Idem. ut prius 6 Ioh. Cornwail, Mil. ut prius 7 Tho. de
VVitton VVitton Or, on a Cheveron, Sable, 5 Plates. 8 Will. Brounshul 9 Ioh.
Boreley Broms-croft Ca^tle Arg. a Fesse checque Or, and Az. upon a Lions ramp.
Sable, armed Gnles. 10 Rog. Acton ut prius 11 Edw. Sprengeaux 12 Robertus
Tiptot Argent, a Saltire ingrailed, Gules. HEN. V Anno 1 Rob. Corbet, Mil.
Morton Or, a Raven proper. 2 Rob. Corbet, Mil. ut prius 3 Rich. Laken, Mil.
Quarterly per Fesse indented, Ermin and Azure. 4 Geor. Hankeston 5 Will.
Ludelowe ut prius 6 Adam Peshal, Mil. ut prius 7 Rob. Corbet ut prius 8
Johannes Bruyn Azure, a Cross Molin, Or. 9 Idem. ut prius HEN. VI. Anno 1
Johannes Bruyn ut prius 2 Hugo Harnage Cund Argent, 6 Torteauxes. 3 Tho. le
S^ange Gules, 2 Lions passant, Argent. 4 Will. Bo^y ut prius 5 Tho. Corbet ut
p^ius 6 Will. Li^chfeld 7 Ioh. Winnesbury ut prius 8 Hugo Bu^gh, and Thomas
^opton Az. a Cheveron betwixt 3 flower de Luces, Ermin. Hopton Gu. Seem de
Cross croslets a Lion Ramp. Or. 9 Rich. A^chet 10 Johannes Bruyn ut prius 11
Johannes Ludlow ut prius 12 (...). Corbet, de Ley ut prius 13 Hugo Cr^sset
Upton Cresset Azure, a Cross within a Border ingrailed, Or. 14 Rob. Inglefeld
BERK-sh. Barry of 6 Gules and A^gent, on a chief, Or, a Lion passant Azure. 15
Will. Ludlow ut prius 16 Will. Liechfield 17 Hum. Low 18 Nicholaus Eyton ut
prius 19 Idem ut prius 20 Johannes Burgh ut prius 21 Will. Ludlow ut prius 22
Thomas Corbet ut prius 23 Nichol^us Eyton ut prius 24 Hugo Cresset ut prius 25
Fulcho Sprencheaux 26 Will. Ludlow ut prius 27 Io^. Burgh, Mil. ut prius 28
Rogerus Ey^on ut prius 29 Thomas Herbert Chirbury Per pa^e Azure and Gules, 3
Lions ramp^, Argent. 30 Will. Laken ut prius 31 Ioh. Burgh, Mil. ut prius 32
Robertus Corbet ut prius 33 N^cholaus Eyton ut prius 34 Will. Mitton Per Pale
Gules and Azure, au^ Eagle (...) with 2 he^, Or. 35 Tho. Hord, Arm. ut prius 36
Fulco Sprencheaux 37 Tho. Cornwail, ar. ut prius 38 Rob. Co^ber, Mil. ut prius
EDW. IV. Anno 1 Hum. Blou^t, Ar. Kin^ (...) (...) (...) six. (...) (...)
Sable. 2 Rog. Kin^ston, ar. Hor^ey See ou^es in (...) (...)* 3 Idem ut prius 4
Ioh. Burgh, Mil. ut prius 5 Rich. Lee Armig. ut prius 6 Rob. Ey^on, ar. ut
prius 7 Hum. Blount, ar. ut prius 8 Ioh. Leighton, ar. Watlesbury Quarterly per
(...) indented Or, and Gules. 9 Rob. Cresset, Ar. ut prius 10 Rog. K^naston,
ar. ut prius 11 Rog. K^aston, Mi. ut prius 12 Rob. Charleton, ar Or, a Lion
rampant, Gules. 13 Will. Newport ut prius 14 Johan. Leighton ut prius 15 Hum.
Blount, Mil. ut prius 16 Johannes H^i 17 Rich. Laken, Ar. ut prius 18 Rich.
Ludlow, Mil. ut prius 19 Richardus Lee ut prius 20 Th. Blount, Arm. ut prius 21
Ioh. Harley, Mil. Or, a ^end cotised, Sable. 22 Ioh. Leighton, ar. ut prius
RICH. III. Anno 1 Thomas Mitton ut prius 2 Thomas Hord. ut prius 3 Rob.
Cresser, and Gilber. Talbot, Mil. ut prius Gules, a Lion Rampant, and a border
ingrai^ed, Or* HEN. VII. Anno 1 Ioh. Talbot, mil. ut prius 2 Rich. Laken, mil.
ut prius 3 Thomas Hord. ut prius 4 Edward* Blount ut prius 5 Rich. Ludlow, mil.
ut prius 6 Johan. Newport ut prius 7 Will. Young, mil. Kenton Or, 3 Roses,
Gules. 8 Edw* Blount, ar. ut prius 9 Tho. Blount, mil. ut prius 10 Th.
Leighton, mil. and Rich. Lee, armig. ut prius ut prius 11 Rich. Lee, armig. ut
prius 12 Tho. Screvin, arm. Fradgly Argent, Guttee Gules, a Lion rampant,
Sable. 13 Rich. Laken, Mil. ut prius 14 Rich. Harley, Mil* ut prius 15 VVil.
Otteley, ar. Pichford Argent, on a Bend Azure, three Garbes, Or* 16 Ioh.
Newport, Ar. ut prius 17 Tho. Blount, Mil. ut prius 18 Pet. Newton, ar. Heytley
Argent, a Cross Sable, fleury, Or* 19 Idem. ut prius 20 Geo. Manwayring, arm.
CHESH Argent, two Bars, Gules. 21 Th. Cornwail, mil. ut prius 22 Rob. Corbet,
Mil. ut prius 23 Th* Kinaston, mil. ut prius HEN. VIII. (...) 1 Th. Laken, arm.
ut prius 2 Ioh. Newport, ar. ut prius 3 Th. Scriven, arm. ut prius 4 Pe^.
Newton, ar. ut prius 5 ^ill. Otteley, ar. ut prius 6 Tho. Laken, arm. ut prius
7 Th. Cornwall, mil. ut prius 8 Rob. Pigot, armig. Chetwin Er^in, 3 Fusiles in
Fesse, Sable* ^ Pet. ^ewton, arm. ut prius 10 Tho. Blount, mil. ut prius 11 Th.
Cornwall, mil. ut prius 12 Ioh. Salter, armig. Oswa^rey Gules, 10 Billets Or,
4, 3, 2, and 1^ 13 Geo. Bromley, ar. Bromley Quarterly per Fesse indented, Arg.
and Or. 14 Pet. N^wton, arm. ut prius 15 Thomas Vernon Hodn^t Argent, Frettee,
Sable, a Canton, Gules. 1^ Th. Cornwall, mil. ut prius 17 (...). Corbet de ley,
ar. 18 Tho. Screvin, arm. ut prius 19 Ioh. Talbot, mil. Alb^ighton 20 Rob.
Nedeham, ar. Shenton Argent, a Bend ingrailed, Azure, betwi^t 2 B^cks-heads,
Sable* 21 Rog. Corbet, arm. ut prius 22 Th. Cornwall, Mi^. ut prius 23 Th.
Manwayring ut prius 24 Th* Laken, miles. ut prius 25 Th. Talbot, miles ut prius
26 Tho. Vernon, arm. ut prius 27 Rob. Nedeham, M. ut prius 28 Ioh. Corbet, arm.
ut prius 29 Ioh* Talbot, miles. ut prius 30 Rich* Manwayring ut prius 31 Rich.
Laken, arm. ut prius 32 Rob. Nedeham, mi. ut prius 33 Ioh. Talbot, mil. ut
prius 34 Th. Newport, mil. ut prius 35 Rich. Mitton, ar. ut prius 36 Rich*
Manwayring ut prius 37 Th. Vernon, arm. ut prius 38 Th. L^e, armig. ut prius
EDW. VI. Anno 1 Will. Young, ar. ut prius 2 Rich. Cornwall, ar. ut prius ^ Tho.
Newport, ar. ut prius 4 Andr. Corbet, mil. ut prius 5 Rich. Newpo^t, ar. ut
prius 6 Ric. Manwayring (mil* ut prius PHIL* Rex, and MAR. Reg. Anno 1 Adam
Milton, m^. 2 Nic. Cornwall, ar. ut prius 3 Andr. Corbet, mil. ut prius 4 Rich.
Leveson, mil. Lilleshall Az. 3 Laurel-leaves slipped, Or. 5 Rich. Newport, ar.
ut prius 6 Th. Farmour, arm. Argent, a Fesse Sable, between 3 Lions-heads
erased, Gules. ELIZ. Reg. Anno 1 Rich. Mitton, Ar. ut prius 2 Rich. Corbet,
arm. ut prius 3 Rich. Cornwall, ar. ut prius 4 Arth. Manwayring ut prius 5 Geor.
Blount, mil. ut prius 6 Rob. Nedeham, ar. ut prius 7 Hum. O^slow, ar. Onslow
Argent, a Fesse Gules, betwixt 6 Merlins Sable, beaked and legged, Or. 8 Th.
Charlton, arm. and Th. Eaton, armig. ut prius 9 Edw. Leighton, ar. ut prius 10
Rich. Newport, mi. ut prius 11 And. Corbet, mil. ut prius 12 Roll. Laken, arm.
ut prius 13 Will. Gratewood, A. 14 Th. Powel, armig. Worthen Arg. 3 ^ars-heads
coupee, Sable. 15 Roub. Pigot, arm. ut prius 16 Ioh. Hopton, arm. ut prius 17
Walt, Leveso^, ar. ut prius 18 Art. Maynwa^ing, m. ut prius 19 F^anc. Lawley,
ar. Spoon-Hill Argent, a Cross Fo^mee throughout, Or and Sable. 20 Will.
Young. arm. ut prius 21 Edw. Cornwall, ar. ut prius 22 VVil. Gratewood, a. 23
Th. Williams, ar. Willaston Sa. 3 Nags-heads erased, Ermin. 24 Carolus Fox,
arm. Chain ham Ar. a Cheveron betwixt 3 Foxes beads erased, Gules. 25 Rich.
Cresset, arm. ut prius 26 Roll. Barker, a^m. Haghmond Gules, a Fess checky Or
and Az. betwixt 6 Annulets of the Second. 27 Fran^. Newp^rt, ar. ut prius 28
Rob. Nedeham. ut prius 29 Edw. Leighton, ar. ut prius 30 Th. Cornwall, ar. ut
prius 31 Andr. Charleton, ^. ut prius 32 Will. Hopton, ar. ut prius 33 Rob.
Eyton, armig. ut prius 34 Rich. Corbet, arm. ut prius 35 Rob. Powel, armig. ut
prius 36 Frances Albany, ar. Fern-Hill Arg. on ^ Fess betwixe 3 cinquefoiles
Gules, a Gray-^ond current, Or. 37 Rob. Nedeham, ar. ut prius 38 Edw. Scriven,
arm. ut prius 39 Carolus Fox, arm. ut prius 40 Edw. Kinaston, mi ut prius 41
Hum. Lee, armiger. ut prius 42 Franc. Newport, a^. ut prius 43 Franc. Newton,
ar. ut prius 44 Rog. Ki^aston, ar. ut prius 45 Rog. Owen, mil. Condover Arge^t,
a Lion rampant Sable, a Canton of the field. JACOB. Rex Anno 1 Rog. Owen* mil.
ut prius 2 Hum. Briggs, arm. Haughton Gu. 2 Bars gemels, Or, on a Canton, Sa. a
Cressent of the first. 3 He^. Walop, mil. Red-Castle Argent, a Bend Wavy,
Sable. 4 Rob. Nedeham, m. ut prius 5 Ed^. Fox, miles. ut prius 6 Rob. Purslow,
mil. Sidbury Ar. a Cross ingrailed fleury Sa. a Border of the same form Gu.
^ezance. 7 Rich. Mitton, arm. Holston Per Pale Gu. and Az. an Eagle displayed
with 2 heads, Arg. 8 Bonham. Norton, a^. Stretton Or, 2 Bars Gules, on a Chief,
Azure, an Ineschoucheon Ermin. 9 Fran. Laken, mil. Kinlet Quarterly per Fess
indented, Ermin and Azure. 10 Tho. Gervis, mil. 11 Ioh. Cotes, armig. Woodcoat
Quarterly Ermin, and paly of six, Or and Gules. 12 Tho. Piggot, ar. ut prius 13
Th. Cornwall, Mil. ut prius 14 Rolan. Cotton, mi. B^lla-Porte Az^a a Cheveron
betwixt 3 CottonSkeans Arg. 15 Rob. Owen, Arm. ut prius 16 Tho. Harris, Arm.
Boreatton Or, 3 Vrchins Azure, 17 Will. VVhitmore, ar Appley Vert, Fret^y, Or.
18 Walter Barker, ar. ut prius 19 ^h. Edwa^ds, Arm. Creete Gules, a Cheveron,
engrailed between 3 Boars heads erased, Or. 20 Will. Owen, Mil. ut prius 21
Walt. Piggot, Ar. Chetwin Ermin, 3 Fusils in F^sse, Sable. 22 Tho. Jones, arm.
CAR. Rex. Anno 1 Fran. Charleton, ar. Appley 2 Ric. Newport, Mil. High Ar^ol
Ar. a Cheveron Gules, betwixt 3 Leopards heads, Sable. 3 Rich. Prince, arm.
Shr^wsbury Gu. a Saltir Or, over all a Cross ingrailed, Ermin. 4 Ioh. Corbet,
Bar. Stoake Or, 2 Ravens in Pale proper, a border ingrailed, Gules. 5 Walt.
Acton, ar* Aldenh^m Gu. 2 Lions passant Arg. between 9 Crosses croslets,
Fitched, Or. 6 Hum. VValcot, ar. VValcot Ar. a Chever. inter 3 chess-Rooks, Er.
7 Tho. I^eland, arm. Abrington Gul. 6 fleur de Luces, Argent. 8 Phil. Eyton*
Mil. Eyton Or, a Fret, Azure. 9 Tho. Thynne, Mil. Cause Castle Barry of 10 Or
and Sable. 10 Ioh. Newton, arm. Heytleigh ut prius Arg. a Cross Sable fleury,
Or. 11 Rob. Co^bet, arm. 12 Paulus Harris, mil. ut prius 13 VVil. Pierpoint,
ar. Tong-Castl^ Arg. a Lion Ramp. Sab. in an Orb of Cinquefoiles, Gules. 14
Rich. Lee* Gules, a Fess Co^ponee, Or and Az. betwixt 8 Billels, Argen. 15 Rog.
Kinnaston, ar ut prius 16 Th. Nicholas, arm. Shrewsbury 17 Ioh. VVelde, ar
VVillye 18 Bellum nobis 19 hoc fecit 20 inane. 21 22 Rob. Powel, ar. T^ Park
Arg. 3 Boars-heads co^pee, Sable*

RICHARD the Second.
9. NICHOLAS de SANDFORD.] This ancient Name is still extant, at the same place
in this County in a worshipful equipage; Welfare a dear token thereof. For in
the List of such as compounded for their reputed delinquency in our late Civil
Wars, I find Francis Sandford, of Sandford Esquire. paying four hundred fifty nine
pounds for his composition. Yet I believe the Gentleman begrudged not his money
in preservation of his own integrity, acting according to the information of
his conscience, and the practice of all his Ancestors. I understand that the
said Francis Sandford was very well skilled in making Warlike Fortifications.

HENRY the IV.
1 JOHN CORNWALL, Miles.] A Person remarkable on several accounts. 1 For his
high Extraction, descended from Richard Earl of Cornwall, and King of the
Almains, as his Arms do evidence. 2 Prosperous Valor under King Henry the
Fifth in France, there gaining so great Treasure, as that therewith he Camd.
Brit* in Bedfordshire.
built his fair house at Amp-hi^ in Bedfordshire, 3 Great Honor, being created
by King Henry the Sixth Baron Fanhop, and Knight of the Garter. 4 Constant
Loyalty, sticking faster to King Henry the Sixth, than his own Crown did,
faithfully following after the other forsook him. 5 Vigorous vivacity,
continuing till the reign of King Edward the Fourth, who dispossessed him of
his Lands in Bedford-shire. 6 Cheerful disposition, pleasantly saying: That not
He, but his fine House at Amp-hill, was Camd. ut prius.
guilty of high Treason: happy! that he could make mirth at his misery, and
smile at the loosing of that, which all his Frowns could keep no longer. Know
Reader that if this J. Cornwall, shall (which I suspect not) prove a distinct
person, from this his Kinsman and Namesake, none will blame me for taking here
a just occasion of speaking of so eminent a Man, who elsewhere came not so
conveniently under my Pen.

EDWARD the Fourth.
2 ROGER KINASTON, Ar.] I cannot satisfy my self in the certain Arms of this
ancient Family (much augmented by match with HORD) finding them giving sundry
[all good and rich] Coats in several Ages, but conceive they now fix on, Ar. a
Lion ramp. Sa.

RICHARD the Third.
1 THOMAS MITTON.] He, in obedience to King Richard's commands, apprehended the
Duke of Buckingham (the Grand Engener to promote that Usurper) in the house of
Humphry Banaster, who for the avaricious desire of a thousand pounds betrayed
the Duke unto the Sherif.

3 GILBERT TALBOT Mil.] He was son to John Talbot, second Earl of Shrewsbury,
of that name. In the time of his Sherivalty, Henry Earl of Richmond (afterward
King Henry the Seventh) marching with his men to bid battle to King Richard the
Third, was met at Shrewsbury by the same Sir Gilbert, with two thousand men
well appointed (most of them Tenants and Retainers to his Nephew George fourth
Earl of Shrewsbury, then in minority) whence forward and not before, his Forces
deserved the name of an Army. For this and his other good service in
Bosworth-field King Henry rewarded him with fair Lands at Grafton, in
VVorcester-shire, made him Governor of Calis in France, and Knight of the
Garter, and from him the present Earl of Shrewsbury is descended.

I conceive it was rather his son than himself, to whom King Henry the Eight
(fearing a sudden surprise from the French) wrote briefly and peremptorily That
he should instantly fortify the Castle of Calis. To whom Governor Talbot
unprovided of necessaries as briefly as bluntly replied, That he could neither
fortify nor fiftifie without money.

Queen ELIZABETH.
45 ROGER OWEN, Miles.] He was the son of Sir Thomas Owen, the Learned and
religious Justice of the Common Pleas, who lies buried on the South side of
the Quire of Westminster Abbey. This Sir Roger, most eminent in his Generation,
deserved the Character given him by Mr. In Shropshire.
Camden.

Multiplici doctrina tanto Patre dignissimus.

He was a Member of Parliament, Vndecimo Jacobi, (as I take it) when a great
Man therein (who shall be nameless) cast a grieveous, and general Aspersion on
the English Quo genere hominum nihil est putidius.
Clergy. This Sir Roger appeared a Zelot in their defense, and not only removed
the Bastard [Calumny] from their doors, at which it was laid, but also carried
the Falsehood home to the true Father thereof, and urged it shrewdly against the
Person, who in that place, first revived the Aspersion^.

King JAMES.
14 ROWLAND COTTON, Miles.] Incredible are the most true relations, which many
eyewitnesses, still alive, do make of the Valor and Activity of this most
accomplished Knight. So strong, as if he had been nothing but bones: so nimble,
as if he had been nothing but sinews.

CHARLES the First.
2 RICHARD NEWPORT, Miles.] Signal his Fidelity to the king, even in his lowest
condition, by whom he was deservedly rewarded with the Title of Baron of
High-Arcol in this County, being created at Oxford the 14 of October, 1642. His
son Francis Lord Newport at this day honors his honor with his Learning
and other natural accomplishments.

Farewell.
May this Shire, by Divine Providence, be secured from the return of the
Sweating sickness, which first began and twice raged in the Town of
Shrewsbury. The Cure was discovered, too late to save many, yet soon enough to
preserve more thousands of Men viz. by keeping the Patient in the same posture
wherein he was seized, without Food or Physic, and such who so weathered out
the disease, for twenty four hours, did certainly escape.

SOMERSETSHIRE has the Severn-sea on the North, Glocestershire on the
North-east, Wilts-shire on the East, Dorcet-shire on the South, and Devonshire
on the West. Some will have it so called from the Summerlinesse, or temperate
pleasantness thereof. With whom we concur, whilst they confine their
Etimologies to the Air; dissent, if they extend it to the Earth, which in
winter is as winterly, deep and dirty, as any in England. The truth is, it is
so named from Sommerton, the most ancient Town in the County. It stretches
from East to West 55 miles, and from North to South 42 miles. No Shire can show
finer ware which has so large measure, being generally fruitful though little
moistry be used thereon.

The Inhabitants will tell you that there be several single Acres in this Shire
(believe them of the larger sise and sesqui-jugera if measured) which may serve
a good round Family with bread for a year, as affording a bushel of Wheat for
every week therein, a proportion not easily to be paralleled in other places.

Natural Commodities.
Lead.
Plenty of the best (for the Kind thereof) is dug out of Myndip-hills.
Indeed it is not so soft, pliant and equally fusile, as that in Derby-shire,
not so proper for sheeting, because when melted it runs into knots, and
therefore little known to, and less used by our LondonPlumbers. For being of a
harder Nature it is generally transported beyond the Seas, and employed to make
Bullets and Shot, for which purpose't is excellent. May Foreigners enjoy wild
Lead to kill Men, whilst we make use of tame Lead to cover Houses, and keep
people warm and dry therein.

It Is almost incredible what great sums were advanced to the Bishops of Bath
and Wells by the benefit of Lead, since the later end of Queen Elizabeth,
Bishop Still is said to have had the Harvest, Bishop Montague the Cleanings,
Bishop Lake the Stubble thereof, and yet considerable was the Profit of Lead to
him and his Successors.

Lapis Calaminaris.
Plenty hereof is also found in Myndip-Hills, and it is much used in Physic
(being very good as artificially ordered for the clearing of the sight) and
more by Mettalists. For Brass, no original, but a compound Metal is made of
this Stone and Copper, and becomes more hard than Copper alone, and therefore
the more serviceable for many other purposes.

And now the Ridle in Nature which so long has posed me, is at last explained,
viz. How it can come to pass that Brass, being made of the best Copper with
much Art and Industry, is notwithstanding afforded some Pence in the Pound
cheaper, than Copper itself. This comes to pass because the Calaminary-stone
being of it self not worth above six pence in the pound, does in the
composition metalescere, turn Metal, in the mixture thereof, whereby the mass
and Bulk of Brass is much advanced.

I have no more to observe of this Stone, save that it was first discovered in
this County in that juncture of time when the Copper Mines were newly
r^-discovered in Cumberland, God doubling his gift by the seasonable giving
thereof.

Chief.
The Best and Biggest in England are made at Chedder, in this County. They may
be called Corporation Cheeses, made by the Join-Daryes of the whole Parish,
putting their Milk together, and each one, Poor and Rich, receive their share
according to their proportion.

So that some may think, that the Unity and Amity of those Female Neighbors,
living so lovingly together, gives the better Runnet and Relish to their
handiwork.

If any ask, why as good Cheese may not be made in the Vicenage, where the
soil is as rich, and the same Houswifry? it will be demanded of them, why
(nails must be driven out with nails) the like Cheese in Color, Taste and
Tenderness may not be made at Cremona, as at Parma, both lying in Lombardy,
near together, and sharing equally in all visible advantages of fatness and
fruitfulness. The worst fault of Chedder Cheese is, they are so few and dear,
hardly to be met with, save at some great Man's Table.

Woad.
In Latin Glastum, or Glaustum, was much used by the Ancient Britains, for
the painting of their Faces: for I believe it will hardly be proved, that they
dye their whole bodies. Say not, painted terriblenesse, is no terriblenesse,
rather ridiculous than formidable, seeing Vizards are more frightful than men's
own faces. This Woad gave the Britains a deep black tincture, as if they would
blow up their enemies with their Sulphurous countenances.

Our Dyers make much use thereof, being Color ad Colorem, the Stock (as I may
say) whereon other Colors are granted. Yea, it gives them truth and
fruithfulnesse, who without it prove fading and hypocritical.

This Herb does greatly impair the ground it grows on; profitable to such to
set, who have land to let without Impeachment of Waste, it being long before it
will recover good grass therein. I have placed Woad (which grows in all rich
places) in this County, because (as I am informed) it grows naturally therein
(hardly to be destroyed) especially about Glassenbury. Insomuch that a Learned
M. (...). Langl^y late Schoolmaster of Paul's.
Critic, and my Worthy good friend had almost persuaded me, that from this
Glastum, that Town takes its denomination.

Mastiffes.
Smile not, Reader, to see me return to course Creatures amongst the
Commodities of this County. Know, they are not (like Apes) the fools and
jesters, but the useful Servants in a Family, viz. the Porters thereof. Pliny
observes, that Britain breed's cowardy Lions, and courageous Mastiffes, which
to me seems no wonder, the former being whelp'd in prison, the later at
liberty. An English Mastiffe Anno 1602 did in effect worst a Lion, on the same
token, that Prince Henry allowed a kind of pension for his maintenance, and
gave strict Stows Annuals, page 336.
order That he that had fought with the King of Beasts should never after
encounter any inferior Creatures.

Our English Mastiffes are in high reputation beyond the Seas, and the story is
well known, that when an hundred Molossi were sent hence a present to the Pope;
a LackLatin Cardinal, standing by, when the Letter was read, mistook Molossos
for so many Mules. Surely had Britain been then known to the Ancient Romans,
when first (instead of manning,) they Dogged, their Capitol, they would have
furnished themselves with Mastiffes fetched hence for that purpose, being as
vigilant as, more valiant then, any of their Kind. For the City of St. Malow in
France is Garrisoned with a Regiment of Dogs, wherein many ranks are of
English Extraction.

Hence it is that an Drayton in his Polyolbion.
Author tells me, that it passes for the Blazon of this County,

Set the Band-Dog on the Bull.

It seems that both the Gentry and Country-folk in this Shire, are much
affected with that pastime, though some scruple the lawfulness thereof. 1 Man
must not be a Barrater, to set the Creatures at variance. 2 He can take no true
delight in their Antipathie, which was the effect of his sin. 3 Man's Charter of
Dominion empowers him to be a Prince, but no Tyrant over the Creatures. 4
Though Brute Beasts are made to be 2 Pet. 2* 12.
destroyed, they are not made to be tormented. Others rejoyn, that God gave us
the Creatures as well for our pleasure as necessity: that some nice
consciences, that scruple the Baiting of Bulls, will worry men with their
vexatious cruelties. All that I dare interpose is this, that the tough flesh of
Bulls is not only made more tender by baiting, but also thereby it is
discolored from Ox-beef, that the Buyer be not deceived.

Manufactures.
Taunton Serges are eminent in their Kind, being a fashionable wearing, as
lighter than Cloth, yet thicker than many other Stuffs. When Dionysius
sacrilegiously plundered Jove his Statue of his Golden Coat (pretending it too
cold for Winter, and too hot for Summer) he bestowed such a vestime^t upon him
to fit both Seasons. They were much sent into Spain, before our late War
therewith, wherein Trading (long since complained of to be dead) is now
lamented generally as buried, though hereafter it may have a resurrection.

The Buildings.
Of these the Churches of Bath and Wells are most eminent. Twins are said to
make but one Man, as these two Churches constitute one Bishops See. Yet as a
Twin oft-times proves as proper a person as those of single Births. So these
severally equal most, and exceed many Cathedrals in England.

We begin with Bath considerable in its several conditions, viz. the beginning,
obstructing, decaying, repairing, and finishing thereof.

1 It was begun by Oliver King Bishop of this Diocese in the reign of Henry the
Seventh and the West end most curiously cut and carved with Angels climbing up
a Ladder to Heaven. But this Bishop died before the finishing thereof.

2 His Death obstructed this structure so that it stood a long time neglected,
which gave occasion for one to write on the Church-wall with a Char-coal.

O Church I wail thy woeful plight,
Whom King, nor Card'nal, Clark, or Knight
Have yet restored to ancient right.
Alluding herein to Bishop King who begun it, and his four Successors in thirty
five years, viz. Cardinal Adrian, Cardinal Wolsey, Bishop Clark, and Bishop
Knight, contributing nothing to the effectual finishing thereof.

3 The decay and almost ruin thereof followed when it felt in part the Hammers
which knocked down all Abbyes. True it is the Commissioners proffered to sell
the Church to the Townsmen under 500 Marks. But the Townsmen fearing if they
bought it so cheap to be thought to cousin the King: so that the purchase might
come under the compass of concealed lands, refused the profer. Hereupon the
Glass, Iron, Bells, and Lead (which last alone amounted to 480 Tun) provided
for the finishing thereof were sold and sent over beyond the Seas, if a
shipwreck (as some report) met them not by the way.

4 For the repairing thereof, collections were made all over the Land in the
reign of Queen Elizabeth, though inconsiderable, either in themselves, or
through the corruption of others. Only honest Mr. Billet (whom I take to be
the same with him, who was designed Executor, to the Will of William Cecil Lord
Burghley) disbursed good sums to the repairing thereof, and a Stranger under a
fained name took the confidence thus to play the Poet and Prophet on this
Structure.

Be blithe fair Kirck, when Hemp is past,
Thine Olive, that ill winds did blast,
Shall flourish green for age to last.
Subscribed Cassadore.
By Hemp understand Henry the Eight, Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary, King
Philip, and Queen Elizabeth. The Author I suspect had a Tang of the Cask, and
being parcel-popish expected the finishing of this Church at the return of
their Religion, but his prediction was verified in a better sense, when his
Church

5 Was finished by James Montague Bishop of this See, disbursing vast sums in
the same, though the better enabled thereunto by his Mines at Mynedep, so that
he did but remove the Lead from the bowels of the Earth to the roof of the
Church, wherein he lies enterred under a fair Monument.

This Church is both spacious and specious, the most lightsome as ever I
beheld, proceeding from the greatness of the Windows, and whiteness of the
Glass therein.

All I have more to add is only this, that the parable of Jotham [Judg. 9. 8.]
is on this Church most curiously wrought (in allusion to the Christian Surname
of the first Founder thereof,) how the Trees going to choose them a King,
proffered the place to the OLIVE. Now when lately one OLIVER was for a time
Commander in Chief in this Land, some (from whom more Gravity might have been
expected) beheld this Picture as a Prophetical Prediction, so apt are English
fancies to take fire at every spark of conceit. But seeing since that Olive
has been blasted bottom, his Root and Branches, this pretended Prophecy with
that observation the reason is withered away.

As for the Cathedral of Wells it is a greater so darker than that of Bath, so
that Bath may seem to draw devotion with the pleasantness, Wells to drive it
with the solemnity thereof, and ill tempered their Minds who will be moved with
neither. The West Front of Wells is a Masterpiece of Art indeed, made of
Imagiry in just proportion, so that we may call them Vera and spirantia signa.
England affords not the like. For the West end of Excester begins
accordingly, it does not like Wells persevere to the end thereof.

As for the Civil Habitations in this County (not to speak of Dunstar Castle,
having an high ascent, and the effect thereof, a large prospect by Sea and
Land) Mountague built by Sir Edward Philips, Master of the Roles, is a most
magnificent Fabric. Nor must Hinton St. George, the House of the Lord Poulet
be forgotten having every stone in the Front shaped Doule-wayes, or in the form
of a Cart-nail. This I may call a Charitable Curiosity, if true what is
traditioned. That about the reign of King Henry the Seventh, the owner thereof
built it in a dear year, on purpose to employ the more poor people thereupon.

The Wonders.
VVockey Hole in Mendip-hills some two miles from Wells. This is an
undergroundConcavity, admirable for its spacious Vaults, stony Walls, creeping
Labyrinths, the cause being un-imaginable, how and why the Earth was put in
such a posture, save that the God of Nature is pleased to descant on a plain
hollowness, with such wonderful contrivances.

I have been at, but never in this Hole, and therefore must make use of the
description of a Learned eye Dr. Hakewil in his Apolog. lib. 5. pa. 6,.
Witness.

Entering and passing through a good part of it with many lights. Among other
many strange Rarities, well worth the observing; We found that water which
incessantly dropped down from the Vault of the Rock, though thereby it made
some little dint in the Rock, yet was it turned into the Rock it self, As
manifestly appeared even to the judgment of sense, by the shape, and color,
and hardness; It being at first of a more clear and glassie substance then the
more ancient part of the Rock, to which no doubt but in time, it has been and
will be assimulated: And this we found not in small pieces, but in a very great
quantity, and that in sundry places enough to load many Carts; From whence I
infer that as in this Cave, so no doubt in many other, (where they searched)
the Rocks would be found to have increased immediately by the dropping of the
water, besides that increase they have from the Earth in the Bowels thereof,
which still continuing as it does, there can be no fear of their utter failing.

Medicinal Waters.
BATH is well known all England and Europe over, far more useful and wholesome
though not so stately as Dioclesian his Bath in Rome, (the fairest amongst 856
in that City, made only for pleasure and delicacy) beautified with an infinite
of Marble Pillars, (not for support but ostentation,) so that Salmuth says,
fourteen thousand men were employed for some years in building thereof. Our
Baths-waters consist of

1 Bitumen, (which has the predominancy,) sovereign to discuss, glutinate,
dissolve, open obstructions, etc.

2 Niter, which dilateth the Bitumen, making the solution the better, and water
the clearer. It cleanses and purges both by Stool and ^rine, cutteth and
dissolveth gross Humors.

3 Sulphur, In regard whereof, they dry, resolve, mollify, attract, and are
good for Uterine effects, proceeding from cold and windy Humors.

But how these Waters come by their great heat, is rather controverted than
concluded amongst the Learned. Some impute it to Wind or Airy Exhalations,
included in the Bowels of the Earth, which by their agitation and attrition
(upon Rocks and narrow passages) gather Heat, and impart it to the Waters.

Others ascribe it to the heat of the Sun, whose Beams piercing through the
Pores of the Earth, warm the Waters, and therefore anciently were called Aquae
Solis, both because dedicated to, and made by the Sun.

Others attribute it to quicklime, which we see does readily heat any water
cast upon it, and kindles any combustible substance put therein.

Others refer it to a Subterranean fire kindled in the bowels of the Earth,
and actually burning upon Sulpher and Bitumen.

Others impute the heat (which is not destructive but generative joined with
moisture) to the fermentation of several minerals.

It is the safer to relate all, than reject any of these Opinions, each having
both their Opposers and Defenders.

They are used also inwardly, in Broths, Beer, Juleps, etc. with good effect.
And although some mislike it because they will not mix Medicaments with
Aliments, yet such practice begins to prevail. The worst I wish these waters
is, that they were handsomely roofed over (as the most eminent Bathes in
Christendom are,) which, (besides that it would procure great benefit to weak
persons,) would gain more respect hither in Winter Time or more early in the
Spring; or more late in the Fall. The Right Honorable James Earl of
Marleborough, undertook to cover the Crosse-Bath at his own charge, and may
others follow his resolution, it being but fit, that where God has freely
given the Jewel, Men bestow a Case upon it.

Proverbs.
Where should I be bore else th^n in Tonton Deane?

This is a parcel of Ground, round about Tonton, very pleasant and populous,
(as containing many Parishes) and so fruitful, to use their Phrase with the Zun
and Zoil alone, that it needs no manuring at all. The Peasantry therein are as
Rude as Rich, and so highly conceited of their good Country (God make them
worthy thereof) that they conceive it a disparagement to be born in any other
place: as if it were eminently all England.

The Beggars of Bath.

Many in that place, some natives there, others repairing thither from all
parts of the Land, the Poor for Alms, the pained for ease. Whither should Fowl
flock in an hard frost, but to the Barn-door? Here all the two seasons the
general confluence of Gentry. Indeed Laws are daily made to restrain Beggars,
and daily broke by the connivence of those who make them: it being impossible,
when the hungry Belly barks, and bowels sound, to keep the tongue silent. And
although Oil of whip be the proper plaster for the cramp of laziness, yet
some pity is due to impotent persons. In a word, seeing there is the
Lazars-Bath in this City, I doubt not but many a good Lazarus, the true object
of Charity may beg therein.

Saints.
DUNSTAN was born in the Town Lives of the Saints.
of Glassenbury in this County. He afterward was Abbot thereof, Bishop of
London and Worcester, Archbishop of Canterbury, and at last for his promoting
of Monkery, reputed a Saint. I can add nothing to, but must subtract something
from, what I have written of him in my Church History. True it is he was the
first Abbot of England, not in time but in honor, Glassenbury being the
Proto-Abbaty then and many years after, till Pope Adrian advanced St. Albans
above it. But, whereas it follows in my Century 10! page 129.
Book, That the title of Abbot till his time was unknown in England, I admire
by what casualty it crept in, confess it a foul mistake, and desire the Reader
with his Pen to delete it. More I have not to say of Dunstan, save that he
died, Anno Dom. 988. and his skill in Smithery was so great, that the
Goldsmiths in London are incorporated by the Name of the Company of St.
Dunstans.

Martyrs.
JONH HOOPER was born in this Terrae Somersetensis alumnus Bale, de Script.
Brit. cent. 8. number. 86.
County, bred first in Oxford, then beyond the Seas. A great Scholar and
Linguist, but suffering under the notion of a proud man, only in their
Judgments, who were un-acquainted with him. Returning in the reign of king
Edward the Sixth, he was elected Bishop of Gloucester, but for a time scrupuled
the acceptance thereof, on a double account. First, because he refused to take
an Oath tendered unto him.

This Oath I In my Eccles. History.
conceived to have been the Oath of Canonical obedience: but since, (owing my
information to my Worthy Friend, the Learned Dr. John Hacket,) I confess it the
Oath of Supremacy, which Hooper refused, not out of lack of Loyalty but store
of Conscience. For, the Oath of Supremacy as then modelled, was more than the
Oath of Supremacy, injoyning the receivers thereof conformity to the Kings
commands in what alterations soever he should afterward make in Religion.
Which implicit and unlimited obedience, Learned Casuists allow only due to
God himself.

Besides, the Oath concluded with So help me God and all his Angels and Saints.
So that Hooper had just cause to scruple the Oath, and was the occasion of the
future reforming, whilst the King dispensed with his present taking thereof.

The second thing he boggled at, was the wearing of some Episcopal habiliments,
but at last it seems, consented thereunto, and was Consecrated Bishop of
Gloucester.

His adversaries will say, that the refusing of One is the way to get Two
Bishoprics, seeing afterward he held Worcester in Commendam therewith. But, be
it known that as our Hooper had double dignity, he had treble diligence,
painfully preaching Gods Word, piously living as he preached, and patiently
dying as he lived, being martyred at Gloucester Anno 155-.

He was the only native of this Shire suffering for the testimony of the
Truth, and on this account we may honor the memory of Gilbert Bourn Bishop of
Bath and Wells in the reign of Queen Mary, who persecuted no Protestants in his
Diocese to Death, seeing it cannot be proved that one Lush was ever burnt
though by him condemned. I mention Bishop Bourn here the more willingly,
because I can no where recover the certainty of his Nativity.

Prelates.
JOCELINE of Taken generally out of Bp. Godwin.
WELLS. Bishop Godwin was convinced by such evidences, as he had seen, that he
was both born and bred in Wells, becoming afterward the Bishop thereof.

Now whereas his Predecessors styled themselves Bishops of Glaston, (especially
for some few years after their first Consecration) He first fixed on the Title
of Bath and Wells, and transmitted it to all his Successors. In his time the
Monks of Glassenbury, being very desirous to be only subjected to their own
Abbot, purchased their Exemption, by parting with four fair Manors to the Sea
of Wells.

This Joceline, after his return from his five years Exile in France, (banished
with Archbishop Langton on the same account of obstinacy against King John)
laid out himself wholely on the beautifying and enriching of his Cathedral. He
erected some new Prebends, and to the use of the Chapter, appropiated many
Churches, increasing the revenues of the Dignities, (so fitter called than
Profits so mean then their maintenance) and to the Episcopal See, he gave three
Manors of great value. He with Hugo Bishop of Lincoln was the joint Founder of
the Hospital of St. John's in Wells, and on his own sole cost, built two very
fair Chapels, one at VVokey, the other at Wells. But the Church of Wells was
the Masterpiece of his Works, not so much repaired, as rebuilt by him, and
well might he therein have been afforded a quiet repose. And yet some have
plundered his Tomb of his Effigies in Brass, being so rudely rent off, it has
not only defaced his Monument, but even hazarded the ruin thereof. He sat
Bishop (which was very remarkable) more than thirty seven years, (God to Square
his great undertakings giving him a long life to his large heart) and died 1242.

FULKE of SAMFORD was born in this County, but in which of the Samfords (there
being four of that name therein and none elsewhere in England) is hard (and not
necessary) to decide. He was first preferred Treasurer of St. Paul's in London,
and then by Papal Bull declared Archbishop of Dublin, Sir James Ware, in the
Archbishops of Dublin.
1256. Mr. Paris calls him Fulk Basset by mistake. He died in his Manor of
Finglas 1271, and was buried in the Church of St. Patrick, in the Chapel of
St. Mary's which likely was erected by him.

JOHN of SAMFORD. It is pity to part Brethren. He was first Dean of St. Patrick
in Dublin, (preferred probably by his Brother) and for a time Eschaetor ^r
James Ware, ut sup.
of all Ireland. Indeed the Office does male audire, sound ill to ignorant
ears, partly because the vicinity thereof to a worse viz. Cheater.
word ( Esquire and Squire, are known to be the same) partly because some by
abusing that Office, have rendered it odious to people, which in it self was
necessary and honorable. For the name Eschaetor comes from the French word
Escheoir, which signifies to Happen or Fall out, and He by his place is to
search into any Profit accrewing to the Crown by casualty, by the condemnation
of Malefactors, Persons dying without an Heir, or leaving him in minority, etc.
and whereas every County in England has an Eschaetor; This John of Samford
being Eschaetor General of Ireland, his place must be presumed of great Trust
from the King, and Profit to himself.

He was Canonically chosen and by King Edward the first confirmed Archbishop of
Dublin 1284, mediately succeeding ( John de Derlington interposed) his Brothet
Fulke therein, and I cannot readily remember the like Instance in any other
See. For a time he was Chief Justice of Ireland, and thence was sent (with
Anth^ Bishop of Durham) Embas^adour to the Emperor: whence returning he died
at London 1294. and had his Body carried over into Ireland (an Argument that he
was well respected) and buried in the Tomb of his Brother in the Church of St.
Patricks.

THOMAS BECKINTON was born at New Coll. Reg. in Anno 1408.
Beckinton in this County, bred in NewColledge Doctor in the Laws, and Dean of
the Arches, till by King Henry the Sixth he was advanced Bishop of Bath and
Welles.

A All extracted and contracted out of Bishop Godwin his Bishops of Bath and
Wells.
good

1 Statesman; having written a Judicious Book to prove the Kings of England to
the Crown of France, notwithstanding the pretenced Salique-Law. 2 Churchman;
(in the then notion of the Word) professing in his Will, that he had spent six
thousand Marks in the repairing and adorning of his Palaces. 3 Towns-man;
besides a Legacy given, to the Town where he was born, he built at Wells,
where he lived, a fair Conduit in the Marketplace. 4 Subject; always loyal to
King Henry the Sixth, even in the lowest condition. 5 Kinsman; plentifully
providing for his alliance with Leases, without the least prejudice to the
Church. 6 Master; bequeathing five pounds a piece to his chief, five Marks a
piece to his meaner Servants, and forty shillings a piece to his Boys. 7 Man;
He gave for his Rebus (in allusion to his Name) a burning Beacon, to which he
answered in his Nature, being a burning and a shining light.
Witness his many benefactions to Wells Church, and the Vicars therein;
Winchester, New, Merton, but chiefly Lincoln-Colledg in Oxford, being little
less than a second Founder thereof.

A Beacon (we know) is so called from Beckoning, that is, making signs, or
giving notice to the next Beacon. This bright Beacon does nod and give hints of
bounty to future ages, but it is to befeared, it will be long before his signs
will be observed, understood, imitated. Nor was it the least part of his
prudence, that (being obnoxious to King Edward the Fourth) in his life time he
procured the confirmation of his Will under the broad Seal of England, and died
January the 14, 1464.

RICHARD FITZ-JAMES Doctor at Law, was born at Redlinch in this County, of
right ancient and worshipful extraction, bred at Merton College in Oxford,
whereof he became Warden: much meriting of that place, wherein he built most
beautiful Lodgings, expending also much on the repair of St. Mary's in Oxford.
He was preferred Bishop first of Rochester, next of Chichester, last of London.

He was esteemed an excellent Scholar, and wrote some Pitzeus, in Appendice.
Books, which if they ever appeared in public, never descended to posterity.
He cannot be excused for being over busy with fire and faggot in persecuting
the poor Servants of God in his Diocese. He deceased Anno 1512. lies buried in
his Cathedral (having contributed much to the adorning thereof) in a
Chappel-like Tomb, built (it seems) of Bp. Godwins words are ^ materie.
Timber, which was burnt down when the steeple of St. Paul's was set on fire,
Anno 1561. This Bishop was brother to Judge Fitz-James, Lord Chief Justice, who
with their mutual support much strengthened one another in Church and State.

To the Reader.
I cannot recover any native of this County, who was a Bishop since the
Reformation, save only John Hooper, of whom formerly in the Catalogue of
Martyrs.

Statesmen.
Sir AMIAS POULET, Son to Sir Hugh, Grandchild to Sir Amias Poulet, (who put
Godwin in the life of K. Henry the 8.
Cardinal Wolsey, then but a Schoolmaster, in the Stocks) was born at Hinton
Saint George in this County. He was Chancellor of the Garter, Governor of the
Isles of Jersey and Gernsey, and Privy Counselor to Queen Elizabeth, who
chiefly committed the keeping of Mary Queen of Scots to his fidelity, who
faithfully discharged his trust therein.

I know the Romanists rail on him, as over-strickt in his Charge; but indeed
without cause, for he is no unjust Steward, who to those under him allows all
his Masters allowance, though the same be ^ut of the scantest proportion.
Besides it is no news for Prisoners (especially if accounting their restraint
unjust) to find fault with their Keepers merely for keeping them. And such who
complain of him, if in his place, ought to have done the same themselves.

When Secretary Walsingham moved this Knight to suffer one of his Servants to
be bribed by the Agents of the Queen of Scots, so to compass the better
intelligence, he would in no terms yield thereunto. Such conniving at, was
consenting to; and such consenting to, in effect was commanding of such
falsehood. Whereupon the Secretary was fain to go further about, and make use of
an Instrument at a greater distance, who was no menial servant to Sir Amias.

He died Anno Dom. 15.. And was buried in London, in St. Martins in the fields,
where his Epitaph is all an allusion to the three Swords in his Arms, and three
words in his Motto, Gardez la Foy, Keep the Faith. Which harping on that one
string of his fidelity, (though perchance harsh music to the ears of others)
was harmonio^s to Queen Elizabeth.

Capital Judges.
JOHN FITZ-JAMES Knight, was born at Redlinch in this County, of right ancient
and worthy Parentage, bred in the Study of our Municipal Laws, wherein he
proved so great a Proficient, that by King Henry the Eighth, He was advanced
Chief Justice of the Kings Bench. There needs no more be said of his merit,
save that King Henry the Eighth preferred him, who never used either Dunce or
D^one in Church or State, but Men of Ability and Activity. He sat above
thirteen years in his Place, demeaning himself so, that he lived and died in
the Kings favor.

He sat one of the Assistants when Sir Thomas More was arraigned for refusing
the Oath of Supremacy, and was shrewdly put to it to save his own Conscience,
and not incur the Kings displeasure. For Chancellor Audley Supreme Judge in
that place, (being loath that the whole burden of Mores condemnation should
lie on his shoulders alone) openly in Court asked the advice of the Lord Chief
Justice Fitz-James, whether the Indictment were sufficient or no? to whom our
Judge warily returned.

My Lords all, by St. Gillian (which was ever his Oath) I must Mr. More in the
printed life of his grandfather Sr. Tho. More, page 334.
needs confess, that, if the Act of Parliament be not unlawful, then the
Indictment is not in my conscience insufficient.

He died in the thirtyeth year of King Henry the Eighth, and although now there
be none left at Redlinch of his Name and Family, they flourish still at Lewson
in Dorsetshire, descended from Alured Fitz-James (brother to this Judge, and to
Richard Bishop of London) whose Heir in a direct line Sir John Fitz-James
Knight I must acknowledge a strong encourager of my weak endeavors.

JOHN PORTMAN, Knight, was born of Wealthy and Worshipful Extraction at
Portm^ns Orchard in this County, a fair Manor; which descended to him by
Inheritance, the Heir of the Orchards being matched into his Family. He was bred
in the Study of the Common Law, attaining to such eminency therein, that June
11, the second of Queen Mary he was made Chief Justice of the Kings Bench
continuing two years in the place, and dying therein for ought I find to the
contrary, and a Baronet of his name and Lineage flourishes at this day with a
great and plentiful Estate.

DAVID BROOK, Knight, born at Glassenbury, son to John Brook, Esquire. who (as I
read in In the Original of his last visitation of Some^setsh.
Clarentiaux) was Sergeant at Law to King Henry the Eighth. Our David was also
bred in the study of our Laws, and in the First of Queen Mary was made Chief
Baron of the Exchequer, but whether dying in, or quitting the place in the
First of Queen Elizabe^h I am not informed. He married Katharine daugher of
John Lord Shandois, but died without Issue.

JAMES DIER, Knight, younger son to Richard Dier Esquire. was born at Roundhill in
this County, as may appear to any by the Heralds Visitation thereof, and does
also to me by particular information from his relations.

He was bred in the study of our Municipal Law, and was made Lord Chief Justice
of the (...) Pleas, Primo Eliz. continuing therein Sir H. Sp^lmans Gloss.
24 years, longer (if my eye or Arithmetic fa^l me not) than any in that place
before or after him. When Thomas Duke of Northfolk was Anno 1572 arraigned for
Treason, this Judge was present thereat on the same token, that, when the Duke
desired Council to be assigned him pleading that it was granted to Humphry
Stafford in the reign of King Henry the Seventh, our Judge returned unto him,
That Stafford had it allowed him Camdens Eliz. An. 1570.
only as to Point of Law, then in dispute, viz. Whether he was legally taken
out of the Sanctuary, but as for matter of Fact, neither he, nor any ever had,
or could have any Council allowed him, a course observed in such Cases, unto
this day.

But let his own Works praise him in the Prove. 31. 31.
Ga^es, (is known for the place of public Justice amongst the Jews) Let his
Learned Writings, called his Commentaries or Reports evidence his Abilities in
his Profession.

He died in 25 Eliz. (though married) without any Issue; and there is a House
of a Baronet of his name (descended from an elder son of Richard father to our
Judge) at Great Stoughton in Huntington-shire, well improved I believe with the
addition of the Judges Estate.

Sr. JOHN POPHAM of most ancient descent was born at Huntworth So it appears to
me on my best examination.
in this County. In his youthful days he was as stout and skilful a Man at
Sword and Buckler, as any in that age, and wild enough in his recreations. But
Oh! if Quicksilver could be really fixed, to what a treasure would it amount?
Such is wild Youth seriously reduced to Gravity, as by this young man did
appear. He applied himself to a more profitable Fencing, the study of the Laws,
therein atteining to such eminency, that he became the Queens Attourny, and
afterward Lord Chief Justice of England.

Being sent Anno 1600, by the Queen with some others to the Earl of Essex, to
know the cause of the confluence of so many Military Men unto his House, the
Soldiers therein detained him for a time, which some did make to Tantamount to
an imprisonment. This his violent detention Sir John deposed upon his Oath at
the Camdens Eliz. An. 1600.
Earls Trial; which I note the rather for the rarity thereof, that a Lord Chief
Justice should be produced as witness in open Court.

In the Beginning of the reign of king James his Justice was exemplary on
Thieves and Robbers. The Land then swarmed with people which had been
Soldiers, who had never gotten, (or else quite forgotten) any other vocation.
Hard it was for peace to feed all the Idle mouths which a former war did
breed, being too proud to beg, too lazy to labor. Those infected the
Highwayes with their Felonies, some presuming on their multitudes, as the
Robbers on the Northern Rode, whose knot (otherwise not to be untyed) Sr. John
cut asunder with the Sword of Justice.

He possessed King James how the frequent granting of pardons was prejudicial
to Justice, rendering the Judges to the contempt of insolent Malesactors; which
made his Majesty more sparing afterward in that kind. In a word, the deserved
death of some scores, preserved the lives and livelyhoods of more thousands:
Travelers owing their safety to this Judges severity many years after his
death, which happened Anno Dom. 16.

Soldiers.
JOHN The effect of what follows is taken out of the Irish Annals at the end
of Camd Britt.
COURCY, Baron of Stoke-Courcy in this County, was the first Englishman who
invaded and subdued Ulster in Ireland, therefore deservedly created Earl
thereof. He was afterward surprised by Hugh Lacy (corrival for his Title) sent
over into England, and imprisoned by King John in the Tower of London.

A French-Castle, being in controversy, was to have the Title thereof, tried
by Combat, the Kings of England and France beholding it. Courcy being a lean
lank body, with staring eyes, (prisoners with the wildness of their looks,
revenge the closeness of their bodies) is sent for out of the Tower to
undertake the Frenchman, and because enfcebled with long durance, a large bill
of fare was allowed him to recruit his strength. The Monsieur, hearing how much
he had eat and drank, and guessing his courage by his stomach o^ rather stomach
by his appetite, took him for a Canibal who would devour him at the last
course, and so he declined the Combat.

Afterward the two Kings, desirous to see some proof of Courcy's strength,
caused a steel Helmet to be laid on a block before him. ^ourcy looking about
him (...) grimme countenance (as if he intended to cut with his eyes as well as
with his arms) sundered the Helmet at one blow into two pieces, striking the
Sword so deep into the wood, that none but himself could pull it out again.

Being demanded the cause why he looked so sternly, Had I (said he) failed of
my design, I would have killed the Kings and all in the place; words
well-spoken because well taken, all persons present being then highly in good
humor. Hence it is, that the Lord Courcy, Baron of Ringrom, second Baron in
Ireland, claim a privilege (whether by Patent or Prescription, Charter or
Custom I know not) after their first obeisance, to be covered in the Kings
presence, if process of time had not antiquated the practice.

His devotion was equal to his valor, being a great Founder and endower of
Religious Houses. In one thing he foully failed, turning the Church of the Holy
Trinity in Down, into the Church of St. Patrick, for which (as the Story says)
he was condemned, never to return into Ireland, though attempting it fifteen
several times, but repelled with foul weather. He afterward went over and died
in France, about the year 1210.

MATTHEW GOURNAY was born at Stoke-under-Hamden in this County, where his
Family had long flourished since the Conquest, and there built both a Castle
and a College. But our Matthew was the honor of the House, renowned under the
reign of King Edward the Third, having fought in Camdens Brit. in this Coun^.
seven several signal set Battails, viz.

1 At the siege of d'Algizer, against the Sarazens. 2 At the Battle of
Benemazin, against the same. 3 Sluice, a Sea Fight against the French. 4 Cressy,
a Land-fight-against the same. 5 Ingen, Pitched fights against the French 6
Poictiers, Pitched fights against the French 7 Nazaran, under the Black Prince,
in Spain.
His Armor was beheld by Martial Men with much civil veneration, with whom his
faithful Buckler was a relic of esteem.

But it added to the wonder, that our Matthew, who did lie and watch so long on
the bed of honor, should die in the bed of peace, aged Camden, ut prius.
ninety and six years, about the beginning of King Richard the Second. He lies
buried under a fair Monument in the Church of Stoke aforesaid, whose Epitaph
legible in the last age, is since (I suspect) defaced.

Seamen.
Sir AMIAS PRESTON Knight, was descended of an Ancient Family, who have an
Habitationat Cricket, nigh Creukern in this County. He was a Valiant Soldier,
and Active Seaman, witness in 88. when he Camdens Eliz. in 88.
seized on the Admiral of the Galiasses, wherein Hugh de Moncada the Governor
making resistance, with most of his Men, were burnt, or killed, and Mr. Preston
(as yet not Knighted) shared in a vast Treasure of Gold taken therein.

Afterward Anno 1595, he performed a victorious (...) travels 3 part, page 578.
Voyage to the West Indies, wherein he took by assault the I Will of Puerto Santo,
invaded the I Will of Coche, surprised the Fort and Town of Coro, sacked the
stately City of St. Jago, put the Town of Cumana to ransom, entered Jamaica
with little loss, some profit, and more honor, safely returned, within the
space of six months to Milford Haven in Wales.

I have been informed from excellent hands, that on some dis-tast he sent a
Challenge to Sr. Walter Raleigh, which Sr. Walter declined without any
abatement to his Valor (wherein he had abundantly satisfied all possibility of
suspicion) and great advancement of his Judgment. For having a fair and fixed
Estate, with Wife and Children, being a Privy Counselor, and Lord Warden of
the Stannereys, he thought it an uneven l^y to stake himself against Sr. Amias,
a private, and (as I take it) a single person, though of good birth and
courage, yet of no considerable Estate. This also is consonant to what he has
written so judiciously about Duels, condemning those for ill Honors, where the
Hangman Hist. of the World, lib. 5. page 548.
gives the Garland. However these two Knights were afterward reconciled, and
Sr. Amias (as I collect) died about the beginning of the reign of King James.

Learned Writers.
GILDAS, surnamed the WISE was born Usher, De* Brit. Eccl. Primord. in his
Chronologies.
in the City of Bath, and therefore it is that he is called Badonicus. He was
eight years junior to another Gildas called Albanius, whose Nativity I cannot
clear to belong to our Britain. He was also otherwise sur-stiled, Querulus,
because the little we have of his Writing is only a Complaint. Yet was he none
of those whom the (...) 18.
Apostle condemns. These are Murmur^s, Complainers, etc. (taxing only such
who either were impious against GOD, or uncharitable against men, complaining
of them either without cause or without measure,) whilst our Gildas only
inveigheth against the sins, and bemoaneth the sufferings of that wicked and
woeful age wherein he lived, calling the Clergy Montes Malitiae, the Brittons
generally, Atramentum seculi.

He wrote many Books, though we have none of them extant at this day (some few
fragments excepted, inserted amongst the Manuscript Canons) but his aforesaid
History. This makes me more to wonder that so Learned a Critic as Dr. In his
second Book de Hist. Lat* in the end of the 25 (...).
Gerrard (...) should attribute the Comedy of Aulularia in Plautus to this our
Gildas, merely because that Comedy is otherwise commonly called Querulus.
Whereas indeed their language is different, that in Aulularia tolerably pure
(though perchance courser than the rest in Plautus) whilst the style of Gildas
is hardly with sense to be climbed over, it is so harsh and barbarous. Besides
I do not believe that Gildas had a drop of Comical blood in his ve^nes, or any
inclination to mirth and festivity, and if he had prepared any thing Scenical
to be acted on the Theater, certainly it would have been a Tragedy relating to
the ruin and destruction of his Nation. Some variety there is about the date of
his death, which most probably is assigned, Anno 570.

MAURICE SOMERSET carried this County of his Nativity about with him in his
Name, and was bred first a Cistercian Monk in Ford-Abbey, then studied in
Oxford, and became a good Writer both in Prose and Verse. His deserts preferred
him Abbot of Wells, which in his old age he resigned, loving Ease above Honor.
Some Books he dedicated to his Diocesan, Reginald Bishop of Bath, and Pitzeus,
Aetat. 12 nu. 271.
flourished Anno 1193.

ALEXANDER of ESSEBIE is (says my Bale de Script. Brit. Cent. 4. nu. 1^.
Author) by some accounted a Somerset, by others a Staffordshire man; and
therefore by our fundamental Laws, (laid down in our Preface, to decide
differences about nativities) falls to the share of this County. He was the
Prince of English Poets in his age, and in imitation of Ovid de Fastis, put our
Christian Festivals into Verse, setting a copy therein to Baptista Mantuanus.

Then leaving Ovid he aspired to Virgil, and wrote the History of the Bible
(with the lives of some Saints) in an Heroical Poem; and though falling far
short of Virgil, went beyond himself therein. He afterward became Prior of
Qu^re, where this is.
Esseby-Abbey, belonging to the Augustins and flourished under King Henry the
Third, Anno Dom. 1220.

ADAMUS de MARISCO, or ADAM of MARSH was born in this Bale, De script. Brit.
cent. 4. nu. 12 Et Pitz. in A^no 1657.
County, where there be plenty of Marshes in the Fenny part thereof. But I take
Brent-marsh as the principal, the most probable place for his Nativity. It
seems that a foggie Air is no hinderance to a refined Wit, whose Infancy and
Youth in this place was so full of pregnancy. He afterward went to Oxford, and
there became D. D. It is argument enough to persuade any indifferent man into a
belief of his Abilities, because that Robert Groshead that Learned and Pious
Bishop of Lincoln, made use of his pains, that they might jointly peruse, and
aompare the Scripture. He became afterward a Franciscan Friar in Worc^ster,
and furnished the Library thereof with most excellent Manuscripts, for then
began the E^ulation in England betwixt Monasteries, which should outvie other
for most and best Books. He flourished Anno Dom. 1257. I cannot grieve heartily
for this Adam his loss of the Bishoprik of Ely, because Hugo de Balsham his
corrival got it from him, the Founder of Peter house in Cambridge.

Since the Reformation.
HENRY CUFF^ was born at St. George Hinton in this County, as the late Lord
Powlet, Baron thereof, did inform me, though none of that name left there at
this day. He was afterward fellow of Merton College in Oxford, and Secretary
to Robert Earl of Essex, with whom he engaged in his rising, Anno 1600. being
arraigned at Westminster for his life. Sir Edward Cook (then but the Queens
Attorney) disputed Syllogistically against him, whom Cuffe an admirable
Logician could caeteris paribus well have encountered. But power will easily
make a solecisme to be a silogisme. The most pregnant proof brought against him
was a Verse out of Lucan alleged by him. For when the Earl sitting in
consultation with his Accomplices demanded their advice, whether he should
proceed in their design, or desist, Mr. Cu^e returned

Viribus utendum est quas ^ecimus, Arma ferenti The words the Poet are somewhat
different.
Omnia dat, qui justa negat.

This I may say proved his Neck*verse being attested against him, for which he
suffered. He wrote an excellent Book of the difference of the Ages of man, a
rare piece indeed, though not altogether so hard to be procured as worthy to be
perused.

Sr. JOHN HARRINGTON Knight, where born I know not, sure I am he had S. N.
a fair Estate at Kelston near Bath in this County, and is emiment for his
Confessor Extraction.

In his continuance of Bishop Godwin in his Bishops of Winchester.
His Father only for carrying a Letter to the Lady (afterward Queen)
Elizabeth, by Bishop Gardener kept twelve months in the Tower, and made to
spend 1000 pounds ere he could get free of that trouble.

His Mother servant to the Lady Elizabeth, was by Gardiners command sequestered
from her, as an Heretic, and her husband enjoined, not to keep company with
her.

Queen Elizabeth was Godmother to this Sir John, and he was bred in Cambridge,
where Doctor Still was his Tutor, but whether whilst he was Fellow of Christ's,
or Master of St. John's, is to me unknown. He afterward proved one of the most
ingenious Poets of our English Nation, witnsse his translation of Orlando
Furioso out of the Italian, dedicated to the Lady Elizabeth, since Queen of
Bohemia, and the several pieces of his own invention.

It happened that while the said Sir John repaired often to an Ordinary in
Bath, a female Attendress at the Table, neglecting other Gentlemen which sat
higher, and were of greater Estates, applied her self wholly to him,
accommodating him with all necessaries, and prebenting his asking any thing
with her officiousness. She being demanded by him, the reason of her so
careful waiting on him? I understand, said she, you are a very Witty man, and
if I should displease you in any thing, I fear you would make an Epigram of me.

A posthume Book of his is come forth, as an Addition to Bishop Godwins
Catalogue of Bishops; wherein (beside mistakes) some tart reflections in
Uxoratos Episcopos, might well have been spared. In a word, he was a Poet in
all things save in his wealth, leaving a fair Estate to a Learned and Religious
Son, and died about the middle of the reign of King James.

SAMUEL DANIEL was born not far from So am I certified by some of his [late
surviving] acquaintance.
Taunton in this County, whose Faculty was a master of Music: and his
harmonious Mind, made an impression on his Sons Genius, who proved an exquisite
Poet. He carried in his Christian and Surname two Holy Prophets, his Monitors
so to qualify his Raptures, that he abhorred all profaneness.

He was also a judicious Historian, witness his Lives of our English Kings
since the Conquest, until King Edward the Third, wherein he has the happiness
to reconcile Brevity with Clearness, qualities of great distance in other
Authors. A work since commendably continued, (but not with equal quickness
and judgment) by Mr. Trusal.

He was a Servant in Ordinary to Queen Anne, who allowed him a fair Salary. As
the Tortoise burieth himself all the Winter in the ground, so Mr. Daniel would
lie hid at his Garden-house in Oldstreet, nigh London, for some Months
together, (the more retiredly to enjoy the Company of the Muses,) and then
would appear in public, to converse with his Friends, whereof Dr. Cowel, and
Mr. Camden were principal.

Some tax him to smack of the Old Cask, as resenting of the Romish Religion,
but they have a quicker Palat^than than I, who can make any such discovery. In
his old Age he turned Husbandman, and Rented a Farm in Wiltshire nigh the
Devises. I can give no account how he thrived thereupon. For though he was well
versed in Virgil, his fellow Husbandman-Poet, yet there is more required to
make a rich Farmer, than only to say his Georgicks by heart, and I question
whether his Ita^ian will fit our English Husbandry. Besides, I suspect that Mr.
Daniel his fancy was too fine and sublimated to be wrought down to his private
profit.

However he had neither a Bank of wealth or lank of want, living in a competent
condition. By Justina his wife he had no child, and I am unsatisfied both in
the Place and Time of death, but collect the latter, to be about the end of the
reign of King James.

HUMPHRY SIDENHAM was born at Dalverton in this County, of a most Ancient and
Worshipful Family, bred Fellow of Wadham College, so Eloquent a Preacher that
he was commonly called Silver-tongued Sidenham. But let his own printed
Sermons, (and especially that, called the Athenian Babbler) set forth his
deserved praise, who died since our Civil distempers, about the year 1650.

Romish-exile Writers.
JOHN GIBBON was undoubtedly born in this County, though herein Pitts presents
us with an untoward and left handed direction, Pits de Ang. Scrip. pa. 788.
Patrica Somersetensis Diocesis Wintoniensis. Now either W^nchester is
imprinted for Wells, or he was born in this County in some peculiar belonging
to Winchester, which See has large revenues about Taunton. Leaving the Land
for his Religion, Pope Gregory XIII. collated on him a Canons place in the
Church of Bonn. This he soon quitted, and became Rector of the Jesuits College
in Triers, he wrote a Book against G. Schon Professor at Heydelberge in
vindication that the Pope was not Antichrist. Being indisposed in health, his
hearing of the defeat of the Spanish Armado, was no cordial unto him, and died
Anno 1589.

ROBERT PERSON was born in this Pits de Ang. scrip. An* 1610 Camdens Eliz. 1580.
County, bred in Baliol-Colledge in Oxford, till for his viciousness he was
expelled thence with disgrace. Running to Rome, and there finishing the course
of his studies, he with Campian were the first brace of English Jesuits, who
returned hither 1589 to preserve this Nation. Two years after he escaped hence,
and got beyond the Seas.

One of a troublesome spirit, wherewith some moderate Romanists were
so*offended, that (during his abode here) they once resolved to Idem ibid.
resign him up to the Queens Officers. He had an ill natured Wit, biassed to
Satyricalnesse. A great Statesman, and it was not the least part of his policy
to provide for his own safety; who would look on, direct, give ground, abet on
other men's hands, but never played so, as to adventure himself into England.

He wrote a shrewd Book of the Succession to the English-crown, setting it
forth under the false name of Idem, Anno 1594.
Dolman (a dulsecular Priest, guilty of little Learning, and less policy)
dedicating the same to the Earl of Essex. He had an authoritative influence on
all English Catholics, nothing of importance being agitated by them, but
Person had a finger, hand, arm therein. He was for 23 years Rector of the
College at Rome, where he died Anno Dom. 1610.

JOHN FEN was born at New-Coll. Regist. Anno 1555.
Montacute in this County, bred in New-Colledge in Oxford, where he proceeded
Bachelour in Laws, continuing there, till (Anno Dom. 1562) for his Popish
activity, he was ejected by the Queens Commissioners. Then for a time he lived
Schoolmaster at St. Edmunds-bury, till outed there on the same account. Hence
he fled over into Fl^nders, thence into Italy, whence returning, at last he was
fixed at Lovain. He wrote many, and translated more Books, living to finish his
Jubilee, or Fiftieth year o^ exile beyond the Seas, where he died about the
years of our Lord 1613. Let me add that this John Fen, minds me of another of
the same surname and as violent on contrary principles, viz. Humphrey Fen, a
nonconformist Minister, living about Coventry, who in the preface to his last
Will, Made such a Protestation against the Hierarchy and Ceremonies, that when
his Will was brought to be proved, the Sea Master Clark, in the life of Juliane
Harring. page 461.
Preface would not be suffered to be put amongst the Records of the Court, as
which indeed was no Limb, but a Wen of his Testament.

JOHN COLLINGTON was born in this Pits Angl. script. page 807.
County, bred in Lincoln-Colledge in Oxford. Going beyond the Seas and there
made Priest, he returned into England, and with Campian was taken, cast into
the Tower of London, and condemned, but afterward reprieved, enlarged and sent
beyond the Seas. Hence he returned, and for 30 years together zelously advanced
his own Religion, being Assistant to the two Arch-Priests, and he himself
supplied the Place in the vacancy betwixt them. He could not but be a very aged
Man; who* though in restraint, was alive 1611.

Benefactors to the Publik.
The Lady MOHUN. Reader, know, I can surround the Christian Names of her
ne^rest Relations. Her Husband was John, the last Lord Mohun, of Dunstor. Her
eldest daughter Philip, married to Edward Duke of York, her second Elizabeth,
to William Montacute Earl of Salisbury, her youngest Maud, matched to the Lord
Strange of Knockyn, bu^ her own Christian Name I cannot recover.

However, she has left a worthy memory behind her, chiefly on this account,
that she obtained from her Husband, so much good ground for the Commons of the
Town of Dunstor as she could in one Camdens Brit. in this County.
day, (believe it a Summer one for her ease and advantage) compass about,
going on her naked feet. Surely no Ingenious Scholar beheld her in that her
charitable perambulation, but in effect vented his wishes in the Virg. Eclog.
decima.
Poets expression,

Ah! tibi ne teneras tellus secet aspera plantas.

The certain date of her death is unknown, which by proportion is conjectured
in the reign of King Henry the Fifth.

Since the Reformation.
NICHOLAS WADHAM of Merrifield in this County Esquire. had great length in his
extraction, breadth in his Estate, and depth in his liberality. His Hospital
house was an Inn at all times, a Court at Cristmas. He married Dorothy,
daughter to the Secretary, sister to the first Lord Peter's.

Absalom, having no children, reared up for himself a 2 Samuel 18. 18
Pillar to perpetuate his name. This Worthy pair, being Issueless, erected
that, which has, does, and will afford many Pillars to Church and State, the
uniform and regular (nothing defective or superfluous therein) College of
Wadham in Oxford. Had this worthy Esquire (being a great Patron of
Church Livings) annexed some Benefices thereunto (which may be presumed, rather
forgotten than neglected by him) it had for compleatenesse of Fabric and
endowment equalled any English Foundation.

If he was (which some suggest) a Romanist in his Judgment, his charity is the
more commendable, to build a place for persons of a different persuasion.
Whilst we leave the invisible root to the Searcher of hearts, let us thankfully
gather the good fruit, which grew from it. He died before his College was
finished, his Estate by Coheirs descending to Strangwayes, Windham, White,
etc. and he lies buried with his wife under a stately Monument in the fair
Church of Illminster.

PHILIP BISS was extracted from a worshipful Family in this County, who have
had their habitation in Spargrave for some descents. Being bred Fellow, and
Doctor in Divinity in Magdalen-Colledge in Oxford, he was afterward preferred
Archdeacon of Taunton. A Learned Man and great lover of Learning. Now though
it be most true what Reverend Bishop Hall was wont to say, Of Friends and Books
good and f^w are best. Yet this Doctor had good and many of both kinds. And at
his death bequeathed his Library (consisting of so many Folio's as were valued
at one thousand pounds) to Wadham College, then newly founded.

This Epitaph was made upon him, wherein nothing of wit, save the
Verbal-Allusion, which made itself without any pains of the Author thereof.

Camdens remains, page 380
Bis fuit hic natus, puer and Bis, Bis juvenisque.
Bis vir, Bisque senex, Bis Doctor, Bisque Sacerdos.
I collect by probable proportion that his death happened about the year 1614.

Memorable Persons.
Sir JOHN CHAMPNEIS son of Robert Champneis, was born at Chew in this County,
but bred a Skinner in London, and Lord Major thereof 1535. Memorable he is on
this account, that, whereas before his time there were no Turrets in London
(save what in Churches and public structures) he was the first private man,
who in his house, next Cloth-workers Hall, built S^ows Survey of London page
137.
one to oversee his neighbors in the City, which delight of his eye was
punished with blindness some years before his death. But seeing, prying into
Gods secrets is a worse sin than over-looking men's houses; I dare not concur
with so Censorious an Idem Ibidem.
Author, because every consequent of a fact is not the punishment of a fault
therein.

THOMAS CORIAT, Though some will censure him as a person rather ridiculous,
than remarkable, he must not be omitted. For first, few would be found to call
him Fool, might none do it save such, who had as much Learning as himself.
Secondly, if others have more Wisdom than he, thankfulness and humility is the
way to preserve and increase it.

He was born at Odcombe nigh Evil in this County, bred at Oxford, where he
attained to admirable fluency in the Greek tongue. He carried folly (which the
charitable called merriment) in his very face. The shape of his head had no
promising form, being like a Sugarloaf inverted, with the little end before, as
composed of fancy and memory, without any common-sense.

Such as conceived him fool ad duo and something else ad december, were utterly
mistaken. For he drove on no design, carrying for Coin and Counters alike: so
contented with what was present, that he accounted those men guilty of
superfluity, who had more suits and shirts than bodies, seldom putting off
either, till they were ready to go away from him.

Prince Henry allowed him a pension and kept him for his Servant. Sweetmeats
and Coriat made up the last course at all Court-entertainments. Indeed he was
the Courtiers Anvil to try their Wits upon, and sometimes this Anvil returned
the Hammers as hard knocks as it received, his bluntness repaying their
abusinesse.

His Book known by the name of Coriat's Crudities, nauceous to nice Readers,
for the rawnesse thereof, is not altogether useless though the porch be more
worth than the Palace, I mean the Preface of other men's mock-commending verses
thereon.

At last he undertook to travail unto the East Indies by land, mounted on an
horse with ten toes, being excellently qualified for such a journey. For rare
his dexterity (so properly as consisting most in manual signs) in interpreting
and answering the dumb tokens of Nations, whose language he did not understand.
Besides, such his patience in all distresses, that in some sort he might seem,
cooled with heat, fed with fasting, and refreshed with weariness. All
expecting his return with more knowledge (though not more wisdom) he ended his
earthly pilgrimage in the midst of his Indian travail, about (as I collect) the
year of our Lord 1616.

Lord Majors.
Name Father Place. Company Time 1 John Champneis Robert Champneis Chew Skinner
1535 2 George Bond Robert Bond Trul Haberdasher 1588

Know Reader, this is one of the Ten pretermitted Counties, the Names of whose
Gentry were not by the Commissioners returned into the Tower in the 12 of K.
Henry the sixth.

Sheriffs.
This County had the same with Dorsetshire until the ninth year of Queen
Elizabeth, since which time these following have born the Office in this County
alone.

Name Place Arms ELIZ. Reg. Crosses Formee, Argent. 9 Maur. Berkley, mil.
Bruiton Gules, a Cheveron between 10 10 Geo. Norton, Mil. 11 Hen. Portman, ar.
Orchard Or, a flower de Luce Azure. 12 The Lutterel, ar. Dunst. Ca. Or, a Bend
betwixt 6 Martlets, S. 13 Geo. Rogers, arm. Cann^gton Arg. a Cheveron betwixt 3
Bucks current Sa. attired Or. 14 Joh. Horner, arm. Melles Sable, 3 Talbots
passant Arg. 15 Io. Sydenham, arm. Bro^pton Argent, 3 Rams Sable. 16 Ioh.
Stowel, Miles. Stawel Gules, a Cross Lozengee Argent 17 Christop. Kenne, ar.
Con^swick Ermin, 3 half Moons, Gules. 18 Tho. Mallet, arm. Enmore Azure, 3
Escallops Or. 19 Geo* Sydenham, ar. ut prius 20 Joh. Colles, arm. 21 Ioh.
Brett. 22 Maur. Rodney, ar. Rodney S^ke Or, 3 E^glets displayed, Purpure. 23
Hen. Newton, arm. Arg. on a Cheveron Az 3 Garbs, Or. 24 Ioh. Buller, arm. Sa.
on ^ plain Cross Arg. quarter pierced, 4 Eaglets of the field. 25 Ar. Hopton,
arm. VVitham Argent, 2 Bars Sable, each with 3 Mullets of six points, Or. 26
Ga^r. Hawley ar. 27 Nic. Sidenham, ar. ut prius Vert, a Saltir ingrailed Or. 28
Ioh. Clifton, miles, B^rringto^ Sable, Semee of Cinquefoils, a Lion rampant,
Arg. 29 Hen. Berkley, mil. ut prius 30 Edw. Sainthorp, ar. 31 Sam. Norton, arm.
32 Hugo (...), ar. ut prius 33 Ioh. Harington, ar. Sable, a Fr^t, Argent. 34
Geo. Speak, a^g. (...) Argent, 2 Bars Azure, over all an Eagle displayed,
Gules* 35 Geo. L^erel, arm. ut prius 36 Hen. Walrond. AMP. 37 Ioh. Francis,
arm. Comb flouree Argent, a Cheveron betwixt 3 Mullets Gules, pierced. 38 Ioh.
Stowel, mil. ut prius 39 Ioh. Colles, arm. 40 Ioh. Gennings, ar. ^urron Azure,
a Ch^veron Or, betwixt 3 B^zants on a Chief E^min, 3 Cinquesoils, Gules. 41
G^o. Rodney, arm. ut prius 42 Hugo Portman, mil. ut prius 43 Ioh. Mallet,
a^mig. ut prius 44 Joh. May, a^mig. Charterhouse H^yden, Sable, a C^everon Or,
betwixt 3 Roses Arg^, a Chief of the second. 45 Edw. R^gers, (...) ut prius
IAC. Rex. Anno 1 Edw. Rogers, arm. ut prius 2 Ioh. Windham, mil. Orchard Azure,
a Cheveron betwixt 3 Lions ^ds erased, Or. 3 Tho. Horner, arm. ut prius 4 Ioh.
Por^man, arm. ut prius 5 Edw. Hext, miles. Ham Or, a Castle betwixt 3 Pole-Axes
Sable. 6 Edw. Gorges, mil. Wraxal Masculy, Or and Azure. 7 Geo. Lutterel, arm.
ut prius 8 Francis Baber, arm. Chew Mag. Arg. on a Fess Gules, 3 Falcons heads
erased, of the first. 9 Io. Rodney, mil. and Hugo Smith, miles ut pr^s As^ton
Gules, on a Cheveron betwixt 3 Cinquefoil^s Or, pierced, as many Leopa^ds
heads, Sable. 10 Rob. Hendley, ar. Leigh Az^a, Lion Ramp. Arg. crowned Or,
within a border of the second, Entoy^e of 8 Torteauxes. 11 Not. Still, arm. 12
Ioh. Horner, mil. ut prius 13 Barth. Michel, m. and Ioh. Colls, ar Partee per
Fess G. and S. a C^v Ar. betwixt 3 Swans proper. 14 Ioh. Paulet, arm. Hinton S.
Geor. Soble, 3 Swords in py^ A^gent. 15 Rob. Hopton, arm. ut prius 16 Theod
Newton, m. ut prius 17 Io. Trevilian, arm. Ne^combe Gu^s, a Demi-ho^se, Arg^nt,
ill^ing out of the ^aves of the Sea. 18 Hen. Hendley, ar. ut prius 16 Marmad.
Ge^nings, a ut prius 20 Edw. Popham, ar. Argent, on a chief Gul^s, 2 Bu^ks
heads, Or. 21 Will. ^ancis, ar. ut prius 22 Th. Windham, ar. ut prius CAR.
Rex. Anno 1 Rob. Philip^, mil. Montacute Arg. a Ch^veron btween 3 (...) G^s, 2
Ioh. Symmes, arm. Pounsford Azure, 3 Scallops in Base, Or. 3 Ioh. Latch, a^m.
Langford ^r. on a fess Wavy 3 (...). Or, between as many (...) G. 4 Ioh.
Stowel, miles ut prius 5 Tho. Thynne, mil. WILT-Sh. Barree, of 10, Or and
S^ble. 6 Fr. Dodington, m. Loxton Sable, 3 Hunters horns, Arg^. 7 Th. Lutter^l,
arm. ut prius 8 Will. VValrond, ar ut prius 9 Ioh. Carew, miles Or, 3 Lions
passant, Sable, ar-med and Lang^, Gul. 10 Hen. Hodges, arm. Hasilbe^e Or, 3
Cressants and in a Canton 11 Ioh. Baster, arm. AMP. Sa. a D^cal Crown of the
first. 12 13 14 Will. Evvens, ar. Sable, a Fess between 2 flower de Luces, Or.
15 16 17 Bellum nobis 18 haec Otia 19 fecit. 20 21 22 Rich. Cole, arm. Nailsle
Partee per Pale Ar. and G* a Bull pass. countrechanged.

King JAMES.
14 JOHN PAULET, Armiger.] He was son to Sr. Anthony Paulet (Governor of
Jersey) by the sole daughter of Henry Lord Norrice, being the sole sister to
the Brood of many Martial Brethren. A very accomplished Gentleman of quick and
clear parts, a bountiful housekeeper, so that King Charles consigned Monsieur
Soubize unto him, who gave him and his retinue many months liberal
entertainment. The said King afterward created him Baron Paulet of Hinton St.
George, in this County, descended to him from the Denbaudes, the ancient owners
thereof. He married Elizabeth the daughter and sole Heir of Christopher Ken of
Ken-Castle in the same Shire Esquire, whose right honorable son and heir John
Lord Paulet now succeeds in that Barony.

Modern Battles.
None have been fought in this County, which come properly under this Notion:
Indeed the Skirmish at Martials Elm (something military and ominous in the name
thereof) fought 1642 made much Noise in men's ears, (a Musket gave then a
greater Report, than a Canon since.) And is remembered the more, because
conceived first to break the Peace of this Nation, long restive and rusty in
ease and quiet.

As for the encounter at Lang-port, where the Kings Forces under the Lord
Goring were defeated by the Parliaments, July 12, 1645; It was rather a Flight
than a Fight, like the Battle of Spurs (fought many years since) the Horse by
their speed well saving themselves, whilst the poor Foot (pawned in the place)
paid dearly for it. And hence forward the Sun of the Kings cause declined,
verging more and more Westward, till at last it set in Cornwall, and since
(after a long and dark night) rose again by Gods goodness in the East, when our
Gracious Sovereign arrived at Dover.

The Farewell.
May he, who binds the Sea in a girdle of sand, confine it within the proper
limits thereof, that Somersetshire may never see that sad accident return,
which happened here 1607. When by the irruption of the Severn-Sea, much mischief
was, more had been done, if the West-wind had continued longer with the like
violence. The Country was overflown, almost 20 mil. in length, and 4 in
breadth, and yet but 80 persons drowned therein. It was then observeable, that
creatures of contrary natures; Dogs, Hares; Foxes, Conies; Cats, Mice; getting
up to the tops of some hills, dispensed at that time with their antipathies,
remaining peaceably together, without sign of fear or violence one toward
another: To lesson men in public dangers, to depose private differences, and
prefer their safety, before their revenge.

BRISTOL, more truly Bright-Stow, that is Illustrious or Bright dwelling,
answers its Name in many respects. Bright in the situation thereof, conspicuous
on the rising of a Hill; Bright in the Buildings, fair and firm; Bright in the
Streets, so cleanly kept, as if scoured (where no Carts, but sledges are used)
but chiefly Bright, for the Inhabitants thereof, having bred so many eminent
Persons.

It stands both in Somerset and Glocest^-shires (and yet in neither, it being
a Liberty of it self) divided into two parts, by the River Avon, conjoined with
a Bridge, which being built on both sides, counterfeiteth a continued street,
for which strangers at the first sight do mistake it. The houses of the
Merchants herein are generally very fair, and their Entries, though little and
narrow, l^ad into high and spacious Halls which Form may mind the Inhabitants
thereof of their passage to a better place.

Natural Commodities.
Diamonds.
These are the Stars of the Earth, though such but dim ones, which St.
Vincents Rock near to this City does produce. Their Price is abated by their
paleness and softness, to which we may add their Number and Nearness; For,
were they but few and far fetched, their value would be advanced; They are not
those Unions, Pearls so called, because thrifty Nature only affords them by
Uniones quia nu^i duo simul reperientur. Plin. Not. hist. lib. 9. cap. 35.
one and one; seeing that not only Twins but Bunches and Clusters of these are
found together.

Were this Rock of raw Diamonds removed into the East Indies, and placed where
the Beams of the Sun might sufficiently concoct them, probably in some hundreds
of years they would be ripened into an Orient perfection. All I will add is
this; a Lady in the reign of Queen Elizabeth would have as patiently digested
the Lie, as the wearing of False Stones or Pendants of counterfeit Pearl, so
common in our Age; and I could wish it were the worst piece of hypocrisy in
Fashion.

Manufactures.
Gray-Sope.
I behold Bristol as the staple-place thereof, where alone it was anciently
made. For though there be a place in London nigh Cheapside called Sopers-lane,
it was never so named from that Commodity made therein (as some have supposed)
but from Alen le Soper, the long since owner thereof. Yea, it is not above an
hundred and fifty years, by the confession of the Stows Survey page 265.
Chronicler of that City, since the first Soap was boiled in London. Before
which time the Land was generally supplied with Castile from Spain, and
Graysope from Bristol. Yea, after that London meddled with the making thereof,
Bristol-sope (notwithstanding the portage) was found much the Idem in his first
table, verbo Soap.
cheaper.

Great is the necessity thereof, seeing without Soap, our bodies would be no
better than dirt, before they are turned into dust, men whilst living, becoming
noisome to themselves and others. Nor less its antiquity; For although our
modern Soap made of Potashes and other ingredients, was unknown to the
Ancient, yet had they (...), something which effectually supplied the place
thereof, making their Woollen clear, their Linen Cloth cleanly. Christ is
compared by the Mal. 3. 2.
Prophet to Fullers soap, in Hebrew Borith, which word Arias Montanus in his
Interlineary Bible reteineth untranslated, but in his Comment (following the
example of St. Hierom) on the place, renders it Herba fullonum, expounding it
to be Saponaria, in English Sopeworth. Indeed, both Dodoneus and Gerardus
writes thereof, This plant has no use in Physic. Yet, seeing nature made
nothing in vain, Sopeworth cannot justly be charged as useless, because purging
(though not the body) the Clothes of a man, and conducing much to the neatness
thereof.

The Buildings.
Ratcliffe Church in this City clearly carries away the credit from all
Parish-Churches in England. It was founded by Cannings (first a Merchant who
afterward b^ame a Priest, and most stately the ascent thereunto by many
stairs, which at last plentifully recompenceth their pains who climb them up
with the magnificent structure both without and within.

If any demand the cause why this Church was not rather made the Sea of a
Bishop then St. Augustins in this City much inferior thereunto, such may
receive this reason thereof; That this (though an entire stately structure) was
not conveniently accomodated like St. Augustins (formerly a great Monastery)
with public Buildings about it for the Palace of a Bishop, and the Reception
of the Dean and Chapter. However as the Town of Hague in Holland would never be
Walled about as accounting it more credit to be the Biggest of Villages in
Europe, than but a Lesser City, so Ratcliffe-Church esteems it a greater
grace to lead the Van of all Yet some have informed me that it only is a
chapel of Ease to the Mother Church of Bedmister.
Parochial, than to follow in the Rear after many Cathedral Churches in England.

Medicinal Waters.
St. Vincents Well lying West of the City, under St. Vincents Rock, and hard by
the River, is sovereign, for Sores and Sicknesses, to be washed in, or drunk of,
to be either outwardly or inwardly applied. Undoubtedly the Water thereof
runs through some Mineral of Iron^, as appears by the rusty ferruginous
taste thereof, which it retains, though boiled never so much. Experience
proves that Beer brewed thereof is wholesome against the Spleen; and Dr.
Samuel Ward afflicted with that malady, and living in Sidney-Colledge was
prescribed the constant drinking thereof, though it was costly to bring it
thorough the Severn, and narrow seas to Lin, and thence by the River to
Cambridge. But men in pain must not grudge to send far to purchase their ease,
and thank God if they can so procure it.

Proverbs.
Bristol Milk.] Though as many Elephants are fed as Cows grased within the
Walls of this City, yet great plenty of this Metaphorical Milk, whereby Xeres
or Sherry-Sack is intended. Some will have it called Milk, because (whereas
Nurses give newborn Babes in some places Pap, in other water and sugar) such
Wine is the first moisture, given Infants in this City. It is also the
entertainment of course, which the courteous Bristolians present to all
Strangers, when first visiting their City.

Martyrs.
The moderation of John Holyman, Bipshop of this City is much to be commended
who in the reign of Queen Mary, did not persecute any in his Diocese. And yet
we find Rich. Sharp, Tho. Benion, and Tho. Hale, martyred in this City, whose
Blood, the Inquisitor thereof will visit on the account of F^x. Martirolog.
page 2052.
Dalbye the cruel Chancellor of this Dio cess.

Prelates.
RALPH of BRISTOL born in this City, was bred (as I have cause to conceive) in
the Neighboring Covent of Glassenbury. Going over into Ireland, first he
became Treasurer of St. Patricks in Dublin, then Episcopus Darensis, Bishop of
Kildare. He wrote the life of Lawrence Archbishop of Dublin, and granted
(says my Sir I. ware, in Episcopis Darensibus.
Author) certain Indulgences to the Abbey of Glassenbury in England, probably
in testimony of his Gratitude for his Education therein. He died, Anno Dom.
1232.

Since the Reformation.
TOBIAS MATTHEW, D. D. was born in this Sir John Harrington in his continuation
of Bishop Godwi^.
City, bred first in St. John's, then in Christ-Church in Oxford, and by many
mediate Preferments became Bishop of Durham, and at last York. But it will be
safest for my Pen now to fast (for fear for a Surfeit) which formerly In my
Church Hist. Book 11. page 133.
feasted so freely on the Character of this Worthy Prelate, who died 1628.

Seamen.
No City in England (London alone excepted) has, in so short a Time bred more
Brave and Bold Seamen, advantaged for Western Voyages by its situation. They
have not only been Merchants, but Adventurers, possessed with a Public Spirit,
for the General Good. Aiming not so much to return wealthier, as wiser, not
always to en-rich themselves, as inform Posterity by their Discoveries. Of
these, some have been but merely casual, when going to fish for Cod, they have
found a Country, or some eminent Bay, River, or Haven of importance unknown
before. Others were intentional, wherein they have sown experiments, with great
pains, cost, and danger, that ensuing Ages may freely reap benefit thereof.
Amongst these Seamen we must not forget

HUGH Hacluit's Engl. Voyages the 3d. volum. page 10*
ELIOT a Merchant of this City, who was in his Age the prime Pilot of our
Nation. He first (with the assistance of Mr. Thorn his fellow-Citizen) found
out Newfound-land, Anno 1527. This may be called Old-found-land, as senior in
the cognizance of the English, to Virginia and all our other Plantations.

Had this Discovery been as fortunate in public Encouragement, as private
Industry, probably before this time, we had enjoyed the Kernel of those
Countries whose Shell only we now possess. It Is to me unknown when Eliot
deceased.

Writers.
THOMAS NORTON was born in this City, and if any doubt thereof, let them but
consult the Initial syllables in the six first, and the first line in the
seventh chapter of his Ordinal, which put together compose,

Thomas Norton of Briseto
A parfet Master you may him trow.
Thus his modesty embraced a middle way betwixt concealing and revealing his
name, proper for so great a Professor in Chemistry as he was, that his very
name must from his Book be mysteriously extracted.

He was scarce twenty eight In his Ordinal page 88.
years of Age, when in forty days (believe him for he says so Ibid. page 33.
of himself) he learned the perfection of Chemistry, taught, as it seems, by
Mr. George Ripley. But, what says the Poet?

Non minor est virtus, quam quaerere, parta tueri.

The spite is, he complains, that a Merchants wife of Bristol stole from him
the Elixir Ibid. page 34. linea 33.
of life. Some suspect her to have been the wife of William Cannings (of whom
before) contemporary with Norton, who started up to so great and sudden Wealth,
the clearest evidence of their Theatrum Chimicum made by Elias Ashmole, Esquire.
page 441.
conjecture.

The admirers of this Art are justly impatient, to hear this their great Patron
traduced by the Pen of De Angl. scrip. page 666.
J. Pits and others, by whom he is termed Nugarum opifex in frivola scientia,
and that he undid himself, and all his friends who trusted him with their
money, living and dying very poor about the year 1477.

JOHN SPINE. I had concluded him born at Spine in Bark-shire nigh Newbury but
for these diswasives. 1. He lived lately under Richard the Third, when the
Clergy began to leave off their Local Surnames, and in conformity to the Laity,
to be called from their Fathers. 2 My J. Pits. de scrip. Ang. page 673.
Author, peremptorily says he was born in this City. I suspect the name to be
Latinized Spineus by Pits, and that in plain English he was called Thorn, an
ancient Name I assure you in this City. However he was a Carmelite, and a
Doctor of Divinity in Oxford, leaving some Books of his making to posterity. He
died and was buried in Oxford, Anno Dom. 1484.

JOHN of MILVERTON. Having lost the Fore, I must play an After-game rather than
wholely omit such a Man of Remark. The matter is not much, if he, be who was
lost in Somersetshire, (where indeed he was born at Milverton) be found in
Pits. (...). 14. Number. 889.
Bristol, where he first fixed himself a Friar Carmelite. Hence he went to
Oxford, Paris, and at last had his abode in London.

He was Provincial General of his Order thorough England, Scotland and Ireland,
so that his Jurisdiction was larger than King Edward the Fourth's, under whom
he flourished. He was a great Anti-Wi^liffist, and Champion of his Order both
by his writing, and preaching. He labored to make all believe, that Christ
himself was a Carmelite (Professor of wilful Poverty) and his high commending
of the Poverty of Friars, tacitly condemned the Pomp of the Prelates. Hereupon
the Bishop of London, (being his Diocesan) ca^t him into the Jaile from whom he
appealed to Paul the II. and coming to Rome, he was for three years ^ept close
in the Prison of St. Angelo. It made his durance the more easy, having the
Bale cent. 8. number. 44.
company of Platina the famous Papal Biographist, the Neb of whose Pen, had
been too long in writing dangerous Truth. At last he procured his Cause to be
referred to Seven Cardinals, who ordered his enlargement.

Returning home into England, he lived in London in good repute. I find him
nominated Bishop of Bale and Pits ut prius.
St. David's, but how he came to miss it, is to me unknown. Perchance he would
not bite at the bait, but whether because, too fat to cloy the stomach of his
mortified Soul, or too lean to please the appetite of his concealed
covetousness, no man can decide. He died and was buried in London 1486.

WILLIAM GROCINE was born in this City New Col. Register, anno 1467.
and bred in Winchester-School, Where he, when a Youth, became a most excellent
Poet. Take one instance of many. A pleasant Maid (probably his Mistress, however
she must be so understood) in a LoveFrolick pelted him with a Snow-ball,
whereon he extempore Bale de scrip. Brit. cent. 9. number. 5. and Pits in anno
1520.
made this Latin Tetrastick, Me These Ve^ses are printed among Petronius his
Fragments, b^g a Farrago of many Verses later, than that ancient Author.
nive candenti petiit mea Julia: rebar Igne carere nivem, nix tamen ignis erat.
Sola potes nostras extinguere Julia flammas, Non nive, non glacie, sed potes
ignes pari.

A snow-ball white at me did Julia throw, Who would suppose it? Fire was in
that snow Julia alone can quench my hot desire, But not with snow, or Ice but
equal fire.

He afterward went over into Italy, where he had Demetrius Calchondiles and
Politian for his Masters. And returning into England was Public Professor of
the Greek Tongue in Oxford. There needs no more to be added to his Honor, save
that Erasmus in his Epistles often owns him pro Patrono suo, and praeceptore.
He died Anno 1520.

Romish Exile Writers.
JOHN FOWLER was born in Bristol Pits de Ang. scrip. anno 15^9.
bred a Printer by his occupation, but so Learned a Man, that (if the Character
given him by one of his own Idem ibid.
persuasion be true) he may pass for our English Robert, or Henry Stephens,
being skilful in Latin and Greek, and a good Poet, Orator, and Divine. He
wrote an abridgment of Thomas his Sums, the Translation of Osorius into
English, etc. Being a zealous Papist he could not comport with the Reformation,
but conveyed himself and his Press over to Antwerp, where he was signally
serviceable to the Catholic Cause, in printing their Pamphlets, which were
sent over, and sold in England. He died at Namurch 1579. and lies there buried
in the Church of St. John the Evangelist.

Benefactors to the Public.
ROBERT THORN was born in this City, as his ensuing Epitaph does evidence. I
see it matters not what the Name be, so the Nature be good. I confess Thorns
came in by Genesis 3. ^8.
man's curse, and our Savior says, Matt. 7. 27
Do men gather Grapes of Thorns. But this our Thorn, (God send us many Copices
of them) was a Blessing to our Nation, and Wine and Oil may be said freely to
flow from Him, being bred a Merchant-Tailor in London, he gave more than Stows
Survey of Land. page 90.
Four thousand four hundred forty five pounds to pious uses. A Sum sufficient,
therewith to build and endow a College, the time being well considered, being
toward the beginning of the reign of King Henry the Eighth.

I have observed some at the Church-dore cast in six pence with such
ostentation, that it rebounded from the Bottom, and rung against both the sides
of the Basin (so that the same piece of Silver was the Alms and the Givers
Trumpet,) whilst others have dropped down silent 5 shillings without any noise.
Our Thorn was of the second sort, doing his Charity effectually, but with a
possible privacy. Nor was this good Christian abroad, worse (in the
Apostle-phrase) than an I^del at home in not providing for his Family, who gave
to his poor Kindred, (besides Debt forgiven unto them) the sum of five thousand
one hundred Idem ibid.
forty two pounds.

Grudge not Reader to peruse his Epitaph, which though not so good as he
deserved, is better than most in that Age.

Robertus Idem page 193
cubat hic Thornus, Mercator Honestus,
Qui sibi legitimas Art paravit opes.
Huic vitam dederat parvo Bristolia quondam,
Londinum hoc tumulo clauserat ante diem.
Ornavit studiis patriam, virtutibus auxit,
Gymnasium erexit sumptibus ipse suis.
Lector, quisquis ades, requiem cineri, precor, ora
Supplex, and precibus numina flecte tuis.
He died a Batchelour, in the fourtieth year of his Age, Anno Domini 1532, and
lies buried in Saint Christophers, London.

Since the Reformation.
MARY DALE, better known by the name of Mary Ramsey, daughter of William Dale
Merchant, was born in this City. Stows Survey of London page 124.
She became afterward second Wife to Sir Thomas Ramsey Grocer and Lord Major of
London, Anno 1577, and surviving him was thereby possessed of a great Estate,
and made good use thereof. She founded two Fellowships and Scholarships in
Peter-House in Cambridge, and proffered much more, if on her terms it might have
been accepted. For most certain it is that she would have settled on that House
Lands to the value of five hundred pounds per annum and upwards, on condition
that it should be called the College of Peter and Mary. This Doctor So was I
informed by Dr. Seaman, lat^ Master of that College.
Soams, then Master of the House, refused, affirming that Peter, who so long
lived single, was now too old to have a Feminine Partner. A dear jest to loose
so good a Benefactres.

This not succeeding the stream of her Charity was not peevishly dried up (with
those who in matters of this nature will do nothing, when they cannot do what
they would do) But found other Idem in his description o^ Christ Church
channels there in to derive it self. She died Anno Dom. 1596, and lies buried
in Christs-Church in London.

THOMAS WHITE D. D. was born in this City and bred in Oxford. He was afterward
related to Sir Henry Sidney Lord Deputy of Ireland, whose Funeral Sermon he
made, being accounted a good Preacher in the reign of Queen Elizabeth

Indeed he was accused for being a great Pluralist, though I cannot learn, that
at once he had more than one Cure of Souls, the rest being Dignities. As false
is the Aspersion of his being a great Usurer; but one Bond being found by his
Executors amongst his Writings of one thousand pounds, which he lent gratis for
many years to the Company of Merchant-Tailors, whereof he was Free, the rest of
his Estate being in Land and ready money. Besides other Benefactions to
Christ-Church, and a Lecture in St. Paul's, London, he left three thousand
pounds for the Building of Sion College to be a Ramah for the Sons of the
Prophets in London. He built there also a fair Almshouse for Twenty poor Folk,
allowing them yearly six pounds a piece. And another at Bristol, which as I am
informed, is better endowed.

Now as Camillus was counted a second Romulus, for enlarging and beautifying
the City of Rome, So Mr. John Simpson Minister of St. Olaves, Hart-street
London, may be said a second White, for perfecting the aforesaid College of
Sion, building the Gate House with a fair Case for the Library, and endowing it
with Threescore pounds per annum. Dr. Thomas White died Anno Dom. 1623.

Lord Majors.
Name Father Company Time John Aderley John Aderly Ironmonger 1442 Thomas
Canning John Canning Grocer 1456 John Young Thomas Young Grocer 1466

The Farewell.
I am credibly informed that one Mr. Richard Grigson Citizen has expendeth a
great Sum of money in new casting of the Bells of Christ-Church, adding tunable
Chymes unto them. Surely he is the same person, whom I find in the printed List
of Compounders to have paid One hundred and sive pounds for his repuetd
Delinquency in our Civil Wars, and am glad to see one of his persuasion (so
lately purified in Goldsmiths-Hall) able to go to the Cost of so chargeable a
Work.

I wish Bristol may have many more to follow his Example, though perchance in
this our suspicious Age it will be conceived a more discreet and seasonable
desire not to wish the increase, but the continuance of our Bells, and that
(though not taught the descant of Chymes) they may retein their plain song for
that public use to which they were piously intended.

STAFFORDSHIRE has Cheshire on the North-West; Darby-shire on the East and
North-East; Warwick, and Worcester-shires on the South; and Shrop-shire on the
West. It lies from North to South in form of a Lozenge, bearing forty in the
length from the points thereof, whilst the breadth in the middle exceeds not
twenty six miles.

A most pleasant County: For, though there be a place therein still called
Sinai-park (about a mile from Burton) at first so Burtons Descript. of Leicest.
page 119.
named by the Abbot of Burton, because a vast, rough, hilly ground, like the
Wilderness of Sinai in Arabia, yet this, as a small Mole, serves for a soil to
set off the fair face of the County the better.

Yea, this County has much beauty in the very solitude thereof, witness
Beau-Desert, or the Fair Wilderness, being the beautiful Barony of the Lord
Paget.

And if their Deserts have so rare Devises;
Pray then, how pleasant are their Paradises.
Indeed most fruitful are the Parts of this Shire above the Banks of Dove,
Butchers being necessitated presently to kill, the Cattle fatted thereupon, as
certainly knowing that they will fall in their flesh, if removed to any other
Pasture, because they cannot but change to their loss.

Natural Commodities.
The best Alabaster in England (know Reader, I have consulted with Curious
Artists in this kind) is found about Castle-Hay in this County. It is but one
degree beneath White Marble only more soft and brittle: However, if it lie dry
fenced from weather, and may be let alone, long the during thereof. Witness the
late Statue of John of Gaunt in Paul's, and many Monuments made thereof in
Westminster remaining without breck or blemish to this day. I confess Italy
affords finer Alabaster, (whereof those Imagilets wrought at Ligorn are made)
which indeed Apes Ivory in the whiteness and smoothness thereof. But such
Alabaster is found in small Bunches and little proportions, it rises not (to
use the Language of Workmen) in great Blocks, as our English does. What use
there is of Alabaster Calcined in Physic, belongs not to me to dispute. Only I
will observe, that it is very Cool, the main reason why Matt. 26. 7. Mar. 13.
14. Luke 7. 37.
Mary put her ointment so precious into an Alabaster Box, because it preserved
the same from being dried up, to which such Liquors in hot Countries were very
subject.

Manufactures.
Nails.
These are the Accommodators general to unite Solid Bodies, and to make them to
be continuous: Yea coin of gold and silver may be better spared in a
Commonwealth than Nails. For, Commerce may be managed without money by
exchance of Commodities, whereas hard bodies cannot be joined together so fast,
and fast so soon and soundly without the mediation of Nails.

Such their service for Firmness and expedition, that Iron Nails will fasten
more in an hour than Wooden Pins in a day, because the latter must have their
way made, whilst the former make way for themselves.

Indeed there is a fair House on London Bridge commonly called Nonesuch, which
is reported to be made without either Nails or Pins with crooked Tennons
fastened with wedges and other (as I may term them) circumferential devices.
This, though it was no labor in vain* because at last attaining the intended
end, yet was it no better than a vain labor according to the Rule in Logic
frustra fit per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora. But seeing the owner of
that House had his harmless humor therein, and paid dear, no doubt, to his
Workmen for the same; There is no cause that I or any other should find fault
therewith.

The Buildings.
I have presented the Portraicture of the Church of Lichfield in my
Church History, with the due praise of the neatness thereof. But now, alas! the
Body thereof is become a very carcass ruined in our late Civil Wars. The like
Fate is likely to fall on the rest of our Cathedrals, if care be not taken for
their reparations.

I have read of Duke d'Alva, that he promised Life to some Prisoners, but when
they petitioned Him for food, he returned he would grant them life but no meat,
by which Criticism of courteous cruelty the poor people were starved. If our
This Note written in Bad Times seven years since, I thought not sit to put out.
Cathedrals have only a Bare Being, and be not supplied with seasonable
repairs, (the daily ^ood of a Fabric) soon will they be famished to nothing.

As for the Close at Lichfield, I have been credibly informed, that the Plague
(which long had raged therein) at the first shooting of Canon at the Siege
thereof did abate, imputed by Naturalists to the violent purging of the Air by
the Bullets, but by Divines to Gods goodness, who graciously would not have two
Miseries of War and Plague afflict one small Place at the same Time. Pass we
now to Civil Buildings in this Shire.

TUTBURY CASTLE is a stately place, and I dare take it on the credit of an
excellent Samps. Erderswick in his Manuscript Survey of this Shire.
Witness, that it has a brave and large Prospect ( to it, in it, and from it)
Northward it looks on pleasant Pastures; Eastward on sweet Rivers and rich
Meadows; Southward on a goodly* Forest, and many Parks (lately no fewer than
twelve) belonging thereto or holden thereof. It was formerly the Seat of the
Lord Ferrars Earl of Derby, and how it was forfeited to the Crown is worth our
observing.

Robert de Idem Ibid.
Ferrars Earl of Derby siding with Simon Mumford against King Henry the Third,
was fined at fifty thousand pounds to be paid, Pridie Johan. Baptist. next
following. I know not whether more to admire at the suddeness of payment, or
vastness of the Sum: seeing an hundred thousand pounds was the Randsom set by
the Emperor on our King Richard the First, and it shaked all the Co^ers of
England in that Age, (without the help of Church-plate to make it up.) Well,
these Lords following were the security bound for the Earls true payment at the
time appointed.

1 Henry son to Rich. King of the Romans 2 Will. Valence Earl of Pembroke. 3
John de Warren Earl of Surrey* 4 Will. Beauchampe Earl of Warwick. 5 Sir Roger
de Summary. 6 Sir Thomas de Clare. 7 Sir Robert Wa^ond. 8 Sir Roger Clifford. 9
Sir Hamond le Strange. 10 Sir Bartholomew de Sudeley. 11 Sir Robert Bruise, all
being then Barons of the Land.
But Earl Robert unable to advance the money at the time appointed, and
unwilling to leave the Lords, his Bail, under the Kings lash, surrendered his
Lands (and Tutbury Castle amongst the rest) to the clear yearly value of three
thousand pounds into the Kings hands; redeemable, when he or his Heirs should
pay down on one day fifty thousand pounds, which was never performed.

The English Clergy much pitied John the son of this Earl Robert, who
presented a petition to the Pope, informing his Holiness, that the English
Clergy were willing to give him money by way of Contribution to redeem his
Estate, but durst not, because commanded to the contrary under the pain of the
Popes curse. And therefore he craved his Apostolical Indulgence therein.

Something I find was restored unto him, but Tutbury was too sweet a morsel to
return, being annexed to the Duchy of Lancaster. John of Gaunt built a fair
Castle there, walled on three sides by Art, and the fourth by its natural
steepness.

DUDLEY CASTLE must not be forgotten, highly and pleasantly seated, and in the
reign of King Edward the Sixth well built, and adorned by John Dudley Duke of
Northumberland, whereon a story worth the reporting does depend.

The aforesaid Duke Mr. Dugdale in his Illustration of Warwickshire in the
Catalogue of the Earls of Warwick.
deriving himself (who truly not yet decided) from a younger Branch of the Lord
Dudley thirsted after this Castle in regard of the name and the honourableness
of the House, some having avouched that the Barony is annexed to the lawful
possession thereof, whether by purchase or descent. Now finding John Sutton the
Lord Dudley (Grandfather to the last Baron) a weak man exposed to some wants
and entangled with many debts, he by the help of those Money-Merchants wrought
him out of his Castle. So that the Poor Lord turned out of doors and left to
the charity of his Friends for subsistence was commonly called the Lord
Quondam. But after the execution of that Duke Queen Mary sympathizing with
Edward the son of this poor Lord (which Edward had married Katharine Bruges her
maid of Honor and sister to the Lord Shandois) restored him to the Lands and
Honor which justly belonged to his Father.

Proverbs.
In April C^s Brit. in this County.
Doves flood,
Is worth a Kings good.
DOVE a River parting this and Derby-shire, when it overfloweth its Banks in
April is the Nilus of Staffordshire much Battling the Meadows thereof.

But this River of Dove as overflowing in April feeds the Meadows with
fruitfulness, so in May and June choakes the sand grained with Grit and Gravel
to the great detriment of the owners thereof.

Wotton (...) (...).
under Wea^er,
Where God came never.
It is time that this old profane Proverb should die in men's mouths for ever.
I confess in common discourse God is said to come to what he does approve, to
send to what he only permits, and neither to go nor send to what he does
dislike and forbid. But this distinction, if granted, will help nothing to the
defending of this profane Proverb, which it seems took it is wicked original
from the situation of Wotton, so covered with Hills from the light of the Sun a
dismal place, as report represents it. But were there a place indeed, where
God came never, how many years purchase would guilty consciences give for a
small abode therein, thereby to escape Divine Justice for their offenses.

Saints.
Authors do as generally agree about a grand Massacre committed by the Pagans
under Dioclesian on the British Christians in the place where Litchfield now
stands, I say, they as generally agree in the fact, as they disagree in the
number: some making them Two hundred, others five, others seven. And one Author
(certainly he was no Millenary in his Judgment) mounts them to just 999.
Indeed many were martyred in those days both in Britain, and elsewhere, whose
names and numbers are utterly unknown, so true is the expression of In his 27th
Homil. in Evan.
Gregory the Great; Ipse sancti Martyrs Deo numerabiles, nobis arenam
multiplicati sunt, quia quot sint, a nobis comprehendi non possunt, novit enim
eos tantum ille, qui (ut habet Tsalmus 126.) numerat multitudinem Stellarum,
and omnibus eis nomina vocat.

St. BERTELIN was a Britton of a Noble Birth and lead an Eremitical Life in the
C^wden and Sp^ed their descriptions of this C^unty.
Woods near Stafford, anciently called Bethiney, (contracted it seems for
Bertiliney) something of solitariness still remaining in his Memory as being so
alone, it has no memorable particulars of his accounts to accompany it.

WOLFADUS. RUFFINUS
It was pity to part them seeing they were loving in their lives, and in their
death they were not divided. They were sons to Wol^erus, the Pagan King of
Mercia and a Tyrant to boot, who hating Christianity and finding these times to
profess privately to practice it, was so enraged that nothing but their blood
would quench his anger. Wolfadus was taken and martyred at Stone in this
County: Whilst his younger (if not twin brother) Ruffinus came little more
behind him at his death, then he started before him at his birth, seeking to
hid himself in a woody place (where since the Chapel of S. Er. Ms:
Burnweston has been built) was there by his Herod-father found out and
murdered. They were by succeding ages rewarded with reputation of Saint^ip.
This Massacre happened Anno Domini....

Cardinals.
REGINALD POLE was born at Camd^s Brit. in E^glish in Staffordshire.
Stoverton Castle in this County Anno 1500. He was second son unto Sr. Richard
Pole, Knight of the Garter, and Frater (...) q^it. B^van in ^ita Pol^. page 344.
consobrinus (a relation which I cannot make out in reference to him) to Henry
the Seventh. His mother Margaret Countess of Salisbury, was Neice to King
Edward the Fourth, and daughter to Geo^ge Duke of Clarence.

This Reginald was bred in Corpus-Christi-Colledge in Oxford, preferred
afterward Dean of Exeter* King Henry the Eighth highly favored and sent him
beyond the Seas, allowing him a large Pension, to live in an equipage suitable
to his birth and alliance. He studied at Padua, conversing there so much with
the Patricians of Venice, that at last he degenerated into a perfect Italian;
so that neither love to his Country, nor gratitude to the King, nor sharp
Letters of his Friends, nor fear to lose his present, nor hopes to get future
preferments, could persuade him to return into England, but that his pensions
were withdrawn from him.

This made him apply his studies the more privately in a Venetian-Monastery,
where he attained great credit for his Eloquence, Learning, and good Life. Such
esteem foreign Grandees had of his great Judgment, that Cardinal Sadolet
having written a large Book in the praise of Philosophy, submitted it wholly to
his Censure. Pole as highly commended the Work, as he much admired, that a
Cardinal of the Church of Rome, would conclude his old age with writing on such
a subject Idem page 345.
applying unto him the Verses of Virgil,

Est in conspectu Tenedos notissima fama
Insula dives opum, Priami dum regna manebant,
Nunc tantum sinus and statio male fidacarinis.
From Troy may th'Ile of Tenedos bespide
Much famed when Priams kingdom was in pride,
Now but a Bay where ships in danger ride.
These far fetched lines He thus brought home to the Cardinal, that though
Philosophy had been in high esteem, whilst Paganism was in the prime thereof,
yet was it but a bad Harbor for an aged Christian, to cast his Anchor therein.

It was not long before he was made Deacon-Cardinal, by the Title of St. Mary
in Cosmedin, by Pope Paul the Third, who sent him on many fruitless and
dangerous Embassies to the Emperor and the French King, to incite them to War,
against King Henry the Eighth. Afterward he retired himself to Viterbo in
Italy, where his House was observed the Sanctuary of Lutherans, and he himself
became a racking, but no thorough-paced Protestant. In so much, that being
appointed one of three Presidents of the Council of Trent, he endeavored (but
in vain) to have Justification determined by Faith alone.

During his living at Viterbo, he carried not himself so cautiously, but that
he was taxed for begetting a base Child, which Pasquil Idem page 348.
published in Latin and Italian Verses, affixed in the season of liberty on
his lawless pillar.

This Pasquil is an Author, eminent on many accounts. First, for his
self-concealement, being Noscens omnia, and notus nemini. Secondly, for his
intelligence, who can display the deeds of midnight at high noon, as if he hid
himself in the holes of their bedstaves, knowing who were Cardinals Children,
better than they knew their Fathers. Thirdly, for his unpartial boldness. He
was made all of tongue and teeth, biting what e're he touched, and it bled what
e're he bit; Yea, as if a General Council and Pasquil were only above the Pope,
he would not stick to tell where he trod his holy Sandals awry. Fourthly, for
his longevity, having lived (or rather lasted) in Rome some hundreds of years,
whereby he appears no particular person, but a successive corporation of
Satyrists. Lastly, for his impunity, escaping the Inquifition whereof some
assign this reason, because hereby the Court of Rome comes to know her faults,
or rather to know that their faults are known; which makes Pasquils converts
(if not more honest) more wary in their behavior.

This defamation made not such an impression on Poles credit, but that after
the death of Paul the Third, he was at midnight in the Conclave chosen to
succeed him. Pole refused it, because he would not have his choice a deed of
darkness, appearing therein not perfectly Italianated in not taking preferment,
when tendered, and the Cardinals beheld his refusal as a deed of dullness. Next
day expecting a re-election, he found new morning new minds, and Pole being
reprobated, Julius the Third, his professed enemy, was chosen in his place.

Yet afterward he became Alterius Orbis Papa, when made Archbishop of
Canterbury by Queen Mary. He was a person free from passion, whom none could
anger out of his ordinary temper. His youthful Books were full of the Flowers
of Rhetoric, whilst the withered stalks are only found in the Writings of his
old Age, so dry their style, and dull their conceit. He died few hours after
Queen Mary, November the 17, Anno 1558.

Prelates.
EDMUND STAFFORD was Bishop Godwin in the Bishops of Exeter.
Brother to Ralph, first Earl of Stafford, and consequentially must be son to
Edmund Baron Stafford. His Nativity is rationally with most probability placed
in this County, wherein his father, (though Landed every where) had his Prime
Seat, and largest revenues.

He was by King Richard the Second preferred Bishop of Exeter, and under King
Henry the Fourth, for a time, was Chancellor of England. I meet with an Mr.
Philpot in his Caralogue of Lord Chancellors, page 53.
Author who does make him Bishop first of Rochester, then of Ex^ter, and
lastly of York. But of the first and last altum silentium in Bishop Godwin,
whom I rather believe. He was a Benefactor to Stapeltons-Inn in Oxford, on a
threefold account, viz.

Of 1 Credit, first calling it Exeter College, whereby he put an obligation on
the Bishop of that See, favorably to reflect thereon. 2 Profit, adding two
Fellowships unto it, and settling Lands to maintain them. 3 Safety, which
consists in good Statutes, which here he wisely altered and amended.

He sat in his See 24 years, and dying 1419 was buried under an Alabaster Tomb
in his own Cathedral.

WILLIAM DUDLEY son of John Dudley, the Godwi^ in the Bishops of Durham.
Eighth Baron Dudley, of Dudley-Castle in this County, was by his Parents
designed for a Scholar, and bred in University College in Oxford, whence he
was preferred to be Dean of Windsor and afterward was for six years Bishop of
Durham. He died Anno 1483 at London, and lies buried in Westminster on the
South side of St. Nicholas Chapel.

EDMUND AUDLEY Son to the Lord Audley of Heyley in this County, whose surname
was Touchet. I am informed by my worthy Friend that skilful Antiquary M^. Tho.
Barlow of Oxford, that this Edmund in one and the same Instrument writes
himself both Audley and Touchet. He was bred in the University of Oxford, and
in process of time he built the Quire of Saint Mary's therein a new on his own
charge, adorning it Organ^ (...), which I think imports no more than a Musical
Organ.

He was preferred Bishop first of Rochester, then of Hereford, and at last of
Bishop Godwin in the Bishops of Sarum.
Salisbury. He died at Ramsbury, August 23, 1624, and is buried in his own
Cathedral on the South side of the Altar in a Chapel of excellent Artifice of
his own erection. Not meeting with any Bishops born in this County since the
Reformation, let us proceed.

Lawyers.
Sr. THOMAS LITTLETON, Knight. Reader, I have seriously and often perused his
life, as written by Sr. Edward Coke, yet not being satisfied of the certainty
of his Nativity, am resolved to divide his Character betwixt this County and
Worcestershire. He was son to Thomas Westcote, Esquire. and Elizabeth Littleton
his wife, whose mother being daughter and heir of Lord Coke, in his Preface to
Littletons Tenures.
Thomas Littleton, Esquire. and bringing to her husband a great Inheritance,
indented with him before marriage, that her Virgin-sirname should be assumed
and continued in his posterity.

He was bred Student of the Laws in the inward Temple, and became afterward
Serjant, and Steward of the Court of the Marshal-sea of the Kings Household, to
Henry the Sixth. By King Edward the Fourth in the sixth of his Reign, he was
made one of the Judges of the Common Pleas; and in the fifteenth of his Reign
by Him created Knight of the Bath

He is said by our Learned Camd. Brit. in Staffordshire.
Antiquary to have deserved as well of our Common, as Justinian of the
Civil-Law; whose Book of Tenures (dedicated by him to Richard his second son,
who also studied the Laws) is counted oraculous in that kind, which since has
been commented on by the Learned endeavors of Sr. Edward Coke.

He married Johan one of the daughters and coheirs of William Boerley, of
Bromsecraft Castle in Salop, by whom he had three sons, Founders of three fair
Families still flourishing.

1 William. 2 Richard. 3 Thomas. Fixed at Frankley, in this County, where his
Posterity is eminently extant. Whose Issue by Alice daughter and heir of Will.
Winsbury, remain at Pillerton-Hall, in Shropshire. Who by Anne daughter and
heir of John Botreaux has his lineage still continuing in Worcesier-shire.

This Reverend Judge died the 23 of August, in the one and twentieth of King
Edward the Fourth, and lies buried under a very fair Monument in the Cathedral
of Worcester.

EDMUND DUDLEY Esquire. was son to John Dudley Esquire. second son to John Sutton,
first Baron of Dudley as a Learned Antiquary has beheld his Pedigree derived.
But his descent is controverted by many, condemned by some, who have raised a
report that John father to this Edmund was but a S. E. Ms.
Carpenter born in Dudley Town, (and therefore called John Dudley) who
travailing Southward to find work for his Trade lived at Lewis in Sussex, where
they will have this Edmund born, and for the pregnancy of his parts brought up
by the Abbot of Lewis in Learning. But probably some who afterward were
pinched in their purses by this Edmund did in revenge give him this Bite in his
reputation, inventing this Tale to his disparagement. I must believe him of
Noble Extraction, because qualified to marry the daughter and heir of the
Viscount Lisle, and that before this Edmund grew so great with King Henry the
Seventh, as by the age of John his son (afterward Duke of Northumberland) may
probably be collected.

He was bred in the study of the Laws, wherein he profited so well, that he was
made one of the Puis-nee Judges, and wrote an excellent Book compounded of Law
and Policy (which hitherto I have not seen) entitled the J. Bale, and J. Stow.
Tree of the Commonwealth.

But what says Columella? Agricolam arbor ad fructum perducta delectat. A
Husbandman is delighted with the Tree of his own planting when brought to bear
fruit. Judge Dudley knew well how to turn a Land into the greatest profit of
his Prince, which made him employed by King Henry the Seventh to put his penal
Statutes in execution, which he did, with severity, cruelty, and extortion, so
that with Sr. Richard Empson Viis and modis (vitiis and modis rather) they
advanced a mighty Mass of Money to the King, and no mean one to themselves.

King Henry the Eighth coming to his Crown, could not pass in his progress for
complaints of people in all places, against these two wicked Instruments, who
with the two Prove. 30. 14
daughters of the horse leach were always crying, give, give, and therefore he
resolved to discharge their protection and to resign them to Justice, so that
they were made a peaceoffering to popular anger 1510, and were executed at
Tower Hill.

Sir, THOMAS BROMLEY, Knight. Reader, I request thee that this short note may
keep possession for his Name and memory, until he may be fixed elsewhere with
more assurance. He was in the first of Queen Mary, October. 8. made Lord Chief
Justice of the Spelman's Glossary verbo Justiciarius.
Kings Bench, holding his place hardly a year; but, whether quitting his Office
or dying therein is to me unknown.

Soldiers.
JOHN BROMLEY, Esquire. branched from the Bromleys in Shrop-shire, but born and
Holinsh^d page ^51.
living in this County at Bromley, followed the fortunate Arms of King Henry
the Fifth in France. It happened, that in a Battle near Corby the French
(according to their fashion* furious at first) fell so fiercely on the English,
that they got away the Kings Standard of GUIEN to the great dismay of our Army.
But Bromley's heart had no room for fear or grief, anger had so wholely
possessed it: Insomuch, that valiantly he recovered the Captive Standard, and
by his exemplary Prowess largely contributed to that days Victory. Hereupon
Hugh Stafford Lord Bourchier conferred on him a yearly pension of Idem Ibid.
forty pounds during his life. Afterward in the sixth of King Henry the Fifth
Anno 1418 he was not only Knighted by the King for his venturous Activity, but
also made Captain of Dampfront, and Great Constable of Bossevile le Ross in
France: Yea, and rewarded by the King with forty pounds in Land a year to him
and his heirs the Patent whereof is extant in the Tower, and exemplified in my
Holinshed page 563.
Author. He appears to me no more than a plain Knight, or a Knight Batchelour:
But were it in the power of my Pen to create a Banneret, he should, for the
Reason premised, have that Honor affixed to his Memory, who, as we conjecture,
died about the middle of the reign of King Henry the Sixth.

JOHN DUDLEY Duke of Northumberland (where born uncertain) was son to Edward
Dudley, Esquire. (of whom In the Lawyers of this Coun^y.
hereafter) and would willingly be reputed of this County, a Descendent from
the Lord Dudley therein, whose memory we will gratify so far as to believe it.

He lived long under King Henry the Eighth who much favored him, and the
Servant much resembled his Master, in the equal contemperament of Virtue and
Vices, so evenly matched, that it is hard to say, which got the Mastery in
either of them. This John was proper in person, comely in carriage, wise in
advising, valiant in adventuring, and generally (till his last project)
prosperous in success. But he was also notoriously wanton, intollerably
ambitious, a constant dissembler, prodigeously profuse, so that he had sunk his
Estate, had it not met with a seasonable support of Abbey Land, he being one of
those who well warmed himself with the chipps, which fell from the felling of
Monasteri^s.

King Henry the 8th. first Knighted, then created him Vicount Lisle, Earl of
Warwick, and Duke of Nor^humberland. And under Queen Mary he made himself
almost King of England, though not in Title, in power, by contriving the
settling of the Crown on Queen Jane his daugh^er in Law, till success failed
him therein. And no wonder if that design missed the mark, which besides many
rubbs it met with at hand, was thrown against the general bias of English
affection. For this his treasonable practices he was executed in the First of
Queen Mary, much bemoaned by some Martial men, whom he had formerly indeared in
his good service in the French and Scottish Wars. He left two sons who survived
to great Honor. Ambrose Earl of Warwick heir to all that was good, and Robert
Earl of Leicester heir to all that was great in their Father.

The BAGNOLS. Something must be premised of their Name and extraction. The
Bagenhalts (commonly called Bagnols) were formerly a Family of such remark in
this County, that before the reign of King Henry the Eighth, there scarce
passed an Ancient piece of evidence which is not attested by S.E.Ms.
one of that Name. But (see the uncertainty of all humane things) it afterward
sunck down (to use my Authors language) into a Idem in his description of the
Town of Bagenhale.
Plebean Condition. But the sparks of their gentle Blood (though covered for a
time under a mean estate) have since blazed again with their own worth and
valor when Ralph and Nicholas sons to John Bagnol of Newcastle in this County
were both Knighted for their good service, the one in Mustle-Borough fight, the
otherin Ireland. Yea, as if their courage had been hereditary. Their sons
Samuel and Henry were for their Martial merit advanced to the same degree.

Seamen.
WILLIAM MINORS. Reader, I remember how, in the Case of the Ship Money, the
Judges delivered it for Law, that, England being an Island, the very
Middle-land-Shires therein are all to be accounted as Maritime. Sure I am the
Genius even of Land-lock-Counties acts the Natives with a Maritime dexterity;
The English generally may be resembled to Ducklings, which, though hatched
under a Hen, yet naturally delight to dabble in the Water. I mean, though born
and bred in Inland places, (where neither their Infancy nor Childhood ever
beheld Ship or Boat) yet have they a great Inclination and Aptness to
Sea-service; And the present subject of our Pen is a pregnant proof thereof.

This William, son to Richard Minors, Gent. of Hallenbury-Hall, was born at
Uttoxater in this County, who afterwads coming to London, became so prosperous
a Mariner, that he has safely returned eleven times from the East-Iudies:
whereas in the days of our GrandFathers, such as came thence twice, were
beheld as Rarities; thrice, as Wonders; four times, as Miracles.

Much herein (under Divine Providence) is to be attributed to the Make of our
English Ships, now built more advantageous for sailing, than in former Ages.
Besides, the oftener they go, the nearer they shape their Course, use being the
mother of Perfectness.

Yet whilst others wonder at his happiness in returning so often, I as much
commend his moderation in going no oftener to the East Indies. More men know,
how to get enough than, when they have gotten enough, which causes their
Coveteousness to increase with their wealth. Mr. Minors, having advanced a
competent Estate, quitted the water to live on the land, and now peaceably
enjoys, what he painfully has gotten, and is living in, or near, Hartford at
this present year 1660.

Writers.
JOHN STAFFORD, born in the Shire-Town of this County, was bred a Franciscan.
No contemptible Philosopher and Divine, but considerable Historian, who wrote a
Latin History of Englands affairs. Authors are at an absolute loss, when he
lived and are fain by degrees to screw themselves into a general notice thereof.

He must be since the year 1226, when the Franciscans first fixed themselves in
our Land.

He must be before John Ross, who flourished Anno 1480, under Edward the
Fourth, and makes honorable mention of him.

Therefore with proportion and probability he is collected to have written
about 1380.

WILLIAM de Pits. de Ang. script. in appendice, page 854.
LICHFIELD, so termed from the place of his Nativity, applied himself to a
study of Divinity, whereof he became Doctor, and afterward Rector of
All-hallowes the Great in Thames Street, London. He was generally beloved for
his great Learning, and godly li^e. He wrote many Books both Moral and Divine,
in Prose and Verse, one entitled The complaint of God unto sinful Men. There
were found in his Study after his death Stows Survey of London page 251.
Three thousand four score and three Sermons of his own writing. He died Anno
Dom. 1447. being buried under a defaced Monument in the Quire of his own Church.

ROBERT WHITTINGTON born at Bale cent. 9* numb. 43. and Pits. aetat. 16. numb.
940.
Lichfield, was no mean Grammarian: Indeed, he might have been greater, if he
would have been less, Pride prompting him to cope with his Conquerors, whom he
mistook for his Match. The first of these was Will. Lilly, though there was as
great difference betwixt these two Grammarians, as betwixta Verb defective, and
one perfect in all the Requisites thereof. The two other were William Horman,
and Alderedge, both eminent in the Latin Tongue: But some will carp at the
best, who cannot mend the worst line in a Picture, the humor of our
Whittington, who flourished 1530.

Since the Reformation.
HENRY STAFFORD, Baron of Stafford in this County, was son unto Edward Duke of
Buckingham attainted and beheaded under King Henry the Eighth. This our Henry,
though loosing his Top and Top-Gallant (his Earledom and Dukedom) in the
tempest of the Kings displeasure, yet still he kept his Keel, his Barony of
Stafford. The less he possessed of his Fathers Lands, the more he enjoyed of
himself. It was not sullenesse or revenge, but free choice, which made him
betake himself to his studies, wherein he became eminent.

I place him confidently not a trans, but Cis-reformation-man for translating
the Book of Dr. Fox Bishop of Hereford (a favourer of Luther) into English, Of
the Difference of the power Ecclesiastical and Secular.

A Subject profitable in all; seasonable (not to say necessary) in our Times:
For as the Water and Earth making but one Globe take their mutual advantages to
enlarge themselves, so these two powers united under one King in our land, wait
their opportunities to advance their respective Jurisdictions, the right
stating whereof would conduce much to the public Peace. This Lord Pits. anno
1558.
died (I dare not say the more the pity) some months before the beginning of
Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1558.

SAMPSON ERDERSWIK, Esquire. was born at Sandon near Stafford in this County, of a
Right Worshipful and ancient Extraction. He was a Gentleman accomplished with
all Noble qualities, affability, devotion, and Learning. 'T is hard to say
whether his Judgment or Industry was more in matters of Antiquity.

Bearing a tender respect to his native Country and desiring the honor
thereof: he began a description (^ntituled A view of Staffordshire,) Anno
Domini 1593, containing the same till the day of his death. A short, clear,
true, impartial work, taken out of ancient evidences and Records, the Copies
whereof in Manuscripts are deservedly valued for great Rarities. This is he,
who, when I often groped in the dark, yea feared to fall in matters concerning
this County, took me by the hand (Oh! for the like Conductors in other
Counties) and has led me safe by his direction. He was much delighted with
decency of Gods House, which made him on his own cost to repair and new Glaze
the Church of Sandon, wherein (to prevent neglect of Executors) he erected for
himself a goodly Monument of Freestone with his proportion cut out to the
life, and now lies therein interred. He died April the 11, 1603, and let his
Elogie of Mr. Britt. in this Coun^y.
Camden serve for his Epitaph; Venerandae Antiquitatis fuit Cultor Maximus.

THOMAS ALLEN was born in this County, deriving his original from Allanus de
Samps. Erdeswick Manuscrip.
Buckenhole, Lord of Buckenhole, in the reign of King Edward the 2d. He was
bred in Glocester-Hall in Oxford a most excellent Mathematician, where he
succeeded to the skill and scandal of Friar Bacon, (taken at both, but given I
believe by neither) accounted a Conjurer. Indeed vulgar eyes, ignorant in
Optics, conceit that raised which is but reflected, fancy every shadow a
spirit, every spirit a Devil. And when once the repute of a Conjurer is raised
in vulgar esteem, it is not in the power of the greatest Innocence and Learning
to allay it. He was much in favor with Robert Earl of Leicester, and his
admirable writings of Mathematics are l^tent with some private possessors,
which envy the public profit thereof. He died a very aged man toward the end
of the reign of King James.

HENRY and ROBERT BURTON Brethren, and eminent Authors in their several kinds,
were, as some say, born at Fald in this County. But Leichestershire pretending
some probability to their Nativities, has by the Alphabetical advantage
prevented this Shire, and carried away their See in Leichestershire Writers
since the Reformation.
Characters therein.

Besides these deceased WRITERS, Reader, I have Three in my eye, who are (and
long may they be) alive, as different, as eminent in their liberal
inclinations. Edward Leigh, of Rushwel-Hall Esquire. whose Critica Sacra with many
other worthy works will make his Judicious Industry known to posterity. Elias
Ashmole, Esquire. born in Litchfield, critically skilled in Ancient Coins,
Chemistry, Heraldry, Mathematics, what not? John Lightfood, D. D. who for his
exact insight in Hebrew, and Rabbinical Learning has deserved well of the
Church of England. But forgive me, Reader, I have forgot myself and trespassed
on my Fundamental Rules.

Romish Exile Writers.
WILLIAM GIFFORD. Though this Ancient and Worshipful Name be diffused in
several Counties; I have satisfied my self in fixing him here, as an Extract of
the Family of Chillington. He was a man of much Motion, and my Pen is resolved
to follow him, as able to Travel with more Speed, less Pain, and Cost,

1 From his Fathers house he went to, and lived four years in Oxford. 2 Thence
(with his Schoolmaster) he went over to Lovain, where he got Pits. de Illust.
Angl. scrip. page 809.
Lauream Doctoralem in Artibus, was made Master of Arts. 3 Then, studying
Divinity there under Bellarmin, was made Batchelour in that Profession. 4
Frighted hence with War went to Paris. 5 Removed to Rheams, where he eleven
years professed Divinity. 6 Doctorated at Pont-Muss in Lorain. 7 Highly prized
by Henry Duke of Guise and Cardinal Lewis his brother, who gave him a Pension
of two hundred Crowns a year. 8 After their death he went to Rome, where he
became Dean of St. Peter's in the Isle for ten years. 9 Returning to Rheams he
was made Rector of the University therein. 10 At fifty years of Age bidding
farewell to the World, he became a Benedictine at Delaware in Lorain.
Thus far Pitseus: (acquainting us, that he was alive 1611) on whose Stock give
me leave to graft, what follows; This Dr. Gifford was afterward advanced
Archbishop of Rheams by the favor of the Duke of Guise, who is shrewdly
suspected to have quartered to heavily on the profit of that place.

However our Gifford gained so much, as therewith to found not only a Covent
for English Monks at St. Mallows in France, but also at Paris for those of the
same profession. Remarkable Charity, that an Exile (who properly had no home of
his own) should erect Houses for others.

Benefactors to the Public.
This County, I confess, is exceeded by her Neigbours in this particular; and I
meet with few either ancient or eminent Benefactions therein. Yet besides a
^air School at Wolver-Hampton built by Sr. Stephen Jennings Lord Major of
London, and another erected by Mr. Thomas Allen at ^tceter, I am credibly
informed, that

MARTEN NOEL, Esquire. born in the Coun^y-Town of Stafford, bred S^rivener in
London, has fairly built and largely endowed an Hospital in Stafford aforesaid*

The Crown Mu^al amongst the Roman^ wa^ no^ given to every Soldier, who scaled
the Walls, but only to him, who footed them first: on which account a Garland
of Glory is due to this Gentleman, whose Foundation (as I am certified) is the
first [considerable] Fabric of that kind in this County. I^ is to be hoped,
that as the zeal of 2 Cor. 9. 2.
Achaia provoked many, ^o this good Leader will invite ma^y Followers to
succeed him, living in London this present 1660.

Memorable persons.
THOMAS TARLTON. My intelligence of the certainty of his birthplace, coming
too late, ( confessed by the REM.
marginal mark) I fix him here, who indeed was born at Condover in the
neighboring County of Shrap-shire, where still some of his Name and Relations
remain. Here he was in the field keeping his Fathers Swine, when a Servant of
Robert Earl of Leicester (passing this way to his Lords Lands in his Barony of
Denbighe) was so highly pleased with his happy unhappy answers, that he brought
him to Court, where he became the most famous Jester to Queen Elizabeth.

Many condemn his ( vocation I cannot term it, for it is a coming without a
calling) Employment as unwarrantable. Such maintain, that it is better to be a
Fool of Gods making, born so into the World, or a Fool of Man's making jeered
into it by general Dirision, than a Fool of one's own making, by his voluntary
affecting thereof. Such say also, he had better continued in his Trade of
Swine-keeping, which (though more painful, and less profitable) his conscience
changed to loss, for a Jesters place in the Court, who, of all men have the
hardest account to make for every idle word that they abundantly utter.

Others allege in excuse of their Practices; That Princes in all Ages were
allowed their (...) whose Virtue consisted in speaking any thing without
control: That Jesters often heal what Flatterers hurt, so that Princes, by them
arive at the notice of their Errors, seeing Jesters carry about with them an
Act of Indemnity for whatsoever they say or do: That Princes over-burdered with
States-business must have their Diversions, and that those words, are not
censurable for absolutely idle, which lead to lawful delight.

Our Tarlton was Master of his Faculty. When Queen Elizabeth was serious (I
dare not say sullen) and out of good humor, he could un-dumpish her at his
pleasure. Her highest Favorites, would in some Cases, go to Tarleton, before
they would go to the Queen, and he was their Usher to prepare their
advantageous access unto Her. In a word He told the Queen more of her faults,
than most of her Chaplains, and cured her Melancholy better than all of her
Physicians.

Much of his merriment lay in his very looks and actions, according to the
Epitaph written upon him

Hic ^itus est cujus poterat vox, actio, vultus,
Ex Heraclito reddere Democritum.
Indeed the self same words, spoken by another, would hardly move a merry man
to smile, which uttered by him, would force a sad soul to laughter.

This is to be reported to his praise, that his Jests never were profane,
scurrilous, nor Satirical, neither trespassing on Piety, Modesty, or Charity,
as in which plurimum inerat salis, mu^tum aceti, aliquid sinapis, nihil veneni.
His death may proportionably be assigned, about the end of Queen Elizabeth.

JAMES SANDS, of Doctor Hacwill in his Apology, page 283.
Horborn, (nigh Bremingham but) in this County, is most remarkable for his
Vivacity, for he lived 140 and his wife 120 years. He out lived five Leases of
twenty one years a piece, which were made unto him after his Marriage. Thus is
not the age of Man so Universally contracted, but that Divine Providence
sometimes draws it out to an extraordinary length, as for other reasons so to
render the longevity of the primitive Patriarchs more credible. He died about
the year 1625.

WALTER PARSONS born in this County was first Apprentice to a Smith, when he
grew so tall in stature, that a hole was made for him in the Ground to stand
therein up to the knees, so to make him adequate with his Fellow workmen. He
afterward was Porter to King James; seeing as Gates generally are higher than
the rest of the Building, so it was sightly that the Port^ should be taller
than other Persons. He was proportionable in all parts, and had strength equal
to height, Valor to his strength, Temper to his valor, so that he disdained
to do an injury to any single person. He would make nothing to take two of the
tallest Yeomen of the Guard (like the Gizard and Liver) under his Arms at once
and order them as he pleased.

Yet were his Parents (for ought I do understand to the contrary) but of an
ordinary stature, whereat none will wonder who have read what De Civitate Dei
lib. 15. cap. 23.
St. Augustine reports of a Woman which came to Rome (a little before the
sacking thereof by the Goths) of so Giantlike a height that she was far above
all who saw her, though infinite Troops came to behold the spectacle. And yet
he adds Et hoc erat maximae admirationis, quod ambo parents ejus, etc. This
made men most admire, that both her Parents were but of ordinary stature. This
Parsons is produced for proof, that all ages affords some of extraordinary
height, and that there is no general decay of Mankind in their Dimentions,
which if there were, we had ere this time shrunk to be lower than Pigmyes not
to instance in a less proportion. This Parsons died Anno Dom. 162.*

Lord Majors.
Name. Father. Place. Company. Time 1 William Tailor. John Tailor. Ecclestone.
Grocer. 1468 2 Stephen Jennings. Will. Jennings. Wolverhampton.
Merchant-Tailor. 1508 3 Richard Pipe. Richard Pipe. Wolverhampton. Draper. 1578
4 James Harvey. Will. Harvey. Cottwalton. Iron-monger. 1581 5 Stephen Slany.
John Slany. Mitton. Skinner. 1595 6 William Rider. Thom^s Rider. Muclestone.
Haberdasher. 1600 7 Hugh Hamersley Hugh Hamersley. Stafford. Haberdasher. 1627

The Names of the Gentry of this County, returned by the Commissioners in the
12 year of K. Henry the Sixth. Anno Dom. 1433.
Commissioners to take the Oaths. William Bishop of Covent. and Liech. Humphry
Earl of Stafford. Knights for the Shire Hugh Ardeswyk. Thomas Arblastier.

Johannis Sutton, chiv. Johannis Bagot, chiv. Rogeri Aston, chival. Johannis
Gruffith, chi. Johannis Gresley, chiv. Thomae Stanley, arm. Radulphi Egerton,
ar. Radulphi Basset, arm. Roberti Harecourt, ar. Philippi Chetwynd, ar.
Richardi Bagot, arm. Roberti Whitgrave, ar. Thomae Harbor, arm. Willielmi
Grevel, arm. Thomae Detheck, arm. Thomae Goyne, armig. Johannis Miners, ar.
Tho. Oker, arm. senioris. Tho. Oker, arm. junioris. Johannis Minerel, arm.
Richardi Peshale, armi. Hugonis Wrotesley, arm. Riehardi Hareconrt, ar.
Sampsonis Ardiswick, ar. Johannis Winesbury, ar. Thomae Swinerton, arm.
Willielmi Newport, arm. Johannis Hampton, arm. Humphry Low, armiger Richardi
Lone, armig. Willieimi Lee, armiger. Willielmi Everdon, ar. Willielmi Leveson,
arm. Nicolai Warings, arm. Jacobi Leveson, arm. Rogeri Wirley, armig. Cornelii
VVirly, armig. Johannis Whatecroft, ar. Gerardi de Ringeley, ar. Richardi Pety,
armig. VVillielmi Hexstall, ar. Edwardi Doyle, arm. Richardi Selman, arm.
David. Cawardyn, arm. Thome Swynfen, arm. Richardi Rugeley, ar. Johannis
Broghton, arm. Johannis Atwell; arm. Thomae Cotton, armig. Johannis Cotton,
arm. Aymeri Cotton, armig. Thomae VVolseley, ar. Johannis Colwich, ar. Roberti
Swinerton, ar Rogeri Swineshede, ar Th. VVhitington, ar. Joh. More, armiger
Thome More, arm. Joh. Askeby, arm. Joh. Mollesley, arm. Joh. Horewold, ar.
Will. Saltford, ar. VVil. Leventhorp, ar. Will. Corbyn, gent. Joh. Corbyn,
gent. Thomae Walton, ar. Reg. Bro de Oak, ar. Johannis Sheldon, ar. Radulphi
Frebody, arm. Will. Bradshaw, arm. Joh. Bonghay, gent. Joh. Burton, gent.
Roberti Stokes, armig. Joh. Cumberford, armig. Nicolai Thiknes, armig. Aegidii,
Swinerton, arm. Thomae VVolaston, gent. Hugonis Holyns, gent. Thomae Lokewood,
gent. Thomae Stafford, gent. Nicolai Norman, gent. Richardi Snede, gent.
VVillielmi Orme, gent. Hugonis Greneway, gent. Humfridi Clerkeson, Rogeri
Bealchier. VVillielmi Sondbache. Johannis Brennere. Richardi Vicarus. Johannis
VVylot. Thomae Bowyer. Johannis Ruggeley. Petri Goldsone. Nicholai Flaxale.
Thomae Brette. Thomae Neweno. Richardi Banastre. VVillielmi Fouke. Rogeri
Milnes. Richardi Bisheton. Roberti Onowyne. Roberti Berdusmore. Humfridi
Walker, of Kestren. VVillielmi Bowdel, of the Mere VVillielmi Sherred.
VVillielmi Broke Henrici Monyfold. Stephani Bagonnal. Thomae Glyfe. Hug^nis
Bertam.
Sheriffs.
HEN. II.
Anno 1 Milo de Gloucest. Anno 2 Robertus de Stafford, for 6 years together.
Anno 8 Alex. Clericus, for 18 years together. Anno 26 Thomas Noel, for 8 years
together.
RICH. I.
Anno 1 Thomas Noel Anno 2 Tho. de Cressewel Anno 3 Hugo Coventriensis Episc.
and Robertus filius Walleram Anno 4 Hugo Coventr. Episcopus and Rober. de
Humant, frater ejus. Anno 5 Hugo Episcop. Coventr. and Richardus Maresse. Anno
6 Hugo Bardulfe Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Hugo de Caucombe, for 2 years together.
JOH. Regis.
Anno 1 Galfr. filius Petri and Tho. de Erdington, for 5 years together. Anno 6
Tho. Erdington, and Robertus de alta Ripa. Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Tho. de
Erdington, for 9 years together.
HEN. III.
Anno 1 Ranul. Com. Cestr. and Hen. de Aldicheleia, for 4 years together. Anno
5 Ranul. Comes Cest. and Phil. de Kinton, for 3 years together. Anno 8 Ranul.
Com. Cestr. Anno 9 Joh. Bonet, for 3 years together. Anno 12 Hen. de Aldich and
Robertus de Leia. Anno 13 Hen. de Aldich and Will. de Bromley. for 4 years
together. Anno 17 Robertus de Haga, for 4 years together. Anno 21 Joh.
Extraneus, and Robertus de Acton. Anno 22 Joh. Extraneus, for 10 years
together. Anno 32 Thomas Corbet. Anno 33 Idem. Anno 34 Rober. Grendon, for 6
years together. Anno 40 Hugo de Acovere. Anno 41 Hugo de Acovere. Anno 42 Will.
Bagod, for 3 years together. Anno 45 Will. de Covereswel, and Jac. de Aldahell.
Anno 46 Jaco. de Aldahell, for 7 years together.
EDW. I.
Anno 1 Radul. de Mortuo Mari, for 3 years together. Anno 4 Bogo de Knovil, for
3 years together. Anno 7 Rogerus Springhuse, for 7 years together. Anno 14
Rogerus Springhuse, and Lionine Ramesley, for 3 years together. Anno 17
Robertus Corbet. Anno 18 Will. Tictely, for 6 years together. Anno 24 Radul. de
Schirle, for 3 years together. Anno 27 Thomas Corbet. Anno 28 Idem Anno 29
Richardus de Harleigh Anno 30 Idem. Anno 31 Walter de Beysin. Anno 32 Idem.
Anno 33 Johannes de Acton Anno 34 Johannes de Dene. Anno 35 Idem.
EDW. II.
Anno 1 Rogerus Trumwinne Anno 2 Johannes Extraneus. Anno 3 Hugo de Crofts.
Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Hugo de Andecle, for 3 years together. Anno 8 Will. de
Mere. Anno 9 Rogerus de Cheyne. Anno 10 Rogeri Trumwinne. Anno 11 Idem. Anno 12
Robertus de Grendon, for 3 years together. Anno 15 Johannes de Swinerton. Anno
16 Idem. Anno 17 Henricus de Bishburn, for 3 years together.
EDW. III.
Anno 1 Johannes de Hinkele and Henricus de Bishburn Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3
Johannes de Hinkele Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Henricus de Bishburn Anno 6 Idem. Anno
7 Richardus de Peshal Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Johannes de Hinkeley Anno 10 Simon de
Ruggeley. Anno 11 Richardus de Peshal, and Simon de Ruggeley, for 4 years
together. Anno 15 Adam de Peshal Anno 16 Thomas de Swinerton Anno 17 Idem Anno
18 Johannes de Aston Anno 19 Henr. Com. Derby, for 17 years together Anno 36
Johannes de Swinerton Anno 37 Robertus de Grendon Anno 38 Johannes de Perton
Anno 39 Philippus de Lutteley, for 4 years together Anno 43 Henricus Pius Anno
44 Johannes de Perton Anno 45 Idem Anno 46 Johannes de Gresley Anno 47
Nicholaus de Stafford Anno 48 Johannes de Verdon Anno 49 Johannes Bassey Anno
50 Nicholaus de Stafford Anno 51 Petrus de Careswel Anno 52 Walterus de Hopton
Anno 53 Willielmus de Canereswel.
HENRY the Third.
1 Ranul. Com. Cestr. and Henr. de Aldicheleia] This Henricus of Aldicheleia
was the first Lord Audley in this County, and Founder of that Noble Family so
long famous for Martial Achievements. I meet with a S. E. Ms.
Record extant in the Tower, too long to transcribe, wherein King Henry the
Third confirmed unto him not only many Lands of his own Donation, but what
other persons of quality in this County had bestowed on him.

1 Nich. de Verdun gave him Aldithlege. 2 Hugh de Lacy gave him Coulton. 3
Eutropius Hastang gave him Cold Norton. 4 Will. de Betleigh gave him Betleigh.
5 Harvey de Stafford gave him Heleigh. 6 Egidius Erdington gave him Shagbourn.
7 Herbert Rusbin gave him Stanweare. 8 Eugenulphus Greasly gave him Tunstal.
Chaderley. 9 Alice his Wife gave him Chell. Normancot. 10 Margaret Strange gave
him Nerle. Brudnap. 11 Alice Hartoate gave him Weston. 12 Joan Noel gave him
Weston. 13 Peter Morton gave him Hauksley, Bagley, and Morton.
All, or most of these were great Manors cum pertinentiis. What man of men was
this Henry that so many of both Sexes should center in their bounty upon him,
was it for fear, or love, or a mixture of both. But I have no calling to
inquire into the cause thereof, and if they were pleased to give, none will
blame him for receiving them.

Heleigh, the fifth Manor here mentioned was afterward the prime Seat of the
Lord Audley, who also had great Lands in Devon-shire, where formerly we have
spoken of him. Their heir-Males failing about the reign of King Henry the
Sixth, Joan one of their heirs was married to Sir John Tutchet, whose son Sir
John assumed the Title of Baron Audley and was Ancestor to the present Lord
Audley Earl of Castle-haven in Ireland.

EDWARD the Third.
18 John de Aston.] I have not met with a more Noble Family, measuring on the
Level of flat and un-advantaged Antiquity. They have ever borne a good respect
to the Church and Learned Men, and not without just reason, seeing Roger de
Molend Bishop of Litchfield in the reign of King Henry the Third gave Haywood
in this County Rogero de Aston S. E. Ms.
Valecto suo, to Roger de Aston his servant. This Roger was son to Ralph Aston,
and father unto Sir John Aston, whose succession is thus ordered,

1 Sir John Aston, aforementioned. 2 Sir Thomas Aston, his son. 3 Sir Roger Aston,
his son. 4 Sir Robert Aston, his son. 5 John Aston, his son Esquire. 6 Sir John
Aston, his son Knight Banneret. 7 Sir Edward Aston, his son. 8 Sir Walter
Aston, his son. 9 Sir Edward Aston, his son. 10 Sir Walter Aston, his son.
This last Sir Walter was employed by King James Ambassador unto Spain. He
married Gertrude sole daughter of Sir Thomas Sadler of Standon in
Hartford-shire.

Nor must it be forgotten, that that Pious Poet Mr. In his Polyolbion the 12.
Song.
Michael Drayton confesses, that his Muse often found safe and sweet retreat, at
Tixhall, the habitation of this Family, and thus windeth up his well-wishing
for them;

Whose bounty still my Muse so freely shall confess,
That when she lacks words, then signs shall it express.
SHERIFFS. Place. Arms. RICH. II. Anno 1 Brian. Cornwall SHROPs. Arg. a lion
ram^ant Gules, armed Az. in a Border Sab. Bezant^. 2 Will. Calleson 3 Ioh. de
Verdon Or, a Fret Gules. 4 Rog. de Wirley Hampshed Ar. a Cheve. ingrail. betw.
3 Bugle horns, Sa. 5 Will. Wa shall Arg. a Fox passant, Sable. 6 Idem ut prius
7 Humf. de Stafford Or, a Cheveron Gules, a Quarter Ermin. 8 Will. de Walshal
ut prius 9 Rog. Manneyson 10 Adomar. de Lichfeld 11 Will. Chetwin Ingestree.
Azure, a Cheveron betwixt 3 Mullets, Or. 12 Humf. de Stafford ut prius 13 Will.
VValshall ut prius 14 Ioh. Delves Apedale. Ar. a Cheveron Gu. Fretty, Or,
betwixt 3 Delfs Sable. 15 Ioh. Swinerton Argent, a Cross formet Flurt, Sa. 16
Will. de (...) 17 Adam. de Lichfield 18 Rob. Frances Argent, a Cheveron betwixt
3 spread Eagles, Gules. 19 Rob. Mannesin 20 Will. VValshall ut prius 21 Idem
ut prius 22 Idem. ut prius HEN. IV. Anno 1 Will. Sharshal, mi. 2 Rob.
Mannesin, mil. and Will. Newport, m. Arg. a Cheveron Gules, betwixt 3 Leopards
heads, Sable. 3 Rob. Frances ut prius 4 Humf. Stafford ut prius 5 Idem ut prius
6 Will. Newport ut prius 7 Will. VValshal ut prius 8 Will. Newport, mil. ut
prius 9 Rob. Frances, mil. ut prius 10 Tho. Aston, mil. Haywood Argent, a
Fesse, and 3 lozenges in Chief, Sable. 11 Ioh. Delves ut prius 12 Tho. Giffard.
Chillington. Azure, 3 ^irrups leathered, Or. HEN. V. Anno 1 Ioh. Basset, mil.
Drayton. Or, 3 Piles Gules, a Canton Erm 2 Rob. Babthorpe 3 Ioh. Delves ut
prius 4 Rich. Vernon Argent, Frettee Sa. a Canton, Gu. 5 Ioh. Meverel Throwley
Arg. a Griffin segreant, Sable. 6 Will. Trussel Or, a Cross formee fleury,
Gules. 7 Humf. Haighton 8 Ioh. Delves ut prius 9 Idem. ut prius HEN. VI. Anno 1
Tho. Gresley, mil. Varry, Ermin and Gules. 2 Hug. Erdeswick, ar. Sandon. Or, on
a C^veron Gu. 5 Bezants. 3 Ni. Montgomery, m. Or, an Eagle displayed, Azu. 4
Johan. Bagor, mil. Blithfield. Argent, a Cheveron Gules betwixt 3 Martlets,
Sable. 5 Roger. Eston 6 Ric. Vernon, mil. ut prius 7 Phil. Chetwin ut prius 8
Tho. Griffith Gules, a Cheveron betwixt 3 Helmets, Argent. 9 Ni. Montgomery, m.
ut prius 10 Rog. Aston, mil. ut prius 11 Radul. Egerton Argent, a lion rampant
Gules between 3 Pheons, Sable. 12 Thom. Stanley Ar. on a Bend Az 3 stags-heads,
O. 13 Rob. St^elley, mil. NOTIN. Paly of six Argent and Azure. 14 Rich. Peshale
Horsley. Argent, a Cross Formee floyre, Sa. on a Canton Gules, a Wolfs head
erazed, of the first. 15 Phil. Chetwin, mil. ut prius 16 Radul. Basset ut prius
17 Thomas S^anley ut prius 18 Thomas Gresley ut prius 19 Humf. Low 20 Radulpus
Aucher 21 Willielmus Mitton Per Pale Az. and Gules, an Eagle with 2 heads
dispayed, Or. 22 Nic. Mountgomery ut prius 23 Thomas Blount Barry Nebule of 6
O^ and Sable. 24 Ioh. Griffith, mil. ut prius 25 Humf. Blount* ut prius 26 Tho.
Ferrers, arm. Ta^worth. Varry, Or and Gules. 27 Idem. ut prius 28 Humf.
Swinerton ut prius 29 Ioh. Stanley, arm. ut prius 30 Tho. Astley Patshall AMP.
31 Robertus Aston ut prius 32 Rich. Bagot, arm ut prius 33 Th. Cotton, ar. sive
Lotton Let the Name first be agreed on. 34 Ioh. Delves, armig. ut prius 35 Ioh.
Coals, arm. Quarterley Erm. and Paly of six, Or and Gules. 36 Will. Mitton,
arm ut prius 37 Hug Egerton, arm. ut prius 38 Ioh. Stanley, mil. ut prius EDW.
IV. 1 Walt. Wrotesl^y Wrotsley, Or, 3 Piles* Sable a Canton Erm. 2 Ioh.
Harecourt, ar. Or, two Bars Gules. 3 Idem. ut prius 4 Humf. Peshal ut prius 5
Ioh. Stanley, mil. ut prius 6 Tho. Basset, arm. ut prius 7 Ioh. Harecourt, ar.
ut prius 8 Johan. Acton, arm. Gules, 2 Lions passant Argent betwixt 9 croslets,
Or. 9 Ioh. Stanley, mil. ut prius 10 Ran. Brereton, mil. Argent, 2 Bars,
Sable. 11 Hen. Beaumont, mi. Azure, semee de flowers de Lis, a Lion rampant,
Or. 12 Walt. Griffith, mil. ut prius 13 Will. Bass^. ut prius 14 Geo. Stanley
ut prius 15 Ioh. Stanley, mil. ut prius 16 Ioh. Ashton ut prius 17 Hug.
Egerton, ar. ut prius 18 Rich. Bagot ut prius 19 Nic. Mountgomery ut prius 20
Ioh. Aston ut prius 21 Will. Basse^, mil. ut prius 22 Humf. Stanley, mi. ut
prius RICH. III. Anno 1 Ni. Montgomery, ar. ut prius 2 Th. Worlseley, mil. 3
Marm. Constable, m. and Hum. Stafford, m. YORKsh. ut prius Quarterly Gules and
Vary, a Bend, Or. HEN. VII. Anno 1 Humf. Stanley ut prius 2 Hen. Willoughby A M
P. 3 Will. Harper Argent, a Lion rampant in a Bordure engrailed, Sable. 4 Hug.
Peshal ut prius 5 Th. Gresley, mil. ut prius 6 Ranul. Oker (...), if not the
same with Oak over* 7 Rog. Draycot, ar. Or, Fretty Gules on a Canton, Ar. a
Cross Patee, Azure. 8 Ric. Wrotesl^y, ar. ut prius 9 Humf. Stanley, mil. ut
prius 10 Ric. Harecourt, mil. ut prius 11 Ioh. Mitton, arm. ut prius 12 Ioh.
Draycot, arm. ut prius 13 Tho. Gresley, arm. ut prius 14 Will, Harper, arm. ut
prius 15 Ioh. Ferrers, mil. ut prius 16 Johan. Aston, arm. ut prius 17 Ric.
Wrotesley, ar. ut prius 18 Will. Harper, arm. ut prius 19 Ioh. Draycot. mil. ut
prius 20 Will. Smith, arm. 21 Idem ut prius 22 Ludovic. Bagot, mi. ut prius 23
Ioh. Mitton, arm. ut prius 24 Ioh. Aston, mil. ut prius HEN. VIII. Anno 1 Ioh.
G^ard, arm. ut prius 2 Th. Nevil, arm. Chenston-Park Gules, on a Saltire
Argent, an Annulet, Sable. 3 Ioh. Egerton, arm. ut prius 4 Ioh. Mitton, arm. ut
prius 5 Ioh. Aston, mil. ut prius 6 Will. Chetwin, ar. ut prius 7 Th. Nevil*
arm. ut prius 8 Ric. Wrotesley, ar ut prius 9 Ioh. Giffard, mil. ut prius 10
Rad. Egerton, m. ut prius 11 Edward Gray, mi. Barry of six Argent, and Azure, 3
Torteauxes in Chief, a Label of 3 points o^ the first. 12 Lodo. Bagot, mil. ut
prius 13 Ioh. Giffard, mil. ut prius 14 Will. Smith, mil. ut prius 15 Ed.
Littleton; mil. Ple^hall Argent, a Cheveron between 3 Escallops shells, Sable.
16 Edward Gray, mil. ut prius 17 Ioh. Giffard, mil. ut prius 18 Ioh. Blount,
ar. Barry Nebule of 6 Or, and Sab. 19 Ioh. Vernon, ar. ut prius 20 Edw. Ashton,
arm. Argent, a Fess and 3 lozenges in Chief, Sable. 21 Th. Giffard, arm. ut
prius 22 Ioh. Giffard, arm. ut prins 23 Will. Wrotesley, ^r. ut prius 24 Ioh.
Vernon, arm. ut prius 25 Phi. Draycot, mil. ut prius 26 Edw. Ashton, mil. ut
prius 27 Will. Chetwin, ar. ut prius 28 Ioh. Dudley, mil. Or, a lion rampant
tail forked, Vert. 29 Geo. Gresley, mil. ut prius 30 Ioh. Vern^n, arm. ut prius
31 Edw. Littleton, ar. ut prius 32 Edw. Ashton, mil. ut prius 33 Ioh. Giffard,
mil. ut prius 34 Will. Basset, mil. ut prius 35 Th. Fitzherbert, ar. Argent, a
Chief varry Or and Gules, a Bend ingrailed Sable. 36 Geo. Gresley, mil. ut
prius 37 Ioh. Harecourt, m. ut prius 38 Iac. Leveson, and Walt. Wrotesley, ar.
ut prius Quarterly Gules and Azure 3 sinister hands couped, Arg. EDW. VI. Anno
1 Fran. Meverel, ar. ut prius 2 Io. Fleetwood, ar. Cakewish. Partee per Pale
Nebule Az. and O. 6 Martlets in Pale counterch. 3 Will. Snead, mil. Bradwel.
Argent, a Sith and flower de luce in the middle of the Shield, ^able. 4 Ed.
Littleton, ar. ut prius 5 VVil. Basset, mil. ut prius 6 G^o. Blount, mil. ut
prius PHIL. Reg. and MAR. Reginae. Anno 1 Th. Giffard, mil. ut prius 1.2 T.
Fitzherbert, m ut prius 2.3 Pe. (...), mil. ut prius 3.4 Edw. Ashton, mil. ut
prius 4.5 Io. Harecourt, m. ut prius 5.6 Will. Snead. mil. ut prius. ELIZ.
Reg. Anno 1 Hum. Wells, ar. 2 Rad. Bagnol, mil. Ermin, 2 Bars Or, over all a
lion rampant Azure. 3 Ioh. Leveston, ar. ut prius 4 Will. (...), ar. ut prius
5 Ed. Litt^eton, mil. ut prius 6 Rad. Oker, arm. 7 Io. VVrotesley, a^. ut prius
8 Sim. Harecourt, a^. ut prius 7 Io. Skrimshere, ar. Gules, a lion rampant Or,
within a Border, Varry. 10 Io. Fleetwood. ar. u^ p^ius 11 Ric. Bagot, (...). ut
p^ius 12 Walt. Ashton, ar. ut prius 13 Th. ^rentham, ar Argent, 3
Griffns-heads Sable, langued Gules. 14 Geor. Blount, mil. ut prius 15 Ioh.
Giffard, arm ut prius 16 Th. Horwood, ar. Compton Argent, a Cheveron, betwixt 3
Bucks-heads caboshed, Sable. 17 Rad. Add^ley, ar. (...). Argent, on a cheveron
Sable, 3 Mullets of the f^st. 18 Rad. Snead, arm. ut prius 19 Ric. Bagot, arm.
ut prius 20 Io. Chetwyn, arm. ut prius 21 Th. Trentham, ar. ut prius 22 Walt.
Ashto^, m. ut prius 23 Edw. Littleton, ar. ut prius 24 Johannes Gray, ar. ut
prius 25 Th. Gr^ey, ar. ut prius 26 Edw. Leigh, a^m. Gules, a Cross ingrailed
Argent, in the first quarter a lozenge. 27 Rad. Okever, ar. Ermin on a Chief
(...), 3 Bezants. 28 Walt. Leveson, (...) ut prius 29 Will. Basset, arm. ut
prius 30 Ioh. Bows, mil. Elford Ermin, 3 Bows, Sable. 31 Rob. Stanford, ar.
Argent, 3 Bars Azure, on a Canton Gules, a hand holding a broken fauchion,
Or. 32 Edw. Eston, mil. 33 Tho. Leveson, ar. ut prius 34 (...). Trentham, mi.
ut prius 35 Ed. Littleton, mil. ut prius 36 Hen. Griffith, ar. ut prius 37 Rad.
Sneade, arm. ut prius 38 Th. Horwood, ar. ut prius 39 Will. Cromp^on. ar Stone
Argent on a Chief Ver^, 3 Pheons Or. 40 Wall. Wrotesley, a. ut prius 41 Walt.
Bagot, a m. ut prius 42 Will. Chetwyn, ar. ut prius 43 Will. Skevingto^, a.
Argent, 3 Bulls-heads erazed, Sable. 44 Edw. Leigh, arm. ut prius 45 Walt.
Bagot, ar. ut prius JAC. Reg. Anno 1 Walt. Bagot, ar. and ut prius Edw. Leigh.
ut prius 2 Will. Horwood, mil. ut prius 3 Gilb Wake^ing, m. 4 Ed. Brabazon, mil.
Gules, on a Bend Argent, 3 Mar^ets of the first. 5 Walt. Chetwyn, m ut prius 6
Ia. Skrimshere, a. ut prius 7 Walter. Heveningham, arm. A^on Quarterley Or and
Gules, a Border Sable, with Scallop shells, Argent. 8 Simon Weston, m 9 Fr.
Trentham, arm. ut prius 10 Th. Meverel, arm. Argent, Griffin Segreant, Sable.
11 Th. Littleton, mil. ut prius 12 Rich. Fleetwood, Bar. ut prius 13. Ioh.
Peshal, mil. and Bar. ut prius 14 Ioh. Offley, mil. Argent, on a Cross Azure
Formee Flure a lion passant Or, between 4 Cornish Choughs, Sable. 15 Hug.
VVrotesley, ut prius 16 Th. Skrimshere, a. ut prius 17 Hen. Leigh, arm. ut
prius 18 Ed. VVinso^. arm. 19. Rad. Snede, arm. ut prius 20 Will. Cumberford, a
21 Will. Skeffington, arm. ut prius 22 Ed. Stanford, ar. ut prius CAR. I. Anno
1 Th. Pa^kes, arm. 2 Herveus Bago^, Baronet. ut prius 3 Will. Bowyer, mil.
Knipe^ley Argent, a lion rampant betwixt 3 Cross croslets (...), ^ul. 4 Ioh.
Bows, arm. ut prius 5 Ioh. Cotes, arm. ut prius 6 Will. Wollaston, ar. Sable,
3 pierced Mullets Argent. 7 Th. Broughton, ar Langdon Argent, 2 Bars Gules, on
a Canton of the second, a Cross of the first. 8 Th. Horwood, mil. ut prius 9
Hen Griffith, Bar. ut prius 10 Humf. Wyrley, ar. Hampsted Argent, 3 Bugle-horns
Sable, stringed Vert. 11 Ric. Pyot, and Humf. Wyrley, ar. ut prius 12 Ed.
Littleton, Bar. ut prius 13 Ioh. Skevington, a. ut prius 14 Io. Skrimshere, ar.
ut prius 15 Ioh. Bellot, arm. 16 Ioh. Agard, arm. 17 Ed. Mosely, Bar. Sable, on
a Cheveron betwixt 3 Mallets Argent, as many Mullets, Gules. 18 19 Simon*
Rudgeley, 20 * Argent, on a Chev^ Sable, 3 Mullets of the first. 21 22 Th.
Kynnersley, armiger. Azure, (...) de crosses croslet, a lion rampant, Argent.

RICHARD the Second.
1 BRIAN CORNWALL.] He (...) also this year Sheriff of Shrop-shire so that the
two adjacent Counties were under his inspection.

4 ROGER de WIRLEY] When I observe how this Gentleman is fixed in his
Generation, I cannot satisfy my self, whether he lived nearer unto his
Ancestor Rober^ de Wirley, who flourished in this County under King Henry the
2d. (if not before) or whether he approached nearer unto his Descendent S^ John
Wirley that learned Knight now living at Hampsteade. In my Arithmetic he is
equally distanced from them both.

HENRY the Sixth.
12 THOMAS STANLEY.] His true name was Audley. For, after that Adam, youngest
Brother to James Lord (...), had married the daughter and heir of Henry de
Stanley, William their son assumed the surname of Camd. Rem. page 142.
Stanley, and transmitted it to his posterity.

As for this Thomas Stanley, till I be clearly convinced to the contrary, he
shall pass with me for the same person, whom King Henry the Sixth made Lord
Stanley, Knight of the Garter, Lord Deputy of Ireland, and Lord Chamberlain of
his Household; and father unto Thomas Stanley, whom King Henry the Seventh
created the first Earl of Derby.

34 JOHN DELVES, Esquire.] He is the last of that Ancient Family appearing in this
Catalogue, who were fixed in this County in the reign of King Edward the Third.
This Sir John Delves (for he was afterward Knighted) left one daughter and
sole heir called S. E. Ms.
Helene, married unto Sir Robert Sheffield Knight and Recorder of London,
Ancestor unto the present Earl of Moulgrave.

EDWARD the Fourth.
1 WALTER WROTESLEY.] He was lineally descended from S^ Hugh Ca^dens Brit. in
this County.
Wrotesley, one of the first Founder of the most Noble Order of the Garter.

HENRY the Eighth.
28 JOHN DUDLEY.] I had thought his Ambition had been too high to come under
the Roof of such an Office, and discharge the place of a Sheriff. But know,
that as yet Sir John Dudley, was but Sir John Dudley, a Plain, but powerful
Knight, who not long afterward, viz. the 38th. of King Henry the Eighth was
created Viscount Lisley, and then Earl of Warwick, in the first of King Edward
the sixth, Reader by this be pleased to rectify, what before [not so ^xactly]
was written of his Honor, in his Character under the title of Soldiers.
and in the fifth of the said King, Duke of Northumberland. However now he
waited at Assizes, on the Itinerant Judges who afterward made all the Judges
of the Land (Justice Hales alone excepted) attend on him, and dance after the
Pipe of his pleasure, when the Instrument was drawn up ( Testament I can hardly
term it) whereby the two Sisters of King Edward the sixth, were dis-inherited.

King CHARLES.
3 WILLIAM BOWYER Knight.] Thomas Bowyer his Ancestor, from whom he is lineally
descended, did in the reign of King Richard the Second marry S. E. Ms.
Katharine daughter and heir of Robert Knipersley, of Knipersley in this
County, with whom he had a fair Inheritance. The Bowyers of Sussex (invited
thither some 200 years since by an Earl of Northumberland) are a younger Branch
from these in Staffordshire.

BATTLES.
At Hopton Heath in this County in March 1643, a fierce fight happened betwixt
the Kings and Parliaments Forces, on a ground full of Cony-borroughs, therefore
affording ill footing for the Horse. But an equal disadvantage on both sides is
no disadvantage on either. The Royalists may be said to have got the Day, and
lost the Sun which made it, I mean the truly Loyal and Valiant Spencer Earl of
Northampton, though still surviving as in his grateful memory, so in his Noble
and Numerous Issue, no less deservedly honored by others then mutually loving
amongst themselves.

The Farewell.
To take our Vale of Staffordshire. I wish that the Pit-coal (wherewith it
abounds) may seasonably and safely be burnt in their Chimnies, and not have
their burning antedated, before they be dug out the Bowels of the Earth. The
rather, because I have Burton in his description of Leicest. page 218.
read, how in the year 1622 there was found a Coal-mine actually on fire,
between Willingsworth and Weddesbury in this County. I find not by what
casualty this English Aetna was kindled, nor how long it did continue. And
although such combustions be not so terrible here, as in the South of Italy,
where the sulphurous matter more inrageth the fury of the fire, yet it could
not but cause much fright and fear to the people thereabouts.

SUFFOLK has Norfolk on the North, divided with the Rivers of Little Ouse and
Waveny, Cambridge-shire on the West, the German Ocean on the East, and Essex
parted with the River Stoure on the South thereof. From East to West it
stretches forty five miles, though the general breadth be but twenty, saving
by the Seaside, where it runs out more by the advantage of a Corner. The
Air thereof generally is sweet and by the best Speed in his description of
Suffolk.
Physicians esteemed the best in England often prescribing the Receipt thereof
to the Consumptionish-Patients. I say generally sweet, there being a small
parcel nigh the Seaside not so excellent, which may seem left there by Nature,
on purpose to advance the purity of the rest.

Natural Commodities.
Cheese.
Most excellent are made herein, whereof the finest are very thin, as intended
not for food but digestion. I remember when living in Cambridge, the Cheese of
this County was preferred as the best. If any say that Scholars palates are
incompetent Judges, whose hungry appetites make course Diet seem delicates unto
them, let them know, that Pantaleon the Learned Dutch Physician Camd. Brit. in
Suffolk.
counted them, equal at least, with them of Parma in Italy.

Butter.
For Quantity and Quality this County does excel, and venteth it at London, and
elsewhere. The Child, not yet come to, and the old Man, who is past the use of
Teeth eats no softer, the Poor Man no cheaper, (in this Shire) the Rich no
wholesomer food, I mean in the morning. It was half of our Saviors Bill of
Fare, in his Infancy Butter Esaiah 7. 15
and Honey shall he eat.

It is of a Cordial, or if I may say, Antidotal Nature. The story is well known
of a Wife which desiring to be a Widow incorporated Poison in the Butter,
whereon her Husband had his principal repast. The poor man finding himself
strangely affected, repaired to a Physician, who by some Symptoms suspecting
poison, demanded of his Patient which was his chiefest Diet. The sick man told
him, that he fed most constantly on Butter. Eat Butter still (returned the
Physician) which hitherto has saved your Life, for it corrected the poison,
that neither the malignity thereof, nor the malice of the wife, could have
their full operation.

Manufactures.
Clothing.
Here it will not be amiss to insert a passage which I meet with in an
Industrious Antiquary Weavers Funeral Monuments, page 770.
as relating to the present subject.

The Manufacture of Clothing in this County has been much greater, and those
of that Trade far richer, I persuade my self, heretofore than in these times,
or else the Heirs and Executors of the deceased were more careful that the
Testators dead Corpse should be interred in more decent manner, than they are
now a-dayes; Otherwise I should not find so many Marbles richly inlaid with
Brass, to the memory of Cloathiers in foregoing Ages, and not one in these
later seasons. All the Monuments in the Church of Neyland which bare any face
of comeliness, and Antiquity are erected to the memory of Cloathiers, and such
as belong to that Mystery.

Some perchance would assign another reason, viz. Because Monuments formerly
were conceived to conduce much to the happiness of the deceased (as bespeaking
in their Epitaphs the Suffrages of the living in their behalf) which error is
vanished away since the Reformation; all which being fully believed weakneth
not the observation, but that Suff^lk Clothiers were Wealthier in former than
in our Age.

Buildings.
This County has no Cathedral therein, and the Parochial Churches [generally
fair] no one of transcendent eminency; But formerly it had so magnificent an
AbbeyChurch in Bury, the Sun shined not on a fairer, with Leland in his
description of Bury.
three lesser Churches waiting thereon in the same Churchyard. Of these but
two are extant at this day, and those right stately structures;

And if the Servants we so much commend,
What was the Mistress whom they did attend?
Here I meet with a passage affected me with wonder, though I know not how the
Reader will resent it: It is avouuched by all Stow* Speed, Mills, Vincent,
Weaver, etc.
Authors; That Mary youngest sister to King Henry the Eighth, Relict to Lewis
the Twelfth King of France, afterward married to Charles Brandon, Duke of
Suffolk, died on Mid-summer Eve 1533, and was buried in the Abbey Church in
Bury. But it seems her Corpse could not protect that Church from demolishing,
which in few years after was levelled to the ground. I read not that the Body
of this Princess was removed to any other place, nor does any monument here
remain to her memory, though her King-Brother and second Husband survived the
destruction of that Church. A strange thing! save that nothing was strange in
those days of confusion.

As for the Town of Bury it is sweetly seated and fairly built, especially
since the year 1608. About which time it was lamentably defaced with a casual
Fire, though since God has given them Beauty for Isaiah 61. 3.
Ashes. And may the following Distich (set up therein) prove Prophetical unto
the place.

Burgus ut antiquus violento corruit igne,
Hic stet, dum flammis terra polusque flagrent.
Though furious fire the old Town did consume,
Stand This, till all the World shall flaming fume.
Noris the School a small Ornament to this Town founded by King Edward the
Sixth, being itself a Corporation, now (as well as ever) flourishing under Mr.
Stephens, the able Master thereof.

Amongst the many fair houses of the Gentry in this County Long Melford must
not be forgotten, late the house of the Countess Rivers, and the FIRST FRUITS
of PLUNDERING in England; and Sommerley Hall (nigh Yarmouth) belonging to the
Lady Wentworth, well answering the Name thereof: For here Summer is to be seen
in the depth of Winter in the pleasant walks, beset on both sides with
Firr-trees green all the year long, besides other curiosities. As for Merchants
houses, Ipswich Town (corrival with some Cities for neatness and greatness)
affords many of equal handsomness.

Proverbs.
Suffolk Milk.] This was one of the Staple-Commodities of the Land of Canaan,
and certainly most wholesome for Man's Body, because of Gods own chosing for his
own People. No County in England affords better and sweeter of this kind, lying
opposite to Holland in the Netherlands, where is the best Dairy in Christendom,
which minds me of a passage betwixt Spinola and Grave Maurice.

The Spanish General being invited to an entertainment by the aforesaid Prince
at Breda (as I take it) when Lemons and Oranges were brought in for sauce at
the first Cour^e, What a brave Country is my Masters (quoth de Don) affording
this fair fruit all the year long. But when Cream was brought up to close the
Feast, Grave Maurice returned, What a brave Country is ours that yeildeth this
fruit twice every day?

Suffolk fair Maids.] It seems the God of Nature has been bountiful in giving
them beautiful complexions, which I am willing to believe so far forth as it
fixes not a comparative disparagement on the same Sex in other Counties. I
hope they will labor to join gracious hearts to fair faces; otherwise I am
sure there is a Divine Proverb of infallible truth, Prove. ^1. 22.
As a Jewel of gold in a Swines snout, so is a fair Woman which is without
discretion.

Suffolk s^iles.] It is a measuring cast, whether this Proverb pertains to
Essex or this County, and I believe it belongs to both, which being enclosed
Countries into petty quillets abound with high styles troublesome to be
clambred over. But the owners grudge not the pains in climbing them, sensible
that such severals redound much to their own advantage.

You are in the high way to Needham.] Needham is a Market Town in this County,
well stokt (if I mistake not) with poor People, though I believe this in no
degree did occasion the first denomination thereof. They are said to be in the
high way to Needham who do hasten to poverty.

However these fall under a distinction, some go, others are sent thither: Such
as go embrace several ways, some if Poor, of Idleness; if Rich, of
Carelessness, or else of Prodigality.

Others are sent thither against their wills by the powerful oppression of
such, who either detain or devour their Estates. And it is possible some may be
sent thither by no Default of their own, or visible cause from others, but
merely from Divine Justice, insensibly dwingling their Estates, chiefly for
trial of their Patience.

Wherefore, so many ways leading to Needham from diverse quarters, I mean from
different causes; It is unjust to condemn all persons meeting there, under the
Censure of the same guiltness.

Princes.
EDMUND MORTIMER, son to Roger Mortimer, Earl of March, Grandchild of A M P.
Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March, and of Philippa sole daughter of Lionel Duke
of Clarence, may pass with the charitable Reader for a Prince, since he paid
so dear for the same, as will appear. I confess it impossible to fix his
Nativity with assurance, (having not hitherto read any record which reached it)
the rather because of the vastness of his patrimony; and several habitations

In England In the Marches of Wales whence he had his honor. In Ireland
Clare-Cas^le, with many other Manors in Suffolk. VVigmore in Hereford-shire.
Trim, Conaught, with large Lands in Ulsier. Ludlow in Shrop-shire.

But most probable it is that he was born where he was buried, at Clare. After
the death of King Richard the Second, he was the next heir to the Crown. Happy
had he been, if either nearer to it, so as to enjoy the honor thereof; or
farther off, so as not to be envied and suspected for his Title thereunto by
King Henry the Fourth. Now, all the harm, this Earl had done King Henry, was
this, that King Henry held from him his lawful Inheritance. Yea, this meek
Mortimer was content to wave the Crown, so be it he might but enjoy his private
Patrimony, which he could not without many molestations from the King. For,
this is the nature of some Men to heap injuries on those they have wronged, as
if the later injuries would give a countenance of Justice to the former.

He employed this Edmund in a War against Owen Glendour, the Welsh Rebel, on
the same design that 1 Samuel 18. 25.
Saul sent David to fight against, and fetch the fore-skins of the Philistines.
If he proved Conqueror, then was King Henry freed from a professed Foe; if
conquered, then was he rid of a suspected Subject. But Mortimer went by the
worst, and being taken prisoner, the King (though often solicited) never
endeavored his enlargement; till at last he dearly ransomed himself. Yet did
he but exchange a Welsh for an Irish prison, kept 20 years in r^traint in his
own Castle of Trim, in the end of the reign of cunning King Henry the Fourth,
all the reign of courageous King Henry the Fifth, and the beginning of the
reign of innocent King Henry the Sixth, their different tempers meeting in
cruelty against this poor Prisoner. He died Anno Domini 1454. without Issue,
leaving Anne his sister, his heir, and lies buried in Clare, as is aforesaid.

Saints.
St. EDMUND King of the East Angles. Hear what falsehoods are hudled together in
our English Martyrology, written (as he terms himself) By a Catholic Priest,
Permi^ Superiorum. 1608. page 319 on the 20 of November.

At Hexam in Northumberland the passion of St. Edmund King and Martyr, who
being a Saxon by Blood, born in the City of Noremberg in that Province, and
Nephew to Offa King of the East Angles.

First, Hexam in Northumberland, should be Hoxton in this County, where St.
Edmund was martyred. Secondly, there is no City Noremberg in Britain, nor
Europe save that in Germany.

This is enough to make us distrust what he writes afterward, viz. that, When
the said St. Edmund was cruelly murdered by the Danes, and when the Christians,
seeking his Corpse, were lost in a Wood, did call one to another, Where art?
Where art? Where art? The martyred head answered, Here, Here, Here. However,
God forbid, that this Authors fauxities should make us undervalue this worthy
King and Martyr, cruelly tortured to death by the Pagan Danes, and by an old
Author thus not unhansomely expressed.

Ex lib. Abb. de Rufford in Bib. Cott.
Utque cruore suo Gallos Dionysius ornat:
Graecos Demetrius: gloria quisque suis.
Sic nos Edmundus nulli virtute secundus,
Lux patet, and patriae gloria magna suae.
Sceptra manum, diadema caput, sua purpura corpus
Ornat ei, sed plus vincula, mucro, cruor.
As Denis by his death adorneth France:
Demetrius Greece: each credit to his place:
So Edmunds luster does our Land advance,
Who with his virtues does his Country grace.
Scepter, Crown, Robe, his hand, head, corpse renouns,
More famous for his bonds, his blood, his wounds.
His death happened Anno Domini 870. whose body was placed in a goodly shrine,
richly adorned with jewels, and precious stones at Bury in this County. These
all are vanished, whilst the name of St. Edmund will ever remain in that Towns
denomination.

ROBERT GROSTHEAD. ^ehosaphat seeing four hundred Prophets of Baal together,
and suspecting they were too many to be good, cast in that shrewd question; Is
there not here a 1 King. 22. 7.
Prophet of the Lord besides? and thereupon Micaiah was mentioned unto him.

Possible the Reader seeing such swarms of Popish Saints in England, will
demand; Is there not ^et a Saint of the Lord besi^es? and I conceive my self
concerned to return a true answer, that there is Robert Grosthead by name, whom
now we come to describe.

He was born in this Bale de scrip. Brit. cent^. 4* number. 18.
County, bred in Oxford, where he became most eminent for Religion and Learning
in all kind of Languages, Arts and Sciences, and at last was preferred Bishop
of Lincoin, 1235. He wrote no fewer than three hundred Treatises, whereof most
are extant in Manuscript in Westminster Library, which Dr. Williams (his
Successor in the Sea of Lincoln) intended So Mr. Goland the learned Library
keeper (lately deceased) informed me.
to have published in three fair Folio Volumes, had not the late troublesome
Times dis-heartned him. Thus our Civil Wars have not only filled us with
Legions of lying Pamphlets, but also deprived us of such a Treasure of Truth,
as this worthy Man's works would have proved to all posterity.

He was a stout Opposer of Popish-Oppression in the Land, and a sharp Reprover
of the Corruptions of the Court of Rome, as we have largely declared in our
Ecclesiastical History. Such the Piety of his Life and Death, that, though
loaded with Curses from the Pope, he generally obtained the Reputation of a
Saint.

Bellarmine starts a De Sanct. Beatit. cap. 10.
Question, whether one may pray lawfully to him and paint his Picture in the
Church, who is not Canonized by the Pope? and very gravely he determines (a
short line will serve to fadom a shallow water) that privately he may do it,
and that a Picture of such a Man may be painted in the Church, provided his
head be not encompassed with a Radiated Circle as particular to Canonized
Saints. Thus our Learned and Pious Robert must want that addition of a Glory
about his Picture, and the matter is not much, seeing no doubt having Turned
many to righteousness, he does shine in Heaven as the brightness of Dan. 12. 3.
the Firmament. Whose death happened Anno Domini 1254.

Martyrs.
ROWLAND TAILOR. Where born unknown (though some without any assurance have
suggested his Nativity in Yorkshire) was bred in Cambridge, and became head of
Borden Hostle nigh (if not now partly in) Cajus College, where he commenced
Doctor of the Laws. Hence he was by Archbishop Cranmer presented to the Rectory
of Hadley in this County. He was a great Scholar, painful Preacher, charitable
to the Poor, of a comely Countenance, proper Person, (but inclining to
corpulency) and cheerful behavior. The same devotion had different looks in
several Martyrs, frowning in Stern Hooper, weeping in meek Bradford, and
smiling constantly in pleasant Tailor.

Indeed some have censured his merry Conceits as trespassing on the gravity of
his calling, especially when just before his death. But surely such Romanists,
who admire the temper of Sr. Thomas More jesting with the Axe of the
Executioner, will excuse our Tailor for making himself merry with the Stake.
But though it be ill Jesting with edged Tools (whereof Death is the sharpest,)
yet since our Savior has blounted it, his servants may rather be delighted
than dismayed with it. Not long after Doctor Tailor set Archbishop Cranmer who
was his Patron, a Copy of Patients, who indeed wrote after it, but not with so
steady a hand, and so even a Character of constancy. Tailor was martyred at
Hadley, February 9, 1555.

ROBERT SAMUEL was Minister of Barfold in this County, who by the cruelty of
Hopton Bishop of Norwich and Downing his Chancellor, was tortured in Prison.
Not to preserve, but to reserve him for more pain. He was allowed every day but
three mouthfuls of Bread, and three spoonfuls of water. Fain would he have
drunk his own Urin, but his thirst-parched body afforded none.

I read how he saw a Fox Acts ^d M^num. page ^709.
Vision of one all in white, comforting and telling him, that after that day he
never should be hungry or thirsty; which came to pass accordingly, being
within few hours after martyred at Ipswich, August 31, 1555. Some report that
his body when burnt, did shine as bright Idem ibidem.
as burnished silver, Sed parcius ista. Such things must be sparingly written
by those who would not only avoid untruths, but the appearance thereof. Thus
loath to lengthen men's tongues reporting what may seem improbable, and more
loath to shorten Gods hand in what might be miraculous, I leave the relation,
as I found it.

Besides these two, I meet with more than twenty by name martyred ( Confessors
doubling that number) whose ashes were scattered all over the County, at
Ipswich, Bury, Bekles, etc. It is vehemently suspected, that Fox Ma^tyrol. page
1912.
three of them burnt at Bekles had their death antedated before the Writ, de
Haeretico comburendo, could possibly be brought down to the Sheriff. And was
not this (to use Tertullians Latin in some different sense) Festinatio
homicidii? Now though Cha^ity may borrow a point of Law to save life, surely
Cruelty should not steal one to destroy it.

Cardinals.
THOMAS WOLSEY, was born in the Town of Ipswich, where a Butcher, a very honest
Man, was his Father, though a Poet be thus pleased to descant thereon,

Brave Priest who ever was thy Sire by kind,
Wolsey of Ipswich never begat thy mind.
One of so vast undertakings, that our whole Book will not afford room enough
for his Character; the writing whereof I commend to some eminent Person of his
Foundation of Christ-Church in Oxford.

He was made Cardinal of St. Cecily and died heart-broken with grief at
Leicester 1530. without any Monument, which made a great Dr. C^bet in his Iter
Boreale.
Wit of his own College thus lately complain,

And though from his own store Wolsey might have
A Palace, or a College for his grave,
Yet here he lies interred, as if that all
Of him to be remembered were his fall.
Nothing but earth to earth, nor pompous weight
Upon him but a pebble or a quaite,
If thou art thus neglected, what shall we
Hope after death, that are but shreds of thee?
This may truly be said of him, he was not guilty of mischievous pride, and was
generally commended for doing Justice, when Chancellor of England.

Prelates.
HERBERT LOSING was born in this County, as our * Antiquary informs Bale
cent. 2. page 171.
us; In Pago Oxunensi in Sudovolgia Anglorum Comitatu natus: but, on the
perusing of all the Lists of Towns in this County, no Oxun appears therein,
or name, neighboring thereon in sound and syllables. This I conceive the cause
why Bishop Godwin, so confidently makes this Herbert born Oxoniae, in Oxford,
in which County we have formerly placed his Character.

However, seeing Bale was an excellent Antiquary, and being himself a
Suffolk-man, must be presumed knowing in his own County; and conceiving it
possible that this Oxun was either an obscure Church-less-Village, or else is
this day disguized under another name, I conceive it just that as Oxfordshire
led the Front, Suffolk should bring up the Rear of this Herberts description.

Indeed he may well serve two Counties, being so different from himself and two
persons in effect. When young, loose and wild, deeply guilty of the sin of
Simony: When old, nothing of Herbert was in Herbert, using commonly the words
of Will. Malm^sbury.
St. Hierome; Erravimus juvenes, emendemus senes, When young we went astray,
when old we will amend; Now, though some controversy about the place of his
birth, all agree in his death, July 22, 1119; and in his burial, in the
Cathedral Church of Norwich.

RICHARD ANGERVILE, son to S^. Richard Angervile Knight, was born at Hence
commonly called Richardus de ^urgo.
Bury in this County, and bred in Oxford, where he attained to great eminency
in Learning. He was Governor to King Edward the Third whilst Prince, and
afterward advanced by Him to be successively his Cofferer, Treasurer of his
Wardrobe, Dean of Wells, Bishop of Duresme, Chancellor, and lastly Treasurer
of England. He bestowed on the poor every week Eight Quarters of Godwin in his
Bishops of Durham, page 131.
Wheat baked in Bread. When he removed from Duresme to Newcastle (twelve short
miles) he used to give eight pounds sterling in Alms to the Poor, and so
proportionably in other places betwixt his Palaces. He was a great lover of
Books, confessing himself in his Book called Philobiblos.
Exsiatico quodam librorum amore potenter abreptum, in so much that he alone
had more Books than all the Bishops of England in that Age put together, which
stately Library by his Will he solemnly bequeathed to the University of Oxford.
The most eminent Foreigners were his Friends, and the most Learned Englishmen
were his Chaplains, until his death which happened Anno 1345.

JOHN PASCHAL, was born in this Bale de scrip. Brit, centur. 5. number. 95.
County (where his name still continues) of Gentle Parentage, bred a
Carthusian and D. D. in Cambridge. A great Scholar and popular Preacher.
Bateman Bishop of Norwich, procured the Pope to make him the umbratile Bishop
of Scutari, whence he received as much profit, as one may get heat from a
Glowworm. It was not long before, by the favor of King Edward the Third, he
was removed from a very shadow to a slender substance, the Bishopric of
Landaffe; wherein he died Anno Domini 1361.

SIMON SUDBURY, alias, TIBALD, was born at Sudbury, as great as most, and
ancient as any Town in this County. After many mediate preferments (let him
thank the Popes provisions) at last he became Archbishop of Canterbury. He
began two Synods with Latin Sermons in his own person, as rare in that age as
blazing stars, and as ominous; for they portended ill success to Wickliffe and
his followers. However this Simon Sudbury, overawed by the God of Heaven, and
John Duke of Lancaster, did not (because he could not) any harm unto him. He
was killed in the Rebellion of J. Straw and Wat. Tyler, Anno Domini 1381.

And although his shadowey Tomb (being no more than an honourary Cenotaph) be
shown at Christ-Church in Canterbury; yet, his substantial Monument, wherein
his Bones are deposited, is to be seen in St. Gregory's in Sudbury, under a
Marble stone sometimes inlayed all over with Brass, some four yards long, and
two broad, says mine Weavers Fun. M^n. page 743.
eyewitnesse-Authour (though I confess I never met with any of like dimension)
so that in some sense I may also call this a Cenotaph, as not proportioned to
the bulk of his Body, but height of his Honor and Estate.

THOMAS EDWARDSTON, so named from his Birthplace Edwarston in this County (a
Village Camd. Brit. in Suffolk.
formerly famous for the Chief Mansion of the Ancient Family of Mounchensey)
bred first in Oxford, then an Augustinian Eremite in Clare. He was a great
Scholar, as his Works evidence, and Confessor to Lionel Duke of Clarence, whom
he attended into Italy, when he married Joland daughter to John Galeaceus Duke
of Milan.

J. Pits conceives him to have been an Archbishop in Ireland, which is
utterly disowned by Judicious Sir De script. Hib. lib. ^. page 126.
James VVare. And indeed if De script. Brit. cent. 7. number. 7.
Bales words (whence Pits deriveth his intelligence) be considered, it will
appear, he never had Title of an Archbishop, sed cujusdam Archi-Episcopatus
curam accepit, He undertook care of some Archbishopric, probably commended in
the vacancy thereof to his inspection. And why might not this be some Italian
Archbishopric, during his attendance on his Patron there, though afterward
(preferring privacy before a pompous charge) he returned into his Native
Country, and died at Clare. Anno 1396.

THOMAS PEV^REL, was born of good Parentage, in this Bale de scrip. Brit. cent.
7. number. 49.
County, bred a Carmelite, and D. D. in Oxford. He was afterward by King
Richard the Second made Bishop of Ossory in Ireland. I say by King Richard the
Second, which minds me of a memorable passage, which I have read in an
excellent Author.

It may justly seem strange, which is most true, that there are three
Bishoprics in Ireland in the Province of Ulster, by name, Derry, Rapho, and
Clogher, which neither Queen Elizabeth, nor any of her Progenitors did ever Sir
John Davis in his treatise of Ir^land, page 255.
bestow, though they were the undoubted Patrons thereof. So that King James was
the first King of England that did ever supply those Sees with Bishops, so that
it seems, formerly the Great Irish Lords in those parts preferred their own
Chaplains thereunto.

However the Bishoprics in the South of the Land, were ever in the disposal of
Our Kings, amongst which Ossory was one, bestowed on our Peverel. From Ireland
he was removed to Landaffe in Wales, then to VVorchester in England, being one
much esteemed for Learning, as his Books do declare. He died, according to
Bishop Godwins account, March the 1, 1417, and lies buried in his own
Cathedral.

STEPHEN GARDENER, was born in Bale, Pi^s. G^dwin, etc*
Bury St. Edmunds, one of the best aires in England, the sharpness whereof he
retained in his Wit and quick apprehension. Some make him Base-son to Lionel
VVoodvile, Bishop of Salisbury, which I can hardly believe, Salisbury and St.
Edmunds-Bury being six score miles asunder. Besides, time herein is harder to
be reconciled than place. For, it being granted an error of youth in that
Bishop, and that Bishop vanishing out of this World 1485. Gardener in all
probability must be allowed of greater age than he was at his death.

It is confessed by all, that he was a man of admirable natural parts, and
memory especially, so conducible to Learning, that one says, Tantum scimus
quantum meminimus. He was b^ed Doctor of Laws in Trinity-hall in Cambridge, and
after many State-Embassies and employments, he was by King Henry the Eighth
made Bishop of Winchester. His malice was like what is commonly said of white
powder, which surely discharged the Bullet, yet made no report, being secret
in all his acts of cruelty. This made him often chide Bonner, calling him Sir
John Harrington in the Bishop* of Winchester.
Ass, though not so much for killing poor people, as not for doing it more
cunningly.

He was the chief Contriver of what we may call Gardiners-Creed, though
consisting but of six Articles, which caused the death of many, and trouble of
more Protestants. He had almost cut off one who was, and prevented another for
ever being a Queen, I mean Katharine Par and the Lady Elizabeth, had not Divine
Providence preserved them. He complied with King Henry the Eighth, and was what
he would have him; opposed King Edward the Sixth, by whom he was imprisoned and
deprived; acted all under Queen Mary, by whom he was restored, and made Lord
Chancellor of England.

He is reported to have died more than half a Protestant, avouching that he
believed himself and all others only to be justified by the merits of Christ;
which if so, then did he verify the Greek and Latin Proverb,

(...)
Saepe Olitor valde verba opportuna loqu^tus.
The Gardener often times in due season
Speaks what is true, and solid reason.
He died at White Hall of the Gout, November the 12th. 1555. and is buried by
his own appointment on the Northside of the Quire, over against Bishop Fox, in
a very fair Monument. He had done well, if he had paralleled Bishop Fox
(Founder of Corpus Christi College in Oxford) in erecting some public work,
the rather because he died so rich, being reported to have left forty thousand
Bale de scrip. Brit. cent. 8. number. 88.
Marks in ready money behind him.

However on one account his memory must be commended for improving his power
with Queen Mary to restore some Noble Families formerly depressed. My Sir John
Harrington, ut prius.
Author instanceth in some descendan^e from the Duke of Norfolk, in the
Stanhops and the Arundels of VVarder Castle. To these give me leave to add the
Right Ancient Family of the Hungerfords, to whom he procured a great part of
their Patrimony, seized on by the Crown, to be restored.

Since the Reformation.
JOHN BALE was born at In vita sua cen. 8. nu. 1^0.
Covie in this County, five miles from Donwich, and was brought up in
Jesus-Colledge in Cambridge, being before, or after a Carmelite in Norwich. By
the means of Thomas Lord Wentworth, he was converted to be a Protestant. This
is that Bale who wrote a Book De scriptoribus Britannicis, digested into nine
Centuries, not more beholding to Leland, than I have been to Bale in this Work,
and my Church History. Anno 1552, February the 2d. he was consecrated at
Dublin, Bishop of Ossory in Ireland, whence on the death of King Edward the
Sixth, he was forced to fly (some of his servants being slain before his eyes)
and in his passage over the sea, was taken prisoner by Pirates, sold, ransomed,
and after many dangers safely arrived in Switzerland.

After the death of Queen Mary, he returned into England, but never to his
Irish Bishopric, preferring rather a private life, being a Prebendary of the
Church of Canterbury. One may wonder, that being so Learned a Man, who had done
and suffered so much for Religion, higher promotion was not forced upon him,
seeing about the beginning of Queen Elizabeth, Bishoprics went about begging
able men to receive them. But probably he was a person, more Learned than
discreet, fitter to write than to govern, as unable to command his own passion,
and Biliosus Balaeus passes for his true Character. He died in the sixty
eighth year of his Age at Jac. Waraeus de scrip. Hib. lib. 2. page 136.
Canterbury (Anno Domini 1563, in the month of November) and was buried in the
Cathed^al Church therein.

JOHN MAY was born in this Scellet. Cant. of Parker Manuscript.
County, bred in the ^niversity of Cambridge, whereof he became Proctor 1545,
Elected Master of Katharine-hall 1564, Vice Chancellor 1569, and at last
consecrated Bishop of Carlisle, Sept. 27, 1577, continuing eleven years in that
See, and died in April 1598.

JOHN OVERAL, D. D. born a^ Hadley in this County, was bred in the Free School
therein, till sent to St. John's, then to Trinity College in Cambridge whereof
he was Fellow, and there chosen Regius Profess^r; one of the most profound
School-Divines of the English Nation. Afterward by the Queens absolute mandate
(to end a contention betwixt two Corrivals) not much with his will he was made
Master of Katharine-hall. For when Archbishop Whitgift joyed him of the place,
he returned that it was Terminus diminuens, taking no delight in his
preferment. But his Grace told him, That (if the injuries, much more) the less
courtesies of Princes must be thankfully taken, as the Ushers to make way for
greater, as indeed it came to pass.

For, after the death of Dr. Nowel, he was (by the especial recommendation of
Sr. Fulke Grevil) made Dean of St. Paul's. Being appointed to preach before the
Queen, he professed to my Father (most intimate with him) that he had spoken
Latin so long it was troublesome to him to speak English in a continued
Oration. He frequently had those words of the Psalmist in his mouth, Psalm. 89*
11?
When thou with rebukes do correct man for iniquity, thou make his beauty
to consume away like a moth, surely every man is vanity.

I cite it the rather out of the new Translation (something different from the
old) because he was so eminent an Instrument employed therein. King James made
him Bishop of Norwich, where he was a discreet presser of Conformity, on which
score he got the ill will of many disaffected thereunto, and died Anno 1618.

LEONARD MAW, was born at * Rendlesham in this Connty, a remarkable place
Scellet. Cant. of Mr. Parker Manusc.
Iassure you, which, though now a Country Village, was anciently the Residence
of the Kings of the East Angles. Where King Redwald, a Mongrel Christian, kept
at the same time Altar and Bed^*
Arulam, the Communion Table, and Altars for Idols.

He was bred in Cambridge, where he was Proctor of the University, Fellow, and
Master of Peter-house, after of Trinity College, whereof he deserved well,
showing what might be done in five years by good Husbandry to dis-ingage that
Foundation from a great debt.

He was Chaplain to King Charles whilst he was a Prince, and waited on him in
Spain, by whom he was preferred Bishop of Bath and Wells. He had the Reputation
of a good Scholar, a grave Preacher, a mild man, and one of Gentil Deportment.
He died Anno Domini 163..

RALPH BROUNRIG, D. D. was born at Ipswich of Parents of Merchantly condition.
His Father died in his Infancy, and his Mother did not carelessly cast away his
youth (as the first Broachings of a Vessel) but improved it in his Education at
School, till he was sent to Pembroke-hall in Cambridge, and afterward became
Scholar and Fellow thereof.

King James coming to Cambridge, was (amongst others) entertained with a
Philosophy Act, and Mr. Brounrig was appointed to perform the Joco-serious part
thereof, who did both to the wonder of the Hearers.

Herein he was like himself, that he could on a sudden be so unlike himself and
instantly vary his words and matter from mirth to solidity. No man had more
ability, or less inclination to be Satirical, in which kind posse and nolle is
a rarity indeed. He had wit at will, but so that he made it his Page, not Privy
Counselor, to obey, not direct his Judgment. He carried Learning enough in
numerato about him in his pockets for any Discourse, and had much more at home
in his chests for any serious Dispute. It is hard to say whether his loyal
memory, quick fancy, solid judgment, or fluent utterance, were most to be
admired, having not only flumen, but fulmen eloquentiae, being one who did
teach with Authority.

When commencing Bachelour in Divinity, he chose for his Text, Vobis autem,
etc. Philip. 1. 29
It is given to you, not only to believe, but suffer in the behalf of Christ. A
Text somewhat Prophetical to him, who in the Sequel of his life met with
affronts to exercise his Prudence and Patience, being afterward defied by
some, who [almost] Deified him before, in whose Eyes he seemed the blacker, for
wearing white sleeves, when 1641 made Bishop of Exeter.

I was present at his Consecration Sermon, made by his good Friend Doctor
Young, taking for his Text, The waters are risen, O Lord, the waters are
risen, etc. wherein he very gravely complained of the many invasions which
Popular violence made on the Privileges of Church and State. This Bishop
himself was soon sadly sensible of such Inundations, and yet by the Proc^rity
of his parts and piety, he not only safely waded thorough them himself, but
also, (when Vice Chancellor of Cambridge) by his prudence raised such Banks,
that those overflowings were so not destructive, as otherwise they would have
been to the University.

He continued constant to the Church of England, a Champion of the needful use
of the Liturgy, and for the Privileges of Ordination to belong to Bishops
alone. Unmovable he was in his principles of Loyalty, witness this instance.

O. P. with some show of respect unto him, demanded the Bishops Judgment ( non
plus't it seems himself) in some business, to whom he returned, My Lord, the
best counsel I can give you, is, Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's,
and unto God the things that are Gods, with which free answer O. P. was rather
silenced than satisfied.

About a year before his death, he was invited by the Society of both Temples
to be their Preacher, admirably supplying that place, till strong fits of the
Stone, with Hydropical Inclinations, and other distempers incident to
phletorick Bodies, caused his death.

I know all Accidents are minuted and momented by Divine Providence, and yet I
hope I may say without sin, his was an untimely death, not to himself (prepared
thereunto) but as to his longer life which the prayers of pious people
requested, the need of the Church required, the date of Nature could have
permitted, but the pleasure of God (to which all must submit) denied. Otherwise
he would have been most instrumental to the composure of Church differences,
the deserved opinion of whose goodness had peaceable possession in the hearts
of the Presbyterian party. I observed at his Funeral that the prime persons of
all Persuasions were present, whose Judgments going several ways met all in a
general grief for his decease. He was buried on the cost of both Temples, to
his great, but their greater honor.

The Reader is referred for the rest, to the Memorials of his life, written by
the Learned Doctor John Gauden, who preached his Funeral Sermon, and since has
succeeded him, both in the Temple and Bishopric of Exeter. His dissolution
happened in the 67th. year of his Age, December. 7, 1659, and was buried the week
following in the Temple Church.

Statesmen.
S^. NICHOLAS BACON, Knight, was born in this County, not far from the famous
Abbey of St. Edmunds Bury, and I have read that his Father was an Officer
belonging thereunto. His name I assure you is of an Ancient Gentry in this
Shire as any whatsoever. He was bred in Bennet College in Cambridge, to which
afterward he proved a bountiful Benefactor, building a beautiful Chapel
therein.

He afterward applied himself to the study of the Common Law: and was made
Attorney to the Court of Wards, whence he was preferred Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal in the First of Queen Elizabeth, 1558. He married Anne, second
daughter to S^. Anthony Cook, of Giddy-hall in Essex, Governor to King Edward
the Sixth. And it is worthy of our observation, how the Sates-men in that Age
were arched together in affinity, to no small support one to another.

Sir John Cheek, Secretary to K. Edward the Sixth, whose sister was first wife
to Sr William Cecil Secretary to the same King. Sir Will. Cecil aforesaid for
his second wife married the wives sister unto this Sir Nicholas Bacon, Lord
Keeper. Sr. Francis Walsingham Secretary to Queen Elizabeth had a sister
married unto Sir Walter Mildmay, Chancellor of the Exchequer. Sir Franc.
Walsingham was also brother in Law unto Sir Tho. Randolph, that grand
Statesman and Ambassador.
To return to Sir Nicholas Bacon he was condemned by some who seemed wise, and
commended by those that were so, for not causing that S^atute to be repealed
(the Queen relying on him as her Oracle of Law) whereby the Queen was made
illegitimate in the days of her Father. For this wise Statesman would not
open that Camden in the First of Q. Eliz*
wound, which time had partly closed, and would not meddle with the variety,
yea, contrariety of Statutes in this kind, whereby people would rather be
perplexed than satisfied; but derived her right from another Statute which
allowed her succession, the rather, because Lawyers maintain; That a Crown once
worn clears all defects of the wearer thereof.

He continued in his Office about eighteen years, being a Man of rare wit and
deep experience,

Cui fuit ingenium subtle in corpore crasso.

For he was laden with a corpulent body, especially in his old Age, so that he
would be not only. out of breath, but also almost out of life, with going from
Westminster Hall to the Star Chamber, in so much when sitting down in his
place, it was some time before he could recover himself. And therefore it was
usual in that Court, that no Lawyer should begin to speak till the Lord Keeper
held up his staff as a signal to him to begin.

He gave for his Motto, Mediocria Firma, and practiced the former part thereof
Mediocria; Never attaining, because never affecting, any great Estate. He was
not for Invidious Structures (as some of his Contemporaries) but delighted in
Domo Domino pari. Such as was his house at Gorhambury in Hartfordshire. And
therefore when Queen Elizabeth coming thither in progress, told him, My Lord,
your house is too little for you; No Madam (returned he no less wittely than
gratefully) But it is your Highness that has made me too great for mine house.
Now as he was a just practiser of the first part of this Motto Mediocria, so no
doubt, he will prove a true Prophet in the second part thereof Firma, having
left an Estate rather good than great to his posterity, whose eldest son Sir
Edward Bacon in this County was the first Baronet of England. He died on the
20th. of February, 1578, and Iieth buried in the Quire of St. Paul's. In a word
he was a goodman, a grave Statesman, a Father to his Country, and Father to
Sir FRANCIS BACON.

Sir WILLIAM DRUERY, was born in this County, where his Worshipful Family had
long flourished at Haulsted. His name in Saxon sounds a Pearl, to which he
answered in the pretiousness of his disposition, clear and hard, innocent and
valiant, and therefore valued deservedly by his Queen, and Country.

His youth he spent in the French Wars, his middle in Scotland, and his old Age
in Ireland. He was Knight Marshal of Barwick, at what time the French had
possessed themselves of the Castle of Edinburgh, in the minority of King James.
Queen Elizabeth employed this Sir William with 1500 men to besiege the Castle,
which service he right worthily performed, reducing it within few days to the
true owner thereof.

Anno 1575 he was appointed Lord President of Mounster, whether he went with
competent Forces, and executed impartial Justice in despite of the Opposers
thereof. For as the Sign of Leo, immediately precedeth Virgo and Libra in the
Zodiac, so no hope that innocence will be protected, or Justice administered in
a Barbarous Country where power and strength do not first secure a passage unto
them. But the Earl of Desmond opposed this good President, forbidding him to
enter the County of Kerry, as a Palatinate, peculiarly appropriated unto
himself.

Know by the way as there were but four Palatinates in England, Chester,
LancasterDurham and Ely, (whereof the two former many years since were in
effect invested in the Crown) there were no fewer than eight Palatinates in
Ireland, possessed by their Respective Dynasts, claiming Regal Rites therein,
to the great retarding of the absolute Conquest of that Kingdom. Amongst these
(says my Author) Kerry became the Sanctuary of sin, and Refuge of Rebels, as
outlawed from any English Jurisdiction.

Sir William, no whit terrified with the Earls threatening, entered Kerry, with a
competent Train, and there dispensed Justice to all persons, as occasion did
require. Thus with his seven-score men, he safely forced his return through
seven hundred of the Earls, who sought to surprise him. In the last year of his
life, he was made Lord Deputy of Ireland, and no doubt had performed much in
his place, if not afflicted with constant sickness, the forerunner of his
death at Camdens Eliz. hoc anno.
Waterford, 1598.

Sir ROBERT NAUNTON, was born in this County, of Right ancient Extraction, some
avouching that his Family were here before, others that they came in with the
Conqueror, who rewarded the chief of that Name for his service with a great
Inheretrix given him in marriage. In so much that his Lands were then estimated
at (a vast sum in my Judgment) seven Weaver his Fun. Monum. page 751.
hundred pounds a year. For along time they were Patrons of Alderton in this
County, where I conceive Sir Robert was born.

He was first bred Fellow Commoner in Trinity College, and then Fellow of
TrinityHall in Cambridge. He was Proctor of the University, Anno Domini 160
0/1, which Office according to the Old Circle returned not to that College but
once in forty four years. He addicted himself from his youth to such studies,
as did tend to accomplish him for Public employment. I conceive his most
excellent piece called Fragmenta Regalia, set forth since his death, was a
fruit of his younger years.

He was afterward sworn Secretary of State to King James on Thursday the
eighth of January, 1617. which place he discharged with great ability and
dexterity. And I hope it will be no offense here to insert a pleasant passage.

One Mr. Wiemark a wealthy Man, great Novilant, and constant Paul's walker,
hearing the News that day of the beheading of Sir Walter Raleigh: His head
(said he) would do very well on the shoulders of Sir Robert Naunton, Secretary
of State. These words were complained of, and Wiemark summoned to the Privy
Council, where he pleaded for himself, that he intended no dis-respect to Mr.
Secretary, whose known Worth was above all detraction; Only he spoke in
reference to an old Proverb, Two heads are better than one. And so for the
present he was dismissed. Not long after, when rich men were called on for a
Contribution to St. Paul's, Wiemark at the Councel-Table subscribed a hundred
pounds, but Mr. Secretary told him two hundred were better than one, which
betwixt fear and charity Wiemark was fain to subscribe.

He died Anno Domini 163.. leaving one daughter, who first was married to Paul
Vicount Banning, and after to the Lord Herbert, eldest son to Philip Earl of
Pembroke.

Capital Judges.
JOHN de METINGHAM was born in this County (where Metingham is a Village in
VVang ford Hundred not far from Bongey) and was Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas in the reign of King Edward the Third. It is Spelman's Gloss.
verbo Iusticia^ius.
reported, to his eternal praise that when the rest of the Judges (18 Edw. 3.)
were fined and outed for corruption, this Metingham and Elias de Beckingham
continued in their places, whose innocence was of proof against all
accusations, and as Number. 13. 6, ^.
Caleb and Josh^a amongst the Jury of false Spies, so these two amongst the
Twelve Judges only retained their integrity. King Edward in the 20th of his
reign directed a Writ unto him about the stinting of the number of the
Apprentices and Attourneys at Law, well worth the inserting.

D. Edward. Rot. 5. in dorso de Apprenticiis and Attorna^is.
Rex injunxit John de Metingham and Sociis suis, quod ipsi per discre^ionem
eorum provideant and Ordinent numerum certum e quolibet Comitatu de melioribus
and legalioribus and libentius add scentibus, secundum quod intellexerint, quod
Curiae suae and populo de regno melius valere poterit, etc. Et videtur Regi and
ejus Consilio quod Septies viginti sufficere poterint. Apponant tamen praefati
Justiciarii plures, si viderint esse faciendum, vel numerum anticipent.

The Lord the King has enjoined John de Metingham and his Assistants, that
they according to their discretion provide and ordain a certain number out of
every County of such persons which according to their understanding, shall
appear unto them of the better sort and most Legal and most willingly applying
themselves to the learning of the Law, what may better avail for their Court
and the good of the people of the Land, etc. And it seems likely to the King
and his Council that Sevenscore may suffice for that purpose. However the
aforesaid Justices may add more if they see it ought to be done, or else they
may lessen the number.

Some conceive this number of sevenscore confined only to the Common Pleas,
whereof Metingham was Chief Justice. But others behold it as extended to the
whole Land, this Judge his known integrity being entrusted in their choice and
number, which number is since much increased, and no wonder, our Land being
grown more populous, and the people in it more litigious. He died Anno
Domini....

Sir JOHN CAVENDISH Knight, was born at Cavendish in this County, (where his
name continued until the reign of King Henry the Eighth) bred a Student of the
Municipal-Law, attaining to such learning therein, that he was made Lord Chief
Justice of the Kings (or Upper) Bench, July 15, in the 46th. of King Edward the
Third, discharging his place with due commendation, until his violent death on
the fifth of King Richard the Second on this occasion.

John Raw, a Priest, contemporary with Jack Straw and Wat Tyler, advanced
Robert Westbroome, a Clown, to be King of the Commons in this County, having no
fewer than fifty thousand followers. These for eighth days together, in savage
sport, caused the heads of great persons to be cut off, and set on Poles to
kiss and Speed's Chro. in Rich. the Second, page 608.
whisper in one another ears.

Chief Justice Cavendish chanced then to be in the Country, to whom they bare a
double pique; one, because he was honest, the other, learned. Besides, they
received fresh news from London, that one John Cavendish his kinsman, had
lately killed their Idol Wat Tiler in Smithfield. Whereupon they dragged the
Reverend Judge with Sir John of Cambridge, Prior of Bury, into the Marketplace
there, and Lib. Eliers. M. S. in Bil. Cotton.
beheaded them. Whose innocent blood remained not long unrevenged, by Spencer
the Warlike Bishop of Norwich, by whom this rascal rabble of Rebels was routed
and ruined 1381.

Reader, be charitably pleased that this Note may (till better information)
preserve the Right of this County unto Sir ROBERT BROKE, a great Lawyer, and
Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas in the reign of Queen Mary. He wrote an
Abridgment of the whole Law, a Book of high account. It insinuates to me a
probability of his birth herein, because ( Lawyers generally purchase near the
place of their Birth) his Posterity still flourish in a Worshipful equipage at
Nacton nigh Ipswich in this County.

Soldiers.
Sir THOMAS WENTWORTH of Nettlested in this County, of a younger Family
(confessed by the Crescent in his Coat) descended from the Wentworths of
Wentworth-Woodhouse in Yorkshire, was created Baron Wentworth by King Henry
the Eighth. He was a stout and valiant Gentleman, a cordial Protestant, and his
Family a Sanctuary of such Professors, John De scripts Brit. cent. 8. number. 1^0.
Bale comparing him to the good Centurion in the Gospel, and gratefully
acknowledging him the cause of his conversion from a Carmelite.

The memory of this good Lord is much (but unjustly) blemished, because Calis
was lost the Last of Queen Mary under his government. The manner hereof was
huddled up in our Chronicles (least is best of a bad business) whereof this the
effect. The English being secure by reason of the late conquest at St. Quintin,
and the Duke of Guise having notice thereof, he sat down before the Town at
the time (not when 2 Samuel 11. 1.
Kings go forth to, but return from battle) of mid-Winter, even on
New-years-day. Next day he took the two Forts of Rise-bank and Newnam-bridge
(wherein the strength of the City consisted) but whether they were undermined
or undermonied it is not decided, and the last left most suspicious. Within
three days the Castle of Calis, which commanded the City and was under the
command of Sir Ralph Chamberlain, was taken, the French wading thorough the
ditches (made shallower by their artificial cut) and then entering the Town,
were repulsed back by Sir Anthony Ager, Marshal of Calis, the only man, says
Chr^n. (...) g. 632. Speed's Hist. page 856.
Stow, who was killed in the fight (understand him of note:) Others, for the
credit of the business, accounting four score lost in that service.

The French re-entring the City the next being Twelfth-day, the Lord Wentworth
Deputy thereof, made but vain resistance, which (alas) was like the wriggling
of a Wormstail after the head thereof is cut off, so that he was forced to take
what terms he could get, viz. That the Townsmen should depart (though plundered
to a groat) with their lives; and himself with forty nine more * such as the
Duke of Guise should chose, should remain prisoners to be put to ransom.

This was the best news brought to Paris, and worst to London, for many years
before. It not only abated the Queens cheer, the remnant of Christmas, but her
mirth all the days of her life. Yet, might she thank her self for loosing this
Key of France, because hanging it by her side with so slender a string, there
being but five hundred Soldiers effectually in the Garrison, too few to manage
such a piece of importance.

The Lord Wentworth, the second of June following, was solemnly condemned for
Treason, though un-heard, as absent in France, which was not only against
Christian charity, but Roman Justice, Festus confessing it was not fashionable
amongst them, To deliver any man to die before he, which is Acts 25. 16.
accused, have the accusers face to face, and have license to answer for
himself concerning the crime laid against him.

It was well for this Lord that he was detained in France till his ransom was
paid, and Queen Mary dead, who otherwise probably had lost his life, if he had
had his liberty. But Queen Elizabeth coming to the Crown, he found the favor,
or rather had the Justice to be tried again, and was Camden's Eliz. Anno 1559.
acquitted by his Peers, finding it no treachery, cowardice or carelessness in
him, but in Sr. John Harlston and Sr. Ralph Chamberlain, the one Governor of
Rise-Bank, the other of Calis-Castle, for which they were both condemned to
die, though their judgment was remitted. This Lord was the only person I have
read of, who thus in a manner played Rubbers when his head lay at stake, and
having lost the fore, recovered the after-game. He died a very aged man 1590.

Seamen.
THOMAS CAVENDISH, of The substance of what follows is taken out of Mr.
Hackl^its voyages, the last part, page 803.
Trimley in this County Esquire. in pursuance of his generous inclination to make
foreign discoveries for the use and honor of his Nation, on his own Cost
victualled and furnished three Ships (the least of Fleets) as follows,

Tunn. 1 The Desire, Admiral of 120 2 The Content, Vice-Admi^al of 40 3 The
Hugh-Gallant, Rere-Admiral of 40

All three managed by 123 persons, with which he set sail from Plymouth the
21th. of July, 1586.

So prosperous their winds, that by the 26 of August they had gone nine hundred
and thirty leagues to the South of Africa. Then bending their course
South-West, January the 7th. they entered the mouth of the Magellan-straits;
Straits indeed, not only for the narrow passage, but many miseries of hunger
and cold, which Mariners must encounter therein. Here Mr. Cavendish named a
Town Port-famine, and may never distressed Seaman be necessitated to land
there. It seems the Spanjards had a design, so to fortify these Straits in
places of advantage, as to ingross the passage that none, save themselves,
should enter the Southern Sea. But God the promoter of the public good
destroyed their intended Monopoly, sending such a mortality amongst their Men,
that scarce five of five hundred did survive.

On the 24 of February they entered the South Sea, and frequently landed as they
saw occasion. Many their conflicts with the Natives, more with the Spanjards,
coming off Gainers in most, and Savers in all encounters, that alone at
Quintero excepted, April 1, 1587, when they lost twelve Men of account, which
was the cause that the June following they purposely sunk the Rere-Admiral, for
want of Men to manage her.

Amongst the many prizes he took in his passage, the St. Anne was the most
considerable, being the Spanish Admiral of the Southern-sea, of seven hundred
Tuns. However our Cavendish boarded her with his little Ship (a Chicken of the
game will adventure on a greater fowl, and leap where he cannot reach) and
mastered her though an hundred and ninety persons therein. There were in the
Ship an hundred and two and twenty thousand Pezos In English Money 4880^ pounds.
(each worth eight shillings) of gold, the rest of the lading being Silks,
Sattins, Musks and other rich Commodities. Mr. Cavendish his mercy after,
equaled his valor in the fight, landing the Spaniards on the Shore, and
leaving them plentiful provisions.

Surrounding the East Indies, and returning for England, the Ship called the
Content did not answer her name, whose Men took all occasions to be mutinous,
and stayed behind in a road with Stephen Hare their Master, and Mr. Cavendish
saw her not after. But he, who went forth with a Fleet, came home with a Ship,
and safely landed in Plymouth, Sept. 9, 1588. Amongst his Men three most
remarkable, Mr. John Way their Preacher; Mr. Thomas Fuller of Ipswich their
Pilote; and Mr. Francis Pretty of Eyke in this County, who wrote the whole
History of their Voyage.

Thus having circumnavigated the whole Earth, let his Ship no longer be termed
the Desire, but the Performance; He was the third Man, and second English Man,
of such universal undertakings.

Not so successeful his next and last Voyage, begun the 26th. of August, 1591,
when he set sail with a Fleet from Plymouth, and coming in the Magellan-straits
near a place by him formerly named Port-^esire, he was the November following,
casually severed from his Company, not seen or heard of a^tervvard. Pity, so
illustrious a life should have so obscure a death. But all things must be, as
Being it self will have them to be.

Physicians.
WILLIAM BUTLER was born at So am I informed by Mrs Crane in Cambridg; to
whose husband he left his Estate.
Ipswich in this County, where he had one only brother, who going beyond sea
turned Papist, for which cause this William was so offended with him, that he
left him none of his Estate. I observe this the rather, because this William
Butler was causlesly suspected for Popish inclinations. He was bred Fellow of
Clare-Hall in Cambridge, where he became the Aesculapius of our Age. He was the
first English man who quick' ned Galenical Physic with a touch of Paracelsus,
trading in Chemical Receipts with great success. His eye was excellent at the
instant discovery of a cadaverous face, on which he would not lavish any Art:
this made him at the first sight of sick Prince Henry, to get himself out of
sight. Knowing himself to be the Prince of Physicians, he would be observed
accordingly: Complements would prevail nothing with him, entreaties but little,
surly threatenings would do much, and a witty jeere (...) any thing. He was
better pleased with presents than money, loved what was pretty rather than what
was costly, and preferred rarities before riches. Neatness he neglected into
slovinlyness; and, accounting cuffs to be manacles, he may be said not to have
made himself ready for some seven years together. He made his humoursomnesse to
become him, wherein some of his Profession have rather aped than imitated him,
who had morositatem aequabilem, and kept the tenor of the same surliness to all
persons. He was a good Benefactor to Clare-Hall, and dying 1621, he was buried
in the Chancel of St. Mary's in Cambridge under a fair Monument. Mr. John
Crane, that expert Apothecary and his Executour, is since buried by him, and if
some eminent Surgeon was interred on his other side, I would say, that Physic
lay here in state with its two Pages attending it.

Writers.
HUMPHREY NECTON, was born (though Necton be in Northfolk) in this Ba^e cent.
4* ^um. 24.
County, and quitting a fair fortune from his Father, professed poverty and
became a Carmelite in Norwich.

Two Firstships met in this Man, for he Handselled the House-Convent, which
Philip Wat in of Cowgate, a prime Citizen, (and almost I could believe him
Mayor of the City) did after the death of his Wife in a fit of sorrow give with
his whole Estate to the Carmelites.

Secondly, He was the first Carmelite, who in Cambridge took the Degree of
Doctor in Divinity. ^orsome boggled much thereat as false Heraldry in Devotion,
to super-induce a Doctoral hood over a Friars Coul, till our Necton adventured
on it. For though Poverty might not affect Pride, yet Humility may admit of
Honor. He flourished under King Henry the Third, and Edward the First, at
Norwich, and was buried with great solemnity by those of his Order, Anno Dom.
1303.

JOHN HORMINGER was born of good Parents in this Bale de scrip. Brit. and Pits
aetat. 14 number. 450.
County, and became very accomplished in Learning. It happened that traveling
to Rome he came into the company of Italians (the admirers only of themselves,
and the Slighters-General of all other Nations,) vilifying England, as an
inconsiderable Country', whose Ground was as barren, as the people Barbarous.
Our Horminger, impatient to hear his Mother*land traduced, spoke in her
defense, and fluently Epitomized the commodities thereof. Returning home he
wrote a Book De Divitiis and Deliciis Angliae, of the Profit and Pleasure of
England; which had it come to my hand, O how advantageous had it been to my
present design! He flourished 1310.

THOMAS of ELY was born in this County. For though Cambridge-shire boasts of
Ely (so famous for the Cathedral) yet is there Monks-Ely in Suffolk, the Native
Town of this Thomas, who followed the footsteps of his Countryman Necton,
being a Carmelit^ (but in Ipswich) and afterward Doctor in the University of
Cambridge, aith my Bale cent. 4. number. 65.
Author, of Both Divinities.

But the same hand, which tieth, untieth this knot, giving us to understand
that thereby are meant Scholastical and Interpretative Divinity, seeming to
import them in that Age to have been distinct Faculties, till afterward
united, as the Civil and Common Law, in one profession.

Leaving his Native Land, he traveled over the seas with others of his Order,
to Bruges in Flanders, and there kept Lectures and Disputations, as one
Gobelike (a formidable Author) informs my Bale ut prius.
Informer, till his death about 1320.

RICHARD LANHAM was born at a Market Town well known for Clothing in this
County, and bred (when young) a Carmelite in Ipswich. He made it his only
request to the Trefect of his Convent, to have leave to study in Oxford, which
was granted him, and deservedly, employing his time so well there, that he
proceeded Doctor with public applause. Lelands Pencil paints him Pious and
Learned, but Bale comes with his sponge, and in effect deletes both, because
of his great Antipathy to the VVicklevites. However his Learning is beyond
contradiction, attested by the Books he left to Posterity. Much difference
about the manner and place of his death, some making him to decease in his Bed
at Polidor. Virgil.
Bristol, others to be beheaded in London with Sudbury Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Hales Master of St. (...) of Jerusalem) by the Rebellious Crew
of VVat Tyler, who being a Misogrammatist (if a good Greek word may be given to
so Barbarous a Rebel) hated every man that could write or read, and were the
more incensed against Lanham for his eminent Literature. He died Anno Dom. 1381.

JOHN KINYNGHAM was born in this Bale cent. 6. number. 4.
County, bred a Carmelite first in Ipswich, then in Oxford, being the 25th.
Prefect of his Order, in England and Ireland, Confessor to John of Gant and his
Lady. He was the first who encountered Wickliffe in the Schools at Oxford,
disputing of Philosophical Subtilties, and that with so much Ingenuity, that
Wickliffe, much taken with the Man's modesty, prayed Idem ibidem.
heartily for him that his Judgment might be convinced. But whether with so
good success, wherewith Peter Martyr besought God on the same account for
(...) See the life of Bernard Gilpin.
Gilpin, I know not. He died a very aged man Anno 1399, and was buried at York
far, I confess, from Ipswich his first fixation. But it was usual for Prefects
of Orders, to travel much in their Visitations.

JOHN LYDGATE was born in this County at a Camd. Brit. in Suffolk.
Village so called, bred a Benedictine Monk in St. Edmunds-Bury. After some
time spent in our English Universities, he traveled over France and Italy,
improving his time to his great accomplishment. Returning, he became Tutor to
many Noble-mens sons, and both in Prose and Poetry was the best Author of his
Age. If Chaucers Coin were of a greater weight for deeper learning, Lydgates
were of a more refined Standard for purer language, so that one might mistake
him for a modern Writer. But because none can so well describe him as himself,
take an Essay of his History of the life and death of Hector, page 316. and 317.
Verses, excusing himself, for deviating in his Writings from his Vocation.

I am a Monk by my profession,
In Berry, called John Lydgate by my name,
And wear a habit of perfection;
(Although my life agrees not with the same)
That meddle should with things spiritual,
As I must needs confess unto you all.
But seeing that I did herein proceed,
King Hen. 4.
At his command, whom I could not refuse,
I humbly do beseech all those that read
Or leisure have this story to peruse,
If any fault therein they find to be
Or error, that committed is by me;
That they will of their gentleness take pain,
The rather to correct and mend the same
Than rashly to condemn it with disdain,
For well I wot it is not without blame,
Because I know the Verse therein is wrong,
As being some too short and some too long.
For Chaucer that my Master was, and knew
What did belong to writing Verse and Prose,
Never stumbled at small faults, nor yet did view
With scornful eye the Works and Books of those
That in his time did write, nor yet would taunt
At any man, to fear him or to daunt.
He lived to be 60 years of age, and died about the year 1444, and was buried
in his own Convent with this Epitaph,

Mortuus saeclo, superis superstes
Hic (...) Lydgate tumulatus urna,
Qui fuit quondam celebris Britannae
Fama Poesis.
Dead in this World, living above the sky.
Entombed within this Urn does Lydgate lie
In former time famed for his Poetry
All over England.
As for the numerous and various Books, which he wrote of several subjects, De
script. Brit. centur. 8. number. 7.
Bale presents us with their perfect Catalogue.

JOHN BARNYNGHAM, born at a Village so named in this (...) cent. 8. number* 11.
County, was bred a Carmelite in Ipswich, and afterward proceeded Doctor in
Oxford, thence going to Serbon (the Cockpit of controversies) was there
admitted to the same Degree.

Trithemius takes notice of his parts and perfections, allowing him Festivum
ingenium and ad quodcunque deflexum, having a subtle and supple Wit, so that
he could be what he would be, a great Master of Defense in the Schools, both to
guard and hit. Bale says, he saw his Works in Cambridge fairly written in four
great Volumes. Weary with his long Race beyond the seas, he returned at last to
the place whence he started, and retiring to his Convent, whereof he was Ruler
at Ipswich, died there January 22, 1448.

JOHN of BURY was an Augustinian in Clare, Doctor of Divinity in Cambridge,
Provincial of his Order thorough England and Ireland, no mean Scholar and a
great opposer of Reginald Peakock and all other Wicklevites. He flourished Anno
1460.

THOMAS SCROOPE was born at Bradley in this Bale de scrip. Brit. cent. (...).
number. 53. J. Pitz. de (...). (...) page 681. anno 1491.
County, (but extracted from the Lord Scroop in Yorkshire) who rolled through
many professions.

1 He was a Benedictine, but found that Order too loose for his conscience. 2 A
Carmelite of Norwich as a stricter profession. 3 An Anchorite (the dungeon of
the prison of Carmelitisme) wherein he lived twenty years. 4 Dispensed with by
the Pope, he became Bishop of Drummore in Ireland. 5 Qui^ing his Bishopric, he
returned to his solitary life, yet so, that once a week he used to walk on his
bare ^eet and preach the Decalogue in the Villages round about.
He lived to be extremely aged, for about the year 1425 clothed in sackcloth
and girt with an iron chain, he used to cry out in the streets,

That new Jerusalem, the Bride of the Lamb, was shortly to come down from
Heaven* prepared for her Spouse* Revel. 21 and that with great joy he saw the
same in the spirit.

Thomas Waldensis the great Anti-Wicklevite, was much offended thereat;
protesting, it was a scandal and disgrace to the Church. However our Scroope
long outlived him, and died aged well nigh 100 years, Non sine sanctitatis
opinione, say both Bale and (...); And it is a wonder they meet in the same
opinion. He was buried at (...) in this County, Anno 1491.

Since the Reformation.
RICHARD SIRS was born in the edge of this County (yet so, that Essex seems
to have no share in him) nigh Sudbury and was bred a Fellow of St. John's
College in Cambridge. He proved afterward a most profitable Preacher to the
Honorable Society of Grais-Inn, whence he was chosen Master of St.
Katharine-hall in Cambridge. He found the House in a mean condition, the Wheel
of St. Katharine having stood still (not to say gone backwards) for some years
together, he left it replenished with Scholars, beautified with Buildings,
better endowed with Revenues. He was most eminent for that grace, which is most
worth, yet cost the least to keep it, ( viz.) Christian humility. Of all points
of Divinity he most frequently pressed that of Christ's Incarnation, and if the
Angels desired to pry into that Mystery, no wonder if this Angelical Man had a
longing to look therein. A Learned Divine imputed this good Doctors great
humility to his much meditating on that point of Christ's humiliation, when he
took our flesh upon him. If it be true what some hold in Physic, that Omne par
nutrit suum par, that the Vitals of our Body are most strengthened by feeding on
such Meat as are likest unto them, I see no absurdity to maintain, that Men's
souls improve most in those graces, whereon they have most constant meditation,
whereof this worthy Doctor was an eminent instance. He died in the 58th year of
his Age, Anno Domini 1631.

WILLIAM ALABLASTER was born at Hadley in this County, and by marriage was
Nephew to Doctor John Still, Bishop of Bath and Wells. He was bred Fellow in
Trinity College in Cambridge. A most rare Poet as any our Age or Nation has
produced: witness his Tragedy of Roxama admirably acted in that College, and
so pathetically; that a Gentlewoman present thereat (Reader I had it from an
Author whose credit it is sin with me to suspect) at the hearing of the last
words thereof, sequar, sequar so hideously pronounced, fell distracted and
never after fully recovered her senses.

He attended Chaplain in Calis-voyage on Robert Earl of Essex, where he was so
affected with the beauty of Popish Churches and the Venerable respect the
Papists gave to their Priests, that he staggered in his own Religion. There
wanted not those of the Romish party to force his fall, whom they found
reeling; working on his Ambition, who complained of the slownesse of preferment
in England, which followed not so fast as in due time to overtake his deserts;
so that soon after he turned a Papist.

Yet it was not long before he was out of love with that persuasion; so that,
whether because he could not comport with their discipline, who would have made
him (who conceived himself at the top) begin again (according to their course)
at the bottom of Humane Learning; Or, because (which I rather charitably
believe) that upon second thoughts he seriously disgusted the Romish
superstition, he returned into his own Country.

It was not long before he was made Prebendary of St. Paul's, and Rector of the
rich Parsonage of Tharfield in Hartford-shire. He was an excellent Hebrician
and well skilled in Cabalistical Learning, witness his Clerum in Cambridge
when he commenced Doctor in Divinity, taking for his Text the first words of
the first Book of Chronicles

Adam, Seth, Enos.

Besides the literal sense, as they are proper names of the Patriarchs, he
mined for a mystical meaning, Man is put or placed for pain and trouble.

How well this agrees with the Original belongs not to me to enquire; This I
know, it had been hard (if not impossible) for him to hold on the same rate,
and reduce the proper names in the Genealogies following to such an
Appellativeness, as should compose a continued sense. He died Anno Domini 163..

SAMUEL WARD was born at Haveril in this County, where his Father had long been
a painful Minister of the place, and I remember I have read this Epitaph
written on his Monument in the Chancel there, which I will endeavor to
translate;

Quo si quis scivit scitius,
Aut si quis docuit doctius,
At rarus vixit sanctius;
Et nullus tonuit fortius.
Grant some of knowledge greater store,
More Learned some in teaching;
Yet few in life did lighten more,
None thundered more in preaching.
He bred his son Samuel in Cambridge in Sidney College, whereof he became
Fellow, being an excellent Artist, Linguist, Divine and Preacher. He had a
sanctified fancy, dexterous in designing expressive pictures, representing much
matter in a little model.

From Cambridge he was preferred Minister in, or rather of Ipswich, having a
care over and a love from all the Parishes in that populous place. Indeed he
had a magnifick Virtue (as if he had learned it from the Lodestone, in whose
qualities he was so knowing) to attract peoples affections. Yet found he foes
as well as friends, who complained of him to the High Commission, where he met
with some molestation.

He had three Brethren Ministers, on the same token that some have said, that
these four put together, would not make up the abilities of their Father. Nor
were they themselves offended with this Hyperbole, to have the Branches
lessened, to greaten their Root. One of them, lately dead, was beneficed in
Essex, and following the counsel of the Poet,

Ridentem dicere verum,
Quis vetat?
What does forbid but one may smile,
And also tell the Truth the while?
has in a jesting way in some of his Books delivered much Smart-Truth of this
present Times. Mr. Samuel died 163..

JOHN BOISE, Born at Elmeseth in this County, being son of the Minister
thereof. He was bred first in Hadley-School, then in St. John's College in
Cambridge, and was deservedly chosen Fellow thereof. Here he (as a Volonteer)
read in his bed a Greek Lecture to such young Thomas (...) one of them; See the
narrative at the end of his Funeral Sermon.
Scholars, who preferred Antelucana studia before their own ease and ^est. He
was afterward of the Quorum in the translating of the Bible, and whilst St.
Chrysostom lives Mr. Boise shall not die, such his learned pains on him in the
edition of Sir Henry Savil. Being Parson of Boxworth in Cambridge-shire and
Prebendary of Ely, he made a quiet End about the beginning of our Warlike
disturbances.

Romish Exile Writers.
ROBERT SOUTHWEL was born in this County, as Pitseus affirms, who although
often mistaken in his locality, may be believed herein, as professing himself
familiarly acquainted with him at Rome. But the matter is not much, where he
was born, seeing, though cried up by men of his own Profession for his many
Books in Verse and Proof, he was reputed a dangerous enemy by the State, for
which he was imprisoned and executed, March the 3, 1595.

Benefactors to the Public.
ELIZABETH, Vincent in his corrections of Brooks his errors.
third daughter of Gilbert Earl of CLARE and wife to John Burgh Earl of Ulster
in Ireland, I dare not say was born at, but surely had her greatest Honor from
Clare in this County. Blame me not, Reader, if I be covetous on any account to
recover the mention of her Memory, who Anno 1343 founded Clare-Hall in
Cambridge, since augmented by many Benefactors.

Sir SIMON AIR, son of John Air, was born at Brandon in this County, bred in
London first an Upholster, then a Draper. In which Profession he profited, that
he was chosen Lord Mayor of the City 1445. On his own cost he built Leaden Hall
(for a Common Garner of Corn to the City) of squared Stow's Su^vey of London
page 163.
stone in form as it now shows, with a fair Chapel in the East side of the
Quadrant. Over the Porch of which he caused to be written, Dextra Domini
exaltavit me, The Lords right hand has exalted me. He is elsewhere styled
Ho^orandus and famosus Mercator. He left five thousand Marks, a prodigious sum
in that age, to charitable uses, so that if my sight mistake not (as I am
confident it does not) his bounty like 1 Sa^. 10. ^3
Saul stands higher than any others from the shoulders upwards. He departed
this life the 18th. of September, Anno Domini 1459. and is buried in the Church
of St. Mary Woolnoth in Lumbard-street, London.

THOMAS SPRING, commonly called the Rich Clothier, was I believe born, I am
sure lived and waxed Wealthy at Laneham in this County. He built the Carved
^eavers (...). Mon. page 7^7
Chapel of Wainscot, in the North-side of the Chancel, as also the Chapel at
the South Side of the Church. This Thomas Spring, senior, died Anno 1510, and
lies buried under a Monument in the Chapel of his own erection.

Since the Reformation.
WILLIAM COPPINGER born at Bucks-Hall in this County, where his Family
flourishes at this day in a good esteem. He was bred a Fish-monger in London,
so prospering in his Profession that he became Lord Mayor Anno 1512. He gave
the Stow's Survey of London Anno 1512.
half of his Estate (which was very great) to pious uses and relieving of the
poor.

His bounty minds me of the words of Zacheus to our Savior; Luke 19. 8.
Behold Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have taken any
thing from any man by false accusation, I restore him fourefold.

Demand not of me whether our Coppinger made such plentiful restitution, being
confident there was no cause thereof, seeing he never was one of the Publicans,
persons universally infamous for extortion* Otherwise I confess, that that
charity, which is not bottomed on Justice, is but built on a foundred
foundation. I am sorry to see this Gentleman's ancient Arms (the Epidemical
disease of that Age) subtracted (in point of Honor) by the addition of a
superfluous Bordure.

Sir WILLIAM CORDAL, Knight. Where ever he was born, he had a fair Estate S. N.
at Long-Melford in this County, and lies buried in that fair Church under a
decent Monument. We will translate his Epitaph, which will perfectly acquaint
us, with the great Offices he had, and good offices he did to posterity:

Hic Gulielmus habet requie^ Cordellus, avito
Stemmate qui clarus, clarior ingenio
Hic studiis primos consumpsit fortiter annos,
Mox and Causarum strenuus actor er at.
Tanta illi doctrina inerat, facundia tanta,
Ut Parlamenti publica Lingua foret.
Postea factus Eques, Reginae arcana Mariae
Consilia, and Patriae grande subibat opus.
Factus and est Custos Rotulorum, urgente senecta
In Christo moriens cepit ad astra viam.
Pauperibus largus victum vestemque ministrans,
Insuper Hospitii condidit ille domum.
Here William Cordal does in rest remain,
Great by his birth, but greater by his brain,
Plying his studies hard his youth throughout,
Of Causes he became a Pleader stout.
His learning deep such cloquence did vent,
He was chose Speaker of the Parliament.
Afterward Knight Q. Mary did him make,
And Counselor, State-work to undertake;
And Master of the Rolls, well worn with age
Dying in Christ heaven was his utmost stage
Diet and clothes to poor he gave at large,
And a fair At Melford aforesaid.
Almshouse founded on his charge.
He was made Master of the Rolls November 5th. the Fifth of Queen Mary,
continuing therein till the day of his death the J. Philpot in his Catal. of
the Masters of the Rolls.
23th of Queen Elizabeth.

Sir ROBERT HICHAM Knight, and Sergeant at Law, was born (if not at) near
Nacton in this County, and was very skilful in our Common Law. By (...)
practice he got a great Estate, and purchased the fair Manor of Framlingham of
the Earl of Suffolk. Herein he met with many difficulties ( knots which would
have made another man's Axe turn edge to hew them off) so that, had he not been
one of a sharp Wit, strong Brains, powerful Friends, plentiful Purse and
indefatigable Diligence, he had never cleared the Title thereof to him and his
heirs.

I am willing to believe that gratitude to God (who gave him to wade thorough
so many Encumbrances and land safely at last on the peaceable possession of his
Purchase) was the main motive inclining him to leave a great part of his Estate
to pious uses, and principally to Pembroke-Hall in Cambridge. He departed this
life a little before the beginning of our Civil Wars.

Memorable Persons.
JOHN CAVENDISH Esquire. was born at Cavendish in this County, bred at Court, a
Servant in ordinary attendance on King Richard the Second, when Wat Tyler
played Rex in London. It happened that Wat was woundly angry with Sir John
Newton Knight, ( SwordBearer to the King then in presence) for devouring his
distance, and not making his approaches mannerly enough unto him; Oh the pride
of a self-promoting Pesant! Much bussling a rising thereabout, Sir William
Walworth, Lord Mayor of London, arrested VVat and with his Dagger wounded him;
and being well stricken in years, wanted not valor but vigor to dispatch him.
He is seconded by John Cavendish standing by, who twice or thrice wounded him
mortally; my Speed in his Chron. page 607.
Author complaining, That his death was too worthy, from the hands of
honorable persons, for whom the Axe of the Hangman had been too good. I would
have said, the H^lter of the Hangman. But it matters not, by whom a Traitor be
killed, so he be killed.

Hereupon the Arms of London were augmented with a Dagger, and, to divide the
Honor equally betwixt them, if the Heaft belonged to Walworth, the Blade, or
point thereof at least, may be adjudged to Cavendish. Let me add that King
Richard himself showed much wisdom and courage in managing this matter, so
that in our Chronicles he appears wiser Youth than Man; as if he had spent
all the stock of his discretion in appeasing this tumult, which happened, Anno
Dom. 1381.

Sir THOMAS COOK, Knight. Sir WILLIAM CAPELL, Knight.
I present these pair of Knights in parallels, because I find many considerable
occurrences betwixt them in the course of their lives;

1 Both were natives of this County, born not far asunder. Sir Thomas at
L^venham, Sir William at Stoke-Neyland. 2 Both were bred in London, free of the
fame Company of Drapers, and were LordMayors of the City. 3 Both by Gods
blessing on their industry attained great Estates, and were Royal-Merchants
indeed. The later is reported by tradition (since by continuance consolidated
into Historical truth) that, after a large entertainment made for King Henry
the Seventh, he concluded all with a Fire, wherein he burnt many Bonds, in
which the King (a Borrower in the beginning of his Reign) stood obliged unto
him; (a sweet perfume (no doubt) to so thrifty a Prince) not to speak of his
expensive Frolic, when at another time he drank a dissolved Pearl (which cost
him many hundreds) in an health to the King. 4 Both met with many molestations,
Sir Thomas being arraigned for lending money (in the reign of King Edward the
Fourth) hardly escaped with his life (thank a good God, a See Judge Markham his
life in Nottingham-shire.
just Judge and a stout Jury) though griveously fined, and long imprisoned. As
for Sir William, Empson and Dudley fell with their bodies so heavy upon him,
that they squeased many thousand pounds out of his, into the Kings Coffers. 5
Both died peaceably in Age and Honor, leaving great Estates to their
Posterities. The Cooks flourishing lately at Giddy-Hall in Essex, in a
Worshipful, as the Capels at Hadham in Hartford-shire now in an Honorable
condition.
Nor must it be forgotten, that Elizabeth, daughter to Sir William Capel, was
married to William Powlet Marquess of Winchester, and Mildred, descended from
Sir Thomas Cook to William Cecil, Lord Burleigh, both their husbands being
successively Lord Treasurers of England, for above fifty years. Sir Thomas Cook
lies buried in the Church of Augustine^, London. Sir William Capel in the
South Side of the Parish Church of St. Bartholomews (in a Chapel of his own
addition) behind the Exchange, though the certain date of their deaths do not
appear.

Lord Mayors.
Name Father Place Company Time 1 John Michel John Michel Ekelingham
Stock-Fishmonger He was Mayor again 1436
1422. 2 Henry Barton Henry Barton Myldenhal Skinner 1428. 3 Roger Oteley Will.
Oteley Vfford Grocer 1434. 4 John Paddesley Simon Paddesley Bury St. Edmunds
Goldsmiths 1440. 5 Simon Air John Air Brandon Draper 1445. 6 William Gregory
Roger Gregory Myldenhal Skinner 1451. 7 Thomas Cook Robert Cook Lavenham Draper
1462. 8 Richard Gardener John Gardener Exning Mercer 1478. 9 William Capel John
Capel Stoke-Neyland Draper 1503. 10 William Coppinger Walter Coppinger Buckshal
Fish-monger 1512. 11 John Milborn John Milbourn Long-Melford Draper 1521. 12
Roger Martin Lawrence Martin Long-Melford Mercer 1567. 13 John Spencer Richard
Spencer Walding-Field Cloath-worker 1594. 14 Stephen Some Thomas Some Bradley
Grocer 1598.

Reader, this is one of the twelve pretermitted Shires, the Names of whose
Gentry were not returned into the Tower in the reign of King Henry the Sixth.

Sheriffs.
Know that this County and N^hfolk had both one Sheriff until the seventeenth
year of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, a List of whose names we formerly have
presented in the description of Northfolk.

(...) Place Arms. Reg. ELIZ Anno 17 Rob. Ashfield, ar. Netherhall Sable,
(...) Fesse ^ngrailed betwixt 3 flower de Luces, Arg. 18 Ioh. (...), arm.
Sable, a Fesse checkee Or and Azure betwixt 3 Naggs heads erazed, Argent. 19
Will. Spring, mil. Lanham Argent, on a Cheveron between 3 Martlets Gules, as
many Cinquefoiles of the Field. 20 Rob. Jermin, mil. Rushbrook Sable, a
Cressant betwixt (...) Mullets, Argent. 21 Philip. Parker, mil. Arwerton
Argent, a Lion passant Gules betwixt 2 Bars Setheron 3 Bez^nts, in Chief as
many Bucks heads ^abosed of the third. 22 Th. Bernardiston, m. Kedington Azure,
a Fesse Dauncette Ermin, betwixt 6 Crosle^s, Argent. 23 Nich. Bacon, mil.
Culfurth Gules, on a Chief (...) 2 Mullets, Sable. 24 Will. Drury, mil. Halsted
Argent, on a Chief Vert, the letter Tau betwixt 2 Mullets pierced Or. 25 Carol.
Framling* ham, miles. 26 Ioh. Gurdon, arm. Assington S. 3 Leopards heads
jessant flowers de Luce, Or. 27 Will. Clopton, a^. Sable, a Bend Argent betwixt
2 Cotises dauncette, Or. 28 Geo* Clopton, ar. ut prius 29 Franc. Jermy, arm.
Arg. a Lion ramp. gardant Gules. 30 Phil. Tilney, arm. Shelleigh Argent, a
Cheveron betwixt 3 Griffins-heads erazed, Gules. 31 Will. Walgrave, m. (...)
Party per Pale Argent, and Gu. 32 Tho. Rowse, arm. Sable, 2 Bars engrailed
Argent. 33 ^c. Garnish, arm. Ar. a chev. engr. Az. bet. 3 scallops Sab. 34
Lionel Talmarsh, (...). Helmingha^ Argent, Fretty Sable. 35 Rob. Forth, arm.
Or, 3 Buls-heads coupee Sable. 36 Tho. Cro^, arm. Saxmundha^ * Ar. on a fess
Gu. 3. Garbs Or, between 2 cheverons Az. charged with Escallops, Arg. 37 Will.
Spring, mil. ut prius 38 Tho. *Eden, arm. 39 Antho. Wingfield, Letheringham
Argent, a Bend Gules cotised able, 3 Wings of the first. 40 Hen. Warner, ar. 41
Antho. Felton, ar. Playford Gules, 2 Lions passant E^in, crowned Or. 42 Edw.
Bacon, arm. ut prius 43 Edwin. Withipol. Christ Church in Ipswich. Party per
pale Or and Gules, 3 Lions p^ssant regardant, armed Sable, langued Argent, a
Bordure interchanged. 44 Tho. Stutvile, (...). Dallam (...), Argent and Gules,
a Lion rampant Sable. Nicol. Bacon, miles ut prius Reg. JACO. Anno 1 (...).
Bacon, miles. ut prius 2 Edm. Bokemham, armiger, (...) Tho. Playters, arm.
(...) Bendy Wavy of six Argent and Azure. 4 Antho. Penning, ar. I^oho.
Wentworth, armiger. Sable, a Cheveron between 3 Leopa^ds heads, Or. 6 Lionel
Talmarsh, ar ut prius 7 Geo. le Hunt, miles. 8 Thom. Tilney, arm. ut prius 9
Calthorp Parker, mil. ut prius 10 Martin Stutevil. ut prius 11 Rob. Brook,
miles. AMP. 12 Rob. Barker, mil. Perfess embatt'led Or and Azure 3 martlets
counterchanged. 13 Tho. Clench, arm. 14 Lio. Ialmarsh, m. B. ut prius Azure, a
Cheveron Argent. 15 Edw. Lewkenor, m. 16 Io. Wentworth, m. ut prius 17 Hen.
North, miles. Azure, a Lion passant Or, between 3 Flower de (...), Ar. 18 Will.
Spring, miles. ut prius 19 Will. Wetle, arm. 20 Rob. Brook, arm. 21 N^.
Bernardiston, m ut prius 22 Galf. Pittman, arm. Reg. CAROL. 1 Samuel Aylemer,
arm. Cleydon Argent, a Cross Sable betwixt 4 Cornish (...) proper. 2 Joha.
Prescot, mil. S. a Chev. betwixt 3 (...), Ar. 3 Maur. Barrowe, ar. S. 2 swords
in Saltire Ar. (...) betw. 4 flowers de luce Or, within a Bordure compone of
the second and (...) 4 Brampt. Gourden, a. ut prius 5 Hen, Hookenham, a. 6
Johan, Acton, arm. 7 Rob. Crane, miles. Chyston Ar. a Fess betw. 3 Cross (...)
fitchee Gu. 8 Will. *Some, miles. 9 Edw. Bacon, miles. ut prius Gules, a
Cheveron betwixt 3 Mallets, Or. 10 Ioha. Barker, arm. ut prius 11 Ioha. Rouse,
miles. ut prius 12 Phil. Parker, mil. ut prius 13 Ed. Duke, armiger. Brampton
Az a Cheveron betwixt 3 (...) Argent membred Gules. 14 Ioh. Clench, arm. 15
Sim. Dewes, miles. Stow-Hall Or, 3 Quatersoil^s, Gules* 16 Will. Spring, arm.
ut prius 17 Will. (...), a^ 18 Maur. Barrowe, ar^ ut prius 19 20 Ioha. Cotton,
arm 21 22 Tho. Blosse, arm.

Queen ELIZABETH.
18 JOHN HIGHAM Arm.] I find this passage in the Ingenious Michael Lord
Montaigne in France, in his Essay * of Glory, Lib. (...). cap. 16.


I have no name which is sufficiently mine. Of two I have the one common to all
my Race, yea and also to others. There is a Family at Paris, and another at
Montpellier, called Montaigne, another in Brittanny, and one in Zantoigne,
surnamed de la Montaigne. The removing of one only syllable, may so confound
our Web, as I shall have a share in their Glory, and they perhaps a part of my
shame. And my Ancestors have heretofore been surnamed HEIGHAM, or HIQUEM a
surname which also belongs to an House well known in England.

Indeed the Highams (so * named from a Village in this County) were, (for I
suspect (...). (...). [in English] in Suffolk
them extinct) a right Ancient Family, and Sr Clement Heigham, (Ancestor to
this John our Sheriff,) who was a Potent Knight in his Generation, lies buried
under a fair Tomb in Thorning-Church in Northfolk.

20 ROBERT JERMIN, Miles] He was a Person of singular Piety, a bountiful
Benefactor to Emanuel-Colledge, and a man of great command in this County. He
was Father to Sir Tho. Jermin (Privy Concellour and Vice-Chamberlain to King
Charles the First) Grandfather to Thomas and Henry Jermin Esquires. The younger
of these being Lord Chamberlain to our present Queen Mary, and sharing in her
Majesty's sufferings during her long Exile in France, was by King Charles the
Second deservedly advanced Baron, and Earl of St. Albans.

23 NICHOLAS BACON Miles.] He was son to Sir Nicholas and elder Brother to Sir
Francis Bacon, both Lord Chancellors of England, and afterward by King James in
the ninth of his reign on the 22 of May created the first Baronet of England.

36 THOMAS CROFTS, Armiger.] He was a Man of Remark in his generation; Father
to Sir John Crofts, Grandfather to.... Crofts, who for his Fidelity to his
Sovereign during his suffering condition, and for several Embassies, worthily
performed to the King of Poland and other Princes, was created Baron Crofts by
King Charles the Second.

CHARLES the First.
15 SIMONDS DEWES Miles.] This Sir Simonds was Grandchild unto Adrian D^wes
descended of the Ancient Stem of Des Ewes Dynasts or Lords of the Dition of
Kessel in the Duchy of Gelderland: who came first thence, when that Province
was wasted with Civil War in the beginning of King Henry the Eighth.

He was bred in Cambridge as appeared by his printed speech (made in the long
Parliament) wherein he endeavored to prove it more Ancient than Oxford. His
Genious addicted him to the study of Antiquity. Preferring Rust before
Brightness, and more conforming his mind to the Garb of the former than mode
of the modern times. He was studious in Roman Coin to discriminate true ones
from such as were cast and counterfeit. He passed not for Price to procure a
choice piece, and was no less careful in conserving than curious in culling
many rare Records. He had plenty of precious Medals, out of which a methodical
Architect might contrive a fair Fabric for the benefit of posterity. His
Treasury afforded things as well new as old, on the token that he much admired
that the Ordinances and Orders of the late Long Parliament did in Bulks and
number exceed all the Statutes made since the Conquest. He was loving to
Learned Men to whom he desired to do all good offices, and died about the year
of our Lord 1653.

The Fare-wel.
To conclude our description of Suffolk, I wish that therein Grain of all kinds
may be had at so reasonable rates, that rich and poor may be contented
therewith. But if a Famine should happen here, let the poor not distrust Divine
providence, whereof their Grandfathers had so admirable a testimony 15.. When
in a general dearth all over England, plenty of Pease did grow on the Seashore
near Dunwi^h (never set or sown by humane industry) which being gathered in
full ripeness, much abated the high prices in the Markets, and preserved many
hundreds of hungry Families from famishing.

SURREY has Middlesex (divided by the Thames) on the North, Kent on the East,
Sussex on the South, ^ant and Bark-shires on the West. It may be allowed to be
a Square (besides its Angular expatiation in the South-west) of two and twenty
miles, and is not unproperly compared to a Cynamon-tree whose Bark is far
better than the Body thereof. For the skirts and borders bounding this Shire
are rich and fruitful, whilst the ground in the inward parts thereof is very
hungry and barren, though by reason of the clear Air and clean ways full of
many gentile habitations.

Natural Commodities.
Fullers-Earth.
The most and best of this kind in England (not to say Europe) is dug up
nigh Rygate in this County. It is worth 4 d. a Bushel at the Pit; 16 d. at the
Wharfe in London, 3 s. at Newbury, and Westward twice as dear. Double the use
thereof in making Cloth, to scour out stains, and to thicken it, or (to use
the Trades-mans term) to bring it to proof. Though the transporting thereof be
by Law forbidden, yet private profit so prepondereth the public, that Ships
ballasted therewith are sent over into Holland, where they have such Magazins
of this Earth, that they are ready (on their own rates) to furnish us
therewith, if there should be any occasion*.

And now we are mentioning of Earth, near Non-such is a Vein of Potters-Earth,
much commended in its kind, of which Crusibles are made for the melting of
Gold, and many other necessary Utensils.

Wall-Nuts.
As in this County, and in Cash-Haulton especially, there be excellent Trouts:
so are there plenty of the best Wall-nuts in the same place, as if Nature had
observed the Rule of Physic, Post Pisces Nuces. Some difficulty there is in
cracking the Name thereof, why Wall-Nuts; having no affinity with a Wall,
whose substantial trees need to borrow nothing thence for their support. Nor
are they so called, because walled with shells, which is common to all other
Nuts. The truth is, Gual or Wall to the old Dutch signifies strange or
exotic, (whence Welsh, that is Foreigners) these Nuts being no natives of
England or Europe, and probably first fetched from Persia, because called Nux
Persique in the French tongue.

Surely, some precious worth is in the Kernels thereof (though charged to be
somewhat obstructive and stopping of the stomach) because provident nature has
wrapped them in so many coverts; a thick green one (^alling off when ripe) an
hard yellowish, and a bitter blackish one. As for the timber of the
VVall-nut-tree, it may be termed an English Shittim-wood for the fineness,
smoothness, and durableness thereof, whereof the best Tables, with stocks of
Guns and other manufactures are made.

Box.
The best, which England affords, grows about Darking in this County, yet
short in goodness of what is imported out of Turkey. Though the smell and shade
thereof be accounted unwholesome; not only pretty toys for children, but useful
tools for men, and especially Mathematical Instruments are made thereof. But
it is generally used for Combs, as also by such as grave Pictures and Arms in
wood, as better because harder than Pear Tree, for that purpose. For mine own
part, let me speak it with thankfulness to two good Lords and Patrons, it has
not cost me so much in Wood and Timber of all kinds, for the last ten years, as
for Box for one twelve-moneth.

Manufactures.
Gardening.
I mean not such which is only for pleasure (whereof Surrey has more than a
share with other shires) to feast the sight and smell with flowers and walks,
whilst the rest of the body is famished, but such as is for profit, which some
seventy years since was first brought into this County, before which time great
deficiency thereof in England.

For we fetched most of our Ch^ries from Flanders, Apples from France, and
hardly had a Mess of Rath-Ripe pease but from Holland, which were dainties for
Ladies, they came so far and cost so dear. Since Gardening has crept out of
Holland to Sandwich in Kent and thence into this County, where though they have
given six pounds an Aker and upward, they have made their Rent, lived
comfortably and set many people on work.

Oh, the incredible profit by digging of Ground! For though it is confessed
that the Plough beats the Spade out of distance for speed (almost as much as
the Press beats the Pen) Yet what the spade wants in the Quantity of the
Ground, it manureth, It recompenceth with the plenty of the Fruit it yeildeth;
that, which is set, multiplying a hundred fold more than what is sown.

It Is incredible how many poor people in London live thereon, so that in some
seasons, Gardens feed more poor people than the Field. It may be hoped that in
process of time Anis-seeds, Cumin-seeds, Caraway-seeds, (yea Rice it self) with
other Garden VVare now brought from beyond the seas, may hereafter grow in our
Land, enough for it is use, especially if some ingenious Gentlemen would
encourage the Industrious Gardiners by letting Ground on reasonable rates unto
them*.

Tapestry.
Pass we from Gardening a kind of Tapestry in Earth, to Tapestry, a kind of
Gardening in Cloth. The making hereof was either unknown, or un-used in
England, till about the end of the reign of King James, when he gave two
thousand pounds to Sir Francis Crane, to build therewith an House at Morecleark
for that purpose. Here they only imitated Old Patterns, until they had procured
one Francis Klein a German to be their Designer.

This F. Klein was born at Rostock, but bred in the Court of the King of
Denmark at Coppenhagen. To improve his skill he traveled into Italy, and lived
at Venice, and became first known unto Sir Henry VVootton, who was the English
Lieger there. Indeed there is a stiff contest betwixt the Dutch and Italians
which should exceed in this Mystery, and therefore Klein endeavored to unite
their perfections. After his return to Denmark he was invited thence into
England by Prince Charles, a Virtuoso, Judicious, in all LiberalMechanical
Arts, which proceeded on due proportion. And though Klein chanced to come over
in his absence, (being then in Spain) yet King James gave order for his
entertainment allowing him liberal accommodations, and sent him back to the
King of Denmark with a Letter, which for the form thereof, I conceive not
unworthy to be inserted, trans-scribing it with my own hand, as follows, out
of a Copy compared with the Original,

Jacobus Dei Gratia magnae Britanniae, Franciae and Hiberniae Rex, fidei
Defensor, Serenissimo Principi ac Domino, Domino Christiano Quarto eadem gratia
Daniae, Norvegiae, Vandalorum and Gothorum Regi, Duci Slesuici, Holsatiae,
Stormariae, and Ditmarsiae, Comiti in Oldenburg and Delmenhorsh, Fratri,
Compatri, Consanguineo, and Affini nostro charissimo salutem and felicitatem
Serenissimus Princeps Frater, Compater, Consanguineus and Affinis charissimus.

CUm Franciscus Klein Pictor, qui litteras nostras fert, in animo habere
indicasset, (si Vestra modo Serenitate volente id fieret) filio nostro Principi
Walliae operam suam locare, accepimus benevole id a Vestra Serenitate fuisse
concessum, data non solum illi quamprimum videretur discedendi venia, verum
etiam sumptibus erogatis ad iter, quo nomine est quod Vestrae Serenitati
gratias agamus. Et nos quidem certiores facti, de illius in Britanniam jam
adventu, quanquam absente filio nostro, satis illi interim de rebus omnibus
prospeximus. Nunc vero negotiorum causa in Daniam reversurus, tenetur ex pacto
quam primum id commode poterit ad nos revenire; Quod ut ei per vestram
Serenitatem facere liceat peramanter rogamus. Vestra interea omnia, fortunas,
valetudinem, Imperium Deo commendantes Optimo Maximo.

Datum e Regia nostra Albaula die Julii 8 Anno 1623. Serenitatis Vestrae Frater
Amantissimus JACOBUS Rex.

I perceive that Princes, when writing to Princes subscribe their names, and
generally superscribe them to subjects. But the K. of Denmark detained him all
that Summer, (none willingly part with a Jewel,) to perfect a piece which he
had begun for him before. This ended, then over he comes, and settled with his
Family in London, where he received a Gratuity of an hundred pounds per annum,
well paid him, until the beginning of our Civil Wars. And now Fervet opus of
Tapestry at More-clark, his designing being the soul, as the working is the
body of that Mystery.

Buildings.
There are two most beautiful Palaces in this County, both built by Kings.
First Richmond by King Henry the Seventh, most pleasantly seated on the Thames.
A building much beholding to Mr. Speed, representing it in his Map of this
County. Otherwise (being now plucked down) the form and fashion thereof had for
the future been forgotten.

Nonesuch the other, built by King Henry the Eighth, whereof our English
Camden in the description of Surrey.
Antiquary has given such large commendations. Indeed what Sebastianus
Cerlius, most skilful in building, spoke of the Pantheon at Rome, may be
applied to this Pile, that it is Ultimum ex^mplar consummatae Architecturae.

But grant it a Non-such for building (on which account this and Windsor Castle
are only taken notice of in the description of Sebastian Braune) yet in point
of clean and neat situation, it has Some-such, not to say some Above-such.
Witness Wimbleton in this County, a daring Structure, built by Sir Thomas
Cecil, in eighty eight, when the Spanjards invaded, and (blessed be God) were
conquered by our Nation.

Medicinal Waters.
Ebsham.
They were found on this occasion some two and forty years since (which
falls out to be 1618.) One Henry Wicker in a dry Summer and great want of
water for Cattle, discovered in the Concave of a Horse or Neats-footing, some
water standing. His suspicion that it was the stale of some Beast, was quickly
confuted by the clearness thereof. With his Pad-staffe he did dig a square hole
about it, and so departed.

Returning the next day, with some difficulty he recovered the same place, (as
not sufficiently particularized to his memory in so wide a Common) and found
the hole, he had made, filled and running over with most clear water. Yet
Cattle (though tempted with thirst) would not drink thereof, as having a
Mineral taste therein.

It is resolved that it runs through some veins of Alume, and at first was
only used outwardly for the healing of Sores. Indeed simple wounds have been
soundly and suddenly cured therewith, which is imputed to the Abstersiveness of
this Water, keeping a wound clean, till the Balsome of Nature does recover it.
Since it has been inwardly taken, and (if the Inhabitants may be believed)
diseases have here met with their Cure, though they came from contrary causes.
Their convenient distance from London adds to the Reputation of these Waters,
and no wonder if Citizens coming thither, from the worst of smoakes into the
best of Airs, find in th^selves a perfective alteration.

The Wonders.
There is a River in this County which at a place called the Swallow, sinketh
unto the Earth and surgeth again some two miles off nigh Letherhead, so that it
runs (not in an entire stream but) as it can find and force its own passage
the interjacent distance under the Earth. I listen not to the Country people
telling it was experimented by a Goose which was put in, and came out again
with life (though without feathers;) But hearken seriously to those who
judiciously impute the sudden sub^dency of the Earth in the interstice
aforesaid to some underground hollowness made by that water in the passage
thereof. This River is more properly termed Mole, then that in Spain is on the
like occasion called Anas, that is, a Ducke or Drake. For Moles (as our
Surrey-Riv*er) work under ground, whilst Ducks (which Anas does not) dive under
water. So that the River Alpheus may more properly be entitled Anas, if it be
true what is Virgil. ^. 3.
reported thereof; that, springing in Peloponesus, it runs under the Sea and
rises up again in Sicily.

Nor may we forget a Vault (wherein the finest sand I ever saw) nigh Rygate,
capable conveniently to receive five hundred Men, which subterranean-Castle in
ancient time was the Receptacle of some great Person, having several Rooms
therein. If it be merely Natural i^ does curiously imitate Art* if purely
Artificial, it does most lively simulate Nature.

Proverbs.
The vale of Holms-dale, Never won, ne ever shall.

This proverbial Ryme has one part of History, the other, of Prophecy therein;
and if on examination, we find the first to be true, we may believe the other
the better.

Holms-dale lies partly in this Shire, and partly in Kent. And indeed has
been happy in this respect, that several battles being fought therein and
thereabouts, betwixt our Saxon Kings (the true owners of the Land) and the
Danes, the former proved victorious. Thus was not Holms-dale won pro una and
altera and tertia vice.

But I.hope I may humbly mind the men of Holms-dale that when King William the
Conqueror had vanquished King Harold at Battle in Sussex, he marched with his
Army directly to London through the very middle and bowels of Holms-dale, *and
was it not Won at that time? However, if this Vale has not been Won hitherto,
I wish and hope it never may be hereafter, by a Forreign-Nation invading it.

Princes.
HENRY eldest son of K. Henry the Eighth and Queen Kathari^e Dowager, was born
at Speeds Chro. page 789.
Richmond in this County, Anno Domini 1509. on the first of January. As his
Parents were right glad for this Newyears-gift of Heavens sending, so the
greater their grief when within two months he was taken away again. The
untimely death of this Prince, as also of another son by the same Queen (which
lived not to be Christ'ned) was alleged by King Henry the Eighth in the
public Court held in Black-Friars, London, about his Divorce; as a punishment
of God upon him, for begetting them on the Body of his Brothers wife. This
short-lived Prince Henry was buried in Westminster the twenty-third of February.

HENRY of OATLANDS, (so I have heard him called in his Cradle) fourth and
youngest son of King Charles the First and Queen Mary, was born at Oatlands in
this County Anno 1640. This I thought fit to observe both because I find St.
James's by some mistaken for the place of his Birth, and because that house
wherein he was born is buried in effect, I mean taken down to the ground. He
was commonly called Duke of Gloucester by a Court Prolepsis (from the King,
manifesting his intentions in due time to make him so) before any Solemn
Creation. Greatness being his only guilt, that he was the son of a good King
(which many men would wish, and no child could help.)

The then present Power, more of coveteousness than kindness (unwilling to
maintain him either like or unlike the son of his Father) permitted him to
depart the Land, with scarce tolerable Accommodations and the promise of a
[never-performed] Pension; for his future Support. A passage, I meet with in my
worthy Dr. Hylyn in his life and reign of King (...) page 1^7.
Friend concerning this Duke, deserves to be written in letters of Gold.

In the year 1654, almost as soon as his two Elder Brethren had removed
themselves into Flanders, he found a strong practice in some of the Queens
Court to seduce him to the Church of Rome, whose temptations he resisted beyond
his years, and thereupon was sent for by them into Flanders.

He had a great appetite to Learning and a quick digestion, able to take as
much as his Tutors could teach him. He fluently could speak many, understood
more Modern Tongues. He was able to express himself in matters of importance
presently, properly, solidly, to the admiration of such who trebled his Age.
Judicious his Curiosity to inquire into Navigation, and other Mathematical
Mysteries. His Courtesy set a luster on all, and commanded men's Affections to
love him.

His life may be said to have been All in the night of affliction, rising by
his Birth a little before the setting of his Fathers, and setting by his Death
a little after the rising of his Brothers peaceable Reign. It seems Providence,
to prevent Excess, thought fit to temper the general mirth of England with some
mourning. With his Namesake Prince Henry he completed not twenty years, and
what was said of the Sir Francis Nethersole in his Fu^, Orat. on Prince Henry,
page 16.
Uncle, was as true of the Nephew: Fatuos a morte defendit ipsa insulsitas; si
cui plus caeteris aliquantulum salis insit (quod miremini) statim putrescit.

He deceased at Whitehall on Thursday the 13th. of September 1660, and was
buried (though privately) solemnly, Veris and spirantibus lacrymis, in the
Chapel of King Henry the Seventh.

Martyrs.
I meet with few (if any) in this County, being part of the Diocese of Politic
Gardener. The Fable is well known of an Ape, which having a mind to a Chest-nut
lying in the fire, made the foot of a Spannel to be his tongs, by the proxy
whereof he got out the Nut for himself. Such the subtlety of Gardener, who
minding to murder any poor Protestant, and willing to save himself from the
scorching of general hatred, would put such a person into the fire by the hand
of Bonner, by whom he was sent for up to London and there destroyed.

Confessors.
ELEANOR COBHAM daughter to the Lord Cobham of Sterborough-Castle in this
County, was afterward married unto Humphrey Plantaginet, Duke of Gloucester.
This is she who, when alive, was so persecuted for being a Wickliffi^e and for
many heinous crimes charged upon her. And since her memory hangs still on the
file betwixt Confessor and Malefactor. But I believe that the voluminous pains
of Mr. Fox in vindicating her innocence against the Cavils of Alane Cope and
others, have so satisfied all indifferent people that they will not grudg her
position under this Title. Her troubles happened under King Henry the Sixth,
Anno Domini 14...

Prelates.
NICHOLAS of FERNHAM, or, de Fileceto, was born at Fernham in this County, and
bred a Physician in Oxford. Now our Nation esteems Physicians, little
Physic, little worth, except far fetched from foreign parts. Wherefore this
Nicholas to acquire more skill and repute to himself, traveled beyond the
Seas. First he fixed at Paris, and there gained great esteem* ^. Paris in anno
1. 29.
accounted Famosus Anglicus. Here he continued until that ^niversity was in
effect dissolved, thorough the discords betwixt the Clergy and the Citizens.
Hence he removed, and for some years lived in Bononia. Returning home his fame
was so great, that he became Bale de script. B^it. page 293.
Physician to King Henry the Third. The Vivacity and health of this Patient
(who reigned longer than most men live) was an effect of his care. Great were
the gi^ts the King conferred upon him, and at last made him Bishop of Chester.
Wonder not, that a Physician should prove a Prelate, seeing this Fernham was a
general Scholar. Besides, since the Reformation, in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth, we had J. Coldwel, Doctor of Physic, a Bishop of Sarum. After the
Resignation of Chester he accepted of the Bishopric of Durham. This also he
surrendered, (after he had sitten nine years in that See) reserving only three
Isackson's Chron.
Manors for his maintenance. He wrote many Books, much esteemed in that Age,
of the practice in Bale ut sup.
Thysick and use of Herbs, and died in a private life 1257.

WALTER de MERTON was born at Merton in this County, and in the reign of King
Henry the Third, when Chancellors were chequered in and out, three times he
discharged that Office.

1 Anno 1260 placed in by the King, displaced by the Barons, to make room for
Nicholas of Ely. 2 Anno 1261. when the King (counting it no Equity or
Conscience, that his Lords should obtrude a Chancellor on him) restored him to
his place, continuing therein some three years. 3 Anno 1273. when he was
replaced in that Office for a short time.
He was also preferred Bishop of Rochester, that a rich Prelate might maintain
a poor Bishopric. He founded Merton-Colledge in Oxford, which has produced
more famous Schoolmen, than all England (I had almost said Europe) besides. He
died in the year 1277, in the fifth of King Edward the First.

THOMAS CRANLEY was in all probability born at, and named from Cranley (in
Blackheath Hundred) in this County. It confirms the conjecture, because I can
not find any other Village so named in all England. Bred he was in Oxford, and
became the first Warden of New New-Coll. Register anno 1380.
College, thence preferred Archbishop of Dublin in Ireland. Thither he went
over 1398, accompanying Thomas Holland Duke of Surrey and Lieutenant of
Ireland, and in that Kingdom our Cranley was made by King Henry the Fourth
Chancellor and by King Henry the Fifth Chief Justice thereof. It seems, he
finding the Irish possessed with a rebellious humor, bemoaned himself to the
King in a terse Poem of 106 Verses, which Leland perused with much pleasure and
delight. Were he but half so good, as some make him, he was to be admired. Such
a Case, and such a Jewel, such a presence and a Prelate clear in Complexion,
proper in Stature, bountiful in Housekeeping and House-repairing, a great
Clerk, deep Divine, and excellent Preacher. Thus far we have gone along very
willingly with our ^. Marleburgensis of the W^iters of I^eland.
Author, but now leave him to go alone by himself, unwilling to follow him any
farther for fear of a tang of Blasphemy, when bespeaking him, Thou art fairer
than the children of men, full of grace are thy lips, etc.

Anno 1417 he returned into England being fourscore years old, sickned and died
at Faringdon, and lies buried in New-Colledge Chapel, and not in Dublin, as
I. Bale and J. Pit^.
some have related.

NICHOLAS WEST was born at Mr. Hatchers Manuscript of the Fellows of Kings C^ll.
Putney in this County, bred first at Eaton, then at Kings-Colledge in
Cambridge, where (when a youth) he was a Rakel in grain. For, something
crossing him in the College, he could find no other way to work his Revenge
than by secret setting on fire the Masters lodgings, part whereof he burnt to
the ground. Immediately after this Incendiary (and was it not high time for
him?) left the College, and this little Heros^ratus lived for a time in the
Country, debauched enough for his conversation.

But they go far who turn not again. And in him the Proverb was verified,
Naughty Boys sometimes make good Men, he seasonably retrenched his wildness,
turned hard Student, became an eminent Scholar and most able Statesman, and
after smaller promotions was at last made Bishop of Ely, and often employed in
foreign Embassies. And now, has it been possible, he would have quenched the
fire he kindled in the College with his own tears, and in expression of his
penitence became a worthy Benefactor to the house, and rebuilt the masters
Lodgings firm and fair from the ground. No Bishop of England was better
attended with Menial Servants, or kept a more bountiful house, which made his
death so much lamented, Anno Dom. 1533.

Since the Reformation.
JOHN PARK^URST was born at Bale de scr^. Brit. and ^dwin in the Bi^hops (...)
No. which.
Gilford in this County, bred first in Magdalen then in Merton-Colledge in
Oxford. Here it was no small part of praise, that he was Tutor, yea Mecenas, to
John Jewel. After his discontinuance returning to Oxford, it was no small
comfort unto him to hear his Pupil read his Learned humanity-Lectures to the
Somato Christians, (Reader I coin not the word my self, but have took it in
Payment from a good D^. (...) in the (...) li^e of Jewe^ pa. 26.
hand) that is, to those of Corpus Chris^i College, to which house then J^wel
was removed. Hereupon Mr. Parkhurst made this Distich;

Olim discipulus mihi chare Juelle, fuisti
Nunc ero discipulus te renuente tuus.
Dear Jewel, Scholar once thou wast to me,
Now against thy will I Scholar turn to thee.
Indeed he was as good a Poet as any in that Age, and delighted to be an
AntiEpigrammatist to John See Fox his Acts and mon. page 1471.
White Bishop of Winchester, whom in my opinion he far surpassed both in
Phrase and fancy.

Mr. Parkhurst, when leaving Oxford, was presented Parson, shall I say, or
Bishop of Cleve in Gloucestershire; as which may seem rather a Diocese than a
Parish for the rich Revenue thereof. But let none envy Beneficium opimum
beneficiario optimo, A good living to an incumbent who will do good therewith.
He laid himself out in works of Charity and Hospitality. He used to examine the
Dr. Humphry in the Latin life of Jewel page 30.
Pockets of such Oxford Scholars as repaired unto him, and always recruited
them with necessaries, so that such who came to him with heavy hearts and light
purses, departed from him with light hearts and heavy purses.

But see a sudden alteration. King Edward the Sixth dies, and then he, who
formerly entertained others, had not a house to hide himself in. Parkhurst is
forced to post speedily and secretly beyond the Seas, where he remained all the
reign of Queen Mary, and providing for his return in the First of Queen
Elizabeth, was robbed of that little he had, by some Searchers appointed for
that purpose. Were not these Thieves themselves robbed, I mean of their
expectation, who hoped to enrich themselves by Pillaging an Exile and a Poet?
It grieved him most of all that he lost the fair Idem page 99.
Copy of his Epigrams, though afterward with much ado he recovered them from
his foul papers. These at last he put in print Et juvenilem (...) senex edidit,
without any trespass on his gravity, such his Poems being so witty that a young
man, so harmless that an old man need not be of them ashamed.

Being returned into England he was by Queen Elizabeth preferred to the
Bishopric of Norwich, and was consecrated B. Godwin in his Bishops of Norwich.
Sept. the 1, 1560. 14 years he sat in that See, and died 1574.

THOMAS RAVIS was born of worthy Parentage at So expressed in his Epitaph on
his monument in St. Paul's.
Maulden in this County, bred in Christ-Church in Oxford, whereof he was Dean,
and of which University he was twice Vice Chancellor. Afterward, when many
suitors greedily sought the Bishopric of Gloucester then vacant, the Lords of
the Council *requested Doct. Ravis to accept thereof.

As he was not very willing to go ^hither, so (after his three years abode
there) those of Gloucester were unwilling he should go thence, who in so short a
time had gained the good liking of all sorts, that some who could scant brook
the name of Bishop were Sir J. Harrington in his Additional supply to B.
Godwins Catalogue of Bishop^ pa. 32.
content to give (or rather to pay) him a good Report.

Anno 1607 he was removed to London, and there B. Godwin in his Bishops of
London.
died on the 14th. of December 1609. and lies buried under a fair Tomb in the
wall at the upper end of the North-part of his Cathedral.

ROBERT ABBOT D. D. was born at Guilford in this County, bred in (...) College
in Oxford, whereof he became Principal, and Kings Professor of Divinity in that
University. What is said of the French, so graceful is their Garb, that they
make any kind of Clothes become themselves, so general was his Learning, he
made any liberal employment beseem him, Reading, VVriting, Preaching, Opposing,
Answering, and Moderating, who could dis-intangle Truth though complicated with
errors on all sides. He so routed the reasons of Bellarmin, the Romish
Champion, that he never could rally them again. Yet Preferment (which is
ordered in Heaven) came down very slowly on this Doctor, whereof several
Reasons are assigned,

1 His Humility affected no high Promotion. 2 His Foes traduced him for a
Puritan, who indeed was a right godly Man and cordiat to the Discipline, as
Doctrine of the Church of England. 3 His Friends were loath to adorn the Church
with the spoil of the University and mar a Professor to make a Bishop.
However preferment at last found him out, when he was consecrated B. of
Salisbury, December. 3. 1615. Herein he equaled the felicity of Suffridus B. of
Chichester, that being himself a Bishop he saw his brother George at the same
time Archbishop of Canterbury. Of these two, George was the more plausible
Preacher, Robert the greater Scholar; George the abler Statesman; Robert the
deeper Divine; Gravity did frown in George and smile in Robert.

But alas! he was hardly warm in his S^e, before cold in his Coffin, being one
of the ^ive Bishops, which Salisbury saw in six years. His death happened Anno
1617.

GEORGE ABBOT was born at Guilford in this County, being one of that happy
Ternion of Brothers, whereof two eminent Prelates, the third, Lord Mayor of
London. He was bred in Oxford, wherein he became Head of University-Colledge; a
pious man, and most excellent Preacher as his Lectures on Jonah do declare.

He did first creep, then run, then fly into preferment, or rather preferment
did fly upon him without his expectation. He was never incumbent on any Living
with cure of souls, but was mounted from a Lecturer to a Dignitary, so that he
knew well what belonged to the stipend and benevolence of the one, and the
dividend of the other, but was utterly unacquainted with the taking of Tithes,
with the many troubles attending it, together with the causeless molestations
which Persons Presented meet with in their respective Parishes. And because it
is hard for one to have a Fellow-suffering of that, whereof he never had a
suffering, this (say some) was the cause that he was so harsh to Ministers when
brought before him.

Being Chaplain to the Earl of Dunbar then Omni-prevalent with King James, he
was unexpectedly preferred Archbishop of Canterbury, being of a more fatherly
presence than those who might almost have been his Fathers for age in the
Church of England. I find two things much charged on his memory: First, that in
his house he respected his Secretary above his Chaplains, and out of it always
honored Cloaks above Cassocks, Lay above Clergymen. Secondly, that he
connived at the spreading of nonconformity, in so much that I read in a modern
Author,

Had Bishop The Observator rescued, page 272.
Laud succeeded Bancroft and the project of Conformity been followed without
interruption, there is little question to be made, but that our Jerusalem ( by
this time) might have been a City at unity in it self.

Yet are there some of Archbishop Abbot his relations, who (as I am informed)
will undertake to defend him, that he was in no degree guilty of these crimes
laid to his charge.

This Archbishop was much humbled with a casual homicide of a keeper of the
Lord Zouch's in Bramzel-Park, though soon after he was solemnly quitted from
any irregularity thereby.

In the reign of King Charles he was sequestered from his Jurisdiction; say
some, on the old account of that homicide, though others say, for refusing to
License a Sermon of Dr. Sibthorps. Yet there is not an Express of either in the
Instrument of Sequestration, the Commission only saying in the general, That
the said Archbishop could not at that present in his own person, attend those
services, which were otherwise proper for his cognizance and Jurisdiction.

For my own part I have cause to believe that as Vulnus semel sanatum novo
vulnere recrudescit, so his former obnoxiousness for that casualty was renewed
on the occasion of his refusal to License that Sermon with some other of his
Court-un-compliances. This Archbishop died Anno Dom. 1633. having erected a
large Hospital with liberal maintenance at Guildford the place of his nativity.

RICHARD CORBET D. D. was born at Ewel in this County, and from a Student in,
became Dean of, Christ-Church, then Bishop of Oxford. An high Wit, and most
excellent Poet, of a courteous carriage and no destructive nature to any who
offended him, counting himself plentifully repaired with a jest upon him. He
afterward was advanced Bishop of Norwich, where he died Anno Dom. 1635.

Statesmen.
THOMAS CROMWELL was born at Putney in this County, of whom I have given measure
pressed down and running over in my Church History.

WILLIAM HOWARD, son to Thomas Howard, second of that Surname, Duke of
Nor^hfolk, was by Queen Mary created Baron of Effingham in this County, and by
her made Lord Admiral of England, which place he discharged with credit. I
find, he was one of the first Hackluyt in his Sea-voyages, in his Epistle
Dedicatory.
Favorers and Furtherers with his purse and countenance of the strange and
wonderful discovery of Russia. He died Anno Domini. 154..

CHARLES HOWARD, son to the Lord William aforesaid, succeeded him (though not
immediately) in the Admiralty. An hearty Gentleman, and cordial to his
Sovereign, of a most proper person, one reason why Queen Elizabeth (who though
she did not value a Jewel by, valued it the more for, a fair Case) reflected so
much upon him. The first evidence he gave of his prowes was, Id^m ut prius.
when the Emperors sister the Spouse of Spain with a Fleer of 130 Sails,
stoutly and proudly passed the narrow Seas, his Lordship accompanied with ten
ships only of Her Majesty's Navy Royal environed their Fleet in a most strange
and warlike sort, enforced them to stoop gallant, and to vail their Bonnets for
the Queen of England.

His service in the eighty eighth is notoriously known, when at the first news
of the Spaniards approach, he towed at a cable with his Camd. Eliz. in 88.
own hands to draw out the harbourbound-ships into the Sea. I dare boldly say,
he drew more though not by his person by his presence and example, than any ten
in the place. True it is, he was no deep Seaman (not to be expected from one
of his Extraction) but had skill enough to know those who had more skill than
himself, and to follow their instructions, and would not sterve the Queens
service by feeding his own sturdy wilfulness, but was ruled by the experienced
in Sea-matters, the Queen having a Navy of Oak, and an Admiral of Osier.

His last eminent service was, when he was Commander of the Sea-(as Essex of
the Land-) forces at the taking of Cadiz, for which he was made Earl of
Nottingham the last of the Queens creation.

His place was of great profit (Prizes being so frequent in that age) though
great his necessary, and vast his voluntary expenses, keeping (as I have read)
seven standing Houses at the same time, at London, Rigate, Effingham,
Blechenley, etc. so that the wonder is not great if he died not very wealthy.

He lived to be very aged, who wrote Man (if not married) in the first of Q.
Elizabeth, being an invited guest at the solemn Consecration of Matthew Parker
at Lambeth, and many years after by his testimony Mason de Minist^rio Anglicano.
confuted those lewd and loud lies, which the Papists tell of the Naggs-head in
Cheap Side. He resigned his Admiralty in the reign of King James, to the Duke
of Buckingham, and died toward the later end of the reign of the King
aforesaid.

Seamen.
Sir ROBERT DUDLEY Knight, son to Robert Dudley Earl of Leicester by Douglas
Shefeld (whether his Mistress or Wife, God knows, many men being inclinable
charitably to believe the later) was born at Mr* Dugdale in his Illustrations
of Warwickshire, title Kenelworth-Castle*
Shene in this County, and bred by his mother (out of his Fathers reach) at
Offington in Sussex. He afterward became a most complete Gentleman in all
suitable accomplishments, endeavoring in the reign of King James to prove his
legitimacy, and meeting with much opposition from the Court in distaste he left
his Land, and went over into Italy. But Worth is ever at home and carries its
own welcome along with it. He became a Favorite to the Duke of Florence, who
highly reflected on his Abilities, and used his directions in all his
Buildings. At this time Ligorn from a Child started a Man without ever being a
Youth, and of a small Town grew a great City on a sudden, and is much beholding
to this Sir Robert for its fairness and firmness as chief contriver of both.

But by this time his Adversaries in England had procured him to be called home
by a special Privy Seal which he refused to obey, and thereupon all his Lands
in England was seized on by the King, by the Statute of Fugitives. These his
losses doubled the love of the Duke of Florence unto him. And indeed Sir Robert
was a much meriting person on many accounts, being an

Excellent 1 Mathematician, especially for the practical part thereof in
Architecture. 2 Phisician, his Catholicon at this day finding good esteem
amongst those of that Faculty. 3 Navigator, especially in the Western Seas.

Indeed long before his leaving of England whilst as yet he was Rectus in
Curia, well esteemed in Queen Elizabeth's Court, he sailed with three small
Ships to the Isle of Trinedad, in which Voyage he sunk and took Hack^yl's
voyages, second Part, page 574.
nine Spanish ships, whereof one an Armada of 600 Tunn.

It must not be forgotten how he was so acceptable to Ferdinand the Second
Emperor of Germany, that by his Letters Patents bearing date at Vienna, March
the 9, 1620, he conferred on him and his Heirs the Title of a Duke of the
Sacred Empire. Understand it a Title at large (as that of Count Arundels)
without the Assignation of any proper place unto him. How long he survived this
Honor it is to me unknown.

Writers.
NICHOLAS OCKHAM was bred a Franciscan in Oxford, and became the eighteen^h
public Lecturer of his Convent in that University. He is highly praised by the
Writers of his own Order for his Learning, whom I do believe, notwithstanding
Bale De sc^ipt. Brit. ce^ur. 5. number. 17.
writes so b^tterly against him. He flourished Anno 1320.

WILLIAM OCKHAM was born in this Camd. Brit. in this County.
County, in a Village so called of Oaks; and indeed our William was all Heart
of Oak, as soon will appear.

He was first bred under John Scotus, and afterward served him as Aristotle
did his Master Plato, disproving his Principles, and first setting on foot a
new sort of Sophistry. Then it was hard to hear any thing in the Schools for
the high railing betwixt the

REALS, headed by John Duns Scotus.

NOMINALS fighting under their General Ockham.

Neither of them conducing much to the advance of Religion.

Our Ockham flushed with success against John Scotus, undertook another John of
higher Power and Place, even Pope John the three-and-twentieth, and gave a
mortal wound to his Temporal Power over Princes. He got a good Guardian, viz.
Lewis of Bavaria the Emperor, whose Court was his Sanctuary, so that we may
call him a School-man-Courtier. But he was excommunicated by the Pope, and the
Masters of Paris condemned him for a Heretic, and burnt his Books. This I
conceive was the cause, why Luther was so versed in his Works, which he had at
his fingers ends, being the sole Schoolman in his Library, whom he esteemed.

However, at last the Pope took Wit in his Anger finding it no policy to enrage
so sharp a Pen, and though I find no Recantation or public Submission of
Ockam, yet he was restored to his state, and the repute of an Acute School-man.
Now because he is generally complained of, for his Soul of opposition,
(gainsaying what ever Scotus said) it will serve to close his Epitaph, what
was made on a great Paradox-monger, possessed with the like contradicting
spirit.

Sed jam est mortuus, ut apparet,
Quod si Viveret id negaret.
But now he is dead, as plainly does appear,
Yet would deny it, were he living here.
He flourished under King Edward the Third, and dying 1330 was buried at Bale
de scrip. Brit. centur. 5. number. 18*
Monchen in Bavaria.

JOHN HOLBROOK was (as Leland relates) a profound Philosopher and Mathematician
much esteemed with the English Nobility, for his rare accomplishments, and yet
is his short Character blemished in De script. Brit. cent. 7. number. 9.
Bale with a double

Ut fertur One relating to the Place of his Birth, yet so, as Surrey is
assigned most probable. The other to the time wherein he flourished.

The last is a wonder to me, that so exact a Critic, who had with great pains
reduced the Tables of Alphonsus most artificially to Months, Idem Ibid.
Days, and Hours, should have his own memory left at such a loss, as to the
Timeing thereof; that Authors, (hopeless to hit the mark of the year) aim only
at the Butt of the Age, and conjecture him to have been eminent in the
fourteenth Century.

GEORGE RIPLY was born, says my Camd. Brit. in this County.
Author, at Riply in this County. But on the serious debate thereof, he clearly
appears a Native of Yorkshire, and therefore we remit the Reader to that
County, where he shall find his large Character.

Since the Reformation.
HENRY HAMMOND D. D. was born at Chertsey in this County, his Father being
Doctor of Physic, and Physician to King James. He was bred in Eaton-School,
where (...) Mr. Bust (so skilful in reading other Boys) could not spell his
Nature, but being posed with the Riddle of his portentous Wit at last even left
him to himself, which proved the best. Hence he became Fellow of
Magdalen-Colledge in Oxford till preferred Canon of Christ-Church and Orator
of the ^niversity.

He may be called an Angelical Doctor, as justly as he, who is generally so
styled. First, For his Countenance and Complexion, White and Ruddy; resembling
the common portraictures of Cherubins. Secondly, His Sanctity, spending his
life in Devotion. His eating and drinking were next to nothing, so exemplary
his Abstinence; And he always embraced a single life. Thirdly, Meekness.
Michael Jude 9.
durst not (the valor of an Archangel is frighted at a sin) bring a railing
accusation against Saton: Herein only our Doctor was a Coward; he feared to
revile any of an opposite Judgment. Fourthly, his Charity; He was the Tutelar
Angel to keep many a poor Royalist from famishing, it being verily believed,
that he yearly gave away more than two hundred pounds.

Lastly, for his Knowledge; Such the Latitude of his Learning and Languages. As
Distillers extract Aqua Vitae, or Living Water, from the dregs of Dead Beer: So
he from the rotten writings of the Rabbis drew many Observations to the
advance of Christianity.

He could turn his Plow-Shares and Pruning Hooks into Swords and Spears in his
Controversial Treatises, and could again at pleasure convert his Swords and
Spears into Plow-share^ and Pruning Hooks in his Comments and Practical
Cathechisme.

He was well versed in all Modern Pamphlets touching Church Discipline. When
some of the Royal Disputants (in the Treaty at Uxbridge) in some sort did
over-shoot their Adversaries, this Doctor could lay his Arguments level against
them, and discourse with the Parliament-Divines in their own Dialect.

But alas! he was an Angelical man, no Angel; Witness his death of the Students
disease, the Stone. He died at Westwood in Worcestershire at the house of the
Lady Packington; his PELLA, where he peaceably reposed himself whilst all our
English Jerusalem was in Combustion. One thousand pounds well nigh were due
unto him at his death, yet there appeared neither specialty, nor any man's h^nd
amongst his Writings; so confident he was that his conscientious debtors would
faithfully pay, what was freely lent them. By his Will he empowered Dr.
Humphre^ Henchman (since Bishop of Sarum) his sole Executor to expend according
to his discretion in the relief of poor people, not exceeding two hundred
pounds. Let this his short Character be pitched up like a Tent for a time, to
be taken down when a firmer Fabric (which, as I am informed, a more able Pen
is about) shall be erected to his memory. He died Anno Domini 1659.

Romish Exile Writers.
NICHOLAS SANDERS was born at Register of New-Colledge, anno 1548.
Charlewood in this County (where his Family still continues worshipful) bred
Bachelour of the Laws in New-Colledge. Going over beyond the seas, he was made
D. D. at Rome, and afterward Kings-Professor thereof at Lovain.

Pity it was, he had not more honesty or less Learning, being Master of Art in
malice, not hoping the whole body of his lies should be believed, but, being
confident the least finger thereof finding credit could prove heavy enough to
crush any innocence with posterity; presuming the rather to write passages
without truth, because on a subject beyond memory.

He thought it would much advantage his Cause, to call the Church of England
Schismatic first in that his libellous Treatise. But what said St. Augustine
in a Dispute with one of the Co^tra literas (...), lib. 2. cap. 8 tom. ^.
Donatists? U^rum schismatici nos simus an vos, non ego nec tu, sed Christus
interrogelur ut judicet Ecclesiam suam.

Indeed the controversy consisting much in matter of fact, let Records and
Histories be perused, and it will appear that our English Kings, after many
intolerable provocations, and intrenchments on their Crown from the Church of
Rome, at last (without the least invading of others) conserved their own right.
Partly, as Supreme Princes calling together their Clergy, by their advice to
reform the errors therein; partly to protect their subjects from being ruined,
by the Canons and Constitutions of a foreign power.

But this subject has lately been so handled by that Learned Baronet Sir Roger
Twysden, that, as he has exceeded former, he has saved all future pains
therein. To return to Sanders, it is observeable, that he who ^urfeited with
falsehoods, was famished for lack of food in Ireland. We must be sensible, but
may not be censorious on such actions; such deserving to forfeit the eyes of
their souls, who will not mark so remarkable a judgment, which happened Anno
Domini 1580.

Benefactors to the Public.
I mee^ with none besides Bishop Mer^on (of whom I have spoken) eminent before
the Reformation. Since it we find

HENRY SMITH, who was born at So testifies his monument in the upper end of
the Chancel of (...).
Wandsworth in this County. Now, Reader, before I go any further, give me leave
to premise and apply a passage in my apprehension not improper in this place.

Luther Commenting on those words Genesis 1. 21. And God created great Whales,
rendereth this reason why the creation of Whale^ is specified by name; Ne
territi magnitudine cre^ ea spectra esse, Lest affrighted with their greatness
we should believe them to be ^nly Visions or Fancies. Indeed many simple people
who lived (where Luther did) in an Inland Country three hundred miles from the
sea, might suspect that Whales (as reported with such vast dimentions) were
rather (...) than Realities. In like manner being now to relate the Bounty of
this Worthy Person, I am affraied that our In^idel Age will not give credit
thereunto, as conceiving it rather a Romanza or Fiction than a thing really
performed, because of the prodigious greatness thereof. The best is, there are
thousands in this County can attest the truth herein. And such good deeds
publicly done are a pregnant proof to convince all Denyers and Doubters
thereof.

This Henry Smith Esquire. and Alderman of London gave to buy Lands for a
perpetuity for the relief and setting the Poor to work.

Croidon one thousand pounds. In Kingston one thousand pounds. Guilford one
thousand pounds. Darking one thousand pounds In Farnham one thousand pounds
Rigate one thousand pounds

In Wandsworth to the Poor five hundred.

Besides many other great and liberal legacies bequeathed to pious uses, which
I hope by his Executors are as conscionably employed, as by him they were
charitably intended. He departed this life the 13th. of January 1627. in the
seventy-ninth year of his Age, and lies buried in the Chancel to Wandsworth.

Memorable Persons.
ELIZABETH WESTON. We must gain by degrees what knowledge we can R E M.
get of this eminent Woman who no doubt was

1 Of Gentile Extraction because her Parents bestowed on her so liberal and
costly Education. 2 A Virgin, because she wrote a book of Poetry called
Parth^nicon. 3 A great Scholar, because commended by two grand Critics. 4 She
must flourish by proportion of time about 1600.
Hear what Janus Dousa says of her,

Angla vel Angelica es, vel prorsus es Angelus (...)
Si sexus vetat hoc* Angelus est animus.
Joseph Scaliger praises her no less in prose, Parthenicon Elizabethae
Westoniae, Virginis nobilissimae, Poetriae florentissimae, linguarum plurimarum
peritissimae. And again speaking to her, Pene prius mihi contigit admirari
ingenium tuum quam nosse.

It seems her fame was more known in foreign parts than at home. And I am (...)
that for the honor of her Sex and our Nation I can give no better account of
her. However, that her memory may not be harbourless, I have lodged her in this
County (where I find an Ancient and Worshipful Family of the Westons
flourishing at Sutton) ready to remove her at the first information of the
certain place of her Nativity.

Here we may see how capable the weaker Sex is of Learning if instructed
therein. Indeed when a Learned Maid was presented to King James for an English
rarity, because she could speak and write pure Latin, Greek and Hebrew, the
King returned, But can she spin? However in persons of Birth and quality,
Learning has ever been beheld as a rare and commendable accomplishment.

The Names of the Gentry of this County, returned by the Commissioners in the
12 year of King Henry the Sixth, Anno Dom. 1433.
Commissioners to take the Oaths. H. Bishop of Winchester Cardinal of England.
Robert de Ponyges Chivaler. Joh. Fereby, one of the Knights of the Shire.

Regin. Cobham, de Lingfeld, mil. Joh. Kigele de Walketon, mil. Hen. Norbury de
Stokedebero^, m. Joh. Leboys de Farnham, mil. Joh. Weston de Papeworth, arm.
Th. Winter shul de Wintershul, ar. Tho. Husele de Southwark, arm. Johan. Corue
de Mercham Rob. Skirnde Kingeston Rob. Fitz-Robert de Bernas Joh. Gainsford de
Crowherst, ar. Will. Uvedale de Tichsay arm. Nich. Carewe de Bedington. Joh.
Ardern de Lie, armigeri. Rog. Elingbrig de Croydon, ar. Th. Codeington de
Codington, a. Joh. Yerd de Chayham, arm. Will. Kyg^le de Waweton, arm. Joh.
Burg de Waleton, armiger. Joh. Merston de Cobbesham, arm. Will. Otteworth de
Parochia Scemortle, armiger. Arth. Ormesby de Southwark, ar. Will. Weston de
Okeham, arm. Thomae Stoughton Ade Lene Lord de Southwark, ar. Will. Godyng de
eadem armig. Nich. Hogh, de eadem. Joh. Malton, de eadem. Joh. Godrick de
Bermondsey, ar. Tho. Kenle de Southwark, arm. Rob. Stricklond de Walworth.
Rich. Tyler de Southwark. Joh. Hanksmode, de eadem. Joh. Newedgate, de eadem,
ar. Will Sidney de Cranle. Will. Newgate de eadem, arm. Hen. Snokeshul de
eadem, ar. Joh. Burcest^e de Southwark, ar. Joh. Burdeux de West-Benchworth,
armiger. David. Swan de Dorking, arm. Will. Ashurst de East-Benchworth Tho.
Ashurst de Dorking Rob. At Sonde de Dorking. Joh. Walleys, de eadem. Joh.
Fontaines de Clopham, ar. Joh. Bitterle de Wandesworth, ar. Radul. Wymbledon de
Asshestede Ric. Parker de Byflete, armigeri. Tho. Neweton de Crockfeld, arm.
Will. Norman de Lambehithe, ar. Joh Henham de Southwark, ar. Will. Arberton de
Chamberwel. Nich. Randolf de Leddrede, ar. Tho. Grosham, de eadem. Joh. Exham
de Ewel. Petri Swiftede Lambhith, Gent. Joh. Thorp de Thorp, armiger. Joh.
Milton de Egham. Joh. Bowet de Bokham magna, ar. Laurent. Done de Effingham.
Tho. Slifeld de Bokham magna, a. Tho. Done de Coneham. Joh. Done de eadem.
Will. Craulede Duntesfeld. Rob. March de eadem. Joh. At Lee de Adington.
Johannis Leicestre de Kersalton. Johannis Drux de Ditton. Roberti Mildnale de
Kingeston. Johannis Chinnore, de eadem Tho. Overton de Merton, arm. Will.
Lovelase, de eadem. Tho. Hereward de Morwe. Walteri Broke, de eadem. Thomae
Palshud, de eadem. Richardi Comb, de eadem. Richardi Eton, de eadem. Huzonis
Ashbury, de eadem. Nich. Fitz-John, de eadem, ar. Thomae Bule de Wonersham, ar.
Roberti N^timber de VVatton Rob. Bronnesbury de Bermondesey Roberti
Charingworth de Lamhi^he Thomae Hering de Croydon. Richardi Ludlow de Hendle in
Leheth. Henr. Coleman, de Farnham. VVillielmi Hayward, de eadem. Johannis
Lilborn, de eadem. Johannis Redingher she de Craule VVillielmi Brigges de
Sanderstede Richardi Lynde, de eadem. Thomae Best de Caterham. Thomae Basset de
Cullesdon. Roberti Rokenham, de eadem. Richardi Colcoh, de eadem. Richardi
Herteswode, de Ly^. VVillielmi Rode de Guldeford. Richardi At Lee de
Godeston. Roberti Dog de Croyden. Jacobi Janyn, de eadem. Rich. Laurence de
Chiding fold. Willielmi Hichecock de Alfold. Johannis Raynold de Dontesfold,
Johannis Wadebroke de Wybryg. Richardi Tymme de Coneham. VValteri At Den de
Sutton. Johannis Charlewode. Henrici Aleyn de Merscham. Johannis Campton de
Chayham. Johannis Asher de Godaming. Will. Inningfeld de Lingefeld. Thomae
Sandre de Cherlewode. Richardi Baker de Pekeham. Richardi Ode de Camerwel.
Johannis Skinner de Reygate. Richardi Knight, de eadem. Stephani Balhorn de
Dorking. Johannis Vincent de Maldon. Thomae Vincent de Coneham. Johannis Lake
de Kingston. Thomae Broker de eadem. VVillielmi Stoley, de eadem. Johannis
Lake, de eadem. VValteri VVoderove, de eadem. Thomae Settonde Ewel. Thomae
Chetema^ de Ebbesham. Johannis Kigh^le de VVaweton, junior. Rogeri Longland de
Croyden. Richardi Hayward de Foting. Thomae Ingram de Shire. Johannis Frolbury,
de eadem. R^berti Tome de Walton. Richardi Osteler de Coneham.
Sheriffs of Surrey. Of both. Of Sussex. HENRI. II. Anno 1 Robertus Belet 1
Hugo Wareluilla 2 Paganus 2 Magerus Maleuvenant 3 Paganus 4 4 Radulphus Picot 5
Paganus 5 Radulphus Picot 6 6 7 Paganus 7 Episc. Chichester. Hilarious 8 Paganus
8 Hilarious Episc. Chichester. 9 Paganus 9 Hen. Archi-diaconus 10 Gervasius
Cornhil 10 Rogerus Hai 10 Rogerus Hai 11 Gervasius de Cornhil 11 Rogerus Hai 12
Roger. Hay 13 Gervasius de Cornhil 13 Rogerus Hai 14 Hugoni de Dour 14 Idem 15
Gerva. de Cornhil, for 14 years. 15 Idem 16 Reginaldus de Warrenn, for 7 years.
29 Idem and 29 Hen. de Cornhil, filius ejus 23 Rogerus filius Renfridi, for 11
years. 30 Henr. de Cornhil, for 4 years. RICHARD. I. Anno 1 Henricus de Cornhil
1 Philippus Ruffus 2 Idem 2 Philippus de Tresgar 3 Idem 3 Idem 4 Radul. de
Cornhil 4 Johannes Marescal 5 Idem 5 Idem 6 Will. de St. Mar. Ecclesia. 6
Willielmus Mareshal 7 Idem 7 Willielmus Marescal 7 Willielmus Panus 7 Galfre.
Peverel 7 Stephanus de Pountfold 8 Robertus de Turnham 8 Willielmus Marescal 8
Alanus de Withton 8 Stephanus de Poudfold 9 Robertus 9 Willielmus 9 Alanus 9
Stephanus 10 Willielmus Marescal 10 Mich. de Apletricham. JOHAN. Rex. Anno 1
Robertus de Turnham 1 Willielm. Marescal 1 Alanus de Wichenton 1 Mich. de
Appeltricham 2 Johannes Chaper 2 Robertus de Turnham 3 Johannes Chaper 4
Williel. Marescal 5 Robertus Turnham 5 Mich. de Apletricham 5 Johannes Ferles.
6 Willielmus de Chaignes 6 Richardus de Maisi 6 Willielmus de St. Laudo 7 Idem
8 Willielmus de Cahaignes. Anno Anno Anno 9 Idem 10 Robertus de Beregefeld 10
Johannes filius Hugonis 11 Robertus de Milborn 11 Willielm. Briewre 12 Robertus
de Beregefeld 12 Johannis filius Hugonis 13 Johanna filius Hugonis 13 Matthew.
filius Herbert 13 Robertus Beregefeld 13 Gilbertus de Barier 14 Gilbert. de
Barrier 14 Matthew. filius Herbert 15 Johannes filius Hugonis 15 Matthew. filius
Herbert 15 Robertus de Beregefeld 15 Gilbert. le Barrier 16 Gilbert. de Baryer
16 Matthew. filius Herbert 17 Matthew. filius Herbert 17 Reginald. de Cornhil 17
Gilbert. Barrier HENR. III. Anno 1 1 2 Gilbertus Barrarius 2 Matthew. filius
Herberti 3 Will. de Warren C. Surr. 3 Gilbertus Barrarius 3 Willielmus de Mara 4
Will. de Warrena C. Sur. 4 Matthew. filius Herberti 4 Willielmus de Maram, for 6
years. 4 Gilbertus Barrarius, for 6 years. 10 10 Matthew. filius Herberti 10 10
Herbert filius Walteri for 4 years. 11 Johannes Oracesdon 12 Johannes de
Gatesden, for 4 years. 14 15 Robertus de Laudelawe 16 15 Henricus de Wintershul
17 Williemus Brunus 16 Idem 18 Idem 17 Petrus de Rival 18 Id. and Hen. de
Cancel 19 Simon de Echingham 19 Joelus de Germano 20 Simon de Echingham 20
Henry de Bada 20 Johannes de Gatesden 20 Joel de Sancto German 21 Johannis de
Gatesdon 21 Johann. de Gatesdon 21 Joel de Sancto Germano 21 Philip. de Crofts
22 Johannes de Gatesden 22 Idem 22 Nicholaus de Wancy 22 23 23 Johannes de
Gatesden 24 Johannes de Gatesden 24 Johannes de Gatesden 24 Nicholaus de Wancy
24 Philippus de Crofts 25 Gregorius de Arsted 25 26 Idem 26 Philippus de Crofts
27 Radul. de Kaymes for 3 ye. 30 Rob. de Savage. for 4 years. 34 Nic. de Wancy,
for 3 years 37 38 Will. and Mich. de Vere 39 40 Galfr. de Grues 41 Idem 42
Gerard. de Cuncton 43 David. de Jarpennil Anno Anno Anno 44 Johannes de Wanton
45 Idem 46 Rogerus de VVikes, for 6 years 46 Willielmus de Lazouch, for 3
years. 46 Robertus Agwilon for 6 years. 52 Rogerus de Loges, for 3 years. 55
Matthew. de Hasting 55 Bartholomeus de Hasting 56 Idem 56 Idem EDW. I. Anno 1
Matthew. de Hastings 2 Idem 3 Willielmus de Herne 4 Johannes VVanton, for 3
years. 7 Emerindus de Cancellis 8 Idem 9 Nicholaus de Gras, for 5 years. 14
Richardus de Pevensey 15 Idem 16 Will. de Pageham, for 5 years. 17 Rogerus de
Lukenor, for 4 years. 21 Robertus de Gla morgan for 6 years. 27 Joh. Albel, for
4 years. 31 Walter de Gedding 32 Idem 33 Robertus de le Knole' for 3 years.

Sheriffs of Surrey, and Sussex.
EDW. II.
Anno 1 Walter de Gedding Anno 2 Willielmus de Henle and Robertus de Stangrave
Anno 3 Willielmus de Henle, and Robertus de Stangrave Anno 4 Idem Anno 5
Willielmus de Henle Anno 6 Willielmus de Henle and Willielmus de Mere Anno 7
Petrus de Vienne Anno 8 Idem Anno 9 Willielmus Merre Anno 10 VValterus le Gras
Anno 11 VValterus le Gras, and Petrus de VVorldham Anno 12 Petrus de VVorldham,
and Henricus Husey Anno 13 Idem Anno 14 Henricus Husey Anno 15 Nicholaus Gentil
Anno 16 Anno 17 Petrus de VVorldham, and Andream Medested, for 3 years.
EDW. III.
Anno 1 Nicholaus Gentil Anno 2 Nicholaus Gentil, and Robertus de Stangrave,
for 3 years. Anno 5 Johannes Dabnam Anno 6 Willielmus Vaughan Anno 7 Idem Anno
8 Willielmus Vaughan, and and Joh. Dabnam, for 3 years. Anno 11 Willielmus
Vaughan Anno 12 Idem Anno 13 Godfridus de Hunston Anno 14 Wilielmus de Northo,
and Godfridus de Henston Anno 15 Hugo. de Bowcy, and Willielmus de Northo Anno
16 Andreas Peverel, and Hugo. de Bowcy Anno 17 Idem Anno 18 VVilliemus de
Northo Anno 19 Regind. de Forester for 3 years. Anno 22 Rogerus Daber Anno 23
Tho. Hoo, for 3 years Anno 26 Richardus de St. Oweyn Anno 27 Idem Anno 28 Simon
de Codington Anno 29 Rogerus de Lukenor Anno 30 Will. Northo Anno 31 Tho. de
Hoo, for 3 years. Anno 34 Richardus de Hurst, for 3 years. 37 Simon de
Codington 38 Ranul. Thurnburn 39. Johannes Wateys 40 Johannes Weyvile 41
Andreas Sackvile 42 ^dem 43 Ranul. Thurnburn 44 Idem 45 Willielmus Neidegate
46 Roger. Dalingrugg 47 Nicholaus Wilcomb 48 Robertus de Loxele 49 Robertus
At Hele 50 Johannes St. Clear 51 Johannes de Melburn.
The Sheriffs of these two Counties, before King Edward the Second are in the
Records so involved, complicated, perplexed, that it is a hard task to
untangle them, and assign, with the Sheriffs did severally, which jointly
belong unto them. Had the like difficulty presented it self in other united
Shires, I suspect it would have deterred me from ever meddling with their
Catalogue. Nor will we warrant, that we have done all right in so dare a
subject, but submit our best endeavors to the censure and correction of the
more Judicious.

HENRY the II.
7 Sussex, HILARIOUS Episcopus Chichester.] The King had just cause to confide
in his loyalty and commit the Shire to his care. For, although I behold him as
a Frenchman by birth* yet great always was his loyalty to the King, whereof
afterward he gave a signal testimony. For, whereas all other Bishops assembled
at the Council of Clarendon, only assented to the Kings propositions with this
limitation, Salvo ordine suo, this Hilarie absolutely and simply subscribed the
same. The time of his Consecration, as also of his death is very uncertain.

EDWARD the Third.
1 ANDREAS SACKVIL.] The Family of the Sackvils is as Ancient as any in
England, taking their Name from Sackvil (some will have it Sicca Villa) a Town,
and their Possession in Normandy. Before this time, we meet with many Eminent
Persons of their Name and Ancestry.

1 Sir Robert Sackvil Knight, younger son of O^de^us Vitalis in his Norman Stor.
Herbrann de Sackvil, was fixed in England, and gave the Manor of Wickham in
Suffolk, to the Abbey of St. John de Baptist in Colchester, about the reign of
William Rufus 2 Sir John de Sackvil his son, is by Matthew Page 262. Anno 1260.
Paris, ranked amongst those Persons of Prime Quality, who in the reign of King
John, were Assistants to the five and twenty Peers, appointed to see the
Liberties of Charta Magna performed. 3 Richard de Sackvil, (as I have cause to
believe his son) was one of such Quality, that I find Hubertus de Anesty to
hold two Fields in Anesty, and Little Both in Hartfordsh.
Hormeed of the Honor of Richard Sackvil. Now the word Honor, (since
appropriated to Princes Palaces) was in that Age attributed to none but Sr. H.
Spelmans Glossa verbo Honor.
the Patrimony of principal Barons. 4 Sir Jordan Sackvil, Grandchild to the
former, was taken prisoner at the Battle of Emesham, in the Age of King Henry
the Third, for siding with the Barons against him. 5 Andrew, his son and heir,
being under Age, at his Fathers death, and the Kings Ward, was imprisoned in
the Castle of Dover, Anno the third of Edward the First, and afterward, by the
special command of the said King, did marry Ermyntude an (I conceive a Spanish)
Honorable Lady of the Household of Queen Elianor, Whereby he gained the Kings
favor, and the greater part of his (formerly forfeited) Inheritance.
I behold this Andrew Sackvil the Sheriff, as his son, Ancestor to the Truly
Honorable Richard now Earl of Dorset.

Sheriffs.
Name Place Arms. RICH. II. Anno 1 Will. Percy Or, a Lion Rampant, Azure. 2
Edw. Fitz-Herbert Gules, 3 Lions Rampant, Or. 3 Ioh. de Hadresham 4 Nich.
Sleyfeld 5 Will. Percy ut prius 6 Will. Weston Ermin, on a Chief Azu. 5
Bezants* 7 Will. Waleys 8 Robertus Nutborne 9 Richardus Hurst 10 Thomae Hardin
11 Idem 12 Edw. de ^t. Johan. Argent, on a Chief Gules, 2 Mullets, Or. 13 Rob.
Atte-Mulle 14 Rob. de Echingham 15 Nicholaus Carew Beddingt^ Surrey. Or, 3
Lions Passant-gardant Sable armed and langued, Gules. 16 Thomae Jardin 17
Nicholaus Slyfeld 18 Edw. St. John ut prius 19 Ioh. Ashburnham Ashburnham.
Suss. Gules, a Fess betw. 6 Mullets, Ar. 20 Willielmus Fienes Azure, 3 Lions
Rampant, Or. 21 Johannes S^lerne 22 Willielmus Fienes ut prius HEN. IV. Anno 1
Radu. Codington 2 Nicholaus Carew and ut prius Johannes Pelham Laughton. Azure,
3 Pelicans, Argent. 3 Ioh. Ashburnham ut prius 4 Robert. Atte-Mulle 5 Idem 6
Phil. St. Ole^e Quarterly Or and Gules, a Been Vayree. 7 Thomae Sackvile 8
Thomae Clipsham 9 Willielmus Verd 10 Tho* Ashburnham ut prius 11 Ioh. Warn
Campie 12 Ioh. VVaterton HEN. V. Anno 1 Johan. Haysham 2 Ioh. Wintershul 3 Ioh.
Clipsham 4 Ioh. Uvedale 5 Johannes Weston ut prius 6 James Knotesford Arg. 4
Fusile in Fesse Sable. 7 Johannes Clipsham 8 Johannes Hace 9 Ioh. Bolvey, and
James Knotesford ut prius HEN. VI. Anno 1 Rog. Fiennes, miles ut prius 2 Ioh.
Wintershul 3 Io^an. Clipsham 4 Thomae Lewkenor Azure, 3 Cheverons, Argent. 5
Johan. Ferriby 6 Will. Warbleton 7 Ioh. Wintershul 8 Willielmus Uvedale ut
prius 9 Willielmus Finch Argent, a Cheveron between Griffins passant, Sable. 10
Th. Lewkenor, m. ut prius 11 Johan. And^rne 12 Richardus Walle^ (...), 3
Walnut-leaves Or, betwixt 2 Bendlets, Argent. 13 Rog Fiennes, mil. ut prius 14
Rich. Dalingrugg 15 Johan. Fereby 16 ^homae Uvedal ut prius 17 James Fiennes ut
prius 18 Rog. Lewkenor ut prius 19 Nicholaus Carew ut prius 20 Walt.
Strickland 21 Ioh. Stanley Arg. on a Bend Az. 3 Bucksheads cabossed, Or. 22
Ioh. Baskett, arm. Azure, a Cheveron Erm. betwixt 3 Leopards-heads, Or. 23
Nich. Carew ut prius 24 Nich. Husey 25 Will. Belkn^pe 26 Robertus Radmill 27
Nich. Carew ut prius 28 Ioh. Pennycoke 29 Johan. Lewkenor ut prius 30 Thomae
Yard 31 Rich. Fienes, mil. ut prius 32 33 Ioh. Knotesford ut prius 34 Tho
Cobham, mil. Gules, on a Cheveron Or, 3 Estoiles, Sable. 35 Nicholaus Husee ut
prius 36 Tho. Basset 37 Thomae Tresham Per Saltire Sable and Or, 6 trefoiles of
the last. 38 Rob. Fienes, arm* ut prius EDW. IV. Anno 1 Nich. Gainsford
Crohurst Arg. a Chever. G. betwixt 3 Greyhounds Current, Sable. 2 Walt. Denis
3 Idem 4 Tho. Goring, arm Argent, a Cheveron between 3 Annulets, Gules. 5 Tho*
Vvedale, m. ut prius 6 Will. Cheney, ar. 7 Tho. Vaugham 8 Rog. Lewkenor, m. ut
prius 9 Nich. Gainsford, a. ut prius 10 Rich. Lewkenor, a. ut prius 11 Th. t.
Ledger, arm. KENT Azure, Fretty Arg. a Chief, Or, 12 Ioh. Gainsford. ut prius 13
Nich. Gainsford ut prius 14 ^ho. Lewkenor, ar. ut prius 15 Tho. Echingham ^6
Ioh. Wode. Ser, ar 17 Henr. Roos, mil. 18 Will. Weston ut prius 19 Tho.
Combs, arm. 20 Ioh. Elringhton 21 Tho. Fienes ut prius 22 Ioh. Apseley, ar,
Barry of 6 Arg. and Gules, a Canton, Ermin. RICH. III. Anno 1 Hen. Roos, miles
2 Ioh. Dudley 3 Ioh* Norbury, mil. Nich. Gainsford. ut prius HEN. VII: Anno 1
Nich. Gainsford ut priur 2 Tho. Combs, arm. 3 Will. Merston 4 Rob. Morley
Sable, 3 Leopa^ds Or, Flowery, Ar. 5 Ioh. Apseley, a^m ut prius 6 Rich.
Lewkenor, ar. ut prius 7 Edw. Dawtree, arm Az. 5 Fusiles in Fesse, Arg. 8 Ioh.
Leigh, arm. Stockwel. G. a Cross engrailed within a Border, Arg. 9 Ioh. Coke,
armig. 10 Ioh. Apseley, arm. ut prius 11 Ric. Lewkenor, a. ut prius Sable, 3
Lions passant gardant inter 2 Bends Geweros, Arg. 12 Matthew. Brown, ar.
Beachworth 13 Rich. Sackvile, a^. ut prius 14 Ioh. Coke, arm. 15 Tho.
Ashburnhan ut prius 16 Ioh. Gainsford, ar. ut prius 17 18 Ioh. Apseley, arm ut
prius 19 Rad. Shirley, ar. Paly of 8 Or and Az a Canton Erm. 20 Rich. Sackvile,
a^ * ut prius G. A Lion ramp. Queve for^hee, 21 Godr. Oxenbrig,^ Arg. within a
Border V. charged an Entoire of 8 Escalops Or. 22 Will. Ashburnham ut prius 23
Tho. Morton, ar. Quarterly, Gules and Erm. in the first and fourth, a
Goats-head erased, Arg. 24 Tho. Ficnis. mil. ut prius HEN. VIII. Anno 1 Ioh.
Leigh, armig. ut prius 2 Edw. Lewknor, ar. ut prius 3 Rog. Lewknor. mil. ut
prius 4 God. Oxenbr^igg, mi. ut prius 5 Rich. Shirley, ar. ut prius 6 Roger.
Copley, ar. 7 Ioh. Leigh, mil. ut prius 8 Will. Ashbu^ham ut prius 9 Ioh.
Gainsford, m. ut pri^s 10 Rich. Carewe, ar. ut prius 11 God. Oxenbrigg, m. ut
prius 12 Ioh. Scott, armig. Arg. 3 Katharine wheels S. with in a Border
engrailed, Gules. 13 Edw. Bray. miles. ^rg. a Cheveron between 3 Eagles legs
erazed, Sable. 14 Rich. Covert, ar. Slaugham Suff. Gules, a Fesse Erm. betwixt
3. Leopards, Or. 15 Will. Ashburnham ut prius 16 Tho. West, mil. Arg. a Fesse
Dancette, Sable. 17 Rich. Shirley, ar. ut prius 18 Ioh. Dawtree, mil. ut prius
19 Ioh. Sackvill, ar. ut prius 20 Rich. Belingham. Arg* 3 Munters-horns
st^inged, Sable. 21 Rog. Copley, mil. 22 Will. Goring, mil. ut prius 23 Rog.
Lewkenor, m. ut prius 24 Christop. Moore, (...) Looseley Az on a Cross Arg. 5
Martlets, S. 25 Ioh. Palmer, arm. Angma^in. Or, 2 Bars Gules, on each 3
trefoils Ar. in Chief a Greyhound Current Sable, collared of the first. 26
Rich. Belengham. ut prius 27 Will. Goring, m. ut prius 28 Rich. Page, miles.
29 Nich. Gainsford. a. ut prius 30 Edw. Bray, miles. ut prius 31 Christop.
Moor, m. ut prius 32 Ioh. Sackvile, arm. ut prius 33 Tho. Darell, arm. Az. a
Lion Ra^p. Or, Crowned Argent. 34 Rich. Belingham, a ut prius 35 Ioh. Palmer,
arm, ut prius 36 Ioh. Thetcher, arm. 37 Ioh. Dawtree, mil. ut prius 38 Ioh.
Sackvile, arm ut prius EDW. VI. Anno 1 Thom Carden, mil. 2 Ioh. Scott, armig.
ut prius 3 Nich. Pelham, mil. ut prius 4 Will. Goring, m. ut prius 5 Rob.
Oxenbrigg, ^. ut prius 6 Anthon. Brown, m. ut prius Rex PHIL. and MAR. Reg Anno
1 Tho. Saunders, mil. chartwood Sable, a Cheveron between 3 Bulls heads, A^g. 2
Ioh. Covert, arm. ut prius 3 Will. Saunders, ar. ut prius 4 Edw. Gage, mil.
Gyronne of four, Az. and Arg a Saltire, Gules. 5 Ioh. Ashburnham. ut prius 6
Will. Moore, arm. ut prius Regin. ELIZ. Anno 1 Tho. Palmer, mil. ut prius 2
Ioh. Colepeper, ar. ^rg. a Bend engrail^d, Gules. 3 John Stidolf, arm. Arg. Or
a Chief Sable, 2 Wolves heads Erased, Or. 4 Hen. Goring, arm. ut prius 5 Will.
Gresham. 6 Rich. Covert, arm. ut prius 7 Antho. Pelham, ar* ut prius 8 Will.
Dawtree, arm. ut prius This year the 2 Counties were divided. Sheriffs of
Surrey. alone.
Name Place Amre^. 9 Franc. Carew, ar. ut prius 10 Hen. We^on, mil. ut prius 11
Thom. Lifeld, ar. ut prius 12 Tho. Brown, arm. ut prius This year the two
Counties were again united under one Sheriff.
Name Place Amre^. 13 Ioh. Pelham, arm. ut prius 14 Tho* Palmer, mil. ut prius
15 Fran. Shirley, arm. ut prius 16 Ioh. Read, arm. and Rich. Polsted. 17 Hen*
Pelham. arm. ut prius 18 Will. Gresham, ar. ut prius 19 Tho. Shirley, mil* ut
prius 20 Georg. Goring, ar. ut prius 21 Will. Moore, mil. ut prius 22 Will.
Morley, arm. ut prius 23 Edw. Slifeld, arm. 24 Tho. Brown, mil. ut prius 25
Walt. Covert, arm. ut prius 26 Tho. Bishop, arm. Parham Argent, on a Bend
cottised Gules (3 Bezauts. 27 Rich. Bostock, ar. Sable a Fesse Humet A^g. 28
Nich. Parker, ar. 29 Rich. Brown, arm. ut prius 30 Ioh. Carrell, arm. Harting
Argent, 3 Bars and as many Martlets in Chief, Sable. 31 Thom. Pelham, a. ut
prius 32 Hen. Pelham, arm. ut prius 33 Rob^. Linsey, arm. Or, an Eagle
displayed Sable beaked and membred Az. a Chief Varry. 34 Walt. Covert, mil. ut
prius 35 Nich. Parker, mil. 36 Will. Gardeux, a. 37 Rich. Leech, arm. 38 Edm.
Culpeper, a. ut prius 39 Georg. Moore, arm. ut prius 40 Jam. Colebrand, a.
Botham Az. 3 Levels with Plummets, O. 41 Tho. Eversfeld, a. Den Erm. on a Bend
S. 3 Mullets, O. 42 Edm. Boier, arm. Camberwel. Sur. O. a Bend varry betwixt 2
Cottises Gules- 43 Thom. Bishop, arm. ut prius 44 Ioh. Ashburnham. ut prius 45
Rob. Lynsey. ut prius JAC. Rex. Anno 1 Rob. Linsey, arm. ut prius 2 Hen.
Goring, mil. ut prius 3 Edw. Culpeper, mil ut prius 4 Tho. Hoskings, mil. 5
Hen. Morley, arm. ut prius 6 Georg. Gunter, mil. Sable, 3 Gantlets, within a
Border, Or. 7 Thom. Hunt, miles 8 Ioh. Lountesford Az. a Cheveron betwixt 3
Boares Or, Coupe Gules. 9 Edw. Bellingham (...) prins 10 Will. Wignall a*
Tandrigde Sur. Azure, on a Cheveron Or, betwixt 3 Ostriges 3 Mullets, Gules. 11
Edw. Goring, arm. ut prius 12 Ioh. Willdigos, m. 13 Rola. Tropps, Mor and Ioh.
Morgan, m. 14 Ioh. Shirley, mile* ut prius 15 Ioh. Middleton, a. 16 Ioh.
Howland, mil. Shatham Arg. 2 Bars and 3 Lions Ramp. in Chief, Sable. 17 Nich.
Eversfeld, a. ut prius 18 Rich. Michelborne 19 Franc. Leigh, mil. ut prius 20
Tho. Springet, m. 21 Ben. Pelham, mil. ut prius 22 Amb. Brown, arm. ut prius
CAROLUS Rex. Anno 1 Edr. Alford, arm. G. 6 Pears 3, 2, and 1, and a chief, O. 2
Tho. Bowyer, arm. Leghthorn Suss. Or, a Bend Vary betw. 2 Cotises, G 3 Edw.
Jourden, arm. Gatwik S. an Eagle displaied betw. 2 Bendlets Ar. a Canton,
si^ster Or. 4 Steph. Board, mil. 5 Anth. May, arm^ger. G. a Fesse between 8
Billets, Or. 6 Will. Walter, mil. Wimbl^ Az. a Fesse indented Or, between 3
Eagles, Argent. 7 8 John* Chapman, m. 9 Rich. Evelyn, arm. Wotton Az. a G^yphon
passant and Chief, O. 10 Will* Culpeper, ar. ut prius 11 Will. Morley, mil. ut
prius

When I look upon these two Counties, it puts me in mind of the Epigram in the
Poet.

Nec cum te possum vivere, nec sine te.

Neither with thee can I well,
Nor without thee can I dwell.
For these two Shires of Surrey and Sussex generally had distinct Sheriffs
until the Reign of King Edward the Second, when they were united under One.
Then again divided in the ninth of Queen Elizabeth; united in the thirteenth,
divided again in the twelfth of King Charles, and so remain at this day, but
how long this condition will continue is to me unknown, seeing neither
conjunctim, nor divisim, they seem very well satisfied.

Sheriffs of this Connty alone.
Name Place Amre^. King CHARLES Anno 12 Antho. Vincent, mil. Stocked Azure, 3
Quarterfoils, Argent. 13 Abernn 14 Johan Gresham, mil 15 Ioh. Howland, mil. ut
prius 16 Tho. Smith, armig. 17 Georg. Price, arm. 18 19 Edru. Jorden, arm. ut
prius 20 Mathe. Brand, mi* 21 22 Will. VVymondsal, mil. Putnie.

RICHARD the Second.
19 JOHN ASHBURNHAM.] My poor and plain Pen is willing, though unable, to add
any luster to this Family of stupendous Antiquity. The Chief of this name was
High Sheriff of Sussex and Surrey, Anno 1066. when WILLIAM Duke of Normandy
invaded England, to whom King Harauld wrote, to assemble the Posse Comitatunm,
to make effectual resistance against that Foreigner. The Original hereof, an
Honorable Heir-Loome (worth as much as the Owners thereof would value it at)
was lately in the Possession of this Family. A Family wherein the Eminency has
equalled the Antiquity thereof, having been Barons of England in the Reign of
King Henry the Third.

The Last, Sr. John Ashburnham, of Ashburnham, married Elizabeth Beaumont,
Daughter of Sr. Tho. Beaumont (afterward by especial Grace created
Viscountess Crawmount in Scotland) and bare unto him two Sons, John of the
Bedchamber to King CHARLES the first and second, and William Cofferer to his
Majesty, who will build their Name a Story Higher to Posterity.

HENRY the Sixth.
29. JOHN LEWKENOR.] He was afterward knighted by this King, and was a Cordial
Zealote for the Lancastrian Title, at last paying dear for his Affections
thereunto. For in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth, Anno 1471. He, with
three Thousand others was slain in the Battle at Teuksbury, valiantly fighting
under Prince Edward, Son to King Henry the sixth.

HENRY the Seventh.
12 MATTHEW BROWN, Armiger.] I would be highly thankful to him ( Gratitude is
the Gold wherewith Scholars honestly discharge their Debts in this kind) who
would inform me how Sr. Anthony Brown (a younger Branch of this Family) stood
related to this Sheriff. I mean, that Sr. Anthony, Standard Bearer of England,
second Husband to Lucy, fourth Daughter to John Nevell, Marquess Montacute, and
Grandfather to Sr. Anthony Brown, whom Queen Mary created Viscount Montacute.
He was a zealous Romanist, for which Queen Mary loved him much the more, and
Queen Elizabeth no whit the less, trusting and employing him in Embassies of
High Consequence, as knowing, he embraced his Religion, not out of politic
Design, but pure Devotion. He was direct Ancestour to the Right Honorable the
present Viscount Mountacute.

This Viscount, is eminently but not formally a Baron of the Land, having a
Place and Vote in Parliament, by an express clause in his Patent, but otherwise
no particular Title of a Baron: This I observe, for the unparalled rarity
thereof, and also to confute the peremptory Position of such, who maintain,
that only actual Barons sit as Peers in Parliament.

HENRY the Eighth.
10 NICHOLAS CAREW, Miles.] He was a jolly Gentleman, fit for the favor of
King Henry the Eighth, who loved active Spirits, as could keep pace with him in
all Achievements, and made him Knight of the Garter, and Master of his Horse.

This Sr. Nicholas built the fair House (or Pala^e rather) at Beddington in
this County, which, by the advantage of the Water, is a Paradise of Pleasure.

Tradition in this Family reports, how King HENRY, then at Bowls, gave this
Knight opprobrious Language, betwixt jest and earnest, to which the other
returned an Answer rather True than Discreet, as more consulting therein his
own Animosity than Allegiance. The King, who in this kind would give and not
take, being no Good Fellow in tart Repartees, was so highly offended thereat,
that Sr. Nicholas fell from the top of his Favor, to the bottom of his
Displeasure, and was bruised to Death thereby. This was the true Cause of his
Execution, though in our Chronicles all is scored on his complying in a Plot
with HENRY, Marquess of Exeter, and HENRY Lord Mountague.

We must not forget, how in the Memory of our Fathers, the last of this Surname
adopted his near Kinsman a Throck-morton to be his Heir, on condition to assume
the Name and Arms of C^rew. From him is lineally descended Sr. Nicholas Carew,
Knight. who, I confidently hope, will continue and increase the Honor of his
Ancient Family.

EDWARD the Sixth.
1 THOMAS CARDEN, Miles] Some five Years before, this Knight was improbable to
be Sheriff of this or any other County, when cunning Gardener got him into his
clutches within the compass of the six Articles, being with a Lady (and some
others of the Kings Privy Chamber) indicted for Heresy, and for aiding and
abetting Anthony Persons, burnt at WINSOR, as is above Berksh. Title Martyr.
mentioned. But King HENRY coming to the notice hereof, of his special
Goodness, without the Fox Mar^yr. page 1221.
suit of any man, defeated their Foes, preserved their Lives, and confirmed
their Pardon.

ELIZABETHA Regina.
20 GEORGE GORING.] He would do me an High Favor, who would satisfy me how
Sr. George Goring, Knight (bred in Sydney College in Cambridge, to which he
was a Benefactor) referred in kindred to this present Sheriff.

This our Sr. George was by King Charles the first created Baron of Hurst
Per-point in Sussex, and (after the death of his Mothers Brother, Edward Lord
Denny) Earl of Norwich. He is a Phaenix, sole and single by himself, [
vestigia sola retrorsum] the only Instance in a Person of Honor, who found
Pardon for no Offense, his Loyalty to his Sovereign. Afterward going beyond
the Seas, He was happily instrumental in advancing the Peace betwixt Spain and
Holland. I remember how the Nobility of Bohemia, who fided with Frederick,
Prince Palatine, gave for their Motto, COMPASSI CONREGNA^IMUS, meaning, that
such who had suffered with him in his Adversity, should share with him in his
Prosperity, when settled in his Kingdom. But alas* their hopes failed them.
But blessed be God, this Worthy Lord, as he patiently bare his part in his
Majesty's Afflictions, so he now partaketh in his Restitution, being Captain of
his Guard.

To the Reader.
May ^e be pleased to behold this my b^ief Description of (...), as a Running
Collation to stay his Stomach, no set meal to Sati^fie his hunger. But to tell
him good News, I hear, that a Plentiful Feast in this kind is providing for
his Entertainment, by Edward See more of him in the Life of Nich. upton, in
Devon-shire.
Bish, Esquire. a Native of SVRREY, intending a particular Survey thereof. Now, as
when the Sun a^iseth the Moon (...) down obscurely, without any observation: so
when the pains of this worthy Gentleman shall be public, I am not only
contented, but desirous that my weak Endeavors (without further Noise or
Notice) should sink in Silence.

The Farewell.
I have been credibly (...), that one Mr. CLARKE, some seven score Years since
built at his Charges the MarketHouse of Fa^nham in this County. Once rep^oving
his Workmen for going on so slowly, they excused themselves, that they were
hindered with much people pressing upon them, some liking, some disliking the
Model of the Fabri^k.

Hereupon Mr. Clarke caused this Distich (hardly extant at this day) to be
written in that House.

You who do like me give (...) to end me.
You who dislike me give money to mend me.
I wish this Advice practiced all over this County, by those, who vent their
various Verdicts in praising or reproving (...) erected gratis, for the General
Good.

SUSSEX.
SUSSEX has Surrey on the North, Kent on the East, the Sea on the South, and
Hant-shire on the West. It is extended along the Seaside threescore miles in
length, but is contented with a third of those miles in the breadth thereof. A
fruitful County, though very durty for the travelers therein, so that it may
be better measured to its advantage, by days-journeys then by miles. Hence it
is, that in the late Order for regulating the wages of Coach-men, at such a
price a day and distance from London, Sussex alone was excepted, as wherein
shorter way or better pay was allowed. Yet, the Gentry of this County well
content themselves (...) the very badness of passage therein, as which secureth
their provisions at (...) prices; which, if mended, Higglers would mount, as
Hence Bagers.
bajulating them to London.

It is peculiar to this County, that all the rivers, (and those I assure you
are very many,) have their fountains and falls in this Shire, (though one may
seem somewhat suspicious) as being bred, living, (though not to their full
strength and stature of being navigable,) and dying therein, swallowed up by
the sea.

It is sufficient evidence of the plenty of this County, that the Toll of the
Wheat, Corn and Malt, growing or made about, and sold in the City of
Chichester, does amount yearly at a half penny a Quarter, to sixty So was I
informed by M^. Peckham the Recorder of (...).
pounds and upwards, (as the Gatherers thereof will attest) and the numbers of
the Bushels we leave to be Audited by better Arithmeticians.

It has been said that the first Lord Abergavenny, Viscount (...), and ^he
Earl of (...).
Baron, Viscount, and Earl in England, all three have, and have had, for some
term of time their chief residence in this County; and it is more civility to
believe all then to deny any part of the repo^t, though, sure I am, this
observation was discomposed at the death of the Earl of Essex, since which time
Viscount Hereford is the first Person in England of that Dignity.

Natural Commodities.
Iron.
Great the necessity hereof, some Nations having lived in the ignorance of Gold
and Silver, scarce any without the use of Iron. Indeed we read not of it in
making the Tabernacle (though from no mention no use thereof, therein cannot
infallibly be inferred) which being but a Slight and Portable Building, Brass
might supply the want thereof* But in the Temple which was a firmer fabric 1
Cron. (...). 2.
we find Iron for the things of Iron, and a hundred 1 Cron. 29. ^
thousand Talents of that Metal employed therein.

Great the quantity of Iron made in this County, whereof much used therein, and
more exported thence into other parts of the Land, and beyond the Seas. But
whether or no the private profit thereby will at long-running countervail the
public loss in the destruction of wood^, I am as unwilling to discuss as
unable to decide. Only let me add the ensuing complaint, wherein the
Timber Trees of this County deplore their condition, in my opinion richly worth
the Readers perusal;

Joves Oak, the warlike Ash, veyn'd Elm, the softer Beech,
Short Hazell, Maple plain, light Aspe, the bending Wych,
Tough Holly, and soomth Birch, must altogether burn:
What should the Builders serve, supplies the Forgers turn;
When under public good, base private gain takes hold,
And we poor woeful woods, to ruin lastly sold.
But it is to be hoped, that a way may be found out, to ^harke Seacole in such
manner, as to render it useful for the making of Iron. All things are not
found out in one age, as reserved for future discovery, and that perchance may
be easy for the next which seems impossible to this generation.

Talk.
Talk (in Latin Talchum) is a cheap kind of Mineral, which this County
plentifully affords, though not so fine as what is fetched from Venice. It is
white and transparent like Crystal, full of strekes or veins, which prettily
scatter themselves. Being calcined and variously prepared, it makes a curious
White wash, which some justi^y lawful, because Clea^ing not Changing
Complexion. It is a great Astringent, yet used but little in Physic. Surely,
Nature would not have made it such an Hypocrit to hang out so fair a sign,
except some guest of Quality were lodged therein, I mean, it would not appear
so beautiful to the eye except some con^ealed worth were couched therein;
Inclining me to believe that the virtue (...) is not yet fully discovered.

Wheat ears.
Wheat-ears is a bird peculiar to this County, hardly found out of it. It is so
called, because fattest when Wheat is r^pe, whereon it feeds; being no bigger
then a Lark, which it equalleth in the fineness of the flesh* far exceeds in
the fatness thereof. The worst is, that being only seasonable in the heat of
summer, and naturally larded with lumps of fat, it is soon subject to corrupt,
so that (though abounding within forty miles) London-Poulterers have no mind
to meddle with them, which no care in carriage can keep from Putrefaction. That
Palate-men shall pass in silence, who being seriously demanded his judgment
concerning the abilities of a great Lord, concluded him a man of very weak
parts, because once he saw him at a great Feast feed on CHICKENS when there
were WHEAT-EARS on the Table. I will add no more in praise of this Bird for
fear some female Reader may fall in longing for it, and unhappily be
disappointed of her desire.

Carpes.
It is a stately fish but not long See Memor^ble Persons in this County.
Naturalized in England, and of all Fresh Water fishes (the Ele only excepted)
lives longest out of his Proper Element. They breed (which most other fishes
do not) several Months in one year, though in cold Ponds they take no comfort
to increase. A learned Sir Francis Bacon in his History of life and death.
Writer observes they live but ten years, though others assign them a far
longer life.

They are the better for their age and bigness, (a rule which holds not in
other Fishes) * (...) and Janus D^branius.
and their Tongues by ancient Roman* Palate-men were counted most delicious
meat* though to speak Properly, they have either no Tongues in their Mouths, or
all their Mouths are Tongues, as filled with a Carneous substance, whilst their
Teeth are found in their throats. There is a kind of Frog which is a Professed
Foe unto them, insomuch that of a Hundred Carpes put into a Pond, not five of
them have been found therein a year after* And though some may say perchance,
two-leged Frogs stole them away, yet the strict care of their Owners in
watching them, disproved all suspicion thereof.

Now as this County is eminent for both Sea and River-(...), namely an Arundel
Mullet, a Chichester Lobster, a (...) Cockle, and an Ame^ly Trout. So Sussex
Mr. Isack (...) in his Complete Angler page (...).
abounds with more Carpes then any other of this Nation. And though not so
great as Jovius reports to be found in the Lurian Lake in Italy, weighing
more then fifty pounds, yet those generally of great and goodly* proportion. I
need not add, that Physicians account the galls of Carp^s, as also a stone in
their heads to be (...), only I will observe that because Jews will not eat
Caviare made of (...), (because coming from a fish wanting Scals, and therefore
forbidden in the Levitical Levit. 11. 12.
Law.) Therefore the Italians make greater profit of the Spaun of Carps,
whereof they make a Red Caviare well pleasing the Jews both in Palate and
Conscience.

All I will add of Carps is this, that Ramu^ himself does not so much redound
in Dichotomies as they do. Seeing no one bone is to be found in their body
which is not forked or divided into two parts at the end thereof.

Manufactures.
Great Guns.
It is almost incredible, how many are made of the iron in this County. Count
Gondomer well knew their goodness, when of K. James he so often begged the boon
to transport them.

A Monk of Mentz (some three hundred years since) is generally reputed the
first Founder of them. Surely ingenuity may seem transposed, and to have
crossed her hands, when about the same time a S^uldier found out Printing; and
it is questionable, which of the two Inventions has done more good, or more
harm. As for Guns, it cannot be denied, that though most behold them as
Instruments of cruelty; partly, because subjecting valor to chance; partly,
because Guns give no quarter; (which the sword sometimes does,) yet it will
appear, that since their invention, victory has not stood so long a Neuter,
and has been determined with the loss of fewer lives. Yet do I not believe
what Soldiers commonly say, that he was cursed in his Mothers belly, who is
killed with a Cannon, seeing many prime persons have been slain thereby.

Such as desire to know the pedigree, and progress of great Guns in England,
may be pleased to take notice,

1. Anno 1535. John Oaven was the first Stows Annals page 572.
Englishman, who in England cast brass Ordnance, Cannons, Culverings, etc. 2.
Peter Idem page 584.
Baud a Frenchman, in the first of King Edward the sixth, was the first who in
England cast Iron-Ordnance, Falcons, Falconers, Minions, etc. 3. Thomas Johnson
covenant-servant to Peter aforesaid, succeeded and exceeded his Master, casting
them clearer and better. He died about 1600.
Some observe, that God has so equally divided the advantage of weapons,
between us and Spain, that their steel makes the best swords, our iron the most
useful Ordnance.

Glass.
Plenty hereof is made in this County, though not so fine as what Tire
afforded, fetched from the river Belus, and the Cendevian Lake; nor so pure as
is wrought at Chiosa nigh Venice, whereof the most refined falls but one degree
short of Crystal, but the course glasses here serve well enough for the
common sort, for vessels to drink in. The workmen in this mystery are much
increased since 1557. as may appear by what I read in an Tho. Charnock in his
Breviary of Philos^phy, cap. 1.
Author writing that very year.

As for Glass-makers they be scant in this land,
Yet one there is as I do understand,
And in Sussex is now his habitation,
At Chiddingsfold ^e works of his occupation.
These brittle commodities are subject to breaking upon any casualty, and
hereupon I must transmit a passage to posterity, which I received from an
Author beyond exceptions.

A noble man, who shall be nameless, living not many miles from Cambridge, (and
highly in favor with the Earl of Leicester,) begged of Queen Elizabeth all the
plate of that University, as useless for Scholars, and more for State then
Service, for Superfluity then Necessity. The Queen granted his suit, upon
condition to find glasses for the Scholars. The Lord considering this might
amount to more then his Baronry, would maintain (except he could compass the
Venetian Artist, who, as they say, could make Vitra sine vitio fragilitatis
pellucida; yea, could consolidate glass to make it malleable,) let his
petition, which was as charitable as discreet, sink in silence.

By the way be it observed, that though course* glass-making was in this County
of great antiquity, yet, The first Stows (...) p^g. 1040.
making of Venice-glasses in England, began at the Crochet Friars in London,
about the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, by ^ne Jacob Venaline, an
Italian.

The Buildings.
Chichester Cathedral is a fine fabric, built (after it had been twice
consumed with fire) by Bishop (...) (the second of the Name) about the year
1193. Country folk are confident in their tradition, that the Master-workman
built Sarisbury, and his Man the Church of Chichester, and if so, s^quitur
Dominum non Passibus aequis. But P^oportion of Time, -- confuteth the conceit,
seeing S^ffride flourished under King John, -- and Bishop Poor (the Founder of
Sarisbury) lived much later under King Hen^y the third.

Now though (...) bestowed the Cloth and Making on the Church, Bishop Sherborn
gave the Trimming and best Lace thereto, in the reign of King Henry the
seventh. I am sorry I can follow the Allegory so far, being (...) that now it
is not only Seam ripped, but Torn in the whole-cloth, having lately a great part
thereof fallen down to the ground.

Arundel Castle is of great esteem, the rather because a Local-Earldome is
cemented to the wall^ thereof. Some will have it so n^med from Arundel the
Horse of Beavoice the great Champion. I confess it is not withont precedence in
Antiquity, for Places to take names from Horses, meeting with the Promentory
Mela, ^nias, (...), (...).
Bucephalus in Peleponesus, where some report the Horse of Al^xander buried,
and B^llonius will have it for the same cause called Cavalla at this day. But
this Castle was so called long before that Imaginary Horse was foled, who
cannot be fancied elder then his Master Beavoice, flourishing after the
Conquest, long before which Arundel was so called from the river Arund ^unning
hard by it.

^etworth, the house of the Earls of Northumberland is most famous for a
stately Stable, the best of any Subjects in Christendom. Comparisons must move
in there own ^pheres, and Princes only are meet to measure with Princes: tell me
not therefore of the Duke of Saxony his Stable at Dresden, wherein are ^n (...)
(...) and eight horses of service, (with a Magazene out of which he can Arm
thirty thousand Horse and Foot at a days warning,) that Elector being the most
Potent Prince in the Empire. But is not the proportion fair, that ^etworth
Stable affords standing in state for threescore horse, with all necessary
accommodations?

Wonders.
Expect not here, I should insert, what William of Newbury writes, (to be
recounted rather amongst the Untru^hs then Wonders) viz. That in this County
not far from B^ttail-Abby, in the Place where so great a slaughter of the
Englishmen was made, after any shower, presently sweateth forth very fr^sh
blood out of the Earth, as if the Evidence thereof did plainly declare the
voice of Blood there shed, and cries still from the Earth unto the Lord.

This is as true, as that in white chalky Countries (about Baldock in Hartford
shire) after rain run rivolets of Milk; Neither being any thing else then the
water discolored, according to the Complexion of the Earth thereabouts.

Proverbs.
He is none of the Hastings]

This Proverb though extended all over England, is properly reduceable to this
County as Originated there, for there is a Haven Town named Hastings therein,
which some erroneously conceive so called from have or speed, because William
the [afterwards] Conqueror Landing there, did as Matthew Paris says with Have
or Speedily erect some small Fortification. But sure it is that there is a
Noble and Ancient family of the Hastings in this Land, (I will not say first
taking their Name from this Town) who formerly were Earls of Pembroke, and
still are of Huntington.

Now men commonly say they are none of the Hastings, who being slow and slack
go about business with no agility. Such they also call [dull Dromedaries] by a
foul mistake, merely because of the affinity of that name to our English word
Dreaming, applied to such who go slowly and sleepily about their Employment.
Whereas indeed D^omedaries are Creatures of a Constant and Continuing
Swiftness, so called from the Greek word Dremo to Run, and are the (...) for
travel for the Eastern Country.

Martyrs.
Grievous the persecution in this County, under John Christopherson the Bishop
thereof. Such his Havoc in burning poor Procestants in one year, that had he
sat long in that See, and continued after that rate, there needed no Iron-mills
to rarify the Woods of this County, which this BONNER junior would have done of
himself.

I confess the Papists admire him as a most able and profound Divine, which
minds me of an Epigran made by one, who, being a Suitor to a surly and
scorn^ull. Mistress, after he had largely praised her rare parts and Divine
perfections, concluded,

She has too much Divinity for me; Oh! that she had some more Humanity!

The same may this Diocese say of Christopherson, who, though carrying much of
Christ in his Surname, did bear nothing of him in his Nature, no meekness,
mildness or mercy, being addicted wholly to cruelty and destruction, burning no
fewer then ten in one fire in Jews, and seventeen others at several Times in
sundry Places.

Cardinals.
HERBERT de BOSHAM was born at (...) (...) in his (...) of (...). page 165
Bosham a goodly manor in this County, (which Earl Godwin craftily (...)
(...). in (...).
kissed out of the Archbishop of Canterbary,) and being a good Scholar he was
a Manubus (I mean to write, not to fight for him) unto Thomas Becket
Archbishop of Canterbury. He was present at his Murder-martyring, and h^d the
discretion to make no resistance, lest he had been sent the same way with his
Master. However amongst many other books, he wrote the story of his M^sters
death. Going over into Italy he was by Pope Alexander the third m^de Arch
bishop of Beneventum, and in the Month of December 1178. created Cardinal, but
by what title, it is unknown, as also is the exact date of his death.

Prelates.
JOHN PECKHAM born of obscure The substance of his life is taken out of Bishop
(...) in (...) Catalogue of Arch-b^shops of (...).
Parents in this County, bred when a boy in Jews, When a Youth, a Franciscan
in Oxford, when a Young man, in Paris, when a Man, he lived in Lions, (where he
became Canon) when a Grave-man in Rome, there made Auditor of causes in that
Court, when an Old man in Canterbury, preferred against his will (except out of
cunning he would seem Courted into what he Coveted) by the Popes plenary power,
to be Arch bishop thereof.

Peckham believed the Pope invited him freely to that place, when soon after he
was called upon to pay a sad reckoning, no less then four thousand marks. A
worthy man he was in his place, who neither feared the Laytie nor flattered the
Clergy, unpartially imposing on both (if appearing Pecant) most severe penance:
he was a great punisher of Pluralists, and injoyner of Residence.

His Canons place at Lions, he not only kept during his life, but left it to
his successors, who held it in Commendam some hundred years afterward. Loath
they were to part with it as a safe retreating place, in case our English Kings
should banish them the Realm. Besides it was a Convenient Inn for them to
Lodge at, as almost in the Midway of their journey betwixt Canterbury and Rome.

He sat Archbishop almost fourteen years, built and endowed a College at
Wing ham, yet left a great estate to his Kindred. I believe his wealth well
gotten, because the land purchased therewith has lasted so long in the Lineage
of his Allies, in this and the next County, even to our age, he died Anno Dom.
1294.

ROBERT WINCHELSEY. Although Bishop Godwin Out of whom the (...) is (...) of
what follows.
says, ubi natus traditur, opinor, a nemine, yet considering the custom of
the Clergy in that age, none can doubt his birth in this County, except any
should deny Winchelsey to be therein. He was bred in the neighboring Shire of
Kent, where he was such a proficient in Grammar Learning, all did foretell,
that he, [then the Arch-Scholar in the School] in due time would be Archbishop
of the Sea of Canterbury.

He was afterward admitted in Merton-colledge in Oxford, went thence to Paris,
where he took the degree of Master of Arts, and became Rector (perchance no
more then a Regent amongst Us,) of that University; returning to Oxford he
there proceeded Doctor of Divinity, and became Chancellor thereof,
successively Canon of Paul's, ArchDeacon of Essex and Arch bishop of Canterbury.
He went to Rome, to procure his Pall of Pope Celestine.

This is that Celestine, formerly an Eremite, whom a Cardinal (afterward his
Successor by the Name of Boniface the eighth) persuaded, by a voice through a
hollow-trunk to resign his Popedom, and return into the wilderness, which he
did accordingly. Herein his Holiness did trust the Spirit before he did Joh. 4.
1.
try it, contrary to the counsel of the Apostle. But this Pope appearing
Fallible in his Chamber, if in his Chair and consul^ing his Conclave of
Cardinals, no doubt would not have been deceived.

He easily obtained his Pall, and refused a Cardinals Cap offered unto him,
returning to Canterbury, he was there solemnly inthroned, and on the same day
Consecrated one Bishop, bestowed 12. rich Benefices on 12. Doctors, and 12.
meaner Livings on as many Bachelors in Divinity.

Confiding in the Canon of the Council of Lions, which forbad the Clergy to pay
any taxes to Princes, without the consent of the Pope, he created much
molestation to himself, King Edward the first useing him very harshly, till at
last he overcame all with his patience. For the main he was a worthy Prelate,
excellent Preacher, being Learned himself, he loved and preferred Learned men.
Prodigious his Hospitality, Godwin in Car: of Bishops of Canter, page 147.
being reported that Sundays and Fridays he fed no fewer, then four Thousand
men when corn was cheap, and five Thousand when it was dear, and because it
shall not be said, but my Belief can be as Large as his Bounty, I give credit
thereunto. Otherwise it seems suspicious, as a mock-imitation of those self
same Numbers of Persons, which Christ at Man 15. 38.
two Mat. 14. 21.
several times miraculously fed with Loafes and Fishes. His Charity went home
to them, which could not come to it, sending to such, who were Absented by
their Impotencies.

After his Death, happening Anno Domini 1313. he was accounted ( though not the
Popes) the Poor-mans Saint, (Bountiful men will always be Canonized in the
Calender of Beggars,) Poor-people repairing in Flocks, to the place of his
burial, and superstitiously praying unto him, and they could best tell,
whether they found as much Benefit from his Tomb when dead, as at his Table
when living.

THOMAS I Bale, Mr. Parker in Ant. Brit. I Pits, Bishop Godwin, and Sir Henry
Savile in his life prefac'd to his book de causa D^i.
BRADWARDINE was descended of an ancient family at Bradwardine in
Hereford-shire, who removing thence, had settled themselves for three
generations in this County, where this Thomas was born, in or near the City of
Chichester. He was bred Fellow of Merton-colledge in Oxford, where he became a
most exquisite Mathematician, and deep Divine, being commonly called Doctor
Profundus. He was Confessor to King Edward the third, and some impute our great
Conquest in France, not so much to the Prowess of that King as to the Prayers
of this his Chaplain. He constantly preached in the Camp, Industry to Officers,
Obedience to Common-souldiers, Humility to all in good, Patience in bad
success. He exhorted them to be Pious to God, Dutiful to their King, Pi^full
to all Captives, to be Careful in making, Faithful in keeping articles with
their enemies. After the death of Strafford, he was made Archbishop of
Canterbury, and at Avenion (where the Pope then resided) received his
Consecration. Here he was accounted (...), somewhat Clownish by the Romish
Court, partly, because he could not mode it with the Italians, but chiefly,
because money being the general Turn-key to Preferment in that place, he was
mee^ly advanced for his merit.

But that which most recommended his memory to posterity, is that worthy book
he made de Causa Dei, wherein speaking of Pelagius, he complains in his
second Book, that, Totus paene mundus, ut timeo and doleo, post hunc abiit, and
erroribus ejus fave^. I fear and lament that almost the whole world runs after
him, and favors his errors. Bradwardine therefore undertook to be Champion for
Grace and Gods cause, against such who were not defensores, sed deceptores, sed
inflatores, sed praecipitatores liberi arbitr^, as August, de Great. and lib. a
bit. cap. 14.
Augustine calls them, and as the same Father says of Cicero Idem de civ. D
i lib. 5. cap. 9
dum liberos homines esse volunt, faciunt sacrilegos. He died at Lamb^th in
October Anno Dom. 1349.

THOMAS ARUNDELL was the fourth Archbishop of Canterbury who was born in this
County, Son he was to Robert, Brother to Richard Fitz-Alen both Earls of
Arund^ll. Herein he stands alone by himself, that the Name Arundell speaks
him both Nobleman and Clergyman, the Title of his fathers honor, and place of
his own birth, meeting both in the Castle of Ar^ell.

It was ^ither his Nobility, or Ability, or Both, which in him did supplere
aetatem, qualifying him to be Bishop of Ely at Godwin in the Arch. bishops of
C^t.
twenty two years of age. He was afterward Archbishop of York, and at last of
Canterbury 1396. and three several times Lord Chancellor of England, viz. In
the Tenth of Richard the second, 1386. in the Fifteenth of Richard the second,
1391. the Eleventh of Henry the fourth, 1410.

By King Richard the second, when his Brother the Earl of Arundell was
beheaded, this Thomas was banished the land. Let him thank his Orders for
saving his Life, the Tonsure of his hair for the keeping of his Head, who
otherwise had been sent the same path a^ pase with his Brother.

Returning in the First of K. Henry the fourth, he was restored to his
Archbishopric. * Reader, for the greater credi^ of this Cou^y, I put there
four Arch-bish^p together, otherwife Bishop Burwos^ (^olloing hereafter) in
time preceded the two latter.
Such who commend his Courage for being the Churches Champion, when a powerful
Party in Parliament pushed at the Revenues thereof, condemn his Cruelty to the
Wicklevites, being the first, who persecuted them with Fire and Faggot. As for
the manner of his death, we will neither carelessly wink at it, nor curiously
stare on it; but may with a serious look solemnly behold it. He who had stopped
the mouths of so many servants of God from preaching his Word, was himself
famished to Death by a swelling in his Throat. But seeing we bear in our Bodies
the seeds of all Sicknesses, (as of all sins in our souls) it is not good to be
over-bold and buisie in our censures on such Casualties. He died February 20.
1413. and lies buried in his Cathedral at Canterbury.

HENRY BURWASH so named says my Weavers fun. monument page 213.
Author (which is enough for my discharge) from Burwash a Town in this County.
He was one of Noble Alliance. And when this is said, all is said to his
Commendation, being otherwise neither good for Church nor State, Sovereign nor
Subjects, Covetous, Ambitious, Rebellious, Injurious.

Say not, what makes he here then amongst the worthies; for though neither
Ethically nor Theologically, yet Historically he was remarkable, affording
something for our Information, though not Imitation.

He was recommended by his kinsman B^rtholomew de Badilismer (Baron of Leeds in
Kent) to K. Edward the second, who preferred him Bishop of Lincoln. It was not
long be fore falling into the Kings displeasure his Temporalities were seized
on, and afterward on his submission restored. Here, in stead of new Gratitude,
retayning his old Grudge, he was most forward to assist the Queen in the
deposing Godwin on the Bishops of L^ncoln.
of her husband. He was twice L. Treasurer, once Ch^ncellor, and once sent over
Ambassador to the Duke ^. Philipot in his Catalogue of Chancello^rs.
of Bavaria. He died Anno Domini 1340. Such as mind to be merry may read the
pleasant Story of his apparition, being condemned after Death to be viridis
Godwin ut prius.
viridarius, a green ^rester, because in his life time he had violently
enclosed other men's Grounds into his Park. Surely such Fictions keep up the
best Park of Popery, [Purgatory] whereby* their fairest Game and greatest Gain
is preserved.

Since the Reformation.
WILLIAM BARLOW D. D. My industry has not been wanting in Qaest of the place
of his Nativity; but all in vain. Seeing therefore I cannot fix his character
on his Cradle, I am resolved (rather then omit him) to fasten it on his Coffin,
this County where in he had his last preferment.

A man he was of much Motion and Promotion; First, I find him Canon Regular of
S^. (...) in Essex, and then Prior of Bisham in Barkshire.

Then preferred by K. Henry the eighth Bishop of St. Asaph, and consecrated
Febr. 22. 1535.

Translated thence the April following to St. David's remaining 13. years in
that See.

In the Third of King Edward the sixth, he was removed to the Bishopric of
Bath and Wells.

Flying the Land in the Reign of Queen Mary, he became Superintendent of the
English Congregation at Embden.

Coming back into England, by Q. Elizabeth he was advanced Bishop of Chichester.

It is a Riddle, why he chose rather to enter into new First Fruits, and begin
at Chichester, then return to Bath a better Bishopric. Some suggest, that he
was loath to go back to Bath, having formerly consented to the Expilation of
that Bishopric, whilst others make his consent to signify nothing, seeing
empowered Sacrilege is not so mannerly as to ask any, By your leave.

He had a numerous and prosperous female-Issue, as appears by the Epitaph on
his Wifes Monument in a Church in Hant-shire, though one shall get no credit in
translating them.

Hic Agathae tumulus Barloi, Praesulis inde,
Exulis inde, iterum Praesulis, Uxor erat.
Prole beata fuit, plena annis, quinque suarum,
Praesulibus vidit, Praesulis ipsa, datas.
Barlows Wife Agathe does here remain,
Bishop, then Exile, Bishop then again*
So long she lived, so well his Children sped,
She saw five Bishops her five daughters wed.
Having sat about ten years in his See, he peaceably ended his Life, Dec. 10.
1569.

WILLIAM JUXTON was born at Chichester in this County, bred Fellow in Saint
Johns-colledge in Oxford, where he proceeded Bachelour of Law; very young, but
very able for that degree, and afterward became Doctor in the same Faculty,
and President of the College.

One in whom Nature has not Omitted, but Grace has Ordered, the Tetrarch
Humor of Choler, being Admirably Master of his Pen and his Passion, for his
Abilities he was successively preferred by King Charles the first Bishop of
Hereford and London, and for some years Lord Treasurer of England. A
troublesome place in those times, it being expected that he should make much
Brick, (though not altogether without, yet) with very little Straw allowed unto
him. Large then the Expenses, Low the Revenues of the Exchequer. Yet those
Coffers which he found Empty, he left Filling, and had left Full, had Peace
been preserved in the Land, and he continued in his Place. Such the mildness of
his temper, that Petitioners for Money, (when it was not to be had) departed
well pleased with his denialls, they were so civilly Languaged. It may justly
seem a wonder, that, whereas few spoke well of Bishops at that time, and Lord
Treasurers at all times are liable to the Complaints of discontented people,
though both Offices met in this man, yet with 3 John 12.
Demetrius, he was well reported of all men, and of the truth it self.

He lived to see much shame and contempt undeservedly poured on his Function,
and all the while possessed his own soul in patience. He beheld those of his
Order to lose their votes in Parliament, and their insulting enemies hence
concluded, (Loss of speech being a sad Symptom of approaching Death,) that their
Final extirpation would follow, whose own experience at this day gives the Lie
to their malicious Collection. Nor was it the least part of this Prelates
Honor, that amongst the many worthy Bishops of our Land, King Charles the
first, selected him for his Confessor at his Martyrdom. He formerly had had
experience [in the case of the Earl of Strafford] that this Bishops Conscience
was bottomed on Piety not Policy, the reason that from him he received the
Sacrament, good Comfort and Counsel, just before he was Murdered. I say just
before that Royal Martyr was Murdered; a Fact so foul, that it alone may
confute the error of the Pelagians, maintaining, that all Sin comes by
imita^ion, the Universe not formerly affording such a Precedent, as if those
Regicides had purposely designed to disprove the Observation of Solomon, that
there is No new thing under the Sun. King Charles the second, Anno Domini 1660.
preferred him Archbishop of Canterbury, which place he worthily graceth at the
writing hereof, Feb. 1. 1660.

ACCEPTUS FRUIN D. D. was born at -- in this County, bred Fellow of
Magdalen-colledge in Oxford, and afterward became President thereof, and after
some mediate preferments, was by King Charles the first, advanced Bishop of
Coventry and Lichfield, and since by King Charles the second, made Archbishop
of York.

But the matter whereof Porcellane or China dishes are made, must be ripened
many years in the earth, before it comes to full perfection. The Living are not
the proper objects of the Historians Pen, who may be misinterpreted to flatter,
even when he falls short of their due Commendation, the Reason why I add no
more in the praise of this worthy Prelate. As to the Nativities of
Archbishops, one may say of this County, many Shires have done worthily, but
SUSSEX surmounteth them all, having bred Five Archbishops of Canterbury, and at
this instant, claiming for her Natives the two Metropolitans of our Nation.

Statesmen.
THOMAS SACKVILL, son and heir to Sir Richard Sackvill (Chancellor, and
SubTreasurer of the Exchequer, and Privy-Counsellour to Queen Elizabeth) by
Winifred his wife, daughter to Sir John Bruges, was bred in the University of
Oxford, where he became an excellent Mills his Catalogue of honor page 412.
Poet, leaving both Latin and English Poems of his composing to posterity.
Then studied he law in the Temple, and took the degree of Idem ibidem.
Barrister; afterward he traveled into foreign parts, detained for a time a
prisoner in Rome, whence his liberty was procured for his return into England,
to possess the vast Inheritance left him by his father, whereof in short time
by his magnificent prodigality, he spent the greatest part, till he seasonably
began to spare, growing near to the bottom of his Estate.

The story goes, that this young Gentleman coming to an Alderman of London, who
had gained great Pennyworths by his former purchases of him, was made (being
now in the Wane of his Wealth,) to wait the coming down of the Alderman so
long, that his generous humor being sensible of the incivility of such
attendance, resolved to be no more beholding to Wealthy pride, and presently
turned a thrifty improver of the remainder of his Estate. If this be true, I
could wish that all Aldermen would State it on the like occasion, on condition
their noble debtors would but make so good use thereof.

But others make him the Convert of Queen Elizabeth, (his Cousin german once
removed) who by her frequent admonitions, diverted the torrent of his
profusion. Indeed she would not know him, till he began to know himself, and
then heaped places of honor and trust upon him, creating him

1. Baron of Buckhurst in this County, (the reason why we have placed him
therein,) Anno Dom. 1566. 2. Sending him Ambassador into France, Anno 1571.
into the Low Countries; Anno 1586. 3. Making him Knight of the Order of the
Garter, Anno 1589. 4. Appointing him Treasurer of England, 1599.
He was Chancellor of the University of Oxford, where he entertained Camdens'
Elizabeth in page 1592.
Q. Elizabeth with a most sumptuous feast. His elocution was good, but inditing
better, and therefore no wonder if his See fragmenta Regalia, in his Character
written by Sir Robert Naunton.
Secretaries could not please him, being a person of so quick dispatch,
(faculties, which yet run in the blood.) He took a Roll of the names of all
Suitors, with the date of their first addresses, and these in order had their
hearing, so that a fresh-man could not leap over the head of his senior, except
in urgent affairs of State.

Thus having made amends to his house for his misspent time, both in increase
of Estate and Honor, being created Earl of Dorset by King James, he died on
the 19. of April, 1608.

Capital Judges.
Sir JOHN JEFFRY Knight, was born in this County, as I have been informed. It
confirms me herein, because, he left a fair Estate in this Shire; (Judges,
genebuilding their Nest, near the place where they were Hatched,) which
descended to his Daughter. He so profited in the study of our Municipall-Law,
that he was preferred Secondary Judge of the Common Pleas, and thence advanced
by Queen Elizabeth, in Michaelmas Term, the nineteenth of her Reign, to be
Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, which place he discharged for the Term of
two years, to his great commendation. He left one only Daughter and Heir,
married to Sir Edward Mountague, (since Baron of Boughton) by whom he had but
one Daughter, Elizabeth, married to Robert Barty, Earl of Linsey, Mother to the
truly Honorable Mountague, Earl of Linsey and Lord Great Chamberlain of
England. This worthy Judge died in the 21. of Queen Elizab^h.

Soldiers.
The ABBOT of BATTLE. He is a pregnant Proof, that one may leave no Name, and
yet a good Memory behind him. His Christian or Surname cannot be recovered out
of our Holi^shed, Stow, Speed, etc.
Chronicles, which hitherto I have seen; But take his worth as follows:

King Richard the second in the beginning of his Reign was in Nonage, and his
Council, some will say, in Dotage, leaving the Land and Sea to defend
themselves, whilst they indulged their private Factions.

This invited the French to invade this County, where they did much mischief,
Plundering (the Thing was known in England before the Name) the people thereof,
and carrying away captive the Prior of Jews; And no wonder, if our Abbot was
startled therewith, seeing it may pass for a Proverb in these parts.

Ware the Abbot of Battle, When the Prior of Jews is taken Prisoner.

Wherefore (though no Sheriff) he got together (as well as he might) the Posse
Comitatus, and putting it in as good a posture of defense as the time would
permit, marched to Winchelsey and fortified it.

Some condemned him herein, it being incongruous for a Clergyman to turn
Soldier. They objected also, that he ought to have expected Orders from Above,
doing Rectum but not Recte, for want of a Commission.

Others commended him, to save and preserve, being the most proper Performance
of a Spiritual Person. That, in Hosts Publicos omnis Homo Miles. That though
it be high Treason for any to Fight a Foe in a Set field without Command from
the Supreme power, yet one may (if he can) repel a Rout of Armed Thieves
invading a Land, the first being the fittest Time for such a Purpose, the
Occasion it self giving (though no express) an Implicit Commission for the
same. This Abbot used rather the Shield then the Sword, being only on the
Defensive side.

Well, the French followed the Abbot, and besieged him in the Town of
Winchelsey. In Bravado they dared him to send out one, two, three, four or
more, to try the Mastery in fight, to be encountered with an equal number; But
the Abbot refused to retail his men out in such Parcels, alleging, that he was
a spiritual person, not to challenge but only defend.

Then the French let fly their great Guns, and I take it to be the first and
last time, they were ever planted by a Foreign Enemy on the English Continent,
and then roared so ^ud, that they lost their voice, and have been (blessed be
God) silent ever since.

The Enemy perceiving that the Country came in fast upon them, and suspecting
they should be surrounded on all sides, were fain to make for France as fast as
they could, leaving the Town of Winchelsey behind them, in the same form and
fashion wherein they found it.

I behold this Abbot as the Saver not only of Suffex, but England. For as
Dogs, who have once gotten an Haunt to worry sheep, do not leave it off till
they meet with their reward: So, had not these French felt the smart as well as
the sweet of the English Plunder, our Land, (and this County especially,) had
never been free from their incursions. All this happened in the reign of King
Richard the second, Anno Domini 13...

Sir WILLAM PELHAM Knight, was a Native of this County, whose ancient and
wealthy Family has long flourished at Laughton therein. His Prudence in Peace,
and Valor in War, caused Queen Elizabeth to employ him in Ireland, where he
was by the Privy Council, appointed Lord Chief Justice to govern that Land, in
the interim betwixt the death of Sir William Drury, and the coming in of Arthur
Gray Lord Lieutenant of Ireland.

Say not that he did but stop a Gap for a twelvemonth at the most; seeing it
was such a GAP, Destruction had entered in thereat to the final ruin of that
Kingdom, had not his Providence prevented it. For in this juncture of time,
Desmund began his Rebellion 1579. inviting Sir William to Camdens Eliz. anno
citato.
side with him, who wisely gave him the Hearing with a Smile into the Bargain.
And although our Knight (for want of force) could not cure the wound, yet he
may be said to have washed and kept it clean, resigning it in a recovering
condition to the Lord Gray, who succeeded him. Afterward he was sent over into
the Low Countries 1586* being Commander of the English Horse therein: and my
Idem anno 1586.
Author says of him, Brabantiam persultabat, He leaped-through Brabant;
Importing Celerity and Success, yea as much Conquest, as so sudden an
expedition was capable of. I suspect he survived not long after, meeting no
more mention of his Martial Activity.

The Shirleys.
Their ancient extraction in this County is sufficiently C^mdens Brit. in
Sussex.
known. The last age saw a leash of brethren of this family, severally eminent.
This minds me of the Roman Horatii, though these expressed themselves in a
different kind for the honor of their Country, pardon me if reckoning them up
not according to their age.

Sir ANTHONY SHIRLEY second Son to Sir Thomas, set forth from H^luits Voyages
part 3. page 598.
Plymouth May the 21. 1596. in a ship called the Bevis of Southampton, attended
with six lesser vessels. His design for Saint Thome, was violently diverted by
the contagion they found on the South coast of Africa, where the rain did stink
as it fell down from the heavens, and within six hours did turn into magots.
This made him turn his course to America, where he took and kept the City of
Saint Jago two days and nights, with two hundred and eighty men, (whereof
eighty were wounded in the service) against three thousand Portugalls.

Hence he made for the Isle of Fuego, in the midst whereof a Mountain
Aetna-like always burning, and the wind did drive such a shower of ashes upon
them, that one might have wrote his name with his finger on the upper deck.
However in this fiery Island, they furnished themselves with good water, which
they much wanted.

Hence he sailed to the Island of Margarita, which to him did not answer its
name, not finding here the Perl-Dredgers which he expected. Nor was his gain
considerable in taking the town of Saint Martha, the Isle and chief town of
Jamaica, whence he sailed more then thirty leagues up the river Rio-dolci,
where he met with great extremity.

At last, being diseased in person, distressed for victuals, and deserted by
all his other ships, he made by New Foundland to England, where he arrived
June 15. 1597. Now although some behold his voyage, begun with more courage
then counsel, carried on with more valor then advice, and coming off with more
honor then profit, to himself or the nation, (the Spaniard being rather
frighted then harmed, rather braved then frighted therewith,) yet unpartial
judgments, who measure not worth by success, justly allow it a prime place
amongst the probable (though not prosperous) English Adventures.

Sir ROBERT SHIRLEY youngest Son to Sir Thomas, was by his Brother Anthony
entered in the Persian Court. Here he performed great Service against the
Turks, and showed the difference betwixt Persian and English valor, the
latter having therein as much Courage, and more Mercy, giving Quarter to
Captives who craved it, and performing Life to those to whom he promised it.
These his Actions drew the Envy of the Persian Lords, and Love of the Ladies,
amongst whom one (reputed a kins-man to the great Sophy) after some Opposition,
was married unto him. She had more of Eb^ny, then Ivory, in her Complexion, yet
amiable enough, and very valiant, a quality considerable in that Sex, in those
Countries. With her he came over into England, and lived many years therein. He
much affected to appear in foreign Vestes, and as if his Clothes were his
limbs, accounted himself never ready till he had something of the Persian
Habit about him.

At last a Contest happening betwixt him and the Persian Ambassador, (to whom
some reported Sir Robert gave a Box on the Ear,) the King sent them both into
Persia, there mutually to impeach one another, and joined Doctor Go^gh, (a
Senior Fellow of Trinity-colledge in Cambridge,) in Commission with Sir Robert.
In this ^oyage, (as I am informed) both died on the Seas, before the
controverted difference was ever heard in the Court of Persia, about the
beginning of the reign of K. Charles.

Sir THOMAS SHIRLEY. I name him the last, (though the eldest Son of his Father)
because last appearing in the world, men's Activity not always observing the
method of their Register. As the Trophies of Miltiades would not suffer
Plutarch in his life.
Themistocles to sleep, so the Atchivements of his two younger brethren, gave
an Ala^m unto his spirit. He was ashamed to see them Worn, like flowers in the
Breasts and Bosoms of foreign Princes, whilst he himself withered upon the
stalk he grew on. This made him leave his aged Father and fair Inheritance in
this County, and to undertake Sea Voyages into foreign parts, to the great
honor of his Nation, but small enriching of himself, so that he might say to
his Son as Aeneas to Aescanius,

Disce puer Virtute^ ex me verumque Laborem, Fortunam ex aliis.

Virtue and Labor, Learn from me thy Father,
As for success, Child Learn from others rather.
As to the general performances of these three brethren, I know the Affidavit
of a Poet, carries but a small cre^it in the court of History, and the Comedy
made of them, is but a friendly foe to their Memory, as suspected more
accommodated to please the present spectators, then inform posterity. However
as the belief of Miti^ (when an Inventory of his adopted Sons misde^nours, was
brought unto him) embraced a middle and moderate way, nec omnia credere nec
nihil, neither to believe all things nor nothing, of what was told him: so in
the list of their Atchivements we may safely pitch on the same proportion, and
when abatement is made for poetical embelishments, the remainder will speak
them Worthies in their generations. The certain dates of their respective
deaths I cannot attain.

Physicians.
NICHOLAS HOSTRESHAM. Know, Reader, I have placed him in this County, REM.
only on presumption, that Horsham in this Shire (no such place otherwise in
England,) is contracted for Hostresham. He was a learned man, a most famous
Physician, and esteemed highly of all the Nobility of the Land, who coveted his
company on any conditions. It seems that he was none of those so pleasing and
conformable to the Humor of their Patients, as that they press not the true
Cure of the Disease, and yet none of those, who are so Regular in proceeding
according to Art for the Disease, as that they respect not sufficiently the
condition of their Patients, but that he was of a Middle Temper, and so in
effect was two Physicians in one Man. Many were the Books he wrote, reckoned
upby De Script. Brit. Cent. 8, Number. 8*
Bale and In Anno 1443.
Pitz, amongst which I take especial notice of one, contra dolorem renum, thus
beginning, Lapis quandoque generatur in renibus. I observe this the rather,
because his Practice was wholly at home, (it not appearing that he ever went
beyond the Sea,) and this is contrary unto the confidence of such, who have
vehemently affirmed, that the Stone was never heard of in England, until Hopps
and Beer made therewith, (about the year 1516.) began to be commonly used. He
flourished, Anno Domini 1443.

Writers.
LAURENCE SOMERCOTE was born says De Script. Brit. Cent. 4. Number. 2.
Bale in the South-part of the Kingdom. S. N.
But had, I am sure his best English preferment in Sussex, being Canon of
Chichester. After his breeding here under his Careful Parents, and Skillful
Masters, who taught him Logic and Rhetoric, he applied himself to the Study
of the Law, and attained to great Learning therein. Then leaving the Land, he
went to Rome, and repaited to (his Brother or Kinsman) Robert Somercote
Cardinal, who it seems procured him to be SubDeacon under the Pop^. He wrote
some Books both in Latin and French, and flourished in the year of our Lord
1240.

JOHN DRITON so is his Surname Englished by Bale, -- And why not as well John
Driby, (a V^llage in Lincolnshire) seeing no Driton in all England. The truth
is this, in Latin he wrote himself, de Arida Vill^, equivalent with Sicoa
villa or Sack-wil, a Surname most renowned in this County: and because it is
added to his Character, ex Illustri quadam Angliae familia procre^s, it suiteth
well with our conjecturing him this Countryman. He was bred according to the
Mode of that Age in France, and there became at Paris, Summus Gymnasii
Moderator, which (howsoever rendered in English) sounds a high place Conferred
on a Forreigner. In his time was much busling in the University, about an
Apocrypha Book, (patched together out of the Dreams of Joachime and Cyril two
Monks,) which was publicly read and commented on by many Admirers thereof, by
the name of the Eternal Gospel.

The Pope, who often Curses where God Blesses, here Blessed where God Cursed,
and notwithstanding the solemn Commination against such Additions to Scripture,
favored them, and (what a Charitable Christian can scarcely believe,) damned
their Opposers for Heretics, this our Sackwill bestirred himself, and with
William de Sancto Amore and other pious Men, opposed this piece of Imposture.

Pitz, in the Character of this our de Arida Villa, treads like a foundred
Horse on stones, mentioning only that he met with much disturbance -- without
any particulars thereof. At last this Eternal Gospel had a Temporal End, and
(with the Serpents of the Egyptian Inchanters which vanished away,) this
pretended Quint Essence Gospel sunk with shame into silence, whilst the other
four Gospells (with the Serpent of Moses) do last and continue. This our
Writer flourished 1260.

JOHN WINCHELSEY was bred in Oxford, and became a great Scholar therein. I am
not bound to believe Bale in full latitude, that he made a De Script. Brit.
C^nt. 5. Number. 11.
Centaur-Divinity out of Poets and Philosophers; but this I believe, that in
his old Age he turned a Franciscan, and when Gray, became a Green Novice of the
Order at Sarisbury. Many condemned him, that he would enter into such a life
when ready to go out of the world, and others of his own Covent commended him,
who being old, was concerned to find out the most compendious way to Heaven.
The year of his Probation was not ended, when he died and was buried in that
Covent Anno 1326.

Since the Reformation.
WILLIAM PEMBLE was born in this County, where his Parents had no plentiful
AMP.
Estate, but their wants were supplied (as to this their Sons education in
Learning,) by the bounty of John Barker of Mayfield in this Shire, Esquire. as by
the following passage may appear, written by Mr. Capel his worthy Tutor.

In the Epist. Dedicatory before his Lectures on the Sacram^nt.
You are the man, who supported the Vine, that bore this and many other
excellent grapes. His studies had shrunk and withered, even then, when they
were about to knit, had it not been for you and your Exhibitions; who have
raised up an able Scholar, a learned Divine, a well studied Artist, a skillful
Linguist, and (which is the soul of all) a very godly Minister.

So then, if I have missed Master Pembles native County, yet I shall be excused
by the known Proverb, Non ubi nascor, sed ubi pascor, Sussex affording him his
most effectu^l maintenance. He was bred in, (or if you will, he bred)
Magdalen-hall in Oxford, that house owing its late luster to his Learned
Lectures, the gravest in the University not disdaining their presence thereat.
He was an excellent Orator indeed, as who spoke nonex ore sed ex pectore, many
excellencies being in him; but above all, this was his Crown, that he
unfainedly sought Gods Glory, and the good of Men's Souls. He died in the flower
of his Age, as he was making his Lectures on the Prophecy of Zachary,
(finishing but nine chapters of fourteen) Anno Dom. -- of a burning fever.

THOMAS CHUNE Esquire, living at Alfriston in this County, set forth a small
Manual, entitled Collectiones Theologicarum Conclusionum. Indeed many have
much opposed it (as what book meets not with opposition?) though such as
dislike, must commend the brevity and clearness of his Positions. For mine own
part, I am glad to see a Lay-Gentleman so able and industrious. His book was
set forth 1635.

THOMAS MAY was born in this County, of a worshipful but decayed Family, bred
Fellow-commoner in Cambridge in Sidney college, where he seriously applied
himself to his studies. He afterward lived in Westminster, and about the
Court. He was an Elegant Poet, and translated Lucan into English. Now though
Scaliger be pleased to say Hypocritically of Lucan, Non canit sed latrat, yet
others (under the Rose) as judicious, allow him an excellent Poet, and loseing
no luster by Mr. Mays translation.

Some disgust at Court was given to, or taken by him, (as some will have it)
because his Bays were not gilded richly enough, and his Verses rewarded by King
Charles according to his expectation. He afterward wrote an History of this
State, in the beginning of our Civil Wars, and being my self (for my many
writings) one under the Authority of the Tongues and Pens of others, it ill
becomes me to pass any censure on his performance therein. Sure I am, if he
were a Biassed and Partial writer, he lies buried near a good and true
Historian indeed, (I mean Mr. Camden) in the West Side of the North Isle of
Westminster Abbey, dying suddenly in the night Anno Dom. 1652. in the 55. year
of his Age.

JOHN SELDOM, son of Thomas Seldom, was born at Salvington within the parish of
East Terring in this County, and the ensuing inscriptions being built three
stories high, will acquaint us with his age and parentage.

The lowest is written on the top stone of his sepulcher, being five foot deep
in the ground.

Hic inhumatur corpus Johannis Seldeni. The second is inscribed on a blew
marble stone, lying flat on the (...) in the Temple Church.

J. Seldenus, J. C. Hic situs est. The third is graven on the wall, in a
monument of white and black marble.

Johannis Seldenus Heic juxta situs, natus est decimo sexto Decembris MDLXXXIV.
Salvintoniae qui viculus est Terring occidentalis in Sussexiae maritimis,
parentibus honestis, Joannae Seldeno Thomae filio, e Quinis secundo, Anno
MDXLI. nato.

Et

Margareta filia and haerede unica Thomae Bakeri de Rushington, ex Equestri
Bakerorum in Cantio familia, filius (...) cunis superstitum unicus, Aetatis
fere LXX. annorum. Denatus est ultimo die Novembris, Anno salutis reparatae
MDCLIV. per quam expectat heic Resurrectionem faelicem.

He was first bred in Mr. Leigh of religious and learned men page 100.
Hart-hall in Oxford, then in the Inner Temple in London, where he attained
great skill in the Law, and all Antiquity. His learning did not live in a Lan^,
but traced all the Latitude of Arts and Languages, as appears by the many and
various works he has written, which people affect, as they stand affected
either by their Fancy or Function. Lay-gentlemen, preser his Titles of honor,
Lawyers, his Mare Clausum, Antiquaries his Spicelegium ad Edmearum, Clergymen
like best his book de Dis Syris, and worst his History of Tithes.

Indeed the body of that History did not more offend them in point of profit,
then the preface thereof in matter of credit. Such his insolent reflections
therein. Nor will it be impertinent here to insert a passage of consequence
which I find in a Modern Author of good Intelligence.

Master Extraneus Vapulans made by an Alter idem to Doctor Heylin page 167.
Seldom was no friend to Bishops, as constituted and established in the Church
of England. For, being called before the High Commission, and forced to make a
public acknowledgment of his error and offense gived unto the Church, in
publishing a book entitled, The History of Tithes, it sunk so deep into his
stomach, that he did never after affected the men, or cordially approved the
calling, though many ways were tried to gain him to the Churches interest.

To this his public acknowledgment I can say nothing, this I know, that a Mr.
Spencer keeper of the Library at Jesus-colledge.
friend of mine employed on a fair and honest account, to peruse the Library of
Archbishop Laud, found therein a large letter written to him, and subscribed
with Master Seldens own hand, wherein he used many expressions of his
Contrition, much Condemning himself for setting forth a book of that nature;
which Letter my aforesaid friend gave back again to Master Seldom, to whom (I
assure you) it was no unacceptable present.

But that which afterward entitled him to a general popularity, was his
pleading with Master Noy for a Habeas Corpus of such Gentlemen, which were
imprisoned for the refusal of the Loan. Hence was it that most men beheld
Master Seldom as their Common Council, and them selves as his Clients,
conceiving that the Liberty of all English Subjects was concerned in that Suit.
He had very many Ancient Coins of the Roman Emperors, and more modern ones of
our English Kings; dying exceeding wealthy. Insomuch, that naked charity, both
wished and hoped for a good new Coat at his hands, but mist of its Expectation.
The Archbishop of Armagh (to whom he was always most civil and respectfull,)
preached his Funeral Sermon. The Large Library which he left is a Jewel
indeed, and this Jewel long looked to be put into a New Cabinet, when one of
the Inns of Court (on which it was bestowed) should be pleased to provide a
fair and firm Fabric to receive it, but now is reposited ( Bodly within a
(...)) in the matchless Library of Oxford.

Romish Exiled Writers.
GREGORY MARTINE was born at Macfield in this County, bred (contemporary Pits
de Ang. script. Anno 1582.
with Campian,) Fellow of Saint Johns-colledge in Oxford. He was chosen by
Thomas Duke of Northfolk, to be Tutor to his Son Philip Earl of Arundell, and
well discharged his trust therein.

Going afterward beyond the Seas, and living some time in Doway and Rome, he
fixed at last in the English-colledge at Rhemes, where he was Professor of
Divinity. As he was Papal both in his Christian and Surname, so was he deeply
dyed with that Religion, writing many Books in the defense thereof, and one
most remarkable, entitled, A Detection of the corruptions in the English
Bible. Athaliah 2 Kings 11. 14.
did craftily to cry out first, Treason, Treason, when she was the greatest
Traitor her self; and this Martine, conscious of the many and foul corruptions
in his own Rhemish translation, politickly complained of the Faults in our
English Bible. He d^ed the 28. of October 1582. and lies buried in the Parish
Church of St. Stephens in Rhemes.

THOMAS STAPLETON was born at Henfield in this County, as Pitts Page 796.
his familiar friend does inform us. Object not that it is written on his Tomb
at Saint Peter's at Lovaine.

Thomas Stapletonus qui Cicestriae in Anglia Nobili loco Natus.

Chichester there not being taken restrictively for the City, but extensively
for the Diocese. His bare Surname is sufficient proof of his Gentile Birth.

Those of his own persuasion please themselves much to observe, that this
Thomas was born in the same year and month, wherein Sir Thomas Moor was
beheaded, as if Divine Providence had purposely dropped from Heaven, an Acorn
in place of the Oak that was ^ell'd.

He was bred in New college in Oxford, and then by the Bishop ( Christopherson
as I take it) made Cannon of Chichester, which he quickly quitted in the First
of Queen Elizabeth. Flying beyond the Seas, he first fixed at Doway, and there
commendably performed the Office of See his Epitaph in (...).
Catechist, which he discharged to his commendation.

Reader, pardon an Excursion caused by just Grief and Anger. Many counting
themselfs Protestants in England, do slight and neglect that Ordinance of God,
by which their Religion was set up, and gave Credit to it in the first
Reformation, I mean CATECHIZING. Did not nor Savior say even to Saint Peter
himself? feed my Lambs, feed my heep; And why Lambs first? 1. Because they were
Lambs before they were Sheep; 2. Because, if they be not fed whilst Lambs, they
could never be Sheep; 3. Because She^p can in some sort feed themselves, but
Lambs (such their tenderness) must either be fed, or famished. Our Stapleton
was excellent at this Lamb-feeding, from which Office he was afterward
preferred Kings Professor of Divinity in Lovain, and was for forty years
together, Dominus ad Oppositum, the Undertaker-General against all Protestants.
Dr. Whitacre Professor in Cambridge, experimentally professed, that Bellarmine
was the fairer, and Stapleton the shrewder adversary.

His preferment (in mine Eye) was not proportionable to his Merit, being no
more then Cannon and Master of a College in Lovain. Many more admired that
Stapleton mist, then that Allen got a Cardinals Cap, equalling him in
Strictness of Life, exceeding him in Gentility of Birth and Painfulness of
Writing for the Romish Cause. Such consider not that Stapletons Ability was
drowned with Allens Activity, and one Grain of the Statesman is too heavy for a
pound of the Student; Practical Policy in all Ages, beating Pen-pains out of
distance in the Race of Preferment. Stapleton died, and was buried in St.
Peter's in Lovain, Anno 1598.

Benefactors to the Public.
Reader, let not the want of Intelligence in me, be mis-interpreted want of
munificence in the natives of this County, finding but one most eminent, and
him since the Reformation.

RICHARD SACKVILL Eldest son of Thomas Earl of Dorcet, by Cecilly his Wife, had
his Barony (if not his Birth) at Buckhurst in this County. A Gentleman of
Singular learning in many Sciences and Languages; so that the Greek and Latin,
were as Mills in Catalogue of hon. page 418.
familiar unto him, as his own native Tongue. Succeeding his father in that
Earldom, he enjoyed his dignity not a full year, as lacking seven Weeks
thereof. Yet is there no fear that the shortness of his Earlship will make his
Name forgotten, having erected a Monument which will perpetuate his Memory to
all Posterity, viz. A College at East-greensted in this County, for one and
Thirty poor people to serve Almighty God therein. Endowing the same with three
hundred and thirty pounds a Year out of all his Land in England. By Margaret
sole daughter to Thomas Duke of Norfolk, he left two surviving sons, Richard
and Edward, both Persons of admirable parts, (successively Earls after him,)
and dying 1608. was buried at Withiham in this County.

Memorable Persons.
JOHN PALMER, HENRY PALMER, THOMAS PALMER,
Sons unto Edward Palmer, Esquire. of Angmarine in this County. A Town so called as
I am informed from Aqua Marina, or the water of the sea, being within two Miles
thereof, and probably in former Ages nearer thereunto.

Their Mother was daughter to one Clement of Wales, who for his effectual
assisting of King Henry the seventh, from his landing at Milford-haven, until
the Battle of Bosworth, was brought by him into England, and rewarded with good
Lands, in this and the next County.

It happened that their Mother being a full fortnight inclusively in Labor,
was on Whitsunday delivered of John her eldest son, on the sunday following of
Henry her second son, and the sunday next after of Thomas her third son. This
is that which is commonly called Superfoetation, (usual in other Creatures,
but rare in Women,) the cause whereof we leave to the disquisition of (...).

These Three were knighted (...) their (...) by King (...) the eighth, (who
never laid his sword on his Shoulders who was not a Man) so that they appear as
remarkable in their suc^esse as their Nativities. The truth hereof needs no
other Atrestation then the general and uncontrolled Tradition of their no
less worshipful then Numerous posterity in Sussex and Kent. Amongst whom I
instance in Sir Roger Palmer aged 80. years, lately deceased and (...) to our
late King, averring to me the faith hereof on his Reputation. The exact date of
these Knights deaths I cannot attain.

LEONARD (...) of (...) in this County, being much delighted in gardening, man's
Original vocation, was the (...) who brought over into England from beyond the
seas Carps and Pippins, the one well cooked delicious, the other cordial and
restorative. For the proof hereof, we have his own In his book of fishing,
(...) and planting.
word and witness, and did it, it seems, about the Fifth year of the reign of
King Henry the eighth, Anno Dom. 1514. The time of his death is to me unknown.

WILLIAM WITHERS born at Walsham in this County, being a Child of Eleven years
old, did Anno 1581. lie in a Trance Ten days without any sustenance, and at
last coming to himself, uttered to the Standers by, many strange speeches,
Inveighing against Pride, (...), and other Outrageous sins. But let the Credit
thereof be Charged on my Holinshed in (...) Chronicle page (...).
Authors account.

The Names of the Gentry of this County Returned by the Commissioners in the
twelsth year of King Henry the sixth.
Commissioners. S. Bishop of Chichester, John Earl of Huntington. Knights for
the shire. William St. John, William Sidney.

Abbatis de Bello Tho. de Echingham, mil. Hugon. Halsham, mil. Rog. Ferrys,
mil. Tho. Leukenore, mil. (...). (...), mil. Hen. Husee, mil. Rich.
Dalyngrigge, ar. Edw. Sakevyle, ar. Will. Ryman, ar. Rog. Gunter, ar. Rob. Lyle
Johan. Bartelet Will. Ernele Walt. Urry Johan. Lylye Ioh. Knottesford, ar.
Rich. Profyt Johan. Bolne Walt. Fust. Johan. Wilteshire Ade Iwode Will. Halle
de Or^ Ioh. (...) Tho. (...) Rob. Arnold (...). Peers Rich. Danmere Tho.
Stanton Tho. Cotes Ioh. Wyghtrynge Will. Hoar Johan. Sherar Johan. Hilly Will.
Warnecamp Will. Merwe Toh. Grantford Rad. Vest (...). Vest Johan. Hammes de
Padyngho Johan. Parker de Jews Jacob. Hon^wode Prior de Jews Abbatis de Ponte
Rober^ Rober. Abbatis de Begeham Prioris de Mechilham Prioris de Hasting Rich.
Waller, ar. Johan. Ledes, ar. Johan. Bramshel, ar. Rich. Cook, ar. Rich.
Farnfold Ioh. Burdevyle, ar. Rad. Rademeld, ar. Johan. Apsle Rich. Grene Tho.
Grene Will. Blast Rober. Tank Johan. Bradebrugge Will. Delve Will. Shreswell
Johan. Luniford Johan. Penhurst Johan. Goringe Sim. Cheyne Tho. Ashburnham
Rich. Clothule Rob. Hyberden Johan. Dragon Tho. Surflet Henrici Exton Io^.
Symond Will. Scardevyle Will. Yevan Ioh. Rombrigg Hen. Wendon Rich. Danel Rich.
Roper Tho. Fustyngden Rad. Shreswell
Sheriffs.
This County had the same Sheriffs with Surry, till the twelfth year of Queen
Elizabeth, and then for the four years following, had these Sheriffs peculiar
to it self.

Name Place Arms REG. ELIZA. (...) 9 Ed. Bellingha^, ar. Arg. 3. Hunters-horns
stringed S. 10 Ioh. Apseley, ar. Barry of 6. Ar. and G. a Cant. Er. 11 Hen.
Goring, ar. Arg. a Chev. twixt 3 (...) G 12 Edw. Carrell, ar. Harting Arg. 3.
Bars, and as many Mar^lets in Chief S.

Then were the two Counties reunited under one Sheriff, until the twelfth
year of K. Charles, when, being divided, these following were proper to Sussex
alone.

Sheriffs.
Name Place Arms REX. GARO. Anno 12 Edw. Bishop, mi. Parham Ar. on a Bend
coticed G. 3 (...). 13 Anth. Fowlc, ar. (...) Gu. a Lion Pass. Guard betwixt 3
Roses Or. 14 Anth. Forster, ar. Tronton S. on a Cheveron A^ 3 Scallopshels of
the field betwixt as many Pheons Or. 15 Edw. Apsley, ar. ut prius 16 Geo.
Churchar, ar. 17 Egid. Garton* ar. 18 19 Ioh. Baker, ar. 20 Edw. Pain, ar* Ar.
on a fess Engrailed G. 3 Roses Erm. 21 22 Tho. Eversfield, ar. Erm. on a Bend
S. 3 (...) Or. betwixt as many (...) S.

The Farewell.
For my Vale to this County, I desire to be their Remembrancer of the counsel
which their countryman, William Earl of Arundle, gave to his Son Henry
Fitzallen, last Earl of that Surname, viz. Never to trust their Camde^s Eliz.
Anno 1580.
Neighbors the French. Indeed for the present they are at amity with us, but
foreign friendship is ticklish, temporary, and lasts no longer then it is
advantaged with mutual interest. May never French land on this shore, to the
Loss of the English. But if so sad an Accident should happen, send then our
Suss^xians no worse success, then their Ancesters of Rye and Winchelsey had
1378. in the reign Stow his Cronicle in this year.
of Richard the second, when they embarked for Normandy. For in the night they
entered a Town, called Peter's port, took all such Prisoners who were able to pay
ransom, and safely returned home without loss, and with much rich Spoil, and
amongst the rest they took down out of the Steeple the Bells, and brought them
into England. Bells, which the French had taken forme^ly from these Towns, and
which did afterward Ring the more merrily, restored to their proper place,
with addition of much wealth to pay ^or the cost of their Recovery.

VVARWICK-SHIRE.
WARWICKSHIRE has Leicester and Northampton-shires on the East, Oxford, and
Gloucester-shires on the South, Worcester on the West, and Staffordshire on
the North thereof. In form at the first view in a Map it does pretend to some
Circularness, but attaineth no exactness therein, as extending Thirty three
miles, from North to South, though from East to West not distanced above twenty
six.

One said no less truly then merrily, It is the Heart but not the Core of
England, having nothing Course or Choaky therein. The Wood-land part thereof
may want what the Fieldon affords. So that Warwickshire is defective in
neither. As for the Pleasure thereof, an (...) Speed in his descript. of
Warwickshire.
Author is bold to say, that from Edg-hill one may behold it another Eden, as
Genesis 13. 10.
Lot did the Plain of Jordan, but he might have put in, It is not altogether so
well watered.

Natural Commodities.
Sheep.
Most large for bone, flesh and wool in this County, especially about
Worm-Leighton. In this Shire the complaint of J. Rous continues and
increases, that sheep turn Canibals, eating up men, houses, and towns, their
pastures make such depopulation.

But on the other side, it is pleaded for these Enclosures, that they make
houses the fewer in this County, and the more in the Kingdom. How come
buildings in great towns every day to increase? (so that commonly Tenants are
in before Tenements are ended,) but that the poor are generally maintained by
Clothing, the Staple-trade of the Nation.

Indeed Corn does visibly employ the poor in the place where it grows, by
Ploughing, Sowing, Mowing, Inning, Threshing: but Wool invisibly maintains
people at many miles distance, by Carding, Spinning, Weaving, Dressing, Dying
it. However an expedient might be so used betwixt Tillage and Pastureage, that
Abel should not kill Cain, the Shepherd undo the Husbandman, but both subsist
comfortably together.

Ash.
It is the Prince (Oak being allowed the King) of Eglish Timber, growing
plentifully in the Wood-land Part of this County. I confess it far short in
Sovereigness against Serpents of the Italian Ash, if true what Pliny reports,
(making Affidavit thereof on his own Experience, Not. Hist. (...). 16. cap. 13.
Experti prodimus) that a Serpent incircled with Fire and Boughs of Ash, will
in this Dilemma, put himself rather on the hazard of fire, then adventure on
the fence of Ashen Boughs. It is also far infe^iour in toughness to the
Spanish Ash, and yet a Stand of Pikes made of English Ash, and managed with
English-mens Arms, will do very well. But to wave the Warlike, and praise the
Peaceable use of the Ash, it is excellent for Plow-timber, besides many
Utensils within a Family. Being cut down Green it burns (a Peculiar
Privilege of this Wood) clear and bright, as if the Sap thereof, had a
fire-feeding Unctiousness therein. The fruit thereof is good in Physic, whose
Keys are opening of obstructions arising from the Spleen.

Cole.
Much hereof is dug up at Bedworth, which (in my Measuring) of all
Cole-mines, North of Thames, is the most Southward, adding much to their Price,
and Owners Profit. The making such Mines destroys much, but when made
preserves more Tim^er. I am sorry to hear, that those black Indies, both in
Quantity and Quality, fall short of their former fruitfulness, and I wish they
may recover their lost Credit, being confident, the Earth there will bleed
Profit as plentifully as any, had the Miners but the good Hap, to hit the right
vein thereof. As for Manufactures in this County, some Broad cloths are made in
Coventry, and ten might be made for one, if the mystery thereof were vigorously
pursued.

The Buildings.
Coventry much beholding to the Lady Godiva, (who took Order that her Charity
should not prejudice her Modesty, when she purchased the Privileges of this
Place) shows two fair Churches close together: How clearly would they have
shined, if set at competent Distance? whereas now, such their Vicinity, that
the Archangel eclypseth the Trinity.

Saint Ma^ies in Warwick a Beautiful Structure, owes its life to the Monuments
of the dead therein, most being Earls of Warwick. Of these, that in the Body of
the Church is the Oldest, that in the Chancell is the largest, that in the
Chapel (of Guilt Brass) the Richest, that in the Chapter House (of Fulke Lord
Brook) the latest. Greatness may seem in some fort to be buried in the Tomb of
the Earl of Leicester, and Goodness in that of the Earl of Warwick. Women are
most delighted with the Statue of the Infant Baron of Denby, and Scholars most
affected with the learned Epitaph of Sir Thomas Puckering. In a word, so
numerous is the Church with its Appendences, as I am informed by my Worthy
Friend, the Mr. Venour.
Minister, that he can accommodate One Clergyman, of all Dignities and Degrees,
to repose them, in several Chapells or Ve^ries by themselves.

Kenelworth, alias Kenilworth. It had the Strength of a Castle, and Beauty of a
Princes Court; Though most fair the Porch, no danger of the Castles running out
thereat, (like that of Mindus at the Gate) as most Proportionable to the rest
of the Fabric. I confess Handsome is an unproper Epithete of a Giant, yet
Neatness agrees with the Vastness of this structure.

Some Castles have been Demolished for security, which I behold destroyed, se
defendendo, without offense. Others Demolished in the heat of the Wars, which I
look upon as Castle-slaughter. But I cannot excuse the Destruction of this
Ca^tle, from Wilfull-murder, being done in cold blood, since the end of the
Wars.

I am not stocked enough with Charity to pity the Ruiners thereof, if the
materials of this Castle answered not their Expectation, who destroyed it.

Pass we now from the Preterperfect to the Present Tense, I mean from what was
once, to what now is most magnificent, the Castle of Warwick. It over-looketh
the Town which is washed and swept by Nature, so sweet on a Rising Hill, is the
situation thereof. The Prospect of this Castle is Pleasant in its self, and far
more to the Present Owner thereof, the Right Honorable Robert Lord Brook,
seeing the Windows look into Lands mostly of his Possession.

We will conclude the Buildings of this County, with the beautiful Cross of
Coventry. A Reformed Cross, (or Standard rather) without any Cross thereon,
being a Masterpiece, all for Ornament, nothing for Superstition, so that the
most curious, has just cause to commend, the most conscientious to allow, none
to condemn it.

It was begun 1541. the 33. and finished 1544. the 36. of King Henry the
eighth, at the sole cost of Sir William Hollis Lord Mayor of London,
Great-grand-father to the Right Honorable the Earl of Clare.

The Wonders.
At Lemington, within two Miles of Warwick, there issue out (within a stride)
of the womb of the Earth, two Twin-springs, as different in Taste and Operation,
as Esa^ and Jacob in disposition, the one Salt, the other Fresh. Thus the
meanest Countryman does plainly see the Effects, whilst it would pose a
Consulta^ion of Philosophers to assign the true cause thereof. To this
Permanent let me join a trans^ent Wonder which some was fifty years since. The
Situation of Coventry is well known, on a rising Hill, having no River near it,
save a small Brook, over which generally one may make a Bridge with a Stride.
Now here happened such an Inundation, on friday April the seventeenth 1607.
(attested under the Seal of the City, in the Majoralty of Henry S^wel) as was
equally admirable;

In 1. Coming about eight a clock in the morning, no considerable rain
preceding, which might suggest the least suspicion thereof. In 2. Continuance,
for the Space of three Hours, wherein it overflowed more then two hundred and
fifty dwelling Houses, to the great damage of the Inhabitants. In 3. Departure,
or vanishing rather, sinking as suddenly as it did rise.
Thus what the Scripture says of John 3. 5.
wind, was then true of the water, One cannot tell, whence it came, nor whither
it went. Leaving others to enquire into the second and subordinate, I will
content my self with admiring the Supreme Cause, observed by the Psalm. 107. 35.
Psalmist, He turns a wilderness into a standing water, and dry-ground into
waterSprings.

Medicinal waters.
At Newenham Regis there is a Spring, the water whereof drunk with Salt
loosneth, with Sugar binds the Body. It is also very Sovereigne against
Ulcers, Impostumes, and the Stone. This last I commend to the Readers choice
observation, the same Sp^d in his Description of Warwickshire.
Author affirming that it turns Sticks into Stone, and that he himself was an
Eyewitness thereof. Now, how it should dissolve the Stone in the Body of a
Man, and yet turn Wood into Stone, I leave to such who are naturae a
Sanctioribus Consiliis, at their next meeting at their Counsel-table, to
discuss and decide.

Proverbs.
He is the black Bear of Arden.]

Arden, is a Forest, anciently occupying all the Wood-land part of this
County. By the Black Bear, is meant Guy Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, who (besides
the allusion to his Crest) was Grim of Person and Surly of resolution, for when
this Bear had gotten Pierce Gavistone, (that Munkey and Minion of King Edward
the second) into his Chambers, he caused his Death at a Hill within two miles
of Warwick, notwithstanding all opposition to the contrary. The Proverb is
appliable to those who are not Terricula menta, bnt Terrores, no fancy-formed
Bug-bears, but such as carry fear and fright to others about them.

As bold as Beauchamp.]

Some will say the concurrence of these two B. B. did much help the Proverb,
and I think (as in others of the same kind) they did nothing hinder it. However
this quality could not be fixed on any name with more truth. If it be demanded,
what Beauchamp is chiefly meant, amongst the many of that Surname, Earls of
Warwick? The answer of mutinous people is true in this case, One and all.

1. William. 2. Guy. 3. Thomas. 4. Thomas. 5. Richard. 6. Henry.

Such a series there was of successive undauntedness in that noble Family. But,
if a better may be allowed amongst the best, and a bolder amongst the boldest;
I conceive that Thomas the first of that name, gave the chief occasion to this
Proverb, of whom we read it thus reported in our Out of which it is observed
by Mr. M lls in his Catal. of Honor page 804. and Mr. Dug^ale in his Earls of
Warwick.
Chronicles:

At Hogs in Normandy, in the year of our Lord 1346. being there in safety
arrived with Edward the third, this Thomas leaping over shipboard, was the
first man who went on land, seconded by one Esquire, and six Archers, being
mounted on a silly Palfray, which the sudden accident of the business first
offered to hand; with this company, he did fight against one hundred armed men,
and in hostile manner overthrew every one which withstood him: and so at one
shock, with his seven assistants, he slew sixty Normans, removed all
resistance, and gave means to the whole fleet to land the Army in safety.

The Heirs-male off this name, are long since extinct, though some deriving
themselves from the Heirs-generall, are extant at this day.

The Bear wants a Tail, and cannot be a Lion.]

Nature has cut off the Tail of the Bear close at the Rump, which is very
strong, and long in a Lion; for a great part of the Lions strength consists in
his Tail, wherewith (when Angry) he uses to Flap and Beat himself, to raise
his Rage therewith to the Height, so to render himself more Fierce and Furious.
If any ask why this Proverb is placed in Warwickshire? Let them take the
Ensuing Story for their satisfaction.

Robert Dudley Earl of Leice^er, derived his Pedigree from the ancient Earls of
Warwick, on which Title he gave their Crest, the Bear and Ragged Staff, and
when he was Governor of the Low Countries, with the high Title of his
Excellency, disusing his Own Coat of the Green-Lion with Two Tails, he signed
all Instruments with the Crest of the Bear and Ragged Staff. He was then
suspected by many of his jealous adversaries, to hatch an Ambitious design to
make himself absolute Commander (as the Lion is King of Beasts) over the
Low Countries. Whereupon some (Foes to his faction, and Friends to the
Dutch-freedome) wrote under his Crest, set up in Public places,

Ursa caret cauda, non queat esse Leo.

The Bear he never can prevail
To Lion it, for lack of Tail.
Nor is U^sa in the feminine merely placed to make the Verse; But because
Naturalists observe in Bears, that the Female is always the strongest.

This Proverb is applied to such who not content with their Condition, aspire
to what is above their worth to deserve, or Power to atchive.

He is true Coventry-blew.]

It seems the best blews, so well fixed as not to fade, are died in Coventry.
It is applied to such an one who is fidus Achates, a fast and faithful friend
to those that employ him. Opposite hereunto is the Greek Proverb, (...) in
Probl. Cur polypus mutat co^pus.
(...), Ignavi vertitur color, A Coward will change color, either for fear or
falsehood, when deserting those who placed confidence in him. As for those who
apply this Proverb to persons so habited in wickedness, as past hope of
amendment, under favor I conceive it a secondary, and but abusive sense
thereof.

Princes.
ANNE NEVILL Daughter and Co*heir to Richard Nevill Earl of Warwick, was most
prob^bly born in Warwick-castle. She was afterward married with a great portion
and inheritance, to Edward Prince of Wales, sole Son to King Henry the sixth. A
Prince, neither dying of Disease, nor slain in Battle, nor executed by Justice,
but barbarously butchered by Richard Duke of Gloucester.

Was it not then a daring piece of Court-ship in him, who had murdered her
husband, to make love unto her in way of marriage; and was not his success
strange in obtaining her, having no (...) to commend his person to her
affection? O the Impotency of the weaker sex, to resist the battery of a
Princely Suitor, who afterward became King by his own ambition! however her
life with him proved neither long nor fortunate.

It happened that there was the muttering of a marriage between Henry Earl of
Richmond, and Elizabeth eldest Daughter to Edward the fourth, so to unite the
houses of Lancaster and York. To prevent this, King Richard the third intended
to marry the Lady himself, so methodicall he was in breaking the Commandments
of the second Table. First Honor thy Father and Mother, when he procured his
Mother to be proclaimed a harlot, by a Preacher at Paul's Cross. Secondly, Thou
shall not kill, when he murdered his Nephews. Thirdly, Thou shall not Commit
adultery, being now in pursuit of an incestuous Copulation.

Say not that this match would nothing confirm his title, seeing formerly he
had pronunced all the Issue of King Edward the fourth as Illegitimate; for
first, that design was rather indevoured then effected, most men remaining
(notwithstanding this bastardizing attempt) well satisfied in the rightfulness
of their extraction. Secondly, they should or should not be Bastards, as it
made for his present advantage. Tyrants always driving that nail which will
go, though it go cross to those which they have driven before. Lastly, if it
did not help him, it would hinder the Earl of Richmond, which made that Usurper
half wild till he was wedded.

But one thing withstood his desires, this Anne his Queen was still alive,
though daily quarrelled at, and complained of (her son being lately dead) for
barren, and O what a loss would it be to nature it self, should her husband dye
without an heir unto his virtues! Well, this Lady understanding that she was a
burden to her husband, for grief soon became a burden to herself, and wasted
away on a sudden. Some think she went her own pace to the grave, while others
suspect a grain was given her to quicken her in her journey to her long home.
Which happened Anno Dom. 1484.

EDWARD PLANTAG^NET Son to George Duke of Clarence, may pass for a Prince,
because the last Male-heir of that Royal Family. Yea, some of his Foes feared,
and more of his Friends desired, that he might be King of England. His Mother
was Isabel, Eldest Daughter to Richard*Nevill Earl of Warwick. And he was born
in Mr. Dugdale in his Illustrations of Warwick (...), in the Catalogue of the
(...) thereof.
Warwick-castle.

As his Age increased, so the Jealousy of the Kings of England on him did
increase, being kept Close Prisoner by King Edward the fourth, Closer by King
Richard the third, and Closest by King Henry the seventh. This last, being of a
New Lineage and Surname, knew full well how this Nation hankered after the Name
of Plantagenet, which as it did out-syllable Tuthar in the Mouths, so did it
outvie it in the Affections of the English. Hence was it, that the Earl was
kept in so strict Restraint, which made him very weak in his Intellectuals, and
no wonder, being so sequestered from human converse.

It happened, a marriage was now in debate, betwixt Prince Arthur, and
Katherine Daughter to Ferdinand King of Spain, and the latter would not consent
thereunto, until to clear all Titles, this Edward Plantagenet were taken out
of the way. Thereupon he was Charged for intending an Escape out of the Tower,
(was he not a very fool indeed, if not desiring his own liberty?) which far
fetched deduction was (...) into High Treason. The simple Earl was persuaded by
his friend pretending Foes, to confess the fact as the only way to find favor,
and so freely acknowledging more against himself, then others could prove, yea,
or himself did intend, soon after found the Proverb true, Confess and be
Beheaded.

However the blood of this Innocent (so may he truly be termed take the word
in what sense you please) did not pass unpunished, and the Lady Katherine
Dowager was wont to acknowledge the death of her two Sons an ill success of her
match, as Heavens Judgment on her family, for the Murdering of this Earl,
which happened Anno Domini 1499.

Saints.
Saint WOLSTAN. There is some difference, but what is easily reconcilable,
about the place of his Nativity,

J. Pitz, de illust. Angliae Script. aetate undecima number. 174. Sanctus
Wolstanus natione Anglus Wigorniensis.

Hierom. Porter, in the Flowers of the lives of English Saints, p. 84. Saint
Wolstan was born in Warwickshire, of worthy and religious Parents.

The accommodation is easy, seeing a Warwickshire man by his County, may be a
Worcester-man by his Diocese, to which See the western moity of that County
does belong. Since I have learned from my worthy M^. Dugdale in (...)
illustrations of this County.
friend, that Long Irtington in this Shire, may boast of the birth of Saint
Wolstan. He afterward began Bishop of Worcester, and for his piety and
holiness was generally reverenced.

Indeed he was like Jacob, a plain man, with Nathaniel an Israelite without
guile, welt or guard. He could not Mode it, or comport, either with French
ficleness, or Italian pride, which rendered him at once hated by two Grandees,
K. Will. the Conqueror, and Lankfank the lordly Lombard Archbishop of
Canterbury.

These resolved on his removal, quarrelling with him that he could not speak
French, (a quality which much commended the Clergy in that Age to preferment,)
and command him to give up his Episcopal staff and ring into the hands of the
King. But old Wolstan trudged to the Tomb of King Edward the Confessor in
Westminster, who had been his Patron, and there offered up his Episcopal
Habilliments, These (said he) from you I received, and to you I resign them.

This his plain dealing so wrought on his adversaries, ( Honesty at long
running is the best Policy,) that he was not only continued, but countenanced
in his Bishopric, yea, acquired the reputation of a Saint. The greatest fault
which I find charged on his Memory, is his Activity in making W. Rufus King to
the apparent injury of Ro^ert his Elder Brother. But it is no wonder, if Clergy
men betray their weakness, who being bred in a Covent, quit Church business, to
intermedle with Secular matters. He died January 19. 1095.

Martyrs.
Name Place Vocation Martyred Time Laurence Sanders Priest Coventry Feb. 8.
1555. Robert Glover Mancetor Gentleman Coventry Sept. 20. 1555. Cornelius
Bongey Coventry Capper Coventry Sept. 20. 1555. John Careless Coventry Wever
King's Bench, London

To these let me add JULIUS PALMER a hopeful scholar, bred in
Magdalen-colledge in Oxford, and though burnt in Newbury, born at Coventry.
Ralph Bains Bishop of this Diocese, was the cause of much persecution therein.

Confessors.
JOHN GLOVER. David says, He shall deliver th^e from the snare of the Hunter.
Psalm. 91. 3.
Now Hunters often change their Hare, losing that which they first followed,
and starting another which they hunt and take: So it happened here. For this
John was the person by his persecutors designed to Death, who (after many
temporal and spiritual troubles) Miraculously escaped those Nimrods. Whilst
Robert Glover his younger Brother (of whom before) without their intention,
fell into their hands, and lost his life. Yet was there no mistake in Divine
Providence, making the Swervings and Aberrations of men, tend in a straight
line, to the accomplishing of his hidden Will and Pleasure.

Cardinals.
WILLIAM MAKLESFIELD was born says my Bishop Godwi^ in hi^ Catal. of Cardin.
p^g. 170.
Author (but with an abatement of a hic fertur) in the City of Coventry. He was
made Batchelour of Divinity at Paris, Doctor at Oxford and being a Dominican
was made General of their Order.

Pope B^nedict the eleventh, (who was of the same fraternity,) formerly his
familiar acquaintance, made him Cardinal, with the title of Saint Sabine. But
such his misfortune, that he was dead and buried at London, before his
Cardinals cap was brought to him.

What said David, He shall carry nothing away with him when he dies, Neither
shall his Psalm. 49. 17.
Pomp follow him. Yet this man's State endeavored to follow him as far as it
could. For his Cardinals cap being sent to London with great Solemnity, was
with much Magnificence set on the Bishop G^dwin ut supra.
Monument where he was buried. And perchance this cap did him as much good when
he was dead, as it would have done, if he had been living. Sure I am, that
F^ithfull Linen did him far more service, which adventured to go down with him
into the grave, for the winding of his body therein.

Bishop Go^win in his Ca^al of Cardin.
PETER PETOW by Master Camden called William Petow, (and had I been at his
Christening, I could have decided ^he controversy,) was Cam^ens Bri^. (...)
Warwick-sh.
descended from an Ancient family, which for a long time have flourished at
Chesterton in this County. Being by Order a Franciscan, he was by Pope Paulus
the third created Cardinal, (his title unknown) June 13. 1557.

The same Pope also made him Legate a Latere, and Bishop of Salisbury, to the
apparent wronging of John Capon Bishop thereof, then alive, and no more
Obnoxious then others of his Order. But I forget what the Cannon-law says,
None may say to the Pope, why do thou so? as if what were unjust in it self,
were made just by his doing it.

P^tow thus Armed, with a Legatine Power advances toward England, with full
Intent and Resolution, either to force his Admittance into the English Court,
or else to depart as he came.

But Queen Mary though Drenched, not Drowned in Popish Principles, would not
Unprince herself to Obey his Holiness, and understanding it a Splenatick design
against Cardinal Poole, whom she entirely affected, (wonder not at such
differences betwixt AntiCardinals, whereas worse between Anti-Popes,)
Prohibited his entrance into the Realm, which Petow took so tenderly, that
the April after he dyed in France 1558.

Prelates.
JOHN STRATFORD son of Robert and Isabell Stratford, is notoriously known to be
born at Stratford, an Eminent Market in this County. This makes me much admire,
and almost suspect my own Eyes, in what I read, both in Archbishop Parker, and
Bishop Godwin,

In (...) life of Stratford.
De cujus Gente atque Patria nihil accepimus.
Idem Ibid^m.
De cujus viri Natalibus traditum non reperi quicquam.
Being by Papal provisions preferred Bishop of Winchester, without the Royal
Consent, he fell into the Dis-favour of King Edward the second, regaining his
Good will, (by the intercession of Archbishop Mepham) and being a Subject, not
to the Prosperity, but person of his Prince, he forsook him not in his
greatest Extremity. This cost him the Displeasure of the Queen Mother, and King
Edward the third, till at last Converted by his Constancy, they turned their
frowns into smiles upon him.

When Archbishop of Canterbury, he persuaded King Edward the third to invade
France, promising to supply him with competent provisions for the purpose. A
promise not so proportionable to his Archiepiscopal Capacity, as to him, as he
had been twice Treasurer of England, and skillful in the collecting and
advancing of money, so that he furnished the King with great sums, at his first
setting forth for France.

These being spent before the year ended, the King sends over for a supply.
Stratford instead of Coin, returns Counsel, advising him to alter his
Officers, otherwise, if so much was spent at a Breakfast, the whole wealth of
the land, would not suffice him for Dinner.

Over comes the angry King, from whose fury Stratford was forced to conceal
himself, until publicly passing his purgation in Parliament, he was restored
to the reputation of his Innocence, and rectified in the Kings esteem. He
built, and bountifully endowed, a Beautiful College, in the Town of his
Nativity, and having set Archbishop fifteen years, dyed Anno 1348. leaving a
perfumed memory behind him, for his Bounty to his Servants, Charity to the
Poor, Meekness and Moderation to all persons.

RALPH STRATFORD (kinsman to the foresaid Archbishop,) was born Godwin ^n the
Bi^hops of London.
in the Town of Stratford on Avon, where he built a Chapel to the honor of
Saint Thomas. He was first Cannon of Saint Paul's, and afterward May 12. 1339.
was consecrated at Canterbury Bishop of London.

During his sitting in that See, there happened so grievous a Pestilence in
London, that hardly the Tenth Person in some places did escape. Then each
Churchyard was indeed a Polyandrum, so that the Dead might seem to Justle one
another for room therein. Yea, the Dead did kill the Living, so shallowly were
their heaped Corpse interred.

Whereupon this Bishop Charitably bought a Piece of Ground nigh Smithfield. It
was called No*Mans-Land, not a part Ante, as formerly without an Owner,
(seeing it had a Proprictary of whom it was legally purchased,) but de futuro,
none having a particular interest therein, though indeed it was All-Mens-Land,
as designed and consecrated for the General Sepulture of the Deceased. This
Bishop having continued about 14. years in his See, he died at Stepney 1355.

ROBERT STRATFORD (brother to the Archbishop aforesaid) was in the reign of
King Edward the third made Bishop of Chichester. He was at the same time
Chancellor of Oxford, (wherein he was bred) and of all England. Honorable
Offices, which sometimes have met in the same Person, though never more
deservedly then in the Present Enjoyer of them both.

In his time there was a tough contest betwixt the South and Northern-men in
that University. They fell from their Pens to their Hands, using the contracted
fist of Mar^ial, Logic, bloody blows passing betwixt them. Th s Bishop did
Brian Twin.
wisely and fortunately bestirre himself an Arbitrator in this Controversy,
being a proper Person for such a performance, born in this County, (in the very
Navil of England) so that his Nativity was a Natural Expedient betwixt them,
and his Judgment was unpartiall in compremising the difference.

He was accused to the King for favoring the French, with his Brother
Archbishop, contented patiently to attend till Pregnant Time was delivered of
Truth her Daughter, and then this Brace of Prelates appeared Brethren in
Integrity. He died at Allingbourn April 9. 1362.

JOHN VESTY alias HARMAN, Doctor of Law, was born at Sutton Colefield in this
County, bred in Oxford; A most vivacious person, if the Date of these Remarks
be seriously considered.

1. In the twentieth year of King Henry the sixth, he was appointed to
celebrate the Divine-service in the Free-Chappell of Saint Blase of Sutton
aforesaid. 2. In the twenty third year of Henry the seventh, he was made Vicar
of Saint Michaells Church in Coventry. 3. Under K. Henry the eighth, he was
made Dean of the Chapel Royal, Tutor to the Lady Mary, and President of
Wales. 4. In the Eleventh of K. Henry the eighth, 1519. he was advanced to be
Bishop of Exeter.
Which Bishopric he destroyed, not only shaving the Hairs, (with long leases)
but cutting away the limbs with sales outright, in so much that Bishop Hall his
successor in that See, complains in print, that the following Bishops were
Barons, but Bare-ones indeed. Some have Confidently affirmed, in my hearing,
that the word to Veize (that is in the West, to drive away with a Witness) had
its Original from his Profligating of the lands of his Bishopric, but I yet
demurre to the truth thereof.

He robbed his own Cathedral to pay a Parish Church, Sutton in this County,
where he was born, whereon he bestowed many Benefactions, and built fifty one
houses. To enrich this his Native Town, he brought out of Devonshire many
Clothiers, with Desire and Hope to fix the Manufacture of Clothing there. All
in vain, for as Bishop Godwin observes,

Non omnis fert omnia tellus.

Which though true conjunctively, that all Countries put together bring forth
all things, to be Mutually bartered by a Reciprocation of Trade, is false
disjunctively, no one place affording all Commodities, so that the
Cloath-workers here, had their pains for their labor, and sold for their lost.

It seems though he brought out of Devon-shire the Fiddle and Fiddlestick, he
brought not the Rosen, therewith to make Good Music, and every Country is
innated with a Peculiar Genius, and is left handed to those trades, which are
against their Inclinations.

He quitted his Bishopric (not worth keeping) in the reign of King Edward the
sixth, and no wonder he resumed it not in the reign of Queen Mary, the Bone not
being worth the taking, the Marrow being knocked out before. He died (being
103. years old,) in the reign of Q. Mary, and was buried in his Native Town,
with his Statue Mitred and Vested.

Since the Reformation.
JOHN BIRD was born in the City of B^le de Script. Brit.
Coventry, bred a Carmelite at Oxford, and became afterward the 31. (the
head-game) and last Provincial of his Order. He Preached some smart Sermons
before King Henry the eighth, against the Primacy of the Pope, for which he was
preferred (says Bishop Godwin) to be successively Bishop of Ossery in Ireland,
Bangor in Wales, and Chester in England.

To the two last we concur, but dissent to the former, because John Bale
contemporary with this John Bird, and also Bishop of Ossery, (who therefore
must be presumed skillful in his Predecessors in that See) names him not
Bishop of Ossery, but Episcopum Pennecensem in Hibernia, the same Bale says of
him, Audivi eum ad Papismi vomitum reversum. I have heard that (in the reign of
Queen M^ry) he returned to the vomit of Popery: which my charity will not
believe. Indeed in the first of Queen Mary he was outed of his Bishopric for
being married, and all that we can recover of his carriage a^terwards, is this
passage at the examination of Master Thomas Hawk, Martyr. When John Bird (then
very old) brought Boner a bottle of Wine, and a dish of Apples, probably a
present unto him for a Ne noceat, and therefore not enough to speak him a
Papist in his persuasion.

Bishop Boner desired him to take Hawks into his Chamber, and to try if he
could convert him, whereupon after Boners departure out of the room, the
quondam Bishop accosted Hawks as follows,

Fox Acts and Monum. page 1588. and anno 1555.
I would to God I could do you some good, you are a young man, and I would not
wish you to go to far, but learn of the elders to bear somewhat.

He enforced him no further, but being a thorough old man even fell fast
asleep. All this in my computation amounts but to a passive compliance, and is
not evidence enough to make him a thorough paced Papist, the rather because
John Pitts omitteth him in the Catalogue of English-writers, which no doubt he
would not have done, had he any assurance, that he had been a radicated
Romanist. Nothing else have I to observe of him, but only that he was a little
man, and had a pearl in his eyes, and dying 1556. was buried in Chester.

States men.
Sir NICHOLAS THROCKMORTON Knight, fourth Son of Sir George Throckmorton of
Coughton in this County, was bred beyond the Seas, where he attained to great
experience. Under Queen Mary he was in Guild Hall arraigned for Treason
(compliance with Wyat) and by his own wary pleading, and the Jurie's upright
verdict hardly escaped. Queen Elizabeth employed him Her Leiger a long time,
first in France, then in Scotland, finding him a most able Minister of State,
yet got he no great wealth, and no wonder, being ever of the opposite party to
Camdens Eliz. Anno 15^9.
Burleigh Lord Treasurer; Chamberlain of the Exchequer, and Chief Butler of
England, were his highest preferments. I say Chief Butler, which office like an
empty covered cup, pretends to some state, but affords no considerable
profit. He died at supper with eating of salates, not without suspicion of
poison, the rather because happening in the house of one no mean artist in that
faculty, R. Earl of Leicester. His death as it was sudden, was seasonable for
him and his, whose active (others will call it turbulent) spirit had brought
him into such trouble as might have cost him, at least, the loss of his Idem
Anno 1570.
personal estate. He died in the fifty seventh year of his age, February the
12. 1570. and lies Stows Survay of London p. 149.
buried in the South Side of the Chancel of St. Katharine Cree-Church London.

EDWARD CONWAY Knight, Son to Sir John Conway Knight, Lord and Owner of
Ragleigh in this County. This Sir John being a Person of Great skill in
Military affairs, was made by Robert Earl of Leicester (General of the
English Auxiliaries in the united Provinces) Governor of Ostend. His Son Sir
Edward succeeded to his Fathers Martial skill and valor, and twisted therewith
peaceable policy in State-affaires* so that the Gown and the Sword met in him
in most Eminent Proportion, and thereupon King James made Him one of the
Principal Secretaries of State.

For these his good services, he was by him created Lord Conway of Ragleigh in
this County, and afterward by King Charles, Viscount Killultagh in the County
of Antrim. And lastly in the third of King Charles, Viscount Conway of Conway
in Carnarvanshire, England, Ireland and Wales, mutually embracing themselves in
His Honors. He dyed January the third, Anno 1630.

JOHN DIGBY Baron of Sherborn, and Earl of Bristol, was born in this County, a
younger Son of an ancient family, long flourish^ng at Coleshull therein. To
pass by his Infancy, (all Children being alike in their long Coats) his Youth
gave pregnant hopes of that Eminency, which his mature age did produce.

He didken the Emhassador-Craft, as well as any in his age, employed by King
James, in several services to frreign Princes, recited in his Patent (which I
have perused) as the main motives of the Honors conferred upon him. But his
managing the Matchless Match with Spain, was his Masterpiece, wherein a Good
(I mean a Great) number of State-Traverses were used on both sides.

His contest with the Duke of Buckingham, is fresh in many men's Memories,
charges of High Treason mutually flying about. But this Lord fearing the Dukes
Power (as the Duke this Lor^s policy) it at last became a Drawn Battle betwixt
them; yet so, that this Earl lost the love of King Charles, living many years
in his Dis-favour: But such as are in a Court-Cloud, have commonly the
Countries Sunshine, and this Peer during his Eclyps was very Popular with most
of the Nation.

It is seldom seen, that a favorite once Broken at Court, sets up again for
himself, the hap (rather then happiness) of this Lord, the King graciously
reflecting on him, at the beginning of the Long-Parliament, as one Best able to
give him the safest Counsel in those dangerous Times. But how he incensed the
Parliament so far as to be excepted Pardon, I neither do know nor dare enquire.
Sure I am after the surrender of Exeter, he went over into France, where he met
with that due respect in foreign, which he missed in his Native Country. The
worst I wish such, who causelessly suspect him of Popish inclinations, is, that
I may hear from them but half so many strong Arguments for the Protestant
Religion, as I have heard from him, who was to his commendation a Cordial
Champion for the Church of England. He dyed in France about the year 1650.

Writers.
WALTER of COVENTRIE was born (...) cent. 3. number. 74.
and bred a Benedictine therein. Bale says he was, Immortali vir dignus
Memoria, and much commended by Leland (though not of set purpose, but) sparsim
as occasion is offered. He excelled in the two Essential Qualities of an
Historian, Faith and Method, writing truly and orderly, only guilty of
Coursness of style. This may better be dispensed with in him, because Historia
est res veritatis non Eloquentiae, because bad Latin was a catching disease in
that age. From the beginning of the Britons he wrote a Chronicle (extant in
Bennet College Library) to his own time. He flourished Anno 1217.

VINCENT of COVENTRIE was born in the chief City in this shire, and bred a
Thomas Eccl stone in Chroni^le of Franciscans.
Franciscan (though Learned Leland mistakes him a Carmelite) in the University
of Cambridg.

His order at their first entrance into England, looked upon learning as a
thing beneath them; so totally were they taken up with their Devotion. This
Vincent was the first who brake the Ice (and then others of his order drank of
the same water) first applied himself to Academicall studies, and became a
public Bale de Script. cent. 4. number. 12.
Professor in Cambridge, he set a Copy for the Carmelites therein to imitate,
who not long after began their public Lectures in the same place, he left some
books to posterity, and flourished Anno Dom. 1250.

JOHN of KILLINGWORTH born in that Castelled-village in this County, bred in
Oxford, an excellent Philosopher, Astronomer and Physician. He studied the
Stars so long, that at last he became A STAR himself in his own Sphere, and
out-shined all others of that Faculty. He was Father and Founder to all the
Astronomers in that Age. I never did spring such a Covye of Mathematicians all
at once, as I met with at this time, Cervinus or Heart, Cure, John Stacy and
Blach, Bale de Scrip. Brit. Cent. 6. number. 10.
all bred in Merton College. Which Society in the former Century applied
themselves to School Divinity, in this to Mathematics, and attained to
Eminency in both, so good a Genius acted within the walls of that worthy
foundation. He flourished about the year 1360.

WILLIAM of COVENTRY was born and bred a Carmelite in that City. He in his
Youth was afflicted with an unhealable Sprain in his Hip, and was commonly
called Claudus Conversus, which I adventure to English, the lame Converted.

Conversus pits de Scrip (...) (...).
properly is one, who for lack of Learning or Deformity of Body, is condemned
to the servile work in the Monastery, under a Despair ever to be made Priest,
termed it seems Conversus, because not of voluntary choice, Turning, to that
course of Life, but Turned (as Passively necessitated) thereunto.

But hear how J. Pits clincheth in his Praise. Claudicavit corporis gressu, non
virtutis progressu, vitiatus corpore non viciosus animo, being in his writings
full of S^ntences. Amongst which Bale takes especial notice of his Prodesset
Hierosolymam petere and alia invisere loca sacra, sed multum praestaret eo
precio pauperes alere domi, wherein though I perceive no more sententiousness
then common sense, yet because it contains a Bold Truth in those Blind Days,
it may be mentioned. He never set his name to his Books, but it may (according
to the Frierly-Fancy) be collected out of the Capital Letters of his several
works. Who flourished Anno 1360.

JOHN ROUSE Son of Jeffery Rouse, was born at Warwick, but descended from the
Rouses of Brinkloe in this County, he was bred in Oxford, where he attained to
great Eminency of Learning, he afterward retired himself to Guis^cliffe
within a Mile of Warwick.

A most delicious place, so that a Man in many Miles Riding cannot meet so much
variety, as there one forlong does afford. A steep Rock full of Caves in the
Bowels thereof, washed at the Bottom with a Crystal River, besides many
clear Springs on the side thereof, all overshadowed with a stately grove, so
that an ordinary Fancy may here find to it self Helicon, Parnassus, and what
not? Many Hermites (and Guy Earl of Warwick himself) being sequestered from the
world, retreated hither. Some will say it is too Gaudy a place for that
purpose, as having more of a Paradise then Wilderness therein, so that men's
thoughts would rather be Scattered then Collected with such various objects.
But seeing Hermits deny themselves the Company of Men, let them be allowed to
Converse with the Rarities of Nature, and such are the fittest texts for a
solitary devotion to comment upon.

To this place came our John Rouse, and by leave obtained from King Edward the
fourth, immured himself therein, that he might apply his Studies without
distraction. Here he wrote of the Antiquities of Warwick, with a Catalogue of
the Earls thereof, a Chronicle of our English Kings, and a History of our
Universities. He was as good with the Pensill as the Pen, and could Draw
Persons as well as Describe them, as appears by lively Pictures Limmed with his
own hand. He died a very aged man, Anno Domini 1491.

Since the Reformation.
WILLIAM PERKINS was born at Marston in this County, bred Fellow of
Christcolledge, and then became Preacher of Saint Andrews in Cambridge.

The Athenians did nothing else but Acts 17. 24.
tell or hear some new thing. Why tell before hear? Because probably, they
themselves were the first Finders, Founders, and Fathers of many reports. I
should turn such an Athenian to fain and invent, should I add any thing
concerning this worthy Person, whose life I have formerly written at large in
my Holy-State. He died Anno Dom. 1602.

THOMAS DRAX D. D. was born at Stonely in this County, his Father being a
Younger Brother of a Worshipful family, which for many years had lived at
Wood-hall in Yorkshire, he was bred in Christs-colledge in Cambridge. He was a
Pious man, and an excellent Preacher, as by some of his Printed Sermons does
appear. He translated all the Works of Master Perkin^ his Countryman and
Collegiat) into Latin, which were Printed at Geneva. Doctor King Bishop of
London, removed him from his Native Country, and bestowed a Benefice on him
nigh Harwich in Essex, where the change of the Air was conceived to hasten his
Great change, which happened about the year 1616. I cannot forget how this
worthy name of Drax may be resembled to the river Anas in Spain, which having
run many miles under ground, surgeth a greater channel then before. They have
flourished at Wood hall a^oresaid, in the Parish of Darfield, ever since a
Coheir of the Noble Family of Fitz-williams brought that good Manor, (with
the alternate gift of the Mediety of the rich Parsonage therein,) in marriage
into this Family, as since by an Heir-general it has been alienated. But after
many various changes, this Name has recovered and increased its luster in Sir
James Drax, a direct descendant from the Heirs-male, who by Gods blessing on
his Industry and Ingenuity, has merited much of the English nation, in
bringing the Sugars and other Commodities of the Barbados to their present
perfection.

WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE was born at Stratford on Avon in this County, in whom
three eminent Poets may seem in some sort to be compounded, 1. Martial in the
Warlike sound of his Sur-name, (whence some may conjecture him of a Military
extraction,) Hasti-vibrans or Shake-speare. 2. Ovid, the most natural and
witty of all Poets, and hence it was that Queen Elizabeth coming into a
Grammar School made this extemporary verse,

Persius a Crab-staffe, Bawdy Martial, Ovid a fine Wag.

3. Plautus, who was an exact Comaedian, yet never any Scholar, as our
Shake-speare (if alive) would confess himself. Add to all these, that though
his Genius generally was jocular, and inclining him to fe^ivity, yet he could
(when so disposed) be solemn and serious, as appears by his Tragedies, so that
Heraclitus himself (I mean if secret and unseen) might afford to smile at his
Comedies, they were so merry, and Democritus scarce for^ear to sigh at his
Tragedies they were so mournful.

He was an eminent instance of the truth of that Rule, Poeta non fit, sed
nascitur, one is not made but born a Poet. Indeed his Learning was very little,
so that as Cornish diamonds are not polished by any Lapidary, but are pointed
and smoothed even as they are taken out of the Earth, so nature it self was all
the art which was used upon him.

Many were the wit combats betwixt him and Ben Johnson, which two I behold
like a Spanish great Gallion, and an English man of War; Master Johnson (like
the former) was built far higher in Learning; Solid, but Slow in his
performances. Shake-spear with the Englishman of War, lesser in bulk, but
lighter in sailing, could turn with all tides, tack about and take advantage of
all winds, by the quickness of his Wit and Invention. He died Anno Domini 16...
and was buried at Stratford upon Avon, the Town of his Nativity.

MICHAEL DRAYTON born in this County at Athelston, as appears in his
poetical address thereunto.

Song 13. p. ^13.
My native Country,
If there be virtue yet remaining in thy earth,
Or any good of thine thou breathe into my birth,
Accept it as thine own whilst now I sing of thee;
Of all thy later Brood the unworthiest though I be.
He was a pious Poet, his conscience having always the command of his fancy,
very temperate in his life, slow of speech, and inoffensive in company. He
changed his laurel for a crown of glory, Anno 1631. and is buried in
Westminster-Abby near the South-door with this Epitaph,

Do pious Marble, let thy Readers know,
What they, and what their children owe
To Draitons name, whose sacred dust
We recommend unto thy trust.
Protect his memory, and preserve his story,
Remain a lasting Monument of his glory:
And when thy ruins shall d^aime
To be the Treasurer of his name:
His name that cannot fade, shall be
An everlasting Monument to thee.
He was born within few miles of William Shake-speare, his Countryman and
fellowPoet, and buried within fewer paces of Jeffry Chaucer, and Edmund Spencer.

Sir FULKE GREVIL Knight, Son to Sir Fulke Grevil the Elder, of Becham-Court in
this County, he was bred first in the University of Cambridge. He came to the
Court, backed with a full and fair Estate; and Queen Elizabeth loved such
substantial Courtiers, as could plentifully subsist of themselves. He was a
good Scholar, loving much to employ (and sometimes to advance) learned men, to
wh^m worthy Bishop Overal chiefly owed his preferment, and Mr. Cambden (by his
own Confession,) In (...) (...). in War^-Shire.
tasted largely of his liberality.

His Studies were most in Poetry and History, as his works do witness. His
Style conceived by some to be swelling, is allowed for lofty and full by
others, King James created him Baron Brook of Beachamp-Court, as descended from
the sole daughter and heir of Edward Willowby the last Lord Brook, in the reign
of King Henry the seventh.

His sad Death or Murder rather, happened on this occasion. His discontented
servant conceiving his deserts not soon or well enough rewarded, wounded him
Mortally, and then (to save the law the labor) killed himself, verifying the
observation that he may when he pleases be master of an other man's life, who
contemns his own.

He lies buried in Warwick Church under a Monument of black and white Marble,
whereon he is styled Servant to Q. Elizabeth, Counselor to K. James, and
friend to Sir Phillip Sidney. Dying Anno 16... without Issue, and unmarried,
his Barony by virtue of Entail in the patent descended on his kinsman Robert
Grevill Lord Brook, father to the Right Honorable Robert Lord Brook.

NICHOLAS BYFIELD was born in this County, (as his son Mr. Adoni^m (...), who
(...) to leave larger inst^uctions of his (...) life, but I received them no^.
has informed me,) bred (as I remember,) in Queens-colledge in Oxford. After
he had entered into the Ministry, he was invited into Ireland, to a place of
good profit and eminency, in p^ssage whereunto, staying wind-bound at Chester,
his Inn proved his home for a long time unto him, preaching a Sermon there with
such approbation, that he was chosed Minister in the City. Not without an
especial Providence, seeing the place promised in Ireland, would have failed
him, and his going over had been a labor in vain. The Cestrians can give the
best account of his profitable preaching and pious life, most strict in keeping
the Lords day, on which occasion pens were brandished betwixt him and Mr.
Breerwood.

In his declining age he was presented to the Benefice of Isleworth in
Middlesex, where for fifteen years together he preached twice every Lord's Day,
and expounded Scripture every Wednesday and Friday, till five weeks before his
death, notwithstanding there was Mors in oll^, A stone in his bladder, which
being taken out, weighed, and measured after his death, was found of these
prodigious proportions.

In 1. Dr. Go^ge P^eface to Posthume works of Mr. Byfi^ls.
Weight, thirty three ounces and more. In 2. Measure about the edge, fifteen
inches, and an half. In 3. Measure about the length, thirteen inches and above.
In 4. Measure about the breadth, almost thirteen inches.
It was of a solid substance to look upon, like a flint. Lo, here is the
patience of the Saints. All I will add is this, the Pharisee said proudly, I
thank thee Lord, I am not as this Publican. Let Writer and Reader say humbly,
and thankfully to God, We are not as this truly painful Preacher, and let us
labor, that as our bodies are more healthful, our souls may be as holy as
his, who died and was buried at I^leworth.

PHILEMON HOLLAND, where born, is to me unknown, was bred in Trinity-colledge
S.N.
in Cambridge, a Doctor in Physic, and fixed himself in Coventry. He was the
Translator General in his Age, so that those Books alone of his Turning into
English, will make a Country Gentleman a competent library for Historians, in
so much that one says,

Holland with his Translations does so fill us,
He will not let Suetonius be Tranquillus.
Indeed some decry all Translators as Interlopers, spoiling the Trade of
Learning, which should be driven amongst Scholars alone. Such also allege,
that the best Translations are works, rather of Industry then Judgment, and
(in easy Authors) of Faithfulness, rather then Industry; That many be but
Bunglers, forcing the meaning of the Authors, they translate, picking the lock,
when they cannot open it.

But their Opinion resents too much of Envy, that such Gentlemen, who cannot
repair to the Fountain, should be ^ebard access to the Stream. Besides, it is
unjust to charge All, with the faults of some, and a Distinction must be made
amongst Translators, betwixt Cobblers and Workmen, and our Holland had the true
knack of Translating.

Many of these his Books he wrote with One Pen, whereon he himself thus
pleasantly versified.

With one sole pen I writ this Book,
Made of a Gray Goose Quill.
A Pen it was, when it I took,
And a Pen I leave it still.
This Monumental Pen, he solemnly kept and showed to my reverend Tutor Doctor
Samuel ^ard. It seems he leaned very lightly on the Neb thereof, though
weightily enough, in an other sense, performing not slightly, but solidly, what
he undertook.

But what commends him most to the Praise of Posterity, is his Translating
Camdens Britannia, a Translation more then a Translation, with many excellent
Additions, not found in the Latin, done fifty years since in Master Camdens
life time, not only with his knowledge and consent, but also, no doubt, by his
desire and help. Yet such additions (discoverable in the former part with
Asterisks in the Margent) with some Antiquaries obtain not equal
Authenticalness with the rest. This eminent Translator was Translated to a
better life, Anno Dom. 16...

FRANCIS HOLYOAKE (latining himself de sacra Qu^rcu) and Minister of Southam,
born at Witacre in this County. He set forth that staple Book which Schoolboys
called Riders Dictionary. This Rider did Borrow (to say no worse) both his
S^ddle and Bridle from Thomas Thomatius, who being bred Fellow of
Kings-colledge in Cambridge, set forth that Dictionary known by his Name, then
which, Men, have not a Better and Truer; Children, no Plainer and Briefer. But
Rider after Thomas his death, set forth his Dictio^ary, the same in effect,
under his own Name, the property thereof, being but little disguised with any
Additions.

Such Plageary ship ill becomes Authors or Printers, and the Dove being the
Crest of the Stationers Arms, should mind them, not like Rooks, to filch
copies one from an other. The Executors of Thomas Thoma^us entering an Action
against Rider, occasioned him in his own defense to make those Numerous
Additions, to his Dictionary, that it seems to differ rather in Kind then
Degree, from his first Edition.

I am forced to place this Child, ^ather with his Guardian then Father, I mean,
to mention this Dictionary rather under the name of Master Holyoake then Rider,
both because the residence of the latter is wholly unknown unto me, and because
Mr. Holyoak^ added many (as his learned Son has since more) wonders thereunto.
This Master Holyoake died Anno Dom. 16...

JAMES CRANFORD was born at Coventry in this County, (where his father was a
Divine and Schoolmaster of great note) bred in Oxford, beneficed in
Northampton shire, and afterward removed to London, to Saint Ch^istophers. A
painful Preacher, an exact Linguist, subtle Disputant, Orthodox in his
Judgment, sound against Sectaries, well acquainted with the Fathers, not
unknown to the Schoolmen, and familiar with the Modern Divines. Much his
Humility, being James the less in his own esteem, and therefore ought to be
the Greater in Ours. He had as I may say, a Broad-chested Soul, favorable to
such who differed from him. His Moderation increased with his Age, Charity with
his Moderation, and had a kindness for all such who had any goodness in
themselves. He had many choice books, and (not like to those, who may lose
themselves in their own libraries, being Owners, not Masters of their books
therein,) had his books at such command, as the Captain has his Soldiers, so
that he could make them at pleasure go or come, and do what he desired. This
lame and loyal Mephibosheth, (as I may term him) sadly sympathizing with the
sufferings of Church and State. He died rather infirm then old, Anno 1657.

Romish Exile W^iters.
WILLIAM BISHOP was born in this County, says my Pits de (...). Ang. Script.
(...) Anno 1612.
Auther, ex Nobili Familia. Enquiring after his Surname in this Shire, I find
one John Bishop, Gentleman, Patron of Brails in this County, who died Anno
1601. Aged 92. Mr Dugdale in his Illust. of Warwickshire page 4. 7.
Being a Protestant, as appears by his Epitaph, who according to Proportion
of time, might in all Probability be his father, the rather, because he is said
Parents and ampli Patrimonii spem reliquisse, to have left his Parents, and
the hope of a fair Inheritance.

Reader, a word by the way of the word Nobilis, which sounds high in English
ears, where Barons youngest children are the lowest step of Nobility, whilst
Nobilis from the Pen of a Our Countryman Pits did foranize with long living
beyond the Seas.
foraigner, generally imports no more then an ordinary Gentleman.

It is not long since my weakness was employed to draw up in Latin a
Testimonial for a high German, who indeed was of honorable extraction, and
according to direction, I was advised to style him Generosissimum ac
Nobilissimum. For Generosus (which runs so low in England) in Saxony does
carry it clear as the more honorable Epithet. Thus Words like Counters stand
for more or less according to Custom. Yea, Latin words are bowed in their
Modern senses, according to the acception of several Places.

This Bishop leaving the Land, went first to Rhemes, then to Rome, where he was
made Priest, and being sent back into England, met with variety of success,

1. Being seized on, He was brought before Secretary Walsingham, and by him
committed to the Marshalsey. 2. After three years, being b^nished the Realm, he
became a Doctor of Sorb^. 3. He returned into England, and for nine years
labored in the Popish Harvest. 4. By their Clergy, he was employed a Messenger
to Rome, about some affairs of importance. 5. His business dispatched, he
returned the third time into England, and after eight years industry therein to
advance his own Cause, was caught and cast into Prison at London, where he
remained about the year 1612. 6. Soon after he procured his Enlargement, and
Anno 1615. lived at Paris in Collegio Atrebatensi.
Men of his Persuasion, cry him up for a most Glorious Confessor of the^ Popish
faith, who, (if any goodness in him) should also be a Thankful Confessor of
the Protestant Charity, permitting him twice to depart Prison, (on hope of his
amendment,) though so Active an Instrument against our Religion. No such
courtesy of Papists to Protestants, Vestigia nulla retrorsum. No return
(especially the second time) out of durance. The first disease being dangerous,
but deadly their Relaps into a Prison, but perchance this William Bishop found
the more favor, because our Church* men accounting it to^ much severity, to
take away both his Credit and his Life, both to Conquer and Kill him, seeing
this Priest, whilst in Prison, was often worsted, (though his Party bragged of
victory,) both by Tongues and Pens, in Disputings, and Writings, of several
Protestants, amongst whom Robert Abbot (afterward Bishop of Salisbury) gave
him the most fatal Defeat. The certain date of his death is to me unknown.

Benefactors to the Public.
HUGH CLOPTON was born at Stratford, a fair Market Town in this County* bred a
Mercer in London, and at last Lord Mayor thereof, Anno 1491. Remem^g (...) his
Native Town stood on Avon (a River in Summer, and little Sea in Winter,)
^oublesome for Travelers to pass over, he in liew of the former inconventent
(...), built a stately and long Stone Bridge, of many Arches, over the Channel
and Overflowings thereof.

I behold this Bridge, more useful, though less costly, then what Caligula
made, termed by (...) (...) (...) (...). 19.
Suetonius novum and inauditum spectaculi genus, reaching from Putzol to Bauly,
three miles and a quarter. This was only a Pageant-bridge for Pomp, set up, to
be soon taken down, whereof Lipsius said well, Laudem immenso operi vanitas
detra^it. But our Cloptons Bridge remains at this day, even when the College
in the same Town built by Archbishop Stratford, is (as to the intended use
thereof) quite vanished away. Indeed Bridges are the most lasting Benefactions,
all Men being concerned in their continuance, lest by dest^oying of them, they
destroy themselves, not knowing how soon, for their own safety they may have
need to make use thereof. Many other Charities he bestowed, and deceased Anno
1496.

Since the Reformation.
............. HALES Esquire, He purchased a prime part of the Priory of
Coventry. Now, either out of his own inclination, or as a Condition of his
Composition with King Henry the eighth, or a mixture of both; he founded and
endowed a fair Grammer-school* in Coventry. Herein I have seen more* (abate the
Three English*schools of the first Magnitude) and as well learned Scholars, (be
it spoken that the Master, Us^er, and Scholars, may according to their
Proportions divide the praise betwixt them) as in any School in England. Here
is also an Infant, which may be an Adult Library, when it meets with more
Benefactors.

JOHN Lord HARRINGTON son to James Lord Harrington, was born at Comb Abbey in
this County, (accruing unto him by his Mother Heiress of ^elway,) as by a
property of that Family, lately (or still) surviving, I have on very strict
enquiry been certainly informed.

He did not count himself privileged from being Good, by being Great, and his
timely Piety rising early, did not soon after go to Bed, (as some young Saints,
beheld under an other Notion) but contiuned watchful, during his life.

He was one of the first, who began the pious fashion (since followed by few of
his Quality,) of a Diary, wherein he registered, not the Injuries of others done
unto him, (a work of Revenge not Devotion,) but of his Fa^lings and Infirmities
toward his Master. Thus making even with the God of Heaven, by Repentance in
Christ at the end of every day, he had (to use the Expression and Counsel of
the Reverend ArchBishop of Armagh) but one day to repent of before his death.

He lived out all (...) days in the appointment of Divine Providence, not half
of them according to the course and possibility of Nature, not Half a Quarter
of them according to the hopes and desires of the Lovers and Honourers of
Virtue in this Nation, especially of the society in Sidney-colledge in
Cambridge, whereto he was a most (...) Benefactour. He was the last Male of
that Honorable Family, as one justly complains.

JOHANES DOMINUS HARRINGTONIUS. H. Holland. Herologia 139.
Anagramma INSIGNIS ERAT (AH) UNUS HONOR DOMI.

The Reader is referred for the rest, unto his Funeral Sermon, preached by
Master Stock of London, who though he would not (to use his own Phrase) Gild a
Po^sheard, understand him, Flatter unworthyness; yet gives him his large and
due Commendation. He died unmarried Anno 161.. leaving his two Sisters his
Heirs, Lucy married to Edward Earl of Bedford, and Anne, who by Sir Robert
Chichester had a daughter Anne, married to Thomas Earl of Elgin, and Mother to
Robert L. Bruce, who is at this day, Heir Apparent to no small part of the
Lands, but Actually possessed of a larger of the Virtues of his Honorable
Great-uncle.

Memorable Persons.
THOMAS UNDERHILL Esquire, was born at Neaher-Eatendon in this County. It is
pity to part him from Elizabeth his wife, seeing the Poetical fiction of
Philemon and Baucis, found in them an Historical performance with improvement.

* Sed pia Baucis anus parilique aetate Philemon
Illa sunt annis juncti juvenilibus, illa
Consenuere casa: paupertatemque ferendo
Effecere levem, nec iniqua mente ferendam.
But good old Baucis with Philemon matchd,
In* youthful years, now struck with equal age,
Made poorness pleasant in their cottage Thatched,
And weight of want with patience di^ aswage.
Whereas this our Warwick-shire-Pair, living in a worshipful equipage, and
exemplary for their hospitality, did teach others, not how Poverty might be
born, but Wealth well used (by their Example) for the owners and others good.

The Ovidian-couple appear issueless, whereas twenty children, viz. t^teen sons
and seven daughters were begotten and born, by this Thomas and Elizabeth,
living sixty five years together in marriage.

Indeed the poeticall-pair, somewhat outstrip'd them in the happiness of their
death, their request being granted them,

-- Et quoniam concordes egimus annos,
Auferathora duos eadem: nec conjugis unquam
Busta meae videam: nec sim tumulandus ab illa.
Because we lived and loved so long together,
Let Us not behold the funerals of either;
May one hour end us both: may I not see
This my wife buried, nor wife bury me.
However these See their Monument in the Church of N^ther-Eatendon.
Underhills deceased in one year, she in July, he in October following 1603.

Lord Mayors.
Name Father Place Company Time 1 John I suspect this Catalogue (though taken
out of Mr. Stow) imperfect, and that Sir William Hollis Lord Mayor (and builder
of (...)) was this Coun^y-man*
Coventry William Coventry Coventry Mercer 1425 2 John Olney John Olney
Coventry Mercer 1446 3 Robert Tate Thomas Tate Coventry Mercer 1488 4 Hugh
Clopton John Clopton Stratford upon Avon Mercer 1491 5 John Tate Thomas Tate
Coventry -- 1496 6 William Cockain William Cockain Baddesley Skinner 1619 7
John Warner John Warner Rowington Grocer

The Names of the Gentry of this County Returned by the Commissioners in the
(...) year of King Henry the sixth. 1433.
William Bishop of Lincoln, Commissioners to take the Oaths. Richard Earl of
Warwick. John Cotes, Knights for the shire. Nicholas Metley. Knights for the
shire.

Radul. Nevill, mil. Ioh. Colepeper, mil. Will. Mounford, mil. Edw.
Oddingsselles, m. Tho. B^rdet, mil. Rich. Otherston Abbatis de Camba Will. Pole
Abbatis de Alyncestre Joh. Buggeley Abbatis de Miravalle Edw. Bron^ete de
Farnburgh, ar. Bald. Mountford de Hampton, ar. R^d. Brasebrugg de Kinnesbury,
ar. Will. Lucy de Charlecote, ar. Tho. Hugford de Emescote, ar. Tho. Erdington
de Erdington, ar. Rob. Arden de Bromwich, ar. Will. Pucfrey de Shiford, ar.
Rog. Harewell de Morehall, ar. Rich. Hyband de Ippesley, armig. Will. Botoner
de Wythybroke Ioh. Midlemore de Eggebaston, ar. Thome Porter de Escote, ar.
Tho. (...) de Tonworth, ar. Tho. Waryng de eadem, ar. Rich. Verney, ar. de
Wolverton Tho. G^ene de Solyhull, ar. Joh. Chelwyn de Alspath, ar. Ioh.
Waldiene de eadem, ar. Nich. Ruggeley de Donton, ar. Will. Holt de Aston, ar.
Rich. Merbroke de Codbarow, ar. Galf. Allefley d eparva Lalleford Tho. Greswold
de Solyhull Tho. Haynton de Napton Will. Parker de Tonworth Edm. Starkey de
Stretton Ranul. Starky de eadem Will. Derset de Thurlaston Rich. Hall de
Stretford Ioh. Mayell de eadem Simon. Forster de Althercton Clemen. Draper de
^adem Johan. Darant de Berston Rog. Mullward de Nuneton Johan. Omfrey de eadem
Johan. Waryn de eadem Hum. Jacob de Tamworth Tho. Neuton de eadem Math.
Smalwode de Sutton Rich. Dalby de Brokhampton Rich. Eton de Warwick Hum. Corbet
Johan. Aleyn de Berford Tho. Iakes de Woner Rog. Clerk de Tatchbrook Rich.
Briches de Longedon Will. Reynold de Attilburgh Ioh. Michell majoris civitatis
Coventrae Will. Donington unius Ballivorum civitatis Predictae. Rob. Southam
alterius Ballivorum civitatis Predicte. Egidii Alles sley Magistri Gildae
Sanctae Trinitatis de Coventrae. Lauren. Cook de Coventrae Merchant Rich. Sharp
de eadem Merchant Rich. Boton de eadem Fishmonger Ioh. Lychefeld de eadem
Grasier Ioh. Wall de eadem Fishmonger Ioh. Leder de Coventrae Merchant Tho.
Estop Magi^ri Gildae Sanctae Trinitatis Warwick Nich. R^dy de eadem Ioh. Mayell
de eadem sentor Will. Hopkyns de eadem Ioh. Broune de eadem junior. Johan.
Stokes de Henlen in Ardeon Gildae Villae Magistri predictae Johan. Thorp de
Kolle.
Sheriffs.
This Shire was in Conjunction, under the same Sheriffs with Leichestershire,
until the year of Q. Elizabeth. Since which time Warwickshire has these
appropriat to it self.

N^me Pl^ce Arms ^EG. ELIZA. Anno 9 Rob. Midlemore Egbaston Par Chev. Arg. and
S. in chief 2 martlets of the second. 10 Bas. Feelding, ar. Ne^lia^ Pa. Ar^on a
F^ss Az 3 Fusils Or. (...) Sim. Ardern, ar. Gul. 3 Cross C^osselets Fitiche a
chi^f O^. 12 Fr. Willoughby, a. Midleton O^, on 2 Bars Gul 3 Waterbudgets Arg.
13 He. Cump^o^, m. Du. Cumpton Cumpton Sab. a Lion passant Or, inter 3 Helmets
Arg. 14 Full. Grevile, mil. BeuchampCourt. Sa. a Bor^r and C^oss engrailed Or,
thereon 5 pellets. 15 Sam. Marow, ar. Berkswell Az. a Fess engrailed betwixt 3
womens-heads cooped Or. 16 Edw. Ardon, ar. 17 Will. Boughton, ^. Lauford S. 3
Crescents, Or. 18 Hum. Ferrers, ar. A M P. 9 Will. Catesby, m. Ar. 2 Lions
^ass. S. ^0 Tho. Lucy, mil. Charlcott Gal. Crusulee Or, 3 Picks [(...) Lucies]
H^uriant Ar. ^1 Ed. Boughton, ar* ut pri^s 22 Geo. Digby, ar. Coleshull Az. a
Flower delu^e Ar. ^3 Tho. Leigh, ar. Stonleigh G. a Cross engrailed Arg. on the
first quarter, a I^zen of the second. 24 Io. Harington, m. Comb. Abbey S. a
Fret Ar. 5 Edw. Holt, ar. Aston Ar. 3 Flower deluces Az. 26 Full. Grevill, mil.
ut prius ^7 An. Shuckburgh, a. Shugbury S. a Chev. betwixt 3 Mullets Ar. ^8 Th.
Daubrigcourt Soli^ul Ermin, 3 B^rs Humet G. ^9 Hum. Ferrers, ar. ut priu^ 30
Will. Feelding, ar. ut prius 31 Will. Boughton, a. ut prius 32 Rich. Verney,
ar. Compton Az. on a Cross Arg. 3 Mullets G* 33 Will. Leigh, mil. Murdak. 34
Rad. Hubaud, ar. 35 Ge. Devereux, ar. Cost. ^wich A* g. a Fess G^n chief 3
Torteauxes. ^6 Edw. Grevill, ar. ut prius 37 Tho. Le^gh, mil. ut prius 38 Rob.
Burgoyn, ar. ^ on chief embatteled, Ar. as many Martlets S. 39 Cle. Fisher, ar.
Pack^ng Ar. a Chev. varry between 3 Lions Rampent G. 40 Sam. Marowe, ar. ut
prius 41 Tho. Hoult, ar. ut prius 42 Tho. Lucy, mil. ut pri^s 43 Rob. Burde^t
Bramcot Az. 2 Bars Or. on each 3 Martlets G. 44 Will. Peyto, ar. Chesterton
Barry of 6 Pieces Arg. and G, per ^ale ind^nted and coun^ changed. 45 Barth.
Hales G. 3 Arrows Or, fea^red and Headed A^. REG. IAC. Anno 1 Barth. Hale^, ^r.
ut prius 2 Rich. Verney, mi. ut prius 3 Tho. Beaufoe, mil. Guise Clif. Erm. ^n
a (...) 3 Cin^ue foiles Or. 4 Ed. Boughton, ar. ut prius 5 Will. Comb, ar. 6
And, Arch^ a^* Tanwo^th Azure^ A^rows Or. 7 Will. Somervile, m. Ar. on a sess
bet^een 3 A^nuleis G. as many L^opard-heeds of the first. 8 ^as. Feelding, ar.
ut prius 9 Tho. Luc^* mil. ut priu^ 10 C^e. Th^ogmorto^ Hasley G^ o^ a Ch^ Aug.
3 (...) Gemelles S. 11 Ioh. Reppingto^, a. 12 Ioh. Fert^s, mil. 13 Will. Comb,
ar. ut pr^us 14 Wall. Devereux, m. ut prius 15 Io. Sh^ckburgh, a. ut pri^s 16
Fran. Leigh, mil. (...)* Ut prius, w^ du^ difference. 17 Rob. Lee, mil. Regis*
18 ^h. Temple, m. and b. Dasset Arg. on 2 Ba^ S. 6 Martle^s Or. 19 Will. Noell,
ar. Or, Fret^ G. ^ Can^n Ermine. 20 Ioh. H^ebaud, ar. 21 Tho. Puckering, m.
Warwick* S. a B^nd fus^lly c^ised Ar. 22 Her. Unde^hill, m. Eatendon Arg. a
Cheveron G. between 3 Tre^s Ver^. CAR. REG. Anno 1 Ioh. Newdigate, a. Erdbury
G. 3 Lions Gambes [or Pawes] erazed A^g. 2 S^m. Archer, mil. ut prius 3 Rob.
Fisher, mil. ut pr^us 4 Geo. Dever^x, a. ut prius 5 Rog* Burgo^n, ar. ut prius
6 Will. Purefoy, ar. S. 3 Pair of Cantlets arming [or clipping] Arg. 7 Will.
Boughton, ar. ut prius 8 Tho. Lucy, mil. ut prius erect proper. 9 Sim. Clerk,
mil. S^lford G. 3 Sword^ in fess, the Points 10 Rich, Murdon, ar. Morton E^m.
on a C^if S. a Talbot pass Argent. 11 Gre. Verney, mil. ut prius 12 Tho. Leigh,
mil. ut prius 13 Ed. Underhill, mi. ut prius 14 Ioh. Lisle, ar. 15 Geo. Warner,
ar. Wolston Arg. a Cheveron ^w x^ 3 Boars^eads S. cooped G. 16 Edw. Ferrars
Badesly G. 7 Ma^klees conjunct. viz. 3 17 SPATTA 3 and 1 Or, a Canton Erm. 18
HAeCMIHI 19 BELLA 20 DEED- 21 RUNT. 22 Rich. Lucy, at. ut prius

Queen Elizabeth.
27 AN. SHUGBURG, Ar.]

Though the Records belonging to this family have been embezeled, so that the
Links of their Successions cannot be chained in a continued Pedigree from their
Original, yet is their Surname right ancient in the place of their Name and
Habitation, giving for their Arms the Stones Astroites [in Heraldry reduced to
Mullets, which they most resemble) found within their Manor.

King James.
2 RICHARD Verney Mil.]

In his Sheriffalty the Powder-Traitors met at Dunchurch, at their appointed
huntingmatch; when suspecting their plot discovered, they entered on such
designs as despair dictated unto them, scattering of scandals, breaking of
houses, stealing of horses, etc* But such the care of this Sir Richard to keep
the peace of this County, that he hunted the Hunters out of this into the next
Shire of Worcester.

16 FRANCIS LEIGH, Mil.]

He was c^eated Baron of Dunsmore, and afterward Earl of Chichester by K.
Gharles the first. His Eldest daughter and Heir, was married to Thomas Earl of
Southampton, his younger to George Villiers Viscount Grandison.

King Charles.
2 SIMON ARCHFR, Mil.]

This worthy Knight is a lover of Antiquity, and of the Lovers thereof. I
should be much dishear^ed at his great Age, which promises to us no hope of
his long continuance here, were I ^ot comfort^d with the consideration of his
worthy Son, the Heir as well of his S^udiousness, as Estate.

12 THOMAS ^IGH, Mil*]

King Charles the first, at Oxford created him for his fidelity in dangerous
times Baron of Stoneleigh in this County, and he is happy in his son Sir Thomas
Leigh, who undoutedly will dignify the honor which descends unto him.

The Battle on October 3. 1642.
As for the fatal Fight at Edgehill, ( called Keinton-field from the next
Market Town thereunto) the actings therein are variously related, and ^ confess
my self not to have received any particular intelligence thereof, I will
therefore crave leave to transcribe what follows out of a short, but Dr.
Heylyn i^ ^he Hist. and Reign of K, Charles.
worthy work, of my honored friend, confident of the Authentical truth
thereof. The Fight was very terrible for the time, no fewer then five thousand
men slain upon the place* the Prologue to a greater slaughter, if the dark
night had not put an end unto that dispute.

Each part pretended to the victory, but it went clearly on the Kings side, who
though ^e lost his General, yet he kept the Field, and possessed himself of
the dead bodies; and not so only, but he made his way open unto London, and in
his way forced Banbury Castle, in the very sight as it were of the Earl of
Essex, who with his flying Army made all the have he could toward the City,
(that he might be there before the King) to secure the Parliament. More certain
signs there could not be of an abs^lute victory.

In the Battle of Taro, between the Confederates of Italy, and Charles the
eight of France, it happened so that the Confederates kept the Field, possessed
themselves of the Camp, Baggage and Artillery, which the French in their
breaking through had left behind them. Hereupon a dispute was raised, to whom
the Honor of that day did of right belong; which all knowing an^ impartial
men gave unto the French* For though they lost the Field, their Camp, Artillery
and Baggage, yet they obtained what they fought for, which was the opening of
their way to France, and which the Confederates did intend to deprive them of.
Which resolution in that case may be a ruling case to this; the King having not
only kept the Field, possessed himself of the dead bodies, pillaged the
carriages of the enemy, but forcibly opened his way toward London, which the
enemy endeavored to hinder, and finally entered triumphantly into Oxford, with
no fewer then an hundred and twenty Co^ours taken in the Fight.

Thus far my friend. Let me add, that what Salust observes of the
Conspirators with Cateline, that where they stood in the Fight, whilst living,
they covered the same place with their Corpse when dead, was as true of the
Loyal Gentry of Lincolnshire with the Earl of Linsey, their Country* man. Know
also that the over-soon, and over-far pursuit of a flying Party with Pillaging
of the Carriages, (by some who prefer the snatching of wealth, before the
Securing of Victory,) has often been the Cause why the Conquest has slipped
out of their fingers, who had it in their hands, and had not some such
miscarriage happened here, the Royalists had totally (in all probability)
routed their Enemies.

The Farewell.
I cannot but congratulate the happiness of this County, in having Master
William Dugdale [now Norrey] my wrothy Friend, a Native thereof. Whose
Illustrations are so great a work no Young Man could be so bold to begin, or
Old Man hope to finish it, whilst one of Middle-Age fitted the Performance. A
well chosen County for such a Subject, because lying in the Center of the Land,
whose Luster diffuseth the Light, and darteth Beams to the Circumference of
the Kingdom. It were a wild wish* that all the Shires in England where
described to an equal degree of per^ection, as which will be accomplished,
when each Star is as big and bright as the Sun. However one may desire them
done, quoad speciem, though not quoad gradum, in imitation of Warwickshire. Yet
is this hopeless to come to pass, till men's Pains may meet with Proportionable
Encouragement, and then the Poets Prediction will be true,

Sint Maecenates non desint Flacce Marones,
Virgiliumque tibi vel tua Rura dabunt.
Let not Maece^asses be Scant,
And Maroes we shall newer Wan^*
For. Flaccus then thy Country-field,
Shall unto thee a Virgil yield*
And then would our Little [divided World] be better described, then the Great
World, by all the Geographers, who have written thereof.

WESTMERLAND.
WESTMERLAND has Cumberland on the West and North, Lancashire on the South,
Bishopric and Yorkshire on the East thereof. From North to South it extends
thirty miles in length, but is contented in the breadth with twenty four.

As for the soil thereof, to prevent exceptions, take its description from the
pen of a credible J. Speed in the description of this County.
Author.

It is not commended either for plenty of Corn or Cattle, being neither stored
with arable grounds to bring forth the one, nor pasturage to breed up the
other; the principal profit that the people of this Province raise unto
themselves, is by clothing.

Here is cold comfort from nature, but somewhat of warmth from industry; that
the land is barren is Gods pleasure, the people painful their praise; that
thereby they grow wealthy, shows Gods goodn^ss, and calls for their
gratefulness.

However, though this County be sterile by general Rule, it is fruitful by
some few exceptions, having some pleasant vales, though such ware be too fine,
to have much measure thereof. In so much, that some Back-friends to this
County, will say, that though Westmerland has much of Eden, (running clean
through it) yet has little of Delight therein.

I behold the barrenness of this County as the cause why so few Frieries and
Convents therein, Master Speed (so curious in his Catalogue in this kind)
mentioning but one Religious house therein. Such lazy-folk did hate labor as a
house of Correction, and knew there was nothing to be had here, but what Art
with Industry wrested from Nature.

The Reader perchance will smile at my curiosity, in observing, that this small
County, having but four Market Towns, three of them are, Kirkby-Stephens,
KirkbyLonsdale, Kirkby-Kendale, so that so much of Kirk or Church, argues not
a little Devotion of the Ancestors in these parts, judiciously expressing it
self, not in building Convents for the ease of Monks, but Churches for the
worship of God.

The Manufacture.
Kendall Cottons are famous all over England, and Master Camden terms that
Town Lanificii gloria, and industria praecellens. I hope the Town^men thereof
(a word is enough to the wise) will make their commodities so substantial,
that no Southern Town shall take an advantage, to gain that Trading away from
them: I speak not this out of the least distrust of their honesty, but the
great desire of their happiness, who being a Cambridge-man out of Sympathy wish
well to the Clothiers of Kendall* as the first founder of our Sturbridge-fair.

Proverbs.
Let Uter-Pendragon do what he can,]
The River Eden will run as it ran.]
Tradition reports, that this Uter-Pendragon had a design, to fortify the
Castle of Pen-Dragon in this County. In order whereunto, with much art and
industry, he invited and tempted the River of Eden, to forsake his old channel,
and all to no purpose. The Proverb is appliable to such, who offer a rape to
Nature, endeavoring what is cross and contrary thereunto.

Naturam expellas Furca licet, usque recurret.

Beat Nature back, it is all in vain,
With Tines of Fork, 'twill come again.
However, Christians have not only some hope, but comfortable assurance, that
they may conquer the corruptions of their Nature. If F^rca (in no unusual
sense) be taken for the Cross, by the virtue of Christ's sufferings thereon, a
man may so repel Nature, that it shall not recoile to his destruction.

Princes.
KATHARINE PAR daughter of Sir Thomas Par, was born at Kendall-castle in this
County, then the prime seat of that (though no parliamentary) Barony, devolved
to her father by inheritance from the Bruses and Rosses of Werk. She was first
married unto John Nevile Lord Latimer, and afterward to K. Henry the eighth.

This King first married half a maid, (no less can be allowed to the Lady
Katharine, the Relict of Prince Arthur,) and then he married four maids
successively; of the two last he complained, charging the one with impotency,
the other with inconstancy, and being a free man again, resolved to wed a
Widow, who had given testimony of her fidelity to a former husband.

This Lady was a great favourer of the Gospel, and would earnestly argue for
it, sometimes speaking more then her husband would willingly hear of: Once
politic Gardener (who spared all the Weeds, spoiled the good Flowers and
Herbs) had almost got her into his clutches, had not divine Providence
delivered her. Yet a Jesuit tells us that the King intended, if longer
surviving, to behead her for an Heretic; to whom all that I will return is
this, that he was neither Confessor, nor Privy-Coun^ellour to King Henry the
eighth.

This Queen was afterward married to Thomas Seymer, Baron of Sudeley and Lord
Admiral, and died in childbed of a daughter Anno Domini 1548. her second
husband surviving Godwins An^ls of K. Edward the sixth in (...) anno.
her. This makes me the more admire at the great mistake of In his Catal. of
honor page 229.
Thomas Mills (otherwise most industrious and judicious in genealogies) making
this Lady married the third time, unto Edward Burgh eldest son unto Thomas Lord
Burgh, without any show of probability.

Cardinals.
CHRISTOPHER BAMBRIDGE born near Godwin* in his Archbishop of York.
Apleby in this County, was bred Doctor of Law in Queens-colledge in Oxford. He
was afterward Dean of York, Bishop of Durham, and at last Archbishop of York.
Being employed an Embasadour to Rome; he was an active instrument to procure
our King Henry the eight, to take part with the Pope against Lewis King of
France, for which good service he was created Cardinal of Saint Praxis. A title
some say he long desired, let me add, and little enjoyed. For falling out with
his Steward Rivaldus de Modena an Italian, and fustigating him for his faults,
the angry Italian Idem ibidem.
Poisoned him.

Herein something may be pleaded for this Cardinal out of the Old, sure I am
more must be pleaded against him out of the New Testament, if the places be
Paralleled.

Proverbs 29. 19. 1 Timothy 3. 3. A servant will not be corrected by words,
etc. A Bishop must be no striker, etc.

But grant him greatly faulty, it were uncharitable in us, to beat his Memory
with more stripes, who did then suffer so much for his own Indiscretion; His
death happened July 14. 1511* and was buried at Rome (not in the Church of
Saint Praxis, which entitled him, but) in the Hospital of the English.

Prelates.
THOMAS VIPONT was descended of those Ancient Barons, who were Hereditary Lords
of this County. Surely either his Merit was very great, or Might very
prevalent, (advantaged by his near and potent Relations.) That the Canons of
Carlisle stuck so stiffly to their electing their Bishop, when King Henry the
third, with so much importunity commended John Prior of Newbury unto them. This
Thomas enjoyed his place but one year, the only reason as I conceive that no
more is reported of him. He died Anno Dom. 1256.

JOHN de KIRKBY born at one of the two Kirkbies (Landsdale or Stephens) in this
County, was first Canon, and afterward Bishop of Carlisle Anno 1332. This is
that Stout Prelate who when the Scots invaded. England Anno 1345. with an Army
of thirty thousand, under the conduct of William Douglas, and had taken and
burnt Carlisle with the Country thereabouts, I say this John Kirkby was he who
with the assistance of Thomas Lucy, Robert Ogle, (persons of prime power in
those Parts) fighting in an advantageous place, utterly routed and ruined them.
Such as behold this Act with envious eyes, cavelling that he was non-resident
from his Calling, when he turned his Miter into an Helmet, Crosier-staffe into
a Sword, consider not that true Maxim, In* Publicos hosts omnis home miles,
and the most conscientious Casuists, who forbid Clergymen to be Military
Plaintiffs, allow them to be defendants. He died Anno Dom. 1353.

THOMAS de APPLEBY born in that Eminent Town in this County, where the Assizes
commonly are kept, was legally chosen Bishop of Carlisle by all that had right
in that Election. Yet he was either so Timorous, or the Pope so Tyrannical, or
both, that he durst not own the choice with his public consent, until he had
first obtained his Confirmation from the Court of Rome. He was Consecrated Anno
Dom. 1363. and having set 33. years in that See, deceased December* 5. 1395.

ROGER de APPLEBY went over into Ireland, and there became Prior of Saint
Peter's near Trim (formerly founded by Simon de rupe forti Bishop of Mead)
hence by the Pope he was preferred Bishop of Ossory in the same Kingdom. He
died Anno Dom. 1404.

WILLIAM of STRICKLAND descended of a Right Worshishful Family in this County,
Anno 1396. by joint consent of the Cannons chosen Bishop of Carlisle. However by
the concurrence of the Pope and K. Richard the second, one Robert Read was
preferred to the Place, which injury and affront, Strickland bare with much
moderation. Now it happened that Read was removed to Chichester, and Thomas M^x
his successor translated to a Grecian Bishopric, that Strickland was Elected
Bishop Godwin in the (...). of the Bishops of Carlisle.
again, (Patience gains the Goal with Long-running,) and Consecrated Bishop of
Carlisle Anno 1400. For the Town of Perith in Cumberland, he cut a p^ssage with
great Art, Industry, and Came ^ens Brit. in Cumberland.
Expense, from the Town into the river Petterill for the conveiance of Boatage
into the Irish sea. He sat Bishop 19. years, and died Anno Dom. 1419.

NICHOLAS CLOSE was born at Bibreke in this County, and was One of the Six
Original Fellows whom K. Henry the sixth placed in his new erected College of
Kings-colledge in Cambridge. Yea he made him in a manner Master of the Fabric,
committing the building of that house to his Fidelity, who right honestly
discharged his trust therein. He was first Bishop of Carlisle, then of
Leichfield, where he died within a year after his Consecration, viz. Anno Dom.
1453.

Since the Reformation.
HUGH COREN or CURWEN was born in this ^anuscript Additions to Sir James Ware.
County, and made by Queen Mary Archbishop of Dublin. Brown his immediate
Predecessor being deprived, for that he was married. Here it is worthy of our
observation, that though many of the Protestant Clergy in that Land were
imprisoned, and otherwise much molested, yet no one Person, of what quality
soever, in all Ireland did suffer Martyrdom, and hereon a remarkable Story
does depend. A Story which has been solemnly avouched, by the late reverend
Archbishop of Armagh, in the presence of several persons, and amongst others
unto Sir James Ware Knight, (that most excellent Antiquary,) and diverse in the
University of Oxford, who wrote it from his mouth, as he received the same from
ancient persons of unquestionable credit.

About the third of the reign of Queen Mary, a Pursevant was sent with a
Commission into Ireland, to empower some eminent persons, to proceed with fire
and faggot against poor Protestants. It happened by Divine Providence, this
Pursevant at Chester lodged in the house of a Protestant Innkeeper, who having
gotten some inkling of the matter, secretly stole his Commission out of his
Cloke-bag, and put the Knave of Clubs in the room thereof. Some weeks after he
appeared before the Lords of the PrivyCouncel at Dublin, (of whom Bishop Coren
a principal) and produced a Card for his pretended Commission. They caused him
to be committed to prison for such an affront, as done on design to deride
them. Here he lay for some months, till with much ado at last he got his
enlargement. Then over he returned for England, and quickly getting his
Commission renewed, makes with all speed for Ireland again.

But before his arrival there, he was prevented with the news of Queen Mary's
death, and so the lives of many, and the liberties of more, poor Servants of
God were preserved.

To return to our Coren, though a moderate Papist in Queen Mary's days, yet he
conformed with the first to the reformation of Queen Elizabeth, being ever
sound in his Heart. He was for some short time chief Justice and Chancellor of
Ireland, till he quitted all his Dignities in exchange for the Bishopric of
Oxford. It may seem a wonder, that he should leave one of the best
Arch-bishopricks in Ireland, for one of the worst Bishoprics in England. But
oh, no Preferment to Quiet, and this Politic Prelate very decrepit, broken
with old age, and many State Affairs, desired a private repose in his Native
Land, before his death, which happened Anno Dom. 1567.

BARNABY POTTER was born in this County 1578. within the Barony of Mr. S.
Clarke in his live of Mode^ne Divin. 39^.
Kendall, in which Town he was brought up until he was sent to Queens-colledge
in Oxford, becoming successively Scholar, Fellow, and Provost thereof. He was
chosen the last with the unanimous consent of the Fellows, when being at great
distance, he never dreamed thereof.

Then resigning his Provosts Place, he betook himself to his Pastoral charge
in the Country. He was Chaplain in Ordinary to Prince Charles, being accounted
at Court the Penitential Preacher, and by King Charles was preferred Bishop of
Carlisle, when others sued for the Place, and he little thought thereof. He was
commonly called the Puritanicall Bishop, and they would say of him in the time
of King James, that Organs would blow him out of the Church, which I do not
believe, the rather because he was loving of, and skillful in Vocal Music,
and could bear his own part therein.

He was a constant Preacher and performer of family duties, of a Weak
Constitution, Melancholy, Lean, and an Hard Student. He dyed in honor, being
the last Bishop that dyed a Member of Parliament, in the year of our Lord 1642.

Statesmen.
Sir EDWARD BELLINGHAM Knight, was born of an ancient and warlike family, in
this Though Sussex (where his Surname is of good esteem) may pretend unto him.
I am confident of his right Location.
County, servant of the Privy-Chamber to King Edward the sixth, who sent him
over Anno 1547. to be Lord Deputy of Ireland, whose Learning, Wisdom, and
Valor, made him fit to discharge that place.

Hitherto the English-pale had been hide-bound in the growth thereof, having
not gained one foot of ground in more then two hundred years, since the time of
King Edward the third. This Sir Edward first Sir Jo Davis in discourse of
Ireland, page 69.
extended it, proceeding against the Irishry in a martial course, by beating
and breaking the Moors and Connors, two rebellious Septs. And, because the Poet
says true,

It proves a man as brave and wise
To keep, as for to get the prize.
He built the forts of Leix and Offaly, to secure his new acquisition. Surely,
had he not been suddenly revok*d into England, he would have perfected the
project in the same sort, as it was performed by his successor the Earl of
Sussex, by settling English plantations therein.

Such his secrecy (the soul of great designs) that his Soldiers never knew
whither they went, till they were come whither they should go. Thus he
surprised the Earl of Desmond, being rude and unnurtured, brought him up to
Dublin, where he informed and reformed him in manners and civility, sometimes
making R. Holinshed Irish C^ron. page 109.
him to kneel on his knees an hour together, before he knew dis duty) till he
became a new man in his behavior. This Earl all his life after highly honored
him* and at every dinner, and Idem ibidem.
supper would pray to God for good Sir Edward Bellingham, who had so much
improved him.

This Deputy had no fault, in his Deputiship but one, that it was so short, he
being called home before two years were expired. Surely, this has much
retarded the reducing of the Irishry, the often shifting of their Deputies,
(too often change of the kinds of plasters, hinders the healing of the sore,)
so that as soon as they had learned their trade, they must resign their shop
to another, which made King James continue the Lord Chichester so long in the
place, for the more effectual performance therein.

Coming into England he was accused of many faults, but cleared himself as fast
as his adversaries charged him, recovering the Kings favor in so high a
degree, that he had been sent over Deputy again, save that he excused himself
by indisposition of body, and died not long after.

Writers.
RICHARD KENDAL. I place him here with confidence, because no See V^llare
Anglica.
Kendal in England, save what is the chief Town of this County. He was an
excellent Grammarian, and the greatest instructor ( Shreud and Sharp enough) of
youth in his age. He had a vast collection of all Latin Grammars, and thence
extracted a Quintessence, whereof he was so highly conceited, that he Bale and
Pitz de Script. Brit.
publicly boasted, that Latin only to be Elegant, which was made according
to his Rules, and all other to be Base and Barbarous; Which, Reader, I
conceive, (being out of his, though) under thy Correction, a Proud and
Pedantick expression. He flourished in the reign of K. Henry the sixth.

Since the Reformation.
BERNARD Son of EDWIN GILPIN Esquire, was born at Kentmire in this County, Anno
1517. At sixteen years old, (very young in that Age from those Parts,) his
Parents sent him to Queens-colledge in Oxford; whence his merit advanced him
one of the first Students in the new foundation of Christ's church.

Hitherto the Heat of Gilpin was more then his Light, and he hated Vice more
then Error, which made him so heartily dispute against Master Hooper, (who
afterward was Martyred) when indeed he did follow his Argument with his
Affections.

How afterward he became a zealous Protestant, I refer the Reader to his
Life, written at large by Bishop Carlton, he was Rector of Houghton in the
North, consisting of fourteen Villages.

In his own house he boarded and kept full four and twenty scholars. The
greater number of his boarders were* poor men's sons, upon whom he bestowed
meat, drink, and cloth, and education in learning. He was wont to entertain his
Parishioners and strangers at his table, not only at the Christmas time, as
the custom is, but because he had a large and wide Parish, a great multitude
of people, he kept a table for them every Sunday from Mich^elmas to Easter. He
had the Gentlemen, the Husbandmen, and the Poorer sort set every degree by
themselves, and as it were ordered in ranks. He was wont to commend the married
estate in the Clergy, howbeit himself lived and dyed a single man. He bestowed
in the building, ordering and establishing of his School, and in providing
yearly stipends for a Schoolmaster and an Usher, the full sum of five
hundred pounds: out of which School he supplied the Church of England with
great store of learned men. He was careful to avoid not only all evil doing,
but even the lightest suspicions thereof. And he was accounted a Saint in the
judgments of his very enemies, if he had any such. Being full of faith
unfeigned, and of good works, he was at the last put into his grave as a heap of
wheat in due time swept into the garner. He dyed the 4. of March 1583. and in
the 66. year of his age.

RICHARD MULCASTER was born of an ancient extract in the North, but whether A.
M. P.
in this County or Cumberland, I find not decided. From Eaton-school he went to
Cambridge, where he was admitted into M.S. Hatcher of the Scholars there^.
Kings-colledge 1548. but before he was graduated, removed to Oxford. Here such
his proficiency in learning, that by general consent he was chosen the first
Master of Merchant-Tailors-School in London, which prospered well under his
care, as by the flourishing of Saint John's in Oxford does plainly appear.

The Merchant-Tailors finding his Scholars so to profit, intended to fix Mr.
Mulcaster, as his Desk to their School, till death should remove him. This he
perceived, and therefore gave for his Motto,

Fidelis servus, perpetuus asinus. But after twenty five years he procured his
freedom, or rather exchanged his service, being made Master of Pauls-school.

His method in teaching was this. In a morning he would exactly and (...)
(...), and (...) the lessons to his Scholars, which done he slept his hour
(custom made him critical to proportion it) in his desk in the School* but woe
be to the (...) (...) slept the while. Awaking he heard them (...) and (...)
(...) be (...) to pity, as soon as he to pardon, where he found just fault. The
(...) of (...) Mothers prevailed with him as much as the requests of indulgent
Fathers, rather increasing then mitigating his severity on their offending
child.

In a word, he was Plagosus Orbilius, though it may be truly said (and safely
for one out of his School) that others have taught as much learning with fewer
lashes. Yet his sharpness was the better endured, because unpartiall, and many
excellent Scholars were bred under him, whereof Bishop Andrews was most
remarkable.

Then quitting that place, he was presented to the rich Parso^ge of
Stanford-rivers in Essex. I have heard from those, who have heard him preach,
that his Sermons were not excellent, which to me seems no wonder; partly,
because there is a different discipline in teaching children and men; partly,
because such who make Divinity (not the choice of their youth, but) the refuge
of their age, seldom attain to eminency therein. He died (...) the (...) of
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

CHRISTOPHER POTTER D. D. kinsman to Bishop Potter, (of* whom before) was born
in this County, (...) Fellow of Queens-colledge in Oxford, and at last was
chosen Provost thereof, Chap^in in Ordinary to King Charles, and Dean of (...).
One of a sweet nature, ^mely pre^ence, courteous carriage, devout life, and
deep learning; he wrote an excellent book entitled Charity mistaken, containing
impregnable truth, so that malice may s^arl at, but not bite it, without
breaking its own teeth. Yet a railing Jesuit wrote a pretended (...) thereof,
to which the Doctor m^de no return; partly, because the industrious Be would
not meddle with a (...) or Hornet rather, partly, because Mr. Chillingworth a
great Master of defense in School Divinity, took up the Cudgells against him.
This worthy Doctor died in the beginning of our civil distempers.

Benefactors to the Public.
ROBERT LANGTON Doctors of Law. MILES SPENCER Doctors of Law.
Though disputable, I conceive them rightly placed since the Reformation.
It is pity to part them, being Natives of this County, (as I am credibly
informed) Doctors in the same facul^y, and Copartners in the same Charity, the
building of a fair School at Appleby, The Pregnant Mother of so many Eminent
Scholars.

As for Robert Langton he was bred in, and a Benefactor to Queens-^edge in
Oxford, owing the Glaseing of many Windows therein to his Beneficence. Witness
his Conceit to Communicate his Name to Posterity, viz. a Ton (the (...) or
Fancy General, for all Sirnames in that Termination) extended very long beyond
an ordinary proportion, [ Lang the Northern man pronounces it] whereby he
conceived his Surname completed. I shall be thankful to him, who shall enform
me of the Dates of their several deaths.

ANNE CLYFFORD, sole Daughter and heir to George Earl of Cumberland, Wife first
to Richard Earl of Dorset, then to Phillip Earl of Pembrok^ and Montgomery,
(though born and nursed in Hartfordshire, yet) because having her greatest
Residence and Estate in the North, is properly referrable to this County. The
Proverb is, Homo non est ubi animat, sed amat, One is not to be reputed there
where he lives, but where he loves, on which account this Lady is placed, not
where she first took life, but where she has left a most lasting Monument of
her Love to the Public.

This is that most beautiful Hospital, Stately Built, and Richly Endowed, at
her sole Cost, at Appleby in this County.

It was conceived (a bold and daring part of Thomas Cecill (son to Treasurer
Burghleigh) to enjoin his Masons and Carpenters, not to omit a days Work, at
the building of Wimbleton house in Surr^y, though the Spanish Armado, Anno
1588. all that while shot off their Guns, whereof some might be heard to the
Place. But Christianly Valiant is the Charity of this Lady, who in this Age,
wherein there is an Earthquake of Ancient Hospitals, and as for new ones, they
are hardly to be seen for New lights, (I say) Courageous this Worthy (...)
(...), who dare found in this Confounding Age, wherein so much was demolished
and a^ened, which was given to God and his Church. Long may she live in Wealth
and (...), exactly to Complete, what^oever her (...) Intentions have (...).

M^morable Persons.
RICHARD GILPIN, a Valiant Man in this County, was (...) offed in the Reign of
K. John about the year 1208. in the Lordship of Kent-mire-^all by the Baron of
Kendal, (...) his singular deserts ^oth in Peace and War.

This Life of Bernard (...) wrote by Bishop (...) page 2.
was that Richard (...), who s^w the wild Bore, that raging in the Mountains
(...) (as sometimes that of Erimanthus) much indamaged the Country people*
whence it is, that the Gilpins in their Coat- Arms give the Bore.

I confess the story of this Westmerland-Hercules sounds something Romanza
like. However, I believe it, partly, because so reverend a pen has recorded
it, and because the people in these parts need not feign foes in the fancy,
Bears, Bores and Wild beasts, who in that age had real enemies, the
neighboring Scots to encounter.

Lord Mayors.
Name Father Place Company Time 1 Cuthbert Buckle Christopher Buckle Bourgh
Vintner 1593

Sheriffs.
I find two or three Links, but no continued chain os Sheriffs in this County,
until the 10. of K. John, who bestowed the Baily-week and Revenues of this
County, upon Robert Lord Vipont.

ROBERT de VIPONT the last of that Family, about the reign of K. Edward the
first left two daughters.

1. Sibel married to Roger Lord Clifford. 2. Camdens (...). in (...).
Idonea (the first and last I meet with of that Christian-name, though proper
enough for women, who are to be Genesis 2. 18.
meet helps to their husbands,) married to Roger de Leburn.
Now because honor nescit dividi, Honor cannot be divided betwixt Coheirs,
and because in such cases it is in the Power and Pleasure of the King, to
assign it entire to which he pleased, the King Conferred the Hereditary
Sheriffalty of this County, on the Lord Clifford, who had Married the Eldest
Sister.

I^ has ever since continued in that honorable family. I find Elizabeth the
Widow of Thomas Lord Clifford, (probably in the Minority of her son)
Sheriffess, (as I may say) in the sixteenth of Richard the second, till the
last of K. Henry the fourth.

Yet was it fashionable for these Lords to depute and present the most
Principal Gentry of this Shire, their Sub-Vicecomites, Under-sheriffs, in their
Right to order the affairs of that County. I find Sir Thomas Parr, Sir William
Parr, (Ancestors to Q. Katherin Parr,) as also Knights of the Families of the
Bellingams, Musgraves, etc. discharging that office, so high ran the Credit and
Reputation thereof.

Henry Lord Clifford was by K. Henry the eight Anno 1525. Created Earl of
Cumberland, and when Henry the fifth Earl of that family, died lately without
Issue male, the Honor of this Hereditary Sheriffalty, with large Revenues,
Reverted unto Anne the sole daughter of George Clifford third Earl of
Cumberland, the Relict of Richard Earl of Dorset, (and since of Phillip Earl of
Pembroke and Mountgomery,) by whom she had two daughters the Elder married to
the Earl of Thanet, and the younger married to James Earl of Northampton.

The Farewell.
Reader, I must confess my self sorry and ashamed, that I cannot do more right
to the Natives of this County, so far distanced North, that I never had yet the
opportunity to behold it. O that I had but received some intelligence from my
worthy friend Doctor Thomas Barlow Provost of Queens-colledge in Oxford! who
for his Religion and Learning, is an especial ornament of Westmerland. But
Time, Tide, and a PrintersPress, are three unmannerly things, that will stay
for no man, and therefore I request, that my defective endeavors may be well
accepted.

I learn out of Master Camden, that in the River Cann in this County, there be
two Catadupae or Waterfalls, whereof, the Northern sounding Clear and Loud,
foretokeneth Fair Weather, the Southern on the same Terms presageth Rain* Now I
wish that the former of thesemay be Vocal in Hay-time and Harvest, the latter
after Great Drought, that so both of them may make welcome Music to the
Inhabitants.

VVILT-SHIRE.
WILT-SHIRE has Gloucester-shire on the North, Berk-shire and Hampshire on the
East, Dorset-shire on the South, and Summerset-shire on the West. From North to
South it extends 39. Miles, but abateth ten of that Number in the breadth
thereof.

A pleasant County and of great Variety. I have heard a Wise man say, that an
Ox left to himself would of all England, choose to live in the North, a Sheep
in the South part hereof, and a Man in the Middle betwixt both, as partaking of
the pleasure of the plain, and the wealth of the deep Country.

Nor is it unworthy the observing that of all Inland Shires, (no ways bordered
on Salt Water) this Compare the Tables of Mr. Speed.
gathers the most in the Circumference thereof, (as may appear by comparing
them,) being in compass one Hundred Thirty and Nine Miles. It is plentiful in
all English, especially in the ensuing Commodities.

Natural Commodities.
Wool.
The often repetition hereof (though I confess against our rules premised) may
justly be excused. Well might the French Ambassador return, France, France,
France, reiterated to every petty title of the King of Spain. And our English
Wool, Wool, etc. may counterpoize the numerous but inconsiderable Commodities
of other Countries. I confess a Lock thereof is most contemptible. Non flocci
te facio, passing for an expression of the highest neglect, but a quantity
thereof quickly amounts to a good valuation.

The Manufactures.
Clothing.
This Mystery is vigorously pursued in this County, and I am informed that as
MEDLEYS are most made in other Shires, as good WHITES as any are woven in this
County.

This mentioning of Whites to be vended beyond the Seas, minds me of a
memorable contest in the reign of King James, betwixt the Merchants of London,
and Sir William Cockain, once Lord Mayor of that City, and as Prudent a Person
as any in that Corporation. He ably moved, and vigorously prosecuted the
design, that all the Cloth which was made might be died in England, alleging,
that the wealth of a Country consists in driving on the Natural Commodities
thereof, through all Manufactures, to the utmost, as far as it can go, or will
be drawn. And by the Dying of all English cloth in England, Thousands of poor
People would be employed, and thereby get a comfortable subsistence.

The Merchants returned, that such home-dying of our cloth, would prove
prejudicial to the sale thereof, Foreigners being more expert then we are in
the mystery of fixing of Colors. Besides, they can afford them far cheaper
then we can, much of dyingstuff growing in their Countries, and Forraigners
bear a great affection to White or Virgin cloth, unwilling to have their
Fancies prevented by the Dying thereof, insomuch that they would like it
better, (though done worse) if done by themselves. That Sir William Cockain had
got a vast deal of Dying-stuff into his own possession, and did drive on his
own interest, under the pretense of the Public good. These their Arguments
were seconded, with good store of good Gold, on both sides, till the Merchants
prevailed at last, (A Shole of Herrings is able to beat the Whale it self,) and
Clothing left in the same condition it was before.

Tobacco pipes.
The best for shape and color (as curiously sized) are made at Amesbury in
this County. They may be called Chimneys portable in pockets, the one end being
the Harth, the other the Tunnell thereof. Indeed at the first bringing over of
Tobacco, Pipes were made of silver and other metalls; which, though free from
breaking, were found inconvenient, as soon fouled, and hardly cleansed.

These Clay-pipes are burnt in a furnace, for some fifteen hours, on the
self-same token, that if taken out half an hour before that time, they are
found little altered from the condition wherein they were when first put in. It
seems all that time the fire is a working it self to the height, and does its
work very soon, when attained to perfection. Gauntlet-pipes, which have that
mark on their heel, are the best; and hereon a Story does depend.

One of that trade observing such Pipes most salable, set the Gauntlet on those
of his own making, though inferior in goodness to the other. Now the workman,
who first gave the Gauntlet, sued the other upon the Statute, which makes it
penal for any to set another Mark on any Merchantable Commodities. The
Defendant being likely to be cast, (as whose Counsel could plead little in his
behalf,) craved leave to speak a word for himself, which was granted. He denied
that he ever set another man's mark: for the Thumb of his Gauntlet stands one
way, mine another, and the same hand given dexter or sinister in Heraldry, is a
sufficient difference. Hereby he escaped, though surely such, who bought his
Pipes, never took notice of that Criticisme, or consulted which way the Thumb
of his Gauntlet respected.

The Buildings.
The Cathedral of Salisbury (dedicated to the Blessed Virgin) is paramount in
this kind, wherein the Doors and Chappells equal the Months, the Windows the
Days, the Pillars and Pillarets of Fusill Marble (an ancient Art now shrewdly
suspected to be lost) the Hours of the Year, so that all Europe affords not
such an Almanac of Architecture.

Once walking in this Church, (whereof then I was Prebendary) I met a
Countryman wondering at the Structure thereof. I once (said he to me) admired
that there could be a Church that should have so mamy Pillars, as there be
Hours in the Year; And now, I admire more, that there should be so many Hours
in the Year, as I see Pillars in this Church.

The Cross Isle of this Church is the most beautiful and lightsome of any I
have yet beheld. The Spire Steeple (not founded on the ground, but for the main
supported by Four Pillars,) is of great height and greater workman-ship. I
have been credibly informed that some Foreign Artists beholding this building,
brake forth into Tears, which some imputed to their Admiration, (though I see
not how wondering can cause weeping,) others to their Envy, grieving that they
had not the like in their own Land.

Nor can the most Curious (not to fay Cavilling) Eye, desire any thing which is
wanting in this Edifice, except possibly an Ascent, seeing such who address
themselves hither for their devotions, can hardly say with David, I will go up
into the house of the Lord.

Amongst the many Monuments therein, that of Edward Earl of Hartford, is most
magnificent, that of Helen Sua^enburgh a Swede, (the Relict of William Marquess
of Northampton, and afterward married to Sir Thomas Gorges,) is most commended
for its artificial plainness.

But the curiosity of Critics is best entertained with the Tomb, in the North
of the Nave of the Church, where lies a Monument in stone, of a little boy
habited all in Episcopal Robes, a Miter upon his ^ead, a Crosier in his hand,
and the rest accordingly. At the discovery thereof (formerly covered over with
Pews) many justly admired, that either a Bishop could be so small in Person, or
a Child so great in Clothes; though since all is unriddled. For it was Mr.
Gregori's Opera Posthum^, page 95. etc.
fashionable in that Church (a thing rather deserving to be remembered, then fit
to be done,) in the depth of Popery, that the Choristers chose a boy of their
society, to be a Bishop among them, from Saint Nicholas till Innocents day at
night, who did officiate in all things Bishop-like, saying of Mass alone
excepted, and held the state of a Bishop, answerably habited, amongst his
fellows the counterfeit Prebends: one of these, chancing to die in the time of
his mock-Episcopacy, was buried with Crosier and Miter as is aforesaid. Thus
superstition can dispense with that, which Religion cannot, making Piety
Pageantry, and subjecting what is sacred, to lusory representations.

As for Civil-buildings in this County, none are such Giants as to exceed the
Standard of Structures in other Counties. Long-leat the house of Sir James
Thynne was the biggest, and Wilton is the stateliest and pleasantest for
Gardens, Fountains, and other accommodations.

Nor must the industry of the Citizens of Salisbury be forgotten, who have
derived the River into every Street therein, so that Salisbury is a heap of
Islets thrown together. This minds me of an Epitaph made on Mr. Francis Hide
a Native of this City, who dyed Secretary unto the English Leiger in Venice,

Born in the English Venice, thou did die
Dear friend in the Italian Salisbury.
The truth is that the strength of this City consisted in the weakness thereof,
incapable of being Garrisoned, which made it in our Modern Wars to escape better
then many other places of the same proportion.

The Wonders.
Stone-henge.
After so many wild and wide conjectures of the Cause, Time, and Authors
hereof, why, when and by whom this monument was erected, a Posthume-book comes
lagging at last, called Written by Inigo Jones, Esquire.
Stone-henge restored, and yet goes before all the rest. It is questionable,
whether it more modestly propounds, or more substantially proves this to be
a Roman work, or Temple dedicated to Coelus or Coelum, (son to Ether and Dies)
who was senior to all the Gods of the Heathen.

That it is a Roman design he proves by the Order, as also by the Scheame
thereof, consisting of four equilateral Triangles, inscribed within the
Circumference of a Circle, an Vitru lib. 5.
Architectonicall Scheam used by the Romans; Besides the Portico or entrance
thereof, is made double, as in the Roman ancient Structures of great
Magnificence. Not to say, that the Architraves therein are all set without
Mortar, according to the Roman Architecture, wherein it was ordinary to have
Saxa nullo fulta glutino.

No less persuasive are his Arguments to prove a Temple dedicated to Coelum;
First, from the S^ituation thereof, standing in a plain, in a free and open
Air, remote from any village, without woods about it* Secondly, from it is
Aspect, being sub dio, and built without a roof; Thirdly, from the Circular
form thereof, being the proper Figure of the Temple of Coelus; Not to mention
his other arguments, in which the Reader may better satisfy himself from the
original Author, then my second-hand relation thereof.

Knot Grass.
This is called in Latin Gramen caninum supinum longissimum, and grows nine
miles from Salisbury, at Master Tuckers at Maddington. It is a peculiar kind,
and of the ninety species of Grasses in England is the most mavelous. It
grows ordinarily fifteen foot in length, yea, I read of one four and twenty
foot long, which may be true, because, as there are Giants amongst men, so
there are Giants amongst Giants, which even exceed them in proportion.

The place whereon it grows is low, (lying some Winters under water) having
hills round about it, and a spacious sheep common adjoining. The soil whereof,
by every hasty shower is brought down into this little meadow, which makes it so
incredibly fruitful. This Grass being built so many stories high, from knot
to knot, lies matted on the ground, whence it is cut up with sickles, and
bound into sheaves: It is both Hay and Provender, the joint-like knots whereof
will fat swine.

Some conceive that the seed thereof transplanted, would prosper plentifully
(though not to the same degree of Length) in other places, from whose judgment
other husbandmen dissent, conceiving it so peculiar to this place, that Ground
and Grass must be removed both together. Or else it mrst be set in a Parellel'd
position, for all the particular advantages aforesaid, which England will
hardly afford. So that nature may seem mutually to have made this Plant and
this Place one for another.

Proverbs.
It is done secundum usum Sarum.]

This Proverb coming out of the Church, has since enlarged it self into a
civil use. It began on this occasion; Many Offices or forms of service were
used in several Churches in England, as the Office of York, Hereford, Bangor,
etc. which caused a deal of Confusion in Gods Worship, until Osmond Bishop of
Sarum, about the year of our Lord 1090. made that Ordinall or Office which was
generally received all over England, so that Churches thence forward easily
understood one another, all speaking the same words in their Liturgy.

It is now applied to those persons which do, and Actions which are formally
and solemnly done, in so Regular a way by Authentic Precedents, and Paterns of
unquestionable Authority, that no just exception can be taken thereat.

Princes.
MARGARET PLANTAGENET Daughter to George Duke of Clarence, and Isabel Nevile
Eldest Daughter and Coheir of Richard Nevile Earl of Warwick, was born August
14. 1473. Mr. Dugdale in hi^ Allustration of Warwickshire page 335.
at Farrley-Castle in this County. Reader, I pray thee, let her pass for a
Princess, because Daughter to a Duke, Niece to two Kings, ( Edward the fourth,
and Richard the third,) Mother to Cardinal Reginale Poole. But chiefly, because
she was the last liver of all that Royal Race, which from their birth wore the
names of Plantagenets. By Sir Richard Poole a Knight of Wales, and Cozen-Jerman
to King Henry the seventh, she had diverse children, whereof Henry Lord
Mountague was the eldest, he was Accused of Treason, and this Lady his Mother
Charged to be Privy thereunto, by King Henry the eighth, who (as his father was
something too slow) was somewhat too quick in discovering Treasons, as soon as
(if not before) they were. On the Scaffold as she stood, she would not gratify
the Executioner with a Prostrate Posture of her body.

Some beheld this her action as an argument of an erected soul, disdaining
pulingly to submit to an infamous death, showing her mind free, though her body
might be forced, and that also it was a demonstration of her innocence. But
others condemned it as a needless and unseasonable animosity in her, who,
though supposed innocent before man for this fact, must grant her self guilty
before God, whose Justice was the supreme Judge condemning her. Besides it was
indiscreet to contend, where it was impossible to prevail, there being no guard
against the edge of such an axe, but patience; and it is ill for a soul to go
recking with anger out of this world.

Here happened an unequal contest betwixt Weakness and Strength, Age and
Youth, Nakedness and Weapons, Nobility and Baseness, a Princess and an
Executioner, who at last draging her by the hair (gray with age) may truly be
said to have took off her head, seeing she would neither give it him, nor
forgive him the doing thereof. Thus dyed this Lady Margaret, Heir to the name
and stout nature of Margaret Duchess of Burgundy, her Aunt and God-mother,
whose spirits were better proportioned to her Extraction then Estate, for
though by special Patent she was created Countess of Sarisbury, she was
restored but to a small part of the inheritance she was born unto. She suffered
in 23. year of the reign of K. Henry the eighth.

JANE SEYMORE, Daughter to Sir John Seymoure Knight, (honorably descended from
the Lords Beauchamps) was (as by all concurring probabilities is collected)
born at Wulfall in this County, and after was married to King Henry the eight.

It is currantly traditioned, that at her first coming to Court, Queen Anne
Bollen espying a Jewel pendant about her neck, snatched thereat, (desirous to
see the other unwilling to show it,) and causually hurt her hand with her own
violence; but it greived her heart more, when she perceived it the Kings
Picture by himself bestowed upon her, who from this day forward dated her own
declining and the others ascending in her husbands affection.

It appears plainly by a passage in the Act of Parliament, that the King was
not only invited to his marriage, by his own affections, but by the Humble
Petition and intercession of most of the Nobles of his Realm, moved thereunto,
as well by the convenience of her years, as in respect that by her Excellent
Beauty and Pureness of Flesh and Blood, (I speak the very words of the Act it
self,) she was apt (God willing) to Conceive Issue. And so it proved
accordingly.

This Queen dyed some days after the birth of Prince Edward her son, on whom
this Epitaph.

Phoenix Jana jacet, nato Phoenice dolendum,
Saecula Phoenices nulla tulisse duas.
Soon as her Phoenix Bud was blown,
Root-Phoenix Jane did wither.
Sad, that no age a brace had shown
Of Phoenixes together.
Of all the Wives of King Henry she only had the happiness to dye in his full
favor, the 14. of October. 1337. and is buried in the quire of Windsor Chapel,
the King continuing in real mourning for her even all the Festival of Christmas.

Saints.
ADELME Son to Bale de script. Brit. (...). 1. Number. 83.
Kenred, Nephew to Ina King of the West Saxons, was bred in Foreign parts, and
returning home was Abbot of Malmesbury Thirty years, a Person Memorable on
several Accounts.

1. He was the first Cambd. Brit. (...) (...).
Englishman who ever wrote in Latin. 2. He was the first that ever brought
Poetry into England. 3. The first Bishop of the Sea of Sherburn.
Bid gives him a large commendation for his Learning, the rather, because he
wrote a book for the reducing the Britons to observe Easter according to the
Church of Rome.

Impudent Monks have much abused his Memory with Shameless lies, and amongst
the rest with a Wooden Miracle, that a Flowers of English Saints page 491.
Carpenter having cut a Beam for his Church too short, he by his Prayers
stretched it out to the full proportion. To this, I may add another lie as
clear as the Sun it self, on whose Idem p. 492.
Rays (they report) he hung his Ve^ment, which miraculously supported it to
the great admiration of the beholders.

Coming to Rome to be Consecrated Bishop of Sherburn, he reproved Pope Sergius
his fatherhood, for being a father indeed to a Base Child, then newly born. And
returning home he lived in great Esteem until the day of his death, which
happened Anno Dom. 709.

His Corpse being brought to Malmesbury, were there Inshrined, and had in great
Veneration, who having his longest abode whilst living, and last when dead in
this County, is probably presumed a Native thereof.

EDITH Natural daughter of King Edger, by the Lady Wolfhild, was Abbess of
Wilton, wherein she demeaned her self with such Devotion, that her Memory
obtained the reputation of Saint-ship. And yet an Polyc. lib. 6. cap. 9.
Author tells us, that being more curious in her attire, then beseemed her
profession, Bishop Ethelwold sharply reproved her, who answered him roundly,
That God regarded the Heart more then the Garment, and that Sins might be
covered as well under Rags as Robes.

One John Capgrove in vit^ (...) Edith^.
reports that after the slaughter of her brother Edward, holy Dunstan had a
design to make her Queen of England, (the Vail of her head it seems would not
hinder the Crown,) so to defeat Ethelred the lawful Heir, had she not declined
the proffer, partly, on Pious, partly, Politic diswasions. She died Anno Dom.
984. and is buried in the Church of Dioness at Wilton of her own building, she
is commonly called Saint Edith the younger, to distinguish her from Saint Edith
her Aunt, of whom before.

Martyrs.
It plainly appears that about the year of our Lord 1503. there was a
persecution of Protestants (give me leave so to Antedate their name) in this
County, under Edmund Audley, Bishop of Salisbury, as by computation of time
will appear. Yet I find but one man, Richard Smart by name, (the more
remarkable, because but once, and that scentingly Acts and Mon. page 815.
mentioned by Mr. Fox) burnt at Salisbury, for reading a book called Wicliffs
Wicket, to one Thomas Stillman, afterward burnt in Smithfield. But under cruel
Bishop Capon Wiltshire afforded these

Marian Martyrs.
Name Vocation Residence Martyred in Anno John Fox Act. and Mon. p. 1894.
Spicer Free-Mason William Coberly Tailor Kevel Salisbury 1556 Apr. John
Maundrell Husbandman

Confessors.
Name Vocation Residence Persecuted in Anno John Fox Act. and Mon. p. 2054.
Hunt Husbandman Marleborough Salisbury 1558 Richard White Husbandman

These both being condemned to die, were little less then miraculously
preserved, as will See (...) in Mem. Per. in this Shire.
appear hereafter.

ALICE COBERLY must not be omitted, wife to William Coberly forenamed,
(charitably presuming on her repentance,) though she failed in her Constancy on
this occasion. The Jaylors wife of Salisbury, heating a key Fox Act. and Mon.
p. (...).
fire hot, and laying it in the grass, spoke to this Alice to bring it in to
her, in doing whereof, she pitiously burnt her hand, and cried out thereat. O
(said the other) if thou can not abide the burning of a key, how will thou
endure thy whole body to be burnt at the stake. Whereat the said Alice revoked
her opinion.

I can neither excuse the Cruelty of the one (though surely doing it not out of
a Persecuting, but Carnal preserving intention) nor the Cowardliness of the
other. For she might have hoped that her whole body encountering the flame with
a Christian resolution, and confidence of Divine support in the Testimony of
the truth, would have found less pain, then her hand felt from the sudden
surprise of the fire, wherein the unexpectedness added (if not to the pain,) to
the fright thereof. This sure I am, that some condemn her shrinking for a burnt
hand, who would have done so themselves for a scratched finger.

Cardinals.
WALTER WINTERBURN was born at Bishop Godwin in his (...). of Cardin. p. 171.
Sarisbury in this County, and bred a Dominican-fryer. He was an excellent
Scholar in all Studies suitable to his Pitz de Ang. script. in Anno 1305.
age, when a Youth, a good Poet and Orator, when a Man, an acute Philosopher,
(Aristotelicarum doctrinarum heluo, says he Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 4.
(...) 85.
who otherwise scarce gives him a good word,) when an Oldman, a deep
Controvertial Divine, and Skillful Casuist, a quality which commended him to be
Confessor to King Edward the first.

Now news being brought to Pope Benedict the eleventh, that William Maklesfield
Provincial of the Dominicans, and designed Cardinal of Saint Sabin, was dead
and buried at London, before his Cap could be brought to him, he appointed this
Walter to be heir to his Honor. The worst is, as Medlers are never ripe till
they are rotten, so few are thought fit to be Cardinals, but such as are
extremely in years. Maklesfield had all his body buried, and our Winterburn had
one foot in the grave, being seventy nine years of age, before he was summoned
to that dignity.

However, over he went with all have into Italy, and though coming thither too
late, to have a sight of Pope Benedict the eleventh, came soon enough to give a
suffrage at the choice of Clement the fifth. This Walter his Cardinals Cap was
never a whit the worse for wearing, enjoying it but a year. In his return home
he died, and was buried at Genua, but afterward his Corpse were brought over,
and Re-interred most solemnly in London Anno 1305.

ROBERT HALAM. was, says my Pitz de script. Brit. Anno 1410.
Author, Regio sanguine Angliae natus, born of S. N.
the blood Royal of England, though how, or which way, he does not acquaint us.
But we envy not his high Extraction, whilst it seems accompanied with other
Eminences. He was bred in Oxford, and afterward became Chancelour thereof
1403. From being Archdeacon of Canterbury, he was preferred Bishop of
Salisbury. On the sixth of June 1411. he was made Cardinal, though his
particular title is not expressed. It argues his Abilities, that he was one of
them, who was sent to represent the English Clergy, both in the Council of Pisa
and Constance, in which last service he dyed, Anno Dom. 1417. in Gotleby Castle.

Prelates.
JOANNES SARISBURIENSIS was born at, and so named from, old Sarum in this
County, though I have heard of some of the Salisburies in Denby shire, who
Essay to assert him to their Family, as who would not recover so eminent a
person?

Leland says, that he sees in him Omnem (...) Orbem, all the World (or if you
will the whole Circle) of Learning. Centuria 3. Number. 1.
Bale says, that he was one of the first, who since Theodorus Archbishop of
Canterbury, living five hundred years before him, (oh the (...) of Barbarism
in England!) endeavored to restore the learned languages to their Original
Purity, being a good Latinist, Grecian, Musician, Mathematician, Philosopher,
Divine, and what not?

What learning he could not find at home, he did fetch from abroad, traveling
into France and Italy, companion to T. Becket in his Exile, but no partner in
his protervity against his Prince, for which he sharply reproved him. He was
highly in favor with Pope Eugenius the third, and Adrian the fourth, and yet
no author in that age has so pungent passages against the Pride and
Covetousness of the Court of Rome. Take a taste of them.

Joannes Sarisburiensis in Polycratico. Sedent in Ecclesia Romana Scribae and
Pharisaei, ponentes onera importabilia in humeros hominum. Ita debacchantur
ejus Legati, ac si ad Ecclesiam flagellandam egressus sit Satan a facie Domini.

Peccata populi comedunt, eis vestiuntur, and in iis multipliciter luxuriantur,
dum very adoratores in Spiritu adorant Patre^. Qui ab eorum dissentit Doctrina,
aut Haereticus judicatur, aut (...). Manifestet ergo seipsum Christus, and
palam faciat viam, qua nobis est incedendum.

Scribes and Pharisees sit in the Church of Rome, putting unbearable burdens
on men's backs. His Legates do so swagger, as if Satan were gone forth from the
Face of the Lord to scourge the Church.

They eat the sins of the people, with them they are clothed, and many ways
riot therein, whilst the true worshipers worship the Father in Spirit, who so
dissent from their Doctrine, are condemned for Heretics, or Schismatics.
Christ therefore will manifest himself, and make the way plain, wherein we must
walk.

How does our Author Luther it (before Luther) against their errors and vices?
the more secure for the general opinion men had of his person, all holding our
John to be, though no Prophet, a Pious man, King Henry the second made him
Bishop of Chartres in France, where he died 1182.

RICHARD POOR Dean of Sarisbury, was first Bishop of Chichester, then of
Sarisbury, S. N.
or Old Sarum rather. He found his Cathedral most inconveniently seated for
want of water, and other necessaries, and therefore removed it a mile off, to a
place called Merry-field, (for the pleasant situation thereof,) since
Sarisbury. Where he laid the foundation of that Stately Structure, which he
lived not here to finish.

Now, as the place whence he came was so dry, that as Malmsbury says,
miserabili commercio, ibi aqua vaeneat, by sad chaffer, they were fain to give
money for water, so he removed to one, so low and moist, men sometimes, (upon
my own knowledge) would give money to be rid of the water. I observe this for
no other end, but to show, that all humane happiness, notwithstanding often
exchange of places, will still be an Heteroclite, and either have too much or
too little for our contentment.

This Poor was afterward removed to the Bishopric of Durham, and lived there
in great esteem, Mat. Paris characterizing him, eximiae sanctitatis, and
profundae scientiae virum. His dissolution in a most pious and peaceable manner
happened, April 5. Anno Domini 1237. His Corpse by his Will were brought and
buried at Tarrent in Dorsetshire, in a Nunnery of his own founding, and some of
his Name [and probably Alliance] are still extant in this County.

WILLIAM EDENDON was born at Edendon in this County, bred in Oxford, and
advanced by King Edward the third, to be Bishop of Winchester and Lord
Treasurer of England. During his managing of that Office, he caused new coins
(unknown before) to be made, groats and half-groats, both readier for change
and fitter for charity. But the worst was Godwin in the Bishops of Winchester.
imminuto nonnihil pondere, the weight was somewhat abated. If any say, this
was an un-episcopal act; know, he did it not as Bishop, but as Lord Treasurer,
the King, his Master, having all the profit thereby. Yea, succeeding Princes,
following this pattern, have sub-diminished their coin ever since. Hence is it,
that our Nobility, cannot maintain the port of their Ancestors, with the same
revenues; because so many pounds are not so many pounds, though the same in
noise and number, not the same in intrinsecal valuation.

He was afterward made Lord Chancellor, and erected a stately Convent for
Bonhomes at Edendon in this County, the place of his Nativity, valued at the
Dissolution per annum at five hundred twenty one pounds, twelve shillings, five
pence, half penny. Some condemn him for robbing Saint Peter (to whom with Saint
Swithin, WinchesterChurch was dedicated) to pay all Saints collectively, to
whom Edendon-Covent was Speed in h^s Catal. of Religious houses in Will-shire.
consecrated, suffering his Episcopal Palaces to decay and drop down, whilst he
raised up his new foundation. This he dearly paid for after his death, when
his Executors were sued for dilapidations, by his successor William Wickham,
(an excellent Architect, and therefore well knowing how to proportion his
charges for reparations,) who recovered of them Bishop GodWin in his Bishops of
Winchester.
one thousand six hundred sixty two pounds ten shillings, a vast sum in that
Age, though paid in the lighter groats and half-groats. Besides this, his
Executors were forced to make good the standing-stock of the Bishopric, which
in his time was empaired, viz.

Oxen 1556. Weathers 4717. Ewes 3521. Lambs 3521. Swine 127.

This Edendon sat in his Bishopric twenty one years, and dying 1366. lies
buried on the South Side, in the passage to the Quire, having a fair Monument
of Alabaster, but an Epitaph of course stone, I mean so barbarous, that it is
not worth the inserting.

RICHARD MAYO alias MAYHOWE was born nigh Hungerford in this County, of good
parentage, whose Sur-name and Kindred was extinct in the last generation, when
the Heirs-general thereof, were married into the Families of Montpesson and
Grove. He was first admitted in New-colledge Register in Anno 1459.
New-colledge, and thence removed to Magdalens in Oxford, where he became
President thereof 27. years. It argues his abilities to any indifferent
apprehension, that so knowing a Prince as Henry the seventh, amongst such
plenty of Eminent Persons, elected and sent him into Godwin in the Bishops of
Hereford.
Spain, Anno 1501. to bring over the Lady Katharine to be married to Prince
Arthur, which he performed with all fidelity, though the heavens might rather
seem to Laugh at, then Smile on that unfortunate marrying. After his return he
was rewarded with the Bishopric of Hereford, and having sat 11. years therein
dyed 1516 and lies buried in his Church on the South Side of the high Altar,
under a Magnificent Monument.

Since the Reformation.
JOHN THORNEBOROUGH B. D. was born (as I am credibly informed) in the City of
Salisbury, bred in Magdalen-colledge in Oxford. He did (...), and his Goodly
Presence made him more acceptable to Queen Elizabeth, preferring him Dean of
York, and Bishop of Lymbrick in Ireland, where he received a most remarkable
deliverance, in manner as follweth.

Lying in an Old Sir John Harrington in his additionall supply to Bishop Godwin
page 158.
Castle in Ireland, in a large room, partitioned but with Sheets or Curtains,
his Wife, Children and Servants, in effect an whole Family; In the dead time of
the night, the floor over head being Earth and Plaster, as in many places is
used, overcharged with weight, fell wholly down together, and crushing all to
pieces that was above two foot high, as Cupboards, Tables, Forms, Stools,
rested at last on certain Chests, as God would have it, and hurt no living
Creature.

In the first of King James 1603. he was consecrated Bishop of Bristoll, and
held his Deanery an Irish Bishopric in commendam with it, and from thence was
translated to Worchester. I have heard his skill in Chimistry much commended,
and he presented a precious extraction to King James, reputed a great preserver
of health, and prolonger of life. He is conceived by such helps to have added
to his vigorous vivacity, though I think a merry heart (whereof he had a great
measure) was his best Elixar to that purpose. He died exceeding aged, Anno Dom.
164.

JOHN BUCKRIDGE was So am I am informed by Mr. Anthony Holmes his Secretary
still alive.
born at Dracot nigh Marleborough in this County, and bred under Master
Mullcaster in Merchant-Taylors school, from whence he was sent to Saint
Johns-colledge in Oxford, where from a Fellow, he became Doctor of Divinity,
and President thereof. He afterward succeeded Doctor Lancelot Andrews in the
Vicaridge of Saint Giles Criplegate, in which Cure they lived one and twenty
years a piece, and Bishop Godwin in his (...). of the Bishops of Rochester.
indeed great was the Intimacy betwixt these two learned Prelates. On the ninth
of June 1611. he was Consecrated Bishop of Rochester, and afterward set forth
a learned Book in opposition of John Fisher, De potestate papae in
Temporalibus, of which my Idem ibidem.
Author does affirm

Johannem itaque Roffensem habemus, quem Johanni Roffensi opponamus, Fishero
Buckerigium, cujus argumentis (si quid ego video) ne a mill quidem Fisheris
unquam respondebitur.

He was afterward preferred Bishop of Ely, and having Preached the Funeral
Sermon of Bishop Andrews, (extant in Print at the end of his works) survived
him not a full year, dying Anno Dom. 163. He was decently Interred by his own
appointment in the Parish Church of Bromly in Kent, the Manner thereof belonged
to the Bishopric of Rotchester.

Statesmen
EDWARD SEIMOR and THOMAS SEIMOR, both Sons of Sir John Seimor of Wolfull
Knight in this County. I join them together, because whilst they were united in
affection they were invinsible, but when divided, easily overthrown by their
enemies.

Edward Seimor Duke of Sommerset, Lord Protector and Treasurer of England,
being the Elder Brother, succeeded to a fair Paternal inheritance. He was a
valiant Soldier for Land-service, fortunate, and generally beloved by Martial
men. He was of an open nature, free from jealousy and dissembling, affable to
all People. He married Anne Daughter of Sir Edward Stanhop knight, a Lady of a
high mind and haughty undaunted spirit.

Thomas Seimor the Younger Brother, was made Barron of Sudley, by offices and
the favors of his Nephew, K. Edward the sixth, obtained a great Estate. He was
well experienced in Sea affairs, and made Lord Admiral of England. He lay at a
close posture, being of a reserved Nature, and was more cunning in his
Carriage. He married Queen Katharine Parr, the Widow of King Henry the eighth.

Very great the Animosities betwixt their Wives, the Duchess refusing to bear
the Queens Train, and in effect justled with her for Precedence, so that what
betwixt the Train of the Queen, and long Gown of the Duchess, they raised so
much dust at the Court, as at last, put out the eyes of both their husbands,
and occasioned their Executions, as we have largely declared in our
Ecclesiastical History. The Lord Thomas Anno 154.. The Lord Edward Anno 154.

Thus the two best Bullworks of the safety of King Edward the sixth, being
demolished to the ground, Duke Dudley had the advantage the nearer to approach
and assault the Kings Person, and to practice his destruction as is vehemently
suspected.

Sir OLIVER SAINT JOHN Knight, Lord Grandison, etc. was born of an ancient and
honorable family, whose prime seat was at Lediard-Tregoze in this County. He
was bred in the wars from his youth, and at last by King James was appointed
Lord Deputy of Ireland, and vigorously pursued the principles of his
Predecessors, for the civilizing thereof. Indeed the Lord Mountjoy reduced
that Country to obedience, the Lord Chichester to some civility, and this Lord
Grandison first advanced it to considerable profit to his Master. I confess In
the life of Richard the second.
T. Walsingham writes, that Ireland afforded unto Edward the third, thirty
thousand pound a year paid into His Exchequer, but it appears by the Sir John
Davis in Disc. o Ireland page 39. etc.
Irish-records (which are rather to be believed) that it was rather a burden,
and the constant revenue thereof beneath the third part of that proportion. But
now, the Kingdom being peaceably settled, the income thereof turned to good
account, so that Ireland (called by my Author the Land of Ire, for the constant
broiles therein for 400. years,) was now become the Land of Concord. Being
re-called into England, he lived many years in great repute, and dying without
issue, left his Honor to his Sisters son by Sir Edward Villiers, but the main
of his estate to his Brothers son Sir John Saint John Knight and Baronet.

Sir JAMES LEY Knight and Baronet, son of Henry Ley Esquire, (one of great
Ancestry, who on his own cost with his men, valiantly served King Henry the
eighth, at the siedge of Bullen) was born at Tafant in this County. Being his
fathers sixth son, (and so in probability barred of his inheritance) he
endeavored to make himself an Heir, by his Education, applying his book in
Brasen-nose-colledge, and afterward studying the Laws of the Land in
Lincoln's Inn, wherein such his proficiency, King James made him Lord Chief
Justice in Ireland.

Here he practiced the charge King James gave him at his going over, (yea, what
his own tender Conscience gave himself,) namely, Not to build his Estate on the
ruins of a miserable Nation, but aiming by the unpartial execution of Justice,
not to enrich himself, but civilize the People, he made a good Progress
therein. But the King would no longer lose him out of his own Land, and
therefore recalled him home about the time when his fathers inheritance, by the
death of his five elder brethren descended upon him. It was not long before
Offices and Honor flowed in fast upon him, being made by

King James. King Charles. 1. Aturney of the Court of Wards. 2. Chief Justice
of the Upper Bench 18. of his reign Jan. 29. 3. Lord Treasurer of England in
the 22. of his reign December. 22. 4. Baron Ley of Ley in J. Philipot in his
(...). of Lord Treasurers page 84.
Devonshire the last of the same Month.
1. Earl of Marleburg in this County, immediately after the Kings Coronation.
2. Lord President of the Council, in which place he died Anno Domini 1629.


He was a person of great gravity, ability and integrity, and as the Caspian
Sea is observed neither to ebb nor flow, so his mind did not rise or fall, but
continued the same constancy in all conditions.

Sir FRANCIS COTTINGTON Knight, was born nigh Mere in this County, and bred,
when a youth, under Sir........ Stafford. He lived so long in Spain, till he
made the garb and gravity of that Nation become his, and become him. He raised
himself by his natural strength, without any artificial advantage; having his
parts above his learning, his experience above his parts, his industry above
his experience, and (some will say) his success above all; so that at the last
he became Chancellor of the Exchequer, Baron of Hanworth in Middlesex, and
(upon the resignation of Doctor Juxon) Lord Treasurer of England, gaining also
a very great estate. But, what he got in few years, he lost in fewer days,
since our Civil Wars, when the Parliament was pleased (for reasons only known
to themselves) to make him one of the examples of their severity, excluding him
pardon, but permitting his departure beyond the seas, where he dyed about the
year 1650.

Capital Judges.
Sir NICHOLAS HYDE Knight, was born at Warder in this County, where his father
in right of his wife, had a long lease of that Castle, from the family of the
Arundels. His father, I say, (descended from an Ancient Family in Cheshire,) a
fortunate Gentleman in all his Children, (and more in his Grandchildren) some
of his underboughs out-growing the top-branch, and younger children (amongst
whom Sir Nicholas) in wealth and honor exceeding the heir of the family.

He was bred in the Middle Temple, and was made Sergeant at Law the first of
February 1626. and on the eighth day following was sworn Lord Chief Justice of
the Kingsbench, succeeding in that Office, next save one unto his Countryman
Sir James Ley, (then alive, and preferred Lord Treasurer, born within two miles
one of another) and next of all unto Sir Randal Crew lately displaced. Now,
though he entered on his place with some disadvantage (Sir Randal being
generally popular) and though in those days, it was hard for the same person,
to please Court and Country, yet he discharged his office with laudable
integrity, and died 1631.

Soldiers*
First, for this County in general, hear what an ancient Author, who wrote about
the time of King Henry the second, reports of it, whose words are worthy of
our translation and exposition.

Johannes Sarisburiensis de Nugis Curialium 6. cap. 18.
Provincia Severiana, quae moderno usu ac nomine ab incolis Wiltesira vocatur,
eodem jure sibi vendicat Cohortem Subsidiariam, adjecta sibi Devonia and
Cornubia. The Severian Province, which by modern use and name is by the
inhabitants called Wiltshire, by the same right chalengeth to it self to have
the Rere, Devonshire and Cornwall being joined unto it.

The Severian Province.] We thank our Author for expounding it Wiltshire,
otherwise we should have sought for it in the North, near the Wall of Severus.

By the same right] Viz. by which Kent claims to lead the Vanguard, whereof
See Kent in title (...).
formerly.

To have the Rere] So translated by Mr. In his Notes on (...) page 303.
Seldom (from whom it is a sin to dissent in a Criticisme of Antiquity)
otherwise some would cavil it to be the Reserve. Indeed the Rere is the basis
and foundation of an Army, and it is one of the chief of Divine promises, Isa.
58. 8.
The glory of the Lord shall be thy rereward.

We read how the Romans placed their Triarii, (which were Veteran soldiers)
behind, and the service was very sharp indeed cum res rediit ad Triarios. We
may say that these three Counties, Wiltshire, Devonshire and Cornwall, are the
Triarii of England, yet so that in our Author Wiltshire appears as principal,
the others being added for its assistance.

Here I dare interpose nothing, why the two interjected Counties betwixt Wilts
and Devon, viz. Dorset and Summerset are not mentioned, which gives me cause
to conjecture them included in Devonia, in the large acception thereof. Now
amongst the many worthy Soldiers which this County has produced, give me
leave to take special notice of

HENRY D'ANVERS. His ensuing Epitaph on his Monument in the Church of Dantsey
in this Shire, will better acquaint the Reader with his deserts, then any
character which my Pen can give of him.

H^re lies the body of Henry Danvers second son to Sir John Danvers Knight,
and Dame Elizabeth Daughter and Coheir to Nevill Lord Latimer. He was born at
Dantsey in the County of Wilts, Jan. Anno Dom. 1573. being bred up partly in
the Low-CountryWars under Maurice Earl of Nassaw, afterward Prince of Orange;
and in many other military Actions of those times, both by Sea and by Land. He
was made a Captain in the Wars of France, and there Knighted for his good
Service under Henry the fourth the then French King. He was employed as
Leiutenant of the Horse, and Sergeant Major of the whole Army in Ireland, under
Robert Earl of Essex, and Charles Baron of Mountjoy, in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth. By King James the first, he was made Baron of Dansey, and Peer of
this Realm, as also Lord President of Munster, and Governor of Guernsey. By
King Charles the first, he was Created Earl of Danby, made of his Privy
Council, and Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter. In his latter time
by reason of imperfect health considerately declining more active Employments,
full of Honors, Wounds and Days, he died Anno Domini 1643. Laus Deo.

For many years before St. George had not been more magnificently Mounted I
mean the solemnity of his feast more sumptuously observed,) then when this Earl
with the Earl of Morton were installed Knights of the Garter. One might have
there beheld the abridgment of English and Scottish in their Attendance. The
Scottish Earl (like Zeuxis his Picture) adorned with all Art and Costliness,
whilst our English Earl (like the plain sheet of Apelles) by the Gravity of his
habit, got the advantage of the Gallantry of his Corrival with judicious
beholders. He died without Issue in the beginning of our Civil Wars, and by his
Will made 1639. settled his large Estate on his hopeful Nephew Henry D'Anvers,
snatched away (before fully of age) to the great grief of all good men.

Writers.
OLIVER of MALMESBURY was (says my Pits de Illus. 1. Angl. scrip^. Anno 1060.
Author) i^ ipsius Monasterii terratorio natus, so that there being but few
paces betwixt his cradle, and that Convent, he quickly came thither, and became
a Benedictine therein. He was much addicted to Mathematics, and to judicial
Astrology. A great Comet happened in his age, which he entertained with these
expressions;

Venisti? Venisti? multis matribus lugendum malum? Dudum te vidi, sed multo jam
terribilius, Angliae minans prorsus excidium.

Art thou come? Art thou come? thou evil to be lamented by many mothers? I saw
thee long since, but now thou art much more terrible, threatening the English
with utter destruction.

Nor did he much miss his mark herein, for soon after, the coming in of the
Norman Conqueror deprived many English of their lives, more of their laws and
liberties, till after many years by Gods goodness they were restored.

This Oliver having a mind to try the truth of Poetical reports, an facta vel
ficta, is said to have tied Wings to his hands and feet, and taking his rise
from a Tower in Malmesbury, flew as they say Idem ibidem.
a ^rlong, till something failing him, down he fell, and brake both his Thighs.
Pity is it but that Icarus-like he had not fallen into the water, and then

OLIVER OL'VARIS nomina fecit aquis.

I find the like Recorded in the Abdia^ (...). Apost. hist. lib. 1. Egesip.
(...). 3. cap. 2. Epiph. lib. Tom. 2. haeres. 21. Anto^. chro. part. 1. tit. 6.
cap. 4.
Ecclesiastical History of Simon Magus, flying from the Capitol in Rome high in
the Air, till at last (by the Prayers of Saint Peter,) he fell down and
bruised himself to death. But that Simon did it by the Black, our Oliver by the
White Art, he being supported by ill spirits, this by mere ingenuity, which
made him the more to be pitied.

He wrote some books of Astrology, and died Anno Dom. 1060. Bale de script.
B^it. Cent. 2. Number. 51.
five years before the Norman Invasion, and so saw not his own prediction
(prevented by death) performed. It being the fate of such Folk, Ut sint Oculati
for as and caecutiant Domi. That when they are quick sighted to know what shall
betide to others, they are blind to behold what will befall to themselves.

WILLIAM quitting his own name of SUMMERSET, assumed that of MALMESBURY,
because there he had (if not born) his best Preferment. Indeed he was a
Duallist in that Convent, (and if a Pluralist no ingenious person would have
envied him,) being Canter of that Church, and Library Keeper therein. Let me
add and LibraryMaker too, for so may we call his History of the Saxon Kings
and Bishops, before the Conquest and after it until his own time. An History
to be honored, both for the Truth and Method thereof, if any fustiness be
found in his Writings, it comes not from the Grape, but from the Cask, the
smack of Superstition in his books, is not to be imputed to his person, but to
the Age wherein he lived and dyed, viz. Anno Dom. 1142. and was buried in
Malmesbury.

ROBERT CANUTUS. His Surname might justly persuade us to suspect him a Dane,
but that In vit^ Roberti Canuti Cent. 3. Number. 4.
Bale does assure him born at Cricklade in this County, and further proceeds
thus in the desciption of the place.

Leland in the life of great King Alfred informs us, that during the
flourishing of the glory of the Britains, before the University of Oxford was
founded, two Scholars were famous both for Eloquence and Learning, the one
called Greeklade, where the Greek, the other Latinlade, where the Latin tongue
was professed, since corruptly colled Cricklade and Lechlade, at this day.

Having so good security, I presumed to Print the same in my Church History,
and am not as yet ashamed thereof. But since my Worthy Friend Doctor Heylyn,
(whose Relations living thereabouts, gave him the opportunity of more
exactness,) thus reports it, that Cricklade was the place for the Profession
of Greek, Lechlade, for Physic and Latin, a small village, (small indeed, for
I never saw it in any Map) hard by the place where Latin was professed.

But to proceed, our Canute went hence to Oxford, and there became Chief of the
Canons of Saint Fridswith. He gathered the best flowers out of Pliny his
Natural History, and composing it into a Garland, (as he calls it) dedicated
the book to King Henry the second. He wrote ^so his Comments on the greater part
of the Old and New Testament, and flourished Anno 1170.

RICHARD of the DIVISES. A word of the place of his nativity. The Vies or
Devises, is the best and biggest Town for trading ( Salisbury being a City) in
this Shire, so called, because anciently divided betwixt the King and the
Bishop of Salisbury, as Mine-Thine (corruptly called Minden) a City in
Westphalia had its Name from such a partition. Now because the Devises carries
much of strange conceits in the common sound thereof, and because Stone-henge
is generally reputed a wonder, CountryPeople who live far off in our Land
misapprehend them (distanced more then 12. miles) to be near together. Our
Richard born in this Town, was bred a Benedictine in Winchster, where his
Learning and Industry rendered him to the respect of all in that Age. He wrote a
History of the reign of King Richard the first, under whom he flourished, and
an Epitome of the Bale de script. Brit. C^nt. 3. Number. 28.
British affairs, dedicating them both to Robert Prior of Winchester. His
History (...) could never see but at the second hand, as cited by others, the
rarity thereof making it no piece for the Shop of a Stationer, but a Property
for a public Library. His death was about the year 1200.

GODWIN of SALISBURY Chanter of that Church, and (what ever was his skill in
Music) following the precepts of Saint Paul, he made Ephesians. 5. 19.
melody in his heart, having his mind given much to Meditation, which is the
Chewing of the Cud of the food of the soul, turning it into Clean and Wholesome
Nourishment. He wrote (beside other works) a book of Meditations, dedicating the
same to one Ramulia, or rather Ranilda, an Anchoress and most Bale de script.
Cent. 4. Number. 20.
incomparable woman, (says my Author) the more remarkable to me, because this
is the first and last mention I find of her memory. This Godwin flourished
about the year of our Lord, 1256.

JOHN of WILTON Senior, was bred an Augustinian Friar, and after he had stored
himself with homebred Learning, went over into France, and studied at Paris.
Here he became a subtle Disputant, insomuch that John Baconthorp (that Staple
School-man) not only highly praises him, but also uses his authority in his

JOHN of WILTON Junior, was bred a Benedictine Monk in Westminster. He was
Elegant in the Latin tongue (...) Cent. 6. Number. 17.
praeter ejus aetatis sortem. He wrote Metricall Meditations, in imitation of
Saint Bernard, and one Book highly prized by many, entitled Horologium
sapientiae, english it as you please, the Clock or Dial of Wisdom. Arguments.
I meet not with any man in that age better stocked with Sermons on all
occasions, having written his Summer, (...) de script. Brit. Cent. 4. Number. 94.
his Winter, his Lent, his Holy Day Sermons. He flourished under King Edward
the second, Anno 1310.

He was a great Allegory-Monke, and great his dexterity in such Figurative
conceits. He flourished some fifty years after his Namesake under King Edward
the third.

Reader, I confess there be See Villare Anglicanum.
eleven Wiltons in England, and therefore will not absolutely avouch the
Nativities of these two John's in this County. However because Wilton which
denominateth this Shire, is the best and biggest amongst the Towns so called, I
presume them placed here with the most Probability.

JOHM CHYLMARK was born at that Village, well know in Daworth Hundred, and bred
Fellow of Merton-colledge in Oxford. He was a diligent searcher into the
mysteries of Nature, an acute Philosopher and Disputant, but most remarkable
was his skill in Mathematics, being accounted the Archemedes of that age,
having written many (...) de script. Brit. Cent. 6. Number. 99.
Tractates in that Faculty, which carry with them a very good regard at this
day. He flourished under King Richard the second, Anno 1390.

THOMAS of WILTON D. D. was for his Learning and Abilities made first
Chancellor, and then Dean of Saint Paul's in London, in his time (in the reign
of King Edward the fourth,) happened a tough contest betwixt the Prelates and
the Friars; the latter pretending to poverty, and taxing the Bishops for their
pomp and plenty. Our Wilton politickly opposed the Friars. Now as the only
way for to withdraw Hanniball from his invasive war in Italy, was by recalling
him to defend his own Country near Carthage, so Wilton wisely wrought a
diversion, putting the Friars from accusing the Bishops, to excuse themselves.

For although an Old Gown, a Tattered Cowle, a Shirt of Hair, a Girdle of
Hemp, a Pair of Beads, a Plain Crucifix, and Picture of some Saint, passed for
all the wealth and Wardrobe of a Friar, yet by hearing Feminine Confessions,
(wherewith Wilton twitteth them) and abusing the Key of Absolution, they opened
the Coffers of all the Treasure in the Land. He wrote also a smart Book on this
subject,

Idem Cent. 8. Number. 32.
An validi Mendicantes sint in (...) Perfectionis?
Whether Friars in health and Begging, be in the state of perfection?
The Anti-Friarists maintaining, that such were Rogues by the Laws of God and
Man, and fitter for the House of Correction, then State of Perfection. This
Dean Wilton flourished Anno Dom. 1460.

Since the Reformation.
WILLIAM HOREMAN was (says my Idem Cent. 8. Number. 70.
Author) Patria Sarisburiensis, which in the Strictest sense, may be rendered
born in the City, in the Largest born in the Diocese of Salisbury, and in the
Middle-sence, (which I most embrace) born in Wiltshire, the County wherein
Salisbury is situated. He was bred (says Bale) first in Eaton, then in
Kingscolledge in Cambridge, both which I do not deny, though propably, not of
the Foundation, his name not appearing in the exact Collected in (...) by Mr.
Hatcher.
Catalogue thereof. Returning to Eaton, he was made Vice-Provost thereof, where
he spent the remainder of his (...). He was one of the most General Scholars
of his age, as may appear by the Diffusiveness of his Learning and Books
written in all Faculties.

Grammar. Of Orthography. Poetry. Of the Quantities of penultime syllables.
History. A Chronicle, with a Comment on some, and Index of most Chronicles.
Controversial Divinity. A Comment on Gabriel Biel. Case On the divorce of King
Henry the eighth. Hnsbandry. A Comment on Cato, Varro, Columella, Palladius, de
Re Rustica.

Other books he left unfinished, for which Bale sends forth a sorrowful sigh,
with a Proh Dolor: which his passion, is proof enough for me to place this
Horeman on this side of the line of Reformation. He dyed April 12. 1535. and
lies buried in the Chapel of Eaton.

Masters of Music.
WILLAM LAWS son of Thomas Laws a Vi^ar Choral of the Church of Salisbury,
was bred in the Close of that City, being from his Childhood inclined to
Music. Edward Earl of Hertford obtained him from his Father, and bred him of
his own cost in that Faculty, under his Master Giovanni Coperario an Italian,
and most Exquisite Musician. Yet may it be said that the Scholar in time did
Equal, yea Exceed his Master.

He afterward was of the Private Music to King Charles, and was respected and
beloved of all such Persons, who cast any looks toward Virtue and Honor.
Besides his Fancies of the three, four, five and six parts to Vyol and Organ,
he made above thirty several sorts of Music, for Voices and Instruments,
neither was there any Instrument then in use, but he composed to it so aptly,
as if he had only studied that.

In these distracted times his Loyalty engaged him in the War for his Lord and
Master, and though he was by General Gerrard made a Commissary on design to
secure him (such Officers being commonly shot-free by their place, as not
Exposed to danger,) yet such the activity of his Spirit, he disclaimed the
Covert of his Office, and betrayed thereunto by his own adventurousness was
casually shot at the Siege of Chester, the same time when the Lord Bernard
Stuart lost his life.

Nor was the Kings soul so engrossed with gr^ef for the death of so near a
Kinsman, and Noble a Lord, but that hearing of the death of his dear servant
William Laws, he had a particular Mourning for him when dead, whom he loved
when living, and commonly called the Father of Music. I leave the rest of his
worth to be expressed by his own Works of Composures of Psalms done jointly by
him and his brother Master Henry Laws, betwixt which two no difference, either
in Eminency, Affection, or otherwise considerable, save that the one is
deceased, and the other still surviving. Master William Laws dyed in September
164..

Benefactours to the Public.
I durst venture no farther, finding no more of his name in Mr. Cambden.
T. STUMPS of the Town of Malmesbury in this County, was in his Age one of the
most eminent Clothiers in England, of whom there passes a story told with some
variation of circumstances, but generally to this purpose.

King Henry the eighth, Hunting near Malmesbury in Bredon Forest, came with
all his Court Train unexpected, to Dine with this Clothier. But great
Housekeepers are as seldom surprised with Guests as vigilant Captains with
Enemies. Stumps commands his little Army of Workmen which he fed daily in his
house, to fast one Meal until night, (which they might easily do without
indangering their health,) and with the same Provision gave the King, and his
Court-train (though not so delicious and various) most wholesome and plentiful
entertainment.

But more Authentic is what I read in the great Camdens Brit: in (...).
Antiquary, speaking of the plucking down of Malmesbury Monastery.

The very Minster it self, should have sped no better then the rest, but being
Demolished, had not T. Stumps a wealthy Clothier, by much suit but with a
greater sum of Money, redeemed and bought it for the Iowns-men his
Neighbors, by whom it was converted to a Parish Church, and for a great part
is yet standing at this day.

I find one William Stumps Gentleman, who in the one and thirtieth I perused
the Original in the Remembrancers (or Sir Thomas (...)) Office, C. 7. (...)
rot. 147.
year of King Henry the eight, bought of him the demeans of Malmesbury Abbey,
for fifteen hundred pound two shillings and a half penny. Now how he was
related to this T. Stumps, whether son or father is to me unknown. It will not
be a sin for me to wish more branches from such Stumps, who by their bounty may
preserve the Monuments of Antiquity from destruction.

Memorable Persons.
-- SUTTON of (...). Tradition and an old Pamphlet (newly vamped with
Additions) make him a great Clothier, Entertaining King Henry the first, and
bequeathing at his death one hundred pounds to the Weavers of Salisbury, with
many other benefactions. I dare not utterly deny such a person, and his
bountiful Gifts, but am ^ured that he is notoriously mis-timed, seeing
Salisbury had scarce a stone laid therein, one hundred years after King Henry
the first; and as for old Sarum, that age knew nothing of Clothing, as we have
proved before. Thus these Mungrell Pamphlets (part true, part false,) do most
mischief. Snakes are less dangerous then Lampries, seeing none will feed on
what is known to be poison. But these books are most pernicious where truth and
falsehoods are blended together, and such a Medly Cloth, is the Tale-story of
this Clothier.

MICHEL born at........... in this County, was Under-sheriffe to Sir Anthony
Hungarford, (a worthy Knight) Anno 1558. in the last year of Queen Mary. Of
this Master Michel I find this Character,

A right and a perfect Fox h^s Acts and Mon. page 2655.
godly man.

Under sheriffs generally are complained of as over-crafty, (to say no worse of
them,) but it seems hereby the place does not spoil the person, but the person
the place. When the Writ de comburendis haereticis, for the Execution of
Richard White and John Hunt (of whom formerly) was brought to Mr. Michel,
instead of burning them. He burnt the Writ, and before the same could be
renewed, Doctor Geffray (the bloody Chancellor of Salisbury who procured it)
and Queen Mary, were both dead, to the Miraculous preservation of Gods poor
Servants.

Sir JAMES -- Vicar Choral (as I conceive) of the Church of Sarisbury, in the
reign of King Edward the sixth, was wholly addicted to the Study of Chemistry.
Now as Socrates himself wrote nothing, whilst Plato his Scholar praised him to
purpose, so whilst the Pen of Sir James was silent of his own worth, Thomas
Charnock his Scholar (whom he made Inheritour of his Art) thus chants in his
Commendation.

I In his ^ma (...).
could find never Man but one,
Which could teach Me, the secrets of our Stone.
And that was a Priest in the Close of Salisbury,
God rest his Soul in Heaven full merry.
This Sir James pretented that he had all his skill not by Learning, but
Inspiration, which I list not to disprove. He was alive Anno 1555. but died
about the beginning of Queen Elizabeth.

Lord Mayor.
Name Father Place Company Time Sir Nicholas Lambert Edward Lambert Wilton
Grocer 1531

The Names of the Gentry of this County Returned by the Commissioners, in the
twelsth year of King Henry the sixth.
R. Bishop of Salisbury, Commissioners to receive the Oaths. Walt. Hungarford,
Knight. Robert Andrew, Knights for the Shire. Robert Long. Knights for the
Shire.

Rob. Hungarford, mil. Edm. Hungarford, m. Ioh. Stourton, mil. Will. Becham,
mil. Ioh. Beynton, mil. Will. Westbery Justiciarii. Ioh. Seymour Will. Darell
Rich. Milbourn Edm. Dantesey Ioh. Westbery, sen. David. Cerington Randul. Thorp
Lau. Gowayn Rog. Peryton Will. Gore, sen. Roh. Ernly Rob. Blake Tho. Drew
Will. Dangers Rob. Paniffote Ioh. Westbery, junior. Will. Rouse Tho. Boneham
Johan. Rous Will. Besyle Rob. Baynard Rog. Trewbody Will. Caynelt. Will.
Botreauxe Will. Widecombe Ioh. At Berwe Ioh. Northfolk Ioh. Sturmy Tho.
Cryklade Rob. Bodenham Johan. Bride Rob. Beast Cob. Colyngborn Hen. Chancy Ioh.
Comb Ioh. West Rob. Onewyn Tho. Ierderd Ioh. Whitehorn Ioh. Gergrave Nich.
Wotton Tho. Hall Ioh. Hall Rich. Hall Will. ^ore, (...). Rob. Crikkelade Ioh.
Lambard Tho. Beweshyn Rich. Mayn Ioh. Mayn Ioh. Benger Rob. Mayhow Hen. Bardley
Rob. Confold Ioh. Mumfort Tho. Hancock Ioh. Osburn Ioh. Gillberd Ioh. Attuene
Ioh. Escote Gul. Orum Rich. So^wel Reg. Croke Ingel. Walrond Ioh. Waldrine
Rich. Warrin Will. Stanter Rob. Solman Tho. Temse Will. Temse Tho. Ryngwode
Will. Watkins Rob. Backeham Walt. Backeham Will. Dantesey Rich. Caynell Rich.
Hardone Ioh. Tudworth Ioh. Coventre Tho. Gore nuper de Lynshyll Rob. Wait
Will. Coventre Ioh. Ingeham Ioh. Martyn Walt. Evererd Will. Polelchirch Ioh.
Justice Walt. Stodel^y Will. Wychamton Rob. Air Ioh. Voxanger Sim. Air Ioh.
Ford Will. Russell Ioh. Scot Tho. Vellard Pet. Duke Ioh. Quinton Tho. Quinton
Ioh. Bourne Rich. Warneford Ioh. Stere Tho. Hasard Rob. Lyvenden Will. Lyng
Ioh. Davy Rob. Davy Rob. Flower Will. Leder Ioh. Edward Ioh. Cutting Tho.
Blanchard Will. Moun Edm. Penston Rich. Lie Ioh. Bellingdon Ioh. Pope Ioh. Lie
Ioh. Spender Walt. Clerk Ioh. Quarly Will. Bacon Ioh. Everard Nich. Spondell
Will. Walrond Tho. Stake Rich. Cordra Rich. de Bowys. Will Renger Thom. Bower
de Devise.
R. is here Robert Nevil then Bishop of Salisbury. Walter Hungerford was the
Lord Hungerford Treasurer of England.

WILL. WESTBRY Justiciarii.]

Surely this Justice must be more then an Ordinary one of the Peace and Quorum,
because preposed to John Seimour a signal Esquire, late High-sheriffe of the
Shire. Yet was he none of the two Chief-Justices of Westminster, as not
mentioned in their Catalogue. Probably he was one of the Puny Judges in those
Courts, but because no certainty thereof, we leave him as we found him.

DAVID CERINGTON.]

The self same name with Sherington for all the literal variation, and they, I
assure you, were men of great Anchestry and Estate in this County. Sir Henry
Sherington was the last Heir-male of this Family, dwelling at Lacock in this
County, a Right Godly Knight, and great friend to Bishop Jewel, who died in
his house at Lacock. He dissuaded the Bishop from Preaching that Lord's Day, by
reason of his great Weakness, Affirming it better for a Private Congregation to
want a Sermon one day, then for the Church of See ^he life of Bishop Jewel
p^efixed to his Apology.
England to lose such a Light for ever. But he could not prevail, the Bishop
being resolved to expire in his calling. This Sir Henry left two Daughters
which had Issue, one married into the Honorable family of Talbot, the other
unto Sir Anthony Mildmay, who enriched their Husbands with great Estates.

Sheriffs of Wilt-shire.
HEN. II.
Anno 1 Will. qui fuit Vic. Anno 2 Com. Patricius Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Anno 5
Idem. Anno 6 Anno 7 Rich. Clericus Anno 8 Idem. Anno 9 Mil. de Dantesaia Anno
10 Rich. de Wilton Anno 11 Rich. de Wilteser Anno 12 Rich. de Wilton for 15
years. Anno 27 Mich. Belet, Rob. Malde Anno 28 Mich. Belet and Rob. Malde Rog.
filius Reuf. Anno 29 Rob. Malduit Anno 30 Idem. Anno 31 Idem. Anno 32 Rob.
Malduit. Anno 33 Idem.
RICH. I.
Anno 1 Hug. Bardulfe Anno 2 Will. Comes Saresb. Anno 3 Rob. de Tresgoze Anno 4
Will. Comes Saresb. Anno 5 Will. Comes Saresb. and Tho. filius Will. for 4
years. Anno 9 Steph. de Turnham and Alex. de Ros Anno 10 Idem.
JOHAN. REX.
Anno 1 Steph. de Turnham and Wand. filius Corcelles Anno 2 Comes Will. de
Saresb. and Hen. de Bermere Anno 3 ^dem. Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Comes Will. de
Saresb. and Johan. Bonet for 6 years. Anno 11 Will. Briewere and Rob. filius
Anno 12 Idem. Anno 13 Nich. Briewere de Vetri ponte and Will. de Chanto Anno 14
Idem. Anno 15 Idem. Anno 16 Will Comes Saresb. and Hen. filius Alchi Anno 17
Idem.
HEN. III.
Anno 1 Anno 2 Will. Comes Saresb. and Rob. de Crevequeor for 6 years. Anno 8
Will. Comes Saresb. Adam de Alta Ripa Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Idem. Anno 11 Sim.
de Halei Anno 12 Eliz. Commit. Saresb. and Ioh. Dacus Anno 13 Ioh. de Monemue
and Walt. de Bumesey Anno 14 Ioh. de Monemue Anno 15 Idem. Anno 16 Eliz. Com.
Saresb. and Ioh. Dacus for 4 years. Anno 20 Eliz. Commit. Sarum and Rob. de
Hugen. Anno 21 Eliz. Commit. Sarum Anno 22 Rob. de Hogesham Anno 23 Idem. Anno
24 Idem. Anno 25 Nich. de Haversham for 6 years. Anno 31 Nich de Lusceshall
Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Idem. Anno 34 Will. de Tynehiden for 4 years. Anno 38
Will. de Tenhide Io. de Tenhide fill. and Here Is Anno 39 Idem. Anno 40 Ioh. de
Verurd Anno 41 Idem. Anno 42 Idem. Anno 43 Ioh. de Verund and Galf. de Scudemor
Anno 44 Idem. Anno 45 Ioh. de Verund Anno 46 Rad. Cussell Anno 47 Idem. Anno 48
Idem. Anno 49 Rad. de Aungers, Ioh. de Aungers Anno 50 Rad. de Aungers Anno 51
Will. de Duy and Steph. de Edwarth for 5 years. 56 Steph. de Edwarth and Walt.
de Strichesley
EDW. I.
Anno 1 Walt. de Strichesle Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Hildebrandus de
London for 6 years. Anno 10 Ioh. de Wotton for 8 years. Anno 18 Rich. de Comb
Anno 19 Idem. Anno 20 Tho. de Sto Omero for 5 years. Anno 25 Walt. de Pevely
Anno 26 Idem. Anno 27 Idem. Anno 28 Ioh. de Novo Burgo Anno 29 Idem. Anno 30
Ioh. de Hertingerr Anno 31 Idem. Anno 32 Idem. Anno 33 Hen. de Cobham Anno 34
Ioh. de Gerberge Anno 35 Idem.
EDW. II.
Anno 1 Andreas de Grimsted Anno 2 Alex. Cheverell and Ioh. de Sto Laudo Anno 3
Idem. Anno 4 Will. de Hardene Anno 5 Adam. Walrand Anno 6 Adam. Walrand and
Johan. Kingston Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Johan de Holt and Phus. de la Beach Anno 9
Phus. de la Beach Anno 10 Idem. Anno 11 Walt. de Risum Anno 12 Idem. Anno 13
Idem. Anno 14 Ioh. de Tichbourn and Adam. Walrand. Anno 15 Idem. Anno 16 Anno
17 Adam, Walrand Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Idem.
EDW. III.
Anno 1 Adam. Walrand Anno 2 Phus. la Beach Anno 3 Ioh. Manduit Anno 4 Idem.
Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Anno 7 Ioh. Manduit and Will. Randolph Anno 8 Johan.
Tichbourn and Johan. Manduit Anno 9 Gilb. de Berewice and Reg. de Pauley Anno
10 Idem. Anno 11 Petr. Doygnel and Gil. de Berewice Anno 12 Johan. Manduit Anno
13 Idem. Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15 Tho. de Sto. Mauro and Rob. Lokes. Anno 16
Johan. Manduit Anno 17 Idem. Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Johan. Roches Anno 20 Idem.
Anno 21 Ioh. de Roches and Tho. Semor Anno 22 Rob. Russell Anno 23 Idem. Anno
24 Idem. Anno 25 Nullus Titulus in hoc Rotulo Anno 26 Tho. de la River Anno 27
Idem. Anno 28 Idem. Anno 29 Ioh. Everard Anno 30 Tho. de Hungerford for 5
years. Anno 35 Hen. Sturmy for 6 years. Anno 41 Walt. de Haywood for 5 years.
Anno 46 Will. de Worston Anno 47 Hen. Sturmy Anno 48 Ioh. Dauntesey, mil. Anno
49 Ioh. de la Mare, mil. Anno 50 Hugo Cheyne Anno 51 Idem.
Edward III.
35 HENRY STURMY.]

They were Lords of Woolfhall in this County, and from the Time of King Henry
the second, were by right of Inheritance, the Bailiffs and Guardians of the
Forest of Savernake, lying hard by, which is of great note for plenty of good
game, and for a kind of Fern there, that yeildeth a most Pleasant Savor: In
remembrance whereof, their Hunters-horn, of a mighty bigness, and tipped with
silver, is kept by the Seymours Dukes of Somerset unto this day, as a Monument
of their Descent, from such Noble Ancestors.

Sheriffs.
Name Place Arms RICH. II. Anno 1 Pe. de Cushaunce, m and Will de Worston. 2
Rad. de Norton Virt, a Lion rampant Or, alibi Argent. 3 Idem. 4 Lau. de Sco.
Martino and Hug. Cheyne 5 Nich. Woodhull 6 Bern. Brokers, mil. 7 Ioh. Lancaster
8 Idem. 9 Ioh. Salesbury 10 Idem. 11 Hug. Cheyne 12 Id^m. 13 Rich. Mawardin 14
Ioh. Roches 15 Rob. Dyneley 16 Ioh. Goweyn 17 Rich Mawardin 18 Ioh. Moigne ^9
Tho. Bonham 20 Rich. Mawardin ^1 Idem. 22 Idem. HEN. IV. Anno 1 Ioh. Dau^tesey
Dantesey Az. a D^agon and Lion Rampant comhatant Arg. 2 Will. Worston and Ioh.
Gawayne 3 Will. Cheyne 4 Walt. Beauchamp Varry. 5 Walt. Beauchamp ut prius 6
Wall. Hungerford, m. Sable 2 Bars Arg. 2 Plates in Chief. 7 R^d. Grene 8 Walt.
Beauchamp ut pri^s 9 Rob. Corbet Or, a Raven Proper. 10 Will. Cheyne, mil. 11
Ioh. Berkley, mil, Gules a Cheveron betwixt 10 Crosses Formee Arg. 12 Tho.
Bonham HEN. V. Anno 1 Elias de la Mare Gules, 2 Lions ^assant Gardant Argent. 2
Hen. Thorpe 3 Tho. Calsten 4 R^b. Andrewe 5 Will Findern 6 Will. Stur^y, mil.
Woolf-h^ll Argent 3 Deme-Lions Gules. 7 Tho. Ringwood 8 Will. Darell Az. a lion
Rampant O^ Crowned Argent. 9 Idem. HEN. VI. Anno 1 Will. Darell ut prius 2 Rob
Shotesb^ook, (...). 3 Will. Findern 4 Walt Pauncefott Gules, 3 Lions rampant
Arg. 5 Ioh. Stourton, ar. Stourton Sa. a Bend Or, betwixt 3 fountains proper. 6
Will. Darell, ar. ut prius 7 Ioh. Pawlett, ar. Sable 3 swords in Point Argent 8
Ioh. Bainton Brumham Sable, a Bend lozenges Argent. 9 Davi. Sherrington 10 Ioh.
Seymor Woolf-hall Gul. 2 A^gels-wings paleways, inverted Or. 11 Walt.
Strickland 12 Ioh. Stourton, mil. ut prius 13 Steph. Popham, mil. Arg. on a
Chief Gul. 2 Bucksheads Caboshed Or. 14 Edw. Hungerford ut prius 15 Will.
Beauchamp, m. ut prius 16 Ioh. Stourton, mil. ut prius 17 Ioh. Lisle, mil. Or a
Fess betwixt 2 Chev. Sa. 18 Ioh. Saintlo, mil. 19 Ioh. Norris Quarterly Az. and
Gul. a Fret Or, with Fess Az. 20 Rich. Restwold Argent, 3 Bends ^able. 21 Will.
Beauchamp ut prius 22 Ioh. Bainton ut prius 23 Ioh. Basket Az. a Cheveron Erm.
betwixt 3 Leopards-heads Or. 24 Rich. Restwold ut prius 25 Will. Stafford Or a
Cheveron Gul. on a Canton Ermine. 26 Will. Beauchamp, m. ut prius 27 Ioh.
Norris ut prius 28 Phil. Barnard 29 Ioh. Seymor, mil. ut prius 30 Ioh. Nanson
31 Edw. Stradling Dantesey Paly of 6 Arg. and Az. on a Bend G. 3 Cinquefoyls
Or. 32 Ioh. Willoughby 33 Geo. Darell 34 Reg. Stourton, mil. 35 Hen. Long, ar.
Sab. a Lion ram^nt betwixt 8 Crosses crossed Arg. 36 Ioh. Seymor, ar. ut prius
37 Hug. Pilkenham 38 Ioh. Feiris, ar. EDW. IV. Anno 1 Geor. Darell ut prius 2
Reg. Stourton, mil. ut prius 3 Idem. 4 Rog. Tocotes, mil. 5 Geor. Darell, mil.
ut prius 6 Tho. de la Mare ut prius 7 Ch^i. W^ey 8 Rich. D^rell, mil. ut prius
9 Geo. Darell, mil. ut prius 10 Lau. R^ynford, mil. 11 Rog. ^es, mil. 12 Maur.
Beikley, mil. ut prius 1^ Ioh Willoughby, m. AMP. 14 Will. Collingborne ^5 Hen.
Long, ar. ut prius 16 W^lt. Bonham, ar. 17 Edw. Hargill, ^r. ^8 I^h (...) Ar^.
a Lion Ramp. S. a Martlet on his Shoulder Or. 9^ Walt. Hungerford ut prius 20
C^ Bulkley S. a Chev. twixt 3 Bulls-heads Cabashed Argent. 1^ (...) Collingborn
a 12 Ioh. Mompesson, ar. ut prius RICH III. Anno 1 Hen Long, ar. ut prius 2
Edw. Hargill, ar. ut prius 3 Ioh. Musgrave and Rog. Tocotes, mil. WESTME. Azure
6 Annulets Or. HEN. VII. Aano 1 Rog Tocotes, mil. 2 Ioh. Wroughton ut infra 3
Ioh. Turbervile Ermine, a Lion Rampant Gules Crowned Or. 4 Tho. Uniom 5 Edw.
Darell, mil. ut prius 6 Constan. Darell ut prius 7 Io. Lie de Flamston 8 Ioh.
York Arg on a Salter Az. an Escallop Or. 9 Edw. Darell, mil. ut prius ^0 Rich.
Puddesey, ar. 11 Constan. Darell ut prius 12 Geo. Chaderton 13 Edw. Darell,
mil. ut prius 14 Geo. Seymor, mil. ut prius 15 Ioh. Hudleston, mil. CUMBER.
Gules, Frettee Argent. ^6 Tho. Long, ar. ut prius 17 Ioh York, ar. ut prins 18
Wi l. Caleway 19 Ioh. Danvers, mil. Dauntesey G. a chev. inter 3 Mullets Or* 20
Ioh Ernley, ar. Wi^ham Arg. on a bend ^. 3 Eaglets displayed Or. 2^ Ioh.
G^ayne, ar. 22 Tho. Long, mil. ut prius 23 I^h. Seymor, mil. ut prius 24 Ioh.
Mompesson, ar. ut prius HEN. VIII. Aano 1 Edw. Darell, mil. ut prius 2 W^
Hungerford, m. ut prius 3 Hen. Long, a^. ut prius 4 Chr Wrough^on, (...) ut
prius 5 Ioh Danvers, mil. ut prius 6 W^ll B^ham, ar. 7 Ioh. Scr^pe, mil.
Castle-com Azu. a bend Or, a Mullet difference. 8 Nich. Wadh^m, mi 9 Edw
Hu^ord, m. ut prius ^0 Ioh. Seymo, mil. ut prius 11 Edw. Darell, mil. ut prius
12 Ioh. Skilling, ar. 13 Edw. ^on. on, mil u^ prius 14 Ioh Er^ley, ar. ut prius
^5 The. York, ar. u^ prius (...) Ioh Se^mor, mil. ut prius ^7 H^. ^ong, mil. ut
prius 18 Ioh. (...), mil. Arg. a Cross Engrailed Gul. betwixt 4 Wate^ Bougets
S. 19 Ant. Hu^g ford, m. ut prius 20 Ioh. E^ley, ar. ut ^ius 21 Ioh. H^sey, ar.
DORSE. Azu. 3 Horse-heads Cooped Or, bridled Argent. 2^ Tho. York, ar. ut prius
23 Tho. Bonham, ar. 24 Ioh. Ernley, ar. ut prius 25 Wall. Hungerford, m. ut
prius 26 Rob. Baynard, ar. Leckham Sab. a Fess btwixt 2 Cheverons Or. 27 Tho.
York, ar. ut prius 28 Hen. Long, mil. ut prius 29 Ioh. Bruges, mil. Arg. On a
Cross Sa. a Leopardshead Or. 30 Ant. Hungerford, m. ut prius 31 Ioh. Ernely,
ar. ut prius 32 Edw. Mompesson, ar. ut prius 33 Hen. Long, mil. ut prius 34
Ioh. Marvin, ar. Funt-hill Arg. a Demi-lion Ramp. Cooped S. charged on the
shoulder with a flower de luce. 35 Ioh. Erneley, ar. ut prius 36 Anth.
Hungerford ut prius 37 Caro. Bulkley, ar. ut prius 38 Rich. Scroope, ar. ut
prius EDW. VI. Anno 1 Silv. Danvers, ar. ut prius 2 Amb. Dauntsey, ar.
Lavington G. a Lion Ramp. Arg. chasing a wyvern Vert, Alias, Azure a Dragon
proper and a Lion Arg. Gombatant. 3 Ioh. Bonh^m, ar. 4 Ioh. Mervyn, ar. ut
prius 5 Iac. Scumpe, mil. 6 W^ll. Sherington, m. and Edw. Baynard, ar. ut prius
ut prius PHIL. and MAR. Anno Ma. 1 Ioh. Erneley, ar. ut prius 1, Hen.
Hungerford, a. ut prius 2, 3 Ioh. St. John, ar. Lediard Argent on a Chief, G. 2
Mullets pierced Or. 3, 4 Ant Hungerford, m. ut prius 4, 5 Wa. Hungerford, m. ut
prius 5, 6 Hen. Brunker, ar. Melsam Argent 6 Ogresses 2, 2, 2. on a Chief
imbattled Sa. a Loz^ng of the first, thereon a CrossPatee of the second. ELIZ.
REG. Anno 1 Ioh Zouch, mil. G. 10 Besants 4, 3, 2, and ^. on a Canton Or a
Lozeng vert thereon a flower de luce Arg. 2 Iac. Stumpe, mil. 3 Ioh. Me^vine,
mil. ut prius 4 Geo. Penruddock, ar. Cumpton Gul, a Limb of a Tree Raguled and
Trunked in Bend Arg. 5 Ioh. Erneley, ar. ut prius 6 Tho. Button, ar. Alcon
Ermine a Fess Gules. 7 Ioh. Air, ar. ut infra Reader, arriving somewhat too
late at some of these Arms I am fain to refer thee to what follows. 8
Nich. Snell, ar. ut infra 9 Hen. Sherington, a. 10 Geo. Ludlowe, ar. ut infra
11 Tho. Thynne, mil. Longleate Barry of Ten pieces Or and S. 12 Will. Button,
ar. ut prius 13 Edr. Baynton, ar. ut prius 14 Ioh. St. John, ar. ut prius 15
Wol. Hungerford, m. ut prius 16 Ioh. Danvers, mil. ut prius 17 Rob. Long* ar.
ut prius 18 Tho. Wroughton, m. ut infra 19 Ioh. Hungerford, m. ut prius 20 Hen.
Knivet, mil. Argent a Bend within a Border engrailed Sable. 21 N^ch. St. John,
ar. ut prius 22 Mich. Erneley, ar. ut prius 23 Will. Brounker, ar* ut prius 24
Wall. Hungerford, a. ut prius 25 Jasper. Moore, a^. ut infra 26 Ioh. Snell, ar.
ut infra ^7 Ioh. Danvers, mil. ut prius 28 Edm. Ludlow, ar. ut infra 29 Rich
Mody, ar. ut infra 30 Wall. Hunger^ord, m. ut prius 3^ Hen. Willoughby, a. ut
prius 32 Ioh. Wa^nford, ar. Party per fess imbatteled Arg. and Sab. 6 Crosses
patee Counterchanged. 33 Will. Air, ar. ut infra 34 Ioh Hungerford, m. ut
prius 35 Ioh. Thynne, ar. ut prius 36 Edw. Hungerfo^d, a. ut prius 37 Hen.
Sadler, ar. Everley Or a Lion Ramp. part per Fess Azure and Gules 38 Ioh.
Dauntsey, ar. ut prius 39 Iac. Marvyn, mil. ut prius 40 Edw. Penruddock, a. ut
prius 41 Walt. Vaughan See the Notes on this years. 42 Tho. Snell, ar.
Quarterly Gul. and Az. a Cross flowery Or. 43 Hen. Baynton, mil. ut prius 44
Walt. Long, mil. ut prius 45 Jasper. Moore, mil. and prim. Jacob. Ermin on a
Cheveron between ^ Mores-heads proper. 2 Swords Argent. JAC. REX. a Quarterly
Ar. and G. a Cressant in the first quar. of the second. Anno 1 Jasper. Moore,
mil. ut prius b Sabl. a Cross between 4 Nails Gules. 2 Alex. Tutt, mil. a 3
Ioh. Hungerford, ar. ut prius c G a Cheveron Vairy, twixt 3 Crescants ermine. 4
Gabriel. Pile, ar. b 5 Tho. Thynn, mil. d Arg. a Chev. G. twixt 3 Bo rsheads
Cooped S. Tusked Or. 6 Rich. Goddard, ar. c Stondo^ Hu. 7 Ioh. Ayliffe, ar. e
Argent on a Chief Gu. 2 Buckheads Or. 8 Eg. Wroughton, m. d Brodhenton 9 Will.
B^on, mil. ut prius f A^. a Dimselyon ramp. Cooped S. charged on the Shouldiers
with a flower de luce Or. 10 Fran. Popham, m. e Litlecott 11 Will. Pawlet, mil.
ut prius 12 Hen. Marvyn, ar. f Pertwood g G a Lion passant Er. wounded in the
Shoulder. 13 Tho. Moore, ar. g ut prius 14 Rich. Grubham, mil. h G. a Fess
ingrailed between 3 Harpies Arg. Crined Or. 15 Ioh Horton, mil. 16 Hen. Moody,
mil. h Garesdon i Az. Semee de fleur de Lzes O^, a Lion Rampant Arg. 17 Hen.
Poole, mil. i k Arg. a Bend Gu. Guttee d'eau twixt 2 Cornish Choughs proper a
chief countercomponce Or and Sable. 18 Carol Pleadall, m. k Colshill 19 Will.
Pawlet, ar. ut prins 20 Ioh. Lamb, mil. ut prius 21 Gifford. Long, ar. ut
prius 22 Edw. Read, ar. Gules a Saltire betwixt 4 Garbs Or. CAR. REG. Anno 1
Fran. Seymour, mil. ut prius 2 Egid. Estcourt, mil. Newton Ermen on a Chief
Indented G. 3 Stars. 3 Walt. Long, ar. ut p^us 4 Ioh. Ducket, ar. Sa. a Saltyr
Arg. a Mullet difference. 5 Rob. Baynard, mil. ut prius 6 Ioh. Topp, ar. Sto^on
Arg. a Canton Gu. a Gantlet of Mail clenched proper. 7 Edw. Hungerford, m.
Balnei. ut prius 8 Ioh. St. John, mil. ut prius 9 Hen. Ludlow, mil. Hildenrel
Ar. a Chev. twixt 3 Bears-heads erazed S. 10 Fran. Goddard, ar. ut prius 11
Geor. Ayliffe, mil. ut prius 12 Nevil. Poole, mil. ut prius 13 Edw. Bayn^on,
mil. ut prius 14 Ioh. Grubb* ar. Pottern * Per Fess, Arg. and Az. 3 Chaplets
counterchanged. 15 Ioh Duke, ar.* Lakes 16 Egid. Air, ar. Ar. on a Chev. S. 3
Cater-foiles O. 17 Rob. Chivers, ar. Arg. a Cheveron Engrailed G. 18 INGRATUM
19 BELLO DE- 20 BEMUS IN- 21 ANE. 22 Ant. Ashly Cooper, Bar. G. a Bend
engrailed betwixt 6 Lions rampant.

King Henry VI.
23 JOHN BASKET, Esquire.]

High-sheriffe of this County in the twenty third of King Henry the sixth. He
is memorable on this account, that a solemn dispensation granted unto him from
the Court of Rome, acquainteth us with the form of those Instruments in that
Age, not unworthy our perusal.

Nicholaus miseratione divina, etc. Sanctae Crucis in Jerusalem Presbyter
Cardinalis; Dilectis in Christo nobilibus Johanni Basket Scutifero, and Aliciae
ejus Uxori, Sarisburiensis Diocesis, Salutem in Domino. Solet annuere Seeds
Apostolica piis votis, and honestis petentium precibus, maxim ubi salus
requiritur animarum, favorem benevolum impartiri. Cum igitur ex part vestra
nobis fuerit humiliter supplicatum, ut in animarum vestrarum solatium, eligendi
Confessorem ideoneum vobis licentiam concedere dignaremur. Nos vestris
supplicationibus favorabiliter annuentes, Authoritate Domini Papae, cujus Thus
it is written in the Original which we have englished, and request the learned
Readers bette^ (...) struction.
primariae curam gerimus, and de ejus speciali mandato super hoc vivae vocis
oraculo nobis facto, devotioni vestrae concedimus quatenus liceat vobis idoneum
and discretum Presbyterum in Confessorem eligere, qui super peccatis quae sibi
confitebimini (nisi talia sint propter quae sit dicta Seeds consulenda)
authoritate praedicta vobis provideat de absolutionis debitae beneficio, and
paeni^tia salutari quamdiu vixeritis, quotiens fuerit opportunum. Vota ver^
peregrinationis and abstinentiae si qua emisistis, quae commode servare non
potestis, ultra marina (beatorum Petri, and Pauli, atque Jacobi, Apostolorum
votis duntaxat exceptis) commutet vobis idem Confessor in alia opera pietatis.

Dat. Florentiae, sub sigillo officii Priariae, 3. Non. Aprilis Pontificatus
Domini Eugenii Papae 4. Anno Decimo.

Nicholas by divine mercy, etc. Priest Cardinal of St. Crosses in Jerusalem; To
the beloved in Christ the worshipful John Basket Esquire. and Alice his Wife, of
the Diocese of Salisbury, Greeting in the Lord. The Sea Apostolic uses to
grant the pious desires, and honest requests of petitioners, chiefly where the
health of souls requires courteous favor to be bestowed upon them. Seeing
therefore on your behalf you have supplicated humbly unto us, that for the
comfort of your souls we would vouchsafe to grant you license tochuse for your
selves a Confessor, we favorably yiedling to your request by the authority of
our Lord the Pope, the Charge of whose Primary we bear, and from his Special
Command in this case made unto us by the Oracle of his mouth, do grant to your
devotion, so far forth as it may be lawful for you, to choose a fit and
discreet Priest for your Confessor, who as touching the sins which ye shall
confess unto him (except they be such for which the said See is to be consulted
with) may by authority aforesaid provide for you concerning the benefit of due
absolution, and wholesome Penance, so long as ye live, so often as there shall
be occasion. But if ye have made any foreign vows of pilgrimage and fasting,
which ye cannot conveniently keep (vows to blessed Peter, Paul, and James,
Apostles only excepted,) the same Confessor may commute them for you into
other works of piety.

Given at Florence, under the seal of the office of the Primary, 3. Non. of
April the 13. year of the Popedom of Pope Eugenius the fourth.

The tenth of Pope Eugenius falls on the twentieth of King Henry the sixth,
Anno Domini 1440. Why it should be higher and harder to dispense with vows made
to Saint James, then to Saint John, (his brother, and Christ's beloved
disciple,) some Courtier of Rome must render the reason. The posterity of this
Master Basket in the next generation removed in Dorset-shire, where they
continue at this day in a worshipful condition, at Divenish.

Queen Elizabeth.
11 THOMAS THIN, Mil.]

The great and sudden wealth of this Knight, being envied by a great Earl, and
PrivyCouncellour neighboring on his Estate, caused his summons before the
Counsel Table, to answer how in so short a time he had gotten so large
Possessions, some suggested as if he had met with Treasure Trove, or used some
indirect means to enrich himself. The Knight calmly gave in the unquestionable
particulars of the Bottom he began on, the accrewment by his Marriage, and with
what was advanced by his industry and frugality, so bringing all up within the
view (though not the Touch) of his present Estate. For the rest, my Lords (said
he) you have a good Mistress our Gracious Queen, and I had a good Master the
Duke of Sommerset, which being freely spoken, and fairly taken, he was
dismissed without further trouble. Nor were his means too big for his Birth, if
descended (as Camden says) from the Ancient Family of the Bottevils.

41 WALTER VAUGHAM, Ar.]

His Arms (too large to be inserted in that short space) were, Sable, a
Chever^n betwixt three Childrens-heads Cooped at the Shoulders Argent, their
Peruques Or, Inwrapped about their Necks, with as many Snakes Proper, whereof
this (they say) the Occasion, because one of the Ancestors Guillam's display of
Heraldry page 174.
of this Family, was born with a Snake about his Neck. Such a Neck-Lace, as
Nature, I believe never saw. But grant it. How came the Peruques, about the
Infants Heads? So that Fancy, surely, was the sole Mother and Midwife of this
Device. The Lands of this Walter Vaugham, (afterward Knighted) descended to
his Son Sir George, a Worthy Gentleman, and after his Issueless decease to a
Brother of his, who was born blind, bred in Oxford, brought up in Orders, and
Prebendary of Sarum.

King Charles.
1 FRANCIS SEYMOUR, Mil.

This wise and religious Knight, (grandchild to Edward Earl of Hartford, and
brother to William Duke of Sommerset,) was by King Charles the first Created
Baron of Troubridge in this County, since for his Loyalty, made
Privy-councellour to K. Charles the second, and Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster.

Battles.
Lansdoune Fight.
This was fought in the Confines of this County and Somerset the 13. of July
1643. It was disputed by parcells and peece-meals, as the Place and narrow
Passages would give leave; and it seemed not so much one entire Battle, as a
Heap of Skirmishes hudled together. It may be said in some sort of both ^des,

Victus uterque fuit, Victor uterque fuit.

For the Parliament Forces five times (by the confession of the Royalists) beat
them back with much Disorder, Sir Bevill Greenfield being slain in the Head of
his Pikes, (Major Lowre in the Head of his Party of Horse.) Yet the Kings
Forces allege Demonstration of Conquest, that Prince Maurice and Sir Ralph
Hopton, remained in the Heads of their Troops all Night, and next Morning found
themselves possessed of the Field and of the Dead, as also of three hundred
Arms, and nine (...) of Powder, the Enemy had left behind them.

Round way Fight.
Five days after Prince Maurice with the Earl of Carnarvan returning, and the
Lord Wilmot coming from Oxford, with a gallant supply of Select Horse, charged
the Parliament Forces under the Conduct of Sir William Waller. With him were
the Horse of Sir Arthur Haslerigg so well Armed, that (if of Proof as well
within as without) each Soldier seemed an Impregnable Fortification. But these
were so smartly Charged by the Prince, that they fairly forfook the Field,
leaving their Foot (which in English Battles bear the heat of the day) to shift
for themselves.

In the mean time Sir Ralph Hopton hurt lately (with the blowing up of Powder)
lay sick and sore in the Town of the Devizes. His Men wanted Match, whom Sir
Ralph directed to beat and to boil their Bed-cords, (necessity is the best
Mother of Ingenuity,) which so ordered did them good service; when Marching
forth into the Field, they effectually contributed to the total routing and
ruining of the Parliament ^oot which remained.

The Farewell.
This County consisting so much of sheep, must honor the Memory of King Edgar,
who first freed the Land from all Wolves therein. For the future I wish their
flocks secured

From

1. Two-legg'd Wolves, very destructive unto them. 2. Spanish Ewes, whereof one
being brought over into England, Anno.......... brought with it the first
general contagion of sheep. 3. Hunger-Rot, the effect of an over-dry summer.
I desire also, that seeing these seem to be of the same breed with Genesis 29. 8.
Laban^ and Exodus 3. 1.
Jethros sheep, which had their solemn times and places of drinking, (which in
other Shires I have not observed) that they may never have any want of
wholesome water.

WORCESTERSHIRE has Staffordshire on the North, Warwickshire on the East,
Gloucester-shire on the South, Hereford and Shorp-shires on the West. It is of
a Triangular, but not equilaterall form, in proportion stretching from

North to South Twenty two Miles. South to North-west, Twenty eight Miles.
Thence to her North-east point, Twenty eight Miles.
Be this understood of the continued part of this Shire, which otherwise has
Snips and Shreds cut off from the whole cloth, and surrounded with the
circumjacent Countries, even some in Oxfordshire distanced, by
Gloucester-shire interposed.

What may be the cause hereof, it were presumption for me to guess after the
conjectures of so many Learned men. Cambdens Brit. in Worcestershire.
Some conceive that such who had the Command of this County, (probably before
the Conquest,) and had parcells of their own Land scattered in the Vicinage,
desired to Unite them to this County, so to make their own authority the more
entire. Or else as a Carew in his survey of Cornwall fol. 98.
Worthy Writer will have it (rendering a reason why part of Devon-shire
straggleth into Cornwall,) it was done that there might rest some cause of
Intercourse, betwixt this and the Neighboring Counties, adding moreover, that
a late great man ensued and expressed the like consideration, in the division
of his Lands betwixt two of his Sons. All I will say is this, that God in the
partage of Palestine (Reader if you forget, I must remember my own profession)
betwixt the twelve Tribes, on the same account, (as the learned conceive) made
some Tribes to have In-lots within another, And Manasseh had in Issachar, Josh.
17. 11.
and in Asher, Bethshean and her Towns, and Ibleam and her Towns, etc.

This County has a child's portion (and that I assure you a large one) in all
English, and especially in these

Natural Commodities.
Lampreys.
In Latin Lampetrae, a lambendo petras, from licking the rocks, are plentiful
in this and the neighboring Counties in the river of Severn. A deformed fish,
which for the many holes therein, one would conceive, nature intended it rather
for an Instrument of Music, then for man's food. The best manner of dressing
whereof, says my Cambdens Brit. in Worcestershire.
Author, is, To kill it in Malmesey, close the mouth thereof with a nutmegg,
the holes with so many cloves, and when it is rolled up round, putting in
thereto filbard-nut-kernells stamped, crumbs of bread, oil, spices, etc.
Others, (but those M^so-lampreys) do add, that after all this cost, even cast
them away, seeing money is better lost then health; and the meat will rather be
delicious then wholesome, the eating whereof cost King Stows Chron. ^ag 142.
Henry the first his life. But, by their favor, that King did not dye of
Lampreys, but of excess in eating them; and I am confident the Jews might
surfeit of Manna it self, if eating thereof above due proportion.

Perry.
This is a Drink or a Counterfeit Wine, made of Pears, whereof plenty in this
County; though such which are least delicious for taste, are most proper for
this purpose. Such the Providence of Nature to design all things for man's
service. Peter Martyr when Professor in Oxford, and sick of a Fever, would
drink no other Dr. Humphred in the large latin life of Bishop Jewel page 31.
liquor, though it be generally believed both cold and windy, except, corrected
with spice, or some other addition.

Salt.
I have In Cheshire and Northumberland.
twice formerly insisted hereon, and do confess this Repetition to be flatly
against my own Rules, laid down for the regulating of this work, save that the
necessity of this Commodity, will excuse it from any offense. I beheld England
as a long well-furnish'd Table, and account three principal Salt-cellars set at
distance thereon. Worcester shire, I fancy the Trencher Salt, both because it
is not so much in quantity, (though very considerable,) and because it is
whiter, finer and heavier, then any other. Ch^shire, I conceive deserves to be
reputed the Grand-salt-cellar, placed somewhat benea^h the middle, whilst the
third is the Salt of New Castle, set far North, at the lower end of the Table,
for the use of those, who otherwise cannot conveniently reach to the former.
The usefulness of this not-duely-valued-blessing, may be concluded from the
Latin word Salarium, so usual in ancient and modern Authors, which imports
the entertainment or wages of Soldiers, anciently paid chiefly (if not only)
in Victuals, and takes its name by a Synecdoche, fr om Sal or Salt, as of all
things most absolutely needful, without which condiment, nothing can be
wholesome nutriment.

I read in a modern Author, describing his own County of Che-shire, and
measuring all things to the advantage thereof, that,

William Smith in the ValeRoyal page 18.
There is no Shire in England, or in any other Country beyond the seas, where
they have more then one salt-well therein, neither at Droitwich in
Worcestershire is there more then one, whereas in Che-shire there be four, all
within ten wiles together.

Here let me enter this Caveat in preservation of the right of Worcestershire,
that Camdens Brit. in ^shire.
many salt-fountains are found therein, but stopped up again for the
preservation of woods, so that the making of salt at one place alone, proceeds
not from any Natural, but a Politic restriction. Nor must I forget, how our
German-Ancestors (as Tacitus reports) conceited such places where salt was
found, to be nearest to the heavens, and to ingratiate men's p^ayers to the
gods; I will not say, founding their superstition on the mis-apprehension of
the Jewish-worship, Lev^t 2. 13.
Every sacrifice shall be salted with salt.

The Buildings.
I am sorry I have never seen the Cathedral of Worcester, so that I cannot
knowingly give it a due commendation, and more sorry to hear that our late
Civil Wars, have made so sad an Impression thereon.

The Market Towns are generally handsomely built, and no Shire in England can
show a brace of them, so neat and near together, as Beaudley and Kiddermister
in this County, being scarcely two miles asunder.

Saints.
Saint RICHARD born at Which, [alias Droitwich] from which he took his name, was
bred in Oxford, afterward at Paris, and lastly at Bononia in Italy, where for
seven years together he heard and read the Canon Law. Having thus, first
plentifully laid in, he then began to lay out, in his Lectures in that
University, and returning Home, became Chancellor of Oxford, then of
Canterbury, till at last chosen Bishop of Chichester. He was a great Becketist,
viz. a stout opposer of Regal Power over Spiritual Persons, on which, and other
accounts, he wrote a Book to Pope Innocent the fourth, against King Henry the
third. These his qualities with the reputation of his holy life, so commended
his memory to the notice of Pope Urban the fourth, that seven years after his
death, viz. Anno 1260 he canonized him for a Saint. It seems men then arrived
sooner at the maturity o^ [Popish] Saintship then now a days, more distance
being now required betwixt their death and canonization. As for their report,
that the Wiches or Salt Pits in this County were miraculously procured by his
prayers, their unsavory lie has not a grain of probability to season it, it
appearing by ancient Camden in (...)-shire plainly proves it out of ^vase of
(...).
Authors, that salt-w^ter flowed there time out of mind, before any sweet-milk
was given by Mother or Nurse to this Saint Richard. This County affording no
Martyrs (such the moderation of Bshop Pates) let us proceed to

Cardinals
JOHN COMIN, or Cumin. It must cost us some pains (but the merit of the man
will quit cost) to clear him to be of English extraction. For the proof whereof
we produce the testimony of Giraldus Cambrensis, his contemporary and
acquaintance, who says, L^b. 2. (...). Hiber. cap. 23.
he was Vi^ Anglicus natione. Hereby the impudent falsehood of John Demster the
Scottish Historian, does plainly appear, thus expressing himself.

Johannes Cuminus ex nobilissimo Comitum Buchaniae stemmate ortus, Banfiae
natus, falsissime inter Anglos reponitur, cum ipse viderim quaedam ipsius nuper
Parisiis scripta, quibus suorum Popularium causam, Pontifici Lucio commendavit
in bibliotheca Pauli Petavii, Senatoris Parisiensis. John Cumin descended from
the most noble stock of the Earls of Buchan, born at Banfe, is most falsely set
down amongst the English, seeing I my self lately saw some of his writings at
Paris, in the Library of Paulus Petavius, Senator of Paris, in which he
recommended the cause of his Countrymen to Pope Lucius.

In plain English, this Scottish Demster is an arrant rook, depluming England,
Ireland and Wales, of famous Writers, merely to feather his own Country
therewith; so that should he, according to the Jewish Law, be forced to make
fourfold restitution for his felony, he would be left poor enough indeed.

Besides Alexander Comin was Created first Earl of Buchan, by King Camdens
Brit. in Scotia page., 48.
Alexander the second, who began to reign Anno Dom. 1214. whereas Comin (by the
testimony of Demster himself) died 1212. and therefore could not properly
descend of their stock, who were not then in being.

I cannot certainly avouch him a Worcestershire man, but know that he was bred
a Monk at Giraldus Cambr. lib. 2 expugn. Hiber. cap. 23.
Evesham therein; whence he was chosen (the King procuring it) a clero
Dublinensi consone satis and concorditer, Archbishop of Dublin. He endowed
TrinityChurch in Dublin with two and twenty Prebends, and was made by Pope
Lucius Cardinal of Saint Vellit in Italy.

HUGH of EVESHAM so called from the place of his Nativity in this County,
applied himself to the Study of Physic, with so good success that he is called
the Ba^e de script. Brit. Cent. 4. Number. 50.
Phoenix in that Faculty; Great also was his skill in the Mathematics, and
especially in Astrology. Some questions arising at Rome about Physic (which
consequencially were of Church government) Pope Martin the fourth sent for our
Hugh, to consult with him, who gave such satisfaction to his Demands, that in
requital, he Created him Cardinal of Saint Laurence, 1280. But so great the
envy of his Adversaries at his preferment, that seven years after he was put to
death by Idem ibidem.
Poison, and let none say, he might have foreseen his Fate in the Stars, seeing
Hell, and not the Heavens brooded that design. Neither say Physician cure thy
self, seeing English Antidotes are too weak for Italian Poisons. But Cicaonius
to Palliate the business, says he died of the Plague, and thus I believe him
of the Plague of Hatred in the hearts of such who contrived his death. Which
happened Anno Domini, 1287.

Prelates.
WULSTAN of BRAUNDSFOED was born at Brandsford in this County, and afterward
became Prior (equivalent to Dean in other foundations) of Worcester. He
deserved well of his Covent, building a most beautiful Hall therein. Hence was
he preferred Bishop of Worcester 1338. the first and last Prelate who was born
in that County, and dyed in that See. He was Verus Pontifex in the gramaticall
notation thereof, building a fair bridge at Braundsford (within three miles of
Worcester) over the river Teme, on the same token, that it is misprinted Tweed
in Bishop His Catalogue of the Bishops of Worcester set forth 1616.
Godwin, which made me in vain to look for Braundsford in Northumberland. He
dyed August 28. 1349.

JOHN LOW was born in this Godwin in the Bishops of Rochester.
County, bred an Augustinian Friar at Which therein; afterward he went to the
Universities, and then settled himself in London. Hence he was preferred by King
Henry the sixth to Saint Asaph, and thence was removed (desiring his own
quietness) from one of the best Bishoprics in Wales, to Rochester the meanest
in England. He was a great Book-monger, and on that score, Bale (no friend to
Friars) gives him a large Testimonial, that Bishop ut prius.
Godwin borrows from him (the first and last in that kind) the whole
character of his commendation, and this amongst the rest; Opuscula quaedam
scripsit purgatis auribus digna.

He deserved well of posterity in preserving many excellent manuscripts, and
bestowing them on the Magnificent Library, which he furnished at Saint
Augustines in London. But alas! that Library at the Dissolution vanished away
with the Stows survey of London ^n Broadstreetward.
fine Spire-steeple of the same Church, (oh, the wide swallow of sacrilege!)
one person, who shall be nameless, imbezelling both books and buildings to his
private profit. He dyed Anno Dom. 1467. and lies buried in his own Cathedral
(over against Bishop Merton) under a Marble monument.

EDMUND BONNER alias SAVAGE. He had to his Father John Savage a Priest, richly
beneficed and landed in Cheshire, son to Sir John Savage, Knight of the Garter
and Privy Councellor to King Henry the seventh. His Mother Concubine to this
Priest, (a dainty dame in her youth, and a jolly woman in her age,) was sent
out of Cheshire to cover her shame, and lay down her burden at Elmeley in this
County, where this bouncing babe Bonner was Manuscript collections of the
industrious Antiquary Mr. Dodsworth extant in the Library of the Lord Fairfax.
born. The history of his life may be methodized according to the five Princes
under whom he lived.

He was born under King Henry the seventh, and bred a Bachelor in the Laws in
Broadgates-hall in Oxford.

Under King Henry the eight, he was made Doctor of Laws, Archdeacon of
Leicester, Master of the faculties under Archbishop Cranmer, and employed in
several Embassies beyond Seas. All this time Bonner was not Bonner, being as
yet meek, merciful, and a great Cromwellite, as appeared by some tart printed
Repartees betwixt him and Bishop Gardener. Indeed he had sesqui corpus, a Body
and Half, (but I hope that Corpulency without Cruelty is no sin) and toward
his old age he was overgrown with fat, as Master Fox (who is charged to have
persecuted Persecutors with ugly pictures,) does represent him. Not long after
he was consecrated Bishop of London.

Under King Edward the sixth, being deputed to preach publicly concerning the
Reformation, his faint and frigid expressions thereof, manifested his mind
rather to betray then defend it, which cost him a deprivation and imprisonment.
Then it was when one jeeringly saluted him, Good morrow Bishop quondam, to whom
Bonner as tartly returned, Good morrow Knave semper.

Being restored under Queen Mary to his Bishopric, he caused the death of
twice as many Martyrs as all the Bishops in England besides, justly occasioning
the verses made upon him.

Si fas caedendo caelestia scandere cuiquam,
Bonnero coeli maxima porta patet.
NEMO ad BONNERUM.
Omnes Episcopum esse te dicunt malum,
Ego tamen Bonnere te dico bonum.
If one by shedding blood, for bliss may hope,
Heavens widest gate for Bonner does stand op'e.
NO BODY speaking to BONNER.
All call thee cruel and the sponge of blood,
But Bonner, I say, thou art mild and good.
Under Queen Elizabeth he was deprived and secured in his Castle, I mean the
Marshallsea in Southwark, for as that prison kept him from doing hurt to
others, it kept others from doing hurt to him, being so universally odious he
had been stoned in the streets if at liberty. One great good he did, though not
intentionally, accidentally to the Protestant Bishops of England. For lying in
the Marshalsea, and refusing to take the Oath of Supremacy tendered to him by
Horn, then Bishop of Winchester; he pleaded for himself, that Horn was no
lawful Bishop, which occasioned the ensuing Parliament to confirm him and the
rest of his order to all purposes and intents.

After ten years soft durance in all plenty, (his face would be deposed for his
whole body that he was not famished), enjoying a great temporal Estate left
him by his Father. He * Bishop Godwin his Catalogue of the Bishops of London.
dyed 1569. and was buried says Bishop Godwin in Barking Churchyard, amongst
the thieves and murderers, being surely a mistake in the Printer, Allhallows
Barking being on the other side the Thames, nothing relating to the Marshalsea.
And I have been credibly informed that he was buried in the Churchyard of S.
Georges in Southwark. But so long as Bonner is dead let him choose his own grave
where he will be buried. But enough, if not too much of this Herostratus, who
burnt so many living temples of the Holy Ghost, and who, had he not been
remembered by other writers, had found no place in my history.

Since the Reformation.
JOHN WATSON was born at So was I informed by Mr. Venners, the Minister of St.
Mary's in W^wick, whose father. was Nephew and Steward to this Bishop.
Bengeworth in this County, where some of his name and relations remain at this
day, bred (I believe) in Oxford, and afterward became Prebendary, then Dean of
Winchester. Hence he was advanced Bishop of that See, and the ensuing passage
(which, I expect, will meet with many infidels, though to me credibly attested)
will acquaint us with the occasion thereof, and suspecting the Bishopric of
Winchester when vacant would be offered unto him.

Dean Watson aged sixty years, and desirous to lead a private life, in the
sickness of Bishop Horn, privately promised the Earl of Leicester (in that Age
the Dominus fac multum (if not totum) in the disposal of Church Dignities,)
two hundred pounds that he might not be made Bishop of Winchester, but remain
in his present condition.

The Bishopric falling void, and the Queen expressing her intention to confer
it on Watson, the foresaid Earl requested the contrary, acquainting the Queen
with the passage betwixt them, how otherwise it would be two hundred pounds out
of his way.

Nay then (said the Queen) Watson shall have it, he being more worthy thereof
who will give two hundred to decline, then he who will give two thousand pounds
to attain it.

I confess, such who have read so much of the Corruption of the Earl of
Leicester, and heard so little of the Integrity of Watson, will hardly credit
this story, which I am ready to believe, and the rather, because of this his
Epitaph written on his Marble Monument in the Church of Saint Mary Overies.

D. Johannes Watson, hujus Ecclesi^ Winton. Praebendarius, Decanus, (...)
deinde Episcopus, prudentissimus pater, vir optimus, praecipue erga inopes
misericors, obiit in Domino January 23. anno ^tatis 63. Episcopatus quarto,
1583.

Nothing else have I to observe, save that there were three Watsons Bishops in
the reign of Queen Elizabeth, Thomas of Lincoln, our John of Winchester, and
Anthony of Chichester, though I believe little allied together.

Statesmen.
Sir THOMAS COVENTRY Knight, was born at Croone in this County, Eldest Son to
Sir Thomas Coventry Knight, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas. He was
bred in the Inner Temple a student of the Laws, and in the year 1618. was
Treasurer of the said Temple, and Attorney General to King James. He was
afterward made Lord keeper of the Great Seal of England, the first day of
November, in the first year of King Charles.

He was by the same King, Created in the fourth of his reign April 10. Baron
Coventry of Alesborough in this County.

An ingenious H. L. Esquire. page 172.
Gentleman in his History gives him this Character, in relation to his
Keeper-ship, that he enjoyed that dignity fifteen years, if it was not more
proper to say, that dignity enjoyed him. This latter age affording none better
qualified for the place. Adding, that he knew enough, and acted conformable to
his knowledge, so that Captious Mali^e ^nds mute to blemish his fame. To which
we will only add some few operative words taken out of his Patent when he was
Created Baron.

Nos igitur in persona Pr^dilecti, and per quam fidelis (...) ^stri Thomae
Coventry Militis, custodis magni sigilli nostri Angliae, gratissima and
dignissima serviti^, quae idem consiliarius noster tam Pr^charissimo Patri
(...) Jacobo Regi (...) Memoriae per multos an^s, quam nobis ab ipsis R^gni
nostri primis auspiciis fidelissime and prudentissime praestitit and impendit,
indiesque impendere non desistit; nec non (...), prudentiam, strenuitatem,
dexteritatem, integri^tem, industriam, (...) nos and nostram coronam animo
benigno and regali intime recolentes constantiam and fidelitatem ipsi^ Thomae
Coventry Militis, etc. In cujus rei, etc. T. R. apud Westminster. decimo di^ Aprilis
Anno regni Regis Caroli 4.

He died about the beginning of January 1639. before our Civil distempers
began, so that it is hard to say whether his Honorable Life, or Seasonable
Death, was the greater favor which God bestowed upon him.

I must not forget, that it has been observed, that never Lord Keeper made
fewer Orders, which afterward were Reversed, then this Lord Coventry, which
some ascribe to his Discretion, grounding most of his Orders on the Consent,
and Comprimise of the parties themselves interested therein, whose hands so
tied up by their own Act, were the more willing to be quiet for the future.

Writers on the Law.
Sir THOMAS LITLETON, Knight. Reader, the Nimiety of my Cautiousness (loath to
prejudice the seeming right of any) made me to bestow part of his. Character on
Staffordshire, who since am convinced, that he wholly and solely belongs to
this Shire, as born at Frankley therein, and I request the Reader to rectify
some mistakes I formerly In Staffordshire.
wrote by that which follows. He was a man remarkable in many respects.

First, for his Extraction, he was Son to Thomas Wescot, Esquire, and Elizabeth
Litleton his wife, who being a Double Inheritrix, by her Father to the
Litletons, Mother to the Quatremains, indented with Husband, that her Heritable
Issue, should assume her Surname. Say not her Husband might say, Accepi dotem,
cognomen perdidi, seeing it was done before his marriage by his free consent.
Besides we find even in Scripture it self, Joab being constantly named the son
of his Mother 2 Samuel 2. 13.
Zeruiah.

Secondly for his happiness, that two great Kings had a great Sympathy to him,
who had an Antipathy each to other, Henry the sixth, whose Sergeant he was, and
rod Judge of the Northern circuit, and Edward the fourth, who made him a Judge,
and in his reign he rod the Northamptonshire Circuit.

Thirdly, for his Exquisite skill in the Laws, witness his Book of Tenures,
which though writ about two hundred years since, yet at this day, retains an
Authentical reputation. Insomuch that when in the reign of King James, it came
in question upon a Demu^rer in Law, whether the release to one Trespasser,
should be available or no to his Companion, Sir Henry Hubbard, and Judges
Warberton, Winch, and Nicols his Companions, gave Judgment according to the
opinion of our Litleton, and openly said, that They would not have HIS CASE
disputed or questioned.

Lastly, for his happy posterity, having left three families, signally fixed
and flourishing in this and the neighboring Counties of Stafford and Salop. And
Lord Coke in his Preface to Li^letons Tenures.
one says very truly, that these Quarter the Arms of many Matches, after the
best manner of quartering them, (other are scarce half-half-quartering them)
viz. they possess at this day, good land on the same account.

Indeed the Lord Idem ibidem.
Coke observes that our Lawyers seldom dye either without Wills or Heirs. For
the first I believe it, for our Common Lawyers will not have their Estates come
under the Arbitrary dispose of a Civilian Judge of the Prerogative, and
therefore wisely prevent it. For the second, the Observation as qualified which
Seldom may pass, otherwise our Grandfathers can remember Sir James Dier Lord
Chief Justice, and Periam Lord Chief Baron, both dying without Issue. His Book
of Tenures has since been Commented on by Sir Edward Coke, his most Judicious
Pen.

Dic mihi, number Textus vel Commentatio prestat?
Dicam ego, tam Textus, quam Commentatio prestat.
He died in the 21. year of King Edward the fourth, and lies buried in the
Cathedral of Worcester, having formerly constituted Doctor Alcock his
faithful friend, (and then Bishop of Worcestor,) Supervisor of his Will, who
saw it performed to all critical particulars.

Soldiers.
RICHARD BEAUCHAMP Earl of Warwick, was born at the Ma^or-house of Mr. William
D^gdale in his survey of Warwickshire (...) the Earls of Warwick.
Salwape in this County, January the 28. 1381. King Richard the second, and
Richard Scroope then Bishop of Coventry, (afterward Archbishop of York,) were
his Godfathers. A person so redoubted for Marshall Achievements, that the
poetical fictions of Hercules his labors found in him a real performance.

1. Being hardly 22. years old in the fifth of King Henry the fourth, at the
Queens Coronation he Justed and Challenged all comers. 2. He bid battle to
Owen Glendour the Welsh Rebel, put him to flight and took his Bannor with his
own hands. 3. He fought a pitched field, against the two Piercies at
Shrewsbury, and overcame them. 4. In his passage to the Holy land (whither he
went on Pilgrimage) he was challenged at Verona by an Italian Sir Pandulph
Malacet, to fight with him at three weapons, viz. with Axes, Arming Swords, and
Sharp Daggers, whom he had slain at the second weapon, had not some seasonably
interceded. 5. Fighting at Justs in France with Sir Collard Fines, at every
stroke he bare him back-ward to his horse, and when the French suspected that
he was tied to his Saddle, to confute their jealousies, our Earl lighted, and
presently remounted. 6. He was eminently active in the Kings victorious battles
in France, and might truly say, Quorum pars ego magna fui. 7. He was one of
those whom King Henry the fifth sent to the Counsel of Constance, whose whole
retinue amounted unto eight hundred horse. 8. Here he killed a Dutch Duke who
challenged him, Sigismond the Emperor and his Empress beholding it. 9. The
Empress affected with his valor, took the Badge from one of the Earls men,
(being a plain Bear of Silver) an^ wore it on her shoulder. But the next day
our Earl presented her with a Bear (which was his Crest) made of Pearls and
Precious Stones. 10. Being sent by King Henry the fifth, with a thousand men in
arms to fetch Q. Katherine, sole daughter to the King of France, he fought
with the Earls of Vendosm and Linosin, killed one of them with his own hand,
routed the forces of five thousand men, and brought the Lady, whom he saw
safely married to the King. 11. He was by the said Kings Will, appointed
Governor to his son in his m^no rity, and made Lieutenant o^ a^l France. 12.
During his life our ^uccess in France was progressive, and retrograde after his
death.
It must not be forgotten, how Sigismond the Emperor coming into England, told
King Henry the fifth, that no Christian King had such another Knight, for
(...), Nurture, and Manhood. He obtained leave of the King, (because in his
Dominions) that he might by Imperial Authority fix a Title of Honor upon him,
and caused him to be named the Father of Courtesy, as indeed true courage and
courtesy, are undividuall Companions.

The last time he went over into Normandy, he was tossed with a hideous
Tempest, so that despairing of life, he caused himself to be bound (for who
could bind him against his will?) with his Lady and infant Son, to the Main
Mast, on this design, that having his Armor and Coat of Arms upon him, he
might thereby be known, that such who should light on his corpse, if either
noble or charitable, might afford him a Christian burial.

Yet he escaping the Tempest, and landing safely in France, dyed in his bed (no
usual repose for so restless and active a spirit,) at Roan of a lingering
disease April 30. 1439. and lies buried in a most stately Tomb, in a Chapel
of the Collegiat Church of Warwick, where his Epitaph graven in brass is
pointed with Bears, serving for Commas, Colons, Periods, and all distinctions
thereof. His Mr Dugdale in his Survey of Warwickshire, in the Earls of Warwick
where the preceding particulars are proved out of Authentic Records.
deeds of Charity (according to the devotion of those days) were little
inferior to the Achievements of his valor.

Physicians and Chemists.
Sir EDWARD KELLEY [ alias TALBOT,] was born at Worcester, (as I have it from
the Scheame of his Nativity, graved from the original calculation of Doctor
Dee) Anno Domini 1555. August the first, at four a clock in the afternoon, the
Pole being there elevated, gr. 52.. 10. Thus Reader, I hope, that my exactness
herein, will make some reparation for my uncertainties, and looser intelligence
in the births of other persons.

He was well studied in the mysteries of nature, being intima^e wi^h Doctor
Dee, who was beneath him in Chemistry, but above him in Mathematics. These two
are said to have found a very large quantity of Elixir, in the ruins of
Glass^nbury- Abbey. Indeed I have read, how William Bird, the Prior of the Bath,
left and lost the Elixir in the walls of his Priory; and, it may seem strange,
that what was lost at Bath, was found at Glassenbury, in the same County
indeed, but sixteen miles asunder. But so long as Kelley had this treasure,
none need trouble themselves how or where he came by it.

Afterward (being here in some trouble) he went over beyond the seas, with
Albertus Alasco a Polonian Baron, who gave for his Guillam's dis play of
Heraldry page 216.
Arms the Hull of a ship, having only a Mainmast and a top, without any
tackling, and gave for his Motto, Deus dabit Vela, God will send Sails. But it
seems, this Lord had formeny carried too high a sail, of whom a good C^mdens
Eliz. Anno 1583.
Author reports, that Aere alieno oppressu^ clam recessit* and now, it seems,
sought to repair his fortunes, by associating himself with these two
Arch-chemists of England.

How long they continued together, is to me unknown. Sir Edward (though I know
not how he came by his Knighthood) with the Doctor, fixed at Trebona in
Bohemia, where he is said to have transmuted a brass Theatrum Chemicum p. 481.
warming-pan (without touching or melting, only warming it by the fire, and
putting the Elixir thereon,) into pure silver, a piece whereof was sent to
Queen Elizabeth. He had great converse with Rodulphus the second Emperor.

I have seen a voluminous Manuscript, in Sir Thomas Cotton his Library, of the
particulars of their mysterious proceedings; where amongst many strange
passages, I find this ensuing monstrosity. They kept constant intelligence with
a Messenger or Spirit, giving them advice how to proceed in their mystical
discoveries, and injoyning them, that by way of preparatory qualification for
the same, they should enjoy their Wives in common. Though boggling hereat at
first, they resolved to submit thereunto, because the Lawgiver might dispense
with his Laws, in matters of so high a nature. Hereby may the Reader guess the
rest of their proceedings.

This probably might be the cause, why Doctor Dee left Kelley, and returned
into England. Kelley continuing still in Germany, ranted it in his expenses
(say the Brethren of his own art) above the sobriety befitting so mysterious a
Philosopher. He gave away in gold-wyer-rings, at the marriage of one of his
Maidservants, to the value of four thousand pounds. As for the high conceit he
had of his own skill in Chemistry, it appears sufficiently in the beginning
of his own works, though I confess my self not to understand the Geberish of
his language.

All you that fain Philosophers would be,
And night and day in Geber's kitchen broyle,
Wasting the chips of ancient Hermes Tree;
Weening to turn them to a precious Oil,
The more you work, the more you loose and spoil.
To you I say, how learned so e're you be,
Go burn your Books, and come and learn of me.
Come we now to his sad Catastrophe. Indeed the curious had observed, that in
the Scheme of his Nativity, not only the Dragons-tail was ready to promote
abusive aspersions against him, (to which living and dead he has been
subject,) but also something malignant appears posited in Aquarius, which has
influence on the legs, which accordingly came to pass. For being twice
imprisoned (for what misdemeanor I know not) by Radulphus the Emperor, he
endeavored his escape out of an high window, and tying his sheets together to
let him down, fell (being a weighty man) and brake his leg, whereof he died
1595.

I believe him neither so bad as W^dvers Fun* ^on page 45.
some, nor so good as others do character him, all know, how Separation is of
great use amongst men of his profession; and indeed, if his pride and
prodigality were severed from him, he would remain a person, on other accounts,
for his industry and experience in practical Philosophy, worthy recommendation
to posterity.

Writers.
FLORENCE of WORCESTER was probably born near, certainly bred in that City, one
eminent in learning as any of his age, and no less industrious. Many books are
extant of his making, and one most useful, beginning at the Creation, and
continued till his death. This he calls Chronicum Chronicorum, which some
esteem an Arrogant Title, and an Insolent defiance of all Authors before and
after him, as if (as the Rose is flos florum, so) his were the Superlative
Chronicle of all that are Extant. But others meet with much modesty in the
Title Chronicum Chronic^rum, as none of his own making, but only gathered both
for Matter and Language out of others, he being rather the Collector then the
Original Composer thereof. He died Anno Domini 1119.

JOHN WALLIS or WELSH, is confessed natione Pitz. de illus. A^g. Scrip. pa. 342.
Anglus, which I observe, to secure his nativity against Welch-claimes
thereunto, only grounded on his Sur-name. Yet I confess, he might be mediatly
of Welch-extraction, but born in this County, (where the family of the Walshes
are extant at this day in a worshipful equipage,) where he became a Franciscan
in Worcester. Leaving Oxford he lived in Paris, where he was common ly called,

Arbor vitae, The tree of life,

Non absque insigni Servatoris blasphemia, With no small blasphemy to our
Savior, says our Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 4. page 317.
Author. But, to qualify the matter, we take the expression in the same sense,
wherein Prove. 15. 4.
Solomon calls a wholesome tongue a Tree of Life.

Yet might he better be termed, the tree of knowledge of good and evil, whose
books (amounting to no fewer then twenty volumes,) are not so practical for
their use, as curious in their speculations. In the ancient Libraries of Bali^l
and Oriel-Colledge, most of his Manuscripts are reported extant at this day. He
died and was buried at Paris, Anno Dom. 1216.

ELIAS de J. Bale de ^crip. Brit. Cent. 4. Number. 33.
EVESHAM was born in this County, of good Parentage, from whom (as it seems
by J. Bale) he had expectancy of a fair estate. This did not hinder him, from
being a Benedictine in the Abbey of Evesham, where he became a great Scholar, *
J. Pi^. de script. Ang. pa. 351. Anno 1270.
and wrote an Excellent Chronicle. Bale knows not, where to place him with
any certainty. But Pitz not more knowing, but more daring, assigns him to
have flourished in the year 1270.

WILLIAM PACKINGTON. I confess two Villages (the less and greater) of this AMP.
name in Warwickshire, and yet place this Packington here, with no discredit
to my self, and greater grace to him. For, first I behold him as no Clergyman,
(commonly called from their Native Places) but have reasons to believe him
rather a Layman, and find an Ancient Family of his Name (not to say Alliance)
still flourishing in this County. He was Secretary and Treasurer to Edward the
Black Prince, and his long living in France, had made the language of his Nurse
more natural to him, then the tongue of his Mother. Hence it was that he wrote
in French the story of five English Kings, [King John, Henry the third, Edwards
first, second and third,] and a book of the Achievements of the Black Prince.
He flourished Anno Dom. 1380.

Since the Reformation.
Sir EDWIN SANDYS, Son to Edwin Sandys, D. D. was (in all probability) born in
this County, whilst his father was Bishop of Worcester. He was bred in
Cambridge, and attained to be a most accomplished person.

I have known some pitiful in Affection, but poor in Condition, willing but
unable to relieve one in greater want then themselves, who have only gotten an
empty Purse, and given it to others to put their charity therein for the
purpose aforesaid. Such my case, I can only present the Reader with a Place in
this my Book for the Character of this worthy Knight, but can not contribute
any Coin of MEMOIRES or Remarkables to the furnishing thereof. Only let me
add, he was (...), right-handed to any great employment; and was as constant
in all Parliaments, as the Speaker himself, being beheld by all as an Excellent
Patriot (faithful to his Country, without being false to his King,) in all
transactions. He was the Treasurer to the undertakers for the Western
Plantations, which he effectually advanced, the Bermudaes (the firmest (though
not the fairest) Footing the English have in the West Indies,) owing their
happiness to his Care, and Sandys Tribe is no contemptible Proportion therein.
He had a commanding Pen, witness his work of the Religion of the Western World,
(many in one Book,) so much matter is Stowed therein. I have been informed,
that he bequeathed by his Will, a Considerable Sum to the Building of a
College in Cambridge, but Debts not coming in according to Expectation, his
good Intention failed in the performance thereof. He died much lamented of all
good Men, about the year, 1631.

Romish Exile Writers.
RICHARD SMITH D. D. was born in this Pitz. de Ang Scrip. in Anno 1563.
County, bred in the University of Oxford, where he became Kings Professor and
was fit for that place in all things, if (as one of his own persuasion avoweth)
Non obstitisset Laterum debilitas, and Vocis exilitas, The weakness of his
Sides, and lowness of his Voice had no hindered him.

King Edward the sixth, afterward sent for Peter Martyr over to be his
Professor in this University, betwixt whom and Doctor Smith, so great the
Contest, that waving all engagements it is best to State it to the eye of the
Reader, as it is represented by Authors of both sides.

Pitz. de Script. in Anno 1563.

Petrum Martyrem apostatam Monachum, and Haeresis Zuvinglicanae sectatorem, a
Rege Edwardo sexto Oxonii in Cathedram Theologicam intrusum, in publicis
disputationibus haeresis convicit, and Cathedr^m suam victor repetiit, sed Rege
obstante non impetravit.

In public disputations he convicted Peter Martyr the Apostate Monk, and a
follower of the Zwinglian Heresy, thrust in by King Edward the sixth, into the
Divinity Chair in Oxford, and being Conqueror did require his own Chair to be
restored him; which he obtained not, because the King did withstand him.

L. Humphredus in vita Juelli page 44.

Sed animosus iste Achilles, die ad disputandum constituto, cum non Compa^eret,
sed ad Divum Andream in Scotiam profugeret, ratus eum qui in hoc Articulo been
lateret, been vivere.

But this valiant Achilles, when he did not appear on the day appointed for him
to dispute, fled to Saint Andrews in Scotland, conceiving it that in a case of
this kind, he lived best who lay hid the closest.

From St. Andrews he afterward conveyed himself over into the Low Countries.

But this Smith returned afterward in the reign of Queen Mary, when Peter
Martyr was glad to get leave to fly from that University. Thus we see (as to
speak unbiassed without reflection on the Cause) that in such controversies it
mattereth little who are the Disputants on either side, whilst the Prevalent
power is the Moderator.

Doctor Smith flying again over into the Low Countries, was made Dean of Saint
Peter's in Dorway, and the first Professor in the University founded therein. He
died Anno Domini 1563.

JOHN MARSHALL was born at Dalisford in this County, as * New-colledge Register
does attest, which is to be credited before J. Pits making him to be born in *
Dorsetshire. He was bred at New-colledge in Oxford, where he proceeded
Bachelor of Laws, and for his gravity and learning was chosen second Master of
Winchester school. But in the first of Queen Elizabeth he left the land with
Thomas Hide, chief Schoolmaster thereof; so that now their Scholars had a fat
Otium, and in both their absence might play with Security, till a ^uccessor
received their Scepter. He became afterward Canon of Lisle in Flanders, though
a long time disturbed in his quiet Possession thereof. He wrote a book much
prised by Men of his Persuasions, against John Cal^ld an English Protestant. At
his death he bequeathed a Ring with a rich Stone to adorn a piece of the
Cross in his Cathedral (which by Doctor Gifford was solemnly applied
thereunto) and died Anno Domini 1597.

ROBERT BRISTOW was born in this Pitz. de script. A^g. page 779.
Connty, bred first in Oxford in Exeter-colledge, whence he conveyed himself
over beyond the seas, living first at Lovaine, then in the English College at
Doway. He was the first of that foundation that was made Priest, being the
right hand of Cardinal Allen, who departing to Rhemes, left Bristow Prefect of
Doway-colledge. Afterward he was sent for to Rhemes, where he wrote his book
Idem ibidem.
say the Papists, Contra futilem Fulkum, Against foolish That worthy Confuter
of the Rhemish Testament.
Fulk, (railing is easier then reasoning with such mouths) who indeed was a
grave and godly Divine. Being very sickly, he was advised for his health to
return into his native Country, where having the good hap to miss that which
cures all diseases, he died in his bed near London 1582.

HENRY HOLLAND born in this Idem pa. 804.
County, was bred Fellow of Saint Johns-colledge in Oxford. Leaving the land he
fled over to Doway, where he took the degree of Bachelour in Divinity, and
Order of Priesthood. Hence he removed to Rhemes, where, says my Idem ibidem.
Author, Traductioni Bibliorum ^crorum astitit, He assisted (I might say truly
to the Traducing, but let it be) the Translating of the Bible. Returning to
Doway, he read Divinity in a Monastery hard by, wherein he was living 1611.

Masters of Music.
WALTER of EVESHAM was born thereabouts, and bred therein a BenedictineMonke.
His harmonious mind expressed it self in its love of Music, wherein he
attained to great eminency, and wrote a Learned book in that faculty.

But here Bilious Cent. 18. Number. 100.
Bale lets fly without fear, (though not without some wit,) inveighing against
all Music in Churches, pretending to produce a Pair-Royal of Fathers for his
own opinion, viz. Saint Jerome calling such chanting, Theatrales modulos,
Gregory terming it consuetudinem reprehensibilem, and Athanatius flatly
forbidding it the Church, for the vanity thereof. But by Bales leave, such
speak not against the decent ornaments of wives, who reprove the Prove. 7. 10.
garish attire of harlots, the abuse, not use of Music, being taxed by the
Fathers aforesaid. Our Walter flourished under King Henry the third, Anno 1240.

Benefactors to the Public.
Reader, it may be disputed in me, whether I am more ashamed of or grieved for
my mean intelligence of Benefactions in this County, before and since the
Reformation. But I comfort my self, that the Dugdales in this County, I mean
the worthy future Illustrators thereof, will supply my defect. Only I will add

RICHARD DUGARD B. D. was born at Grafton-Fliford in this County, bred under
Master Henry Bright in the Kings-school at Worcester. I name him the rather,
because never did Master Calvin mention his Master Corderius with more honor,
then Master Dugard gratefully remembered Master Bright. He was chosen Fellow of
SidneyColledge, where in my time (for I had the honor of his intimate
acquaintance) he had a moiety of the most considerable Pupills, whom he bred in
learning and piety, in the golden mean betwixt superstition and faction. He
held a gentle-strict-hand over them, so that none presumed on his lenity to
offend, or were discouraged by his severity to amend. He was an excellent
Grecian, and general Scholar; old, when young, such his gravity in behavior;
and young, when old, such the quickness of his endowments. He bestowed on the
College an hundred and twenty pounds for some perpetual use for the Master
and Fellows: and ten pounds for books for the Library. At last he was surprised
with a presentation of the Rectory of Fulleby in Lincolnshire, where by his
constant preaching and pious living, he procured his own security; a rare
happiness in those troublesome times. He died January 28. Anno Dom. 1653. and
lies buried under a Marble-stone in his Chancell.

M^morable Persons.
JOHN FECKENHAM was born of (...) de (...). (...). in (...). Tract. 1. (...).
3. page 233.
poor parents in Feckenham Forest in this Shire. He was the last Clergy man I
find (and therefore Memorable) who Locally was Surnamed, and was bred a
Benedictine in Evosham, and at the dissolution thereof ^eceived an Annual
Pension of an hundred florens, which (in my accounting,) make up some twenty
pounds. This maintained him when afterward he went and studied in Oxford,
attaining to eminent learning therein.

In the reign of King Edward the sixth, he was imprisoned in the Tower, until
Sir Phillip Hobby, (to use Feckenhams own words) quasi Mutuatum accepit,
Borrowed him of the Tower. Being at Liberty, he had frequent Disputations in
the Earnest, yet Modest defense of his Religion.

By Queen Mary he was made Abbot of Westminster, being the last Mitred Abbot
(and therefore more Memorable) who sat in Parliament. He was very gracious with
the Queen, and effectually laid out all his interest with her, (sometime even
to offend, but never ^o injure Her,) to procure Pardon of the Faults, or
Mitigation of the Punishments, for poor Protestants.

By Queen Elizabeth, he was highly honour^d, and proffered (as is currantly
traditioned) the Sea of Canterbury which he refused, and was kept in easy
restraint. For although he found not the same favor with Joseph, to whom the
Jailer committed the care of all his family, making him Super-intendent of all
other Prisoners, yet had he always Respective Usage, and oftimes Liberty on his
Parol. By his Bounty to the Poor, he gained the good will (says Master Camden)
of all Persons, whilst I behold his Bounty to Others as the Queens Bounty to
him, enabling (because not disenabling) him for the same, and permitting him
peaceably to possess his Estate. He died a very aged man in Wisbich-castle, (as
I collect) Anno 1585. and the Character which Pitzeus gives him, may suffice
for his Epitaph. Pitz. de script. Ang. page 786.
Erat in eo insignis pietas in Deum, mira charitas in proximos, singularis
observantia in majores, mitis affabilitas in inferiores, dulcis humanitas in
omnes, mul^plex doctrina, redundans facundia, incredibilis religionis
catholicae zelus.

HENRY BRIGHT was born in the City of Worcester. No good man will grudge him
under this Title, who shall seriously peruse this his Epitaph, composed by
Doctor Joseph Hall then Dean in the Cathedral in Worcester.

Mane Hospes and lege,

Magister Henricus Bright,

Celeberrimus Gymnasiarcha,

Qui Scholae Regiae istic fundatae, per totos Quadraginta Annos Summa cum Laud
praefuit.

Quononalter magis sedulus fuit Scitusve aut dexter in Latinis, Graecis,
Hebraius Literis feliciter edocendis:

Test utraque Academia, quam Instruxit affatim numerosa pube literaria.

Sed and totidem annis eoque amplius Theologiam professus, and hujus (...) per
Septennium Canonicus major, saepissime Hic and Alibi Sacrum Dei praeconem magno
cum Zelo and Fructu egit:

Vir Pius, Doctus, Integer, frugi, de Republica, deque Ecclesia optime meritus,

A laboribus perdiu, per noctuque ab anno 1562. ad 1626. strenue usque extant
latis 4to. Martii suaviter requievit in Domino.

For my own part, I behold this Master Bright, placed by Divine Providence in
this City, in the Marches, that he might equally communicate the Luster of
Grammerlearning, to youth both of England and Wales.

Lord Mayors.
Name Father Place Company Time 1 Richard Lee Simon Lee Worcester Grocer 1460 2
Richard a Lee John a Lee Worcester -- 1468 3 Alexander Avenon Robert Avenon
Kings Norton Iron-monger 1569

This is one of the twelve pretermitted Counties, the Names of whose Gentry
were not returned into the Tower, by the Commissioners, in the reign of King
Henry the sixth.

Sheriffs.
HEN. II.
Anno 1 Anno 2 Will. de Bello Campo, for 14 years. Anno 16 Will. de Bello Campo
and Hugo de Puckier Anno 17 Ranul. de Launch, for 4 years. Anno 21 Rob. de Lucy
Anno 22 Mich. Belet, for 7 years. Anno 29 Rad. de Glanvill Anno 30 Mich. Belet
Anno 31 Rob. Marivion for 3 years.
RICH. I.
Anno 1 Rob. Marmion Anno 2 Will. de Bello Campo Anno 3 Will. de Bello Campo,
and Rich. de Piplinton Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Will. de Bello Campo Anno 6 Idem.
Anno 7 Hen. de Longo Campo, for 3 years. Anno 10 Rad. de Grafton
JOH. Rex.
Anno 1 Rad. de Grafton Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Will. de Cantela and Adam. de
Worcester, for 3 years. Anno 6 Rob. de Cantelu, Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Will. de
Cantelu, and Adam. Clicus Anno 9 Will. de Cantelu, and Walt. le Puchier, for 3
years. Anno 12 Will. de Cantelupo, and Adam. Ruffus Anno 13 Will. de Cantelupo,
and Adam. Delwich Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15 Will. de Cantelupo, and Phus. Kutton,
for 3 years.
HEN. III.
Anno 1 Anno 2 Walt. de Bello Campo, and Hen. Lunett, for 3 years. Anno 5 Walt.
de Bello Campo, for 3 years. Anno 8 Walt. de Bello Campo, and Hug. le Pohier
Anno 9 Walt. de Bello Campo, and Tho. Wigorne for 3 years. Anno 12 Walt. de
Bello Campo, for 3 years. Anno 15 Walt. de Bello Campo, and Hug. le Poer* Anno
16 Walt. de Bello Campo, and Will. de Malvern, for 3 years. Anno 19 Walt. de
Bello Campo, and Hug. le Pohier Anno 20 Idem (sive Will.) Anno 21 Will. de
Bello Campo, and Will. de Blandhall Anno 22 Idem. Anno 23 Will. de Bello Campo,
and Laur. de Wandlesworth, for 3 years. Anno 26 Will de Bello Campo, and Simon
de London Anno 27 Will. de Bello Campo, for 24 years. Anno 51 Will. de Bello
Campo, and Ioh. de Hull Anno 52 Idem. Anno 53 Will. de Bello Campo, for 3
years.
EDW. I.
Anno 1 Will. de Bello Campo Comes Warwic. for 26 years. Anno 27 Guido. de
Bello Campo, for 9 years.
EDW. II.
Anno 1 Guido. de Bello Campo Comes. War, and Rob. de Berkenhall Anno 2 Guido.
de Bello Campo Comes War, and Walt. de Perthrope, for 4 years. Anno 6 Guido.
de Bello Campo, and Rob. de Warwick Anno 7 Idem. Anno 8 Guido. de Bello Campo
Anno 9 Johan. de He^ingwoll Anno 10 Walt. de Bello Campo Anno 11 Idem. Anno 12
Will. Stracy Anno 13 Idem. Anno 14 Idem. Anno 15 Will. de Bello Campo Anno 16
Anno 17 Nich. Russell Anno 18 Idem. Anno 19 Walt. de Kokesey
EDW. III.
Anno 1 Walt. de Kokesey Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Rich* de H^deslowe, for 3 years.
Anno 6 Tho. de Bello Campo Comes War, for 46 years.
RICH. II.
Anno 1 Tho. de Bello Campo Comes War, for 4 years. Anno 5 Tho. de Bello
Campo, for 13 years. Anno 18 Tho. de Bello Campo Anno 19 Idem. Anno 20 Ioh.
Washburne Anno 21 Hen. Haggeley Anno 22 Rob. Russell
HEN. IV.
Anno 1 Tho. de Bello Campo Anno 2 Tho. de Bello Campo, and Will. Beaucham Anno
3 Tho. Hodington Anno 4 Rich. de Bello Campo Comes War, f^r 9 years.
HEN. V.
Anno 1 Rich. de Bello Campo, for 9 years.
HEN. VI.
Anno 1 Rich. de Bello Campo, for 16 years. Anno 16 Norm. Washburne Subvic. In
the 17. year of King Henry the sixth, this worthy Richard Beauchamp deceased.
And here the records are at a loss, (such as ever since came to my hand)
presenting no Sheriff for 21 years, till the end of the reign of King Henry the
sixth. And yet I am confident that Henry Beauchamp Son and Heir to Richard
aforesaid, Earl of Warwick and Albemarle (for Duke of ALBEMARLE I meet with
none, before that ILLUSTRIOUS PERSON who now deservedly possesses that
Honor,) enjoyed the Shrevalty of this County.
EDW. IV.
Anno 1 Walt. Scull Subvic. for 19 years. Here we have an Undersheriff, but no
High sheriff could my industry hitherto recover, though my confidence is
grounded on good cause, that Richard Nevill (the MakeKing) Duke of Warwick, was
Honorary Sheriff, though too great to officiate in his Person. Anno ^0 Jacob.
Radcliffe, mil. for 3 years.
RICH. III.
Anno 1 Jacob. Radcliffe, miles Anno 2 Will. Houghton, miles Anno 3 Hum.
Stafford and Rich. Nanfan.
HEN. VII.
Anno 1 Rich. Nanfan Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Ioh. Savage, mil. for 5 years. Anno 8
Ioh. Savage, arm. for 5 years. Anno 13 Ioh. Savage, mil. for 12 years.
HEN. VIII.
Anno 1 Ioh. Savage, mil. for 7 years. Anno 8 Will. Compton, mil. for years.
Henry VII.
3. JOHANNES SAVACE, Mil.]

I behold him (and am sure my Eyes are not deceived) as the same with that
Person, who was made Knight of the Garter, and Privy-Councellour to this King.
Yet will I not be Positive, whether 'twas he, or his Son, who removing into
Cheshire, and marrying the Heir-generall of the ancient Family of Bostocks,
attained thereby a great Inheritance, and was Ancestor to the present Earl of
Rivers.

Henry VIII.
8. WILL. COMPTON, Mil.]

He was highly and deservedly a Favorite to this King, so that, in the Court,
no lay Man abating only Charles Brandon (in whom Affection and Affinity met,)
was equal unto him. He might have been, for Wealth or Honor, what he pleas^d,
but contented himself with what he was. His Son Peter married into the Right
Honorable Family of Shrewsbury, and his Grand son Sir Henry Compton, was one of
the three, H. C * [ Henry Carry, Henry Compton, and Henry Cheny,] who were made
Barons by Queen Elizabeth, Ancester to James Earl of Northampton. For the
happiness of whom, and His, when I cannot orally pray, I will make signs of my
affection to heaven.

Sheriffs.
Nam^s Place Arms HEN. VIII. A^no 27 Walt. Walsh. ar. A^a Fess betwixt 6
Martlets S. 28 Idem ut prius 29 Ioh. Russell, jun. Strensha^ Argent, a Cheveron
betwixt 3 Crosses Cros^ets Fitche S. 30 Rob. Acton, ar. Sutton Gul. a Fess
within a Border Engrailed Erm. 31 Gilbt. Talbott, mil. Grafcon G. a Lion
rampant and a Border engrailed Or. 32 Ioh. Pakington, ar. Per Ch^veron S. and
Ar. in Chief 33 Ioh. Russell, mil. ut prius 3 Mullets Or. In Base as many 34
Go. Th^gmorto^, *m. Throgmorto^ G^bes Gules. 35 Tho. Hunkes, ar. Radbroke * G.
on a Cheveron Arg. 3 bars 36 Ioh. Talb^tt, mil. ut pri^ gemelle Sable. 37 Rob.
Act^n, mil. ut prius Ar 3 Mullets S. within a Border Platee. 38 Ioh. Russell,
mil. ut prius EDW. VI. Anno 1 Will. Sheldon, mil. Beely S. a Fess Arg. betwixt
3 Swans proper. 2 Rich. Ligon, mil. Argen^, 2 Lions passant Gules. 3 Will.
Gower, arm. Azure a Cheveron between 3 4 Will. Ligon, a^m. ut prius
^olves-heads erased Or. 5 Tho. Russell, mil. ut prius 6 Ioh. Talbott, mil. ut
prius PHIL and MAR. Anno 1 Hen. Dingley, ar. Charlton Arg. a Fess S. a (...)
^etwixt 2 Ioh. Talbott, ar. ut prius 2 Ogresses in Chief. 3 Tho. Baskervile, m.
Arg. a Cheveron Gul. betwixt 3 4 Will. Sheldon, ar. ut prius Hurts proper. 5
Ioh. Littleton, ar. Frankley Arg. a Cheveron between 3 Escalops Shells S. 6 Ioh.
Knottesford, a.* * Arg. 4 fucils in fess Sable. ELIZ. REG. Anno 1 Tho. Russell,
ar. ut prius 2 Will. Ligon, ar. ut prius 3 Tho. Packington, m. ut prius 4
Galfr. Markham, ar: Azu. in Chief Or, a Lion Issuant G. and ^order Arg. 5 Tho.
Baskervile, mil. ut prius 6 Will. Iefferyes, and Will. Hunkes, ar. Holm. ^af.
Sable a Lion Rampant betwixt 3 ut prius Scaling Ladders Or. 7 Anth. Daston, ar.
8 Ioh. Littledon, mil. ut prius 9 Will. Sheldon, ar. ut prius 10 Hen. Dingley,
ar. ut prius 11 Tho. Russell, mil. ut prius 12 Fran. Walsh, arm. ut p^ius 13
Ioh. Rowse, ar. Rouslench Sable, 2 Bars Engrailed Arg. 14 Ioh. Littleton, mil.
ut prius 15 Rich. Ligon, ar. ut prius 16 Edw. Colles, ar. 17 Edw. Harewell, ar.
Bifford Argent on a Fess Nebule Sab. 3 18 Rad. Sheldon, ar. ut prius
Hares-^eads cooped of the first. 19 Ioh. Russell, ar. ^t prius 20 Hen. Berkley,
ar. G. a`Cheveron txixt 10 Crosses Argent. 21 Wal^. Blunt, ar. Kid^mister Barry
Nebnle of 6 Or and 22 Fran. Walsh, ar. ut prius Sable. 23 Tho. Folliat, ar.
Purton Arg. a Lion Ramp. queve forchee 24 Ioh. Walshburne, ar. ut infra Purple,
Armed G. crowned Or. 25 Rich. Ligon. ar. ut prius 26 Gilb. Littleton, ar. ut
prius 27 Tho. Lucy mil. WARWI. Gules, Crusuly Or, 3 Lucies or Pikes, Hauriant
Arg. 28 Will. Child, ar. Northwick Gul. a Cheveron Erm. betwixt 3 Eagles Closs,
Or. 29 Egid. Read, ar. 30 Geor. Winter Huddington Sable, a Fess Ermine. 31
Will. Savage, ar. Argent, 6 Lions Rampant Sable. 32 Edw. Colles, ar. ut prius
33 Hen. Bromeley, mil. Quarterly per fess indented G. 34 Will. Ligon, ar. ut
prius and Or. 35 Tho. Biggs, ar. Lenchwick Arg. on a Fess be^wixt 3 Revens 36
Ioh. Pakington, mil. ut prius proper, as many Annulets of 37 Tho. Folliat, ar.
ut prius the Field. 38 Edw. Harewell, ar. ut prius 39 Fran. Dingley, ar. ut
prius 40 Will. Walsh, ar. ut prius 41 Will. Child, ar. ut prius 42 Ioh.
Washborn, ar. Arg. on a Fess betwixt 6 Martlets Gules 3 Cater-foiles of the
first. 43 Will. Savage, ar. ut prius 44 Geor. Blunt, ar. ut prius 45 Th.
Russel, m. and 1 Ia. ut prius JAC. REX. Anno 1 Tho. Russell, mil. ut prius 2
Rich. Walsh, ar. ut prius 3 Will. Barnaby, ar. Acton Arg. a Lion Pass. Guard.
betwi^ 4 Walt Snage, ar. 3 Escalops S. 5 Ioh. Pakington, mil. ut prius 6 Arno.
Ligon, mil. ut prius 7 Rich. Greves, mil. 8 Ioh. Rowse, mil. ut prius 9 Edr.
Pit, mil. Churwiard 10 Ioh. Savage, ar. ut prius Azu. 3 Bars, and as many
Stars in Chief Or. 11 Rob. Berkeley, ar. ut prius 12 Sher. Talbott, ar. ut
prius 13 Fran. Moore, ar. 14 Will. Iefferies, ar. ut prius 15 Will. Berkeley,
ar. ut prius 16 Sam. Sandys, mil. Or, a Fess indented be^wixt 3 17 Walt. Blunt,
ar. ut prius Crosses Croslets Fitchee G. 18 Will. Kite, ar. 19 Edr. Seabright,
ar. Besford Argent, 3 Cinque Foyles Sable. 20 Ioh. Woodward, m. 21 Ioh.
Culpepper, ar. KENT Argent, a bend engrailed Gules. 22 Egid. Savage, mil. ut
prius CAR. REX. Anno 1 Walt Devereux, m. Argent, a Fess Gules, in Chief 3 2
Edw. Cooks, ar. Tort^uxs. 3 Rich. Skynner, ar. 4 Hen. Bromley, ar. ut prius 5
Will. Ieffreys, ar. ut prius 6 Arth. Smithes, mil. 7 Jacob. Pit, mil. ut prius
8 Tho. Good, ar. 9 Ioh. Keyt, ar. 10 Ioh. Savage, ar. ut prius 11 Will.
Russell, bar. ut prius 12 Ioh. Rows, mil: ut prius 13 Edw. Dingley, ar. ut
prius 14 Tho. Greaves, ar. 15 Ioh. Winford, ar. 16 18 19 1 20 21 22

Queen Elizabeth.
19. JOHN RUSSELL, Ar.]

The same Gentleman (no doubt) who was afterward Knighted, and betwixt whom
and Sir Henry Berkeley, was so deadly a quarrel, as that great bloodshed was
likely to have ensued, at the Sessions in Worcester, by reason of their many
friends and followers engaged therein. But Doctor Whitgift, then Bishop of
Worcester, and Vice President of Wales, (in the absence of Sir Henry Sidney,
then in Ireland,) wisely prevented it, by providing a strong watch at the
gates, and about the City; and requiring them to bring both parties, with their
attendance well guarded, to his Palace. Here he caused them all (to the number
of four Sir Geo. Paul in the life of Archbishop Whitgist pa. 23.
or five hundred) to deliver their weapons into his own Servants custody, and
after two hours pains taken, sometimes in persuading, and otherwhiles in
threatening them, he made them so good friends, that they both attended him hand
in hand to the Town Hall, where in amity and love, they performed the service
of their Country.

36. JOHN PACKINGTON, Mil.]

It is now good manners for me to hold my peace, and listen to a Sir Rob Nauton
in Fragm. R^gal.
Privy-Councellor, thus describing his character, He was a Gentleman of no mean
family, of form and feature no ways disabled a very fine Courtier, and for the
time which he stayed there (which was not lasting) very high in the Queens
grace. But he came in and went out, and though disassiduity, drew the curtain
between himself and the light of her favor, and then death overwhelmed the
remnant and utterly deprived him of recovery. And they say of him, that had he
brought less to the Court then he did, he might have carried away more then he
brought, for he had a time of it, but was no good husband of opportunity.

King James.
2. RICHARD WALSH, Ar.]

I find him called in our Chronicles, (perchance by a Prolepsis) Sir Richard
Walsh. Yea, I find him styled so, by him who best might, because he K. James in
discourse of Powder Treason page 244.
made him so, Knighting him for his good service.

In his Sheriffalty, the Powder-Traitors, sereted out of Warwickshire by Sir
Richard Verney, were as fiercely followed by Sir Richard Walsh, out of the
bounds of this County, till they took covert in the house of Stephen Littleton,
at Hallbach in Stows Chron. page 880. and Speeds pa. 910.
Staffordshire. This discreet Sheriff, not standing on the punctilio of
exceeding his Commission, in a case wherein the peace of the Kingdom was so
highly concerned, prosecuted his advantage, and beset the house round about,
till both the Wrights were killed in the place, Catesby and Percy slain with
one bullet, Rookwood and Winter wounded, all the rest apprehended.

The Battles.
Worcester Fight.
Many smart Skirmishes have happened in this County, and near this City. We
only insist on that Fatal Fight, September the third, 1651.

Know then (as Introductory thereunto) that His Majesty on the first of August
foregoing, began his March from Edenbrough into England, not meeting with any
considerable Opposition, (those at Warrington being soon put to flight by his
Presence,) until he came to Worcester: His Army consisted of twelve thousand
effectual Fighting men, (whereof two thousand English, the rest of the
Scottish Nation) but neither excellently Armed, nor plentifully stored with
Ammunition, whilst the Parliament Forces under Cromwell, more then doubled that
Number, wanting nothing [but a Good Cause] that an Army could wish or desire.

The Royalists Chiefest strength consisted in two Passes they possessed over
the River of Severn, which proved not advantageous according to expectation:
For the Enemy found the River Fordable elsewhere; and the Bridge and Pass at
Uptrn, though valiantly defended by Major General Massey, (who received a shot
in his hand) was forced by Lambert pouring in unequal Numbers on the Kings
Forces. Besides Cromwell finished a Bridge of Boards and Plancks over the main
River, with more Celerity and less Resistance, then could have been expected in
a matter of such importance.

Then began the Battle, wherein His Majesty to remember his subjects Good,
forgot his own Safety, and gave an incomparable example of Valor to the rest,
by Charging in his Own Person. This was followed by few to the same degree of
danger, but imitated in the greatest measure by the Highlanders, fighting with
the But-ends of their Muskets, when their Ammunition was spent. But new
supplies constantly Charging them, and the Main Body of the Scotch Horse not
coming up in due time from the City to His Majesty's relief, his Army was
forced to retreat in at Sudbury-gate, in much disorder.

If there were (which some more then whisper) false and foul Play in some
Persons of Principal Trust; as they have had a great space seasonably, God
grant them his Grace sincerely to repent, for their Treacherous retarding the
happiness, prolonging and increasing the Miseries of a Gracious King and three
great Nations. Sure it is, here were slain the Flower of the Scottish Loyal
Gentry, with the most Illustrious, William (formerly Earl of Lanerick) Duke of
Hamilton. As for Common Soldiers, some few who escaped had a longer life, to
have a sadder death, wandering in the Country till other men's Charity and their
own Strength failed them.

Since, how God has conducted His Majesty miraculously through Laberynths of
many Difficulties, to the Peaceable Possession of his Throne, is notoriously
known to the wonder of the world. Here my Muse heartily craveth leave to make
an Humble address to His Majesty, depositing at his feet the ensuing*

PANEGYRIC.
1.
AT Wor'ster great Gods goodness to our Nation,
It was a Conquest Your bare Preservation.
When 'midst Your fiercest foes on every side
For Your escape God did a LANE provide;
They saw You gonc, but whether could not tell,
Star-staring, though they asked both Heaven and Hell.
2.
Of foreign States You since have studied store,
And read whole Libraries of Princes over.
To You all Forts, Towns, Towers and Ships are known,
(But none like those which now become Your OWN.)
And though Your Eyes were with all Objects filled,
Only the Good into Your Heart distilled.
3.
Garbling men's manners You did well divide,
To take the Spaniards wisdom, not their pride.
With French activity You stored Your Mind,
Leaving to them their Fickleness behind;
And soon did learn, Your Temperance was such,
A sober Industry even from the Dutch.
4.
But tell us, Gracious Sovereign from whence
Took You the pattern of Your Patience?
Learned in Afflictions School, under the Rod,
Which was both used and sanctified by God;
From Him alone that Lesson did proceed,
Best Tutor with best Pupil best agreed.
5.
We, Your dull Subjects, must confess our crime,
Who learnt so little in as long a time,
And the same School. Thus Dunces poring looks
Men^ not themselves, but only mar their Bnoks.
How vast the difference 'twixt wise and fool?
The Master makes the Scholar, not the School.
6.
With rich conditions ROME did You invite,
To purchase You their ROYAL PROSELYTE,
(An emptysoul's soon tempted with full Coffers)
Whilst You with sacred scorn refused their proffers.
And for the FAITH did earnestly CONTEND
Abroad, which now You do at Home DEFEND.
7.
Amidst all Storms, Calm to Your Self the while,
Saddest Afflictions You did teach to smile.
Some faces best become a Mourning Dress,
And such Your Patience, which did grace Distress,
Whose Soul despising want of worldly pelf,
At lowest ebb went not beneath it Self.
8.
GOds JUSTICE now no longer could dispense
With the Abusing of His PROVIDENCE,
To hear SUCCESS his APPROBATION styled,
And see the Bastard brought against the Child.
[ SCRIPTURE] by such, who in their own excuse
Their Actings against His Writings did produce.
9.
The Pillar, which Gods people did attend,
To them in night a constant Light did lend,
Though Dark unto the Egyptians behind;
Such was brave MONCK in his reserved mind,
A Riddle to his Foes ^e did appear,
But to YOU and Himself, Sense plain and clear.
10.
By Means unlikely God atchives his End,
And crooked ways straight to his Honor tend;
The great and ancient Gates of LONDON Town,
(No Gates, no City) now are voted down,
And down were cast, O happy day! for all
Do date our hopeful rising from their fall.
11.
Men's loyal Thoughts conceived their Time was good,
But Gods was best; Without one drop of Blood,
By a dry Conquest, without foreign hand,
( Self-hurt, and now) Self-healed, is Our Land.
This silent Turn did make no noise, O strange!
Few saw the changing, all behold the Change.
12.
So Solomon most wisely did conceive,
His Temple should be STILL BORN though ALIVE.
That stately Structure started from the ground
Unto the Roof, not guilty of the sound
Of Iron Tool, all noise therein debarred;
This Virgin-Temple thus was s^en, not heard.
13.
THE impatient Land did for Your presence long,
England in swarms did into Holland throng,
To bring Your Highness home, by the Parliament
Lords, Commons, Citizens, Divines were ^ent:
Such honor Subjects never had before,
Such honor Subjects never shall have more.
14.
The officious Wind to serve You did not fail,
But scoured from West to East to fill Your Sail,
And fearing that his Breath might be too rough,
Proved over-civil, and was scarce enough;
Almost You were becalmed amidst the Main,
Prognostic of Your perfect peaceful Reign.
15.
Your Narrow Seas, for Forraigners do wrong
To claim them, (surely does the Ditch belong
Not to the common Continent, but Isle
Enclosed) did on You their Owner smile,
Not the least loss, only the NASEBY mar'ls
To see her-self now drowned in the CHARLES.
16.
You land at Dover, shoals of People come,
And KENT alone now ^eems all CHRISTEN DOM.
The Cornish Rebels (eight score Summers since)
At BLACK HEATH fought against their lawful Prince
Which doleful place with hateful Treason stained
Its Credit now by Loyalty regained.
17.
Great LONDON the last station You did make,
You took not it, but LONDON You did take:
And now no wonder Men did silence break,
When Conduits did both French and Spanish speak.
Now at WHITE HALL the Guard, which You attends,
Keeps out Your Foes, God keep You from Your Friends.
18.
THe Bells aloud did ring, for joy they felt
Hereafter Sacrilege shall not them melt.
And round about the Streets the Bonfires blazed,
With which NEW LIGHTS Fanatiques were amazed.
The brandisht Swords this Boon begged before Death,
Once to be (...), then buried in the Sheath.
19.
The Spaniard looking with a serious Eye,
Was forced to trespass on his Gravity,
Close to conceal his wondering he desired,
But all in vain, who openly admired.
The French, who thought the English mad in mind,
Now fear too soon they may them Sober find.
20.
The Germans seeing this Your sudden Power,
Freely confessed another Emperor.
The joyful Dane to Heavens cast up his Eyes,
Presuming suffering Kings will ^ympathize.
The Hollanders (first in a sad suspense)
Hoped, that Your Merty was their Innocence.
21.
LOng live Our Gracious CHARLES, Second to none
In Honor, who ere sat upon the Throne:
Be You above Your Ancestors renowned,
Whose Goodness wisely does Your Greatness bound;
And knowing that You may be What You would,
Are pleased to be only What You should.
22.
EUROP's Great ARBITRATOR, in Your choice
Is placed of Christendom the CASTING VOICE;
Hold You the Scales in Your Judicious Hand,
And when the equal Beam shall doubtful stand,
As You are pleased to dispose one Grain,
So falls or rises either France or Spain.
23.
As Sheba's Queen defective Fame acc^s'd,
Whose niggardly Relations had abused
The abundant worth of Solomon, and told
Not half of what she after did behold:
The same Your case, Fame has not done You right,
Our Ears are far out-acted by our Sight.
24.
Your SELF's the Ship returned from foreign Trading,
England's Your Port, Experience the Lading,
God is the `Pilot; and now richly fraught,
Unto the Port the Ship is safely brought:
What Is dear to You, is to Your Subjects cheap,
You sowed with pain, what we with pleasure reap.
25.
The Good-made Laws by You are now made Good,
The Prince and Peoples right both understood,
Both being Bank'd in their respective Station,
No fear hereafter of an Inundation.
Oppression, the KING'S EVIL, long endured,
By others caused, by YOU alone is cured.
And here my Muse craves her own nunc dimittis, never to make Verses more; and
because she cannot write on a better, will not write on another Occasion, but
heartily pray in Prose, for the happiness of her Lord and Master. And now
having taken our Vale of verses, let us therewith take also our Farewell of
Worcestershire.

The Farewell.
I read in a good Fines Moriso^n his Travails page 3.
Author, how the State of Lunenburg in Germany, (whose chief revenues arise
from the sale of salt,) prohibited poor people the benefit thereof. Whereupon
Divine Providence (offended, that a Monopoly was made of his mercy) stopped the
flowing of those Salt-springs. for a time, till the Poor were restored to their
paxtage therein. I am not particularly instructed, what share the Poor have in
the Salt of this Shire, not knowing how their interest is stated therein: But I
presume the concernments of the Poor are well cared for, and all things equally
ordered betwixt them and Rich-people, grounding my confidence on the long and
large continuance of the Saltpits amongst them. All I will add, is this; I
shall pray that they may endeavor for Coll. 4. 6.
spirituall-soul-savoriness, that their speech may be always with grace
seasoned.

As for the Loyal City of Worcester, (which deserves a particular Farewell by
it self:) I heartily desire, that God would be pleased to restore unto it the
years, which the Locust, Caterpillar, and Palmer-worm have devoured. And how
quickly can he do it (as by infinite other ways, so) by blessing the Clothing,
the Staple Commodity in this County? not ^ormerly omitted by me, but
pretermited till this Occasion. Sure it is, that the finest (though this may
seem a word of Challenge) Cloth of England, is made at Worcester, and such I
believe, was that which In his Collo^uy entitled UXOR (...).
Erasmus, that great Critic (who knew fine Cloth as well as pure Latin) is
calls Pannus Britannicus; Lempster Wool (in the neighboring County of
Hereford) being here made into (Pardon the Prolepsis till it be died) the
purest Scarlet.

YORKSHIRE.
YORKSHIRE has the Bishopric of Durham and Westmer land on the North;
Lancashire and a snip of Cheshire on the West; Derby, Notingham and
Lincolnshire, (divided by Humber) on the South; and the German Ocean on the
East thereof. It extends (without any Angular advantages) unto a square of
fourscore and ten miles, adequate in all Dimensions unto the Dukedom of
Wirtenberg in Germany. Yea, on due consideration, I am confident, that all the
seven United Provinces, cannot present such a square of solid Continent,
without any Sea interposed.

One may call and justify this to be the best Shire of England, and that not by
the help of the general Katachresis of Good for Great, (a good blow, good
piece, etc.) but in the proper acception thereof. If in Tullies Orations, (all
being excellent) that is adjudged optima quae longissima, the best which is the
longest, then by the same proportion, this Shire (partaking in goodness alike
with others) must be allowed the best. Seeing Devonshire it self the next in
largeness, wisely sensible of the visible inequality betwixt them, quits all
claims of corrivality, (as a case desperate) and acknowledges this as
Paramont in greatness.

Indeed, though other Counties have more of the Warm Sun, this has as much as
any of God's [ temporall] blessings. So that let a Survayer set his Center at
Pon^fract or thereabouts, and take thence the Circumference of twenty miles, he
there will meet with a tract of ground not exceeded for any, nor equalled for
the goodness and plenty of some Commodities. I would term it the Garden of
England, save, because it is so far from the Mansion House, I mean, the City of
London. Insomuch that such sullen dispositions, who do not desire to go
thither, only because of the great distance, the same if settled there, would
not desire to come thence, such the delight and pleasure therein.

Most true it is, that when King Henry the eight, Anno 1548. made his Progress
to York, Doctor Tonstall Bishop of Durham, then attending on him, showed the
King a Valley, (being then some few miles North of Doncaster,) which the Bishop
Out of a Manuscript of Willam Vavasor of Hassellwood Etquire.
avowed to be the richest that ever he found in all his travails thorough
Europe. For within 10. miles of Hasselwood the seat of the Vavasors there were,

165. Manor houses of Lords, Knights and Gentlemen of the best quality. 275.
Several Woods, whereof some of them contain five hundred Acres. 32. Parks and
two Chases of Dear. 120. Rivers and Brooks, whereof Five be Navigable, well
stored with Salmon and other Fish. 76. Water-mills, for the Grinding of Corn on
the aforesaid Rivers. 25. Cole-mines, which yield abundance of Fuel for the
whole County. 3. Forges for the making of Iron, and Stone enough for the same.
And within the same limits as much sport and pleasure for Hunting, Hawking,
Fishing and Fowling, as in any place of England besides.

Natural Commodities.
Geat.
A word of the name, color, virtues and usefulness thereof. In Latin it is
called Gagates, (as different in nature, as alike in name to the precious stone
called Gagites, only found in an Eagles nest) whence our English word Geat is
deduced. But be it remembered, that the Agate, vastly distinct from Geat, is
also named Gagates.

It is found in this County toward the sea side, in the Camdens Brit. in this
County.
clefts of the rocks, whose gaping chaps are filled up therewith. It is
naturally of a reddish and rusty color, till it becomes black and bright by
polishing. Indeed the luster consists in the blackness thereof, ( Negroes have
their beauties as well as fair folk,) and vulgar eyes confound the inlayings
made of black Marble (polished to the height) with Touch, Geat and Ebony,
though the three former be stones, the last a kind of wood.

The virtues of Geat are hitherto concealed. It is the lightest of all solid
(not porous) stones, and may pass for the Emblem of our memories, attracting
trifles thereto, and letting slip matters of more moment. Rings are made
thereof, (fine foyles to fair fingers;) and bracelets with beads, here used for
Ornament, beyond sea for Devotion; also small utensills as Salt-cellars, and
the like. But hear how a Marbodaeus in suo de Gemmis Libell^.
Poet describes it.

Nascitur in Lycia lapis, a prope gemma Gagates,
Sed ge^us eximium faecunda Britania mittit,
Lucidus and niger est, levis and laevicssimusi idem:
Vicinas paleas trahit attritu calefactus,
Ardet aqua lotus, restinguitur unctus olivo.
Geat a stone, and kind of gemm,
In Lycia grows, but best of them
Most fruitful Britain sends, it is bright
And black, and smooth and very light*
If rubbed to heat, it easily draws,
Unto it self both chafe and straws.
Water makes it fiercely flame,
Oil does quickly quench the same.
The two last qualities, some conceive, to agree better to our sea-coal, then
Geat, whence it is, that some stiffly maintain, that those are the British
Gagates meant by foreign Authors; and indeed, if preciousness of stones be
measured, not from their price and rarity, but usefulness, they may be
accounted precious. But hereof formerly in the Bishopric of Durham.

Alume.
This was first found out nigh Ge^burgh in this County, some sixty years since,
by that worthy and learned Knight Sir Thomas Chaloner (Tutor to Prince Henry)
on this occasion. He observed the leaves of trees there abouts more deeply
green then elsewhere, the Oaks broad-spreading, but not deep-rooted; with much
strength, but little sap; the earth clayish, variously colored, here White,
there Yellowish, there Blew, and the ways therein in a clear night glistering
like glass; symptoms which first suggested unto him the presumption of
Minerals, and of Alum most properly.

Yet some years interceded betwixt the discovery and perfecting thereof; some
of the Gentry of the Vicinage, burying their estates here under earth, before
the Alum could be brought to its true consistency. Yea, all things could not
fadge with them, until they had brought (not to say stol) over three prime
workmen in Hogsheads from Rochel in France; whereof one, Lambert Russell by
name, and a Walloon by birth, not long since deceased. But when the work was
ended, it was adjudged a Mine Royal, and came at last to be rented by Sir Paul
Pindar, who paid yearly,

To The King 12500. The Earl of Moulgrave. 01640. Sir William Penniman 00600.

Besides large salaries to numerous Clarks, and daily wages to Rubbish-men,
Rockmen, Pit-men, and House-men or Fire-men; so that at one time (when the
Mines were in their Majesty) I am credibly informed he had in pay no fewer then
eight hundred, by sea and land.

Yet did not the Knight complain of his bargain, who having the sole sale of
the commodity to himself, kept up the reputation thereof, and the price of Alum
at six and twenty pound the Tun. This he did the easier, because no better, and
scarce other (save what from Rome and Rochel) Alum in all Europe.

But the late long-lasting-Parliament, voted it a Monopoly, and restored the
benefit thereof to the former Proprietaries, who now pursue the work at five
several places.

1. Sands-end, belonging to the E. of Moulgrave. 2. Ash-holme, belonging to the
E. of Moulgrave. 3. Slapy-wath, Sir William (formerly Penniman's) Darcey's. 4.
Dunsley, Mr. Tho. Fairfax's 5. Whitbay Sir Hugh Cholmley's.
Such now the emulation betwixt these Owners, to under-sell one another, that
the Commodity is fallen to thirteen pound the Tun. Great the use hereof in
Physic and Surgery, as a grand Astringent; besides, much thereof is daily
employed by Clothiers, Glovers, Dyers, etc. so that some will maintain, that
another thing in England as white and far sweeter then Alum, may of the two be
better spared, with less loss to the Commonwealth.

Lime.
I am credibly informed that within few miles of Pontfract, no less then twenty
thousand Pounds worth of this Coarse Commodity is yearly made, and vended in
the Vicinage. It is a great Fertilizer of Ground if judiciously disposed of.
Indeed the laying of Lime on light and sandy ground (like the giving hot
cordials to persons in high feavours, enough to drive them into a Frenzy,) will
soon burn out the heart thereof, which bestowed on cold and chill ground,
brings it to a fruitful consistency, and prudently ordered, it will for a long
time retain the same.

Horses.
These are Men's wings, where with they make such speed. A Generous creature an
Horse is, sensible in some sort of honor, made most handsome, by (that, which
deformes man most,) Pride. The Kings of Israel, were not forbidden (as some may
mistake) the having, but the Deu^. 17. 19.
multiplying of them; chiefly, because they were a Foreign, yea, an Egyptian
Commodity, and God would cut off from his children all occasion of commerce
with that Country, which was the Staple-place of Idolatry.

Our English Horses have a mediocrity of all necessary good properties in them,
as neither so slight as the Barbe, nor so slovenly as the Flemish, nor so fiery
as the Hungarian, nor so aerie as the Spanish Gennets, (especially if, as
reported, they be conceived of the wind,) nor so earthly as those in the
Low Countries, and generally all the German Horse. For stature and strength,
they are of a middle size, and are both seemly and serviceable in a good
proportion. And whilst the Seller praises them too much, the Buyer too little,
the indifferent Stander by, will give them this due commendation.

It is confessed, that our English Horse, never performed any eminent and
signal Service beyond the Seas, in comparison of the Atchivements of their
Infantry. Partly, because our Horses sent over many together in Ships, beat and
heat themselves, and are not for sudden use in the field, after their
Transportation, so that some time of rest must be allowed them, for their
recovery. Partly, because the Genius of the English has always more inclined
them to foot-service, as pure and proper Manhood indeed without any mixture,
whilst in a Victory on horseback, the credit thereof, ought in equity to be
divided betwixt the Man and his Horse.

Yorkshire does breed the best race of English Horses, whose keeping commonly
in steep and stony ground, brings them to firmness of footing and hardness of
hoof. Whereas a Stud of Horses bred in foggy fenny ground, and soft rotten
morasses (delicacy marrs both Man and beast,) have often a Fen in their feet,
being soft and soon subject to be foundred. Well may Philip be so common a name
amongst the Gentry of this County, who are generally so delighted in
Horsemanship. I have done with this subject, when I have mentioned the monition
of David, An Horse is Psalm. 33. 17.
but a vain thing to save a man, though it is no vain thing, to slay a man, by
many casualties, such need we have whether waking or sleeping, whether walking
or riding, to put our selves by Prayer into Divine Protection.

Manufactures,
As for CLOTHING, so vigorously followed in this County, we refer it to our
FAREWELL in this our description, and here insist on,

Knives.
These are the teeth of old men, and useful to those of all ages. For, though
some think themselves scarce Gentlemen with Knives, as good as they, conceive
themselves scarce men without them, so necessary they are on all occasions. The
most of these for common use of Country People, are made in this County;
whereof the bluntest, with a sharp stomach, will serve to cut meat, if before
them. Sheffeild, a remarkable Market, is the Staple Town for this Commodity,
and so has been these three hundred years, witness Chaucer speaking of the
accoutrements of the Folio 15.
Miller.

A Sheffeld whitel bare He in his hose.

One may justly wonder how a Knife may be sold for one penny, three trades
anciently distinct concurring thereunto, Bladers, Haft-makers, and
Sheath-makers, all since united into the Corporation of Cutlers. Nor must we
forget, that though plain-knife-makeing was very ancient in this County, yet
Stow* Chro. page 1038.
Thomas Mathews on Fleet-bridge London, was the first Englishman, who Quinto
Elizabethae made fine Knives, and procured a Prohibition, that no more
ships-lading of Hafts should be brought from beyond the seas.

Pins.
A Pin passes for that which is next nothing, or (if you will) is the terminus
a quo, from which something does begin, and proceed from a Pin to a pound, etc.
However it is considerable both as hurtful and useful; Hurtful, if
advantagiously placed it may prove as mortal, as a Poneyard; the life of the
greatest man lying at the mercy of the meanest thing; Useful, not only to
fasten our ornaments, but fill up the c^ks betwixt our clothes, lest wind and
weather should shoot thorough them.

Many and very good of these are made in this County, a Commodity not to be
slighted, since the very dust that falls from them is found profitable. We
commonly say that it is not beneath a proper person to stoop to take up a Pin,
until he be worth Ten thousand pounds, according to the thrifty rule in
Latin: Qui negligit minima nunquam ditescet. Such who admire, that so many
millions of Pins, made, sold, used, and lost in England, should vanish away
invisible, may rather wonder how so many that wear them, (being no more then
Pins in the hand of their Maker,) do decay, die, and slip-down in the dust, in
silence and obscurity. I will add, that the world is well altered with
England, as to this Commodity, now exporting so much of them into foreign
parts, whereas formerly Idem ibide^.
Strangers have sold Pins in this land to the value of threescore thousand
pound a year.

Medicinal Waters.
About a mile and a half from Knares-borough Westward, in a morish boggy ground
arises a spring of a Vitrioline taste and Odor. It was discovered by one
Master Slingsby, about the year 1620. and is conceived to run parallel with the
Spaw waters in Germany.

Not far off, is a sulphur-well, which has also the qualities of saltness and
bitterness; The stench whereof though offensive, (Patients may hold their nose
and take wholesome physic) is recompensed by the virtues thereof. Insomuch,
(as my Jo. French Doctor of Physic in his Yorkshire Spaw page 113.
Author says) It heateth and quickneth the stomach, bowels, liver, spleen,
blood, veins, nerves, and indeed the whole body, insomuch that it consumes
crudities, rectifieth all cold distempers in all parts of the body, causes a
good digestion, cures the dropsy, spleen, scurvy, green sickness, gout. And
here it is high time to hold still, for if this last be true, let that disease
which formerly was called dedecus medicinae, be hereafter termed decus fontis
Knaresburgensis.

In the same parish over against the Castle (the river Nid running betwixt)
arises a spring which runs a little way in an entire stream, till dammed
at the brow of the descent with ragged rocks, it is divided into several
trickling branches, whereof some drop, some stream down, partly over, partly
through a jetting rock, this is called the Petrifying well, (how grammatically
I will not engage) because it converteth spungy substances into Vide what I
have form^ly write of wonders in Northamptonshire.
stone, or crusteth them over round about.

We must not forget Saint Mungus his Well which some have slighted as an
ineffectuall superstitious relic of Popery, whilst others maintain it has
regained its reputation, and is of Sovereign virtue. Some will have the name
thereof mistaken, for Saint Magnus, which in my opinion was rather so called
from Saint Mungo (Kentigernus in Latin) a Scottish Saint, and much honored in
these Northern parts. I believe no place in England can show four springs so
near in situation, so distant in operation.

Such as desire to know more of the nature and use of these springs, of the
time, manner and quantity, wherein the Waters are to be taken, and how the
Patient is to be dieted for his greater advantage, may inform themselves by
perusing two small Treatise, one set forth, Anno 1626. by Edmund Dean Doctor of
Physic, living in York, called Spadsacrena Anglica. The other written some six
years since by John French Doctor of Physic, and is very satisfactory on that
subject.

The Buildings.
The Church of Beverly is much commended for a fine Fabric, and I shall have a
more proper occasion to speak hereafter of the Collegiate Church in Rippon, but
amongst ancient Civil Structures we mu^ not forget,

Wrese^ Castle.
It is sealed in the Confluence of Derwent and Owse. In what plight it is now I
know not, but hear how Leland commends it in his Itinerary through this
County. It is built of square stone, which some say was brought out of France,
it has four fair Towers, one at each corner, and a Gatehouse (wherein are
Chambers five stories high,) which makes the fifth. In Lelands time it looked
as new built, though then 100. years old, as being erected by the Lord Percy
Earl of Winchester, in the reign of King Richard the second. Without the Walls
(but within the Mote,) gardens done Opere Topiario. In a word, he terms it
one of the properest buildings North of Trent.

But that which most affected him, was a study, in an eight square Tower,
called Paradise, furnished with curious and convenient Deskes, laden with
variety of choice books; but as Noah's flood is generally believed of learned
men, to have discomposed the Paradise in Eden, so I shrewdly suspect that the
Deluge of time has much impaired, if not wholly defaced, so beautiful a
building, then belonging to the Earl of Northumberland. Amongst many fine and
fair Houses now extant in this County, we hear the highest commendation of
Maulton late the house of the Lord Euers.

Proverbs.
From Hell, Hull, and Halifax, -- deliver us.]

This is part of the Beggars and Vagrants Letany. Of these three frightfull
things unto them, it is to be feared, that they least fear the first,
conceiting it the furthest from them. Others conceive it only to relate to the
dangerous Haven thereof.
Hull, is terrible unto them, as a Town of good government, where Vagrants meet
with Punitive Charity, and it is to be feared are oftener Corrected then Amended.
Halifax, is formidable unto them for the Law thereof, whereby Thieves taken
(...) in the very Act of stealing of cloth, are instantly beheaded with an
Engine, without any further Legal Proceedings.

A Scarborough warning.]

That is none at all, but a s^dain surprise, when a mischief is felt before it
be suspected. This Proverb is but of 104. years standing, taking its Original
from Godwin in his Annals of Q Mary.
Thomas Stafford, who in the reign of Queen Mary, Anno 1557. with a small
company seized on Scarborough-castle, (utterly distitute of provision for
resistance) before the Townsmen had the least notice of his approach. However,
within six days, by the industry of the Earl of Westmerland, he was taken*
brought to London, and Beheaded. So that since the Proverb accepts a
secondary (but no genuine) sense; and a Scarborough-warning may be a Caveat to
any, how he undertaketh a treacherous design. But if any conceive this Proverb
of more ancient original, fetching it from the custom of Scarboroughcastle in
former times, with which, it was not a word and a blow, but a blow before and
without a word; as using to shoot ships which passed by and struck not sail,
and so warning and harming them both together; I can retain mine own, without
opposing their opinion.

As true Steel as Rippon Rowels.]

It is said of trusty Persons, men of metal, faithful in their employments.
Spurs are a principal part of Knightly Hatchments, yea, a Mr. D^aiton in his
Poly-ol^, Song 2. page 71.
Poet observes,

The Lands that over Ouze to Barwick forth do bear,
Have for their Blazon had the Snaffle, Spur, and Spear.
Indeed, the best Spurs of England, are made at Rippon a famous Town in this
County, whose rowels may be enforced to strike through a Shilling, and will
break sooner then bow. However the horses in this County are generally so good,
they prevent the Spurs, or answer unto them, a good sign of thrifty metal for
continuance.

An Yorkshire * way-Bit.]

That is an Overplus not accounted in the reckoning, which sometime, proves
as much as all the rest. Ask a Countryman here on the highway, how far it is
to such a Town, and they commonly return, So many miles and a way-bit, which
way-bit, is enough to make the wearied Travailer surfeit of the length thereof.
If such over-measure be allowed to all Yards, Bushels, etc. in (...) Shire, the
Poor therein have no cause to complain of their penny-worths, in buying any
Commodities.

But hitherto we have run along with common report, and false spelling, (the
way not to win the race) and now return to the starting place again. It is not
Way-bit, though generally so pronounced, but Wee-bit a pure Yorkshirisme, which
is a small bit in the Northern Language.

Merry Wakefield.]

What peculiar cause of mirth this Town has above others, I do not know, and
dare not too curiously inquire, left I turn their mirth among themselves, into
anger against me. Sure it is seated in a fruitful soil, and cheap Country, and
where good cheer and company are the Premises, mirth (in common consequence)
will be the Conclusion. Which, if it does not trespass in time, cause and
measure, Heraclitus the sad Philosopher, may perchance condemn, but Saint
Hilary, the good Father will surely allow.

Princes.
HENRY, youngest son to William Duke of Normandy, but eldest to King William
the Conqueror, (by whom he was begotten after he was Crowned King,) on which
politic (...), he claimed and gained the Crown, from Duke Robert his eldest
brother, was Anno Dom. 1070. born at Selbey in this County. If any ask, what
made his Mother travail so far North from London? know it was to enjoy Her
Husbands company; who, to prevent insurrections, and settle peace, resided many
months in these parts; besides, his peculiar affection to Selby, where after he
founded a MitredAbby.

This Henry was bred (say some) in Paris, say Tho* Rudburn Leland, Fabian,
Ba^e, and Pitz. page 203.
others in Cambridge, and I may safely say in both, wherein he so profited,
that he attained the Surname of Beauclerke. His learning may be presumed a
great advantage to his long and prosperous reign for thirty five years and
upwards, wherein he remitted the Norman rigor, and restored to His subjects a
great part of the English Laws and Liberties.

Indeed his princely virtues, being profitable to all, did with their luster so
dazzle the eyes of his subjects, that they did not see his personal vices, as
chiefly prejudicial to himself. For, he was very wanton, as appears by his
numerous natural issue, no fewer then Speeds Chro. page 453.
fourteen, all by him publicly owned; the males highly advanced, the females
richly married, which is justly reported to his praise, it being lust to beget,
but love to bestow them. His sobriery otherwise was admirable, whose temperance
was of proof against any meat objected to his appetite, Lampreys alone
excepted, on a surfeit whereof he died, Anno Domini 1135. He had only two
children, William dying before, and Maud surviving him; both born in Normandy,
and therefore omitted in our Catalogue.

THOMAS Fifth son of King Edward the first, and the first that he had by
Margaret his second Wife, was born at (and surnamed from) Brotherton, a small
Village in this County, June 1. Anno Dom. 1300. He was created Earl of
Norfolk, and Earl Marshall of England. He left no male-issue, but from his
females, the Mowbrays Dukes of Norfolk, and from them the Earls of Arundel and
Lords Berkeley are descended.

RICHARD PLANTAGENET Duke of York, commonly is called Richard of Conisborrow,
from the Near to Rotheram.
Castle in this Shire of his nativity. The Reader will not grudge him a place
amongst our Princes, if considering him fixed in his Generation betwixt an
Antiperistasis of Royal extraction, being,

Son, to a Son of a King.
Father, to the Father of a King.
Edmund of Langley, Duke of York.
Richard Duke of York.
Fifth son to K. Edward 3.
Father to King Edward 4.
Besides he had married Anne, Daughter and sole Heir to Edward Mortimer, the
true Inheritrix of the Crown. But tampering too soon and too openly, to derive
the Crown in his Wives right to himself, by practicing the death of the present
King, he was taken and beheaded for treason, in the reign of K. Henry the fifth.

EDWARD sole son to King Richard the third, and Anne his Queen, was Speeds
Cronpag. 738.
born in the Castle of Midleham, near Richmond in this County; and was by his
father created Prince of Wales. A Prince, who himself was a child of as much
hopes, as his Father a man of hatred. But he consumed away of a sudden, dying
within a month of his Mother; King Richard little lamenting the loss of either,
and presently projecting to repair himself by a new Marriage.

The untimely death of this Prince, (in respect of the term to which by
Natural possibility he might have attained) in his innocent age, is generally
beheld as a punishment on him, for the faults of his Father. The Tongue
foreswears, the Ears are cut off; the Hand steals, the Feet are stocked, and
that justly, because both consisting of the same body. And because Proles est
pars parentis it is agreeable with divine justice to inflict on Children
temporal judgments for defaults of their Parents.

Yet this judgment was a mercy to this Prince, that he might not behold the
miserable end of his Father. Let me add, and a mercy also to all England. For
had he survived to a man's estate, he might possibly have proved a wall of
partition, to hinder the happy union of the two houses of York and Lancaster.

Saints.
HILDA was daughter unto Prince Hererick, nephew to Edwin King of
Northumberland, and may justly be counted our English Huldah, not so much for
sameness of sex, and name-sounding similitude, as more concerning conformities.
Huldah lived in a 2 Chronicles. 34. (...).
College, Hilda in a Convent at Strenshalt in this County; Huldah was the
Oracle of those times, as Hilda of her age, being a kind of a Sir Henry
Spelmans Councils.
Moderatresse in a Saxon Synod, (or conference rather) called to compromise the
controversy about the celebration of Easter. I behold her as the most learned
English Female before the Conquest, and may call her the She-Gamaliel, at whose
feet many Learned men had their education. She ended her holy life with an
happy death, about the year of our Lord 680.

BENEDICT BISCOP was born says Pitz amongst the East Saxons; says In his
flowers of the Lives of the Saints pa, 47.
Hierome Porter in Yorkshire, whom I rather believe. First, because writing his
life ex professo, he was more concerned to be curious therein. Secondly,
because this Benedict had much familiarity with, and favor from Oswy King of
Northumberland, in whose Dominions he fixed himself, building two Monasteries,
the one at the influx of the river Were, the other at the river Tine into the
sea, and stocking them in his life time with 600 Benedictine Moncks.

He made five Voyages to Rome, and always returned full fraught with Relics,
Pictures and Ceremonies.

In the former is driven on as great a Trade of Cheating, as in any earthly
Commodity, in so much that I admire to meet with this passage in a Jesuit, and
admire more that he Met not with the Inquisition for writing it. Addam, *
nonnunquam in Tem plis, reliquias dubias, profana corpora pro Sanctorum, (qui
cum Christo in Coelo regnant) exuviis sacris fuisse proposita.

He left Religion in England, Braver, but not better then he found it. Indeed,
what Tully said of the Roman Lady, That she danced better then became a modest
woman, was true of Gods Service as by him adorned, the Gaudiness prejudicing
the Gravity thereof. He made all things according (not to the Pattern in the
Mount with Mose's, but) the Precedent of Rome; and his Convent, being but the
Romish Transcript, became the English Original, to which all Monasteries in the
Land were suddenly conformed.

In a word, I reverence his Memory, not so much for his first bringing over
Painted Glass into England, as for his bringing up Pious Bead in his Monastery.
Being struck beneath the Girdle with the dead Palsy, his soul retired into the
Upper Rooms of his Clay Cottage, much employed in meditation, until the day of
his death, which happened Anno 703.

Saint JOHN of Beverley, may be challenged by this County, on a threefold
title, because therein he had his

1. Birth, at Harpham in this County, in the East Riding. 2. Life, being three
and thirty years and upwards, Archbishop of York. 3. Death, at Beverley in this
County, in a College of his own foundation.
I remember his Picture in a Window in the Library at Salisbury, with an
inscription under it (whose character may challenge to it self three hundred
years antiquity) affirming him the first Master of Arts in Oxford, and Alfredus
Beverlacensis reports as much. Arts indeed were, and Oxford was (though
hardly an University) in that age; but seeing the solemnity of graduating was
then unknown, a judicious Bishop Godwin in the Archbishops of York.
Oxonian rejects it as a fiction. More true it is, that he was bred at
Strenshalt under Hilda aforesaid, which sounds something to her honor, and
nothing to his disgrace, seeing eloquent Apollos himself learned the Primer of
his Christianity, partly, from Acts 11. 26.
Priscilla. He was afterward educated under Theodorus the Grecian and
Archbishop of Canterbury. Yet was he not so famous for his Teacher, as for his
Scholar, Venerable Bede, who wrote this John's Hist. Eccles. lib. 5. cap. 2, 3.
etc.
life, which he has so spiced with Miracles, that it is of the hottest for a
discreet man to digest into his belief.

Being very aged, he resigned his Archbishopric, that he might the more
effectually apply his private devotions in his College at Beverley, for which
he procured the Freedstool from King Athelston. Yet such Sanctuaries (though
carrying something of holiness in their name) had a profane abuse for their
very use, making Malefactors with their promise of impunity, and then
protecting them from justice. Saint John died May 7. 722. and was buried in the
Porch of his Collegiate Church. A Synod held at London 1416. assigned the day
of his death an Anniversary Solemnity to his Memory.

THOMAS PLANTAGENET. Before I proceed, I must confess my self formerly at a
great loss, to understand a passage in an Honorable Author, speaking of the
counterfeit Relics detected and destroyed at the Reformation.

Lord Herbert in the life of King Henry the eighth, page 431.

The Bell of Saint Guthlac, and the Felt of Saint Thomas of Lancaster, both
remedies for the Head ach.

But I could recover no Saint Thomas (saving him of Canterbury) in any English
Martyrology, till since on inquiry I find him to be this Thomas Plantagenet.

He was Earl of Derby, Lancaster, Leicester, and (in the right of Alice his
Wife) of Lincoln. A popular person, and great enemy to the two Spencers,
Minions to King Edward the second, who being hated as Devils for their pride,
no wonder if this Thomas was honored, as a Saint and Martyr, by the In
Sanctorum numerum retulit vulgus. Came. Brit. in Yorkshire.
common sort. Indeed he must be a good Chemist, who can extract Martyr out of
Malefactor, and our Chronicles generally behold him put to death for Treason
against K. Edward the 2d. But let him pass for a Saint in this Shire, though
never solemnly canonized; it being true of such local Saints, what Servius
Honoratus observes of Topicall Gods, Ad alias Regiones nunquam transibant,
They travailed not so far as to be honored in other Countries. His beheading,
alias his Martyr^ome, happened at Pontfret, Anno Dom. 1322.

RICHARD Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 5. Number. 80.
ROLE alias HAMPOLE had his first Name from his Father, the other from the
Place (three Miles from Doncaster) where living he was Honored, and dead was
Buried, and Sainted. He was a Heremite, led a strict life, and wrote many Books
of Piety, which I prefer before his Prophetical Predictions, as but a degree
above Almanac Prognostications. He threatened the Sins of the Nation, with
suture Famine, Plague, Inundations, War, and such general Calamities, from
which, no Land is long free, but subject to them in some proportion. Besides
his Predictions if Hitting, were Heeded; if Missing, not Marked.

However, because it becomes me not (...), let him pass for a Saint. I will
add, that Our Saviors Mat. 21. 25.
Dilemma to the Jews, may partly be pressed on the Papists his Contemporaries.
If Hampoles Doctrine was of Men, why was he generally reputed a Saint; if from
God, why did they not Obey him, seeing he spoke much against the vitiousness
and covetousness of the Clergy of that Age? He died Anno Domini 1349.

JOHN of BIRLINGTON or BRIDLINGTOM was born hard by that Town, bred two years
in Oxford, where he profited in piety and learning above his age and equals.
Returning home, for a short time he was teacher to a Gentleman's Sons, until
the twentieth year of his age he entered himself a Canon-Regular in the Covent
of Bridlington, where he grew eminent for his exemplary holiness.

It was his happiness that such offices always fell to his share, as did not
retard but quicken his devotion, as Chaunter, Almoner, etc. At last he was
cho^en Prior, but refused the place, alleging his own unworthiness, professing
he had rather be beaten in pieces with blows, then accept thereof, so that
another was put into the place. This new elect dying soon after, our John was
chosen again in the vacancy, and then took it, fearing there might be as much
peevishness in rejecting, as pride in effecting it, and hoping that Providence
which fairly called him to, would freely fit him for the discharge of that
office.

He used to treat strangers at his table with good cheer, and seemingly kept
pace with them in eating, morsel for morsel, whilst he had a secret
contrivance, wherein he conveyed his exceedings above his Monastical pittance.
Being demanded of one why he did not enter into more strict and austere Order,
Surely, said he, A man may lead a sincere and acceptable life in any order, and
it were arrogance in me to pretend to a severer discipline, when I cannot
observe as I ought, this easier course of life. My Harpfields Eccl. Hist. p.
577. out of whom his life is extracted.
Author says, that Martha and Mary were both compounded in him, being as
pious, so provident to husband the revenues of their house to their best
advantage.

Going to view their lands in Richmond-shire, he gave a visit to a woman lately
turned an Ancorist, and renowned for her holiness; she told him, that now her
vision was out, who the night before dreamed, that an Eagle flew about her
house with a label in his bill, wherein was written Jesus is my love, and you,
says she, are the person who so honor him in your heart, that no earthly
thing can distract you. To whom our John returned, I came hither to hear from
you some saving and savoury discourse, but seeing you begin with such idle
talk, farewell; and so waved any farther converse.

However, I must not dissemble, that the prophesies fathered on this our John
are as fabulous and frivolous as her dreams, witness that deadly passage in an
excellent Camden^ (...) in York shire.
Author,

In Johannis de Bridlington vatis monastici vaticinales rythmos omnino
ridiculos incidimus: yet no doubt he was a holy man, and could one light on his
life unleavened, before heaved up with the ferment of Monkish fiction, it would
afford many remarkables. He died in the sixtieth year of his age, 1379. and was
reputed (though I believe not solemnly canonized) a Saint, amongst his own
Countrymen.

WILLIAM SLEIGHTHOLME. It is pity to part him from his last named dear friend,
such the sympathy of amity and sanctity betwixt them. Once this William
demanded of his friend John, what might be the reason, that the Devil in their
days afrighted few, if any, with his terrible appearance, who in former ages
was very frequent with formidable apparitions? reflecting in this his question,
perchance on Saint Paul's messenger of Satan sent to 2 Cor. 12. 7.
buffet him, but chiefly on those usual [reported] personal combats of the
Devil with Saint Dunstan, Guthlake, etc. To whom his friend returned, We are
grown so remiss in goodness, that the Devil needs not put himself to such
pains, seeing less and lighter temptations will do the deed. It is recorded
Harpfield Eccl. Hist. p. 577.
of this William, that he was one of singular piety, and after his death
wrought many miracles at his Tomb in the Monastery of Bridlington, where he
was buried about the year 1380. I will add no more, but that I have a learned
friend William Slight holme Doctor of Physic living at Buntingford in
Hartfordshire, but born in this County, whom I believe remotely related to this
Saint.

Expect not here, that I should add to this Catalogue that Maiden, who to
secure her virginity from his unchaste embraces that assaulted it, was by him
barbarously murdered, whereby she got the reputation of a Saint, and the Place,
the Scene of his Cruelty, (formerly called Horton) the Name of Hali-fax or
Holy-hair. For the credulous People conceited that the Veins which in form of
little threads spread themselves between the Bark and Body of that Camdens Brit.
in Yorkshire.
Yew-tree, (whereon the head of this Maid was hung up) were the very hairs
indeed of this Virgin head, to whom they flock in Pilgrimage.

Oh! how sharp sighted, and yet how blind is Superstition? Yet these
Country-folks fancies had the advantage of Ovid Metam. lib. (...). fol. 9.
Daphnes being turned into a Laurell-tree.

In frondem cri^es, in ramos brachia crescunt.
Into a bough her hair did spread,
And from her Arms two branches bred.
But here she is wholly omitted, not so much because her Name and Time are
unknown, but because the judicious behold the whole Contrivance devoid of
Historical truth.

Martyrs.
The County (and generally the Province of York) escaped very well from Popish
persecution, which, under Gods goodness, may be justly imputed to the tempers
of their four succeeding Archbishops.

1. Thomas Wolsey, whom all behold as a person more proud, then cruel; not so
busying himself to maintain Popery, as to gain the Popedom. 2. Edward Lee,
more furious then the former, persecuting many to imprisonment, none to death,
save two, of whom See Martyrs in the City of York.
hereafter. 3. Robert Hollgate, who was, as they say, a parcell-Protestant,
imprisoned and deprived for being married. 4. Nicholas Heath, a meek and
moderate man, carrying a Court of Conscience in his bosom, long before Queen
Mary made him Chancellor of England.
Hereupon it came to pass, that the Diocese of York was dry with Gedeon's
fliece, whilst others lying near unto it, were wet in their own tears and blood.

Confessors.
Where no fish, there no fry, and seeing here no Martyrs, which are Confessors
full blown, no wonder if here no Confessors, which are Martyrs in the bud.

Cardinals.
JOHN FISHER was born in the Town of Beverly in this County, his father Robert
Fisher was by condition a Merchant, and lived in good reputation. He was
afterward bred in Michaell-house in Cambridge, whereof he was the first
Chancellor pro termino vitae, and Bishop of Rochester. How this Fisher was
caught afterward in the net of Elizabeth Barton, (commonly called the holy
Maid of Kent,) thereby made accessory to her dissembling; How stiff he was
against King Henrys Divorce and Title of Supreme head of the Church; How the
Pope sent him a Cardinals Cap, and the King Cut off his head, has been so
largely related in my Ecclesiastical History; and being I hope pardoned by the
Reader for my former tediousness, I will not now contract a new guilt by
offending in Prolixity on the same person. The rather because his Manuscript
life written 80. years since by Richard Hall of Christs-colledge in Cambridge,
is lately set forth in Print under the name of Thomas B^ily D. D. in which book
as I do not repine at any passages, ( though Hyperbolicall) to the praise of
this Prelate; so I cannot but be both angry and grieved at the many false and
scandalous reflections therein, on the worthy Instruments of our Reformation.
This learned Bishop was beheaded in the year 1535. the Threescore and
seventeenth year of his age.

Let me add he was tried by an Ordinary Jury, and not by his Peers, whereof
several reasons are rendered. Some thought he forgot to demand his Privilege
herein, (disturbed with grief and fear) as Edward Duke of Somerset forgot to
crave the Ben^fit of the Clergy, or, that he neglected it as surfeiting of long
life, and (...) of his Dissolution. Others, because he preferred death in a
Direct Line before a Circumferential Passage thereunto, (as Certain though not
so Compendious) being assured that the Lords durst not displease the King in
acquitting him. But most imput^ it to his suspicion that if desiring to be
tried by his Peers, it would have been denied him, as not due to a Bishop. And
yet that worthy Lawyer, Judge Stamford in his Pleas of the Crown ^ibro tertio
Fol. 153.
leaves it doubtful, and seems inclined to the Affirmative. Besides Sir
Robert Brook in his Novell Cases 30. M. 10. p. 465.
affirms in Express Terms, that a Bishop is Peer of the Realm, and ought to
be tried by his Peers. The best is, our Charity may be Confident, that our
Bishops will so inoffensively behave themselves, and God we hope so secure
their innocence, that there will not hereafter be need to decide this Question.

Prelates.
EUSTATHIUS de FAUCONBRIDGE was born in this County, where his Surname
appears among the Ancient Sheriffs thereof. He was chosen Bishop of London,
in the sixth of King Henry the third, Anno 1222. carrying it clearly from a
Company of able Competitors, occasioning this Distick,*

Godwin in the Bishops of London.
Omnes his Digni, tu Dignior omnibus, omnes
Hic plene sapiunt, before ipse sapis.
All here are Worthy, thou the Worth: est,
All fully Wise, thou Wiser then the rest.
Idem ibidem.
Others played on his Name Eustatius [One that stood well] both in Respect of
his spiritual Estate (yet let him that stands take heed lest he fall) and
Temporal Condition, well fixed in the Favor of Prince and People, being Chief
Justice, then Chancellor of the Chequer, and afterward Treasurer of England,
and twice Ambassador to the King of France. He deserved right well of his own
Cathedral, and dying October 31. 1228. was buried under a Marble Tomb, on the
South Side of the Presbytery.

WILLIAM de MELTON, was born in this County, (wherein are See Villare
Anglicanum.
four villages so named) and preferred therein Provost of Beverly, and Canon,
then Archbishop of York. He went to Avinion, there to procure his
Consecration. I say to Avinion, whither then the Court was removed from Rome,
and continued about threescore and ten years, on the same token, that those
remaining at Rome (almost starved for want of employment) called this the
seventy years captivity of Babylon.

Consecrated after two years tedious Attendance, he returned into England, and
fell to finish the fair fabric of his Cathedral, which John Roman had began,
expending seven hundred Marks Godwin in the Arch bishops of York.
therein. His life was free from Scandal, signal for his Chastity, Charity,
Fasting and Praying. He strained up his Tenants so as to make good Music
therewith, but not break the string, and surely Church Lands were intended,
(though not equally, yet) mutually for the comfortable support both of Landlord
and Tenants.

Being unwilling that the Infamy of Infidel should be fixed upon him,
(according to the Apostles Doctrine) for not providing for his family, he
Godwin in his Arch bishops of York.
bought three Manors in this County, from the Archbishop of Roan, with the
Popes Confirmation, and settled them on his Brothers Son, whose Descendant
William Melton, See our Catalogue of Sheriffs in this County.
was High Sheriff of this County, in the Fiftieth of King Edward the third.

There is a Place in York as well as in London called the Old-baly, herein more
remarkable then that in London, that Archbishop Melton compassed it about with
a Godwin ut prius.
great Wall. He bestowed also much cost in adorning Feretrum [English it the
Bear or the Coffin) of Saint William, a Person purposely omitted by my Pen,
because no assurance of his English Extraction. Archbishop Melton dyed, (after
he had sat two and twenty years in his See) Anno Domini 1340. Entombed in the
Body of his Church nigh the Font, whereby I collect him buried below in the
Bottom of the Church, that Instrument of Christian Initiation, anciently
advancing but a little above the Entrance into the Church.

HENRY WAKEFEILD is here placed with Assurance, there being three Towns of that
name in (and none out of) this County. Indeed his is an Episcopal Name, which
might mind him of his Office, the Diocese of Worcester, (to which he was
preferred Anno 1375. by King Edward the third,) being his Field, and he by his
place to Wake or watch over it: Nor hear I of any complaints to the contrary,
but that he was very vigilant in his Place. He was also for one year Lord
Treasurer of England. Dying March 11. 1394. he lies covered in his own Church,
Godwin in his Bishops of Worcester.
Ingenti marmore, and let none grudge him the greatness of his Gravestone, if
two foot larger then ordinary, who made the Body of this his Church, two Arches
longer Westward then he found it, besides a fair Porch added thereunto.

RICHARD SCROOPE son to the Lord Scroope of Bolton in this County, brother to
William Earl of Wilt-shire, was bred a Doctor of Divinity in Cambridge,
attaining to be a man of great learning and unblamable life. Nor was it so much
his high extraction as his own Abilities causing him to be preferred Bishop
first of Coventry and Lichfield, then Archbishop of York. Being netled with
the news of his Earl-brothers Beheading, he conjoined with the Earl of
Northumberland, the Earl Marshall, Lord Bardolph and others, against King Henry
the fourth as an Usurper, and Invader of the Liberties of Church and State. The
Earl of Westmerland, in outward deportment complied with him, and seemed to
approve a Writing wherein his main intentions were comprised, so to Trepan him
into his destruction: Toling him on, till it was too late for him either to
advance or retreat, the King with his Army being at Pontfract.

Bishop Godwin says, it does not appear that he desired to be tried by his
Peers, and I believe it will appear, that nothing was then Calmly or
Judiciously transacted, but all being done in an hurry of heat, and by Martial
Authority. The Executioner had five strokes at his Neck, before he could sunder
it from his Body, Imputable not to his Cruelty but Ignorance, it not being to
be expected, that one nigh York, should be so dextrous in that trade as those
at London. His beheading happened Anno 1405.

STEPHEN PATRINGTON was born in the Village so called in the East Riding of
this County. He was bred a Carmelite and Doctor of Divinity in Oxford, and the
three and twentieth Provincial of his Order through out England Pitz. de
script. Ang. Number. 766.
for fifteen years. It is incredible (says Leland) what Multitudes of People
crowded to his Sermons, till his Fame preferred him Chaplain and Confessor to
King Henry the fifth. He was deputed of the King, Commissioner at Oxford, to
enquire after and make Process against the Poor Wicklevites, and as he was
busyed in that employment, he was advanced to the Bishopric of Saint David's.
Hence he was sent over to the Council of Constance, and therein (says
Walsingham) gave great Testimony of his ability. Returning into England, he was
made Bishop of Chichester, but dying before his Translation was finished 1417.
was buried in White-fryars in Fleetstreet.

WILLIAM PEIRCY was Son to Henry Peircy (second Earl of Northumberland of that
Name) and Eleanour Nevill his Wife. Indeed the Son of a Public Woman,
conversing with many men, cannot have his Father certainly assigned, and
therefore is commonly called Filius Populi. As a base child, in the Point of
his Father is subject to a sham^full, so is the Nativity of this Prelate as to
the Place thereof, attended with an Honorable Uncertainty, whose Noble Father
had so many houses in the Northern Parts, that his Son may be termed a Native
of North-England* but placed in this County because Topliffe is the Principal,
and most Ancient seat of this Family. He was bred a Doctor of Divinity in
Cambridge, whereof he was Chancellor, and had a younger Brother George Peircy
a Clerk also, though attaining no higher preferment then a Prebend in Beverly.
Our William was made Bishop of Carlisle, 1452. Master Mills Catal. of honor p.
721.
erroneously makes him afterward Bishop of Wells, and it is enough to detect
the mistake without disgracing the Mistaker. He died in his See of Carlisle 1462.

CUTHBERT TONSTALL was born at Hatchforth in Richmond-shire in this County, of
a most Worshipful Family, (whose chief seat at Tonstall Thurland not far off,)
and bred in the University of Cambridge, to which he was in books a great
Benefactor. He was afterward Bishop of London, and at last of Durham. A great
Grecian, Orator, Mathematician, Civilian, Divine, (and to wrap up all in a
word) a fast friend to Erasmus.

In the reign of King Henry the eight, he publicly confuted the papal
supremacy in a learned Sermon, with various and solid arguments, preached on
Palmes-sunday before his Majesty Anno Domini 1539. And yet (man is but man) he
returned to his error in the reign of King Edward the sixth, continuing
therein in the first of Queen Elizabeth, for which he was deprived of his
Bishopric. He showed mercy when in Power, and found it in his Adversity,
having nothing but the Name of a prisoner, in which condition he died, and was
buried at Lambeth 1560.

RALPH BAINES was born in this Ba^e. Pitz. Bishop Godwin.
County, bred Fellow of Saint Johns-colledge in Cambridge. An Excellent
Linguist in Latin, Greek and Hebrew, I say Hebrew then in its Nonage, whereof
Baines was a good Guardian, first in learning, then in teaching the Rules
thereof.

Hence he went over into France, and became Hebrew Professor at Paris. He wrote
a Comment on the Proverbs in three Volumes, and dedicated it to King Franc is
the first of France, that Grand Patron of good Men and great Scholars.

Pitz tells us, De Ang. script. Anno 1559.
ferunt, it is reported, that the Ministers of Geneva, have much depraved many
of his writings in several places, which I do not believe. Such passages
(doubtlesly according to the Authors own writing) being reducible to two Heads.
First, his fair mentioning of some learned Linguists though Protestants, with
whom he kept an Epistolary Correspondency. Secondly, some expressions in
preferring the Original of Scripture, to the Diminution of the Vulgar
Translation.

Returning into England, he was by Queen Mary 1555, made Bishop of Coventry and
Litchfield. Hitherto no ill could be spoken of his Intellectualls, and
hereafter no good of his Moralls in point of his Cruelty, he caused such
persecution in his Diocese. His greatest Commendation is, that though as bad a
Bishop as Christopher son, he was better then Bonner. In the first of Queen
Elizabeth he was deprived of his Bishopric, and dying not long after of the
Stone, was buried in Saint Dunstans 1560.

Since the Reformation.
THOMAS BENTHAM was born in this Bale de script. sui temporis p. 113.
County, bred Fellow of Magdalen-colledge in Oxford. Under King Henry the
eight, he was a Complier with, no Promoter of Popery. In the first of Queen
Mary, repenting of his former, he resolved not to accumulate sin, refusing not
only to say Mass, but also to correct a scholar in the College (though urged
thereto by Doctor Humphred in the life of Bishop Jewel page 72. and 73.
Sir Robert Reed the Prime Visitor,) for his absence from Popish Prayers,
conceiving it injurious to punish in another, that omission for a fault, which
was also according to his own Conscience. He also then assisted Henry Bull (one
of the same Foundation) to wrest out, and throw down out of the hands of the
Choristers the Censer, when about to offer their superstitious Incense.

No wonder then if he was fain to fly into Foreign parts, and glad to get over
into Germany, where he lived at Basil, Preacher to the English Exiles, to whom
he expounded the entire book of the Acts of the Apostles. Now seeing the
Apostles suffering was above all their Doing, it was a proper portion of
Scripture, for him hence, to press patience to his banished Countrymen.

Toward the end of Queen Mary, he was secretly sent for over, to be
superintendent of the London Conventicle, (the only true Church in time of
Persecution,) where with all his Care and Caution, he hardly escaped. In the
second of Queen Elizabeth, he was Consecrated Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield,
succeeding Ralph Baines therein, (one of the same County with him, but a
different Judgment,) and died on the 21. of February 1578.

EDMUND GUEST was born at Mr. (...) in h^s Manuscript Catal. of the Fellows of
Kings-colledge.
Afferton in this County; bred Fellow of Kingscolledge in Cambridge, where he
proceeded Doctor of Divinity. He was afterward Almoner to Queen Elizabeth, and
he must be both a wise and a good man whom she would trust with her Purse. She
preferred him Bishop first of Rochester, then of Salisbury, John Bale (says my
Bishop Go^win in ^be Bishops of Sarum.
Author) reckons up many books made by him of considerable value. He died
February 28. 1578. the same year and month with his Countryman Thomas Bentham
aforesaid.

MILES COVERDALE was born in this Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 9. Number. 61.
County, bred in the University of Cambridge, and afterward became an
Augustine Friar, till his eyes being opened he quitted that Superstitious
Profession. Going into Germany, he labored greatly in Translating of the
Bible, and in writing many books reckoned up by John Bale. He was made Doctor
of Divinity in the University of Tubing, and returning into England, being
incorporated in Cambridge, was soon after made Bishop of Exeter, by King Edward
the sixth 1551.

But alas, he was not comfortably warm in his place, before his place by
persecution grew too hot for him, and in the first of Queen Mary he was cast
into prison, a certain forerunner of his Martyrdom, had not Frederick King of
Denmark seasonably interposed. This good King with great Importunity hardly
obtained this small Courtesy, viz. that Coverdale should be enlarged, though
on this condition, to be banished out of h^s Country. In obedience whereunto,
he went over into Germany. In the first of Queen Elizabeth he returned to
England, but not to Exeter; Never resuming that, or accepting any other
Bishopric. Several men assigned several causes hereof, but Coverdale only
knew the true reason himself.

Some will say, that for the Books he made, he had better been placed under the
title of Learned Writers, or for the Exile and Imprisonment he suffered ranked
under Confessors, then under the title of Prelates, manifesting an aversness of
his own judgment thereunto, by not returning to his Bishopric. But be it
known that Coverdale in his judgment approved thereof; Being one of those
Bishops, who solemnly Consecrated Matthew Parker Archbishop of Canterbury at
Lambeth. Now, quod efficit tale, magis est tale, I understand it thus, He that
makes another Archbishop, is abundantly satisfied in his Judgment and
Conscience of the lawfullness thereof, Otherwise such dissembling had been
inconsistent with the sincerity of so grave and godly a person. He died Anno
Dom. 1588. and lies buried in Saint Bartholomews behind the Exchange, under a
fair Stone in the Chancell.

ADAM LOFTUS was born in this Sir Jam^s Ware de Praesulibus Lageme page 38.
County, and bred in Trinity-colledge in Cambridge, where he Commenced Doctor
of Divinity the same year with John Whitgift afterward Archbishop of
Canterbury. He was Chaplain to Robert Earl of Sussex, Deputy of Ireland, and
was first made Archbishop of Armagh, Anno 1562. and afterward Archbishop of
Dublin, Anno 1567.

Wonder not that he should desire his own degradation, to be removed from
Armagh (then Primate of Ireland) to Dublin a Subordinate Arch bishopric,
seeing herein he consulted his safety (and perchance his profit) more then his
Honor, Armagh being then infested with Rebels, whilst Dublin was a secure
City.

After the death of Sir William Gerrard, he was made Chancellor of Ireland,
which place he discharged with singular Ability and Integrity, until the day
of his death.

And that which in my judgment commends him most to the notice of Posterity,
and most ingageth Posterity in thankfullness to his memory, is, that he was a
profitable Agent in, yea, a principal procurer of the Foundation of the
University and College of Dublin, (where Dermitius son of Mercard King of
Lemster had formerly found a Convent for Canons Regular,) and the first
Honorary Master thereof, being then Archbishop (if not Chancellor of
Ireland,) to give the more credit and countenance to tha^ Foundation. He died
April 5. Anno 1605. and was buried in the Church of Saint Patrick, having been
Archbishop from his Consecration eight Months above two and forty years.
Reader, I must confess, I admired hereat, until I read that Miller Magragh
(who dyed Anno Domini 1622.) was Archbishop of Cassell in Ireland ten months
above Sir James Ware de Archepis. Cassell p. 31.
one and fifty years.

GEORGE MOUNTAIN was born in this County, at......... and bred in
Queenscolledge in Cambridge, where he became Fellow and Proctor of the
University. He was Chaplain to the Earl of Essex, whom he attended in his
Voyage to Cales, being indeed one of such personal valor, that out of his
gown, he would turn his back to no man; he was afterward made Dean of
Westminster, then successively Bishop of Lincoln, and London: whilst residing
in the latter, he would often pleasantly say, that of him the Proverb would be
verified, Lincoln was, and London is, and York shall be, which came to pass
accordingly, when he was removed to the Archbishopric of York, wherein he
died; thorough which Sees, never any Prelate so methodically passed but himself
alone. He was a good Benefactour to the College wherein he was bred, whereon
he bestowed a fair piece of plate, (called Poculum Charitatis, with this
Inscrip tion Incipio, I begin to thee,) and founded two Scollerships therein.

Capital Judges.
Sir WILLIAM GASCOINGE was born at So am I informed by Mr. Richard Gass^oinge
one descended from him, an accomplished Antiquary in Record-Heraldrie.
Gauthorp in Harwood parish, (in the midway betwixt Leeds and Knaresburgh,) and
afterward was Student of the Law in the Inner Temple in London. Wherein he so
profited, that being Knighted, the sixth of King Henry the fourth, he was made
Chief Justice of the King's Bench, November 15. and therein demeaned himself
with much integrity, but most eminent for the following passage.

It happened that a Tho Eliot in his Chron. out of whom our modern Historians
have transcribed it.
servant of Prince Henry (afterward the fifth English King of that Christian
name) was arraigned before this Judge for felony, whom the Prince then present
endeavored to take away, coming up in such fury, that the beholders believed
he would have stricken the Judge. But he sitting without moving, according to
the Majesty he represented, committed the Prince prisoner to the King's Bench,
there to remain until the pleasure of the King his Father were farther known.
Who, when he heard thereof by some pickthank Courtier, (who probably expected a
contrary return) gave God thanks for his infinite goodness, who at the same
instant had given Him a Judge who could minister, and a Son who could obey
justice.

I meet in J. Stows Annals page 342.
Stow with this Marginall note, William Gascoinge was Chief Justice of the
King's Bench, from the sixth of Henry the fourth, till the third of Henry the
fifth: and another J. Trussell in the continuation of Daniel page, 92.
Historian makes King Henry the fifth, in the first of his reign, thus
expressing himself in relation to that Lord Chief Justice, For which act of
Justice I shall ever hold him worthy of the place, and my favor, and wish all
my Judges to have the like undaunted courage, to punish offenders of what rank
soever. Hence our W. Sh^kespear in his second part of the life of King Henry
the fourth.
Comedian (fancy will quickly blow up a drop in History into a bubble in
Poetry,) has founded a long scene on the same subject.

Give me leave for my love to truth to rectify these mistakes out of
authentic records. First, Gascoinge was made Judge not in the sixth, but first
of King Henry the fourth, Original de ipso anno Bundello 2. rot. 52.
on the first of November. Secondly, he died December 17. in the fourteenth of
King Henry the fourth, so that in a manner, his sitting on the bench ran
parallel to the Kings sitting on the throne; This date of his death is fairly
written in his stately Monument in Harwood Church.

GU^DO de FAIRFAX. A word of his Surname and Family. Fax and Vex are the same,
signifying Hair. Hence Matthew Flores Historiarum Anno Gratiae 891.
Westminster calls a Comet (which is stella ^rinita) a Vexed Star, and this
Family had their Name from Beautiful Bushy Hair. I confess I find in Flo^es
Histo^rum A^no G^atiae 099.
Florilegus, writing of the Holy War, Primum Bellum Christianorum fuit apud
Pontem Pharfax fluminis, The first Battle of the Christians was at the Bridge
of the River Pharfax, but cannot concur with them who hence derive the Name of
this Family. But where ever it began it has continued at Walton in this
County, more then four hundred and fifty years, for Faithfully collected out of
ev^dences, by that Industrious Antiquary Ro^ert Dodsworth.
Nineteen Generations, Charles a Viscount now living being the Twentieth. But
to return to Sir Guiao Fairfax Knight, he was bred in the study of the Common
Law, made Sergeant thereof, and ever highly favored the house of York in those
Civil distempers. Hence it was that he assumed a White-rose, bearing it in his
Coat of Arms on the shoulder of his Black Lion, (no difference as some may
suppose, but) an evidence of his affection to that Family. Yet was he by King
Henry the seventh advanced Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench, supplying the
Spelmans Glossary verbo Justitiarius.
Intervall betwixt Sir William Hussy and Sir John Fineaux. The certain date of
his death is to me unknown.

ROGER CHOLMLEY Knight. He is placed in this County with moderate assurance.
For his Father (as I am instructed by those of his Family) lived in this
County, though branched from Cheshire, and much conversant in London, being
Lieutenant of the Tower under King Henry the seventh. By his Will he bequeathed
a Legacy to Roger his Natural Son, then Student of the Laws, the self same
with our Roger, as Proportion of time does evince.

He applied his studies so effectually, that in the 37. of King Henry the eight
in Michaelmas term, he was made Chief Id^m ib^dem.
Baron of the Exchequer, and in the sixth of Edward the sixth Chief Justice of
the King's Bench.

In the first of Queen Mary July 27. he, with Sir Edward Mountague, Lord Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, was committed to the Stows Cron. page 613.
Tower, for drawing up the Testament of King Edward the sixth, wherein his
Sisters were dis-inherited. Yet Sir Rogers activity amounted no higher then to
a Compliance and a subscription of the same. He afterward was enlarged but
lost his Judges Place, living some years in a private condition.

When William Flower was burnt in Westminster, Sir Hugh being present, (though
called by Acts and Mon. p. 1577.
Master Fox but plain Master Cholmley,) willed him to recant his Heresy, which
I impute rather to his Carnal Pity, then Great Affection to Popery.

He built a Free School of brick at High-gate Nordens speculum Brit. page 22.
about the year 1564. the Pension of the Master being uncertain, and the School
in the disposition of six Governors, and I believe he survived not long after,
and have some ground for my suspicion that he dyed without Issue.

Sir CRISTOPHER WRAY Knight, was born in the spacious Parish of Bedall, the
main motive which made his Daughter Frances Countess of Warwick, scatter her
Benesactions the thicker in that place. But I have been informed, that his
Ancestor by some accident, came out of Cornwell where his Name is right
Ancient. He was bred in the study of our Municipall Law, and such his
proficiency therein, that in the sixteenth of Queen Elizabeth in Michaelmas
Term, he was made Lord Chief Justice of the King's Bench.

He was not like that Judge who feared neither God nor man, but only one Widow
(lest her importunity should weary him,) but he heartily feared God in his
Religious Conversation. Each man he respected in his due distance off of the
Bench, and no man on it to biass his judgment. He was pro tempore, Lord Privy
Seal, and sat Chief in the Court, when Secretary Davison was sentenced in the
Star Chamber. Sir Christopher collecting the censures of all the Commissioners,
concurred to Fine him, but with this Comfortable conclusion, that, as it was in
the Queens power to have him punished; so, Her Highness might be prevailed with
for mitigating, or remitting of the Fine, and this our Judge may be presumed no
ill instrument in the procuring thereof.

He bountifully reflected on Magdalen-colledge in Cambridge, which infant
Foundation had otherwise been starved at nurse for want of maintenance. We know
who says, * the righteous man leaves an inheritance to his Childrens
Children, and the well thriving of his third Generation, may be an evidence of
his well-gotten goods. This worthy Judge died May the eighth, in the thirty
fourth of Queen Elizabeth.

States* Men.
Pardon Reader my post poning, this Topic of Statesmen, being necessitated to
stay a while for further information.

Sir JOHN PUCKERING, Knight. was born at Flamborough head in this County, as I have
learned out of the Extant in York-house in the Library of the Lord Fai^fax.
Notes of that industrious and judicious Antiquary Mr. Dod^worth. He was second
Son to his Father, a Gentleman who left him neither plentiful nor penurious
estate: his breeding was more beneficial to him than his portion, gaining
thereby such skill in the Common Law, that he became Queens-Serjeant, Speaker
in the House of Commons, and at last Lord Chancellor of England. How he stood
in his judgment in the point of Church Discipline, plainly appears by his
following Speech, delivered in the House of Lords, 1588. the Original whereof
was courteously communicated unto me.

And especially you are commanded by Her Majesty to take heed, that no ear be
given, nor time* afforded to the wearisome solicitations of those, that
commonly be called Puritans, wherewithal the late Parliaments have been
exceedingly importuned; which sort of men, whilst that (in the giddiness of
their Spirits) they labor and strive to advance a new Eldership, they do
nothing else but disturb the good repose of the Church and Commonwealth: which
is as well grounded for the body of Religion it self, and as well guided for
the Discipline, as any Realm that prosesseth the Truth: and the same thing is
already made good to the world, by many the writings of Godly and Learned men,
neither answered nor answerable by any of these new fangled Refiners. And, as
the present case stands, it may be doubted, whether they, or the Jesuits do
offer more danger, or be more speedily to be repressed. For, albeit the
Jesuits do empoison the hearts of her Majesty's Subjects, under a pretext of
Conscience, to withdraw them from their obedience due to Her Majesty: Yet, do
they the same, but closely, and only in privy corners: But these men, do both
teach and publish in their printed Books, and teach in all their Conventicles,
sundry opinions, not only dangerous to the well-setled Estate and Policy of the
Realm, by putting a Pique between the Clergy and the La^ty; But also much
derogatory to Her Sa^red Majesty, and Her Crown, as well by the diminution of
her ancient and lawful Revenues, and by denying her Highness Prerogative and
Supremacy, as by off^ng peril to her Majesty's safety in her own Kingdom. In
all which things (however in other points they pretend to be at war with the
Popish Jesuits) yet by this separation of themselves from the unity of their
Fellow Subjects, and by abasing the Sacred Authority and Majesty of their
Prince, they do both join and concur with the Jesuits, in opening the door,
and preparing the way to the Spanish Invasion, that is threatened against the
Realm.

And thus having according to the weakness of my best understanding, delivered
Her Majesty's Royal pleasure and wise direction, I rest there, with humble suit
for Her Majesty's most gracious pardon in supply of my defects, and recommend
you to the Author of all good counsel.

He died Anno Domini 1596. caractered by In his Elizabeth, Anno 1596.
Mr. Cambden, VIR INTEGER. His estate is since descended, (according to the
solemn settlement thereof) the maleissue failing, on Sir Henry Newton, who
according to the condition, has assumed the Sur^name of Puckering, and I can
never be sufficiently thankful to him and his Relations.

Sir GEORGE CALVERT, Knight. was born at Kiplin near Richmond in this County, had
his education first in Trinity College in Oxford; then beyond the Seas. His
abilities commended him first to be Secretary to Robert Cecil, Earl of
Sarisbury, Lord Treasurer of England. Afterward he was made Clerk of the
Council, and at last principal Secretary of State to King James, succeeding Sir
Thomas Lakes in that office, Anno 1619.

Conceiving the Duke of Buckingham highly instrumental in his preferment, he
presented him with a Jewel of great value, which the Duke returned him again,
not owning any activity in his advancement; whom King James, ex mero motu,
reflecting on his ability designed for the place.

This place he discharged above five years, until he willingly resigned the
same 1624. on this occasion; He freely confessed himself to the King, That he
was then become a Roman Catholic, so that he must either be wanting to his
Trust, on violate his Consolence in discharging his office. This his ingenuity
so highly affected King James, that he continued him Privy Councellor all his
reign (as appears in the Councel-Book) and soon after created him Lord
Baltemore of Baltemore in Ireland.

During his being Secretary, he had a Patent to him and his Heirs to be
Absolutus Dominus, and Proprietarius, with the Royalties of a Count Palatine of
the Province of Avalon in New Foundland. A place so named by him in imitation
of old Avalon in Somerset shire, wherein Glassenbury stands; the first fruits
of Christianity in Britain, as the other was in that part of America. Here he
built a fair House in Ferry Land, and spent five and twenty thousand pounds in
advancing the Plantation thereof. Indeed his public spirit consulted not his
private profit, but the enlargement of Christianity and the Kings Dominions.
After the death of King James he went twice in person to New found-Land. Here
when Mounsier de l'Arade with three Men of War sent from the King of France,
had reduced our English Fishermen to great extremity; This Lord with two Ships
manned at his own charge, chased away the Frenchman, relieved the English, and
took six^y of the French Prisoners.

He removed afterward to Virginia, to view those parts, and afterward came
into England, and obtained from King Charles (who had as great an esteem of,
and affection for him, as King James) a Patent to him and his Heirs for
Maryland on the North of Virginia, with the same Title and Royalties conferred
on him, as in Avalon aforesaid, now a hopeful Plantation peopled with eight
thousand English souls, which in process of time may prove more advantageous
to our Nation.

Being returned into England, he died in London, April 15. 1632. in the 53.
year of his age, lying buried in the Chancel of S. Dunstans in the West,
leaving his Son the Right Honorable Cecil Calvert, now Lord Baltemore, heir to
his Honor, Estate, and Noble Disposition.

THOMAS WENTWORTH, Earl of Strafford, Deputy, though Son to William See the
Register of that St. Dunstan.
Wentworth of Wentworth-Woodhouse in this County, Esquire (at his Sons birth)
afterward Baronet) yet because born in Chancery Lane, and Christened April 22.
Anno 1593. in Saint Dunstans in the West, has his Character in London.

Seamen.
ARMIGELL WAAD, born of an ancient Family in Yorkshire, as I am informed from
his Epitaph on his monument at Hampstead in Midlesex: wherein he is termed Hen.
8. and Edw. 6. Regum Secretiori consilio ab epistolis, which I took the
boldness to interpret (not Secretary, but) Clerk of the Council. Take the rest
as it follows in his Funeral Inscription.

Qui in maximarum Artium disciplinis prudentiaque civili instructissimus,
plurimarum linguarum callentissimus, legationibus honoratissimis perfunctus,
and inter Britannos Indicarum Americarum explorator primus.

Indeed he was the first Englishman that discovered America, and his several
voyages are largely described in Mr. Hackluite his Travels.

This English COLUMBUS had by two Wives twenty Children, whereof Sir William
Waad was the eldest, a very able Gentleman, and Clerk of the Council to Queen
Elizabeth. This Armigel died June 20. 1568. and was buried as is aforesaid.

MARTIN FROBISHER, Knight. was born nigh Stows Chron. page 809.
Doncaster in this County. I note this the rather, because learned Mr.
Carpenter in his Geography recounts him amongst the famous men of Devonshire,
(But why should Devon-shire, which has a flock of Worthies of her own, take a
Lamb from another County?) because much conversing therein.

He was from his youth bred up in Navigation, and was the first Englishman that
discovered the North way to China and Cathai, whence he brought great store of
black soft Stone, supposing it Silver or Gold Ore, but which, upon trial with
great expense, proved useless; yet will no wise man laugh at his mistake,
because in such experiments, they shall never hit the mark, who are not content
to (...) it.

He was very valiant, but withal harsh and violent (faults which may be
dispensed with in one of his profession) and our Chronicles loudly resou^d his
signal service in Eighty Eight, for which he was Knighted. His last service was
the defending of BrestHaven in Britain, with ten ships, against a far greater
power of Spaniards. Here he was shot into the side, the wound not being mortal
in it self; But Swords and Gu^s have not made more mortal wounds, than Probes
in the hands of careless and skillesse Surgeons, as here it came to pass:
The Surgeon took out only the Bullet, and left the bumbast about it behind,
wherewith the sore festered, and the worthy Knight died at Plimo^th, Anno 1594.

GEORGE CLIFFORD, Lord Clifford, Vescye, etc. Earl of Cumberland, was son to
Henry second Earl of that Family, by his second Lady, a person wholly composed
of true Honor and Valor, whereof he gave the world a clear and large
demonstration.

It was resolved by the judicious in that age, the way to humble the Spanish
greatness, was not by pinching and pricking him in the Low Countries, which
only emptied his veins of such blood as was quickly re-filled: But the way to
make it a Cripple for ever, was by cutting off the Spanish sinews of War, his
Money from the West Indies.

In order whereunto, this Earl set forth a small Fleet at his own cost, and
adventured his own person therein, being the best born Englishman that ever
hazarded himself in that kind.

His Fleet may be said to be bound for no other Harbor but the Port of Honor
though touching at the Port of Profit in passage thereunto; I say, touching;
whose design was not to enrich himself, but impoverish the enemy. He was as
merciful as valiant, (the best metal bows best) and left impressions of both in
all places where he came.

Queen Elizabeth Anno 1592. honored him with the dignity of the Garter. When
King James came first out of Scotland to York, he attended him with such an
equipage of Followers, for number and habit, that he seemed rather a King than
Earl of Cumberland. Here happened a Stow^ Chronicle 1 Ja^.
contest between the Earl and the Lord President of the North, about carrying
the Sword before the King in York; which office, upon due search and enquiry,
was adjudged to the Earl, as belonging unto him: and whilst Cliffords Tower is
standing in York, that Family will never be therein forgotten. His Anagram was
as really as literally true.

Georgius Cliffordius Cumberlandius.
Doridis regno clarus cum vi f^lgebis.
He died 1605. leaving one Daughter and Heir, the Lady Anne, married to the
Earl of Dorset, of whom In the Benefactors to the public in (...).
hereafter.

Physicians.
Sir GEORGE RIPLEY, (whether Knight or Priest, not so soon decided) was
undoubtedly born at Ripley in this County, though some have wrongfully
entitled Surry to his Na^vity. That Yorkshire was the place of his birth,
will be evidenced by his relation of Kindred, reckoned up by In his Medulla,
toward the end thereof, to G. Nevil Archbishop of York.
himself, viz.

1. (...). 2. Riple^. 3. Madlay. 4. Willoughby. 5. Burham. 6. VVaterton. 7.
Flemming. 8. Talboyes, Families found in Yorkshire and Lincolnshire; but, if
sought for in Surrey, to be met with at Nonesuch. Secondly, it appears by his
preferment, being Canon of Bridlington in this County; and to clear all, Bale
de script. Brit. Cent. 8. (...). 19.
In patria Eboracensi, says my Author.

But Philemon Holland has not only erroniously misplaced, but (which is worse)
opprobriously miscalled him, in his description of Surrey;

In the next Village of Ripley was born G. de Ripley, a ringleader of our
Alchimists, and a mystical Impostor;

Words not appearing in the Latin Britannia, and therefore Holland herein no
Translator of Cambden, but traducer of Ripley.

Leaving this Land, he went over into Italy, and there studied twenty years
together in pursuance of the Philosophers Stone, and ^ound it in the year 1470.
as some collect from those his words then written in his Book; Juveni quem
diligit anima mea, (spoken by the Spouse. Cant. 3. 4.) so bold is he with
Scripture in that kind.

An English Gentleman of good credit reported, that in his travels abroad, he
saw a Record in the Isle of Malta, which declares, that Sir George Ripley gave
yearly to those Knights of Rhodes* Theatrum Chem. Brit. page 458.
One hundred thousand pounds, toward maintaining the war (then on foot)
against the Turks. This vast donation makes some suspect this Sir George for a
Knight (who by this might have been Eques Auratus) though indeed never more
than Sir Priest* and Canon of Bridlington.

Returning into his native Country, and desiring to repose his old age (no
Philosophers Stone to quiet retirement) he was dispensed with by the Pope to
leave his Canons place, (as too full of employment) and became a
Carmelite-Anchorite at Boston in Lincolnshire, where he wrote no fewer than 25.
Books, though his Compound of Alchimy carries away the credit of all the rest.
It presents the Reader with the twelve gates, leading to the making of the
Philosophers Stone, which are thus reckoned up in order,

1. Calcination. 2. Solution. 3. Separation. 4. Conjunction. 5. Putrefaction.
6. Congelation. 7. ^ibation. 8. Sublimation. 9. Fermentation. 10. Exaltation.
11. Multiplication. 12. Projection.
Oh for a Key (says the Common Reader) to open these Gates, and expound the
meaning of these words, which are familiar to the knowing in this mystery. But
such who are disaffected thereunto, (what Art has not enemies?) demand whether
these gates be to let in, or let out the Philosophers Stone, seeing Projection
the last of all, proves but a Project, producing nothing in effect.

We must not forget, how the said Sir George beseeches all men, wheresoever
they shall meet with any of his Experiments written by him, or that go under
his name (from the year 1450. to the year 1470.) either to burn them, or afford
them no credit, being written according to his esteem not proof; and which
(upon trial) he afterward found false and vain.

For mine own part, I believe his Philosophy truer than his Chimical Divinity;
for so may I call his Work, wherein he endeavors to equal in merit for
mankind, the compassion of the Virgin Mary, with the passion of Christ. He died
about the year of our Lord 1492. and some of his Works are since exactly set
forth, by my worthy and accomplished Friend Elias Ashmole, Esqire, in his
Theatrum Chimicum Britannicum.

THOMAS JOHNSON was born in this County, not far from * Hull, bred an So his
near Kinsman and Apothecary living on Snow-hill informed me.
Apothecary in London, where he attained to be the best Herbalist of his age in
England, making Additions to the Edition of Gerard. A man of such modesty, that
knowing so Much, he would own the knowledge of Nothing. The University of
Oxford bestowed on him the Honourary degree of Doctor in Physic; and his
loyalty engaged him on the Kings side, in our late Civil War. When in Basing
House a dangerous piece of service was to be done, this Doctor (who publicly
pretended not to Valor) undertook and performed it. Yet afterward he lost his
life in the siege of the same House, and was (to my knowledge) generally
lamented of those, who were of an opposite judgment. But let us bestow this
Epitaph upon him,

Hic Johnsone jaces, sed si mors cederet herbis
Art fugata tua, cederet illa tuis.
Here Johnson lies: could Physic fence deaths dart,
Sure death had bin declined by his art.
His Death happened Anno Dom. 1644.

W^iters.
ALPHRED of Beverley, born therein (a Town termed Urbs or City by De script.
Brit. sect. 2. page 187.
Bale) or thereabouts, and bred in the University of Cambridge. Hence he
returned to his native place, where he was made Treasurer of the Convent, ^ence
(as some will have it) commonly called Alphredus Thesaurarius: others concei^g
this his Topical relation too narrow to give him so general a Name, will have
him s^ styled from being so careful a storer up (God send more to succeed him
in that Office) of memorable Antiquities. Indeed, with the good Householder, he
brought out of his Treasury things new and old, writing a Chronicle from Brutus
to the time of his own death, which happened Anno 1136.

GULIELMUS REHIEVAILENSIS, or WILLIAM of RIEVAULX was so named from the place
of his Nativity in this County, being otherwise a Monk of Rushford. His
Learning was great according to that age, and his genius inclined him most to
History; whereof he wrote a fair Bale de scrip^t B^it. Cent. 2. number. 9^.
Volumne of the things done in his own age, himself being an eye witness of a
great part thereof. For though generally Monks were confined to their
Cloisters, more liberty was allowed to such persons whose Pens were publicly
employed. And when Monks could not go out to the news, news came home to them:
such was their intelligence from Clergy men, who then alone were employed in
State Offices. It was no wonder, that the writings of this William did, but had
been a miracle if they did not savor of the superstition of the times. He
dedicated his Book to Ealread Abbot of Rievaulx, and died Anno Dom. 1146.

EALREAD Abbot of Rievaulx lately named, was one eminent in his generation for
Piety and Learning. He was most intimate with David King of Scotland, and had
the rare felicity to adventure on desperate Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 2. Number.
99.
differences betwixt great persons; and yet above humane hope to complete their
agreement. He had Saint Augustines Confessions both by heart, and in his heart;
yet generally he is accounted the English Saint Bernard, and wrote very many
Books, whereof one, De Virginitate Mariae, and another, De Abusionibus
Claustri, showing twelve abuses generally committed in that kind of life. Yet
as Saint 1 Timothy 5. 3.
Paul honored widows, that were widows indeed; he had a high esteem for Monks,
who were Monks indeed; so addicted to a solitary life, that he refused all
Honors and several Bishoprics proffered unto him. He died in the 57. year of
his age, 1166. and after his death attained with many the reputation of a Saint.

WALTER DANIEL was Deacon to Ealread aforesaid, and it is pity to part them.
Leland says, that he followed his Abbot

Sancta Invidia,

Give me leave to english it, with holy emulation, and they who run in that
race of Virtue, neither supplant such who are before them, nor justle those
that are even with them, nor hinder those who come behind them. He trod in his
Masters foot* steps; yet so, that my Author says, Non modo aequavit sed
superavit, writing a Book on the same subject, De Virginitate Mariae. He
flourished Anno 1170. under King Henry the second, and was buried in his own
Abbey.

ROBERT the SCRIBE (but no Pharisee, such his Humility; not Hypocrite, such his
Sincerity,) was the fourth Prefect of Canon Regulars at Bridlington in this
County. He had his surname from his dexterity in writing, not a little
beneficial in that age; In his Life written by himself.
Erasmus ingeniously confessing, that his Father Gerard got a handsome
livelihood thereby. But our Robert in fair and fast writing did reach a Note
above others, it being true of him what was said,

Nondum lingua suum dextra peregit opus.
The Tongue her task has not yet done,
When that the Hand her race has run.
And he may be said to have had the long Hand of short Hand (such the swiftness
of his Pen) though I confess Brachyography was not then, nor many years after
invented. But he, though a quick Scribe, is but a dull one; who is good only at
fac simile, to transcribe out of an original, whereas our Robert left many
Books of his own making to posterity. He flourished Anno Dom. 1180. and lleth
buried before the Doors of the Cloister of his Convent.

PETER of Rippon, was Canon of that College, built anciently therein by Saint
Wilfred, purposely omitted by us in our Catalogue of Saints, to expiate our
former tediousness concerning him in our Church History. Jeoffry Archbishop of
York, not only delighted in, but doted on our Peter. He wrote a Book of the
life and miracles of Saint Wilfred. How many suspected persons did prick their
credits, who could not thread his Needle. This was a narrow place in his
Church, and kind of Purgatory (save that no fire therein) through which chaste
Persons might easily pass, whilst the Incontinent did stick therein, beheld
generally as a piece of Monkish Legerdemain.

I am sorry to hear, that this Collegiate Church (one of the most ancient and
famous Churches in the North of England) has the means and allowance appointed
for the repair thereof detained, and more ^orry that on the eighth of December,
1660. a violent wind blew down the great Steeple thereof, which with its fall,
bea^ down the Chancel (the only place where the people could assemble for
Divine Worship) and much shattered and weakened the rest of the Fabric, and I
hope, that His Majesty's Letters Patents will meet with such bountiful
contributions, as will make convenient Reparation. Our Peter flourished Anno
1190. under King Richard the first.

WILLIAM of NEWBOROUGH, was born at Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 3. num^ro 53.
Bridlington in this County, but named of Newborough, not far off, in which
Monastery he became a Canon Regular. He also was called Petit or Little, from
his low stature; in him the observation was verified, that little men (in whom
their heat is most contracted) are soon angry, flying so fiercely on the memory
of Geffrey of Monmouth, taxing his British Chronicle, as a continu^d fiction,
translated by him indeed; but whence? from his own Brain, to his own Pen, by
his own Invention. Yea, he denies that there was ever a King Arthur, and in
effect overthrows all the Welsh History. But learned Leland conceives this
William Little greatly guilty in his ill language, which to any Author was
uncivil, to a Bishop unreverent, to a dead Bishop uncharitable. Some resolve
all his passion on a point of mere revenge, heartily offended, because David
Prince of Wales Godwin in the Bishops of St. Asaph.
denied him to succeed G. Monmouth in the Sea of St. Asaph, and therefore fell
he so soul on the whose Welsh Nation. Sure I am, that this angry William so
censorious of G. Monmouth his falsehoods, has most foul slips of his own Pen,
as when he affirms, That in the place of the slaughter of the English, nigh
Battle in Sussex, if peradventure it be wet with any small shower, presently
the ground thereabouts sweateth forth Cited and confuted by Cambden in Sussex.
very blood, though indeed it be no more, than what is daily seen in Rutland
after any sudden rain, where the ground flows with a reddish moisture. He
flourished Anno 1200. under King John.

ROGER HOVEDEN was born in this County, of the Illustrious Family of the
Hovedens, says my Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 3. Number. 55.
Author, bred first in the study of the Civil, then of the Canon Law, and at
last, being servant to King Henry the second, he became a most accomplished
Courtier. He is the chiefest (if not sole) Lay-Historian of his age, who being
neither Priest nor Monk wrote a Chronicle of England, beginning where Bid
ended, and continuing the same until the fourth of King John. When King Edward
the first laid claim to the Crown of Scotland, he caused the Chronicles of
th^s Roger to be diligently searched, and carefully kept, many Authentical
passages therein tending to his present advantage. This Roger flourished in the
year of our Lord, 1204.

JOHN of HALIFAX commonly called De SACRO BOSCO, was born in that Town so
famous for Clothing, bred first in Oxford, then in Paris, being the prime
Mathematician of his age. All Students of Astronomy enter into that Art through
the Door of his Book, De ^phaera. He lived much beloved, died more lamented,
and was buried with a solemn Funeral, on the public Bale out of Leland. Cent.
6. Number. 93.
cost of the University of Paris, Anno 1256.

ROBERTUS PERSCRUTATOR, or ROBERT the SEARCHER, was born Pits de Ang. script.
page 419.
in this County, bred a Dominican, great Mathematician and Philosopher. He got
the surname of Searcher, because he was in the constant quest and pursuit of
the Mysteries of Nature. A thing very commendable, if the matters we seek for,
and means we seek with be warrantable.

Yea Solomon himself on the same account might be entitled Searcher, who by
his own confession, Eccles. 7. 25.
Applied his heart to know, and to Search, and to seek out wisdom, and the
reason of things.

But curiosity is a kernel of the forbidden fruit, which still sticks in the
throat of a natural man, sometimes to the danger of his choking: it is heavily
laid to the charge of our Robert, that he did light his Candle from the Devils
Torch to seek after such secrets as he did desire, witness his Work of
Ceremonial Magic, which a conscientious Christian would send the same way with
the Ephesian conjuring Books, and make them fuel for the fire. However in that
age he obtained the reputation of a great Scholar, flourishing under King
Edward the second, 1326.

THOMAS CASTLEFORD, born in this Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 4. Number. 100.
County, was bred a Benedictine in P^mfraict, whereof he wrote a History, from
ASK a Saxon first owner thereof, to the Lacies from whom that large Lordship
descended to the Earls of Lancaster. I could wish some able Pen in Pomfraict
would continue this Chronicle to our time, and give us the particulars of the
late memorable siege, that though the Castle be demolished, the Fame thereof
may remain. Leland freely confesses that he learnt more then he looked for by
reading Castlefords History, promising to give a larger account thereof, in a
Book he intended to write of Civil History, and which I suspect he never set
forth, prevented by death. Our Castleford flourished about the year of our
Lord, 1326.

JOHN GOWER was born (says Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 7. Number. 23.
Leland) at Stitenham (in the North Riding in Bulmore* Wapentake) of a Knightly
Family. He was bred in London a Student of the Laws, till prizing his pleasure
above his profit, he quitted Pleading to follow Poetry. He was the first
refiner of our English Tongue, effecting much, but endeavoring more therein.
Thus he who sees the Whelp of a Bear but half lickt, will commend it for a
comely Creature, in comparison of what it was when first brought forth. Indeed
Gower left our English Tongue very bad, but ^ound it very very bad.

Bale makes him Equitem aurat^m and Poetam Laureatum, proving both from his
Ornaments on his monumental Statue in Saint Mary Overies, Southwark. Yet he
appears there neither laureated nor hederated Poet (except the leaves of the
Bays and ^y be withered to nothing, since the erection of the Tomb) but only
rosated, having a Chaplet of four Roses about his head. Another Stow in his
Survey of London in Bride Ward without.
Author unknighteth him, allowing him only a plain Esquire, though in my
apprehension the Colar of S.S.S. about his neck speak him to be more. Besides
(with submission to better judgments) that Colar has rather a Civil than
Military relation, proper to persons in places of Judicature, which makes me
guess this Gower some Judge in his old age, well consisting with his original
education.

He was before Chaucer, as born and flourishing before him (yea by some
accounted his Master;) yet was he after Chaucer, as surviving him two years,
living to be stark blind, and so more properly termed our English Homer. Many
the Books he wrote, whereof three most remarkable, viz. Speculum Meditantis, in
French, Confessio Amantis, in English, Vox Clamantis, in Latin. His death
happened, 1402.

JOHN MAR, (by Bale called MARREY, and by Trithemius MARRO) was born at Pits
de Ang. script in An. 1407.
Mar, a village in this County, three miles West from Doncaster, where he was
brought up in Learning. Hence he went to Oxford, where (says Leland) the
University bestowed much honor upon him for his excellent Learning.

He was by Order a Carmelite, and in one respect it was well for his Memory
that he was so, which makes De script. Brit. Cent. 7. Number. 32*
John Bal^ (who generally falls foul on all Friars) to have some civility for
him, as being once himself of the same Order, allowing him subtly learned in
all secular Philosophy. But what do I instance in homebred Testimonies? Know
Reader, that in the Character of our own Country Writers, I prize an Inch of
Foreign above an Ell of English Commendation, and Outlandish Writers,
Trithemius, Sixtus Senensis, Petrus Lucius, etc. give great Encomiums of his
Ability; though I confess it is chiefly on this account, because he wrote
against the Opinions of J. Wickliffe. He died on the eighteenth of March. 1407.
and was buried in the Convent of Carmelites in Doncaster.

THOMAS GASCOIGNE eldest son to Richard (the younger brother unto Sir William
Gascoigne Lord Chief Justice) was born at Huntfleet in this County, bred in
Baliol College in Oxford, where he proceeded Doctor in Divinity, and was B^ian
Twin^ An^iq. Oxon. in hoc Anno.
Commissioner of that University Anno Dom. 1434. He was well acquainted with
the Maids of Honor, I mean Humane Arts and Sciences, which conducted him first
to the presence, then to the favor of Divinity, the Queen. He was a great
Hieronymist, perfectly acquainted with all the Writings of that Learned Father,
and in expression of his gratitude for the good he had gotten by reading his
Works, he collected out of many Authors, and wrote the life of Saint Hierom. He
made also a Book called Dictionarium Theologicum, very useful to, and therefore
much esteemed by the Divines in that age. He was seven and fifty years old B^le
de script. Brit. Cent. 8. Number. 12.
Anno 1460. and how long he survived afterward is unknown.

JOHN HARDING was born (says my Bile de script. B^it. Cent. 8. Number. 30.
Author) in the Northern parts, and I have some cause to believe him this
Countryman. He was an Esquire of ancient Parentage, and bred from his Youth
in Military Employment. First under Robert Umfrevil, Governor of Roxborough
Castle, and did good service against the Scots. Then he followed the Standard
of King Edward the fourth, adhering faithfully unto him in his deepest
distress.

But the Masterpiece of his service was his adventuring into Scotland, not
without the manifest hazard of his Life; where he so cunningly demeaned
himself, that he found there, and fetched thence out of their Records, many
Original Letters, which he presented to King Edward the fourth. Out of these he
collected an History of the several Solemn Submissions publicly made, and
Sacred Oaths of Fealty, openly taken from the time of King Athelstane, by the
Kings of SCOTLAND, to the Kings of ENGLAND for the Crown of SCOTLAND, although
the Scotch Historians stickle with might and maine, that such Homage was
performed only for the County of Cumberland, and some parcels of Land their
Kings had in ENGLAND south of TWEED. He wrote also a Chronicle of our English
Kings, from BRUTUS to King EDWARD the fourth, and that in English Verse; and in
my Judgment he had drank as hearty a draught of Helicon as any in his age. He
was living 1461. then very aged, and I believe died soon after.

HENRY PARKER was bred from his infancy in the Carmelite Convent at Doncaster,
afterward Doctor of Divinity in Pits de script. Aug. Anno. 1470.
Cambridge. Thence he returned to Doncaster, and well it had been with him, if
he had staid there still, and not gone up to London to preach at Pauls-Crosse,
where the subject of his Sermon was to prove, That Christ's poverty was the
pattern of humane perfection; and that men professing eminent sanctity, should
conform to his precedent, Going on foot, feeding on Barley-bread, wearing
seamless-woven-coats, having no houses of their own, etc. He drove this nail so
far, that he touched the quick, and the wealthy Clergy winched thereat. His
Sermon offended much as preached, more as published, granting the Copy thereof
to any that would transcribe it. For this the Bishop of London put him in
prison, which Parker patiently endured (in hope, perchance, of a rescue from
his Order) till being informed, that the Pope effectually appeared on the party
of the Prelates, to procure his liberty, he was content at Pauls-Cross to B^le
de script. Brit. Cent. 8. Number. 29.
recant. Not as some have took the word, to say over the same again (in which
sense the Cuckoo, of all Birds, is properly called the Recanter) but he unsaid,
with (at least seeming) sorrow, what he had said before. However from this time
we may date the decay of the Carmelites credit in England: who discountenanced
by the Pope, never afterward recruited themselves to their former number and
honor, but moulted their feathers till King Henry the eight cut off their very
wings, and body too, at the Dissolution. This Parker flourished under King
Edward the fourth, Anno 1470.

Since the Reformation.
Sir FRANCIS BIGOT Knight, was born and well landed in this Bale in his Book
called Scriptores nostri temporis.
County. Bale gives him this testimony, that he was Evangelicae veritatis
amator. Otherwise I must confess my self posed with his intricate disposition.
For he wrote a book against the Clergy

Of IMPROPRIATIONS Had it been against the Clergy of Appropriations, I could
have guessed it to have proved Tithes due to the Pastors of their respective
Parishes. Whereas now having not seen (nor seen any that have seen) his book, I
cannot conjecture his judgment.

As his book, so the manner of his death seems a riddle unto me, being (though
a Protestant) slain amongst the Northern Rebels, 1537. But here Bale helps
us not a little, affirming him found amongst them against his will. And indeed
those Rebels, to countenance their Treason, violently detained some Loyal
Persons in their Camp; and the Blind sword, having Aciem not Oculum, killed
friend and foe in fury without distinction.

WILFRID HOLME was born in this County, of Gentile parentage, Bale de script.
Brit. Cent. 9. Number. ^2.
Veritati Dei tunc revelatae Auscultans, and Pitz taxes him, that his Pen was
too compliant to pleasure K. Henry the eight. The truth is this, he lived in
these parts in that juncture of time when the two Northern Rebellions happened,
the one in Lincoln, the other in Yorkshire; and when the Popish party gave it
out, that the Reformation would ruin Church and State, level all dignities
and degrees; Wilfrid to Confute the Priests truthless Reports, and the Peoples
causless Jealousies, stated the Controversy, Truly, Clearly and Wittily, in
the manner of a Dialogue. He survived not many months after the setting forth
of this book Anno 1536.

THOMAS ROBERSON was born in this Pitz. de Ang. script. in Anno 1544.
County, and being Doctor of Divinity in Oxford was one of the best Grammarians
for Greek and Latin in that age. He had an admirable faculty in teaching of
youth; for every Boy can teach a Man, whereas he must be a Man who can teach a
Boy. It is easy to inform them who are able to understand, but it must be a
Master piece of industry and discretion, to descend to the capacity of
Children. He wrote notes upon the Grammar of Lilly, and besides others, one
book, De Nominibus Idem ibidem.
Hetoroclitis, and another De verbis Defectivis, so that by his pains the
hardest parts of Grammar are made the easiest, and the most anomalous, reduced
to the greatest regularity by his endeavors. What Robert Robinson, (under
whose name Quae genus in the Grammar is Printed) was to this Thomas Roberson, I
have no leisure to enquire, and leave it to those to whom it is more proper,
suspecting they may be the same person; and that Pitzaeus our Author, living
mostly beyond the seas, might be mistaken in the name: However, he flourished
Anno Domini 1544.

WILLIAM HUGH was Bale de script. B it. Cent. 9. Number. 72.
born in this County, and bred in Corpus Christi College in Oxford, where he
attained to great Eminency in Learning. In his time the Consciences of many
tender Parents were troubled about the Final Estate of Infants dying
unbaptized, as posting from the Womb to the Winding sheet, in such speed, that
the Sacrament could not be fastened upon them. To pacify persons herein
concerned, this William wrote and Dedicated a book to Q. Katherine Parr,
entitled, The troubled man's Medicine. He died of the breaking of a Vain, Anno
Dom. 1549.

ROGER ASCHAM was born at Kirby-weik in this County, and bred in Saint
JohnsColledge in Cambridge, under Doctor Medcalfe, that good Governor, who
whet-stonelike, though dull in himself, by his encouragement, set an edge on
most excellent wits in that foundation. Indeed Ascham came to Cambridge just at
the dawning of learning, and staid therein till the bright-day thereof, his own
endeavors contributing much light thereunto. He was Orator and
Greek-Professour in the University, (places of some sympathy, which have often
met in the same person,) and in the beginning of the reign of Queen Mary,
within three days, wrote letters to Edw. Grant in the life of Ascham.
forty seven several Princes, whereof the meanest was a Cardinal. He
travailed into Germany, and there contracted familiarity with John Sturmius and
other learned men, and after his return was a kind of teacher to the Lady
Elizabeth, to whom (after she was Queen) he became her Secretary for her Latin
letters.

In a word, he was an Honest man and a good Shooter; Archery (whereof he wrote
a book called (...)) being his only exercise in his youth, which in his old
age he ex changed for a worse pastime, neither so healthful for his body, nor
profitable for his purse, I mean Cock-fighting, and thereby (being neither
greedy to get, nor careful to keep money) he much Camdens Eliz. Anno 1568.
impaired his estate.

He had a facile and fluent Latine-style, (not like those, who, counting
obscurity to be elegancy, weed out all the hard words they meet in Authors,)
witness his Epistles, which some say are the only Latine-ones extant of any
Englishman, and if so, the more the pity. What loads have we of letters from
foreign Pens, as if no Author were complete without those necessary
appurtenances? whilst surely our Englishmen write, (though not so many,) as
good as any other Nation. In a word, his (...) is accounted a good book for
Young Men, his Schoolmaster for Old-men, his Epistles for all men, set out
after his death, which happened Anno Dom. 1568. December 30. in the 53. year of
his Age, and he was buried in Saint Sepulchers in London.

Sir HENRY SAVILL Knight, was born at Bradley, in the Parish of Hallifax in
this County, of ancient and worshipful extraction. He was bred in Oxford, and
at last became Warden of Merton-colledge and also Provost of Eaton. Thus this
skillful Gardener had at the same time a Nurcery of young Plants, and an
Orchard of grown Trees, both flourishing under his careful inspection.

This worthy Knight carefully collected the best Copies of Saint Chrysostom,
and employed Learned men to transcribe and make Annotations on them, which
done, he fairly set it forth, on his own cost, in a most beautiful Edition; a
burden which he underwent without stooping under it, though the weight thereof
would have broken the back of an ordinary person. But the Papists at Paris had
their Emissaries in England, who surreptitiously procured this Knights learned
Labors, and sent them over weekly by the Post into France, Schedatim sheet by
sheet, as here they passed the Press. Then Fronto Duceus (a French Cardinal as
I take it) caused them to be Printed there with implicit faith and blind
obedience, letter for letter as he received them out of England, only joining
thereunto a Latin translation and some other inconsiderable Additions. Thus
two Editions of Saint Chrysostom did together run a race in the world, which
should get the speed of the other in public sale and acceptance. Sir Henry
his Edition started first by the advantage of some Months. But the Parisian
Edition came up close to it, and advantaged with the Latin Translation (though
dearer of p^ice) out-stript it in quickness of Sale, but of late the Savilian
Chrysostom has much mended its pace, so that very few are left of the whole
Impression.

Sir Henry left one only Daughter richly married to Sir William Sidley of Kent
Baronet. He dyed at Eaton, where he lies buried under a Monument with this
Inscription Hic jacent Ossa and Cineres Henrici Savill sub spe certa
resurrectionis, natus apud Bradley juxta Halifax in Comitatu Ebor, Anno Domini
1549. ultimo die mensis Novembris, Obiit in Collegio Etonensi Anno Domini 1621.
xix die mensis Februarii.

It must not be forgotten, that he was a most excellent Mathematician, witness
his learned Lectures on Euclid. Yet once casually happening into the Company of
Master Briggs of Cambridge, upon a learned encounter betwixt them, Master
Briggs demonstrated a truth, besides (if not against) the judgment of Sir
Henry, wherewith that worthy Knight was so highly affected, that he chose him
one of his Mathematick Professors in Oxford, wherein he founded two, allowing a
liberal salary unto them.

THOMAS TAILOR was born at Richmond in this County, where his father (a
bountiful entertainer of people in distress) was Recorder of the Town. He was
afterward bred in Christs-colledge in Cambridge, and chose a Fellow thereof.

This Timothy, grave when green, entered very young but not raw, into the
Ministry at 21. years of age, and continued in the same at Reading and London
for the space of thirty five years. His Sermons were generally well studied,
and he was wont to say, That oftimes he satisfied himself the least, when he
best pleased his people, not taking such pains in his preaching. His flock was
firmly founded and well bottomed on Catechistacall Divinity. It being observed
that his Auditors stuck close to their principles in this Age* wherein so many
have reeled into damnable Errors. He was a great giver of Alms, but without a
Trumpet, and most strict in his Conversation.

Zeal for the House of God may be said in some sort to have Consumed him; Dying
in the fifty six year of his age, Anno Domini 1632. comfortably avowing at his
death that we serve such a Master, Who covers many imperf^ctions, and gives
much wages for a little work.

NATHANIELL SHUTE was born at So I am informed by Mr. Christopher Shute,
minister of Saint Ve^ in London, heir to his fathers virtue.
Gigleswick in this County, Christopher Shute his father being the painful
Vicar thereof. He was bred in Christs-colledge in Cambridge. A most excellent
scholar and solid preacher: Though, nothing of his is extant in Print, save a
Sermon called Carona Charitatis, preached at the funeral of Master F^shbourn.
But the goodness of the Land of Canaan may as well be guessed from one great
bunch of grapes, as if the spies had brought whole vineyards along with them.
Indeed he was a profou^d and profitable preacher for many years together at St.
Mildred Poultrey in London.

One in the University being demanded his judgment of an excellent sermon in
Saint Mary's, returned, that It was an uncomfortable sermon, leaving no hope of
imitation for such as should succeed him. In this sense alone, I must allow
Master Nathaniel Shute an uncomfortable preacher (though otherwise a true
Barnabas and Son of consolation) possessing such as shall follow him in time,
with a despair to equal him in eminency.

He died Anno Domini 1638. when our English sk^e was clouded all over, and set
to rain, but before any drops of war fell down amongst us. Doctor Holdesworth,
most excellently preached his Funeral Sermon, taking for his text, We have
this our treasure in earthly vessels.

JOSIAH SHUTE brother to Nathaniel aforesaid, was bred in Trinity college in
Cambridge, and became afterward Minister of Saint Mary Woolno^h in London, and
was, (Reader I do say and will maintain it,) the most Precious Jewel that was
ever shown or seen in Lumbardstreet; All Ministers are Gods Husband m^n, but
some of them can only plough in soft ground, whose Shares and Coultures will
turn Edge in a hard point of Divinity. No ground came amiss to Master Shute,
whether his Text did lead him to controversiall or positive Divinity; having a
strain, without straining for it, of native Eloquence: he spoke that which
others studied for. He was for many years, and that most justly, highly,
esteemed of his Parish; till the beginning of our late Civil Wars some began
to neglect him, distasting wholesome meat well dressed by him merely because
their mouths were out of taste, by that general distemper, which in his time
was but an Ague, afterward turned to a fever, and since is turned to a Frensy
in our Nation.

I insist hereon the rather for the comfort of such godly Ministers, who now
suffer in the same nature wherein Mr. Shute did before; indeed, no servant of
God can simply and directly comfort himself in the sufferings of others, (as
which has something of envy therein,) yet may he do it consequentially in this
respect, because, thereby he apprehends his own condition herein consistent
with Gods love and his own salvation, seeing other precious Saints taste with
him of the same affliction, as many godly Ministers do now a days, whose
sickles are now hung up as useless, and neglected, though before these Civil
Wars they reaped the most in Gods harvest. Master Shute dyed Anno Domini 1640.
and was buried with great solemnity in his own Church, Master Udall preaching
his Funeral Sermon: since his death his excellent Sermons are set forth on
some part of Genesis, and pity it is there is no more extant of his worthy
endeavors.

It must not be forgotten, how retiring a little before his death into the
Country, some of his Parishioners came to visit him, whom he cheerfully
entertained with this expression. I have taught you, my dear flock, for above
thirty years, how to live, and now I will show you in a very short time how to
dye. He was as good as his word herein, for within an Hour he in the presence
of some of them was peaceably dissolved.

Be it also known, that besides these two brothers Nathaniel and Josiah, fixed
in the City of London, there were three more, bred and brought up in the
Ministry, viz. Robert preacher at Lyn, Thomas Minister for a good time in
Chester, and Timothy lately (if not still alive) a preacher in Exeter.

All great (though not equal) Lights, are set up in fair Candlesticks, I mean,
places of eminency, and conveniently distanced one from another, for the better
dispersing of their Light; and good Housewives tell me, Old Candles are the
best for spending. Happy their Father who had his Quiver full with five such
Sons, he need not be ashamed to see his Enemies in the Gate. It is hard to say,
whether he was more happy in his sons, or they in so good a Father, and a wary
man will crave time to decide the doubt, until the like instance does return
in England.

GEORGE SANDYS youngest son of Edwin Sandys Archbishop of York, was born at
Bishops-Thorp in this County, he proved a most accomplished gentleman, and an
observant Travailer, who went as far as the Sepulcher at Jerusalem, and has
spared other men's pains in going thither, by bringing the Holy Land home to
them; so lively is his description thereof, with his passage thither, and
return thence.

He most elegantly translated Ovid his Metamorphosis into English verse, so
that as the soul of Aristotle was said to have transmigrated into Thomas
Aquinas, (because rendering his sense so naturally,) Ovid's genius may seem to
have passed into Master Sandys. He was a servant, but no slave to his subject,
well knowing that a Translatour is a person in free Custody; Custody, being
bound to give the true sense of the Author he translated; Free, left at liberty
to cloth it in his own expression.

Nor can that in any degree be applied to Master Sandys, which one rather
bitterly then falsely charge on an Author, whose name I leave to the Readers
conjecture.

We know thou do well
as a Translatour,
But where things require,
a genius and a fire,
Not kindled before by others pains,
as often thou have wanted brains.
Indeed some men are better Nurses, then Mothers of a Poem, good only to feed
and foster the Fancies of others, whereas Master Sandys was altogether as
dexterous at Inventing as Translating, and his own Poems as spritefull,
vigorous, and masculine. He lived to be a very aged man, whom I saw in the
Savoy Anno 1641. having a youthful soul in a decayed body, and I believe he
dyed soon after.

JOHN SALTMARSH was extracted from a right ancient (but decayed) family in this
County, and I am informed that Sir Thomas Metham his kinsman, bountifully
contributed to his education, he was bred in Magdalen-colledge in Cambridge.
Returning into this his Native Country, was very great with Sir John Hotham the
Elder. He was one of a fine and active fancy, no contemptible Poet, and a good
Preacher, as by some of his profitable Printed Sermons does appear. Be it
charitably imputed to the information of his Judgment and Conscience, that of a
zealous observer he became a violent oppresser of Bishops and Ceremonies.

He wrote a book against my Sermon of Reformation, taxing me for many points of
Popery therein. I defended my self in a book called Truth maintained, and
challenged him to an answer, who appeared in the field no more, rendering In the
beginning of his book against Mr. Gattacre.
this reason thereof, that he would not shoot his arrows against a dead mark,
being informed that I was dead at Exeter.

I have no cause to be angry with fame (but rather to thank her) for so good a
Lie. May I make this true use of that false report, to dye daily. See how
Providence has crossed it, the dead [reported] man is May 20. 1661. at the
writing hereof.
still living, the then living man dead; and seeing I survive to go over his
grave, I will tread the more gently on the mold thereof, using that civility on
him which I received from him.

He died in or about Windsor (as he was Riding to and fro in the Parliament
Army) of a Burning Fever, venting on his deathbed strange expressions,
apprehended (by some of his party) as extaticall, yea, prophetical raptures,
whilst others accounted them (no wonder if outrages in the City, when the enemy
has possessed the Castle commanding it) to the acuteness of his disease which
had seized his intellectualls. His death happened about the year 1650.

JEREMIAH WHITACRE was born at Wakefield in this County, bred Master of Arts in
Sidney-colledge, and after became Schoolmaster of Okeham, then Minister of
Stretton in R^and. He was chosen to be one of the Members of the late Assembly,
wherein he behaved himself with great moderation; at last he was Preacher at
St. Mary Magdalens Bermonsey, well discharging his duty, being a solid Divine,
and a man made up of Piety to God, pity to poor men, and Patience in himself.
He had much use of the last, being visited with many, and most acute diseases.
I see Gods love or hatred cannot be conjectured, much less concluded, from
outward accidents, this merciful man meeting with merciless afflictions.

I have sometimes wondered with my self, why Satan the Magazeen of Malice, (who
needs no man to teach him mischief,) having Job in his power, did not put him
on the rack of the Stone, Gout, Colic or Strangury, as in the height, most
exquisite torments, but only be-ulcered him on his Skin, and outside of his
body.

And (under correction to better judgments,) I conceive this might be some
cause thereof. Being to spare his life, the Devil durst not inflict on him
these mortal maladyes, for fear to exceed his commission, who possibly, for
all his cunning, might mistake in the exact proportioning of the pain to Jobs
ability to bear it, and therefore was forced to confine his malice to external
pain, doleful but not deadly in its own nature.

Sure I am, this good Jeremiah was tormented with Gout, Stone, and one ulcer in
his bladder, another in his kidneys, all which he endured with admirable and
exemplary patience, though God of his goodness grant that (if it may stand with
his will) no cause be given that so sad a Copy be transcribed. Thus God, for
reasons best known unto himself, sent many and the most cruel Bayliffes to
arrest him to pay his debt to nature, though he always was ready willingly to
tender the same, at their single summons. His liberality knew no bottom but an
empty purse, so bountiful he was to all in want. He was buried on the 6. of
June, Anno 1654. in his own Parish in Southwarke, much lamented: Master Simon
Ash preaching his Funeral Sermon, to which the Reader is referred for his
further satisfaction. I understand some sermons are extant of his preaching,
Let me but add this Distick and I have done.

Whites ambo, Whitehead, Whitgift, Whitakerus uterque Vulnera Romano quanta
dedere papae?

Romish Exile Writers.
JOHN YOUNG was born in this County. His life appears to me, patched up of
unsuiting pieces, as delivered by several Authors. A Judicious Par. Her.
Skelet. Cap. 2. lib. M etc.
Antiquary, seldom mistaken, will have him a Monk of Ramsey, therein
confounding him with his Namesake many years more ancient. J. Pi^ de Ang.
Script. page 770.
An other will have him bred Doctor of Divinity in Trinity-colledge in
Cambridge, though that Foundation (suppose him admitted the first day thereof,)
affords not Seniority enough to write Doctor, before the reign of Queen Mary,
except we understand him bred in some of the Hostles, afterward united
thereunto. So that I rather concur herein with the forenamed Antiquary, that
he was Fellow of Saint Johns-colledge in that University.

It is agreed, that at the first, he was at the least a Parcell-Protestant,
translating into English the Book of Arch bishop Cranmer, of the Sacrament. But
afterward, he came off with a witness, being a Zealous Papist, and great
Antagonist of Mart. Bucer, and indeed as able a Disputant as any of his Party.

He was Vice Chancellor of Cambridge, Anno 1554. Master of Pembroke hall,
KingsProfessor of Divinity, and Rector of Land-beach nigh Cambridge, but lost
all his preferment in the first of Queen Elizabeth. Surely more then Ordinary
Obstinacy appeared in him, because not only deprived but imprisoned. And in my
judgment, more probably surprised before he went, then after his return from
foreign parts. He died under restraint in England, 1579.

JOHN MUSH was born in this Ut prius page 810.
County, bred first in the English-colledge at Doway, and then ran his course
of Philosophy in their College at Rome. Afterward being made Priest, he was
sent over into England, to gain People to his own persuasion, which he did
without and within the Prison for 20. years together, but at last he got his
liberty.

In his time the Romish Ship in England did spring a dangerous Leak, almost to
the sinking thereof, in the Schism betwixt the Priests and the Jesuits. Mush
appeared very active and happy in the stopping thereof, and was by the English
Popish Clergy sent to Rome to compose the controversy, behaving himself very
wisely in that service. Returning into his own Country he was for fourteen
years together assistant to the English Arch* Priest, demeaning himself
commendably therein; he wrote many books, and one whose title made me the more
to mind it,

Vitam and Martyrium D. Margaretae Clithoroae.

Now whether this D. be for Domina or Diva, for Lady or Saint, or both, I know
not. I take her for some Gentlewoman in the North, which for some practices in
the maintenance of her own Religion, was obnoxious to, and felt the severity of
our Laws. This Mush was living in these parts, Anno 1612.

Benefactors to the Public.
THOMAS SCOT was born at Ro^heram, no obscure market in this County; waving his
paternall name, he took that of Ro^heram, from the place of his Nativity. This
I observe the rather, because he was (according to my exactest enquiry) the
last Clergyman of note with such an assumed Surname, which Custom began now to
grow out of fashion, and Clergymen (like other men) to be called by the name
of their fathers.

He was first Fellow of Kings-colledge, afterward Master of Pembroke-hall in
Cambridge, and Chancellor of that University; here he built on his proper cost
(saving something helped by the Scholars) the fair gate of the School, with
fair walks on each side, and a Library on the East thereof. Many have mistaken
this, for the performance of King Richard the third, merely, because his Crest
the Boar is set up therein. Whereas the truth is that Rotheram having felt the
sharp Tuskes of that Boar, (when imprisoned by the aforesaid King, for
resigning the Great Seal of England to Queen Elizabeth, the relict of King
Edward the fourth,) advanced his Arms thereon, merely to engratiate himself.
He went thorough many Church preferments, being successively Provost of
Beverly, Bishop of Rochester, Lincoln, and lastly Archbishop of York; nor less
was was his share in Civil honor, first, Keeper of the Privy Seal, and last,
Lord Chancellor of England. Many were his Benefactions to the Public, of
which none more remarkable then his founding five Fellowships in Lincoln
college in Oxford. He deceased in the 76. year of his age at Cawood of the
plague Anno Domini 1500.

JOHN ALCOCKE was born at Beverly in this County, where he built a Chapel,
and founded a Chantry for his parents. He was bred a Doctor of Divinity in
Cambridge, and at last became Bishop of Ely, his prudence appeared in that he
was preferred Lord Chancellor of England by King Henry the seventh, a Prince
of an excellent palate to taste men's Abilities, and a Dunce was no dish for his
diet. His piety is praised by the pen of J. Bale, which (though generally
bitter) drops nothing but honey on Alcocks Memory, commending him for a most
mortified man; Given to Learning and Piety from his Childhood, growing from
grace to grace, so that in his age none in England was higher for holiness. He
turned the old Nunnery of Saint Radigund, into a new College called Jesus in
Cambridge: surely had Malcolm King of Scots, first founder of that Nunnery,
survived to see this alteration, it would have rejoiced his heart to behold
Leudness and Laziness turned out, for Industry and Piety to be put in their
place. This Alcock died October 1. 1500. And had Saintship gone as much by
merit as favor, he deserved one as well as his namesake Saint John his
predecessor in that See.

Since the Reformation.
The extent of this large Province and the distance of my Habitation from it
have disabled me to express my desires suitable to the merit thereof in this
Topic of Modern Benefactors, which I must leave to the Topographers thereof
hereafter to uspply my defaults with their diligence. But let me forget my self
when I do not remember the worthy and charitable Master....... Harrison
inhabitant of the Populous Town of Leeds, so famous for the Cloth made
therein. Methinks, I hear that great Town accosting him in the Language of the
Children of the Prophets to 2 King. 6. 1*
Elisha, Behold now, the place where we dwell with thee is too strait for us.
The Church could scarce hold half the inhabitants, till this worthy gentleman
provided them another. So that now the men of Leeds may say with Genesis 26. 22.
Isaac, Rehoboth, God has made room for us. He accepted of no assistance in
the building of that fair Fabric, but what he fully paid for, so that he may
be owned the sole Founder thereof. But all his Charity could not secure him
from sequestration in our Troublesome Times. All I will add is this, as he
has built a House for God, may ( God in Scripture Exodus 1. 21.
Phrase) build a House for him, I mean, make him fruitful and fortunate in his
posterity.

Memorable Persons.
PAULINUS DE LEEDS born in this County where there be three Towns of that name
in one Wapentake. It is uncertain in which of these he was born, and the matter
is of no great concernment. One so free from Simony and far from buying a
Bishopric that when a Bishopric bought him, he refused to accept it. For when
King Henry the second chose him Bishop of Carlisle and promised to increase the
Revenue of that Church with three hundred mark yearly rent, besides the grant
Godwin in his Catalogue of Bishops out of R. Ho^e len.
of two Church livings and two Manors near to Carlisle, on the condition that
this Paulinus would accept the place, all this would not work him to embrace so
wealthy an offer. The reasons of his refusal are rendered by no Author, but
must be presumed very weighty to overpoise such rich proffers, on which account
let none envy his name a Room in this my Catalogue. He flourished about the
year of our Lord 1186.

WILLIAM DE LA POLE born at Ravensrode in this County, was for wealth and skill
in Merchandise inferior to none in England, he made his abode at Kingston Came.
Brit. in Yorkshire.
upon Hull, and was the first Mayor of that Town. When K. Edward the third was
at Antw^rp, and much necessitated for money (no shame for a Prince always in
War, to be sometimes in want) this William lent him many thousand pounds of
gold. In recompense whereof the King made him his Valect (equivalent to what
afterward was called Gentleman of the Bedchamber,) and Lord Sed Quaere,
because he appears not in Sir H. Spelmans Catalogue.
Chief-Baron of his Exchequer, with many other honors. Amongst which this was
one, that he should be reputed a Banneret, not that he was really made one,
seeing the flourishing of a Banner over his head, in the field, before or after
a fight, was a ceremony essential thereunto; but he had the same precedence
conferred upon him. I find not the exact date of his death, but conjecture it
to be about the year 1350.

Lord Mayor.
Name Father Place Company Time 1 William Eastfield William Eastfield Tickell
Mercer 1429 2 John Ward Richard Ward Howdon Grocer 1484 3 William White William
White Tickhill Draper 1489 4 John Rudstone Robert Rudstone Hatton Draper 1528 5
Ralph Dodmer Henry Dodmer Pickering leigh Mercer 1529 6 William Roch John Roch
Wixley Draper 1540 7 Richard Dobbes Robert Dobbes Baitby Skinner 1551 8 William
Hewet Edmund Hewet Wales Cloth-worker 1559 9 John Heart Ralph Heart Sproston
Court Grocer 1589 10 Richard Saltonstall Gilbert Saltonstall Hallyfax Skinner
1597 11 William Cravon William Cravon Apletreewick Merchant-Tayler 1610

The Names of the Gentry of this County Returned by the Commissioners, in the
twelfth year of King Henry the sixth.
John Archbishop of York, Commissioners. Richard Earl of Salisbury. Edmund
Darel, Knight, Knights for the Shire. Robert Hopton, Knight. Knights for the
Shire.

Tho. Sayvell, chiv. Rob. Umbtred, chiv. Hen. Bonnflete, chiv. Radul.
Graystock, chi. Edm. Hastings, chiv. Radul. Bulmer, chiv. Will. Plumton, chiv.
Ioh. Sempest, chiv. Ioh. Melton, chiv. Edm. Talbot, chiv. Ioh. Saltvain, chiv.
Will. Gascoigne, chiv. Ant. de Sancto Quintino, arm. Ioh. Constable de Halsham,
arm. Will. Inhidby de Riplay Hen. Vavasor de Hesiwood, arm. Tho. Metham de
Grymston, arm. Ioh. Perchay de Ritton, arm. Radul. Pudsay de Craven arm. Tho.
Saltmarsh de Saltmarsh Tho. Nuthill de Riston, ar. Tho. Constable de Cotfosse,
ar. Tho. Darcy de Newsted ar. Nich. Ashton de Heton, ar. Alex. Lonnde de
Southcave, ar. Will. Ardern de Belthorp, ar. Rich. Redmain de Harwod, ar. Will.
Moncheux de Barnstone, ar. Ioh. Routh de Routh, arm. Tho. Gray de Barton, arm.
Radul. Stanfeld, ar. Rog. Tempest de Broughton, ar. Tho. Clarell de Steton
senioris, ar. Will. Birton de Snapethorp, ar. Ioh. Manston de Manston, ar. Tho.
Trollop de Carethorp, ar. Will. Hastings de Roncheby, ar. Ioh. Conyers de
Cleveland, ar. Rob. Lambton de Nunthorp, ar. Ioh. Banaster de Wakefeld, ar.
Rob. Pylkinton de Ayrenden, ar. Ioh. Midleton de Lonesdale, ar. Tho. Radecliffe
de Bradley, ar. Tho. Redneyne de Lonesdale, ar. Will. Thorton de Lonesdale, ar.
Tho. Manncell de Burford, ar. Iac. Metcalfe de Worsleydale, ar. Rob. Hynkersell
de Parochia de Roderham Gent. Ioh. Hutton de Thrysk, Yeom. Will. de Stokdale de
Richmondshire, Yeo. Rob. Saty^ de Rich. mondshire, Yeom. Bayn. Tennand de
Craven, Yeom. Tho. Goll. de Grysthewayt, Yeom. Rog. Tenand. de Longstrath,
Yeom. Tho. Swelting d^ Newhall in parochia de Spoford, Yeom.
See the Worthyes General of England cap. 14.
Here is a very slender return of Gentry, (hardly worth the inserting and)
bearing no proportion to the extent and Populousness of the Province. The
Reader may remember, how the main design driven on in this Enquiry, was,
(whatever was pretended) to detect such as favored the Title of the House of
York. Now the Gentry of this County were generally addicted to that Party,
which made them so remiss in this matter, slightly slubbering it over, doing
something for show, and nothing to purpose. And this being the last Catalogue
which occurreth in this kind, we will here take

Our farewell of the English Gentry.
The worst I wish our English Gentry is, that by Gods blessing on their thrift
they may seasonably out-grow the sad impressions which our Civil Wars have left
in their estates, in some to the shaking of their Contenument. I could wish
also that for the future, they would be more careful in the Education of their
children, to bring them up in Learning and Religion; for I suspect, that the
observation of forraigners, has some smart truth therein, that Englishmen, by
making their children Gentlemen, before they are men, cause they are so seldom
Wisemen.

Indeed Learning (whatever is fondly fancied to the contrary) is no more a
burden to the bearer thereof, then it is cumbersome for one to carry his head
on his own shoulders. And seeing Gentry alone is no Patrimony (which as the
plain Proverb says, sent to Market will not buy a Bushel of Wheat,) it is
good even for those of the best birth to acquire some Liberal quality, which
in case of casualty, may serve them for a safe second, and besteed them toward
the attaining of a Livelihood. I could name the Scotch Nobleman, who having
lost his Land and Honor, through the default of his father, in the reign of
King James, maintained himself completely by the practice of Physic and
Chimistry, much in my mind to his commendation. And it is reported to the
praise of the Scotch Nobility, that anciently they all were very dextrous at
Surgery, and particularly it is recorded of Buchanan rerum Scotiarum lib. 13.
sol. 131.
James the fourth King of Scotland, quod vulnera scientissime tractavit, that
he was most skillful in handling of wounds. It is good also for those of great
Descent to acquaint themselves with Labor, not knowing what evil may be on the
Earth, and the Romans (all know) did choose their wise men, not by their white
but hard hands, whence the name of Callidi took it is denomination.

But above all Religion is the greatest ornament, without which all Emblemes of
Ancestry are but Putamina Nobilitatis, The husks and empty shells of Nobility.
Yea, when a fair Coat of Arms belong to one of foul manners, it is so far from
being a Credit unto him, that such Arms give the Lie to the bearer thereof, as
Tacitly upbraiding him for being unworthy of his own extraction.

Sheriffs.
HEN. II.
Anno 1 Bartraneus de Bullemer for 9 years. Anno 10 RECORDA MANCA to the end of
this Kings reign.
RICH. I.
Anno 1 Randul. de Glanvil Anno 2 Osbert. de Longo Campo, and Ioh. Marest Anno
3 Osbert. de Longo Campo Anno 4 Hugo. Burdulf, and Hugo de Bobi Anno 5 Idem.
Anno 6 Idem. Anno 7 Galfr. Episc. Ebor. and Roger. de Batwent, for 7 years.
JOH. REX.
Anno 1 Galfr. filius Petri and Ia. de Petem Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Will. de
Stutevill, and Will. Breto Anno 4 Idem. Anno 5 Galfr. filius Will. de Percy and
Rad. de Normanvite Anno 6 Rob. de Lasei Constabular. Cestr. and Rob. Walusis,
for 6 years. Anno 12 Gilb. filius Remfr. and Hen. de Rademan ( sive Radanor)
for 4 years. Anno 16 Rob. de Percy and Hen. de Middleton Anno 17 Petr. filius
Herberti and Rich. de Hussebene
HEN. III.
Anno 1 Anno 2 Galfr. de Heonel, and Simon. de Hales Anno 3 Idem. Anno 4 Galf.
de Nevill Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Galfr. de Nevill, and Simon. de Hall Anno 7 Idem.
Anno 8 Simon. de Hall Anno 9 Eustacius de Ludham Anno 10 ^dem. Anno 11 Rob. de
Rokefeld Anno 12 Idem. Anno 13 ^dem. Anno 14 Will. de Stutevill, and Phil. de
Assell Anno 15 Idem. Anno 16 Idem. Anno 17 Petr. de Rixall Anno 18 Brianus de
Insula Anno 19 Ioh. filius Galfridi Anno 20 Idem. Anno 21 Brianus filius Alani,
and Roger. de Stapleton Anno 22 Idem. Anno 23 Briand. filius Alani, and Nich.
de Molis, and Will. de Middleton Anno 24 Nich. de Molis Anno 25 I^em. Anno 26
Idem. Anno 27 Hen. de Bada, for 4 years. Anno 31 Hen. Batthen Anno 32 Idem.
Anno 33 Will. Daker Anno 34 Rob. de Creping Anno 35 Idem. Anno 36 Will. Daker
Anno 37 Rob. de Creping Anno 38 Will. de Horsenden Anno 39 Will. de Latyme^
Anno 40 Will. de Latymer, for 4 years. Anno 44 Will. de Latymer, and Ioh. de
Oketon Anno 45 Idem. Anno 46 Pet. de Percy Anno 47 Idem. Anno 48 Idem. Anno 49
Will. de Baszall Anno 50 Idem. Anno 51 Idem. Anno 52 Will. de Latymer Anno 53
Idem. Anno 54 Idem. Anno 55 Rog. Estanneus, and Hen. de Kirby Anno 56 Idem.
EDW. I.
Anno 1 Rog. Estraneus Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Alex. de Kirkton, for 4 years. Anno
7 Ranul. de Dacre Anno 8 Idem and Johan* de la Degirmes Anno 9 Ioh. de
Lichgremes, for 5 years. Anno 14 ^ervasius de Clifton, for 6 years. Anno 20
Johan. de Meats Anno 21 Johan. Byrun for 7 years. Anno 28 Rob. Ougle Anno 29
Simon. de Kimne, for 4 years. Anno 33 Will. de Honks Anno 34 Idem. Anno 35
Idem.
EDW. II.
Anno 1 Ioh. de Crepping Anno 2 Idem. Anno 3 Johan. de Gaas and Johan. de Eure
Anno 4 Gerar. Salvein and Johan. Eure Anno 5 Idem. Anno 6 Gera^. Salvein Anno 7
Idem. Anno 8 Ioh. Malebis and Nich. de Meyrill Anno 9 Simon. Ward Anno 10 Nich.
Gray and Simon. Ward Anno 11 Idem. Anno 12 Idem. Anno 13 Nullus titulus Commit.
in hoc Rotulo Anno 14 Anno 15 Simon. Ward Anno 16 Anno 17 Roger. de Somervile
Anno 18 Idem.
EDW. III.
Anno 1 Roger. de Somervile Anno 2 Johan. Darcy Anno 3 Hen. Fawcomberge Anno 4
Idem. Anno 5 Rad. de Bulmer Anno 6 Anno 7 Pet. de salso Maresco Anno 8 Pet. de
Middleton Anno 9 Idem. Anno 10 Petr. de salso Maresco Anno 11 Rad. de Hastingly
and Tho. de Rokeby Anno 12 Rad. de Hastinges Anno 13 Idem. Anno 14 Idem. Anno
15 Ioh. de Elauds Anno 16 Ioh. Fawcombergh Anno 17 Tho. de Rokeby, for 7.
years. Anno 24 Gerar. Salvaine Anno 25 Will. de Plumpton Anno 26 Pet. de
Nuttelle Anno 27 Milo. de Stapleton Anno 28 Pet. Nuttelle Anno 29 Milo.
Stapleton, for 5 years. Anno 34 Tho. de Musgrave Anno 35 Marmad. Constable Anno
36 Idem. Anno 37 Tho. de Musgrave Anno 38 Idem. Anno 39 Idem. Anno 40 Marmad
Constable Anno 41 Idem. Anno 42 Johan. Chamon and Will. Acton Anno 43 Idem.
Anno 44 Idem. Anno 45 Ioh. Bigod Anno 46 Rob. de Roos Anno 47 Will. Acton Anno
48 Ioh. Bygod Anno 49 Will. Percehay Anno 50 Will. de Melton Anno 51 Rad. de
Hastinges
Edward II.
9. SIMON WARD.]

The Male-line of his Ancient family expired in Sir Christopher Ward,
Standard Bearer to K. Henry the eighth, at Bolloign. He lived at Grindal,
(though Mulwish he lived at) leaving three daughters, married into the
respected families of Strickland, Musgrave, and Osborn.

Edward III.
17 THOMAS DE ROKEBY.]

Nothing can be written too much, in the praise of this worthy Knight, who was
twice 1351. and 1355. Lord Justice of Ireland. He came over thither, when the
damnable custom (so is it called in the old Statut. 12. Hen. 4. cap. 6.
Statutes of Ireland) of Coigne and Livory, was publicly practiced. This was
a custom begun in the time of King Edward the second, by Maurice Fitz-Thomas
Earl of Desmond, whereby the Commander in Chief (and others pretending his
power) extorted from people, Horse-meat, Mans-meat, and money at pleasure,
without any ticket, or other satisfaction. A thing so destructive to that
Country, that it is thus described in an ancient discourse of the decay of
Ireland, (the Authors zeal against it transporting him into the marches of
profaneness,) that it was The words are cited by Sir John Davis in his
discovery of Ireland, page 30.
invented in hell, where if it had been used and practiced, it had long since
destroyed the Kingdom of Beel-zebub, as tending to the making of division.

Sir Thomas endeavored to the utmost of his power to extirpate this practice,
and effected it in some measure, famous for this saying, which he left in
Ireland behind him, Annals Hibern. at the end of Camdens Brit. Anno 1356.
That he would eat in wooden dishes, but would pay for his meat gold and silver.

Sheriffs.
Names Place Arms RICH. II. Anno 1 Io. Constable de Huilsham Quarterly, Gules,
and Vairee a B^nd Or. 2 Rob. de Nevill de Horby Gules, a Saltire Argent. 3 Ioh.
Savill Arg. on a Bend Sab. 3 Owls of the first. 4 Rad. Hastings, mil. Argent,
a Maunch Sable. 5 Will. de Erghom 6 Ioh. Savill ut prius 7 Gerard. ^fleet 8
Rob. Constable ut prius 9 Idem. ut prius 10 Rob. de Hilton Arg. 2 B^rs Azure,
over all a Flower de Luce Or. 11 Io Savill ut prius 12 Ioh. Goddard 13 Ia.
Pickerings Ermin, a Lion Rampant Azure, Crowned Or. 14 Will. Melton Az^a Cross
pattonce voided Ar. 15 Rad. de Eure Quarterly, Or and G. on a Bend Sab. 3
Escalops Arg. 16 Ioh. Upeden, mil. Ermin, on a Chief Azure, 3 Lions Or. 17 Ia.
de Pi^kering, m. ut prius 18 Rob. Constable ut prius 19 Rad de Eure ut prius 20
Rob. de Nevill ut prius 21 lac. Pickering ut prius 22 Ioh. Upeden ut prius HEN.
IV. Anno 1 Ioh. Constable, mil. ut prius 2 Tho. Bromflet, mil. Will.
Dronsfield, m. Sab. a Bend issuant 6 flower de Luces, viz. 3 on each side Or. 3
Ioh. Savill ut prius 4 Rich. Redman Gul. 3 Cussions Erm. Buttoned and Tasselled
Or. 5 Idem. ut prius 6 Will. Dronsfield, m. 7 Ioh. Ebton, mil. 8 Tho. Rokeby,
mil. Arg. a Chever. tw'xt 3 Rooks S. [Bea k't and Legd Az. 9 Will. de Harringto^
m. Argent, a Fret Sable. 10 Edw. Hastinges, m. ut prius 11 Edw. Sandesord, m.
Per Chev. Sab. and Ermine, 2 Boars-heads in Chief Cooped Or. 12 Tho. Rokeby,
mil. ut prius HEN. V. Anno 1 Will. Harrington, m. ut prius 2 Tho. Bromsset,
mil. ut prius 3 Rich. Redman, mil. ut prius 4 Edw. Hastinges, mil. ut prius 5
Rob. Hilton, mil. ut prius 6 Ioh. Bigod, mil. 7 Tho, Bromflet, mil. ut prius 8
Halv. Maulever, m. Allerton Sable, 3 Hounds Cursant in Pale A^g. 9 Will.
Harrington, m. ut prius HEN. VI. Anno 1 Will. Harrington, m. ut prius 2 Rob.
Hilton, mil. ut prius 3 Ioh. Langton, mil. 4 Ri^h. Hastinges, m. ut prius 5
Will, Ryther, mil. Azure, 3 Cressents Or. 6 Rob. Hilton, mil. ut prius 7 Will.
Harrington, m. ut prius 8 Ioh. Clorevaux, m. 9 Will. Rither, m. ut prius 10
Rich. Pickering, m. ut prius 11 Hen. Bromfleet, mil. ut prius 12 Rich
Hastinges, m. ut prius 13 Will. Ryther, mil. ut prius 14 Will. Tyriwhit, mil.
Gules, 3 Pewets Or. 15 Ioh. Constable, mi. ut prius 16 Rob. Constable, m. ut
prius 17 Will. Ryther, mil. ut prius 18 Ioh. Tempest, mil. Arg. a Bend betwixt
6 Martlets Sable. 19 Rob. Wate^ton, mil Barrie of 6 Ermine and Gul. 3 Cressents
Sable. 20 Will Gascoign, mil. Gauthorp Arg. on a Pale S. a Lucies-head Erected
Or. 21 Tho. Metham, mil. Quarterly, Az. and Arg. on the first a flower de luce
Or. 2^ Edw, Talbott, mil. Bashall Argent, 3 Lions Rampant Purpure Or. 23 Will.
Eure, mil. ut prius 24 Ia. Strangways, mil. Ormsby Sab. 2 Lions Passant Arg.
Paly, Gules. 25 Rob. Oughtrede, m. Or, on a Cross Flurt G. 4 Martlets of the
field. 26 Will. Plumpton, m. Plumpton Azure, on 5 Fufils in fess Or, (...) many
Scallops G 27 Io. Conyers, mil. * 28 Iac. Pickering, mil. ut prius * Azure a
Maunch Or. ^9 Rob. Oughtrede, m. ut prius 30 Rad. Bygod, mil. ut prius 31 Iac.
Strangways, m. ut prius 32 Ioh. Milton, jun. m. ut prius 33 Ioh. Savill, mil.
ut prius 34 Tho. Harrington, m. ut prius 35 Ioh. Hotham, mil. Or, on a Bend
Sable, 3 Mu^ets Argent. 36 Rad. Bygod, mil. ut prius 37 Ioh. Tempest, mil. ut
prius 38 Tho. Metham, mil. ut prius EDW. IV. Anno 1 Ioh. Savill, mil. ut prius
2 Rob. Constable, m. ut prius 3 Idem. ut prius 4 Ioh. Constable, mi. ut prius 5
Edw. Hastings, mil. ut prius 6 Ric. Fitzwilliams, m. (...) A^gent and Gules. 7
Iac. Harrington, m. ut prius 8 Ioh. Conyers, mil. ut prius 9 Iac. Strangways,
m. ut prius 10 Hen. Vaulvasor, mil. O^, a Fess Dancettee Sable. 11 Edw.
Hastinges, m. ut prius 12 Rad. Ashton, mil. 13 Id^m. ut prius 14 Walt.
Gr^ffith, mil. 15 Ioh Conyers, mil. ut prius 16 Ia. Harrington, mil. ut prius
17 Edw. Hastinges, m. ut prius 18 Will. Ryther, mil. ut prius 19 Rob.
Constable, m. ut prius 20 Hugo. Hastinges, m ut prius 21 Marm. Constable, m. ut
prius 22 Rad. Bygod, mil. ut prius RICH. III. Anno 1 Will. Eure, mil. ut prius
2 Edw. Hastinges, m. ut prius 3 Tho. Markindale HEN. VII. Anno 1 Ioh. Savyll,
mil. ut prius 2 Rob. Ryther, mil. ut prius 3 Ioh. Nevill, mill. ut prius 4
Marm. Constable, m. ut prius 5 Hen. Wentworth, m Woodhouse (...). a (...).
twixt 3 Leopardsheads Or. 6 Tho. Wortley, mil. Argent, a Bend with 3 Bazants
betwixt 6 Martlets Gules. 7 Hen. Wentworth, m. ut prius 8 Ia. Strangways, mil.
ut prius 9 Marm. Constable, m. ut prius 10 Ioh. N^vil, mil. ut prius ^1 Will.
G^scoign, mil. ut prius 12 Ioh. (...), mil. ut prius 13 Will. Conyers, mil. ut
prius 14 Ioh. Hotham, mil. ut prius 15 Idem. ut prius 16 Walt. Griffith, mil.
ut prius 17 Tho. Worthley ut prius 18 Will. Conyers, mil. ut prius 19 Rad.
Ryther, mil. ut prius 20 Io Cutts, m. ( sive Carr) Let the name first be agreed
on. 21 Rad. Eure, mil. ut prius 22 Io Norton, mil. ut prius 23 Idem. ut prius
24 Io. Strangwaies, mi. ut prius HEN. VIII. Anno 1 Mar. Constable, m. ut prius
2 Rad. Evers, m^l. ut prius 3 Io. Constable, mil. ut prius 4 Io. Everingham, m.
Wadsley G. a Lion Ramp. Varry, a label with 3 points Or. 5 Will. Percy, mil. 6
Io. Norton, mil. ut prius See our Notes. 7 Io. Carre, mil. Gules, on a Cheveron
Argent, 3 Mullets L. 8 Rich. Tempest. mil. ut prius 9 Will. Bulmer, mil. G. a
Lion Ramp. Or, billittee S 10 Io. Nevill, mil. ut prius 11 Pe^. Vavasor, mil.
ut prius 12 Th. (...), m. ut prius 13 Will. Maleverer, m. ut prius 14 Hen.
Clifford, mil. Checky Or, and Az. a Fess G. 15 Io. Nevill, mil. ut prius 16 Io.
Constable de Holdernes, mil. ut prius 17 Iac. (...), ar. Argent. 3 Calves
Sable. 18 Will. Middleton, m. 19 Io. Nevill, mil. ut prius 20 Io. Constable,
mil. ut prius 21 Rad. Ellerker, sen. m. Elleker Or a Fess betwixt three
waterbougets Or. 22 Io. Strangwaies, m. ut prius 23 Nich. Fairfax, mil. Arg. 3
Bars Gemelles G. over all a Lion Ramp. S. 24 Mar. Constable, m. ut prius 25 Io.
Constable, mil. ut prius ^6 Will. Fairfax, mil. ut prius 27 Geo. Darcy, mil.
Azu. 3 Cinque-fo^les betwixt 9 (...) croslets Arg. ^8 Br. Hastings, mil. ut
prius 29 Hen. Savill, mil. ut prius 30 Ia. Strangwaies, m. ut prius ^1 Will.
Fairfax, mil. ut prius 32 Rob. Nevill, mil. ut prius 33 Hen. Savill, mil, ut
prius 34 Tho. Tempest, mil. ut prius 35 Ioh. Dawney, mil. Cowicke Arg. on a
Bend couised Sab. 3 Annulets of the First. 36 N chapter Fairfax, mil. ut prius 37
Chri. Danby, mil. Arg. 3 Cheverons Bracy S. on a Chief of the second, 3 Mullets
of the first. 38 Io. Tempest, mil. ut prius EDW. VI. A^no 1 Ri^h. Cholmeley, m.
Whitby Gul. 2 Helmets in Chief Arg. in Base a Garb Or. 2 Will. Vavasor, mil.
ut prius 3 Will. Calverley, m. Calverley 4 Leon. (...), m. Aketon 5 Tho. (...),
mil. 6 Th. (...), m. ut prius PHIL. and MAR. A^no M. 1 Tho. Waterton, m. ut
prius 1, 2 Ing^ Clifford, mil. ut prius 2, 3 Chri. Metcalf, mil. ^t prius 3, 4
Rich. Cholmlev, m. ut prius 4, 5 Rob. Constable, m. ut prius 5, 6 Rad.
Ellerker, mil. ut prius ELIZ. REG. Anno 1 Ioh. Vaughan, ar. Sutton Az. on a
mullet Arg. a Cressent Sable. 2 Ioh. Nevill, mil. ut prius 3 Nich. Fairfax,
mil. ut prius 4 Geo. Bows, mil. Stretham Erm. 3 Bows Bent G. 5 Will. Vavasor,
mil ut prius 6 Will. Ingleby, mil. Ripley Sable, an Estoile Argent. 7 Tho.
Gargrave, mil. Nosthall Lozengie Arg. and Sable, on a Bend of the first, 3
Cressents of the second. 8 Ioh. Constable, mil. ut prius 9 Hen. Savyll, ar. ut
prius 10 Rich. Norton, ar. ut prius 11 Tho. Gargrave, mil. ut prius 12 Chri.
Hilliard, ar. Az. a Cheveron betwixt 3 mullets Or. 13 Tho. Fairfax, ar. ut
prius 14 Ioh. Dawney, ar. ut prius 15 Marm. Constable, m. ut prius 16 Will.
Bellasis, mil. Newborogh Arg. a Cheveron Gu. betwixt 3 flower de luces Az. 17
Tho. Danby, mil. ut prius 18 Tho. Boynton, ar. Barmstone Or. a Fess between 3
Cressents Gules. 19 Will. Fairfax, ar. ut prius 20 Cl. Wondsworth, ar.
Kirklington 21 Rich. Goodrich, ar. Ribton Arg. on a Fess G. twixt 2 Lions pas.
Guard. S. a flour de luce of the first, between 2 Cressents O. Arg. a Lion
Rampant Sable. 22 Rad. Burcher, ar. 23 Rob. Stapleton, mi. 24 Tho. Wentworth,
m. ut prius 25 Got. Gargrave, mil. ut prius 26 Ioh. Hotham, mil. ut prius 27
Bri. Stapleton, ar. ut prius 28 Hen. Constable, m. ut prius 29 Rob. Ask Or, 3
Barralets Azure. 30 Rich. Maleverer ut prius 31 Io. Dawney, mil. ut prius 32
Phil. Constable, ar. ut prius 33 Rich. Goodrick, ar. ut prius 34 Will. Mallery
Ripley Or, a Lion Ramp. queve forchee G. collard Ar. 35 Rad. Eure, ar.
primogen. Domini Eure ut prius 36 Fran. Vaughan, ar. ut prius 37 Chri.
Hilliard, ar. ut prius 38 Fran. Boynton, ar. ut prius 39 Tho. Lassells, ar.
Sable, a Cross Flurt Or. 40 Marm. G^imston, ar. Arg. on a Fess Sable, 3 mullets
of 6 points Or. 41 Rob. Swift, ar.* Doncaster 42 Fran. Clifford, ar. ut prius *
Or, a Cheveron Varry twixt 3 Roebucks coursant proper. 43 Will Wentworth, ar.
ut prius 44 Tho. Strickland, ar. 45 Hen. Bellasis, mil. ut pri^ JAC. REX. Anno
1 Hen. Bellasis, mil. ut prius 2 Rich. Gargrave, m. ut prius 3 Will Banburgh,
m* Howson Arg. a Pheon, on a Chief Sab. a Lion Passant of the first. 4 Hen.
Griffeth, mil. ut prius 5 Tim. Hutton, mil. Mask 6 Hug. Bethell, mil. Alne Ar.
a Cheveron between 3 Boarsheads (...) S. 7 Fran. Hildsley, mil. 8 Tho. Dawney,
mil. ut prius 9 Hen. Sling^by, mil. See our Notes. 10 Chri. Hilliard, mil. ut
prius 11 Geo. Savill, m. and bar. ut prius 12 Io. Armitage, ar. Kerkles Az. a
Lions-head Erased between 3 Croslets Or. 13 Edw. Stanhop, mil. Quarterly Ermine
and Gules. 14 Mith. Warton, m. Beverly Or, on a Cheveron Az^ a Ma^let betwixt 2
Pheons of the first. 15 Rob. Swift, m. ut prius 16 Will. Alford, mil. Bilton
Gules, 6 Pears and a Chief Or. 17 Arth. Ingram, m. Erm. on a Fess Gu. 3
Escallops Or. 18 Tho. Odwer, m. and b. 19 Rich. Tempest, mil. ut prius 20 Guide.
Palms, mil. Lindley G. 3 flour de luces Arg. a Chief Varry. 21 Hen. Ienkins,
mil. 22 Rich. Cholmeley, m. ut prius CAR. REX. Anno 1 Tho. Wentworth, (...) and
(...). ut prius 2 Tho. Norcliff, mil. Manythorp Azure 5 Mascles in Cross Or, a
Chief Erm. 3 Tho. Fairfax, mil. ut prius 4 Math. Boynton, mil. and bar. ut
prius 5 Art. Ingram, jun. m. ut prius 6 Io. Gibson, mil. 7 Tho. Laton, mil. Lat
n A^. a Cheveron betwixt 3 Cross. Crosle^s Fetchee Sable. 8 Arth. Robinson, m.
Newby 9 Mar. Wyvell, mil. and bar. Custable Burton G 3 Cheverons braced, Varry
a Chief Or. 10 Ioh Hotham, m and b. ut prius 11 Will. Pennyman, b. Mask G. a*
Cheveron Ermin^ bewixt 3 Spear-heads A^g. 12 Ioh. Ramsden, mil Byram Ar. on a
Cheu. betwixt 3 flower de luces S. asmany Rames* heads cooped of the first.

Henry IV.
8 THOMAS ROKEBY, Mil.]

I may call him Sir Thomas junior, in distinction from an Elder (probably his
Ancestor) of his Name, of whom in the 17. of King Edward the third. This Sir
Thomas in this year of his Sherivalty, acquitted himself Loyal and Valiant,
against Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland, and the Lord Bardolfe, who
returning out of Scotland with considerable Forces, began a War against the
King, both which, Sir Thomas at Bareham-more in this County overcame and took
Prisoners. A service the more remarkable, because performed by the sole
assistance of this Shire, and quenching the fire in the first spark, he
presented the King with a Cheap, Sudden, and Seasonable Victory.

Henry V.
8 HALVATHEUS MAULEVER, Mil.]

Or Mal levorer, in Latin Malus Leporarius, or the Bad Hare-^unter. A
Gentleman of this County, being to let slip a brace of Greyhounds, to run for
a great wager, (Tradition is the Author) so held them in the Swinge, that they
were more likely to strangle themselves then kill the Hare; whereupon this
Surname was fixed on his family. I doubt not but many of this extraction are
since as Dexterous in the Criticismes of hunting as any N^mrod whatsoever.

Henry VI.
11 HENRY BROMFLEET, Miles.]

In the next year, he was sent with other Ambassadors both of the Clergy and
Layety, to the Council of Basil, and after his return, was by the King
Created Lord Vescy in the right of his Mother Anastatia, Daughter and Heir to
William Atton Lord Vescy. Mr. Brit. (...) T^rksh re.
Camden observes. this Passage inserted in his Pattent, unusual in that age.

Volumus and vos, and Haer^des vestros Masculos, de corpore vestro legitime
Exeuntes, Barons de Vescy (...).

Now though hereby the Barony of Vescy was intailed only on his Heirs Male,
yet was the Kings Favor more extensive then his Patent in this Particular. For
this Henry leaving no Male-iss^, but Margaret his Sole Daughter and Heir,
married to John Lord Clifford, (father to Henry first Earl of Cumberland of
that Sur-name;) She notwithstanding the Premises, derived the Barony of Vescy
into that Family, which at this day they enjoy.

22 EDMOND TALBOT, Mil.]

This family of Talbots is (though unrelated to the house of Shrew^bury,) of
right ancient extraction, seated in this Country ever since the time of King
Henry the second. As for this Edmond Talbot our present Sheriff, (who dyed in
the first of (...). Edward the fourth,) he was father to Sir Thomas Talbot, one
very zealous for the house of York, and a servant to King Richard the third,
who bestowed an Anuity of 40* pounds by the year, on him and his heirs for his
good service, as by the following Patent will appear.

Richardus Dei Gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae and Dom. Hiberniae. Omnibus ad
quos praesentes literae pervenerint salutem: sciatis quod de gratia nostra
speciali ac pro bono and gratuito servitio quod dilectus serviens noster Thomas
Talbot Miles in ^aptur a magni adversarii nostri Henrici nuper (de facto sed
non de jure) Regis Angliae nobis ac bon^ Memoriae Regi Edwardi quarto (fratri
nostro) defuncto impendit, and in futurum fideliter impendet; dedimus and
Concedimus eidem Thomae, and heredibus suis Masculis quandam Annuitatem, sive
annualem reditum quadraginta libraram, Habendum, and percipiendum annuatim
eidem Thomae and heredibus suis de-exitibus perficuis and reventionibus
Comitatus Palatini nostri Lancastriae in Com. Lanc. per manus Receptoris ibidem
pro tempore existente ad Festum Sancti Michaelis Arch-angeli, aliquo statuto
actu sive Ordinatione in contrarium editis sive provisis in aliquo non Obstante.

In cujus rei testimonium has literas fieri fecimus Patentes Dat. apud Ebor.
2do. Aug. Anno regni 2do.

A branch of these Talbots are removed into Lancashire, and from those in
Yorkshire Colonel Thomas Talbot is descended.

Edward IV.
10 HEN. VAVASOR, Mil.]

It is observed of this family, that they never married an Heir, or buried
their Wives. The place of their habitation is called Hassell-wood, from wood,
which there is not wanting, though stone be far more plentiful, there being a
quarry within that Manor, out of which the stones were taken which built the
Cathedral and Saint Mary's Abbey in York, the Monasteries of Holden-selby and
Beverly, with Thornton-colledge in Lincolnshire, and many others. So pleasant
also the prospect of the said Hassel-wood, that the Cathedralls of York and
Lincoln, being more then 60. miles asunder may thence be discovered.

H^nry VIII.
2 RADULPHUS EURE, Alias EVERS, Mil.]

He was afterward by the above named King, Created a Baron and Lord Warden of
the Marshes toward Scotland. He gave frequent demonstration (as our Chronicles
do testify) both of his Fidelity and Valor, in receiving many smart Incursions
from, and returning as many deep Impressions on the Scots. There is a Lord
Evers at this day, doubtless a Remoter Descendant from him, but in what
distance and degree it is to me unknown.

5 WILLIAM PERCY, Mil.]

I recommend the following Passage to the Readers choicest observation, which I
find in Camdens Brit. in Yorkshire,

More beneath, hard by the River [Rhidals] side stands Riton, an ancient
Possession of the ancient family of the Percy-hays, commonly called Percys.

I will not be over confident, but have just cause to believe this our Sheriff
was of that Family. And if so, he gave for his Arms, Party per fess, Argent
and Gules, a Lion Rampant, having Will. Percy-hay (Sheriff in the last of Edw.
the third) for his Ancestor.

23 NICHOLAS FAIRFAX, Mil.]

They took their name of Fairfax, a Pulchro Capillitio, from the fair hair,
either bright in color or comely for the plenty thereof, their Motto in
alusion to their Name is Fare, fac, say do, such the sympathy (it seems)
betwixt their tongues and hearts. This Sir Nicholas Fairfax minds me of his
Namesake and Kins-man Sir Nicholas Fairfax of Bullingbrooke Knight of the
Rhodes, in the reign of Edward the fourth.

Jacomo Bosio in his fol. 578.
Italian History of Saint John of Jerusalem, says, that Sir Nicholas Fairfax
was sent out of Rhodes, when it was in great distress, to Candia, for relief of
Men and Provisions, which he did so well perform, as the Town held out for some
time longer, and he gives him this Character in his own Language, Cavilero
Nicholo Fairfax Inglich homo multo spiritoso e prudento.

Queen Mary.
3 CHRISTOPHER METCALFE, Mil.]

He attended on the Judges at York, attended on with three hundred Horsemen,
all of his own name and kindred, well mounted and suitably attired. The Roman
Fabii, the most populous tribe in that City, could hardly have made so fair an
appearance, in so much that Master Camden gives the Metcalfes this character,

Camdens Brit. in Yorkshire.
Quae numerosissima totius Angliae familia his temporibus censetur. Which at
this time, viz. Anno 1607. is counted the most numerous family of England.

Here I forbear the mentioning of another, which perchance might vie numbers
with them, lest casually I minister matter of contest.

But this Sir Christopher is also memorable for stocking the river Yower in
this County, hard by his house, with Idem ibidem.
Crevishes, (which he brought out of the South) where they thrive both in
plenty and bigness. For although

Omnia non omnis terra, nec unda feret.
All lands do not bring,
Nor all waters every thing.
Yet most places are like trees which bear no fruit, not because they are
barren, but are not grafted, so that dumb nature seems in some sort to make
signs to Art for her assistance. If some Gentleman in our parts, will by way
of ingenuous retaliation, make proof to plant a Colonie of such Northern
Fishes, as we want in our Southern Rivers, no doubt he would meet with suitable
success.

Queen Elizabeth.
4 GEORGE BOWS, Mil.]

He had a great Estate in this County, and greater in the Bishopric of Durham.
A Man of Metal, indeed, and it had been never a whit the worse, if the
quickness thereof, had been a little more allayed in him. This was he who some
seven years after, viz. Anno 1569. was besieged by the Northern Rebels in
Bernards Castle, and straightened for Provision, Camdens Eliz Anno 1569.
yielded the same on Condition they might depart with their Armor.

After the suppression of the Rebels, their Execution was committed to his
Care, wherein he was severe unto Cruelty. For many Well-meaning people were
engaged (and others drawn in) into that Rising, who may truly be termed Loyal
Traitors, with those two hundred 2 Samuel 15. 11.
men, who went after Absolon in their simplicity, and knew not any thing,
solicited for the Queens service. These Sir George hung up by scoars, (by the
Office of his Marshallship,) and had hung more, if Mr. Bernard Gilpin, had not
begged their lives by his importunate intercession.

23 ROBERT STAPLETON, Mil.]

He was descended from Sir Miles Stapleton, one of the first founders of the
Garter, and Sheri^ in the 29. of Edward the third. He met the Judges with
sevenscore men in suitable liveries, and was (says my Sir Jo. Harrington in
the Archbishops of York.
Author) in those days for a man well spoken, properly seen in languages, a
comely and goodly personage, had scant an equal, (except Sir Philip Sidney) no
superior in England. He married one of the Co- heirs of Sir Henry Sherington,
by whom he had a numerous posterity.

42 FRANCIS CLIFFORD, Ar.]

He afterward succeeded his Brother George in his Honors and Earldome of
Cumberland, a worthy Gentleman, made up of all Honorable accomplishments. He
was Father to Henry the fifth and last Earl of that Family, whose sole Daughter
and Heir was married to the right Honorable, and well worthy of his Honor,
the then Lord Dungarvon, since Earl of Cork.

45 HENRY BELLASIS, Mil.]

He was afterward by King Charles Created Baron Fauconbridge of Yarum, as
since his Grandchild by his Eldest Son is made Vicount Fauconbridge.

John Bellasis Esquire, his second Son, who in the Garrison of Newarke and
elsewhere, has given ample Testimony of his Valor, and all Noble Qualities
accomplishing a Person of Honor, since is advanced to the dignity of a Baron.

King James.
9 HENRY SLINGSBY, Mil.]

The Arms of this Ancient and Numerous Family (to large too be inserted in our
List) are as follows; Quarterly the First and Fourth Gules, a Cheveron
between two Leopardsheads, and a Hutchet or Bugle Argent. The Second and Third
Argent, a Griffon Surgeant Sable, suppressed by a Fess Gules.

11 GEORGE SAVILL, Mil. and Bar.]

This is the last mention of this Numerous, Wealthy, and Ancient Family, which
I find in this Catalogue; and here, Reader, to confess my self unto thee, my
expectation is defeated, hoping to find that vigorous Knight Sir John Savill in
this Catalogue of Sheriffs. But it seems, that his constant Court-attendance,
(being Privy-Councellour to King Charles) privileged him from that employment,
until, by the same King he was Created Baron Savill of Pomfraict, as his Son
since was made Earl of Sussex. I hear so high commendation of his house at
Houley, that it disdaineth to yield precedence to any in this Shire.

King Charles.
12 JOHN RAMSDEN, Mil.]

The Reader will pardon my Untimely and Abrupt breaking of this Catalogue, for
a reason formerly rendered. Only let me add that the Renowned Knight Sir
Marmaduke Langdale was Sheriff, 1641. He without the least Self-attribution may
say, as to the Kings side of Northern Actions, Pars Ego magna fui. But as for
his Raising the Siege of Pomfraict, (felt before seen by the Enemy) it will
sound Romanza-like to Posterity, with whom it will find Plus famae quam fidei.
No wonder therefore if K. Charles the second Created him a Baron, the Temple of
Honor being of due open to him, who has passed through the Temple of Virtue.

The Battles.
Many Engagements (as much above Skirmshes as beneath Battles) happened in this
Shire. But that at Marston-moor, July 2. 1644. was our English Pharsalian
Fight, or rather the Fatal Battle of Cannae to the Loyal Cavaliers.

Indeed it is Difficult and Dangerous to present the Particulars thereof. For
one may easier do right to the Memories of the Dead, then save the Credits of
some Living. However things past may better be found fault with, then amended;
and when God will have an Army Defeated, Mistakes tending thereto will be
multiplied in despite of the greatest care and diligence.

Know then that Prince Rupert having fortunately raised the Siege at York, drew
out his Men into the Moor, with full intention to fight the Enemy. Discreet
Persons, beholding the Countenance of the present affairs with an unpartiall
Eye, found out many Disswasives for the Prince to hazard a Battle. 1. He had
done his Work by relieving York, let him Digest the Honor thereof, and grasp
at no more. 2. His wearied Soldiers wanted refreshing. 3. Considerable
Recruits were daily expected out of the North, under Colonel Clavering.

Add to all these, that such were the present Animosities in the Parliament
Army, and so great their Mutual Disatisfactions when they drew off from York,
that (as a prime Person since freely confessed,) if let alone, they would have
fallen foul amongst themselves, had not the Prince preparing to fight them,
Cemented their Differences to agree against a General Enemy. But a Blot; is no
Blot if not hit; and an Advantage, no Advantage, if unknown: though this was
true, the Prince was not informed of the differences aforesaid.

However he did not so much run out of his own Ambition of Honor, as answer
the Spur of the Kings Command, from whom he had lately received a Letter,
(still safe in his Custody) speedily to fight the Enemy if he had any
Advantage, that so he might spare and send back some Supplies to his Majesty's
perplexed occasions at Oxford.

Besides the Prince had received certain Intelligence, that the Enemy had the
Day before, sent away seven thousand Men, now so far distanced, that they were
past possibility of returning that day. The former part hereof was true, the
latter false, confuted by the great Shout given this day in the Parliaments
Army, at the return of such forces unto them.

But now it was too late to draw off, the Parliament forces necessitating them
to fight. A Summers Evening is a Winters Day, and about 4. a Clock the Battle
began.

Some causelessly complain on the Marquess of New Castle, that he drew not his
men soon enough (according to his Orders) out of York, to the Prince his
seasonable succor. Such consider not that Soldiers newly relieved from a Nine
weeks Siege, will a little Indulge themselves. Nor is it in the power of a
General, to make them at such times to March at a Minutes warning, but that
such a Minute will be more then an Hour in the length thereof.

The Lord General Gor^ng so valiantly charged the left Wing of the Enemy, that
they fairly forsook the Field. General L^slie with his Scottish ran away more
then an Yorkshire mile, and a Wee-bit. Fame with her Trumpet sounded their
flight as far as Oxford, the Royalists rejoicing with Bonfires for the Victory.
But within few days, their Bays by a mournful Metamorphosis were turned into
Willow, and they sunk the lower in true sorrow, for being mounted so high in
Causeless Gladness.

For Cromwell with his Curassires did the work of that Day. Some suspected
Colonel Hurry (lately converted to the Kings party) for foul play herein, for
he divided the Kings Old Horse (so valiant and victorious in former fights)
into small Bodies, alleging this was the best way to break the Scottish
Lanciers. But those Horse, always used to charge together in whole Regiments or
greater Bodies, were much discomposed with this new Mode, so that they could
not find themselves in themselves. Besides a right valiant Lord, severed (and
in some sort secured) with a Ditch from the Enemy, did not attend till the foe
forced their way unto him, but gave his men the trouble to pass over that
Ditch: the occasion of much disorder.

The Van of the Kings foot being led up by the truly honorable Colonel John
Russell, impressed with unequal numbers, and distanced from seasonable
succor, became a Prey to their Enemy. The Marquess of New-castles White-coats
(who were said to bring their Winding sheet about them into the field) after
thrice firing, ^ell to it with the But ends of their Muskets, and were
invincible; till mowed down by Cromwells Carassires, with Jobs Servants, they
were all almost slain, few escaping to bring the Tidings of their overthrow.

Great was the Execution on that Day, Cromwell commanding his Men to give no
quarter. Various the numbering of the slain of both sides, yet I meet with none
mounting them above six, or sinking them beneath three thousand.

I remember no Person of honor slain on the Kings side, save the hopeful Lord
Carry, eldest Son to the E. of Monmouth. But on the Parliaments side, the Lord
Didup [a lately created Baron] was slain, on the same Token, that when King
Charles said, that he hardly remembered, that he had such a Lord in Scotland;
one returned, that the Lord had wholly forgotten that he had such a King in
England. Soon after more then 60. Royalists of prime quality removed themselves
beyond the Seas, so that hencefor ward the Kings affairs in the North, were in
a languishing condition.

The Farewell.
As I am glad to hear the plenty of a courser kind of Cloth is made in this
County, at Halifax, Leeds, and elsewhere, whereby the meaner sort are much
employed, and the middle sort enriched; So I am sorry for the general
complaints made thereof. Insomuch that it is become a general by word, to
shrink as Northern Cloth, (a Giant to the eye, and Dwarf in the use thereof,)
to signify such, who fail their Friends in deepest distress, depending on their
assistance. Sad that the Sheep the Emblem of Innocence, should unwillingly
cover so much craft under the woo^ thereof; and sadder, that Fullers commended
in Mark 9. 3.
Scripture for making cloth white, should justly be condemned for making their
own Consciences black, by such fraudulent practices. I hope this fault for the
future, will be amended in this County and elsewhere. For sure it is, that the
transporting of wool and Fullers-earth (both against Law) beyond the Seas, are
not more prejudicial to our English clothing abroad, then the deceit in
making cloth at home, debasing the Foreign estimation of our Cloth to the
unvaluable damage of our Nation.

YORK is an Ancient City built on both sides of the River Ouse, conjoined with
a Bridge, wherein there is one Arch, the highest and largest in England. Here
the Roman Emperors had their residence, (Severus and Valerius Constantius their
death) preferring this place before London, as more approaching the Center of
this Island: and he who will hold the Ox-hide from rising up on either side,
must fix his Foot in the middle thereof.

What it lacks of London in Bigness and Beauty of Buildings, it has in
Cheapness and Plenty of Provisions. The Ordinary in York will make a Feast in
London, and such Persons who in their Eating consult both their Purse and
Palate, would choose this City as the Staple place of good cheer.

Manufactures.
It challenges none peculiar to it self, and the Foreign Trade is like their
River, (compared with the Thames) low and little. Yet send they course Cloth to
Ha^orough, and have Iron, Flax and other Dutch Commodities in return.

But the Trade which indeed is but driven on at York, runs of it self at
Hull, which of a Fishers Town, is become a Cities fellow, within three hundred
years, being the Key of the North. I presume this Key (though not new made) is
well mended, and the Wards of the Lock much altered, since it shut out our
Sovereign from entering therein.

The Buildings.
The Cathedral in this City answers the Character which a foreign The
Writer of the life of Aeneas Syl^ius or Pope Pius secundus.
Author gives it, Templum opere and magnitudine toto orb memorandum, the work
of John Roman, Willam Melton, and John Thoresbury. Successive Archbishops
thereof. The Family of the Percyes contributing Timber, of the Valvasors, Stone
thereunto.

Appending to this Cathedral is the Chapter House, such a Master piece of Art
that this Golden verse (understand it written in Golden Letters) is ingraved
therein.

Ut Rosa Flos Florum sic est Domus ista Domoru^.
Of Flowers that grow the Flower's the Rose,
All Houses so this House out-goes.
Now as it follows not that the Usurping Tulip is better then the Rose, because
preferred by some Foreign Fancies before it; so is it as inconsequent that
Mod^h Italian Churches are better then this Reverent Magnificent Structure,
because some humorous Travailors are so pleased to esteem them.

One may justly wonder, how this Church, whose Edifice Woods (designed by the
Devotion of former ages, for the repair thereof) were lately sold, should
consist in so good a condition. But as we read, Psalm. 106. 46.
that, God made all those to pity his Children, who carried them captive; so I
am informed, that some who had this Cath^drall in their command, favorably
reflected hereon, and not only permitted but procured the repair thereof; and
no doubt he does sleep the more comfortably, and will die the more quietly for
the same.

Proverbs.
Lincoln was, London is, and York shall be,]

Though this be rather a Prophecy then a Proverb, yet because something
Proverbiall therein, it must not be omitted. It might as well be placed in
Lincoln shire, or Middlesex, yet (if there be any truth therein) because Men
generally worship the Rising Sun, blame me not if here I only take notice
thereof,

That Lincoln See the life of Archbishop Mountain in the B^efactors of this
County.
was, namely a far Fairer, Greater, Richer City, then now it is, does plainly
appear by the ruins thereof, being without controversy the greatest City in
the Kingdom of Mercia.

That London is, we know; that York shall be, God knows. If no more be meant,
but that York hereafter shall be in a better condition then now it is, some may
believe, and m^re do desire it. Indeed this Place was in a Fair way of
Preferment, (because of the convenient Situation thereof,) when England and
Scotland were first United into GreatB^itain* But as for those who hope it
shall be the English Metropolis, they must wait until the River of Thames run
under the great Arch of Ouse-bridge. However York shall be, that is, shall be
York still, as it was before.

Saints.
FLACCUS ALBINUS more commonly called Alcuinus, was born, say some, nigh
London; say others, in York, B. de scrip^. Brit. Number. 17. Cent. 2.
the later being more Probable, because befriended with his Northern Education,
under Venerable Bede, and his advancement in York. Here he so pl^d the well
furnished Library therein, (much In (...) sua ad Carolum Mag^um.
praised by him) that he distilled it into himself, so great and general his
knowledge. Bale ranketh him the third Englishman for Learning, placing Bid and
Adelme before him; and our Alcuinus his Humilt^y is contented with the place,
though he be called up higher by the judgments of others.

Hence he travailed beyond the Seas, and what Aristotle was to Alexander, he
was to Charles the first Emperor. Yea, Charles owed unto him the best part of
his Title The Great, being made Great, in Arts and Learning by his Instructions.

This Alcuinus was the Founder of the University in Paris, so that whatsoever
the French brag to the contrary, and slight our Nation, their Learning was
Lumen de Lumine nostro, and a Tapor lighted at our Torch. When I seriously
peruse the Orthography of his Name, I call to mind an Anagram which the Papists
made of Reverend Calvin, bragging like boys for finding of a Bees, when it
proves but a Hornets Nest; I mean Triumphing in the sweetness of their conceit,
though there be nothing but a malicious sting therein.

CALVINUS LUCIANUS
And now they think they have Nicked the Good man to Purpose, because, Lucianus
was notoriously known for an Atheist, and Grand Scoffer at the Christian
Religion. A silly and spirefull Fancy, seeing there were many Lucians worthy
Persons in the Primitive ^imes, amongst whom the chief, one Presbyter of
Antioch and Eusebius. lib. 8 cap. 13.
Martyr under Dio^sian, so Famous to Posterity for his Translation of the
Bible. Besides the same literal allusion is found in the name of

ALCUINUS LUCIANUS
Thus these Nominall Curiosities, whether they hit or miss the Mark, equally
import nothing to Judicious Beholders.

He was made first Abbot of Saint Augustines in Canterbury, and afterward of
Saint Martins in the City of Towers in France, and dying Anno 780, he was
buried in a small Convent appendant to his Monastery.

He is here entered under the Topic of Saints, because though never solemnly
canonized, he well deserved the Honor: His Subjects said to David, Thou art
worth ten Thousand of us; and though I will not* ascend to so high a
Proportion, many of the Modern * a Sam. 18. ^.
Saints in the Church of Rome must modestly confess, that on a Due and True
estimate our Alcuinus was worth many Scores of them at least; so great his
Learning and holy his Conversation.

SEWALL had his Nativity probably in these Parts. But he was bred in Oxford,
and S. N.
was a Scholar to St. Edmund, who was wont to say to him, Sewald, Sewald, thou will have many Afflictions, and dye a Martyr. Nor did he miss much of his mark
therein, though he met with Peace and Plenty at first, when Archbishop of
York. The occasion of his Trouble was, when the Pope plenitudine potestatis,
intruded one Jordan an Italian to be Dean of York, whose Godwin in the Arch
bishops o^ York.
Surprised Installing Sewald stoutly opposed. Yea at this time there were in
England, no fewer then three Hundred Benefices possessed by Italians, where the
People might say to them, as the Eunuch to Philip, How can we understand
without an ^nterpreter? Yea which was far worse, they did not only not teach
in the Church, but mis-teach by their lascivious and debauched behavior. Asfor
our Sewald Matthew Paris says plainly, that he would not bow his Knee to Baal,
so that for this his contempt, he was excommunicated and cursed by Bell, Book,
and Candle, though it was not the Bell of Aarons Garment, nor Book of
Scripture, nor the Candle of an Unpartiall Judgment. This brak his heart, and
his Memory lies in an Intricate posture, (peculiar almost to himself) betwixt
Martyr and no Martyr, a Saint and no Saint. Sure it is, ^ewall though dying
excommunicated in the Romish, is reputed Saint in Vulgar estimation, and some
will maintain that the Popes solemn Canonization is no more requisite to the
making of a Saint, then the Opening of a Man^ Windows is necessary to the
luster of the Sun. Sewald died Anno Dom. 1258.

Script. Brit. Cen^. 4. Number. 23.
Bale, who assumeth liberty to himself to surname Old-writers at his pleasure,
is pleased to Addition this worthy man, Sewaldus Magnanimus.

Martyrs.
VALENTINE FREESE and his Wife were both of them born in this City, and both
gave their lives therein at one Fox Acts and Mon. p. 10^7.
Stake, for the testimony of Jesus Christ, Anno Domini 1531. Probably by order
from Edward Lee the cruel Archbishop. I cannot readily call to mind a man and
his wife thus Married together in Martyrdom: And begin to grow confident that
this Couple was the first and la^ in this kind.

Confessors.
EDWARD FREESE brother to the aforesaid Valentine, was born in Idem ibidem page
1026.
York, and there a Prentice to a Painter. He was afterward a Novice-Monke, and
leaving his Convent, came to Colchester in Essex. Here his heretical
Inclination (as then accounted) discovered it self in some sentences of
Scripture, which he Painted in the Borders of Cloths, for which, he was brought
before John Stoaksley Bishop of London, from whom he found such cruel usage as
is above belief. Master Idem ibidem.
Fox says, that he was fed with Manchet made of Saw-dust, or at the least a
great part thereof, and kept so long in Prison, Manicled by the wrests, till
the Flesh had overgrown his Irons; and he not able to kembe his own head became
so distracted, that being brought before the Bishop, he could say nothing, but
my Lord is a good man. A sad sight to his Friends, and a sinful one to his
Foes, who first made him mad, and then made mirth at his madness.

I confess distraction is not mentioned in that list of losses, reckoned up by
our Mark. 10. 29.
Savior, He that left his House, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or
Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands, for my sake, etc. But seeing his wits
is nearer and dearer to any man then his wealth, and seeing what is so lost may
be said to be left; no doubt this poor man's distraction was by God graciously
accepted, on his enemies severely punished, and to him mercifully rewarded. We
must not forget how the wife of this Edward Freese, being big with child, and
pressing in to see her husband, the Porter at Fulham gave her such a kick on
the belly, that the child was destroyed with that stroke immediately, and she
died afterward of the same.

Prelates.
JOHN ROMAN so called because his Godwin in the Catalogue of the Archbishops of
York.
Father was born in Rome, though living a long time in this City, being
Treasurer of the Cathedral therein, and I conjecture this John his Son born in
York, because so Indulgent thereunto. For generally Pure Pute Italians
preferred in England, transmitted the gain they got by Bills of Exchange or
otherwise into their own Country, and those outlandis^ Mules though lying down
in English Pasture, left no Hairs behind them: Whereas this Roman had such
Affection for York, that being advanced Archbishop, he began to build the Body
of the Church, and finished the North Part of the Cross-Isle therein. Polydore
Virgil praised him, (no wonder that an Italia^ commended a Roman) for a Man of
great Learning and Sincerity.

He fell into the disfavour of King Edward the first, for Excommunicating
Anthony Beck Bishop of Durham, and it cost him four thousand marks to regain
his Princes Good Will. He died Anno Domini 1295. And let none grudge his Buria^
in the best Place of the Church, who was so Bountiful a Builder thereof.

ROBERT WALBEY born in this City, Godwin in his Catalogue of Bishops.
was therein bred an Aug^stinian Friar, he afterward went over into France,
where he so applied his studies, that at last he was chosen Divinity Professor
in the City of Toulouse: he was Chaplain to the black Prince, and after his
death to his Father K. Edward the third. Now as his Mr. enjoyed three Crowns,
so under him in his three Kingdoms this his Chaplain did partake successively
of three Miters, being first a Bishop in Gascoine, then Archbishop of Dublin
in Ireland, and afterward Bishop of Chichester in England, not grudging to be
degraded in Dignity, to be preferred in profit. At last he was consecrated
Archbishop of York, and was the first and last Native which that City saw the
least of Infants, and (in his Time) when Man, the greatest therein. Yet he
enjoyed his place but a short time, dying May 29. Anno Domini, 1397.

Since the Reformation.
THOMAS MORTON was born Anno 1564. in the City of York, whose father Richard
Morton, (allied to Cardinal Morton Arch* bishop of Canterbury,) was a Mercer
(I have been informed the first of that calling in that City sure,) of such
repute, that no Mercers for many years by past, were of any Eminency, but
either immediately or mediately were Apprentices unto him. He was bred in York
school, where he was Schoolfellow with Guy Faux, which I note, partly, to show
that Loyalty and Treason, may be educated under the same Roof, partly, to give
a check to the received opinion, that Faux was a Fleming, no Native Englishman.

He was bred in Saint Johns-colledge in Cambridge, and chosen Fellow thereof to
a Fellowship to which he had no more Propriety, then his own Merit, before
Eight Comp^titors for the place, equally capable with himself, and better
befriended.

Commencing Doctor in Divinity, he made his Position, (which though unusual
was Arbitrary and in his own power,) on his second Question, which much
defeated the expectation of Doctor Playfere, replying upon him with some
passion, Commos^i mihi stomachum. To whom Morton returned, Gratulor tibi
Reverende professor de bono tuo stomacho caenabis apud me hac nocte.

He was successively preferred Dean of Gloucester, Winchester, Bishop of
Chester, Coventry and Lichfield and Durham. The Foundation which he laid of
Foreign corre spondency with eminent persons of different persuasions, when he
attended as Chaplain to the Lord Evers, (sent by King James Ambassador to the
King of Denmark and many Princes of Germany,) he built upon unto the Day of his
Death.

In the late Long Parliament, the displeasure of the House of Commons fell
heavy upon him, partly, for subscribing the Bishops Protestation for their
Votes in Parliament; partly, for refusing to resign the seal of his Bishopric,
and baptizing a Daughter of John Earl of Rutland with the sign of the Cross;
two faults, which compounded together in the judgment of honest and wisemen
amounted to a High Innocence.

Yet the Parliament allowed him eight hundred pounds a year (a proportion above
any of his Brethren) for his maintenance. But alas the Trumpet of their
Charity gave an uncertain sound, not assigning by whom or whence this sum
should be paid. Indeed the severe Votes of the Parliament ever took full
effect, according to his observation, who did Anagram it

VOTED OUTED
But their merciful Votes found not so free performance. However this good
Bishop got a thousand pounds out of Goldsmiths-hall, which afforded him his
support in his old Age.

The Neb of his Pen was unpartially divided into two equal Moyeties, the one
writing against Faction, in defense of three Innocent Ceremonies; the other
against Superstition, witness the Grand Impostor, and other worthy works.

He solemnly proffered unto me (pardon me Reader, if I desire politiquely to
twist my own with his Memory; that they may both survive together,) in these
sad times to maintain me to live with him; which Courteous Offer as I could not
conveniently accept, I did thankfully (...). Many of the Nobility deservedly
honored him, though none more then John Earl of Rutland, to whose Kinsman
Roger Earl of Rutland he formerly (...) been Chaplain. But let not two worthy
Baronets be forgotten, Sir George Savill, who so civilly paid him his purchased
Annuity of two hundred pounds, withal Proffered advantages; and Sir Henry
Yelve^ton, at whose house he dyed, aged 95. at Easton-Manduit in Northampton
shire, 1659. For the rest the Reader is remitted to his life, written largely
and learnedly, by Doctor John Barwick Dean of Durham.

Statesmen.
Sir ROBERT CAR was born in this City on this occasion, Thomas Car his father
Lord of Furnihurst, a man of great lands and power in the South of Scotland,
was very active for Mary Queen of Scots; and on that account forced to fly his
land, came to York. Now although he had been a great inroder of England, yet
for some secret reason of State, here he was permitted safe shelter, du^ing
which time Robert his son was born; this was the reason why the said Robert
refused to be Naturalized by Act of our Parliament, as needless for him born in
the English Dominions.

I have read how his first making at Court was by breaking of his leg at a
Tilting in London whereby he came first to the Cognizance of King James; Thus a
fair starting with advantage in the notice of a Prince, is more then half the
way in the race to his favor: King James reflected on him whose Father was a
kind of Conf^ssor for the cause of the Queen his Mother; besides the Young
Gentleman had a handsome person and a convenience of desert; Honors were
crowded upon him, made Baron, Viscount, Earl of Sommerset, Knight of the
Garter, Warden of the CinquePorts, etc.

He was a well natured man, not mischievous with his might, doing himself more
hurt then any man else. For abate one foul fact with the appendance and
consequences thereof notoriously known, and he will appear deserving no foul
Character to posterity; but for the same he was banished the Court, lived and
dyed very privately, about the year of our Lord, 1638.

Writers.
JOHN WALBYE was born in this City, of honest Parentage. He was bred an
Augustinian (Provincial of his Order,) and Doctor of Divinity in Oxford. A
Placentious Person, gaining the good will of all, with whom he conversed, being
also Ingenious, Industrious, Learned, Eloquent, Pious, and Prudent. ^.
Pitz writes, that (after Alexander Nevell) he was Chosen but never Confirmed,
Arch bishop of York, (an Honor reserved for Robert his Younger Brother, of
whom In the Pre^ (...) in (...) City.
before.) But Bishop Godwin makes no mention hereof, which renders it
suspicious. The said Pitz makes him actual Archbishop of Dublin, whilst Bale
(who being an Irish Bishop, had the advantage of exacter Intelligence,) has no
such thing, whence we may conclude it a Mistake. The rather because this John
is allowed by all to have died in this place of his Nativity, 1393. Also I will
add this, that though sharp at first against the Wickliffites, he soon abated
his own Edge; and though present at a Council kept at Stanford, by the King
against them, was not well pleased with all things transacted therein.

JOHN ERGHOM was born in this (...) (...) Script. (...) Number. 50. (...) (...).
City, an Augustinian by his profession. Leaving York he went to Oxford, where
passing thorough the Arts, he fixed at last in Divinity, proving an admirable
Preacher. My Idem. (...). (...)
Author tells me, that sometimes he would utter nova and inaudita, whereat one
may well wonder, seeing Solomon has said, There is no n^w thing under the Sun.
The truth is, he renewed the custom of expounding Scripture in a typical way,
which crowded his Church with Auditors, seeing such (...) preaching break's no
bones, much pleased their fancy, and little crossed or curbed their
corruptions. Indeed some (but not all) Scripture is capable of such comments,
and because metalls are found in Mountains, it is madness to Mine for them in
every rich Meadow. But in expounding of Scripture, when men's inventions outrun
the Spirits intentions, their swiftness is not to be praised, but sawcyness to
be punished. This Erghom wrote many books, and dedicated them to the Earl of
Hereford, (the Sea Camdens Brit. in Hereford-shire.
same with Edward Duke of Buckingham,) and flourished under K. Henry the
seventh, Anno 1490.

Since the Reformation.
RICHARD STOCK was born in this City, bred Scholar of the house in Saint
JohnsColledge in Cambridge, and designed Fellow of sidney, though not accepting
thereof. He was afterward Minister of All hallows Bredstreet in London, by the
space of thirty two years, till the day of his death.

Where (if in health) he omitted not to Preach twice every Lords day, with the
approbation of all that were Judicious and Religious. No Minister in England
had his Pulpit supplied by fewer Strangers. Doctor Davenant afterward Bishop
of Sarum, (whose father was his parishioner) was his constant Auditor, while
lying in London. His Preaching was most profitable, Converting many, and
Confirming more in Religion, so that appearing with Comfort at the Day of
Judgment, he might say, behold I and the Children that God has given me. He
was zealous in his life, a great Reformer of prophanations on the Sabbath,
prevailing with some companies to put off their wonted Festivalls from Mundays
to Tuesdays, that the Lordsday might not be abused by the preparation for such
entertainments. Though he preached often in neighboring Churches, he never
neglected his own, being wont to protest, That it was more Comfortable to him
to win one of his own Parish then twenty others.

Preaching at Saint Paul's Cross when young, it was ill taken at his mouth, that
he reproved the inequality of Rates in the City, (burdening the Poor to ease
the Rich,) and he was called a Green head for his pains. But being put up in
his latter days to preach on the Lord Mayors Election, and falling on the same
subject, He told them, That a Gray head spoke now what a Green-head had said
before. He dyed April 20. Anno Domini 1626. with a great lamentation of all,
but especially of his Parishioners.

Memorable Persons.
JOHN LEPTON of York Esquire, servant to King James, undertook for a wager to
ride six days together betwixt York and London, being sevenscore and ten miles,
stylo vetere, as I may say, and performed it accordingly, to the greater praise
of his strength in acting, then his discretion in undertaking it. He first set
forth from Aldersgate May 20. being Monday, Anno Domini 1606. Mr. Sanderson his
History of King James hoc anno.
and accomplished his journey every day before it was dark. A thing rather
memorable then commendable, many maintaining, that able and active bodies, are
not to vent themselves in such vain (though gainful) ostentation; and that it
is no better then tempting Divine Providence, to lavish their strength, and
venture their lives, except solemnly summoned thereunto by just necessity.

Lord Mayors.
Expect not Reader, that under this Title I should present thee with a list of
the Lord Mayors of this City born therein. Only to make this part conformable
to the rest of my book, know, that I find one Native of this City Lord Mayor of
London, viz.

Name Father Place Company Time 1 Martin Bows Thomas Bows York Goldsmith 1545

The Farewell.
To take our leaveof this Loyal City: I desire that some Lucrative Trade may
be set up therein, to repair her former losses with advantage. Mean time I
rejoice, that the Archiepiscopat See is restored thereunto, not despairing, but
that in due time, (if the Supreme Authority adjudge it fit) the Court of the
Presidency of the North, may be re-erected therein, presuming the Country will
be Eased, and City Enriched thereby, as the Loadstone which will atract much
Company, and by consequence Commodity thereunto.

Let me add, I am informed, that Sir Thomas Widdrington, a person accomplished
in all Arts, (as well as in his own Profession of the Laws,) has made great
Progress in his Exact Description of this City. Nor do I more congratulate the
happiness of York coming under so Able a Pen, then Condole my own Infelicity,
whose unsuccessfull attendance hitherto could not compass speech with this
worthy Knight. Sure I am when this his work is set forth, then indeed YORK
SHALL BE, what? a City most completely Illustrated in all the Antiquities and
Remarkables thereof.

FINIS.
THE PRINCIPALITY OF WALES.

PSALM. 95. 4, 5. In his hand are the deep places of the Earth: the strength of
the Hills is his also. The Sea is his, and he made it. PROVE. 27. 25, 26. The
herbs of the Mountains are gathered. The Lambs are for thy clothing, and the
Goats are the price of thy fields. A NECESSARY PREFACE TO THE READER.
IT bare a debate in my serious consideration, whether a Total Omission or
Defective Description of this Principality were to be preferred, finding my
self as Unable to do it Exactly, as Unwilling to Pretermit it. For First, I
never was in Wales, and all know how necessary (...) is to accurateness
herein. Secondly, I understand not their Language, and cannot go to the Cost,
nor dare take the State of having an Interpreter. King James was wont
pleasantly to say, that he cared not though he was poor himself, so long as his
Subjects were Rich, as confident he could command their wealth, on good
conditions and a just occasion. But indeed it matters not how meanly skilled a
Writer is, so long as he has Knowing and Communicative Friends; my happiness
in England, who here am quite destitute of such assistance. However on the
other side, a Total Omission seemed very unhandsome, to make a Cipher of this
Large Principality. Besides, England cannot be well described without Wales,
such the Intimacy of Relation betwixt them, three of our English Kings Edward
2. H^nry 5. Henry 7.
being born, and many of Our Prime Atchievments being acted in Wales.
Wherefore, I resolved to endeavor my utmost in the description thereof, though
sadly sensible in my self, that my desires were as high as a Mountain, but my
performances would fall as low, ( would they were half so fruitful) as the
Valleys.

And here I humbly desire, that the many faults by me committed, may be like a
Ball cast down and deaded on a soft Floor, even to be buried in my own weakness
to my own shame, without the least Ripling or Rebounding to the disgrace of the
Welsh Country or Nation. And my hope and desire is that these my weak pains
will provoke others of more Ability, to substitute a more Exact Description in
the room thereof.

I had rather the Reader should take the name of that worthy Knight from Master
In his Brit. in Shropshire.
Camden, then from me, who designing to build according to the Italian Mode of
Architecture, plucked down a good and convenient English-house, preposterously
destroying the one, and never finished the other: I hope the Reader, will not
be so uncharitable, ( I will not say undiscreet) but will allow our grains a
subsistence, till they will willingly vanish at the substitution of another.

In Doubtful Nativities of Worthy Persons betwixt England and Wales, I have
not called for a sword to divide the controverted Child betwixt the two
Mothers, but have wholly resigned it to Wales, partly, out of desire of
quietness, (not engage in a contest,) partly, because I conceived England might
better spare then Wales want them.

To conclude some will wonder, how Perfect [ coming from Perficere, to do
thoroughly,] and Perfunctorie [ derived from Perfungi, thoroughly to discharge,]
should have so Opposite Senses. My Motto in the description of this
Principality is betwixt them both,

Nec Perfect, Nec Perfunctorie.

For as I will not pretend to the Credit of the former, so may I defend my self
from the shame of the latter, having done the utmost, which the Strength of my
Weakness could perform.

WALES.
THIS PRINCIPALITY has the Severn Sea on the South, Irish-Ocean on the West
and North, England on the East, anciently divided from it by the River Severn,
since by a Ditch drawn with much Art and Industry, from the Mouth of Dee to the
Mouth of Wie. From East to West, [Wie to Saint Davids] is an hundred, from
North to South, [Car^ion to Hollihead] is an hundred and twenty miles.

The Ditch or Trench lately mentioned, is called Clauhd-Offa, because made by
King Offa; who cruelly enacted, that what Welch-man soever was found on the
East Side of this Ditch should forfeit his Right Hand. A Law long since
Cancelled, and for many ages past, the Welsh have come peaceably over that
Place, and good reason, bringing with them both their Right-hands and
Right-hearts; no less Loyally then Valiantly to defend England against al^
enemies, being themselves under the same Sovereign United thereunto.

It consists of three parts, the partition being made by ^oderick the great,
about the year 877. dividing it betwixt his three sons.

1. North Wales, Whose Princes chiefly Resided at 1. Aberfrow, 2. Mathravall,
3. Dynefar. 2. Powis, 3. South Wales.

This division in fine proved the Confusion of Wales, whose Princes were always
at War, not only against the English, their Common Foe, but mutually with
themselves to enlarge or defend their Dominions.

Of these three North Wales was the chief, as does plainly appear, first,
because Roderick left it Mervin his Eldest Son. Secondly, because the Princes
thereof were by way of Eminency styled the Princes of Wales, and sometimes
Kings of Aberfrow. Thirdly, because as the King of Aberfrow paid to the King of
London, yearly Threescore T. Mills in his Catal. of Hon. page 292.
and three pounds by way of Tribute, so the same sum was paid to him by the
Princes of Powis and South Wales.

However South Wales was of the three the Larger, Richer, Fruitfuller,
therefore called by the Welsh Deheubarth, that is, The Right-side, because
nearer the Sun. But that Country being constantly infested with the Invasions
of the English and Flemings, had North Wales preferred before it, as more
entire and better secured from such annoyances. Hence it was, that whilst the
Welsh-tongue in the South is so much mingled and corrupted, in North Wales it
still retains the purity thereof.

The Soil.
It is not so Champion and Level, and by consequence not so fruitful as
England, mostly rising up into Hills and Mountains of a lean and hungry nature,
yet so that the ill quality of the ground is recompensed by the good quantity
thereof.

A right worshipful Knight in Wales, who had a fair Estate therein, his rents
resulting from much Barren-ground, heard an English Gentleman (perchance out of
intended opposition) to brag, that he had in England, so much ground worth
forty shillings an Acre; you (said he) have ten yards of Velvet, and I have te^
score of Frize, I will not exchange with you. This is generally true of all
Wales, that much ground does make up the Rent, and yet in proportion they may
lose nothing thereby, compared to Estates in other Countries.

However there are in Wales most pleasant Meadows along the sides of Rivers,
and as the sweetest flesh is said to be nearest the bones, so most delicious
valleys a^e interposed betwixt these Mountains.

But now how much these very Mountains advantage the Natives thereof, in their
Health, Strength, Swiftness, Wit, and other natural Perfections, Give me leave
to stand by silent* whilst a great Master of Language and Reason entertaineth
the Reader with this most excellent and pertinent discourse,

Carpenters Geography second Book, chap. 15. page 258. This conceit of
Mounsieur Bodin, I admit without any great contradiction, were he not
over-peremptory in overmuch censuring all Mountainous people of Blockishness
and Barbarism, against the opinion of Averroes a great Writer; who finding
these People nearer Heaven, suspected in them a more Heavenly Nature. Neither
want there many reasons drawn from Nature and Experiment to prove Mountainous
People more pregnant in Wit, and Gifts of understanding then others inhabiting
in low and plain Countries. For however Wit and Valor are many times divided,
as we have shown in the Northern and Southern people, yet were they never so
much at variance, but they would sometimes meet. First therefore, what can
speak more for the witty temper of the Mountain People, then their clear and
subtle Air, being far more purged and rarefied, then that in Lower countries.
For holding the Vital spirits to be the chiefest Instruments in the Souls
Operation, no man can deny but that they sympathize with the Air, especially
their chiefest foment. Every man may by experience, find his Intellectual
Operations more Vigorous in a Clear day, and on the contrary most Dull and
Heavy, when the Air is any way affected with foggy vapors. What we find in
our selves in the same place at diverse seasons, may we much more expect of
places diversely affected in Constitution. A second reason, for the proof of our
assertion, may be drawn from the Thin and spare Diet, in respect of those
others. For people living of Plains have commonly all Commodities in such
plenty, that they are subject to surfeiting and luxury, the greatest Enemy and
Underminer of all Intellectual Operations. For a fat Belly commonly begets a
gross Head, and a lean Brain: But want and scarcity the Mother of Frugality
invites the Mountain-dwellers to a more sparing and wholesome Diet. Neither
grows this convenience only out of the scarcity of Viands; but also out of the
Diet. Birds, Fowls, Beasts, which are bred upon higher places are esteemed of a
more Cleanly and wholesome feeding, then others living in Fens and Foggy Places.
And how far the Quality of our Diet prevails in the Alteration of our Organs
and Dispositions, every Naturalist will easily resolve us. A third reason may
be drawn from the cold Air of these Mountainous Regions, which by an
Antiperistasis keeps in and strengthens the Internal heat, the chief
instrument in Natural and Vital Operations. For who perceives not his Vital and
by consequence his Intellectual Parts, in cold frosty weather to be more
strong, and vigorous, then in hot and soultry seasons, wherein the spirits be
d^faced and weakened? This disparity in the same region, at diverse times, in
regard of the disposition of the Air, may easily declare the disparity of
diverse Regions, being in this sort diversely affected. A fourth reason, may be
taken from the Custom and Hardness, whereunto such people inure themselves
from their infancy; which (as Huartus proves) begets a better temper of the
Brain, in regard of the Wit and Understanding; which we happen to find clean
otherwise with them, who have accustomed themselves to deliciousness. These
reasons perhaps would seem only probable, and of no great moment, were they
not strengthened with Foreign and Domestic Observations.

Thus much I thought fit to transcribe out of our Author, un paralleld in his
kind, confident that our ensuing work will be a Comment on his Text, or rather,
will, by the Induction of several instances, Natives of Wales, be the Proof of
the Truth of this his most Judicious assertion.

Natural Commodities,
Silver.
Tully (a better Orator then Historian, yet better Historian then Metallist,
affirms that Britain affords, ne micam auri vel argen^i, not a grain of
gold or silver: understand him what in his age was discovered. Otherwise Wales,
and especially Cardiganshire yields ROYAL MINES, where the silver holds
standard, and pays with profit for the separation from Lead, and the refining
thereof, as by the ensuing particulars will appear.

1. Six Mountains there are in Cardigan shire, (pardon British Reader, if I
spell them rather after our English Pronunciation, then the Welsh Orthography,)
viz. Comsomelock, Tallabant, Gadarren, Bromefloid, Geginnon and Cummerrum. 2.
The Romans first began to mine here, (as appears by their coins found
therein,) working in trenches, not above twenty or four and twenty fathom deep,
and found plenty of Lead. 3. The Danes and Saxons wrought by Sheafts, so they
call what is long and narrow; whether mounting into the air, (as Spires of
Steeples,) or sinking into the earth, as their Pits here, an hund^ed fathom
deep. 4 They found great plenty of Lead, but at last deserted their works,
either because the vein of metal failed, or they drowned with the irruption of
water. 5. Customer Smith, about the latter end of the reign of Queen Elizabeth,
discovered Silver in Comsomelock, and sent it up to the Tower of London with
great expense, to be coined. 6. After his death, the design was prosecuted, and
more perfected by Sir Hugh Middleton Knight, coining the Silver to his great
charge, as his Predecessor, at the Tower. 7. After the death of Sir Hugh, Sir
Francis Godolphin of Cornwall Knight, and Thomas Bushel Esquire, undertook the
work. 8. King Charles, for their greater encouragement, and sparing their
expense, granted them power of coinage at Aberrusky in that County. 9. Thomas
Bushel (Sir Francis dying soon after, and Comsom^lock being deserted)
adventured on the other five Mountains. 10. Not disheartened, that the first
year and half afforded no effectual discovery, at last these Mines yielded one
hundred pounds a week, (besides Lead amounting to half as much) coined at
Aberrusky aforesaid. 11. The pence, groats, shillings, half-crowns, etc. of
this Silver, had the Ostrich feathers (the Arms of Wales) for distinction
stamped on them.
Then came our Civil Wars, and discomposed all the work, when Mattocks must be
turned into Spear^, and Shovells into Shields, or else probably before this
time the project had arrived at a greater perfection.

Here by the way, it is richly worth the observing, how the modern manner of
Mining exceeds what was formerly used. For thirty years since they began at
the top of a Mountain, digging directly downwards with their Shafts, which was
subject to a double mischief, of damps, and drowning. Besides, vast was the
expense before they could come to the bowels of the Mountain, wherein the Oar
(if any) was most probably expected.

Since they have gone a more compendious way by Adyts, making their entrance
(some five foot and a half high, and perchance as broad,) into the Mountain, at
the lowest level therereof, so that all the water they meet with, conveyeth it
self away as in a channel, by the declivity of the place. And thus they
penetrate the most expeditious way athwart the middle thereof, which brings
them to the speediest discovery of the metal therein.

But the rarest invention is the supplying of the Miners with fresh air, which
is performed by two men's blowing wind by a pair of bellows on the outside of
the Adit, into a pipe of lead, daily lengthened as the Mine is made longer,
whereby the Candle in the Mine is daily kept burning, and the Diggers recruted
constantly with a sufficiency of breath. This invention was the masterpiece of
Sir Franci^* Bacon, Lord Ver^lam, and not only so acknowledged by Thomas
Bushel his grateful servant, but also effectually prosecuted by him; a person
innated with a public spirit, if he might meet with proportionable
encouragement.

And here methinks it were ^tting (Pardon, (reader) a short digression) that
rewards should be given to such undertakers, who are the discoverers of
profitable projects; and not only to such who exactly hit the mark, but even
to those who ingeniously miss it, because their aberrations may be directions
to others. And though many tympanies and false conceptions would happen, yet
amongst many miscarriages some pregnant* wits would happily be delivered of
rare inventions* especially if the State would be pleased to be their Midwife
favorably to encourage them.

Lead.
This is found in many places in Wales, but in Carnarvan-shire the best, in
many respects. First, because so near the sea, so that they may cast the Oar
into the Ship. Metalls elsewhere are dug as out of the Bowels of the Earth,
so out of the Bowels of the Land, I mean, so far from any Conveyance by Water,
that the expense of the portage swallows much of the profits thereof: which
charge is here avoided. Secondly, for the plenty. Lastly, for the purity
thereof. Insomuch that there was great probability for a long time that it
would have proved a Mine Royal. Which hope was frustrated at last to the great
gain of the owners thereof. For a Leaden Mine is a Silvermine to such Subjects
as possess it, whilst a Silver-mine is but a Leaden one unto them, from whom
the property is taken, as then accrewing to the Crown or State, by virtue of
its Prerogative.

Goats.
In Latin Capri, a Carpendo, from cropping, (therefore forbidden to be kept in
some places, because destructive to young Woods,) are when young, most nimble
and frisking, (whence our English to Caper,) but afterward put on so great
gravity, that an HeGoat is recounted by wise Prove. 30. 31.
Agur, amongst the four creatures which are comely in going. Yea, if that
ornamentall excrement which grows beneath the chin, be the standard of
wisdom, they carry it from Aristotle himself. They are strong above their
proportion, and an He-Goat will beat a Ram of equal bigness. Hence it is that
in Dan. 8. 4, 7.
Daniel, the Persian Monarchy is compared to a Ram, and the Macedonian, which
subdued the Persian, resembled to a Goat. They can clamber the highest hills,
without help of a ladder, delighting in steep and craggy places, seeming rather
to Dum^sa pendere procul de rupe capellae. Egl. 1.
hang then stand, as they are feeding.

Their flesh, disguised with good cookery, may deceive a judicious palate, as
it did Genesis 27. 25.
Isaac's, for venison. Of their skins excellent gloves are made, which may be
called our English-Cordovant, soft, supple and stretching, whence the
expression of Cheverelconsciences, which will stretch any way for advantage.
Course Coverings are made of their shag, God himself not despising the present
of Exodus 25. 4.
Goats-hair, which made the outward case of the Exodus 26. 7.
Tabernacle. Their milk is accounted cordial against consumptions; yea, their
very stench is used for a perfume in Arabia the Happy, where they might surfeit
of the sweetness of spices, if not hereby allayed. In a word, Goats are be^ for
food, where Sheep cannot be had.

Plenty of these are bred in Wales, especially in Montgomery-shire, which
minds me of a pleasant passage, during the restraint of the Lady Elizabeth.
When she was so strictly watched by Sir Henry Benefield, that none were
admitted access unto Her, a Goat was espied by a merry Fellow, (one of the
Warders) walking along with her. Whereupon, taking the Goat on his Shoulders,
he in all have hurried him to Sir Henry, I pray Sir (said he) Fox Acts and Mon.
pa. 2095.
examine this fellow, whom I found walking with her Grace, but what talk they
had I know not, not understanding his Language. He seems to me a stranger, and
I believe a Welsh-man by his frieze Coat.

To return to our subject, I am not so knowing in Goats, as either to confirm
or confute what Pliny Not. Hist. lib. 8. cap. 50.
reports, that Adhuc lactantes generant; They (...) young ones, whilst they
themselves as yet suck their Dams. He adds, that they are great enemies to
the Olive Trees, (which they embarren with licking it) and therefore are never
sacrificed to Minerva. Sure I am a true Deity accepted them for his service; as
many kids well nigh, as lambs, being offered in the Old Testament.

The Manufactures.
The British generally bearing themselves high on the account of their gentile
extraction, have spirit which can better comport with designs of sudden
danger then long difficulty, and are better pleased in the employing of their
valor then their labor. Indeed some souls are over-lovers of liberty, so that
they mistake all industry to be degrees of slavery. I doubt not but posterity
may see the Welsh Commodities improved by art far more then the present Age
does behold, the English as yet as far excelling the Welsh, as the Dutch exceed
the English in Manufactures. But let us instance in such as this Country does
afford,

Frieze.
This is a course kind of Cloth, then which none warmer to be worn in Winter,
and the finest sort thereof very fashionable and gentile. Prince Henry had a
frieze suit, by which he was known many weeks together, and when a bold
Courtier checked him for appearing so often in one Suit, Would (said he) that
the Cloth of my Country (being Prince of Wales) would last always. Indeed it
will daily grow more into use, especially since the Gentry of the Land being
generally much impoverisht, abate much of their gallantry, and lately resigned
rich clothes to be worn by those (not whose persons may best become them, but)
whose purses can best pay for the price thereof.

Cheese.
This is milk by Art so consolidated, that it will keep uncorrupted for some
years. It was anciently (and is still) the Staple food for Armies in their
marching, witness when David was sent with 1 Samuel 17. 18.
Ten Cheeses to recruit the provisions of his Brethren, and when 2 S^. 17. 29.
Barzillai with Cheeses (amongst other food) victualled the Army of K. David.
Such as are made in this Country are very tender and palatable, and once one
merrily (without offense I hope) thus derived the Pedigree thereof;

Adams nawn Cusson, was her by her birth,
Ap Curds, ap Milk, ap Cow, ap Grass, ap Earth.
Foxes are said to be the best Tasters of the fineness of Flesh, Flies of the
sweetest Grapes, and Mice of the tenderest Cheese, and the last, (when they
could Compass (...) in that kind) have given their Verdict for the goodness of
the Welsh. What should be the reason, that so many people should have such an
Antipathie* against Cheese (more then any one manner of meat) I leave to the
skillful in the Mysteries of Nature to decide.

Metheglen.
Some will have this word of Greek extraction, from (...), contracted (...).
But the British will not so let go their none Countriman MATTHEW GLIN, but will
have it purum potum Cambricum, wholly of Welsh original: Whencesoever the word
is made, the liquor is compounded of water, honey, and other ingredients, being
most wholesome for man's body. Pollio Romulus, who was an hundred years old,
being asked of Augustus Caesar, by what means especially he had so long
preserved his vigor both of mind and body; made answer, Plin. Not. Hist. lib.
(...). cap. 24.
Intus mulso, foris oleo, by taking Metheglen inward, and oil outward.

It differs from Mede, ut vinum a Va^ro de lingua Lat.
lora, as wine from that weak stuff which is the last running from the grapes
pressed before. It is a most generous liquor, as it is made in this Country, in
so much that had Atlas (...) Bohemia.
Mercator, who so highly praised the Mede of Egra, for the best in the world; I
say, had he tasted of this Welsh Hydromel, he would have confined his
commendation to Germany alone, and allowed ours the precedence. Queen
Elizabeth, who by the Tudors was of Welch-descent, much loved this Her native
liquor, recruiting an annual stock thereof for Her own use, and here take if
you please,

The Receipt thereof,
First gather a Bushel of Sweet-briar leaves, and a Bushel of Time, half a
Bushel of Rosemary, and a Peck of Bay Leaves. Sees all these (being well
washed) in a Furnace of fair water, let them boil the space of half an Hour, or
better, and then pour out all the water and herbs into a Vat, and let it stand
till it be but milk-warme, then strain the water from the herbs, and take to
every six Gallons of water one Gallon of the finest Honey, and put it into the
That is the Wort or boiled liquor.
Boorn, and labor it together half an hour, then let it stand two days,
stirring it well twice or thrice each day. Then take the Liquor, and boil it
anew, and when it does sees, skim it as long as there remains any dross.
When it is clear, put it into the Vat as before, and there let it be cooled.
You must then have in readiness a kind of new Ale or Beer, which, as soon as
you have emptied, suddenly whelme it upside down, and set it up again, and
presently put in the Metheglen, and let it stand three days a working. And then
tun it up in Barrells, tying at every Tap-hole, (by a Pack-thred) a little bag
of beaten Cloves and Mace, to the value of an Ounce. It must stand half a year
before it be drunk.

The Buildings.
The Holy Job 3. 4.
Spirit complains, that great men build Desolate places for themselves;
therein taxing their Avarice, Ambition, or both. Avarice, they join House to
Esai. 5. 8.
House, [by Match, Purchase, or Oppression,] that they may be alone in the
Land, that their Covetousness may have Elbow-room to lie down at full length,
and wallow it self round about. These love not, because they need not
Neighbors, whose numerous Families can subsist of themselves.

Or else their Ambition is therein reproved, singling out Desolate Places for
themselves, because scorning to take that Fruitfulness which Nature does
tender, and desireing as it were to be Petty-Creators, enforcing Artificial
Fertility on a place where they found none before.

I* well knew, that wealthy Man, who being a great improves of ground, was wont
to say, that he would never come into that place which might not be made
better: On the same token, that one tartly returned, that then he would never
go to Heaven, for that place was at the best. But the truth is, Fertilizing of
barren ground may be termed a Charitable Curiosity, employing many poor people
therein.

It is confessed that Wales affords plenty of barren places, (yielding the
benefit of the best Air,) but the Italian humor of building has not affected
(not to say infected) the British Nation. I say the Italian-humor, who have a
merry Proverb, Let him that would be happy for a Day, go to the Barber; for a
Week, marry a Wife; for a Month, buy him a New-horse; for a Year, build him a
New-house; for all his Lifetime, be an Honest-man. But it seems that the Welsh
are not tempted to enjoy such short happiness for a years continuance.

For their Buildings, generally they are like those of the old Britains,
neither big nor beautiful, but such as their Ancestors in this Isle formerly
lived in, For when Cataracus that valiant British General, (who for nine years
resisted here the Tacitus
Romans puissance) after his Captivity and Imprisonment, was enlarged, and
carried about to see the Magnificence of Rome, Zonaras and out of him Camden in
his Remains page 245.
Why do you (said he) fo greedily desire our poor Cottages, whereas you have
such stately and magnificent Palaces of your own?

The simplicity of their common building for private persons may be conjectured
by the Palaces of their Princes. For Hoelldha Prince of Wales, about the year
800. built a house for his own residence of White-hurdells or Watling,
therefore called Ty Gwin, that is, the White-house or Whitehall if you please.

However there are brave buildings in Wales, though not Welsh buildings, many
stately Castles, which the English erected therein. And though such of them as
survive at this day, may now be beheld as Beauties, they were first intended as
bridles to their Country. Otherwise their private houses, are very mean indeed.
Probably they have read what Master Camden writes, that the building of great
houses was the bane of good housekeeping in England, and therefore they are
contented with the worse habitations, as loath to lose their beloved
hospitality. The rather, because it has been observed that such Welsh
buildings as conform to the English mode, have their Chimneys though more
Convenient, less Charitable, seeing as fewer eyes are offended, fewer bellies
are fed, with the smoking thereof.

But though the Lone-houses in Wales, be worse then those in England; their
Markettowns generally are built better then ours, the Gentry (it seems) having
many of their habitations therein.

The Proverbs.
These are twofold. 1. Such as the English pass on the Welsh. 2. Such as the
Welsh make on the English. The latter come not under my cognizance, as being in
the British Tongue, to me altogether unknown Besides my friend Master James
Howel in a Treatise on that Subject, has so feasted his Reader, that he has
starved such as shall come after him, for want of New Provisions. As for the
former sort of Proverbs, we insist on one or two of them.

His Welsh Blood is up.]

A double reason may be rendered, why the Welsh are subject to anger. 1. Moral;
Give losers leave to speak, and that passionately too. They have lost their
land, and we Englishmen have driven their Ancestors out of a fruitful Country,
and pend them up in Barren Mountains. 2. Natural; Choler having a Predominancy
in their Constitution, which sounds nothing to their disgrace. Impiger Horace
de Art Poetica.
Iracundus, is the beginning of the Character of Achilles himself. Yea, Valor
would want an Edge, if Anger were not a Whetstone unto it. And as it is an
Increaser of Courage, it is an Attendant ^n Wit, Ingeniosi sunt Cholerici. The
best is, the anger of the Welsh does soon arise, and soon abate, as if it were
an Emblem of their Country, up and down, chequered with Elevations and
Depressions.

As long as a Welsh pedigree.]

Men (who are made Heralds in other Countries) are born Heralds in Wales, so
naturally are all there inclined to know and keep their descents, which they
derive from great antiquity: so, that any Welsh-gentleman (if this be not a
Tautology) can presently clime up, by the stairs of his pedigree, into princely
extraction. I confess some Englishmen make a mock of their long pedigree,
(whose own perchance are short enough if well examined,) I cannot but commend
their care in preserving the memory of their Ancestors, conformable herein to
the custom of the Hebrews. The worst I wish their long pedigree, is broad
possessions, that so there may be the better symmetry betwixt their extractions
and estates.

Give your horse a Welch-bait.]

It seems it is the custom of the Welsh travailers, when they have climed up a
hill (whereof plenty in these parts) to rain their horses backward, and stand
still a while, taking a prospect (or respect rather) of the Country they have
passed. This they call a bait, and (though a Peck of Oats would do the
palfrey more good) such a stop does (though not feed) refresh. Others call this
a Scotish-bait, and I believe the horses of both mountainous Countries, eat the
same provender, out of the same manger, on the same occasion.

Proceed we now to our Description, and must make use in the first place of a
general Catalogue, of such who were undoubtedly Welsh yet we cannot with any
certainty refer them to their respective Counties, and no wonder,

1. Because they carry not in their Sur names any directions to their
nativities, as the ancient English generally (and especially the Clergy) did,
till lately, when conquered by the English, some conformed themselves to the
English custom. 2. Because Wales was anciently divided but into three great
Provinces Northwales, Powis, and South Wales, and was not modelled into Shires,
according to the modern division, till the reign of K. Henry the eighth.
Of such therefore who succeed herein, though no County of Wales (perchance)
can say this man is mine, Wales may avouch all these are ours. Yet I do not
despair, but that in due time this my Common may God willing be enclosed, (and
fair Enclosures I assure you is an enriching to a Country,) I mean, that having
gained better intelligence from some Welsh Antiquaries (whereof that
Principality affords many) these persons may be Un-general'd, and impaled in
their particular Counties.

Princes.
I confess there were many in this Principality, but I crave leave to be
excused from giving a list of their nativities. They are so ancient, I know not
where to begin, and so many, I know not where to end. Besides, having in the
fundamentalls of this Book confined Princes to the children of Sovereigns, it
is safest for me, not to sally forth, but to entrench my self within the
aforesaid restrictions.

Only I cannot but insert the following note found in so Authentic an Author,
for the rarity thereof in my apprehension, Camdens Remains, page 181.

As for the Britains or Welsh, whatsoever Jura Majestatis their Princes had, I
cannot understand that they ever had any Coin of their own, for no Learned of
that Nation have at any time seen any found in Wales or elsewhere.

Strange that having so much Silver dug out, they should have none Coined in
their Country, so that Trading was driven on either by the bartery or change of
Wares and Commodities, or else by money Imported out of England and other
Countries.

Confessors.
WALTER BRUTE was born in Wales, and if any doubt thereof, let them peruse the
ensuing protestation, drawn up with his own hand,

Fox Acts and Mon. page 477.
I Walter Brute, Sinner, Layman, Husbandman, and a Christian, (having mine
offspring of the Britains, both by Fathers and Mothers side,) have been accused
to the Bishop of Hereford, that I did err in many matters concerning the
Catholic Christian faith: by whom I am required, that I should write an answer
in Latin to all those matters, whose desire I will satisfy to my power, etc.

Observe herein a double instance of his Humility, that being a Welch-man,
(with which Gentleman is reciprocal) and a Scholar Idem p. 475.
graduated in Oxford, contented himself with the plain addition of husbandman.

He was often examined by the aforesaid Bishop, by whom he was much molested
and imprisoned, the particulars whereof are in Master Fox most largely related.
At last he escaped, not creeping out of the window by any cowardly compliance,
but going forth at the door fairly set open for him by Divine Providence. For,
he only made such a general subscription, which no Christian man need to
decline, in form following:

Idem p. 50^.
I Walter Brute, submit my self principally to the Evangely of Jesus Christ,
and to the determination of holy Kirk, and to the General Councels of Holy
Kirk. And to the sentence and determination of the four Doctors of holy writ,
that is, Austin, Ambrose, Jerome, and Gregory. And I meekly submit me to your
correction, as a Subject ought to his Bishop.

It seems the Popish Prelates were not as yet perfect in their art of
persecution, ( Brute being one of the first who was vexed for Wickliffisme) so
that as yet, they were loose and favorable in their language of Subscription.
But soon after they grew so punctual in their expressions, and so particular
in penning abjurations and recantations; that the persons to whom they were
tendered, must either strangle their consciences with acceptance, or lose their
lives for refusal thereof.

NICHOLAS HEREFORD. I have presumptions to persuade my self (though possibly A
M P.
not to prevail with the Reader) to believe him of British extraction. He was
bred Doctor of Divinity in Oxford, and a Secular Priest, betwixt whose
Profession and Fryery, there was an ancient Antipathy. But our Hereford went
higher, to defy most Popish Principles, and maintain

That

1. In the Eucharist, after the Consecration of the Elements, Bread and Wine
still remained. 2. That Bishops and all Clergymen, ought to be subject to
their Respective Princes. 3. That Monks and Friars, ought to maintain
themselves by their own labor. 4. All ought to regle their lives, not by the
Popes Decrees, but Word of God.
From these his four Cardinal Positions, many Heretical Opinions were by his
Adversaries deduced, (or rather detracted,) and no wonder they did Wrack his
Words, who did desire to torture his Person.

From Oxford he was brought to London, and there with Philip Repington was made
to See the story at large in Mr. Foxes Acts and Mon.
Recant his Opinions publicly at Saint Paul's Cross, 1382. See their several
success;

REPINTON like a violent Renegado proved a Persecutor of his Party, for which
he was rewarded, first with the Bishopric of Lincoln, then with a Cardinals
Cap.

HEREFORD did too much to displease his Conscience, and yet not enough to
please his enemies. For the jealousy of Archbishop Arundel persecuted and
continued him always a Prisoner.

The same with the later was the success of John Purvey his partner in
opinions, whom T. Walden terms the Lollards Library. But they locked up this
Library, that none might have access unto it, keeping him and Hereford in
constant durance. I will say nothing in excuse of their Recantation, nor will I
revile them for the same: knowing there is more requisite to make one valiant
under a Temptation, then only to call him coward who is foiled therewith. Yet I
must observe, that such as consult Carnal Councills, to avoid afflictions
(getting out by the window of their own plotting, not the door of Divine
Providence) seldom enjoy their own deliverance. In such Cases our Saviors
words are always (without the parties Repentance) spiritually and often
literally true, Mar* 16. 25.
He that finds his life shall lose it. And although we read not that this
Hereford was put to death, he lost the life of his life, his liberty and
luster, dwindling away in obscurity as to the time and place of his death.

REGINALD PEACOCK was born in Wales, Relicta Cambria sold natali. Bale Cent. 8.
Number. 19.
bred in Kings (commonly says Bale called Orial) Colle^ge in Oxford, where for
his learning and eloquence, he proceeded Doctor in Divinity; Bishop first of
Saint Asaph, then of Chichester. For twenty years together he favored ^he
opinions of Wicliffe, and wrote many books in defense thereof, until in a Synod
held at Lambeth by T. Bourcher Archbishop of Canterbury 1457. he was made to
recant at Paul's Cross (his books being burnt before his eyes) confuted with
seven solid arguments, thus B^le ut prius.
reckoned up, Authoritate, Vi, Art, Fraud, Metu, Terrore and Tyrannide.

Charitable men behold this his Recantation as his suffering, and the act of
his enemies: some account it rather a slip then a fall, others a fall, whence
afterward he did arise. It seems, his recanting was little satisfactory to his
adversaries, being never restored to his Bishopric, but confin^d to a poor
pension in a mean Monastery, where he died obscurely, though others say, Fox
Acts and Mon. page 710.
he was privily made away in prison. He is omitted by Pitzeus in his Catalogue
of Writers, a presumption, that he apprehended him finally dissenting from the
Popish persuasion.

Popes.
I find none bred in this Principality, and the wonder is not great; For before
the time of Austin the Monk his coming over into England, Wales acknowledged no
Pope, but depended merely on their own Archbishop of Carlyon. Yea, afterward
it was some hundreds of years, before they yielded the Pope free and full
obedience; besides, the inhabitants of Wales being depressed in their
condition, had small accommodations for their travels to Rome, and those at
Rome had less list to choose persons of so great distance into the Papasie.

Cardinals.
SERTOR of WALES was so called from his Native Country. By some he is named
Fontanerius Valassus, but why, says Bishop In Cat. Card. page 171.
Godwin, Rationem non capio, and I will not hope to understand what he could
not. He was bred a Franciscan, and was chosen (very young for that place) their
General the nineteenth in succession, Anno Domini 1339. Afterward he was made
Bishop of Massile, then Archbishop of Ravenna, next Patriarch of Grado, and by
Pope Innocent the sixth, was made Cardinal, Anno Domini 1361. But being
extremely aged, he was so unhappy, that before the Cardinals Cap could come to
him, he was gone out of this world. Many Books he wrote of his Lectures,
Quodlibets, but chiefly, he is eminent for his Comment on Saint Austin, De
civitate Dei. He died at Padua in Italy, and was therein Pitz. de Ang. script.
p. 497.
buried in the Church of Saint Anthony.

Prelates.
MARBOD EVANX (I had almost read him Evans a noted name in Wales,) was born in
this Country, and bred in the study of all Liberal Sciences. In his time the
Danes woefully harassed the Land, which caused him to ship himfelf over into
little Britain in France; the inhabitants whereof may be termed Cosin-Germans
to the Welsh, as Sons to their younger brethren, much symbolizing with them in
manners and language. Here Marbod, though abroad, was at home, (worth is the
worlds Countriman) and his deserts preferred him to be Episcopus Redonensis,
Bishop of Renes, Praelatus non Elatus, such his humility in his advancement.

We may conclude him a general Scholar by the variety of his works, writing of
gems and precious stones, and compounding profit and pleasure together in his
book called Carmina Sententiosa, much commended ( Italian praise of British
Poetry is a black swan) by Lilius * Giraldus an Italian in his life's of Poets.
We will conclude all with the Character Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 2. Number. 50.
given unto him by Speculum Sal. lib. 4. cap. 16.
Giraldus Cambrensis, Marbodus bonarum literarum magister eruditus colores
rhetoricos, and tam verborum quam sententiarum exornationes versibus egregiis
declaravit. He flourished 1050.

WALTER de CONSTANTIIS. Who would not conclude him from his Surname born at
Constance on the Boden Zee in Switserland? But we have a Constat for his Bale
de script. Brit. Cent. 3. Number. 41.
British Nativity. He was preferred first Archdeacon of Oxford, then Bishop of
Lincoln, then Archbishop of Rohan, by King Richard the first. A man of much
merit, besides his fidelity to his Sovereign, whom he attended to Palestine,
through many perils by Sea and by Land. (...) so much, that there want not
those, who will have him named, De Constantiis, from the Expressive Plural,
relating to his Constancy to his Master in all conditions.

No doubt he had waited on him in his return through Austria, and shared with
him in the miseries of his Captivity, if not formerly remanded into England, to
retrench the Tyranny of William Longcampt Bishop of Ely, which he effectually
performed. He had afterward a double Honor, first to interr King Richard at
Font-Everard, then to invest K. John with the Principality of Normandy, as
being the Prime Prelate therein. His death may be collected about the year 1206.

CADUCANUS a Welsh-man by birth, was a very skilful Divine, and Bishop of
Bangor. Leaving his Bishopric he became a Cistercian Monk in Monasterio
Durensi sive Dorensi, (which for the present I am unwilling to English.) Here I
find two learned Antiquaries, the one the lender, the other the debtor, (I had
almost said the one owner the other stealer,) much divided in their judgments,
about this his retrograde motion, from a Bishop to a Monk, the one commending,
the other condemning him herein;

J. Leland cited by Bale. J. De script. Brit. Cent. 3. Number. 85.
Bale. Rarum hoc equidem exemplum est, ut quis optimas fortunas macra commutet
tenuitate. This indeed was a rare example, that one should willingly exchange
the best fortunes for a lean meannesse. Qui Episcopatu^ appetit (ait Paulus)
perfectum opus desiderat. Non sic de monachatu otioso, quum sit plantatio, quam
non consolidavit Pater coelestis. Whosoever desires a Bishopric desires a good
thing, says 1 Timothy 3. 1.
St. Paul. It cannot be said so of Monkery, which is a plant, wh^h the Heavenly
Father has not planted.

It is past my power to comprimise a difference betwixt two so great persons in
so great a difference, at so great a distance; only to hold the balance even
betwixt them, give me leave to whisper a word or two,

First for Leland, whereas he calls the Bishopric of Bangor, Optimas
fortunas, it was never very rich, and at the present very troublesome; (by
reason of the Civil Wars) so that Caducanus turning Monk, in most men's
apprehension, did but leave what was little for what was less.

As for John Bale, he himself under King Edward the sixth, was Bishop of Ossory
in Ireland, and flying thence in the days of Queen Mary, did not return in the
reign of Queen Elizabeth to his See, but contented himself rather with a See
his life in Suffolk.
Canons place in the Church of Canterbury; so that by his own practice, a
Bishops place may on some considerations be left, and a Private (though not
Superstitious) life lawfully embraced.

The best is, even Bale himself does consess of this Caducanus, that after ^e
turned Monk, Studiorum ejus interea non elanguit successus, He was no less
happy, then industrious in his endeavors, writing a book of Sermons, and
another called speculum Christiano^um. He dyed under the reign of King Henry
the third, Anno Domini 1225.

Since the Reformation.
HUGH JOHNES born in Wales, was bred Batchelour of the Laws in the University
of Oxford, and made Bishop of Landaff (which See it seems for the poorness
thereof, lay Bishopless for three years after the death of Bishop Kitchen,) May
5. 1566. Memorable no doubt on other accounts, as well as for this, that though
this (...) be in Wales, he was the Bishop Godwin in his Car. of Bishops of
L^ndaffe.
first Welch-man, who for the last three hundred years ( viz. since John of
Monmouth elected 1296.) was the Bishop thereof. He was buried at Matherne,
November 15. 1574.

Doctor......... PHILIPS was a native of Mr. James Chaloner in his Descr. of
the Is^ of Man page 7.
Wales, had his education in Oxford, and was afterward preferred to be
Episcopus Sodorensis, or Bishop of Man. Out of his zeal for propagating the
Gospel, he attained the Manks tongue, and usually preached therein.

Know by the way, Reader, that the King of Spain himself (notwithstanding the
vastness of his Dominions,) had not in Europe more distinct languages spoken
under his command, then had lately the King of great Britain, seven tongues
being used in his Territories, viz.

1. English, in England. 2. French, in Gersey and Guernzey. 3. Cornish, in
Cornwall. 4. Welsh, in Wales. 5. Scotch, in Scotland. 6. Irish, in Ireland. 7.
Manks, in the Isle of Man.
This Doctor Philips undertook the translating of the Bible into the Manks
tongue, taking some of the Islanders to his assistance, and namely Sir Hugh
Cavoll, Minister of the Gospel, and lately (if not still) (...) of
Kir-Michael. He perfected the same work in the space of Idem page ^.
twenty nine years, but prevented by his death, it was never put to press. I
know not whether the doing hereof sounds more to the honor of the dead, or
the not Printing thereof since his death, to the shame of the living, seeing
surely money might be procured for so general and beneficial a design. Which
makes some the less to pity the great pains of the Ministers of the Isle of
Man, who by double labor read the Scriptures to the people out of the English
in the Manks-tongue. This singularly learned, hospitable, painful and pious
Prelate died Anno Dom. 16...

Physicians.
ROBERT RECORD was born in this Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 8. Number. 3.
Country, ex Claris Parentibus, bred in Oxford, where he proceeded Doctor of
Physic. His soul did not live in the Lane of a single science, but traversed
the Latitude of Learning, witness his Works

In

Arithmetic, not so absolute in all numbers, before his time, but that by him
it was set forth more Complete. Astrology, he Practical part whereof has so
great an influence upon Physic. Geometry, whereof the wrote a Book, called the
Path of Geometry, and that easier and nearer then any before. Physic, of the
Judgments of Urines: and though it be commonly said Urina meretrix, yet his
judicious rules have reduced that Harlot to Honesty, and in a great measure
fixed the uncertainty thereof. Metals, his Sight may seem to have accompanied
the Sunbeams into the Bowels of the Earth, piercing into those Penetralls in
his discoveries of, and discourses on Gold and Silver, (wherewith I believe him
well stored,) Brass, Tin, Lead, and what not?
What shall I speak of his skill in Anatomy, Cosmography, Mu^ick, whereof he
read public Lectures in Oxford?

As for his Religion (say not this is of no Concernment in a Physician) I
conjecture him to be a Protestant. First, because he wrote of Auricular
Confession, and de Negotio Eucharistiae, each whereof is a Noli me tangere, for
a Romish Layman to meddle with, according to Popish principles. Secondly,
because so largely commended by Bale. But I dare conclude nothing herein,
having not hitherto seen his Treatises in Divinity. He flourished under K.
Edward the sixth about the year, 1550.

THOMAS PHAIER was born in Pitz. Aetat. decima sexta anno 1550.
Wales, and bred (I believe) first in Oxford, then in London, a general
Scholar, and well versed in the Common Law, wherein he wrote a book De natura
Brevium, of the Nature of Writs. Strange that he would come after Justice
Fitz-herbert, who formerly had written on the same Subject. But probably
Phaiers Book (having never seen any who have seen it) treats of Writs in the
Court of Marches, (whereto Wales was then subjected, and) where the Legal
Proceedings may be somewhat different from ours in England.

But the Study of the Law did not fadge well with him, which caused him to
change his Copy, and proceed Doctor in Physic. Now (though he made none) he,
out of French did translate many useful books. 1. Of the Pestilence, and the
cure thereof. 2. Of the Grief of children. 3. Of the Nature of Simples. 4. The
Regiment of Nuturall Life. He had also his Diversion, some excursion into
Poetry, and translated Virgil his Eneads, Magna Gravitate (says my Idem ibidem.
Author) which our Modern Wits, will render, with great Dullness, and avouch,
that he instead of a Latin Virgill, has presented us with an English Ennius,
such the rudeness of his verse. But who knows not, that English Poetry is
improved fifty in the Hundred, in this last Century of years? He died, and was
buried in London about the year of our Lord 1550.

ALBANE HILL was Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 9. Number. 38.
Britannus by birth. I confess Britannus does not clearly carry his Nativity
for Wales, except it were additioned Cambro-Britannus. But according to our
peaceable promise In our Preface to the Reader.
premised, let him pass for this Countryman. The rather, because so many Hills
(and Mountains too) therein. He was bred a Doctor of Physic, professing and
practicing most beyond the Seas, more famous in Foreign Parts, then in his
Native Country. I find two eminent Outlandishmen, viz. Josias Simler, an
Helvetian of Zurich; and Bassianus Landus, an Italian of Placentia,
charactering him to be, Medicus Nobilissimus ac optimus, and in omni
disciplinarum genere optime versatus, and that he wrote much upon Galen, and the
Anatomicall part of Physic, so that we may say with the Virgil Ecloga sixta.
Poet,

Ut littus Hilum, Hilum omne sonarct.
The shore resounded still,
Nothing but Hill and Hill.
I find no time affixed wherein he flourished, but according to the received
Rule, Noscitur e socio, he may from his Contemporaries be collected in full
Luster, Anno 1550. and it is remarkable that Wales had three eminent Physicians
Writers all in the same Age.

Writers.
Be it premised, that as I should be loath by my lasiness to conceal, so with
all my Industry I conceive it impossible to complete their Characters. For as
the Venetian Courtezan, after she had put off her lofty attire, and high
Chippines, almost pares away her self into nothing; such the slender account
given us of these Writers, that after some set forms and Commendations of
Course common to all Persons, be first defalked, the remainder will be next to
nothing. But it is no fault of me the Cistern if I be empty, whilst my fountain
is dry, seeing I spill nothing by the Leakage of my Neglect, but faithfully
deliver all the intelligence I find, as follows:

PETROK was a Welch-Irish-Cornish-Man. He had his birth in Bale de script.
Brit. Cent 1. Number. 60.
Wales, but breeding in Ireland, according to the Mode of that Age, wherein all
British sailed over into Ireland, (as the English in after ages did into
France,) there to have their Education in all learned Sciences. Who would have
thought to have found Helicon amongst the Bogs, as indeed it was at that Time?
Petrok after twenty years reading good Authors there, came over into Cornwall,
and fixed himself nigh the Severn Sea, in a small Oratory called Petrok-Stowe,
(the station or abiding place of Petrok) now corruptly Pad-Stowe, where many
eminent Scholars were brought up under him. He wrote a book of Solitary life,
whereto he was much addicted.

I confess Petrok is somewhat degraded, as entered under the Topic of Writers,
who is reputed a Saint, and I remember a handsome Church in Exeter dedicated to
his Memory, who flourished Anno 560.

GILDAS the FOURTH, for there were three before him, viz. Gildas Albanius,
Gildas Surnamed Sapiens, (of whom In the Writers of Somersetshire.
before) Gildas Cambrius, and this our Gildas, who laggeth last in the Teame of
his Name-sakes. But the second of these is worth all the rest, (were there four
hundred of them) whom I behold as a Sun indeed, shining with the Luster of his
own desert, whilst two of the others are but so many Meteors about him, some
suspecting them, no realities in Nature, but merely created by men's
sight-deception, and the reflection of the Memory of the true Gildas.

This our fourth Gildas is made a Welch-Scotch-Irish-Man, Wales sharing in him
two parts of three, viz. his Birth and Death, the largest part of his life
belonging to Ireland, where he studied. Many the Books imputed to him of the
Wonders and first inhabitants of Britain, of King Arthur and his Bale de
script. Brit. Cent. 2. Number 21.
unknown Sepulehre, so that now we can teach Gildas what he knew not, namely,
that King Arthur was certainly buried at Camdens B^it. in Somersetsh^e.
Glassenbury. He wrote also of Percevall and Lancelot, who^ I behold as two
Knights Combatants, and presume the former most victorious, from the Notation
of his Name, Per sevalens, prevailing by himself.

Our Author is charged to be full of Fables, which I can easily believe, for in
Ancient History if we will have any thing of truth, we must have something of
falsehood, and (abating only Holy-writ) it is as impossible to find Antiquity
without Fables, as an old Face without Wrinckles. He flourished Anno Dom. 860.

BLEGABRIDE LANGAURIDE. Philip Comineus observes, that to have a short Name is
a great advantage to a Favorite, because a King may readily remember, and
quickly call. him. If so, the writer aforesaid is ill qualified for a Favorite.
But let him then pronounce his own Name, for others will not trouble themselves
therewith. He attained to be a great Scholar, Doctor of both Laws, and
Archdeacon of the Church of Landaft. He to the honor of his Country, and use
of Posterity, translated the laws of Howell the most modest King of Wales, and
flourished Bale de script. B^it. Cen^. ^. Number. 23.
914.

SALEPHILAX the BARDE. This Mungrell name seems to have in it an Eye or Cast
of Greek and Latin, but we are assured of his Welsh extraction. In inquiring
after his works, my success has been the same with the painful Thresher of
Mill-dew'd wheat, gaining little more then Straw and Chafe. All the grain I
can get is this, Bale de script. Brit Cent. 2. Number. 29.
that he set forth a Genealogy of the Britains, and flourished about the year
920.

GWALTERUS CALENIUS (may we not English him Walter of Calen?) was a Cambrian by
his Bale de script. B^it. Cent. 2. Number. 65.
Nativity, though preferred to be Archdeacon of Oxford. He is highly prized
for his great learning, by Lealand and others. This was he who took the pains
to go over into Britain in France, and thence retrived an Ancient Manuscript of
the British Princes, from Brutus to Cadwalader. Nor was his labor more in
recovering, then his courtesy in communicating this rarity to Jeffrey of
Munmouth, to translate the same into Latin. Nor was this Walter himself idle,
continuing the same Chronicle for four hundred years together, until his own
time. He flourished Anno Dom. 1120. under King Henry the first.

GUALO BRYTANNUS born in Wales, was from his Infancy a servant to the Muses,
and lover of Poetry. That he might enjoy himself the better herein, he retired
into a private Bale de script. B^t. Cent. 3. Number. 5.
place, from the noise of all people, and became an Anchorite for his Fancy not
Devotion, according to the Poet,

Carmina secessum scribentis and otia quaerunt.
Verses justly do request
Their writers privacy and rest.
Here his pen fell foul on the Monks, whose covetousness in that age was so
great, that of that subject

Difficile est Satyram non scribere.
'Twas hard for any then to write,
And not a Satyr to indite.
He wrote also Invectives against their wantonness and impostures, and yet it
seems did it with that Cautiousness, that he incurred no danger. Indeed he is
commended by John of Sarisbury and others, Quod esset Prudens and Doctus. He
flourished Anno Domini 1170. under King Henry the second.

WILLIAM BRETON was born (says Bale and Pitz. the later alleging one Willot
for his Author) in Wales, bred a Franciscan at Grimsby in Lincolnshire. I will
not quarrel his Cambrian extraction, but may safely mind the Reader, that
there was an ancient family of the Bretons at Ketton in Rutland next
Lincolnshire, where this William had his education.

But, let this Breton be Brito, (believing the allusion in sound not the worst
evidence for his Welsh original) sure it is, he was a great Scholar, and deep
Divine; the Writer of many books both in Verse and Prose; and of all, his
Master-pi^ce was, an exposition of all the hard words in the Bible, which thus
begins,

Difficiles studeo parts, quas A Nominative case singular, according to the
barbarism of that age.
Biblia gestat,
Pandere; sed nequeo, latebras nisi qui ma ^festat
Auxiliante Deo, qui c^ vult singula praestat,
Dante juvamen eo, nihil insuperabile restat, etc.
Hard places which the Bible does contain,
I study to expound; but all in vain,
Without Gods help, who darkness does explain,
And with his help nothing does hard remain, etc.
Such the reputation of his book, that in the controversy betwixt Standish
Bishop of Saint A^aph and Erasmus, [unequal contest] the former appeals to Bale
de script. Brit. Cent. 5. Nam. 89.
Br^tons book, about the interpretation of a place of Scripture. This William
died at Grimsby, Anno Domini 1356.

UTRED BOLTON was born says Lealand, ex Transabrina Gente. Now though parts of
Salop, Worcester and Gloucester-shire, with all Hereford shire be beyond
Severn, yet in such doubtful Nativities England gives up the Cast, rather
then to make a Contest to measure it. Troublesome times made him leave his
Country and travail to Durham, where he became a Benedictine. He had a rare
Natural Happiness, that the Promptness and Pleasantness of his Parts, Bale de
script. B^it. Cent. 5. Number. 53.
commended all things that he did or said. This so far ingratiated him with the
Abbot of his Convent, that he obtained leave to go to Oxford, to File his
Nature the Brighter by learning.

Hither he came in the heat of the difference, betwixt Wickliffe and his
Adversaries. Bolton sided with both and with neither, consenting in some things
with Wickliffe, dissenting in others, as his conscience directed him.

William Jordan, a Dominican (and Northern Man,) was so madded hereat, that he
he fell foul on Bolton, both with his Writing and Preaching. Bolton angry
hereat, expressed himself more openly for Wickliffe, especially in that his
smart Book, Pro Veris Monachis, for True Monks, or Monks Indeed, (parallel
with Saint Paul's Widows indeed, 1 Timo. 5. 3.
which were to be honored) showing what Sanctity and Industry was required of
them. Hereat the anger of Jordan did Overflow, endeavoring (and almost
effecting) to get Bolton excommunicated for an Heretic. This Learned Man
flourished under King Richard the second 1330.

JOHN GWENT was born in Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 5. Number. 81.
Wales, bred a Franciscan in Oxford, till he became Provincial of his Order
throughout all Britain. He wrote a Learned Comment on Lombard his Common Places,
and is charactered a Person, qui in Penitiore recognitae Prudentiae Cognitione
se vel admirabilem ostenderet. Here ends Lealand his writing of him, and
begins Bale his railing on him, pretending himself to the truest Touchstone
of Spirits, and trying Men thereby. Yet does he not charge our Gwent, with any
thing peculiar to him alone, but common to the rest of his Order, telling us
(what we knew before) that all Mendicants were acted with an ill Genius, being
Sophisters. Cavilers, etc. this Be being no more, guilty then the whole Hive
therein. He dyed at Hereford in the Verge of his Native Country 1348.

JOHN EDE was (says C^nt. 7. Number. 28.
Bale,) genere Wallus, by Extraction a Welsh man, immediately adding patria
Herefordensis, by his Country a Hereford-shire man. We now for quietness sake,
resign him up wholly to the former. Yet was he a Person worth contending for,
Lealand says much in little of him, when praising him to be, Vir illustris
Fama, Eraditione and Religione. He wrote several Comments on Aristotle, Peter
Lumbard, and the Revelalion. He was chief of the Franciscans Convent in
Hereford, where he was buried in the reign of King Henry the fourth 1406.

DAVID BOYS. Let not Kent pretend unto him, wherein his Surname is so Ancient
and Numerous, our Author assuring us of his Bale de script. Brit. Cent. 8: Number.
12.
British Extraction. He studied in Oxford (says Lealand) no less to his own
Honor, then the Profit of others, reaping much benefit by his Books. Having
his Breeding at Oxford, he had a Bounty for Cambridge, and compassing the
writings of John Barningham his Fellow-Carmelite, he got them fairly
transcribed in four Volumes, and bestowed them on the Library in Cambridge,
where Bale beheld them in his Time. He was very familiar (understand it in a
good way) with Eleanor Cobham Duchess of Gloucester, whence we collect him at
least a Parcell-Wickliffite. Of the many books he wrote, fain would I see that
Entitled of Double Immortality, whether intending thereby the Immortality of
Soul and Body, or of the Memory here and Soul hereafter. I would likewise
satisfy my self in his Book about the madness of the Hagarens, whether the
Mahometans be not meant thereby, pretending themselves descended from Sarah,
when indeed they are the Issue of the Bondwoman. He was Prefect of the
Carmelites in Gloucester, where he dyed 1450. Let me add, that his Surname is
Latined Boethius, and so Wales has her David Boethius, whom in some respects
she may Vie with Hector Boethius of Scotland.

Since the Reformation.
Sir JOHN RHESE alias Ap Rise Knight, was born in Wales, Noble by his Lineage,
but more by his Learning. He was well versed in the British Antiquities, and
would not leave a Hoof of his Countries Honor behind, which could be brought
up, to go along with him. Now so it was, that Polydore Virgil that Proud
Italian, bare a Pique to the British, for their Ancient Independency from the
Pope. Besides, he could not so easily compass the Welsh Records into his
clutches, that so he might send them the same way with many English
Manuscripts, which he had burnt to ashes. This made him slight the Credit of
Welsh Authors, whom o^ Sir John was a Zelot to assert, being also a Champion to
vindicate the story of King Arthur. Besides, he wrote a Treatise of the
Eucharist, and by the good words Script. Brit. Cent. 9. Number. 57.
Bale bestows on him, we believe him a Favorour of the Reformation,
flourishing under King Edward the sixth 1550.

JOHN GRIFFIN was born in Pitz. de Angscript. ae^at. 16. an. 1550.
Wales, first bred a Cistercian Friar in Hales-Abbey in Gloucester-shire. After
the dissolution of his Convent he became a Painful and Profitable Preacher. He
suited the Pulpit with Sermons for all seasons, having his Conciones Aestivales
and Brumales, which he preached in English, and wrote in Latin; flourishing
under King Edward the sixth, Anno Domini 1550.

HUGH BROUGHTON was born in Wales, but very nigh unto Shrop-shire. He used to
speak much of his Gentility, and of his Arms, which were the Owls, presaging,
as he said his Addiction to the study of Greek, because those were the birds of
Minerva, and the Embl^me of Athens. I dare not deny his Gentile Extraction, but
it was probable, that his Parents were fallen to great decay, as by the ensuing
story will appear.

When Mr. Barnard Gilpin that Apostolic man was going his annual journey to
Oxford, from his Living at Houghton in the North, he spied by the way-side a
Youth, one while walking, another while running; of whom Mr. Gilpin demanded
whence he came, he answered out of Bishop Carleton in the life of Mr. Gilpin.
Wales, and that he was a going to Oxford with intent to be a Scholar.

Mr. Gilpin perceiving him pregnant in the Latin, and having some smattering
in the Greek Tongue, carried him home to Houghton, where being much improved in
the Languages, he sent him to Christs-colledge in Cambridge. It was not long
before his worth preferred him Fellow of the House.

This was that Broughton so famous for his skill in the Hebew, a great Ornament
of* that University, and who had been a greater, had the heat of his Brain, and
Peremptoriness of his Judgment been tempered with more moderation; being ready
to quarrel with any who did not presently and perfectly embrace his Opinions.
He wrote many books, whereof one called The consent of times, carries the
general commendation.

As his Industry was very Commendable, so his Ingratitude must be condemned, if
it be true what I read; that when Master Gilpin his Mecaenas (by whose care,
and on whose cost he was bred, till he was able to breed himself,) grew old, he
procured him to be troubled and Idem ibidem.
molested, by Doctor Barnes Bishop of Durham, in expectation of his Parsonage,
as some shrewdly suspect.

At last he was fixed in the City of London, where he taught many Citizens, and
their Apprentices the Hebrew Tongue. He was much flocked after for his
Preaching, though his Sermons were generally on Subjects, rather for Curiosity
then Edification. I conjecture his death to be about the year of our Lord 1600.

HUGH HOLLAND was born in Wales, and bred first a Scholar in We^minster, then
Fellow in Trinity-colledge in Cambridge. No bad English, but a most excellent
Latin Poet. Indeed, he was addicted to the New-old Religion; New, in
comparison of Truth it self; yet Old, because confessed of long continuance. He
travailed beyond the Seas, and in Italy (conceiving himself without Ear-reach
of the English,) let fly freely against the Credit of Queen Elizabeth. Hence
he went to Jerusalem, though there he was not made, or he would not own himself
Knight of the (...). In his return he touched at Constantinople, where Sir
Thomas Glover Ambassador for King James, called him to an account for his
Scandalum Reginae at Rome, and the former over freedom of his tongue, cost him
the confinement for a time in Prison. Enlarged at last, returning into England,
with his good parts bettered by learning, and great learning increased with
experience in travail; he expected presently to be chosen Clerk of the Council
at least, but preferment not answering his expectation, he grumbled out the
rest of his life in visible coffeehouse. He made verses in description of
the chief Cities in Europe, wrote the Chronicle of Queen Elizabeth's reign,
(believe him older and wiser, not railing as formerly,) and a book of the life
of Master Camden, all lying hid in private hands, none publicly Printed. This
I observe, the rather, to prevent Plagearies, that others may not impe their
credit with stolen feathers, and wrongfully with ease pretend to his painful
endeavors. He had a competent estate in good Candle-rents in London, and died
about 'the beginning of the reign of King Charles.

The Farewell.
To take my Vale of the Worthies of Wales General, I refer the Reader for the
rest to a Catalogue of their names, set forth at the end of the Welsh
Dictionary: Which Catalogue, I was once resolved to Print as an Appendix to
this Work; till dissuaded on this Consideration: It being Printed in Welsh, in
the re-printing whereof, our Best English Correctors would be but bad Welsh
Corrupters, and make a Mungrel Language, more than departed from Babel, or ever
since was any where used. And now we proceed to the Particular Shires of Wales*

ANGLESEY.
ANGLESEY. Let us in the first place congratulate the Restitution of this
Island to its ancient Latin Appellation, ^eeing it was in a fair way to forget
its own Name of MONA, which some filched from this, and fixed on the Isle of
Man, pretending,

1. The allusion in sound, betwixt Man and Mona. In hoc medio cursu [inter
Iberniam and Britanniam] est Insula quae appellatur Mona. Caesar de bello
Gallico. lib. 5.
2. The description thereof in Caesar, placing it in the middle betwixt Ireland
and Britain, which position better agrees to Man than Anglesey. 3. The
Authorities of many [later] Historians, amongst whom Polydor Virgil, and Hector
Booetius.
But Dr. Humphrey Lluyd, in his learned Letter to Ortelius, most clearly
demonstrateth this to be the true Mona; and the Reason of Reasons does evince
the truth thereof taken from Tacitus, reporting the Roman foot (under Paulinus)
to have swum over from the continent of Britain, to the Isle of Mona. Now such
swimming over (with the Oars only of Arms and Legs) (ten Leagues at least) to
Man is utterly impossible, which from Britain to Anglesey (being hardly an
Italian mile) may, (though with much difficulty and danger) half be performed.

ANGLESEY, that is, the English Island (so called, since conquered by our
Countrymen) is surrounded on all sides with the Irish Sea save on the South;
where a small Fret (known by the peculiar name of Menai) sundreth it from the
Welsh Continent, having twenty miles in the length, and seventeen in the
breadth thereof. May the Inhabitants be like the land they live in; which
appears worse than it is, seemingly barren and really See Speed his Description
thereof.
fruitful, affording plenty of good Wheat, and to grind it,

Millstones.
These in the Greek Mat. 18. 6. Luke 17. 2.
Gospel are termed (...), that is, Asses Millstones; either because Asses (as
Saint Hillary will have it) used to draw them about (before men taught the wind
and water to do that work for them) or because the lower Millstone was called
(...), an See Erasmus in his Chil. in Prove. Antionius Asinus.
Ass, from the sluggishnesse thereof as always lying still. Observe an
opposition betwixt Artificial and Natural Mills, I mean our mouths: In the
former the lower Millstone lies always immovable, whilst in our mouths the
upper Jaw always stands still, and the n^ther applies it self in constant
motion thereunto. Excellent Millstones are made in this Island. When in
motion, in default of Grist to grind, they will fire one another; so necessary
is foreign employment for active spirits, to divert them from homebred
combustions.

The Wonders.
Before we begin on this plentiful Topic, be it premised, that I conceive the
Author of that Dystick was too strait laced in his belief, thus expressing
himself,

Mira cana^, non^ visa mihi sed cognita multis,
Sed nisi visa mihi non habitura fidem.
Wonders here by me are told,
To many men well known;
But till my eyes shall them behold
Their truth I*le never own.
For mine own part I conceive, he that will not believe is unworthy to be
believed, and that it is an injury to deny credit to credible persons,
attesting as follows.

There are diverse Trees * daily dug out of moist and marish places which are
Humphrey Llyid in his learned Letters to Ortelius.
firm and fir for Timber. They are as black within as Ebony, and are used by
the Carvers of that Country to Inlay Cupboards and other wooden utensils. These
Trees are branched into a double difficulty; first, how they came hither;
secondly, how preserved here so long from putrefaction.

Some make the Pedigree of these Trees very ancient, fetching them from Noah's
flood* then overturned with the force thereof. Others conceive them out down by
the Romans when conquering this Island, and shaving away their woods, the
Covert of Rebellion.

Others apprehend them felled (or rather falling) of themselves, their weight
meeting with the waterish and failing foundation; and it is more easy for one
to confute the conjecture of others, than to substitute a more rational in the
room thereof.

But grant this first Knot in these Trees smoothed, how they came hither: a
worse Knob remains to be plained; how they are preserved sound so many Ages,
seeing moisture is the mother of corruption, and such the ground wherein they
are found: Except any will say, there is clammy bituminous substance about them
(like those in Camb. Brit. in that County.
Lancashire) which fenceth them from being corrupted. I could add to the
wonder; how Haste nuts are found under ground with sound kernels in them; save
it is fitter, that the former difficulties be first conjured down, before any
new ones be raised up.

Proverbs.
Camb. Brit. in Anglesey.
Mon Mam Cymbry.]

That is, Anglesey is the Mother of Wales.

Not because bigger than Wales (as Mothers always are, whilst their Children
are infants) being scarce one twentieth part thereof: nor because (as Parents
always) ancienter than Wales, which being an Island may be presumed junior to
the Continent, as probably made by the interruption of the Sea; but because
when other Counties fail, she plentifully feeds them with provision, and is
said to afford Corn enough to sustain all Wales. Nor is she less happy in
Cattle than Corn, so that this Mother of Wales is in some sort a Nurse to
England. I have seen yearly great droves of fair Beasts, brought thence and
sold in Essex it self; so that he who considers how much meat Anglesey spends,
will wonder that it spares any; how much it spares that it spends any.

Crogging, Crogging.]

This Historical Byword (for Proverb properly it is none) we will consider;
First, in the Original: Secondly, in the Use: Thirdly, in the Abuse thereof.
Original. In the reign of King Henry the second, in his many expeditions
against Wales, one proved very unsuccessful, wherein diverse of his Camp were
sent to essay a Passage over Offas ditch at Croggen-Castle. These being
prevented by the British, were most of them slain, and their graves hard by are
to be discovered at this day.

Use. The English afterward when having the Welsh at advantage, used to say to
them, Crogging, Crogging, as a Provokative to revenge, and disswasive to give
them quarter: As if the Romans on the like occasion should cry to the
Carthaginians, Cannae, Cannae.

Abuse. Continuance of time, which assumeth to it self a liberty to pervert
words from their primitive sense, in ignorant mouths has made it a disgraceful
Attribute, when the English are pleased to revile the Welsh; though to speak
plainly, I conceive not how that word can import a foul disgracing of them,
first occasioned by their valiant defeating of us. This Byword (though
Croggen-Castle is in Denbigh-shire) being generally used all over Wales, is
therefore placed in this, because the first County thereof.

Prelates.
GUIDO de MONA, was so sir-named from his Birthplace in Anglesey. Some suspect
that Filius insulae may be as bad as Filius populi, no place being
particularized for his birth: whiles others conceive this sounding to his
greater dignity, to be denominated from a whole Island; the Village of his
nativity being probably obscure, long and hard to be pronounced. He was
afterward Bishop of Saint David's, and Lord Treasurer of England under King
Henry the fourth, who highly hono^ed him; for when the Parliament moved that no
Welsh-man should be a State Officer in England, the King excepted the Bishops,
as confident of their faithful service. Indeed T. Wallingham makes this Gui the
Author of much trouble, but is the less to be believed therein, because of the
known Antipathy betwixt Friars and Secular (...); the former being as faulty in
their lafie speculation, as the other often offending in the practical
over-activity. This Bishop died ^nno 1407.

ARTHUR BULKLEY, Bishop of Bangor, was born either in Cheshire, or more
probably in this County: But it matters not much had he never been born, who
being bred Doctor of the Laws, had either never read, or wholly forgotten, or
wilfully would not remember the Chapter, De sacrilegio; for he spoiled the
Bishopric, and sold the five Bells: being so over-officious, that he would go
down to the Sea to see them shipped, which, in my mind, amounted to a second
selling of them.

We have an English Proverb of him who makes a detrimental bargain to himself,
That he may put all the gains gotten thereby into his eye, and see nothing the
worse. But Bishop Bulkley saw much more the worse by what he had gotten, being
himself Godwin in the Bishops of Bangor.
suddenly deprived of his sight; who had deprived the Tower of Bangor of the
tongue thereof. Thus having ended his credit before his days, and his days
before his life, and having sat in that See fourteen years, he died 1555.

WILLIAM GLYN* D. D. Was bo^n at (...). in this County, bred in Queens College
in Cambridge whereof he was Master, until in the second of Queen Mary he was
preferred Bishop of Bangor. An excellent Scholar, and I have been assured by
judicious Persons, who have seriously perused the solemn Disputations (printed
in Master Fox) betwixt the Papists and Protestants; that of the former none
pressed his Arguments with more strength and less passion than Doctor Glyn:
though const^t to his own, he was not cruel to opposite judgments, as
appears by the appearing of no persecution in his Diocese, and his mild
Nature must be allowed at least Causa socia, or the fellow-cause thereof. He
died in the first of Queen Elizabeth, and I have been informed that Jeoffry
Glyn his Brother, Doctor of Laws, built and endowed a Free-Schoole at Bangor.

Since the Reformation.
ROULAND MERRICK, Doctor of Laws, was born at Boding an in this County, bred in
Oxford, where he became Principal of New Inne-Hall, and afterward a Dignitary
in the Church of Saint David's. Here he with others in the reign of King Edward
the sixth, violently prosecuted Robert Farrar his Diocesan, with intention (as
they made their boast) Fox his Act^ and Mon. A^. 1555. page 1^44.
to pull him from his Bishopric, and bring him into a praemunire, and prevailed
so far, that he was impris^ned.

This Bishop Farrar was afterward martyred in the reign of Queen Mary. I find
not the least appearance, that his former adversaries violented any thing
against him under that Queen. But it is suspicious that advantage against him
(I say not with their will) was grafted on the stock of his former accusation.
However it is my judgment that they ought to have been, and I can be so
charitable to believe that Dr. Merrick was penitent for his causeless vexing
so good a See more in the Martyrs of Carmarthenshire.
person. Otherwise many more besides my self will proclaim him unworthy to be
(who had been a Persecutor of) a Bishop. He was consecrated Bishop of Bangor
December 21. in the second of Queen Elizabeth, 1559. and sat six years in his
See. I have nothing to add, save that he was Father to Sir Gilly Merrick,
Knight, who lost his life for engaging with the Earl of Essex, 1600.

LANCELOT BULKLEY was born in this Sir James Ware de Praesulibus (...).
County, of a then right Worshipful (since Honorable) Family, who have a fair
habitation (besides others) near Beumaris. He was bred in Brazen nose College
in Oxford, and afterward became, first Archdeacon, then Archbishop in Dublin.
He was consecrated the third of October, 1619. by Christopher Archbishop of
Armagh. Soon after he was made by King James one of his Privy Council in
Ireland, where he lived in good reputation, till the day of his death, which
happened some ten years since.

Seamen.
MADOC, Son to Owen Gwineth ap Gruffyth ap Conan, and brother to David ap Owen
Gwineth, Prince of North Wales, was born probably at Aberfraw in this County
(now a mean Town) then the principal Camb. (...). in Angle^y.
Palace of their royal Residence. He made a Seavoyage westward, and by all
probability, those names of Cape de Breton in Noruinberg, and Pengwin in part
of the northern America, for a white Rock and a white headed bird, according to
the British, were relics of this discovery. If so; then let the Genoveses and
Spaniards demean themselves as younger Brethren, and get their Portions in
Pensions in those parts paid as well as they may, owning us Britons* (so may
the Welsh and English as an united Nation style themselves) for the Heirs, to
whom the solid inheritance of America does belong, for the first discovery
thereof. The truth is, a good Navy with a strong Land-Army therein, will make
these probabilities of Madoc, evident Demonstrations, and without these, in
cases of this kind, the strongest Arguments are of no validity. This Sea voyage
was undertaken by Madoc, about the year 1170.

The Sheriffs.
Expect not my description should conform this Principality to England, in
presenting the respective Sheriffs with their Arms. For as to Heraldry, I
confess my self Luscum in Anglia, Caecum in Wallia. Besides, I question,
whether out Rules in Blazonry, calculated for the East, will serve on the West
of Severne? and suspect that my venial mistakes may meet with mortal anger.

I am also sensible of the prodigious Antiquity of Welsh Pedegrees, so that
what Zalmana said of the Israelites slain by him at Tabor, Each of them
resembles the children of a Judge. 8. 18.
King; all the Gentry here derive themselves from a Prince at least. I quit
therefore the Catalogue os Sheriffs to abler Pens, and proceed to.

The Farewell.
I understand there is in this Island a kind of Allumenous Earth, out of which
some (fifty years since) began to make Alum and Copperess, until they (to use
my Speed in the Decription of Anglesey.
Authors phrase) like unflesht Soldiers gave over their enterprise, without
further hope, because at first they saw it not answer their overhasty
expectations. If this Project was sirst founded on rational probability (which
I have cause to believe) I desire the seasonable resumption thereof, by
Undertakers of as able Brains and Purses, but more patience than the former, as
a hopeful forerunner of better success.

BRECKNOCK-SHIRE.
BRECKNOCK-SHIRE has Radnor shire on the North, Cardigan and Carmarthen-shires
on the West, (...)-shire on the South, Hereford and Monmouth-shires on the East
the length thereof being adjudged twenty eight, the (...) thereof twenty miles.

My Speed in his Description of this County.
Author says that this County is not greatly to be praised, or disliked of,
with which his Character, the Natives thereof have no cause to be well pleased,
or much offended. The plain truth is, the fruitfulness of the Valleys therein
makes plentiful amends for the barrenness of the Mountains, and it is high
time to give a check to the vulgar error, which falsely reports this County
the worst in Wiles; let it (...) for me to say, this is not it, and which is
it, let others determine.

Nor does it sound a little to the credit of this County, that (...) (...) the
chief Town thereof, does at this present afford the title of an Eartl to James
Duke of Ormond, the first that ever received that Digniry. Above four hundred
years since, a Daughter of Gilbert and Maud Becket, (and Sister to Tho. Becket)
was by King Henry the second, bestowed in marriage on one Butler an English
Gentleman. Him King Henry sent over into Ireland, and (endeavoring to (...)
(...) blood) rewarded him with large lands, so that his posterity were created
Earls of Ormond. Now therefore we have cause to congratulate the return of this
noble Family i^to their Native Country of England, and wish unto them the
increase of all (...) therein.

Natural Commoditi^s
Otters.
Plenty of these ( Lutrae in Latin) in Brecknock-meer. A Creature that can dig
and dive, resident in the two clements of Earth and Water. The (...) where he
bites, makes his Teeth to m^et, and the Otter leaves little distance betwixt
them* He is as destructive to Fish, as the VVoolf to Sheep. See we here, more
is required to make fine Flesh than to have fine Feeding, the Flesh of the
Otter (from his innate rankness) being naught, though his Diet be dainty. I
have seen a reclaimed Otter, who in a quarter of an hour would present his
Master with a brace of Carps.

Otter-VVooll is much used in the making of Beavers. As Physicians have their
Succedanea, or Seconds, which well supply the place of such Simples, which the
Patient cannot procure, so the Otter is often in stead of the Bever, since the
BeaverTrade is much wasted in the West Indies, their remnant retiring high into
the Country, and being harder to be taken. Yea Otter-wooll is likely daily to
grow dearer, if Prime Persons of the weaker Sex (which is probable) resume the
wearing of Hais.

Brecknock-shire equalling her Neighbors in all General Commodities, exceeds
them in

Wonders,
In the Air. He that relates Wonders walks on the edge of an house, if he be
not careful of his footing, down falls his credit: this shall make me exact in
using my Authors (...) ut prius.
words, informed by credible persons who had experimented it; That their
Cloaks, Hats, and Staves cast down from the top of an Hill (called
Mounch-denny, or Cadier Arthur) and the North-East Rock thereof, would never
fall, but were with the air and wind still returned back, and blown up again;
nor would any thing descend save a stone, or some metalline substance.

No wonder that these should descend, because (besides the magnetical quality
of the Earth) their forcing of their way down is to be imputed to their united
and intended gravity. Now though a large cloak is much heavier than a little
stone; yet the weight thereof is diffused in several parts, and fluttering
above, all of them are supported by the Clouds, which are seen to rack much
lower than the top of the Hill. But now, if in the like trial, the like
repercussion be not found from the tops of other Mountains in Wales of equal
or greater height, we confess our selves at an absolute loss, and leave it to
others to beat about to find a satisfactory answer.

Let me add that waters in Scripture are divided into waters above, and waters
under Genesis 1. 7.
the Firmament: by the former, men generally understand (since the
interpretation thereof relating to Coelum Aqueum, is exploded by the judicious)
the water engendered in the Clouds. If so, time was, when the waters beneath
were higher than the waters above; namely, in Noah's flood, when the waters
prevailed fifteen Cubits above the tops of Genesis 7. 20.
the Mountains.

In the Water.
When the Mere Llynsavathan (lying within two miles of Brecknock) has her
frozen Ice first broken, it makes a monstrous noise, to the Astonishment of
the hearers, not unlike to Thunder. But till we can give a good cause of the
old Thunder, [and Job 2^: 14.
the power of his Thunder who can understand?] we will not adventure on the
disquisition of this new one.

In the Earth.
Reader, pardon me a word of Earthquakes in general. Seneca beholds them most
terrible, because most Natural quest. cap. 1.
unavoidable of all earthly dangers. In other frights [ Tempest, Lightning,
Thunder, etc.] we shelter our selves in the bowels of the Earth, which here
from our safest refuge, become our greatest danger. I have learned from an able
* Pen, that the frequency and fearfulness of Earthquakes, gave the first
occasion to Dr. Hackwill in his Apology, lib. 2. sect. 4.
that passage in the Letany, From sudden death good Lord deliver us.

Now to Wales. The Inhabitants of this County have a constant Tradition, that
where now the Mere Llynsavathan spreads its waters, stood a fair City, till
swallowed up by an Earthquake, which is not improbable. First, because all the
Highways of this County do lead thither; and it is not likely that the
Loadstone of a bare Lake should attract so much Confluence. Secondly, Ptolomy
places in this Tract the City Loventrium, which all the care of Master As he
confesses in the Description of this shire.
Cambden could not recover by any ruins or report thereof, and therefore
likely to be drowned in this Poole. The rather because Levenny is the name of
the River r^nning through it.

Saints.
Saint
KEYNE. CANOCH. CADOCK.
The first of these was a Woman (here put highest by the courtesy of England;)
the two later, Men, all three Saints, and children to Braghan, King, builder
and namer of Brecknock. This King had four and twenty Daughters, a jolly
number; and all of them See Cambdens Brit. in B^nockshire.
Saints: a greater happiness, though of them all, the name only of Rob.
Buckley M. S. in vilis SS. mulierum Angliae in vita Sanctae Keyn^. fol. 90.
Saint Keyne surviveth to posterity. Whether the said King was so fruitful in
Sons, and they as happy in Saintship, I do not know, only meeting with these
two, Saint Canoch and Saint Cadock, (whereof the later is reported a Martyr)
all flourishing about the year of our Lord 492. and had in high veneration
amongst the people of South Wales.

I know not whether it be worth the reporting, that there is in Cornwall, near
the Parish of St. Neots, a Well arched over with the robes of four kinds of
Trees, VVithy, Oak, Elm, and Ash, dedicated to Saint Keyne aforesaid. The
reported virtue of the Water is this, That whether Carew his Survey of Cornwall.
page 130.
Husband or Wife come first to drink thereof, they get the mastery thereby.

St. CLINTANKE was King of Brecknock, a small Kingdom for an obscure King,
though eminent with some for his Sanctity. Now it happened, that a noble Virgin
gave it out, that she would never Jo. Capgrave in Cabal. S. S. Brit.
marry any man except the said King, who was so zealous a Christian. Such as
commend her good choice, dislike her public profession thereof, which with
more Maiden-like modesty, might have been concealed. But, see the sad success
thereof. A Pagan Soldier purposely to defeat her desire, killed this King as he
was one day a hunting; who, though he lost his life, got the reputation of a
Engl. Martyr. on the 19. August.
Saint, and so we leave him. The rather, because we find no date fixed unto
him; so that the Reader may believe him to have lived, even when he thinks best
himself.

Prelates.
GILES de BRUISE, born at Brecknock, was Son to William de Bruise Baron of
Brecknock, and a prime Peer in his Generation. This Giles became afterward
Bishop of Hereford, and in the Civil Wars sided with the Nobility against King
John; on which account he was banished, but at length returned, and recovered
the Kings favor. His Paternal Inheritance (by death it seems of his elder
Brother) Godwin in the Bishops of Hereford. page 536.
was devolved unto him (being together Bishop and Baron by descent) and from
him after his death, transmitted to his Brother Reginald, who married the
Daughter of Leoline Prince of Wales. If all this will not recover this Prelate,
into our Catalogue of Worthies, then know, that his Effigies on his Tomb in
Hereford Church, holds a Steeple in his hand, whence it is concluded, that he
built the Belfree of that Cathedral, as well he might, having so vast an
estate. His death happened Anno 1215.

Since the Reformation.
THOMAS HOWEL was born at So was I told by his Brother Mr. James Howel.
Nangamarch in this County, within few miles of Brecknock, bred Fellow of Jesus
College in Oxford, and became afterward a meek man, and most excellent
Preacher. His Sermons, like the waters of Siloah, did run softly, gliding on
with a smooth stream: So that his matter by a lawful and laudable felony, did
st^al secretly into the hearts of his hearers. King Charles made him the last
Bishop of Bristol, being consecrated at Oxford. He died Anno Dom. 1646. leaving
many Orphan children behind him.

I have been told, that the honorable City of Bristol has taken care for
their comfortable education, and am loath to pry too much into the truth
thereof, lest so good a report should be confuted.

Statesmen.
HENRY STAFFORD, Duke of Buckingham. Though Humphrey his Father had a fair
Castle at, and large lands about Stafford (whereof he was Earl) yet his
Nativity is most probably placed in this County, where he had Brecknock-Castle,
and a Principality about it. This was he, who with both his hands set up
Richard the third on the Throne, endeavoring afterward with his hands and
teeth too, to take him down, but in vain.

He was an excellent Spoaks-man, though I cannot believe that his long Oration
(to persuade the Londoners to side with the Usurper) was ever uttered by him in
terminis, as it lies in Sir Thomas Mores History. Thus the Roman Generals
provided themselves of Valor, and Livy (as he represented them) stocked them
with Eloquence. Yet we may be well assured that this our Duke either did or
would have said the same, and he is the Orator who effects that he aims at;
this Duke being unhappily happy therein.

Soon after not remorse for what he had done, but revenge for what King Richard
would not do (denying his desire) put him on the project of unravelling what he
had woven before. But his fingers were entangled in the threads of his former
Web; the King compassing him into his clutches, betrayed by Humphrey Banister
his Servant. The Sheriff seized this Duke in Shropshire, where he was digging a
Speeds Chronicle in the reign of King Rich. the third
ditch in a Disguise; How well he managed the Mattock and Spade, I know not,
this I know, that in a higher sense, He had made a Psalm. 7. 1^.
Pit, [to disinherit his Soveraign] and dug it, and is fallen into the Ditch
which he had made, being beheaded at Sarisbury without any legal Trial, Anno
1484.

Memorable Persons.
NESTA. Hunger makes men eat what otherwise they would let alone, not to say,
cast away: The cause I confess (wanting matter to furnish out our Description)
inviting me to meddle with this Memorable (not Commendable) Person.

1. She was Daughter to Gr^ffin Prince of Wales. 2. Wife to Bernard de
Neumarch, a Noble Norman, and Lord by Conquest of this County. 3. Mother to
Mahel, an hopeful Gentleman, and Sibyl his Sister. 4. Harlot to a young man,
whose name I neither do, nor desire to know.
It happened, Mahel having got this Stallion into his power, used him very
hardly, yet not worse than he deserved. Nesta madded hereat, came in open
Court, and on her Oath, before King Henry the second, publicly protested, (no
Manna like revenge to malicious minds, not caring to wound their Foes, though
through themselves) that Mahel was ^e of Neumarch his Son, but begotten on her
in Adultery.

This, if true, spoke her dishonesty; if false, her perjury; true or false, her
peerless impudency. Hereby she disinherited her Son, and settled a vast
Territory on Sibyl her sole Daughter, married afterward to Milo Earl of
Hereford.

The Farewell.
When Mr. Speed in pursuance of his Description of England, passed this County,
no fewer than Eight, who had been Bailiffs of Brecknock, gave him courteous
entertainment. This does confirm the Character I have so often heard of the
Welsh Hospitality. Thus giving them their due praise on just occasion, I hope,
that the British Reader will the better digest it, if he find some passages
altogether as true as this, though nothing so pleasing to Him, in our following
Farewells.

CARDIGAN-SHIRE.
CARDIGAN-SHIRE is washed on the West with the Irish Sea, and parted from the
neighboring Shires by Rivers, and the Reader will be careful that the
similitude of their sounds betray him not to a mistake herein.

1. Dovi severing it on the North from Merioneth-shire. 2. Tovy on the East
from Brecknock-shire. 3. Tyvy on the South from Carmarthen and Pembroke-shlre.
My Speed in the description of this Coun^y.
Author says the form thereof is Horn-like (wider toward the North) and I may
say it has a Corn^-Copia therein of all things for man's sustenance, especially
if industry be used.

This County, though remotest from England, was soonest reduced to the English
Dominion, whilst the Countries interposed maintained their liberty. The reason
whereof was this; The English being far more potent in shipping than the Welsh,
found it more facile to sail over the Mountains of Water (so the Surges of the
Sea are termed by the Qu^ti ^mtes volv^ Aquarum. Ovidius.
Poet) than march over the Mountains of Earth; and by their Fleet invaded and
conquered this County in the reign of Rufus; and Henry the first bestowed the
same entirely upon Gilbert de Clare.

Natural Commodities.
Bevers.
Plenty of these formerly did breed in the River Tyvy, which (says Giraldus
Cambrensis) was the only place afforded them in all Britain. A cunning
Creature, yet reported by some men more crafty than he is; who relate, that,
being hunted, and in danger to be taken, he biteth off his Stones, as useful in
Physic (for which only his life was then sought) and so escapes. Hence some
will have him called Castro, a Castrando seipsum: And others add, that having
formerly bitten off his Stones, he stands upright, and shows the Hunters
that he has none, that so they may surcease their pursuit of an unprofitable
Qu^re.

Hence it was, that amongst the Egyptians, the Bever passes for an
Hieroglyphick of him who hurts himself, though by Alciate the great
Emblematist, he is turned to another purpose, to teach men rather to part with
their purses, than their lives, and by their wealth to redeem themselves out of
danger.

The plain truth is, all those reports of ^he Bever, are no better than vulgar
errors, and are disproved both by sense and experience; For his Stones are so
placed in his body, as those of the Boar, that it is impossible for himself
with his teeth to touch them. And some maintain they cleave so fast to his
back, they cannot be taken away without loss of his life.

However, grant the story true, the gelding of himself would not serve his
turn, or excuse the Bever from Hunters now adays, except he could also flea off
his skin, the wool whereof is so commonly used for the making of Hats. All
that I will add, is this, that what plenty soever there was of Bevers in this
County, in the days of Giraldus, the breed of them now is quite destroyed, and
neither fore-foot of a Bever (which is like a Dogs) nor hind-foot (which is
like a Goose) to be seen therein.

Proverbs.
Being well at leisure in this little County, we will observe (what indeed is
general to all Wales) something Proverbial, and conducing to our necessary
information.

Talaeth, Talaeth.]

In effect the same in English with Fin^, Fine; when Mothers and Nurses are
disposed to please their little Ones in dressing them: take the original
thereof: When Roderick the Great divided Wales betwixt his three Sons, into
three Dominions; [ North Wales, South Wales, and Powis.] He ordered, that each
of them should wear upon his Bonnet or Helmet a Coronet of Gold, being a broad
lace or head-band indented upwards, set and wrought with precious stones called
in the British Talaeth, and they from thence Dr P^well in his Histo^y of Wales
page 36.
Ytri twysoc Talaethioc, that is, the three crowned Princes. But now either the
number of Princes is well multiplied in Wales, or, which is truer, the Honor
of Talaeth is much diminished; that being so called, wherewith a Child's head is
bound uppermost upon some other linen clothes. Thus the English have that,
which they call the Crown of a Cap.

Bu Arthur and tra fu.]

That is, Arthur was not, but whilst he was. It is sad to say, Nos fuimus
Trojes, the greatest eminency when not extant is extinct. The Friar never loved
what was good.

Ne thorres Arthur Nawdd gwraig.]

That is, King Arthur did never violate the refuge of a Woman. Arthur is
notoriously known for the mirror of manhood. By the Woman's Refuge, many
understand her Tongue, and no valiant man will revenge her words with his
blows. Nullum memorabile Nomen, -- F^minii in Paena.

Caleny Sais wrah Gymro.]

That is, the heart of a Englishman (whom they call Saxons) toward a
Welsh-man. It is either applied to such who are possessed with prejudice, or
only carry an outward compliance without cordial affection. We must remember
this Proverb was origined, whilst England and wales were at deadly Feude,
there being better love betwixt them since the union of the Nations.

Ni Ch^itw Cymbro oni Gollo.]

That is, the welshman keeps nothing until he has lost it. The historical
truth thereof is plain in the British Chronicles, that when the British
recovered the lost Castles from the English, they doubled their diligence and
valor, keeping them more tenaciously than before,

A fo Pen, bid Bont.]

That is, he that will be a Head, let him be a Bridge. It is founded on a
Fictitious tradition thus commonly told. Benigridran a Britain is said to have
carried an Army over into Ireland; his men came to a River over which neither
was Bridge nor Ferrey, hereupon he was fain to carry all his men over the River
on his own back. To lesson men not to affect the empty title of a General,
except they can supply their Soldiers with all necessaries, be their wardrobe
in want of Clothes, Kitching in want of Meat, etc. Thus Honor has ever a
great burden attending it.

We will conclude these General Proverbs of wales with a Custom which was
ancient in this Nation, they had a kind of Play Dr. Davis in his Proverbs
litera Chapter
wherein the stronger who prevailed, put the the weaker into a Sack; and hence
we have borrowed our English Byword to express such betwixt whom there is
apparent odds of strength, he is able to put him up in a bag.

The Farewell.
It is observable what a credible Roger Houeden, and out of him Mr. Cam^d, in
this County.
Author reports, that there was in this County a City (once an Episcopal See)
called Llan-Badern-Vaure, that is, Llan-Baderne the great. Which City is now
dwindled to nothing.

Reader, by the way, I observe that Cities surnamed the Great, come to Little
at last, as if God were offended with so ambitious an Epithete; Sidon the Josh.
11. 8.
Great, Ninive the Jonah 3. 2.
Great, Babylon the Revel. 18. 2.
Great, it is fallen, etc. But the cause of the ruin of this City was for
their cruel killing of their Bishop, which provoked Divine Justice against them.

I hope the welsh warned herewith, will for the future demean themselves with
due respect to such persons, and am confirmed in my confidence from their
commendable Proverb, Na difanco y Beriglawr, vilify not thy Parish Priest, and
then much more ought the Bishop to be respected.

CARMARTHEN-SHIRE.
CARMARTHEN-SHIRE has Pembroke shire on the W^st, the Severn-Sea on the South,
Cardigan-shire on the North, Brecknock and Glamorgan-shires on the East. The
mountains therein are neither so many nor high as in the neighboring Counties,
affording plenty of Grass, Grain, Wood, Fish, and what not? Besides, nature
here gives the Inhabitants both meat and stomach; the sharpness of the air
breeding an appetite in them.

There is a place in this County called Golden-grove, which I confess is no
Ophir or Land of Havilah, yielding Gold in specie, but plentifully affording
those rich Commodities, which quickly may be converted thereunto; and the
pleasure is no less than the profit thereof. It is the Possession of the right
Honorable Richard Vaughan Baron of Emelor in England, and Earl of Carbery in
Ireland. He well deserves to be owner of Golden-grove, who so often has used
a Golden hand, in plentiful relieving many eminent D^vines during the late
Sequestration. This county affording no peculiar Commodities, let us proceed to

Wonders.
Giraldus Cambrensis reports a Fountain to be in this County (let he himself
find it out and justify it) which conformable to the Sea, ebbe^h and flows
twice in four and twenty hours. But seeing this is a maritime Shire, possibly
there may be a more then ordinary communication betwixt it and the Ocean, and
then the wonder is not so great.

More credibly it is related, that there are in this Shire, strange
subterranean Vaults, conceived the Castles of routed people in the Civil Wars.
And no wonder, seeing David first set up in a defensive posture for himself in
the Cave of Adullam, so that having no place where he could safely set the sole
of his foot above ground, all his present help was under the Earth, and future
hope was above the heavens.

Martyrs.
ROBERT FARRAR an English man by bi^th, but where born unknown, was a prime
Martyr of this County. A man not unlearned, but somewhat indiscreet, or rather
uncomplying, which procured him much trouble: so that he may be said with Saint
Laurence to be broyled on both sides, being persecuted both by Protestants and
Papists.

He was preferred to be Bishop of Saint David's, by the Duke of Sommerset, then
Lord Protector, who was put to death not long after. Some conceive, that the
Patrons fall was the Chaplains greatest guilt, and encouraged his enemies
against him. Of these, two were afterward Bishops in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth, viz. Thomas Young Arch. Bishop of York, and Rowland Merrick Bishop
of Bangor.

Soldiers.
Sir RICE ap THOMAS was never more than a Knight, yet little less than a Prince
in this his Native County. If the Author of Praelia Anglornm may not be
believed,

-- Ricius Thomas flos Cambro-Britannum.

King Henry the seventh will himself witness his worth. To him lately landed at
Milford Haven with contemptible forces; this Sir Rice repaired with a
considerable accession of choice Soldiers, marching with them to Bosworth
field, where he right valiantly behaved himself. That thrifty King according to
his cheap course of remuneration (rewarding Gown-men in Orders (by him most
employed) with Church Livings, and Swordmen with Honor) afterward made Sir
Rice Knight of the Order, and well might he give him a Garter, by whose
effectual help he had recovered a Crown.

Elmelin in this County was one of his principal seats, whose name and ^ture he
altered, building and calling it Camb. (...) in this County.
New Castle, and I believe it one of the latest Castles in Wales, seeing since
that time it has been fashionable to demolish, not to erect fortified Houses.

As he appeared early, so he continued long in military action, for I find him
in the fourth year of King Henry the eighth, conductor of five hundred light
horse, at the pompous and expensive fiege of Therouene, where I meet his last
mention in our English Chronicles.

WALTER de DEVEREUX son of -- Devere^x and Cicely his Wife (sole sister to
Thomas Bourchier last Earl of Ess^x) was born in the town of Mills in his
Catalogue of Honor in the Earls of Essex.
Carmarthen, and by Queen Elizabeth in his Maternall Right created Earl of
Essex. One Martially minded, and naturally hating Idleness, the Rust of the
Soul.

Though time has silenced the factions, and only sounded the Facts of Queen
Elizabeth's Court, no place had more heart-burnings therein, and it was a great
part of Gods goodness and her prudence that no more hurt was done thereby. Many
maligned our Earl -- Tantae ne Animis Aularibus Irae? desirous to thrust him on
dangerous designs. Nor need we consult the Oracle of Apollo to discover his
chief Adversary, being he was a prime Favorite, who loved the Earls nearest
relation better than he loved the Earl himself, whom he put on the project of
Ireland.

Yet was not our Walter surprised into that service, seeing Injuria non fit
volenti, and being sensible that his room was more welcome to some than his
company at Court, he willingly embraced the employment. Articles (the first and
last I believe in that kind) are drawn up betwixt the Queen and him, who was to
maintain such a 200. horse and 400. foot.
proportion of Soldiers on his own Cost, and to have part of the fair
Territory of -- ClandeBoy in Ulster for the conquering thereof. So much for the
Bears skin, now all the craft will be to catch, kill, and fley the Bear himself.

Well, to maintain an Army (though a very little one) is a Sovereigns and no
Subjects work, too heavy for the support of any private man's estate, which cost
this Earl first the Mortgaging, then the selling outright his fair Inheritance
in Essex. Over he goes into Ireland with a noble company of Kindred and
Friends, supernumerary volunteers above the proportion of Soldiers agreed upon.

Sir William Fitz-VVilliams Lord Deputy of Ireland hearing of his coming, and
suspecting ( Court jealousy rises very early, or goes not to bed at all) to
be ecclipsed by this great Earl, sollicits the Queen to maintain him in the
full power of his place, without any diminution; alleging this, much to
conduce to the Honor of her Majesty whom he represented. Hereupon it was
Ordered, that the Earl should take his Commission from this Lord Deputy, which
with much importunity and long attendance, he hardly obtained, and that with no
higher Title than Governor of Ulster.

After many impressions (not over successfully) made in Ulster, he was by the
Deputy * Camb. Eliz. Anno 1573.
remanded into the South of Ireland, where he spent much time (take much in
little in my Authors words as to his general performance) Nullius bono sed
magno suo damno. His Friends in the English Court grow few and cold, his Foes
many and active; affronts were plentifully powered upon him, on purpose either
to drown him in grief, or burn him in his own anger. From Munster he was sent
back into Ulster, where he was forbidden to follow his blow, and use a Victory
he had gotten: Yea, on a sudden Camb. Eliz. Anno 1575.
stripped out of his Commission, and reduced to be a Governor of three hundred
men: yet his stout Stomach (as true tempered Steel) bowed without breaking, in
all these afflictions embracing all changes with the same tenor of const^cy.
P^y days in Ireland came very thick, moneys out of England very slow; his noble
Associates began to withdraw, common men to mutiny, so that the Earl himself
was at the last recalled home.

Not long after he was sent over the second time into Ireland with a loftier
Title, (the length of the Feather makes not the Head the higher) of Earl
Marshall of Ireland, where he fell into a strange looseness (not without
suspicion of Poison) and he died, Anno 1576. His Soul he piously resigned to
God, his Lands (much impaired) descended to his Son Robert, but ten years of
age. His Body was brought over and buried in Carmarthen the place of his
Nativity, and his Widow Lady (to say no more) was soon re-married to Robert
Earl of Leicester. Let me add, that he died in the Camb. Eliz. Anno 1576.
36* year of his age, fatal to his Family, his Father and Grandfather dying in
the same, which year Robert Earl of Essex his Son never attained to, and
whether it had not been as honorable for his Grandchild Robert Earl of Essex
to have died in the same year of his age, or to have lived longer, let others
decide.

Writers.
AMBROSE MERLIN was born at Carmarthen, a City so denominated from his Nativity
therein. This I write in conformity to common Tradition (and he who will not
errare cum vulgo, must pugnare cum vulgo) my own judgment remonstrating
against the same, finding the City called Mariadunum in Ptolomy, before Merlins
Cradle was ever made, if Merlins Cradle was ever made.

His extraction is very incredible, reported to have an Incubus to his Father,
pretending to a Pedigree older than Adam, even from the Serpent himself. But a
Dr. Brown in his vulgar Errors, Book 7. Chapter 16.
Learned Pen demonstrateth the impossibility of such Conjunctions. And let us
not load Satan with groundless sins, whom I believe the Ioh. 8. 44.
Father of lies, but [in a litteral sense] no Father of Bastards.

Many are the pretended Prophesies of Merlin, whereof the British have a very
high esteem, and I dare say nothing against them; only I humbly tender to this
Nations consideration a modest Proverb of their own Country, Namyn Dduw nid oes
Dewin; that besides God there is no Diviner. Yet I deny not but the Devil can
give a shrewd conjecture; but often the deceiver is deceived. Sure I am Merlins
Prophesies have done much mischief, seeing such who pretended skill therein,
that they could unfold his meaning (though for my part I believe they must have
the Devils key who open the Devils lock) put Dr. Powell in his History of
Wales, page 386.
Owen Glendower on his Rebellion against King Henry the fourth, persuading him
the time was come wherein he should recover the Welsh Principality, which
caused the making of those cruel Laws, with Draco's, written in blood against
the Welsh, which no tender Englishman can read without regret.

There want not those who maintain Merlin to be a great Chemist, and those we
know have a Language peculiar to themselves, so that his seeming Prophesies are
not to be expounded historically but naturally, disguising the mysteries of
that faculty from vulgar intelligence.

The best Prophecy I meet with in Merlin which hit the mark indeed, is what I
find cited out of him by In his History of Ireland.
Giraldus Cambrensis.

Sextus maenia Hiberniae subvertent, and Regiones in Regnum redigentur.

The Sixth shall overturn the walls of Ireland, and reduce their Countries into
a Kingdom.

This was accomplished under King James the sixth, when their Fastnesses (Irish
Walls) were dismantled, and Courts of Civil Justice set up in all the Land. But
enough of Merlin, who is reported to have died Anno --

The Farewell.
How this County (with the rest of Wales) has preserved its woods in our
unhappy Civil Wars is to me unknown; yet if they have been much wasted (which I
suspect) I wish that the Pit-Coal, which in some measure it affords, may
daily be increased for the supply of their fuel.

CARNARVON. This County has the Irish Sea on the West, Anglesea (divided by
Menaifre^) on the North, Denby shire on the East, and Merionith shire on the
South. This I have observed peculiar to this County, that all the Market are
Sea Towns (being five in number, as noted in the Maps) which no other County in
England or Wales does afford.

The Natives hereof count it no small credit unto them, that they made the
longest resistance against, and last submitted unto the English: And indeed for
natural strength, it exceeds any part of this Principality; so that the
English were never more distressed, than in the Invasion thereof.

I am much affected with the ingenuity of an English Nobleman, who following
the Camp of King Henry the third, in these parts, wrote home to his friends
about the end of September 1245. The naked truth indeed as follows; (...)
Paris Anno notato, page 924.
We lie in our Tents watching, fasting, praying, and freezing: we watch for
fear of the Welsh-men, who are wont to invade us in the night; we Fast for want
of meat, for the half penny loaf is worth five pence; we Pray to God to send us
home again speedily; we Freeze for want of winter garments, having nothing but
thin linen betwixt us and the wind.

Yet is this County in it self sufficiently plentiful (though the Welsh had the
wit to keep ^ood from the English) and Snow-don-Hills therein are commended by
my * Author for fertility of wood, cattle, fish, and fowl.

Smile not Reader, to hear of Fish in so high Mountains which have plenty of
Pools interposed.

Wonders.
Giraldus Cambrensis tells us how there is a Lake in Snowden Hills in this
County, which has a floating Island therein. But it seems that it either
always swimmeth away from such who endeavor to discover it, or else that this
vagrant wearied with long wandering has at last fixed it self to the Continent.
He tells us also of Monoculous Fishes, though not fully acquainting us how
their one eye is disposed. Whether Polyphemus-like in the midst of their head,
or only on one side. The truth is, these One-eyed Fishes, are too nimble for
any men with two eyes to behold them.

Proverbs.
Craig Eriry or Snow don will yield Camb. Brit. in ^shire.
sufficient Pasture for all the Cattle of Wales put together.]

Some will say this cannot be literally true, except the Cattle of Wales be
few, beneath, and Snow-don-hills fruitful above all belief. The best is, the
time is not expressed how long these hills will suffice for their pasture. But
let us not be so morose, but to understand the meaning of this expression,
importing by help of an Hyperbole, the extraordinary fruitfulness of this place.

Diange ar Gluyd, a boddi ar Gonway.]

That is, to escape Clude and be drowned in Conway: parallel to the Latin,
Incidit in Scyllam qui vult vitare Charibdin.

However, that Pilot is to be pitied, who to shun Scylla does run on Charibdis,
because those rocks were near and a narrow passage betwixt them; whereas the
two Rivers of Clude and Conway are twenty miles a sunder, affording men scope
enough to escape them; but little or much in such cases are the same with
indiscreet persons.

Princes.
EDWARD the Fourth (but first surviving) son of King Edward the First and Queen
Eleanor, was born at Carnarvon in this County, April 25. 1284. No Prince ever
ascended the English Throne with greater, or used it with less advantage to
himself.

First, though his Father had in a manner surprised the W^lsh to accept him for
their Prince, (pleading his royal extraction, birth in Wales, in ability to
speak a word of English, and innocence that none could tax him with actual
sin.) Yet I find them not for his Fathers fallacy to think the worse of his
Son, sic juvat esse deceptos, and generally they accepted him, as preferring
that a Prince should be put with wit, rather than with violence upon them.

In England he succeeded to a wise and victorious Father who happily had hit
the expedient to be both beloved and feared by his Subjects, leaving the land
in so good a posture for government, that touch the wheel and it would turn in
the right tract of its self. But this Edward first estranged himself from his
Subjects, and [in effect] subjected himself to a stranger Pierse Gaveston his
French Minion, and after his execution to the two Spencers, who though Native
Englishmen, were equally odious to the English for their insolence.

Hence it was that he first lost the love of his Subjects, then of his Queen
(the vacuity of whose bed was quickly filled up) then his Crown, then his Life.
Never any English Kings case was so pitiful, and his person less pitied, all
counting it good reason that he should give entertainment to that woe, which
his wilfulness had invited home to himself. His violent death happened at
Berkley Castle, September. 22. 1327.

Saints.
There is an Island called Berdsey justly reduceable to this County (lying
within a mile of the South-West Promontory thereof) wherein the Corpse of no
fewer than Cambd Brit. in Insulis Brita^.
twenty thousand Saints are said to be interred.

Estote vos omnes Sancti; Proud 1 Kin. 20. 10.
Benhadad boasted that the dust of Samaria did not suffice for handfuls for all
the people that followed him. But where would so many thousand Bodies find
Graves in so petty an Islet? But I retrench my self, confessing it more facile
to find Graves in Berdsey for so many Saints, than Saints for so many Graves.

States=Men.
JOHN WILLIAMS was born at Aber-Conwy in this County, bred Fellow of Saint
John's College in Cambridge, Proctor of the University, Dean of Westminster,
Bishop of Lincoln, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, and lastly
Archbishop of York. In my Church History I have offended his Friends, because
I wrote so little in his praise, and distasted his Foes because I said so much
in his defense. But I had rather to live under the indignation of others, for
relating what may offend, than die under the accusation of my own conscience,
for reporting what is untrue. He died on the 25. day of March, 1649.

Prelates since the Reformation.
RICHARD VAUGHAN, born at Nuffrin (or else at Etern) in this County, was bred
Fellow in Saint John's College in Cambridge, and was afterward successively
Bishop of Bangor, Chester, and lastly of London; a very corpulent man, but
spiritually minded; an excellent Preacher, and pious Liver, on whom I Cited in
H. Holl^nd, but made (as I have been told) by J. Owex.
find this Epigram, which I will endeavor to English.

Praesul es (o Britonum decus immortale tuorum)
Tu Londinensi primus in Urbe Brito.
Hi mihi Doctores semper placuere, docenda
Qui faciunt, plus quam qui faciendae docent.
Pastor es Anglorum doctissimus, optimus ergo,
Nam facienda doces ipse, docenda facis.
Prelate of London (O immortal grace
Of thine own Britons) first who had that place.
He Is good, who what men ought to do, does teach
He Is better, who does do, wh^t men should preach.
You best of all, preaching what men should do,
And what men ought to preach that doing too.
Here to justify the observation, Praesul must be taken for a plain Bishop,
and primus accounted but from the conversions of the Saxons to Christianity.
For, orherwise we find no fewer than Reckoned up by Bishop Go^dwin in his
Catalog^e.
sixteen Arch Bishops of London, before that time, and all of the British
Nation. He was a most pleasant man in discourse, especially at his Table,
maintaining that Truth, At meals be glad, for sin be sad, as indeed he was a
mortified man. Let me add, nothing could tempt him to betray the Rights of the
Church to sacrilegious Hands, not sparing sharply to reprove some of his own
Order on that account. He died March 30. 1607. being very much lamented.

HENRY ROULANDS born in this County, bred in the University of Oxford, was
consecrated Bishop of Bangor, November. 12. 1598. We have formerly told how
Bishop Bulkley plundered the Tower of Saint Asaph of five fair Bells; now the
bounty of this Bishop bought four new ones for the same (the second Edition in
Cases of this kind is seldom as large as the first) whereof the biggest cost an
Godwin in the Bishops of Bangor.
hundred pounds. He also gave to Jesus College in Oxford, means for the
maintenance of two Fellows. He died Anno Dom. 1615.

The Farewell.
The Map of this County (as also of Denby and Flint-shire) in Mr. Speed is not
divided (as other Shires in England and Wales) with Pricks into their several
Hundreds, which would have much conduced to the completing thereof, whereof he
renders this reason, That he could not procure the same (though promised him)
out of the Sheriffs Books; fearing lest the riches of their Shire should be
further sought into by revealing such particulars. He adds moreover, This I
have observed in all my Survey, that where least is to be had the greatest
fears are possessed. I would advise these Counties hereafter to deny no small
Civility to a painful Author, holding a Pen in his hand, for fear a drop of his
Ink fall upon them; for though juice of Lemmon will fetch such spots out of
Linen, when once printed in a Book they are not so easily got out, but remain
to posterity.

DENBIGH-SHIRE.
DENBIGH-SHIRE has Flint-shire, Cheshire, and Shrop-shire on the East,
Montgomery and Merionith-shires on the South, Carnarvonshire (divided by the
River Conwey on the West) being from East to West thirty one, from North to
South twenty miles.

The East part of this County (toward the River Dee) is fruitful, but in the
West the industrious Husbandman may be said to fetch his bread out of the fire,
paring off their upper Turfs with a Spade, piling them up in heaps, burning
them to Ashes, and then throwing them on their barren ground, which is much
fertilized thereby.

Natural Commodities.
Amelcorne.
This English Word (which I find in the English In his Brit. in the description
of this County.
Cambden) is Welsh to me. Let us therefore repair to his Latin Original, where
he informs us, that this County produces plenty of Arinca. Here the
difficulty is a little changed, not wholly cleared. In our Dictionaries Arinca
is Englished

1. Rice; but this (though a frequent name of many in this Country) is a grain
too choice to grow in Wales, or any part of England. 2. Amelcorn; and now
having run round, we have not stirred a step, as to more information of what we
desired a kind of.
At last with long beating about, we find it to be RYE, in Latin more
generally called Serale. Not. Hist. lib. 28. cap. 16.
Plinles Pen casts three dashes on this Grain, being (it seems) no friend to
it, or it to him.

1. Est tantum ad arcendam famem utile, Good only to drive away famine, as not
pleasant at all. 2. Est, (licet far mixtum) ventri ingratissimum, as griping
the Guts. 3. ^ascitur quocunqne solo, any base ground being good enough to bear
it.
However, (whatever his foreign Rye was) that which grows incredibly
plentiful in this County; is very wholesome, and generally in England, Rye
makes moistest bread in the dryest Summer, for which cause some prefer it
before Wheat it self.

Buildings.
The Church of Wrexham is commended for a fair and spacious building, and it is
questionable, whether it claims more praise for the artificial Tower thereof,
or for the

Organs.
These were formerly most Comb. B^it. in D^nbigshire
famous (the more because placed in a Parochial, no Cathedral Church) for
beauty, bigness and tunableness: though far short of those in worth which
Michael Emperor of Constantinople caused to be made of pure Zonaras Tom. 3.
Gold, and beneath those in bigness which George the Salamitan Abbot, made to
be set up in the Church of his Convent, whose biggest Pipe was B^schius de
Monast. Germ. fol. 107.
eight and twenty foot long, and four spans in compass.

The first Organ which was ever seen in the West of Europe, was, what was
Marian. Scot. in Chron. sub An. 757.
sent Anno 757. from Constantine the Grecian Emperor, to Pipin King of France.
And their general use in Churches began about the year 828. I read that the
form of this instrument was much improved by one Bernard a Venetian (who was
absolutely the best Sab^llicus Enne. 10. lib. 8.
Musician in the World) with addition of many Pipes thereunto.

What is become of Wrexham-Organs, I know not, and could heartily wish, they
had been removed into some Gentleman's house, seeing such as accuse them for
superstitious in Churches must allow them lawful in private places. Otherwise
such Moroso's deserve not to be owners of an articulate voice sounding thorough
the Organ of a Throat.

But, to return to the buildings in this County, Holt Castle must not be
forgotten; How well ^t is now faced and repaired without, I know not; I know
when it was better lined within, than any Subjects Castle (I believe) in Europe
at that time, viz. when in the possession of William Lord Stanley. When the
ready money and plate therein (besides Jewels and rich Household Stuff) amounted
unto Lo^d B^coas Henry (...) ^venth, page 133.
forty thousand Marks, got by the plunder of Bosworth field. But as the River
Dee, running by this Castle, is soon after swallowed up in the Irish Ocean; so
it was not long before this vast treasure, upon the Owners attainder, was
confiscated into the Coffers of King Henry the seventh.

Prelates.
LEOLINE being born in the Marches, he had a double name, to notify him to
posterity. One, after the Welsh-mode a Patre, Bishop Good^ in the Bishops of
Saint Asaph.
Leoline ap Llewelin ap Yuyr, the other according to the custom of the English
Clergy, a Patria, Leoline de Bromfield, a most Camb. Brit. in De^b. (...).
fruitful tract of ground in this County. Under King Edward the first, Anno
1293. he was consecrated Bishop of Saint Asaph, and deserved right well of that
See, by his manifold Benefactions, appropriating some Churches to his Chapter.

As for a portion of Tithes in the Parish of Corwen, appropriated to the
Fabric of the Church, Bis^op Godwin ut prius.
he reduced it to its former estate. The first and last instance (for Precedent
I dare not call it) which I have met with, of a Church legally appropriated,
which reverted to its presentative propriety. Had King Henry the eighth, at the
dissolution of Abbeys, followed this example, the Church had been richer by
many pounds; the Exchequer not poorer by a penny. I find also, that he asked
Idem. Ibid.
leave of King Edward the first to make a Will, which may seem very strange,
whether it was a Court-complement, or ex gratia cautela, or because Welsh
Bishops in that age might not Testamentize without Royal assent. By his Will he
bequeathed much of Plate, rich Vests and Books to the Canons of that Church and
his Chaplains, dying Anno Dom. 1313.

Since the Reformation.
GODFREY GOODMAN was born of wealthy Parentage in this County, bred under his
G^briel (...).
Uncle (of whom hereafter) in Westminster School, then in Trinity College in
Cambridge, where he commenced Doctor of Divinity, successively preferred
P^ebendary of Windsor, Dean of Rochester, and Bishop or (...). He is (...)
joined to the Prelates before (though he lived long (...)) the Reforma^on,
because he agreed with them in Judgment, dying a professed Romanist, as
appears by his Will Yet the Adversaries of our Hierarchy have no cause to
triumph thereat, who (...) charge Popish compliance on all his Order, being
able to produce of two hundred Bishops since Queen Elizabeth but this only
instance, and him a person of no great eminency; not only disavowed by his
fellow Prelates, but imprisoned in the late Convocation for his erroneous
Opinions.

Indeed in this Discourse he would be constantly complaining of our first
Reformers; and I heard him once say in some passion, That Bishop Ridley was a
very Odd man; to whom one presently returned, he was an Odd man indeed my
Lord, for all the Popish party in England could not match him with his equal in
Learning and Religion. To give Goodman his due, he was a harmless man, hurtful
to none but himself, pitiful to the poor, hospitable to his neighbors, against
the ruining of any of an opposite judgment, and gave the most he left to pious
uses. He was no contemptible Historian, but I confess an under-match to Doctor
Hackwell. But I remember the Ring bequeathed to me in his Will with the Posie
thereof, Requiem Defunctis; and therefore I will no longer be troublesome to
his Memory, who was made Bishop 1624. and some seven years since deceased in
Westminster almost 80. years of age.

Writers since the Reformation.
WILLIAM SALESBURY was born in this County, where his family flourishes at
this day. This Gentleman out of a love to his Native language, Amor patriae
ratione valentior omni, composed a short English and Welsh, Dictionary, first
privately presented to, and approved by King Henry the eighth, (being a Tuthar,
by his Fathers side of Welsh extraction) and then publicly printed, Anno Dom.
1547.

Some captious spirits will quarrel the usefulness thereof, seeing the Welsh
did not want, and the English did not wish a Book of that natnre. But, let them
know that it is useful for both Nations; to the English for attaining, to the
Welsh for retaining that Language.

Attaining. For being an original Tongue, an Antiquary is lame without it,
(which I find by my own defect) to understand the ( few of many) remaining
Monuments of that Nation.

Retaining. That Tongue as well as others by disuse being subject not only to
Corrup^ion, but Oblivion, by the confession of the Natives of that Country.
Indeed all Dictionaries of Languages are very useful, Words bringing Matter to
the Tongue, and as In Cratylo.
Plato well observed, (...). A Name or Word is an instrument of Instruction,
and ushere^h Knowledge into our Understanding.

However, seeing nothing can be begun and finished at once, Salesbury his Book,
(as the first in this kind) did rather essay, than effect the work, and since
has been completed by others. He died about the year, 1560.

Benefactors to the Public since the Reformation.
Sir THOMAS Son of RICHARD EXMEW, was born at Rythin in this County. Being bred
in London a Goldsmith, he thrived therein so well, that Anno 1517. he was Lord
Mayor thereof, besides other Benefactions in his own Country: and to Saint Mary
Magdalen in Milk-street, London, (where he lies buried.) He made the Stows
Survey of London. page 578.
Water Conduit by London-wall at More-gate. (...), (so Pindar begins his Poems)
Water is a Creature of absolute and common Concernment, without which we should
be burnt with the thirst, and buried with the filth of our own bodies.

GABRIEL GOODMAN, Son of Edward Goodman, Esquire was born at Rythin in th^s County,
afterward Doctor of Divinity in Saint John's College in Cambridge, and Dean of
Westminster, where he was fixed for full forty years; though by his own parts
and his friends power, he might have been what he would have been in the Church
of England. Abigail said of her Husband, Nabal is his name, and folly is with
him. But it may be said of this worthy Dean, Goodman was his name, and goodness
was in his nature, as by the ensuing Testimonies will appear.

1. The Bible was translated into Welsh on his cost, as by a note in the
Preface thereof does appear. 2. He founded a Schoole-house, with a competent
salary in the Town of his Nativity; as also, erected and endowed an Almes-House
therein for twelve poor people. 3. He repaired the House for the Minister
(there called the Warden) of Rythin, furnishing it with Plate and other
Utensils, which were to descend to his Successors. 4. He purchased a fair House
with Land thereunto at Chiswick in Middlesex, where with his own hands he set a
fair Row of Elmes, now grown up to great beauty and height, for a retiring
place for the Masters and Scholars at Westminster in the heat of Summer, or any
time of Infection. If these Lands at this Day be not so profitably employed, as
they were by the Donor piously intended, it is safer to bemoan the sad effect,
than accuse the causers thereof.
There needs no other Testimony of his Honesty and Ability, than that our
English Nestor, the Lord Treasurer Cecil, made him one of the Executors of his
Will, to dispose of great sums to charitable uses; which Trust he most
faithfully discharged. He died in the year 1601. and is buried in the
Collegiate Church of Westminster, whereof he so well deserved, as of all
England, Mr. Cambden performing his Perambulation about it on his expenses.

Sir HUGH MIDDLETON, Son of Richard Middleton was born at Denbigh in this
County, and bred in London. This is that worthy Knight, who has deserved well
of London, and in it of all England. If those be recounted amongst David's
worthies, who breaking through the Army of the 2 Samuel 23. 16
Philistines, fetched water from the Well of Bethlehem, to satisfy the longing
of David (founded more on fancy than necessity,) how meritorious a work did
this worthy man perform, who to quench the thirst of thousands in the populous
City of London, fetched water on his own cost, more than 24. miles, encountering
all the way with an Army of oppositions, grapling with Hills, struggling with
Rocks, fighting with Forests, till in defiance of difficulties he had brought
his project to perfection? But, Oh wha^ an injury was it unto him, that a
potent Person, and idle Spectator should strike in; (Reader I could heartily
wish, it were a falsho^d what I report) and by his greatness possess a moity of
the profit, which the unwearied endeavors of the foresaid Knight had purchased
to himself!

The Farewell.
I heartily wish this County may find many like Robert Eari of Leicester (by
his bounty much advancing the building of a new Church in Denbigh) who may
willingly contribute their Charity for the repairing of all decayed Churches
therein. Yea, may it be happy in faithful and able Ministers, that by their
pains they may be built up in the Faith of the Lord.

FLINT-SHIRE.
FLINT-SHIRE. It takes the name from Flint, formerly an eminent place therein.
But why Flint was so named will deservedly bear an enquiry, the rather because
I am informed there is scarce a Flint stone to be found in the whole shire.

An eminent Mr. John Jones.
Antiquary well known in these parts (Reader I must carry my Author at my back,
when I write that which otherwise will not be believed) has informed me, it
was first called Flit-Town, because the people Flitted or removed their
habitations from a small Village hard by, to and under a Castle built there by
King Edward the first. Afterward it was called Flint Town, or Flint to make it
more sollid in the prononciation. Now although sometimes Liquids are melted out
of a word to supple it to turn the better on the tongues end; It will hardly be
presidented that ever the sturdy Letter N. was on that or any account
interjected into the middle of an original word. But it is infidelity not to
believe what is thus traditioned unto us.

It has the Sea on the North, Shropshire on the South, Cheshire on the East,
and Denbigh-shire on the west thereof, the smallest County in Wales, whereof
the Natives render this reason, That it was not handsomely in the power of King
Edward the first (who made it a Shire) to enlarge the Limits thereof; For the
English Shires, Shropshire and Cheshire he would not discompose, and on the
Welsh side he could not well extend it without prejudice to the Lord Marchers,
who had Potestatem vitae and necis in the adjacent Territories, the King being
unwilling to resume, and they more unwilling to resign, their respective
Territories.

If any ask why so small a parcel of ground was made a Shire, let them know
that every foot therein in Content was ten in Concernment, because it was the
passage into North Wales. Indeed it may seem strange that Flint, the Shire
Town, is no Market Town, no nor Saint Asaph (a City, qua seeds Episcopi) till
made so very late. But this is the reason, partly the vicinity of Chester, the
Market genera^ of these parts; partly that every village has a Market in it
self, as affording all necessary Commodities.

Nor must we forget that this County was parcel of the Pallatinate of Chester,
paying two thousand Marks (called a Mize) at the change of every Earl of
Chester, until the year of our Lord, 1568. For then upon the occasion of one
Thomas Radford committed to prison by the Chamberlain of Chester, Flint-shire
(says my W. Smith in his Vale Royal of Englant, page 15.
Author, revolted, I dare say) disjoined it self from that County Pallatine,
and united it self to the Principalities of Wales, as conceiving the same the
more advantageous.

Proverbs.
Mwy nag ^n bwa yro Ynghaer.]

That is, more then one Yugh-Bow in Chester. Modern use applies this Proverb
to such, who seize on other folks goods (not with intent to steal but) mistaken
with the similitude thereof to their own goods. But give me leave to conjecture
the original hereof, seeing Cheshire-men have been so famous for Archery.

Princes.
ELIZABETH the seventh Daughter of King Edward the first, and Queen Elenor, was
born at Ruthland Castle in this County; a place which some unwarily confound
with Rythin Town in Denbigh shire. This Castle was anciently of such receipt,
that the King and his Court were lodged therein; yea, a Parliament, or
something equivalent, was kept here, or hereabouts; seeing we have the Statutes
of Ruthland (on the same token the year erroneously printed in the Statutes of
Ruthland) made in the -- year of King Edward the first. This Lady Elizabeth at
fourteen years of age was married to John, the first of that name, Earl of
Holland, Zealand, etc. And after his death, remarried to Humfre^ Bohune Earl
of Hereford and Essex, High Constable of England, by whom he had a numerous
issue. She died Anno Dom. Speeds Chron. page 564.
1316. and was buried in the Abby-Church of Saffron Walden in Essex.

Saints.
CONGELLUS or COMGALLUS. I perceive a storm a coming, and must provide a
shelter against it. The omitting this Writer will make Wales angry, and the
inserting him will make Ireland offended with me, whom a (...) de scrip. (...).
Cent. 3. (...) 5^.
good Antiquary makes the first Abb^t of Banchor in this County, and a
Arch-^shop (...) de (...). (...). Primor.
better (though living later) first Abbot of Bangor nigh Nockfergus in Ireland.
What is to be done herein? When the Controversy was started, whether the Isle
of Man belonged to England or Ireland, it was adjudged to the later, because no
venomous Creature will live therein. But this controverted nativity is not
capable of that discrimination. Indeed if the difference was betwixt Wales and
England my Native Country, concerning Congellus, we would (according to our
premised principles) freely resign him, not daring to be so bold with an
outlandish Interest: let him stand here so long till better evidence be brought
to remove him. For if those be beheld as the worst of Felons, who steal
straggling Children in London streets from their Parents, and spirit them over
unto foreign Plantations; high also is their robbery, who deprive Countries of
their true Natives (as to their Memories after their deaths) and dispose them
elsewhere at their pleasures. As for Congellus, it is agreed on all hands, that
he was one of a pious life, who wrote learned Epistles, and being aged eighty
five years, died Anno Dom. 600.

St. BENO was instructor to Saint Wenefride, committed by her Father to his
careful Education; now it happened when the head of the said Wenefride was cut
off by Cradocus Son to Alane King of North Wales (for not yielding to his
unlawful lust) This Beno miraculously set it on Acta S. (...) apud Sur. Tom. 6.
3. November. and Breviar. sec. (...) Sarum in l^ct. S. (...). and R.B. in her
Manuscript life in the English College in St. Omers.
again, she living fifteen years after. But if the tip of his tongue who first
told, and the top of his fingers who first wrote this damnable lie, had been
cut off, and had they both been sent to attend their cure at the Shrine of
Saint Beno, certainly they would have been more wary afterward, how they
reported or recorded such improbable untruths.

ASAPH was born in these parts, of right honorable parentage, and bred at
LlanElvy in this County, under Kentigernus (or Mongo) the Scotch Bishop in that
place. Here the said Kentiger^us had a Convent consisting of 663. Monks,
whereof Camb. Brit. (...) Flint-shire.
300. being unlearned (in the nature of Lay-Brethren) were employed abroad in
Husbandry, as many busied about work at home, the rest attended Divine service
in the Convent, so divided, that some were always officiating therein. Amongst
these Asaph was eminently conspicuous, for piety and learning, in so much, that
Kentigernus (being called into his own Country) resigned both his Convent and
Cathedral unto him. Here this Bishop demeaned himself with such Sanctity, that
Llan-Elvy lost its name, and after his death was called from him, St. Asaph. He
was an assiduous Preacher, having this Speech in his mouth, Such who are
against the preaching of Gods Word, envy man's salvation. Bishop Godwin
confesses himself ignorant of the certain time of his death, though Hierom.
Porter (...) sanctorum, May 1.
another (not more knowing, but more confident) assigns the first of May (but
with this abatement) about 569. I say not out possibly, a random date may hap
to hit the mark.

Here I would be thankful to them, who should expound unto me, that passage in
J. Bale, concluding the life of this Saint, with these words,

Bale de scrip. Brit. Cent. 1. Number. 68.
Primus hic erat, qui d Romano Pontifice Unctionem accepit.

He was the first, who received Unction from the Pope of Rome.

This neither Pits owneth (ready enough to steal out of Bale, especially to
improve what might sound to Papal advantage) nor any other Romanist writing his
Life, whom I have seen, so that it seems to me a Note (...) scattered. After
the death of Saint Asaph, his See stood void above 500. years, until Jeffery of
Monmouth was placed therein.

Prelates since the Reformation.
RICHARD PARRY D. D. was born at Ruthin in this County; bred in Christ Church
in Oxford* whence he was preferred Dean of Bangor, and at last Bishop of Saint
Asaph, consecrated December. 30. 1604. Bishop Godwin passes on him this
Complement (take it in the best derivation of the word from Completio mentis)
that he desires being so near unto him in time and his Studies, to be his
equal in other Episcopal Qualities. I crave the Readers leave to forbear any
further Character of him. Pictures present buildings, presumed at great
distance, very small, whilst such things which are* supposed near the eye, are
made in a greater proportion. Clean contrary I may sasely write largely on men's
lives at far distance, whilst (as I may say) I must make Landskips of those
near hand, and touch little on them, who lived in later times. Bishop Parry
died Anno Dom. 16....

Soldiers.
OWEN GLENDOWER-WYE was born in his ancient Patrimony of Glendower-Wye in this
County, then bred in London a Student in the Common Law, till he became a
Courtier, and servant to King Richard the second. After whose death, this Owen
being then on the wrong side of preferment, retired to this his Native County,
where there arose a difference betwixt him and his neighbor the Lord Gre of
Ruthen about a piece of Common, which Owen by force recovered, and killed the
Lord Gre.

There wanted not many to spur his posting Ambition, by telling him, that he
was the true Heir to all North Wales, and now or never the time to regain it.
That the injuries he had already offered the English were above pardon, and no
way left to secure himself, but by committing greater. There needs no Torch
to light Tinder, where a Spark will do the deed, and hereupon Owen brake out
into open rebellion.

The worst was, being angry with the King, his revenge fell upon God, burning
down the fair Cathedrals of Bangor and Saint Asaph. His destructive nature
delighted in doing mischief to others, though no good to himself. King Henry
the fourth found it more facile by far, to depose King Richard, than subdue
this Owen, who had taken Roger Mortimer Earl of March (and next Heir to the
Crown) prisoner.

Writers.
ELVODUGUS, surnamed Probus (and no doubt it was true of him, what was said of
Probus the Emperor, he was Vir sui nominis) was a Cambrian by birth, and this
Countryman by habitation; for he lived most of his days at Bangor Bale and Pits
de scrip. (...).
Monachorum, in that age the Cambridge and Oxford of all Britain. He wrote many
Books (and particularly a Chronicle of his Nation) which the envy of time has
denied to posterity. He had many eminent men for his Scholars, amongst whom was
learned Nenniu^, commonly called Nennius Elvodugi, assuming his Masters name
for his surname, on which account some mistake him for his Father. This
Elvoduge flourished Anno 590.

Since the Reformation.
MERIDITH HANMER, D. D. was born in this County, where a respective Family of
his name and alliance flourish at Han-meer at this day; was Treasurer of
Trinity Church in Dublin. He translated the Ecclesiastical Histories of
Eusebius, Socrates Euagrius, etc. into English, wrote an Ephemeris of the Irish
Saints, and a Chronicle of that Country. He died at J. (...) de scrip. Hib.
page 137.
Dublin of the Plague, Anno 1604.

Benefactors to the Public since the Reformation.
RICHARD CLOUGH was born at Denbigh in this County, whence he went to be a
Chorister in the City of Chester. Some were so affected with his singing
therein, that they were loath he should lose himself in empty air
(Church-Musick beginning then to be discountenanced) and persuaded, yea,
procured his removal to London, where he became an Apprentice to, and
afterward Partner with Sir Thomas Gresham. He lived some years at Antwerp, and
afterward traveled as far as Jerusalem, where he was made a Knight of the
Sepulcher, though not owning it after his return under Queen Elizabeth (who
disdained her Subjects should accept of such foraign Honor) he afterward by
Gods blessing grew very rich; and there want not those, who will avouch that
some thousands of pounds were disbursed by him for the building of the Burse or
Royal Exchange. Such maintain that it was agreed betwixt him and Sir Thomas
Gresham, that the survivor should be chief Heir to both; on which account they
say that the Knight carried away the main of the Estate. How much the new
Church in Denbigh was beholding to his bounty, I am not as yet certainly
in^ormed. This is true, that he gave the Impropriation of Killken in
Flint-shire, worth an hundred pounds per annum to the Free School in Denbigh;
and if the same at this day be aliened, I question whether Repentance without
Restitution will secure such who are the Causers thereof. He died Anno Dom, 15
--

Memorable Persons.
THOMAS ap William, ap Thomas, ap Richard, ap Howel, ap Evan Va^ghan, etc.
Esquire, was born of ancient and worshipful Parentage at Moston in this County.
This Gentleman being called at the Panel of a Jury by the aforesaid names, and
many more, was advised by the (...). R^m. page 145.
Judge in the reign of King Henry the eight, for brevity sake to contract his
name, who thereupon denominated himself Moston, from the place of his Nativity
and ancient Inheritance. This leading Case was precedential to the practice of
other Gentry in Wales, who (leaving their Pedigrees at home) carry one surname
only abroad with them, whereby much time (especially in Winter when the days
are short) is gained for other employment.

The Farewell.
I understand that superstitious pilgrimages do still continue of fond people
in this County to the Well of St. Winifred, and will only presume to mind them
of a savoury Proverb of their own Nation, Goreu Pererindod Cyrchu offeren Sull,
that is, It is the best Pilgrimage to frequent the Divine Duties of the
Sabbath. A Pilgrimage it may well be called in Wales, where some Parishes are
so large, people go ten miles to Church, and whose pains are employed more
acceptable to God, than in longer peregrinations to less porpose.

GLAMORGAN-SHIRE.
GLAMORGAN-SHIRE has the Severn Sea on the South, Carmarthen on the West,
Brecknock on the North, Monmouth-shire (severed by the River Remney falling
from the Mountains, which in the Brit^sh Tongue signifies, to drive) on the
East thereof. The North of this County is so full of Mountains, that almost
nothing is to be had, the South is so fruitful a Valley, nothing at all is
wanting therein. Indeed it is the Garden of Wales, and I am informed, that at
Saint Donats in this Shire (an ancient house of the right Worshipful Family of
the Stradlings) grows as good fruit, and as soon ripe as in any part of
England.

Mr. Cambden will have it so called (though others affirm one Morgan a Prince
thereof gave his name thereunto) from Mor the British word for the Sea, as
agreeing (...) its situation.

Wonders.
Giraldus Cambrensis reports that in the Island Barrey (termed so from Baruch
an Holy man that was there buried) three miles from the mouth of Taff, there
appears a chink in a Rock or Cliff, to which if you lay your ear, you may
easily discover a noise, not altogether unlike to Smiths at work, one while
blowing of the Bellows, another while striking of the Hammer, the grinding of
Iron Tools, the hissing of Steel Gads, yea the puffing noise of Fire in a
Furnace. I must confess my self at a loss for the reason thereof; for it cannot
proceed from the close stealing in of the Sea water (as some have supposed)
seeing the same noise continues even at a low Ebb, when the Sea is departed.

There is also at Newton on the bank of Ogmore westward, a Well, the water
whereof is so low at the flowing of the Sea in Summer, you can scarce get up a
dish full of the same; whereas at the ebb thereof you may easily recover a pail
or bucket full. In (...) (...) in this County.
Mr. Cambden doubting of the truth, made his own eyes Witnesses herein, finding
it true according to the common relation, adding withal that it is the same
(thoughnot so discernable by reason of the accession of much rain water) in
Winter.

Civilians.
Sir EDWARD CARNE is here placed with confidence, because assured to be a Camb.
(...). Anno 1559.
Welsh-man, and I find his Family flourishing at Gwillims (...).
Wenny in this County. He was bred (I believe in Oxford) Doctor of the Civil
Law, and was Camb. Eliz. Anno 1561.
Knighted by Charles the fifth, Emperor.

The first public service he eminently appeared in was, when King Henry the
eight having intelligence of the Popes intention, shortly to cite him to appear
at Rome, either in Person or Proxy, d^spatched him thither for his Lord
Herbert in the life of K. Hen. 8.
Excusator, to remonstrate that his Grace was not bound by Law so to appear.

This he effectually performed, pleading, that the Emperor was so powerful at
Rome, that he could not expect Justice; declaring, that unless they desisted,
he must appeal thence to the able men in some indifferent Universities; and if
this were refused, he protested a nullity in all that they did. A behavior
which spoke him of no less Valor than Ability.

Queen Mary highly prized him, and no whit the less, for his cordial appearing
for King Henry in the matter of her Mothers Divorce, imputing it to the
discharge of his C^edit and Calling, in him who otherwise was a through paced
Romanist, and whom she employed her Ambassador to the Pope.

After her death he still resided at Rome, and by command from Queen Elizabeth,
repaired to Pope Paul the fourth, to give him an account, that his Mistress was
called to the Crown of England. To whom the Hist. Council of Trent. lib. 5.
1558.
Pope returned, That England was a Fee of the Church of Rome, and that she
could not succeed as Illegitimate. A str^nge reply ^o a civil Message, and
fitting his mouth with whom it was a usual saying, Ibid. Paulo ante eod.
That he would have no Prince in his Compagnion, but all Subject under his Foot.

Besides, he commanded Sir Edward Carne, to lay down the Office of an
Ambassador, and under the pain of the greater C^mb. E^iz. A^no 1559.
Excommunication, and confiscation of all his goods, not to go out of the City,
but to take on him the Regiment of the English Hospital therein. So that I see
not how Queen Elizabeth can be taxed by the Papists for a Schismatic, and
wilful breach from the Church of Rome, being thrust away thence by the Pope
himself, so barbarously treating her Ambassador (whilst as yet she had made no
alteration in Religion) against the Law of Nations; though I confess, some
conceive, that the crafty old Knight was (such his addiction to Popery) well
contented with his restraint, wherein he died, 1561.

The Farewell.
I heartily congratulate the return of the Name (and with it of the Sea) to
Landaff in this County. Sure I am, our Civil Wars had deprived it of the better
moity of its appellation Land, leaving bare aff, thereunto. I am not Ignorant
that Landaff, in British, is the Church by Taff, though that Church I fear will
not stand long that has lost its ground. Happy therefore is it, that now
Landaff may be truly termed Landaff, having through Gods goodness, (and long
may it possess them) regained its ancient Lands and Revenues.

MERIONITH-SHIRE.
MERIONITH-SHIRE, (in Latin Mervinia) has the Sea on the West side, on the
South (for certain miles together) Cardiganshire, severed by the River Dony,
and on the North bounded upon Carnarvon and Denbigh-shire.

It is extreme mountainous, yea (if true what Giraldus Cambrensis reports
thereof) so high the Hills therein, that men may discourse one with the other
on the tops thereof, and yet hardly meet (beneath in the Valley) in a days
time. Yet are not the Mountains altogether useless, feeding great numbers of
Sheep thereon. Mr. Cambden takes especial notice of the beauty and comeliness of
the Inhabitants of this Shire.

Nor must it be forgot that there is a place at this day called Le Herbert upon
this account;

When the unhappy difference raged betwixt the Houses of York and Lancaster,
David ap Jenkin ap Enion, a stout and resolute Gentleman (who took part with
the House of Lancaster) valiantly defended the Castle Arleck against King
Edward the fourth, until Sir William Herbert (afterward Earl of Pembroke) with
great difficulty made his passage unto it, and so furiously stormed it, that
immediately it was surrendered.

Wonders.
There is a Lake in this County called in British Lhin-tegid, in English
Pimble-mear, which may be termed our Leman Lake, having the same work of wonder
therein, though set forth by nature in a less Letter. For as Rhodanus running
through that French Lake, preserves his stream by it self (discernable by the
discolouration thereof) with the Fishes peculiar thereunto. The same is here
Camb. B^it. in Merionithshire.
observed betwixt the River Dee, and the water of the Lake; so that here is
(what some cavil at in the Grammar) a Conjunction disjunctive. Let Philosophers
dispute, what invisible partition incloseth the one severally from the other. I
have heard some, by way of similitude, apply it to such, who being casually
cast into bad company, lie at such a cautious posture of defense, that they
keep their own innocence entire, not maculated with the mixture of their bad
manners, as rather being in, than of, their Society.

We must not forget another strange quality of Pimble-mear, viz. It swells
not with all the Waters, and those very many, which fall therein by the
bordering Mountains, whereas Idem. Ibidem.
a blast of wind will quickly make it mount above the bounds and banks thereof.
Like some strange dispositions, not so much incensed with blows, as provoked by
words (accounted but wind) into passion.

I know not whether it be worth the relating, what is known for a truth of a
Market Town called Dogelthy in this Shire, that

1. The Walls there of are 3. miles high. 1. The Mountains which surround it.
2. Men come into it over the water, but 2. On a fair bridge. 3. Go out of it
under the water. 3. Falling from a Rock, and conveyed in a wooden Trough (under
which Travelers must make shift to pass) to drive an Over-shot Mill. 4. The
Steeple thereof does grow therein 4. The Bells (if plural) hang in an Yeugh
tree. 5. There are more Alehouses than houses. 5. Tenements are divided into
two or more Tipling-houses, and Chimnyless Barns used to that purpose.

This last I had [mediately] from the mouth of a Judge in his Charge condemning
the same.

Saints.
Saint THELIAN was of British extraction, and placed here until with certainty
he A M P.
c^n be removed to another County. He was bred under Dubritius Bishop of
Landaff, by whose Holy care he attained to a competent Learning, and exemplary
Sanctity. Great his acquaintance and intimacy with Saint David Bishop of
Menevia.

In his days the Picts harrassed his Country, he was much envied for his
Holiness, by one of their chief Commanders, In the ^ers of English Saint^, page
150.
who sent two lewd Strumpets, supposing by their tempting tricks to entrap this
holy man. These women counterfeiting madness (whereby they might assume the
more liberty to themselves of filthy discourse) returned distracted Idem Ibidem.
indeed, not having understanding enough to relate the cause of their sad
misfortune, which wrought so much upon the first design of their practices,
that he received the Faith and was baptized, and ever after had a great
veneration and esteem for this our Saint.

He accompanied Saint David to Jerusalem, and returning into his own Country,
by his fervent Prayers freed the same from the Plague, wherewith it was then
much infested. His death happened February the ninth, about the year of our
Lord, 563.

The Farewell.
This County (the inhabitants whereof generally betake themselves to the
feeding of Sheep) was much beholding to Ludwall their Prince, who (King Edgar
imposing on him as a yearly Tribute, the presenting him with three hundred
Wolves) did in a manner free it from Wolves. It is my desire, that seeing that
ill natured Creature is at this day totally removed out of it, that the people
wholly lay aside all strife and animosities, and give no longer occasion to the
Proverb, Homo Homini Lupus.

MONTGOMERY-SHIRE
MONTGOMERY-SHIRE is bounded on the South side with Cardigan and Radnor-shire,
on the East with Shrop-shire, on the North with Denbighshire, and on the West
thereof with Merionith-shire. Nature cannot be accused for being a Stepmother
unto this County; For although she has mounted many an high Hill (which may
probably be presumed not over fruitful) yet has she also sunck many a
delightful Valley therein, ( Humility is the common attendant of Greatness,
accompanied with true worth) which plentifully yield all necessaries for man's
comfortable subsistence. The Chief Town therein stands, and bestows its. Name
upon the whole County. It never dignified any with the Title of Earl thereof,
until the reign of King James, who created Philip Herbert, second Son to Henry
Earl of Pembroke, Baron Herbert of Shurland, and Earl of Montgomery.

Natural Commodities.
Horses.
How good and swift are bred in this County, I may well spare my Commendation,
and remit the Reader to the Character I find given of them in a good Draiton in
I^'s Poly^bion, page 95.
Author;

-- From the Gomerian fields,
Then which in all our Wales there is no Country yields
An excellenter Horse, so full of Natural fire,
As one of Phoebus Steeds had been that Stallions Sire
Which first their race begun, or of the Asturian kind,
Which some have held to be begotten by the wind.
Now after proportionable abatement for his Poetical Hyperbole, the remainder
is enough to inform us of the good Strain this Shire does afford.

Proverbs.
Y Tair Chiwiorydd.]

In English the Three Sisters, being a common Byword to express the three
Rivers of (...), Severn, Rhiddiall, arising all three in this County, out of
the South-west side of Plynnillimmon Hill, within few paces one of another, but
falling into the Sea more miles asunder; Severn into the Severn Sea, Wye into
the Severn, Rhiddiall into the Irish Sea.

The Tradition is, that these three sisters were to run a race, which should be
first married to the Ocean, Severn and Wye having a great journey to go, chose
their way through soft Medows, and kept on a Travelers pace; whilst Rhiddiall
(presuming on her short Journey) staid before she went out, and then to recover
her lost time, runs furiously in a distracted manner, with her mad stream, over
all opposition.

The Proverb is applyable to Children of the same Parents, issuing out of the
same Womb, but of different dispositions, and embracing several courses of
lives in this World, so that their Cradles were not so near, but their Coffins
are as far asunder.

Pywys Paradwys Cymry.]

That is, Powis is the Paradise of Wales. This Proverb refers to Teliessen
the Author thereof, at what time Powis had far larger bounds than at this day,
as containing all the land inter-jacent betwixt Wye and Severn; of the
pleasantness whereof we have spoken In the Proverbs in Hereford-shire.
before.

Gwan die Bawlyn Hafren, Hafren fyad hifcl cynt.]

That is, Fixed thy Pale [with intent to sense out his water] in Severn, Severn
will be as before. Appliable to such who undertake projects above their power
to perform, or grapple in vain against Nature, which soon returns to its former
condition.

Writers.
GEORGE HERBERT was born at Montgomery-Castle, younger Brother to Edward Lord
Herbert (of whom immediately) bred Fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge, and
Orator of the university, where he made a speech no less learned than the
occasion was welcome, of the return of Prince Charles out of Spain.

He was none of the Nobles of T^koa, who at the building of Jerusalem Nehem. 3.
5.
put not their necks to the work of the Lord; but waving worldly preferment,
chose serving at Gods Altar before State-employment. So pious his life, that as
he was a copy of primitive, he might be a pattern of Sanctity to posterity, to
testify his independency on all others, he never mentioned the name of Jesus
Christ, but with this addition, My Master. Next God the Word, he loved the Word
of God, being heard often to protest, That he would not part with one leaf
thereof for the whole world.

Remarkable his conformity to Church Discipline, whereby he drew the greater
part of his Parishioners to accompany him daily in the public celebration of
Divine Service. Yet had he (because not desiring) no higher preferment than the
Benefice of Bemmerton nigh Salisbury (where he built a fair house for his
Successor) and the Prebend of Leighton (founded in the Cathedral of Lincoln)
where he built a fair Church, with the assistance of some few Friends free
Offerings. When a Friend on his death bed went about to comfort him with the
remembrance thereof, as an especial good work, he returned, It is a good work
if sprinkled with the Blood of Christ. But his Church (that unimitable piece of
Poetry) may out-last this in structure. His death happened Anno Dom. 163 --

EDWARD HERBERT, Son of Richard Herbert, Esquire, and Susan Newport his Wife,
was born at Montgomery * Castle in this County, Knighted by King James, So was
I informed b^ Si^ (...). Herbert his (...) (...), late M^ster of the Revels.
who sent him over Ambassador into France. Afrerwards King Charles the first
created him Baron of Castle Island in Ireland, and some years after Baron of
Cheirbury in this Coun^y; he was a most excellent Artist and rare Linguist,
studied both in Books and Men, and himself the Author of two Works most
remarkable, viz. A Treatise of (...), written in French, so highly prized
beyond the Seas, that (as I am told) it is extant at this day with great Honor
in the Popes Vatican.

He married the Daughter and sole Heir of Sir William Herbert of Saint Julians
in Monmouth-shire, with whom he had a large Inheritance both in England and
Ireland. He died in August, Anno Domini 1648. and was buried in Saint Giles in
the fields, London, having designed a fair Monument of his own Invention to be
set up for him in the Church of Montgomery, according to the Courteously
c^mmunicated unto me by Mr. Stone the Stone-(...) at his House in Long Acre.
Model following;

upon the ground a Has pace of fourteen foot square, on the midst of which is
placed a Dorrick Column, with its rights of Pedestal Basis, and Capital
fifteen foot in height; on the Capital of the Column is mounted an urn with an
Heart Flamboul supported by two Angels. The foot of this Column is attended
with four Angels placed on Pedestals at each corner of the said Has pace, two
having Torches reverst, extinguishing the Motto of Mortality; the other two
holding up Palms, the Emblems of Victory.

This Monument has not hitherto, (by what obstruction I list not to enquire)
and I fear will not be finished, which has invited me the rather to this
Description, that it might be erected in Paper when it was intended in Marble.

Memorable Persons.
HAWIS GADARN. She was a Lady of remark, sole Daughter and Heir to Owen ap
Graffyth, Prince of that part of Powis called Powis Wenwinwin, which takes up
this whole County. She was justly (as will appear) surnamed Gadarn, that is,
the Hardy. I confess Hardy sounds better when applied to men (as Philip the
Hardy, a Prince in France) meek and mild, being a more proper Epethite for a
woman. Yet some competent hardiness (to comport with troubles) mis-becometh not
the weaker Sex; and indeed if she had not been Hawis the Hardy, she had been
Hawis the Beggarly. She had four Uncles, her Fathers Brethren, Lhewelyn, John,
Griffith Vachan, and David, which uncles became her Cosens, detaining all her
inheritance from her. Give (said they) a Girl a little Gold and marry her, God
and nature made Land for men to manage.

Hereupon Hawis comes to Court, complains to King Edward the second. The
mention of her minds me of the Daughter of Zelophehad, who pleaded so
pathetically for her patrimony before Moses and Joshua. The King commiserating
her case, consigned his Servant John Charleton (born at Apple in Shropshire) a
vigorous Knight to marry her, creating him in her right B^ron of Powis.

Thus was he possessed of his Lady, but get her Land as he can, it was bootless
to implead her uncles in a Civil Court, Action was the only Action he could
have against them, and he so bestirred himself with the assistance of the Kings
Forces, that in short time he possessed himself of three of her uncles
prisoners, and forced the fourth to a composition. Yea, he not only recovered
every foot of his Wives Land, but also got all the L^nds of her uncles, in
default of their issue male to be settled upon her. I wish that all Ladies
injured by their potent Relations, may have such Husbands to marry them, and
match their adversaries. These things happened about the year of our Lord, 1320.

Know Reader, there were four John Charletons successively Lords of Powis,
which I observe rather, because their Homonymy may not occasion confusion.

JULINES HERRING was born at Flambere-Mayre in this County 1582. His Father
returned hence to Coventry, to which he was highly related. Coventry, whose
Ancestors (for the space of almost two hundred years) had been in their course
chief Officers of that City. Perceiving a pregnancy in their Son, his parents
bred him in Sidney College in Cambridge, he became afterward a profitable and
painful Preacher at Calk in Derby-shire, in the Town of Shrewsbury* and at
Rendbury in Cheshire, being one of a pious life, but in his judgment
disaffected to the English Church Discipline.

I could do no less than place him amongst the memorable Persons, otherwise
coming under no Topic of mine (as writing no Books to my knowledge) (...) hi^
Life written at large by Mr. Samuel Clark.

I say Mr. Clark whose Books of our modern Divines I have perused, as
Travelers by the Levitical Law were permitted to pass through other men's
Vinyards. For they must eat their fill on conditions they put no Grapes up in
their Deuteronomy. 23. 24.
Vessels. I have been satisfied with reading his works, and informed my self in
Places and Dates of some men's births and deaths. But never did nor will
(whatever has been said of me, or done by others) incorporate any considerable
quantity of his Works in my own, detesting such Felony, God having given me (be
it spoken with thanks to him, and humility to man) plenty of my own, without
being plagiary to any Author whatsoever.

To return to Julines Herring, whose Christian name is very usual in the
Country amongst people of quality, in memory of Julius Palmer (in the Marian
Days martyred, and) a Native of that City; he being prohibited his preaching
here, for his Nonconformity, was called over to Amsterdam, where he continued
Preacher to the English Congregation, some years well respected in his place,
and died in the year of our Lord, 1644.

The Farewell.
And now being to take our leave of this County, the worst I wish the
Inhabi^ants thereof, is, that their Horses (excellent in their kind, whereof
before) may (to use ^he Coun^-mans expression) Stand well, being secured from
all Infectious and pe^lential Dise^ses. ^he rather because when God is pleased
to strike this Creature (not unfitly termed man's wings, whereby he so swi^tly
flies from one place to another, for dispatch of his occasions) it is a sad
presage, that he is angry with the Riders, and will (without their seasonable
Repentance) punish their sins with some exemplary judgment.

MONMOUTH-SHIRE.
MONMOUTH-SHIRE. I may fi^ly call this an English-Welsh County, for though it
lie West of Severn, yea of (...) it self; and though the Welsh be the common
Language thereof, yet it does wear a double badge of English relation. First,
whereas formerly all Welsh Counties sent but one Knight to the Parliament, this
had the privilege of two, Conformable to the Shires of England. Secondly, it
is not subject to the Welsh Jurisdiction, but such Itinerant Judges as go
Oxford Circuit have this County within the compass of their Commission.

Manufactures.
Caps.
These were the most ancient, general, warm, and profitable coverings of men's
heads in this Island. It is worth our pains to observe the tenderness of our
Kings to preserve the trade of Cap-making, and what long and strong struggling
our State had to keep up the using thereof, so many (...). in London, Stat. 13.
of Q. Eliz. cap. 19. and probably twice as many in the land beside.
thousands of people being maintained thereby in the land, especially before
the invention of Fulling-Mills, all Caps before that time being wrought,
beaten, and thickened by the hands and feet of men, till those Mills as they
eased many of their labor, outed more of their livelihood. Thus ingenious
inventions conducing to the compendious making of Commodities, though
profitable to private persons, may not always be gainful to the public, to
which what employes most, is most advantageous, as Capping anciently set
fi^teen distinct Callings on work, as they are reckoned up in the 13. of Q.
Eliz. cap. 19.
Statute,

1. Carders. 2. Spinners. 3. Knitters. 4. Parters of Wool. 5. Forsers. 6.
Thickers. 7. Dressers. 8. Walkers. 9. Dy^rs. 10. Battellers. 11. Shearers. 12.
Pr^ers. 13. Edgers. 14. Liners. 15. Band-makers. And other Exercises.
No wonder then if so many Statutes were enacted in Parliaments, to encourage
this Handicraft, as by the ensuing Catalogue will appear.

1. Anno 22. of Edward the fourth Cap. 5. That none thicken any Cap or Bonnet
in any Fulling-Mill, upon pain to forfeit forty shillings. 2. Anno 3. of Henry
the eighth, Cap. 15. That no Caps or Hats ready wrought should be brought from
beyond the Seas, upon the forfeiture of forty shillings. Yet because
notwithstanding this Statute, some still presumed to import foreign Wares, it
was enacted, 3. Anno 21. of Henry the eighth, Cap. 9. That such outlandish Hats
should be sold at such low prices as are specified in the Statute, merely to
deter the Merchant from importing them, because such their cheapness that they
would turn to no account. 4. Anno 7. of Edward the sixth, Cap. 8. Fulling-Mills
beginning now to take footing in England, the Statute made the 22 of Edward the
fourth was revived, to stand and remain in full force, strength and effect. 5.
Anno 8. of Queen Elizabeth, Cap. 11. Fulling-Mills still finding many to favor
them, the pains and profit of Cap-making was equally divided betwixt the Mills
and the Cap-makers, it being enacted, That no Cap should be thicked or fulled
in any Mill, until the same had first been well scoured and closed upon the
Bank, and half footed at least upon the foot-stock. 6. Lastly, to keep up the
usage of Caps, it was enacted the 13. of Queen Eliz. Cap. 19. That they should
be worn by all persons (some of worship and quality excepted) on Sabbath and
Holy Days, on the pain of forfeiting ten groats for omission thereof.
But it seems nothing but Hats would fit the Heads (or humors rather) of the
English, as fancied by them fitter to fence their fair faces, from the injury
of wind and weather, so that the 39 of Queen Elizabeth this Statute was
repealed. Yea, the Cap accounted by the Romans an emblem of liberty, is
esteemed by the English (except Faulconers and Hunters) a badge of servitude,
though very useful in themselves, and the Ensign of constancy, because not
discomposed, but retaining their fashion, in what form soever they be crowded.

The best Caps were formerly made at Monmouth, where the Cappers Chapel does
still remain, being better carved and gilded than any other part of the Church.
But on the occasion of a great plague happening in this Town, the trade was some
years since removed hence to Beaudly in Worcestershire, yet so that they are
called Monmouth Caps unto this day. Thus this Town retains, though not the
profit, the credit of Capping, and seeing the Child still keeps the Mothers
name, there is some hope in due time she may return unto her.

All I will add is this, if at this day the phrase of wearing a Monmouth Cap
be taken in a bad acception, I hope the inhabitants of that Town will endeavor
to disprove the occasion thereof.

Saints.
Saint AMPHIBALUS a Citizen of Carlion. See the Saints in Hereford shire.

Saint AARON was a wealthy Citizen of Carlion in this County, who for the
testimony of the Christian Faith, was martyred under the Tyrant Emperor
Dioclesian. By the way we may observe the names of the three first British
Martyrs as to their Language.

1. Alban Of Latin Original. 2. Amphibalus Greek 3. Aaron. Hebrew

It seems that the Christian Britons at the Font quitted their Native names as
barbarous, and imposed on their Children those of the learned Languages. This
Aaron was martyred, Anno Dom. 303.

Saint JULIUS. It is pity to part so fast friends, both being Citizens of
Carlion. Yea, they were lovely in their lives, and in their deaths they were
not divided, both suffering martyrdom together, and therefore like Philip and
Jacob one day is assigned to their Memories in the Calendar.

Nor must I forget how Carlion the place of their abode, though now a small
Town, was once a great City stretching so far o^ both sides of the River, that
Camb. Brit. in Monmouthshire.
Saint Julians (a house of late of Sir William Herberts) was sometimes within
the City, though now about a mile South-West thereof, being a Church dedicated
anciently to the Memory of this Saint Julius.

Cardinals.
GEFFERY of Monmouth is by Cicaonius
some very firmly avouched to have been created a Cardinal, but by what Pope,
and with what Title uncertain; but my worthy Bishop Godwin in the Catalogue o^
the Bishops of S. Asaph.
Author justly suspecteth the truth hereof; alleging that Popes in that age
advanced few Forraigners at so great a distance to that Title, except their
merits to the Sea of Rome (which appears not to this Jeffery) were very great.
Let me add, that it is improbable so much honor should be done unto him
whilst living, who was so solemnly disgraced after his death; whose Books
(extant in his life) were afterward by the Court of Rome publicly prohibited.
See him therefore in this Shire under the Title of Writers.

JOHN of Monmouth, so called from the place of his Nativity, D. D. and Canon of
Lincoln, was chosen Anno 1296. Bishop of Landaff. The manner whereof was
remarkable, for when Robert Kilwarby complained to Pope Celestine, how that
Cathedral had been for seven years without a Bishop; (caused either by the
troublesomness of those Times, or the exility of revenue thereof) his Holiness
remitted his Election wholly to the discretion of this Archbishop, to confer
that vacant See on whomsoever he pleased. The Archbishop knowing all eyes
intent on his Integrity herein, resolved on a Welsh-man by his birth (as most
proper for, and acceptable in the place) and on one of merit for the Function.

Both Qualifications met in this John of Monmouth, as British by his birth and
alliance, and Charactered to be Doctus and Pius Theologus. One of his Harpf.
Hist. Eccl. Ang. page 490.
Successors in that Bishopric acknowledges that he was Multimodis sedi suae
Benefactor, and more particularly, that he procured the Rectory of Newland in
the Forest of Dean to be appropriated thereunto. But one Bishop [ Anthony
Kitchen by name] more unlanded Landaff * Godw. in his Catalogue of Bishops in
Landaff.
in one, than all his Predecessors endowed it in four hundred years. This John
dying April 8. 1323. was buried in Saint Mary's Chapel, whose Epitaph in
French is hardly legible at this day on his Marble Monument.

WALTER CANTILUPE was Son to William [the elder] Lord Cantilupe, whose prime
residence was at Abergavennie in this County. One of high birth, higher
preferment (made by King Henry the third, Bishop of Worcester) and highest
spirit. In his time the Popes Legate came into England, and complained of many
Clergymen, keeping their livings against the Canons, intending either to force
such irregular Incumbents into avoydance, (so to make room for the Popes
Favorites) or else to compound for their continuance at his arbitrary price.
But our Walter would not yield to such extortion. Indeed he was one of a keen
nature, and his two-edged spirit did cut on both sides, against

The Pope. The King. Telling Rusland his Legate, coming hither 1255. that he
would prefer to be hanged on the Antiq. Brit. Anno praedicto.
Gallows, rather than ever consent to such expilation of the Church. Siding
with the Barons, he encouraged them in their Civil Wars, promising Heaven for
their reward, though this doctrine cost him an excommunication from the Pope.

Lying on his deathbed he was touched with true Godwin in the Bishops of
Worcester.
remorse for his disloyalty, and upon his desire obtained absolution. He died
February the fifth, 1267. whom I behold as Uncle unto Thomas Cantilupe the
Sainted Bishop of Hereford.

Soldiers.
RICHARD de CLARE was born (as from all concentred probabilities may be
conjectured) at Strigule-Castle in this County, and had the Title of Earl of
Strigule and Pembroke. He was otherwise surnamed Strongbow, from drawing so
strong a Bow, and had Brachia projectissima, says my Camb. Brit. in this
County.
Author; though I can hardly believe that Reacher, which another writes of
him, that Mills in his Catalogue of Hon. page 1082
with the palms of his hands he could touch his knees, though he stood up
right. More appliable to him is the expression of Epist. ad A^ticum, lib. 4.
Tully, Nihil egit levi brachio, being a person of effectual performance.

It happened that Mac Murugh Lord of Leinster, in the year of our Lord 1167.
being expelled his Territory for several Tyrannies, by the Lords of Meth and
Conaght, repaired to our King Henry the second, and invited him to invade
Ireland. But that politic King, fearing, if failing in success, to forfeit the
reputation of his discretion, would not engage in the design, but permitted
such Subjects of his, who had a mind Militare propriis stipendiis, to adventure
themselves therein.

Amongst these Richard Strongbow was the principal, going over into Ireland
with twelve hundred men, too great for an Earls Train, yet too little for a
Generals Army, to make a National Invasion; yet so great his success, that in a
short time he prossessed himself of the Ports of Leinster and Mounster, with
large lands belonging thereunto; insomuch that King Henry grew jealous of his
greatness, remanded him home, and commanded him to surrender his acquests into
his hands, which done, he received them again by re-grant from the King, save
that Henry reserved the City of Dublin for himself.

This Strongbow is he who is commonly called Domitor Hiberniae, The Tamer of
Ireland; though the Natives thereof then, and many hundred years after, paid
rather ^erbal submission, than real obedience to our English Kings. Yea, some
of their great Lords had both the power and Title of Kings in their respective
Territories, witness the Preface in the Commission, whereby King Henry the
second made William Fitz. Adelme his Lieutenant of Ireland; Archiepiscopis,
Episcopis, Regibus, Comitibus, Baronibus, and omnibus fidelibus suis in
Hibernia, Salutem. Where Kings are postposed to Bishops, which speaks them
Royolets by their own ambition, and by no solemn inauguration. This Earl
Richard died at Dublin 1177. and lies buried in Trinity Church therein.

Sir ROGER WILLIAMS born of an ancient Family at Penrosse in this County, was
first a Soldier of Fortune under Duke D'Alva, and afterward successfully
served Queen Elizabeth, having no fault, save somewhat over-free and forward to
fight.

When a Spanish Captain challenged Sir John Norris to fight a single Combat
(which was beneath him to accept, because a General) This Roger undertook the
Don. And after they had fought some time (both Camb. E^z. in Anno 1581.
Armies beholding them) without any hurt, they pledged each other a deep
^raught of Wine, and so friendly departed.

Another time at midnight he assaulted the Camp of the Prince of Parma, nigh
Venloe, slew some of the enemies, and Idem. 1586.
pierced to the Tent of the General, as highly blamed by some for rashness, as
commended by others for his valor. He bravely defended Slufe, whilst any hope
of help.

WILLIAM HERBERT, Earl of Pembroke, with Sir Richard Herbert his Brother, were
both undoubtedly born in this County; but whether or no at Ragland Castle, is
uncertain. Both valiant men, and as fast Friends to King Edward the fourth, as
professed Foes to Richard Nevil Earl of Warwick. They gave the last and
clearest evidence hereof in the Battle of Banbury, where we find it reported,
that these two leading the Army of the Welsh, with their Poll-Axes, twice made
way through the Battle o^ the Northern men (which sided with King Henry the
sixth) without any mortal wound.

There passes a tradition in the Noble Family of the Herberts of Chierbury,
that this Sir Richard their Ancestor slew that day one hundred and forty men
with his own hands, which if done in charging, some censure as an act of
impossibility; if after a rout in an execution, as a deed of cruelty. But
others defend both truth and courage therein, as done in passing and repassing
through the Army. Indeed Guns were and were not in fashion in that age, used
sometimes in sieges, but never in field service; and next the Gun, the Poll-Ax
was the mortal Weapon, especially in such a Dead han^ as this Knight had, with
which Quot icti, tot occisi. He is reported also to be of a Giants stature, the
Peg being extant in Mountgomery Castle, whereon he used to hang his Hat at
dinner, which no man of an ordinary height can reach with his hand at this day.

However both these brave brethren, circumvented with the subtilty of their
Foes ( Odds at any time may be bet on the side of treachery against valor)
were brought to Banbury, beheaded and buried, the Earl at Tinterne and Sir
Richard at Abergaveny in this County.

Writers.
JEFFREY of Monmouth was born in, and named from, Monmouth. He was also called
ap Arthur, from his Father, (as I suppose) though others ^ale de scrip. B^t.
C^nt. 2. (...) 86.
say, because he wrote so much of King Arthur; but by the same propor^ion Homer
may be termed Achillides, and Virgil the Son of Aeneas. Yea, this Jeffrey, by
an ancienter title might be surnamed ap Bruit, whose story he asserteth. He
translated and compiled the various British Authors into one Volume.

I am not so much moved at William Newbourough, calling this his book Ridicula
sigmenta, as that Giraldus Cambrensis his Countryman, and (as I may say)
Con-sub-temporary, should term it Fabulosam historiam. Indeed he has many
things from the British. Bards, which though improbable, are not ipso facto
untrue. We know Herodotus, nicknamed by some Pater Fabularum, is by others
acknowledged to be Pater Historiarum.

The truth is, that both Novelants and Antiquaries must be content with many
falsehoods, the one taking Reports at the first rebound, before come to; the
other raking them out of the dust, when past their perfection.

Others object, that he is too hyperbolical in praising his own Country: A
catching disease, seeing Livy mounts Italy to the skies, and all other Authors
respectively; and why should that be mortal in our Monmouth, what is but venial
in others? And if he be guilty in Mis-timing of actions, he is not the only
Historian without company in that particular.

However on the occasion of the premises, his book is prohibited by his
Holiness, whilst the lying Legend is permitted to be read without control:
Thus Rome loves questuosa, non inutilia figmenta, Falsehoods whereby she may
gain. Some conceive it to be his greatest fault, that he so praises the
ancient Church in Britain, making it Independent from the Sea of Rome, before
Austin the Monk came hither. One makes him a Cardinal, which is improbable,
whilst it is more certain that he was Bishop of St. Asaph, and flourished Anno
1152.

THOMAS of Bale de script. Brit. cent. 2. number. 94.
Monmouth was probably born, certainly bred and brought up in the chief Town of
this County. Nor does it move me to the contrary, because Pits calls him an
Englishman, Monmouth in that Age being a Frontier Garrison, peopled with
English Inhabitants.

It happened at this time many Jews lived in Norwich, where their habitation
was called Id. Ibid.
Abraham's Hall, though therein not practicing the piety of that worthy
Patriarch. He, out of conformity to Gods command, sacrificed his one and only
son; they, contrary to his will in his Word; crucified the child of another,
William by name. His Sepulcher was afterward famed for many miracles, whereof
this Thomas wrote an History, and dedicated it to William de Turbes, Bishop of
Norwich, though he lived above six score miles from the place of those strange
performances: But probably the farther the better, Major e longinquo
reverencia, and miracles are safest reported, and soonest believed at some
competent distance. He flourished Anno 1160. under King Henry the Second.

Benefactors to the Public.
HENRY PLANTAGENET, first Duke of Lancaster, was born in Monmouth castle, AMP.
the chief seat of his Barony. He is commonly surnamed Speeds Chro. in the
foundation of Bennet College.
de torto collo, or the wryneck, and by others the Mills Catal. of Honor in
the Dukes of (...).
good Duke of Lancaster, by which name we entitle him, it being fitter to call
men from what was to be praised, than what to be p^tied in them; not from their
natural defects, but moral perfections. His bounty commends him to our mention
in this place, being head of the Guild of Corpus-Christi in Cambridge, and the
first Founder of a College so called in that Universi^y. Indeed the Land was
but little he conferred thereon, but great the countenance of so eminent a
person in procuring and settling their Mortmaine. He dyed in the year of our
Lord, 1361. and was buried in the Collegiate Church at Leicester, which he
founded. Blanch his only daughter which had issue, was married to John of
Gaunt Duke of Lancaster.

Since the Reformation.
WILLIAM JOHNES was a Native of the Town of Monmouth, a person whose Estate was
very considerable in several respects, viz. in

1. His Emptiness, being forced out of Monmouth, for not being able to pay ten
Groats: as the late (...). (...), Esquire.
Recorder of that Corporation has informed me. How had he been undone, if he
had not been undone? 2. His Filling, flying to London, he became first a
Porter, and then (his Brains being better than his Back) a Factour, and going
over to Hamborough, by his industry and ingenuity made such a vent for Welsh
Cottons, that what he found Drugs at home, he left Dainties beyond Sea. 3. His
Refunding, founding a fair School-house in the place of his Nativity, allowing
fifty pounds yearly for the Master, thirty for the Usher, with one hundred
Marks salary to a Lecturer. Besides, a stately Almes-house for twenty poor
folk, each of them having two Rooms and a Garden, with half a Crown a week,
besides other conveniences.
All which his Reckoned up in Stow his Survey of London, page 103.
Benefactions, and many more, he by Will submitted to the oversight of the
honorable Company of Haberdashers in London, who at this day right worthily
discharge their trust herein. He dyed Anno Dom. 16 --.

Memorable Persons.
WILLIAM EVANS was born in this County, and may justly be accounted the Giant
of our Age for his stature, being full two yards and an half in height: He was
Porter to King Charles the First, succeeding Walter Persons in his place, and
exceeding him two Inches in height, but far beneath him in an equal proportion
of body; for he was not only what the Latins call Compernis, knocking his
Knees together, and going out squalling with his feet, but also haulted a
little; yet made he a shift to dance in an Antimask at Court, where he drew
little Jeffrey the Dwarf out of his pocket, first to the wonder, then to the
laughter, of the beholders. He dyed Anno Dom. 163..

Sheriffs.
This was made a Shire by Act of Parliament in the 27. year of King Henry the
Eight, but it seems not solemnly settled till five years after.

Name. Place. Arms. HEN. VIII. Anno. 32 Car. Herbert, ar. Per pale, Azure and
Gules, 3 Lions rampant. Arg. 33 Walt. Herbert ar. ut prius 34 Walt. ap Robert,
ar 35 Hen. Lewis, ar. 36 Re. ap Howel, ar. Gules, a Lion rampant gardant, Arg.
37 Io. Hen. Lewis, ar. 38 Anth. Welsh, ar. Azure, six Mullets, 3, 2, 1. Or.
EDW. VI. Anno 1 Tho. ap Morgan, ar Lanterra^ Or, a Griffin segreant, Sab. 2
Car. Herbert, mil. ut prius 3 Will. Morgan, mil. ut prius 4 Will. Herbert, ar.
ut prius 5 Walt. Herbert, ar. ut prius 6 Will. Herbert, ar. ut prius MAR. REG.
Anno 1 Anth. Welsh, ar. ut prius 2 Walt. ap Robert 3 Will. Joh. Thomas 4 Roll.
Morgan, ar. ut prius 5 Hen. Lewis, ar. 6 Tho. Morgan, mil. ut prius ELIZ. REG.
Anno 1 Tho. Herbert, ar. ut prius 2 Geo. Ia^es, ar. 3 Rog. Williams 4 Will.
Herbert. Colebrok 5 Will. Herbert St. Julian 6 Will. Morgan, ar. Tredeger ut
prius. 7 Ioh. Henry Kemis Vert, on a Cheveron, Or, 3 Pheons, Sable. 8 Will. Ioh.
ap Roger. ut prius 9 Will. Morgan, ar. 10 Christ. Welsh, ar. ut prius 11 Row.
Morgan, ar. ut prius 12 Will. Herbert ut prius 13 Tho. Herbert ut prius 14
Will. Morgan, ar. ut prius 15 Milo Morgan ut prius 16 Row. Kemis, ar. ut prius
17 Christ. Welsh, ar. ut prius 18 Rich. Morgan ut prius 19 Will. Ioh. ap Roger
Per pale, Azure and Gules 3. Lions rampant, Arg. 20 Will. Jews, ar. 21 Will.
Herbert, mil. utprius 22 Tho. Morgan, ar. ut prius 23 Edw. Morgan, ar. ut prius
24 Edw. Morgan, ar. ut prius 25 Mat. Herbert, ar. ut prius 26 Will. Jews, ar.
ut prius 27 Rich. Morgan, ar. ut prius 28 Io. Jones, ar. Sab. a Stag standing
at Gaze, Arg. Attired and unguled, Or. 29 Hen. Morgan ut prius 30 Hen. Herbert,
ar. ut prius 31 Nich. Herbert, ar. ut prius 32 Edw. Lewis, ar, ut prius 33
Wal^. Vaughan, ar 34 Row. Morgan, ^r. ut prius 35 Walt. Jones, ar. ut prius 36
Math. Herbert, ar. ut prius 37 Mat. Prichard, ar. Sable, a Lion rampant, Arg.
38 Andr. Morgan, ar. ut prius 39 Hen. Herbert, ar. ut prius 39 Will. Morgan,
ar ut prius 40 Hen. Billing (...) 41 Rich. Kemis, ar. ut prius 42 Edw. Kemis,
ar. ut prius 43 Edw. Morgan, ar. ut prius 44 Hen. Morgan, ar. ut prius 45 Ioh.
Gainsford, ar. JACOB. Anno 1 Ioh. Gainsford, ar. 2 Row. Williams, ar 3 Valen.
Prichard, ar ut prius 4 Will. Price, ar. 5 Walt. Mountague Argent, three
Fusils in fess, Gules, a border, Sable. 6 Car. Jones, ar. ut prius 7 Hen.
Lewis, ar. 8 Will. Ramlyns, ar 9 VVil. Morgan. mil. ut prius 10 Rog. Batherne,
ar. 11 Egid. Morgan, ar. ut prius 12 Will. Jones, ar. ut prius 13 Tho. Vanne.
ar. 14 Tho. Morgan, ar. ut prius 15 Geo. Milbouru, ar. Gules, a Cheveron
betwixt three escalops, Arg. 16 Will. Hughes, ar. 17 Tho. ^ocks, ar. 18 Walt.
Aldey, ar. 19 Rob. Jones, ar. ut prius 20 Will. Walter, ar. 21 David Lewis,
ar. 22 Ed. Morgan, ar. ut prius CARO. I. Anno 1 Car. Somerset, ar. 2 Car.
Williams, m. 3 Will. Keymis, ar. ut prius 4 Will. Thomas, ar. 5 Ioh.
Walter, ar. 6 Will. Baker, ar. 7 Nich. Keymeis, ar. ut prius 8 Nich. Arnold,
ar. 9 Lodo. Vanne, ar. 10 Geo. Milborne, ar. ut prius 11 Hen. Probert, ar. 12
Tho. Morgan, ar. ut prius 13 Will. Herbert, ar. ut prius 14 Nich. Moor, ar.

The Farewell.
I understand that in Ca^b. Brit. in this County.
January 1607. part of this County which they call the Moore, sustained a great
loss by the breaking in of the Severn sea, caused by a violent South-west wind,
continuing for three days together: I heartily desire the Inhabitants thereof
may for the future be secured from all such dangerous inundations* ( water
being a good servant but bad master) by his Providence, who binds the sea in
a girdle of sands, and says to the waves thereof, Thus far shall ye go and no
further.

PEMBROKE-SHIRE is surrounded on all sides with the Sea, save on the
North-East, where it boundeth on Cardigan, and East where it butteth on
Carmarthen-shire. A County abounding with all things necessary for man's
livelihood; and the East part thereof is the pleasantest place in all Wales,
which I durst not have said for fear of offense, had not I^ agro ^otius
VValiiae amoe^ssimo, Giral. Cambren.
Giraldus their own Countryman affirmed it.

Nor is it less happy in Sea than in Land, affording plenty of Fish, especially
about Tenby, therefore commonly called Tenby-y-Piscoid; which I rather observe
for the vicinity of the British piscoid, with the Latin piscosus, for
fishfull, though never any pretended an affinity between the two Languages.

A part of this Country is peopled by Flemmings, placed there by King Henry the
first, who was no less politic than charitable therein. For, such Flemmings
being driven out of their own Country, by an irruption of the Ocean, were fixed
here to defend the land given them against the Welsh, and their Country is
called little England beyond Wales. This minds me of a passage betwixt a
Welsh and English man, the former boasting Wales in all respects beyond
England; to whom the other returned, he had heard of an England beyond Wales,
but never of a Wales beyond England.

Natural Commodities.
Faulcons.
Very good are bred in this County of that kind, they call Peregrines, which
very name speaks them to be no Indeginae, but Forraigners, at first lighting
here by some casualty: King Henry the second passing hence into Ireland, cast
off a Norway Goshawk at one of these: but the Gos-hawk taken at the source by
the Faulcon, soon fell down at the Kings foot; which performance in this
ramage, Giral. Cambr.
made him yearly afterward, send hither for Eyesses. These Hawks Aeries (not
so called from building in the Air, but from the French word Air an Egg) are
many in the Rocks in this Shire.

Buildings.
For a sacred structure, the Cathedral of Saint David is most eminent, began by
Bishop Peter in the reign of King John, and finished by his Successors; though,
having never seen it, I can say little thereof. But in one respect, the roof
thereof is higher than any in England, and as high as any in Europe, if the
ancient absolute and independent jurisdiction thereof be considered, thus
stated by an Authentic Giral. Itin. Cambr. lib. 2. cap. 1.
Author, Episcopi Walliae a Menevensi Antistite sunt consecrati, and ipse
similiter ab aliis tanquam suffraganeis est consecratus, nulla penitus alii
Ecclesiae facta professione vel subjectione. The generality of which words must
be construed to have reference, as well to Rome as to Canterbury; Saint David's
acknowledging subjection to neither, till the reign of King Henry the first.

Princes.
HENRY TUTHAR, Son to Edmund Earl of Richmond, and Margaret his Lady, was born
at Sir Francis Baco ^ in the conclusion of his Character in his life.
Pembroke in this County, Anno Dom. -- In the reign of King Henry the sixth, he
was bred a Child at Court, when a young man, he lived an Exile in France, where
he so learned to live of a little, that he contracted a habit of frugality,
which he did not depose till the day of his death. Having vanquished King
Richard the third, in the battle of Bosorsth, and married Elizabeth eldest
Daughter to King Edward the fourth, he reigned King of England by the name of
Henry the seventh.

He is generally esteemed the wisest of our English Kings, and yet many
conceive, that the Lord Bacon writing his life, made him much wiser than he
was, picking more prudence out of his actions, than the King himself was privy
to therein, and not content to allow him politic, endeavored to make him
policy it self.

Yet many think h^s judgemen^ (...) him, when refusing the (...) (...) of
Columbus, for the discovery of America, who might therein have made a secret
adven^e, without any prejudice to the r^putation of his wisdom. But such his
wa^ss, he would not tamper with costly Cont^s, though never ^o probable to be
gainful; nor would he hazard a hook of Silver to catch a fish of Gold. He was
the first King, who secretly sought to aba^e the formidable greatness (the
Parent of many former Rebellions) in the English ^earage, lessening their
Dependencies, countena^cing the Commons, and encouraging the Yeomandry, with
provisions against Depopulations. However ^ereby he did not free his Successors
from fear, but only exchanged their care, making the Commons (who because more
numerous, less manageble) more absolute and able in time to con^est with
Sovereignty.

He survived his Queen, by whom he had the true Title to the Crown, about five
years. Some will say, that all that time he was King only by the Courtesy of
England, which I am sure he was loath to acknowledge. Others say he held the
Crown by Conquest, which his Subjects were as unwilling to confess. But let
none dispute how h^ h^ld, seeing he held it, having Pope, Parliament, Power,
Purse, Success, and some shadow of Succession on his side.

His greatest fault was, grinding his Subjects with grievous exactions, he was
most magnificent in those Structures he has left to posterity. Amongst which,
his ^evotion to God is most seen in two Chapels, the one at Cambridge, the
other at Westminster; his charity to the poor in the Hospital of the Savoy; his
Magnificence to himself in his own Monument of gilded Copper; and his vanity
to the World in building a Ship called the Great Harry, of equal cost, says
some, with his Chapel, which asterwards In the beginning of the Reign of Queen
Mary, S^ow. page 16.
sunk into the Sea, and vanished away in a moment.

He much employed Bishops in his service, finding them honest and able. And
here I request the judicious and learned Reader to help me at a dead li^, being
posed with this passage written in his life, by the Lord Verulam.

He did use to raise Bishops by steps, that he might not lose the profits of
the First fruits, which by that course of gradation was multiplied.

Now, I humbly conceive, that the First fruits (in the common acception of the
word) were in that age paid to the Pope, and would fain be informed, what
By-FirstFruits these were, the emolument whereof accrued to the Crown. This
politic King at his Palace of Richmond, April 22. 1509. ended his life, and
was buried in the Magnificent Chapel aforesaid. On the same token that he
ordered by his last VVevers Fun. Mon. page 20.
Will and Testament, that none save such of the Blood Royal (who should descend
from his Loins) should be buried in that place, straightly forbidding any other
of what Degree or Quality soever, to be interred therein. But only the Will of
the King of Heaven does stand inviolable, whilst those of the most Potent
earthly Princes are subject to be infringed.

Saints.
JUSTINIAN was a Noble Briton by birth, who with his own inheritance built a
Monastery in the Island of Ramsey in this County, where many Monks lived
happily under his discipline, until three of them, by the Devils instigation,
J. Capgrave in Catal. S. S. B^it.
slew this Justinian, in ha^red of his sanctity, about the year of Christ, 486.
His body was brought with great veneration to Menevia, and there interred by
Saint David himself, and since much famed with [supposed] Miracles.

Writers.
GIRALDUS CAMBRENSIS, whose Surname, say some, was Godwin in the Bishops of
St. David's.
Fitz-Girald, say others was J. VVareus de scrip. Hib. page 112.
Barry, and I believe the latter, because he says so himself in his Book, Lib.
^. cap. 2. extant in Sir R. Cottons Library.
De vita sua, and was born at Tenby in this County.

His Father. His Mother. William de Barry an Englishman. Anga^eth, the daughter
of Nesta, daughter of Rhese Prince of South Wales.

He was Nephew to David the second Bishop of St. David's, by whom he was made
Archdeacon of Brecknock. He was wont to complain, that the English did not
love him because his Mother was a Welsh-woman; and the Welsh did hate him
because his Father was an Englishman; though by his excellent writings he
deserved of England well, of Wales better, and of Ireland best of all; making a
Topographical description of all three: But acting in the last as a Secretary
under King In the life time of King He^. his Father.
John, with great industry and expense. Yea, he was a great Traveller, as far
as Jerusalem it self, and wrote De mirabilibus terrae Sanctae, so that he might
be styled Geraldus Anglicus, Hibernicus, Hierosolymitanus, though it was his
mind and modesty only to be Cambrensis.

One may justly wonder that having all Dimensions requisite to preferment, his
birth, broad acquaintance, deep learning, long life, (living above seventy
years) he never attained to any considerable Dignity. Hear how betwixt grief
and anger he expresses him self concerning his ill success at Court;

Irreparabili damno duo fere lustra consumens, nihil ab illis K. (...). 2. and
his Sons.
preter inanes vexationes and (...) veris promissa suscepi.

Indeed for a long time no Preferment was proffered him, above a beggarly
Bishopric in Ireland, and at last the Sea of S. David's was the highest place
he attained. Whilst some impute this to

His
Planet: the malignant influence whereof has blasted men of the most merit.
Pride: some men counting it their due for preferment to court them; and that it
is enough for them to recive, too much to reach after it. Profitableness to be
employed in meaner places. Some having gotten an useful Servant, love to wear
him out in working, and (as Gardiners keep their hedges close cut, that they
may spread the broader) maintain them mean, that they may be the more
industrious.
Giraldus himself tells us the true reason that he was ever beheld oculo
novercali, because being a Welsh-man by the surer side, and then such the
Antipathy of the English, they thought no good could come out of Wales. Sad,
that so worthy a man should poenas dare Patriae and Matris suae.

Being at last (as we have said) made Bishop of Saint David's, he went to Rome,
and there stickled for an exemption of that his See from And to make it an
absolute Metropolitan.
Canterbury, whereby he highly offended Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury. But
Giraldus after long debates, being rather overborn with Bribes, than overcome
in Cause, returned re infecta, died and was buried in his own Cathedral, about
the year 1215.

The Farewell.
I know not what better to wish this County, than that the Marle (a great
fertilizer of barren ground) which it affords, be daily increased,
(especially since Corn is in all probability likely to grow scarcer and
scarcer;) that their land through Gods blessing being put in heart therewith,
may plentifully answer the desires of the Husbandman, and hereafter repair the
Penury of this, with the Abundance for many succeeding years.

RADNOR-SHIRE.
RADNOR-SHIRE, (in British Sire Maiseveth) in form three square, is bounded on
the North-West with Hereford-shire, and on the South side (separated by the
River Wye) with Breckneck-shire, and on the North part thereof with
Montgomery-shire. Nature may seem to have chequered this County, the East and
South parts being fruitful, whilst the North and West thereof (lying rough and
uneven with Mountains) can hardly be bettered by the greatest pains and
industry of the Husband man. Yet is it indifferently well stored with woods,
and conveniently watered with running Rivers, and in some places with standing
Meers.

In his B^it. in this Shire.
Mr. Cambden tells us, that there is a place therein termed Melienith, (from
the Mountains thereof being of a Yellowish color) which stretches from Offa
Dike unto the River Wye, which cutteth overthwart the West corner of this
Shire, where meeting with some stones which impede its motion on a sudden, for
want of ground to glide on, has a violent downfall, which place is termed
Raihader Gowy, that is, the Fall or Floodgates of Wye. Ibid Ibidem.
Hereupon he supposes it not improbable, that the English men forged that word
for the name of this Shire, terming it Radnor-shire.

Princes.
HENRY of MONMOUTH, (so called from that well known Town wherein he was born)
has his Character fixed here, because formerly passed over in its proper
place, through the posting speed of the Press. He was Son to King Henry the
fourth, (by Mary one of the Daughters and Heirs of Humfrey de Bohun Earl of
Herefo^d, and) whom he succeeded on the Throne (being the fifth of that name)
and began his reign March 20. Anno 1413.

He cannot be excused from extravagancies in his Youth, seeing the King his
Father expelled him his Council, (substituting his younger Brother the Duke of
Clarence President in his steed) for the same. Yet as those bodies prove most
healthful, which break out in their youth, so was his soul the sounder for
venting it self in its younger days: For, no sooner was his Father dead, but he
reclaimed himself, and became a glory to his Country, and a constant terror to
his Enemies. Yea, he banished all his idle Companions from Court, allowing them
a competency for their subsistence.

When the Lord Chief Justice (who had secured him when Prince, for striking
him for the commitment of some of his lewd Companions) begged his Pardon for
the same, he not only forgave him, but rewarded his Justice, for distributing
it without fear or partiality.

In his reign a Supplication was preferred, that the Temporal Lands given to
pious uses, but abusively spent, might have been seized to the King. This was
wisely awarded by Chichley Archbishop of Canterbury, by putting the King on
the design of recovering France. Yea, this King by his valor reduced Charles
the sixth King of France, to such a condition, that he in a manner resigned his
Kingdom into his hand.

And here the French men found him as good (or rather worse) as his promise,
which he made to the Dolphin (who sent him a Barrel of Paris Tennis-Balls)
sending such English Balls, that they proved to their great loss.

He died at Boys S. Vincent in France, the last day of August, Anno 1422. and
was brought over with great solemnity, and interred in Westminster Abbey.

Prelates.
ELIAS de RADNOR. GUILIELMUS de RADNOR.
Ijoyn them together for three Reasons; First, because Natives of the same
Town, understand it Old Radnor, the new town of that name being built probably
since their decease. Secondly, because Bishops of the same See, Landaff.
Thirdly, because eminent, being eminent for Nothing, the names and dates of
their deaths (the one May 6. 1240. the other June the 30. 1256.) being all that
learned Antiquary and their Successor, In his Ca^ of the Bish^ps of L^ndaff.
Bishop Godwin, could recover of their memories, which dishear^eth me from
^arther enquiry after them. For, let them never look for a crop, who sow that
ground, which so skilful an husbandman thought fit to lie fallow.

The Farewell.
It much affected me (and I believe all others whose hearts are of flesh and
blood) what I read in an D^. Powel in his* History of VV^les. page 387.
Author concerning the rigorous laws imposed on the observation of the Welsh.
For when Owen Glyndower-dwy (inveigled by some well-skilled in Merlins
Prophesies, that the time was come, wherein the Britains through his assistance
should recover their ancient freedom and liberty) raised a Rebellion, making
war upon the Earl of March (the Heir apparent both to the Crown of England and
Principality of Wales) King Henry the fourth (enraged at his proceedings)
enacted these ensuing Laws.

First, That no Welshman should purchase Lands, or be chosen Citizen or Burgess
of any City, Borough, or Market Town, nor be received into any Office of Mayor,
Bailiff, Chamberlain, etc. or to be of the Council of any Town, or to bear
Armor within any City. Besides that, if any Welsh-man should impeach, or sue
an Englishman, It was ordained, he should not be convicted, unless by the
judgment of English Justices, verdict of English Burgesses, or by the Inquest
of the English Boroughs where the suits lay: Yea, that all English Burgesses
who married Welsh Women should be disfranchised of their Liberties. No
congregation or Council was permitted to the Welsh-men, but by license of the
chief Officers of the same Seig^ory, and in the * Ibid. Ibidem.
presence of the same Officers. That no Victuals should be brought into Walls,
unless by the especial license of the King and his Council. That no Welshmen
should have any Castle, Fortress, or House of Defense of his own, or any other
m^ns to keep. That no Welsh-man should be made Justice, Chamberla^, Chancellor
etc. of a Castle, Receivor, Eschetor, etc. nor other Officer or Keeper o^W
Records, and ^ nor of the Council of any English Lord. That no English man that
in time to come should marry a Welsh-woman be put in any Office in Wales, or in
the Marches o^ the same.

Now as I am heartily sorry that ever the Welsh were bound to the observance of
so rigorous Laws, so am I truly glad, that at this day they are (to the
happiness both of England and Wales) freed from the same: Yea, I shall
constantly pray, that God would be pleased to grant us of the Loins of our
Sovereign, one who may be born Prince of the one, and (after the [though late]
decease of his Majesty) King of the other.

FINIS.
AN ALPHABETICAL INDEX TO FULLER'S Worthies of England.
A.
NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. ST. Aaron Monm. 50 Robert Abbot Surr. 82 George Abbot
Surr. 83 Sir Roger Achley Shrop. 10 John Acton Middl. 104 Ralph Acton ib. 178
Sir Thomas Adams Shrop. 10 William Adams ib. 10 William Adams Kent 77 Adam de
Marisco Somer. 27 St. Adelme Wilt. 147 Pope Adrian IV. Hertf. 20 -- Agelnoth
Kent 68 William Alabaster Suff. 70 ^ Alan de Morton Berk. 104 Albericus de Veer
Bedf. 121 b Alan of Lynne Norf. 256 Flaccus Albinus, alias Alcuinus York. 227
King Alfred Berk. 96 Alphred of Beverly York. 205 Henry de Aldecheleia Staff.
50 John Alcock York. 214 Albricius of Land. 216 Robert Aldricke Bucks 131
William Alley ib. 131 William Aldersea Ches. 191 St. Alride Cumb. 217 St.
Alkmund Derb. 231 James Altham Essex 347 William Alton Hant. 11 St. Alban
Hertf. 19 St. Alnulphus Bedf. 115 c William Alan Lanc. 109 Edward Allin Land.
223 Rose Allin Essex 323 Bertram Fitz-Allin Linc. 166 Thomas Allin Staff. 42
John Amersham Buck. 135 St. Amphibalus Monm. 50 -- Anderton Lanc. 119 Sir
Edmund Anderson Linc. 161 -- Anderson Northumb. 310 Lancelot Andrews Land. 206
Thomas Andrews Northamp. 300 Richardus Anglicus Land. 215 Laurentius Anglicus
ib. 216 Anne, D. to King Charles Westminster. 229 Richard Angervile Suff. 29 Henry
D'Anvers Wilt. 153 Sir Edmund Appleby Leicest. 136 Thomas de Appleby Westmorl.
137 Roger de Appleby ibid. Sir Simon Archer Warw. 133 William Armyne Linc. 155
David Archidiaconus Bedf. 122 King Arthur Cornw. 201 Prince Arthue Hant. 4 John
Arundle Cornw. 200 202, 209 Thomas Arundell Suss. 103 St. Asaph Flint. 38 Roger
Ascham York. 209 John Ashburnham Surrey 95 Thomas Askine Berk. 91 William
Ascough Linc. 156 Anne Askewe ib. 155 Thomas Ashbourne Derby 236 Sir Thomas de
Ashton Lanc. 122 John de Aston Staff. 48 Sir Walter Aston ib. 50 -- Atwell
Cornw. 202 Edmund Audley Staff. 42 Sir Thomas Audley Essex 327 James Lord
Audley Devon. 258 John Aylmer Norf. 238 B.
NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. Richard Badew Essex 335 John Badby Land. 204 Sir Francis
Bacon Westmin. 241 Robert Bacon Oxf. 337 Sir Nicholas Bacon Suff. 62, 75 Ralph
Baines York. 197 John Baconthorpe Norf. 255 William Baitman Norw. 276 Sir
Richard Baker Oxf. 338 John Bale Suff. 60 Thomas Bagnols Staff. 44 Christopher
Bambridge Westmorl. 136 Bankinus Londin. Land. 217 Sir John Banks Cumb. 219
John Ball Oxf. 339 John Bancroft ib. 333 Richard Bancroft Lanc. 112 Ralph
Baldock Her^f. 21 Sir Paul Bannyng Essex 347 Hugo de Balsham Camb. 160 Amias
Bamfeild Devon. 272 Richard Barnes Lanc. 110 William Barry Kent 94 Thomas
Barrington Essex 340 John Barnston Chesh. 183 John Barkham Devon. 276 Juliana
Barnes Land. 217 Richard de Barking Essex 325 Adam of Barking ib. 332 Thomas
Barret ib. 340 a John Barret Norf. 258 John Barnet Hertf. 21 Edward Bash ib. 30
Richard de Baskervill Heref. 44 Sir James Baskervill ib. 46 John Barningham
Suff. 69 Herbert de Basham Sussex 101 William Barlow ib. 103 Salephilax the
Bard Wales 13 John of Basingsloke Hant. 10 b Valentine Barret Kent 94 John
Basket Berk. 108 Thomas Basket Dorces. 28^ John Basket Wilt. 163 Abbot of
Battle Sussex 106 Walter de Baud Simon and alii Essex 343 James Baynam Glocest.
354 Richard Basset Bedf. 121 John Basset Cornw. 210 Thomas Beckington Summers.
23 Thomas Becket Land. 203 -- Bid Durham 292 Sir Thomas Beigney Devon. 265
Philip de la Beach Berk. 104 Margaret Beaufort Bedf. 115 Anne Beauchamp Ox^.
330 Richard Beauchamp Berk. 92 and Worc. 171 Sir Edward Bellingham Westmorl.
138 Thomas Bell Glocest. 362 -- Beavois Hant. 9 Sir Robert Bellknap Leicest.
131 Richard Belgrave ib. 132 Sir Henry Bellasis York 223 John Bellasis ibid.
St. Beno Flint. 38 Thomas Benion Summers. 34 Thomas Bendish Essex 340 Thomas
Bentham York 197 Robert Bennet Berk. 92 Thomas Berkley Gloc. 363 Gilbert
Berkeley Norf. 238 Dame Katherine Berkeley Gloc. 361 Bertram Fitz-Allen Linc.
166 St. Bertelin Staff. 40 Peregrin Berty Linc. 161 Sir Richard de la Bear
Heref. 46 Alphred of Beverly York 205 St. John of Beverly ib. 192 William
Bischop Warw. 129 Benedict. Biscop York. 192 Thomas Bickely Buck. 131 Sir
Richard Bingham Dors. 281 John Bird Warw. 22 Thomas Bilson Hant. 7 Sir Francis
Bigot York. 209 John of Birlington, alias Bridlington ib. 193 Sir Thomas de
Billing Northamp. 286 Philip Biss Some. 30 John Bloxham Linc. 165 Michael
Blaunpayn Corn. 203 Peter Blundell Dev. 265 Cornelius Bongy Warw. 120 Utred
Bolton Wales 14 Robert Bolton Lanc. 116 John Boise Suff. 71 David Boyse Wales
15 Dr. John Bois Kent 84 Sir William Boleyn ib. 95 Queen Anne Bollen Land. 202
Sir Godfrey Bollen Norf 258 Edward Bonner, alias Savage Worc. 169 William
Bowyer Staff. 53 William Booth Chesh. 174 Laurence Booth ibid. John Booth ib.
155 Edward Bone Cornw. 206 Wenfr. Boniface Devon. 249 Sir George Bows York.
223 Henry Bourchier Essex 338 John Bourchier Hertf. 27 Thomas Bourchier Essex
324 William of Bottlesham Cambr. 152 Andrew Board Land. 215 Philip Bottiller
Essex 345 -- Boso Hertf. 20 John Bray Cornw. 205 Sir John Bramston Essex 329
Robert Braybrook Northamp* 284 Henry de Braybrook Bedf. 122 Robert de Braybrook
ibid. Henry Bradshaw Ches. 190 Sir Henry Bradshaw ib. 177 Robert Brassy ib. 182
John de Bradfeild Berk. 92 John of Bridlington, alias Birlington -- York. 193 a
William Breton Wales 14 Walter Brute ib. 8 Sir Henry Bromfleet York. 221 Gualo
Britannus Wales 14 Hugh Broughton ib. 16 Richard Broughton Hunt. 53 b John
Briton, alias Breton Heref. 37 Nicholas Breakspear Hertf. 20 William de Brito
Kent 91 Sir Richard Brakenburgh ib. 95 Maurice Bryyn Essex 339 Giles de Bruce
Breckn. 23 John Bradford Lanc. 108 Sir Thomas Bromley Staff. 43 John Bromley
ibid. Sir Thomas Brumley Shrop. 6 William Briewere Berk. 103 Sir John Brewerton
Chesh. 185 Edward Brerewood ib. 190 William Brewer Devon. 252, 268 Fulco de
Breantee Berk. 104 Walter Bronscombe Dev. 274 Ralph Browning Suff. 61 Sir
Robert Brook ib. 65 Sir David Brook Summers. 25 Walter Brown Land. 228
William Brown Rutl. 348 Christopher Brown ib. 253 John Brown ib. 354 Stephen
Brown Northumb. 308 Matthew Brown Surr. 98 Thomas Bradwardine Suss. 102
Wulstan of Braundsford Worc. 168 Robert Bristow ib. 176 Ralph of Bristol
Summers. 34 Henry Bright Worc. 177 William Brightman Nottingh. 319 Fulk de Brent
Middl. 182 Edmund Brudenell Northamp. 300 Henry Bullock Berk. 95 John
Buckingham Buck. 130 Edward Bulstrod ib. 141 William Burgoin Devon. 265 Hubert
de Burgo Kent 91 Thomas Lord Burgh, or Borough Linc. 159 Arthur Bulkly Anglesey
^18 Lancelot Bulkly ib. 19 Sir Ralph Butler Gloc. 356 Charles Butler Hant. 13
Sir Thomas Burge Linc. 174 Henry Burton Staff. 46 Robert Burton William Butler
Suff. 67 William Burton Leic. 134 Robert Burton ibid. Sir Thomas Burdet Leic.
140 John of Bury Suff. 69 Boston of Bury Linc. 165 Robert Burnel Shrop. 4 Henry
Burwash Suss. 103 John Buckeridge Wilt. 151 Nicholas Byfeild Warw. 122 Hub. de
Burozo Kent 91 C.
NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. Sir Peter Carew Devon. 272 Nicholas Carew Surr. 96 Richard
Carew Cornw. 205 Sir John Carry Devon. 253 James Carry ibid. Valentine Carry
Northum. 305 Henry Carry Hertf. 23 Sir Henry Carry ibid. John Careless Warw. 120
Robert Can^tus Wilt. 155 Sir George Calvert York. 201 Sir Robert Calvert ib.
230 Thomas Castleford ib. 207 Caducanus Wales 10 Gualt Calenius ib. 14 St.
Canock Breckn. 22 St. Cadock ibid. Sir Edward Carne Glamor. 41 Wal^er Cantilupe
Monm. 51 Giraldus Cambrensis Pemb^. 57 Vinarius Cap^llanus Norf. 269 Sir John
Cavendish Suff. 65 Thomas Cavendish ib. 66 John Cavendish ib. 72 William Caxton
Camb. 157 Sir Hugh Calvely Chesh. 178 John Canon Cumb. 220 Robert. Epis.
Carliol. ib. 225 Edmund Campian Land. 222 Sir Robert Catelin Leic. 131 John
Caius Norf. 275 Sir Philip Calthrope ib. 270 Sir William Capell Suff. 73
Richard Capell Gloc. 361 Arthur Capell Hertf. 28 Nathaniel Carpenter Devon. 264
John Carpenter Gloc. 355 Sir William Catesby Northamp. 286 George Garleton
Northumb. 304 Thomas Cantilupe Heref. 35 Osburn of Canterbury Kent 99 Thomas
Car^wright Hertf. 27 Thomas Carden Surr. 96 William Cecill Linc. 159 Jane
Cecill ib. 168 David Cecill Northamp. 299 Sir Thomas Cecill ib. 300 David
Cerington Wilt. 159 Cecily Daugh. to Edw. IV. Westmin. 237 Sir Julius Caesar
Middl. 185 King Charles I. Kent 67 King Charles II. Westmin. 237 Wit. Chapel
Notting. 317 Humphry Chetham Lanc. 121 Sir Thomas Chaleton Middl. 187 Maurice
Chamner Land. 222 Henry Chichely Northamp. 292, and 283 Richard Chichester
Devon. 263 Sir Arthur Chichester ibid. 254 Robert Chichester ibid. 251 Roger of
Chester Chesh. 189 Richard Chamond Cornw. 211 William Chadderton Chesh. 175 Sir
Hugh Cholml^y ibid. 187 Lawrence Chaderton Lane. 117 John de Chesill Essex 325
John Christopherson Lanc. 110 Thomas Cheyney Kent 96 Will^am Cheyney ibid. 95
Sir Fr^ncis Ch^ney Buck. 141 Sir John Che^ke Camb. 156 Thomas Chase Bedf. 115
Peter Chapman Berk. 97 Thomas Chaucer ibid. 106 Jeffrey Chaucer Oxf. 337
William Chillingworth ibid. 339 -- Child Devon. 266 John Christmas Ess^x 346
John Chedworth Gloc. 355 Thomas Charnock Kent 82 David of Chirbury Shrop. 8
Thomas Churchyard ibid. 9 Sir John Champneys Some. 31 Thomas Chune Suss. 109
John Chylmarke W^lt. 156 Sir Roger Cholmley York. 200 Sir William Chauncey
Northamp 301 Sir Dudley Charlton Oxf. 334 Roger the Cistercian Devon. 263
Francis Clearke Bedf. 118 William Clarke Oxf. 345 George Clearke ^anc. 121 Sir
John Clarke Northamp. 299 Richard de Clare Monm. 51 Richard Clough Flint. 39
St. Clintanke Breck. 22 Francis Cl^fford York. 223 George Clifford ibid. 203
Anne Clifford Wesimor. 140 Richard Clarke Dors. 282 Osbern Claudian Gloc. 357
Katherine Clyvedon ibid. 361 Sir Jervase Clifton Camb. 169 Richard Clifford
Kent 70 John Cleaveland Leic. 135 Hugh Clopton Warw. 129 Elizabeth Clare Suff.
71 Nicholas Close Westmorl. 137 Alice Coberly Wilt. 148 Sir Francis Cottington
ibid. 152 Hugh Coren, alias Curwen Westmor. 137 John Comin, alias Cumin
Worcest. 167 Sir Thomas Coventry ibid. 170 Walter of Coventry Warw. 124 Vincent
of Coventry ibid. William of Coventry Roger Ep. Covent. and Litch. Berk. 104
Walt. de Constantiis Wales 10 St. Congellus; alias Comgallus Flint. 38
Constantine G. Essex 322 William Coberly Wilt. 148 Sir Edward Conway Warw. 123
Miles Coverdale York. 198 Sir William Compton Worc. 179 -- Cock Devon. 261
Henry Cock Hertf. 32 Sir Edward Coke Norf. 250 and Buck. 141 Sir John Cook
Derb. 233 George Cook ibid. 232 Sir Thomas Cook Suff. 73 Sir Anthony Cook
Essex 327 John Cowell Devon. 262 Roger Comes ibid. 268 Dr. John Cosen Durh. 295
Dr. Richard Cosen ibid. 296 Thomas Cole Berk. 97 Sir John Cokeyn Bedf. 116
Richard Cox Bucks. 131 Samuel Collins ibid. 137 Ralph of Cogshall Essex 332
Henry Cotton Hants. 7 Sir Robert Cotton Hunting. 52 Sir Rowland Cotton Shrop.
16 William Cotton Land. 206 T^omas Cotton Camb. 167 William Collet ibid. 161
John of Cornwa^ Cornw. 203 Godfrey of Cornwall ibid. Sir John Cornwall Shr^p.
15 Brian Cornwall Staff. 53 Richard Conwail Heref. 46 Thomas Conisby Hertf^ 32
Sir Thomas Conisby Heref. 47 John Courcy Summers. 25 John Collington ibid. 30
Thomas Coriat Summers. 31 William Coppinger Suff. 71 Sir William Co d^ll ibid.
7^ Eleanor Cobham Surr. 80 Richard Corbet ibid. 83 John Col^on Norf 255 John
Coupeland Northumb. 312 Richard Courtney Devon. 252 William Courtney ibid. 250
Peter Courtney ibid. 253 Richard Crackanthorp Cumb. 221 Sir Randall Crew Chesh.
178 Randall Crew ibid. 184 William Crew ibid. ibid Thomas Crofts Suff. 75 James
Cranford Warw. 128 Lyonel C^anfeild Land. 211 Sir James Crofts Heref. 41 Thomas
Cranley Surr. 81 Thomas Cranmer Not. 316 Robert Crowley Northamp. 290 Roger of
Crowland Linc. 164 Thomas Cromwell Surr. 83 Sir Oliver Cromwell Hunt. 54 Thomas
Cromwell Cambr. 168 Sir Henry Cromwell ibid. 169 Sir George Crook Buck. 133
John Croke ibid. 140 John Crane Camb. 160 William Crowmer Kent 95 Ralph
Cudworth Lanc. 117 Henry Cuffe Summers. 28 Bartholomew Culie Leic. 132 Thomas
Curson Land. 223 John Curd Northamp. 283 Sir John Cuts Cambr. 168 Roger Curson
Derb. 232 John Cut-cliffe Devon. 263 Hugh Curwen, alias Coren Westmor. 140 John
Cumin, alias Comin Worc. 167 D.
NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. Michael Dalton Camb. 159 Sir Robert Dallington Northamp.
288 Sir Thomas Dacres Hertf. 32 Henry Danvers Wilt. 153 Mary Dale Summers. 37
Samuel Daniel ibid. 28 Walter Daniel York. 205 George Day Shrop. 5 William Day
Sir John Darell Berk. 111 James Davenant Land. 207 Sir Humphrey Davenport
Chesh. 178 John Damerell Devon. 271 John of Darlington Durh. 295 Robert Darcy
Essex 339 John Davies Heref. 40 Sir Robert Dennis Devon. 272 Baldwin Devonius
ibid. 274 Sir Edward Denny Hertf. 32 Robert Devereux Heref. 38 Walter Devereux
ibid. 46 and Caermar. 28 John Dee Lanc. 116 John Delves Staff. 53 Simon Dewes
Suff. 75 David Archidiaconus Bedf. 122 Francis Dillingham ibid. 117 Sir James
Dier Summers. 25 John Digby Warw. 124 Richard of Devises Wilt. 155 John Diggons
Hant. 14 Leonard Digges Kent. 82 Daniel Dike Hertf. 28 Jeremiah Dike ibid.
Nicholas Dixon ibid. 29 Sir Wolstan Dixie Hunting. 53 Sir Robert Dimock Line.
174 Sir William Doddington Hants. 14 Robert Dodford Northamp. 290 Sir William
Dormer Bedf. 126 Robert Dormer Bucks. 141 Thomas Dorman ibid. 137 John Dod
Chesh. 181 Thomas Dove Land. 207 John Doreward Essex 339 Sir John Doderidge
Devon. 257 George Downham Chesh. 189 John Downham ibid. 191 John Done Land.
221 John Douland Westminst. 244 Edmund Doubleday ibid. 245 Sir Robert Doyle
Oxf. 345 Sir William Druery Suff. 63 Drugo Drury Norf. 272 Thomas Drax Warw.
125 Michael Drayton ibid. 126 John Driton Sussex 109 John Drusius Hants. 12 Sir
Francis Drake Devon. 261 St. Dunstan Summers. 21 William Dudley Staff. 42 Edmund
Dudley ibid. 43 John Dudley ibid. 44* 53 Sir Robert Dudley Surr. 84 Augustine
Dudley Northamp. 283 John of Dunstable Bedf. 116 Arthur Ducke Devon. 262 Brian
Duppa Kent 73 James Duport Leic. 134 Richard Dugard Worc. 176 E.
NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. Robert Eaglesfield Cumberl. 222 Adam de Easton Heref. 36
St. Ealphage Kent 67 John Easday ibid. 99 Ealread of Rievaulx York. 205 St.
Ebba Northumb. 304 Thomas Ecklestone Chesh. 180 King Edward III. Berk. 88
Edward Son to King Edgar Dorset. 278 King Edward I. Westmin. 236 King Edward
IV. Caernar. 28 St. Edward the Confessor Oxf. 331 King Edward V. Westmin. 337
King Edward VI. Middl. 178 Edward Son to Edward III. Oxf. 330 Edward Son to
King Richard III. York. 191 Edward Son to King Henry VI. Westmin. 236 St.
Edmund Berk. 89 and Suff. 56 Edmund, Son to King Henry VII. Kent 66 Edmund, Son
to King Edward III. Hertf. 19 Edmund, Son to King Edward I. Oxf. 330 Edmund of
Hadham Hertf. 19 Thomas Edwardston Suff. 59 Sir Clement Edmunds Shrop. 6 Sr.
Edwold Oxf. 331 St. Edburgh Hant. 4 and Buck. 128 Thomas Eden Essex 336 Richard
Edgcomb Devon. 271 Sir Peter Edgeombe Cornw. 210 St. Edith Wilt. 147 William
Edendon ibid. 150 John Ede Wales 15 St. Edilburge Essex 322 William Egremont
Cumb. 220 Sir Thomas Egerton Chesh. 176 Eleanor, Daughter to King Edward I.
Berk. 88 and Hants. 4 Queen Elisabeth Kent 66 Elisabeth, Daughter to King
Edward IV. Westmin. 237 Elisabeth, Daughter to King Charles I. ibid. 239
Elisabeth, Daughter to Earl of Clare Suff. 71 Elisabeth, Daughter to King
Edward I. Flint. 37 Thomas of Ely Suff. 68 Hugh Elio: Summers. 35 Sir Thomas
Eliot Camb. 168 Nicholas of Ely Camb. 152 Humphry Ely Heref. 41 St. Elfred
Hunting. 49 John of Eltham Kent 65 Bridget of Eltham ibid. John Elryngton
Middl. 188 Elvodugus Probus Flint. 39 Sir Richard Empson Northamp. 287 Wi^liam
Englebert Dorces. 284 Samson Erderswick Staff. 45 John Erghom York. 230 William
Essex Berk. 108 Henry de Essex Bedf. 121 Alexander of Esseby Summers. 27
Nicholas Estwick Northamp. 291 Ethelbert Heref. 35 St. Ethelburgh Essex 322
Sylvester de Everton Bedf. 116 John Eve^sden Cambr. 157 Hugh of Evesham Worc.
168 Elias of Evesham 174 Walter of Evesham 176 Walter Eustathius York. 195
Marbod Evan Wales 10 William Evans Monm. 54 Sir Ralph Evars, alias Eure York.
222 Sir Thomas Exmew Denb. 35 William of Exeter (...). 275 Sir Simon Air Suff.
71 F.
NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. Peter Fabell Middl. 186 Anthony Faunt (...). 142 Robert
Fabian Land. 218 John Fastolfe Norf. 253 Eustathius de Fauconbridge York. 195
Guido de Fairfax ibid. 199 Sir Nicholas Fairfax ibid. 222 Robert Farrar
Caermar. 27 Sir Jeffrey Fenton Notting. 319 Edward Fenton ibid. 318 Roger
Fenton Lanc. 116 John Fen Summers. 29 Sir Richard Fenys Oxf. 345 Daniel Featly
ibid. 340 Nichol^s of Fernham Surr. 80 John Feckenham Worc. 177 Haimo of
Feversham Kent 80 Besil Feriplace Berk. ^10 Henry Filmer ibid. 90 Sir Anthony
Fitz-Herbert Derb. 253 Richard Fishacre, alias (...) Devon. 263 Richard
Fishbourn Hunt. 53 Simon Fish Kent 69 John Fisher Leic. 141 and York. 194
Edward Fines Linc. 158 Sir Moile Finch Kent 96 Sir Henry Finch ibid. 76 Sir
John Fineux ibid. ibid. Bertram Fitz-Allin Linc. 166 Robert Floyd, alias Fludd
Kent. 78 Richard Fletcher Kent 72 Giles Fletcher ibid. 78 and Land. 221 John
(...) Northamp. 288 Fleta, or Fleet Land. 212 Florence of Worcester Worc. 174
William Flower Camb. 151 Humphry Foster Berk. 107 Humphry Forster ibid. 109
Humphry Foster Cumb. 218 John de Ford Devon. 263 John Fowler Summers. 36 Gilbert
Fo^ot Devon. 251 Robert Foliot ibid. iaeid. Sir Henry Fortescue ibid. 256 Sir
John Fortescue Sir Adrian Fortescue Edward Fox Gloc. 355 Richard Fox Linc. 157
John Fox ibid. 167 Martin Fotherby ibid. 158 William de Folvil Leic. 133 John
Freeman Northamp. 301 Ralph Fresbourn Northumb. 307 St. Frideswide Oxf. 331
Valentine (...) York. 228 Edward Freese ibid. ibid. Sir Martin Frobisher ibid.
202 Acceptus Fruin Suss. 104 Sir Thomas Frowicke (...). 183 Thomas Frowicke
ibid. 188 William Fulke Land. 219 Fu co de Brean^ee Berk. 104 Stephen de
Fulbu^ne Camb. 152 Nicholas Fuller Hants. 12 G.
NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. William Gascoigne Bedf. 125 Thomas Gascoigne York. 208 Sir
William Gascoigne ibid. 199 Sir John Gates Essex 346 John de Gatesden Hertf. 24
(...) of Gainsbo ough Linc. 155 Simon of Gaunt Land. 205 Henry of Gaunt Linc.
153 Harvis Gadarn Montg. 4 Thomas (...) Shrop. Stephen Ga diner Suff. 6
Christopher St. German Land. 212 Richard George Essex 323 Sir Humphrey Gilbert
ibid. 332 William Gilbert ibid. ibid. (...) Gilbert (...). 5 Gil^ert of
Westminst. 242 John Gibbon Some. 29 G^bert of Sempringham Linc. 154 Thomas
Gibson Northumb. 307 William Gisford Staff. 46 Gildas the Wise Summers. 27
Gildas the 4th Wales 13 Bernard Gilpin Westmor. 139 Richard Gilpin ibid. 141
John Giles (...). 24 Anthony Gilby Linc. 167 Giles de Bruise Breckn. 23 Giraldus
Cambrensis Pembr. 57 Robert Glover Kent 82 and Warw. 120 John Glover ibid.
ibid. Bartholomew Glanvile Norf. 269 William Glyn Anglesey 19 Owen Glendowerwye
Flint. 39 Robert of Gloucester Gloc. 358 Richard Duke of Gloucester Cumb. 228
Edmund Gourney Norf. 258 John Goslin ibid. 275 Matthew Gournay Summers. 25
Francis Godwin Northam. 284 Thomas Godwin Berk. 92 Gabriel Goodman Denb. 35
Godfrey Goodman ibid. 34 Katherine Gowches Hants. 5 Roger Goad Buck. 136 Thomas
Goad Cambr. 159 Godfrey Goldsborough ibid. 153 Sir Francis Godolphin Cornw.
(...) John Godard Essex. 333 Nicholas Gorrham Hertf. 26 James Goldwell Kent 72
Thomas Goldwell Thomas Goodrich Linc. 157 William Gouge Middl. 184 George
Goring Surr. 96 John Gower York. 207 and Berk. 107 William Goldingham Essex 339
Sir Thomas Gresham Norf. 259 Henry Green Northamp. 297 Anne Green Oxf. 34^
Wil^m Grocirie Summers. 36 Robert Grosthead Suff. 57 Sir F^lke Grevill Warw. 127
William de Grenvil Cornw. 199 Thomas Granvil ibid. 210 Sir Richard Greenvil
(...). 258 Henry Gray Be^f. 118 Lord A^thur Gray Buck. 134 William G^ey Derby
232 Lord Anthony Gray Durh. 299 Jane Gray Leicest. 127 Katharine Gray Mary Gray
John Griffin Wales 15 John Gregory Euck. 136 Arthur Gregory Doro. 284 Edmund
Grindall Cumb. 218 John Grandesson Heref. 37 Richard of Gravesend Kent 71 John
Gwent Wales 15 Edmund Guest York. 198 John Gwin Berk. 91 John Gwillim Heref. 40
Gualo Britannus Wales 14 Guido de Mona Anglesey 18 H.
NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. Sir James Hales Kent 69 Thomas Hale Summers. 34 -- Hales
Warw. 130 Alexander of Hales Gloe. 358 Thomas of Hales ibid. 359 Richard Hale
Hertf. 30 Edward Hall Land. 219 Joseph Hall Leic. 129 Robert Halam Wilt. 149
John of Halifax, alias Sacro Bosco York. 206 Henry Hammond Surr. 85 John
Hanvile Oxf. 336 James Harrington Rutl. 348 Sir John Harrington Summers. 28 Lord
John Harrington Warw. 130 Sir Robert Harecourt Berk. 107 Sir William Harper
Bedf. 118 Walter Haddon Buck. 135 John Harman, alias Vesty Warw. 122 John
Harley Buck. 130 Richard Hampole, alias Role York. 193 John Harding ibid. 208
Richard Hackluit Heref. 39 Haimo of Hithe Kent 71 Haimo of Feversham ibid. 80
Edward Halsall Lanc. 120 William Harvey Kent. 79 Jeffery de Harby Leic. 132
Robert de Harby ibid. 133 Meredith Hanmer Flint. 39 William Hastings Leic. 141
Sir Edward Hastings Francis Hastings ibid. 142 Sir Edward Harwood Linc. 162 Job
Hartop ibid. 163 Thomas Haslewood Kent 81 Sir Christopher Hatton Northamp. 285
Hugh Hatton Chesh. 186 Raw Hayes Cornw. 202 Andrew de Harcla Cumb. 225
Elisabeth Hardwicke Derb. 237 Sir William Hankford Devon. 255 Edmund of Haddam
Hertf. 19 Sir William Hampton Gloc. 361 Thomas Hawks Essex 323 Sir John
Hawkewood ibid. 330 Samuel Harsnet ibid. 326 King Henry I. York. 190 King Henry
III. Hants. 4 King Henry IV. Linc. 152 King Henry V. Radn. 59 King Henry VI.
Berk. 89 King Henry VII. Pembr. 56 King Henry VIII. Kent 66 Henry, Son to King
Henry VIII. Suff. 79 Henry, Son to King Charles I. ibid. ibid. Henry Fitz-roy,
Son to K. Henry VIII. Essex. 321 Henry Bishop of Winch. and Card. Angl. Hunt.
15, 16. Henrietta, Daughter to King Charles I. Devon. 274 Charles Herle Cornw.
205 St. Herebert Cumberl. 217 Sir William Herle Devon. 255 George Herbert
Montgom. 46 Edward Herbert ibid. ibid. William Herbert Monm. 52 Sir Anthony
Fitz Herbert Derb. 233 and Gloc. 356 St. Helen Essex 322 Roger of Hereford
Heref. 39 Nicholas Hereford Wales 9 Martin Heton Lanc. 112 John Herdwick Leic.
137 and York. 194 Nicholas Heath Land. 205 John Heiwood ibid. 221 Sir John
Hewet Northam. 301 Thomas Hereningham Essex 340 Julines Herring Montg. 47
Thomas Hides Berk. 96 John of Hide Hants. 10, 11 Sir Nicholas Hide Wilt. 153
Sir Rowland Hill Shrop. 10 Haimo of Hithe Kent. 71 Ralph de Hingham Norf. 249
Sir Oliver Hingham ibid. 253 John Higham Suff. 74 Sir Robert Hicham ibid. 72
Hilarious Bishop of Chichester Surr. 92 St. Hilda York. 191 Alban Hill Wales 12
Sr. Hildetha Essex 322 Arthur Hildersham Cambr. 158 Sir John Howard Berk. 107
Thomas Howard Essex 328 William Howard Surr. 83 Charles Howard Henry Howard
Norf. 263 Queen Katharine Howard Land. 202 Robert Holcot Northam. 289 Gilbert
of Holland Linc. 164 Thomas Holland Shrop. 9 Philem. Holland Warw. 127 Henry
Holland Worc. 176 Hugh Holland Wales 16 John Holyman Buck. 130 and Summers. 34
Francis Holyoake Warw. 128 Wilfr. Holme York. 209 Robert Holgate ibid. 194
Lawrence Holebeck Linc. 166 Thomas Hoo Bedf. 124 and Hertf. 32 Sir William
Hollis Notting. 323 James Hobart Norf. 258 Richard Holsworth Northumb. 305 John
Hooper Summers. 21 Sir William Horn Cambr. 160 Robert Horn Durh. 295 Richard
Hooker Devon. 264 Richard Howland Essex 326 George Horsey Hertf. 32 Thomas
Howel Breck. 23 John Hornby Linc. 165 Robert Hownslow Middl. 184 John Howson
Land. 207 Robert Hoode Notting. 320 John Horminger Suff. 68 John Holbrook Surr.
85 Nicholas Hortresham Suss. 108 William Horeman Wilt. 156 Roger Hoveden York.
206 William Hugh ibid. 209 St. Hugh Linc. 152 Hugh of Reading Berk. 95 Lawrence
Humphred Buck. 136 John Hunt Wilt. 148 Gregory of Huntington Hunt. 50 Henry of
Huntington ibid. 51 Matthew Hutton Lanc. 111 Sir Richard Hutton Cumb. 219 Roger
Hutchison Hertf. 27 Randal Hugden Chesh. 190 Richard Huloet Camb. 158 Sir John
Huddlestone Camb. 168 Hucarius Levita Cornw. 202 Sir William Huser Linc. 160
John Huser ibid. 174 I.
NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. William James Chesh. 175 Thomas James Hants. 12 Richard
Fitz-James Summers. 23 John Fitz-James ibid. 24 James, Son to King Charles I.
Westmin. 239 Thomas Jackson Durh. 297 Robert Jermin Suff. 75 John Jewel Devon.
253 John Jegon Essex 326 -- Jeffery Rutl. 348 Sir John Jefferey Sussex 105
Thomas Ilam Land. 233 John Incent Hertf. 29 Sir Francis Inglesfeild Berk. 109
John, Son to King Edward I. ibid. 88 Sir Oliver St. John Wilt. 152 Sir John St.
John Bedf. 125 Oliver St. John ibid. ibid Hugh Johnes Wales 11 William Johnes
Monm. 53 Thomas Jones Lanc. 112 Benjamin Johnson Westmin. 243 Thomas Johnson
York. 204 Robert Johnson Linc. 169 Joan, Daughter to King Edward II. Land. 201
Thomas Joyce Oxf. 332 George Joy Bedf. 117 Sir Ralph Josceline Hertf. 29
Joceline of Wells Summers. 22 Josephus Iscanus Devon. 274 Barthol. Iscanus ibid.
ibid. Roger of St. Ives Hunting. 51 Sir Anthony Jud Kent 84 Robert Ivory Land.
217 St. Justinian Pembr. 57 William Juxton Sussex 104 K.
NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. Katharine, Daughter to King Henry III. Land. 201
Katharine, Daughter to King Henry VII. ibid. 202 Katharine, Daughter to King
Charles I. Westmin. 240 John Kendricke Berk. 97 St. Kenelme Gloc. 353 John Kemp
Kent 69 Thomas Kempe ibid. 71 John of Kent ibid. 80 Henry Keble Land. 233
Matthew Kellison Northamp. 292 Richard Kendall Westminst. 139 Sir Edward
Kelley, alias Talbot Worc. 172 St. Keyne Breckn. 22 St. Kiby Cornw. 198 --
Kiltor ibid. 205 John King Buck. 132 Henry King ibid. ibid. Sir William
Kingston Gloc. 368 Sir Anthony Kingston Robert Kinaston Shrop. 16 John
Kinyngham Suff. 68 -- Kidstone Lanc. 122 John Kite Land. 205 Hugh Kirkstead
Linc. 164 John of Killingworth Warw. 124 John de Kirkby Westmor. 136 William
Knight Land. 205 Henry de Knighton Leicest. 133 Sir Robert Knowles Chesh. 179
Sir Francis Knowles Oxford 334 and 335 Sir Henry Knowles Sir William Knowles
Sir Robert Knowles Sir Thomas Knowles Lettice Knowles Sir Thomas Kneisworth
Cumb. 160 L.
NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. Nicholas Latham Northamp. 293 William Lawd Berk. 93 Roger
Layburn Cumb. 218 Gerh. Langbane ibid. 221 Henry Langley Essex 339 Edmund of
Langley Hertf. 19 Robert Langland Shrop. 8 Richard Laken ibid. 12 Richard
Lanham Suff. 68 Robert Langton Westmor. 140 Stephen Langton Kent 97 Simon
Langton ibid. 99 Walter de Langton Leic. 128 Thomas Langton ibid. 133 John
Laurence Essex 323 Arthur Lakes Hants. 7 Sir Thomas Lakes ibid. 9 Lamfrid ibid.
10 William Lamb Kent 85 Hugh Latimer Leic. 127 William Laxton Northamp. 293
William Laws Wilt. 156 Blegabride Langauride Wales 13 Laurentius Anglicus
Land. 216 Thomas Leg Norf. 276 John Lewkenor Surr. 95 Francis Leigh Warw. 133
Thomas Leigh Sir James Ley Wilt 152 Edward Lee York. 194 Paulin de Leeds ibid.
215 John Lepton ibid. 231 -- Leoline Denb. 34 John Leventhorpe Essex 340
Hucarius the Levite Cornw. 202 Hugh Legate Hertf. 26 Thomas Leaver Lanc. 115
William Lempster Heref. 39 Sir Anthony St. Ledger Kent 73 William de Leicester
Leic. 132 Robert de Leicester ibid. Thomas Linacer Derb. 235 August. Linsell
Essex 326 Thomas de la Lynd Dorc. 284 Simon Lynch Essex 337 and Kent 85 William
Lyford Berk. 96 William Lynwood Linc. 156 William Lilly Hants 11 William
Lidlington Linc. 164 Nicholas Lyra Land. 217 Nicholas of Lynne Norf. 254 Alan
of Lynne ibid. 256 Thomas Lydyate Oxf. 338 Edward Littleton Staff. 42 Sir
Thomas Littleton ibid. ibid. and Worc. 171 William de Lichfield Staff. 45 John
Lydgate Suff. 68 Herbert Losing Oxf. 332 and Suff. 58 Adam Loftus York. 198
William Longchamp Essex 342 John Low Worc. 168 Sir Richard Lovelace Berk. 110
Henry Longuile Buck. 141 Maud Lucy Cumb. 222 John Lucas Essex 347 Egid. Lucas
ibid. 340 William de Lubbenham Lei^. 132 Thomas Lupsett Land. 218 M.
NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. John Marbeck Berk. 91 John Mason ibid. 93 Thomas Magnus
Notting. 320 Sir Henry Martin Land. 214 Gregory Martin Suss. 111 Richard Martin
Devon. 275 William Martin Alan de Marton Berk. 104 (...), Daughter to King
Edward I. Berk. 88 Philip Ma^pas Land. 232 Queen Mary Kent 66 Mary, Daughter to
King Charles I. Westminst. 238 Mary. Daughter to King Edward I. Berk. 88 Mary.
Daughter to King Henry VIII. Kent 66 Mary, Daughter to King James ibid. 67 Lady
Margaret, Countess of Richmond Berk. 115 Maud, Countess of Northumberland Cumb.
222 Simon Firz-Mary Land. 228 Walter Male-clerk Cumb. 225 John Mar, alias
Marrey York. 207 George Marsh Lanc. 108 and Chesh. 188 John Marshal Worc. 175
Stephen Marshal Hunt. 52 Adam of Marsh Summers. 27 Matthew of We^minst. 242
Tobias Matthew Summers. 34 John May Suff. 61 Thomas May Suff. 110 John Matthew
Buck. 137 Andrew Marvail Cambr. 159 Roger de Martivall Leic. 129 Hugh of
Manchester Lanc. 114 Sir John Markham Notting. 317 William Mansfield ibid. 318
John Maundrell Wilt. 148 Sir Halvatheus Maulever, alias Mallevorer York. 221
and Warw. 120 William Makilsfeild Chesh. 174 Thomas Maldon Essex 333 Henry
Marny ibid. 346 Sir Henry Maynard ibid. 347 Perotine Massey Hant. 5 John
Mandevile Hertf. 26 Ralph of Maidenstan Kent. 70 Sir Roger Manwood ibid. 76
Robert Mascall Shrop. 5 and Sussex 113 Leonard Maw Suff. 61 Richard Mayo, alias
Mayhow Wilt. 150 Richard Mayhowe ibid. ibid. Oliver of Malmesbury ibid. 154
William of Malmesbury Walter de Merton Surr. 81 John de Metingham Suff. 64 St.
Meliorus Cornw. 199 Joseph Mede Essex 334 Simon Mepham Kent. 71 William de
Melton York. 195 Sir Christopher Metcalfe ibid. 222 Rowland Merrick Angles. 19
Ambrose Merlin Carmar. 29 -- Michell Wilt. 158 Sir Hugh Middleton Denb. 36
David Middleton Chesh. 189 Sir Henry Middleton Walter Mildmey Essex 335 Thomas
Milles Kent 82 Anthony Milemay Northamp. 300 St. Milburgh Shrop. 3 Thomas
Mitton ibid. 16 John of Milverton Summers. 35 William Minors Staff. 44 Sir
Thomas More Land. 208 and Dorset. 289 Margaret More Land. 209 Peter Morwing
Linc. 167 George Monox Land. 233 Sir William Mounson Linc. 163 John Mordant
Bedf. 105 Thomas Morton York. 229 John Morton Dorset. 279 Robert Morton Richard
Montague Buck. 132 James Montague Northamp. 284 Edward Montague ibid. 287 and
293 Sir Henry Montague ibid. 289 Guido de Mona Anglesey 18 George Mountain
York. 199 Fines Morison Linc. 167 Sir Richard Morisin Essex 327 Sir John
Mortimer Heref. 46 Edmund Mortimer Suff. 56 Lady Mohun Summers. 30 William Mohun
Cornw. 211 John Molle Devon. 250 George Moncke ibid. 259 Thomas De la More
Gloc. 358 S^r William Molineux Lanc. 113 John Mountgomery Essex 339 Je^y of
Monmouth Monm. 50,52 John of ibid. 50 Thomas of ibid. 53 Henry of Monmouth
Radnor. 59 John Mush York. 213 Richard Mulcaster Westmor. 139 N.
NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. Sir Robert Naunton Suff. 64 Thomas of Newmarket Cambr. 153
John Newburgh Doro. 289 William of Newborough York. 206 Cicely Nevil^ Durh. 291
Bishop Ralph Nevill Bishop Alexander Nevill ibid. 293 Bishop Robert Nevill
Bishop George Nevill Hugo de Nevill Essex 342 John de Nevill Thomas Nevile Kent
99 Anne Nevill Warw. 118 St. Neots Essex 323 Hugh of St. Neots Hant. 50
Humphrey Necton Suff. 67 Thomas Neale Gloc. 359 Richard Neile Westminst. 241 --
Nesta Breck. 23 Sir Richard Newport Shrop. 16 Alexander Nequam Hertf. 25 Sir
Francis Nethersole Kent 85 Sir Aug. Nicholls Northamp. 288 Ambrose Nicholas
Hunt. 53 Alexander Nowell Lanc. 115 Henry Noel Leic. 137 Martin Noell Staff. 47
Edward Norgate Cambr. 161 Henry Norrice Berk. 109 Sir Edward North Cambr. 168
Thomas Norton Summers. 35 Sir John Norton Kent 95 Lord Henry Norris Sir Thomas
Norris Sir John Norris Sir Henry Norris Oxf. 334 and 335 Sir Edward Norris
Maximilian Norris William Norris William Nottingham Notting. 318 William Noy
Cornw. 200 John de Northwood Kent 91 Richard Northall Middl. 182 -- Nothelmus
Land. 216 Richard of Northamp. 283 Adam of John of Northamp. 289 O.
NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. Henry of Oatlands Surrey 79 Nicholas Ockham ibid. 85
William Ockham Owen Oglethorpe Oxf. 333 Sir Thomas Offley Chesh. 191 Sir John
Oldcastle Heref. 36 Hugh Oldham Lanc. 109 Adam de Orlton Heref. 37 St. Osith
Essex 323 St. Oswald Shrop. 3 John Overall Suff. 61 William Oughtred Buck. 137
Sir Thomas Overbury Gloc. 359 John Owen Northamp. 285 Sir Roger Owen Shrop. 16
John of Oxford Oxf. 337 Robert of Oxford P.
NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. William Pagett Land. 210 George Palin Chesh. 182 Edward
Palmer Gloc. 362 James Palmer Westminst. 444 Julius Palmer Warw. 120 John
Palmer Henry Palmer Sussex 112 Thomas Palmer Eusebius Pagett Northamp. 290 Sir
John Packington Worc. 181 William Packington ibid. 174 Katherine Parr Northamp.
282 and Westmorl. 136 Sir Thomas Parr Northamp. 298 Sir William Parr bis Thomas
Parr Shrop. 11 Richard Parr Lanc. 113 Richard Parry Flint. 39 Stephen
Patrington York. 196 Henry Parker ibid. 208 Richard Park^r Camb. 159 Matthew
Paris ibid. 156 William Paston 249 Sir Clement Paston Norf. 253 Sir William
Paston 263 Peter Patesh^l Northamp. 290 Martin de Pateshall ibid. 286 John
Paulet Summers. 32 Walter Parsons Staff. 48 John Paschall Suff. 59 John
Parkhurst Surrey 81 William Perkins Warw. 125 William Pemble Sussex 109 John
Peckham ibid. 101 Sir William Pelham ibid. 106 Peter Petow Warw. 120 Thomas
Peverell Suff. 59 Robert Person Summers. 29 Anthony Persons Berk. 90 Robert
Perpoint Notting. 323 Dorothy Petre Essex 330 John Peach Kent 95 Thomas Penketh
Lanc. 114 Andrew Perne Norf. 259 William Piercy York. 196 Sir William Piercy
ibid. 222 Regina^d Peacock Wales 9 Petrok ibid. 13 Robertus Perscrutator, alias
the Searcher York. 206 John Plough Notting. 319 Edmund Plowden Shrop. 6 George
Plantagenet ibid. 2 Edward Plantagenet Warw. 119 Marg. Plantagenet Wilt. 146
Richard Plantagenet York. 191 Thomas Plantagenet ibid. 192 Henry Plantagenet
Monm. 53 Richard Plantagenet Northamp. 282 and Shrop. 2 Thomas Phaier Wales 12
Dr. -- Phillips ibid. 11 John Philpot Hants. 5 and Kent 82 Sir John Philpot
ibid. 84 John Phreas Land. 215 John Pitts Hants. 13 Agnes Pirest, or Pressed
Devon. 249 Hugh Pirry Gloc. 362 John Pilkinton Lanc. 110 Peter of Rippon York.
206 William Platt Land. 224 Thomas Playfere Kent 85 Thomas Playford ibid. 83
Robert Plympton Devon. 263 Sir Thomas Pope Land. 223 Barnaby Potter Westmor.
138 Christopher Potter ibid. 140 George Porter Cumber. 220 Sir Lewis Pollard
Devon. 256 Henry de la Pomeroy ibid. 265 John Points Gloc. 366 John Poynet
Kent. 72 Sir Edward Poynings ibid. 73 Richard Poor Wilt. 149 William de la Pole
York. 215 Reginald Pole Staff. 40 Sir John Popham Summers. 25 Sir John Portman
ibid. 24 Sir Amyas Powlet ibid. ibid. William Powlet Hants. 8 Sir John Poulney
Leic. 136 John Poultney ibid. 137 William Prude Kent 98 John Prideaux Devon.
254 Roger de Prideaux Cornw. 209 John Preston Northamp. 291 Sir Amias Preston
Summers. 26 Elvodugus Probas Flint. 39 Sir John Puckering York. 201 Sir William
Purchase Cambr. 160 George Purient Heart. 32 Robert Pullen Oxf. 332 Q.
NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. Francis Quarles Essex 334 R.
NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. Ralph Radcliffe Chesh. 180 Thomas Ratcliffe Essex 330 and
Leic. 132 William Ratcliffe Linc. 168 El^as de Radnor Radn. 59 Gulielmus de
Radnor Thomas Ram Berk. 93 William Ramsey Hunt. 51 Sir John Ramsden York. 224
Ranulphus, or Randall of Chester Chesh. 190 Thomas Randolph Northamp. 291
William de Raleigh Devon. 252 Sir Walter Rawleigh ibid. 261 William Rastall
Land. 212 John Rastall ibid. 219 Richard Rawson ibid. 232 Thomas Ravis Surr. 82
William of Reivaulx York. 205 Ealred of Reivaulx Philip Repington Wales 9
Robert Record ibid. 12 William of Reading Berk. 92 Philip de Repingdon Derb.
232 Hugh of Reading Berk. 95 John Reinolds Devon. 264 Michael Reneger Hants. 11
William Read Kent. 71 Peter Read Norf. 255 Margaret Rich Berk. 89 Alice Rich
Robert Rich ibid. 95 Richard Rich Hants. 8 and Land. 232 Sir Rice ap-Thomas
Caerm. 27 King Richard I. Oxf. 329 King Richard III. Cumb. 228 and Cornw. 210
Richardus Comes Devon. 268 Richardus Anglicus Land. 215 Sir Richard of Which
Worc. 167 Sir Thomas Richardson Norf. 252 John Richardson Cambr. 158 and Chesh.
176 St. Richard of Which Worc. 167 Sir John Rhese, alias ap-Rice Wales 15 Sir
George Ripley York. 203 George Ripley Surrey 85 Sir Thomas Ridley Cambr. 158
Sir Thomas Ryves Dorc. 282 Edward Rishton Lanc. 118 Peter of Rippon York. 206
Sir Richard Roberts Cornw. 211 Thomas Roberson York. 209 Robert the Scribe
ibid. 205 Henry Robinson Cumb. 219 John Rogers Lanc. 107 Robert Rogers Dorset.
283 Roger of Chester Chesh. 188 Roger Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield Berk.
104 John Rochford Linc. 172 Sir John Rochford ibid. 174 Roger the Cistertian
Devon. 263 Thomas Rokeby York. 221, 218 Sir Thomas Roper Land. 213 John Rouse
Warw. 125 Richard Role, alias Hampole York. 193 John Roman Cornw. 205 and York.
228 Henry Roulands Caernar. 32 Anthony Rouse Cornw. 211 John Roper Kent 96
Dennis Rolls Devon. 272 Rosamund Heref. 41 Richard Rothwell Lanc. 122 Sir Ralph
Rowlet Essex 346 Henry Fitz-Roy ibid. 321 Sir Francis Russel Bedf. 125 and
Northumb. 314 John Russel Hants. 6 and Dorces. 281 John Russel Worc. 181 Thomas
Rudborne Hertf. 21 John Ruthall Gloc. 355 S^. Rumald Buck. 128 Helias Rubeus
Cambr. 157 St. Ruffinus Staff. 40 S.
NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. Thomas Sackvill Sussex 105 Richard Sackvill 112 Arnold
Savage Kent. 94 Thomas Savage Chesh. 175 John Savage 187 Edmund Savage, alias
Bonner Worc. 169 Sir John Savace ibid. 179 Andrew Sackvill Surrey 92 Richard
Sackvill Sir Robert Sackvill Sir John Sackvill Sir Jordan Sackvill Johan. de
Sacro Bosco York. 206 Salkeld Cumb. 221 Sir Henry Savill York. 210 Sir George
Savill ibid. 224 Goodwin of Salisbury Wilt. 155 Johannes Sarisburiensis ibid.
149 Sutton of Salisbury ibid. 157 John Saltmarsh York. 212 Salephilax the Bard
Wales 13 Sir Ralph Sadlier Middl. 183 Henry Saltrey Hunt. 50 William Salisbury
Denb. 34 Fulke of Samford Summers. 22 John of Samford Nicholas de Sandford
Shrop. 15 Sir Edwyn Sandys Worc. 174 George Sandys York. 212 Edwyn Sandys Lanc.
110 James Sands Staff. 47 Nicholas Sanders Surr. 86 Laurence Sanders Warw. 120
Henry of Sandwich Kent 71 Robert Samuel Suff. 58 William Sauter Land. 203
Gilbert Segrave Leic. 128 Thomas Scroope Suff. 69 Richard Scroope York. 196 Sir
Jervas Scroop Linc. 174 Robert the Scribe York. 205 Thomas Scott ibid. 214 John
Scott Kent 95 William Scott ibid. 94 John Scotus Northumb. 307 Gilbert de
Sempringham Linc. 154 William Sengham Land. 216 John Seldom Suss. 110 (...)
Sclater Bedf. 117 John Scrivener Buck. 129 Richard Senhouse Cumber. 219 William
Sevenoake Kent 84 John Seintleger ibid. 94 St. Sewall York. 227 Thomas Seymore
Wilt. 151 Edward Seymore Jane Seymore ibid. 146 Sir Francis Seymore ibid. 164
Robert the Searcher, alias Perscrutator York. 207 Sertor of Wales Wales W^les
William Shakespeare Warw. 126 Edmund Sheffield Linc 166 John Shorditch Middl.
188 -- Shamborn Norf. 264 Robert of Shrew^bury Shrop. 4 Ralph of Shrewsbury
Shrop. 4 Robert of Shrewsbury 8 Sir Anthony Shirly Sussex 107 Sir Robert Shirly
Sir Thomas Shirly 108 William Shirwood Durh. 297 Robert Sherbo^n Hants. 6 John
of Shepey Kent 71 Anthony Shugburgh Warw. 133 Nathaniel Shute York. 211 Jo^ah
Shute Richard Sharp Summers. 34 William Siveyer Durh. 297 Edward Simonds Her^f.
28 Sir Henry Sidney Kent 74 Sir Philip Sidney 75 Francis Sidney 85 Humphrey
Sidenham Summers. 29 Richard Sibbs Su^. 69 Robert Skinner Northamp. 285 John
Skeleton Cumb. 221 and Norf. 257 Sir William de Skipwith, bis Linc. 160 William
Skipwith Leic. 142 John Skuish Cornw. 204 Sir James Skudamore Heref. 47 William
Sleightholm York. 193 Sir Henry Sl^gsby ibid. 223 Henry Smith Surrey 87 Sir
Thomas Smith Berk. 94 and Essex 328 John Smith Chesh. 179 William Smith 184
Miles Smith, D. D. Heref. 38 Richard Smith Worc. 175 William Smith Lanc. 119
John Smith 120 Henry Smith Leic. 134 Robert Smith 136 Robert Southwell Suff. 71
Laurence Sommercote Suss. 108 Sophia, Daughter to King James Kent 67 Robert
Sommercoat Linc. 155 William of Somerset Wi^t. 154 Maurice Sommerset Summers. 27
John Spicer Wilt. 148 John Spine Summers. 35 Thomas Spring Suff. 71 John Speed
Chesh. 181 John Sprint Gloc. 360 Miles Spencer ^estmor. 140 Edmund Spencer
Land. 219 William Spencer Northamp. 299 Robert Spencer 300 Thomas Sparks Linc.
167 Charles Stuart, Son to James D. of York ^stminst. 240 John Still Linc. 158
Nicholas Stanford ibid. 165 Sir William Stamford (...). 183 Sir Simon Steward
Cambr. 169 Henry Stafford Breck. 23 and Staff, 45 Edmund Stafford Staff. 45
John Stafford John Stafford Dorc. 279 Humphrey Stafford Leic. 141 Henry
Standish Lanc. 109 John Standish 114 Thomas Stanley Staff. 53 James Stanley
Lanc. 109 John Stratford Warw. 121 Ralph Stratford Robert Stratford William
Fitz-Stephens Land. 216 John Stow ibid. 219 Alexander Strange ibid. 224 Egid.
Strangwayes Dorces. 289 Sir Humphrey Starkey Chesh. 177 John Stathom Derb. 233
John Stanbery Devon. 253 Thomas Stapleton Suss. 111 Sir Robert Stapleton York.
223 William of Strickland Westmor. 137 Richard Stock York. 231 Simon Stock
Kent 80 Matthew Stoakes Buck. 135 Thomas Stuckely Devon. 258 Walter de
Stuchesly Gloc. 363 Thomas Sternhold Hants. 11 -- Stumps Wilt. 157 Henry Sturmy
ibid. 161 Sir Richard Sutton Chesh. 182 Richard Sutton Linc. 168 Sir George
Summers Dorc. 282 Simon Sudbury, alias Tibald Suff. 59 Richard Sulcard Westmin.
242 T.
NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. Sir John Talbot Shrop. 7, 12 Richard Talbot ibid. 5 Sir
Gilbert Talbot 16 Sir Edmund Talbot York. 221 Sir Edward Talbot, alias Kelley
Worc. 172 Thomas Tarlton Staff. 47 William Tavernour Oxf. 344 Rowland Tailour
Suff. 57 Thomas Tailour York. 210 Robert Testwood Berk. 96 Hester Temple Buck.
138 John Terer Chesh. 192 Alan of Tewksbury Gloc. 358 Thomas Thirlby Cambr. 153
Robert Thorn Summers. 36 Sir Nicholas Throckmorton Warw. 123 Sir Arthur
Throgmorton Northam. 301 John Thornborogh Wilt. 151 Sir John Thin ibid. 164
Francis Thin Kent. 82 St. Theliah Merion. 43 Sir Rice ap-Thomas Carmar. 27
Thomas of Woodstock, Son to King* Edward III. Oxf. 330 Thomas, Son to Edward I.
York. 191 Thomas ap-William, etc. Flint. 40 St. Theorithoid Essex 3^2 John
Thorpe Norf. 257 Simon Thurway Cornw. 203 John Tiptoft Cambr. 155 Sir James
Tirrel Cornw. 210 John Tyrril Essex 338 Gervase of Tilbury ibid. 332 Sir
Frederick Tilney Linc. 161 Dr. Tighe ibid. 167 Christopher Tie Westmin. 244
Thomas Tisdall Oxf. 341 St. Tibba Rutl. 347 Simon Tibald, alias Sudbury Suff.
59 Cuthbert Tonstall York. 197 Robert Tomson Hants. 10 John Towers Norf. 149
Robert Townson Cambr. 153 Sir Roger Townsend Norf. 272 John Towers ibid. 249
Michael Tregury Cornw. 199 John Tregonwell ibid. 202 John Trevisa Cornw. 204
Bartholomew Traheron ibid. ibid. Nicholas Tremaine Devon. 266 Andrew Tremaine
Edward Trotman Gloc. 356 Sir William Tracy ibid. ibid. Richard Tracy Gloc. 359
Sir Edmund de Trafford Lanc. 122 Elias de Trekingham Linc. 164 George Trigg
ibid. 168 -- Trestram Middl. 186 Sir Thomas Tressam Northamp. 300 Thomas
Tressam William Turner Northumb. 305 William Tucker Devon. 275 John Tuckvile
ibid. 276 James Turbervil Dorc. 279 Richard Turpin Leic. 133 Thomas Tusser
Essex 334 Sir Brian Tuke ibid. 346 Roger Twiford Middl. 184 William Twisse
Berk. 96 V.
NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. Robertus de Vaus Cumber. 225 Sir Nicholas Vaux Northamp.
298 Walter Vaghan Wilt. 164 Richard Vaughan Carnar. 31 Henry Vavasor York. 222
Albericus de Veir Bedf. 121 Veal Cor^w. 205 John Vernon Derb. 244 Sir Francis
Vere Essex 331 Sir Horace Vere Henry Vere Aubrey de Vere ibid. 333 Henry Veer
Northamp. 298 Sir Robert Venile Norf. 252 John Vesty, alias Harman Warw. 122
Richard Verney ibid. 133 George Villiers Leic. 130 Richard Vines ibid. 134
Machell Vivan Northumb. 308 Thomas Vipont Westmor. 136 Robert de Vipont ibid.
141 Vinarius Capellanus Norf. 269 Richard Ulverston Lanc. 114 Sir Henry Umpton
Berk. 94 Sir Edward Umnpton ibid. 110 John Underhill Oxf. 333 Thomas Underhill
Warw. 130 Nicholas Upton Devon. 264 St. Ursula Cornw. 199 W.
NAMES. SHIRE. PAGE. John Watson Worc. 170 Robert Watson Norw. 276 John Warner
Westmin. 241 John Walch Linc. 174 Sertor of Wales Wales 10 Richard Walsh Worc.
181 John Wallis, or Welsh ibid. 174 Henry Wakefield York. 196 Armigell Waad
ibid. 202 Robert Walby York. 229 John Walby 230 Simon Ward ibid. 218 Samuel
Ward Suff. 70 and Durh. 298 John Walter Heref. 41 Walter Bishop of Carlisle
Cumb. 225 Robert Fi^z-Walter Essex 330 Matilda Fitz-Walter ibid. 336 Sir John
Walter Shrop. 7 Richard of Wallingford Berk. 95 George Walker Lanc. 118 John of
Waltham Essex 325 Roger of Waltham ibid. 333 Sir Isaac Wake Northamp. 286
Nicholas Wadham Summers. 30


