THE FULL TRIAL BETWEEN Henry Duke of Norfolk, PLAINTIFF, AND John German,
Esquire, DEFENDANT, AT THE King's Bench Bar at Westminster, On Thursday,
November. xxiiii. in Michaelmas-Term, 1693.

LONDON,

Printed in the Year, 1693.

THE TRIAL, etc,
Council for the Plaintiff.
Mr. Attorney General. Mr. Solliciter General. Mr. Sergeant Levins. Mr.
Sergeant Thompson. Mr. Sergeant Burch, and Mr. Bannister.
Council for the Defendant.
Mr. Sergeant Pemberton. Mr. Sergeant Tremaine, Sir William Williams. Sir
Thomas Powis. Mr. Sergeant Girdler. Sir Bartholomew Shore. Mr. Jones.
Secondary. Crier, call the Defendant, John German, Esquire


Crier. John German, come forth, and make your Defense, or else you will be
taken by your Default.


Council: We appear


Secondary, Crier, Call the Jury.


Crier. Gentlemen of the Jury, answer to your Names.


Sir Michael Hen^age, Knt. Sir Thomas Gra^tham, Knt. Sir Charles Hump^revel Knt
Sir William Hill, Knt. Ralph Haughtry, Esquire Robert Shesfield, Esquire Hugh Squire,
Esquire John Cu^gs, Esquire Charles Prior. Richard Craddock. William Withers, Esquire
Richard Pag^, Esquire
Clerk of the Papers. HENRY Duke of Norfolk is Plaintiff, and John German,
E^que is Defendant: The Record sets forth, For that he, the said Duke now^s,
and for several Years last past, has been, and more especial: for the space
of Four Years last past, enstated one of the Knights of the G^rrer, and Lord
Marshal of England, and has been of good Name, Fame, and Convers^tion; and
has not only gained the good Will, Esteem. Credit, and Affection of all Their
Majesty's Liege People, as well Neighbors, and others: But also of the King
and Queen, who chose him to be one of Their Majesty's Privy-Councel. The
Defendant not being ignorant of the Premises, but endeavoring to grieve the
said Duke; and not only to bring him into Disgrace and Contempt with the late
King James the II. and his Subjects, but also with the King and Queen that now
is, and all their Liege Subjects. The First day of August, in the Second Year
of the late King James the Second, and diverse times afterward, the Desendant,
without the leave of the said Duke, has unlawfully kept Company with the said
Duchess; and by Lascivious Tricks, and Obsequious Glances, Winks and Nodds,
and other Lascivious Ways and Means, and by fair Inticements and (...),
committed Adultery with the said Duchess, and caused her for to commit
Adultery, and caused the said Duchess for to absent from the s^id Duke; and
the said Duchess, against the Will of the said Duchess, did detain; by reason
whereof, he is not only deprived of the Society of his Wife, and of other
Advantages in managing his Domestic Affairs, but also he the said Duke, being
so troubled and disquieted in his Mind, that he could not attend the necessary
Affairs of this Realm as he ought: And this he lays to his D^mage 100000 l.

The Defendant pretends, That he is not guilty of any thing within this Six
Years.

The Plaintiff he comes, and replyeth, and says, That he is guilty within
this Six Years.

Your Issue is to try whether he was guilty within this Six Years, before the
26th. Day of May last past.

Mr. Bannister. May it please Your Lordship, and You Gentlemen of the Jury;
This is an Action brought by Henry, Duke of Norfolk, against one John German.
The Plantiff sets forth, That the First day of August, in the Second Year of
the Reign of the late King James, the Desendant did by unlawful ways and means
entice away his Duchess, by which means he had not the benefit of her Society;
and by his Lascivious Conversation, committed Adultery with her, and caused her
to commit Adultery; and this he lays to his Damage 100000 l. If we prove he
did so, we hope you will give us good Damages and Cost.

May it please your Lordship, and you Gentlemen of the Jury: This is a very
Melancholy thing to be told; yet it is fit the Age we live in, may know it, so
as the Offender may be punished. The Duke of Norfolk is the first Duke of
England, Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter, Lord High Marshal of
England, and one of the Lords of Their Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council,
and he to be so abused! perhaps none sound any such Cause to come before any
Court.

(...) a very hard thing for (...), (...) this Case is, ^o produce strong and
pregnant Evidence; but our Proof^ are such' as I am ashamed to repeat* them,
but desire the Witnesses may tell your Lordship, and the Gentlemen of the Jury
what they know: It was not kept secret, but it was known so, as all the Kingdom
did ring of it; and how the Defendant had the Duchess frequently to his House,
and how they lived in Adultery we will take that method that is most plain.


At. Genesis My Lord, it will be necessary to give your Lordship an Account of
something of the beginning of this Matter.


L. C. I. As to the time,


Serj. Tremaine. They would make this a sort of a running Account.


Sir Will. Williams. It must be within Six Years before the 26th of May last,
if they will prove any Adultery; before it is nothing.


L. C. I. If the Witnesses be not heard, it is impossible to tell whether it be
within the Statute of Limitations.


Mr. Ius. Eyres. If we hear it, and find it out of time, then when we have
heard it, we can tell the Jury how it is, whether it be within the time they
are to take notice of.

If they open Evidence that goes beyond Six Years, I hope your Lordship will
not su^er them to do that.


Mr. Serj. Thompson. Here are Anticipation, Directions, and what not.


Attorn. Genesis We will call Witnesses if your Lordship please. Come Rowland
Owen, do you know the Duchess of Norfolk?


Rowland Owen. Yes.


Attorn. Genesis Do you know John German?


Roll. Owen. Yes, very well. I have seen him several times Dine and Sup at my
Lord Duke's House.


Attorn. Genesis Tell what Familiarity you have seen pass between the Dut^hess and
German.


Roll. Owen. I was ordered by one Henry Keamer to go down to White Hall with
Plate and T^ble-Cloath, and to go to the Blue-Posts for some things, and then
to go down to W^e-Hall; there was a Supper to be that Night, and then I went
down to White Hall. Then when I came there at my Lord Duke's Apartment, I
opened the Door; and afterward going into a Room, I saw Mr. German and the
D^chess in Be^ together, and the Duchess pushed me out, and asked me how I
durst be so imp^dent as to come in, and chid me.


Lord Ch Just. Who chid you?


Attorn. Genesis He says (my Lord) the Duchess of Norf^lk.


Serj. Tremaine; Pray when was this?


Roll. Owen. About Seven Years since.


Serj. Tremaine. Owen, you speak something of a Supper, and that you went down
to White-^ale; who gave you the Key?


Roll. Owen. One Henry Keamer.


Sir T. Powis. What, are you a Street Porter?


Roll. Owen. I am Usher of the Hall.


Attorn. Genesis You are Servant to the Duke, are you not.


Roll. Owen. Yes.


Sir T. Powis Was this at Supper that Night?


Roll. Owen. I cannot tell.


Sir T. Powis. You carried down Plates.


Roll. Owen. Yes.


Sir T. Powis. Now I ask you; This you say was Seven Years ago, who did you
tell it to?


Roll. Owen. To the Housekeeper.


Sir T. Powis. What was she?


Roll. Owen. One Mrs. Webb.


Sir T. Powis. Did you tell no body else?


Roll. Owen. No, indeed, I will not lie.


Attorn. Genesis We will call another Witness, Margaret Ellwood,

Do you know the Duchess of Norfolk?


Margaret Ellwood. Yes, my Lord.


Attorn. Genesis Do you know John Germ^ne?


Mar. Ellwood. Yes, my Lord, I did about Seven Years since* but I do not know
whether I know him now.


Attorn. Genesis Pray tell my Lord and the Jury what you know.


Mar. Ellwood. It was my Business, being Housekeeper, to look after my
Affairs, and I being called down upon some Business, I saw my Lady and German
together, and I saw my Lady in an ill posture upon the Stool; and my Lady said
to Mr. German, kick her.


Serj Thompson. Tell how you saw her.


Mar. Ellwood. Why, when I saw her, I saw her bare Knee, and German was near
to her; and then I came away, she being angry, I came from her.


Serj Thompson. Was Germaine's Breeches down?


Mar. Ellwood. His Breeches was down, and his Hat and Sword lay upon the Table.


Attorn. Genesis What posture was the Duchess in?


Mar. Ellwood. I saw her bare Knee.


Attorn. Genesis Was she lying down?


Mar. Ellwood. Yes, and the Saturday after I did see Mr. German come, and he
went to Bed to her.


L. Chapter Ius. How do you know that?


Mar Ellwood. I opened the first Door, and looked through the Key hole of the
other Door, and saw them go to Bed.


L. Chapter Ius. How do you know he was in Bed with her?


Mar. Ellwood. Why, I saw them; for there was a Wax Candle in the Chamber, and
I could see them easily.


L. C. I. What time was this you saw them in bed, had they no Courtai^?


Marg. Ellwood. Yes, my Lord, they had, and th^ugh they were drawn of both
sides the bed; they left them open at the foot:


L. C. Ius. Did you ever pretend this before?


Marg. ^llwood. Yes, I did.


L* C. I. Did you ever Swear this before?


M Ellwood. Yes, my Lord, I did in the Parliament House.


Sir T. Powis. You have lived in several places since, did you never ^ell any
bodies Servants?


M. Ell. To no body, but to Mrs. Webb, and my Lady next morning gave orders
that I should be put away, but she heard no more of it, and I staid.


Attorn. Genesis Do you know any thing else?


Mar. Elwood. I was making my Lady's Bed, with one Anne Burt^, and I found Mr
Germaine's Handkerchief and Ruffles in the Bed all at one time.


At. Genesis Do you remember any Shirt and Waste-coat that were found?


Mar. Ellwood. Yes.


L. Chapter Iu. Did you find his Handkercheif and Ruffles in my Ladies Bed?


Mar. Ellwood. Yes.


L. C. I. Did you never see him come down S^airs?


Mar. Ellwood. We set Traps for him ^o ^all over, but he never came down to
fall over them.


Serj. Tremaine. Do you know of any thing but in the first year of King James?


Mar. Ellwood. No, not I.


At. Genesis We will call another Witness, Mrs. Benskyn. I thin^ Mrs. Benskyn you
are married.


Mrs. Bensk^n. Yes.


At. Genesis What is your Christian Name?


Mrs Bens^yn. Anne.


At. Gen* Pray tell my Lord, and the Jury, what you know?


Anne Ben^kyn. My Lord, I was House-Maid and Servant to the Duchess in the
first Year of King James's Reign; about Barthotholomew-Tide, my Lady Duchess
went to London with German, Nell Gwin, and some others, and we did not expect
them to come home that night, but she did; and after they went to Supper, and
after that they went to Cards, and after that my Lady Duchess had a great mind
to go to bed, and desired us to make her a fire, and so we did; and my Lady
went to bed, and said, she thought the King and Queen should send for me, I
would not rise till Eleven a Clock to morrow morning, so the Candles were put
out, and two Foot men stood to wait; Because, Mr. Germain he used to be
Generous to the Servants, and they waited till two a Clock in the morning, and
I asked them next morning if Mr. Ge^main had been there, and they said no, for
they had been there all the while, and if he came ^e could not go, for they
said, we have laid Chairs and Stools in the way, that if he came he might fall
over them; and the next morning, I saw a man with a Paper-Box in his hand, and
he asked me for Mr. Germains Chambers or Lodgings, I told him, I knew none he
had there. My Lord, The next day my Lady Duchess ordered me to make her a
fire, which coming to do, Mrs. Kniveton was Combing of her head, and Nell Guin
came in, and said, Good morrow to your Grace, how did you rest last night, she
said well. and one Coll. Cornwell came in, and said to my Lady Duchess, how
does Mr. Germain do?. And she said, why do you ask me, and Coll. Cornwall said,
he did not lie at home last night; then Nell Guin said, we shall see him come
out by and by like a drowned Mouse, and so I went to make my Lady Duchess Bed,
and found a Handkerchief and Ruffles. And Mrs. Kniveson came and said, come
hither and I will show you a sight, and when I came, there lay a Shirt and
Wastcoat, and I took them away, because it was a place that any body as they
came, might see them, and my Lord Duke was not in Town.


Attor. Genesis How came you to take notice of the Ruffiles, and Handkerchief?


An. Benskyn. Why, Mrs Kniveton, said, it was a man's Ruffles.


Sir Tho. Powis. How long was this since? in 1685? Had there not been an Appeal?


Anne Benskin. Yes, there was.


Serj. Burch. Was there any thing remarkable in the Bed?


Anne Benskin. The Bed was stained.


Sir Tho. Powis. What is your Name now? Benskin?


Anne Benskin. Yes.


Sir Tho. Powis. What is your other Name?


Anne Banskin. Burton.


Sr Tho. Powis. Was you ever Married?


Anne Benskir. Sir, You know I could have no other Name, if I was not Married.


Sir Tho. Powis. You have Lived in several Places?


Anne Benskin. I Lived with my Lord of Clare, and my Lord Aires.


Serj. Burch. Did German go by any other Name, than he goes by now?


Anne Benskin. Not as I know of.


A^t. Genesis We will call another Witness, one Th^mar Hudson.


At. Genesis Tho. Hudson, Do you know the Dutehess of Norfolk, and Mr. German?


Tho. Hudson. Yes.


At. Genesis Pray, what you observe betwixt the Duchess of Norfolk and German?


Tho. Huds^n. Sir, I was a^ Servant to Mr. Scroggs, who was the Dutchess's
Steward; and so, he going away on other Business, I was left Butler at Windsor:
so there came two Captais, to play at Cards; and one of the Captains asked, If
Mr. German lay ther^? I told him, No. Now, his Man, as I heard after, had
brought German a Shir^ and Waste-Coat^r For, as soon as his Man was gone, we
found the Waste-Coat and soul Shirt: And that same Day the Datchess treated the
Queen at Windsor?


At. Gen When war this?


Tho. Hudson. It was in 1685.


Sir Tho. Powis. Was this in the Year 1685?


Tho. Hudson. Yes, it was so; for I thok it down in my Book.


Mr. Jove's. Did yhu swear all this before the House of Lords?


Tho. Hudson. Yes; but only the Day of the Month I could not well remember
then; (...) Ire^shed my Memo^y since:


Serj. Thompson. We will call Mrs. Hastings and Elizabeth Knave.


Serj. Thompson. Mrs. Frances Hastings, Do you know the Duchess of Norfolk, or
Mr. German.


Mrs. Hastings. I know nothing of them, but only the lay at my House.


At Gen Did you know Mr. German?


Mrs. Hastings. I saw him but once.


At. Genesis Did you ever see Mr. German lie at your House?


Mrs. Hastings. Yes.


A^t. Genesis When.


Mrs. Hastings. The Pirst Year of King James's Reign.


At. Genesis How long?


Mrs. Hastings. A whole Summer:


At. Genesis We will call another Witness, one Elizabeth Knave.


At. Genesis Elizabeth Knave, Did you ever Live with Mrs. Hastings?


Eliz. Knave. Yes.


At. Genesis How long?


Eliz. Knave. A whole Summer.


At. Genesis Did you ever see the Duchess of Norfolk?


Eliz. Knave. Never.


At. Genesis Did you ever see the Duchess and Mr. German together?


Eliz. Knave. No, but that Mr. Germaine's Servant said, It was the Duchess of
Norfolk, that was with Mr. German: And as she and I was making the Bed, I
found an Handkerchief, m^rkt with an M, and a Coronet.


At. Cen. In whose Bed was this?


Eliz. Kuave. Why? ir was in Mr. Germaine's Bed.


At. Genesis How long since?


Eliz. Knave. In the First Year of King James's R^ign.


L. C. Just. Woman, Did you find the Handkerchief?


Eliz. Knave. Yes, my Lord.


L. C. Just. What Mark had it?


Eliz Knave. An M, and a Coronet.


Serj. Thompson You see, how far we are gone?


L. C. Just. All without the Statute.


Serj. Thompson. We shall show to your Lordship, and to the Gentlemen of the
Jury, That my Lady Duchess went by the Name of my Lady Bateman, and Mr.
German went by the Name of her Brother; and he did take an House at Fox-Hall,
beyond the Water; the Man's Name was Scriber: And she lived in that Place for
Three Quarters of a Year, and more; and then Mr. German came constantly to
her; And it was known after, to be the Duchess of Norfolk, though she wens by
another Name, and her Servant Henry Keamer also: This Keam^r was he, that the
First Witness, gave him a Key to the Chambers at White Hall.


At. Genesis Peter Scribler. Pray do you know oue M. German?


Mr. Scriber. Yes, Sir.


At. G^n. Pray did he come to take any House of you?


Peter Scriber. Yes, Sir.


At. Genesis How long since?


Peter Scriber. Above Two years since.


At. Genesis Who did he take it for?


Peter Scriber. He told me for a couple of Ladies that came from Holland; As he
told me.


At. Genesis Pray by what Name went they?


Peter Scribler. One went by the Name of Mrs. Brian, another by the Name of
Madam Bateman,


At. Genesis Did you know any Gent. called Mr, Germain, that lived near the
Cockpit.


Peter Scribler. Indeed Sir, I know not where he lives. I have seen one walking
in the Garden that went bv the Name of my Lady Batemans Brother.


L. C. (...) Just. Where is your House?


Peter Scriber. At Fox Hall.


L. C. I. Who paid you the Rent?


Peter Sc^iber. One half y^ar (my Lord) was paid by my L^dy Bateman.


L. C. Just. What ^ervants had she?


Peter Serio^r. She had one that went by the Name of Goodman.


At. Genesis We will call another Witness.

Thomas Lloyd.

Do you know the Lady Bateman, and Mr. John German?


Thomas Ll. Yes Sir.


At Gen How often have you seen Mr. John German at Fox Hall?


Tho. Ll. Often.


At. Genesis Who was the Lady Bateman?


Tho Ll. The Duchess of Norfolk.


At. Genesis How do you know that?


T^. Ll. Because I have seen her coming out of the House of Lords and they said
it was the Duchess of N^rfolk.


At. Genesis Are yo^ sure o- that?


Thomas Ll. Yes Sir.


At, Genesis What is he?


T^o. Ll. I know not, but I heard after, his Name was Heaven, but when he
w^ited of the Lady Bateman, he went by the Name of Goodm^n. About Michaelmas
last was 12 months; it was I Sir, Mr. German, that Summer was walking with
the Lady Bateman.


Sir William Williams. You say you saw Mr. Germain, walking that Summer, with
the Lady Bat^maine. What Summer was that that?


Tho. L. L. Why, Summer was a twelve month?


Sir William Williams. Are you sure it was within 2, 3, or 4 Years.


Tho. L. L. Yes, that I am sure of.


Sir William Williams. Was it the beginning or the ending of S^mmer.


Tho. L. L. It was about the height of Summer.


At. Genesis We will call another VVitness, one Robert Henningway^


At. Genesis Where do you live?


Robert Hen^way. At Fox-hall.


At. Genesis Do you know one that went by the name of the Lady Bateman.


R. H. Yes, Sir.


At. Genesis Do you know how it was?


R. H. The Duchess of Norfolk.


At. Genesis Do you know the Duchess of Norfolk if you saw her?


R. H. Yes.


At. Genesis And are you sure that she that went by the name of the Lady Bateman,
is the Dutchejs of Norfolk.


R H. Yes.


At. Genesis Do you know one Mr. Goodman, that waited upon the Lady Bateman.


R. H. Yes.


At. Genesis Was that his right name.


R. H No, his name was K^amer.


L. C. I. Where did you see her?


R. H. Near her Fathers House, my Lord Peterboroughes.


L. C. I. Why, how did you know she was the Duchess of Norfolk.


R. H. Why, all that ever I knew* said she was so?


At. Genesis Where did you see the Duchess of Norfolk?


R. H I have seen her in the House, and out of the House.


L. C. I. What Occasions had you to observe her;


At. Genesis He was a Guardian employed there.

We will call another witness Andrew Anderson.

Do you know the Duchess of Norfolk.


Andrew A^derson. Never otherwise, but by the name of the Lady Bateman


At. Genesis Do you know a Lady that went by the name of the Lady Bateman


A. Anderson. Yes.


At. Genesis Do you know one Mr Germain


A. Anderson. I never saw him, but he went by the name of my Lad^es Brother, I
have carried him o^t times by water to Fox* Hall.


At. Genesis Have you carried that Gentleman that lives next door to the Cock*
Pi^, by matter to Fox-Hall.


A. Anderson. Yes.


At. Genesis By what name did he go by.


A. Anderson. By the the name of my Ladies Brother.


At, Genesis What is his name, or by what name does he go by Nor.


A. Anderson. You know very well.


At. Genesis Have you c^rried any wood from Fox-Hall to the Cockpit.


A. Anderson. Yes.


At. Genesis From who.


Andrew Anderson. From my Lady Bateman.


L. C. Ius. When did you carry him by Water? And where did you take him up?


Andrew Anderson. Sometimes (my Lord) from the Stairs in Channel Roe, sometimes
at one place, and sometimes at another.


Attorn. Genesis My Lord, he says he carried from Fox*Hall some Wood, and it came
over, and it was carried to the Cock*Pit.


L. C. Ius. When you see him then, by what Name did he go by.


And. Anderson. I never knew him then but by the Name of my Ladies Brother.


L. C. Ius. What Name goes he by now.


And. Anderson. All that knows his Name, knows it to be German.


Attorn. Genesis Did you know one that went by the Name of Goodman, that lived at
Foz Hall with his Lady Bateman.


And. Anderson. Yes.


Attorn Genesis What is right Name?


And. Anderson. I knew not but what was his right Name then, but now I hear his
right Name in Keamer.


L. Chapter Ius. When you did carry him by Water, where did you carry him?


And. Anderson. My Lord, sometime to one place, and sometimes to another, as I
am commanded, I must observe.


Attorn. Genesis We will prove that the Duchess has been sevral times privately
with German at the Cockpit, and that Germaiee has gotten a private Door
into the Park, for which he paid 40 s. to Mr. Bradbury.


Attorn. Genesis Mr. Bradbury, Pray where do you live?


Mr. Bradbury. I live next Door to Mr. Germaine's.


Attorn. Genesis Where is that?


Mr. Bradbury. By the Park Wall, next Door to the Cook-Pit.


At. Genesis Pray tell my Lord, and the Gentlemen of the Jury how it was was.


Mr. Hen. Bradbury. My Lord, Mr. German had no way near as might go into the
Park; so he spoke to my Man that he might have a Privilege to go through my
Door into the Park; so I ordered my Man to give him or his Servants Passage,
and about a Year after he sent a Workman to me, that he might make a Doo^ out
into the Park, and I did agree with him for a Buck or 40 s. which he pleased.
And so a Door was made: But since he has gotten a Door himself into the Park.


At. Genesis We will call another Witness, one John Dagly.

John Dagly* pray give an account of what you know of the Duchess of Norfolk
and Mr. German.


John Dagly. I was at work there, and I saw a Gentlewoman going to and fro,
up-stairs and down-stairs: I asked who that was? and I was told it was the
Duchess of Norfolk. There was a brave curious Bed; and I was saying* to some
of the House, thr^ it was a very fine B^d: And asking what it might be worth?
they said it cost 700 l. And I was then just maoried: I said, I have a good
mind to bring my Wife hither, and give her a Flurt upon it.

And we then laid all our Heads together, as if we ^ere* se^ling the Nation;
and then they said, That Bed was for the Duchess of Norfolk.


At. Gen We will call another Witness.


Serj. Burch. Richard Owen, do you know Mr. German at the Cockpit?


Rich. Owen. Yes.


At. Genesis What Company have you seen with him?


Rich. Owen. I saw a Lady in a Mask I may say a hundred times.


At. Genesis How often?


Rich. Owen. I may say a hundred times in a Mask walking about* Another time I
saw my Lord Duke of Norfo'k walking amongst the Trees in the Park, and this
Lady looking out of the Window toward him in Mr, Germaine's House. This I have
seen; I speak what I know.


At. Genesis Pray, Jane Wadsworth, come and tell my Lord and the Jury what you
know. Speak out, Do you know Mr. German?


Jane Wadsworth. Yes.


At. Genesis Where lives he?


Jane Wadsworth. In Park-street, near the Royal Cock Pit.


At. Genesis Hove you ever seen the Duchess of Norfolk at Mr. Germaine's House?


Jane VVadsworth. Yes.


At. Genesis Upon what account.


Jane VVadsworth. I living next door, going in for a Pint Po^, met a Dutchwoman
that belonged to the House, and asked her for it, she said, there was never a
Pint-Pot there, it was above Stairs, and bad me go up and fetch it, and so I
did, and I met the Duchess of Norfolk ^hen, and she had a Nightgown on, and
Flanders. Lace, but in Night Linning.


At. Genesis Was she undressed?


Jane Wadsvvorth. Undressed a^ one may think, she might have a Petticoat on.


L. C. I, What occasion had you to go there?


J. VVadvvorth. For a Pint Pot my Lord, and going up, I saw the Duchess of
Northfolk going from one ^oom to another: And my Lord, another time I saw the
Duchess of Northfolk and Mr. Germain in a Coach together.


At. Genesis When was that?


J. VVadsvvorth. It was in March last, and I saw the Coachman, I asked him who
it was tha^ he sat down out of the Coach, and he said an honest Gentleman that
gave him 2 s. for the carrying him from the Hor, k-Ferry.


At. Gen, Have you ever seen Mr. Germain, at the Duchess house


J. VVahsvvorth Yes, I did disguise my self, and followed him to see where he
would go, and I did see him go into the Dutch^ss house (...) tha Mill-Bank.


At. Genesis When was this?


J. VVadsvvorth. In May last.


Lord Chapter Just. What time a Day?


Ia. Woodsworth About (my Lord) 9 a Clock at Night.


Sir Thomas Powess. When you went for the Pint Pot, did you ever say any thing
to any Body of it, that you had seen the Duchess of Norfolk?


Ia. Wadsworth. Yes, To one Hurman, that I had seen the Duchess of Norfolk;
How, said he? if my Master had seen you to go up stairs, he would have killed
the Dutch Woman.


Lord Chapter Just. Do you know my Lady Duchess well?


Ia. Wadsworth. Yes, my Lord, I know her well? she had Flanders Horses stood in
my Stable, when I kept the Bear Inn; and she came often to see them, I knew her
very well.

We will call another Witness, one Ann Read.


Sergeant Burch. Ann Read, do you know Mr. Germain's House?


Ann Read. Yes:


Sergeant Burch. Where is it?


Ann Read. By the Cock Pit.


Sergeant B^nch. Do you know him?


Ann Read. Yes.


Sergeant Burch. What Company have you seen go there?


Ann Read. In April last, I saw a Chair go by, and some said it was the
Duchess of Northfolk; and so I went and saw her in the Chair twice.


Sergeant Burch. Did you see her with her Mask off?


Ann Read. I saw her with her Mask off, and saw her sat down at Germain's
House, and the Door was immediately opened


Lord Chapter Just. Did you know the Duchess before?


Ann Read. Yes, my Lord.


Lord Chapter Just. Did you see her before this Time?


Ann Read. Yes, my Lord.


Lord Chapter Just. What Time a Day was this?


Ann Read, Betwixt two and three a Clock.


At. General. You say you saw her with her Mask off, and sat down at
Germain's House, and the Door was immediately opened.


Ann Read. Yes.


At. General. Now we will call another Witness, one Thomas Foster.


At. General. Thomas Foster, do you know the Duchess of Norfolk?


Tho. Foster. Yes.


At General. How did you come to know her?


Tho. Foster. I drove her often in a Coach with Mr. Germain.


At. General. How long since?


Tho. Foster. About this Time four Years.


At. General. Where did you use to carry them?


Tho. Foster. Some time into Lombard Street, and some-time to one place, and
some-time to another; and once I looked back, and saw them with their Heads
together.


At. General. Are you sure it was the Duchess of Northfolk?


Tho. Foster. Y^s, Sir, I knew her before she was M^rried, and I knew her after.


Sir Tho. Pow^ss. Did you see them?


Tho Foster. Yes.


Sir Tho. Powiss. Was their Heads la^d together.


Tho. Foster. Ye^.


Sir Tho. Powiss. When you was in the Coac^, you say you saw them?


Tho. Foster. Yes.


Lord Chapter Just. Did you look back to see them?


Tho. Fosteo. Yes, my Lord, and their Heads were laid together.


Serj. Tremain. Where do you live now?


Tho. Foster. With the D^e of Nothfolk.


At. General. We will call another Witness, one Mr. Bowtel. Pray, do you know
Mr. Germain?


Mr, Bowtel. Yes, Sir.


At. General. Do you know the Duchess of Northfolk?


Mr. Bowtel. Yes, Sir.


At. General. Have you seen her?


Mr. Bowtell. Yes, at Mr. Germain's House.


At. General. Was it the Duchess of Northfolk?


Mr. Bowtell. Ye^,


At. General. Did you know her (...)?


Mr. Bowtell. Yes, Sir.


At. Gen^ral. Had you full Sight of her?


M^. Bowtell. Yes, Sir.


At. General. What Apparel was she in?


Mr. Bowtell. In Man's Apparel.


Lord Chapter Just. How long have you known the Duchess of Northfolk.


Mr. Bowtell. This 8 or 10 Ye^rs.


Serj. Tremain. Do you believe it was the Duchess of Northfolk?


Mr. Bowtell. I do very believ^ it.


Seoj. Tremain. Do you take it upon your Oath?


Mr. Bowtell. I do verily believe it: The Duchess being in a Chair, the Maid
came running after her with an Hand-Basket.


At. General. When was this?


Mr. Bowtell. In April last.


Lord Ch* I^st. Are you sure it was the Dutchess's Maid?


Mr. Bowtell. She gave in Evalence as so, in the House of Lords.


At. General. What is her Name?


Mr. Bowtell. Frances Knight.


At. General. What? Did you observe a Hand-Basket in her Hand?


Mr. Bowuell. I suppose, there was Clothes; for I saw the top of a Wallcoat
hang out.


At. General. We have brought this down so far.


Lord Chapter Just. Why, this is not within the Statute. I must direct the I^y.


At. General. We have told you, when it began. We will call another Witness, ^e
Mary I.


Serj. Thompson. Do you know Mr. Germain?


Mary I. Yes, Sir.


Serj. Thompson. Do you know where he lives?


Mary I. Yes, at the Royal Cockpit in Park-Street.


Serj. Thompson. Did you ever see the Duchess of Norfolk in your Lifetime?


Maoy I. I cannot tell, whether I did or not; for I do not know her; so I
cannot tell, when I do see her.


Sir Will. Williams. They have called about 19 Witnesses; for the first five
Years we pass them, for they did not speak one Word of any thing, since 1686.
And for the other, they have not proved any one Act, in the The of the
Declaration, betwixt Mr. Germain, and the Duchess of (...). They have not
proved any thing that has any tendency in that, which Iare Wadsworth says;
and what is that which she says? Why, she being a Woman that sold Ale, she had
let a Pint-Pot go to Mr. Germain's House, so she went for it, and the Dutch
Woman that lived there, directed her to go up the Stairs for this Pint-Pot; she
Swea^, that she then saw the Duchess of Northfolk, and she had a Petticoat on.
And this is the Evidence that she hathgiven; she does not pretend that Mr.
Germain was in the House, or in Company with the Duchess; and she appears to
be a Stranger in the House, and she must run up Stairs. As for her (...), she
is one of the Vil^t of Women; she would say something in March or May la^;
there is no Act proved by her, and she is a vile and incredible Witness; we
shall call Witnesses to show it.


Sir. Tho. Powis. My Lord, we will pr^e ii; and as for this Woman Wadsworth, we
will not only call the Person she spoke to of this, that will contradict her
self and tell what she did say; but also to her Credit and Reputation; so that
now, my Lord, I believe upon the whole matter, we cannot do the D^ of Norfolk
^e Honor, th^n to acq^t the (...), for it will be (...) Honor to the Duke of
Norfolk to have the Defendant acq^, than satisfaction to (...) by gi^ing him
any D^mage wh^ver.


St. Will. Williams. We will call a Witness o^e Grace Co^ Do you know Jane
Wadsworth?


Grace Cook Yes Sir.


Sir Will. Williams. Pray t^ll my Lord and the Jury, what Discourse you, and I^
Wadsworth have had together.


Grace Cook. I will, She aad I had some talk together, and she then said I
could do them no good, for I am mistaken.


Sir Will. Williams. When did she tell you? this sitting the Parliament.


(...) Yes* She came in and said I can do them no good, ^ in^ Hand; said she I
can do them no good, for said she, I did go into Mr. Germans House and
thought I had seen the Duchess of Norfolk but now I am mistaken.


Sir Will. Williams. You are a near Neighbor to her.


Grace Cook. Yes, Sir.


Sir Will. Williams. What is her Reputation?


Grace Cook. I cannot say any thing to her Reputation?


Sir Will. Williams. Who was by?


Grace Cook. There was another Woman.


I^ne Wadsworth. I had a Subp^na, and as I was going to Mr. Germans House,
there was oue of his Servants; I had like to have been then knocked down: And
there was one Hall, what said he, are you to be a Wittness? What will you
Swear? and another I deserved to be at Bridewell.


L. C. I. Who was it that told you that you deserved to be at Bridewell?


I^ne Wadsworth. Hosea his Chairman. And, my Lord, it is not a Fortnight since
I was robbed: And it is not a Fortnight since there came in Persons and
threatened and said what they would do to me: And it is n*ot Two Months since
that a Person or two did beat me, and liked to have knocked me down, and they
ran into this Woman's House.


Serj. Thompson. You are asked if those Persons that had liked to have knocked
Mrs. Wadsworth down did not run into Mrs Cooks House.


Wit. Yes.


Serj. Tremain. The Question is, Whether what they Swear was true.


Wit. She said she was chancing to go for a Pint Pot to Mr. Germains, and going
up stairs for it, said she I thought I had seen the Duchess of Norfylk then
there; but I see it was not she: And one Hosea G^ly asked if she was sure of
what she said was true, she said she would not say it for the World.


At. General. What Trade are you?


Wit. A Joyner.


At. General. Are you not employed by Mr. Germain.


Wit. Yes.


Attor. Genesis How long since?


Wit. Why ever since King William was crowned.


At. Genesis Have you been ever since employed by him?


Wit. No by times I have been.


At. Genesis Upon your Oath, Who did you hear this Lady was that used to come to
Germains House?


Serj. Levins. By the Oath you have taken, Did you not hear it was reported it
was the Duchess of Norfolk?


Wit. Yes, Sir.


Serj. B^rch. Did not you whisper daily in the Ear, and say that you believed
her to be the Duchess of Norfolk?


Wit. I cannot remember.


Serj. Pemberton. Was that Woman in such a Condition as she says the was?


Wit No, I think that she was in as good a Conditionhe^ ^s she is now.


Serj. Thompson. That could not be, she was sain to be carry* in a Chair.


Serj. Pemberton. We will call one (...).

Tell my Lord and the Jury, what you heard Foster the Duke (...) Norfolk's
Coachman say of of Mr. Germain.


Hall. Why he said that Mr. Germain had done very ill in turning him of in
Ireland, and he would be revenged of him.


Tho. Foster. My Lord, Mr. Hall and I was speaking something of the Duke and
Duchess of Norfolk. then I said ^o him that Mr. Germain had done very ill by
me in turning me of in Ireland, but I did not say I would be revenged of him.


Wit. I chancing to go to Spring-Garden, I saw Thomas Forster carrying Water to
the Horses that was in the Stable, and after he and I had spoke to one another,
What said he will not you make me drink this Morning? I told him I did not care
if I did, and so we went to drink, now said I to him Thomas, are not you a fine
Fellow to abuse so good a Master that would give you Money when you wanted it,
are not you sorry for it? I am says he, but it is too late; but the Devil I
think had possessed me; and he said he was got to be drunk, and when one is
drunk he will say any thing, said he; I remember not a word I said; and said
he, I hope my Master will pardon me, and he said that some was promised good
Employments in the Dukes Service, but none had gotten any, but one and that is
Housekeeper, and he said it was better to be a Housekeeper in Hell.

Did he say he had wronged Mr. Germain?

Yes he did and said he was druuk.


L. C. I. He was not drunk when he was in the House of Lords. He said he was
sorry that he had wronged his Master, and he hoped, that he would pardon him.


Serg. Tremaine, We will call Alexander Harman; Did you ever see that Woman,
Jane Wadsworth, in Mr. Germaine's House?


Alex. Harman. No Sir.


I. Wadsworth. Pray, my Lord, give me leave, and I will tell you how it was:
Alexander Harman came into my House, and I told him, That I had seen the
Duchess of Norfolk at Germaine's House: I told him, I wanted a Pint Pot that I
had lent to Mr. Germaine's House, and going thither, asking the Dutchwoman for
it, they bid me go up the stairs for it, and so I did, and then I saw the
Duchess of Norfolk; said he to me, You should not have gone up the Stairs for
it, for if my Master should have known it, he would have killed the Dutchwoman.


Sir Will. Williams. We will call another Witness.


Margaret Candy. What did you hear this Woman, Jane Wadsworth say?


Margaret Candy. She came to Mrs. Cooks, with a Paper in her hand, and said
she, I thought I had seen the Duchess of Norfolk at Mr. Germaine' s House, but
now, she said, she is better satisfied, that she never did see her there.


Sir W. Williams. Did she complain that she was beaten and abused?


Margaret Candy. Not as I know of.


Serg. Pemberton. She and others were examined in the Lords House, and the
Lords would not believe them.


L. C. I. We do not know what the Lords did believe or disbelieve, they were
examined so far forth as to enable them to make a Law, we must now hear what
the Witnesses say.


Sir W. Williams. We will call another Witness, Francis Knight Francis Knight,
was you ever at Germaine's House.


Fr. Knight. No my Lord.


L. C. I. The Woman said, she talked with you there.


Fr. Knight. She will not say it to my face.


L. C. I. Did you ever carry a Letter from the Duchess of Norfolk to Mr.
German, or to any Person in his House?


Fr. Knight. No my Lord.


L. C. I. Mr. Bowtel says, That he saw the Duchess and this Maid.

Was not you there in the Summer.


Fr. Knight. Never.


L. C. I. Never carried a Basket.


Fr. Knight. Never.


L. C. I. Did you never go with a Chair?


Fr. Knight. No:


L. C. I. Call Mr. Bowtel again.


At. Genesis Mr. Bowtel, Is this the Maid that had the Basket of Clothes.


Mr. Bowel. As I supposed to be Clothes.


At. Genesis Did she come out of the House when the Chair came.


Mr. Bowtel. She followed it presently, and then I was near her and knew her
Face.


At. Genesis Is this the Dutchess's Servant.


Mr. Bowtel. Yes Sir, she was the Dutchess's Servant. I saw her then.


At. Genesis When was this.


Mr. Bowtel. In April last.


At. Genesis Was you upon your Oath in Germaine's House, in April last?


Fr. Knight. I broke my Leg then.


Sir W. Williams. Was you, in April last, in Mr. Germaine's House.


Sir T. Pewis. Was this in open day.


Mr. Bowtel. Sun was about half an hour high.


Sir T. Powis. We will call another Witness, one Mrs. Pennington. Do you know
one Jane Wadsworth, was the your Servant?


Mrs. Pennington. She was a while, she pretended to be Sick, and, as I was
informed afterward, she was not; for there was a Man that gave Physic, and I
bad him to go and look upon my Maid, and he did so, and came and said, your
Maid may be sullen, but she is not Sick; and coming to her, I sound her sullen,
and afterward I met her out of my House, said I, Jane, What do you do here,
she made some excuse, and said, she was not well; I told her, I would take care
of her; and how that they did not deserve Servants, that would not take care of
them when they was Ill; I saw her mu^ed, and her Coats trussed up. I walked
after her, and said, Jane, Whither art thou going? and bid her let me see what
she had in her Coats; and I thought it was good to have a Witness; I spoke to
one, said I, Gaffer Hall, come hither, do you take notice, that this Linen is
all mine.

A good while atter, I saw this Jane Wadsworth standing at Mr. Bird's, said I,
she was my Servant several Years ago; and, my Lord, this happened when the
D^fference was betwixt the Duke and the Duchess, for they said, she was a
grievous Witness against the Duchess.

Upon this, Mrs. Bobs^n, my Lord of Peterborough's Servant, sent to me.

Then I came to be a Witness,


Serg. Thomps. Mrs. Pennington, How came she to you first of all?


Mrs. Penning. She was recommended to me first; and she being minded to go away
soon after she came, I said, Jane, if you will go, go; and then I observing
when she went away, he Clothes about her to be trussed up; I walked after her
into Danes-yard, I said to her, Jane, What have you in your Coats? and there I
found my Linen.

We will ca^ another Witness, Mrs. Pennington's Maid.


Mrs. Penington' s Maid. I saw all the Linen that my Mistress took from her as
she said.


At. Genesis Did you see any?


Mrs. Pen. Maid. Yes.


At. Gee. Whose was it?


Mrs. Pen. Maid. My Mistress.


At. Genesis She told you so.


Mrs. Pen. Maid. Yes.


Councils for the Def. We will call the Defendants Man William How.

How long was your Master in Fland^s?


W. H^. A M^th.


Council for the Def. Was you and your Master with the King in Ireland.


W. How. Yes, we went with him, and came back again with him.


Sir W Williams. It Is said, he was at Fox-Hall, about three Years since.


W. How. We was out of the Kingdom four Months.


Sir T. Powis. There is no material Witness but what this Woman is.

Now we will call another Witness. Pray Mr. Welburne, tell my Lord and the
Jury, what Discourse you have had with the Duke of Norfolk concerning his
Duchess.


Mr. Welburne. My Lord, about the m^ddle of December last, my Lord Duke was
pleased to send for me to come to him, and so I came to Mr. Negroe's, and he
brought the Duke of Norfolk into his own Room to me; said he to me, there are
some Treaties betwixt me and my Wife, Sir Robert Clayton, and Sir Robert H^ward
are concerned in them.

There is one thing, that I find my Wife is setting up to have a great
Equipage, this I do not like: I hear, said he, she is about to have a Coach,
Horses, and two or three Footmen. And this is not all, said he, there is
Castle-R^sing, that my Wife has a Pretention to, and of Bestoe-B^lling, now if
she will part with her Pretentions in them, I shall take it well, and we may be
reconciled. I know Drayton is a seat that She has a kindness for: Pray tell my
Wife of it, and let her consider of it; if she be willing to comply with me in
this, I shall take it well: And, said he, I am told, if I bring a Bill of
Divorce into the House of Lords, it would take effect. And so I went from the
Duke of Norfolk to the Duchess, and told her what the Duke said; and my Lord
of Peterborough hearing of it, he was angry that I went to the Duke.


Sir W. Williams. Did you acquaint the Duchess, That if she would parr with
her Pretentions in Castle-Rising and Billingal, all things might be reconciled.


Mr. Welburne. I did,

The Bill of Divorce was lodged in the House of Lords, in January then
following.


Mr. Welb. There is one thing, my Lord, that the Duke said that I had
forgotten, he did speak of 25000 l. or some such thing, he could make of
Castle-Rising and Bestoe-Billing.


At. Genesis My Lord, we will call some Witnesses to Mrs. Wadsworth's Reputation,
because they speak against it. Mr. Dugly, Do you know Mrs. Wadsworth?


Mr. D^gly. Yes.


At. Genesis Pray, What Reputation is she of.


Mr. Dugly. Very good Reputation.


At. Genesis Was she ever upon the Parish?


Mr. Da^ly. Never in her days.


At. Genesis Mr Prince, pray do you know Mrs. Wadsworth.


Mr. Prince. Yes Sir.


At. Genesis What is her Occupation.


Mr. Prince. A Pains-taking Woman.


At. Genesis What Reputation is she of.


Mr. Prince, Good Reputation.


Mrs. Wadsworth. My Lord, I would not live with Mrs. Pennington any longer, for
she kept a disorderly House.

One of the Iur^. Pray, What is that she says?


L. C. I. She says, that Mrs. Pennington, with whom she lived, kept a
disorderly House.


I. Wadsworth. My Lord, I kept House, and paid 60 l. a Year, for the Bear-Inn,
and my Lord, my Husband, lay sick a great while, and he having a M^nd to go
into the Country, for his Health, I had 15 s. of the Churchwardens and
Overseers, and that was all that ever I had.


At. Genesis We will call another Witness, Mr. Em^y Argus. Pray how long have you
known Mrs. Wadsworth?


Mr. Argus. Many Years.


At. Genesis What Reputation was she of?


Er. Argus. She was always accounted a Honest, Laborious, Pains-taking Woman.


At. Genesis Whether, did she keep the Bear-Inn?


Mr. Argus. She did.


At. Genesis Whas she ever kept at the Parish Charge?


Mr. Argus. No.


At. Genesis Was she ever in the Poors Book?


At. Genesis We have produced Three Substantial People, that all say, that she
always was accounted an Honest, Laborious Woman.


L. C. I. You do observe what you have proved; you have proved no lascivious
Conversation; because you spoke of that in the Opening of the Evidence; you
have not proved any lascivious Conversation within this 6 Years.


At. Genesis This Court says we have not proved the Duchess to go beyond Sea.
We will call a Witness, Mr. Negroe


Mr. Negroe, Pray did the Duchess go over with the Duke beyond Sea? The Duke
came back, did the Duchess come with him?


Mr. Negroe. The Duchess, she came over again in 86; after that she stayed in
England some Time, and about the time of the Revolution; then it was given out,
that she was gone over again.


At. Genesis What Time was it that you heard she came back?

In 89.


Mr. Negroe. I can inform the Court if they please, the Time when my Lord was
sued for Allemony.

A Letter was then read in the Court, from the Duke to the Duchess.


Serj. Thompson. This Cause has been in the House of Lords. The Question,
whether they blieved or not believed, was not the Question, but they would have
some time to make some Proofs at Law.


At. Genesis For as all unlawful Conversations must have a beginning, it is
necessary we should show something of that and the Time, and that does fortify
the Evidence that is given within the Time.


Solicitor Genesis Pray my Lord, if you Lordship please; This is the use we make
in giving in Evidence, somethings before, to show the Fact within the six
Years, their frequent meeting in a Lascivious manner; and we make use of that
before the six Years, to explain what use we make of it, in matters done done
within the six Years.


Serj. Tremain. I do appeal to your Lordship, and all that hear me, whether
within this six Years they have proved any Lascivious Action, or any undecent
Action, so that this will not charge the Defendant; for if the Duchess will
come to his House, when he is not at home, he cannot help it. All the Proof is
without the six Years, and no Proof within the six Years to charge him to
inflict such a Crime. If they had carried it down, as to have proved Acts
within the six Years, I should have said they have done something.


L. C. I. Have you done?

Yes, Sir.


L. C. I. GEntlemen of the Jury, you understand very well the Nature of this
Action, and the Record has been opened to you, which was to this effect,

That the Defendant the 2d Day of April, in the 2d Year of the Late King James,
he did entice away the Plantiffs Duchess, whereby he had not the Benefit of
her Society, and that he had Lascivious Conversation with her, lived in
Adultery with her and caused her to Commit Adultery. The Defendant pleaded that
he did not commit any thing within this six Years.

Gentlemen, what has been before, is not now to be taken Notice of;

But the Plantiffs Council has given in Evidence of some Acts before, which is
not for any Damages, as we expressed before; but to explain some Actions that
has been between them.

For my part, I must declare that these matters may be given in Evidence to
explain; but they are not to be given in Evidence to any other purpose.

The first Witness, is one Owen, and he tells you, that he was sent to
White Hall, and he says that he went into the Lodgings there, and then he did
see the Duchess and Germain in Bed together.

Then there is another Witness, that proves it another Time and Place, That is
Margaret Ellwood, and she tells you in what manner she found the Duchess,
and Germain was very Angry at her, and that his Hat and Sword lay upon the
Table; and you are told by her, that looking through the Keyhole, she
perceived them in Bed: she said the Curtains at the Beds-Feet was actually
open, and she saw them in Bed together, and found Germains Handkerchief and
Ruffles in my Lady's Bed.

The next Witness is one Anne Benskin, and she says, they were in expectation
of him one Night at Windsor, they stayed up till Two a Clock, and laid Chairs
and Stools in his way, that if he came, he might fall, but he did not come down
that time: All this is about Seven Years ago, and out of the time mentioned in
the Declaration; and then after they come, and begin about the Year 1689. and
they tell you of a Lodging taken at Fox Hall, at one Scriber's House, for a
couple of Ladies, one went by the name of Bateman, and the other Brian; during
that time, the Man of the House knew nothing of one that went by the name of
Mr. German, but of my Lady's Brother; he had been seen walking in the Garden:
They tell you, they have seen that Lady that went by the name of the Lady
Bateman; and that very Lady was the same that was the Duchess of Norfolk: And
the Waterman says, That he has carried him often by Water, and he went by the
name of my Lady Bateman's Brother: He has carried him from the Stairs in
Channel-Row to Fox-Hall, when the Lady Bateman lodged there; and has carried
Wood from Fox-Hall, by the Lady Bateman's Order, to the Cockpit, and there is
no manner of question, but Mr. Germaine's House is at the Cockpit.

But then they come to Mrs. Wadsworth, and she is a Woman that lived next Door,
and she had occasion to go to Germaine's House for a Pint Pot, and there
coming, she met with a Dutch-Woman, and asked her for the Pint Pot, she says,
she bade her go up stairs for it, which she did, and then she saw the Duchess
of Norfolk undressed, in a Morning Gown, she said she very well knew her, she
had seen her many times, and she was sure this was the Duchess of Norfolk. She
tells you, that at another time, I think it was in May last, that she did see
Mr. German go to the Mill-Bank; she was sure it was him, and she did think he
would go there; and thereupon she doged him from that very place: She said, she
had told one Harman, that she had seen the Duchess of Norfolk; How, said he,
If my Master had seen you he would have killed the Dutch-Woman.

Then comes one Foster, the Coachman, and says, That about four Years since
he has carried the Duchess of Norfolk, and Mr. German, ofttimes: and one
time (he driving) he looked back, he saw Mr. German, and the Duchess of
Norfolk, lying with their heads together.

Then comes Mr. Bowtell, and he tells you, That in April last he was at Mr.
Germaine's House, and he saw the Duchess in Man's Apparel, and he said, there
was an old Maid had a Hand-Basket with some Clothes, and this was the Servant
of the Duchess of Norfolk. Now Gentlemen, these are Witnesses that prove to
you the Issue in the time mentioned.

Now Gentlemen, they have called some to discredit these Witnesses; they begin
with Jane Wadsworth, they bring one Candy that should say, That she heard Jane
Wadsworth say, that she thought at the first it was the Duchess of Norfolk,
but she was mistaken.

Then they call some more Witnesses, that is Mrs. Pennington, that was her
Mistress twelve Years ago, and she says, That she pretended to be sick a while
after she had been with her, and so going away, she seeing her Clothes tucked
up, she seeing what was the matter she had some of her Linen, she said she
lived with her not above a Fortnight, and they parted; she said she was
indigent and poor, and her Maid says the same.

And then they bring another Witness against one Foster, the Coachman; telling
him of what he had said against Mr. German; he said he was got to be Drunk,
and when a Man is Drunk, he will say any thing.

Then, as to Mr. Bowtell, whereas he salth he saw the Duchess in Man's Apparel
at Germaine's House, and the M^id was there, and the Maid comes and says,
that she was not there; that she was ill, and her Leg was bro^k, rnd denies
that ever the Duchess was there, or that she saw her in a Chair, or in Man's
Apparel.

Now for Ann Read, no Evidence at all against her Testimony, and she is very
Positive of what was done in May last.

They have called one Mr. Welborne, who says that the Duke sent for him, and
after some Discourse spoke to him about Bestow-Billing, and Castle Rising; and
he says the Duke sent to him to have the Duchess to know, if she would comply
with him, he did not question, but to prosecute a Bill of Divorce in the House
of Lords with Effect.

They tell you indeed, of Foster that Germain had turned him out of his
Service, and that he should say he would be revenged of him; but he denied that.

And then the Duchess Letter in 87. was read: I cannot see what Inference you
can make of it, but that the Duke had no design of showing any Unkindness, you
have heard the Letter read, and you may make your Inference, as you will.

Then, as to Mrs. Wadsworth, they have brought some Persons to speak to her
Reputation; and they tell you, She is is an industrious Woman, and of fair
Conversation, and rented an House of Threescore Pounds a Year* And as to what
they alleged, that she was kept by the Parish; no such thing was: but her
Husband being sick, and about going into the Country, the Churchwardens helped
him with about Sixteen Shillings. But she never was in the Poors-Rates, or in
the Poors Book.

And then as to Mrs. Pennington, what she says against her, she answers
this, Tha^ why she did Live no longer with her, she says* Her Mistress kept a
disorderly House.

The Question will be, What was Betwix^ the Duchess, and the Defendant, within
these Six Years; if you are satisfied, that there has been any such Lascivious
Conversation.

For, if so be, that it was only before the Six Years, To what purpose their
meeting a^ Fox-Hall, and taking Lodgings at Fox-Hall and to what purpose the
Duchess came to Germaine's House so?

So that, it is left to You, Gentlemen, to consider, If there has been any
unlawful Conversation, and Lascivious Intercourse, betwee^ the Duchess, and
the Defendant, within these Six Years? If so, You are to find for the
Plaintiff; If not, You are find for the Defendant.

The next Morning, being Friday, the Iur^ came with their Verdict to the King's
Bench Bar; and being asked, If they were agreed (...) their Verdict? They
said, Yes: And being a^ked, Who should say for them? They said, The^ Foreman:
And being asked, Whether the found for the Plaintiff, or Defendant? The said,
For the Plaintiff: And being asked, Wh^ Damage or Cost? They said, One Hundr^
Marks Damages, with Cost of Court.


FINIS.

