The Cheaters Speculum: OR, THE New English Rogue.

Being an Account of the many Notorious Cheats and Villainous Actions of William
Fuller the Impostor, from the time of his Birth, to his advancement to the
Pillory, and late famous settlement in Bridewel; with the prodigious steps that
he made in that wonderful Expedition, and his present Behavior in that
College.

To which is added a living Elegy on his deadly Misfortunes

From Pillory rtip'd
To Bridewel to he whipped
The lash my Back has nip'd.
The work I hate,
Is now my Fate.
Fuller the Cheat,
His Hemp does beat.
Sham Plots to defeat.
woodcut, depicting punishments

London: Printed for P. Markham near Bridge-water-Squ^

The Cheaters Speculum; or, the new English Rogue, etc.
WIlliam F -- r, the Wonder as well as Shame of Mankind, was born at Milton
near Sitingbur^ in Kent, in the Year 1674. his Father being by Occupation a
Butcher; who having the Misfortune to die a Prisoner in the King's Bench: His
tru^ begotten Son, after several Wild and Extravagant Rogurie^ by him
committed, was put an Apprentice to one Mr. James Hartley a Coney-Wool Cutter
in Shoe-Lane, the 4th of January, 1686; in whose Service he continued (tho with
much uneasiness) till some time after the pretende^ Prince of Wales was born,
as his said Master (now in Luggate) is ready to attest; therefore a special
Evidence you may be sure, for such a dark Iutriegue. Passing by his ungrateful
flight from his Master, and his strange, or at least pretended Discoveries of
the Lord knows what a^ White Hall, in his imaginary Post of the Back-Stairs;
and his changing his Religion almost as often as his Clothes. I shall hasten to
relate some, (for it is impossible to set down all in this narrow Compass) of
his most notorious Cheats and Villainies, as follows, viz. Having been in
France for some time, where it is supposed he picked up his Plot, etc. he came
to London, and bluster'd under no less a Dignity than the Major of a Regiment;
in which disguise he put several scurvy tricks on Persons of no mean Quality,
by pretended Bills of Exchange; particularly 50 l. from a Mercer in
Covent Garden. From a Pastry Cook near St. James's, by pretending to prosecute
Roman Catholics, he hooked out of him near 80 l. and under pretense of being a
Country Gentleman, in the Year 1691, cheated a Colonel in Westminster of
Considerable Sums of Money, besides what he run in the Tick for Board, Lodging,
etc. but at last the Colonel having danced a great while to the Tune of
Patience; he snaps him up and sends him to his Father's Lodging in the
King's Bench Prison, till he had the opportunity of Liberty, under pretense of
going out with the Keeper to buy his Wife a Top-knot and Commode, leaping out
of one Boat into another, and so got off: After this, England being to hot for
him, he makes for Ireland; where Lodging at a Barbers House in Dublin, he
wheedled a Dutch Officer^ out of a 100 l. and some other Persons of great Sums,
by drawing Counterfeit Bills of Exchange on an Eminent Merchant in Wood-street,
and made use of the most Honorable Persons Names in London, to countenance his
Cheats; by which means he run in his Landlords Debt near a 100 l. and being
asked for it, he prevailed on a poor Honest Citizen to be bound for it, with
plenty of Oaths and large promises of returning it as soon as he came to
England.

Soon after his arrival in England, he embarked for Flanders and in his way
thither wheedled 10 l. out of the Capt. of Ship, telling him he was such a
Colonel, and writes him a Bill to receive the Money at Amsterdam; but when he
came to get his Bill accepted, he was surprised to hear the Gentleman say he
knew no such Colonel, and so was forced to make the best of a bad Market.

Being flushed with good success, he had the impudence to pretend himself a
Person of great Quality, and under that disguise so far insinuated himself into
the favor of a certain English Major General, that he sucked 200 Guineas from
him; and had the Honor to Ride every day with him in his Coach; but as soon as
he saw an opportunity, he gave the General the Dog to hold.

From hence he marches (with his Pocket well lined) to the Hague; where he gave
himself the Title of Baron Fuller, and under that Nominal Dignity, he played
many a villainous Cheat, and lived at a damnable high Rate, and among other
things playing all his Money away one Night at Gaming, threw among them a Bill
of Exchange of 30 l. payable to William Baron Fuller or his Order, which passed
as current as right Sterling English; but getting near its (supposed)
intrinsic value, he left both the Game and Gamsters to make the best Market
they could of his piece of Paper. Soon after meeting with a Dutch Officer
lately arrived from England, Fuller gets acquainted with him, and under the
Notion of being Sir William Fuller, he without much scruple obtained 200
Guilders from him, leaving a Bill of his hand to receive it in London.

Being at Rotterdam, he grew very intimate with a Scotch Merchant, who
wonderfully doting on him above the rest, Fuller takes the Advantage, and
paums a Bill of 300 l. English Money upon him to receive at Amsterdam, and got
him to lend him 150 l. all under the old pretenses, that his Money was not
arrived according to his appointment, and some days after finding the Scoth Man
would suddenly go for Amsterdam, he wheedled him out of 50 l. more, which the
Scot, or rather Sot, to make even Money on it paid him without the least
scruple, and takes the Paper Mortgage for his Security, leaving Fuller to
rejoice at his Absen But about a Month after coming to Helvetsluys, he had the
unhappiness to meet with a particular friend of the General he had Cheated of
the 200 Guineas, who taking Sir William aside, tells him his Crime, and demands
the Money forthwith, otherwise threatened to jayl him for a Cheat^ So that
Fuller being astonished, was forced to pay the 200 Guineas back again, and glad
of escaping so, but was forced to make up the Sum with his Watch, which moved
the Gentleman to that degree, that he threw him five Guineas back again, and
bid him Cheat all the World, except a Soldier; adding that that little would
serve him for working Tools to set up with.

Being brought to the narrow scantling of 5 Guineas, and meeting with some
English Merchants who were waiting for a Passage gets to Harwich into their
acquaintance, and telling abundance of Lies, he in short went on board with
them, and by the way told them that his Coach and Six Horses were ordered by
his Letters to meet him at Harwich, in which they should bear him Company to
London: and thereupon gets 10 l. from one of them, upon promise of payment at
his arrival; but his promised Coach not coming, he with the Merchants were
forced to accept of a Hired Coach to London: where taking leave of his Fellow
Travelers, by inviting them to a fat Buck Feast the Tuesday following, at the
Queens-head-Tavern. where he promised to pay the Money borrowed, but though they
came at the time appointed, no Fuller appeared.

Passing by the affront he offered to the House of Commons in 91, and his being
voted a Cheat, and his Pillory advancement for it. Soon after he wheedl'd 15 l.
out of Dr. Oats, for which piece of Ingratitude to a sworn Brother of the
Lying Order, the Doctor never gave him a good word since. Being at Chichester,
he drew a Counterfeit Note for 5 l. on a Banker in Lombard Street, which he
imposed on Mr. Barnes the Carrier, who when he came to Town (though too late)
found out the Cheat though he had lost the Cheater. Coming incognito to London,
he took a Lodging at a Cane-Shop just without Temple Bar. at Capt. Daintries;
where pretending himself (as usually he did) a Person of Quality, and being
disappointed of his Rents, and returns out of the Country, and one day
pretended to be wounded by some Ruffins, who hindered his Journey into Kent to
receive his Rents, under pretense of seeking Revenge of his pretended
Assassinators, borrows a Brace of Pistols to the value of 6 Guineas, and
marched off Bag and Baggage to Gravesend, leaving his name in the Capt's. Book.
as a testimony of his acknowledgment: And afterward being come to Canterbury
with his Man at his Heels; where the People of that place, instead of putting
tricks upon Travellors were sufficiently tricked by them, which for want of
room I can^t particularize. A Gentlewoman in that Country having an Extravagant
Son, who was sentenced to die,; Fuller hearing she was able and willing to lay
down a Considerable sum to save his Life, went to her and proffered his
Service, telling her he could not only get a Reprieve, but her Son's Pardon
also; by having such Interest with the Earl of Romney and Albermarle. The
Mother who gave him over for lost, upon Fullers Request, she agrees to give him
60 l. in Hand. and 40 l. when the Pardon was sealed; when having accordingly
paid the Money, he marched off directly into Yorkshire, leaving the mournful
Cheated Mother out of her Money, and the Poor Man out of his Life.

Having hammered out (some time after) a unsensical Book called his plain
Proof, and sold it Mr. H. -- 's for a considerable Sum, he at last so far
imposed upon her, as to wheedle a much greater out of her afterward, which he
will pay when the Devil's blind, unless his new Employment in Bride well proves
more beneficial to him than it has done to his Predecessors.

But to proceed, in School, he being reduced to great Wants, comes to a small
Village in Kent, where one Anne Brown a poor Widow woman being at the Door, he
asked for Lodging, and being admitted, he told her that he came of an
Honorable Family in that Country, but being bound for other Men, had quite
ruined himself and his Children, therefore was now forced to work for his
Living, and thereupon defired her to get him some Hay-making, which she
accordingly did, for which he thanked her, and he agreed to give her 2 s. 8 d.
per week for Dye^ and Lodging, and after a Weeks work he refused his wages,
telling his Landlady, he would let it lie in his Master's Hands till it was a
good Lump, which she finding true upon enquiry, was well pleased. In fine, he
worked so long till his Wages came to 40 Shillings, which he having received,
comes home one Night and tells her of it, and that he would pay her in the
Morning, which the old Woman not at all doubting, by reason of his fine Tongue.
But the next Morning, instead of performing his promise, after having sent her
into the Cellar for a pot of Ale, he bolts the Door on the out side, and gently
marched off, leaving his old Landlady to get her enlargement by a more civiller
Customer.

Going from thence near Horsham in Sussex, he overtook a Tailor as ragged as
both their manners, who after Fuller found him in a necessitous Condition, and
fit for any enterprising project, told him that he had thought of an invention
that would help them both to Money enough. (Quoth he) you shall sham the blind
Man, and I Will be the guide, and i am sure we shall make good Wages on it; the
Tailor loving Idleness as well as Fuller, consented to the Project, and
accordingly the next day, they got some seering Candle, which seered up his
Eyelids so artificially, that he seemed blind indeed, so they went away,
rambling all over Surrey and Hampshire, and in a short time got about 4 l. and
afterward going into Wiltshire, where Fuller (being Judas, for he kept the
bag) was minded to cheat the counterfeit blind of his share, when being to lead
him over a Plank that lay cross a Brook, Fuller lead him besides it, where he
left the blind Man in a very wet pickle, both comfortless and pennyless, in
order to get his Eyes open to find his treacherous Fellow Traveller, but it was
to as little purpose, as to look for a Needle in a Bottle of Hay.

At Blandford in Dorsetshire, he made a Counterfeit pass to save his Charges in
his way to Newcastle, but was detected at Thornbury; and he corrected at the
Whipping Post, by Order of Justice Manning. Being somewhat warmed with the
Beadles lusty Lashes at Thornbury, as he went on the Road, he over took a Cart
loaded with Hay, and coming into Abingdon an Innkeeper seeing Fuller follow the
Cart in a Country Habit, took him to be the owner, and thereupon asked him the
price of it; Fuller told him 28 Shillings, and thereupon had the impudence to
fetch him a handful of it, telling him 'twas as good as ever Nose was put to;
so that while the Carter was talking with some others, Fuller clapped up a
Bargain for 26 Shillings, and gave him a Receipt for the Money, desiring the
Innkeeper to bid his Man make haste home, so flinging down his Sixpence,
marched off with his lucky Booty, leaving the Innkeeper to make the best of a
bad Market.

After this, coming to Bramyard in Herefordshire, he so far insinuated on the
easy nature of the Curate, by pretending himself to be a Cambridge-Schollar,
that he lent him his Horse and Gown to ride to Church, which was some half a
mile distance, in order to preach a Sermon for him; the Parson and his Wife
going the nearest way over the Meads to the Church, he found his Parishioners
wondering to see him without his black Gown, but he told them he had lent his
Gown to a young Cambridge-Schollar to preach for him that Morning, who he was
sure would make a pretty piece of work on it, and truly so he did, for he rode
away with his Horse, Gown and Cassock, and left the Congregation to go home to
Dinner without a Sermon, and the Parson without his Horse, etc. and at Henly
upon Thames, at the Cathern Wheel, having run about 3 l. in the Score in 4 days
time, he marched off on Foot, and left his Horse and his Landlord to dispute
the Reckoning.

In his way to London, near Maidenhead Thicket, seeing a Gentleman come riding
after him, he laid himself down, pretending he heard something extraordinary,
and the Gentleman being inquisitive to know what it was, Fuller replied, that
till then, he did not believe there was such things as Faries, but now he was
convinced by hearing them not only talk, but making such ravishing Harmonies of
all sorts of Music as never was heard in this World, and ^hen laid his Ear
down close again to the Ground, and ^hen seemed to admire it. The Gentleman
being desirous ^o hear this pleasant Melody, desires Fuller to hold his Horse,
and while he was attentive in listening with his Ear ^lose to the Ground, Fuller
whips upon his Horse, and ^ides away with all speed toward Slough, where being
^ear the Town, he turns the Horse loose, in order to let him find out his usual
Inn; and as he thought, it so happened, for he made unto the sign of the
Royal-Oak, and the Chamberlain seeing ^im without his owner, Cries out Master,
here is Mr. P. -- 's ^orse, which Fuller hearing, told the Innkeepeper that Mr.
P. -- ^ah sent him with his Horse from the White-Hart in Maiden^ead, desiring
him to send him Ten Pound, Yes, says the Inn^eeper, a 100 l. without any pledge
if he desires it, so that he said the 10 l. immediately, and took Fullers
Receipt for it, who ^ou may be sure did not stay long to dispute, for some
hours after ^^e owner of the Horse comes in his Jack-boots, puffing and
blowing; Sir, says the Inkeeper, what need had you to send your Horse to me for
10 l. when your own Note had been sufficient for ten times as much. Why, is my
Horse here, says the Gen^^^man? Yes, says the Host, but I let the Man have 10
l. that ^rought him on your Account: The Gentleman damned the Messenger, but
was glad he had borrowed no more upon him, for he valued his Horse at 40
Guineas.

After his coming to London, he fell to his old Trade of writing Shams and
Stories, which were believed by abundance of Knaves and Fools about Town, but
pushing the j^st too far, he was by both Houses of Parliament, ordered to be
prosecuted in good Earnest for a Cheat, which was done accordingly, he being
found guilty, and Sentenced to the Pillory, and afterward to Bridewel, there
to be whip^ and held to hard Labor, where we now ^eave him til the 24th of
October next, where multitudes of all Ages Sexes, and Qualities pays him daily
Visits to see him handle the Beetle, and beat that Hemp which all along
threatened him with Destruction, which when he has accomplished and paid his
Fine of a Thousand Marks for his Fees, he will be at liberty to set up his old
Trade again, for without all question, he will not be unfurnished with a Stock to
begin with.

His ELEGY.
LAment ye Females, who believed his Canting,
Since all his bleshly motions now are wanting.
Sure every pious Dame, and Mother 's Daughter
Will with wet Eyes drop sympathetick Water.
Tell me ye f^^r ones, is it not a pity?
He should be snatched from Ladies in the City,
To be thus rudely exercised by Floging,
Who was so fit for Nightly sports and Joging,
A Murri^ take the Whip, says they, it spoild him,
And cursed be the Dirt and Eggs that moil'd him,
Cold is that Corpse accustomed once to warm ye,
Who used with Sword in Hand to mount and Storm ye:
Mute is that Tongue, so sweetning and so daring,
The Noisome Hemp has stopped him now from swearing:
These small white Hands are full of plaguey Blisters,
That has so often stroak'd his pious Sisters;
Grim Death a damp upon his fancy strikes,
And all is stiff but what a Lady likes;
While Grouds of M^bb, to see him fills the Door,
Which makes Bridewel, much FULLER than before.
FINIS.

