The Worlds Honor DETECTED, And, for the unprofitableness thereof, REJECTED;
And the HONOR which comes from GOD alone, ASSERTED, and reduced to practice:
OR, Some REASONS why the People of God called Quakers, do deny the accustomary
Honor and Salutations of the World, consisting in putting off the Hat, Bowing,
Titling, bidding Good Morrow, Goodnight, etc. upheld by them in a Respect of
Persons, contrary to the Royal Law of Liberty, Iam. 2.

Their several Pleas for the same impleaded, and diverse Objections answered, By
a Friend to Truth, who is no respecter or regarder of persons, called a Quaker.

B. F.

Romans 13.7. Give honor to whom honor is due; Yea,

Honor all men, 1 Pet. 2.17. Yet,

Honor is not seemly for a fool, Prove. 26.1.

How can ye believe, that receive honor one of another, and seek not the
Honor which comes FROM GOD ALONE? Joh. 5.44.

-- salute him not (or say not to him, God speed) for he that saluteth him (or
says so to him) is partaker of his evil deeds, 2. Joh. 11.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson, 1663.

To the READER.
FRIEND,
IN this Paper thou have a faithful account why we do not use (but testify
against) the Customs of the World in their Salutations, which yet we impose
upon no man's understanding, but singly bear the Testimony of the Lord as we
have received it from him, leaving the thing to be witnessed by the Light and
Spirit of God alone in every man's Conscience, to which every one must stand or
fall, and in which a man ought narrowly to weigh all his deeds; and as he shall
find peace or reproof from the Lord, after due inquest, so let him do; not out
of fear, to shun the Cross in any thing, nor for affection, or out of imitation
to any, without the sense and feeling of the Judgment of the Lord, and his
leadings; in both which there is danger and an absolute mistake of the way of
Truth, in which the Servants of the Lord are led: and such are as far from the
true Unity with the People of God, as they that are conformable to the Worlds
Customs in blindness, of which I thought good to warn all men every where, that
they might come to the true ground, or ground of Truth in themselves, there to
find and feel the Judgments of the Lord against all evil, by the Light made
manifest in themselves, and to receive of the Power of the Lord which leads out
of the evil seen, which Power is received in the giving up to, and answering
of, the Convictions of the Light; And that the whole World may know that our
Unity stands not in an external conformity of the Hat, Cap, or any other
outward thing or action, but in that Light, Life, Power and Spirit which the
World knows not, neither can receive, in and by which we are all united unto
one Spirit, Soul, Mind and Body, of which Christ is the head, even by the
living virtue which proceeds and descends from him, to the enlivening of
each member, according to the measure which it is capable of where it is; so
that our Unity is not without but within, nor with any outward practice, though
never so apparent to have been the practice of the Saints and holy men of old,
whether Patriarchs, Prophets, or Apostles and Disciples in the times of
greatest purity, further than it is now in this day, and in that person that
does it, found, felt and known to proceed from that One, only Ancient and
eternal Spirit and Life, in which alone God has always been worshipped and
honored, and not at all out of it, at any time; for he that is not in the
Spirit is in the flesh, and he that is in the flesh cannot please God; and he
that is not in the Life, is in death; and the dead cannot praise our God, who
is a living God, and lives for evermore. He that reads, let him try himself.

B. F.

The Worlds Honor detected; and, for the unprofitableness thereof, rejected;
and the Honor that comes from God alone, asserted, and reduced to practice,
etc.
THat there is an Honor from men to each other, which also is to be showed
upon all occasions to all men in common; yea, and a special Honor from
Inferior to Superior Relations according to the flesh, as from Children to
their Parents, from Servants to their own Masters, from Wives to their own
Husbands, from Subjects to their own Emperors, Kings, Princes, Magistrates, or
Rulers, and from the People of God to those whom the Lord has placed as
Watchmen over them; yea, and a double Honor to all those that rule well, and
are found doing the Work of the Lord faithfully, is of it self so clear, that
it needs no proof, being so clearly asserted in the holy Scriptures, and denied
by no People (that I have ever met with, or heard of) which shows it to be
amongst the number of those things placed by God, immediately from himself in
his creature Man; which of all demonstrations, is the most firm and valid that
any man can have, because he has a firm testimony thereof immediately in
himself, which being free from all possibility of being corrupted, unless by
himself, and with his own consent, I call the most firm and stable assurance
that man can have, far exceeding any writing, or written testimony, which being
never so pure, true, and infallibly so in it self at its first giving forth,
may in process of time, through malice of men, or the weakness and negligence
of Transcribers, be falsified, vitiated, and corrupted, or defective, before it
reaches my hands; and so consequently without my consent or guilt: but so
cannot this immediate inward living Testimony of the Spirit or Light of God in
man be; but here every man must have a hand in corrupting it for himself, and
turning this Grace of God, which has appeared to all men, bringing Salvation,
into wantonness, whereby they justly bring condemnation and darkness upon
themselves.

Now what this true Honor is, this is the Question among many, and how it is
given or shown to men in general, and how to each particular Relation.

This true Honor then, it self, I affirm (and I hope with the consent of all
intelligent men) to be LOVE, or a Principle of Love, Universal Love, placed by
God, near man, in his heart and mouth; and it is shown or given to any man in
particular (and so in general) by extending it self forth in the Actions of
Love toward him, as his condition and necessity requires.

This, with me, is the only true foundation of all true and lasting Honor,
which comes from God undeniably; as that without which all honor, so called,
is no honor, but only in show, and not in deed; for how can I honor him whom
I love not, or indeed love a man, and not honor Him? its impossible.

These two then are inseparable, yea, they are convertibles, they are one: this
Love is Honor, and this Honor is Love; where the one is wanting, the other
cannot truly be; where and whenever the Universal Love cools to any member of
the body of mankind, there and then the true Honor cease, till the Love be
again renewed; and if there yet abides a show of honor, it is indeed but a
show, a deceitful piece of hypocrisy; as the worlds honor, and honoring one
another, for the most part is; who can, and frequently do, make a show of
honoring one another, while deceit and mischief lodges in their hearts, and
is covered over with that mantle which they often assume for that very end: As
their own Proverb in the Italian tongue has it;

Chi ti carezza piu che no suole, o in gannato ti ha o in gannar ti Vuole.

He that courteth thee more than he is wont, either he has deceived thee
already, or intends it.

Now, as I have said, there never was any People so dull, but they have
honored, or had in esteem (which is all one) some or other, at least their
Relations; but to honor all men, to love all men, is the perfectian of a
Christion, it is his work, and his alone, who is in the Lord; none else can, but
such as dwell in God, that is, in Love, which is the bond of Perfection.

The Heathens they loved their friends, and honored those that loved them; and
the Scribes and Pharisees their Brethren, saluting them with their
self-invented and accumstomary salutations and manners: but to love and honor
all men, belongs to the Perfection; unto which Christ, the Eternal Son and Love
of the Father, labored to bring his Disciples, that they might be like unto
Him, perfect, as their Heavenly Father is perfect.

Of this true honor which comes from God, the World being ignorant, or at
least heedless, they have gone about to establish their own honor, which is of
the Earth, comes from men, from the earthly spirit of the World in men and
women, and so pleases the same spirit in all; for the World receives its own.

And having now changed this true, natural, genuine Honor which is of God,
into their own artificial, feigned, and strained art of Complement, consisting
in bundles of fopperies, fond Ceremonies, foolish windings, turnings,
crouchings and cringings with their bodies, uncovering their heads, using
multitudes of frothy, frivolous, light, vain, yea, and most commonly lying
words, in a way of Complement; which being brought forth, the airy, light, vain
mind in men, is so taken with it, that it is set up in their minds, as the most
accomplished piece that can be imagined amongst them, and ratified by a
perpetual Law, as unalterable as the Laws of the Medes and Persians, to be the
only standard, by which all honor, respect, reverence, esteem or love must be
measured; being so enamoured upon it, that they deem it their glory and crown,
to be exact in it, to a punctilio, de cap-a-pe; and he is amongst them
accounted, the most accomplished Gentleman that is most expert at it: Being
thus arrived to so high esteem at Court, and had in such venerable reverence
among the Grandees of the Earth, and renowned Ones of the World, it provokes
the ambitious honour-seeking-spirit in its more inferior Orb (each according to
their ability) to seek to render themselves Masters of it, by a certain
double-diligent observation and practice of them; yea, it has such influence
upon Professors of God, Christ, Scripture, Spirit, Professors that profess
themselves separated from, and chosen out of the World, that the most sober
amongst them (not to mention the more light) are found conforming to them so
far as their gravity will admit (and somewhat further too sometimes) but
wherein themselves fall short, lest they should be too grossly guilty of levity,
and justly charged therewith, yet, is it none of their smallest cares, and
strenuous endeavors, to use all means imaginable (according to their ability)
to train up their Children in these evil manners (deceitfully called good
manners now a days) and to that end send them to Schools to learn them to
walk, and shail their legs in Dancing, to doff their Hats, and wring their
bodies in Congees, and how to hold their hands, heads, necks, and make fine
Courtesies backwards, with such like things, as young Women learn at such
places, that so they may not lose one grain, hair, nor jot of that honor,
renown, fame, respect, and worship among men, which their Parents can purchase
them by their money: And thus the Fathers having eaten lowre Grapes, the
Childrens teeth are commonly set on edge; and such as are not of themselves so,
are oft-times made to eat; and so this kind of honor is instilled into them in
their tender age, that it may as it were grow up with them, and through custom,
and the esteem it has in the world, become natural to them; that so the true
Honor which should take place, is by this bastard honor, supplanted,
suppressed, and, as it were, ejected.

This is the case, and thus it stands with the World, Professors and Profane,
and many know it well, but will not see. And therefore those whom the Lord has
in mercy redeemed out of these vanities, and stopped many in their full career,
that they cannot run into the same excess of vanity with them; because they
forsake all this mock-honour, are (though found in the more excellent, in the
Honor which comes from God toward all men) despised, mocked, rendered strange
Monsters, Wonders, gazing stocks, Spectacles to all Nations, Countries and
Cities, where these things are made the standard or touchstone of all Civility
and Good-manners.

Yet this is no more then was of old; for there is no new thing under the Sun:
as the Prophet of the Lord said, Behold! I and the Children thou have given me,
are for signs and wonders in Israel. So it may be said now, for so it is at
this day.

Therefore ye despisers, wonder not at us, that we have forsaken and denied all
these things, root and branch, but turn your eyes into and among your selves,
and see what strange and antic manners you have among you, see what baubles
and toys you are pleased with, what pitiful sorry things you are delighted
in, seek after, covet, and love, and wonder that Man, whom God made upright,
and planted a noble Plant in his own Image, to love and take his delight in,
him alone, should ever come to be so degenerated, and fallen in love with such
vanities as these, things more light than feathers: at this, I say, rather
wonder, for here is true matter of wonder, of wonder indeed.

Wherefore let every man of sobriety and moderation, weigh the thing, ponder
it, and tell me, which of you cannot think in his heart (much less is convinced
there) that this is the Honor which comes from God alone, which he requires
that men should yield to each other? who of you all has faith therein?

Object. But some may say, we do not say that these things are the honor it
self which comes FROM GOD, we pretend it not, they are but a kind of civil
Worship, honor and respect used toward each other, as certain signs and
tokens of the esteem we have in our hearts toward each other, which we do
hereby express; and so the whole is but an indifferent thing, which does not
once in the least touch or concern the Conscience or Religion, etc.

Answ. If it be not OF AND FROM GOD (call it what you will, and do it for what
end you will, it matters not) it is OF AND FROM THE DEVIL; for more than two
fountains, roots or originals, from whence all Actions proceed, can no man
find, there is no Third or Mean betwixt Good or of God (which is one) and evil,
or of the Devil (which is the other) it is either a fruit of the Spirit,
well-pleasing to God; or a work of the flesh, satisfying the carnal mind:
either it is of the good root of Faith, or of the evil root of Sin: For
whatsoever is not of Faith, IS Sin. There Is no middle-place, nor middle-nature
betwixt these two: Is not the very plowing of the wicked sin; yea, his prayers
abomination?

Or, is there indeed any thing else, truly considered, amongst all the actions
of the children of men, so indifferent, as that they touch not the conscience,
or concern not the honor and glory, or service of God?

But though I thus enquire, yet to this I know its commonly said Yea -- yea,
there is nothing more ready and common amongst men, than to say to us in this
case, What do you talk of this? of Conscience in these things? it is folly,
there is no matter of Conscience in it, they are indifferent things, putting off
the Hat and bowing is but a civil matter, in which there is nothing of Religion.

But, I say, this is no less than the Antichrist, who exalts himself above
all that is called God, The very Lucifer that would dissolve the continual
everlasting Bond betwixt God and Man, and would absolve the creature Man of his
Obedience to God his Creator, and duty, of continually minding the Lord, and
setting him always before his eyes, at least in some things which he terms
indifferent.

But it was the judgment of one (who I believe knew God better than these men)
That a man ought in all his actions to obey God, and not to do any thing, but
as unto him; nay, not so much as eat or drink, (things as indifferent (if there
were place for such indifferency) as any can be) and far more indifferent than
these baubles of wagging the Hat, etc. being absolutely necessary to the
ordinary conservation of life and being, which these idle things cannot once
pretend to.

His Judgment you may read as well as I, he is one of sufficient Antiquity and
Authority enough, even to merit credit with the greatest contenders for, and
pretenders to Antiquity, the Roman Catholics; and may not be slighted by any
that have any esteem for Ancient Authors -- His Judgment then I find recorded
in a Letter of his, written and addressed to his dear Friends, the Saints or
Church of God at Corinth, which being since (by the industry of some) divided
into chapters and verses, and there you may read it in his first Letter,
written to the Corinthians from Philippi, chap. 10. ver. 31. Whether therefore
ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye DO, (if there can be any thing imagined more
indifferent (than these things) yet do it, even that also, yea) DO all to the
glory of God.

And again, in another Epistle of the same Author (a faithful Servant, Minister
and Apostle of Christ) written from Rome to the Colossians, chap. 3. v. 17. (as
it is now divided) he says also to them, Whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do
all in the Name of the Lord Jesus, etc. -- who spoke on this wise to all that
would profess his Name, If any man will follow me, let him deny himself, and
take up his Cross Daily, and follow me, as ye may read it in the history of
his life, words and actions, penned by Matthew, chap. 16.24. Mark 10.21. and
Luke 9.23. which three Histories, with that of John, the Acts of the Apostles,
and the several Letters or Epistles of Paul, Peter, James, John, Jude, and the
Revelation, are with the Books of the old Testament bound together, and called
the Law of God, and Rule for all Christians to walk by. But Oh! that they were
found walking in those paths of Holiness there declared of, and embracing from
their hearts the Doctrines in them delivered, and excelling in the Virtues
therein recorded! would it not be otherwise with them? Surely yea. But to this
they can never come, while estranged from that Spirit who wrought all these
things in the Saints: for as no Prophecy of old came by the will of man, so
neither the fulfilling of any of these things in man. But to return to the
Present case.

Who can say that he does thus put off his Hat, etc. to the honor of God, in
the Name of the Lord Jesus, as a follower of Christ, in a cross to himself? etc.

Object. But your selves say, We must honor all men; if so, How shall we show
it, or what shall be the demonstration thereof? A man may tell me, that he
honors me in his heart, when perhaps he hates me, how shall I know it, unless
he shows it forth in his outward man.

Answ. True, a man may pretend honor, while envy and hatred is in his heart,
and no man knows what is in the heart of man, save the Spirit of man that is
in him; and it is not the Hat that does or can discover man's heart, but the
Spirit of God. We must not therefore set up things for Demonstration, which
demonstrate nothing at all: for a man may make as great a show of honor with
his Hat, and his fawning flattering tongue, by Titles, Complements, many
Good-morrows and Good-nights etc. when he not only not honors thee, but hates
thee in his heart, and intends thee a mischief, and only covers himself under
this cloak; as the German Proverb has it, Mehr Feind, Mehr Ehr. The greater
Enemy, the more Worship or Honor.

But let no man trouble himself about the demonstration of Honor; for where
the true Honor is in the heart, it will show it self enough, no fear; and
where it is not, why should any desire a show of it, seeing it can be no more
but a bare show indeed? And why any should delight in, or desire a show without
substance, I know not, unless to verify the Proverb, Populus vult decipi,
People love to be deceived.

Obj. But may we then use no external actions or gestures to demonstrate this
honor by?

Answ. Yea, but it must then be by such things or actions as proceed from the
true honor, are agreeable to it, and inseparable from it, which may bring
clear demonstration with them; else it is but in vain: for, as good not at all,
as to no purpose.

He that uses a thing to this or that end, which cannot answer the end
intended, labors in vain: And such are, and thus do, all that use those
self-set-up customary ceremonial Gestures and Postures in Salutations, to
demonstrate the true honor and esteem by, as experience daily demonstrates,
that they are but a feigned humility.

As therefore there is a true honor and a false, so there is a true and living
demonstration, agreeable to the true honor and inseparable from it, and a
false show and semblance thereof in ceremonies without substance, which may be
and is, where the true honor, love and esteem is not, and so is deceitful.

But as fire and flax, necessarily makes its way through and infallibly
demonstrates it self: and as life infallibly shows it self, by natural heat and
motion, to such as are alive and can discern or feel it; so this true honor
which comes from God alone, dwelling in the heart, as necessarily shows it
self, by certain natural, lively actions, that are inseparable from it, and so
consequently true and infallible, according as the indwelling honor leads,
moves, guides, directs and puts forth it self, either by giving the hand,
falling on the neck, embracing, kissing, and at all times, upon all occasions,
by doing good to all, helping them, walking toward all men in Love, Patience,
Meekness and Peace, so far as in them lies, feeding the Hungry, clothing the
Naked, visiting the Sick, the Widows and Fa^herless, which, with many other
such like things, are pure Religion and undefiled; which also are more
infallible demonstrations of true honor, than those dirty customs of bowing
the body, bidding Good Morrow and Goodnight, wagging the Hat, and such like
things, practiced in a bare custom, while the heart and thoughts may be full of
deceit, and compassing evil against the person pretended to be honored
thereby: and thus these things, being the customs and fashions of the world
now, do exactly answer to the customs and traditions, and lip-honour among the
People of old, in which there neither was nor is any substance at all, and so
for the unprofitableness thereof to be rejected, and a more true, right and
undeceiveable used instead thereof.

For, as a man afar off, perceiving a thing to move, or rather moved, should
thence infer life to be in it, when he drew nearer to it should find himself
grossly deceived, and that the cause of the motion was only artificial, from
without, not naturally intrinsecal.

Even so, he that should conclude that a man honors or esteems him,
because he worshippeth his person, and greets him in the Marketplace, when he
comes to look well into it, and to have occasion to try it, may find himself
ex^reamly deceived, and instead of true honor indeed, only find an empty
show, and nothing else; instead of true love, nothing but false complements,
wind, vanity and deceit, which cannot stand the trial.

And as that motion which comes from life, the more any man draws toward it,
the more it appears to be natural, not artificial, and so shuns no trial,
fears not the most piercing search, but rather willingly embraces it that it
may be manifest.

Even so again, These true natural, genuine demonstrations of honor, or
actions and gestures when they proceed from the inward life, ground, principle
and nature of the true Honor, moving in the heart, and putting forth it self
in them, they fear no search, no trial, but are free, open and willing to be
weighed and looked into, yea rejoice in the most narrow and exact observation,
and prying eye, and come willingly to the Light, that so they may be made
manifest to be of God.

This then, forasmuch as it can deceive no man, why should it not be by all
Christians willingly embraced and preferred, before a deceitful, weak, beggarly
Rudiment, Ordinance and Fashion of the world, as the doffing the Hat is, in
which there is no substance?

Is it not because the one is light, easy and pleasant to the fleshly mind in
men and women, the other hard, uneasy, and a great cross to that mind? Is it
not a clear demonstration that men are more inclined to a shadow, than
substance; more affected with vanity than well-doing.

Yet is this no great wonder that it is thus in the world; for what can be
expected from thistles, but thistles? or, do men gather grapes on thorns? This
kind of honor is their own invention, therefore they love it. And no wonder to
see the world love its own. The other is from God alone, the author and
fountain of all true Honor, Love and Esteem; therefore a cross to the world,
rejected, and not received by them, for the world only loves and receives its
own.

But why this pretty Idol, this feigned humility, this will worship, this
earthly thing, this fashion of the world, should be so acceptable to the
Professors of this Age, who profess themselves to be God's Elect, chosen out of
the world, I understand not; seeing its said to them that were so indeed, that
the fashion of this world passes away (and always did from the Saints) and
they were commanded, not to fashion themselves according to the world, and
forbidden to be conformable to it.

Why these, I say, should be so zealously conformable to such an empty show,
and plead for it, and be offended at Us, who are indeed separated from the
world, and dead with Christ to the Rudiments, Traditions, Fashions, Customs,
and carnal Ordinances thereof, and so can no more, as living in the world, be
subject to them, as they are, I cannot apprehend, unless because, though they
profess themselves to be chosen out of the world, they remain yet in the nature
thereof, and so may as fitly be called the Professors of this World, as of this
Age. Which name if they did bear and own, it would be no more strange; for it
was always as great a cross to the Professors of the World to break any of
their light, frothy, fond, foolish customs and traditions, as for the most
profane. But Friends! is it enough for you to profess your selves chosen out of
the world, and yet never know your selves redeemed out of any of their Customs,
Ordinances, and Institutions, excepting in a few Religious (so called)
Ceremonies about the Worship of God; but otherwise abiding wholly conformable
to all its Manners, Fashions and Customs, either in will or act in your selves,
or approbation thereof in your children whom you train up in them. But your
Reasons you have for its use, you commonly render, are these.

First, That common Plea, of the indifferency of these things, which is
answered, and found to be a mere Chimaera, not to be found in Rerum Natura.

2. Your next, commonly grants that honor of which we speak, to be good,
serviceable and necessary. But adding, These things ye must do, (we also do the
same) and not leave the other undone, Mat. 23.23.

Answ. But where is this written? No where. And admit it had, wherefore might
they not since have been done away for the unprofitableness of them, as
(Tything Mint and Anise) the thing of which Christ speaks there, though once a
Command of God? as Heb. 7.12.

Does not the Moon, and also the Stars, disappear before the light of the Sun?
wherefore then should not this unprofitable shadow cease before the serviceable
substance? what needs a Candle where the Sun shines?

So, if I do a man good, exercise meekness, patience and love toward a man, be
ready to help, inform him, do him good; Is not this demonstration clear enough
that I honor that man? What need then of any thing else? if none, then
whatsoever is more, is of the Evil-one, and of the superfluity of naughtiness.
Or, may I not believe all this, unless it be accompanied with Cap and Knee,
Good Morrow Sir, Goodnight, Madam I kiss your hands, Your humble servant Sir,
with the rest of that phanatick fry of insignificant Complements? may I not
certainly conclude that a man lives and speaks to me, when I see him* feel him,
and hear him, unless I also see his shadow? what mad Phanaticism is this! But

3. Your third Pretense is made up of an acknowledgment again on the other
hand, viz. That it is true, there is great abuse got into these Al-a-mod^sh
Greetings and Hat-Complements, much superfluity and deceit, which is evil; but
withal ye tell us the abuse must not take away the use of a thing; that if
others be too superfluous therein, we should let our moderation appear; if
others do it in deceit and pretense only, we may do it in uprightness and
singleness as it ought; if others do it only, per forma, in a custom and usage,
we should do it with an understanding? Or, say some, Will you not eat and
drink, because others eat to excess, and add drunkenness to thirst? or will you
not set meat and drink before your friend, because others do it in deceit
sometimes?

Answ. This bears a fair show, and at first blush seems something; but being
well weighed, proves nothing, and vanishes away. First, prove wagging the Hat,
with that whole phanatick Regiment of Al-a-modish Complements, as good,
serviceable and necessary, as eating and drinking, or setting meat and drink
before him that hungers or thirsts, and then we will grant more than can now in
reason be desired of us.

Besides, be it well observed, we have never opposed or contradicted any
necessary, or any way serviceable kind of demonstration of honor, nor are we
in the least against it, but do, and always have, pleaded for the same, in
opposition to this cripple, ceremonial, shadowy, modish worsh^pping of men's
Persons, consisting in Idle, Street, or Market-Salutations, by doffing the Hat,
etc. which is below the dignity of a man: which, as none stand in need thereof,
so neither can it do them any good, but may much hurt.

Now that which in it self is needless, and can do no man good, but may many
harm, that is ABUSE it self, and accordingly ought to be avoided, and therefore
we have thus denied them.

But admit that these things had once been serviceable, and that it could yet
clearly be made appear wherein, or for what end they were first instituted by
men; yea, admit they had once been undoubted Institutions of the Lord, and
consequently serviceable, yea necessary for that time, place and people to whom
they were so given; yet cannot this prove them to be still so; and that they
cannot, through the corruption and egregious abuse of them, become not only
needless, but unlawful for the People of God once to touch, taste or handle;
and therefore he that from the once legitimacy of an outward practice, shall go
about to infer and urge the necessity of its perpetual duration, may be found
resisting his Maker, as many have been, in seeking to perpetuate and bind his
People to that which the Lord is about to annihilate and bring his People out
of.

For the universal abuse, or degenerating of a thing, merely ceremonial, in it
self neither essential to the Being nor well-being of any man, does ipso facto,
take away the necessity of the use thereof from the People of God.

Now whether any can doubt that these things have not been so corrupted or
degenerated, is to me a great question, the thing is so apparent to the meanest
of capacities. And if any doubt of the truth of the Position, I refer them for
further testimony to the Scriptures of Truth, in which they may search, and see
whether it be not so. For tell me,

What became of the brazen Serpent for the abuse thereof? no doubt the
Idolatrous People were as unwilling to part with it altogether, as now-a-dayes
with their Idols; and if a Plea of Reformation from the Abuse to the Right Use
could have prevailed with Hezekiah to have spared it, it had never been so
ground to powder. And did it fare any better with all the Types, Figures,
Shadows and Ceremonies of the Levitical Priesthood, all once avowed
Institutions of God? were they not for the weakness, unprofitableness and abuse
thereof all done away, even the very use of them?

How much more then shall the Lord for the mis-use, corruption, weakness and
unprofitableness of these earthly things, which never could pretend Divine
Institution, nor lay claim to any better Original, than the Noisome dunghill of
Humane Custom, lead his People out of them, and not suffer them to touch, taste
nor handle them, as nasty, polluted, defiled things, defiled with the despising
or slighting of the poor, and exalting of proud flesh, because rich? unless any
will say that the Lord is more bound to, and tender over the idle devices of
men, than of his own once pure Institutions, when they have been defiled by the
sons of men, which would be little less than blasphemy; and therefore few are
so shameless as to say* it in words, though most do in their works.

Object. But it may be said in this manner which you propound, The Rich may
indeed honor the Poor, viz. by doing them good, etc. and this is to them
sufficient without the Hat, or Street-Salutatious, which also (we judge) does
not so well become them as the Rich: Nor can the Poor any other way demonstrate
or show honor to the Rich but by those things; for, as the Rich stand not in
need of their help, assistance, doing good, etc. so neither have the Poor
wherewithal to do it, and for this cause was this standing bare-headed, bowing,
scraping, titling, etc. set up amongst us, for the Poor to honor the Rich, and
the Rich each other, by each according to their quality, who yet stand not in
need of each others help, assistance, doing good, etc.

Answ. This is well confessed, and the plain truth indeed, though some seek to
hide it, to wit, That these Manners and Titles are invented to maintain a
Respect of Persons, and to exalt the Person of the Rich man that wears costly
garments, gay attire, and Gold-Rings, etc. over the person of the Poor mean
man, clad in vile raiment, that he may ( cum Privilegio) say to such a one,
Come behind me, sit at my footstool, stand off, with thy Hat in thy hand, I am
more noble, more honorable, more worshipful than thou. This their practice
plainly speaks to every discerning eye, though many with their tongues may
dissemble the contrary.

But Friends, this was honestly and plainly reproved by a good man, who had
been educated in good manners, and wanted for no Tutors to teach him any; this
good old Author, named James, plainly calls this matter, committing sin and
transgression of the Law, in the 2d chapter of his Letter written to the
scattered Tribes, and the 9th verse, as it is now divided.

Now blame us not for rather adhering to Antiquity in this case, than to
Novelty; rather to the good manners of Christ and his Apostles and Followers,
than to the evil manners of men, falsely called good.

Besides, it is a very great mistake; for the Rich have as much need of the
Mean and Needy, as the Needy have of them, else the Great man must be his own
servant (and 'twere well he could so be) his own Tailor, Weaver, Ploughman, and
what not.

Thus has the all-wise God ordered it that men stand in need of each others
aid and assistance, that so they may not despise, contemn, trample upon, and
scorn each other, as it nevertheless often happens, not for want of stupid
ignorance.

For the Rich, as is said, do as much (or more) stand in need of the Poor, as
they of the Rich; and a poor man that is faithful in all his actions, is as
honorable, worthy of as much honor, love and esteem, both before God and man,
as the greatest Peer in a Nation; yea the Lord has more regard unto, and
honor for such a mean, faithful, upright-hearted, Gentle-(minded)-man indeed,
than for a high, proud, false, angry, imperious, tyrannical, perverse-minded
Gentleman, falsely so called.

What difference is there betwixt the person of the Rich and of the Poor, the
person of Caesar, and Lazarus the beggar? has not the Eternal Being made all
men of one blood, from the King upon the Throne, to the Beggar upon the
Dunghill? He has not made such a difference as to the persons, as that he
should bring forth the one person to honor, serve and worship the other, but
all to worship and honor him. And if he has given to any, or they have
fraudulently gotten to themselves a little more wealth, or a larger portion of
this worlds goods than others, they must even thereof render him an account;
for the Earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof. And if any one man be
invested with more Power, Authority, or preferred to higher Offices than
another, it is not of, nor for himself, but of and from the Lord; for
preferment comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the South,
but God is Judge, to whom he must, even of it also, give an account, as a
servant according to the flesh, as well as another man; and to him, as a person
according to the flesh, belongs no more honor than to another man; but
Subjection and Obedience is to the Power in the Office: and what does this
concern proud flesh, or the person of any man? we regard no man's person. And
assuredly that is the pride of flesh, which the Lord will stain, which says, I
am a Magistrate in Power, in Authority, in God's stead; therefore I must, I
will be honored in my Person: for what is this but to assume the honor of God
to self? Consider and beware, for thou art but a Steward, whatever thou art,
and the Lord is Judge, who puts down one and sets up another, as it
pleases him, and rewards every one according to his deeds.

Obj. To respect Persons, say some, is sin, James testifies that clearly
enough; but we, respect or honor [every body] we do it to all alike, Poor as
well as Rich, and then there is no respect of persons.

Answ. Ye may imagine so, but it is not truly so, ye do put a difference: for
which of you will keep a stir in the streets to give a mean man or woman the
wall, or upper-hand, as it is accounted amongst you? or make a bussle to put
them up to the upper end of the Table (as you distinguish it) as ye do many
times (even to loathing) to the Rich? but your Reason is ready, It does not so
well become them, as the Rich. And so --

Behold here, ye mannerly Christians! ye Professing People! the use and service
of your decent, good manners (so called) to exalt the person of the Rich-man,
though proud, and abase the person of the Mean-man, though humble; which is
quite contrary to the Lord, who resists and abaseth the Proud, and shows
favor, and gives honor to the Humble, and therefore it is an abomination to
the righteous impartial God.

Nor are they to the Rich any otherwise serviceable, than a fifth Wheel to a
Wagon, to hurry them headlong to destruction, raising and strengthening the
spirit of pride in them, which is ready enough to show and put forth it self,
although it should have no such excitations and provocations from without, by
which the love and lust after such things is fed, and that mind satisfied which
delights in them.

Now, this mind cannot we feed, satisfy or please; for, as he that is in the
World, or in the flesh, cannot please God; so they that are in God, and do walk
in his Light and Spirit, by which the World, and spirit thereof, is crucified
in and to them, cannot please the World, nor that carnal mind which is enmity
to God, and therefore cannot own these things.

Object. Yea, but some there are, and many too, that take no delight in these
things, that seek them not, desire them not, regard, value them not, and are
dead to them; and why can you not do it to them! what danger is therein? To
others, it is true, it may, as you say, do them more hurt then good; yea say
some, If we knew such as expect it, look for it, seek it, thirst and hunt after
it, we could not give it to such our selves.

Answ. 'Twere well such as speak on this wise, were indeed come so far, so said
and so done, were, so far, well; But as for us, we cannot do it to them,
because it can do them no good, none at all, but may do others harm, as is
granted.

Now, why I should be urged to do that which can do no man good, but may do
many, yea most men harm, I know not, nor can see any reason for it.

But yea, even to such there is a danger also; for, although some, may at
present stand in such a condition, and retain their integrity therein; yet it
is said, To him that thinks he stands, let him tak^ heed lest he fall;
there are other temptations enough within and without, though no man should
meet with this, and who is certain that he shall stand in the day of Trial? yea
in the least Trial? Did not Adam soon fall from his innocence, by beholding and
desiring a thing pleasant to the eyes, and to be desired? To get honor, to be
worshipped! what more pleasant! what more desirable! though indeed there is no
honor nor worship at all in it, nor ever was it so accounted by the people of
God, to put off the hat, but a shame and reproach rather, as may be seen by the
Priests being forbidden to uncover their heads, Levit. 10.6. and 21. 10. But
seeing the frothy minds of people, have imagined to themselves an honor in it;
why should we add unto any man's temptation by this vain thing? nay rather let
us leave off this thing.

Object. But, say some again, it is their due, and we must not detain from any
man his due, lest he should abuse it; and much less from him that is not likely
to abuse himself with it, because others do; for the Apostle says, Give unto
every man his due, honor to whom honor is due, etc.

Answ. True, honor is due to the honorable, but then we must see to give them
the honor which is due, and not a strange far-fetcht device instead of it, in
which is no honor at al, as where is it written, that putting off the hat,
bidding good morrow, and goodnight, saying (though a lie) I kiss your hands
Sir, your Humble Servant Madam, and such like, is the honor due, or that there
is any honor, real, true honor in any of these things; that there is honor
so called, so esteemed, a pretense, and show of honor in these, and every of
these things, I know, but to what mind does it so seem? by what spirit are
these things accounted honor? but by that mind which delights it self in
vanity, and by that spirit and generation which calls light darkness, and
darkness light. -- Now does the Apostle recommend Christians to follow this
mind, to be instructed from it, to count that honor which it might esteem so,
and accordingly to give it them as their due? or does he not rather refer them
to the Spirit of the Lord which teaches all things honorable* and is the
Author of all true honor, and to render that to every man in the Lord, and not
an empty show? the former we deny (nor cannot be proved) and this we assert;
therefore

What the Apostle says, we willingly own and acknowledge, neither would we
upon any pretense withhold from any man his due; but as for your
common-far-fetcht-fine-spun consequences, you must give us leave to deny them,
till you can better prove them; If you be so willing to be deceived, we are not
willing to deceive you, to put you off with Cap and Knee, a few fine ^awning
words, shaddowy scrapes and cringes, when a better substance is your due.

Object. But it is said again, you give offense to the weak; Now the Apostle
says, Judge this rather that ye give no occasion or offense to the Jews nor
Gentiles, nor to the Church of God, 1 Cor. 10.32.

Answ. This is a mere shift, and blind subterfuge for ignorance and deceit
both, a something, though nothing to the purpose; for the Apostle speaks here
of things that offended the week Consciences of some in those days, and so
plainly speaks of matters of Conscience. But our Adversaries generally, with
one mouth cry out (and think it an invincible Argument against us) There is
nothing of Religion in these things, they are no matters of Conscience, they
are things of Civil concern, indifferent, may be left or done.

Now these two Pleas, or Shifts, are diametrically opposite, and cannot stand
together; only if you cleave to the first (as I think all do) to call them
civil, indifferent things, no matters of Conscience, then your Plea is good
against your selves, in that ye are found offending us (so far as in you lies)
by doing that which we in Conscience to the Lord cannot do, and your selves may
leave undone if you will.

But besides, it is granted the good and humble, the meek, lowly are not
offended at it, matter it not, whether they have it or not, and evil-minded men
we are not to please, in their Haughty, Proud, Ambitious Minds. The Apostles
were not men-pleasers, and warned the Christians not to become such, nor to be
subject to the Ordinances or Rudiments of the world.

Object. It Is true, the good and meek are not offended for their own sakes,
because they are not honored, etc. But for your sakes, who thereby seem to
them, Proud, High-minded, Obstinate, Self-willed, Self-conceited men, and of a
Contentious Spirit, etc.

Answ. -- Let it all come out -- And then know, that if any judge us with a
rash, false judgment, according to outward appearance, to their forward,
froward minds; we appeal from their judgment, to him that cannot err in
judgment, and knows the inmost frame of our hearts and Spirits, and judges us
with Righteous Judgment; Have therefore but a little patience to observe our
conversations, and if the rest of our converse does not plainly demonstrate the
contrary, let your judgment stand upon that person till it does.

But withal, Friends! who are more proud than those that are ready at giving
and receiving this threadbare honor? who are so handy in it, that they have
every jot thereof at their fingers and tongues ends as it were? Oh! that ye
were indeed enemies to Pride, and offended at it, then would ye suspect your
selves and your own manners more then us and ours, and then ye would abstain
from that whole bundle of aerie manners, which are as Oil poured into the fire
of Ambition, to increase the flame and burning thirst thereof.

Yea, commonly, those that are so expert in this mannerly trade, do willingly
receive again, what they give, with increase, and so do often give the more
liberally, that they may receive their returns in more abundance, as the
Germane Proverb, says, Ehr will geehrt sein, Honor would be honored; but both
the giver and the receiver are out of the Truth, Way, and Faith of Christ, in
that matter, for, he received not honor of men.

So it is not true Humility, nor morigerosness to be exact in the Academy of
Complements, nor yet in a self-pleasing-way of simply putting off the hat, and
bidding good morrow and good-even (which some hope to excuse themselves with)
as not being conformable to the worlds abused customs.

Nay, nay, these are not the right badges of true Honor, Humility or good
manners -- but rather of feignedness, vanity and custom. -- But he that joins
himself to those of low degree, going before them in honor as a good example,
-- honoring and serving all men in that which is good and serviceable, in his
place; as well the poor as the rich, the mean as the mighty, without respect of
persons; he bears the badges of Humility, and shows his good breeding and
manners.

But alas! how empty are our modern mannerly Ones of these things! when shall
we see these things in our streets? in which of our Cities shall we see a great
man or a rich man proffering his service, and lending his helping hand to a
mean despicable man, upon any occasion? Nay either his hands or his clothes are
too fine to stoop to it, and to give them the upper hand as they term it. Oh
nay! that would not be seemly; yea, are they not generally rather ashamed to
pass along the streets with one in a mean habit, unless he be on the lower
hand, so called, or with his Hat in his hand a-loof off at a distance, as if he
were made of some courser Nature or more ignoble matter: -- And if peradventure
some mean man, who sees through the pitiful hood of Lord-ship, Sir John Hood,
Worship, Master-ship, and such like gay titles, should, meeting such a One,
pass by him, and his gugaws, without the observance of giving him the wall, cap
or knee, more than to another mean person; then oft-times Cain appears in wrath
and fury, Shimei in railing and reviling, or Ishmael in scoffing.

And these are thy manners, nay thy good manners (so called) O Christendom! are
these the badges of thy Humility? away with them, they stink in the nostrils of
the Lord.

But as concerning the offense pretended; we in sincerity say, We would not
willingly give offense to any thing that is good, or any thing of God in any
man, how weak, mean or low soever; but rather do desire, that all men may come
to the knowledge of the Truth, and to walk in the Light thereof, in which there
is no occasion of stumbling nor offense.

But there are that do, on the one hand make Conscience of that which (to do)
is not sin, and on the other hand make no Conscience or scruple to do that
which is sin: -- As the Papists in abstaining from meats at certain Seasons by
the Church of Rome forbidden; and again, in Worshipping Bread and Wine, and
Honoring Images of Wood and Stone, etc. by doffing their Hats, bowing and
cringing to them, etc. (the very Actions here in question) and so zealous they
are for these things, that they are possessed with a certain bitterness (where
they may show it with Authority) against such as conform not to them.

Will ye now say, that we must abstain from the one, and do the other, to avoid
giving them offense? if yea, then why do you not so your selves, but call that
Superstition, and this Idolatry? If not, then why should we be more conformable
to your Customs to avoid giving you offense, then ye are to theirs upon the
same account? are ye not as great or a greater offense to them, then we are to
you? seeing they are offended upon a certain Religious or Conscientious, and ye
but upon a pettish, pevish, wilful account.

Object. Its further Objected, It is the custom of the Country where you dwell.

Answ. And what then! it is also the custom of most Countries, and of most men
in most Countries, to Lie, Cheat, Cozen, Curse, Swear, Steal, be Drunk, live in
Fornication, Adultery, Wantonness, or spend their time in the one or other
Vanity more then in serving or fearing the Living God; and therefore, says the
Scripture, The Customs of the People are vain; must we then be subject to their
Customs? -- If ye say, ye do not mean so, then I say, this plea of Custom, is
vain.

Object. But these are the Customs of the wicked only in all Nations, which
though they be the most or greatest part of Nations, yet good Customs are
derived from the better part (though the smallest) for we must not follow a
Multitude to do evil; But this is the Practice or Custom, not of the wicked
only, but also of the sober, Godly and Wise, unless ye think there are none
such but your selves.

Answ. This is but what the Papists say, still to your selves, no better
payment; for they also, say unto you, its the Custom of our Country, and Cum
fueris Romae, Romano Vivit^ more; When ye are at Rome, ye must do as they do
there; and why can ye not? say they, ye are strange Fanatics; what! are ye
alone Wise, alone Godly, alone Conscientious? Have you more Holiness and
Conscience then all your and our Forefathers? More understanding then all the
Learned men amongst us, at present, or that for many hundred years past have
been; none of which ever doubted of these things.

Object. Another Argument is, The Magistrates command it, and ye must obey the
Magistrates; Let every Soul be Subject to the Higher Powers, etc.

Answ. The Magistrate is not the Highest Power, unto which the Soul is to be
subject, but the power unto which the Soul both of the Magistrate as well as
the Subject, is to be subject unto, is the Power of God, from whence the power
of the Magistrate comes, and so must be subject to it; -- and the outward man
is to be subject to the outward Power for Conscience Sake; which therefore
cannot be in things against or contrary to the Will of the Lord and a good
Conscience.

But the Papists also say the same to you, Our Magistrates command it, etc. but
which of you can go to hear Mass, or Reverence, Honor, and Worship Images for
Conscience Sake, because the Magistrate commands it? or is it lawful for any of
you so to do upon that account? if ye know not, ask your Priests.

Object. By putting off their Hats and bowing to Images, Blocks and Stocks are
Worshipped, and that is Idolatry; but our Practice is not so, it is but a Civil
Honor, Worship or Respect.

Answ. When did ever Idolaters, confess themselves such, or acknowledge their
Practice to be Idolatry? Do not the Papists also say, Their Practice is not
Idolatry? surely yes; for say they, Idolatry, is a giving the Divine Honor
which is due to God alone, to the Creature; which (say they) we do not to the
Images of the Saints, nay nor to the Saints themselves neither; but it is a
certain due, convenient, decent respect, Worship or Ecclesiastical Honor,
which our Holy Mother the Church requires of us her Children, thereby to show
forth the esteem and reverence which we in our hearts do bear unto the Saints
deceased, of blessed Memory, who are represented by their Images, and not at
all do we worship the Image it self, which is but wood, or stone, etc. -- as
other wood and stone is, only they are by our Priests Consecrated and set
apart for such an use, etc.

Wherefore in vain it will be for you to defend your selves against us with the
same weapons wherewith the Papists defend their practice, which you call
Idolatry, against you; -- For, what you say for yours, that they do for theirs;
and whatsoever therefore you would return to them as proof to evince unto them,
that their practice is Idolatry or Superstition, and unlawful, that take to
your selves, -- and so either go back to them or come forward with us out of
all Superstition and Idolatry; halt not thus betwixt two, as you do, so long as
you continue in the one, and condemning the other, being blinded by affection
to your own ways.

For the Action is the same amongst you as them, viz. Putting off the Hat, or
bowing in a way of Respect, Honor, Worship or Reverence to an external Object;
-- all the difference is, they do it to lifeless Images, ye many times to
wicked men, who are dead whilst they live.

Now, why is the putting off the Hat, etc. to an Image, Idolatry, and to a
degenerated Wicked ambitious man (who is worse) not? Is it the Image makes the
difference? For, they do put off their Hats to Images, and ye say, they Worship
Images; and ye do the same to men; -- may we not then say, that ye worship men?
-- And where does the Scripture say, the Worshipping of Images is Idolaetry, and
of men, good? or are not men also Images?

In vain again will be your distinction of a Civil Worship, and so no Idolatry;
for then, in comes the Pontifician with his cover of Ecclesiastical Worship,
and not Divine, and so as little Idolatry as yours.

Can ye now reject (which foundation) their distinction of Ecclesiastical, we
upon the same ground deny yours of Civil Worship; for they stand both in one
ground.

Object. Some now say the Papists do intend a Religious, Divine, Honor and
Worship; we not; therefore though the Action be the same, yet the intention
makes their's Idolatry, ours not.

Answ. They, or at lest most of them deny it, would you admit us to say the
same of you? But, this opens a wide door, and gives liberty to be present at
the Mahumetan, Mass-worship, or any other gross Idolatrous Worship, and to the
Worship, the worst of Idols externally; for if the inward intent of the mind
makes that Idolatry, which otherwise is not evil but good; then you may
lawfully put off your Hats to Images, bow the Knee to the Wafer-Idol as you
meet it in the streets, -- or are present in the Idol-Temples and Mas-houses,
-- if ye do not intend, in your minds any honor to that, but do it to some
other end, especially if ye do but (in your way) worship your God at that time.
And then, if this be Orthodox Doctrine amongst you, how much less excusable are
ye, in giving offense to the Papists in these things which ye believe ye may do
without sin, then we in offending you, in that which we cannot, sine laesa
Conscientia, conform unto?

If any say, All things are lawful, but all things are not so expedient; and
therefore though it be lawful for us to put off our Hats passing by an Image,
or bow the Knee before an Idol, yet it is not expedient; for that, we should
thereby strengthen those worshippers in their Idol-worship, and confirm them in
the blindness of their minds; which we may not do, but rather labor to inform
their minds both by Word and Example, and therefore in love to their Souls we
cannot do it.

We also say to you, Though putting off the Hat in it self might seem nothing,
and be done, yet we having therein found the Cross of Christ, and in the Cross,
the Power of God, we cannot make the Cross of Christ to cease; but considering
the great abuse therein, and error of Peoples minds, and what mind is pleased
and fed therewith, we cannot but walk in the Cross to that mind in others,
which is crucified in our selves, that so they may come also to take up the
daily Cross to that mind in them, which (...) after honor, and seeks honor
of men, earthly honor, honor below, which that of the Hat is, and not from
above.

Moreover, your practice is to us as plain Idolatry and Superstition, as the
Papists is to you; and that you will not see it to be so, is as little our
fault, as that they will not confess theirs so to be.

For what is an Idol, but something made of a thing of nothing; For we know
(says the Apostle) that an Idol in the world is nothing; only they make
something of it, -- and there is the Idol.

And what is Superstition? but to stand -- upon an empty formality, and to be
bound up, and bowed down to it, this is Superstition; or to take up, and stand
in, and not move from a Formality, nor suffer others so to do, because it is a
custom.

Now what is a Hat, or what is in it, that ye will needs have that put off as
the only honor due to Magistrates? Is there any thing more in it then in the
Coat, Cloak, Glove or Shoe? but as the inventing Idol-making-mind has placed
something in it; and therefore its no dishonor to Magistrates to deny it, but
rather an honor, because it tends to the opening of their eyes, and leading
them out of Bondage to Fruitless Customs and Formalities.

And ye that think to cover your selves with the pretense of Civil Worship, and
say, We must be subject to the Civil Magistrate in all Civils, and he commands
it.

Have ye never read how that Ahasuerus the King, commanded that all his
Subjects should Bow and Reverence Haman? and yet Mordecai refused to bow
himself or obey the Kings Command, though but in a Civil Matter, or a Civil
Worship (as ye call it) whereupon your Predecessors presently said to him, Why
do thou transgress the King's Command? At which Haman also being wroth, he
procured the King's writing to slay all the Jews, but the Lord frustrated his
purpose.

Certainly had you lived in his day, you would have said much more, This man is
an obstinate, self-willed fool, that will not do such a trifle to save his own
life, and the lives of all his Brethren, the whole Nation of the Jews.

Wherefore O ye Magistrates and Rulers of the People, whether called Emperors,
Kings, Princes, or by what other Title soever distinguished, listen not to the
Complaints and dissembling Accusations of such envious, ambitious Hamans, who
though they pretend your Honor, and Zeal to have all your Laws and Orders
obeyed, yet trust them not, it is their own Ends and Honor they seek under that
cover, therefore beware of them; neither lend your Ear to that Haman-spirit in
your selves, when it would rise up in wrath and fury, and put you upon drawing
the Sword of Justice against a harmless, innocent, peaceable people, only for
the law of their God, and tenderness of their Conscience, if you have no other
just matter against them; for that Spirit is not to be your Counselor, neither
ever was sent by God to be your Guide unto Righteousness, and therefore is to
be Judged and Condemned in its appearance and rising in you, by that more Noble
Principle of God in you, which the Lord has placed near you, to guide, Counsel
and direct you, to lead your feet into the Path of Peace, Justice, Mercy and
Righteousness, in which the Throne of the King is established -- and to be his
sure and everlasting Record, Evidence and Witness for him against you, in every
thing that you act contrary to it.

And therefore, if ye neglect this, and reject its Counsel, ye reject the
Counsel of the Lord against your selves; and by giving heed to that seducing
Spirit, which tempts and hurries you into wrath and fury, and to offer violence
to any Innocent man, for his Conscience to God-wards, in such a thing of
naught, as a few pitiful, dead, dull, groundless Ceremonies, ye will be
thereby found fighters against God, and justify the violence offered to your
selves, for your Consciences, by your Enemies, when they had power over you;
and not only so, but also contract the guilt of all the Innocent Blood, shed
from Righteous Abel to this day, by all the Persecutors that ever were; for
whosoever is found in the Persecuting Nature and Spirit, is a Member of that
Body, let his profession now, differ never so much from many of the old
Persecutors in other ages, and agree with the greatest and meekest of
Sufferers; it matters not, it is not a few Words or Articles that changes the
Nature or Spirit. The Murderer is the Murderer still, though got into a
peaceable man's Habit; He that was a Liar from the beginning, is so still,
though he may change his garb; The Wolf retains his Nature, though in the
Sheeps clothing.

Therefore upon you will lie the guilt of all, and where the guilt lies, there
the wrath abides, and the stroke of God's Vengeance will assuredly follow and
not tarry, and heavy and dreadful will it be when it comes.

So Awake, awake, take heed, I say, beware what ye do; and it is for your sakes
that we thus call unto you, more then our own; for as for us we are nothing
careful, nothing Solicitous in these matters, but are freely given up to the
Lord our God, patiently, and rejoycingly to suffer whatsoever ye shall have
power to inflict upon us (for ye are limited, though ye may be apt to think it
is not so) as has often been manifest, both in our Native Country, at Rome,
and other places under the Pope's Dominions, -- and amongst the New England
Persecutors.

If any deem themselves in the Truth, and believe us to be in the wrong; and
because their Bishops, Pastors, Teachers, Priests, etc. -- tell them, they may
without any more ado, use the Power they have to Oppress, Suppress and Ruin,
us and ours, or any, for their tender Consciences and exercise of their
Religion, which is every man's due, and no man ( de jure) does hold at the Will
or Pleasure of any earthly Ruler whatsoever, but immediately from the God of
Heaven, whose immediate Subjects they ought to be in all such things: -- I say,
If any hereupon shall begin; attempt or undertake such a thing, they will
thereby manifest themselves to be no Christians, in that they do unto others,
that which they would not that others should do unto them, under which Law,
Christ Jesus has indispencably concluded all his Disciples, that are, ever
were, or ever shall be so, from the Prince to the Peasant, none excepted,
whether in, or out of Authority.

And that man or company of men will be found in the Great and Notable day of
their Account and Trial, before the judgment of Jesus Christ the King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, Arch- Rebbels and Traitors to, Invaders and
Subverters of (so far as in them lies) his Kingdom, Rule and Government, and
Oppressors, Tormentors, and cruel Murderers of his Innocent, Peaceable,
harmless Subjects; -- Therefore again I say Beware, and look to the end, -- sit
first down and reckon the Charge, the Trouble, the Cost, and the Reward; and
further know, -- That it is in vain to attempt such a thing; its impossible to
effect such a thing; it demonstrates weakness, want of understanding in him
that shall begin it; -- for the work is endless; it will be always doing, and
always to do, and never have an end; -- besides the Curse of God attending
such an enterprise.

If it were but to Banish, Ship off, Imprison, Impoverish, Ruin or cut off a
certain number of men, now visible, admit it were five or ten hundred thousand
in a Nation, Male and Female, Old and Young; perhaps some Tyrannical men might
persuade a Prince this might be done, and perhaps some bloody Tyrant might
think it could be effected, and say in himself, Well! i will rid my Land of all
these Sects and Schismatics, of all these Heretics and Seducers, -- and then
I shall be quiet in my Land, I shall have Peace and no Division, etc. this has
a fair show all to tempt.

But alas! a wise man will see that these men are all absolutely deceived and
seduced in themselves, these Counselors are besotted, and hastening to their
own destruction; for no man can see a day nor hour before him in this wretched
work; for when thus, this number now seems ruined, or rather while it is doing,
the number is doubled, yea seven times doubled; And this is evident to every
ingenious man, that has but been observant, and taken notice of the Histories
that he has read of old, and things he has seen of late years, that the blood
of the Persecuted, the Oppressions of the Oppressed, are as Seed cast into the
ground, which brings forth increase, thirty, sixty, and a hundred fold; and
thus the work has always, and always will swell under their hands, and the
guilt of innocent blood increases, and the measure of their iniquity is
filling up, till at length the Cry, the strong and vehement Cry of innocent
blood pierces the Heavens, and enters the Ears of the Lord of Hosts, who
arises to render vengeance upon these Cains and mighty Nimrods of the earth,
and deliver the remnant of his people out of their Iaws, and then their torment
will be great, yea, greater than they shall be able to bear, though they should
have many Kingdoms under their Dominions, and as much variety of Pleasures as
their vain hearts can invent for their diversion, yet a little contemptible
worm from our God shall gnaw at the root of it all, and cause it to wither, and
take away their peace, and terror and dismayedness shall be their inseparable
Companion; paleness shall cover their Faces, and the true and faithful Witness
and Rewarder, shall open the Books, and produce the Records that are written
against them, and the works of their Hands, and Counsels of their Hearts shall
be their perpetual torment; for, Suum invidia torquet auctorem, Mischief brings
torment upon him that devises it.

-- And in that day, it will appear, that we had more ground to deny these
things, then you had to keep them up, when the Lord had, by us his People,
brought forth a Testimony against them, and endeavored the removal of them, --
merely because it was your custom, and ye would have it so, and the contrary
would breed disorder and confusion amongst you, -- and for no other ground at
all indeed; -- whereas we have forsaken and denied them in our own practice,
and testified against them in others, for these several weighty Reasons.

1. Forsaken them in our own Practice, because we have not found the Spirit of
the Lord leading us unto them, nor saw any ground in the same for them; which
yet ought to be, and is the guide of every true Christian, as it is written, As
many as are led by the Spirit, are the Sons of God, and no more; and what we
find not the Spirit of God leading us unto, we can have no faith in, and
whatsoever is not of Faith, the Scripture says, is six; therefore we leave
them.

2. We have moreover found the Spirit of God limiting us in them, and leading
us out of them, in which practices we also lived, (yet not without the
Judgment of the Lord oft-times in our selves for them, though we knew it not)
while we walked in the vanity of our minds, after the Traditions of the world,
darkened thereby in our understandings, and greatly strangers from the Life of
God; unto which life being now turned, and come to receive the enlightnings
thereof day by day in our Hearts, we have chosen it for our Leader, and it
leads us out of all dead works, of which sort these are; therefore we forsake
them, and as it is required at our hands, testify against them.

3. In this Light, springing from the Life of God, or the Word of God, 1 John.
shining in our Hearts, we see the whole Mass of it to be a weak unprofitable
thing; not able to answer the end for which it is said to be practiced, viz. to
show Honor, Respect and Love, -- and so ought to cease especially when a
better and more serviceable means is discovered; which we being found in; are
altogether careless to answer the Will of any man, or Custom of any Nation
therein, but do lay it a side, and trample it under our feet as a thing of
naught.

4. We find it tending merely, and solely to strengthen, feed and please the
Spirit of Ambition in men and women, by which they are led to destruction;
wherefore we cannot practice those things, lest we should be found guilty
thereof, which so far as in us lies, we desire and seek to prevent, even of our
enemies themselves.

5. We find it the very same kind of Honor and Salutation which Christ so
sharply reproved in the Scribes and Pharisees, and strictly forbad to his
Disciples, and has severely judged and broken down in us; and therefore if we
should be found in them, we should return to build that which God has thrown,
and is throwing with an everlasting destruction, and so we should become more
lovers and pleasers of men than of God.

6. We find it, even the whole Corpse of it, to be an Invention of man,
degenerate man, springing from a corrupt vain mind, in a false and groundless
conceit, to corrupt ends, and is waxed more and more corrupt in the use thereof
every day than other; for which causes we can have no unity with them, nor
touch, but avoid them as defiled and polluted, which the Lord loatheth, as much
as ever he did any of his own Institutions, when they became corrupted and
defiled by the Sons of men, as the Scriptures plainly declare; but this custom
of doffing the Hat, especially, as an Honor and Worship, never had its rise
from God but from men of corrupt minds; as will very readily appear, if we do
but consider, that no People or Nation but those called Christians since the
Apostasy do practice it: for neither the Jews, who had their outward Law both
in relation to the Worship of God, and respect to Magistrates, never were
commanded any such thing, neither ever practiced any such thing among
themselves when they entered into their Synagogues (nor yet do there) nor before
their Magistrates, nor to one another, but in these Countries where they follow
the Custom of the Country; Neither do the Turks observe it as an honor, but
look upon it as a shame, or reproach, or an odious thing; Nor do we read that
the Apostles or Primitive Chrstians ever practiced any such thing to
Magistrates or to each other.

Yea admit further, (which cannot be proved) that the Apostles themselves had
practiced it among themselves, to each other, yea, to all they met, good and
bad, as now its practiced, that cannot bind us now, nor limit the Lord to it,
more than to other of his Institutions, for several Reasons before mentioned.

But as for us, we believe the Hat to be an Earthly thing, not the Honor which
is from Above, but from Below, made for covering the nakedness as well as the
other clothes; and with which God nor man, neither is nor can be truly
worshipped, more than by putting off the Shoe, Glove, Coat, or any other
Garment; neither do we believe that its any part of the Worship of God, nor
renders the Worship any thing the more well-pleasing or acceptable to the Lord,
but is far below the Worship of God, yea, or Dignity of a man, that is a man
indeed; and therefore all that are contending for the honor and worship of the
Hat, are contending for the honor which is below, which the Saints and People
of God never did, and therefore this honor will into the dust.

If any now urge upon us the example or practice of any of the Holy men of God,
mentioned in Scripture, for bowing, because they bowed both to Angels and Men;
-- we say, that binds us not now, to do the same things, -- we must take heed
to another rule and guide in this day, -- than their Actions.

As for example, its said of Abraham, He bowed himself to the Earth, before the
three Men or Angels; and also before the People of the Land; -- Concerning
Jacob it is said, He bowed seven times to the Earth, till he came past his
Brother Esau; and concerning David, That he fell upon his face to the ground,
and bowed himself three times, etc.

Object. Now say people, Will ye condemn these Holy Men of God, or will ye be
more holy than they?

Answ. Far be it from us to condemn those Worthies of the Lord; the Lord has
justified them, and who shall condemn them? but to desire to be even more
holier than they, if it can be, we hope will offend no true Christian, nor be
used as matter of accusation against us.

Yet if these, or any other at any time, did any thing without command or
approbation from the Lord, or against his Will, we are not to take them for our
example in such things, I judge all will grant: -- well then,

That they did bow, etc. -- is indeed written; but that they had any command
for it, nor praised or approved in it, where is that written? search and tell
us.

Abraham went to buy a Burial place of that strange people; Jacob was afraid
its plainly said, and called Esau Lord; though there was a promise that the
Elder should serve the Younger; yea he said (in his fear) that he beheld his
face, as if he had beheld the Face of God; may we therefore speak such words to
any wicked man? consider it; -- David was also in great Trouble and sore
Affliction.

Now these things considered, what might move them so to do, or how far they
were approved, or not, by the Lord in that day, I rather leave to the Lord than
determine.

Object. But some perhaps may say, They were not reproved for it, therefore it
was not evil.

Answ. As it is not written that they were reproved, so neither is it recorded
that they were approved. Besides, we find not that Abraham was by the Lord
reproved, for saying that Sarah was his Sister; nor Isaac in the like case, for
fearing the people of the Land; nor Joseph for swearing by the Life of Pharaoh;
the Custom of the Court and Country where he dwelt, no dout; nor lastly, any of
the Patriarks, for having more wives than one.

Yet, who believes not these things to be unlawful? much less does any man look
upon it to be his duty to do so, though these Worthies did so? -- so that it is
not their example without command, Warrant or Approbation; nay nor yet their
approved Actions, that must be our ground or rule to act by in this
dispensation, unless the same things should of us be required in this
Dispensation; Nay it is not what others now do by the infallible leading of the
Spirit of God even in this day, that must be a ground for me to do the same
thing; but my Ground, Rule and Guide must be in my self from the Lord; Nay
further, it is not what the Lord led me to do yesterday, by his infallible and
unerring Life and Spirit in my own particular, that must be my ground for doing
the same thing this day, without the same movings, leadings and guidings also
this day, yea, at that instant of time, when I go about the thing.

And herein we differ from all Sects who are set down in a form, either of what
they take up by Tradition written or unwritten, it is all one to the Lord, of
which they have felt nothing from the Lord in themselves, or at the best,
having found something of God stirring in them, and leading them to it in days
past, are settled down in their Form, and going on in the Practice, satisfied
with what they have felt, whether they feel the same still or not, and so are
withered, and offer up a dead Sacrifice to the Living God.

But we plainly say, That he that goes one Day, or Hour, or Moment before the
Power or Life of God in the Worship of God, is a will-worshiper, and his
worship is not accepted, -- for I may do that this Day, this Hour, in the
motion of the Spirit of God, in which I may be justified of the Lord, in my
obedience to him; which to morrow if I should go to do again, I might do it in
my own will, and so instead of being approved and justified, being not covered
in the Action with the Spirit of the Lord, shame before the Lord, though not
before men, who only see the outside, would cover my face.

And thus the Lord has led his people out of many things, never to return unto
them again, as Warring, Killing, Slaying, Fighting for outward Possessions,
Lands and Inheritances, Worshipping in Temples made with hands, and upon
Mountains, as Holy Places, with all the whole Body of the Jewish Worship,
Ceremonies, and observing Days, Sabbaths, Months and Years, once Commands of
the Lord; but long since rejected and done away, for the abuse, weakness, and
unprofitableness of them; yea abhorred of the Lord, and unlawful for his people
to touch.

Object. If any say these things are unlawful now, because the Scripture
testifies against them; but show us where the Scripture forbids to honor men
by bowing, putting off the Hat, etc.

Answ. These things were unlawful, because Paul testified against them; but
Paul therefore testified against them, as in the Case of Circumcision, because
they were become unprofitable, yea abominable, and so unlawful, else Paul had
testified against that which was lawful, that so he might render it unlawful
for the future, which is ridiculous to imagine.

And as for doffing the Hat, bidding Good Morrow, and such like stuff, they are
mere upstart Novelties, which in those days no man once dreamed of; but those
things which were then practiced as instead of these things, were forbidden and
reproved by Christ, and particularly Greetings and Salutations in the Market
places, or upon the ways, calling men Master, and Bowing, whether before Men
or Angels, though formerly practiced by diverse Friends of God.

Before Angels; though Abraham, Lot and others bowed themselves before them,
yet John was forbidden so to do, see Rev. 9. See thou do it not, for I am thy
fellow Servant, Worship God. -- and, --

Before Men; though many have bowed themselves to the earth, yet Cornelius was
by Peter reproved for so doing (when he fell at his feet) with a, stand up, I
my self am also a man; as it is written, at the Name of Jesus, not of any man,
every knee shall bow.

Again Christ says, I receive not honor of men, and testified against this
very kind of honor, these ceremonial toys, and evil manners, in the Scribes
and Pharisees, and publicly reproved them for being called of men Rabbi, or
Master, and for these Crooked, Market-street-Salutations, and therefore
certainly did not give them himself.

Object. Its said, Christ did not reprove the thing it self, but only such men
as loved, desired and sought for that honor, and those Salutations in public,
and to be called of men Master, etc.

Answ. This cover is too narrow, and pretense too short; for it is apparent,
that Christ reproved them simply for receiving those things, saying, How can ye
believe that receive (not only ye that seek, but also ye that receive) honor
from men, and seek not the honor that comes from God alone, [Mark] that honor
alone, -- and sets himself as an example before them; I receive not honor of
men, -- he says, not, I seek it not, I desire it not, love it not, take no
pleasure in it, but simply I receive it not; and forbade his Disciples strictly
to be called Master or Rabbi.

And in this Doctrine all his Disciples abode, and all the Apostles; as may be
seen in their Writings, Epistles and Letters, which they occasionally wrote to
each other, -- in none of which is any mention made of Mr. Paul, Mr. Peter, Mr.
Matthew, John or James; -- neither are any of Paul's Letters, To the Right
Reverend Father in God, his Grace, Timothy, -- Archbishop, or Bishop of
Ephesus, -- nor subscribed Your Honors most Humble and Devoted Servant; nor to
the Reverend and very Learned Mr. Titus, Minister of the Word of God, or
Minister of the Gospel at Crete; As the Bold and Irreverend Bishops, and
Pragmatick Priests of our times, do without blushing bedaub each other with the
Illustrious Titles of Reverend, Right Reverend, Divines, Fathers, Doctors or
Masters, while they at the same time make profession of being Ministers or
Servants of Christ and his Flock: And in their Prayers cry out no less
Hypocritically then Audatiously, To thee O Lord, to thee alone belongs all
Honor, Glory, Reverence, Thansgiving and Dominion, for thou alone art worthy,
etc.

And yet so soon as they are out of their talking Stool, will be looking for
Reverence and Honor from the people whose Servants they pretend to be; and if
they do any man a good turn, as they count it, are presently offended if they
have not many returned them for it, and had in esteem as good Benefactors; what
think thou Reader, of these seeming holy-humble-Servants or Ministers? are
they not over Faithful to their Lord and Master, whom in pretense they serve?
but in reality themselves: -- for though in Hypocrisy, with fained Words and
fair Speeches they confess themselves (and it is true enough, though they intend
nothing less that they are) unworthy, and that he alone is worthy of all
Praise, Honor, Reverence and Thanksgiving; yet as unworthy as they really are,
they will put in for a share with him, of his Praise, Honor, and Thanks, and
Persecute for want of it; yea, and least the people should according to their
Doctrine and Prayers, give all Honor and Thanks to God, and so scruple giving
any to them, they will be sure to give to one another, partly to remove that
scruple out of the peoples minds, as a thing very consistent with their
Doctrine; knowing that people look more at their Actions than their Doctrines,
and expect more from the Comment than the bare Text; -- and partly because in
so doing, they are sure never to go without their Idol Honor, so long as
there is two alive to give it to each other: -- Oh abominable! how far were any
of these loathsome things from the thoughts of the poor despised-self-denying
Apostles and Disciples of Christ? Yea, how do they to this day stink in the
Nostrils of all Sober-minded Christians? Are these Ministers of Christ, of that
world contemning Honor and Pomp despising Jesus? Where, or who then are the
Ministers of Antichrist? -- But I shall leave these, and turn to another sort
of Professors, -- who are more finely covered; saying,

Object. It was in matters of Faith or Church matters that they shunned this
Worldly Honor and Titles, and respect of Persons; but in the world in Civil
Matters and Stations there, as they term it, there they used them; and so the
Apostle James is to be understood, Have not the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ
in Respect of Persons; for if one come into your Assembly (that is Church) with
a Gold Ring, and goodly Apparel, and another in vile raiment, -- etc. -- there
in such Places and such Cases, where all are one in Christ, there was, nor is,
to be no respect of Persons; but to one another in worldly Concerns, and to the
World, they did, and might, Paul called Festus Noble, and gave Agrippa his
Title of King.

Answ. It were well ye were all come thus far: for I have seen very few that
call themselves Disciples whether sprinkled or dipped, that have left off
calling each other Master, (I mean as a Title, not as an Office or Relation;
for Servants and Scholars may acknowledge their Masters according to the flesh,
and are to be obedient to them) in Discourses about matters of Faith, Church or
Worship; I believe the number of them is very few, but where does it appear
that the Apostles or Disciples in other outward occasions, gave titles to each
other; -- I read indeed that Paul writ to Timothy to bring his Cloak with him,
which he left at Troas with Carpus; but do not find that he calls him Mr.
Timothy there, no more then when he charge him to Preach the Word, and to be
instant in season and out of season.

Also in your Churches, so called, or Meeting Houses, Is it not ordinary to
find finer, handsomer, (so called) easier, warmer stools, seats or Pillows, for
the Rich, well-bred, and gay-clad Christians, than for the meaner sort? Yea,
and in many Steeplehouses in London, these fine Seats are locked, lest some of
their mean Brethren or Sisters, being weary, should step in, and sit down by
them; yea, many times they are locked, and none in them; if any now be better
reformed, and farther removed from such unrighteous respect of Persons, it is
well.

And for the rest, as that the Apostles and Disciples did use those things to
the world, and in worldly Assemblies, it is a mere groundless Suggestion.

For first, Christ did as sharply reprove that spirit that made distinctions in
places at Feasts, as in the Synagogues, as much the (...), the uppermost Rooms
at Feasts, as the (...), the chief Seats in the Synagogues.

And secondly, In all the actions both of Christ and his Apostles with
unbelievers, or men of the World, before Rulers and Magistrates, Military or
Civil, Lords Temporal or Spiritual (as they will now again be distinguished) of
what degree or quality soever they were, we find not that they ever used, or
gave them any Titles of Honor, so called, -- But only bare distinctions of
Offices and Relations, as to call a King, a King; a Governor, a Governor; a
Centurion, a Centurion; a Priest, a Priest; a Scribe, a Scribe; and the
High Priest, High Priest; and so a Father Mother, Master, were to be owned in
the several Relation i^ which they stood by their own Children, Servants and
Scholars All which are plain distinctions of Offices and Relations, not
flattering Titles, as Job says, now called titles of Honor, -- which things
they always and altogether waved, even when they acknowledged the Office: As

In Jesus his Answer to the Governor Pilate, he says no^ Your Excellency, nor
Your Honor, nor Your Worship, nor Si^ you say it, -- but plainly, Thou say
it. In like manner (...) says to the High Priests Conjuration, again, only,
Thou say Matt. 26, 64. -- Not as the Pope will have it, your Holiness says
it; nor Your Eminency, as the Cardinals will have it; not Your Grace, as the
Lord Bishops will have it; not Your Honor, as the Lords Temporal will have it,
nor Your Worship says it, as every Justice of Peace expects to be worshipped
in these days; nay, nor you say it, as every body now will have it; so far are
all, both high and low, great and small, degenerated from the simplicity that
was in Jesus.

So also Peter and John when they were brought in before the Council,
High Priest, etc. -- we read not that they doffed their hats, or uncovered
their heads, and scraped a leg when they came in; neither in their Answer do we
find one word of, If it please your Worships, your Honors, your Graces, your
Eminencies, nor, may it please your Holiness, as the Roman High Priest would
expect with his Conclave of Cardinals, Synod of Archbishops, Bishops, etc. Or
as an Assembly of Presbyterian (blasphemously so called) Divines, would expect
should be given to them or their Prolocuter, an Officer as little to be read in
the History of Scripture, as Deans, Chapters, Apparitors, etc. with that whole
Rabble of Exotic Officers; but all Language we perceive them to use, was, Men,
Brethren, and Fathers.

He that would see more of this, let him read Paul's Defense before the
Governors, Felix, Festus, and King Agrippa, with his Appeal to Caesar -- in all
which, not one word again of your Holiness to Ananias the High Priest, nor
Excellency to the Governors, nor, May it please your Majesty, your Sacred
Majesty, your most Excellent Majesty, nor your Grace, nor any such like fond
frivolous Titles to King Agrippa, as are commonly used, and looked upon as due,
to all in any Authority, from the feeblest Justice of Peace in a Country, to
the mightiest Prince upon his Throne.

Which Baubles are now looked upon as the only badges, signs or tokens of
Honor, Respect, Reverence and Obedience to Magistrates, by the silly, sorry
Dry-Vines of these days: And wherefore? but because they come in their order,
for their share! but their deceit is palpable, and folly manifest: For as
certain as the Apostles taught Obedience to Magistrates, and Subjection and
Honor, so certainly they practiced it, did honor them, and were obedient,
though they offered them none of these worthless Ceremomies, nor had their
persons in admiration for advantage sake.

Wherefore, O ye professors of all sorts, how have you been cheated into these
things by these Deceivers and blinders of the People? Can ye not see that all
these things came up in the Apostasy? can ye discern any footsteps for them on
the other side? Look back and see if ye cannot find that all these Titles, of
his most Sacred, Imperial, Invincible Majesty, Emperor of the Holy Roman
Empire; His most Sacred Catholic Majesty of Spain; His most Christian Majesty
of France; His most Excellent and Sacred Majesty of Great Britain, Defender of
the Faith, etc. -- Eminency to Cardinals, Grace to Archbishops, Highness to
Princes, Honor to Lords, Worship to Knights, etc. -- came not all from the
same root from whence his Holiness came to be Pope? who has arrived to that
pitch of Blasphemy, which can dispense other more petty blasphemous Titles at
his pleasure, to such as did him a pleasure, and became sworn Vassals to his
Grandeur.

How he (the Pope) came by this Title of Holiness, I think most Professors are
able to see, viz. that it was partly by flattery, and partly by force, and
ungodly Usurpation in the night of Apostasy; not all at once, but by degrees
from step to step; and he had a great while, several hundred years work, and
watching for opportunities to encroach and grasp all his Power and Authority
over Soul and Body, Kings and Subjects, here and hereafter, so long as his
Purgatory Prison lasts.

And can ye see this, and refuse to give it him, and yet not see all the rest
that are but as so many branches and small twigs springing from the same Root?
Oh ye foolish people and unwise! who has bewitched you, that ye cannot obey
the Testimony of Truth that has been so clearly born, so evidently held forth
amongst you against these things? How is it that ye cannot see all these
flattering Titles to have had their ground, rise and growth in the Apostasy;
and that your selves are there, so long as you continue in the use, practice,
and upholding of these things? Is there the least footstep of these things to
be seen or read in the simple, single, upright carriage of Christ and his
Followers? How came your first Reformers to deny some of these Titles, and
retain other of them? was it not out of juggling deceit, or for fear of men at
the best? For shame therefore leave these things, now the day is so far dawned,
and return to simplicity, for you shall no longer slumber nor sleep at rest in
them, but judgment shall awaken you, smite you, and call you up to shake off
these night-cloaths, and appear as Children of the Day, who fear not man, but
God.

And as for Paul's calling Festus, Noble, which some would catch hold of to
save themselves by, just as sinking men, that earnestly grasp at the least twig
to keep themselves above water; but alas, it will not bear them, it sinks with
them, -- for this is nothing like your Priest-flattering Titles, neither was it
an accustomary thing with them to every one in Authority, and that at every
turn almost in their speech to them, as is now usual and expected from Rulers,
-- for we find none using it but Paul, and Paul not to every Ruler; for to
Felix he did not, though the Jews set him an example, and but once to this
Festus; so that the thing was not an useless title of Honor (so called) or
thing of custom, but only a reasonable, just and worthy acknowledgment of his
reasonable, just and noble carriage toward him; which not finding from Festus,
but a partial covetous spirit, that would have had money, he neither did nor
could call him Noble. But,

Obj. It is further objected by some (that would gladly render these Ceremonies
purely Christian Manners) -- That Christ did expressly command his Disciples to
use Salutations to all men, especially (Mat. 5.47.) saying, If ye salute your
Brethren only, what do ye more than others? do not even the Publicans so? --
from hence directly inferring (O monstrum horrendum!) that Christ teaches his
to outdo the Scribes and Pharisees, Publicans and Sinners in these Ceremonial
manners: whereas it is very apparent, that he himself minded nothing less,
shunning and reproving them; yea, his whole simple conversation was a living
testimony against them, respecting or regarding no man's person, as it is
confessed of him by his adversaries themselves when they came to ensnare him.
-- But,

Answ. It is particularly evident, that it was far from his purpose to teach
them worldly manners, his drift being to learn them to exceed all, both
Professors and Profane, in that which was good, necessary, and of service to
all, viz. in love to all, which is the bind of perfection, putting before them
the goodness of their heavenly Father, which extends to all, Just and Unjust;
For he causes (says he) his Sun to rise upon the Evil and the Good, and Rain
to fall upon the Just and Unjust; which he sets before them, I say, as that
which they were to press after, yea, and attain to, if they would be perfect,
as their heavenly Father is perfect, -- which Perfection the manners of the
world never brought any to, but all that come to it, or press after it, do
first turn their backs perfectly upon, and leave behind them. --

But, because all men, both Scribes and Pharisees, Publicans and Sinners, Jews
and Gentiles, all sorts of people, Professors and Profane, did by their
Salutations, use to show or express the seeming love, favor and respect they
bear to each other; therefore does Christ in this place mention them (as Paul
in another place does, running of Races for a prize; not thereby intending to
render that practice Christian-like, no more than he intends to legitimate
Swearing, contrary to the manifest Doctrine of Christ, (as some think) because
he says, Mon (that are in strife) swear by the greater, to end all strife.)
Even thus Christ mentions the Salutations and Greetings of men to his
Disciples, to inform them, that their Salutations, or the demonstration of
their Love, Honor or Respect, Esteem and Good Will to men, which was to hold
forth the Peace of God to men, to do good to all, to bless and pray for them,
etc. -- ought to extend (beyond their empty Salutations to their Friends only)
to All, to Enemies, to those that hated and persecuted them for their love and
good will; and herein stood or consisted their Perfection above all other men,
their likeness to their heavenly Father; and not in such fond manners as the
Pharisees and Publicans (and the modern) Salutations and Complements: Of which
there would be no end, if, by these words, every man were bound to put off his
Hat, and bid Good Morrow and Goodnight Sir, or Mistress to every man or woman
he should meet betwixt Aldgate in London, and Whitehall in Westminster; for all
that he meets are either Friends and Brethren, or not.

But Friends, Christ did not only say to his Apostles, Salute, but he also
taught them how, when, who, where, and upon what occasions they should salute.

So we shall now try and compare your Salutations to the Apostles Salutations,
that so you may see how unreasonably you infer your self-invented Salutations
from the Salutation of the Apostles.

1. Then, The Apostles saluted by command from the Lord, with a Salutation
which had no correspondence with that manner of Salutation then used by the
world: Therefore ye salute with a Salutation contrary to the Command of the
Lord, which is wel-pleasing to the world, yea their own invention.

2. The Apostles when they came into a City or Village, were to enquire who
were worthy, and to salute such only. Therefore, ye salute all, good and bad,
worthy and unworthy, if not too poor.

3. The Apostles saluted that worthy house when they entered into it, but were
expressly forbidden to salute any man upon the way: Therefore ye salute upon the
way, Streets, Markets, or any other public place; And though Christ reproved
it in the Pharisees, that is no matter. --

4. The Apostles entering into that worthy house, and saluting it, saluted it
thus, saying, Peace be to this house. See Mat. 10.13. Luke 10.5. -- Therefore
ye salute any man upon the Street or Market, by bowing, doffing the Hat, and
saying, Good Morrow Sir, Goodnight Madam, Your Servant, or, humble Servant
Madam; every man according to the mode he judges best. What fine consequences
are these, O ye unchristian wresters!

Christ commanded his Apostles to salute, and expressly informed them how, and
gave them their Salutation, which was perfectly abstracted from all honoring
or worshipping of men's persons, far removed from all show of worldly pomp,
estate, and respect of persons, flat contrary to the worlds customs and
manners, and a cross to them -- and ye reject that, and set up another manner
of Salutation, every way correspondent with the worlds manners, and
wel-pleasing to their vain minds, yea the very device of their own brain. And
herein all Sects agree to follow the worlds manners and traditions -- though
they call the Scripture their Rule.

But would the Bishops approve of this Argument from the Papists? Christ said,
Go, teach all Nations, baptizing them, etc. Therefore, we, besides Water, use
Salt, Spittle, and the Chrism, making three Crosses, one in the Name of the
Father, one in the Name of the Son, and a third in the Name of the Holy Ghost.

O nay! we should then assuredly hear, that Christ had not only commanded to
baptize, but he had taught wherewith, viz. with fair Water only. --

Now, would the Presbyterian admit of that, as proof, for the Episcopal Priests
crossing the Infant in the forehead, nor the Baptist for the Presbyterian or
Independents sprinkling water in the face of an Infant, and calling it the
Baptism of Christ --

Nay, nay, then and in this case they would say, Christ did not only command
his Disciples to baptize, but he told them who ( viz. Believers, not Infants)
wherewith ( viz. with, or rather in water alone) and how ( viz. by dipping or
plunging the body under water, and not by sprinkling a little water in the
face.) -- But they are also mistaken, for this neither is, nor ever was, the
Baptism of Christ, no more than the Circumcision outward was Christ's, he was
Minister of another Circumcision, and Author of another Baptism; he baptizeth
in another Water, which washes not away the filth of the flesh outward, but
washes and cleanses the inward parts, and circumciseth or cutteth off the
foreskin of the heart, of which the outward Circumcision and Baptism were in
their times figures and types, the one by Moses, the other by John the Baptist,
both Servants, but this is the Lord from Heaven; and as he is, so is his
Ministration and Operation, heavenly, spiritual and invisible -- and so is his
Kingdom, and not of this world -- He that is wise will understand these things,
but fools will despise knowledge.

But to return to the Salutation. I say, in this all parties can satisfy them
in the practice of a thing for Salutation, and urge the Scripture and Command
of Christ for it; when as, amongst the Apostles and Disciples of old, such
practices were never used as their Salutation, who always walked in a cross to
the ways, manners and customs of the world. --

And then also use it toward people whom the Apostles were not to salute; for
they saluted none in any City or Village where they entered, with Peace, save
only such as were represented to them, upon enquiry, as worthy: But ye all bid
Good-morow, Goodnight, etc. -- to every one of your acquaintance, worthy or
unworthy, Gamsters, Drunkards, Adulterers, Harlots, Proud, Covetous, Ambitious
persons, such as live in pleasures, who are not worthy the Name of Christians;
yea, there is none so unworthy, but he is worthy enough to receive your
Salutation, from which there is no other bar but Poverty.

Obj. But say some, The Primitive Christians did not salute as ye pretend, by
virtue of a particular command to each of them, as the Apostles had, but it was
a custom amongst them so to do, as appears from the second Epistle of John to
the elect Lady and her children, saying, If any man comes unto you, and
brings not this Doctrine ( the Doctrine of Christ) receive him not into your
house, neither bid him God speed ( or salute him not, as the same word is
rendered in Acts 15. and James 1.) By which (say they) it appears they saluted
by custom, without waiting for a command or motion to it.

Answ. The contrary appears from the very words, that they were expressly
forbidden to salute any by custom, as you do, but to try before they saluted;
so that their Salutation stood not in a custom of saluting all they met, or,
all that came to them; but only such as abode in the unity of the Spirit of
Christ, and brought his Doctrine; so that their Salutation stood in the unity
of the Spirit and Life to such as were in it; but as for such as came to them,
not bringing this Doctrine, not abiding in the Spirit, in the Anointing, such
they were not to salute, because it was the custom of the Country -- but were
told by the Apostle, if they did salute such, they should partake of their evil
deeds.

But how can you think upon this Scripture without blushing? Is not your custom
quite contrary to it? Do you try before you salute? are your Salutations
within-doors, as this was, or abroad in the streets, in Marketplaces, among
the world, after their manner? -- If you should forbear saluting all those that
abide not in the Doctrine of Christ, how few would there remain for you to
salute? At the most you might not salute any but those of your own Faith (if ye
judge your selves to have abode in the Doctrine of Christ) and to be sure, no
covetous, proud person, no Idolater, no Swearer, no Drunkard, no Whoremaster,
no Gamester, no vain person, no Liar, no Swearer; for none of these have abode
in the Doctrine of Christ, it allows of no such things: For whosoever
transgresses, abides not in the Doctrine, but has turned his back upon it --
Were it not now more commendable that you had no fellowship with such, that ye
saluted them not, even after your own manner, in bidding them Good Morrow,
Goodnight? etc.

For, though both morning, evening and night are all good, as they were
created; yet to the wicked and such as abide not in the Doctrine of Christ, in
the Anointing, Spirit and Light within, there is nothing good, to the unclean
all things are unclean, both day and night, yea their minds and consciences are
defiled. Are ye not then partakers of their evil deeds while ye have fellowship
with them, bless them, and salute them therein? assuredly yes.

Obj. But all cry out with one consent, That is not our meaning or intent, God
forbid that we should salute, bless, or wish prosperity to people in their evil
deeds or purposes, then we should have fellowship, or partake with them of
their evil deeds indeed; but nay, it is not so, we rather by wishing them a
good day, saluting them, etc. -- we wish or desire for them all good, even
their own conversion from evil, that so they might have a good day indeed.

Answ. Oh fair show, Oh subtle deceit! how fain would men cover themselves!
Might not the Woman to whom John wrote, and her Children, have returned him
that Answer? and what manner of answer it would have been ^o the Apostle let
the wise judge. Surely these men must think themselves wiser than Christ and his
Apostles, or they would not so plainly set themselves against them.

But O that ye were indeed as zealous and earnest in seeking or desiring the
conversion of people from evil! how gladly would we see such a mind in you,
with understanding! then you would assuredly leave your Hat-doffing, mastering,
and bidding Good Morrow and Goodnight, etc. -- and mind the Requirings of the
Lord, and in obedience thereto, speak to people; and in plainness of speech
which they might understand, exhort them to leave off their evil, whether upon
the streets or in their houses.

This is a very easy, but also an exceeding deceitful and dull way, of seeking
the conversion of people, and to bring them out of evil. If it could be done so
easily, every one would be a preacher up of Virtue, and reprover of Vice; but
alas! friend, it is another-guess matter -- believe it --

Neither can any reasonable man persuade himself that an Episcopal Priest
meeting a Presbyterian Parson in the streets, and being saluted by him with cap
and congie, and good morrow Sir, would be able to infer, understand or know
from that, that he was thereby admonished by the Presbyterian Salutant (as
being a false prophet) to cease deceiving the People, and give over seducing
them any longer, and turn to the true Religion -- as a Professor lately in
discourse with me said, about his saluting the Priests, whom he deemed and
adjudged false Prophets, That he thereby wished and desired their conversion,
from deceiving the People, to the right way; -- But assuredly, if such a one
did understand, or were informed that that was the meaning or interpretation of
his Salutation, he would not another time resalute him, with I thank you Sir.
--

Neither would a Drunkard perceive any reproof for his sin, in any such
Salutation, but rather would conclude that Mr. such-a-one his neighbor, had
been very friendly to him to day, and honored him before the People; so far
would he be from being sensible of a reproof in it, or admonition to repent and
be converted, that so he might have a good day, etc. -- O Fraus Fraudum! deceit
upon deceit, madness added to folly! that men should seek to pacify themselves
or others, and stop the mouth of Conscience with such conceits; yet thus it
seems it is, and such covers are used --

But would you not account him a madman that should take singular care how to
get safe over the Sea, and to effect it, should provide himself a Coach with
six horses, and therewith furiously drive into the waters? And what is this
less? to go about to reprove a man for his Pride and Ambition, and pretend
endeavors to bring him out of it, and great care to do it well; and to the
purpose that he may understand it, and return and repent of it, and to effect
it, do nothing but salute, honor, worship, respect him in the Street, in the
Marketplace, before the People; and so (according to his understanding at
least) bless and flatter him in his Pride and Ambition? Is this a likely mean
think ye? Away with such deceit.

But the man replied to me again, It was not always convenient to speak
plainly to me upon the streets.

I believe indeed that you do judge so; yea, that you think it never convenient
neither abroad nor at home, but in the Pulpit, where it follows of course; and
it is your custom to cry out against sin in general, and sometimes against
Pride and Conformity to the World in particular; for which some of you are too
well paid; but to reprove any great, high, proud, ambitious man in particular,
that suits neither your spirits nor occasions at any time; but to doff your
Hats, bow, and cry, God save you, Good morrow Sir, and and such like deceit as
that, this you can very conveniently do almost at any time, in any place, upon
any occasion, and unto any person; provided always that he be not too mean and
despicable: and wherefore is it that the one is so unseasonable, and the other
never, as it were, out of season? is it not because the one is easy and
pleasant to you, and acceptable to others? and the other is so uncouth and
strange, so hard a task, and cross to all? and therefore it is not all one. And
this he should find that should let his Hat stand, and be sparing of his
Good-morrows, etc -- and in obedience to the Lord, should in the Spirit of true
Judgment and meekness reprove sin in the gate, and admonish people both high
and low, to fear the Lord, and depart from evil.

And if any were found so doing, although he should call this saluting, he
would be more acceptable to the Lord, and us his People (for we are not
offended, neither quarrel at the word Salute) than to the common Saluters.

But as for these idle, foolish, good-for-nought, Ceremonious Salutations, we
read that Christ expressly forbad his Disciples to use them upon the way,
either to friend or foe; although when they entered into a house they saluted it
with the salutation of Peace, and that not only to their known Brethren, but
also to such as perhaps would not receive it, but scorn and persecute them for
it, and this was their reward in that case, the Peace of God returned upon them.

But, as I said, alas! this is too hard a task, too great a cross to our
modern, modish, world-conformable Christians, who, oft-times to make good their
exposition of Christ's words, with their deeds are found, even out-aping the
world in their own Apish Customs and Complements.

To these people (though oft-times seeing the thing) there can be no greater
cross. Oh! shall I meet a great man, a rich man, a person of Honor, Earl, Lord
or Knight in the streets, a Justice of Peace, my Friend, my Acquaintance, one
that may do me good, if I honor, worship and respect his person, and mischief
if I do not; nay, when perhaps he will honor me first, shall I not honor him
again? this is hard, who can bear it? what will he say of me? he will judge me
a Fool, a Clown, a Madman; I shall become a gazing, a laughing stock, a
byword, the talk of the Town and Country I shall bring much trouble upon my
self: why! it is but a small thing, let me avoid all this, let me be excused
when I bow! A man may be a Christian surely, and hold a fair correspondence
with the world too. Is not this the sound in many men's ears? even when the Lord
begins to let them see.

Well! but stay a little, Friend, whosoever thou art, and tell me, whose voice
is this? is it not the voice of old Satan, who said of old, Master, save thy
self, whom Christ reproved in Peter, saying, Get thee behind me Satan? and tell
me, do thou hear another voice return upon thee, saying also to thee, Get
thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense unto me, and relisheth not the things
of God, but only those things which concern thy self, thy own ease, profit,
pleasure and repute in the world; but whosoever will be my Disciple, must
forsake himself, take up his cross, and follow me.

Object. Yet, that the god of this world may still keep possession, at least in
one of his territories, his servants plead hard for this Honor, as due, and to
be given at least to the Magistrates, more peculiarly, because the holy
Scripture says clearly, that there is a peculiar Honor due to them, and what
is that? (say they) does not the Scripture call them gods? --

Answ. It Is true, the Scripture called them gods, to whom the Word of God came,
as Christ says, Ioh. 10.34. but he that judges amongst the gods has also
said, they shall dye like men, as one of the Princes -- But where are those
Magistrates, Princes, or men, to whom the Word of the Lord is come in this Age?
or who are they?

Yet a peculiar Honor due to Magistrates, as Magistrates, we grant and own;
but that consists not in these things, as has been plainly enough shown, and
evinced from the Answers and deportments of Christ and his Apostles in their
converse and communication, being brought before Magistrates, who always
honored all, from the King to the least Officer deriving authority from him;
yet were never known to use those flattering and blasphemous Titles of most
Sacred Majesty, Highness, Mightiness, Grace, Honor, Lordship, Worship, etc. --
nor yet the customary cap and knee Complements; but with the simple plain
language of Thou and Thee to them, honored them more, than ye do with all your
vain Titles, and empty Ceremonies.

And if these be (in your judgment) the peculiar Honor due to Magistrates, so
recommeded in Scripture; how is it that you make that which in your judgment is
peculiar to them, common to all, giving it to each other? does not your
practice contradict your plea, and lay open your deceit?

But certain it is, that the Peculiar Honor due to Magistrates, as
Magistrates, is another thing than such baubles, viz. A conscientious Obedience
and Subjection to their Authority, to the Power, which whomsoever resists
(whatsoever person of Magistrate or Subject) resists the Ordinance of God.
But what is this to the persons of men, as men, though in Authority, that they
should assume this honor to themselves, and plead for it as due to them, when
they are to be subject to the Power, which is the Ordinance of God as well as
others. --

Therefore rightly do we distinguish betwixt the Power or Authority with which
a man is invested, and the person or man invested therewith; who as a man, or
person, is in his Office, a Servant to the Power, and ought to be personally
subject to it as well as others. --

If any man slights or rejects this distinction, I shall only ask him, whether
the Obedience be due to the person or will of any man, or no? and whether he
thinks himself in conscience bound, or will obey a Magistrate in all things
that he shall command of himself, or in his own will, though pretending the
Name of the Authority, if it be without, besides, or contrary to the Law,
Authority or Power, which is the standing Ordinance of God, and abides, when
the persons of men invested with it pass away? but on the contrary, if an
Ordinance comes forth from the Power, unquestionably so, what conscientious man
does resist and not submit, at least passively, though in a bad cause? Is not
then our distinction betwixt the Person and the Power sufficiently established
by your own practice?

And for our parts, other Honor due to Magistrates we find none mentioned in
Scripture, nor know any required by God in our selves, nor ever rendered by
Christ and his Apostles, Then Obedience or Submission for the Lord's sake to
every humane creature, as Peter styles all Magistrates, from the King to the
meanest Officer in the Kingdom, 1 Pet. 1.13, 14. Now if we be found rendering
this honor, and any continue yet clamoring against us, and crying out, to
Magistrates belongs a peculiar Honor, and will not see that this is it, even
more than we owe to the will of any man; I judge it altogether needless to
speak any more to such, for to the wise and willing here is enough already
spoken, and to the sattish and wilful too much.

Yet one Scripture there comes to my mind more, by which the sons of delusion,
or deceivers of the Nations, the carnal Clergy, have endeavored to render us
odious to the Magistrates and Rulers, and themselves as gracious and good
Subjects, very tender of, and zealous for their Honor, etc. -- falsely belying
us, as not owning Magistrates, and so not fit to be tolerated, of whom (say
say) the Apostles, Peter and Jude, did plainly testify, saying, These filthy
Dreamers defile the flesh, despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities; and
by Dominion said one to me, is here to be understood the Power or Authority,
and by Dignities, the Titles of Magistrates, etc. -- Poor carnal men!

But do we so? do we despise these? it seems then you do not, but do hunt,
thirst and lust after both, and would fain have both at your will, that so you
might once satiate the blood-thirsty spirit which so lusts in you after the
blood of the Saints, and thereby you would propagate your carnal, formal Faith
and Religion, in the rooting out of others. --

But stay a little, Friends, and here our Defense before we be condemned: We
say, though after outward Power, Authority, Rule, Government or Dominion we
seek not, nor do desire it, yet we despise it not, but do own it in its place,
and do submit unto it for peace and conscience sake, as Christ who was above
all outward Rule also did. The like for Titles, as being distinctions of
several Offices, as names are of diverse persons, we both own and use them; yet
Titles ^here are flattering and blasphemous, in which the Honor of God is
attributed to man whose breath is in his nostrils; and these, we freely confess
we own not, and do trample upon that deceitful mind from whence they came; --
and whether we be the men there mentioned, guilty of despising that Dominion
and those Dignities which the Apostles there spoke of, or not, we shall put to
the issue of a trial: and the words of Christ we own and stan^ to, where he
says, Beware of false Prophets and Seducers, by their fruits you shall know
them; -- and the words of the Apostles shall serve as a Hue and Cry, descrying
the marks and tokens, or fruits, by which these filthy dreamers, and ungodly
men, may be known and discovered, that so all such persons, whosoever they be,
in whom all, or most, or any of these marks are to be found, may be deemed,
held, adjudged and apprehended to be those Deceivers; what can ye desire more?

First then, says Jude, They speak evil of those things which they know not.

Is not this common among your selves? do ye not profess that you know nothing
of Revelations from God in these days, that you have no manifestation nor
discoveries from God, that ye know not the immediate teachings and inspirations
of God? And if any do witness the Word of God abiding in them, the essential
and eternal Word, which lives and abides for ever, in which all the Mysteries
of God and Christ, and eternal Life are hid, and by which all that has
hitherto been made manifest unto the Patriarchs, Moses, the Prophets and
Apostles, or any other the sons of men in all Ages, from the least to the
greatest Manifestation that ever was, has been revealed; and in which much
more lies hid, which shall be revealed and made manifest in the Sons of God in
these latter days. If any, I say, do witness this, and testify of the
Operations, Manifestations, Revelations, and Discoveries thereof, in and unto
them, do ye not cry against it as delusion and fancy, and against them as
deluded Phanaticks?

Secondly, says Jude, -- but what they know naturally, as brute beasts, in
that they corrupt themselves.

Is not this necessarily the condition of all such Teachers as do deny this
Word to abide in them, and know not the Revelation thereof? and so consequently
deny Christ, who is this Word, to be come in the flesh, or to dwell in their
flesh? having nothing but the Scripture and the Writings of men, whereby to
come to the knowledge of God? For not having this Eternal Word, which is CHRIST
the Light and Life abiding in you, what have you else that is divine? or what
can you have more than that which is natural? and whence comes then all your
knowledge of God which you profess, all your Religion, Faith, Hope? etc. but by
getting the natural notion of them into your natural understanding,
comprehension or memory, by natural reading, hearing, and observation? and what
that is more than to know things naturally, as brute beasts do; by that which
is natural to them? And hence it is that all your Learning, Languages, Wisdom,
Knowledge and Religion, being but natural at the best, standing in, and flowing
from the first nature, which neither does nor can know, see, comprehend, nor
understand God, nor the things of the Spirit of God; it is not able to change,
purify, nor cleanse your hearts; and that which is able so to do, and should
so do, not knowing it, ye deny it, disown it, reject it, speak evil of it, and
then cry out, We cannot be delivered from the body of sin and corruption so
long as we live. Oh corrupt men! and more corrupt faith! But this is one sign
more that ye are the men there declared of, for says Peter of them, They
cannot cease to sin; and this is your very profession, you bear this mark in
your forehead with open brazen face; yea, boasting in it as a badge of Orthodox
Christians, counting all others Heterodox Heretics, that believe a finishing
of transgression, and ending of sin; and witness the bringing in, and
possession of everlasting Righteousness on this side the grave.

Thirdly, says Jude, -- They have gone in the way of Cain, etc. -- The way of
Cain! what way was that? Answ. to hate and murder his Brother for Religion, or
about the Service and Worship of God. Now who are they that have gone in this
way for Ages past, and in our time, more than the Clergy or Public Teachers
of the Nations, whether under the Popish, Prelatick, Presbyterian, and
Independent form? Search the Records, and see who have stirred up Persecution
about Religion, and cried out to have Prisons filled, and Meetings (yea and
Countries also by banishments) emptied, Ye or We? Do we need proof, or
compurgations? can any be so void of shames as to demand it, much less to deny
the thing that is so palpably evident? Yet hereby I accuse none that in the
presence of the Lord is clear, and so can in truth speak it.

Fourthly, They say both, -- They ran greedily after the error of Balaam for
reward, having (says Peter) forsaken the Right way, (mark that) and have their
hearts exercised with covetous practices, and so shall through covetousness,
with feigned words, pretending the Honor and Glory of God, feeding the Flock*
Salvation of Souls, etc. with these fair pretenses they shall make merchandise
of the people, says he; whose judgment, as it then lingered not, so it is now
come and coming upon you, and your torment began, even the day dawned upon you,
that you can no longer lie and sleep at rest upon your beds of ease.

Need I to stand forth and make enquiry whether ye be the men here deciphered
or not? or among whom this is fulfilled. Have not the Proverbs of old even made
you manifest to your Flocks? that it is so common amongst them, No Penny, no
Paternoster; and, The Covetousness of the Priests endures for ever, as the
German Proverb says: and many other suchlike Proverbs in diverse languages,
expressing the nature and spirit of your Generation in this particular.

And which of you can in this day clear your selves? which of you have, or yet
will open your mouths without Hire, Tithes, Glebe-land, or some such
super-valuable consideration? yea, are ye not as all other Merchants, watching
all opportunities to prefer your Ware to the best Markets? and not thoroughly
satisfied till you have gotten to the highest pitch, if you can possibly arrive
to it? only the greediness must be covered over with the Pretense of Divine
Providence, or a Call, and then all is well with you. But which of you was ever
called by your God, from the City to a mean Country Village? or from a place of
great ease, preferment and profit, to a place where there is but little or none
of all these carnal accommodations? Oh nay! to such a Call as this (if a Place
be vacant, or a People want a Teacher) you are dull of hearing, and slow of
foot. Nay, your god is not there, that is not his voice, unless it be to one
that is wholly destitute, and so accep^ of it, ministering in hope of a better:
and so you are all pressing forward toward the mark of your calling, (viz.)
Money and Honor among a great People, that so you may (as good proficients)
answer the end of your Parents in putting you to that Trade; this being the
Mark which many of your Paren^s aimed at: who often having several Children, do
exercise their thoughts in providing for them a comfortable and honest, or
honorable employment, and so appoint one to this Trade, another ^o that, and a
third to be a Minister of Christ, or of the Gospel, as they term it; and as
they put forth the other to some Master for a term of years to learn their
Craft, so they put you to the University to learn the Art of speaking by rote,
and trading in words; and when any of you has been a competent time there, and
is grown pretty cunning at cutting out of discourses, wresting plain words, and
handling your tongue deceitfully, then you are fitted for the work of your
Ministry; and the next thing is but to seek out for a Stage to show your Art to
the People, first in one place and then in another, as Mountebanks, till you
can meet with some so silly as to bargain with you for your Ware by the year,
and allow you a shop to sell it in, and this is your Call to the Ministry; for
till some or other will thus buy your Merchandise, you have no Call: but let
the Scriptures with which you trade, bear witness whether this was ever the
Call to the Ministry of Christ. -- But,

Fifthly, says Jude, While they feast with you, they feed themselves without
all fear; and says Peter, esteem it pleasure to live deliciously in the
daytime. Come forth and answer for your selves: Who are more tender and
delicate, than you and your Dames and Children? Who fare more deliciously? who
justify Feasting and Excess in plain terms? and who more often present at
them? Which of you will go from a Lecture, to a poor man's habitation to eat a
little fish and barley-broth, and drink water, as Christ did many times? nay,
your weak stomachs cannot bear such mean food, nor your honorable Calling such
low company; but the Mayor, Deputy-Mayor of a Corporation, or Justice in the
Country you must go along with -- and so the Rich receive your Gospel, and are
found only worthy to entertain you. It Is not for nothing the Proverb does so
mark you out, viz. -- As fat as a Bishop, Parson, or Priest. But the Scripture
cannot be broken which says, Your god is your belly, and you are enemies to
the Cross of Christ. What Excess is there in which you are not, as it were, a
standing Service? at Feasts of all sorts, City-Feasts, Company-Feasts,
Election-Feasts, Rogation-Feasts, Christmas-Feasts, Christening-Banquets (so
called) Wedding-Feasts, in which people often fiddle and pipe, sing and roar,
dance and prance, more liker mad wild horses than civil people, much less
seasoned Christians. In all which the Parson must be present to crave a
blessing upon your ungodly designs, and when he has fed without fear, rise up
to play among the rest; or else, at the best, play the dumb-dog and not bark,
nor stand up to save his Flock, nor defend the Honor and Glory of God, in
testifying against this excess and rioting: but this would be too great a
cross, to which you are many times inveterate enemies; and it may be ye judge
it no part of your work, to which you are called or hired (for these are
convertible terms among your Tribe) being only hired to reprove sin in the
Pulpit, and cry out against vanity, excess, and wantonness there, and so being
only paid for it there, cannot afford to reprove it in private also into the
bargain, as the Proverb again says, De Pries ter doet geen twee Missen Uooreen
Geld. The Priest does not say Two Pater-nosters for One Penny. But,

Sixthly, says Jude, They are Clouds without water, carried about of Winds,
Trees whose fruit withers, etc. --

Plead again, Are ye not guilty? Those that have read but the Histories of King
Henry the 8th, Edward the 6th, Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, may clearly see
that when the Wind at Court breathed on Protestantism against Popery, were not
your fathers one with it? but when the Tempest arose, and the Wind turned at
Court, were they not almost all (a few faithful and sincere-hearted ones
excepted, and those least of all Clergymen) driven before the Wind into their
old dismal den? and what became of their fruit they had gathered, their
National Church? did it not all wither and shrink up into their old stock,
(except a few whom the Lord transplanted and gathered unto himself, as I said)
-- In like manner about twenty years since, when the Parliament began to breath
forth their Indignation against Episcopacy, by degrees, and to blow all the
Tithes, Gl^be-Lands, Augmentations, those Acorns, into the Presbyterians Wood,
how swinishly fore-sighted were multitudes of your Generation, to flock
together thither, every man expecting his advantage from the Windfals
occasioned by that Tempest -- crying up Presbytery as of Divine Right, and down
with Episcopacy as Antichristian, yea so zealously, that ye could not endure
that any should have liberty among you to make profession of that way, nor
read the Common Prayer Book, so odious was it to you, being under the
Parliaments frown. --

But now (that you may perfectly demonstrate your selves to be that Generation
of which the Apostle here speaks, whom he calls Dogs and Swine) the Wind
being again turned at Court, you naturally, as brute beasts, (as swine which is
observable) perceiving a Tempest like to rise and blow all the Profit,
Preferment, and Benefices in the Nations into the Episcopal Forest, where they
are like to fall thick and threefold; how do you have thither with speed,
leading all the Swine of your herds with you, to lick up the vomit, which with
so much indignation ye vomited forth and to wallow in the mire, from which ye
would once have seemed to have been washed! -- crying up the
Common-Pra^^r-Book, with so much zeal that you can scarce bear any man, that is
not as greedy in swallowing that your noisem Vomit as your selves; and as
little can ye endure that any should speak against that Holy-Book, as ye now
term it. -- And wherefore is all this, but that the Scripture might be
fulfilled, which says, Ye are Clouds without rain, and Wells without water,
destitute of the inward streams of living Water in your selves; which we, and
all that believe in him, the Fountain of living Water, through the
superabundant riches of his Grace, partaking of, and enjoying in our earthen
vessels, are as Mount-Sion which cannot be moved, steadfast and faithful to our
Lord, how sore soever the Winds, and ye raging Waves do beat upon us, foaming
out your own shame. But again,

Seventhly, says Jude, These are Murmurers, Complainers, walking after their
own Lusts, etc. --

Come forth again and answer, has not this been your condition all along?
never quiet, never at rest, never content or pleased, but always murmuring,
continually complaining, perpetually crying out for help, first to the King to
suppress those Puritans, Non-conformists, Brownists, Separatists, etc. -- then
to the Parliament to root out the Common-Prayer-Book-men behind you, and the
Sectaries, Schismatics, Independents, Anabaptists, etc. before you; then to
the Protector, for power to restrain Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies, etc. --
thereby continually bewraying your selves to be no Ministers of Christ, who
never wanted Power to fulfill the work of their Ministry to the utmost, and war
against Error, Heresy, Blasphemy and Idolatry, though they had not the help of
the Magistrates Sword with them, to punish the Persons, or plunder the Estates
of such as they called Heretics, Blasphemers and Idolaters; nay, though the
Magistrates Sword was set up to defend Idolatry as the Worship of God, and
Blasphemy as the only Truth, and not only so, but turned against them, to
persecute and afflict, and vex them, as Deceivers, Seducers and Blasphemers;
yet such was the Power with which their Master furnished them for the execution
of their Ministry unto which he had appointed them, that they prevailed against
the power of darkness, so backed. O ye Hypocrites! when did ever Christ send
forth his Ministers without Power? or when did they go to men to complain for
want of it? O ye Deceivers! can ye not see that ye are not sent forth by him,
are none of his Ministers, yea know him not? for verily if ye did, ye would go
to none else for power, but believe that he is sufficient to uphold his
Servants in his Work without the help of Man; what do ye take wages for of the
Rulers, and of the Nations, if ye cannot do the work belonging to it? from
henceforth be ashamed to call out for help, and to say ye want power, or be so
honest as to carry back the wages of unrighteousness, and confess ye are not
the men fitted for that work, nor able to carry it on, and so will not cheat
them in taking the wages for nothing: and give way for them that can and do
wage war against Heresy and Blasphemy, and do preach the Word of Life, which
is nigh, in the mouth and the heart, sharp as a two-edged sword, which being
laid to the root, cuts up all Heresy, Blaspemy, Idolatry, and every evil, and
this freely, without hire, gifts and rewards, without money or price, only
eating and drinking what is set before them, not taking care for to morrow
(much less indenting for a year, or term of life, as some fearful Hypocrites I
have heard of) not taking thought what to eat, or what to drink, or what to put
on, as ye Gentiles or Heathens do, but even with their own hands often ministering
to their own and others necessities. Here is a faithful Ministry, a Ministry of
Christ indeed, which he will own, defend, and provide for so long as they abide
faithful unto him, following the Lamb whither soever he goes. But these ye
call Heretics, Seducers, Blasphemers, and would have them restrained, and
rooted out as such: O Zealous men! But alas, it is evident enough that your Zeal
is not so much against Blasphemy, Idolatry, or Heresy (as ye apprehend it) as
for your Bellies; and against others who (ye know) see you, and that torments
you, that ye cannot live according to your lusts or desires and not be seen --
and therefore against these ye complain and murmur, yea, and (if ye can make a
party amongst the Magistrates) against those Magistrates also, that will not
satisfy your cruel appetite. But otherwise, if the Court can unanimously
blaspheme, ye can do so too; if they be Heretics, ye can be so too, or at best
be silent when they command you to speak no more in that Name; which is an
evident token he never commanded you to speak in his Name, else ye would with
the Apostles, have judged it more right to obey him than men, which with one
consent set up Idolatry, impose the Mass, enforce the Common Prayer Book,
Surplice, etc. -- ye can conform, nay and pretend Conscience in it too -- But
if these things be expelled the Court, O then ye'l not touch them as unholy,
defiled, polluted things; so that the variable humor of the Court is the
standing balance and measuring reed of your Sanctuary, to distinguish betwixt
the precious and the vile. And yet though by this your cunning, as brute
beasts, ye can (with the Cat) be sure to pitch upon your feet from
whence-soever ye be cast down; yet such is your impudence and insolence (though
shame should cover your faces rather) that ye cannot be content, unless ye may
trample upon the works of all others that are more righteous than your selves
-- But,

Eighthly, says Jude, They speak with their mouth great swelling words, having
men's persons in admiration for advantage sake.

Are ye not here depainted to the life? for what great swelling words, and
Titles of most Sacred, most Excellent Majesty, Highness, Mightiness,
Excellency, Holiness, Eminency, Grace, Honor, Lordship, Worship, etc. -- can
ye give to Emperors, Kings, Princes, States, Protectors, Generals, Popes,
Cardinals, Bishops, Lords, Knights, Justices, etc. for advantage sake, Admiring
their persons for advantage sake, says Jude; and is it not so with you? Yes
verily.

And this all Magistrates and great men may know, and I believe many do see,
that if ye got no more of them, or had no more to expect from them, than from
the mean people, ye would have their persons in as little admiration, as the
persons of the meanest; but it is for advantage sake.

And these are they which despise the Dominion, and speak evil of the
Dignities, which the Apostles speak of; and these can one while have men's
persons in admiration, and then again despise them as the worst of men; but
when? it is but when the Advantage comes no more from them, but from another
hand, and so they always keep in with the Advantage; as that shifteth, they
turn, and are always found in its quarters.

How has this been manifest in our Nation in our days? as long as the Honor,
Preferment and Hire came from the King, so long he and his were good, and he
the Lord's Anointed, and your prayers in public were for him; -- but when his
power ceased, that he could not advantage you, and the Advantage must come from
the Parliament, then They were the Higher Power and Supreme Authority; when
they were dismissed, and (...) ^^otector began to favor you, to establish
himself (though it (...) his destruction, and shall be of all that join with
you) then (...) your good man, and the flattering of Highness you gave him,
(...) his Person in admiration for advantage sake, counting him your ^^^ses
that had, as it were, led you out of Egypt (though ye be resolved to dye there)
and brought you almost through the Wilderness of a Confused Toleration as ye
called it, very near the good Land (of Mastery and Tyranny over men's
Consciences) which you longed vehemently after; and his son Richard, who seemed
to be more through-paced to your interests than the old man, he was your Joshua
and Solomon to bring you into it, and build your Temple, in which you would
have offered Sacrifices mingled with the blood of men; and hoping to draw the
man in, by such fawning Titles; ye termed him the light of your eyes, and
breath of your nostrils, like arch Hypocrites and notable proficients at that
art; as if ye had studied nothing else for several years together at the
University but to teach your hearts to dissemble, and your tongues to flatter;
-- Then ye thanked God that the Lord had cast out the King, and eased the Land
of tyrannical Bishops, and blessed the Nation with such Rulers; but now they
are cast forth (for espousing your interest) and the King is returned again,
and all Honor, Preferment and Benefices must come from the King and Bishops,
your bellies now teach you to turn your tongues, and thank God that a Tyrant is
cast out, and the true Heir restored, together with the Ancient, Honorable and
grave Ministry of the Church of England; and His Grace is now come in fashion
with you again. --

But certainly both Kings and Bishops cannot but see your deceit, and who you
serve, and will trust you no more than they would professed Hypocrites; -- and
doubtless they see enough, that what ye at one time have in admiration for
advantage sake, and cry up as the only Dominion, Government and Dignity, at
another time ye speak evil of and despise, when the advantage is to be reaped
from the adverse party.

Therefore O ye Kings, Princes and Rulers, of what degree soever, think not
that such as do thus honor, worship and respect your Persons, are therefore
the more free from being of that ungodly crew of false Teachers, which ( Jude
says) do despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities, -- for it is but for
the advantage and Emolument sake that they do it, try them else. Besides (mark
it) this very having men's persons in admiration, or respecting their persons
for advantage sake, is one of the marks by which these filthy dreamers are to
be known, as you plainly see in the Apostle's words.

Therefore also, judge not us rashly, to be those despisers of Dominion, etc.
because we cannot honor, reverence, worship, or respect your Persons, nor have
them in admiration for any advantage sake that we might thereby enjoy, or
disadvantage that we might thereby avoid. For that is no good consequence; nay,
the contrary is the Affirmation of the Apostle, viz. That such as have men's
persons in admiration for advantage sake, are the very false Teachers which (he
says) do despise Dominion and speak evil of Dignities. --

From whence it is yet further evident, That the true Honor of Magistrates
consists not in worshipping, respecting, or admiring their persons for
advantage sake, -- but in yielding all due Obedience to the Power and Ordinance
of God in all things; -- And the same Honor is due in all things from all
inferior Relations to their Superiors; as from Children to their Parents,
Servants to their Masters, and Wives to their own Husbands, etc.

Yet that none of these Relations may think, that they may command what they
list, and then look upon all under them as bound actually to obey them in all
things whatsoever, because the Scripture says be obedient in all things; they
may plainly see that universal is every where limited again, to that which is
good -- as is here shown, as also what that honor is. --

1. To Rulers.] Honor the King. Qu. How, or with what honor? Answ. Be
obedient to every humane creature, whether to the King as supreme, or etc. -- 1
Pet. 2.13. How far? in all things consistant with the will of the Lord and a
good conscience, and therefore submit your selves not only for wrath, but for
conscience sake, for the Lord's sake, which cannot be in things contrary to
both. --

2. To Parents.] Children honor your father and mother. Qu. With what honor,
or how? Ans. Obey them in all things. In all things; how far? Ans. Obey them in
the Lord, for that is right: this is well-pleasing to the Lord, Ephesians. 6. but
this cannot be in any thing forbidden by the Lord.

3. To Masters.] Let as many Servants as are under the yoke, count [their own
Masters] worthy of all honor, 1 Timothy 6.1. Qu. How? Being obedient to their
Masters (according to the flesh) in all things, Col. 3.22. Qu. But how in all
things? in all what things? Ans. In all things that may adorn the Doctrine of
God our Savior; in all things agreeable with a good conscience, with
simplicity, or singleness of heart, and in the fear of the Lord; in all things
which ye can do as unto the Lord, or as unto Christ: for thus are ye required
to be obedient in all things, which cannot be in any evil thing. Col. 3.22.
Tit. 2.10. Ephesians. 5.8.

4. To Husbands.] Let the Wife see [(...)] that she fear her Husband, Ephesians.
5.33. Qu. How is that to be? Answ. By being good and obedient to their own
proper Husbands, (Tit. 2.5. Ephesians. 5.22, 24.) in every thing. Qu. How in every
thing? Ans. in every good thing as unto the Lord, Ephesians. 5.22. in the fear of
God, Col. 3.18. as it is fit, in the Lord. --

So that it is plain that these general terms, [ Be obedient in all things;
Submit your selves in every thing, to every humane creature, whether to the
King as Supreme, or to the Constable, as deriving his Authority from him] does
not require inferiors to be subject to the will of man in any of these
relations, but to have their eye in all things to the Will of God, to do what
they do, as unto him, submitting themselves in the fear of God, which keeps
the heart clear, upright and pure, and so out of obeying in any evil thing. --
And,

As these Inferior relations, in their places are exhorted to Obedience, so
also are the Superiors charged even to do the same thing, that is just, good,
fitting and well-pleasing to the Lord, as in his fear.

1. Rulers] Let him that rules over men, see that he be just, ruling in the
fear of God; hating covetousness, and not greedy after gifts and rewards which
blind the eye, punishing and being a terror only to the evil, not to the good,
but to them a praise, even of all that do well: For there is a King of Kings
and Lord of Lords, who rewards every man (without respect of persons)
according to his works, in whose hands your life and breath is --

2. Parents] Ye Fathers provoke not your Children, lest they be discouraged;
for with God there is no respect of persons.

3. Masters] -- And ye Masters, do the same things unto them, ( viz. to your
Servants) giving unto them that which is just and equal, forbearing threatening;
knowing that your Master also is in Heaven, neither is there respect of persons
with him, Ephesians. 6.9. etc.

4. Husbands] Husbands love your Wives, as your own bodies, and be not bitter
against them. --

Yet though these should so be in their several stations, this Obedience and
Subjection in all good things, is that which the Lord requires, as well to him
to be rendered, not only to the good and moderate, but also to the hard; for the
obedience is unto the Lord, for his sake, for conscience sake, (and not for
their sakes) and he is the reward of those that obey him in the Faith.

But if they go beyond these bounds in their Commands, commanding things
unfitting, evil, and not well-pleasing to the Lord, but contrary to his Will,
it is then neither honor to God nor them, to obey them actually; but a
dishonor to the Name of God, that any should fear Men more than Him, and not
rather suffer for the Name of Christ, and the Testimony of a good Conscience.
--

But good, wise and prudent Rulers, who know their Authority and fear the Lord,
will not require such things; and such will also be satisfied, with that honor
which comes from God alone, and be content and count it honor enough if the
Power, which is the Ordinance of God, be but honored with Subjection, through
a good and blameless Conversation; well knowing, that as to their persons there
is no such peculiar honor due to them, more than to other men, -- Though
possibly some self-willed, ambitious persons may not be satisfied therewith, as
being too mean and plain, too much like the upright, world-despising and
self-denying Jesus, and his mean, single-hearted Followers and Disciples, who
of old, could not, and yet cannot, honor or reverence, or prefer the Rich-man
with a Gold-Ring and gay Apparel, before a Poor-man in vile raiment, -- at
which such, I say, may be disturbed, it being the chief thing which they
perhaps aimed at in getting into Authority. --

Why! how says he! wherefore am I in Authority! wherefore am I called a Duke,
Earl, Marquess, Lord, Knight, or Esquire? etc. why have I bought these Places
and Titles so dear? why do I put on all these gay clothes? why have I so many
waiting upon me, so many running by my horse or coach side (as dogs?) why such
feathers in my hat, and such a fine sword by my side? why do I build or
purchase such stately palaces? If, notwithstanding all this, I shall be
honored before the People no more than one of the people out of Authority, no
more than a common, simple, plain fellow in a leathern jacket or dublet? what
is it all worth without this, unless I be honored the more for it? tush, it is
not all worth twopence without it, 'twas for that I sought and bought all this,
and now to lose my cost and pains, and to get nor cap, nor knee, nor bow, nor
congie, nor your Grace, Honor nor Worship, nay not so much as good morrow nor
goodnight, nay to have no better language, nor reverend Addresses made to me
in speech than to my Footboy, or than I my self give my Footboy, nothing but
Thou and Thee -- it is intolerable, it torments me, I cannot, I will not bear it
from them; I will not leave till I have rooted them out, but I Will have my will
of them, and prove it by the Scripture too, that they must honor me; am I not
a good Christian then?

Well! if there be such a Haman yet living, I say unto thee, Friend, stop a
little, run not head long to thy own destruction; -- call thy fury a little in
question, examine the cause, consider whence is it, from Heaven or Hell? who
blows the fire? who captivates thee thus? who rages thus in thee against a
harmless people? yea, who tyrannizeth thus over thee? Whose voice is this?
Surely not the Voice of God thy Creator, whom thou ought to fear, nor yet
the natural genuine voice of his innocent creature; but of him that possesses
thy heart, and reigns over thee. Consider then, who is it, and whither he is
leading thee?

And if thou will not be advised, and nothing can satisfy thee but to have thy
own will; -- Go on -- but know, the Lord has determined to deliver Mordecai,
and all his generation, out of the hands of Haman, and thou shall not prosper
that seek their destruction, though thou may be backed with the King's
Command; for even also the heart of the King is in the hand of our God, whom
alone we fear, and not man, and in him alone is our confidence. --

And now all ye that profess the Name of Christ, behold what a Serpent ye
nourish in the bosom of the ambitious man, and how by your slavish conformity
ye increase and strengthen the bands of the Innocent; consider also whether ye
therein please God or man, the flesh or the Spirit, and with whom ye partake in
it.

And thou Ambitious HaMan, consider also who is thy greatest friend, he that
piles up fuel upon fuel upon the flame of thy ambitious spirit, by satisfying
it; or he, that refusing to feed and satiate thy amb^^ious appitite, becomes as
a stumbling-stone in thy way, and as thorns under thy feet, that thou may be
pricked, stumble and fall, and return to rise; and consider what thou art
doing, whither thou art posting, and in whose service, whether thou do obey
God, Christ, or the Spirit of God, to the Salvation of thy Soul, or the Devil,
the World, and thy flesh, to thy destruction?

Consider it, I say, and know that thou art warned, and he not deceived, for
God is not mocked; what thou sowest, that shall thou assuredly reap, whether
unto the flesh destruction, or unto the Spirit, life eternal.

B. F.
Now unto THE KING Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, only wise God alone BE all
Honor and Glory, Majesty, Dominion and Power, Praises, and Thanksgiving for
ever and ever. -- And let no man from henceforth worship the Beast, but fear
God and give glory to him, and worship him alone, for the hour of his Judgment
is come.



THE END.

