HUMBLE ADVICE TO THE CONFORMING AND NONCONFORMING MINISTERS AND PEOPLE, How
to behave themselves under the present Liberty.

By the AUTHOR of Toleration not to be abused.

LONDON: Printed for James Collins at the Kings Arms in Ludgate Street, 1673.

ADVICE TO THE CONFORMISTS and Non-Conformists.
SOme, that think I have sufficiently discovered both the sin and the danger of
the present Separation, desire I would further consider what may be seasonable
to offer by way of remedy: but when the foundations are out of course, what can
I say or do?

Our Church now suffers as the Church of Corinth did, by Schism and
profaneness: and we have noted, that our Divisions and Separations are the
cause of General.
the first, which (as I have shown in another place) can no way be fully
removed, but by our reunion in the public Temple Worship: as our profaneness,
the other great mischief and disease of the time, by a speedy, and hearty, and
general reformation of life.

There is a comfort attending good endeavors, even when there is but little
hope of success: wherefore, if it be not a presumption to follow the example of
one otherwise minded, I shall venture to produce my direction; and what I
humbly conceive to be the present duty both of the Conformists and
Non-Conformists, in order to the securing the Church from total shipwreck in
the present storm; adding my petition also, that both would lay it to heart.

It is a time of liberty, and men are very apt to do what seems right in
their own eyes: and I could even wish that they would do so in earnest; if they
would first wipe off the dust of prejudice and passion. For I doubt not but we
are generally convinced by the Gospel, which we all profess, that it is indeed
our duty, and interest too, to love one another, yea to forbear and yield to
one another, yea to deny our selves in the little satisfaction of having our
own wills and our own ways in small and ind^fferent things for the public
good; and to follow peace and holiness with a conscience void of offense
toward God and all men.

But that I may be a little more More parcular.
particular. I cannot believe that we indeed differ about the existence of
Heaven and Hell; or in our notions of true Godliness, as some in their heats
have intimated: or that our wisest Adversaries think, whatever they say, that
the Ecclesiastical Powers and Courts are merely mercenary, or do really and
intentionally encourage Vice, or discountenance solid and true picty: yet my
hearty and humble request to them, in the first place, is, that they would
consider; 1. What the cause of their present Contempt may be; and whether
something be not too justly imputable to our selves, which ought not to be
carefully searched and reformed before it be too late. Methinks it is adviceable,
now you have so little to do with Schism, that you so turn the edge of your
power against prophanness, as it may appear you are as heartily against this as
that; and that none may think any longer, they have cause to leave us as
enemies to God and godliness, and good men.

I have reason to affirm, that zeal was never guilty of a grosser slander, then
by saying, that the present Clergy of the Church of England, is generally
ignorant, The Clergy.
idle, profane, and opposers of godliness; under which guilt I heartily pray
that none may die impenitent. Sure, if this zeal had any ground or love, it
would be more Regular, and follow Mr. Baxter's good advice, and by proper
complaint and proof endeavor, at least, our Reformation or Ejection. But it is
too too uncharitable and groundless. I am confident, it is nearer to truth to
say, that this Church has not been blessed with a more Able, regular, and
p^ous Clergy, these hundred years (and then I might say a thousand) then at
present; which I mention not to flatter, but to encourage my brethren to
perseverance and continuance in Well-doing, under all such hand Speeches of
ignorance and malice against them.

Yet it cannot be denied, that Too many faulty.
the few ignorant and scandalous Ministers, found here and there amongst us,
are too many: and until the power of the Bishops, both as to the Admission and
ejection of Ministers be more enlarged, and better Countenan^'d by Law, we may
wish a through amendment in this particular till our hearts ache; yet these
slanderers might know that the Church is purged of some such notorious
Scandalous persons daily, where the power of the Church can do it: and where it
cannot, we should pity, and not clamcur. Would the Patrons be pleased to
Patrons.
consider their great trust a little better, they might lay a foundation of
better hopes for the fu^ure: and O that the Lord of the Harvest would put it
into all their hearts, not only to dispose of their gifts freely, but wisely;
and first to take advice with able unconcerned persons before they present
their Clerks to the Bish^p; that there might be no temptation upon him to admit
the unworthy for fear of a Quare impedit.

But, my brethren, (I mean you who are not ashamed to be called Conformists)
may not conscience of our duty supply all the real or supposed defects in the
Law? why should any of our l^ves be a shame to the best profession? why should
Omission, Maladministration of our Office, cause the Philistims to triumph,
or blaspheme that holy Name by which we are called, both as Christians and
Ministers? Do our Enemies strike us in Malice, and is it not in our power to
turn it to our benefit? Let the Dagger that is intended to stab, open our
Impostume, and let out our Corruption.

1. Consider your Calling, and Do your whole Office.
know that both God and man, and the Souls of your People, and the credit of
Religion, and and the present Security of the Church of God, expects your
diligence and faithfulness in the Duties of it; and it is but r^cason, your
Enemies being Judges. One that is no great Friend, says of us, They should
consider, that Reflect on Toleration not to ^e abused, ^3
the Declaration requires of them exact C^nsormity; and indeed it is but
reasonable (says he) that those who will Conform, should be exact in the doing
of it. Let not the abuse of Liberty in others wear out the Sense, or abate the
performance of your Office; for you know you are obliged both to be Sincere and
Entire, wanting nothing, either of Inward or Outward Worship required at your
hands: Thus you will fulfill your Ministry indeed; and doubt not, but Duty will
ever answer it self to God and Man, when little Arts and Devices for Sinister
ends run into the dark to hide themselves.

2. Why should it be said, that Preach better.
the Non-Conformists do out- preach us? Have they better Parts, or more
Learning? It cannot be said. Has Use procured them a better Hab^t, or Knack of
Preaching, as they call it? I can hardly believe it: if in any it be so, it is
not generally; and where it is, let it be our shame: let it quicken our study
and practice for our improvement. Are they affectionate, so be ye: are they
practical and pious, so be ye. Never be ashamed to learn good of an enemy;
especial^y when by that good you shall not only be more effectual for the good
of your people, but remove a scandal from your persons and office, and the
whole Church of England, that suffers by some pitiful and careless Preachers.

Especially let us consider the Mind the Rule of Preaching.
rule and end of our Preaching: the rule is the plain Word of God, and the
Doctrine of it, as it lies in the Doctrine of our own Church. I need not tell
you what advantage our Adversaries take Reflect^on p. 13.
from our juvenile extravagancies in this kind: they tell us that many preach
Socinianism, and make the practice of such (most unreasonably!) no small reason
of their Nonconformity. But is it a matter of p^aise to us, that the
Non-Conformists shall plead their kindness to the Doctrine of our own Church
against us? Is it indeed our glory to use this liberty in Doctrine, and their
shame to use the like in practice? Is there no Nonconformity in point of
Doctrine? Is it wholly contracted into the one point of Worship? To what end
did you subscribe the Articles? To what end did you promise otherwise at your
Ordination? When you forsake your Youth, I hope you will leave this vanity,
whereby you indiscreetly disturb the Church, and open the mouths of gainsayers
to very little purpose: and though it is but your own personal folly to do so,
and cannot possibly have an influence upon our public Doctrine, as weak men
would fear: yet shall I praise you in this? I praise you not.

Consider also the end of Preaching. The End of Preaching.
Design nothing so much in contriving and uttering your Sermons, as the saving
your selves and those that hear you. Preach faith and repentance, and the plain
practical Catechetical points, with that solidness and zele that may commend
you, not to the idle Humms, but the very Consciences of your hearers: while
with full evidence they are convinced, that you desire their good, and design
their happiness; and no temptation may be left them to forsake your Ministry
for their edification. Let nothing savor of Self-esteem, Self-seeking, or
revenge upon persons or parties; or of flattery and connivance at sin in any;
have no jerks or reflections at true piety or strictness of life in any. Let a
formal, dull, and flat spirit of indifferency in Religion be far from you; for
why should you preach away your people? Whatever you imagine, this is not your
wisdom; he that wins souls is wise.

Yet you must consider also, Catechize.
that all your duty is not discharged when you have read prayers and preached a
Sermon; lay a foundation for the establishment of the next (and we hope better)
Age, by Catechizing the Younger sort, and opening the fundamental points of the
Catechism to them. Labor to be serious and seasonable in your Discourses to
the Sick; and be ready to Visit them upon all occasions. And take all
opportunities to discountenance Vice, and Vanity; Shame Vice.
and to imprint upon your People undoubted apprehensions of Piety both of your
Persons and Calling: F^r certainly, something else should show us to be
Ministers of God, besides our habit, especially, when that is despised.

We pray daily, that the Ministers of God may be endowed or clothed with
Righteousness: It Left the Church suffer.
is a Garment as well for defense as for Ornament, both of our Selves, and the
Church of God; who usually is wounded through the Sides, and suffers reproach,
by the real or pretended looseness of her Clergy. I have reason to think your
very Enemies know you are much slandered: Yet it is pity your Lives should be
other then such, as no imputation can fasten upon you. The Fire is kindled, O
Lord, let the Sons of Levi be purged as Gold and Silver, that they may offer
unto the Lord an offering in Righteousness.

Where the Laws have determined The Laws our Rule: but Love also.
you, make them your Rule; but in other things let me beseech you to show your
Charity and love of Peace, and (as much as in you lies) your inoffensiveness
to such as despise and persecute you, as our common Lord has commanded you:
For, except your Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, you are not worthy of the Kingdom of Heaven.

I fear some of us have very needlessly stirred a Spirit of Jealousy in our
Brethen against us these three ways; 1. By slighting the Office of Preaching.
2. By taking new methods in the use of that Office. 3. By speaking unwari^y in
the favor of Popery: And seeing your Adversar^es have object^d them all
against us, giv^ me leave to take n^tice of the effence; and to speak my mind
fre^ly and plainly upon e^ch of them.

For the first touchi^g the Office ^f Preach^ng: I am not ign^rant, Slight not
Preaching.
that the Temple is called the H^use of Pr^ye: And I can by no means consent
with them, that compare it with, much l^ss with them that prefer Preaching
before Prayer.

I know also, that the Apostles Matt. 28. 19.
had their great Commission to Preach, that they might teach the Nat^o^s, and
convert the Infidel World to Christianity; yet the D^^ciples were to be taught
afterward, v. 20. And it cannot be deni^d, bu^ that they were first sent to
the House of Israel; and that they accordingly Preached to the Jews, who were
yet the Church of God: Among whom our Lord himself opened the Scr^ptures, that
is Pre^ched in the Temple. And I think ^t was never yet affirmed, that Prayer
was the only, though ind^ed it was the chief, use of the Temple: Neither is
th^re any reason, that either the one or the other, should josle out its Fellow.

Who dare affirm there is not as true and real a need of Preaching in the
Church, for Conversion t^ Sincerity and Edification, as in the World for
Conversion to the Profession of Christianity? It Is evident, the Prophets of old
preached nothing more, or more frequently, to the Church of the Jews, then
Conversion; and under the same term too: and therefore, let none be so bold
with Scripture as to call it Canting.

And let me whisper in your Ear, that Preaching has the pre-eminence of
Writing, and consequently of reading the Scriptures, both in point of time and
manner of Institution: which may not be thought unworthy our consideration. We
are sure Preaching is an Ordinance appointed immediately by Christ himself,
what ever Reading is; and might possibly, though not so well have delivered the
mind of God the last two thousand years to the World, as it did the first,
though it had never been written. And notwithstanding the unspeakable advantage
of the holy Scriptures, Preaching has obtained in the universal Church to this
day.

Who shall question whether Preaching (whereby we address to God, adoring him
for his mercy and truth) in the Ministry of the Priests Lips be a part of
divine worship? I am sure the Injunctions of his present Majesty makes it part
of divine Service. With reference to Preaching also we have our Ordination and
Institution, and the Laws and Canons require it at our hands.

Why should our Adversaries triumph and say, we are against Preaching? and that
we speak against it to excuse our idleness or inability? are not we best known
by the name of Preachers? do they not by our Preaching see their most need of
us? do they not hence raise their value and estimation for us? do what you can
and spare not, to recover the honor due to the Priesthood in other regards:
But if all the rest be lost, I see no reason we should hazard this also.

It is said the Preachers of our Church are famous, and have long been famous
through the Christian World, for Preaching: Let no man take our Crown; let us
not throw it away our selves.

2. I perceive also offense has Avoid Socinianism. and the suspicion of it.
been taken of the pretended rational way of some of our Preachers both in
their Preaching and Writing: Though no sob^r man can doubt, but that it has
been of late, improved very excellently, for the baffling of Popery and the
shaming of Phanaticism, out ^f the World.

But seeing the Law of Religion is twofold, viz. that of Reason and revelation:
Phanaticism seems to be twofold also. When men so adhere to Revelation as to
despise Reason, or so to glory in Reason, as to neglect Revelation; only with
this difference, the first do sine Ratione, and the later cum ratione insanire;
having the honor to run mad in the Rational way.

M^ thinks it is safest so to use our Reason about Relig^on, as not to draw the
suspicion either of Socinia^sme or Infidelity. Admit there were neither
Phanatick (in ordinary s^nc^) nor Papist in the World, what have we gained, if
we have hazarded Christianity? neither can I bear with so general and
accommodated an account of the Christian Religion. whatsoever i^s pretenses
ar^, as a Jew, a Turk, or a Pagan, may subscribe.

We glory, and that justly, in the great Title of Ministers of the Gospel: and
we are set for the defense of it. And what is the Gospel in strictness of
Speech, but the glad tidings of Salvation by Faith, in the Redemption of
Christ, and the Sanctification of the Holy Ghost: And he that seems to despise
these, is not more like to a Socinian then an Infidel, but more like either
then a Minister of the Gospel.

Is not Faith, both in the grace and profession of it, a great part of the
Christian Religion? or is there nothing in the object of the Christian Faith
but what is Reason abstracted from Revela^ion? I am not altogether ignorant of
the learned attempts this way, though to no great purpose. I know we cannot
believe, and know not why; yet we use to say, that the Arguments inducing Faith
are not taken from the nature of the Object, but from the credibility or
infallibility of the Author or deliverer of it. And our Faith, in the prime
Doctrines of the Gospel is built, not upon them as reasonable in themselves,
but upon Testimony from him that cannot deceive us.

According to our Catechism we say, we believe in God the Father that made the
World. Now, if Reason could have found out certainly that the World was made;
yet that it was made by the Word of God, or by the Son of God, or that things
that do Heb. 11. 1.
now appear were made of things which did not, i. e. that all things were made
out of nothing; these things the Apostle, you know, refers to Faith, as
things never to have been discovered without special Revelation.

Much less that those other great Articles, touching the Redemption of Christ,
and the Sanctification of the Holy Ghost; if you consider them in their
Evangelical Latitude.

That the Second Person in the Trinity should assume the humane Nature into an
Hypostatical union with it self; that this nature should be conceived by the
Holy Ghost; born of a pure Virg^n: That there is a Messiah, and that this is
He. That he died for our sins; that he rose again for our justification: That
he ascended to H^av^n and there sits ^n the right hand of God; and that thence
he shall come again to Judge the World. All these are things, that Reason is an
utter Stranger to. For great is the Mystery of Godliness, God manifested in the
Flesh, etc.

Again, that there is a third Person in the Deity; that this is the Holy Ghost,
that inspired the Divine Writers; and confirm^d the Gospel by Miracles. That he
is sent down from Heaven, to convince the World, to instruct and sanctify, to
govern guide and comfort the Church. These things we all st^dfastly believe as
Evangelical Verities, not discoverable by any other Light, then that of divine
and special Revelation. I might add, that Repentance it self, though it be a
very reasonable thing in those that have offended in order to pardon, etc. Yet,
as it is a grace of this Spirit, and as it is a condition of the new Covenant,
it is matter of Faith, and not to be discovered by Reason alone.

This is the Word of Faith that we ought to Preach, and profess; and thereby,
give our Testimony that the Father sent the Son to be the Savior of the World,
1 John 4. 14. In this, the Apostles and Primitive Martyrs were all Confessors.
Search Antiquity, and you find all ancient Offices to have been compiled as it
were for the same purpose. Our Church both in her Doctrine and Worship, is a
great Pillar of Christianity, whereon little else is written but Jesus Christ.
Review our Catechism and Collects, Hymns and Litany, and several Creeds, as
well as the Offices of the Sacraments; together with the reason and end of all
our Festivals, and particularly of the Lords day; and you cannot but be
confirmed in the acknowledgment of our great profession of the Gospel of Christ.

Then let the World be Infidel, but we that are Christians and Ministers of
Christ, let us joy in believing; and in our places own and prosess the Gospel
by Faith, which we cannot comprehend by Reason.

Let us hold fast the Doctrine, and keep close to the worship, and obs^rve the
Festivals of our own Church as the true Sons of it, and there can be no color
for any suspicion or imputation of Socinianisme upon us.

The sum is, notwithstanding the private opinions of some men, he must needs be
very weak that shall fly from the Church of England, for fear of Socinianism:
of which none can possibly doubt, that moreover read the Canons, made by the
Bishops and the rest of our Clergy in the Convocation of 1640.

3. It Is further complained, Nor Popery. Reflec. (...) 27.
that some of us speak too much in favor of Popery; saying, they had rather be
Papists then Phanaticks, etc. these, though I have no mind to defend, yet it is
evident, they intend only either thus to Droll with Phanatieks, o^ to show an
implacable aversness to Phanaticism; which, they may suppose, they can hardly
do in a higher Form of Speech, then, that which prefers P^pery it self before
it. Though, I think the excellent Dr. is not yet answered, who has proved
Popery to be founded in the grossest sort of Phanaticism.

However, Comparison's, especiaily, where the terms are so opposite, must needs
be offensive and odious; yet, our Brethren ought to consider, that such
supposed rash expressions reflect nothing upon the Church of England; which, as
it owneth not such extravagancy in expression, so it self is owned by them that
use them, as the best Church in the World.

But, to my Brethren I make bold to say, that I know no reason they have to
prefer Popery b^yond some sort of N^n-conformity: I am sure, it is neither
necessary nor seasonable. The Papists may know to use your kindness beyond your
intention; and you find the Non-conformists are scandalized at our very Church
for your sake; and puhlickly plead it against us already. And you cannot but
remember the late horrid consequences, that the groundless suspicion that our
Clergy was Popishly affected, has had upon us both in Church and State.

Yea, give me leave to say soberly, that some atleast of our Noncomformists, I
hope, are not worse then Papists in their Principles about civil Government;
and I hope too their other principles of Religion, and their practices also,
are nearer to us then the Papists. Neither need we look on Nonconformity, all
things considered, as a more formidable Adversary: In my weak opinion, all that
are not for Popery, have reason to unite against it.

But, whatever weakness Non-Conformists are guilty of in thinking otherwise, it
is a truth, that there is no Bulwork so impregnable against Popery, as the
Constitution of the Church of England: And none can read without some
astonishment the incomparable Zeal of the Convocation (in 1640) to secure our
Church both from Popery and Socinianisme.

Lastly, let me conjure you not Continue Loyalty:
to be guilty of the least whisper against the Government of his Sacred
Majesty; but to do your duties without murmuring. You have hitherto had the
honor of being styled the Loyal Clergy: It Is our true glory, that our doctrine
establishes obedience to Princes upon the best Principles in the World. Why
should it be said, that the Non-conformists are now the Royalists, as an
ingenuous Person (J. H.) intimates? Though I must have leave to remember As it
is by J. H.
him, that herein, as well as in some other things, he seems to take too much
liberty to his fancy.

If the rest of his Brethren will stand to his Notion of the power of
Conscience, and the power of the Magistrate touching it; I should desire to put
it to no other issue, whether their Principle or ours, be the most Loyal.

He says, that u^l^ss the matter His first Principles considered.
of the Princes command b^ antecedently nec^ssary in the judgment of the
Subject (it being commanded in Scripture, or required by the light of Nature
for the common good) the Conscience ^f the Subject is not obliged to ob^y that
command Not b^ing here aware, that obedi^nce to man in things we judg^
indifferent, is both commande^ by G^d in Scripture, and required As he says
him self, p. 74.
also by God in the Law of Nature for the common good, i. e^ for the security
of the public Peace, and Gods own Vicegerency upon the Earth.

God s^ith particularly, Submit your selves to every Ordinanc^ of man for the
Lords sake; that i^ out of Conscience to God. Obe^ them that h^ve-Rul^ over
you; give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's. You must needs be subject,
^ot only for wealth but Conscience ^ake. These are expr^ssed abso^lutely; but
where do you find his condition, we need obey and ^ubmit only for wr^th and
not out ^f Conscience, if the thing com^anded be not otherways neces^ary, or
but indifferent in it self? When Man commands what God ^orbids, it is reason we
obey God, though with disobedience* to Man; but when we may obey Man, and not
disobey God, we ^ust do it in obedience to God, that is out of Conscience.

The difference betwixt us is ^lainly this: We say, the Co^sci^nce becomes
obliged to ob^y ^ur Prince by virtue of Gods ^ommand, that we should obey ^im:
You seem to say, that Conscience becomes obliged from the matter or thing
commanded, which quite destroys all obligation of Conscienc^ to obey our
Prince. For you say when a thing is commanded by God, or we think it tends to
the public good, then only Conscience is obliged to obey ou^ Prince: But this
Obligation i^ only from the necessity of the thing commanded; and because you
approve it to be a duty before, and consequently in obedience to your own
Reason an^ Judgment, and and not at al^ out ^f Conscience of the command or in
obedience to the King; for you were in you^ Log^ck equally obliged to do it
whether Man had commande^ you or not.

But in all other Cases you need obey only for wraths sake* that is, no
further th^n you are forced: and therefore, when you ^re got above fear, you
will not, or need not, regard Authority. This Principle will hardly pr^ve ^he
Non-Conform^sts the only Loyalists.

But to make the matter a little plainer; let us consider what ^an oblige the
Conscience but God, and the notice of his Will. Those things which are
indiffe^ent in themselves before, (as Bread and Wine) are therefore made the
necessary Elements of the Lords Supper by Gods command, and ought therefore to
be used ^n Conscience to God. But if man ^ommand any thing, there are ^wo thing
considerable; the ^atter or things commanded, and ^he Authority or command it
self: ^f the thing commanded be ^uch, as God has commanded before; we are
bound in Consci^nce to observe it two ways; from the necessity of the matter,
and from the Authority ^f the command, which are both from God; for he that
has said before Do this has also said Obe^ your Governors.

But if the thing commande^ by man were not commande^ by God before, and be not
forbidden any way by him, though the first way of obligation from the matter
fails, yet the secon^ holds; and obligation from God to obey our G^vernours i^
still upon Conscience, from the not^ce of Gods will in that Case Besid^s, as
was before observed in all ^uch indiff^rent things Go^ requires obedience to
our Governors, not only by his positiv^ Laws in Scripture, as if such
obedience were indifferent before he required it; but also by the Laws of
Nature, for the preservation of Government and the ^ublick good.

Consider well that famous Case of the Recabites: They ^bstained from Wine, in
obedience ^o their Fathers command after ^e was dead, and all fear of his ^rath
was gone: Now what ^ould move or oblige them but Conscience? Conscience, I say;
^ot that the matter was otherwise commanded by God, or was for the public
good, but ^n honor to their dead Parent, which God comman^ed: Therefor we
find God approves, accepts, and rewards it. Which v^ry thing proves it was
ultimately and really an obedience to Gods own Will; for God approves, accepts,
and rewards nothing else.

But the foresaid Author pursues J. H. His second Principle.
his discourse to a Principle, that seems to me of more dangerous consequences
to Government P. 112, etc.
That h^mane Powers may not lawfully cemmand or enforce any thin^ against the
Consciences, or persuasions of the Consciences of the Subject, even in civil
concern^ And for this instance he is venturous to say, that a Tax may b^ P. 118.
laid upon the People; yet if an^ one resuses to pay it, (as one o^ the Fifth
Monarchy, he observes may possibly, in point of Conscience, do) though distress
may b^ taken for the public good, yet the person may not lawfully be punished
for not paying it. An^ thus his matter runs smoothly* but if we may have leave
to make choice of an Instance, ^ think he will desire no furthe^ answer in this
particular. E. G. The Law of God is the Rule of Conscience: This Law is
Negative as well as Affirmative, and binds the Conscience equally in both
respects. So far we are agreed. N^w admit a man of the Fifth Monarchy, or a
number of such men, shall think they are bound in Conscience by virtue of some
plain Text in the Revelations to destroy the Wicked, to set up the Government
of Jesus Christ in his Saints; and from that of the Psalmist in order to this
great work, to bind the Kings of the Earth in Chains, and our Nobles in Fetters
of Iron. Seriously say, what think you of this Case? may not the Sword of the
Magistrate be made a terror to such evil Doers? may not those bloody
Consciences be restrained by commands and menaces? may not these bloody hands
be cut off and punished? may not Conscientious Murder be revenged? no little
Artifices of man's wit, no cunning Subterfugs of debauche^ Consciences can
possibly race out that indeleble Law of Nature, and the God of Nature; he that
shedeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. And if the like color from
Conscience be put upon Theft, Adultery or any of the sins against our
Neighbor, they may easily receive a like Answer. You will say perhaps these
are evil by virtue of Gods command, before man's Law was made; true, so also
it is a good, which God requires before the Tax be made, that we should give to
every one his due, Tribute to whom Tribute, Custom to whom Custom. And I am apt
to think, that what is given to King Charles by our selves in Parliament, is as
due to him, as what was exacted by Caesar's command was to Caesar.

I am afr^id I shall trouble that Ingenious Auth^r, otherwise I should mind
him, that by such Principles the Non-Conformists are not lik^ly to carry it in
point of Loyalty or tendency to Public Good; which draw both Religion, and
Justice, and pr^p^rly it self, under such Authority of private Conscience, as
unh^ng^th Government: And to say no worse, leave all those precious things in
an unestablished condition. But I spare them; for he many times seems to
explain himself a great deal better then his Principle will bear him out: And
sometimes, especially toward the latter end of his Book, when he had better
considered the Consequences of it, he more then seems to suspect it, and
resolves all into the Prudence of the Governor, no doubt finding his
distinction of the Power of restraint and coustraint would not serve him in all
emergencies.

Let him consider; the Law of God obliges us to do, as well as to omit:
Accordingly Conscience, ruled by its apprehensions of that Law, obliges us to
both: Or whether it do so or no, it may be persuaded it does, and that is all
one: And though Conscience err, yet it is to us as God; and by obeying it we
obey God, and it is above all humane Authority. Therefore the Magistrate has
no power to enforce me not to do my apprehended duty; or to punish me if I do
it, though it be to murder the innocent, as in the Case before. He abhors the
consequence, but whose are the premises?

After all this, and supposing some of us to be really guilty, either of
ignorance, scandal, idleness, or imprudence in the aforesaid particulars; I
cannot be so fond as to believe, that this is the chief cause of the present
Separation, whatever is pretended: my Reason is, because it has hitherto so
happened (as a demonstration to the contrary) that, where the Dissenters
themselves acknowledge their Parish Ministers freest from snch exceptions, (and
all other) there is generally the greatest cause to bewail Separation.

Consequently I have no great No hopes; yet do your duties.
encouragement, without a miracle, to believe, that if you should reform every
thing that is really amiss in you, or that they complain of, while you are true
to the duties of your places, the Separation will much abate upon it.

However, you have other sufficient Motives to quicken you, and other Persons
to account with: Therefore s^t the fear of God, and the good of the Church
before you, and remove all appearances of evil from your selves, and all
occasions of evil speaking from the Dissenters. And let nothing discourage you
in your Studies and cares to amend what ^s amiss; to persevere in well doing,
to fulfill your Ministry, and to receive your Crown: And if, notwithstanding
your uttermost endeavors to prevent it, they will be offended, and forsake
your Churches, bear it as your Cross, Pray sor your Enemies.
with the patience of Christians, and the courage of the men of God. And
however they treat you, or the Church, cease not to pity and pray for them, as
you are taught. Pray for them, though your Enemies: Though they slander you and
persecute you, and for nothing else but the truth's sake, as they Apostle: That
it may please thee to forgive our Enemies, Persecutors, and Slanderers, and
turn their Hearts. Pray for them as Sheep that are gone astray; that it may
please thee to bring into the way of truth such as have erred and are deceived.
We beseech thee to hear as good Lord.

Now, my Brethren, I humbly and earnestly beseech you to pardon my freedom
with you. Only take it by the right handle, and I know you cannot take it
amiss. Seeing it is said I have dealt smartly with our Adversaries, if I should
not deal plainly with you, I should neither follow my Example, nor answer my
Reprover.

But I have a word or two also ad populum, for our Conforming People, that yet
^ontinue in one Parochial Communion.

Advice to our Conforming People.
WIll you also go away? you Hold fast.
know we have the words of eternal life: and whether can you go to mend your
selves? Consider the danger of breaking the Union, and dissolving the
constitution of our Parish Churches; and hold fast the profession of your
Faith, without wavering, nor forsaking the assembling your selves together, as
the manner of some is.

Your continuing hitherto with us, declares you are satisfied with our
Communion: And for your Parish Ministers, if they are such as they should be,
fail not to encourage them in the day of their distress, as Children should do
to their Parents: If they are faulty, endeavor in your places to reform or
remove them if incorrigible, that the Church may be no longer scandalized by
them; but be very tender of Separating from them.

Be your Ministers never so obnoxious, your Separation is no^ legal Remedy
either for the Church or you; nor do our Laws allow it: Yea, you have not a
word from the old Non-Conformists or Presbyterians to warrant your going to
separat^ Congregations of another constitution; though indeed they did allow of
going to Neighbor- Parishes, where the Minister was very ignorant or wicked.
But if the Minister be pious and diligent, though of very ordinary and mean
gifts, they do by no means allow an Ordinary, and usual with drawing from his
Ministry, to hear those that are more able.

Are the People that separate of better Lives then you? the fault is not in the
Ministry, by which they were also generally converted, but in your selves: I
speak this to your shame. It is left to you, to recover the honor of of that
means which they disparage by forsaking, and you by profaning.

Yet it is sufficiently observable, that the Separation it self is blemish't
with its peculiar Vices; which you ought by oppositions to avoid.

Are they proud, censorious; Vices of the Separation.
jealous, and rash in Judgment; be ye humble, candid, and charitahle: Are they
partial and trousome to the Church and Neighborhood, be ye Catholic, and as
much as in you lies live peaceably with them and all men. Are they guilty of
Schism by breach of unity? take you heed of being so by breach of Charity. And
by their new and strange devices to deride, study how you may unite. And seeing
they will forsake you, study you to k^ep closer one to another.

Yet, what is or seems to be Their good imitate.
good and commendable in them, if there be any virtue, if there be any pra^se
among them, think on these things; and disdain not to be taught by your
Adversaries. Are they Zealous in their way? do they love and adhere to and
provide one for another? are they strict and temperate? Are they free from
Vanity, Ribaldry, Riot, and Blasphemy? Are they Admirers of their Teachers.
Punctual and greedy observers of the times of their worship, etc. Be you so
too, and much more; and covet earnestly the best gifts. Thus laboring to
redeem the Name and Reputation of the Church of England, from the charge of a
vain and debauched Conversation, under so excellent a Profession.

A PETITION AND ADVICE TO THE NON-CONFORMISTS.
1. TO their Preachers, if Preachers.
they would design to hear me with patience and charity, and meekness of
wisdom, and not count me an Enemy, who would only tell them the truth in love.

Many of you are well known to me; I should wrong you, not to acknowledge you to
be men of Parts and worth, and such as are qualified to serve the Church in a
more then ordinary manner; and I know not that I ever said any thing, when
warmest in Argument, undeserving that Charity of J. H. concering me: who (says
he) upon Conviction, will perhaps as soon as any, be ready to thank God with
us, if a Door so effectual be opened, that we may without offense, and without
Schism, join our strength in mutual love and concord for the carrying on the
great work of man's Salvation through the Nation.

Yet I have said so much against you, that you will not easily believe I would
flatter you: It Is enough, if you can bear with me, that I am not yet convinced,
but that the course you have taken is sinful, and of dangerous consequence;
from which very persuasion only, I too^ all that heat that some complai^ of.

I am yet offended at your Se^paration, but especially that yo^ gather your
Assembl^es at the same time with the Temple-Wor^ship; and in such Places too^
where no exception lies against the Parish-Ministers: Beyond all color or
pretense of Reason; and all Allowance even of those that have hitherto Written
in your defense. And methinks (suffer my plainness) if there be indeed any
Wisdom, and Meekness in you; if any love to to us; if any care to the Church;
if any real desire to avoid the Crime and the charge of Schism; it should be
difficult to persuade you to alter your practice in that one particular.

You do not think the People Keep your Meetings at other t^mes.
would be the worse for our Fellowship. You do not bid Defia^ce to it your
selves; or declare against the Parish-Constitution of our Churches, or for a
Total Separation: If any thing of this nature be said of you, you are offended:
Then think on it seriously, why you should generally so order your Meetings, as
that your Hearers are necessitated to leave our Assemblies.

If I may not deserve to be heard, Whom will ye hearken to in this Point? Shall
we appeal Follow your Friends advice.
to those that would defend you, and Write against me? I am content; follow but
their Advice and Examples in this particular, and you will oblige me never to
trouble you more in this Matter.

Hear what the Author of Sacrilegious P. 90. 91, etc.
D^ssention, etc. says: If you l^ve where the Conformable Minister is
faithful, truly endeavoring the Salvation of his Flock; I charge you in the
^ame of Christ, do not only if possible as much as in you lies, live in love,
familiarity, peace with him; but also do all that you can to maintain his
honor, and promote his work. For all your Nonconformity, you are no better
then he, if you be not more charitable then he. If you set your selves in a
dividing way, secretly to rejoice at his disparagement, and to draw as many
from him as you can, you are but destroyers of the Church of God. Call your
selves what you will, I will call you destroyers if you are dividers.

Yea, much that else would be your duty, must be omitted to avoid Division. The
work of God, the good of Souls, the defense of the Protestant Religion against
Papists, require your utmost conjured strength: And you are Betrayers of all
these, if you are Dividers.

Therefore go as often as you can to his Congregation; and hold communion
personally with him, and lead the People with you. Do not say now we have an
opportunity to do better, it is unlawful to join with them that do worse: For
though it be not lawful to neglect your own duty and opportunity, it is lawful
for you by deed as well as word to show your Christian Concord and Communion.

Therefore in Parishes where all may well hear the Parish Minister, I would not
have you, without necessity Preach at the same hour as he does, but at some
middle time, that you may not seem to vie with him for Auditors, nor to draw
the People from him: But let them go with you to hear him, and after come and
hear you, or before.

And that he likes not this gathering of Churches very well, whatever he had
said in the defense, by the Petition he would have us make for them: That if
possible (upon the terms he had laid down) they might be taken into the
established Ministry; if not, yet tolerated as Lecturers under us in such
Churches where the Ministers desire them. And he has my consent, that either
of these were rather to be admitted, though it be with the loss of part of our
profits, then to hazard all, as I fear you do, by the present separation.

One thing, I humbly renew for your most serious consideration; whether it be
not advisable to instruct your Hearers, in the lawfulness and convenience of
their communicating with us, at least sometimes; and persuading them there unto
both by your teachi^g and example; lest by the constant opposite practice,
their hearts be so alienated from the Temple worship, that when you would
reduce them to it, you shall find it beyond your power.

To the Nonconforming People
FOr you that are our People, who are neither gone away already, or are under
temptation to leave us, I have very little encouragement to trouble you with my
advice; though I shall not say of you, as the Author lately quoted does of the
P. 118.
Conformists in his humble Petition to them, that Satan has got so great
advantage, that the wisest man living is incapable of speaking rightly to them
without offense.

However suffer, though it be a kind of penance to you, yet suffer a word or
two of Exhortatation, which I shall commend with better Authority to you, then
mine own.

1. Suffer the Arguments both Conform as far as you can.
from duty and Peace, and unity and charity, to prevail with you, to conform as
far as you can. And in what you cannot, labor for satisfaction, and if that
cannot be had, use any allowed means for the gratifying your selves in such
things wherein you cannot conform; but do not separate more then you must
needs; Is not this reasonable and proper advice? ask Mr. Baxier? ask the Author
of the Answer to my Book? ask the old Non-Conformists; yea I appeal to your own
Breasts, if you would but suffer your selves seriously and impartially to
consider it: For surely Division is not to be chosen for it self; and there can
be no reason for the use of the dangerous Physic of Separation, and rending
and tearing the body of the Church, beyond necessity.

There are three Questions or Cases of Conscience, that would be thoroughly
canvas'd and resolved before yo^ Separate.

1. Whether we may ordinarily leave our own Parish Ministers to hear others?

2. Whether such as could and did communicate with the Parish Churches before
the liberty, can have any tolerable reason to separate now.

3. Whether such as say they cannot in Conscience join with us in all things,
have any ground to leave us in those Parts of worship they can.

The first is answered by the Old Non-Conformists; particularly by the grave
Mr. Hildersham, in these words:

If thy Pastor, says he, be approved of by the Church Conscionable in his
place, unblameable in his life; though of inferior Parts, take heed thou leave
him not.

1. He may be a true Minister though inferior to many others, Mat. 25. 15.
Which Argument the Apostle uses to persuade all members to unity, Ephesians. 4. 7.

You are bound to love and reverence him, and thank God for him. 1 Cor. 6. 10.
1 These. 5. 13. Romans 10. 15. Luke 10. 16.

3. Doubtless thou may profit by him, if the fault be not in thy self, 1 Cor.
12. 7. and 14. 31.

4. Our profit depends not on Ministers gifts, but on Gods blessing, 1 Cor. 3.
5, 6, 7, 8.

5. None may usually and ordinarily leave his own Pastor, (so qualified as
before) for: 1. As it is Gods own Ordinance, that every own Pastor should have
his own Flock to attend, and take heed unto, Act. 14. 23. So it is Gods
Ordinance, that every one of Gods People should have a Pastor of his own to
attend upon, 1 Pet. 5. 3. Now he cannot be said to depend upon his Pastour's
Ministry, that does ordinarily and usually leave it, and go to another. He
only makes a right use of the benefit of hearing such as have more excellent
gifts then his own Pastor, as leans thereby to his own Pastor the better,
and to profit more by him.

6. If thou leavest thine own Pastor only with a desire to edify thy self.
1. Do it with his consent and leave. 2. Acknowledge thou owe a duty to him as
to thy Superior in the things that belong to thy Soul, 1. These. 5. 11. 3. Thou
art bound to seek his comfort, and to give him all good encouragement, that he
may do his work with joy and cheerfulness, Heb. 13. 17. Hildersham upon the 4
th. of John.

2. The Second Case is touching such of you as could and did ^ommunicate with
us in our Parish worship, before the liberty granted ^y the late Declaration:
And is, whether they can have any tolera^le Reason (except their Judgments be
since changed) to sepa^ate now. That they cannot, I ^ope I have made to appear
suf^ciently in other parts; but if ^y Reasons may not be thought worthy your
Consideration; yet, m^ thinks it is not in considerable, that there are but two
Persons that have set themselves to answer me; and they have both of them
yielded in this point. Though they seem to be a little too exceptious in lesser
matters.

The Author of the Book called Sacrilegious desertion of the holy Ministry
rebuked, etc. delivers himself in the Case fully to our purpose in these
words.

As far as I can promise P. 76.
says he, we will judge of you no worse then we have done, no^ deny any
Communion with you which we have used, and can use, without neglecting ou^ own
work. As I constantl^ Join in my Parish Church in Liturgy and Sac^aments, so I
hop^ to do while I live, (if I live under as honest a Minister) at du^ times.

The Author of the short Reflections upon Toleration not to be P. 37.
abused, is my other public Adversary; let us hear him also. Who are they,
says he, who separate from them where they can have Communion with them, I do
not know. (I wish we could say so too.) Presbyterians I believe will not
scruple to hear all Ministers amongst them to Preach (as they have occasion)
nor possibly someto hear them read. COMMON PRAYER, but will be ready to go with
him as far as they can.

And thus also you have their opinion as to the last Case, viz. Whether such as
say they cannot in Conscience join with us in all things, have any ground to
leave us in those parts of worship wherein they can? You have heard both these
Authors, when they purposely set themselves to speak to these very points, to
intimate their Confession for the Negative. Upon this very ground Ames seems to
affirm, there may be no total Separation from a true Church, but only partial,
quatenus Communio non potest absque peccato exerceri, so far as we may not
communicate without sin.

What man can think it reasonable, that such as live within the bounds of any
true particular Church, should for some offenses renounce all Communion with
it? or, as I said at first, divide and separate more then needs? When once you
can weigh the evil of division, and value Peace in the Church, and union
amongst Brethren truly as you ought; you will be then of the same mind with
with us. O let no prejudice or partial respect of things or persons, any longer
captivate your minds in Error, leading to a practice so dangerous in its
consequence as I have shown; and so unreasonable in its Principles, as your
stoutest Friends, in the Field of controversy would not dare to defend. Yea,
whose very Professions and personal Practices are for the contrary, and would
teach you better.

My first Answerer has many other very good Directions both to you and your
Teachers, for which I thank him; and which I earnestly desire you to consider
and follow.

Remarques upon the late Reflections on Toleration not to be abused.
THese shore Reflections might have been much shorter, and none of the Authors
Reason been lost: Some of them might have been spared, for that they reflect
upon the Author himself, viz. such as these: Blessed God! when will the lust of
implacable men be satisfied upon their Brethren! p. 5. the Author seems to be
incredibly serious, p. 6. Does it not seem ridiculous to you? p. 22. It Is both
malicious and nonsensical imputation. p. 22. They may it seems toler atc any
thing, but his Majesty may not, p. 25. as to the fear of Popery, I wish he and
his Friends were in earnest, p. 27. It Is well known most of the Conformists are
Arminians, p. 28. If he had favored me with his Notion of a true particular
Church, etc. but this was not for Interest, p. 29.

These, and such kind of Reflections, seem not to be worthy of a pure light;
that so lately came out of great darkness and tribulation; as he every where
complains: But this kind of Reflections I have no mind to answer.

I have indeed made reply to all the other parts of his Book: But, upon Second
thoughts have yet resolved to publish only so much of it, as concerns the
Argument, so far as it is New; and not so fully considered as, perhaps, might
be desired, in my Reply to my other Answerer.

The very Question almost in Tit^e page.
'his own words is this: Whether it be not a sinful Separation, and contrary to
the Principles of the late Presbyterians, to gather themselves into
Congregations distinct and separate from the parochial Assemblies, under
present Circ^mstances. Thus I affi^m, and he denies.

The Sum of that which he offers against it, is reduceable to these two
Proposit^ons: 1. We hold the Church of Rome to be a true Church, and yet
Separate from it. 2. Our Parochial are not true Churches; or at least they are
so faulty, as they may lawfully be separated from.

The first of these is much insisted on by my other Adversary, to whom I have
answered in another place: we find it twice, at least in these Reflections, p.
17. by the same Weapon, says he, by which our Brerhren aefend their Separation
from Rome, we defend our Secession in some Ordi^ances from them. But how you
shall defend your Secession in all Ordinances would also be considered. But
more briskly to the same purpose, p. 23. he queries thus; Have not our Brethren
Separated from the Church of Rome; yet many of them do own the Church of Rome
as a true Church? When they have reconciled themselves to to these assertions
of their own, they will be able to see what answer we may give them also. If
they may separate from a Church which they own as true, then surely we may do
so too.

But hereunto I answer.

1. When I affirmed that it was unlawful to gather a Church out of a true
Church (which was the ground of his Reflection,) I did personate and spoke the
propositior of the late Presbyterians. And you do not say, the Presbyterians
hold the Church of Rome to be a true Church: So that as to them, the Argument
may be still valid enough. And those of us, that you say hold the Church of
Rome to be a true Church, may have, and indeed have, other Arguments to condemn
your Separation.

2. You know that was a current Argument of the late Presbyterians against the
Independents; and I used it as theirs: And if it be inconsequent, charge them
with bad Logic, and say they were mistaken, not I.

3. It Is most certain, this is no good Logic with the old Presbyterians: We
may separate from the Church of Rome, therefore from the Church of England. And
when they urge their Adversaries with the unlawfulness of gathering Churches
out of true Churches, they supposed they spoke to Persons that understood what
true Churches they meant, viz. Our Parochial Congregations. And that out of
such true Churches as ours are, where we have the Word and Sacraments truly
dispensed, and we may communicate without sin, it is not lawful to separate and
gather Churches.

4. It is not enongh for you to say our Communion is so corrupt, as you cannot
communicate in it; we prove that the Communion of the Roman Church is such.
Upon this ground the Brownists, the Quaker, the vilest Separatist and Heretic
is armed; and may as well say, you separate from Rome, that you take to be a
true Church; therefore we may separate from you, whether ye be ^o or not.

5. For the Fathers of the Church of England, many of them do indeed hold the
Church of Rome to be vere a Church of Christ; yet generally they say she is not
vera Ecclesia: she is truly a Church as to the Essence, but not morally a true
Church, having neither the Word truly Preached, nor the Sacraments rightly
administered in it; which Calvin makes Essential to a true Church. I dare
undertake to make it evident, when he shall vouchsafe to name those principal
Fathers, whom now he is forsooth unwilling to name; (for what Reason I know
not) I dare undertake, I say, to make it evident, that they meant no other
thing, though they may take the Liberty of their own words.

6. The sum is; the Presbyterians hold the Church of Rome to be a false Church;
and say, you may not gather a Church out of a true Church. The Episcopal
Divines say, that the Church of Rome is truly a Church, but not true as a
Church should be, but false and corrupt both in her Doctrine and Worship; so as
none can lawfully join with her: And yet the Church of England, is both truly a
Church and a a true Church; where the Word of God is truly taught, whose
Doctrine the very Non-Conformists approve of; and in whose worship, many of
them say, we may join without sin; where the Sacraments are also rightly
administered: And therefore, without all further controversy they may hold that
it is lawful to separate from the Church of Rome, but sinful to separate from
the Church of England; and yet not be able to see what Answer you may give them.

7. Besides, lastly, you may easily know, that our eminent Fathers say; that,
if we are in Schism from Rome, the Papists themselves were guilty of it in
Henry the 8th. yea, that we did not, do not separate from the Church of Rome,
for we really were never of that Church: We never did owe any Communion to to
that Church: That, under the encouragement of own Government, and by the
authority thereof, we only reformed our selves, without separating from Rome,
or any other Church. And if so, as in truth it is, much good may your
Consequence do you.

8. But he also intimates a Reflection upon our Churches: He does not indeed
speak out; but he speaks as if our Parochial Assemblies, were either no true
Churches, or such as we may lawfully Separate from. Hear him p. 15. where he
first co^cedes fairly; We do believe, says he, that from a Church, a number of
Christians that have consented to a Pastor that is able and faithful, and
regularly administers the Ordinances of Christ, so as a People may communicate
without sin; and pressing forward toward perfection in order, Christians may
not separate without sin.

And this is that indeed, says he, which some Presbyterians reflected upon our
Brethren of the Congregational way for: And these were those Parochial
Churches, which they contended for as true Churches.

And now the bottom is out, and his Fallicy is apparent in his foisting (I
would use an easier word if I could) his foisting in now and strange matter
into the nature of a true Church; and then fathering it upon the Presbyterians,
when it is purely Independent, Brownistical, or his own.

For, if there be any consequence in what he has said, it is this: A Church
where the Pastor is duly qualified, and the People consent to him; and both
press forward toward perfection in order; you may not separate from: But if
the Pastor be not in all points well qualified, or if the People do not approve
of him, or if they do no^ press forward toward perfection in order, one may
separat^ from such a Church, and the la^ Presbyterians said nothing to the
contrary.

But, suppose the Pastor be faulty in some particulars of his life, if he
regularly administers in his Office; or suppose, he be a good man, and a
diligent Minister, and be set over a People by the Laws of our own Church, but
the People do not like him; will you say, this is no true Church for these
Reasons? If you are a Presbyterian, you dare not. May one separate from such a
Church for these Reasons? or for these Reasons may you betake your self to a
Church of another Constitution? was ever this the opinion of the Old
Non-Conformists or late Presbyterians? Say it not for shame.

But the weight is behind, in the last condition: Pressing forward toward
Perfection in order. These were the Parochial Churches, where this excellency
was found; which the late Presbyterians con^ended for as true Churches. Thus he
would draw his Presbyterian Brethren to own that which is contrary to their
express sense and words; for they did ex professo dispute, that order and
discipline was not essential to a true Church; and only for the want of it
none might separate.

In earnest: Suppose a Church thinks her Order, as to the Government, is as
perfect as she can, or need to have it: And she desires that the Execution were
better, but cannot have it so. Yea, suppose a Church too careless in this
matter, whether it be well or no; will you, or any Presbyterian say, it is
therefore no true Church, or we may therefore separate from it? Was not this
the Case of the Church of Corinth? Does the Apostle advise or allow any
Separation in this case? Though their Doctrine also was more corrupt then
Arminianism that so much offends you, and their Communion debauched even with
Intemperance and Luxury.

Besides, whatever unjust and unconscionable clamours we labor under, we are
ready to maintain, that our Ministers, generally, are of holy and unblameable
Lives; and do faithfully, and regularly administer both the Word and
Sacraments; and that our People generally do, or very lately did, submit to
their Parochial Ministers, and really own them as their Guides, by their
attendance upon the worship of God in our Temples; and those few that did not,
I hope I have sufficiently proved that they ought to have done it.

And now I shall venture to appeal to the Conscience of my Reflecter himself,
whether so general and total a defection and decession from a true Church (as
he seems to acknowledge some of ours to be; and if any, sure they are such as
they separate from) would have been judged other then Schismatical by the
Apostles themselves, or by the Fathers, or by the reformed Churches beyond Sea,
or by our own ancient Non-Conformists, if no other Reason could be alleged for
it, but what he has here urged? As for the late Presbyterians, indeed it is
the very question, what they thought of this point; and whether it be lawful,
in their Judgment for such Reasons as he has brought us, to separate, and to
gather our People into new Churches, will better appear from their own words,
for they can yet speak for themselves, and you will find they do it fully in
the following Dialogue.

What the Reflection means by P. 14.
putting [A Subjection in all the Ordinances of the Gospel to the Lord Jesus
Christ] into the definition of the Church, I cannot certainly divine; but if it
signify any thing more then the received Definitions of a true Church, it
signifies nothing but an Engine of Divisions. The Presbyterians perhaps will
have it in, to serve his Ruling Elder: The Independent, to keep out all Foreign
Jurisdiction, and keep himself exempt from all power without the bounds of a
particular Church: The Anabaptist, for the necessity of Baptizing, as necessary
to a true Church. And thus it becomes an Instrument fitted for the mutual
damning one another.

Whereas, if the difinition of Calvin and reformed Divines keep its authority
(viz. that where the Word of God is truly preached, and the Sacraments rightly
administered, there is a true Church) Mr. Baxter has room enough for his large
Charity, to think they are all true Churches, though Schismatical: That is,
though they are made up of Sheep gone astray from their proper Folds; to which
they yet owe themselves, and ought to return.

A Dialogue BETWIXT THE INDEPENDENT AND PRESBYTERIAN About gathering of
CHURCHES;

Taken out of a Book called, the Grand Debate, and Papers therein Printed, as
they were given in to the Committy of Lords and Commons, and Assembly of
Divines, with the Commissioners of Scotland for Acommodation 1644. Printed in
1648.

LONDON: Printed for James Collins, at the Kings Arms in Ludgate Street, 1673.

TO THE Reader.
Good Reader,
PErhaps thou may censure me too severe with my Answerers, in expposing this
old difference to a public review: but why then did they give me so great an
advantage, and provoke me to take it in my own defense? Why did they Scandalize
the World, and many of their own Friends too, who are yet living Witnesses of
that so notorious a contest? by mincing the matter and seeming shy to
acknowledge that the then Presbyterians were against gathering new Churches out
of the Parochial? To say nothing of their opinion of Toleration: For what
Toleration, as to our purpose, could they, that were Presbyterians, be thought
^^ indulge, who so stiffly refused to allow it to their Independent Brethren,
particularly in the very point of gathering Churches.

In this following Dialogue you have no feigned disguise on either side; but
both speaking over again their own Sense, and Reason, and words throughout,
almost verbatim. As they were given in by themselves to the Committee of the
long Parliament, as appears in the second part of the grand Debate, published
by Persons entrusted by both Parties.

By way of Introduction: You need not be remembered that the Presbyterians were
earnest for an establishment with Uniformity, and did declare that the Members
of particular Congregations do cohabit and live together, within certain bounds
and Precincts of a Parish, p. 6. n. 9. The Independents, not well satisfied,
moved for an Indulgence, and the Dialague may be supposed to begin thus.

A DIALOGUE Betwixt the INDEPENDENT AND PRESBYTERIAN, Taken out of Papers given
to the Committee of Lords and Commons, and Assembly of Divines, with the
Commissioners of Scotland for Accomodations, 1644. Printed, 1648.
Indep. WE are not against your Rule, and the establishment you desire; only
we cannot in Conscionce be so confined: And therefore we desire liberty to
worship God in our own way by our selves.


Presh. We are not altogether against an Indulgence; but we would have none
allowed the benefit of it, but such as agree with us as to the substance of
their Faith and Worship.


Indep. Therefore you cannot deny it to us, who thus agree with you.


Presh. 1. But your desire plainly holds out a total separation: As if our
Churches were not to be communicated with in any thing which should argue
Church Communion: and more could not be said or done against false Churches.

2. It also plainly holds out the lawfulness of gathering Churches out of true
Churches; yea (they add, by way of aggravation the cause of our Reflecters
mistake) such true Churches as endeavor further to reform: Whereof we are
assured, there is not the least hint of an Example in the Word of God.

3. This liberty would pull down what the Parliament would set up, and would
give you a greater privilege then we enjoy, who are under the Rule of
establishment.

4. This would give countenance to a perpetual Schism and Division in the
Church; still drawing away from the Churches under the Rule, etc. and introduce
all manner of confusion in Families, where the Members are of several Churches.


Indep. What liberty then are you contented to allow us, that differ from you
almost in nothing but matters of Government.


Presb. None may be allowed, upon differences only in matter of Government, to
withdraw Communion from us in things wherein they declare an agreement. --
There may be no such indulgence granted to any, as may constitute them in
distinct Congregations, as to those parts of worship where they can join in
Communion with us. Only some expedient may be found to bear with them in the
particulars wherein they cannot agree with us.


Indep. What expedient?


Presb. Such as through scruple or error of Conscience cannot join to parta^e
of the Lords Supper, shall repair to the Minister and Elders for satisfaction
in their Scruples, which if they cannot receive, they shall not be compelled to
communicate. Provided that in all other parts of worship they join with the
Congregation, in which they live, and be under the Government of that
Congregation. So far you have in p. 18, 19, 20, etc.


Indep. If this be all, we must be p^ain with you; We cannot join with you
without sin: We would not li^ve without Ordinances: And for the enjoyment of
them, for for our ed^fi^cation, we would join in another Congregation.

Yet so as not condemning those Churches we join not with, as false; but still
preserving all Christian Communion with the Saints of the same body of the
Church Catholic, and join with them in all duties of worship, that belong to
particular Churches, so far as we are able: If this be called Schism, or the
countenance of Schism, it is more than we have yet learned, p. 36.

Is not this a very fair Plea? It was once Independency. And the Presbyterians
then answered to it in every particular.


Indep. We cannot without sin to us, enjoy all the Ordinances of Christ, and
partake of all duties of worship as Members of that Congregation where our
dwelling is: And what would you have us do?


Presb. If you cannot in all, yet partake in as many duties and ordinances as
you can: And let the Indulgence only supply that, wherein you cannot; and not
exempt you universally in that wherein you can.

But we desire you would speak freely and heartily: Can you enjoy any one
Ordinance in our Congregation as Members? We should be glad to hear from you,
that you can be Members of that Congregation where your dwelling is p. 70.


Indep. But you know we cannot live without Ordinances for our edification:
Therefore for our spiritual good, we may lawfully join in another Congregation.


Presb. 1. This will not follow upon your own Concession: For you consess you
can occasionally join with us without sin; and why not constantly?

2. Your Conscience may err: And the Church is no way bound to indulge a
liberty then, especially to the evident disturbance of her own peace.

3. Whatever indulgence is granted, let this be the boundary of it, which is
given by our Brethren themselves, viz. that such as give no Testimony of their
Godliness and Peaceableness; such as have not used all means in faithfulness to
know the mind of Christ; such as do condemn those Churches which they join not
with, as false; as do not preserve all Christian Communion with the Saints; nor
join with them in all duties of worship so far as they are able, shall not have
the benefit of this indulgence.

And to the end that these words [so far as they are able] may not stand for a
mere Cipher, and signify nothing; let each man particularly declare in what
ordinances he is able to join: that so all total Separation may be prevented,
p. 70.


Indep. Though we shall not join with, we will not condemn your Churches as
false: And this no rigid Separation, p. 71.


Presb. The condemning our Churches as false, does little extenuate the
Separation: For diverse of the Brownists who have totally separated in former
times, have not condemned these Churches as false.

Though you do not pronounce an affirmative judgment against us; your very
separating is a tacit and practical condemning of our Churches; if not as
false, yet as impure; eousque as that in such Admistrations they cannot be by
you, as Members communicated with, without sin.


Indep. However though we cannot communicate with you as Members of your
particular Congregations, yet we will preserve all Christian Communion with you
as Saints and Members of the Catholic Church.


Presb. This is as full a declining Communion with us as Churches, as if we
were false Churches, p. 72.


Indep. If this be called Schism, or the countenance of Schism, it is more then
we have yet learned, either from the Scripture or any approved Author, p. 73.


Presb. It gives manifest countenance to perpetual Sch^sm, should this be
allowed you. Not that we think differences in Judgment in this or that point to
be Schism, or that every Inconform^ty unto every thing is Schism, so as
Communion be preserved: Or that Separation from Idolotrous Communion ex se
unlawful is Schism; but

1. We find that you desire not only that you may be free from communicating
as Members in those Parishes where you dwell, but also that you may have
liberty to have Congregations of such persons, who out of tenderness of
Conscience cannot communicate with us, but do voluntarily offer themselves to
join in separate Congregations of another Communion. Which Secession of our
Members from us is a manifest rupture of our Societies into other, and is
therefore a Schism in the body.

And if the Apostle does call those Divisions of the Church, wherein Christians
did not separate into diverse formed Congregations of several Communions in the
Sacrament, Schisms; much more may such Separations as you desire be so called.

2. We find it not alleged as a Cause of your Separation, either that our
Churches are false, or our Communion ex^se unlawful; but only Scruple of
Conscience, that you cannot without sin as to you, partake in all duties and
enjoy all ordinances, which is no Cause of separating; nor does it take off
Causless Separation from being Schism, which may arise from errors of
Conscience, as well as carnal and corrupt Reasons.

Therefore we conceive the Causes of Separation must be shown to be such, as ex
Natura rei will bear it out; which has not yet been done, nor we think can be.

3. And now we desire you to show out of Scripture and approved Authors, what
you have learned concerning Schism: For the breaking off Members from their
Churches which are lawfully constituted Churches: and from Communion in
Ordinances dispenfed according to Gods word, without just and sufficient Cause
ex natura rei to justify such Secession, and to join in other Congregations of
separate Communion; either because of Causless Scruple of their own Conscience,
or because of personal failings in the Officers or Members of the Congregation
from which they separate, has been accounted Schism, and the setting up Altar
contra Altar.

And concurrently do approved Authors say, and we likewise conceive, that it is
the Cause of the Separation which gives both name and thing to Schism. For if
the cause be unjust or insufficient, according to the Rule of the Word of God,
let our Brethren tell us what such Separation is.

It is our ^arnest desire and Prayer, that our Brethren might enjoy the
Ordinances with the Peace of their Consciences and of the Church also: or that
they would rather deny themselves of their full liberty in every point, then
redeem it at the price of so much danger and disq^riet to the Churches of God,
p. 74, 5, 6, 7.


Indep. The Ministers of the Parish Churches are not such as we can comfortably
join with, and sit down under.


Presh. We do not believe that you mean that only such should be allowed to
gather into your Congregations, who live under bad and unprofitable Ministers,
though that be the only medium there used against our Reason.

Where the Ministry is without P. 84, 85.
just exception, we refer it to your own Conscinces, and to the practice of
your Congregations, to say, how fit it is that the Members should ordinarily,
much less constantly, seek the Ordinances elsewhere.

We long to know; what Reformation of our Parishes will satisfy your
Consciences; or how this Kingdom may be made the Kingdom of the Lord and of his
Christ, better then by dividing it into several parts by the bounds of their
dwellings: that all who give up their Names to Christ, may be taught and
governed, and have all the Ordinances administered among them suitable to their
Conditions, p. 102.


Indep. But it seems you would have us for ever to want the Lords Supper, which
is not to be endured, p. 102.


Presb. 1. Why may not some expedient satisfy you in this, to prevent so great
an evil as Separation.

2. We may not do evil for any good end. If a man should be brought to such a
Straight as that, either he must want the Lords Supper, or separate from the
Congregation whereof he is a Member, he may here want the Ordinance (during
this Error of his Conscience) with less danger, than to purchase it by a
sinful separation.

3. This is a strange and dangerous way of arguing, which may open a gap to as
many Divisions and Subdivisions in the Church as the Errors are, unto which
the minds of men are subject. And if this be allowed, we desire you to consider
how long, not our Churches only, but your own, or any other Churches in the
World, shall be free from uncurable unquietness.


Indep. It must be a prejudice to the Church we are in, if we separate from her
in the Lords Supper: And yet you would have us live under their Government whom
we prejudice, which seems unreasonable to us, p.104.


Presb. If your Errors cause prejudice against you, is it unreasonable for you
to be under the Government of that Church which is prejudiced by you? may you
with good reason Scandalize the Church by Separation, and the Church have no
reason to govern you; then prejudicating or scandalizing Errors are a
Supersedeas to all Government? We do not then wonder that Errors and perverse
opinions so much abound; it may be, they are all but the mediums to liberty,
and exemptions from Government.


Indep. But living in a Parish, does not make us Members of the Church.


Presb. We grant it, a man must in order of Nature first be a Member of the
Church visible, and then living in a Parish, and making profession of
Christianity, he may claim admission into the Society of Christians within
those bounds, and enjoy the Ordinances which are there dispensed.


Indep. Where is your Christian Charity? We would edify our selves the best we
can; and though we differ but in very small matters, you will not suffer us.


Presb. Can you not be edified without Scandalizing the Church of God? we leave
to all men to judge whose Charity is greatest; theirs who labor to preserve
union, or theirs who resolve to separate and break it? We think Charity binds
Christians to prevent all unjust and needless Separation. We wonder at your
Charity, that coming so near us in Doctrine and worship, nothing should content
you but a Separation, p. 105, 106.


Indep. We cannot in Conscience set down, where we cannot enjoy all the
Ordinances, p. 122.


Presb. 1. Have you all the Ordinances in your own Churches?

2. Do you not hold ruling Elders to be an Ordinance? have you these? Or be
your Churches without some one ordinance, and not ours?

3. To determine Controversies of Faith, and cases of conscience judicially, is
an Ordinance: If you must be of no Church but where that is exercised, and the
liberty of opinions restrained, your Churches would be soon destroyed: And you
would find it, we believe difficult to gather more.


Indep. This would prove the best means of Uniformity and Conjunction, to allow
us distinct Churches according to our own Principles.


Presb. This is a Riddle; we wonder how disjunction can be the only way of
Conjunction, and Multiformity of Uniformity, and Separation of Communion, and
different Principles and Practices of Conformity.

What Churches under Heaven may we not hold Conjunction, Uniformity, and
Communion with, upon such terms? p. 123.


Indep. But tender Consciences ought to be relieved.


Presb. We desire to know whether every Persons bare ^lleadging tenderness of
Conscience, shall be sufficient to warrant his deserting our Congregations, p.
49.

2. We much doubt, whether such tenderness as arises out of an op^nion, oui
potest subesse falsum; when the Conscience is so tender, that it may also be an
erring Conscience, can be a sufficient ground to justify such material
Separation, as our Brethren plead for. For though it may bind to forbear or
suspend the Act of Communion in that particulur, wherein men conceive they
cannot hold Communion without sin; yet, it does no^ bind to follow such a
positiv prescript, as possibly may be diverse from the Will and Counse^ of God:
Of which kind w^ conceive this of gathering separated Churches out of other
tru^ Churches to be one, p. 51.


Indep. In case the Lords Supper be not administered in parity, a ^emoval is
allowed ordinarily: Now we would only gather our selves into other Churches;
for ^urer enjoyment, as to our Con^ciencis, of all ordinances, p. 50, 51.


Presb. We conceive, the ground of your Separation from ^ne Church and
gathering others, to this end, that you may ^e preserved from sinning against
your Consciences; and ^or the purer enjoyment of Or^inances, may to men of
other ^udgments be a ground to crave ^oleration for separating from Churches
which are pure, and ^athering impure and corrupt Churches out of them, p. 50.

It was never the meaning of ^he Assemblies to leave the Judg^ent of pure or
impure Ordinances to this Case, unto the alone discretion of a particular
Person: But before any leave (...) Parochial Congregation, ordinarily he ought
to declare the Cause of his grievance, that if it may be his removal may be
prevented: Except he think fit to change his dwelling; in which Case his
removal is without offense.


Indep. Why may it not be as lawful to go to a separate Congregation for
relief, as to remove our dwelling to another Parish?


Presb. It is one thing to remove to a Congregation which is under the same
Rule; another, to a Congregation of a d^fferent constitution from the Rule. In
the one a man retains his Membership; in the other, he renounceth it, p. 52.


Indep. If the purest Churches in the World, unto our Judgment, in all other
respects, should impose as a condition in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper any
one thing that such tender Consciences cannot Join in (as suppose, kneeling) if
they remove from these Churches, and have liberty from the State to gather into
other Churches, to enjoy this and other Ordinances, ^here is no Separation


Presb. 1. If a Church require that which is evil of any Member, he must
forbear to do it; yet, without Separation; and wait on Gods Providence in the
dispensation of that Church, till all remedies have been tried.

2. He that is in this kind oppressed, may be relieved by Appeal, or change his
dwelling.

3. They who thought kneeling in the Act of Communion to be unlawful, either in
England or Scotland did separate or renounce Membership; but did some of them
with Zeal and Lear^ing defend our Churches against those of the Separation.


Indep. But, we hope you will not question us, if we have liberty from the
State to gather into other Churches.


Presb. The Nature of Separation is not to be measured by civil Acts or State,
but by the Word of God: what notion you have of it we know not; but surely to
leave all ordinary Communion in any Church with d^slike, when opposition or
offense offers it self, is to separate from such a Church in the Scripture;
since such a Separation was not in the Apostles times, unless it were used by
false Teachers; all who professed Christianity held Communion together,
notwithstanding differences of Judgment or Corruptions in practice, p. 55.


Indep. Our Churches cannot be thought to be guilty of a plain and total
Separation, unless we did wholly in all things differ, by setting up altogether
differing Rules of Constitution, Worship and Government.


Presb. Of this Assertion we expect some proof: We read not the like in any
Author ancient or modern. Under this pretense Novatians, Donatists, all that
ever were thought to separate, may shelter themselves; who themselves, boasting
of their Separation (the most rigid Separatists) hold the same Rule of worship
and government for substance with you.

We desire you to consider if every small and circumstantial difference amongst
those who agree in most things, and those most substantial, shall be a
sufficient ground to gather Churches out of Churches into a separate and
distinct Communion, how the Churches of God shall ever be kept free from Rents
and Divisions, and how the Peace thereof is possible to be preserved.


Indep. But as we hold your Churches to be true Churches, so we are ready to
hold occasional Communion with them.


Presb. 1. You have estranged your selves from us hitherto, and we have reason
to question, in what sense you account our Ministers and Churches true. 2. If
you may occasionally exercise Acts of Communion with us once, a second, a third
time, without sin; we know no reason why it may not be ordinarily without sin:
And then Separation and gathering Churches would have been needless.

To separate from those Churches ordinarily and visibly, with whom occasionally
you may Join without sin, seems to be a most unjust Separation.


Indep. Suppose you do account our gathering Churches sinful, may not some
things be tolerated which are thought unlawful.


Presb. Our Reason against Toleration is not sounded upon the Supposition that
nothing unlawful may be tolerated; but upon the supposition of unlawfulness to
tolerate the gathering Churches out of true Churches. And you do not once
endeavor to prove, either that such gathering, or the tolerating thereof is
lawful.

We are to debate the lawfulness of forbearance, and may insist upon any proper
medium, to that end; for clearing whereof the lawfulness or unlawfulness of
that point of Church gathering is one of the most necessary.


Indep. If we do not gather into other Churches; Multitudes that cannot conform
must live without some Ordinances all their days.


Presb. Of this before; but we answer, that you wave the main business, viz.
whether there be any Example in Gods Word for gathering Churches out of
Churches.

1. This opens a gap for all Sects to challenge the same liberty as their due.
It should be considered.

2. Whether we must follow an Erroneous Conscience so far as to gather into new
Churches.

3. Whether this be not denied by the Churches in New England.


Indep. Is it not the Right of every man to choose his own Minister?


Presb. Certainly some would deny it, and it will be like to breed much
confusion. Besides, the tolerated will have the greatest privilege by it; they
shall enjoy it absolutely, when those under the Rule cannot, without removing
their dwellings, p. 64, 65.


Indep. Though we do separate, we are such as have given good Testimony of our
Godliness and Peaceableness: And we did not separate till we had used all means
in faithfulness to know the mind of Christ.


Presb. We shall not mind you how Testimonies of Godliness are not always
infallible Protections against Schism or Heresy; as in Milesius, Lucifer,
Audaeus, etc.

We conceive that amongst other means used in faithfulness, this should be one;
that each person give an account of his Scruple to the Eldership or
Congregation where he dwells; that so he may either receive satisfaction, or
have from them a Testimony of Godliness and Peaceableness.


Indep. But you uncharitably charge us with the guilt of Schism, though we do
not say your Churches are false and not to be communicated with, which is hard
measure.


Presb. We have answered this already, but further we say; albeit Schism
consists not in every diversity of opinion or practice, but in an open breach
of Christian love; yet we see not how you can acquit your selves even by this
Rule; when you openly profess a necessity to recede from our Churches as
Members, which while yet you acknowledge them to be true Churches of Christ.

Thus to depart from true Churches, is not to hold Communion with them as such;
but rather by departing, to declare them to be such: Surely at best we may say
of this course as the Philosopher did of the Milesians, Milesii quidem non sunt
insipientes, ea tamen agunt quae insipientes.

Mark once for all, how unaptly the Reflecter would make all the stress of the
Presbyterians Argument, to prove the Schism of the Independents, to beat upon
the endeavors of their Churches to reform: For the Independents were as
unsatisfied with their Reformation, as they are with their worship. For they
say plainly, the Reformation which the Assembly has ultimately pitched upon
satisfies not our Consciences, as our Brethren know. No, you every where find,
they charge them with Separation from true Churches, and aggravate that charge
from their acknowledgment of the truth of those Churches from which they
separate.


Indep. But you endeavor our disgrace, and cast an odium upon us by the word
Schism.


Presb. Your way would give countenance to a perpetual Division in the Church,
still drawing away from the Churches under the Rule: And Schism differs no more
from Division, then Greek from Latin.

We desire you, that by assuming tenderness of Conscience to your dissenting
from the Rule and establishment of a Church Way or Church Order to your way and
godly party, you would not reflect an odium upon us or the Churches under the
Rule.

You know that to give countenance to an unjust or causless Separation from a
lawful Church Communion, is not far from giving countenance to Schism:
Especially wheen the grounds, upon which this Separation is desired, are such,
as upon which all other possible scruples may claim a like Indulgence, and so
this Toleration being the first, shall indeed but lay a Foundation, and open
the Gap, whereat as many Divisions in the Church, as there be Scruples in the
minds of men, shall upon the self same equity be let in, p. 66.


The Conclusion, with a Recapitulation.
OUR work, we see, was effectually done to our hands many years agon, both
against the Independents and the present Presbyterians: whose practice in
gathering Churches, and whose Arguments in defense of that practice are very
much the same. And both are here abundantly confuted by these Presbyterian
weighty Reasons: Which indeed are such, as took not their strength from any
peculiar conditions of the times when they were written; but are now, and ever
will be of equal and invincible prevalency.

Therefore the Dialogue is as proper and seasonable now, as those Papers were
then: Do but change the Person and name [Presbyterian] for the Church of
England, and the whole is as pertinent to our present State as the Reader can
wish. And indeed, what can the wit of the present dissenters add new, to the
Argument as it was then managed? Or what have they said more for themselves?
Reveiw and judge.

The Independents then pleaded.
1. WE only desire a liberty to worship God in Congregations of our own
distinc^ from the Parochial.

2. We condemn not the Parochial Churches as false.

3. We differ from you only in small matters.

4. We agree with you as to the substance of Doctrine and worship.

5. Yet we cannot join with you in all things without sin.

6. And we cannot live without any one ordinance.

7. Therefore we join in another Congregation only for the enjoyment of all
ordinances for our spiritual good.

8. Yet we will preserve. all Christian Communion with the Saints in the Church
Catholic.

9. We cannot be Members of that Congregation where our dwelling is.

10. However we will hold occasional Communion with you.

11. This is no Schism, or countenance of Schism, or rigid separation.

12. We cannot approve or edify by the Parish Ministers.

13. It Is the privilege of every one to choose his own Pastor.

14. Living in a Parish does not make Members of a Church.

15. Removal from one Parish to another is allowed, and why not to a separate
Cogregation?

16. Tender Consciences ought thus to be relieved.

17. It is against Christian charity to deny this liberty.

18. This Liberty will prove the best means of Uniformity.

19. What if we have liberty from the State to gather Churches?

20. Some things may be tolerated that are thought unlawful.

21. Multitudes that cannot conform, must live without some ordinances all
their days.

22. Those that separate have given good Testimony of their Godliness and
Peaceableness: And have used all means first to know the mind of Christ.

23. You charge us with Schism to render us odious.

All these were Independent Arguments in 1644. how they commensed to be
Presbyterian in 1672. I know not: But this I know that then the Presbyterians
were not shy to declare gathering Churches out of our Churches under all
flourishes and iittle pretenses, was a Schismatical and dangerous Separation,
and not to be allowed. For which, they gave the world, not only their
Authority, but such Reasons as you have heard, but shall never see answered.
Some of their Propositions follow.

Some of the Presbyterian Assertions, whereby they refelled the foresaid
Independent pretenses for gathering Churches (as more at large appears in the
Dialogue) are these.
1. OUr Parochial Congregations are true Churches.

2. To make one a Member of such a Church, it is sufficient that he professes
Christianity, and lives in the Parish, and he may claim Communion thereupon.

3. The old Non-Conformists did not separate from the Parish Churches or
renounce Membership, though they thought kneeling at the Communion unlawful
(and I may add, had as much cause to complain of Persecution, and want of
Reformation, as any have now) but did some of them with Zeal and Learning
defend our Churches against those of the Separation.

4. None ought to be indulged, but such as agree with the establishment as to
the substance of Doctrine and Worship.

5. These should not be indulged so far, as to separate and gather new Churches.

6. This is Schism, and the means of confusion in the Church and in Families.

7. None are to be allowed to withdraw Communion in things wherein they agree
with us: But in all such things they ought to retain Communion with the
Congregation where they live.

8. The Separatists holding our Churches to be true Churches, is an Aggravation
of their Separation.

9. To depart from Churches me acknowledge to be true, is not to hold Communion
with them as such; but rather by departing, to declare them not to be such.

10. To leave all Ordinary communion in any Church with Dislike, when
Opposition or Offense offers it self; is ^o Separate in the Scripture-Sense,
and was not in being in the Apostles times, unless by false Teachers.

11. All who professed Christianity in the Apostles times, held Communion
together, notwithstanding differences in Judgment, or corruptions in Practice.

12. The Judgment of pure and impure Ordinances, is not to be left to the alone
discretion of a particular Person.

13. To Separate from those Churches Ordinarily and Visibly, with whom
occasionally you may join without Sin, seems to be a most unjust Separation.

14. It is one thing to Remove to a Congregation that is under the same Rule;
another, to a Congregation of a different constitution. In the one, a man
retains his Membership, in the other he Renounceth it.

15. Testimonies of Godliness are no infallible Protections against Schism.

16. It Is no breach of Charity to hinder all unjust Separaions.

17. A man may want the Lords Supper with less Danger, then to purchase it by a
sinful Separation.

18. The Church is not bound to Indulge a Liberty to Erring Consciences,
especially to the evident disturbance of her own Peace.

19. No pretenses of tenderness of Consciences, or of Edification, or of
enjoying all Ordinances, or of holding Communion with us as Saints in the
Church Catholic, or of Occasional Communion with us as a particular Church, or
of holding communion with us as far as they ^re able, or that they cannot join
with us without Sin, or lastly, no acceptions that they take either against our
Officers or Members: None of these, or any such, can warrant a Sepaparation
from us, or gathering new Churches out of ours. For these make not the Cause of
a just separation, which ought to appear ex natura rei.

Rememmber from whence thou art fallen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 33. Line 2. Read, Not only for Wrath, but also for Conscence sake, Romans
13. 5. p. 34. l. 14. dele and. p. 35. l. 18. r. things. p. 40. l. 1. r.
Subterfuges. p. 54. l. 21. r. should not be. p. 78. l. 17. r. our Government.

Some Books Printed for and sold by James Collins at the Kings Arms in
Ludgatestreet, 1673.
OBservations upon Military and Political Affairs, by the most Honorable
George Duke of Albemarle: Folio, price 6. s.

A Sermon Preached by Seth Lord Bishop of Sarum at the Funeral of the most
Honorable George Duke of Albemarle: Quarto, price 6. d.

Philosophia Pia, or, A Discourse of the Religious tendences of the
Experimental Philosophy, to which is added a Recommendation and Defense of
Reason in the Affairs of Religion, by Joseph Glanvil, Rector of Bath: Octavo,
price 2 s.

The Way to Happiness represented in its Difficulties and Encouragemeents; and
cleared from many popular and dangerous mistakes, by Joseph Glanvil.

A Praefatory Answer to Mr. Henry Stubbs, the Doctor of Warwick, by Jos.
Glanvil: Octavo, price 1. s. 6. d.

The Life and Death of Mr. George Herbert, the Excellent Author of the Divine
Poems. Written by Is. Walton: Octavo, price 1. s.

A Discourse of the Forbearance or penaties, which a due Reformation requires;
by Herbert Thorndike one of the Prebendaries o^ Westminster: Octavo.

A Private Conference between a rich Alderman, and a poor Country Vicar made
Public wherein is discoursed the Obligation of Oaths, which have been imposed
on the Subjects of England: Octavo. 2. s.

The Episcopacy of the Church of England justified to be Apostolical from the
Authority of the Primitive Church: and from the confessions of the most famous
Divines beyond the Seas, by the Right Reverend the late Lord Bishop of Duresm,
with a Preface written by Sir Henry Yelverton Baronet: Octavo.

A Collection of Sermons preached before the King at White Hall by the Right
Reverend Father in God, Seth Lord Bishop of Sarum.

Catholic Charity recommended in a Sermon before the Right Honorable the Lord
Mayor of London, in order to the abating the animosities among Christians that
have been occasioned by differences in Religion, by Jos. Glanvile, Rector of
Bath, price 6. d.

A Mirror of Christianity, and a Miracle of Charity; or an exact Narrative of
the Life and Death of the Lady Alice Duchess Dudley, by R. Coreman, D. D. price
6 d.

The General Assembly, or the necessity of the receiving the Communion in our
Public Congregations evinced from the Nature of the Church, the Word of God,
and Presbyterian Principles; A Sermon by Francis Fulwood, D. D. price 6. d.

Miserere Cleri; A Sermon presenting the Miseries of the Clergy, and Assigning
their true Causes in order to Redress, by Edw. Wettenhall, B. D. price 6. d.

Vrim and Thummim; or the Clergies Dignity and Duty recommended in a Visitation
Sermon; by Mal. Convant, B. D. price 6. d.

A Discourse of Toleration, in answer to a late Book, entitled, A Discourse of
the Religion of England, price 6. d.

Indulgence not justified, being a Continuation of the Discourse of Toleration,
in answer to the Arguments of a late Book, entitled, A Peace Offering or Plea
for Indulgence; and to another, called, The second Discourse of the Religion of
England, price 6 d.

Toleration not to be abused, or a serious Question soberly debated and
resolved upon Presbyterian Principles, etc. price 6 d.

The Judgment of the Learned and Pious St. Augustine, concerning Penal Laws
against Conventicles, and for Unity in Religion, delivered in his 48 Epistle to
Vincentius.

FINIS.

