FUNDAMENTAL POSITIONS AND QUERIES Thereupon, Concerning the FAITH, LAW, AND
CHURCH of CHRIST; To be Considered, as highly conducing to public Peace, Unity
and Happiness.
1. CHRIST our Lord, revealed and restablish'd a Faith, and Law, as the
Universal and necessary [ Mark 16. 16 Heb. 11. v. 6.
] Means for the Application of his Blood and Passion to Mankind.

II. A Belief and Profession of this Faith and Law, ought (at least regarding
the Body of Christianity in General) to be Conform, and Adequate to [ Matt. 28.
20.
] all the Truths or Mysteries so Revealed.

III. Hence this Faith and Law, is [ Ephesians. 4. v 4.
One, and the same amongst all Christians of what different Nation, and under
what distinct Temporal Government soever they be. The Universality of which
Christians thus Combined, and Incorporated in one Faith and Law, is that which
we term the [ Tim. 3. v. 15. Matt. 16. 18.
] Catholic Church: And as this Faith and Law is One; so is the [ Joh. 10. v 16.
] Catholic Church One.

IV. This One Faith and Law thus necessary to the Salvation of all, containing
in it many Sublime and Supernatural Mysteries, or Truths, was delivered by
Christ the Lawgiver to the Apostles; who as his Vicegerents on Earth, were [
Matt. 28. 16. Luke 10. v 16.
] Authorized and Commissioned by Him to Teach others, with a Promise of Divine
Assistance, [ Joh. 14. v. 16.
] least they might mislead their Followers into Error; either by Substraction
from, or Addition to these necssary Mysteries or Truths.

V. Accordingly this Faith and Law was [ 2 Timothy 2. v. ^. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15.
] Transmitted by the Apostles to their Successors, and by Them in like manner
to others the Successive Bishops and Pastors of the Catholic Church. And as
the necessity of Faith in its Unity and [ Ephesians. 5. v. 5.
] Integrity is always the same; so is the Authority to each, and Divine
Assistance not to misguide proportionably the same.

VI. Wherefore, As the Apostles (gathered together in the Holy Ghost,)
Exercised their Authority in determining [ Acts 15.
] Controversies of Faith, and requiring [ Matt. 18. 17.
] a Submission of Judgment from others to their Decisions, in their time: So
also the following Pastors, and Governors of the Catholic Church assembled in
a General Council, and inspired by the same Holy Ghost, exercised the like
Authority in desiding the like Controversies, distinguishing Gospel Truths from
Error, and requiring the like submission of Judgment from Believers, as
occasion was offered in all ensuing Ages.

QVERIES.
I. WHether a Separation at any time whatsoever, and on what Pretense soever,
made by any Part or Member of the whole Church, from the known Faith and Unity
of the same Church, be not opposite and destructive to the Fundamental Grounds
of Religion established by Christ?

II. Whether the Church of England before the Reformation was not a Part, or
Member Subordinate to the whole? And whether by its Separating in Faith and
Communion from the Roman Church, it did not also Separate from the whole then
Extant and Visible Church? If it did; Whether such Separation be Justifiable?
If it did not; Where was the ever Divinely Authorized and Assisted Catholic
Church from the Visible Communion of which the Roman Church had Separated, and
to which the Church of England, deserting the Roman, did Adjoyn and Unite her
self in Faith, Sacraments, and Subordination of Government?

III. Whether the Church of England at the time of the Reformation, assuming
the liberty of Judging, and Determining Controverted Points of Faith by the
Rule of Scripture, Interpreted by her self independently on, and with
disjunction from the Judgment of all and every other, at least then extant
Church or Churches, as her Book of Homilies seems to declare: Did not by this
assumed Liberty, Authorize and Warrant each particular Part, or even Member of
her own Communion, to pass the like Judgment, by the same Rule Independently
on, and with disjunction from her respective Tenets in Faith and Doctrine.
Furthermore, Whether such a Liberty be not repugnant to the Unity of Faith
established by Christ? Whether the Confusions and Disorders infesting the
Nation for above these Forty years, have not in great measure sprung from this
Root or Principle? And whether it does not lay open a direct and unavoidable
way or passage, to all manner of Schisms and Heresies?

IV. Whether private Self-Interpretation of Scripture, in contempt of the
Churches Authority, has not already brought many (and in all likelihood will
daily bring more) of the most weighty Articles of the Christian Religion into
Question and Debate? And this by an endless Labyrinth of Contest, without hopes
of Redress? And whether the same Church Authority, once neglected, the Canon of
Scripture it self, as to its being Gods Word, may not be Controverted; And
finally the whole Systeme of Faith by degrees, perish?

V. Whether the Church of England having upon Self-Abstract-Notions and
Allegations of Gods Word, made a Rupture in the Unity of Faith, and
Subordination of Government from the Church, of which it was formerly a Member,
does not unduly exact from her Fellow Members either an Intern or
(consequently) an Extern Obedience, and Conformity to her own proper Doctrine
and Worship? And whether Justice, Prudence, and common Interest do not require,
either that the Church of England return to the Unity and Obedience of the
Church, from whence (by open Contradiction) she has departed; or that she
allow all other Sects, or Assemblies; yea, even individual Persons, in their
own Judgments of sober Understanding, Dissenting from her, the free Exercise
of their Religion, according to their several, though opposite Sentiments and
Dictamen of Conscience, as to Faith and Worship in Expounding God's Word.

Lastly, Whether the Imposing of Oaths, Tests, Sacraments, Rites, Liturgies,
Ceremonies, etc. by the Church of England upon Persons to whom such Matters do
not appear plain and clear in Scripture, be not contrary to the Spirit and
Genius of the Reformation: And whether such Impositions, and Entanglements
under severe Temporal Penalties, may not be properly termed a Persecution.

God Save the KING.

