THE Grand Case Of the present MINISTRY.

WHETHER They may lawfully Declare and Subscribe, as by the late Act of
UNIFORMITY is required.

AND The several Cases, thence arising (more especially about the COVENANT) are
clearly Stated and Faithfully Resolved.

By the same Indifferent Hand.

With an Addition to his former CASES of CONSCIENCE, hereunto Subjoyned.

Love works no ill to his Neighbor: therefore Love is the fulfilling of the
Law,

Romans 13. London, Printed by J. Macock, for T. Dring, and are to be sold at the
George in Fleet Street, and by M. Mitchel at the first Shop in
Westminster Hall. 1662.

THE PREFACE TO My Dissenting Brethren.
1. A Man may be Felo de se by destroying himself, by our Law: and Fur de se,
by depriving and Stealing himself away from him to whom his Service is due, by
the Imperial Law: and proditor de Se, by the Law of Nature, if he descend from
the Dignity of Humanity, and submit to the Danger which he might avoid. These
are words of the very Learned Doctor Donn, against the Jesuitical ambition to
suffer: and, with all my heart I wish, they were not in all particulars, too
too pertinent to our present Case.

2. For an Opinion, that we are our own Lords, and may dispose of our selves,
for the glory of God, as we please, precipitates, not only Jesuits, but the
zealous of all professions, to forsake themselves, and to quit their Duties,
with a strange prodigality of their Lives and Fortunes.

3. But it is, verily, a great Mistake; for we are not our Own: our Persons,
our Parts, our Estates, and Capacities, they are Gods, the Kings, the Churches,
and our Wives and Friends: and to all of these, in a several respect and
proportion, we are justly accountable for them.

4. It was a Monstrous kind of wantonness in those Women, Gellius speaks of,
that so long played with their own Lives, till they had brought it up for a
fashion, to kill themselves.

5. And yet it should seem, that it is even Natural for men of Stomach, to
value a Name above Life; for the very Heather, tempted with honor and
vainglory, (and sometimes with ease, and a desire to be freed from present
Inconveniences) how familiarly did they kill themselves?

6. Whereupon, it is observed, Arist. Ethic. lib. 3. 6. 7.
that such as labored for public preservation, did oppose themselves to this
strange Corruption, by endeavoring to Convince the World, that there is
nothing more base and cowardly then to destroy ones Self.

7. The Emperors also in their Laws and Constitutions, had Remedies against
it: not only by Forfeitures, but Infamy it self, to remove, if possible, the
Temptation of glory.

8. Yea, as if the Self-denial of Christianity were too weak to encounter it,
we read of a Law in the Earldom of Flaunders to the same purpose: in which,
this destroying of ones self, is counted with Treason, Heresy and Sedition:
and do not our own Laws Reckon it, not only Mans-slaughter, but Murder? yea,
as a thing hardly standing with the truth of our Profession, as Christians, the
Canons of the Church are set against it, denying such persons Christian Burial.

9. Amongst Christians, Bellarmine (by way of reproach, indeed, to his
Adversaries) has this Gradation in his Observation, wherein he places the
worst, first. To Suffer, says he, the Anabaptists are forwardest, the
Calvinists next, and the Lutherans very slack. And if it may be no offense to
my Brethren, we may easily note; that with us, the Quaker is forwardest, the
Anabaptist next, the Independent next, and the Presbyterian last, (no
disparagement to him) though all too forward) in exposing themselves to
needless sufferings.

10. And now, my Brethren, if this Witness be true, and the premises cannot be
denied; let us begin to think with our selves, what it is, that does Warrant
and justify Sufferings, and constitute Martyrdom.

11. Certainly, if propenseness to suffer makes the Martyr, the Anabaptist, the
Quaker, yea, the Jesuit and the Heathen, the Lunatic and the Madman, even
such as have neither Grace nor Reason are far before you.

12. We must conclude, that nothing can prefer the Sufferings of one Way or
Party (be it the Soberest in the World) to an higher Estimation or Reward, then
another, or indeed, secure it from the offense of God, our Neighbor, and
Self-murder, but the Justness of the Cause.

13. Yet, if the Cause be Just, except the Intention be right too, we fail of
Martyrdom: it is not the falling with a beloved party, the satisfying the
humor of a multitude, the preserving a Name with Malcontents, the answering
our own Idea of Convenience, much less, a being revenged upon a Government we
hate, that makes a Martyr. It Is neither the Intention without the Cause, nor
the Cause without the Intention, shall win and wear this Crown; Though I bestow
all my goods to feed the poor: yea though I give my body to be burned, and have
not charity, it profits me nothing.

14. Again, Admit the Cause and the Intention both were right: yet, there is
another way to frustrate the hopes, and lose the Reward of Martyrdom: for
there must be a fit occasion too, Necessitating the Sufferings which God
approves. A Learned Man, against that Jesuiticall fury of daring the
Magistrate, assures us, that the Right Martyrdom perishes upon this ground
(among others) that he which refuses to defend his life by a lawful act, and
entertaines not those overtures of Escape, which God presents him, destroy's
himself.

15. There is a Golden Mean (worth a Golden Mine) fitly illustrated by the Law
of the Roman Army, Jus Legionis facile, non sequi, non fugere: Neither to
pursue persecution with a Neglect of our Safety or duty: nor to run away from
it, with apparent hazard of Gods glory.

16. Indeed, our Supreme Lord sometimes calls for our Goods, our Liberties, and
our Lives, in witness to his truth: yet, though he allows our Affection to
himself a channel to Run in, even to death, when he requires; he, by no means,
indulgeth that Heathenish Corruption of destroying our selves. When God calls
we are bound to suffer, and to suffer cheerfully, and willingly, and readily,
but never Spontaneously, or to have a hand in our own blood; either by
provoking our own Ruin, or suffering for our own Cause, or being our own
Executioners. This is to throw away the Talent lent us; which ought thus only
to be spent, when it may not be improved any other way for our Master's use.

17. To suffer for Christ and the Gospels sake is, indeed, a favor from
Heaven, to you it is given, in the behalf of Christ not only to believe, but
to suffer for his sake; but mark, it must be for his sake, and on his behalf,
and given too, by God, in the course of his providence; not snatched or stolen
by our own Rashness, and hastening the Occasion and Execution of it.

18. God has been pleased to set down in Scripture the Grounds and Causes upon
which he Calls, and we may and must submit to sufferings: and to sbrink, when
fairly called, or run upon sufferings, when not called, the first, is to
crucify Christ in his Cause, and the last, is to crucify Christ in our
selves: but to be crucified for Christ, is to suffer with him, that we may be
also glorified together.

19. Give me leave, my dear Brethren (for whom I, truly, travel in Birth)
without offense to be plain with you, in a few words of serious advice,
seasonably inferred from these Considerations; which my hearty affection and
faithfulness to you, and this poor Church, will not suffer me to omit, and I
shall cease to trouble you.

1. Let me beseech you to suspect that natural Corruption, which, upon
Ambition, Discontent, and Temptation of Credit and Glory in the World, is prone
to hasten you, in this Crisis of distemper, to unwarrantable Sufferings.

2. Take heed of being Hurried to suffering, with the Motion of the Multitude,
or by the foud persuasion of an implicit faith, or dependence upon the
Principles and examples of others; whose Temptations, happily, may be greater
then yours; and yet, if you follow them, their sufferings may be less. Yea, it
is possible, and worthy to be heeded, that others may tempt you to follow them
into that Condition, wherein you, indeed, may suffer for them, and yet they not
suffer with you.

3. Therefore, having the glory of God, the prosperity of Sion, the peace of
the Nation, the progress of the Gospel, the Salvation of Souls, the fulfilling
of your Ministry, and provision for your Selves and your several Families
before your eyes; let nothing tempt you from all these, that amount to no more
then the pleasing and gratifying an Espoused party, that resolves to be Angry:
for, against all these, I can see no reason, why you should resemble that
Spelunca Hienae, which the Prophet complained of; that is a fish (as St.
Chrysostom observes) that has but one backbone, and cannot turn, except it
turn all at one.

4. Above all, take heed of displeasing Christ by pleasing your selves or
friends; of provoking him to forsake you in you sufferings, by dissembling to
suffer for him when you Know you do not; or when, indeed, you do not, and you
think you do.

To suffer the loss of all in pretense for Christ, and, therefore to suffer the
loss of Christ too, this is suffering indeed. What can more imbitter our
sufferings, then to have the punishment of loss temporal seconded with the
punishment of pain Spiritual? and our dissembled sufferings for Christ rewarded
with our real sufferings from him: with a, who has required these things at
your hands?

5. Remember the great end of our Life and callings, of our Stations and
Relations: we are not sent into the world properly to suffer, but to do, viz.
to perform the Offices of Society required of us in our several places.

2. The way to Triumph was not (of old) to be slain in the Battle, but to have
kept the Station, and done all Military duties: let us stand fast, and not be
shaken or moved with the blasts of envious reproaching or flattering words. Let
not small encounters of apprehended inconveniences make us fly, or quit our
duties.

3. Let us fulfill our Ministry begun: and Run the Race that is yet before us,
with patience and perseverance, to the end, despising the shame, as our
forerunner did, who may call us also to follow his steps, as well through evil
as good Report; Yielding him Sweat in the Harvest of our Calling, and not our
Blood till he Calls for it.

6. Pythagoras his Sholars were to suffer themselves to be slain, rather then
to stir their foot and tread down a Bean; and Jarvice, the Priest, in King
James his days, though he had publicly declared before, that it was lawful
to take the Oath of Allegiance, yet he would die in the refusal of it, because
it seemed not Expedient to him to take it then.

2. Ah! my Brethren, is there, indeed, no greater Latitude in
Christian-liberty? must we needs venture all upon a point of Indifferency, or
mere Expediency?

I dare not Determine, how far a Divine positive Law loses its hold and
obligation in Case of Just fear or Necessity: yet, when we see nothing in the
things enjoined, that is against the Law of Nature; and when there is no Rule
to be found against them in the holy Scripture; yea when the Case is such as
indeed ours is, that neither the primitive nor the Reformed Churches, disallow
of Conformity; It Is evident, that at most, there is ground of Scruple only of
the lawfulness; there can be no Knowledge of the unlawfulness thereof.

3. Now in such a Case, Conscience cannot prohibit Conformity (though very
much is still pleaded from it) for indeed, in accurate Speaking, it is not
Conscience Corbo. sum. sum: Tom. 1. p. 1. e. 12.
that does properly bind at all, but that Law which Conscience takes Knowledge
of, and presents to our Understanding.

And if the Law be not clear in it self, or if Conscience take not a full or
clear Knowledge of the Law, especially if there be no Law at all in the Case,
we have no Knowledge to Enlighten and guide our Conscience, we are in
Ignorance, in doubts, or in Scruples; and the Law of Conscience does not now
dictate to us what to do or Suffer; and if, in such a Case, we choose to
Suffer, we may not say, we suffer for Conscience: I did it Ignorantly, not
Conscientiously, says the great Apostle.

Hence a Learned Divine (in confutation of the Jesuists Dr. Don, pseudo. p. 238.
suffering-zeal) concludes, that where God has afforded us no way of attaining
to Certain Knowledge; though a man may have some such knowledge or Opinion as
may sway him, in an Indifferent Action, by Reasons of Convenience; or with an
Apparent Analogy with other points of more evident Certainty; yet, no man may
Suffer any thing for these points, as for his Conscience: because, though he
lighted upon the Truth, yet it was not by any Certain Way which God appointed,
for a Constant and Ordinary means to find out that Truth.

6. But lest I enlarge beyond the bounds of a Preface; In short, O that my
brethren would soberly ask themselves, what that means, I will have mercy and
not Sacrifice? is there no such thing as self-denial, in parting with our own
Wills? is no apprehended Inconvenience to be born for the discharge of our
Trust to God and men? is nothing tolerable that is not best? or is nothing to
be yielded out of charity and pity to the Church and State, Our selves and
Families?

Are the Talents of our offices, our Gifts, and our opportunities of doing
good, at our own disposal? are the shrieks and cries of the Souls of our
people, of our wives and children hanging upon us, easily answered, or the
importunity of Friends, the Reasonings of Brethren, the persuasions of all the
Eminent foreign Reformed Divines, the Authority of long continued Custom in
our own Church, or the Laws of the Land, can all these nothing prevail? What
shall we say to these things? if it be sinful to conform, declare wherein: if
not, but some smaller matter hinder us; I cannot but remember then that he that
died of the Bite of a Weasell, lamented that it was not a Lion.

I speak as unto Wise men, Judge ye what I say; and the God of Truth and Peace
be with you. Amen.

THE Grand Case.
Whether it be lawful to declare, as is required by the late Act, Entitled an
Act for the Uniformity of Public Prayers, etc.

Resol.
I Fear, there are some that question the very lawfulness of the Book of
Common Prayer: so few sheets of paper may not be thought to attempt so great a
Task, as their satisfaction.

Yet, hearing that many Moderate Brethren do now check, who had resolved to
conform, had not these Declarations been required, out of my tender affection
to them, as also my desire of the good of the Church (which, I cannot but
believe, may be much advanced through their Conformity) I have taken this
encouragement, to offer my Reason, why I conceive, that such Ministers as could
otherwise have conformed, may lawfully declare in order thereunto, as by the
said Act is required.

That we may distinctly, and thoroughly judge of this weighty point, we shall
set before our eyes both the Declarations in their own words (for there are two
of them) the first we have in page 73. and the other in page 77. of the Act as
it is now printed: they are as follows.

The first is thus.
I A. B. do here declare my unfeigned Assent and Consent to all and every thing
contained and prescribed in and by the Book Entitled, the Book of
Common Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and
Ceremonies of the Church, according to the use of the Church of England,
together with the Psalter, or Psalms of David, pointed as they are to be sung
or said in Churches; and the Form or Manner of Making, Ordaining, and
Consecrating of Bishops, Priests and Deacons.

The second is thus.
I A. B. do declare, that it is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to
take Arms against the King, and that I do abhor that Traitorous position of
taking Arms by his Authority against his person, or against those that are
Commissionated by him: and that I will conform to the Liturgy of the Church of
England, as it is now by Law Established. And I do declare, that I do hold
there lies no obligation upon me or on any other person from the Oath, commonl
called the Solemn League and Covenant, to Endeavor any Change or Alteration of
Government, either in Church or State; and that the same was in its Self an
unlawful Oath, and imposed upon the Subjects of this Realm against the known
Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom.

These are the Declarations: we proceed to consider each of them, in their
several Branches. Touching the first, the Case is.

CASE I. Whether it be lawful to Declare in the Words of the first of these
Declarations?
Resol.
THis Declaration has two branches. The first is about the Liturgy; the last,
about the Book of Ordination.

1. Touching the Liturgy, we are to declare in these words. I do here declare
my unfeigned Assent and Consent to all and every thing contained and preseribed
in and by the said Book, Entitled the Book of Common Prayer, etc.

2. Touching the Book of Ordination, we are to declare in these words: And the
Form or Manner of Making, Ordaining and Consecrating of Bishops, Priests and
Deacons.

3. Now give me leave to ask, what can possibly render it unlawful for such as
can conform without it (for such I deal with) thus to declare?

4. As for the latter branch, touching the Form or Manner of Making, Ordaining,
and Conseerating Bishops, Priests and Deacons; this, most that have Livings
have Subscribed already at their Ordination, and read their allowance of,
openly, to their several Congregations, upon their Induction: besides, had not
this been required in the Act, who knows not that no conformity without
subscribing and reading the Nine and thirty Articles, in one of which we
declare the same, could legally suffice? Yea, who sees not the weakness of such
a pretense of future conformity; if this part of the Declaration had not been
required; which indeed is no new thing, nor such, as any one without self-abuse
or self-delusion could possibly expect should not still be required; or (truly
I think) without dissimulation or abuse of the world, could say, they intended
to have conformed had not this been required?

5. But I perceive the first part of the Declaration, touching the Liturgy,
bears the greater burden of exception.

The words are, I do here declare my unfeigned assent and consent to all and
every thing contained and prescribed in and by the Book, Entitled the Book of
Common Prayer, etc.

6. But did you indeed intend to have formed had not this Declaration been
required, what can hinder you thus to declare? viz. that you do assent and
consent to that which your selves did intend to practice? and that this your
assent and consent to your own intended practice is not Hypocritical, but
unfeigned? certainly, this is all that is here required.

7. Perhaps, the long Title of the Book afrights us. But if there be more then
in the Book, we have nothing to do with that: for we are only to declare for
every thing contained in the Book: but if there be not, then we that embrace
the substance, have no reason to be scared with the shadow; or to scruple at
that in the Title, which we can use in the Book.

Object. 1. It is objected, that there are several expressions in the Book of
Common Prayer, that though we could safely read them, yet we do not so heartily
like and approve them, as we seem to be required to declare.

Answ. 1. Do not force an Edge upon the words, to wound your selves. Look well
upon the Declaration, and you will find that the object of your assent and
consent is not the words, but things; not every word, but every thing; not
every thing as there expressed, but every thing contained in the expressions,
and prescribed in and by the Book of Common Prayer.

2. Yet, if you can conform to the Book, I hope you can read the words: and if
so, I hope you can assent and consent unfeignedly to the lawfulness of the
Action which your selves perform: and this is all, as more fully I shall show
presently, that is here required of you to declare.

Object. 2. But though we can use the things, yet it is only for peace sake,
and obedience to Authority, etc. and not because we would choose, or can
absolutely approve of the things in themselves.

Answ. We may approve a thing absolutely, as is hinted in the Objection, and
comparatively or respectively.

1. That we should absolutely approve of every thing contained in the Book of
Common Prayer, as that which we would choose above all other, and as best in it
self, we cannot, either with charity to our selves, or our Governors, or with
any color of reason, conceive to be the intention of the Declaration required.
Seeing, it is a moral impossibility, that all men, in so many particulars, and
various circumstances, should be exactly of one mind. And seeing much less will
serve the ends of Government, and the design of the Act for Uniformity.

2. It is therefore, a comparative or respective approbation, that is here
required: or rather in the milder words of the Act, assent and consent the
grounds thereof, are not specified in the Act, but left to our selves; and
whatsoever the grounds and motives are, if they are effectual to prevail upon
us, to assent and consent unfeignedly to the Book of Common Prayer, our
Governors expect no more, for their Act has its end.

3. Thus we are left free to compare the effects and consequences of our
conformity, and Nonconformity: of obedience to the Act, and our disobedience;
and if we can but comparatively approve of conformity, that is, with respect to
its conveniences above Nonconformity; and consequently of every thing to be
conformed to upon the like grounds, we may safely declare our assent and
consent to the same, in the sense of the Act.

4. For doubtless, our Governors intended we should use those means they offer
us, for the same end themselves proposed. Seeing, therefore, by the Act, they
intend, and require uniformity; and seeing also, that they threaten such as
will not thus assure them that they will conform, with the loss of their
Livings, etc. and lastly, seeing all such penalties are annexed to Law, on
purpose to move us to active obedience; what remains, but that we are allowed
thus to reason. Here is such a Declaration required by Law, and such a severe
penalty annexed, for all that disobey it: though I could rather have liked the
Book of Common Prayer, if such and such things had been altered; yet rather
then lose my living, and therewith, all legal opportunity of serving the
Church, rather then show my self cross and disobedient to Authority in lawful
things; rather then ruin my self and family for a thing indifferent, though,
in it self I judge it is inconvenient: I do choose to be obedient and
conformable; and in order thereunto, upon these grounds I declare my assent and
consent unfeignedly to every thing to be conformed unto.

5. Indeed, had the word [Free] been in the Act instead of [unfeigned] there
had been more color of this Objection.

Therefore, out of a vile design, I fear, of some malcontents, that can more
freely consent to our common calamities, then our common Prayers; it is buz'd
up and down, perhaps, not without feigning, that our Free assent and consent is
required. And that thus we are to declare, that we choose these things for
themselves, and of our own accord. Whereas the word Free is not at all
mentioned, and so the whole ground of the exception fails.

6. But for the perfect removal of any such scruple for ever, let the Act
interpret it self. The words immediately forgoing this Declaration, are these.
Every Minister -- shall declare his unfeigned assent and consent to the Use of
all things in the said Book contained, and prescribed, in these words and no
other; they are the words of this Declaration.

Mark, we must declare our unfeigned assent and consent. To what? not simply to
all things, but to all things with respect to their use: to the use of all
things in the said Book. But in what words must we declare for the use of all
things in the said Book? in these words, and no other; and they are, as was
said, the words of the Declaration.

7. The plain meaning of the Act appears, therefore, to be but this: while we
declare, in these words, viz. of the Declaration, we do but declare our
unfeigned assent and consent to the use of Common Prayer: which if we can
lawfully use, we do but declare, that if we do conform, we do nothing against
our consciences: or that, we do unfeignedly assent and consent to the use of
that which we our selves either do, or can use.

And, as if our Governors had purposed to make this their meaning as plain as
the Sun, they have at least twice more given us the same interpretation of
those words. In page 74. such as are hereafter inducted must declare their
unfeigned assent and consent. To what? why to the use of all things therein;
that is, in the Book of Common Prayer contained and prescribed. But how and
after what manner? why according to the Form before appointed; that is, in the
Declaration. The like we have again, page 83.

9. Of that which has been said this is the Sum; the Act, in this first
Declaration requires, that we declare our unfeigned assent and consent to the
use of every thing in the Common Prayer, and the Form of Making, Ordaining, and
Consecrating Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. We suppose the brethren we now
reason with to have purposed to use the Book of Common Prayer, had not these
Declarations been required: and the Form of Making Bishops, Priests and
Deacons, they have, or must have subscribed, and read their assent and consent
unto it, had this Declaration never been required. Therefore I hope there is
nothing of Conscience remaining in these my brethren, to check any longer at
this Declaration. I shall therefore pass on unto the other.

CASE II. Whether is it lawful to declare in the words of the second
Declaration?
Resol.
1. WHen Alcibiades, a young Gentleman of Athens, was afraid to speak before
the Multitude, Socrates, to put him in heart, asked him, fear you such a one?
and names one of the Multitude to him; no, says Alcibiades, be is but a
Tradesman; fear you such a one, says he? and names a second; no, for he is
but a Peasant; or such a one? and names a third, no, for he is but an ordinary
Gentleman. Now, says Socrates, of such as these does the whole Multitude
consist.

2. I confess, there are an heap of several things required in this second
Declaration. And perhaps, their multitude may somewhat scare us. Yea, hence, I
have reason to believe, that some are offended that hardly ever read, much
less examined the particulars of it.

3. But be not afraid, draw near, and take the Declaration into its parts, and
consider of them one by one: its possible, they may not be so formidable as we
are apt of our selves, or as others would have us to fancy. Its possible we may
thus receive encouragement, with Alcibiades, and find a way to escape the
Temptation.

This Declaration concerns three general heads. Taking Arms against the King:
conformity to the Liturgy: and the Oath, called the Solemn League and Covenant.

5. In the first part of this Declaration, concerning the taking Arms against
the King, we are required to declare; First, that it is not lawful upon any
pretense whatsoever to take Arms against the King. Secondly, that we abhor
that Traitorous position of taking Arms by the Kings Authority against his
person, or against those that are Commissionated by him. Accordingly there
arise two Cases.

CASE III.
Whether it be lawful for us to declare, that it is not lawful upon any
pretense whatsoever, to take Arms against the King.

Resol.
1. EIther it is lawful to take Arms against the King, or it is not: if it be
granted that it is not, what should hinder us from declaring it, when by Law
(as now we are) called to do it? but if it should be thought lawful, I must
demand by what Law?

It Is but a subterfuge to speak of the Law of Nature, while the Law of Scripture
and the Law of the Land have undertaken the Case.

3. Now, what says the Scripture? surely it gives not the least color of
encouragement for it, except Obedience and Submission, and that for conscience,
and the Lords sake, be taking Arms.

4. Again, if the Scriptures may be thought too General; let the Laws of the
Land be examined. I question not whether they were not sufficiently plain in
the Case before: yet now, certainly they are above all Contradiction or doubt.
I mean by the late Act for the Safety of the Kings person, where we may learn
in the plainest manner, that it is Treason and Rebellion, and unlawful enough
upon any pretense whatsoever, to take Arms against the King.

5. Such as I now deal with do at the most, only doubt, whether according to
the constitution of this Kingdom, the two Houses are not a power coordinate
with the King: and the King and his two Houses being at variance, whether they
might not side with the Parliament, even to the taking Arms against the King:
but if this were a doubt before, it is not possible it should remain so still;
all color of it being wiped away, and that Controversy as perfectly
determined as an Act of King, Lords and Commons, can possibly do it: as appears
in the Act forementioned, for the safety of the Kings person.

CASE IV. Whether is it lawful to declare, that we do Abhor that Traitorous
position of taking Arms by the Kings Authority against his person, or those
that are Commissionated by him?
Answ.
1. IF this be indeed a Traitorous position, who doubts but that every true
Subject is bound to abhor it? and being lawfully called thereunto, so to
declare.

2. That this is a Traitorous position, I need not say more then what I just
now said in answer to the last Case. Namely, that however it came to be
disputed before, it is now plainly determined to be so by the said Act for the
safety of the Kings person; and it being declared by Law to be a Traitorous
position, it ought so to be reputed: and by this Law also, it being so required
of us, it ought to be declared against, and abhorred accordingly.

3. So much may briefly suffice for the first general in this Declaration. The
second, touching Conformity, offers now to be considered. This we shall pass
with a quick dispatch, that we may hasten to our main design, the discharge of
the Covenant.

The Case about Conformity in short is this.

CASE V.
Whether we may lawfully declare, that we will conform to the Liturgy of the
Church of England, as it is now by Law established?

Resol.
1. FIrst, it seems there is no longer any ground of doubt, whether the Liturgy
be established by Law, i. e. the Law of the Land.

2. Secondly, neither, have we any reason to question, whether it be against
the Law of God, seeing our Brethren, whom we are now treating, are supposed to
acknowledge, that they would have conformed unto it, had not these Declarations
been required; which I know they would not have done, had they thought it to be
contrary to the Law of God.

3. What then can obstruct this part of the Declaration, with brethren so well
prepared for it? this only calls them to pass their former intention to conform
into a promise that they will do so: and to declare that, for the satisfaction
of Law and Authority, they will do that which they acknowledge they can do with
satisfaction to themselves: and which, also, they confess they would have
done, had not they received this dissatisfaction from the Declaration: which
yet we see vanishes before us.

Of the Covenant.
1. BUt the great Mountain is yet to be removed: some say, they are called to
declare against, and to renounce the Covenant: or, as some that would scare
themselves and others from Conformity, to abjure and to unswear the Covenant:
and this, they complain, is too hard for them, they cannot do it.

This is, I confess, a very tender Point, yet such, I hope, as the most tender
Conscience need not fear to be pricked with it, if warily handled. I mean, if
we be not frighted awat from it, or stand not at too great a distance: but with
a sound and impartial judgment draw near unto it, and look well upon it, and
consider after what manner and in what words, we are indeed required to declare
against the Covenant.

2. Under this head, there are three members of the Declaration touching the
Covenant. Something is to be declared against its obligation. Something against
its lawfullness in it self; and something against the lawfulness of its
imposition.

3. We proceed to weigh them, one by one, with all seriousness and fidelity, in
a particular examination of the three Cases that offer themselves in the very
words of the Declaration.

The first, touching the Obligatory force of the Covenant, is in the
Declaration apparently limited to the alteration of Government, and is this.

CASE VI.
Whether we may lawfully declare in these words. I do hold there lies no
obligation upon me or on any other person from the Oath, commonly called the
Solemn League and Covenant, to endeavor any Change or alteration of Government
either in Church or State.

Resol.
MEthinks, it is no great venture to say that such as have taken the Covenant
may lawfully declare that they hold that neither themselves nor any person is
bound by the Covenant to endeavor a change of Government in Church or State.

We are agreed in three things, and so far I shall not create a controversy.

First, that a Covenant both illegally imposed, and illegally taken may bind
the Takers.

Secondly, that the Covenant in Question does not bind to an endeavor to alter
or meddle with the State-Government.

Thirdly, that the alteration or extirpation (as the word is) of
Church Government, being the main business of the Covenant (as the Covenanters
plea has granted) if this main business of the Covenant be lawful, it does
so far bind those that have taken it, if not lawful, they are, at least, so
far discharged, and not under the obligation of it.

Fourthly, it is accordingly, therefore, in plainest terms, again and again
granted us, both by Mr. Crofton, and the more Moderate and Learned Author of
the Covenanters plea, wherein indeed they concur with all Casuists, that, if we
can discover any thing unlawful in the matter, especially this main matter of
the Covenant, it was so far void ipso facto.

5. For the proof of this, they cry aloud for our strong reasons. Such as I
have, I shall now crave leave, with a sincere and humble hand, to offer to my
Brethren.

6. Here I must pitch; and my work, in short, is to prove, that the Covenant,
so far as it engages the takers of it against Church Government, and for the
extirpation or change of it, is unlawful and sinful in the matter of it.

7. But give me leave to fix my foot in a plain distinction. The Res jurata,
the thing Sworn or Covenanted to be done may be either such as is unlawful
simply, and absolutely unlawful for any to do, or quo ad nos, when though it be
not sinful in the primary consideration of it; yet to such and such persons it
is sinful; for it cannot be denied, but that some things are lawful and
laudable in themselves, and for some persons, (as to execute justice, to
dispense the public Ordinances, to bear the Ark, etc.) which are very unlawful
for others not called thereunto, to meddle with all.

8. So that, if to endeavor the extirpation of the Government of the Church by
Prelacy, be either unlawful in the first or absolute Consideration of it, or
else as to those that thus did Covenant, and as it was covenanted; if either
way it be found unlawful, so far the Covenant is sinful in the very matter of
it.

9. Indeed, the immediate question, and that which most nearly concerns the
Covenanters, is not whether the thing sworn be in it self lawful, but whether
it be so to them; and whether this guilt lies not on them, first to purpose,
and then to swear to sin, that is, to do that which some way or other God has
forbidden them to meddle with; for to them to whom it is forbidden, it is as if
it were unlawful in it self (as the Apple to our first Parents) and as it is
unlawful for us, it goes into the matter of the Covenant which we take; and by
consequence that which is only unlawful to us, if sworn, does make that Oath,
as ours, unlawful in its self, that is, in the matter of it.

10. Therefore, I shall not need to dispute, whether the Government of our
Church be so necessary by a Jus divinum, and the word of God, as that it is
unalterable by the power of man, or that it is sinful in it self to endeavor
the alteration of it. I choose rather to come as near my Brethren as I can, and
to argue from the latter branch of the distinction, according to which, my Task
is to prove, that it is unlawful for such as took the Covenant to endeavor a
change of Church Government by virtue of that Covenant. Which may the plainer
appear, if we consider the persons that took the Covenant, either as single
persons, and one apart from another, or as united in the great body that at
first took it.

Upon each of these we shall now proceed.

CASE VII.
Whether any private or single person can lawfully endcavour the alteration of
Church Government by virtue of the Covenant.

Resol.
THis seems to be much the proper Case, seeing the Parliament it self, that
first imposed the Covenant, are now dissolved into private persons. Yea, though
some of the same Members, and many of the same Lords, may possibly sit in the
present Parliament, yet as to that Parliament that is gone and dissolved so
long since, they are but single and private persons: therefore, if the Question
be of any obligation that may be thought to be now on them, from any thing they
did in the Long Parliament, it must concern them as so many private or single
persons, members of the Kingdom, and not of the Parliament.

2. Now, for any such to stand engaged by a public Covenant against a settled
Government (as the Government of the Church is) and accordingly, to endeavor
the extirpation or change of it, is palpably sinful, both as such a Covenant,
and such endeavors, are directly against the Rights of the King, the Laws of
the Land, the privileges of Parliament, the Liberty of the Subject, and the
former obligations which lay upon the Nations: as will appear every one in his
own order.

CASE VIII.
Whether, to Endeavor to alter the Government of the Church, be against the
Rights of the King.

Resol.
TO make the Argument from the Rights of the King conclude the matter of the
Covenant sinful, two things require proof. First, That to endeavor against
the Government of the Church by virtue of the Covenant, is against the Kings
Right. Secondly, Thus to endeavor against the Rights of the King by virtue of
the Covenant is sinful. Of both briefly.

For the first, it is evident, that thus to stand engaged by public Covenant
to endeavor, and accordingly constantly to endeavor against
Church Government, is directly against the Kings Right of Authority and
Prerogative.

1. It Is against the Kings Right of Authority, for he is the Supreme Executor
of the Law; and all inferior officers are but his Commissioners to execute
that government, in which he is alone the Supreme Governor, as we swear him to
be, both in Church and State.

Now take away the body of Governors, the Head must needs fall; and if all
Inferiors be removed, where will the Supreme be?

But that which sits the argument indeed, is this, to be engaged constantly to
endeavor (as the word in the Covenant is) to extirpate the Government of the
Church, does directly oppose us in the whole course of our lives, and that in
the very sense of the Covenanters themselves, against the Kings Government; As
none can deny the Government of the Church politically considered to be, and
against the Kings commissioners in the said Government.

In so much, as they must either resist it, by violence and Arms, as they have
occasion; or at least not own it, not submit unto it, nor yield it any active
obedience, yea, as more anon, pray against it, preach against it, and every way
disown it, revile it, undermine, and watch all occasions to ruin and extirpate
it, according as they stick not to say, they are engaged by the Covenant; If
this be not inconsistent, or at least incongruous, unsuitable to the state and
relation of Subjects, and apparently against the Right of the King and his
Authority, whose government this is, I humbly expect reason to the Contrary.

Secondly, the Matter of the Covenant is thus also against the Rights of the
Kings Prerogative, as Legis-lator, as well as against the Right of his
Authority as Supreme Governor.

I argue not from the imposition, or from the taking of the Covenant without
the King; which, indeed, were both against his prerogative; but as my Argument
at present requires, from the matter of the Covenant specified; as engaging
Subjects to endeavor the alteration of Government without the Kings consent.

Whether, the Government sworn against be established by Law, we shall examine
anon, at present it is enough, that such as it is, it cannot be altered, much
less extirpated, without the change of the Laws, very many Laws, that much
concern, if not establish the same.

Now it is well enough known to be a grand part of the Kings Prerogative, that
no Law be made or altered without his fiat: Much less then, such Laws as
concern himself so nearly as the changing, not his Commissioners only, but his
Government it self.

And it is more then apparent, that the King was in such a condition* when the
Covenant was first taken, that the Covenanters did intend either to force his
consent to change those Laws; or else, to root out the Government by Prelacy,
against the King and the Laws too. Therefore there is no such condition as
might fairly have been in all the Covenant, [if the King shall please] or if we
can prevail with him to change the Laws, or convince him of the great
inconveniences, that we have discovered in this Government of the Church by
Prelacy; But I am sorry to remember how the Covenant was carried on, as if the
plot were laid to down with the Bishops, whether the King would consent or not,
or what ere come on it.

CASE IX.
Whether to endeavor thus against the Kings Rights, as obliged thereunto by
the Covenant, be sinful?

Resol.
WIthout Question it is; for to Covenant or swear to the injury of any is
materially sinful, and void of it self; as if a man should vow he will steal
his Neighbors Horse.

In all Covenants, therefore, the very light of Nature teaches, that
Inferiors must except the rights of their Superiors; Otherwise, if an Oath
will discharge from subjection, how soon may all Government totter and dissolve?

No Covenant can take off the force of the fifth Commandment. Honor thy
Father and thy Mother, more then of sixth, seventh, eight, or of any of the
Rest.

It is therefore granted by all Casuists, that in iis rebus quae superioris
potestati subjiciuntur, in all things which lie under the power of our
Superior, this Condition is necessarily to be understood, in all Covenants,
Oaths and Promises; si ipsi etiam placuerit, if it shall also please him that
is our Superior.

Now nothing can possibly intercept the Conclusion, but that either the
Government of the Church does not lie under the King: or that the Altering of
this Government did not concern his power: or that he gave his Consent, either
to the Covenant, or to the Altering of this Government, but none of all these
are true.

First, the Government of the Church is directly and immediately under the
King: or sworn by us all, to be Supreme Governor, in all causes and over all
persons as well Ecclesiastical as Civil; and indeed, as as was hinted before,
all Ecclesiastical Governors politically considered, are the Kings
Commissioners, and in a plain line of subordination to him. Neither can they be
taken from him, or indeed on purpose opposed or disobeyed, without apparent
injury to the Supremacy, if not with his Royal Assent, and special Commission.

Secondly, Neither may this Government be altered, or any thing changed
therein, (or indeed any thing elsethat cannot be altered without Law,) but by
the Kings own Act; and the alteration of Laws is a thing subject also to the
Kings power, according to the Constitution of this Kingdom, without all dispute.

Thirdly, Neither did the King consent to the Covenant, but, as it is well
known, proclaimed his dissent against it, which very thing is thought
sufficient to void it.

Datur Juritatio Juramenti aliquando per Superiores, si in illa ipsa Materia
Amese. de consc. p. 219.
sint Superiores, circa quam Juramentum versatur; sic Parents: so Parents,
Husbands, Masters, Princes may pronounce (says Dr. Ames) either Oaths or
Vows made by Children, Wives, Servants, Subjects, without their consent, to be
void, in those things which are subject to their power.

Therefore, so far as the Government of the Church cannot be altered but by
Law, it is under the power of the King, at least, not to alter it; he having a
Negative upon both Houses, and consequently his proclamation has pronounced
the Covenant long agon, if this rule be good, which I think none do question,
at least so far void.

I wonder that it should be urged, that the King so many years after, in his
(...), should give his Consent to the Covenant which he had immediately upon
its very birth crushed by his Proclamation.

Yea, so far as his Proclamation could pronounce it void and destroy it, I
think it may well be a Problem, whether the Kings future consent could revive
it, if it had indeed been dead and buried so many years before.

But in what words did the King seem to consent? he says it should least
displease him that men did keep their Covenant. These words do not express his
Consent to the Covenant; much less, to that part of it which concerns
Episcopacy: it was far from him to consent to the Extirpation of that: but
rather as it follows in the Kings words, to preserve (not to extirpate)
Religion in purity, and the Kingdom in peace.

Indeed, thus some would wrest one Coven. plea.
Modest expression, against the plain scope of that whole Chapter in the Kings
Book, framed by him on set purpose to show his dislike of this Covenant to his
death; as any impartial Reader thereof may satisfy him self.

Fourthly, neither can it be said, nor truly is it by any that I have heard of,
that the King did ever consent to the Alteration, much less the Extirpation of
Episcopal Government; he was indeed at last contented upon a very hard
bargain, to give it a suspension for three years; but the sword cut off that
preceding, and the Objection with it.

CASE X.
Whether the Govenanting to endeavor the Extirpation of Episcopal Government
be against the Laws, and consequently sinful.

Resol.
TO swear absolutely without submismision to the will of the supreme Governor,
to endeavor that which cannot be done, either according to Scripture, or the
Constitution of the Kingdom, without his Consent and Act, this transports the
subject beyond his place, it invades the soveraingty, and carries sedition and
rebellion in it.

This cannot be denied, though the thing sworn against be in it self unlawful,
especially when such Covenant is publicly imposed and taken; for no public
Reformation of things amiss can proceed without Tumult, if not consented unto
by the King, who is not to be frighted to do it by his Subjects, in such a
manner, of rising up against him by public Oaths; This is to hurt Majesty,
and indeed to do evil, that good may come; and if any shall swear to do it in
their places, the form of their swearing contradicts the matter sworn; for they
cannot keep their places, and take such an Oath.

3. Much more when the thing sworn against is not evil in it self, nor
contrary to Gods Word; therefore Mr. Crofton and the Author of the Covenanters
plea would take it for granted, that the Government of the Church by Prelacy,
as it is in England, is so: but neither they, nor any other can ever prove it.

4. Neither dare they say, that either lawful Authority may not establish what
Government they judge to be most convenient, if not against the Scripture, or
that it is lawful for Subjects publicly to swear, that without submission to
the pleasure of their Governors, they will endeavor to extirpate such
Government as is not contrary to the Word of God. Or that such a Covenant is
binding upon the people, to endeavor against it, or not to submit unto it.

5. Much less can it bind the people against such Government, if lawful in it
self, and such also as cannot be altered without change of the Law, which lies
not in the power of the people to do without the King, especially if the
Government sworn against be established by Law.

6. The matter is so plain, as Mr. Perkins Cases of Consc.
has decided it: That a Covenant taken against the Laws of the Land is void of
it self, that it has put the Declaration before the Covenant, and Mr. Crofton,
and especially the Author of the Covenantters plea, upon a task impossible,
viz. to make good that the Government of the Church, as in practice in England,
is not established by Law.

I shall labor on purpose to satisfy this doubt presently; in the mean time,
the present turn is apparently served with a plain distinction. We may be said
to endeavor against the Laws, and to swear against them, two ways. Either
when the thing we swear against is expressly established by plain Law; or when
the thing we swear against cannot be abolished without the Alteration or
Abolition of Law.

8. Now admit, that there be no express Law appointing this form of Government
Covenanted against, yet how does this clear the Covenanters from swearing
against Law, when they swear to extirpate that which cannot be extirpated,
without the violation and alteration of many, very many Laws. So that this
evasion, I think, is perfectly obstructed.

9. A little more distinctly, seeing, as I humbly conceive, there is much
strength in this Argument, to weaken, yea to void the Covenants Obligation, in
this particular.

10. I doubt not to assert, that such an endeavor to extirpate
Church Government, as was covenanted, is against the Law both antecedent to the
Covenant, and subsequent: such Laws as were in force before the Covenant was
taken, and such Law as by full and just Authority was enacted since. And to
conclude, that if the endeavors to extirpate Prelacy according to the Covenant
be indeed against the Law in either of these senses, they are plainly sinful,
and no obligation of the Covenant can hold us to them. First, then, let the
Question be put.

CASE XI.
Whether the present Government of this Church were Established by Law in
England before the taking of the Covenant.

Resol.
1. I Have no insight into the Laws: yet there is so much in the very Surface
of them, for this form of Government, that as I cannot but wonder at the doubt,
so I am easily encouraged to encounter it.

2. Yet give me leave, in the first* place to stumble at the fallacious use,
and too weak improvement that I find made of this expression [ Established by
Law] as if nothing could be legal, or opposed as such, that is not positively
appointed in some Statute on purpose; if this be heeded, the advantage hence,
which at most is small, utterly fails the design of the Covenant.

3. To what poor satisfaction has the learned Author of the Covenanters plea
run through the Canon Law, the Civil Law, the Statute law, and the Common Law,
to find such an establishment, with so much industry? while I think none will
dare to question, but this form is legal; and that it is established in the
law, though no express Statute be found appointing it; and so much allowed, so
far fixed and established by the Laws, as that he that shall any way engage
against it, does so far engage against known Law.

4. Is it not pretty to observe, that learned men should be so far subdued by
prejudice, to question whether Episcopacy be established by Law, when
Episcopacy has so long, even for a thousand years together (as Sir Henry
Spelman observes) had a great hand in establishing, yea making the Law it self.

5. Truly, methinks, seeing the power of the Bishops was before the Laws, so
many hundred years before our Parliaments, as now they are, and before our
Norman Laws, I mean, as ours: And seeing also, that they were still a main
cause of the Laws, there is the less reason to expect their Power, or their
Office, or their Government from them; or that the child should beget the
father that begot it.

6. However, give me leave to venture a little without my Line, and to offer a
distinction or two, that happily may cause my Brethren that are troubled with
this scruple, to take better heed to their words, and to take a better course
to vindicate their Cause, then by such a wild adventure to disturb every thing.

1. The Law may establish a thing two ways: either by appointing it de novo: or
by allowing it, and taking it for granted (as having its foundation
sufficiently laid before) upon all occasions: thus the Law does sufficiently
establish the Government of the Church, not only by those special Laws that
relate unto it, but indeed, in every Law which expresses the consent and
advice of the Lords Spiritual.

2. Church Government may be supposed to be established by Law, either in its
Office, thus we need not say the present form is established by Law; for its
Office was before ever the Laws of the Land meddled with Church Government; or,
secondly, in its political power and the exercise of it: thus the present
Government, none can doubt, to be established by Law: where we may read many
times over, the several legal names, with their distinct Jurisdictions, and the
crimes punishable by them, and Authority allowed them so to punish, and the
fees of their Courts, yea and the very form and manner of consecrating the
Bishops established by Law.

3. Thirdly, Church Government is establishable by Law either immediately or
mediately. Immediately, when by an express Statute such a form is appointed,
mediately, when a Statute impowers a person or persons, to Commissionate
Governors for the Church: and he or they, by virtue of such power, do settle a
Government in the Church, accordingly.

7. Suppose the present Government be not established by Law in the first; it is
plainly so, in the second sense: there is Statute Law, declaring the King to be
Supreme Governor, over all persons, and in all causes Ecclesiastical: and
there is Statute Law that gives him Power and Authority, or rather (according
to my Lord Cook) declares him to have power, to appoint and empower his
Commissioners in Ecclesiastical matters. And we know, Church Governors derive
their political power, and the exercise of it, from the King alone, from time
to time accordingly.

8. For the Common Law, common usage which is Common Law, will no doubt plead
prescription, and establish this form of Government over us. A Government (as a
very learned man affirms) may be established by Law, as well by consent and
submission on the peoples Part; as by express suffrage: Quid interest suffragio
populus voluntatem suam declaret an Rebus and facto? Jul.

Thus we have found the Covenant to be against a Government that was
established by the Laws of the Land, before it was imposed or taken, and in
that sense, against the Laws of the Land, and consequently so far sinful, and
not obliging.

10. But however this will pass, certainly there is Law made since the
Covenant, that is plain enough, and will surely hold us: none can encourage any
further doubt, but that the present Church Government is so far established by
the Act for Uniformity, as that it requires every Minister to declare, that he
is not bound to endeavor a change of it.

11. So that if the Covenant should be yet binding on us, to endeavor a change
of this Government, it should oblige us to violate the Law, and consequently to
sin: therefore, whatever we thought before, we may be satisfied that the
Covenant cannot oblige us so far now, viz. contrary to express Law. But we
shall put the Case, and examine it more at large.

CASE XII.
Whether a Covenant taken first, can oblige us against a future Law?

Resol.
1. THis Case being weighty, and indeed much our own; I shall set my self, with
all sincerity, as in the sight of God, to give it a full and clear resolution,
according to the best of my own reason, and the judgment of uninterested and
learned Casuists.

2. That Episcopal Government is restored by Laws made since the Kings return,
viz. in that which was taken from it, its place in the Parliament, and its
former Jurisdiction: also, that this present Church Government is so far
established by the Act for Uniformity; that it is expressly owned and allowed;
that so much as endeavors against it are prohibited, that it is no less then
the loss of our Livings, not to declare that we are not bound to endeavor the
alteration of it. These things are plain enough.

3. The great question here is, whether these Laws, made in the behalf of
Episcopal Government, after the taking of the Covenant against it, can
discharge the Subjects from the Obligation of the Covenant so far.

4. To this I do not fear to answer (Episcopal Government being in it self not
sinful) in the affirmative: neither do I find any noted Casuist to contradict
me.

5. The sum of my reason for the affirmative you have in this plain Argument.

The Covenant to do that which may Prop. 1.
become unlawful, cannot bind, when the thing sworn ( abstracted from our
Covenant) is become unlawful; for then the Covenant becomes a bond of iniquity,
and should bind beyond that known and generally approved rule, that no Covenant
binds further, and therefore not longer, then we lawfully may; and in the words
of the Covenanters plea, make us debtors to hell.

6. I am far from the Opinion of Navarr, Sylvester, Layman, and those that
affirm that no man is further bound by an Oath, then he would have obliged
himself if he had foreseen the ill consequences of it; which is indeed in their
latitude a very dangerous rule, and plainly destructive to humane society.

7. Yet no Casuist, but with Sanches, will allow the Rule, when thus limited;
that what would at first have hindered our obliging our selves, had it been
foreseen, or had it first happened, will also discharge us, when known or come to
pass, from the obligation to the performance of it, if it be by reason that the
matter is inhabilis ad producendam obligationem, that is, if the thing become
unlawful, and consequently weak and unable to produce an obligation, as before.

But to Covenant to endeavor the Prop. 2.
extirpation of Episcopal Government, though it might be thought to be lawful
to do then, yet now it appears it was to Covenant to do that which might become
unlawful, viz. by the Laws, restoring that Government, and prohibiting all
endeavors for the extirpation or alteration of it.

2. Therefore, if it did oblige so far before, which cannot be granted, yet it
can now oblige so far no longer except it have power beyond Authority, and can
warrant disobedience to the Laws of the Land.

3. The reason of the whole lies in that excellent Rule of Dr. Ames, a Rule not
questioned by any that I have heard of. De Rebus ita Mutabilibus, ut rem
promissam faciant illi citam, subintelligitur, si res in eodem statu
permanserint, that is, in the fairest and most uncexeptionable interpretation,
if the change of the state of things do not render the thing sworn or promised
sinful or unlawful.

4. Now it may be worth the examining, what unlawfulness can de novo be
contracted by the change of the state of things mutable?

5. Certainly not an unlawfulness from any immediate prohibition of God: for
then, either the thing could not be lawful, or in that sense mutable before;
and the promise had been sinful ab initio, whereas Dr. Ames supposes the
contrary, and gives this among the rest, as a condition of a lawful Oath: or
else, it must be made unlawful by special revelation, which is absurd to
suppose: especially seeing Ames makes the changableness of the things and the
state of them a possible instrument of changing things before lawful, and
lawfully sworn into sinful, and such as can no longer be obliged unto.

6. What then remains, but that this Rule refers to the laws of men: which
indeed have power to change the state of things indifferent; and to make them,
as to us, and as to their use, though not in themselves, either sinful or
necessary.

7. So that, the meaning of the Rule is, that when we promise or swear any
thing, that is lawful, if it be of a mutable nature, and the contrary to what
we swear may be commanded by Authority; we are only to perform it, with this
condition, if things remain in the same condition; and the command of
Superiors or the Law of the Land do not prohibit, and make it unlawful for us
to do.

8. Thus, admit that Episcopal Government was res indifferens, and res
mutabilis, when men swore against it: yet to perform that Oath is now become
unlawful, by the intervention of new Law, and our duty to Superiors, which no
former Oath can supersede. for according to the Rule, the Oath cannot bind in
things of so mutable a nature, without this condition, si res in eodem statu
permanserint, if the things sworn do no way afterward become sinful.

Objection wherein we have all that can possibly be urged against this Rule,
may give some advantage to our further clearing this weighty matter: it is
this. It may be thought, that God by the virtue of the Covenant has the first
obligation upon us, how then can the Law of man, made afterward, take that off?

prevented in the very Rule it self; for we cannot be bound by any Covenant
about such mutable things, without this condition be understood: and whatever
we think we give unto him, God will accept no bond from us, without this
condition, that it be to the prejudice of none, much less of Superiors.

2. And who sees not, how great a prejudice this must needs effect to
Authority, if an Oath taken by Subjects about things mutable should have power
to suspend all future Laws to the contrary for ever?

3. Indeed, God has the first obligation upon us, (but we mistake wherein) not
by the Covenant mentioned: by his own Law and the Covenant we enter as
Christians; that we will honor our father and mother, obey every Ordinance of
man, and those that Rule over us, and submit our selves unto the higher powers.

4. This is such a pre-obligation as no future Covenant can possibly dissolve;
so that such as make a Covenant that shall bind them against the lawful
commands of Authority do thereby break their Covenant with God; which if they
desire to renew again, they have no course left, but to break off the sin of
their unlawful Covenant by timely repentance.

5. Seriously considering that we promised in the Covenant, that which we have
now, at least, no power to do: we had not the leave of future Governors in
taking: and we see their Laws and Rights will be manifestly violated in the
keeping of the Covenant.

6. We offered that which was not our own, which Authority alone has right and
power to dispose of: thus we offered to God what we stole from our neighbor,
or rather affronted and mocked him with a pretense of giving him more then we
had: for we have not in us to swear, that we will do that for God, which
afterward we cannot do without breach of Laws, and offense to Authority

7. Certainly, the first Table is never to be kept by a breach of the second:
God will not be righted by the injury of our brother; or glorified, by
dishonouring our Father and Mother: our unrighteousness cannot work the
righteousness of God; nor can we fear God by dishonouring the King.

8. This I conceive to be the true reason of the former Rule, as well as a full
answer to the present Objection, and a sufficient proof of the present
Argument. Gods unalterable law is to obey our superiors in things lawful.
Things that are now lawful may be forbidden us by Authority, and then those
things that before were lawful become unlawful: the state of things of this
nature is mutable, and how they will change we know not; only this we know, we
must be subject for conscience sake, and submit to Authority for the Lords sake.

9. Therefore God having the first obligation upon us, and that being
unalterable, no Promise or Oath afwards can discharge us from that; and
consequently, all Promises and Covenants about things that are thus mutable may
be made, or if made can bind, no further then with this condition, if things so
continue, and no command from Authority be to the contrary.

But I have something behind, that I hope may give full satisfaction.

10. There was a famous Case betwixt us and the Jesuits, much disputed in King
James his days, that does fully in all due circumstances answer ours.

11. It was usual then, as appears by the controversy, for Jesuits to go out
of this Land and take an Oath at Rome, according to a certain constitution of
the Pope to that purpose, that they would return into England and publicly
preach the Catholic Faith here.

12. Now, because that some went out of the Land and took this Oath, before the
Laws prohibiting this practice were made, and some after: there arose into
controversy two notable Cases of Conscience: the first, respecting such
persons as took such Oath against the laws before made to the contrary was
this: Whether that Oath to preach publicly the Romish Faith did bind the
persons so sworn, against the Laws before in force, to the contrary? The second
respecting such as took that Oath before the laws to the contrary were made,
was this: whether the laws made against that which before they had sworn to do,
did not render the Oath, though made before to the contrary, void.

13. Both these Cases are so parallel to ours, they justly require us to take
special notice how they were decided.

14. And in earnest, what do our best Divines conclude about them? To the
first, it is answered, that the laws prohibiting that which they swore to do,
being Antecedent to their Oath: the Oath was unjust from the beginning; Sair.
These. Cas. Cons. c. 7.
for which is quoted those words of their own Casuists; a law which forbids
upon pain of loss of goods, death, banishment, or such like, binds a man upon
pain of mortal sin: and thence our Divines conclude, that no Vow can justify
the breach of it.

15. But, suppose the Oath be first taken, what say they then? here also they
positively and without Hesitancy say, that an Oath cannot bind against a law,
though the law be made after the Oath is taken.

Thus says a very Learned man, in answer to the Jesuits, as to this Case: if
these Laws which take hold of you, when you return hither, had been made
between the time of your Vow, and your returning, yet naturally they would work
the same effect upon this Vow of yours, (that is, as if the Law had been made
before their Vow) and make it void. He also adds the same reason why, which
before we have used, because (says he) something was now interposed, which may
Justly, yea Ought to change your purpose.

16. But the Jesuits seemed to complain, that the Laws were made on purpose to
interrupt and hinder the performance of their vow, and to make them break their
Oath. And hence a third notable Case issued, viz.

17. Whether the Evil Intention of those that make the Laws, namely to make
men's previous Oaths void, does not weaken the force of such Laws; as to the
discharging of such Oaths.

The Answer that was given to this, consisted of two branches. 1. That it could
not be any evil intention in the Legis-lators, but clearly, the necessities of
Church and State, that provoked these Laws. 2. However, though the Laws had
been made on purpose to preclude the performance of the vow, yet would they
naturally work the same effect, and void the Vow: urging, that Alphon. Castr.
de potest. leg. Doc. 1.
their own men teach, that the Laws of Princes are not therefore necessarily
unjust and void, because the Prince had an ill intention in the making of them.

All this, says that Learned man, if Vid. Dr. Don, pseudomartyr. p. 156, 157
-- The Application is too easy.
the Laws be Just, is evident and without question; O that we may find it so.

18. But there is a Notable Evasion, that I must needs take notice of, so many
are crowding for an escape at it: they say, rather then break our Covenant, we
will submit to the penalty of the Law, and thus we suppose we fulfill the Law,
and obey Authority.

That we may take the more steady view of it, we will put the Case.

CASE XIII.
Whether a submitting to the penalty annexed, be a due fulfulling or obeying
the Law in point of Conscience.

Resol.
CArminus tells us, that this Opinion De potest. 1. leg. Hum. p. 2. c. 2.
[ that if we undergo the penalty of the Law, we do not sin in the breach of
it:] was the Opinion of some Schoolmen, who thought it a glorious matter, and
fit to raise them a Name, to leave the common and beaten ways; having,
perchance, a delight sawcily to provoke, to gnaw, calumniate, and to draw into
hatred those Powers and Authorities which made those Laws.

2. The ground of this gross mistake, partly respects the Lawmakers: partly,
the Nature of the Law it self; and partly, the end of punishment as annexed to
the Law.

3. The mistake arises very much from an unjust apprehension of Governors,
that make the Laws: we have not that Reverence and Conscience of them as is
meet for such Ministers of God; not considering whose Authority they have, and
execute in their Legislation: if we did, we should learn to submit unto them
for the Lords sake, and obey them out of Conscience: for they make Laws; and if
they be not sinful, God commands us to obey them.

2. We are also very apt to mistake about the Nature of Humane Laws: as if all
such as have a penalty annexed were therefore penal only, or purely penal
Laws, and left the Subjects in a perfect Indifferency whether to yield Active
or Passive Obedience, to do, or to suffer what the Law requires or provides.

4. It Is granted, that some Laws are penal purely; and if that occasion any
doubt about the present Law, I cannot give them safer advice, then seriously to
peruse the excellent pains of Bishop Lectur. of Consc.
Sanderson, drawn out to so much length, upon his observation of the sad
effects of this Mistake, in a most clear discourse about the Nature of penal
Laws, and of such as bind the Conscience.

5. I believe, there is the more to be studied in this point, because I find
the Learned Author of the Covenanters plea asserting also that how far Humane
Laws bind the Conscience, is the main question in the present Controversy.

6. The said Author of the Covenanters plea seems to be a great admirer of that
Excellent Bishop, and no question but he is acknowledged on both sides, for
Learning, Piety, Prudence, Experience, all parts requisite for a perfect
Casuist, as credible as any other the Generation affords; and from his mouth
what person does not snatch at satisfaction? let us then hear what he says in
the Case.

1. He expressly affirms that no Law that has a Command expressed is purely
penal.

2. That all Humane Laws that are not purely penal, do in a sort oblige the
Conscience: in general, immediately, and in particular, ex Consequenti, from
the Word of God.

3. If the matter of the Law be not sinful, we are bound to Active Obedinece;
neither may we wittingly violate, much less oppose them, or be bound so to do,
without sin.

7. To apply this, if the Government be not in it self unlawful: if it be
commanded to be submitted to, if we are required to declare that we are not
bound to endeavor against it; And lastly, these Laws be not purely penal, we
are not left indifferent by God or the Law, whether we will obey or suffer* but
are bound in Conscience to own the Authority, and submit unto the Government,
and declare we are not bound by the Covenant to extirpate or alter it.

8. Indeed, to stick at a particular Law of more private concern, so far as to
suffer the penalty, and not do the thing commanded, might in some Cases, for
private satisfaction, be held more tolerable; but to hold our selves,
notwithstanding Law express to the contrary, bound by Oath not to own a
Government founded or confirmed by Law, or Governors commissionated by the
King; is such a thing as cannot be excused, (without express warrant from
Scripture, which affords it none) by any Rules of sober reasoning before God or
Conscience.

9. Indeed, if the Covenant have such force as to bind the Conscience against
Law, still to endeavor the extirpation of Episcopacy; I cannot see, but as it
now obliges not to own, or to Act under it, will also compel to resist and
fight against it, if occasion were offered.

10. Neither can I see any possible means of tying the hands and hearts of
Covenanters to duty and peace (I speak as a Divine) but this only, that they
suffer their Consciences to be satisfied from Reason and Scripture, that they
first owe such obedience even in Conscience to the lawful Commands of Humane
Authority, as no future Oath can discharge them from it. And that it is not in
their liberty, whether to do what is commanded, or to suffer what is threatened,
seeing God interposeth and decides the question, by determining us to the
first, and requiring our Active Obedience to the Commands of his Deputies,
where himself has not required the contrary in his Word before. Submit your
selves therefore unto every Ordinance of Man for the Lords sake, whether it be
to the King as supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him.

Lastly, the mistake arises from a false opinion of the end of punishment,
which is properly in all Laws not purely penal: the punishment of disobedience,
and not obedience at all. Indeed God requires us to suffer, rather then to do
evil; but Man commands, not to suffer but to do, whom we must obey in lawful
things.

I shall put a period to my Argument (which was the second in order) from the
Laws of the Land, having found the matter of the Covenant in the second
Article, contrary to them we may conclude it sinful, and so far not binding.

11. Yet before I take off my pen, I cannot but acknowledge that some Popish
Casuists do say, that an Oath may bind against the Civil Law in some Cases; if
it be not against the Divine Law, the Law of Nature, or the Canon Law.

The Author of the Covenanters plea would suppose that these Casuists put in
the Canon Law, to save their Infallibility. But may not we, upon as good
grounds, suspect the like partiality in excluding the Civil Law? We are sure
Obedience in things lawful is with severity enough required in Scripture unto
Civil Authority.

12. But we must observe, that these Casuists instance generally, in such oaths
as are concerning Contracts betwixt Man and Man; the performance of which hurts
not the public; and indeed the Covenanters plea mentions no other.

13. But is not a public Oath to alter Government of another Order? for
Subjects to swear to endeavor this, against the Laws of the land, the express
dissent of the supreme Governor; and to hold themselves obliged hereunto,
contrary to an express prohibition of lawful Authority; Truly, methinks, it is
also against both Divine and Natural Law, against Reason and Scripture, which
seem to dictate as with a beam of the Sun, that for public security, Order and
Peace, Subjects acquiesce in the present Government, and not rise up, either to
swear or endeavor against it, contrary to Law.

CASE XIV.
Whether to Endeavonr the Extirpation of Church Government, by virtue of the
Covenant, notwithstanding the Laws to the Contrary, be not against the
Privilege of Parliament, and consequently sinful.

Resol.
1. WE have already showed the sinfulness of the matter of the Covenant in the
second Article, as against the Rights of the King, and the Laws of the Land:
we come now to consider, whether it invade not the Privilege of Parliaments,
and be not sinful also in that regard.

2. We find it a Rule with all Casuists, in omni Juramento excipitur Authoritas
Superioris, i. e. quando agitur de super esse Superioris: for it is confessed,
they add, secus, si non de superesse superioris, sed privatorum. That is, in
all Oaths about such things as lie under the power of our Superiors, their
Authority is excepted.

3. Nor their Authority already exerted in Laws made before the Oath only; but
as it may, de futuro, and afterward be put forth in any New Law, contrary to
our Oath. Therefore D. Jacob gives this instance in the Case. Jurans non exire
domo, etc. A man Decision. Area. p. 173.
swears not to go from home, yet if he commanded by the Judge to appear before
him, or by the King to go into the wars, by obeying these commands, he is not
perjured.

4. Again, if a man promise another, that he will not hurt him, yet if the Law
requires him to kill him, he, in so p. 174.
doing, does not break his Oath; quia illa promissio non occidendi,
intelligitur, nisi lege permittente: because his promise must except the Law.

5. Hence it follows, though all the Covenanters had at first lawfully bound
themselves by their Covenant to endeavor the extirpation of Episcopacy; yet
naturally there must have been this great condition understood, saving the
Authority of Parliaments, that have power to take up our endeavors of this
nature by a Law to the contrary, when they please.

6. For, if this Government of the Church do lie more properly under the power
of Parliaments to establish, or alter it: and if it cannot be altered without a
change of the Law, and the Law cannot be changed but by an Act of Parliament:
is not the Covenant to that purpose; de superesse superioris; and thus,
necessarily conditioned with the exception of their Authority.

7. Non valet Juramentum contra justitiam. But it is against the righteousness
of Obedience, and the honoring of our Superiors, to be held bound to act
against the Authority of our Lawmakers in any new Law that they shall make (if
the matter thereof be not sinful) by any previous obligation whatsoever.

8. This were indeed a handsome trick for private persons, to be all law (in a
short time) to themselves, if private and self-obligations had power to
supersede and prevent all the power of Legislation in our Parliaments to the
contrary: and to change places with our Governors, while thus we are freed
from their impositions, and they are bound to obey the obligations of our
private Covenants.

9. The privileges of Parliaments are so rooted in the constitution of this
Kingdom, that a Parliament in being cannot, in such a case as this, prejudge
succeeding Parliaments to whom it is essential, with their head the King, to
make what Laws they please in things indifferent.

10. Insomuch that if the Covenant had been lawfully imposed by the Long
Parliament, without the King, as indeed it was not; yea had the King himself
been with them, and made the Covenant as lawful as Law could make it: yet it
could not bind the Nation, but upon an exception of the power of future
Parliaments, that by a new Law to the contrary might take off the obligation.

11. Therefore an Act of Parliament made to be unrepealable in any subsequent
Parliaments is void, ipso facto, as that in the eleventh, and another in the
one and twentieth of Rich. the second, was; these so made were void, ipso
facto, in the very constitution.

12. Why? because (as a learned person says) it takes away the very specifical
form, essence and being, that is, the power and privilege of Parliaments.

13. Much more an Act of private persons, or of a Parliament without their
King, that should offer to bind all future Parliaments from doing or enacting
what otherwise is lawful, or engage the people not to obey them, must needs be
so far a void Act, though in the most Solemn League and Covenant.

14. Especially, when a law by a full and undoubted Authority is made, and
actually extant to the contrary; not only restoring the Government sworn
against, not only prohibiting all actions, yea, and endeavors against it, but
requiring us, upon the severest penalty, to declare that we hold we are not
bound by virtue of that Covenant, to do or endeavor any such thing.

15. Besides the holding our selves bound by virtue of that Covenant, to
endeavor the extirpation of Episcopal Government is, indeed, a continued
breach of the privilege of that very Parliament that imposed the Covenant at
first; in the injury thereby offered to the spiritual state thereof, the
Bishops, when they were neither suffered to be present to answer for
themselves, nor to have any others (as all the Commons of England have) to
represent them, and to speak* for them. Non valet juramentum contra justitiam
and charitatem.

16. But I find it much stood upon by Mr. Crofton and the reverend Author of
the Covenanters plea, that they did only Covenant to endeavor in their
places, and by lawful means to extirpate Episcopal Government, and this they
hope they may lawfully do, notwithstanding the Acts of Parliament, and without
any breach of their privileges.

17. But hereunto I answer, that if so to endeavor as they count they are
sworn, be neither unlawful in it self, nor against the Act of Parliament, it is
well enough, they may then keep their Covenant, and not break the Law, or the
privileges of Parliament: but I doubt, we shall find, their endeavors which
they judge just and honest, to be peccant in all the respects mentioned.

That we may discern, whether so or no, we think it fair to put the Case.

CASE XV.
Whether it be lawful to endeavor the extirpation of Episcopacy, by virtue of
the Covenant, notwithstanding the Act of Parliament.

Resol.
1. IT is said, there are more ways of endeavor then by violence and sedition:
and indeed so there may; and if there by any endeavors not forbidden by the
Parliament and Law, whatever they are, we are not called by the Act to declare,
that neither we, nor any other are bound unto them; for wherein the Act does
not require us to declare, we cannot be bound by the same Act to declare.

2. Therefore the endeavors against the Government of the Church, sworn in the
Covenant, are either the same which the Act intends, or not: if they be not the
same; then, notwithstanding the Covenant, we may declare we are not bound to
endeavor in the sense of the Act, by virtue of the Covenant, which never
intended so to bind us: but if the same endeavors be intended both by the
Covenant and the Act, then the Covenant so far loses its force; for, as has
been clearly, I hope, proved, we cannot be bound by it against a law, though
that Law, if the matter in it self be lawful, be made after the Covenant was
taken.

3. I mean, if the endeavors to which we are required to declare we are not
bound by the Act, be such only as are seditious, and may disturb the public,
then either the such endeavors required by the Covenant were seditious
endeavors too, or else This Act does not cross the Covenant in this
particular, but strikes at such endeavors as were not covenanted.

4. If the endeavors in the Covenant be seditious, then they are sinful: and
we cannot be bound to them; and indeed the greatest friends of the Covenant
confess so much; if not, then hey may declare (as indeed they have already in
their Writings) that they are not bound to endeavor seditiously: which is no
doubt the meaning of the Act.

5. However, as was said, let thesence of the word [endeavour] both in the
Covenant, and in the Act, fall how it will; it is plain, that unless it be a
necessary duty, of it self, without respect to the Covenant, thus to endeavor,
which is impossible to be proved, it is a sin to break the Act made against such
endeavors, and a duty to declare we are not bound by the Covenant so to do.

6. But because stresse is laid upon this very word; and indeed much of the
Controversy depends upon it; and I find not any that have written upon the
Covenant, to have distinctly and plainly considered it; I shall take a little
liberty to open the meaning of it in a few distinctions, and apply them as I
pass on.

7. Endeavor, is either private, or public.

1. Private endeavor may be thought to be with God in prayer, in our Closets,
when no other person can receive any influence against Authority from what we
say; and the public suffer no danger by them.

In this sense, to endeavor against what we conceive to be corrupt or sinful
in Church or State, betwixt God and our selves be it: yet a sober,
well-tempered, and enlightened conscience, if hearkened to, may whisper, that to
fet our hearts and faces in our prayers to God (who has said, curse not the
King in thy Bedchamber, no not in thy thought) against Government and Law,
that defends the substantials of Religion, savours but little of a Christian
spirit, and may easily draw the guilt of want of allegiance and charity to
Government, and unwarrantable boldness with God.

8. Yet it may not be out of our way to remember, that prayer is a very unusual
and unacceptable sense of Endeavor: and that there is nothing more usual with
covenanting Ministers, as well as others, in their Sermons in public to the
people, to oppose, or at least to distinguish endeavor and prayer: calling
them to add their endeavor in the use of other means, for the obtaining the
matter of their prayers, or the things prayed for; without which, viz.
Endeavor, we say, prayer is but Muliebre supplicium, weak and unavailable.

9. And doubtless to take the word [ Endeavour] in the Act in this broad and
wide interpretation, without the compass of ordinary use in our selves or
others, is to make a Net for our selves and others, with a desire not to escape
it.

10. For, who can rationally imagine that an Act of Parliament should intend to
govern men's thoughts or closets. The end of Civil Power is to keep the Civil
Peace; and what can Charity or Justice imagine else to be the intention of
Civil Laws? private prayers, if amiss, may provoke God, and trouble our
selves, but they reach not the public peace; Neither can that be presumed to
break Laws which cannot prejudice the end of Law, or be discovered by the
Lawmakers. Therefore, only apparere is esse in Jure: and not to appear to
break the Law, in the sense of the Law, is not to break it.

11. Secondly, there is again public endeavor, and this more or less public.

Endeavor less public, is such as though somewhat privately practiced, has
public influences and effects, or a natural tendency thereunto: This is either
Positive or Negative. Positive, endeavor against Church Government, though in
somewhat a private way, may be of much danger, not only to the thing
endeavored against, which is directly intended by such endeavors, but to the
public peace: and be very seditious in its nature and effects. Such are
venting our animosities and discontents against Government, and persons
commissioned by the King, in our prayers with our families, and discourses with
our Neigbours.

12. This is to enkindle a fire, that if of general practice by Covenanters
scattered up and down, may quickly inflame the whole Kingdom.

13. Such a course of Reformation as this, though the things endeavored to be
reformed were very corrupt, and indeed abominable, no wise man can allow, or
discharge of sedition and unwarrantable acting out of our places.

14. But if the Government sworn against be not unlawful, and if it be fenced
with Laws; and we are required in the Act to declare we are not bound to
endeavor against it: who dare justify such endeavors against Government and
Law, but such as love to despise Dominions, and speak evil of Dignities.

15. 2. This less public way of endeavor is Negative, when we will no way
own or act under the Government in our places, and thus design to weaken the
Government, by withdrawing our own subjection, and encouraging others to do the
like after our example.

16. I wish it were not so: but is not this, with the former, the intended
practice of such as hold themselves obliged by the Covenant? and is this, if
possible, to live peaceable with all men? is this to be subject for wraths
sake? and to obey every Ordinance of man? either the King as Supreme, or those
that are commissioned by him? is this to obey the Laws of the Land? and to do
nothing that may disturb the public?

17. O, that my brethren would sadly consider, if so great a multitude as they
please to boast of, even of all degrees and ranks in the Nation, did indeed
take the Covenant; and all of them should be of their mind, and hold
themselves obliged not to own Church Government, or Act under it, as they may
have daily occasion (notwithstanding the final determination of Authority, that
we must be governed by it) what disturbances, distractions and confusions must
needs follow in Church and State?

3. Blame not the Parliament if they intended by the Act to prevent it:
especially considering, that this is not all. But more public endeavors are
judged by Mr. Crofton lawful too, so long as every man keeps his place.

And truly, if [ endeavours] in the Covenant be the measure of the meaning of
the word, in the Act, as is very likely, I am loath to remember how high it
once carried us: indeed not in private, but too too publicly.

The Covenant speaks of our places and by lawful means; yet also to our power,
and with our lives and estates. And what need of all this, if we may only
petition in a regular and legal course, and so, and no otherwise endeavor;
there being no other lawful way of endeavor in our places, but these, that I
can think of: and as for petitioning too, if that should be forbidden,
certainly we are not bound unto it.

But Mr. Crofton and the said Author tells us of a better meaning [of acting in
our places:] Ministers must preach against the Government, and the Lawyers must
plead against it, the Judge must sentence it, the Soldier must fight against
it, yea, and every tongue must revile it, and speak evil of it, and every mouth
be filled with cursing and bitterness against it.

I need not say, thus it was, when the cause of the Covenant was in the field.
The Lord give us humble and peaceable spirits, to discern at last in the Calm
the way of our duty, from which we have been too long transported by the stormy
wind and tempest.

4. In short, thus to endeavor to alter the Government of the Church, and the
Laws, is either sinful, indifferent, or necessary.

If it be said to be necessary, that is, a duty of it self, without respect to
the Covenant; two things must be proved; both of which are highly incapable of
it. First, that the Government is unlawful in it self. Secondly, that Subjects
are bound to use unlawful endeavors for a Reformation of Government, and Law;
as no doubt those before mentioned are.

If these endeavors be said to be indifferent in themselves, and made
necessary to us, by virtue of the Covenant: I answer, as before is proved, that
we cannot be bound by our own Oath to do a thing indifferent in it self (seem
it never so convenient to us) against a known Law of the Land; and to the
prejudice of Parliamentary power, in the determining of things indifferent.

But if the endeavors be indeed sinful in themselves, we need no power of Law
to discharge us of them, for they never bound us: but the Covenant was so far
naught from the beginning.

5. In a word, that these endeavors are in themselves sinful, appears in the
reason of the Covenant, and the concessions of the very opponents.

1. The Covenant requires no more, and we are bound no farther (say our
Brethren) to endeavor against Episcopal Government, but in our places, and by
lawful means.

But now the first step that our Brethren take in this their endeavor, is out
of their places, viz. by not yielding unto, not obeying, not so much as
acknowledging the Government, which the King and the Law has set over them:
nor making any conscience of the Law, requiring them to disclaim their
obligation to the contrary.

For Subjects not to obey, not to own their superiors, to reject those that
are sent by their King; Yea to make their own Covenant to prevent the commands
of Authority; surely this is for Subjects to be out of their places; and if
these be their endeavors to extirpate the Hierarchy, the Covenant it self, in
the modern sense of it, will not allow them.

2. Again, much more to take all occasions to revile and curse this Government
in our Prayers, and Sermons, and Discourses; and in effect, to do what in us
lies, that the people reject it, scorn it, hate it, trample upon it; and make
it the mark of their malice and revenge; this is certainly to endeavor out of
our places, and by unlawful means too, and far from the Tenor of our Oaths of
Allegiance, Supremacy, and Christianity.

3. Let me then conclude, that look what my Brethren concerned take to be the
sense of endeavor in the Covenant, and how they themselves understand it by
their purposes and practices, and upon sober reckoning, they will find that
such endeavors are both unlawful in themselves, and made unlawful by the Act
of Parliament, and upon either account, much more on both, they need not stick
to declare, as required that neither they, nor any other person is bound thus
to endeavor, notwithstanding the Covenant.

Though, I presume, if there be any other endeavors besides acting against,
speaking evil of, or not yielding unto the Government as established by the
Laws of the Land, (which are not unlawful, seditious, and not inconsistent with
the places of Subjects) my Brethren are not by the Act required to declare
their non-obligation unto them.

Object. But though we may not endeavor the extirpation of Episcopacy, there
may be many corruptions in the Government by Episcopacy, and are we not to
endeavor an alteration or Reformation of them?

Answ. 1. First, as it is unlawful according to the Scriptures, Reason, and the
Constitution of the Kingdom, for Subjects to enter into a public Covenant to
reform the Church, without the consent of the King: so we cannot be bound by
such Oath to endeavor it, by means that are sinful and seditious (as before)
or out of our places.

2. We must distinguish of corruptions in the Government, and the Government it
self, as well in the Answer, as in the Objection: and betwixt a Reformation,
and an Alteration or Change of Government: or an Alteration in the Government,
and an Alteration of the Government.

It Is worth our notice, as to this Objection, that the Act requiring the
Declaration is express for the latter and not the former branch of the
distinction: the words of the Declaration are, I do hold that neither my self
nor any other person has any obligation upon us from the Covenant, to
endeavor to make any alteration or change of Government in Church or State,
nor in the Government of either: that is, indeed, that we are not bound by the
Covenant to labor to pull down this Fram of Government, and set up another,
either in Church or State.

We have sufficient ground for this distinction from our covenanting Brethren
themselves, if not from their distinction of the collective and distributive
sense of the second Article, about Church Government; yet from such moderate
persons among them, that openly declared upon a solemn occasion, that might
they see any material alteration in the Government granted there, they should
hold themselves satisfied, as to the Covenant, in that point.

Besides, the King and Parliament have practically improved the said
distinction (I presume, in order to such Brethrens satisfaction) and have,
indeed, made a material alteration in the said Government, by taking off the
high Commission, and the Oath ex officio, by Law; and yet, established the
Government it self.

CASE XVI.
Whether the Covenant be not against the Liberty of the Subject in this
particular, and therefore sinful in its matter.

Resol.
1. AFter the Bishops were thrown out of their places, in the House of Lords,
we might yet respect them, as well as the rest of the Dignitaries in the
Church, as the Kings Subjects, and to have an interest in the freedom of the
Commons. Now, in this capacity we shall find the Covenant was very injurious to
them, even as Subjects and freemen, and consequently, it tore up the very
foundation of the liberties of the people, and in the destruction of one
society threatened all.

2. It Is well known, that the Governors of the Church were in possession of
their several freeholds, when the Covenant was voted to destroy them, which
their predecessors had enjoyed many hundred years without any interruption
considerable.

3. The number of these Subjects was not small: their manner of living and
governing, in so many famous Corporations, and Colleges, was more then vulgar.

They had a considerable interest in the Lands of the Nation: and much people
being related to them, and more depending on them, and their great hospitality,
were concerned in them, and fell with them.

4. Yea, it is declared by sundry Acts of Parliament, that the holy Church of
England was founded in the state of Prelacy within the Realm of England.

5. And no wonder, that this Crown of England is so much concerned for it: and
that the Kings of England, at their Coronation swear, they will grant, confirm
and keep all the Customs and Privileges of the Church, granted by King Edward;
and expressly to Bishops all Canonical Privileges: and that he will be a
protector and defender of the Bishops.

Yet notwithstanding their number, their Relations, their Freeholds, their
Interest and Continuance, notwithstanding the Acts of Parliament, and the
Royal Oaths: yet was their Extirpation sworn by the Covenant imposed without
Law, or the Kings Consent, and passed in the Parliament, when the persons, the
many Corporations in the Land concerned, had none to represent them in the
house of Lords, or the house of Commons, contrary to the excellent Constitution
of the Nation, and the Liberties of English men.

7. Thus unjustly have they suffered nigh 20. years together; and shall we yet
think our selves bound by a Covenant, that was at first laid in the subversion
of our English Freedom, to prosecute their Ruin?

8. Especially, against the Grain of Authority, the current of the Laws, and
in an Age so zealous to fulfill the Prophecy of Dr. Featly, who at their
lowest, asked this question; How know ye whether Episcopacy may not be revived
and raised up again by future Acts of Parliament, in times as well affected to
the Clergy, as these are ill.

9. For the Rights of Episcopal Government are again confirmed by King and
Parliament: and they that have places therein have as clear a title thereunto
by Law, as any other Subject has to his temporal estate: and how can a
Covenant bind us to injure others, who are first obliged by God himself to
walk honestly?

10. Here I humbly offer, whether the King himself can be bound by Oath to
destroy his people, or any society or person of his Subjects? especially, out
of his Parliament, and when he is according to his Oath and his Office, if he
should never take his Oath, bound to do Justice to all, according to Laws
already made, the true measure of all men's Rights: Salus populi has a
Supremacy over the King: at least, the King of Kings has so, who has first
obliged him to distribute Justice, and preserve the Rights and Liberties of his
people impartially, and without respect of persons.

11. We are sure, the last King, of ever happy Memory, did not consent to the
Covenant: or if he had, he was first bound expressly to the contrary by his
Coronation Oath, to defend the Bishops, and maintain their Canonical
privileges.

12. And in the behalf of the present; we may be bold to say, the Parliament
imposing the Covenant, only by an Ordinance, which lost its force at their
dissolution at his Fathers death, he could not confirm the Covenant by any Act
of his without a Parliament: and the former Ordinance ceased with the former
Parliament: and the Petition of Right tells us, that it is contrary to the
Liberties of the Subject, to have an Oath imposed without an Act of Parliament:
and much more so, if against the Freeholds, and the very being of so many
famous Corporations in the people of England.

13. The King is bound to Right; but cannot be bound to wrong any of his
Subjects: any such obligation is void of it self; for the Oaths of Kings must
also have the condition, so far as lawfully we may; who are accountable to God,
(though not to man) by whom they are entrusted with the good of their Subjects,
and to whom they have sworn.

14. Therefore David when he had made a rash Oath, that he would slay 1 Samuel
25. 32.
Nabal and all his Household, rejoiced when he had occasion offered by Abigail
to break his Oath: and though he swear to Shimei, that he would save 2 Samuel 19.
23.
his life; yet, as if upon better advice he had found that that person had
deserved to die, and been convinced that it was expected from God that Justice
should be done; he commanded his Son Solomon to put him to death: and
doubtless, it had been better for Herod to have saved John Baptist; though he
had broke his Oath, and lost his Reputation, in some measure, with the people.

15. Especially, if through fear or any other temptation, the King should be
thus prevailed with, to promise or swear to injure his Subjects; The Case then
is, as if a man under threats of a Robber, should swear to bring him his
Neighbors horse.

16. Now whether the thing sworn in fear and under temptation be unlawful and
unjust, or not, must be judged by the Conscience of the party sworn.

17. Whence may issue two Cases, with respect to the time when the Oath is
made; and when it is to be performed. But one answer does serve them both: for
when the Conscience dictates the thing sworn to be unlawful, it will rule the
Case: if a man swears for fear, against his Conscience, his Conscience being
Gods Vicegerent within him, he sins against God in swearing; God by his
Conscience having the first Obligation upon him. And if he should perform his
Oath against his Conscience, he fins twice: first, by doing evil, and secondly,
by keeping his evil Oath. For as the Right Reverend Bishop Sanderson concludes
this very case, such Oath does not bind against Conscience.

18. The Author of the Covenanters plea would feign say something to weaken
this Conclusion of the Bishop, supposing the matter of the Oath to be lawful in
it self, and only appearing to be evil to him that swears it: but though he
make a flourish toward it, if we apply his discourse to our present Case of
the Covenant, it vanishech into air.

19. For though it be true, that an erring Conscience does not obligare, it
cannot be denied but it does ligare; and consequently suspend the performance
of the thing sworn, so long as the party apprehends the matter to be sinful,
whether it be indeed so, or not.

That is, no one is bound by the Covenant to endeavor to extirpate the
Government of the Church by Prelacy, while he is persuaded that so to do is
sinful, and to the injury of the Church.

20. And it is all one, whether the Conscience of the party, as I have said,
did thus judge the thing unlawful, when he swore it, or is since so convinced;
for we may not aggravate a rash Oath with unlawful practice, that is, against
Conscience.

21. But if the matter of the Covenant be unlawful in it self, as has amply
appeared, in such a Case, truly there is no dispute; for here Conscience
dictates nothing but Truth and Duty: and it were sad adventure, for a King
himself to second Herod; and to fulfill a wicked Oath by a more wicked Act,
against his Conscience, and his Brother, and his God too.

Si facere intendit, bis peccat: and ex Tolet. Cas. Con.
intention quam habet peccandi, and ex Juramento supra rem injustam.

The Case of Abbots in Henry the Eights time, is too weakly compared with the
Case of the Bishops in ours, unless it be proved that the Abbots were as
useful in the Church as the Bishops, etc. That the Bishops, etc. are declared
to have run into a proemunire, as the Abbots were. That the Abbots had none to
represent them in the Parliment, as the Bishops had not; and especially that
the King was not Active or any way consenting to the Act for the destruction of
the Abbots, as he was not to the Covenant for the Extirpation of the Bishops,
which are not to be undertaken.

CASE XVII.
Whether the matter of the second Article of the Covenant, be not against
former Obligations, and consequently sinful.

Resol.
THe first Spring of all Obligation is in God: Laws bind us, Love binds us,
Oaths and Covenants bind us, but how? as God in Nature or Scripture binds us,
he requires us to love our Neighbor as our selves, and not to wrong him. To
obey Authority, and observe their commands, to pay our vows, and fulfill the
Oath that is gone out of our Lips.

2. It is a sure Rule that as God himself is ever the same, so his Moral
Obligations upon us change not. Neither can any Act of ours take off, or weaken
our Obligations to him.

3. Hence it eternally follows, that a latter Obligation against a former is of
no force, but void of it self; because the former Obligation being from God,
and of a Moral Nature, it is eternal, as God is, and fixed, and not to be broken.

4. There seem to be three Bonds or Cords of God to have had force upon us,
before the Covenant was taken or thought of: all which the Covenant is against,
and endeavors to break in the Second Article of it: to Obey Authority, to keep
our Oaths and Promises, and to serve the Church in our Generation.

1. First, God has first, both by Law of Nature, and holy Scripture, bound us
by his Sovereign indispensable command, to honor our parents, to obey them
that have the Rule over us, to submit to every Ordinance of man for the Lords
sake, whether to the King as supreme, or to those that are sent and
Commissioned by him: and of necessity to be subject not only for wrath, but
Conscience sake: because the powers that be are ordained by God, ordained to be
Ministers of God: whosoever therefore resists, resists the Ordinance of
God, and consequently God himself.

2. Were not these Obligations upon us, even on our very Consciences, before
the Covenant was taken? did not the Covenant find these bars within us? was
not the Conscience thus prepossessed against it? and locked up from it?

3. But how was the Covenant contrary to these Obligations? yea rather how was
it not! it being imposed and taken against the Kings Laws: and the matter of
it, as we have showed, being against the Rights both of King and Parliament:
and the Government of the Church set over us, by the King and Laws, made both
before, and since the Covenant.

4. More particularly, God first obliges us to be subject, and obey our
Governors: and the Covenant would engage to disobey, disown, and destroy them:
I mean, our Governors in the Church, it would discharge us of our Obedience,
and oblige us to resistance, contrary to Gods express Obligati^^ upon us, which
cannot be.

5. Again, the Civil Authority requires us to obey our Ecclesiastical
Governors: The Civil Authority by Acts of Parliament requires us to declare
that we are not obliged to resist them, to endeavor to extirpate them; to this
also we oppose the Covenant, though God first has bound us to obey our Rulers,
which cannot be.

6. I have spoken to this, under another Argument before; I shall here
therefore, only add the plain, but very weighty, and Authentic testimony of
Mr. Perkins, who very distinctly foresaw Cases of Conse.
our Case.

7. He lays down two Rules, among others, that methinks might decide our
Controversy.

1. If an Oath be taken against the Laws of the Land, or Country whereof a man
is member, it binds not; he does not say that it was sinfully taken only, but
it binds not at all: he gives the very reason for it, which I am now improving:
because on the contrary, Gods Commandment binds us to keep the good Laws of
men.

8. Therefore the Covenant, so far as it is against the just Laws of the
Kingdom, that is, such Laws as are not unjust or evil in the matter of them,
can not bind at all, because God has first commanded us and bound us to the
contrary.

9. 2. Again (says Mr. Perkins) if at the first the matter of the Oath were
lawful, and afterward by some means becomes either impossible or unlawful, it
binds not the conscience: when it begins to be unlawful it cease to bind,
says he, because the binding virtue is only from the word of God.

10. Thus also, had there been no Law to render the matter of the Covenant
unlawful, when it was taken; yet it being now unlawful to endeavor to change
the Government sworn against: yea it being a duty to declare that we hold our
selves not bound by the Covenant so to do, the Covenant cannot oblige, either
thus to endeavor which is forbidden, or not thus to declare which is required;
for the one is a sin of Omission, the other of Commission, but both sin, to
which no Covenant can possibly oblige: for then it should oblige us against God
himself.

2. Secondly, the matter of the Covenant in the Second Article is against many
former Oaths, whereby the Nation stood obliged before the Covenant was imposed
or taken: and in that regard we were first obliged by God to the contrary.

1. Not to speak of that natural Allegiance in which all Subjects by the will
of God in the very law of Nature, as well as Scripture, are born obliged, when
they are born Subjects unto our lawful Prince; the Oath of Allegiance
superadded re-enforceth us to obey him in all his lawful commands.

2. And according to the Rules above mentioned, whether this Oath be actually
taken before the Covenant or after, we are by the Divine obligation to obey the
Kings Laws; and to declare that the Covenant does not bind us against the
Kings Ecclesiastical Government, or against his will expressed in the Laws of
the Land, whatsoever is hitherto urged to enervate the same.

3. Especially, if we add the direct obligation of the Oath of Supremacy;
wherein we all own and Recognize the King in all causes and over all persons as
well Ecclesiastical as Civil, Supreme Governor. For how can the Oath to
extirpate his Government, and destroy his Officers against his will and his
known Laws, consist with his sworn Supremacy? or in the cause of Ecclesiastical
Government, how do those Ecclesiastical persons acknowledge him to be their
Supreme Governor, while they resist him, against his express Laws, in this
very cause, even with endeavors to extirpate his Government?

4. Besides many of the ancient Ministry stand more immediately obliged to the
Government of the Church, by their subscriptions to thirty nine Articles:
wherein they have set their hands, that there is nothing superstitious or
ungodly in the Form and Manner of Making, Consecrating and Ordaining of
Bishops, Priests and Deacons: as also in the form of their very Ordination as
Deacons and as Presbyters; in which, they solemnly promised to obey their
Ordinary, and to follow his godly Judgment: which they also bound with the
Oath of Canonical obedience.

5. Lastly, the general protestation, taken some years before the Covenant,
must needs effect the discharge of it so far as they are contrary.

6. That the Protestation was as legal as the Covenant, as yet none ever
questioned. It was imposed by the same power, at least it was never proclaimed
against by the King, as the Covenant was: and that, the Author of the
Covenanters plea argues, did sufficiently ratify it. It was taken by the same
persons generally, and indeed by thousands more then the Covenant was, and that
is, doubtless, enough, by Mr. Croftons Logic, to conclude it National and
perpetual, and not to be violated or made void, by any future power or
obligation or Covenant whatsoever.

7. But wherein is the Covenant contrary to the Protestation?

1. In the Protestation we promised to maintain the privileges of Parliament;
which, as I have shown before, by our standing bound by the Covenant to
endeavor the extirpation of Church Government, notwithstanding its
establishment by Act of Parliament; and by superseding Parliamentary power for
ever, enjoining our subjection to it, are sufficiently violated:

2. In the Protestation, we also promised to defend the liberties of the
Subject. These are also violently seized on by this Second Article of the
Covenant; herein so great and considerable a part of the Nation, as
Ecclesiastical Governors are, have their freeholds sworn against; and their
Power and Offices threatened with utter extirpation, Notwithstanding the
protection of the King and the Laws; yea when neither their King that gave them
their Commissions, nor any to represent them, had liberty to vindicate their
cause, or speak in their behalf in the Parliament, when destruction was
contriving by this way of a Covenant, for them.

3. But these things have been hinted before, and unanswerably handled by
others: I hasten to the third and last way of preobligation mentioned, viz. for
the service of the Church in our generation; when I have sealed that, from our
Oaths and promises now spoken to, with that general Rule of Dr. Ames, never
yet acquainted with doubt, -- Juramentum posterius contra Juramentum, aut etiam
promissionem Antecedentem and honestam, non obligat; a latter Oath, that is
against a former honest Oath, or but a promise, does not bind.

3. Thirdly, I doubt not to say, that the Covenant cannot bind us to forsake
our duties; or discharge us from the exercise of our offices in the service of
the Church, whereunto we are called: and to which we are obliged by God in his
Word, before ever the Covenant was thought on.

1. I acknowledge, that my Lord of Lincoln teaches that the seeming hindering
of some good, does not simply or precisely always discharge us from our Oath:
except there be other circumstances concurring, which evince it non obliging.

2. But there seems to be no room for a question here, when our place and duty
requires us to do that which would be hindered: for then the discharge results
also, yea and principally, from a former Obligation of God upon us, to do our
duty.

3. A man swears he will never come near such a River more, because he had like
to have been drowned there: but at a distance, he sees his Neighbor in the
same hazard at the same place: now certainly, notwithstanding his Oath to the
contrary, he is bound to help his Brother out, and to save his life. What is
the reason of this? there was a prior Obligation of God upon him, thou shall
love thy Neighbor as thy self.

4. Dr. Jacob the Casuist puts a harder Case by far then this; A man swears to
another that he will do him no hurt, yet if by the Law he kills him afterward,
he does not break his Oath; his reason is, quia illa promissio non occidendi
subintelligitur, nisi lege permittente, implying, that there was a
pre-obligation upon him to fulfill the Law.

Indeed, the thing sworn must be indifferent in it self, or at least of weaker
necessity, then the good that would be hindered by the keeping our Oath, and
then all Casuists, I think, concur with Jacob and Sylvester; qui indifferens
aliquid jurat, ut ite ad villam, non esse militem, etc. Dato Casu quo quis
vivere nequeat, nisi veniat contra Juramentum, illud servare non tenetur, and
propria Authoritate contravenire potest.

5. Now, if to endeavor extirpation of Episcopal Government be not sinful, I
am sure it is non-necessary, and then it is but an indifferent thing: if so,
though men have sworn it, yet if the keeping their Oath will hinder the doing
of their Natural duty, both to the King in breaking his Laws, and casting off
his Government: and to the Church, and our several Congregations, in putting
our selves into an incapacity according to Law, to serve any longer in the
Ministry: we are so far discharged of our Oath by the pre-Obligation of God to
our Necessary duty; and (notwithstanding the Covenant) we be to us if we preach
not the Gospel.

6. Upon this ground I stand, and assert, that the Argument ab impeditivo boni,
is not so slight, as the Reverend Author of the Covenanters plea would render
it. Neither does that Author himself say, that in no Case the Argument will
hold: yea at last, he seems to concur with other Casuists, in the Allowance of
it, with these four grains or conditions; it must be a greater good that is
hindered: this greater good must be attainable no otherwise, but by the
violation of the Oath. This good must be certain, and the Oath must be only
made to God.

7. Having laid down these Rules, the said Author bids a challenge to his
Absolvers, to apply them to the Case of the Covenant; and though the stress of
the Argument lies not here, I humbly accept it.

1. I dare affirm, that greater good would accrue to themselves, and to the
Church of God, and their Native Country, by not endeavoring the extirpation of
Episcopacy, or the present Church Government, and by declaring that ye are not
bound so to do, and thereby continuing your employment in the Church, then by
any sober and reasonable man can possibly be imagined, as things and Laws now
are, by such endeavors.

2. What fruit can you look for from such cross proceedings to Government and
Law, but the loss of your place, your capacities to dispense your trust, to
employ and improve your Talents, and, if so many fall together as is feared,
the distraction of the Nation, the discontent of the people, the grief of our
King, and the great hazard and loss of the Church.

3. On the other side, how great advantage must needs follow upon a general
conformity (notwithstanding the Covenant) to the Church and State? how great
satisfaction to our Governors, especially to our most gracious King, whose
indulgence you yet rejoice in, and he yet continues, as the space of your
repentance and obedience, after two years patience, and long suffering. How
much Right would you thus do the Laws, your selves, your families, and your
several Congregations: yea how much encouragement, you that are Leaders, might
you hereby give to your Brethren? your nonconforming Brethren, who depend on
you, and wait your motions, whom you have, as it were power to save or destroy?
your conforming Brethren, who are scandalized by your means before the people?
and made the scorn and reproach of such as count themselves extraordinary
Saints, for your sakes? saying, We will do any thing to save our Livings, but
such and such are the only faithful and conscientious Ministers, they will not
conform. How might you (it is much in your power) how might you thus allay our
storms, still the noise of the people, and in a short while leave nothing
amongst us but peace, and unity, and amity, and all blessed advantages of
profiting souls, of destroying Heresies, of reforming abuses, and crushing that
spirit of profanesse you so much, and continually complain of: but are running
from the only visible remedy of it in the world. Consider what I say, and the
Lord give you to understand it.

2. Give me leave therefore, in the second place, to say also, that these
goods, cannot be attained by us any other way; for by the Laws Ministers cannot
discharge or attend upon their Offices; neither can the people (if they are
bound by the Covenant, not to own, but to resist the Government of the Church,)
concenter together in the peace and settlement of Church or State, they must
not own the Government, nor conform to the proceedings of it; nor the Laws
about it; and yet the civil Authority will stand by it, defend it, protect it,
second its Decrees and Acts with the severe penalties the Law has provided;
and what weeping and complaining, what wasting and ruining of Estates and
Families? what public distraction and confusion must needs follow?

3. Which, thirdly, is as certain as our King and Parliament by Statute Law can
make it. Neither can any sober man, and one that expects not the fruits of
Rebellion and Treason; for a Reformation, imagine how things can alter without
a Miracle: we have as much certainty both Logical and Moral, as wise men know
the Nature of the Case will bear.

4. Lastly, this Oath was made, at least in this Article, to God only: to say
the Scots were parties in the first Article has some color, but not in the
second: for what were they concerned in our Government, while it is was
covenanted, not to meddle with theirs?

How ever both the parties promised what they had no power or right to do, as I
suppose is now past the Controversy with both Nations?

And, my dear Brethren in the Ministry of the Gospel, let me seriously request
you to consider; that though for your Oaths sake you ought to quit your own
interest, yet the Churches, or the States you cannot. Pray satisfy your selves
in this one thing.

1. Before you lay down; who gave you power to expose your selves to an
incapacity of serving God, and his Church in your high and holy calling, and
give her up to the hazards and ruins, you say you foresee, by covenanting
against that, which is now made, (as you know) by Law, the condition of your
station, and discharge of Laz. Seyman.
your office?

2. 'Twas the sentence of a learned Presbyterian, that the Edification of the
Church must proceed as providence makes way. And who has warranted you to
plead your Covenant (in things not necessary) for the obstruction of it?

3. Ask your selves, was not the Law of God, requiring all that should be
received into the Office of the Ministry, to Preach the Gospel, to be a
faithful Steward of the Mysteries of God, to Watch for Souls, in a constant
distribution of all Ordinances to their several Congregations; ask your selves,
I say, were not these Laws of force before your Covenant? how comes it to pass
then, that you plead your Covenant to the voiding of them? in such things too,
as certainly are no conditions of Gods commands?

CASE XVIII.
Whether the matter of the Covenant be not sinful: though taken and imposed by
the two Houses of Parliament?

Resol.
1. HItherto we have considered the Covenanters as so many private and single
persons: and found, that it is not lawful for such to endeavor a change of
Church Government against the Law.

2. Let us now look on them as united: and examine, what validity that adds to
the Covenant, or what legality to such endeavors.

3. It is said, and much insisted on, that the two Houses of Parliament, and
the generality of the people took the Covenant.

But indeed, though this may much alleviate the fault of the vulgar and
particular private persons: in the gross, it adds weight to the
transgression: for so great a body of Covenanters, without their head, casts no
shadow upon that action, other then to darken and put out all color of
lawfulness.

4. Had a private company of persons entered into a private League among
themselves, to endeavor to extirpate Episcopacy; it had not been near so
dangerous, nor their endeavor to perform it, in likelihood, so open and
seditious, and destructive to the public.

5. But so great a body made up of Members of all sorts (but the head to guide
them and warrant their Actions) and all engaging by a Solemn public Oath, to
their power, in their places, with their Lives, Estates (as the Covenant
expresses it) to extirpate the Government of the Church. I cannot but witness,
that indeed, here lay the Eminency of Sedition.

Hence a Lawyer, in his place, is sworn to plead; a Member of Parliament to
Vote; a Minister to Preach, a Soldier to Fight, a Countryman to Contribute;
and all to their power, and with their Lives and Estates, and the utmost hazard
of them, against that Government, though established by Law; against the
express mind of the King: and though also the power imposing were in actual
Arms against the King, even when they imposed it, and the people took it.

6. Thus every one, as related to the body, was an Actor in every ones part:
and no doubt, every one that did but contribute as a Covenanter, did Counsel,
Vote, Preach, and Fight, against Law and Government, not to say, the King.

7. And if any person, that was then zealous for the Covenant would speak
freely, he would easily resolve us, that he meant more when he took it, then to
endeavor in his place in Master Crofton's and the Author of the Covenanters
pleas's, Modern sense.

8. Indeed, the work and business of the Covenant, as all ingenuous
Covenanters must needs confess, and be humbled for, was too too apparent to be
this, viz. to engage the Nation to extirpate Episcopacy, and to endeavor in
such a manner, as though they knew the King would not consent at present, yet
vi and armis they would force him to it, or at least do it without him.

9. Nothing can be more clear, though nothing can be more sad and doleful to
remember, if the primitive meaning of the words in our places in the Covenant
was any thing at all, it was only to keep the people from turbulency and
confusion among themselves; and not at all to hinder them from rising up in
Arms, against the King and his Army, or at least the Kings Army; the visible
way they took, to perform their Covenant, and extirpate Prelacy.

10. But I take no delight to recover the memory of these things; as the Law
has pardoned them; so I hope, my Brethren have seen the folly and madness and
sin of them; and are truly ashamed to remember them. I also crave pardon of my
Reader for the mention of them, with this true Apology, that my Argument forced
me to it.

But we will leave the fact, and inquire after the jus, viz.

CASE XIX.
Whether the two Houses, without the King, could bind themselves and the people
of these Kingdoms, with an Oath, to endeavor the alteration of
Church Government.

Resol.
IT will easily appear they could not, by a few Propositions.

1. The King is caput communitatis, and no Act can pass, or Law be made, to
bind the people without his fiat; the Laws are therefore called the Kings Laws,
and said to be Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty; indeed not without
the Consent of the Lords and Commons, and the Authority of the same.

The Excellent Bishop so often mentioned, concludes and proves at large, the
power Legis-lative to be a power Autocratical, and gives a sad memento to some,
that the wild notion of Coordinate power is a Ridiculous Invention: and that
such as received it, by this gross Sophisme, became guilty of the foulest
perjury; for by it they Acknowledge and constitute a power equal to him in the
Kingdom, whom, in express terms, they have sworn to be the only Supreme
power in the Kingdom.

Secondly, the King is the Fountain of all Justice, as well as Law, (as the Law
it self acknowledges) and has the execution of the Law first in himself, from
whom all Officers, as subordinate, derive their very Office, as well as power
of execution.

Thirdly, The Government of the Prop. 3.
Church cannot be altered, except the Laws be altered, nor yet without
Vncommissioning the Kings Officers, as all Ecclesiastical Governors are.
Neither of which may lawfully be done, without the King.

Therefore Fourthly, The altering Prop. 4.
of Church Government, both as it requires a change of the Law, or an
Vncommissioning the Kings Officers, est res quae Regis potestati subijcitur, in
a very high and eminent manner; and by fair consequence, according to the Rule
held undisputable by all Casuists, neither Parliament, nor people, nor both
together, can be bound to endeavor the Alteration of the Government of the
Church, without this Condition. Si Regi etiam placuerit, if it shall also
please the King.

Which pleasure of the King to alter any thing settled by Law, must not be in
private, or in a private manner expressed, but in a Regal Act, when his two
houses present him with a Bill to that purpose; otherwise the Laws are still
the same, and our Obligations to them, especially for the ratifying any Act or
Undertaking of the Parliament, as the Case is here; But all the world knows,
this was never done, and thereupon according to the Rule, the Obligation of the
Covenant ceased immediately.

No Act of one Parliament can bind Prop. 5.
all future Parliaments, not to meddle with any thing that is within the power
of Parliament: such an Act, as before was showed, is void in it self; much
less could that Ordinance of Parliament about the Covenant survive that
Parliament, and supersede the power of all future Parliaments, to restore and
establish Episcopal Government.

Neither could they bind themselves or the people absolutely, and for ever,
thus to endeavor, without breach of the privileges of all future Parliaments
without this Condition, [if they should also like and approve it:] and that
such endeavors should never be forbidden by King and Parliament, in any future
Law to the Contrary: but that is now done, and datur irritatio Juramenti; and
the Covenant is voided in that point.

Thus, we are at length got over the great stone of stumbling, the Obligation
of the Covenant; only, a weak mistake or two, about this part of the
declaration, remains to be discovered, and we shall pass on.

Obj. It is said, that many things in the Covenant are Morally Good, and how
then can we abjure it?

Answ. 1. My Dear Brethren, pray spare such hard words: you know the word [
Abjure] is not in the Act; And therefore should not be used by men of
Conscience to the trouble of their Brethren, and the more ignorant or
inconsiderate part of the people.

2. We are not called to swear at all, much less to Abjure or Vnswear, as some
too scornefully, yet too frequently, as well as falsely love, to speak: which
is comely in none, much less Ministers, especially such as expect persecution.

3. Neither, are you required to declare against any thing that is good in the
Covenant or that is not evil: or rather against nothing either good or evil in
the Covenant directly, only by Consequence: for we are only to declare that
it does not bind to endeavor to alter the Government either of Church or
State; which seeing it cannot be done without breach of the Laws, we have found
to be sinful; and therefore it is inhabilis ad Obligationem producendam.

4. If any do hold that they are bound by that Covenant to be more Loyal and
faithful to the King, and to reform their own lives, etc. the Act does not say,
that they must hold or declare the contrary.

5. We read it under the Royal hand: I willingly forgive such men's taking the
Convenant, who keep within such bounds of Piety, Law and Loyalty, as can never
hurt either the Church, my self, or the public peace, -- against which no man's
Lawful Calling can engage him.

Obj. But why should we, or how can we declare for others? do we know another
Conscience, or how far he is bound?

Answ. 1. This Complaint arises also from mistake: as if we were called to
declare what other men think or hold of the Covenant; whereas indeed, we are
not required to trouble our selves, whether others think or hold themselves
bound by it or no: but to declare what we our selves think or hold: not, that
others are not bound by the Covenant at all, as before, but so far only, as
not to be troublers of peace, or enemies to Government.

2. Now if this be unlawful (as has methinks appeared sufficiently,) nemo
tenetur ad illicitum: neither we nor any other are obliged unto it: and if it
be a breach of the Act, not so to declare: we are also to declare, as we are
required, that we hold there lies No Obligation upon our selves, or any other
person, by virtue of that Oath called the Covenant, to endeavor any change or
alteration of the Government, either of Church or State.

CASE XX.
Whether it be lawful to declare, that the Covenant was in it self an Unlawful
Oath.

Resol.
1. WE are come to the second branch of the Declaration, touching the Covenant,
that the Covenant was in it self an unlawful Oath.

2. I shall not fly to the following words, which may be Exegeticall of these,
to prove it so, viz. because it was imposed against the Laws and Liberties of
this Kingdom: but allow that phrase [unlawful in it self] to carry more in
it, then the bare illegality of the Imposition.

3. Indeed, if it be granted, that it was unlawful in the Imposition, as the
boldest writer for Obligation of the Covenant do not deny; this unavoidably
draws on another kind of illegality on the takers part: for if it was unlawful
in the imposing, 'twas much more so, in the taking of it; It is unreasonable to
Imagine that the Common people had any more warrant thus to swear in a public
Covenant, about matters of public concernment, without the consent of the
King, then the two houses had, to require it of them.

4. And though it will not follow, that the Covenant is not obliging, merely
because it was sinfully enjoined, or sinfully taken; it will follow, against
all Contradiction, that a Covenant illegally taken is even therefore an
unlawful Oath, and that is the thing we are here called to declare.

5. That is no more then this; that the peoples covenanting in so numerous a
body, in so public a manner, and about matters of so public concernment,
without and against the mind of their King is an unlawful Act: and though the
matter of the Covenant could not have been proved to be unlawful, yet thus it
is properly, because formally an unlawful Oath.

Therefore, it is worth the heeding, for the satisfaction of such a scruple,
that the Act does not call us to declare, that the Covenant was in it self
unlawful (as some too arelesly say it does) that might have seemed to reflect
upon the matter of the Covenant: but that it is, in it self, an unlawful Oath,
which rather seems to intend the form and manner of it, as a public
Covenant, as was now said, taken by a numerous body of Subjects, without and
against the mind of their King.

I shall not need to repeat, what has been urged before, to prove the main
matter of the Covenant unlawful; but shall seal up this, with that
unquestionable Rule of my Lord of Lincoln; who pleases to acknowledge, that
sometimes, though the pactum be illicitum, yet res pacta licet: the things
sworn may be lawful, yet the Oath an unlawful Oath.

CASE XXI.
Whether it be lawful to declare that the Covenant was imposed upon the
Subjects of this Realm, against the known Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom?

Resol.
WE are now, even at our Journies end, and the sooner because we hardly met
with any (...) in our way, in the present Case.

1. I find there is nothing more easily yielded to be unlawful, touching the
Covenant, then the imposition of it; and how it can be unlawful in the
imposition, except it were imposed contrary to the Laws and Liberties of the
Kingdom, I cannot apprehend.

2. It is enough, that we read it as a fundamental in the Petition of Right,
that it is contrary to the Liberty of the Subject to have an Oath imposed
without an Act of Parliament: and the Long Parliament it self, that imposed the
Covenant, never pretended to make an Act of Parliament without the King: or if
they had done so, it had been to very little purpose, because they had thus
pretended to do what they could not do; and acted against the known
Constitution of the Kingdom, as their successons did.

3. If it should be said, that the Oath made with the Gibeonites was against
the Liberties of the people, and yet it was found to be obliging.

First, we are not here called to declare the nonobligation of the Govenant,
but the illegal imposition: yet, seeing we had no occasion to speak unto this
Objection before, briefly a word or two, now.

2. There is no resemblance betwixt the Covenant made with the Gibeonites, and
the Covenant we treat off. That Covenant was not imposed on either part; but
freely taken, and therefore could not be against the Liberties of the people;
volenti non fit injuria.

3. Besides, the Text says expressly, that Joshua made the League with them,
who was Supreme; and all the Princes of the Congregation swear unto them:
whereas, many of our Princes did refuse the Covenant, yea, for ought we know,
most of them; and our Joshua, the King, proclaimed against it.

4. Again, that League was, to show too much favor to strangers, and enemies:
but the Covenant endeavors to root out a very considerable part of our own
Nation.

5. Again, by that League there was no Fundamental, no Law at all violated, no
hurt done: by ours, many Laws are to be torn in pieces: the Kings Prerogative,
whose consent was necessary, invaded: the privilege of Parliament to make new
Laws, in things lawful, or establish the old, broken: the liberties of the
people, in being imposed on, with the Covenant, without an Act of Parliament,
and having so many societies of Ecclesiastical persons destroyed, plainly
subverted.

6. Indeed, nothing can be said, why the Oath made in favor of the 2 Samuel 21.
2.
Gibeonites by Joshua, the King, and all the Princes and people, should not
oblige: and nothing can be said, why the Covenant made with hatred of the
Bishops, for their injury and ruin, by a part of the Parliament and People,
without, and against the King and the Laws, when (contrary to the very
Constitution of the Land) there were none to represent them, in either House;
nothing I say, can reasonably be said, why such a Covenant, so far at least,
should bind at all. One may be bound to do the good he has sworn, so was
Joshua, etc. to the Gibeonites; one cannot be bound to do the evil he has
sworn, as the Covenant would have him.

7. Israel was cheated into a Covenant, that hurt none but themselves; if
themselves at all; and therefore their Covenant obliged them: England, that is,
a great part of it, was also cheated (pardon the expression) into a Covenant
that injured the Takers, and every body else; the King, the Parliament that
made it, all future Parliaments, the Liberties of the people, the Governors
and Government of the Church, yea, and God himself, and the Consciences and
Souls of the Takers themselves, (by breaking the bonds of all former
obligations upon them, to the contrary;) as in particular has before appeared;
and how then can it bind to so much iniquity?

I need say no more to this or other instances of Zedekiah's Oath, etc. or, I
presume, to this Argument of the Declarations: that has indeed engaged me
longer then at first I foresaw.

A general Conclusion, touching the Lawfulness of Reordination, and the
Government, Liturgy and Ceremonies of the Church of England.
THere is but one thing more, in the condition of Law, required of Ministers,
by the Act of Uniformity; Reordination of such, as are only Ordained already
by Presbyters; and Ordination of such as are not, by Bishops. I hope, such as
are concerned herein, will not stand too much upon this, considering, that
liberty is not denied them, to keep their own sense, whether the Ordination by
Presbyters only is valid or not: also that the Act makes it self no judge of
the Ordination by Presbyters in foreign Churches: also, that there is no other
way, according to the Law of the Land to exercise their Ministry in this
Church; as also, that if their former Ordination should be confirmed by any
other form, it could not pass for legal Ordination in this Church or Nation:
nor legally entitle them to the care of souls, or to the profits of their
places; no other being thought fit to be appointed, or allowed by our
Governors; and therefore their submission thereunto cannot be a taking Gods
name in vain, which has so good and so necessary an end; but especially
considering, that worthy Mr. Humphery, has written so effectually and so
largely already, upon this Subject.

He has so well prevented my pains herein, I have only to refer my Brethren
to his Books for their full satisfaction in this point.

2. Concerning that which I have written, in this Treatise, give me leave to
subscribe (which I do, animo) that I have not used one Argument, but I really
judge it convincing, and such as is not, either, answered or prevented by any
thing written, either by Mr. Crofton, or the learned and sober Author of the
Covenanters plea.

3. Neither can I divine, what may possibly be urged against the Declarations,
that is not answered; except only the unlawfulness of the Government,
Liturgy, or Ceremonies of the Church: all which are indeed concerned in the
Declarations required.

4. I confess, I took the lawfulness of these in themselves for granted, and
my reason, I hinted at the beginning of my book, namely, because I was to treat
such only, or chiefly, with it, as had purposed to conform, had not the Act
required them thus to declare: such I conceived, did not believe the Government
of the Church, or any Office or Ceremony of the Common Prayer Book, was in it
self unlawful; who by their Conformity intended before, to own the one, and
practice the other.

5. However, let me humbly beseech my Brethren, (if thus they scruple)
seriously to Consider, that the ablest Pens, that ever Engaged in these great
Controversies, have hitherto found it a task too difficult for them, to evince,
that either the form of Government, or any thing required in our Liturgy, is
in it self unlawful.

6. Yea, give me leave to make my Observation, that very few that have been
Learned, and Sober, and Faithful in the point, since the Reformation, to the
beginning of our late Troubles, but (though they have much scrupled at first)
have argued themselves at length into a Conviction, at least of the lawfulness
of them.

7. I hope my Brethren will not take it amiss, If I offer to remember them,
that Conscience is not Regula Regulans (in the first Consideration, though so
in the second) but Regula Regulata: and that she has a Rule above her, that
must be a Rule unto her, and the very Synterisis and Proposition, from which
alone she must draw and conclude all her definitions of things lawful or
unlawful.

8. The measure therefore of the Judgment of Conscience, is the mind of God
and not our own: Not our own mind, much less our will. So that, what he
commands, must be held a Duty, what he forbids, must be held a sin; and what he
neither commands nor forbids, must be held indifferent: that is, in it self, to
be neither a Duty nor a Sin, by every well enlightened, rightly ruled, and
Indifferent Conscience.

9. Now, if it be a doubt to any Man's Conscience what is left by God
indifferent, that is, what he has neither commdnded and made a Duty, nor
forbidden and made a Sin; What remains, but that he follow the advice of our
Savior, and search the Scriptures? these, we may be sure, are the best Rule of
Conscience, as the clearest Testimony of Gods Mind.

10. If yet the doubt continue, what God has left indifferent, in the
Scriptures themselves, suffer me to say, that it is not possible, that there
should be a better help under Heaven for the removal of it, besides immediate
Revelation (which may not be expected) then the Judgment of the Primitive and
Reformed Churches.

11. Let the person, then, that desires satisfaction indeed, bring his
Conscience and the great things in question, first, to the Bar and Rule of
Scripture; and if he cannot see them condemned there (as truly I cannot) let
him in the fear of the Lord, and the sincerity of his heart after Truth and
Peace, yet prosecute his full satisfaction, by repairing unto, and duly
examining; first, what Opinion the Primitive Churches, (as soon as they took
notice of these things in Controversy) had of them: and then also, ask the
Judgment of the most eminent Reformed Divines; they have freely signified the
same upon all occasions in their witings, ever since the Reformation.

Now, if it be unquestionably found, that both the Primitive and Reformed
Churches have unanimously testified; That they believe, the things now in
Controversy with us, are not forbidden by God, but that they are at least of
an Indifferent Nature, and may lawfully be used; Who art thou, O Man, that
reply? or dare say, they are unlawful.

FINIS.
An Addition to the first Impression, by way of Supplement to the two great
Cases touching the Inexpediency and unlawfulness of things imposed.
I. Touching the Doctrine of Expediency.
LEst the Doctrine of Expediency should yet remain under the cloud of any
exception: I have thought good to add a few things for the farther clearing of
it, in Answer to the only material Objection against it.

quod non expedit non licet: and if that which is not expedient, be not lawful,
then it may not be practiced upon any pretense; for we must not do evil, that
good may come.

Answer hereunto, I crave leave to distinguish: for things are unlawful, or
evil, in specie, or in genere, only.

That I call unlawful in specie, which is in it self, without respect to its
circumstances, prohibited by some special Law, natural or positive, as Theft,
Murder, Profaning the Lords day, etc. now things simply inexpedient, cannot be
thought unlawful in this sense, they being granted on all hands to be in
themselves indifferent.

That is unlawful, or evil in genere only, (on the other hand) that is not the
transgression of any special Law of Nature or Scripture; but by reason of some
accident, or outward respect, circumstance or consequence, (for the sake of
which, the thing becomes forbidden) is unlawful by some general Rule of
Decency, Order, Custom, or the like.

Thus only are things inexpedient, unlawful or evil: not in themselves, but
from their circumstances; not in their Natures, but accidentally; not as
violations of a special, but of a geral Law of God. So that, if the
inexpediency of such a thing, for which alone it is prohibited, be either
severed from it, or over-ballanced, it becomes repugnant to no Law at all; and
consequently, the evil and unlawfulness is, in such a case, removed. Mr.
Calvin Institut. li. 4. c. 11. 31.
gives us some instances of this, shortly, and smartly; Quid? an in Muliere
Carbaso sita Religio est ut nudo capite egredi sit nefas? an sanctum de ejus
silentio decretum, quod violari sine summo scelere non possit? an aliquid in
genuflexione, inhumando cadavere mysterium, quod praeteriri sine piaculo non
possit? minime. -- Sed est Nihilominus in istis rebus quod agendum aut cavendum
mos regionis, instituta ipsa denique humanitas, and modestiae regula dictet.

For, that which by reason of circumstances only, is evil or unlawful, is so
only accidentally, and may be not immutably so: and that which is evil by
accident, in one respect, may be good, yea better in another: now if
circumstances sway on the other hand, the thing that at first seemed otherwise,
may thus prove expedient; and by the very reason of this Objection, lawful.

Yea, admit that some respects do render it inexpedient; yet, if more and
greater render it expedient; it thus becomes more expedient, then inexpedient;
and the overbalance of expediency, concluding the Case (according to Polanus
his Golden Rule,) the inexpediency must yield it self; and the thing proceeds
in such an instance of practice, to be expedient and ought to be done. For,
suppose the thing must either be done, or left undone: and it is inexpedient,
all things considered, to leave it undone, then it is expedient, and
consequently necessary, to be done.

We must not do evil to obtain good; yet we must do good, to prevent evil,
though the thing be good for nothing else. Things that are expedient, are
therefore good. [It seems good to us] and therefore, necessary. [These
necessary things] Acts 15.
whence, those very things, which we are afraid to do, because inexpedient, may
possibly be our duty to do, because expedient.

The sum is, things with respect to expediency and inexpediency, fall under a
double consideration. And such things as in their first consideration are
inexpedient, may in some second respects, be both lawful, expedient, and
necessary* to be done.

Now, whatsoever censure the reason given of it may conflict with; I dare say,
the Proposition it self was hardly ever before opposed; and I would fain hope
it is not now.

No doubt, the Apostles knew very well, that a refusing to eat things
strangled, and blood, at that period of time, especially, by a Law to enjoin
it, carried, in the first consideration of it, no small inconvenience, as is
easily judged from the rest of their Writings; yea, in that very Law, they
grant they are burdens, ( no other Burden) yet to prevent greater
inconveniences, (the Apostasy of the Jews, the interruption of the Gospel,
etc.) it seemed good unto them, yea necessary so to do.

St. Cyprian's Rule is Catholic; we Inst. 4. 12, 11.
either find it, or some Allusion to it, almost every where. Calvin, amongst
others, cites and seals it, and my Conclusion with it. Misericorditer igitur
corripiat homo: quod autem non potest, patienter ferat, and cum delectione
gemat atque lugeat.

St. Ambrose his advice to St. Augustine's Vid. Aug. cpist. 86. Casula: prope
finem. and epist. Januar. 119.
Mother, that she should conform to the usages of every Church where she came,
(which St. Augustine received as an Oracle from God) must needs indulge my
proposition; unless every usage in the several Churches where she might
possibly come, were exactly squared to the strict Idea of fitness and
expediency in the Matron's Mind, which can hardly be imagined. Servilibus
oneribus premunt ut tolerabilior sit conditio Judaeorum.


And St. Augustine himself was in our very Case; it is known, he was much
troubled at the multitude of Ceremonies in his time; and heavily complains of
them as a burden, nay a bondage, to the Church; a bondage Januar. epist. 119.
Ecclesia -- multa tolerat. ibid.
worse then Jewish; yet who ever found him symbolizing with Donatis, or in the
least, to encourage any man, for any such cause, to break the Union and Peace
of the Church by Separation? yea, he was the Captain of the Hosts of the Lord,
against all appearances of such Schism.

Most of the Foreign Reformed Divines, have not only asserted, but applied
the Rule, to our very Case, (and therefore the rather to be heeded) and have de
industria given their advice, from the present principle, touching Conformity
in England: and what do they say in it? do they not either approve our usages,
or dislike them only as inconvenient? and those they dislike as inconvenient,
do they not, notwithstanding their inconvenience, yet earnestly persuade to
Conformity to them? and what is it that moves them so severely to admonish them
against Nonconformity, but a sad prospect of greater inconveniences, the
disquiet of the Church, the provoking of our Governors, and the laying aside
the work of the Gospel.

If Vnacquaintance with these worthy men cause any to doubt or suspect this
truth; I humbly beg them, thoroughly to examine it, especially in the discourse
of the troubles at Franckford, and those weighty papers of Bucer, P. Martyr,
etc. to Bishop Hooper, Cranmer, Greendall, etc. about this very Controversy.
If you read the other disputes, and occasional advices of Calvin, Zanchy,
Polanus, Alesius, Beza, Saravia, Hemingius, Bucanus, Bullinger, Zepperus,
Paraeus, Arelius, and the rest of that golden number; they all consent (except
Illiricus) in the sweetest harmony as one man, that for some Inconveniences
imposed on us, we ought not to quit the Office of the Ministry, or hazard the
Church.

Illiricus, that only eminent foreign Divine in his Age against Conformity,
had this Apology beyond us; that the Interim, full of popish errors, was then
by Charles the Fifth imposed upon Germany,. Yet notwithstanding all his other
excellencies what a horrid Character Melancton, yea and Beza himself gives of
him and his cause: but what was his crime? he hotly persuaded all the Ministers
to lay down their Ministry rather then conform; Bez. in vit. Calv. an. 1540.
which occasioned so many Tumults, that Beza complains he promoted Popery, as
if he had been hired by the Pope of Rome; and indeed, deserved that black name
which a sober Historian gives him. Matthias Flaccius, homo vehemens: and
quocunque loco pedem figeret, accerri mus Turbarum incentor.

Notwithstanding, therefore, these heats of Illyricus and his furious
followers, it will be their Joy and Crown, at last, that can truly say, with
Lumbertus, Nihil novi attuli, sed antiquam and receptam Doctrinam, etc. I have
brought in nothing new, but the old and received Doctrine of the Scriptures,
the Fathers, and the general part of Modern Divines, which my Conscience, yea
these my Eyes bearing me witness, I can safely do.

When I read that imprudent, yea impudent saying of Miricus, branded by
Melancton, viz. that rather then Conformity should be yielded, Desolation
should be made in the Church, and that Princes are to be frighted with the
terror of Insurrection: I find my self carried yet more to the contrary; and
the more enamoured with the sober, safe and peaceable counsel of Melanction,
and his Brethren, in the present Conclusion.

Yet I must needs confess, that the Fruit and profit which the Church has
reaped from this Rule, [that we ought rather to conform to some things
inexpedient, then to lay down our Ministry] the Fruit, I say, hereof has more
deeply affected me, then any hurt or danger of the Contrary, which happily may
not be impertinent briefly to touch.

The Ministers of Suevia (as Melancton tells us) would not conform to the use
of the Surpliee, but rather chose to lay down their Ministry; But Melancton and
Pomeranus, even by the force of this very Principle, that we ought to conform
to some inconveniences, rather then to leave our Ministry, Conc. Melanc. p.
2. sol. 91. ^
recovered most of the Ministers of Marquess Albertus Dominions, to a
peaceable mind, and due Conformity.

By the same Argument Calvin quieted the Church at Geneva, when all in an
uproar about the Wafer-cake: he told them to this effect, that the thing was in
it self indifferent; and for its inconvenience, they ought not to break, and
hazard the Church. Generally, by this alone, he argued both Ministers and
People, that scrupled at it, to conformity again.

Neither have we been altogether without some fruit of this Doctrine in
England: indeed the most eminent Non-conformists here have known its power.

Bishop Hooper, for not practicing, and for preaching against conformity, was
convented before the High Commission, and imprisoned; yet at length, did
conform himself. But by what means? why, at length by the pains of Bucer, Peter
Martyr, and Calvin, he became convinced of this truth (that we ought not to
stick at an inconvenience, to the prejudice of the Church) and then the work
was done.

By virtue of the same principle, were a while after, Doctor Humphrey-Dr.
Reynolds, Dr. Sparks, Dr. Chaloner, Dr. Ayray, Mr. Chaderton, and Mr.
Kenwstubs, all very eminent, after a long reluctance, at last subdued, and
reduced to conformity.

In later time, Mr. Sprint, after he had shown much opposition, has with more
learning, soberness, and industry, testified to the world, that he was
prevailed upon by the same Consideration: the very Title of his Book, is, the
necessity of Conformity in case of Deprivation: he also assures us, in the
Epistle to his Book, that by the same Argument, many others had received
satisfaction from him, and doubts not but many more would.

Give me leave to assume, that this Principle may have life and vigor still: I
mean, not in it self, for so it is Moral, perpetual, and eternal, but in the
minds of sober men. And that when the Tempest is over, and the thoughts of
people a little more Calmed, my Brethren may discern this truth more clearly,
and reap the peaceable fruit of it, (which, our good God, the God of peace, in
mercy to this poor Church grant) yea, I hope I perceive, some blossoms to
appear already: great is the truth, and will prevail.

A Supplement to the Case, touching the Imposition of things unlawful.
IT is well kown, that very Pious and Learned men have ventured much further in
this Argument: boldly asserting, that things not only inconvenient and
unlawful in genere, but more directly sinful, even against particular
Scripture, may lawfully be done in some Emergencies, and Cases of (...).

Neither can it be denied, but that we often find in the Scripture it self,
particular commands, overruled by a more general Law of necessity; and then,
doubtless, the general warrant grants a Supersedeas against particular
obligation: and in such a Case it is not sinful, not to fulfill a particular
command, but rather a clear obedience to God (who in the instance, takes off
the force of the particular) in his more general Law.

Thus the breakers of the Sabbath broke a particular command, yet breaking the
particular, in obedience to the general rule of necessity, they do not do evil
that good may come, but are reckoned Matthew. 12. 2. 3, 4, 5.
blameless, and called Innocent. Thus also the particular Text tells us
expressly, that it is unlawful for any, save the Priests only, to eat the
Shewbread: yet in a strait, the general rule of necessity warrants, not only
David, but those also that were with him to eat thereof. Upon the same account
we 2 Chronicles. 7. 72.
must put Solomon's upon an Altar not appointed: Hezeckiah's admitting to 2 Chronicles. 30. 17. to 21. Act. 27. 30.
the Passover the legally unclean: and Paul his casting the good creatures of
God into the Sea.

Yet we must still carefully distinguish betwixt things that are internally,
Materially, and Naturally evil: and such things as are only extrinsically
evil, or unlawful only by virtue of positive prohibitions in Scripture. For
what has been said I intend only to the latter branch, viz. such things as
are evil only from without, and by virtue of Gods positive precept: for such
things as are Intrinsically and Materially evil, you have had my opinion about
them already in the former Treatise.

If it be well heeded, though a general rule may, in case of necessity,
discharge us from present attendance upon the proper duties of the Lords Day:
the Ceremonial and external parts of worship; yet no necessity that I can find
will excuse wholly either Robbery, Adultery, Murder, etc. things Morally and
Materially evil, and therefore Immutabiliter mala, immutably evil: at least
without some thing more then a general Rule, viz. a special personal warrant;
as the Israelites had, to take the goods of the Egyptians; and Abraham, to slay
his Son Isaac.

Mark the opposition, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice; the positive yields
to the Natural and Moral duty; the less necessary, to the more necessasary,
the less to the greater.

Yet, in such a case, see here is a command too [ I will] and this both,
affirmative, [I will have mercy.] And Negative, [Not sacrifice.] No doubt,
where God can have both, he will: but where he cannot, he will have mercy,
though he lose sacrifice. Yea, rather then lose mercy, he will have no
sacrifice, he prohibits sacrifice; in such a case, even prayer is turned into
sin, and sacrifice is an abomination.

But what is this mercy that the God of heaven so highly values, and so
strictly charge, above his own service: truly, I can hardly think on it,
without wonder, or write it without Mat. 12. 4, 5, 10.
astonishment: it is instanced by our Ver. 11, 12.
Savior, in mercy, not only to men, but to beasts; even sacrifice to the high
God must give way to mercy to our beast. Yet may we hence abate our wonder,
that the Scripture saw reason to prefix that Item, go, and learn what that
means: as if little understood, and less practiced. Go and learn what that
means, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice.

Is mercy to our beast so highly prized? how much more is mercy to our selves,
to our Nation, to the Church, and to the souls of our people? is mercy to a
beast to take place of sacrifice to God? how precious is mercy to all these,
when it meets with sacrifice, and supports the Altar? and when, if we will not
have both together we can have neither, how much more desirable to God and man
to have mercy and piety kiss each other, then to throw away charity and duty
together; which God forbid.

But pardon my digression, and I shall add but one instance more of this
nature, and hasten to conclude with Apology. It is indeed a great one, and much
more insisted on then all the rest, by reason that the practice was more
general, and the nature of it more applicable. It is that famous Apostolical
usage of the Jewish Ceremonies after Christ's Resurrection, and the first
Christians following them, at least in some of them, viz. abstaining from
blood, and things strangled (till St. Augustines time) for the space of near
four hundred year after.

Do not all consent, that those Jewish Ceremonies, even when the Apostles used
them ( viz. Circumcision, Shaving, Vowing, Purifying, Abstaining from blood and
things strangled (which two last they also imposed by a general Decree,) I
say, do not even all consent, that these were truly Mortua (though not
Mortifera) dead with Christ, and buried in his grave, and rendered unlawful to
the Christian Churches, by virtue of the consequence of his Resurrection? yea,
in other Act. 15. 10. Col. 2. 20. Col. 2. 12. Gal. 4. 19, 20.
cases, the use of them is directly reproved, as needless shadows, Ordinances
of the World, Commandments of men that turned from the truth, and weak and
beggarly rudiments.

Yet, now in a second Consideration, they are occasionally approved, as good
and necessary, and accordingly, as already we have said, some of them imposed,
and many of them practiced, by those great examples. The ends, Acts 15. 2, 4,
6, 7.
indeed, moving thereunto were most weighty, viz. the Unity of Brethren,
Winning Souls, the Propagation of the Gospel, the prevention of Scandal, 1 Cor.
9. 19, 20. 1 Cor. 9. 31. Act. 16. 3: Acts 21. 22, 24, 27, 28. In Acts 2. 23.
citing, 1 Cor. 9. 20.
and the danger of the Ministry through persecution.

Calvin is peremptory, Non licuisset, says he, it had not been lawful for
believers to have retained those Ceremonies, except they had made for
Edification, yet boldly adds, licuit, it was lawful for Paul to circumcise
Timothy.

Zanchy, and Peter Martyr, to name no more, come near to us in their
application. Peter Martyr says, that without Controversy, the abstaining from
Loc. com. fol. 1087. Hoopero.
blood and things strangled were Aaronical; yet defends that Apostolical
injunction, for peace, and the better conviction of believers: and thence, the
Surplice.

Zanchy says, the forbidding of things In Phil. 1. fol. 45. 6.
strangled and blood, smelt of Jewish superstition: and that Paul's vow, and
purifying, were hay and stubble at that time. Yet he approves them for love and
peace sake: and thence persuades Ministers, threatened by Authority, to use
such Ceremonies as are hay and stubble, rather then to leave their Ministry. He
concludes from this great President, Ergo multa toleranda Ministris, ne pax
scindatur Ecclesiarum, etc. therefore many things are to be born by Ministers
for the Churches peace, and to avoid scandals: if they be neither such things,
nor Doctrines as strike at the Foundation.

But I forbear to enlarge, or apply this Argument, lest peradventure I be
mistaken to charge my Brethren, with too hard thoughts of our Churches
Impositions: or be thought, my self, to be too Friendly to any thing that is
sinful, which God forbid.

I confess, it is a very tender point; and to be touched gently, both in
Doctrine and Use: but though I cannot be so uncharitable as to fear our Church
will try us with it: or, that it is the case of many of my Brethren, their own
judgments; and lastly, in though I dare not say, how far I should venture in
my own practice upon this principle; yet, I freely consent to the truth of it:
neither can I question it, till I shall see the foresaid Scriptures better
answered, then I have yet done.

Yea, I do firmly persuade my self, that where there is only a Doubt concerning
such unlawfulness of any thing enjoined, much encouragement to a readier
obedience may justly be drawn from a prudent pondering the Premises.

Laus Deo, Ecclesiae Pax.
THE CONTENTS.
The Grand Case. WHether it be lawful to declare, as is required by the late
Act, Entitled an Act for the Uniformity of Public Prayers, etc. Page 1. CASE
I. Whether it be lawful to Declare in the Words of the first of these
Declartions? CASE II. Whether it is lawful to Declare in the words of the
Second Declaration? 13 CASE III. Whether it be lawful for us to declare, that
it is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever, to take Arms against the King.
15 CASE IV. Whether it be lawful to declare, that we do Abhor that Traitorous
position of taking Arms by the Kings Authority against his person, or those
that are Commissionated by him. 17 CASE V. Whether we may lawfully declare,
that we will conform to the Liturgy of the Church of England, as it is now by
Law established? 19 CASE VI. Whether we may lawfully declare in these words. I
do hold there lies no Obligation upon me, or any other person, from the Oath
commonly called the Solemn League and Covenant, to endeavor any Change or
Alteration of Government either in Church or State. 22 CASE VII. Whether any
private or single person can lawfully endeavor the alteration of
Church Government by virtue of the Covenant. 26 CASE VIII. Whether, to
Endeavor to alter the Government of the Church, be against the Rights of the
King. 28 CASE IX. Whether to endeavor thus against the Kings Rights, as
obliged thereunto by the Covenant, be sinful. 32 CASE X. Whether the
Covenanting to endeavor the Extirpation of Episcopal Government be against
the Laws, and consequently sinful. 37 CASE XI. Whether the present Government
of this Church were Established by Law in England before the taking of the
Covenant. 41 CASE XII. Whether a Covenant taken first, can oblige us against a
future Law? 47 CASE XIII. Whether a submitting to the penalty annexed, be a due
fulfilling or obeying the Law in point of Conscience. 60 CASE XIV. Whether to
Endeavor the Extirpation of Church Government, by virtue of the Covenant,
notwithstanding the Laws to the Contrary, be not against the Privilege of
Parliament, and consequently sinful. 67 CASE XV. Whether it be lawful to
endeavor the extirpation of Episcopacy, by virtue of the Covenant,
notwithstanding the Act of Parliament. 74 CASE XVI. Whether the Covenant be not
against the Liberty of the Subject in this particular, and therefore sinful in
its matter. 89 CASE XVII. Whether the matter of the second Article of the
Covenant be not against former Obligations, and consequently sinful. 98 CASE
XVIII. Whether the matter of the Covenant be not sinful, though taken and
imposed by the two Houses of Parliament? 116 CASE XIX. Whether the two Houses,
without the King, could bind themselves and the people of these Kingdoms with
an Oath, to endeavor the alteration of Church Government. 120 CASE XX. Whether
it be lawful to declare, that the Covenant was in it self an Unlawful Oath. 127
CASE XXI. Whether it be lawful to declare that the Covenant was imposed upon
the Subjects of this Realm, against the known Laws and Liberties of this
Kingdom? 130 A general Conclusion, touching the Lawfulness of Reordination,
and the Government, Liturgy and Ceremonies of the Church of England. 136 An
Addition to the first Impression, by way of Supplement to the two great Cases
touching the Inexpediency and unlawfulness of things imposed. 143 A Supplement
to the Case, touching the Imposition of things unlawful. 156
FINIS.
REcensui tractatum hunc, cui Titulus, The Grand Case: Grande quidem opus, si
quod intendit efficiat.

M. Frank. S. T. P. R. P. D. Epo. Land. a Sacris Domest.
Sextilis 11o. 1662.
THere is Extant an Excellent Piece Entitled, Some Necessary and Seasonable
Cases of Conscience about things Indifferent in Matters of Religion, Briefly,
yet faithfully stated and resolved: wherein the just bounds of Imposing on one
hand, and of Obeying on the other, are truly Fixed, By the same Hand. Sold by
Tho: Dring at the George in Fleet Street near Cliffords Inn, 1662.


