THE General Assembly: OR, The Necessity of Receiving the Communion in our
Public Congregations, evinced from the Nature of the Church, the Word of God,
and Presbyterian Principles. IN A SERMON Lately Preached In the CATHEDRAL
CHURCH of EXETER.

By Francis Fullwood. DD.

Luke 22. 19. This do in remembrance of me.

1 Cor. 10. 17 -- One Bread and one Body.

Canon. decim. Apostolorum. Omnes fideles, qui ingrediuntur Eccl^si^m, and
Scripturas ^uliunt, non autem p^rs^verant in ORATIONE, n^c Sanctam COMMVNIONEM
p^rcip^unt, ve ut inquietudines Eccl^siae Commovent, and Conven^^ Commun^one
pr^v^ri.

London, Printed by E. Cotes, for James Collins, at the Kings Head in
Westminster Hall. 1667.

To my Worthy Brethren, the Ministers, that yet Consent not in point of
Conformity.
AMongst the many strange and sad Distempers of this poor Church, I think there
i^ none of more sad or strange observatio^, than the Prodigious neglect of the
Lords Supper. After several Essays, and other Methods, i^ my Place and
Calling, used to redress it, at length these words burst out.

If they seem somewhat warm, I pray you, mistake not my zeal and charity which
o^ght to be so) for spite or malice, or any evil passion; though indeed, to me,
while I labor to be faithful, and to commend my self to every man's Conscience
in the sight of God; It is a very small thing to be judged of you, or of man's
Judgment.

Yea, let me be bold, and caution you also (my Brethren) that you who have
stood it out so m^nfully heretofore against the Independent Separation, take
heed of falling your selves, and of drawing your Friends, unawares with you,
into the Gulf of Brownisme, by your private Meetings, and private Communions.

Let me, at length (if there be yet need) persuade you, to deal like
Christians, and honest Men, if not ^ike Ministers; and when your Friends desire
your advice about Communicating wi^h us, do not intimate your dissatisfaction,
when you cannot speak it: or by solemn silence barden them in sin, and be^ray
them to the Laws, when you may save them from both.

Let me conjure you, if there be any regard due to the King, to the State, to
the Church, to the Laws; yea, to the Command and Ordinance of Jesus Christ, our
Lord, both yours and ours, or to the souls ^f those you seem to love, or your
own Credit, and Reputation, d^, as some of your Brethren, I hope, have done
already: d^a^^o^e^ly, candi^ly, fai^hfully; and let your Fr^ends, by your
seasonab^e advice and good example, know, that it is not their conce^n to
despise or cl^mour Dignities, and Government, or any longer to neglect their
known duties, but rather, speed^ly and h^artily to endeavor, in their p^aces,
to reform, that which they complain of, and to do their duty, and receive the
SACRAMENT.

It is not my business to accuse you, there is one that accuses you, even
Moses; the Law without you and the Law within you: and that, I bear no ma^^ce
in my heart against you, I have this Testimony, I am ready to r^ceive the
COMMUNION with you.

Farewell,
HEBR. 12. 23. To the General Assembly, and Church of the Firstborn which are
written in heaven.
THis Epistle, you know, was written to the Hebrews, that is the Christian
Jews; who were mix't in their principles as well as name: and though,
Christians, were somewhat Jewish. They saw a necessity of the Gospel, and did
profess it; but seemed to retain a smack of the Law: not as yet wholly purged
from the Idol of their Tribe, the leaven of the Pharisees, the old leaven of
the first dispensation.

Besides, they had many friends, even the body of the Jewish party of the other
persuasion; and some of these were become their enemies for Christ's sake, and
the Gospel, and persecuted them for their present Conformity: So that,
considering the persecutions of their enemies, the persuasions of their
friends, and the easy Bias of their own somewhat legal inclinations, we may
believe they were in no little danger.

Hereupon, the Infusions of the Gnostics, who pretended to knowledge and
prudence above any others, the bold and private whispers of these false
teachers, assault and charm them with all Advantages: they at first incline
them to much Caution, then Stagger their faith, and now, they have prevailed
with diverse among them, to lo^k back, yea to d^aw back and forsake the
Christian ^ss^mblies, that were then as public as the Heb 10 ult. c. 10 v 25.
times would ^ea^*

This was the occasion of this Medicinal Epistle: the scope whereof is
consequently, to confirm and secure them in the Truth, the Necessity and the
incomparable Excellency of the Gospel: especially against any Jewish
pretensions to the Contrary: the last of these, viz. The excellency of the
Gospel, you have in a most Elegant and splendid manner, by a very particular
Collation of the Mosaical and Christian state, displayed in the Text and
Context.

First, He draws the shade and black estate of the Law; to which as Christians,
they were not come. For ye are not come unto the mount that might not be
touched and burned with fire, Nor unto blackness and darkness and Tempest, etc.
verse. 18, 19, 20, 21.

Then he sets by it, that which exceeds in glory, the 2 Cor. 3.
Gospel State, to which, as Christians, they were come, verse. 22, 23, 24. but
ye are come to Mount Sion, and unto the City of the living God, the Heavenly
Jerusalem: and to an innumerable Company of Angels. To the General Ve^s. 22 23,
24, 25.
Assembly and Church of the first born, and to God the Judge of all, and to the
Spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the New
Testament, and to the blood of sprinkling which speaks better things than that
of Abel.

That part of this Notable enumeration, that is, chosen out for our present
discourse, seems to lie as the Cornerstone, on which all the rest, on both
sides, lean and depend: yea, it is marvelous to observe, the weight and
Emphasis, the Apostle here lays upon it, and by how many mighty and glorious
words, he endeavors to commend this one and the same thing to us; for what can
we possibly understand by Mount Sion, but the Christian Church? What by the
City of the living God, but the same Church? What by the Heavenly Jerusalem,
but the same Church still? and lastly, what by the General Assembly in the
Text, but as the Text it self explains it, the Church of the first born.

And indeed, it is the Apostles plain intention, by all this and much more, to
instruct and persuade us, that our being come to this Church, as his Phrase is,
is the Radical privilege of Christianity; and that all other Evangelical
privileges, are but branches or fruits of this; the Sum is, by our being come
to the Church of Christ, we are come to the fellowship of the General Assembly
of Saints on earth, and in heaven, of Myriads of Angels, of Jesus the
Mediator, and God himself the Judge of all.

Such is the happiness of our Christian State; and I pray God, that none of us
failing of the grace of God, by the springing up of any root of bitterness in
us, should Verse. 15 c. ^. 1.
seem to come or fall short of it.

Now, you know, your Calling brethren: ye are come, that is, ye are, and stand
admitted to, ye are and continue members of, ye profess and enjoy fellowship
with, the Church of Christ described here, by its Nature, ['tis an Assembly] by
it is quantity, ['tis general,] by it is dignity, ['tis the Church of the
first-born] and by it is security, ['tis written, or enrolled in heaven] Ye are
come -- to the General Assembly, and Church of the firstborn which is written
or enrolled in heaven.

And hither we come, and shall proceed in Order: first considering the Church
in the Nature of it, as it is an Assembly.

THe word, (...), is supposed by some, to admit The Nature o^ the Church.
eleven different significations in Scripture; yet they all consent in this one
General expression of an Assembly: it therefore affords us the common and not
the special or distinguishing nature of the Church.

Yet, though we might reckon many more sorts of Churches or assemblies
differenced, by their Author, Subjects, qualities, ends, etc. Yet, I conceive
they may be all reduced, as to our present discourse, to these three. 1. There
is an Assembly that is sinful, called by the Psalmist, a Congregation of evil
doers, the Devils Chapel, Psalm. 26. 5.
and the Synagogue of Satan. 2. There is an Assembly Civil, or a Church of man,
gathered together for Act. 19 v 32.
Public and Civil occasions. 3. Lastly, there is a Sacred Church, a Holy
Convocation, the Church of God; Such 1 Cor. 1. 1.
is the Assembly in the Text.

1. Here we may Note. it is an Assembly, not a Rabble a confused and turbulent
meeting of ungoverned persons, upon their own heads but an Assembly, that is a
Congregation, that is also a Convocation; Warranted by a just and a Regular
Calling. Ecclesia (says S. Augustine) ex vocatione appellata est. It were
easy to make it evident that profain Authors, as well as Sacred and
Ecclesiastical, do place this call in the very definition of the Church; and
proprie Coetum aliquem a superiori aliquo Convocatum in finem politicum vel
Ecclesiasticum deno^at. Yea the Church and the called are Synonimous terms,
generally in Scripture.

Let all Assemblies look to their Calling; and if the Magistrate allows them
not, let them be sure of the word of God, otherwise, we fear who will claim
them.

2. It is an Assembly, that is Habitually, not always Actually so, much less
altogether in one and the same place, the root of the Hebrew, indeed signifies
Congregare, and the Church, well enough is termed a Congregation; but we must
necessarily understand it to be so in the first act only, not the Second: It Is
so in its first constitution, preparation, disposition, not always in the
exercise of Actual Fellowship and Communion. Indeed, the Nature of the Church
is rather a SOCIETY or a COMMUNITY than a Communion: It Is a Community in order
to Actual Communion, but Actual Communion is rather the formal Action than the
true Nature of the Church: for if it were not so* there would be no Church,
when there is no actual Assembling together, and the dismissing the
Congregation would be the dissolving and the destruction of the Church.
Besides, the General Assembly or the Holy Catholic Church, which cannot thus
actually meet together, would be no Church at all.

Yet, we must note, that the very Nature of the Church supposes fellowship and
Communion of Saints, and consequently, expects and requires it, as occasion
offers, from all that profess themselves Members of it.

3. Lastly, This Assembly, as it is an habitual, so it is a set and fixed
Society of Christians: not a stolen or snatched or occasional meeting: but a set
and fixed Society, whereby it is rendered visible and known to the world.
Hereby, it was known what St. Paul meant, when he wrote his Epistles to the
Churches of Rome, Corinth, Ephesus, Galatia, etc. Because they were fixed and
constant, and open in the profession of Christianity, in the same established
Assembly.

It is the shame of our Churches, especially in Cities, that our Congregations
are certain only in our Parishes, and our Churches distinguished only by our
Houses and Cohabitation. Our Congregations being as fluent as Rivers, as
unconstant as water; and as water, mingling and confounding themselves one with
another, where indeed we have the same place, but seldom or never the same
company. Many persons, when they go out of their Houses, they are scarce
resolved to what Church they shall go, but are easily disposed to be carried by
the wind of Novelty or Party to any other Congregation rather than their own.

Now if we reflect upon what has been observed of the Nature of the Church, we
may gather something of the definition of it. It is, as you heard, a fixed
Society of persons called. Supply the terms of this Call, viz. from what, and
to what these persons are called, and the Definition of the Church of Christ
may be this.

The Church of Christ is a fixed Society of persons called out of the world to
the worship of the true God. The D^finition s^^e Church.


Again, by distinguishing these terms, the World and the Worship of God: (the
World, as the world of Infidelity, and the world of Impiety: The Worship of
God, as external, by Ordinances, and internal, by Graces;) you have the Church
in its usual distinction, as visible and invisible: For,

The visible Church is nothing else, but a company Disti^ct^^n.
called out, or severed from the world of Infidels to worship God in his
external Ordinances: and the Church invisible, is a company called out, or
severed from the world of wicked and impious men to worship God in spirit and
truth.

But, seeing those that worship God in spirit and truth, do also worship him
with external worship; and those that believe with the heart, do also confess
with the Rom, 10.
mouth, the Church invisible is found in the Church visible, as a part in the
whole; and this distinction is justly Imperfect.
rejected; at least concluded imperfect and improper by very judicious and
learned Divines. However it cannot be found in this Text, where, doubtless,
both the Members of it are held and signified by this Assembly, especially as
General, and the General Assembly, which consideration of the Church now offers
it self.

HAving spoken somewhat of the Nature of the Ch^^ch ^s Catholic.
Church as it is an Assembly, we crave your patience to take some measure of the
quantity of it from the word GENERAL. The Church is here called (...) Omnis
Caetus, the whole Company, or General Assembly, upon which I conceive, we may
safely ground our belief of the Catholic or Universal Church.

Yea, in this general affection of the Church, do we not find something
special, something distinguishing this, from all other Assemblies: certainly,
there is no Assembly so general, this is emphatically the general Assembly;
being confined to no time, to no place, to no sort of people: taking in Gods
people in all ages, spreading it self (by the Gospel) over all Kindreds, and
Tongues, and People, and Nations upon earth; having its Head, and ten thousand
times ten thousand of its Members in Heaven, and great multitudes under the
Earth it self. For, though the Souls of the Saints are severed from their
Bodies by Death, yet in spite of Death and Hell it self, both their Souls and
their Bodies are for ever united to Christ and the Church; for they dye in the
Lord, and sleep in Jesus.

It Is true, the word Cathol que (as the Fathers against the Novatians
acknowledge was not used by the Apostles, nor applied to the Church till some
time after them; P^e^son on (...) Cree^.
and then, sometimes in one sense, and sometimes in another, as a very Learned
Man of our own observes. Yet as in the case of particular Churches the
distinction of Par^shes was made long after; yet the ground and reason of this
distinction, and of Parochial Churches, or particular Congregations determined
by Coha^itat^on, is most evident in the Scripture, where the several Churches
bear the names of their several Cities. So, though the word Catholic was
applied to the Church, somet^me after; yet the ground of this application of
it, is very apparent, as in several other places; so particularly in the Text
before us: for where the thing in truth is found, it may fairly claim that
name, as it only signifies that thing. Now by Cathol^ck Church, we mean only
the Universal Body of Christ, containing all particular Members and Churches of
Christ within it, and consisting of them: and this Universal Body we find in
the General Assembly in the Text, wherein we may therefore believe the
Cathol^ck Church.

HEre we cannot but observe the Unity of the (...) ^he Church.
Church; for if it be the General Assembly, it can be but one. There are indeed
many particular Christians, and many particular Assemblies of Christians,
commonly cal^ed particular Churches: but all these are knit and united
together, (as many Sheep in one Fold, and many Companies in one City, and many
Cit^es in one Kingdom in one common aggregative Body, this great Un^versal
Ind^viduum, the Catholic Church or General Assembly. There are many Members,
but one ^ Co^. 12. 20
Body.

Holding the head (says the Apostle) from which all Col. 2. 19.
the b^dy by joints and bands having n^urishm^nt m^nistred and k^^t tog^^h^r,
increas^th w^^h the increase of God. Here is, first to be observed, the Church
in its Head and all the Body: then the union of this Church, which is double;
betwixt the Head and all the Body, and betwixt the members of all the body
among themselves: Again, here is a twofold effect of this double union, of the
union betwixt the Head and the Body, the effect is, N^u^ishment Ministered: and
of the union among the members and parts of this body, is, increase, or growth
in grace: Here is, lastly, the means of all this, viz. Joints and Bands; by
which the members are all knit into one body, and nourished and increased.

But, what are those happy Joints and Bands? it is The Bands of its unity.
worth our enquiry, seeing the unity and consequently, the prosperity of the
whole body depends upon them; the Apostle has notably described them, in that
famous Eulogy of the Primitive Christians; who, I think, were the Church of the
first born, and the small thing or infant of this General-assembly; they (says
he) Continued steadfastly Act. 2. 41.
in the Apostles Doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and of
prayers; so that, profession of the same faith and Communion in the same
Worship, are these happy Joints and Bands, by which all Christians stand united
in one body: and this blessed unity is maintained only by continuing
steadfastly in them; a continuing steadfastly in the fellowship of the
Apostolical Primitive Doctrine, Sacraments and Prayers, continues the being and
unity of the one Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church, to the end of the world.

The Apostle S. Paul is somewhat more particular: he seems to prove that we are
one body, because we are one Spirit: and both these, because we have one Lord,
Epist 4.
one Faith, one hope, one Baptism.

One Lord, we being all Subjects under one Prince, Law, and Government, we are
thus one Kingdom, one People, one Church: the sum of which Law we have in the
D^calogue or ten Commandments; one Faith, i. e. professing the same Scriptures,
Articles, and Fundamentals, the sum of which we have in the Apostles Creed; One
Hope in the same promises, and of the same happiness; one Baptism, that is (by
a figure, a part of worship put for the whole) we have but one and the same way
of worshipping God: We are all Baptized 1 Cor. 12. 13.
into one body, all in every place call upon the Name of the 1 Cor. 1. 1.
Lord Jesus Christ, and though we are many particular Christians and Churches,
yet we are all one bread, and 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17.
one body; for we are all partakers of that one bread.

But, because a person may secretly abjure the Kingdom of Christ, and
Apostatize from his Lord and reject all hope in him, and yet the world nor the
Church suspect it; Moreover, seeing we expressly own Christ to be our Lord, and
our hope in him as our Savior, by faith and Worship; our U^ion with Christ and
the Church, is said to be held only by two Bands: Faith and Worship.

Again, for as much as we have seldom occasion to profess our Faith, but in the
means of the Public Worship: especially, seeing the very Nature of the Church
is an assembly; but chiefly, considering the Visible Church appears such only
at least ordinarily, by her set, Constant and visible Assemblies; the Apostle
reduces the whole matter, to this one point, Not forsaking the Heb. 10. 25.
assembling of our selves together.

Yet, once more, because the word of the Gospel is to be preached to all
nations: and men as such, though they be not Christians, or of the Church, are
Naturally bound to the duty of prayer; and because some do hence conclude,
though very absurdly, that Set and Constant Communion in the word and prayer,
is no part of the No^^ of the Church of God; It may not be thought
unreasonable, to make the (...), a little stricter, and in ^ur age at least, to
lay most weight, upon the reception of the Lords Supper.

This is certainly the special band of union and fellowship betwixt us, and
Christ, and the Church: the other Ordinances, the Word and Prayer, do even
attend this Sacrament: Breaking of Bread, was the Apostolical Fellowship in the
Primitive Church, every Lords Day: and as if this were the Sum Total of all
Worship, all Liturgies seem to be compiled chiefly in order to it: this
Ordinance, therefore is expressly known by the name of the Communion, and I
could heartily wish, that many, that attend our Prayers and Sermons, do not
hence conclude they are yet none of us, they have no Church Fellowship or
Communion with us, because they refuse to Communicate with us in the Lords
Supper.

My matter is now fitted, I hope, for a very serious application to which I
hasten, as my great aim.

I Doubt not, but you all remember, what joy and encouragement Application
General.
the context offered us, to Come unto, to Join with, and continue in the
Fellowship of the Church of God; For we thus come to the General assembly; we
have Communion with our own Church, and with all in every place that Worship
God, and at all times too: with Adam and Abel with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob;
with N^a^, Daniel and Job; with all the Patriarchs, Confessors and Fathers: the
glorious company of the Apostles, the goodly fellowship of the Prophets, the
Noble Army of Martyrs, and the holy Church throughout all the World. Yea thus,
you dwell in the holy Hill, Moun^ Sion, the new and heavenly Jerusalem; where,
even in this life you have fellowship with Myriads of Angels, who have the
charge of you; where you have fellowship with Jesus Christ as Mediator, and
all the virtues of the blood of sprinkling: and thereby also, in the pardon and
favor and presence and glory of God himself the Judge of all.

Who would not covet, who would not steadfastly continue in, and carefully
improve such a society, where such are privileges of every member and such
honor have all it is Saints.

Let us then, hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering; when the
blessed Apostle preached this Doctrine, this was the use he made of it: Seeing
we are all come to this General Assembly, let us never depart from it: never
forsake the Assembling our selves together as the manner of some is. This, in
the Apostles sense, is not only to let loose, but to let go the profession of
our faith: ye have heard of the excellent unity of this General Assembly,
tremble to think of breaking it: ye have heard of the glor^ous advantages of
all that come to it, and have true and sincere fellowship with it, let us
therefore fear least any of us should seem to fall short of Ca^ 4. 1.
them.

The Apostle speaks bitterly, so some would express it: Mark those, says he,
that cause divisions and offenses, R^m 16 17
and ^void them: he uses a hard (some perphaps would think it a railing) word
(...), it signifies dissension causing Schism or Separation, yea Sedition and
Faction, whereby they greatly Scandalize, wound and divide the Church:
therefore the Apostle charge the Church with some heat, that they should mark
such and avoid them: that they should mark them, as men do a Rock at Sea, that
they may avoid ruin and sh^pwrack.

There are two degrees of Schism: The first is a renting and dividing in the
Church: It Is against this the Apostles indignation arises, as you have heard:
this, therefore, doubtless, in his opinion, whatever favor we have for it, was
a very great sin: but the other is a renting our selves, or others from the
Church. And this is so great an evil, that it is both sin and punishment; it is
its own guilt, sentence, and execution.

If we rent our selves from the Body, how do we Extra Ecclesiam nulla Salus.
hold the Head? If we depart from the Church where shall we find salvation?
and what is it to draw back, but to draw back unto perdition? Pardon my
plainness, censure not my charity; for I only repeat the Apostles Arguments,
which he once used upon the same exhortation: they are these and such like. To
forsake the assembling of our selves together, is to despise the Gospel, Heb. 6.
is to shame and crucify Christ, is to profane his Blood, and rent and tear
his Sacred Body; and if those Heb. 10. 25. to 30.
that desp^sed Moses Law, died without mercy, of how much sorer punishment
shall these be thought worthy? to forsake the assembling our selves together,
is by the Apostles interpretation a si^ni^g w^^fully: and if we sin wilfully,
by the Apostles Argument, there remains no mere sacrifice for sin: and what
then remains (I fear to speak it) a certain fearful looking for of Judgment
and fiery indignation that shall devour the adversaries; for Heb. 2. 3. Phil.
4. 1.
how shall they escape that neglect (the means) of so great salvation?

If there be therefore any Corsolation in Christ [to be expected in his Church
and Ord^nances, if any ^omfort of love among Brethren] If any fellowship of the
Spirit, [in the Assemblies of Gods people]* if any bow^l of mercies [towards
your own and others souls, toward us that watch for them, toward this
divided, distressed, calamitous Church of England, and the General Assembly]
Remember ye are Subjects of the same Kingdom, ye are Children of the same
House, Partners in the same Fellowship, Members of the same Body, and that ye
have all these Relations only, or chiefly, in order to Communion: let this
mind then be in you, and rejoice in the gates of Sion, co-habit in the Courts
of Gods House, and with one accord, and one mind, preserve the Unity of the
Church, and save your selves from this untoward Generation, dreading to make
the least breach when a Torrent of Popery or Irreligion threatens daily to
break in upon us.

So sad a prospect is in my eye, that were my words Spirit and Life, or had I
the Tongue of Men and Angels; could I utter power and effects, or pronounce a
fia^ like to Gods: I say, if our divisions continue or increase, so black a
prospect is in my eye (that pretend not to see afar off) that I should employ
all my strength and Oratory here, to advise and persuade you all, to Worship
the Lord Jesus Christ in the Unity and fellowship of his Church.

earnest? especially with us? we could not hear your reproof, did not our
presence confute it? or receive this counsel, but by showing we need it not: do
not we attend the Word and Prayer? do we forsake the General Assembly?

run well; yet you must be remembered (I am sorry you must) that the Apostles
fellowship consisted not only in Doctrine and Prayers, but in BREAKING OF
BREAD. It Is sad, that the Communion Application ^pe^ial.
should be the great matter of our Division: but the Text and our present
condition assure us, that by BREAKING of Bread we may be ONE BODY again: and
now you may see my MARK.

Three things, especially, give life and vigor to an Argument; the
seasonableness of it, the necessity of it, and the capacity or disposition of
the persons to whom it is addressed: and do not all these conspire to quicken a
most earnest application to you in this point of the Sacrament?

1. For the Season, such a discourse is never mis*timed, where the Communion is
so frequently administered; besides, its monthly course is now at hand: but,
alas, expecting a slender appearance, with sadness enough, unbecoming such a
feast, as it is wont to do.

2. Therefore, the necessity of such an Argument, is too too evident; yet it is
not without its advantage; for herein I need not shoot at Rovers, as in other
matters: I have the Mark before me, and I am sure to hit it. I am to reason
with persons, and to endeavor to persuade those very persons, to practice a
duty of great moment, who have sadly and long neglected the same duty: I wish
there be not hundreds of such in my eye.

3. Yet, of your capacity and well disposedness to receive satisfaction I
cannot doubt: I know you are not of the fierce and giddy, but you are of the
moderate part of the City, in whom there is but little or nothing wanting, to
make you entire, and la^king nothing, in the fellowship of the Church,
excepting only this one thing necessary, the receiving the Lords Supper: You
are willing already, and I trust, that with a little persuasion and meditation,
and Gods blessing upon them, you will be obedient in all things.

Th^s, I have much encouragement to proceed, but alas, wherewithal shall I
persuade?

1. ARE YOU NOT CHRISTIANS? are you not bound by the sacred Vow of your
Infancy, that Bo^d of God upon your So^l? are you not bound to obey your Lord,
and to renounce all carnal and spiritual temptations to the contrary? or is not
the command of our Lord, again and again, Do this, do this in remembrance of
me? has he spoken any thing more plainly? or commanded any thing so expressly?
show it if you can; I mean, touching his outward worship.

What is the matter then? is there no fear of his command, who says, Do this?
no lov^ to his Person, who says, do it in remembrance of me? is there no faith
left in his Promises and Presence annexed to his Worship and Ordinance? is
there no more conscience of duty? no more comfort in performing it, or danger
in neglecting it? Consider, I beseech you, that the Lord of the Feast was as
truly provoked (as appears in the story) by the omission and the slight excuses
of those that were invited to his Supper, as by the unpreparedness of him that
came without a Wedding Garment, and a whole City, for contriving to depise the
gracious invitation and Feast of the Gospel, was made as Sodom, and like unto
Matthew. 22. 7.
Gomorrah.

Certainly, the Body and Blood of Christ is the provision of the Gospel Feast;
and this is, especially s^rved up, in that Ordinance which is called the
Communion of his Body and Blood, and the Lords Supper.

2. ARE YOU NOT MEMBERS OF THE CHURCH of Christ, wherein you constantly hear
his word and commands? yea, do you not, by your daily profession, do you not
say, you will obey him? you know the Law as you are Chr^stians* you acknowledge
your Allegiance, and promise obedience by the prof^ssion of the Church, of
which you are members: you know your Masters will, and say you will do it. but
is it done? you say, Lord Lord, but despise his Communion: you cry the Temple
of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, but refuse Fellowship with its Assemblys.
Indeed it is not plain Rebellion, but here is Disobedience with the witness,
and the horrid aggravation of Hypocrisy.

Besides, the very nature of the Church of which you are members, is, as you
have heard, an Assembly, and a Society: Now the direct and immediate expression
of a Society, is communion and fellowship: and you know, that Communion in this
ordinance, is most signally and expressly the Communion of the Church: neither,
lastly, can it be denied, that by Communion with the Church, especially in this
ordinance, we have communion also with Christ himself in all the ben^fits of
his Body and Blood.

Consequently, by not communicationg with the Church in this or^inance, we do
so far w^nt commun^on with Christ; we do so far divide from the Church of
Christ, and blot out the Mark, I mean, the most v^^lent character of our own
Church*Member*ship, allowing our selves too in that very sin, we so much
pretend to abhor; (I must be plain and speak out) the sin of Schism.

For what is Sch^sm^, but a b^eak^ng the fellowsh^p of the Church without just
Cause? it is total, when men renounce it wholly: but, doubtless, it is so in a
very great part, when we deny to communicate with it in that most signal mean
of communion with it, the Lords Su^per. Yea, let it be seriously and sadly
considered, if you, as I fear too many do; I say, if you refuse our Communion,
because you would not join with the Church, (whatever otherways you do
actually join with us, yet) in your own Intention, you are not only guilty of a
Schism with respect, to that particular Congre^ation, to which you belong, but
(our fellowship with a particular Church, being the mean and Bond, by which we
have Communion with the Church Univers^l) you thus also separate from the
Catholic Church, and General Assembly.

LAstly, Let me speak unto you as unto wise men, and Judge ye what I say; and
what is that which may persuade a PRUDENT man to go ON, but that he has BEGUN
well: and that there is no OTHER WAY for him: that, what is behind, is regular
to his OWN PRINCIPLES of Right and Justice: and that his proceeding may greatly
advantage both himself and his generation.

If all these fail, I know not with what Arguments I should deal with you: but
I cannot but hope better things, would you wisely consider, that it is your own
Case, that is strengthened with all the particulars mentioned.

1. You have begun well: neither can it harbor in a sober thought, that you
are not already embodied with us, or no Members of the Church of England: it is
acknowledged but now, that your own intentions to separate from us, do make you
guilty of separation in your own mind, and intention; but you may be guilty of
that sin, both in intention, and affection, that you never yet actually
committed: a Mistake in your selves, cannot make that not to be, which really
is: neither does your abstaining from this one Ordinance, n^llifie your
Communion with us, in the rest, or your visible Church Membership with us.
Thoughts cannot void the natural effect of Actions.

You were at first, Baptized into one Body with us, 1 Cor. 12. 13
and it is far from you, to renounce that Baptism: by your means, your children
also, are still presented to God and our Church, in the same Ordinance, and are
Baptized as you were. You join with our Prayers, and constantly hear our
Sermons, and attend upon our Public Assemblies; and indeed, in a great part
you make them up; only, you fail to complete all, by receiving the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper. But do you abstain from this, lest you should join with a
wicked people? how thin a cheat would you put upon your selves? for Gods sake,
the Churches sake; yea for your own Credit and Reputation, beguile not your
selves into so many mischiefs, upon so weak a shift, upon no ground at all: ye
have done well, in all the rest, and you have the same reason to receive the
Sacrament. Proceed, proceed like wise men, to perfect what you have so well
begun, so far engaged in. Go on and prosper: For,

2. There is no other way for you. God himself has hedged up your way: he
commands you to do this also: he threatens, if you turn aside, or draw back:
you have the encouragement of his many promises to 2 Cor. 7. 1.
p^rfect holin^ss through the fear of God, and the Saints in all ages, that
have gone to heaven the same way, as a cloud of witnesses, (as in the Grecian
Games) are round about you, and leave no other way open to you, but the race
that is set before you. Heb. 12. 1.


The law of man also, obliges and ties you hard to this duty, it has made
special provision in this case: it severely threatens your neglect and
disobedience in this kind. If you have not felt the force of this Law, do not
think the Law is weak and feeble: do not mis-interpret the favor, and
patience, or long-suffering of your Rulers, to turn their grace into
wantonn^ss; both the Canon Law, and the Statute Law, the Laws of the Church,
and of the Land, directly require you to receive this Sacrament, at least three
times a year: and the penalty of them, if you do not (and cannot give good
reason for such omission) I need not tell you, is very s^vere in this, as in
some other special cases.

Perhaps, you hoped that these Laws would have been repealed, or have had their
force abated; but in vain: if you are wise and prudent, you now know it is in
vain to hope it. Perhaps, the fear of the Laws (you best know your own hearts)
has been so far sanctified to you as to work you to comply so far as you do;
but you must know (I speak to wise men) that unless you take one step farther,
and receive the Sacrament, your labor and design is so far lost; you are still
in the same danger, and the severity of the Law is still against you; and
without this one thing more, which is therefore, your safety, as well as your
duty, no other w^y can possibly be found, by the wit of man (as things now are)
to escape it. Yea,

Indeed, you have left no other way for your selves: ye are Come to the General
Assembly, ye are got many stages beyond others: these ye have left behind you;
these ye have lost. Now, if you proceed not, and receive the Sacrament with us,
you are short of us, and the Law; ye loose your labor and your selves.

What then remains, but that you hasten onward, to us, that are before you; who
have both our Arms ready to receive and embrace you: to Jesus Christ in this
blessed Ordinance, who invites, and prepares, and expects you: and the blood of
sprinkling which speaks better things.

3. IS not the matter to which I persuade you, Regular also to your own
principles? and the Doctrine you have received? or is there indeed, any Solid
reason, either from without or from within you, why you should not Communicate
with us? your selves being Jdges, all that can be pretended against it, is
either, the Corruption of the Worship or the Worshippers: let me beseech you to
weigh them both, in their whole strength with your own reason; look upon them
in your own light, and I doubt not to pronounce, you will be ashamed of them
both.

1. All that is excepted against, in the Worship or Administration, (as a Bar
to your receiving) is, that kneeling is required: but for such a shadow, what
wiseman would loose the Substance? you know, that the gesture in it self is
lawful and reverent, and what reason can be given, why we should not obey
Authority, by worshipping God, after a lawful and reverent manner?

Yea, consider, have you not learned, that the Second Commandment, requires an
observance of all the moral and positive worship of God; and does as well
require, that we should bow down and worship the true God, in his own
ordinances, as forbid the worshipping and bowing down to Idols? Certainly, here
is warrant to bow down to God, when we worship him: and if kneeling be bowing
down, and this Sacrament be a part of worship, we have plain warrant to Kneel
at the Sacrament.

Will you say that kneeling is a fit posture only when we pray? this may well
be questioned; yet, let it be heeded, there is prayer used, when you receive
the Sacrament: the Minister prays openly, that the body and blood of Christ may
preserve thy body and soul to everlasting life, while he gives it; and
certainly, every worthy receiver, prays for the grace, while he receives the
signs.

However, what reason can spite it self*offer, why we may not lawfully and
laudably receive kneeling; the same grace, we ask kneeling? and This Sacrament
is the Eucharist.
give thanks, as well as beg upon our knees; they both being parts of that one
ordinance, viz. Prayer; where in, all acknowledge, it is fittest, if we may
with convenience, kneel.

But why do I create scruples? the only one, of the old puritans, and
Prebyterians, in this point, was; least they should, or at least should seem,
to worship the Host. You know, this was the strength of the Objection? but is
not this totally and perfectly removed now? Can you imagine, that any o^e of
the old Puritans, would now refuse to receive kneeling? read their books, and
Judge Righteously.

Indeed, there was complaint, that the Declaration of the reason, why kneeling
is required in the Sacrament, was left out of the former L^turgies; but it is
now inserted, and that complaint is answered. We are assured, by the Churches
public act which is also taken into the body of our Law, and joined to this
very office of the Sacrament, that such Idolatry, as kneeling to the elements,
is not in the least intended, but abominated and abhorred; and that in so plain
and direct terms, as have left no place for Scruple or Cavil.

Now, ask your selves, is not kneeling a very humble and fit gesture for us, in
Gods presence, especially when we pray to him? do not we pray, even while we
receive the Sacrament? do not we exspect to receive a blessing from that
Majesty, to whom we pray, kneeling? is not the Eucharist a Thanksgiving, and
that, a part of Prayer, which is fitly performed, Kneel^ng? however, is it not
a lawful gesture, and required of us by lawful authority? and have not those
very Powers, that require kneeling, taken away all fear of Idolatry and Bread
Worship's, have we therefore any shadow left us? or any ex^use? shall we any
longer neglect so great a duty? or dare we say, we may not, or we fear we may
not receive it, Kneeling.

2. But the Goliath is at hand: the only objection, so far as I can learn, is
now taken from the Worshippers, it is complained, Discipline is Neglected; the
Profane and Scandalous are admitted to the Sacrament: and thus the Church is
Corrupted.

Ans. Were all this admitted, yet, we may therefore separate, is no good
Consequence in your own Logic: but give me leave a little.

Was not the Church of the Jews, that Crucified their Lord as Corrupt as ours,
especially in the Rulers of it? Yet Christ himself held fellowship with them,
and was a Minister of the Circumcision, he d^tects their Hypocrisy, and
cruelty, yea their leaven of false Doctrine and Superstitious vanities; but
never persuades to separat on (only from their sins, not) from the Worship of
God among them. The Church of Corinth, though exceedingly Corrupt, partly in
Doctrine; many (at least) questioning the Resurrection: partly in discipline;
not casting out that wicked person; but chiefly, in Manners, Divisions and
Disorders in Gods worship, these things the Apostle observed; particularly
wrote against. Yea the point of separation came in his way (2 Cor. 6. ult.) and
he calls upon them to come out from Idolaters and separate from them; but not a
word of separation from so wicked a Church; he sharply reproves their
profaneness, severely exhorts every one to his duty; but gives leave to none to
separate.

Indeed, he charge them not to Company with the scandalous, and with such a
one no not to eat; and perhaps this eating, may be stretched to signify eating
at the Sacrament: but on whom does he lay this charge: and how is it to be
observed? he does not call to a few of the best and p^rest, and advise them to
forsake so wicked an assembly; but he speaks to the whole Church, and directs
them, how to avoid 1 Co^. 5.
that wicked company: by casting them out of the Church, and delivering them to
Satan. If any, that is called a brother be a fornicator, etc. with such a one
no not to eat; ye judge those that are within: Therefore put away Ult. v.
from you that wicked person. It Is not, therefore separate from the
Congregation no moral wickedness, can justify this. This were to throw away
all means of reformation, and by our divisions, to let all run to ruin and
destruction: but therefore, put away from among you; every one doing his part,
in his place, for the purging the Church of corruption, and casting out of the
Scandalous, if they will not reform.

You know, this is the only course allowed by God; all other ways of reforming
are tricks of our own devising; and hitherto, the success has been answerable:
the foolishness of God is wiser than men.

But seeing we are so near it, let me be plain with you; and put it home upon
your Conscience: if our Church be so very corrupt, and discipline be not
executed, pray where lies the fault? do not you know, that you must first tell
your brother of his fault (if not a public scandal) This you do not. However,
you know the Officers must proceed, Secundum allegata and probata, upon
complaint and evidence; you, if you know such persons in the Congregation, you
must tell the Church. This you do not. Judge your selves; censure not others,
the sin lies at your own door, not altogether at the Churches, or your
Ministers. Do but your duty faithfully, and who knows but the Church may be
reformed? however, that it is not, is first, your fault, and till you have done
your duty, you have least cause to complain. Certainly, endeavors of
reformation in your place, is your duty; but separation a complicated sin.

Thus, you have found a way to forsake your duty in the Communion of the
Church, and to have fellowship with it, only in its sin. You your selves
connive at wickedness, and then charge your Minister and the Church with your
own crime, and give occasion to your selves to take offense and be gone. Is
this fair or equal dealing? is the complaint reasonable? or the ground of
separation sound and sollid? yea, you know the contrary, and I would believe
you are ashamed of it. You know, though they do not their duty, you must not
omit yours: you know ('it is your own rule and light) that if you are prepared
your selves, you do not communicate with the wickedness of unworthy receivers:
you know, if you have done your part, the Governors must answer for corruption
in discipline: You know, that corruption in manners cannot justify a
separation, or a refusal to join with the Church in any Ordinance of God. You
know, that such refusal or separation is sinful, is schismatical: this you
know, all this is according to your own principle.

Give me leave to reduce the Argument, and I have done with it. Schism is a
forsaking of the Communion of the Church, without just ground. This you
acknowledge.

To refuse to receive the Sacrament, because of the wickedness of the Members
of the Church, is to forsake the Communion of the Church without just ground.
This also you acknowledge It Is indeed, no just ground in the Scripture or the
Judgment of the Church in any age before us: or in the opinion of the old
Non-conformists, or the late Presbyterians, for which I appeal to all their own
Books, and leave you to remember the many years Sermons heretofore out of this
very pla^e, to confirm it.

Now what remains? but, if you continue to ref^se to receive the Communion with
us upon th^s g^ound, because our Church is Corrupt, according to the Sc^ipture,
Antiquity, the Judgment of your Brethren, and your own principles, you thus
continue in sin, and in the ^in of Schism, which God forbid.

Remember therefore how you have received, and heard, R^v^l. 3.
and hold fast; and repent of your folly and easiness to contradict your
principles with your practice; not considering you did so: be not still
beguiled to so strong a course of keeping with a party, by leaving and going
from its Doctrine, or of keeping your Conscience, by violating its Laws. To
conclude, Mark those which cause these Divisions, Schisms, and Offenses,
contrary to the Doctrine you have received, and avoid them as Firebrarnds; and
scorn their Temptation, especially if any would persuade you to neglect a duty
upon such Arguments, as you have cause to believe, they do not believe
themselves; because they have taught you the contrary, and never taught you
otherwise.

Though, truly, would you be persuaded to communicate with us, you would be
easily convinced, that there is too little ground of your scruple: for
generally, those that are really profane, save us the labor, being profane in
this also, that they despise or neglect the Sacrament, and so far excommunicate
themselves. However.

I must not forget to caution some of you, who, happily, think to evade all, by
saying you do not despise the Ordinance, or neglect it; for though you do not
receive with us, in Public, yet you do receive in private; for consult your
own principles and this will not serve your turn; nor to be plain, excuse you
from Schism.

If you count it nothing to dishearten your Minister, and to break the Laws
both of Church and State; yet ask your own hearts why you refuse to Communicate
Publicly? Whether it be not, to avoid Communion with a wicked generation? Ask
again if so, whether this be not a Schismatical separation, unjustifiable by
your own principles, as has been said.

Indeed, the not having Actual fellowship with every particular Congregation,
(which is morally impossible) is not Schism; but doubtless to Refuse Communion
with any particular Church, on such a ground, is Schism in it self and your own
Doctrine. Let me, once again, reason with you: will you yet, rather, then break
bread with it, will you rend and break the Church in pieces? rather, then have
Communion with the body of Christ will ye divide and tear it? When your mind is
satisfied, if you hea^ken to it, that it is sin in you; and so great a sin to
do so, as the pleasing of your selves or others, can never Compensate.

Moreover, I hope you will not mistake me, if out of my tender affection to
you, I desire you seriously, to weigh with your selves, what comfort will
suffering afford you, if the cause be sin and Schism, and your own Hearts
conspire with the Laws to Judge and condemn you; or, to use the Apostles Words,
if the sentence of rejection should pass against you, as such, as being
subverted and sinning, are you not self judged and self-condemned? or what have
you to answer for your selves Tit. 3. 10.
that you should not answer the Laws? I provoke not the Law, I would fain
provoke you to your duty.

LAstly, would you be persuaded to Comply with this duty, how greatly would you
Advantage, both your selves and your Generation? and is not this considerable
with prudent persons? Certainly it is.

I need not present you with Arguments of your own interest and advantage; they
are always with you: your peace, your grace, your Spiritual and Temporal
comfort, very much depend on this Ordinance and your worthy receiving of it:
shall I add, your Estates, the good of your families, yea the interest of that
which you call your party, are herein concerned. Consider the Laws, and the
extent of them.

What is the plea of your Adversaries, but that, your general refusing,
throughout the land; to Communicate with us, looks like a Conspiracy, and a
dangerous sign of your reserving a body to confront (if occasion invites) both
the King and the Church? and how can this be so well answered, as by your
thorough embodying with us, and sealing the un^ty, openly, in the Lords Supper.

What is the Hope of our Common Enemies, but our sad divisions among our
selves, and which way can we frustrate them, but by our Communion?

What is the ground of all our fears? the means of continuing our distractions
at home? the Confidence of Neighbor Nations, that have War with us, but this
one thing, our differences and jealousies among our selves, kept up by our
distance in the Worship of God? you are very near us: take but this step
farther: And evidence your Friendship, by your ^ellowsh^p with us, in the
Supper of the Lord; and all these Black Clouds are gone.

What else remains (in outward appearance) to make us quiet and happy; to
establish a Flourishing Church and State, an Object of Envy, but above the
Malice, of all the Nations round about us?

I speak unto Wise men, Judge ye what I say, and the Lord give you
understanding in all things.

FINIS.

