The Faithful SQUIRE: OR, The Fortunate Farmer's Daughter.
Had she consented to his will,
when he rid first that way,
She might have been unmarried still,
though now a Lady Gay.
To the Tune of, Charon.
This may be Printed,

R. P.





THere was I Will tell you a wealthy young Squire,
Who took his Journey to Gloster-shire,
Decked in such gaudy and sumptuous attire,
Which might become a right noble Peer;
As he rid through a place called Streeter,
strange flames of Love he then did feel,
It was at the sight of a Beautiful Creature,
as she sat close at her Spinning Wheel.
He had no power alas! to ride by her,
but stood and gazed on her Beauty bright;
And was resolved that minute to try her,
hoping she would grant him his hearts delight,
Silver and Gold this Gallant showed her,
hoping thereby to have his will
But his kind profers could no ways delude her.
she was resolved to live honest still.
Often he told her that he would advance her,
if she would tell him her Pedigree;
Then she with blushes returned him this answer,
I was born of a mean Family;
Yet I Will not be at your Devotion,
I value not a Golden Gain,
Though I have never a Groat to my Portion,
my Credit, Sir, I will never slain.
Finding he could not obtain his desire,
he rid away in a cruel Rage,
Vowing again he would never come nigh her;
but yet his flames he could not assuage:
The more he labored to forget her,
the fresher she ran in his mind;
To be his Lady he needs must admit her,
Beauty had so far his Heart confined.
With his Relations he tarried a season,
where there was beautiful Ladies store;
Thus with himself he began for to reason,
why should I marry with one so poor,
When I may have my choice of many,
which are both wealthy, fair and wise;
Yet amongst these I cannot fancy any,
the Farmers Daughter has won the Prize.
With his Relations he long could not tarry,
because he had left his heart behind,
With that fair Beauty, which he vows to marry,
it that he might but her favor find:
Then in a week, or fortnight after,
he to her Father's house did ride,
Saying, if that you will give me your Daughter,
Sir, I will make her my lawful Bride.
Then said her Father, I much do admire,
that you on her so much love should place,
Seeing your Garb and most Sumptuous attire,
speaks you to be of a noble Race,
You may have Ladies at your leisure,
wealthy and fit for your Degree:
I have not want, sa^d the Squire, of Treasure,
she is more precious than Gold to me.
There is no Lady most noble descended,
that shall be honored, Sir, more than she;
With many Servants she shall be attended,
And I my self in her company:
O then bespoke her loving Father,
may all the Powers now Divine,
Make you for ever most happy together,
get her good will, and I Will grant you mine.
Then the young Squire saluted his Beauty,
who gave him freely both Heart and Hand,
Saying, for ever she owned it her Duty,
to be obedient to his command:
And in some three or four days after,
their Ioys they did with comfort crown;
This Squire married the Farmer's fair Daughter,
and lived together near London Town.
Though in this happy and splendid condition,
yet like the innocent tender Dove,
She is a stranger to Pride and Ambition,
in her Humility's graced with Love:
So that her Carriage is commended
by many Lords of high degree,
And the young Ladies most noble descended,
daily delights in her Company.
Printed for I. Deacon, at the Angel in Giltspur-street.


