The Faithful Soldier. OR, THE SPEECH OF A COMMON SOLDIER CONCERNING His
ARREARES, AND Putting the KING to death.

Printed in the Year, 1649.

THE FAITHFVL SOVLDIER. OR, The Speech of a Common Soldier concerning his
Arrears, etc.
Fellow Soldiers,
Hear me a word or two, I have somewhat to say which concerns every man of
us. We hear they intend to put the KING to death; they know (Fellow Soldiers)
it is in our power to save His life, for if we think fit to have Him live,
neither Council nor Commissioners will dare to touch Him. And as our case yet
stands, I think we are stark mad if we suffer Him to die; for as yet they have
not paid us our Arrears, and perhaps never will when the KING is once dead;
they promised to pay us this day and that day, but now they confess, that
indeed they dare not give us our Arrears, for they say, If we Soldiers once
had all our money, we would soon disband and go home to our friends. Is this
fair dealing? by this Rule we must never have it, for they can always say
they dare not trust us; this makes them give us now and then a pittance, which
scarce keeps life and soul tegether; but for our Arreares (which are as truly
ours as the clothes upon our backs) we may wait long enough. For if the KING
be put to death, there will be such weeping, such cursing, and raging, all
England will cry out, and say, O ye bloody Soldiers, have ye murdered our
KING? Ye took Oaths and Covenants to defend His Person, and now have ye cut
His Throat? Truly (Fellow Soldiers) we are arrant fools to make the world
hate us for killing the KING, and yet we not be one penny the better for it. If
we see cause, we can any time hereafter take away his life, when we have our
Arrears, and things are better settled; but if now we shed his blood, we can
never make him alive again: Therefore, before we do that which can never be
undone, let us Soldiers make our best use of it; let us declare, that until
they pay us all our Arrears they shall not put the KING to death; let us do
this, (and on my life, it will bring in every penny of our money; you shall see
they will strive who shall first pay us; those that are so hot to have the
KING'S blood, will pay us rather than let Him live; and those who are His
friends will give us any thing rather than let Him die: my Landlord told me,
that if we Soldiers would save the KING'S life (which we can easily do) the
KING'S Friends would pay us all our Arreares, and give us two hundred thousand
pounds as a gratuity besides; He bid us name our Sum and it should be paid us
down upon the nail. And why (fellow Soldiers) should we refuse this? now is
the time, for when the KING, is dead they will not give us two pence; we know
the Scots would not part with the KING until they had their two hundred
thousand pounds, and are not our Arreares as due as theirs? nay, when the
Parliament got the KING they would have kept Him, had not we resolutely fetched
Him from Holdenby; yet while they had Him, they grew so high, that they offered
to Disband us without paying all Arreares. Then we got the KING, and while we
used Him civilly, all England was for us, who then but the Army, the KING and
the Army were in every man's mouth; but as soon as we clapped Him in
Carisbrooke-Castle, and suffered none to make Addresses to Him, then all the
Kingdom cried out upon the Army, each County began to rise upon us, you know
what work we had in Wales, Kent, Essex, twenty thousand Scots pouring in upon
us, who if they had but the twentieth part of our English courrage, we had
found a hard task of it. So ye see the KING still is all in all; who ever got
the KING had the hearts of the People; in all our Quarters and wherever we
Marched ye heard the People still calling for their KING; if they hate us and
fought with us for keeping Him in Prison, how will they rage when they see us
cut His throat? think ye that then they will pay us our Arreares? I say
(fellow Soldiers) we are all stark mad if we let the KING die till we have
our money.

But, perhaps some will say, that the Council of War does not hinder our
Arreares, that they are Officers, and would be as glad of their money as we
would: I confess indeed some Officers would, for some are in the same case
with us us; but the Chief Commanders, the Grandees are of another mind, they
have all at command, Sequestrations, Offices, Parliament and all; Lieutenant
General Cromwell has many thousand pounds a year of the Earl of Worcester's
Estate: They can pay themselves, but when will they pay us? They make the
Parliament Vote what they please; nay (fellow Soldiers) when we took the
money from Weavers-hall, the Council of War refused to let Us have it, but
Voted (forsooth) to send it to the Navy, (he that Writes the OCCURRENCES says
so in print. And the other day, They and the House Voted two hundred thousand
pounds more for the Navy; they know the Seamen can pay themselves, they have
Ships in their power as we now have the KING in our power; and should we serve
them as the Seamen served them, perhaps then we might have our Arreares: But
if at any time we ask for money, Master Poters is hired to stop our mouths;
that Fellow has cosen'd us I know not how often, and by my consent when next
he comes, let us clap him neck and heels; he said, they would pay us as soon
as we came to London, but here we have waited two months longer, yet no
Arreares: then they told us, that the Parliament was full of Rotten Members,
and the House must be purged e're we could be paid; I think we gave it a
sufficient Purge, we Imprisoned and drove away so many Members that we have not
left above fifty or threescore, not a Member sits now but such as our Council
of War approved of, and both They and our Council have sat seven Weeks, yet
no Arreares. Alas! (fellow Soldiers) these are all tricks, mere Tricks, they
can never want such excuses as these; and if now we let them take the KING and
put him to death, we may go whistle for our Arreares.

But suppose now we had our Arreares, (which we are not like if we lose this
opportunity,) are we the better for this Kings death? When He is gone, either
we must have another King, or a new kind of Government; and this new
Government will be either a Parliament, or a Committee, or many Kings at once:
For Parliaments and Co^mittees we know how they have used us, they Voted and
gathered up wealth for themselves, but let us bleed and storve, sink or swim,
all was one to them. And for many Kings at once, they say that heretofore
England had six or seven Kings at a time, but these petty Kings were little
better then one of our Colonels, and they never left cutting one another
throats till all again came under one King. If then we must have but one King
still, why should we kill this King? Ye know when He dies, His son, the
Prince of WALES is King; what, must we cut his throat also? we cannot if we
would, and this Kings Blood will stick so upon as and make us so abominable to
all the people, we shall have small heart to kill any more Kings. But were it
in our power to destroy this King, and all His Posterity, and all the Kings in
Christendom (which are his Allies;) who then shall be our King? The Council
says in our Remonstrance we must have an Elective King; but whom shall we
Elect? If we choose our General, alas, he will be seduced by wicked Council;
we know he is a gallant man in the Field, but at Councels of War he does
little, and speaks less; he is fitter to be our General then our King. Or
shall Leiutenant General Cromwell be the man? The truth is, they talk most of
him, and I believe he looks to be KING, and therefore I hold him unfittest of
all; six years since he was but Captain Cromwell, and if now he be such a
great man, it is our Swords have made him so; should any man have said to us
six years ago, Ye Soldiers shall fight, and never leave fighting till ye
have cut King CHARLES his throat, and made Captain CROMWELT. King of England,
I think we all should have thought that man mad. And yet (Fellow Soldiers)
this is our cafe; have not we spun a fine thread? Let who will be King, we shall
be but Common Soldiers still. I remember the tale of a Knight and a Carrier,
the Knight coming from London met the Carrier, and told him news, how King
Edward was murdered, and Crook-back'd Richard was Crowned King of England;
Alas Sir (said the Carrier) what is that to me? I shall be but a Carrier still;
So whether it be King CHARLES or King Cromwell, we shall be but Common
Soldiers still; what are Crowns and Scepters to us? When the King was at
Carisbrook and at Hampton Court, he offered to Pay us all our Arreares, and to
grant us the MILITIA as long as he lived; Could any King say more? For my part
I like Him as well as Lieut. General Cromwell: King CHARLES is as Liberal as
Lieut. General Cromwell; King CHARLES is as Chaste as Lieut. General Cromwell;
King CHARLES is as Merciful as Lieutenant General Cromwell; King CHARLES is
as Wise as Lieut. General Cromwell; King CHARLES is as Temperate as Lieutenant
General Cromwell; King CHARLES is as Patient as Lieutenant General Cromwell;
King CHARLES is as handsome a Man as Lieutenant General Cromwell; King CHARLES
has as sweet Children as Lieut. General Cromwell; and King CHARLES is as well
Descended as Lieutenant General Cromwell. Remember when first we refused to
Disband, it was for our Arrears, and Indemnity confirmed by the Royal Assent;
we had an Ordinance of both Houses, but we wanted His Majesty's Royal Assent;
what, can we have His Assent after we have cut His throat? sure we are all mad.
Alas (Fellow Soldiers) what good will the Kings blood do us? We now can save
His life with a wet finger, let us do it, we shall get all our Arreares,
Indemnity, and every thing; all the Kingdom, City, and Country, will love us,
and pray for us: Now or never (Fellow Soldiers) let us save our Credit, save
our Arrears, save our KING'S Life, One and All, Gods Blessing go along with us.

FINIS.

