A Faithful REPRESENTATION of the state of IRELAND: Whose bleeding Eye is on
England for help.

OR The Horrid Conspiracy Discovered; and most humbly presented to the Wisdom
of Parliament for timely prevention, if not impossible.

Wherein it appears the Design is laid at the Root of all the Parliaments
Interest there, the Adventurers Lands, and the New-English men's Lives, (as they
call them) as well as at the power of godliness, and of the present Government.

Published by Constant and Cordial Adherers to the Parliament and
Commonwealth, on the behalf of themselves, and of thousands in Ireland.

Prove. 18. 17. He that is first in his own Cause seems just: but his
Neighbor comes and searches him out.

Job. 22. 30. He shall deliver the Island of the Innocent, Or, The INNOCENT
shall deliver the Island!

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black spread Eagle near the West end
of Paul's, 1660.

A Faithful Representation of the Affairs of Ireland, intended for the
Parliament, February 21. before their new Force put upon them.
AS no Nation in the World has gone thorough more stupendous Providence, and
swifter Revolutions; So never any has passed thorough more iminent Hazards and
Menacing Whirl-pits then this poor Island; with such amazing and Miraculous
Deliverances as the FINGER of the Lord has written upon them; There is none
like to THY GOD (O England.) Who rides upon the heavens in thy help, and in
his excellency on the sky! The ETERNAL God is thy Refuge! and underneath the
everlasting ARMS, HAPPY art thou (O Israel!) who is like unto thee, O People!
SAVED BY THE LORD! etc. The last whereof was not the Least, if not one of the
GREATEST SALVATIONS that our eyes have seen from one of the most FATAL STROKES
that ever was given to a Magistracy in the Nation; by that unhappy and
never-enough-dreaded Interruption of Parliament October last, Whereby a WICKET
was opened (at least) to that Wide and Dangerous Door that the Common Enemy
has taken in the three Nations at this day; being never more stirring and
acting to Retreive and Prosecute the Horrid Design of Sr. George Booth then at
this instant, which like a Dismal Cloud has overspread us through the heat and
benefit of those Distractions and Confusions that came upon us, importing the
Greatest Calamity and Misery (without a Miracle of Mercy) that can be imagined
or impendent, So that had not the Lord been on our side, now may Israel say, if
the Lord had not been on our side to save us, when men rose up (so fast)
against us, they had swallowed us up QVICK! long ere this. And particularly in
poor Ireland, where the face of Affairs at this instant portend and promise all
things for it, as near, yea very near affected, if the Parliament by their
wonted Wisdom and Courage do not quickly interpose in it. Wherefore several of
us, who (like Job's Messengers) are escaped at present (and more are following)
to attend upon the Parliaments pleasure for a hearing, (on the behalf of our
selves and of thousands in that Nation of the Parliaments best and constant
friends) are ready to make a most true Report of that Land, to discover the
Conspiracy there afoot, to enucleate Irelands Lamentable Case from the
Calumnies and most Cunning Sophistications of their (late) PERFECT NARRATIVE,
but indeed ERRATIVE, and Collusion both in matters of Fact, and of Faith, being
throughout most false, (put forth on purpose to delude the Parliament and Good
people of this Nation, and to abuse their judgment;) and are ready to prove
upon our perils (sed bona fide) every one of the ensuing Particulars, (and more
too) very material to the Parliaments service as well as welfare of all
Ireland, which we shall humbly submit to the judgment of Parliament, and to
the most accurate scruteny of any, or of all whether Friends or Foes in the
whole Nation to draw their just Conclusions from, and to convince them of the
Deplorable Danger thereof.

First, The Plot in Ireland laid.
In that they openly and frequently Declared for a Free Parliament, that an
eminent Leader of them did it at the head of the Soldiers, 1 For a Free
Parliament and the King.
the Soldiers again reciprocally declared it to their Officers, that with this
voice for a Free Parliament they rode about the streets of Dublin blandishing
their swords, drinking healths to that purpose at their Bonfires, speaking
contemptibly of this Parliament, making no such sign of joy when the post
brought the News of their Return to their great Trust and Authority, being many
of them struck with a great damp thereat, (who had rejoiced at their
Interruption;) and many openly declared and avowed for the King, as at
Youghall, Mallows and other places, constantly drinking the Kings health. So
that page 9. of their Narrative they fallaciously represent the Case, in
saying, they declared for the Parliament, and were met with by the
Acclamations of All; but never tell us for what Parliament.

Secondly, 2 To Arm the Kings party, and put them into power,
'That they imediately armed, empowered and preferred such as were in open
Hostility for the King against the Parliament, and such as at Sir George Booths
rebellion manifested their eminent dis-affection to this Parliament and diverse
other Officers who fought under Inchequeen and Ormond against the Parliament
are now in command, settled by them; and such as laid down their Commissions,
and refused to obey the Parliament against Sir George Booth: All these are
armed, in places of Command, and advanced, nor is it altogether inconsiderable
the over Compliance of the rest and of the Best of them with the single Person
upon all occasions and transactions which they can no ways palliate, but with
a poor and empty Apology for it, (p. 23, of their Narrative) that it was no
more then what was in the Generallity of the three Nations, by which they
detect themselves sufficiently, and what COPY it is that they intend to write
after, viz. The Generallity of the Nations. But O Lord! Deliver not the Soul of
thy Turtle-dove unto the MVLTITVDE.

Thirdly, 3 To imprison the Parliments friends and tutn them out of power.
That they have imprisoned many hundreds (not only Field-Officers and of the
Army but) others of the best affected English to the Parliament in Cities,
Towns, Countries, Ministers of the Gospel, Justices, Planters, Trades men, and
pious Christians that have ever given the greatest proof of their most Cordial
adhaerance and faithfulness to the Authority of this Parliament at all times,
and never Acted any thing to the contrary, also in the Militia (as well as
Army) such as declared their adhering to this present Parliament they have put
out, and placed others in (and such only) as suite better with some other
Design; yea, one of their own lately affirmed it, that in their Council of
Officers there is not (he was confident) five real and absolute for this
Parliament or their Interest.

Fourthly, They have also otherwise disabled, and disarmed most of all the
Parliaments Friends, 4 To disable disarm and expose them to the Irish revenge.
and of the most approved fidelity and constancy (that we can hear of) in the
whole Nation; exposing thereby the poor naked English, to the most merciless
Rage of the Native Irish, not having wherewithal to defend themselves from
them who watch but an opportunity to slay them; as in the case of Captain
Cornick an honest peaceable man, lately set upon in his own house, (but
himself escaping) they fell to fiering, burned up his out houses, and all his
Corn in stacks, took away his Cattle to the value of five hundred pounds in
all. So that from thence and some late execrable Murders, the Irish rebellion
may fear de novo by it; and that it will be but translated by an English
Alphabet of Characters, if not speedily prevented; for,

Fifthly, 5 To Arm the very Irish Rebels.
Whiles they thus use the English, plunder and disarme the best Parliament
friends in the whole Nation, they suffer all the Parliaments professed Enemies
to keep their arms (as well Irish rebels as others,) and not only so, but
deliver them more out of the Parliaments store (with Ammunition in abundance,)
preferring Inchequeens Officers amongst them, and all that ever were for the
King, and never served the Parliament, are permitted not only to keep their
Arms, but to furnish themselves with what more they will.

Sixthly, 6 Keep up a feud between the old and the new English planters.
To make it a deadly feud between the English, themselves (as well as the Irish
and the English, they have newly distingished them into Names of the old
Protestants and the New; the old bandying themselves against the other, the new
English as they call them, wishing their throats were cut; saying, they came to
eat the bread out of their mouths (that planted there, etc.) And the Irish
Papists say they will rather subject to the old Protestants, then to the new,
for the Common prayer book is the mass (they hear) Englished, and under them
they shall have more liberty; But notwithstanding this promising compliance with
the old English, they will quickly give them proof of an insatiable revenge
upon all the English, when they have sufficiently weakened them with their
divisions; and that their Hydropick thirst cannot be so easily quenched, but
the more they drink, the more they will desire, until they exhaust all into
their own hands. Albeit at present, much of the Armies conduct is put into the
hands of old English, Episcopal men, yet such they are, as ever have been and
yet are most bitter enemies to the Parliament and our present English Interest
there! And so may serve to Act the first part of the intended Tragedy in that
Island. The wicked watches the Righteous, and seeks to slay him; but the
Lord will not leave him in his hands, nor condemn him when he is judged;

Seventhly, To make it yet more obvious; Many commissioned Officers and
Soldiers that declared with them at the first, (when they pretended for this
present Parliament, and that justified the Authority of this Parliament against
that force and Interruption that was put upon them, are dismounted and
displaced as not fit for their design, but demurring their recession from the
first Declaration, wherein they owned L. G. L. their Commander in Chief; and
yet in their Narrative, p. 10, 11, 12, have they the confidence to front or
face it for the service of the Parliament, and, p. 12. That they laid aside
only such as opposed the Parliament, or else of whose not acting against the
Parliament they could not be satisfied; that is, as to perpetrate their
Design, and to Act with them upon a hazard, or at an Adventure, as to what
they would have done. For the Honorable Commissioners of Parliament themselves
might have had their Liberty after all, if they would have engaged to them and
acted with them in their Designs, which (they declining) set some on fire upon
an unjust impeaching and devising a charge against them, according to that
dangerous Maxim, That bad Actions must be ever secon ded with worse, and
better never begin then not carry on, what ever it cost them: the truth is as
the prophet complained, he that departs from iniquity makes himself a PREY,
whilst the vilest of men and of the most debauched practices are promoted by
them, both Officers and Soldiers, who serve their turns best: and the wicked
will walk on every side, when the vilest men are exalted.

Eighthly, 8 Listiog Papists after the Parliament sat again.
This will yet appear more evidently or suspitiously, by their raising of men
anew, in listing the very Papists, and other Forces after they knew the
Parliament were sitting, without regarding their direction; posting up Papers
in public places at Dublin, to invite all that would to come in and list, and
they should have pay, but that none who were listed by L. G. L. should have pay
with the rest of the Soldiers without further Orders; And not only in
receiving Irish Rebels and PAPISTS, and listing them, but in casheering those
that would not own a Free Parliament: All this too when all things were in a
very quiet, serene and peaceable posture in Ireland.

Ninthly, 9 Summoning a kind of Parliament by their Arbitiary power.
Their summoning a Convention, to do the work of a Parliament, to raise them
moneys in a way of Loan, Preparing the Elections with Persons most propense and
responsable to their ends, who are Elected, and in a readiness to sit when
they please; nor has their present Council, or Committee of Safety, whereof
Sr. J. Barry holds the Chair a much better Aspect, witness his speech so full
of asperity and reflection upon this present Parliament; But that the
Interruption of the Parliament might be no longer a cover upon this Conspiracy,
some are ready to prove the Plot was laid before the Parliament was
interrupted, though executed after, and with more applause.

Tenthly, 10 Declaring for themselves and that they will stand upon their own
Legs.
They have (a many of them) openly declared, that if their application to this
Parliament prove not propitious to their desires and designs, they will, as
they are a distinct Island, keep up an Interest distinct from England, and
stand upon their own Legs, (as they say) deeming themselves able to subsist
without a dependence upon this Nation; and seeing the Ports are all their own,
they the less fear, or value England, who can have no landing place, but by
their permission and leave.

Eleventhly, 11 Striking at the power of godliness in all under the Notion of
Anal aptists and Sectaries.
This conspiracy strikes at the very Power of Godliness in all judgments whom
they brand with the name of Anabaptists! is too notorious, dismounting Officers
and Soldiers merely for their Religion. The people of God, whether
Presbyterians, Independants, or others are generally threatened, some with
Death, and others with Exile! Godly Ministers some imprisoned (and yet no
Anabaptists) some put out of the Public, and exploded Episcopalians placed in
their rooms. A Soldier coming to the Ministers house of Castle Dermond ran
his pike at him, and called him Anabaptist, told him that he would have his
coat off his back shortly: and had he not withdrawn himself (says) the
Soldier had killed him at that present, and yet that Minister is no
Anabaptist, but Godly and Orthodox. So, that night the Castle was surprised,
they made their Bonfires, and threatening to fire diverse habitations of Godly
men, cast up their sticks with fire upon their houses, threatening to burn them
to the very ground, and at their Bonfires, as they drank healths to C. Stuart
so also to the confusion of all the Anabaptists (accounting Presbyterians and
all such) reputing those Anabaptists that pray in their Families.

Twelfthly, 12 Threatening the Estates of all late Adventurers.
The Adventurers lands, are all threatened, and they in hopes to divide again
by lot, upon a new Adventure, on what they enjoy; They say, there will be
enough to pay their Armies bravely, when those lands lie all sequestered to
their use and service; and when the whole land lies before them; some of them
have said, the Adventurers estates shall pay for it, as well as the Soldiers
lands allotted for Arrears, whom they call (in contempt) the New English; and
wish that their throats were all cut. Whereby all men may see how much they are
concerned in this Irish conspiracy, and how preliminary it is (if the Almighty
prevent us not with mercies) to another Rebellion! But because the Lord has as
precious People in that Nation as any are in the whole World, dear to him and
in Covenant with him! Sound in the Faith! And sanctified through the Truth! We
would yet hope! yet he will not give their increase to the caterpillars, and
their labor to the Locust; yea that they shall not build and another inhabit!
They shall not plant and another eat! They shall not labor in vain, nor bring
forth for trouble: For they are the seed of the Blessed of the Lord, and their
offspring with them.

This Succinct Representation of the Irish Affairs and our fears, not without
some preponderation, suspiring affections, weeping eyes, and aching hearts, over
hundreds of families (in that almost lost Island) did we humbly intend to
tender to the Parliaments service and consideration, before the bridge be quite
drawn up, or it be too late. In which, as (we know) we have the eyes of many
upon us, so the hearts and prayers of many with us, of the faithful of the
land, who labor with the Lord (day and night) with sighs and groans for
deliverance! that our most worthy and renowned Patriots in Parliament, might
recover a dying Nation! Secure our Rights and just Liberties, from the invasion
of others, and of opposite interests; (who are prompted by lust and ambition)!
Preserve our lives, lands and families from these Arbitary foundations and
excentrick Actings, which threaten to devour all at once! Maintain and
countenance us in the power of Godliness and Holiness at the Worship of our
God, according to what is revealed unto us in his Word! Which we do (and desire
from our very Souls to) make the rule of all our ways and actings! And give us
but an equal encouragement, and being with others (after all our Blood!
Travels, (Skulls, Bones of others) hazards and expenses of our selves) during
our peaceable and honest comportment, having never forfeited in the least the
claim we make unless our constant Adhering to the Parliament has done it.
Wherefore seeing Jehovah himself has founded the earth by WISDOM, and by
UNDERSTANDING, has established the Heavens, and without right understanding of
the state of things there, it is impossible to establish the Peace and
Prosperity of that unhappy Nation, so proclive and incident (in its very
Climate) to turbulent Motions and impetuous fluctuations, we once again cry out
for help! All hands! All hearts! And heads to save us! As the Hebrews were
saved in the days of Mordecai and at the suit of Esther from the malice of
Haman, seeing we can say in like manner with Chapter, 7. 4. We are sold, we and
our brethren (the Parliaments proved friends) to be destroyed! to be slain! and
perish: (if the Lord prevent it not by a decree,) but if we had been sold for
bondmen and bondwomen, we had held our tongues (at this time) although the
enemy could not have countervailed the damage, to the Parliaments Interests and
the Nations.

From the very frontispiece and first aspect of this frightfull conspiracy, it
is easy to conjecture with whom they would have stricken Tally; and what it is
they most ateempted, when they seduced and suborned the desperate Soldiers to
sell their own Officers, and sacrifice them to their wills and pleasures; or
that made them ply the Fort of Duncannon with such tempting messages to the
poor Soldiers there, to do the like with Lieutenant General Ludlow, offering
the Soldiers to make them Officers, pay them Arrears, and what not? (for there
perfidy) if they would throw their noble General over the walls to their armed
tyranny; but if not, then they they should be sent to the Barbados and the
like; yea, with what intentions they have drawn up so disingenuous unworthy and
Monstrous charge against that (ever Honorable) Lt. General Ludlow, and those
worthies of Parliament Commissioners there) whom they have ungratefully
traduced, and wronged; yet rather then they will submit to the Parliaments
judgment in it, are resolved to REBEL right out (for all their Appeal and
promise of Acquiescing) as a little time will interpret. Making themselves, the
sole Judges, the Accusers, and (if they can) as Arbitrary and irrational
Executioners also, to the astonishment of all judicious Men. Notwithstanding
all these Nations know, and the well affected in Ireland will heartily witness
it with one voice (as well as the very consciences of their veriest enemies be
forced to confess) that under the Prudent, the pious and painful Government of
these Honorable Patriots, (with a most equal indulging Latitude to ALL, and
(without respect to ANY, faction or party) that Land has enjoyed a very happy
peace, great blessing and florid settlement for some years together! (blessed
be the Lord for it)! and O that we might not sin away all these mercies from us
and our posterities! seeing as the Psalmist says of a People so planted as we
have been, they got not the Land in possession by their own sword, neither did
their own Arm save them: but thy right hand and thine Arm, and the light of thy
Countenance (O Lord) because thou had a favor to them, so that this hope is
yet left us, that the same Almighty God will stir up some or other to be
nursing Fathers, and look after us.

The truth is, although Ireland is like to prove one of the most difficult,
perplexed and intricate pieces the Parliament has to recover, and no Rational
man (that knows them) can possibly imagine those Actings there consistent with
the Parliaments Interest or Cause, yet this is that which renders the Case the
more doubtful and deplorable, that they represent it in England (and to the
Parliament) as if it were all for them and in their service; And (to keep the
Parliament as remote as may be from a right understnnding of Affairs simply)
they not only secure such as could best communicate it, but impeach them
hainously and indeed impiously, (to put the better color upon their bad
Complexion) and have retained some few with them, and but few indeed, (of a
better repute then themselves for principles) to Face their business with, that
is backed and brested, heart and headed (yea in a manner wholly Limbed) with as
implacable enemies and Cavaleers as any the Parliament has. So that the more
unintelligibly and inextricably it is held, beheld or represented in England,
the more certain is the hazard and ruin of poor Ireland, if the Almighty help
not, whereof the Well and Bect Affected People are so generally apprehensive,
as since the Rebellion, they never made the like Lamentation; (mourning like
Doves, and chattering like Cranes,) choosing rather to be shipped away together
into America, (if the Parliament will please to show them that favor) then be
exposed to the Revenge of the Irish there without favor or mercy; For let a
Bear robbed of her Whelps meat a man, rather than a fool in his folly! says
the wise man, They are corupt and speak wickedly! Concerning OPRESSION they
speak LOFTILY! They set their mouth against the heavens, and their tongue
walks through the earth!

Nor are we ignorant of what they have said as others have insinuated and
printed in this Nation, that the Sectaries (as they call them) are the very
Persons against whom they have drawn up the Blackest (if not bloudiest) Bills
of Indictment touching the Execution of their quondam King, and of that
Constitution of Government. Now albeit we cannot say it is intended by all, yet
of this we are sure it is designed by some to Remove or Ruin them as an
Introduction to Charles Stuart and that Government again, which till the
Sectaries be down they can never get up with such Facillity as well as Force
and Fallacy. And we wish this were not the Grand Inducement of others here to
destroy them (or rather the Parliaments best Friends by that name) as well as
of those in unhappy Ireland, who Contrive and Retrive it with so much heat, as
the most plausible string to play upon. But have respect (O Lord) unto thy
Covenant! for the dark places of the earth are full of the habitations of
Cruelty! And however it be, yet God is good to Israel, and to all those who are
of an upright heart! He shall judge the poor of the people! he shall save the
children of the needy, and shall break in pieces the Oppressor! For the Lord
TRIES THE RIGHTEOUS, but the wicked and him that loves violence his soul
hates. Return! (O Lord) Return, for thy Servants sake! the Tribes of thine
Inheritance.

TO THE READER.
READER,
THis faithful Representation was prepared and intended to have been presented
to the Parliament, or given in to the honorable Members thereof) by diverse
worthy Persons (and no Anabaptists) who came out of Ireland, on purpose to make
known her CRY! and CASE! (if possible that the Common Weal might once more
emerge and rise above the waves of that Common Woe and Calamity there
threatened!) but since that the last Alterations, Force and Guards upon the
HOUSE, the Irish Declaration for a Free Parliament, has so far opened their
Aim and Design all along, their CONTEMPT of this Parliament of the Common
Wealth; their INTENT of Reducing to the old slavery and Constitution, as no
more need be said but this, that this horrid PLOT was laid in Ireland, before
the unhappy Interruption of Parliament in England, October last, and is not yet
fully executed or discovered! For some there be that insist upon a Full and
Free Parliament, as it was Anno 1642. before the Lords Spiritual were turned
out! and what may be the the next Step or Motion must be left to Time; only
this we foresee, and so expect at their hands, that neither Reason nor Candor
must draw us as Men or Christians, but Tyranny and Terror drive us as Beasts
to be slain or sold for a company of Slaves, (for our fidelity to the
Parliament and the Cause) seeing whiles they pretend a FREE PARLIAMENT, they
have Forced THIS P. and contrary to all their Faith and Engagements, set up
their SWORDS against the VOTES Wisdom and Resolves of this Renowned Parliament,
and what more Arbitrary? delivering up them that have adhered to them since
Anno 1648. to utter Ruin, and what more Temerary or Unjust? if the God of all
our Mercies and DELIVERANCES do not once more SAVE us! for his sweet Names-sake.

FINIS.

