A Funeral-Oration UPON FAVORITE, My Lady Lap-Dog.

By a Person of Quality.

Immodicis brevis est oetas, and rara Senectus. Mart. Durum; sed levius fit
patientia Quicquid corrigere est nefas. Horat. LONDON, Printed in the Year,
1699.

Epistle Dedicatory TO URANIA.
IT is your Command, Madam, that I should make public the ensuing Oration on
Favorite, and your Commands can be no more resisted than your Eyes. But
besides, that it is not in the power of your Slave to disobey you, I can pay no
less a Tribute to the Manes of our deceased Brother in servitude, than to give
this public Testimony of the respect I have for his Virtues.

Other Lovers not so disinteressed as my self, might perhaps triumph at the
death of so considerable a Rival as was Favorite. But I, Madam, who take share
in all your Afflictions, am so far from rejoicing at it, and erecting a Trophy
on his untimely Destiny, that I profess all the Consolation I can fetch From
Philosophy, from the Lyceum, the Porticus, or the Tusculanum, is not able to
support me under the deep sense I have of your unspeakable Loss.

Nor can we condemn, or think unwarrantable your Grief. Were not the World
sufficiently acquainted with the deserts of Favorite, yet even those who were
altogether strangers to his good Qualities would deduce a reasonable
consequence, that there was something most emphatically, most conspicuously
shining in him, which should prefer hint to Urania's favor. For certainly a
Woman of your Discernment, a Woman so nice a Judge, and so bountiful a Rewarder
of Merit, whether in Man or Brute, could never bestow so plentiful a portion of
your Kindness on a Dog, whose Endowment did not give him a title to it. In
fine, you fed, you cherished, you caressed him. By your Favor you raised him
more above the Animals of his own Species, than Animals themselves are exalted
above the inferior Vegetables.

It Is true, he created some private Jealousies, some Discontents in the Breasts
of your Admiters: But to do public justice to his ashes, I must say that of
Favorite, which cannot, without manifest injury to truth, be affirmed of all
the other Favorites of Princes, of the Richelieus, of the Mazarins, of the
Wolseys, of the Buckinghams, of the Lerma's, and of the Olivares, that in the
Universal corruption of a most degenerate Age, he preserved an unblemished, an
inviolable Integrity to his Mistress; that he did not give Intelligence to a
Foreign Court, of the private Resolutions of State that were taken in the
Cabinet at home; that when Affairs of Importance called her Abroad, he did not
stay behind her, nor sleep ingloriously upon the Couch; that he stood unmoved,
stood unshaken, against all the Attacks of Bribes; that he did not crush
calamitous Merit beneath him, nor supplant the Obstacle in his way above him;
that he never Smiled where he intended to ruin. In shore, that he despised the
little Artifices of the Great, as the Politic Nod, the slavish Cringe, the
deceitful Bow, the betraying Hugg, and the murdering Whisper.

But I will enlarge no farther on his Praises, since I am sensible that by my
want of Ability he has suffered too much already in the ensuing Oration. Expect
not then that after I have injured your Dog, I should be so hardy as to attempt
your Panegyric, that is, to injure you. For, Madam, should I employ all the
Tragical forces of Rhetoric, should I lavish all the magnificence of
Expression, and all the splendid pomp of Metephors, I should fall infinitely
short of my Divine Argument. Eloquence here loses its use, the gaudy Train of
Tropes and Figures are but vain and empty Ostentation. We cannot speak
Figuratively of you, we cannot speak of you with exaggeration. You transcend
all Hyperboles, your Merit rises above the sublimest flights of Fancy. I shall
only say, that all Virtues unite to make a bright Constellation in you, and
that if there were a general shipwreck of your Sex, we should find the
scattered Perfections ofWomankind collected in your self.

Other Ladies, if they have their Graces have their Defects withal. Angelica
talks away the merit of her Face, and what she gains by her Eyes, she loses by
her Tongue. Horatia overwhelms us by the splendour, and leads us Captives by the
Arts of her Dress, who were she to be seen in dishabillee in the ruelle, would
sigh to see her self no longer the Object of Adoration. Melanissa appears with
advantage in the simplicity of an unartful Attire, who cannot suppress the pomp
and Ornament of Dress. Sempronia treads on every Heart when she Dances, but
gains no Triumph when she Sings. Belinda charms us with her Voice, but is
disagreeable at a Ball. Oriana, with her melancholy Air, gives us sad Cause of
Melancholy, but excites our Laughter with her own. Aurelia has Wit, has Youth,
has Beauty to fix the most roving Heart, but cannot fix her own. Lindamira
woul'd make the most constant Lover in the Universe, but wants the Charms to
make us so. Aemilia speaks favorably of all the World, but gives all the World
just occasion not to speak favorably of her. Cassandra's Innocence is above
the Censure of others, but the Innocence of others cannot defend themselves
from the Censure of Cassandra. But in you, Madam, we find united all the
Advantages of the happiest of your Sex, without any of their Defects. What the
most celebrated Wit of this Age has said, of the most celebrated Beauty of a
neighboring Kingdom, may with equal Justice be applied to you. One may be
constant to you, with all the pleasure of inconstancy. We change every moment
for your Graces, but are still constant to your Person. But, Madam, as I shall
not offer Incense to you that has been presented at other. Altars, so neither
will I attempt your Comparison with the most illustrious Beauties of the
former, or present Ages. When ever we think or talk of you, Madam, the Dispute
is not with other, but with your self, which Part, which Feature, which Posture
is most agreeable; whether you charm us most when you Move or Sit, Stand or
Walk; Whether, you throw the Lover down more with your hand, than you trample
on him with your foot; whether is most powerful, the Eloquence of your Eyes,
(...) that of your Tongue; whether is most delicate, your Tread in the Conduct
of your Life, or that of your Gate: In short, whether your Thoughts are
brighter than your Looks, and whether is most boundless your Fancy, to the
Empire of your Beauty. Thus it is with you, Madam, as with Kings or Princes,
whom we dare not bring in competition with their Inferiors, but measure them
by themselves, and compare one part of their Life by the other.

Thus, Madam, by the common Fate of all Dedicators I have suffered my self to
be carried into the stream of Panegyric, even after I had protested against it;
but I shall prosecute this Argument no farther, which I am not able to sustain;
the dreadful fate of Salmoneus ought to deterr me, who died by the Bolts he
endeavored to imitate. By observing this conduct, I shall not only consult my
own Reputation, but the Interest too and Repose of Mankind: For should I
persist to draw your fair Picture, should I descend into the detail of your
innumerable Excellencies and Perfections, there would fall ten thousand Victims
at your Feet, and this Epistle Dedicatory might prove perhaps, in some sense, a
Funeral Oration on the Reader.

I see, Madam, your Breast is capable of tender Impressions. You can be moved
at the Fate of Favorite, (no wonder he out-ran Us in your Affection, since four
Legs will always be too many for two) take pity then of his Orator. You can
weep to see him dead, pay then a Teat to the Funerals of the Man, whom your
self, whom your own bright Eyes have slain.

The PREFACE.
By a Friend of the Author.
MEthinks I see some Surly Morose Critics, who mistake their dullness for
Gravity, and their Spleen for Religion, look down with a haughty Solemn Air
upon the following Performance, and thus vent their pious Choler against it.

A Funeral Oration upon a Ladies Lap-Dog* why What can the meaning of that be?
How comes Panegyric, which ought only to be paid to the memory of the most
Eminent Men, and the most virtuous Matrons, in short, to nothing below a Lord
Mayor or Alderman, to be squandered away upon a Contemptible Brute, What has
this Dog done in his Lifetime, to deserve such an uncommon Tribute ahter his
Death? Has he built any Hospitals to provide for Beggars of his own making? Has
he founded any Lectures to Preach down Socinianism, or left a (...) of Thousand
Pounds to the blew-Coat Infantry? When living, did he encourage the Woollen
Manufacture, or the Royal Fishery? Did he appear Vigorously for Liberty and
Property, or Bark against a Standing Army If nothing of this is to be found in
(...) to be remembered in so extraordinary a manner?

To this I reply, that if our Author was so complacent as to obey the Commands
of a fair Lady, or if he had a Mind to ridicule the rumbling bumbast, and vile
prostitution of the Modern Eloquence; or lastly, if he was resolved to show his
Wit upon a trivial Subject, what is that to any Body, or where is the harm
on it. If the latter is a Sin, several Learned Authors, whose Books he does not
think himself Worthy to carry, have been guilty of it before him. Melancthon,
one of the first Reformers, Writ an Encomium upon an Ant. Lipsius, the famous
Commentator upon Tacitus, Celebrated an Elephant C^rdan, one of the greatest
Philosophers of the last Age, the Gout, as did likewise that great German Wit,
Bilibaldus Pirkheimerus. Dan. Heinsius showed his parts upon a Louse; Caelius
Calcagninus upon a Flea; Johannes Passeratius upon an Ass; Conradus Goddeus
upon an Owl; Franc. Scribanius upon a Fly; Janus Dousa upon a Shadow; Martinus
Schoockius upon Deafness; Guil. Menapius upon a Quartan Ague; Jac. Gutherius
upon Blindness; M. Ant. Majoragius upon Dirt; Arthur Jonston upon an Old Man;
and lastly, Caspar Barlaeus upon an Ens Rationis. Were I minded to show my
great Reading upon this occasion, I could cite an infinite number of the like
examples, as Synesius a Primitive Bishop, who Writ an Oration in praise of
Baldness; but these are more than suficient. However, now my hand is in, I
cannot forbear to tell my Reader, that St. Jerome mentions the last Will and
Testament of a Hogg, under the name Marcus Grunnius Corocotta, Tom. 3. adv.
Ruffin. and Tom. 5. ad Enstochium; so it is a plain case now, I hope, that the
Ancients, as well as the Moderns, have condescended to adorn mean Subjects; and
if any discourteous Critic has a mind to oppose such a numerous body, I give
him leave under my hand to do it.

A Funeral- Oration UPON FAVORITE, My Lady Lap-Dog.
I Am commanded, Gentlemen, to do a Thing to day without a President: For I
believe I am the first Orator who ever yet undertook to speak the
Funeral-Oration of a Dog. But if Catullus could write an Elegy upon Lesbia's
Sparrow; if Alexander could build and dedicate A Town to the Memory of his
Horse; can you think it strange that Urania, no less lllustrious by her Beauty,
than that Monarch was by his Achievments' and who has gained as wide an Empire
by her Eyes, as he did by his Arms: I say, if Urania is willing to celebrate
the Funerals of the Dog she loved so dearly?

Besides, As Favorite eminently excelled all other Dogs during his Life, so it
is but reasonable we should distinguish him at Death. But 'tho' both for the
sake of Urania, and upon the score of his own admirable Qualities, he deserves
to be considered with a Funeral- Oration; yet, of all Men, certainly am I the
most unqualify'd for such an Employment: For, not to insist that any Talent in
Oratory is but slender, Urania's Cruelty has reduced me to a Condition little
better than Favorite's. Yes, Urania; your Unkindness has had the same sad
Effect upon me, that Fate has had upon him; and I am present at my own
Funerals, as well as those of your Dog. But it is your Command, Madam, that I
enter on this Office; and your Eyes have not left me the Liberty to disobey
you. Behold then the Dead, making the Oration of the Dead; an unhappy Man, of a
happy Dog; the Object of your Scorn, of the Object of your Love.

Wherefore, Gentlemen, I demand your Attention, I demand your Sorrows: For, Who
will not afford both their Attention, and their Sorrows to Urania's.
Misfortune? Are not her Misfortunes ours, and are we not interessed in her
Afflictions? Is she moved with any Passion, wherewith we are not likewise
affected? But besides that, our Grief is a Tribute we owe to Urania, and which
it is not in our power to refuse her, Favorite himself, and. his Virtues,
require from us, that we should drop a Tear upon his Grave: For, undoubtedly,
never was Dog possessed of so many excellent Qualities; never was Dog so
beloved living, or regretted dead. To give you a due Sense of our Loss, and
that you may apprehend how just, how warrantable our Sorrows are, I shall set
before you the Virtues and Endowments of this excellent Creature: And here
should I re-count at large his good Qualities, should I enumerate distinctly
his several Excellencies, I should sooner exhaust your Patience, than my
Argument. Let it suffice to touch lightly and cursorily on those which were
most conspicuous and shining in him.

Before I launch out into the immense Ocean of the Argument before me, I might,
after the usual and laudable Example of all the celebrated Panegyrists, both of
Ancient and Modern Times, reckon up a long and illustrious Catalogue of his
Heroic Progenitors. I might tell you, how, by the Mother, he claims Kindred
with all the Courts of Europe; there being hardly a Queen, or Princess. or Lady
of Quality, throughout christendom, in whose Lap there does not lie some one or
other of Favorite's great Relations. I might tell you, how, by the Father, he
is allied to Heaven, and to the Stars: How the Celestial Dog beholding from
above beautiful Fanny, (for Favorite's Mother condescended to dignifie that
Name,) sporting her self in Urania's Garden, struck with the Almighty Date of
Love, and desirous to possess her, like Jove of old quitted his bright Abode,
and descending like a Star-shoot upon Earth, compressed the lovely Nymph in a
Bed of Roses, and begot our Hero. Behold the Extraction of Favorite! Such was
the Race of Hercules, of Achilles, of Aeneas; half Mortal, half Divine. But I
shall insist no longer on his Pedigree.

Nam genus, and proavos. and quae non fecimus ipsi
Vix ea nostra voco --
Great Descent, as it adorns true Merit where it finds it, so where it finds it
not, it does not create it. Favorite relies only on his own Deserts for his
Fame: Favorite reflects back as much Luster on his Noble Ancestors, as he can
derive from them. But let us return from whence we have digress'd, and come to
his own Personal Virtues.

First then, Was ever any thing so beautiful? Nothing, certainly, was seen so
axquisitely formed. What Star more lovely than his Forehead? What Snow more
white than his Feet? What more delicately turned than his Ears? What more
curiously polished than his Neck? No Arrow of Cupid's rounder than his Tail: No
Dove of Venus's smoother and softer than his Back. Assuredly, the Goddess of
Beauty her self, were she to appear in the Form of a Four-footed Animal, would
assume no other Shape than Favorite's.

Again, Was there ever anything so well-manner'd? For the purpose, If at any
time any Ladies of Condition and Quality came to pay their Respects and Devoirs
to Urania, he was never observed, like other illmanner'd Dogs, to run with open
Mouth to the Door, and receive them with the clamorous Salute of his Voice; but
entertain them with a respectful Silence, and introduce them with Civility unto
his Mistress, nor, during the whole Visit, as is also the wont of the rest of
Dogs, thrust himself in a rude and troublesome manner into their Laps,
disordering their Dress, and with dirty Feet incommoding their Linen; but,
like a well-bred Creature, sit at a due Distance, and silently wait the Call of
the Ladies.

A Third remarkable Quality was, his cleanliness. And truly so clean did he
constantly appear, with a Body so white, so smooth, so sleek, that one would
say Venus her self had combed him, that all the Cupids had unanimously washed
him, and that all the Graces had elaborately and exquisitely wiped him. And so
careful and sollicitous was he to preserve himself so, that he avoided all
Commerce with the Stables or Kitchen, lest he should contract a Filth thereby;
confining his conversation altogether to the Chamber or the Parlour, to the Bed
or the Couch. Nor would he ever, without manifest Show of Regret, commit
himself to the Arms of a Footman, or common Servant, as apprehending a Stain
from their Embraces, and Pollution from their very Touch. In like manner,
Whenever Nature importuned him, he would privately withdraw from the Company
into some solitary Retirement, and there obey her Laws: Or if she called upon
him at a Time more unseasonable, when he was either in the Arms or Lap of a
Lady, he would signify with his Foot, or by some certain Tone of his Voice,
the Necessity that pressed him, and admonish her to set him down.

'Twou'd be endless a farther Enumeration of his Virtues. I shall only mention
one Quality more, which crowns and consummates all; that is to say, his
unparalleled Affection to his Mistress. I say, Unparalleled; for I believe,
upon all the Records of Story, there is not to Be found an Instance of so
unexampl'd and singular a Love in Dog: And, as on the one hand I may boldly
affirm, that never had Dog so kind a Mistress; so on the other, I may with
Truth averr, that never had Mistress so affectionate a Dog. Urania's Soul and
Body were not more straightly united, than were She and her Dog; and as soon
might she have been separated from her self, as from him: Wheresoever she went,
he was still her Companion; not her own Thoughts were more constantly with her:
He would accompany her in her private and in her public Walks; he would attend
her in the Park, in the Playhouse, at Balls, at the Court, and in her Visits;
he would follow her to her Chamber, to her Closet, to her Bed; he would invade
her very Retreats and Solitudes, intrude upon her Meditations and Devotions,
and not permit her to be alone, even with her God.

But that wherein he most manifestly and signally testified his Love to his
Mistress, was, his constant Attendance and Presence in the Time of her late
Illness: For, during the whole Course of her Sickness, from the first Moment
the Violence of her Indisposition confined her to her Bed, Favorite was not
known to be absent from her one Minute; but placing himself at the Top of her
Pillow, continued there to abide and watch by her whole Nights and Days,
without Intermission: Nor could he ever, by Force or Flattery, be Prevailed
upon to quit his Seat, before such time as Urania was perfectly restored to her
good Condition of Health.

No Wonder then if a Dog thus excellently endowed, and singularly qualified,
was both admired and loved, was favored and caressed by all that had the least
Acquaintance with his Merits. Upon the Score of these rare Qualities and
Virtues, if any Dog, assuredly Favorite deserved to be immortal. But, alas!
every thing beneath the Sun must terminate, and have an End. After that
Favorite had been deservedly the Joy and Delight of the Ladies, and that, he
had arrived to the highest Pitch of Happiness attainable here below, that is to
say, had acquired particularly the Favor and Love of Urania, behold,
unexpectedly is he taken from us!

Nunc it per iter tenebricosum,
Illuc unde negant redire quenquam.
At vobis male sit malae tenebrae
Orci, quae omnia bella devoratis.
Who can here forbear to grieve, forbear to lament? Who would not here
abundantly weep, abundantly sigh? What Heart so insensible, but would relent
and melt? What Breast so barbarous, but would feel Sentiments of Sorrow?

Lugete o Veneres, Cupidinesque. Weep Ladies, weep Gentlemen, weep; Favorite is
dead; Urania's beloved Dog is dead.

Poor Favorite! How art thou changed from what thou wast but yesterday? What a
Revolution has one Day made? Thou, whom but four and twenty Hours ago the Sun
beheld in Urania's lovely Lap; behold, now shortly the cold Earth will contain
thee. Thou, whom she bore about in her tender Arms; behold, now the rough
Embraces of Death do fold thee. Thou, who wast then thy Mistriss's Joy, art now
her Grief. Thou, who wast then our Envy, art now our Pity. Lastly, Thou, who
wast then so visibly distinguished from all other Dogs, art now confounded with
the meanest.

No more now will thou entertain Urania as thou wast wont, with wanton Play: No
more now will thou divert her with a Thousand Sportive Tricks: No more will thou be her beloved Companion in her Chamber, in her Parlour, in her Garden, in
her Coach, in her Walks, at her Table, and on her Couch; Alas! Where is now
that Beauty, which rendered thee the Admiration of all that beheld thee? Where
those innumerable Graces, by which thou did transcendently surpass the rest
of Dogs, and which created thee the Love of the Ladies, and the Envy of the
Men? So far art thou from being that admired, that beautiful Thing, which once
thou were, that we are making all the haste we can to remove thee out of our
sight, as an Object that offends us, as a Spectacle our Eyes are not able to
support without Aversion and Pain.

Lugete o Veneres, Cupidinesque. Weep Ladies, weep Gentlemen, weep; Favorite is
dead; Urania's beloved Dog is dead.

Who can here forbear complaining of the Rigor of Fate? Who would not be
almost tempted to expostulate in thefse Terms with Heaven? Why are the most
excellent Things still the most perishable? Why was the Flower so fair, and yet
so fading? Why is what we esteem most, snatched from us soonest? Why had not
Fate bestowed fewer Virtues on Favorite, or given a larger Extent to his Life?
But, vain are these Expostulations: Heaven is inexorable, and will not restore
him to us; he is irrecoverably, he is for ever gone. Dislevel your Hair,
Ladies, and tear your Garments: Disfigure your Faces, Gentlemen, and knock your
Breasts. Let us grieve; let us lament?

But what do I madly do? Why do I endeavor to move your Tears, which but flow
of themselves too fast? Why do I attempt to raise your Grief; which rather
wants restraint than incitement. Alas! we have Lamented enough: Let us rather
seek how to diminish, than augment our Sorrow; we need comfort, we need
Consolation. Let these following Considerations, then mitigate our Grief.

First, We would do well to consider, That to dye, is to pay a common Debt to
Nature, and is a necessity, to which the greatest and best Men have submitted.
Of all these infinite numbers of Men: Of all these prodigious swarms of Animals
that fill the Globe; is there one single Person or Creature, who is exempted
from this Lamentable Law? Nay, do not the most inanimate, the most insensible
things arrive at the same end, and suffer the same Destiny with us? Do not the
most durable Walls, the strongest Fortifications decay? The Sun, which is daily
a Spectator or so many Funerals both of Men and of Beasts, is it not it self
perishable? The Earth, which is the common Grave of every living Creature, will
it not find it self a Sepulcher in the Universal Ruin? The Heavens, the Stars,
the Elements, the whole Mass of the Universe, will it hot sooner, or later,
suffer Dissolution? Nay, what is yet more lamentable, what is yet more
deplorable, that which is fairer than the Heavens, that which is brighter than
either Sun, or Stars, the noblest production, the most exquisite Composition of
Nature, Urania her self, will she not one day die, and can we then demand with
justice that Favorite should be Immortal?

Next, let us remember that our Grief may be hurtful to our selves, but cannot
be any real Benefit to Favorite. Could our Lamentations indeed call him back to
life, could our Sighs inspire new Breath into him, or our Tears water the
lovely Flower' till it revived, our Sorrows then were warrantable; but, alas!
fruitless are our Sighs, unprofitable our Tears.

Lastly, let us comfort our selves with this Assurance, that Favorite,
whatsoever his Condition be, is not unhappy. For if, as most Philosophers hold,
the Souls of Brutes perish, and are entirely extinguished with the Body, not
existing after death, as he is not capable of Happiness, so neither is he of
Misery. But if that other Opinion be true, that the Souls of Brutes, as well as
Men, do not dye, but only change their Habitation, and pass by way of
Transmigration from out of one Body into another, Favorite may enter once more
upon the stage or Life, and he that now parts from Urania a Dog, may perchance
return to her again a Squirrel, or Sparrow; or it may be a Lover.

Since then he is partaker of a common Lot, since our Tears can neither profit
him nor our selves, and since we are persuaded he is not unhappy, let us omit
an unjustifiable and unnecessary Sorrow.

Favorite himself, could he speak, would certainly bid us cease our
Lamentations, and give over our needless Complaints, expressing himself after
this manner.

Mourn not for me; for, to what purpose is it to mourn? Has not my Orator
already told you, that your Tears are idely and unprofitably spent; that they
cannot avail to restore me again to Life; and why then this weeping? Why these
Complaints? Why these sad Sighs? Do not disquiet your selves in vain. Do not
give yourselves anxieties which are not needful; But as for you, my beautiful
Mistress, it is your Interest more especially to be sedate, unless you design
to revenge the Men's Quarrel on your own fair Face, and ruin that Beauty, which
has ruined them. For what have those lovely Cheeks, done that you should
endeavor, by excess of Grief, to robb them of those Graces which subdue all
Hearts? How have those bright Eyes offended you, that thus you go about, by
immoderate weeping, to deprive them of that Luster by which they kill? Are you
resolved to make my Grave your Beauty's Sepulcher? Alas! I am not worthy of
the least of your Thoughts, much less your Tears, which are Gemms too bright,
too inestimable to be thrown away so lightly. But if you shall still retain any
kindness for a Dog that has served you faithfully, demonstrate it another way
than by your Tears. Transfer your Love as a Legacy I bequeath from my self to
my Orator, from the Dead to the Dead, but yet from one you cannot recover, to
one whom you can.

I say the Dog himself, had he a Voice, would express himself in the manner I
have represented.

What remains then, but that we bring at once our grief and our Discourse to a
Period? Let us perform our last Office to Favorite. Let us commit his Body to
the Dust, and so depart.

On Favorite, when alive, in Imitation of the 9th Ode of Anacreon.
(...)
TEll me, whose pretty Dog are you?
Whence do you come, and whither go?
Urania is my Lady's Name,
To her I go, front her I came:
Over every Heart the Maid does Reign,
And Men are proud to drag her Chain.
At her bright Feet they bleeding lie,
For her they Sigh, for her they die,
Then use me tenderly, for know,
Her Eyes will sure return the blow.
She calls me Favorite, and loves
Me more than Venus does her Doves.
What would you give Alas! to be
Urania's Favorite like me?
Where e're my Mistress does repair,
I and the Graces follow her.
Sometimes with her in Coach Tried,
Young Cupids running by our side.
Sometimes she Walks with Noble gate,
Whilst I, and Ruin on her wait.
Till kindly favoring my Feet,
She makes her own bright Arms my Seat.
What would you give, Alas! to be
Urania's Favorite like me?
With her at Table do I Eat,
And take my Dinner from her Plate.
Or standing at her Chair am fed,
Receiving from her hand the Bread.
What would you give, Alas! to be
Urania's Favorite like me?
Me on her lovely Lap she lays,
With me she Sports, with me she plays.
Sometimes her bosom's Snow I beat,
With Sportive motion of my Feet:
Sometimes her Mouth I Kiss, and Sip
The Nectar from her Rosy Lip.
What would you give, Alas! to be
Urania's Favorite like me.
At Night I follow her to Bed,
And on her Bosom lean my Head.
The little God of Love, and I
Together on one Pillow lie.
The Dog which in the Heavens appears,
And Shines among the glorious Stars,
I Envy not, while here I rest,
For there is Heaven in her Breast.
What would you give, Alas! to be
Urania's Favorite like me.
But it is time that I were gone,
I Have told my tale, and so have done.
Poor Man! you Sigh, Alas! I fear
Urania then is too Severe.
Farewell, and may my Mistress be
To you as gentle, as to me.
AN Heroic Elegy Upon the DEFUNCT aforesaid.
Out of the Author of Prince A --
Quis desiderio sit pudor, aut modus
Tam chari capitis --
NOW was the Eastern Sky-dy'd purple spread, page 24.

For fair Aurora's radiant Feet to tread: 244.

And now the beauteous Morn began to rise
Streaking with rosy light the smiling Skies.
The Fulgent Sun had with an early ray,
Depo'sd the Shades, 14.
and Reintron'd the Day.
When in a Gloomy Cave, 14.
that nature made
In a dark Rock, and covered with the shade
Of spreading Trees, that Day could not Invade,
Pensive Urania filled with Grief and dread, 9.

And pale confusion, droopt her lovely Head.
With rage dilated, and with Sorrow blown, 177.

Like glowing Aetna on Plinlimmon thrown.
A Velvet Bonnet on her Head, and dressed
For lightness in a thin Embroidered Vest.
Wild with her grief, 240.
distracted with despair,
She Strikes her throbbing Breast, tears off her Hair,
And with her Piercing Screams disturbs the Air.
When the fierce Tempest had its fury broke, 251.

With a deep Sigh the Sad Urania spoke.
Oh my dear Dog, how, mild had been my doom,
Had thou escaped, I suffered in thy room.
Oh that to see this fatal hour I live,
And thee, and all that is dear in Life Survive.
Such on the Ground the fading Rose we see,
By some rude blast torn from the Parent Tree.
But sure I shall not long thy absence Mourn,
I Will have to thee, thou wilt not to me return.
My ill presaging Dreams are brought to bed,
I started in my Sleep, and cried my Dog is dead.
O righteous Heaven why have thou ranged this day, 11.

Against me all thy Judgments in array!
On me let all thy Fiery Darts be spent,
Let not my Crime involve the Innocent.
And cruel Death,
Sure Thou wast Nursed on the horrid Alps high tops, 20.

And feedst thy Hunger with Cerberean Sops.
Hard marble Rocks might with more ease relent, 42.

And fire and plague learn sooner to repent.
Cease heavenly Viols, 12.
cease harmonious Flutes,
Besounding Dulcimers, and tuneful Lutes.
May dire Convulsions for a dismal space. 9.

Distort pale nature, wresting from its place,
This Globe, set to the Sun's more oblique view,
And wrench the Poles some Leagues yet more askew.
Thick Thunderclaps and Lightnings livid glare
Disturb the Sky, 14.
and trouble all the Air.
Eclipses, Comets, Meteors, Lightnings, Storms, 178.

Murders and Monsters of tremendous forms.
Fierce Alpine Allobrogs with slaughter fed, 159.

In snows, and everlasting Winter bred.
Outrage, Distraction, Clamor, Tumult reign,
Since Favorite 's gone, and never will come again.
Why did not Comets shake their fiery hair, 65.

And trail their flaming Trains along the Air:
Why did not Flakes of fire the World amaze,
And intermixed prodigious Meteors blaze.
Impetuous roar oreturn Heavens lofty Towers,
And starry fragments fall in burning showers.
Conflicting Billows against Billows dash, 219.

Thunder against Thunder roar, Lightnings against Lightnings flash.
Swords clash with Swords, Bucklers on Bucklers bray, 228.

And through the World a horrid din convey.
All mingle Tears, your Cries together flow,
And form a hideous harmony of Woe.
Oh Favorite worthy of a milder fate! 220.

But Death's blind strokes distinguish not the Great.
Scarce two full Golden-years are stolen away, 240.

Which in Love's Calendar scarce make a Day,
Wheh first on thee my circling Arms I flung,
And on thy Neck, overwhelmed with Joy, I hung,
A velvet Cap did then thy head equip,
If my decayed Remembrance does not trip.
Too dark the Eternal's ways are, 11.
too profound
For the most sharp created Wit to sound.
But sure thy loss was not in Anger meant, 12.

Heaven is too just, and thou too Innocent.
page Thou came of the Islandine Noble Race,
That right Descent from the swift Eurus trace:
Of lofty Stature, 165.
and a graceful Air,
Feared by the Males, and favored by the Fair.
Thy Hair Celestial, 16.
finely spun and wove
On Looms divine by all the skill above,
Bleach'd in the empyreal Plains, till white as Snow,
Made the long Robe that to thy Feet did flow.
Let me my Sorrow thus express, 156.
it is true
A fruitless Grief, but all that Love can do.
Mean time we must this last kind Office pay, 152.

And Favo'rite's Body to the Dome convey,
Where his Illustrious Fathers lie Interred,
Who reigned by Females loved, by others feared.
Painted and drawn with great Magnificence, 165.

In lasting Oil bought at a vast expense.
Once more Dear Dog, 249.
farewell, till we above
Meet in the blissful Realms of Light and Love.
FINIS.
In the Epistle Dedicatory, Page 5. Line 13. read Support instead of Suppress.


