A further and more particular ACCOUNT OF The Total Defeat OF THE REBELS in
SCOTLAND; The Number of the Slain, Two Standards and 1200 Prisoners brought
into Edinburgh: AND The CONFESSION of diverse of the Prisoners, how they were
drawn into this horrid Rebellion.
A LETTER from Edinburgh, June 24, At Midnight.
SIR,
YOU have already heard the good Tidings of that eminent Victory obtained by
His Majesty's Forces against the Rebels; and this comes only to satisfy you,
in some particulars of that glorious Action, the success where of, has caused
a new face of things, disperfing all those black Clouds that seemed to threaten
this poor Kingdom, which now appears in a posture of Joy and Triumph; and we do
not doubt but in very few days we shall be restored to an entire Tranquillity,
for the Body of the Nation was not at all Tainted or Infected with the
Rebellious poison, but upon all occasions are ready to express their Loyalty,
whereof they have in this juncture given signal instances, by their ready and
cheerful coming out to serve His Majesty, and the general abhorrence they every
where express against these insolent Rebels, their Principles and Practices,
and all that abet or comply with them.

Of these vile wretches, no fewer than 1200 were this afternoon brought in
Prisoners hither, and for the present are kept in the Gray-friars Churchyard,
under a very strong Guard. And we have a certain Account, that there were
killed of their Party at Bothwell-Bridge, and about Hamilton-Park, 800 and
upwards, besides the great numbers that have been slain upon the pursuit.

Our gallant General, his Highness the Duke of Buchlugh and Monmouth, gave
fresh proofs of his Conduct and Courage in this Affair, and we know not which
we ought first to admire, his indefatigable Prudence in giving the necessary
Orders, or, his Courage and Bravery in charging the thickest of the Rebels,
without the least apprehension of danger. Animated by his great Example, the
whole Nobility and Gentry behaved themselves with a singular Gallantry; nor
were any of our Troops wanting in their duty, or that deserved not a particular
recommendation; especially Captain Graham of Claver-house, who with his own
hands took the two Standards beforementioned, his Troop remembering the
slaughter the Rebels made amongst them, on the 29th of May, resolved now to
have full satisfaction, and therefore utterly refused either to give or take
Quarter. Likewise some High-landers belonging to the Earl of Murry, and the
Earl of Mar, charged the Rebels Left-wing with such fury, that the slain were
left on the place as it were in heaps.

The Rebels had 4 pieces of Cannon, one of which they threw into the River of
Clyd, the other 3 were taken. And that you may judge of the temper of the Men,
and what Cruelties they would have exercised, had they been Masters of the
Field. I must not forget to inform you, that there were likewise taken two pair
of Gallows, which they carried along with them; One was like our ordinary Tools
of that kind, and this was for the poorer sort. But the other, being intended
for the Gentry, was of a mode wholly new, and so curiously contrived, that I
know not well how to describe it; It Is one straight piece of Wood with a Screw,
having 12 or 15 branches which screwed up to the top, where there was a cross
piece of wood full of long Iron Spikes, on which the Heads of Persons of
Quality were to be fixed; and each of the aforesaid Branches had an Iron Hook at
the end, to hang people on. Thus the insolent and cruel Rebels had prepared,
like proud Haman, their Gallows for the Kings good Subjects; but like him too,
are themselves like to suffer on them, as they well deserve for their Treason.

Just now News is brought, that Capt. Graham of Claver-house having pursued a
Party of the Rebels Horse as far as Air, did there so warmely Engage them, that
most of them are Killed or taken Prisoners; amongst which last, it is said, is
Welsh, that notorious Preaching Trumpet of Sedition.

There have been since Sunday killed in several places above 400, and diverse of
the Kings Forces are still abroad in Parties in pursuit of them, and hourly
pick up some of them; but the General with the Gross of the Army, is at present
at Ruglen, and intend for Glascow to morrow.

The Privy-Councel have ordered diligent search to be made amongst the
Prisoners and the slain, for the Murderers of his Grace the late Archbishop
of St. Andrews; and that if any of them be found amongst the Dead, their Bodies
to be hanged up in Chains; if amongst the Prisoners, that they shall more
strictly be secured in order to their Trial.

Many of the Prisoners seem to be very sensible of their Wickedness in joining
in this horrid Rebellion, and do Confess, that their Ministers drew them into
the fame, by bold and seditious Sermons, perverting and abusing Scripture,
scandalizing and mis-representing the Government and chief Magistrates; and
withal to encourage them, had given them great assurances of large Supplies and
Assistance both of Men and Money from England and Ireland.

Take here the Names of the Heritors and persons of Note amongst the Rebels.
The Lairds of Earlston, the elder and the younger. Two Brothers of the Earl of
Galloway. The young Lord of Caitlaw. The Lord of Ketloch. The Lord of
Blairquan. Cuningham of Mongrinam. Tho. Bogle of Boglehol. Hamilton of Kinkel,
taken. Balfar of Kinloch, killed. Robert Hamilton Brother to Preston. Major
Lermouth.
Ministers known to be amongst the Rebels.
John Welsh taken. John King. John Kidd taken. Will. Foster. Tho. Douglas. Sam.
Arnot. John Rea. Geo. Barclay. James Semple.
It Is not doubted but this total Defeat has utterly crushed this dangerous
Rebellion, and will very much contribute to the Peace of this Nation for the
future; by opening the Eyes of the People, not to suffer themselves to be led
into such wicked and fatal Enterprises, by a turbulent sort of Self-designing
Kirkmen.


FINIS.

