A further ACCOUNT OF THE PROCEEDINGS Against the Rebels in Scotland, Since the
Arrival of his Grace THE Duke of Monmouth.
Communicated In a LETTER to a Person of Quality From EDENBVRGH* Dated the 19th
of this instant June, 1679. With the Substance of a New Declaration, Published
by the Rebels.
SIR,
HIs Grace the Duke of Monmouth arrived at Edinburgh on the 18th instant, and
was very honorably entertained, his presence giving much assurance and
satisfaction to all his Majesty's good Subjects in these parts, who expressed
their joys in loud Shouts and Acclamations all the way as he passed in the
City. He was immediately received into the Privy Council; and having seriously
inquired into the present posture of Affairs, and consulted thereupon, being
resolved vigorously to enter into Action, he neglected no time, but this day
hastened to the Kings Host, who were marched away before on Tuesday, and lay
encamped at Black-burn, where he is now at the head of them Commander in chief.

They are very near Fourteen thousand strong, all well appointed, and full of
Resolution and Zeal to serve his Majesty, and within a day or two will be much
Increased in number, if there shall be occasion for the same: for these Forces
are only those which come from the South, the West having never been employed,
and those of the North are not yet come up; though from thence we may be
confident of considerable Strength: For those parts are entirely dutiful to the
King, not one place in all the Northern Shires having ever been infected with
Fanaticism of any sort.

The Rebels are about Hambletoun, but we have no exact Account of their
Numbers; only we have advice, That Welsh, the eminent, turbulent, and
seditious Preacher, has lately joined their Main body, with Three hundred men
brought in by him; and that one Spreul a quondam Clerk of the Council under
Cromwell, is President of their Committee, and a great Oracle amongst them. This
man having for his Ill behavior formerly been taken into custody, was suffered
by the Council, not long since, to return home, upon his Parol, and solemn
Engagement to live peaceaby: And yet was scarce any sooner at home, but he
began to foment Sedition, and is now thus become a prime Ringleader amongst
the Rebels. And indeed we have little reason to expect any sincerity in the
Promises of such men as make no Conscience of the Obligations of Loyalty. And
by such their Indulgence to him, it appears how little severe the Council was
in their Proceedings, and how ready to trust any persons that would peaceably
demean themselves; they having never punished any man for his Opinion, but
suffered every thing which these men could call Religion, except going to the
Field-Conventicles in Arms, and suchlike insufferable Insolences. Nor has
there been Fifty pounds Sterling exacted in Fines for House-Conventicles these
three years; so false are all Reports of that nature suggested abroad, and
only coined to make the Government odious, and color Religion.

It Is plain, this design has for some time been hatching: for Cameron, one of
the Rebels, was privately employed to go over into Holland to buy Arms, and
from thence they were furnished; during his being there, he preached at
Rotterdam, and declared that it was a pious thing to kill the Prelates, and
highly pleasing to God.

They commit strange Insolences and Barbarities, wherever they come. At
Glascow, a Butcher when they first attempted that City, and were beat off,
having shot one of them, they have since taken him, and by a Court Martial of
their own, Condemned and shot him to Death for the same, though what he did was
fairly, as he was a Soldier under command. They have likewise taken down the
heads of the Rebels who were Justly Executed for the Rebellion in the year
1666, and have buried them in great State within the Cathedral-Church of
Glascow. And very lately they have emitted an impudent Declaration, wherein
they publish their demands, the chief of of which are these, viz.

That they would have a Parliament wherein there should not be any Nobleman;
and a General Assembly wherein no Bishop or indulged Minister should be
admitted.

By which extravagant Devices, you may guess at the Quality of the men, and
their Principles: for in truth there is not a man Five pounds Sterling per
annum appears as for them; but they freely entertain Bankrupts and Malefactors,
and yet pretend highly to Religion, though much divided in their own notions.

They have not of late increased their numbers, but rather moulder away; and
the Gentry in general throughout the Land, appear very vigorous for the Kings
Service. We are now ready to advance toward them, and do not doubt, by Gods
Blessing, to give a good account of them very shortly, though the common
opinion is, they will scatter themselves before we can get up to them. As soon
as any Account happens, be assured, you shall have it; in the mean time accept
my service, and continue me in your prayers, etc.

FINIS.

