A TESTIMONY TO THE True Light, Which is the Way of Life and Righteousness, to
all that obey it, and are subject to its requirings.

Being a Serious Admonition to all People to turn to the Lord; but more
especially intended for the Inhabitants of the Town of Colchester and Parts
adjacent.

By John Furly.

Also, A true Relation how the Lord made manifest strength in weakness, and
raised up a living Testimony to his Eternal Truth, in a Child of his, (named,
Elizaboth, who deceased the 16th of the twelf Month, called February 1669.) to
the admiration of all that were about her.

My Son, if thy heart be wise, my heart shall (...), even mine; yea, my reins
shall rejoice when thy lips speaks right things, Pro. 2^. 15, 16. The lip of
Truth shall be established for ever, Prove. 12. 19. Every man will kiss his lips
that gives a right answer, Prove. 24. 26. The Tongue of the Just is as choice
Silver, Prove. 10. 20. (...) unto the Righteous, it shall be well with them, for
they shall eat the fruit of their doings, Isa. 3. 10. Printed in the Year, 1670.

A Serious Exhortation to my Neighbors and Acquaintance in and about the Town
of Colchester, to improve their time, before the day of their Visitation be
over.
TO praise my dear deceased Child (who is entered into her Rest, and her Works
follow her) or to exalt my self, the Lord is my Witness, I do not expose this
Relation to public view; but to exalt the Name of our God, and of his
Everlasting Truth, whose Name alone is excellent throughout all the Earth; who
rather then fail will and does raise up Children to be the Heralds to proclaim
his Goodness, making good his Promise; to ordain praises out of the Mouths of
Babes and Sucklings: I say for Psalm. 8. 2.
this cause am I made willing it should be communicated to public view, and
that others may be excited and stirred up thereby to enquire after the Way of
Life and Happiness; that they with her may find rest also for their immortal
Souls. There are many I know with Balaam will desire to dye the death of the
Righteous, and that their latter end may be like theirs, who never so much as
choose the Lord to be their Portion, as she did, nor scarce set one foot forward
in the Way which is Everlasting, but are rather walking in the many bypath,
and in the crooked and broad way which leads to perdition, when as the Way is
but one, and its a plain Way, in which the Wayfaring-man, though a Fool,
(giving heed Isa 35. 8.
thereunto) shall not err: Its the Way in which this Child was educated from
her childhood, and it led her, and it is of ability (I do affirm it in the
Name of the Lord, and give it in as my Testimony for his everlasting Truth) to
bring all that shall obey it to the same Haven of Rest and Happiness as it
brought her.

Quest. Now many an honest heart may say, Let me know that Way, and acquaint me
with that Principle; for rest is that which I desire, and is that which I have
long been seeking after.

Answ. To such I answer, Christ Jesus is the Way, who has lighted every man
and woman that comes into the World; who is come a Light into the Joh. 9. Joh.
3. 17.
World, to the intent that all men through him might believe and be saved;
according to his own assertion, I am the Light of the World, he that believes
John 12. 46. Joh, 8. 12 Joh. 1. 12 Joh. 3. 19
in me shall not abide in Darkness but shall have the Light of Life; And as
many as did receive him, to them he gave Power to become the Sons of God; And
to those that believe in him he is the same at this day; but those that did not
believe on him, but reject him and his Counsel, against their own souls, those
were condemned by him, because they believed not in him; for so himself
affirms, This is the Condemnation that Light is come into the World, and men
love darkness rather then Light; That is the very cause of condemnation, and
the cause why the Wrath of God comes upon men and women; to wit, Because they
are disobedient to the Light with which they are enlightened, which if they did
obey, it would lead them to the Light of Life.

Quest. But some are ready to say, Why is it called Light? Where does this
Light shine? Or where is it to be found? And what effects, when it is obeyed,
will it produce?

Answ. For the sake of the simple-hearted I shall lay it down, as I have
received it of the Lord.

First, Most properly it is called Light, because it makes manifest, according
to the Apostles own words, What ever is reproved, is made manifest by the
Light; for whatever makes manifest is Ephe. 5. 13.
Light.

Secondly, This Light shines in the heart, making manifest the evil that
lurketh and lodges there, discovering the very hidden things of dishonesty; 2
Cor. 4. 6.
making a difference there, between the precious and the vile: And it is a
Discoverer of the very thoughts, intentions, and purposes of the heart, so Heh.
4. 12.
that the Enemy of the soul cannot lay a bait to ensnare you, or with his
cunning wiles come to tempt you; but as you apply your selves to the Light of
Christ, (which shines in your hearts) for direction, and believe therein, and
flee thereunto, as unto a strong Tower, ye will find safety.

Thirdyy, I do affirm, that this Light of Christ, which shines in the heart,
has Power, Virtue, and Efficacy in it to overcome the evil One in all his
appearances; and therefore the Apostle Paul rightly Romans 13. 12.
calls it Armor; commends it to be the Armor of proof; commands it to be put
on: Says he, Put on the Armor of Light, by which you shall be able to resist
Ephe. 6. 16.
the fiery Darts of the Devil; not only be able to resist temptations from
wicked men without you, but also the Devils temptations within you: Yea his
Darts, his most piercing Darts, his fiery Darts, and not only some of them,
but all his fiery Darts are to be resisted by this Light, which is Armor.

Friends and People, there is but Christ or Belial, there is but Light or
Darkness ruling in every man or woman that is in the World; the Darkness, and
the power of it, is that which leads and hurries men and women into sin and
evil: The Light and Power thereof, is that which makes sin and evil manifest,
convinces of sin, repoveth for it, and leads out of it; and this Light is not
at a distance from Joh. 16. 8
you, but it shines in your hearts, in which the abundant Love and Kindness
of God unto man has appeared; that as the Enemy of men's Souls has got a Seat
in man, and is near to him (for as its said, He rules in the hearts of the
Children of Ephe. 2. 2
disobedience) to tempt him to sin and evil; so the Light of Christ is in him
also, to show him the sin, and to lead man out of it, and to give him power to
resist him in all his appearances: So by minding hereof you will not be caught
in his snare; for as its said, In vain is the Net laid in sight of the Bird;
yea, Prove. 1. 17.
as you apply your selves to the Light, and wait for power there from, and
stand upon your watch Tower, the Enemy of your souls will flee from you, as a
routed Enemy, or as darkness does when the Sun arises, and it cannot be
otherwise, for he cannot abide the Light, in it he cannot dwell; darkness is
his Center and Habitation: The appearance Pro. 4. 17
of Light is the appearance of God, and that is terrible to him, that wounds
him most; for God is Light, and in it he dwells, and in him is no darkness 1
John 1. 5. 2 Cor. 6. 15.
at all; and Light and Darkness cannot dwell together, nor Christ with Belial;
and therefore this old subtle Serpent the Devil, the Enemy of mankind, bends
his greatest strength against the Light: I say the power of Darkness most
opposes that, if he can but bring men and women into a dis-esteem and
dis-regard of the Light, to account that as a slight or a 2 Cor. 4. 4.
mean thing, not worth the minding, he soon makes that man or woman his Slave
and Vassel; as it is written, The god of this World blinds the minds of them
which believe not, least the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ (which is
the Image of God) should shine upon them; [Mark] He would not have the Light to
shine, nor its operation in the heart to be regarded; for where its minded he
knows men and Joh. 12. 40.
women soon comes to be redeemed, from under his power, region, and dominion;
and therefore he blinds their minds and closes their eyes, least they should
see with their eyes, and understand with their hearts, and be converted, and
the Lord should heal them: I say, the power of darkness both in himself within,
and in his Instruments without, bends his greatest strength and force (setting
it as it were in battle array) against the Light, and the Children of the
Light, because that makes him and his Kingdom manifest, and not only so, but
destroys, and also detects all the deceitful and unfruitful works of darkness,
that are brought forth by him, and by his offspring, which are all children of
darkness; and could he but expel the Lig^t out of the World, and root that out
of the hearts of people, then he would soon accomplish his desired end indeed;
then would his mountain stand strong for ever; but blessed be the Lord, and
magnified be the pure Name of our God for ever, whose Glory is revealed, and
whose Light is risen, which not only makes him and his subjects manifest, but
shall also destroy and expel the power of darkness, and lay waste his heritage
for ever; it has done so already in the hearts of thousands, Prove. 4. 18.
yea, of ten thousands, and it shall increase more and more, till the
Righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the Salvation thereof as a
Lamp Isa. 62. 1.
that burns; for that is God's determination, to exalt his Son Christ Jesus,
the Light of the World, and to give him a Name above every name; yea; he will
magnify his Law (and Solomon tells thee in the Proverbs, The Law is Light) and
make it honorable; Pro. 6. 23 Isa. 23. 21.
he has done it in a great measure already; the reproach of his people he has
taken away, the mockings of Moab, the revilings of the Children of Ammon is
little now to what it was in years past; but he will magnify it yet more, and
make it yet more honorable; for the Gentiles must come to this Light, and
Kings to the brightness of its rising, Isa. 60. 3. Revel. 21 24.
as it was prophesied by Isaiah; for the Nations of them that are saved must
come to walk in the Light of the Lamb, of which Friends and People, we affirm
that without it ye cannot be freed from the cunning wiles of Satan, who goes
about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour; for Friends, there is
not another power can save you from sin, but that Power which makes sin
manifest; there are but two powers to which all men and women in the World are
subject, the one leads into sin, the other leads out of sin; that power which
prompts and leads into sin, all men will readily grant that's the power of
Darkness, that never leads to God, nor yet to goodness; that Power which leads
out of sin and evil, it must on the contrary be confessed, is the Arm and Power
of God, none dare say that that at any time leads into sin and evil.

So Friends and Neighbors, with the Light which shines in your hearts, which
as you are faithful unto, will increas^ to shine more and more until it be
perfect Pro. 4. 18
d^y, examine your selves every day and hour under wh^t Power and Region you
are, and whom you do (...), (For his Servants assuredly you are (as it is
written) to wh^m you yield obedience) This Light will (...) with you, it will
fl^^ter none of you, nor will i^ accuse any of you falsely; its Voice is God's
Voice in you: and speaks one and the same Language with the Lord in Heaven; it
will never justify you when you do evil, (but then brings anguish,
tri^ulation, and sorrow upon you) nor never condemn you when you have done
well; when you do well, you find and feel inwardly acceptance with the Lord;
Honor, Glory, and Immortallity, is your Portion, agreeable to the Apostles
words, If our Hearts condemn us not, then have we peace toward 1 John 3. 21.
God; So dear Friends, slight not its appearance, for it never appears but to
do you good, or to preserve you from evil before you enter into it; it is a
faithful Witness, there is no bribing of it, that will do Pro. 14. 5
its Office, it will show you the evil you are about to do, that so of your
blood it may be clear, and if you are condemned, your condemnation may be of
your selves, as Christ the Light of the World said, If I had not come ye had
not had sin, but now you have no Cloak for your sin; now men have no excuse, as
it is written, All men shall be left without excuse; John 15. 22.
Every mouth shall be stopped; because, What could the Lord have done more for
men and women, then to place a Light (which is a measure of his own Spirit) so
near them, even in, in their very Hearts and Consciences, that the Enemy of
their souls cannot budge or stir, but this Light makes him manifest; Ephesians. 5. 13
and often woeth and beseeches men to forsake the evil of their ways, which
grieves his holy Spirit, and wounds their own souls; had the Lord not caused
such a Light to shine, or had it not shined within, in the heart, where the
Devil, and his temptations, and his goods lodges, man might have had a fair
plea, and a just excuse another day; and have said, Lord, I saw not the
Tempter, nor his Temptation, thou gave me nothing to discover him; nor yet,
that that was of authority or power to resist or graple with so potent an
Adversary; I was without any Light which should manifest his approach to me, or
if I had it, it was a Light remote from me, the Enemy was in one place, and the
Armor of Light by which I should resist the Devil (and so he be made to flee
from me) was in another place, at a great distance from me, and I needed it
nearer me, yea, within me, for, there I felt the power of Darkness stirring to
tempt and prompt me to sin and evil, and so I was overcome Ephesians. 2. 2.
by him: Yea, and this would have been a fair excuse at the Bar of God's
Tribunal; but all men shall be left without excuse, because, Christ is 1 John
2. 8.
come, the true Light shines, and it shines in your hearts, and makes
manifest the sin that lodges there, to the end that ye might join to its
Power, and resist the Devil in his first appearance, that so the Cockatrice-Egg
might be broaken, before ever it come to be a Serpent: My self, with many
others can set to our seal, that this is true; We have been redeemed by its
Power; We have been saved and preserved by its Arm; We have felt its Efficacy
in our hearts, not only to make sin and evil manifest, but also to give us
power against sin, as we have adhered and joined to it; yea, it has cleansed
us, and sanctified us, and wrought in us mightily, and enabled us to make that
resistance which otherwise we had never been able to make against the man of
sin, and the power of darkness, by which we know it is the Power of God; as
Christ said, If I do not the Works that none ever did, believe me not; If I do,
then believe me for my Works sake: We have felt and tasted it, and experienced
it many a year; and so we affirm not of a thing which we have not tried, or
which we have taken up upon trust or here-say, from other men's reports; but we
have believed, and therefore do we speak; we have tried it, and therefore we
cannot but praise it, and recommend it ^o others, as the only Armor by which
ye must be enabled to resist all the fiery Darts of the Devil; and as that
without which ye cannot be preserved from sin and evil, but no sooner from
Sinners without shall ye be enticed, but you shall consent unto them; Prove. 1.
10.
nor no sooner be tempted by the Evil-One within, but you shall yield to his
temptations. And therefore dear Friends and Townsmen, I exhort you all in the
Name and Fear of the Lord, to prove and try this excellent piece of Armor of
Light; and to that end examine first, whether there is not a Light in you,
which shows you your thoughts, intentions, and purposes of your hearts, whether
they be evil or good, and by what name can you call this, but Light; and then
examine further, when you have an intent and purpose to do evil, whether this
Light does not warn you of it beforehand, showing you its a wicked thing you
are about to do? and that its against the Will and Command of God, and against
the Witness of God in your own Consciences, and yet oft-times you will presume
to do it, (can any man deny this to be true, except such as are seared as with
a hot Iron?) Well, notwithstanding the Light thus testifies against the evil,
yet when ye have committed it, examine further, whether it cease to do
another Office, and that is to bring Judgment upon you, to reprove you, and
convince you of the evil you have done, and sometimes lies so hard upon your
Consciences that you resolve not to do the like another time; and yet again you
not minding the Light, but rather rebelling against it, are soon over-taken in
the same evil again: Oh Friends, upon examination of your own hearts, you
knowing these things to be true, methink, if you would act reason but as men,
you should argue in this manner; Surely this Light which shines in my heart is
the Light of the Lord, and its not placed in me to be put under a Bushel;
surely I ought to obey it, and give heed to it; it is a precious Light, for it
strives with me to make me good; it pleads with me on God's behalf, to forsake
evil, and it never reproves me but when I do evil; surely it can be no less
then a measure of God's Good Spirit, that thus shines in my heart; and so caus^
you to take up a Resolution henceforth to love and obey it and be led by it;
it was so with me when I was first convinced: The Light was so plain a Thing,
and so precious, and so clear a Truth to me, that I have oft-times wondered in
my self how I could oppose it so long, and did not bow to it sooner; and I then
concluded what ever it cost me, to walk in the Light, and be obedient
thereunto; and I can truly say to this day, I have not served a hard Master,
nor was it ever in the least in my heart to question the truth of it, nor has
my faith therein been shaken; but without all controversy it is undoubtedly
the Way to Life and Immortallity, and a Voice from that excellent Glory, which
if men do not give heed unto, and answer its requiring, it will be their
condemnation; for if they that despised Moses's Law dyed without mercy, of how
much Heb. 10. 28, 29.
sorer punishment shall he be thought worthy, that tre^ds under foot the Son of
God and does despite to the Spirit of Grace. Consider further, that that which
has no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but which constantly
declares against it, and reproves for it, cannot be of the nature of the
darkness, against which it testifies, but of a contrary Nature, to wit, of the
Light; and it is that Seed which God has left in man, of which the Apostle
testifies, Had he not left us a Seed, we had been as Sodom, Romans 9. 29.
and made like unto Gomorrah. Now some will confess there is a relic of the
Image of God (which Adam was in, in innocence) left in man; but they reckon it
a trifle, and deny it to be of any power or efficacy to lead to God; but we who
h^ve felt its living Power and Virtue do testify for God, and for his Truth,
that its of a growing Nature, and though, in its first appearance, it is small
and little, even as a Grain of Mustard Seed, as Christ compared it, the least
of all the Seeds in the Garden, yet it comes in time to be the greatest of all
Herbs, and becomes a Tree. Friends, does it make manifest to you one evil one
day? be faithful to its manifestation, and cease from that evil, and then it
will teach you to deny an other, and an other evil after that; for, to that end
the Grace of God appears, until all ungodliness Titus 2. 11.
and worldly lusts be denied, and teache^ to live Righteously, Holy, and
Soberly in this present World: And until you become a new Lump created in
Christ Jesus unto good Works; for like unto Leaven also did Christ compare it,
which hid in three measures of Meal leavened the whole Lump: I say, as ye are
subject to its operation and manifestation, be it in never so little, yet being
faithful hereunto, ye shall be Rulers over much, and so at length come to rule
in the Power and Authority of the Lord, over Satan and all his temptations.

So, Friends and People, to this Principle of God, which is near you, which
brought this Child near unto the Lord, and near and dear unto his People, do I
recommend you, and not to a new thing which you have never before heard of, or
in no wise experienced; but to that which you cannot but be sensible of has
striven with you ever since you were Children, and came to know your right hand
from your left, which, I say, from that time bore a secret testimony in your
hearts, for God, against your Lies and Falsehoods, and Evils committed, though
in never so much secrecy; nay, although your Lies had the best gloss and cover
put upon them that the Devil, and your own wicked hearts, could invent, yet did
this pure Witness of God (which never consented to sin and evil, nor could be
contaminated o^ defiled by it) bear a true and faithful Witness against you,
and show you that you lied and did wickedly; unto this, I say, do I recommend
you, if ever you expect to enter that Kingdom into which no unclean thing can
enter, or ever ye expect to be a Habitation for God, or fit Vessels for the
Lord's use; even to the Word in your hearts; for he that is the Light of the
World is also called the Word of God, Rev. 19. 13.
which was from the beginning, unto which David in his day recommended
Young Men, as that by Psalm. 119. Prove. 6. 23. Joh. 15. 3.
which they should cleanse their way; and which Solomon testified of, Which was
Guide unto his Feet, and a Lamp unto his Path; And which Christ testified of,
had cleansed his Disciples, Ye are clean through the Word; Which Peter also
testified, of, To be a mavelous Light; and the Apostle Paul 1 Pet. 2. 9.
brings in his testimony concerning this ingrafted Word, That its nigh, even in
the Heart and in the Mouth, so that none shall need to say, Who shall ascend to
bring it down, or descend to bring Romans 10.
it up, for its nigh in the heart and in the mouth: And this was the Doctrine
of all the holy Men of God, in all Ages of the World: David prayed to the Lord,
That he would lift up his Light, and his Truth, that they might lead him; for
as he says in another place, In thy Light we shall see Light; Isa. 2. 5.
And the Prophet Isaiah exhorted those that he loved, To walk in the Light of
the Lord, and walked therein himself; Come, says he, And let us walk in the
Light of the Lord; he calls it, The good old Way, and leads into the new and
living Way; and this was the very end why Paul had a Ministry committed to him,
to wit, That h^ mig^t turn people from Darkness unto Light, and from ^he power
of Satan unto God; Good old Simion (...) says, Its A^t. 26. 18.
the Way prepared before the face of all People: Therefore now Friends, you
giving up your consent to the truth of these things, by an inward conviction in
your Consciences, (for to that I appeal, and to that always the Apostles
defired to be evident) rebel no longer against it, the Spirit of God shall not
always strive with you, and if you continue in rebellion against it, you shall
never know the Way Job 24. 13
of it; and this is one main reason why the Light is so much opposed and spoken
against, because people through their rebellion to it, know not the virtue and
efficacy of it, and so speak evil of that they know not, but are incompetent
Judges in the case; and an other reason is, because commonly they are men of
perverse minds, evil men, concerning the Faith, Reprobates.

And this Light reproves for evil deeds; as Christ said, He that does evil
hates the Light, and will not bring his deeds to the Light, lest the Light
should reprove John 3. 20.
him; so from Christ's own Words it follows, they are evil men that hates the
Light, or speaks contemptibly of it, they are such as are Enemies in their
minds to it through wicked works. Col. 1. 20.


But may some say, Do not our Priest and Professors with one consent (yea, as
unanimonsly, as ever the Jews called to have Christ crucified, release not this
man to us, but Barrabas) speak and exclaim against the Light; Some say its a
check; some say a natural light; and some a carnal light; others an
insufficient light; and some call it an Ignus Fatuus; and some a diabolical
light; but the truth is (says many an honest heart) they are divided among
themselves about it (as the Elders was in accusing innocent Susanna; some said,
under a Sick more Tree; and some under an other Tree; and none of all these
testimonies in this case are true; or to be regarded) and we know not what to
think of it; but I dare not but think (say some people) that many of them are
knowing men, and good men, and who shall we believe? Its none but you Quakers
commend the Light, as it was said of Christ's Followers of old, Do any of the
Rulers of the People believe in him? but this People that know not the Law are
accursed.

Here what Christ says, He concludes them ignorant men; against whom thou art
not (whosoever thou art) to opose thy judgment: He said to the learned Mat. 22.
29.
Pharisees, You err not knowing the Scripture (though they had the Scripture)
nor the Power of God; and testifies further against them, They were evil men,
and a Generation of Vipers, and herein their wickedness appeared in hating the
Light; He that does evil hates the Light; such as are reproved by John 3. 20.
it, and judged by it, and condemned by it, are the only Haters of it: I say,
such as would have Christ's Kingdom pulled down, and Satan's Kingdom set up, its
no other that dare lift up a hand or a tongue against the Light, whatever they
may profess in words; can you make me believe, or any rational man, that a good
man that has experienced its operation, and that walks in the Light, can speak
against the Light? its as easy and as possible for a man to fathom the Are, or
make a Girdle for the Sun; he cannot, he dares not; for the Light is his Life,
his Armor, his Preserver, his strong Tower, (which as he flees unto he is
safe) its his delight to dwell in it, and walk in it; its that which he is made
a child of; should he speak against the Light, he should speak against the
Lord, he should vilify his Maker, he should speak against his own Interest,
and against that Kigndom of which he is an Heir; for the Inheritance which is
prepared for him, and others of the Cloud of Witnesses gone before him, is an
Inheritance of Light; for the Apostle Col. 1. 12.
called it, An Inheritance with the Saints in the Light; Nay he is so far from
speaking against it, that he continually exalts it, and commends it; and
commends it best by walking in the Light, and is ready to lay down his Life in
defense of the truth of it; He that does well (its written) loves the Light,
and Joh. 3. 21
brings his deeds to it, that it might be manifest his works are wrought in
God. So all Friends and People, its an everlasting Truth to you, neither your
Guides nor your selves can ever be competent Judges of the Light, or of its
sufficiency, nor ever truly report of its Authority or Power, nor know what it
will lead you from* nor bring you unto, until you come to be led by it, and
give up to its requirings, (as did this dear Child) and when you have done so,
you will bring in your Testimonies for the Lord with me and others, that its a
mavelous Light, and worthy to be followed, loved, and obeyed, for Wisdom was,
and ever will be justified of her Children, as it was ever hated of its
Enemies; but on the contrary, the children of Darkness will exalt their fathers
Kingdom, the Prince of Darkness, and their inheritance, which is a kingdom of
Darkness, 2 Pet. 2. 17. Jude 6.
where they are reserved in Chains of Darkness to the Judgment of the great Day.

So Friends and Townsmen, whose lives the Lord has miraculously spared, in
the last great Contagion in this Town, which swept away thousands, and also
has hitherto preserved, in or from this last Visitation of the Smallpox; and
made you living monuments of his Mercy at this day: Let the time past suffice,
wherein you have walked contrary to this Light of Christ in your Consciences,
and said often to it in your Hearts in this kind, Cease from before me, I
desire not the knowledge of thy Law; nor would you hear the voice of the
Charmer, charm he never so wisely (nor never so seasonably, (even just when
your feet were oft-times going down to the chambers of Death) and which
sometimes has looked you in the face, and smit you in your Hearts, when you
have entertained thoughts of acting wickedly; yet have ye made good the
Prophets words, In a Land of ^^righteousness you would do unjustly, and would
not behold the Majesty of the Lord: I say, let the time past suffice (and now
turn at his reproof, and obey his call, lest his Wrath be kindled against you,
and he may not hear when you call, but may laugh at your calamity, and mock
when your fear comes (for though you have escaped one woe, and a second, yet
the Lord has many more Arrows in his Quiver, which he can bring out of his
Armory of his Justice, wherewith he will wound the hairy Scalp of every one
that goes on in his iniquities) that so a time of refreshing you may know from
the presence of the Lord, before you go hence and see man no more, which is my
hearts desire to the Lord for you all.

Your Friend, J. F.
Colchester, the 18th of of the 12th Month, called February, 69.
Friends,
THis choice Child, this goodly Plant, this Tree of Righteousness; lovely in
her life to all that knew her, but most lovely at her Death, was of age
thirteen Years five Weeks: She loved the Lord of a Child, and also those that
feared him: Her delight was to hear Truth declared, and to be with the
excellent of the Earth, even with such as excelled in Virtue: She dyed at her
Father's House in Colchester, after five days sickness; two days before her
departure she was filled with the Love of God; and the Springs of Life were so
opened in her, that made her Cup to overflow, so that she brake forth into
many precious Expressions, concerning, HOw Good the Lord was, and how Gracious
he had been to her all her days, and never did her hurt in all her life; and
then she lay still a while musing and meditating upon the Lord, and making
melody with Grace in her heart, which was clearly perceived by all that were
about her; after which she again broke forth into praises, How good the Lord
was, and often brethed up to the Lord, that she might be faithful, for if she
were not, her Tallent would be taken from her; and often, with great fervency
of Spirit, begged of the Lord, That he would speak what he had to say to her,
and by her; for said she, I am ready to serve thee, and also to obey thee; (she
was not willing to speak more or less then what the Lord should speak by her,
and in her by his Spirit) very often with great eagerness did she put up that
Petition to the Lord, at which time she lay with most pleasant and sweet
Countenance; saying, She was well, and that she felt no pain: Soon after in the
presence of seven or eight Persons she spoke, as follows (which was taken in
Shorthand from her mouth as she uttered the words.)

WHatever is not of thy self Lord purge out of me; yea, purge me thoroughly
Lord, leave not a wicked word in me; thrust away the power of Darkness, Lord
make me able to praise thee, let me not come into the way which is evil, for if
I do I shall dishonor Thee and thy Truth: I hope I shall never rebel against
thee more, but have full satisfaction in Thee and in thy Ways, and not in the
evil One and his ways: Wash me O Lord thoroughly, let not an unadvised word
come out of my mouth; If it be thy will O Lord speak, for I am willing to hear
thee, and obey thee, though I be accounted unshamefaced by the People of the
World, for the same; I hope I shall never forget thy Loving Kindness while I am
in this World: Oh! thy everlasting Kindness is never to be forgotten; purge me,
cleanse me thoroughly, let not any evil be left in me; make me clean O Lord, that
I may be able to serve thee in the Land of the Living: Show them, O Lord, the
evil of their ways, that have done evilly, and lay a burden upon their spirits
that they may leave it: I feel no pain, the Lord is good to me; good is the
Will of the Lord; let thy Will be done in Earth as its done in Heaven;
Everlasting Kindness, have thou shown me, and I hope I shall never forget it
while I am in this World; Lord purge all here, that they may all be clean and
able to serve thee, let not an unclean spirit be here, that they also may serve
thee in the Land of the Living, whilst they have a being in this World; Oh the
Everlasting Kindness of God is never to be forgetten, good art thou unto me,
thy Goodness is never to be forgotten, woundrous Works have thou done; wash me,
make me clean, leave not in me any thing which is not of thy self; thou
desire not the death of a Sinner, but rather that he should repent and live.
And Lord, if I should not improve my time, that which I have shall be taken
from me; Lord take away the very stump of evil, leave it not in me; if I
improve not my time, my Tallent will be taken from me, yea, assuredly it will.

Then turning to one of her Brothers (who had not carried himself so in the Awe
and Dread of the Lord as he should do, though of late he has given some hopes
of his return) she said to him, Improve thy time, for thou know not how soon
thou may be taken away: If thou give thy mind to Drunkenness what will become
of thee? thou must assuredly go to destruction, thou can not go to Heaven
that way, thou can not ever expect it; but to Hell thou must go, where there
is torment for ever, where the Fire never goes out, but the Flames thereof are
everlasting: Thou art running headlong to destruction, and therefore wait upon
the Lord, and exercise thy mind upon him, else thou must go to destruction.

And so she said to two other of her Brothers, Mind the Lord, improve your
times, as I hope I shall do mine, or else I had better never have known the Way
of Truth.

To her Brother, that she first called; to him she said James, be not a sorrow
to thy Father and Mother, and Brother and Sister; but love the Lord, and then
the Lord will love thee: Go not about to drink Wine (the house of our Father
affords wine, where thou may drink Wine, as we do moderately) lest wrath and
destruction be thy Portion: Fear the Lord, and mind what I say, Go not a
Fudling, but fear the Lord, and beg of him to forgive thee; yea, beg Life of
the Lord, and he may give it unto thee; but if thou go on in the broad way,
destruction will be thy Portion; therefore fear the Lord, and mind what I say,
the Lord will forgive thee if thou return and repens; but if thou do not,
headlong into Hell thou must go* Thou have of ten greived thy Father and
Mother, Oh* what will become of thee! if thou return not Hell will be thy
Portion for ever: Beg of the Lord to forgive thee; repent and walk in an other
Way; Repent, I say, whilst thy day lasts; if thy day be over, then Hell will
be thy Portion, Hell and Torment that never ends: The Lake is for the Liar, and
for the unclean, and for the Swearer, Hell is for them; But Heaven the Father's
Bosom, the Father's House, where there is Bread enough; that's the Portion of
the Righteous: Then she took him by the hand, and also about the neck, and
kissed him: Mind what I say, O dear Brother, the Fire of Hell never goes out,
no, never; is not that a long day? no, never, but flames for ever; that a long
day Brother: Therefore beg of the Lord whilst thou have a day: Thou have been
very wicked, and have greived us, yea, thou have cost me many a Tear; repent
whilst a day lasts, lest everlasting Flames of Fire seize upon thee; that's a
long day, Brother; and thou know not how soon thy days may be shortened, and
thou may come to dye.

The Lord has been good to me, I hope I shall never forget his loving
kindness: To her Brother Benjamin, whom she called, to him she said, Thou have
been a Boy of a perverse spirit; woe will also overtake thee, if thou walk in
the Way of wickedness; but if thou walk in the smooth and narrow way, it will
be well with thee; thou have been naught and stubborn, be not so naught now any
more, but turn a new leaf, that when thou die thou may go to the Lord; In
the Fathers House there is bread enough; there thou shall want for nothing, no,
for nothing, thy stubborn heart must be plucked down, beg of the Lord to
forgive thee; go not on in crooked paths, but walk in the strait and narrow
way, and he will lead thee to happiness, thou shall not miss of it.

Then she called to her Brother Jonathan, and said to him, Be not thou naught;
thou art very apt to be pettish and peevish, that is a bad spirit also, turn a
new leaf, and beg of the Lord to forgive thee.

Then to her Brother James she said again, Beg of the Lord to forgive thee,
dear Brother James, walk in the way of the Righteous; I shall be glad you may
all grow up as Trees of Righteousness, and as Plants of the Lord; mind what I
say to thee dear James, its my love to thee that causes me thus to call upon
thee, to be a new Plant, regenerate, born again; when a good thing comes into
thy mind, hold it fast, make much of it; when a wicked thing comes into thy
mind, put it far from thee, put it away, and put a righteous thing in the room
of it, and then thou will become a good Plant: I shall never forget the
goodness of the Lord, if I should his hand would reach me; if thou have but a
day to live, be good that day, the Lord would not have one Soul to die and
perish, desire of the Lord to break thy stony heart, and to give thee a new
heart; thou have had a foul heart, if thou go on thou will never be out of
torment, is not that a long day? yes, its a long day; Call upon the Lord, mind
what I say, Brother, that will rejoice me and thy Parents, Brothers and
Sisters; thou have been wicked; Oh, what will become of thee, if thou do not
repent, I cannot express it, thou will never be out of Torment, but always
burning; and that is not a heat, Brother, like an Oven, heat with a little
wood: Oh, Brother, let it never be said that, any of John Fu^ly's children are
gone to Hell, and that he was a good man, but his children are wicked children;
thou have cost me many a tear; if thou return to the Lord, thou will then be
their joy and delight; repent whilst thou have a day to live; love the Lord,
Brothers, love good men, hate the Devil; but, oh, love the Lord, and then ye
will he a joy to your Father and Mother.

Then she made a little pause, and said, I see a Vision, a little Youth came
in, in a Murry Gound, the lovei^est Lad that ever I saw in all my life, with a
white cloth about his middle, and a Crown upon his head, and he picked at my
Nose; but when I spoke to him in the Name of the Lord, his Crown fell from off
his head, and almost all his hair, and so he vanished away; the next day she
again mentioned the loveliness of the Lad. This Vision is recommended to the
Spirit of God, that reveals secrets to them that fear him; she not giving any
Interpretation thereof.

When she saw one of her Sisters weep, she said, Weep not for me, I am well;
she never took not^ce of death: Then she said again* I am very well, I hope I
shall never forget the Lord; all serve the Lord, that he may be your Portion,
that will be manner of boasting; in my Fathers House there is bread enough,
there is fullness, want of nothing, yea, there is fullness of Bread, durable
Riches and Honor; I desire never to forget the Lord.

The Reader may take notice, that all these foregoing words were not spoken by
her without intermission; but of times she made a pause, as being spent and out
of breath, and then her heart being lifted up unto the Lord, and rejoicing in
his Pure, Holy, Fresh, Living Presence; ^^e would sing unto the Lord inwardly,
with Grace in her heart; and then begin again, as the spirit of the Lord
breathed through her; for it was manifest to the Beholders, and Hearers of her,
as it will be evident to the Consciences of all that hears this Relation, that
have any sense or feeling of the Life of God; that it was not she that spoke,
but the Spirit of her Heavenly Father that spoke in her; and that thus enabled
her rightly to divide the Word of Truth, and to give to each of her Brothers
their Portion in due season, which I hope will take root downward, and bring
forth fruit upward, to the Honor, Glory, and Praise of the Husbandman, whose
Handy-Works Praise him; to whom be Glory, Honor and Praise for ever, and
Dominion in the highest, and Heavenly Halelujahs for ever Amen.

Written by the Father of this dear Lamb, who is a Companion to all that fear
the Lord, In scorn called a Quaker.

J. F.

Postscript.
ALl young Lads and Girls, that reads this Relation, read it with seriousness
and good consideration; and as you feel desires, that your latter end may be as
this dear Child's was; then consider; what led her to that end? and whether the
same does lead you? whether her way be your way, her delight your delight, and
such Companions a she chose be your Companions? Her Way was the Light in her
own heart, which made her to eschew evil words and actions which others ran
into forlack of taking heed thereto: Her delight was to be obedient to her
Parents, and to be serviceable to the least of God's People, without repining;
nay, she never thought any thing that she was capable of doing, for any of the
Servants of God, a burden Her Companions were them that feared the Lord; and
for children, she bore most affection to those that were most sober and
innocent; to be short, she lived as she dyed, that was, In subjection to that
pure Principle of Light that was in her, by which she was taught obedience, to
that godly discipline and government, to those that were over her in the Lord;
so all that would lay down their heads in the like joy and peace, as she has
done, and would be crowned with honor and immortality, must diligently search
to find and know that pure Principle of Light in you, that is a Reprover of
every evil thought, word, and action, and then walk in obedience and subjection
thereunto, that it may not be your Reprover, but your Comforter, and speak
peace unto you in your own bosoms morning and evening; that so when the last
morning and evening of your lives come, you may be sure of that Peace that none
can take from you; that so death may be no more terrible to you, then it was to
this tender Plant, who walking in innocence, dyed in peace, and is gathered
into Glory; and has a Name and Place among the Faithful.

S. C.

SInce the departure of my dear Lamb, hearing what Lies has been broached
concerning her, in dispite of Gods precious everlasting Truth, as if in her
life time she walked not amongst those People called Quakers; but gave her
Brothers charge, to have a care of them at her death; which thing being as
false and contrary as Light is to Darkness: I could not but bear my Testimony
against it; The Child was always a Lover of those People; to go to their
Meetings it was as her appointed food; their company was her delight, she never
knew when she had enough of it, or did enough for them: Both in her life, and
at her death also, she chose to forsake Father and Mother to live in the City
of London, because she could enjoy more of their Meetings and Company then at
Colchester: she was a Child that feared the Lord, loved and obeyed his Light in
her heart (according to her Measure) which God had placed in her; she feared
and hated a Lie, and lived and dyed in the Truth, which the People called
Quakers do profess.

I say, hearing this false Report concerning my dear Child; for the Truth's
sake I cannot be silent, but am constrained to bring in my testimony concerning
her life and death, That it was in God's precious Truth, to wit, the Light
Christ Jesus, the Rock of Ages, which she was built upon, which is the Way, the
Truth, and the Life, which has led her to her Heavenly Father, where she
rests in his Bosom, and her good Works follow her; as you may see by the
foregoing Treatise; and the Lord knows that it is not so much to commend my
Child, as the Truth and the Way in which she walked, which preserved and kept
her unspotted of the World to the coming of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
in whom she is now at rest: And I would advise all, both old and young, that
have not yet walked in obedience to the Light which shines in their hearts,
now to delay no longer, but speedily to give up to be led thereby; for the
Light is the Way to Life eternal, to all such as walks in, and are given up to
be led by it, as she was; for Wisdom is justified of her Children; a good Tree
cannor bring forth evil fruit, neither can an evil Tree bring forth good fruit
(as the Scripture of Truth Testifies) by the fruit you shall know whether the
Tree or Root, which it grew upon, be good or evil; so I shall leave this to the
Witness of God in all Consciences to judge of the Root, which she was ingrafted
upon, and of the Way which she walked in, by the fruit which she brought forth,
to the Praise and Glory of God, who loved her, and has taken her to himself,
who knows what is best for us; to whom be all Glory and Praise rendered, who
alone is worthy.

By me her dear Mother, Anna Furly.

THe Lord having in measure made me sensible of that blessed Truth, which the
People of God called Quakers do own, and which my dear Sister bore testimony
unto, both in her life and at her death: I could do no less then bring in my
testimony also to the same Truth; that there is no other way but that to Heaven
and Happiness; and that I may be found walking and abiding therein to the end
of my days is the desire of my soul; knowing that he or she that turns their
backs upon the Light, which is the Way of Life, the Lords Soul shall have no
pleasure in such; yea, better were it for such they had never been born, then
having once professed this Truth, they should turn aside from it, into crooked
and bypathes; surely to such the Light will be their condemnation; but unto
them that walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, there is no occasion of
stumbling. Thus having born this my Testimony, I have peace therein, not
minding the reproaches of Amoleck, nor the revilings of the Children of Moab;
for I esteem it greater riches to suffer afflictions with the People of God,
then to dwell in the tents of wi^kedness or enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season.

Anna Furly, jun.

The End.

