Two LETTERS The one from The Right HONORABLE, Sir Thomas Fairfax.

The other from Colonel Ralph Weldon.

Being an exact Relation of the raising of the Siege, and releeving of the Town
of TAUNTON.

Which was Read in both Houses of Parliament on Wednesday being the 14. of May
1645.

And commanded to be forthwith printed.

London printed for John Wright at the Kings Head in the old Bayley. 1645.

For the HONORABLE William Lenthall Esquire, Speaker of the Honorable House
of Commons.
Master Speaker;
I Have sent you here enclosed Colonel Weldens Letter, showing Gods goodness
in the seasonable relief of Taunton; and I hear that the Enemy has sent part
of their Force to Bridgewater, and part to Exceter; we have had a continual
March this fourteen days, the extremity of heat and length of way has much
wearied the Soldiers and worn out their Shoes, which I desire may be supplied
with all speed. This (with some little rest) will make these men willing and
very ready to obey any Command they shall have to do Service. I shall for the
present refer you to this enclosed, and so remain,

Your very affectionate friend, and humble servant, Tho. Fairfax.
White Church 13. May at 12. a clock at night.
To the Right HONORABLE Sir Thomas Fairfax, Commander in chief of the Army
raised for the defense of King and Parliament, present.
Right Honorable,
ACcording to your command I shall give you an account of the good Success
wherewith God has blessed this Party hitherto. We have marched very hard, lost
no time, and this Sunday, the eleventh, came before Taunton, where ten of ours
fell on a hundred of theirs, and killed and took some of them; they could not
believe but we were my Lord Gorings Forces, we were within four miles of the
Town before they would believe we were come: and then about four of the
Clock in the afternoon they confusedly ran every way; Gods goodness appeared
very much to this poor Town: We came in the very point of time, their
Ammunition was all spent, very much of the Town burnt, the Town extremely well
defended, many times entered by storm, and beaten out again, They have two
hundred hurt men in the Town; It must now be our parts to consider how to
subsist. The barbarous Enemy has almost unpeopled the Countrey^ Since I came
hear, in six Weeks time, a wonderful Change, scarce a man to be seen in a
Village. I shall in all humility acquaint you from that I hear: My Regiment is
designed for the West, I humbly entreat, if it be possible, I may wait on
your Honor in your Army, which if your honor shall please to grant, it will
much oblige

Your most humble Servant, Ralph Weldon.
Patmister. May the 11.
FINIS.

