CONCIO AD MAGISTRATUM A Nations Honor, AND A Nations dishonor OR A Kingdoms
Prospective-Glass. Discovering who are the most faithful friends, and who the
most dangerous enemies to the Peace and Prosperity of a Kingdom. Written by P.
Fullwood M. A. R. of South-Normanton in the County of Darby.

LONDON, Printed by John Lock for E. Calvert at the Black-spread-Eagle at the
West end of St. Paul's. 1673.

To the Worshipful FRANCIS REVELL Esquire; Mine honored Patron, all health and
happiness.
THere are two sorts of People counted worthy of Honor, quibus obtigit aut
legenda scribere, aut scribenda agere, either to write things worthy to be
read, or to do things worthy to be written, were I as succesful in the one, as
you are in the other, I need not fear a fair approbation of these my labors,
but a Sermon once delivered goes afterward to the Press as to the execution;
there are man things that in Elocution aurem praetereunt (as St. Ambrose
speaks) that escape the ear, which when they come to public view are more
strictly observed, and many times weighed in the false weights, of misprison;
therefore it was good counsel of that reverend Father: before we deal our poor
endeavors, tructinare and discutere omnes scrupulos malevolentiae ponderate
and discuss, to try and prove every grain against which the envious may
except, but this labrur I leave to those that have leisure to be more curious,
it shall suffice me to trace the steps of that great Doctor of the Gentiles,
who delivered what he had, received not in the entising words of man's wisdom
but in demonstration of the spirit and truth: I hope your wonted candor will
apply an Antidote to expel the poison of malignant spirits, and with the
industrious Be gather honey out of those herbs, whence the venomous spider
sucks poison: but that the porch prove not too large for the building: I
conclude in the Jacob
benediction of the Patriark, the Lord bless you with the blessings of Heaven
above, blessings of the deep the deep that lies under, blessings of the breast
and of the womb.

From my study at South Normanton April 3. 1673. So prays SIR, Your humble
servant Peter Fullwood.

Prove. 14. V. 34. Righteousness exalts a Nation, but Sin is a reproach to any
People.
HOW Transcendent are those Sacred Oracles and Superlative perfections of holy
writ! because of the savor of her Ointments, her name is as ointment poured
forth; therefore the Virgins love Her, all her garments smell of Myrrh, Aloes
and Cassia; here are set the Topez, the Jaspire, the Emerauld, and every
precious Stone. This is a pillar of a Cloud to go before us in the hottest day
of persecution, and a pillar of Fire to lead us in the darkest night of error;
it is the surest Basis of our faith, the most sxact rule of our actions, it is
such savoury meat wherein our Soul delights, and to every one that thirsts
a well of water springing up unto everlasting life; nor is there greater
variety in the use then in the Method; some Scriptures being like the Curtains
of the Tabernacle which all hang together, others of a different temper, where
to draw an inference from a context is as to enforce a marriage being without
consent, of which sort seem these words I have read unto you at this time.

The whole Book of the Proverbs seems to be a Garden of sweet and fragrant
Flowers, holy and divine fited for the use of all Christians, amongst which
none more pregnant, none more profitable then these words, none more pregnant:
Vbi quot verba tot sententiae, so many words, so many sentences, quot
dictiones, tot lectiones, so many sayings, so many lessons; none more
profitable, profitable to the Converted that they may retain righteousness
which exalts a Nation, profitable to the unconverted, that they may abandon
sin which is a shame or a reproach to any People.

Righteousness exalts a Nation, but sin is a shame to any People. I shall
divide the words, as Jacob divided his flocks into two bands: here is a Nations
honor, and a Nations dishonor,

1. A Nations honor, Righteousness exalts a Nation. 2. A Nations dishonor,
sin is a reproach to any People.
in the first here is,

1. The efficient, viz. Righteousness, 2. The effect exalts. 3. The Object a
Nation.
In the second here is,

1. The indictment that's against sin. 2. The sentence, sin is a reproach. 3.
The extent to any People.
Of these in their order, circulo theologico, by Gods assistance and your
Christian patience, leaving Curiosity to its courtiers, and first of the first,
Righteousness. To open this Scripture, because all Scriptures are not open unto
all as St. Gregory speaks, where the Lamb may wade and the Elephant swim; by
the word of God let us divide the waters as with Elijahs mantle, that we may
pass over unto the genine sense of this Scripture, Righteousness admits of
several acceptions in holy writ; but for method sake, I shall rank them into
two heads, first particular Righteousness, and that is a point of moral justice
which contributes to every one that which by any just account may appear due to
them; render to all their dues, tribute to whom tribute is due, custom Romans 13.
v. 7.
to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor: justice is compared
to the pulse, the pulse if it beat equally, it is a sympton of perfect health,
if unequally it signifyes a sore distemper, if it beat not at all, it portends
imminent death, and as it is in the body natural: so also in the body politic,
if judgment come down like a stream, and righteousness flow like many waters,
it is a true Prophet of the peace and prosperity of a Kingdom: but if
judgment be turned into wormwood, and righteousness into gall, it is an
evident note of destructions making that Kingdom like that house which was
built upon the Sand, when the rain descended, and the floods came, and the wind
blew* it fell and great was the fall of it. When God rains upon the ungodly,
fire and brimstone the portion of their Cup, when the floods of Gods judgments
have lift up their heads, when the wind of Gods displeasure drives away the
wicked like chaff, then let the unrighteous Nation tremble for her judgment
slumbreth. Behold the Lord has a controversy with the Hos. 4. v. 1.
Inhabitants of the Land, because there is no truth; mercy, nor knowledge of God
in the Land: but swearing and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing
Adultery, they break out and blood touches blood: therefore shall the land
mourn, and every one that dwells therein shall languish, etc.

Secondly, there is universal righteousness which consists in a general
conformity to the golden rule of Religion in all our actions.

He that has walked in my Statutes, and kept my judgments Ezekiel. 18 v. 9.
to deal truly, he is just, he shall surely live says the Lord God, if ye
believe the witness of men, the witness of God is greater.

Some there are that seem pure in their own eyes, and yet are not washed from
their filthyness, others wash the outside of the cup and platter and like
painted Sepulchers appear beautiful before men, but within are full of
Hypocrisy and Iniquity, but all such Righteousness is as filthy rags in Gods
sight, that which is accounted for righteousness in Gods sight, must be void of
offense toward God and toward man.

This was the Encomium of Zachariah and Elizabeth that Luke 1. v. 16.
they were both righteous before God walking in all the Commandments of God
blameless; and this shall in no wise loose its due reward. The proceedings of
the World is like a Tragedy which begins with Music and ends with Mourning; or
as the progress of the Prodigal Son, who went forth with plenty and returned
with Penury; but the way of Righteousness is like learnings paths, whose root
is bitter, but the fruit is sweet* Peace and Prosperity which leads me to the
second step of this first General. Righteousness exalts, etc,

Righteousness is the high way to preferment: goodness and greatness like
Hippocrates twins will live and dye together; the one makes the Tomb, the other
the Epitaph: Righteousness is the Jacobs ladder whereby we ascend to the
highest pinnacle of promotion. His salvation is nigh them Psalm. 85. v. 9.
that fear him that glory may dwell in our Land* Righteousness exalts from a
Land of Egypt, an house of bondage to be as Jerusalem, which above that is free
with her children, this is an Ark that will keep us from sinking when a deluge
approaches, a Rampart that fears not the Batteries of the common Enemy, we
have a strong City, Salvation will Is^. 26. 1, 2.
God appoint for Walls and Bulwarks* open the gates that the righteous Nation
that keeps the truth may enter in, though the Sea roar and make a noise, or
the billows thereof lift up their heads, yet the righteous shall be like
Plinies Vine, fear neither wind nor weather, or like Mount Zion, which cannot
be removed but stands fast for evermore. Which made that Kingly Prophet cry
out, let integrity and uprightness preserve me. Righteousness seems to bespeak
us as Epimo^das did his shield defend me, and defendam te; defend me, and I
will defend thee, suitable to that of the wiseman, the righteousness of the
Upright shall deliver him: the Bishop Prove. 11 v. 6.
of Monte Pulciano told Charles the fifth in the council of Trent, that one of
the chief instructions he had received from the Pope, was to commend to that
Assembly, that principalities cannot be preserved if Religion be lost: but not
to authorize so sacred a truth, from a Romish Assidavit, we may have it from
Gods own mouth, at what time I shall Jer. 8. 17.
speak concerning a Nation, or concerning a Kingdom: to pluck up, pull down,
or destroy it, if that Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their
evil ways, I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them. It was a
saying of a Philosopher going to fight, Non sic Deos coluimus, aut sit viximus,
ut illi nos vincerent, we have not so served the Gods, or so lived that they
should overcome us. Therefore it was a good Law made by one of our Danish
Kings, that the Bishop of the Diocese should accompany the Sheriff of the Shire
at every Court the own to maintain Gods law, the other the law of the Land;
Then trust in the greatness of your Enemies, or the multitude of your Forces,
there is no King saved by the Psalm. 33. v. 16. 17.
multitude of an Host, a mighty man is not delivered by much strength, an
Horse is but a vain thing to get a Victory, etc. These are Clouds without
water, Trees whose fruit withers, we have a better ammunition provided for
Isa. 26. v. 4.
us: Take unto you the whole Armor of God; that ye may be able to stand in the
evil day: stand therefore having your loins girt with truth, and having the
breast plate of righteousness, trust in the Lord for ever, for with the Lord
God J^h^vah is everlasting strength: the whole World is the Sinners Babylon,
and every Creature is his Tormentor, but the righteous are girt about with
Armor of proof and are out of the rea^h of danger, for righteousness
delivers from Prove. 10. v. 2.
death.

Again Righteousness exalts from a dry and barren Wilderness* to a Land of
Canaan, a land flowing with Milk and Honey: unrighteousness does kindle Gods
heavy wrath and indignation against a Nation, causing to break like fire which
shall devour the Palaces thereof, but the righteous Nation shall flourish like
the Cedars in Libanus, or be as the Tree planted by the waters side which
brings forth his fruit in due season, whose leaf also shall not wither, but
whatsoever he does shall prosper; whilst man sleeps in sin, God sleeps, his ear
heavy that he will not hear, his hand shortened that he cannot help, when man
awakes to righteousness, God awakes his wisdom awakes to direct us, his power
awakes to protect, his mercy awakes to relieve us, If thou were pure and
upright, Job. 8. 6.
surely now he would awake for thee, and make the habitation of thy
righteousness prosperous: that our Souls may grow up as Plants, and our
Daughters as corner stones of the Temple, that our garners may be full and
plenteous, affording all Manner of store, that our sheep may bring forth
thousands in our streets, that our oxen may be strong to labor, that there be
no breaking in, nor no going out, that there be no leading into Captivity, nor
complaining in our streets.

Here then as in a glass we may behold the procreant and conservant cause of a
Kingdoms happiness: as also who are the most faithful friends to the Peace and
prosperity thereof; i. e. The righteous, the best Christians are the best
common-wealths-men, who stand in the gap to avert Gods judgments, and appear at
the Throne of grace, to make blessings flow like many waters amongst us: the
Psalm. 84. v. 11.
Lord is a Sun and a Shield, and no good thing will he withold from them that
walk uprightly, which made the Spouse in the Canticles break forth into this
pathetical acclamation; How much better is thy love then Wine, and the smell of
thine Ointments then all Spices! should the Heavens drop new Wine, and the
Hills flow with milk, might not be entitled to that Inventory of all those
several Eccl. 2.
delights of the Sons of Men? they are not worth the owning in comparison of
the favor of God extended Psalm. 4. v. 6. 7.
to the Righteous: Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance, thou have
put gladness in mine heart, more then in the time that there Corn and Wine and
Oil increased. In all the pleasures of Pharaohs Court, you cannot find a
Parrellell: how transient is all that is in the World, the lust of the flesh,
the lusts of the eyes, and the pride of life, it is a peculiar privilege of
the Saints, (the fountain of whose happiness is sealed up and locked in the
cabinet of Gods favor) to be out of the reach of worldly power or policy: the
gates of Hell shall never prevail against them, Righteousness likewise exalts
us from being an astonishment, and a proverb, and an hissing to all the Nations
round about us, to become a praise and a renown, and a glory of all Lands: God
has reserved the blood of the grape, the choicest mercies for the Righteous,
Majora erunt S. Chrysostom.
praemia quam desideria Sanctorum, the Society of the Saints shall be more than
their Hunger, their happiness Deuteronomy. 28. v. 1.
shall outreach their desires, If thou shall hearken diligently to the voice of
the Lord thy God, to observe and do all his commandments which I command thee
this day, that the Lord thy God will set thee on high above all Nations of the
Earth. So then we may see wherein the glory of a Kingdom consists, not in
outward Pomp and Ostentation, but in the Establishment of Righteousness not
with Dives to be arrayed in purple and fine Linen of the Saints, that is
Righteousness; this the Apostle accounted the chiefest 1 Pet. 3. v. 3.
ornament, whose adorning let it not be outward adorning, or wearing of gold,
or putting on apparel, but show out of a good conversation, our works with
meekness of wisdom, when the Mountain of the Lords house is exalted above the
rest of the Hills, when his Sabbaths are duly observed, his faithful Ministers
highly esteemed, the preaching of the word, and other sacred institutions of
the Church duly observed then the glory of a Kingdom springs forth. So I
come to the last step of this first general, a Nation, Righteousness exalts a
Nation.

Consider what beams of favor shine upon an House or Nation for the righteous
sake, was not Lebanus house blessed for Jacobs sake? Egypt fared the better
for Joseph's goodness, no sooner Noah entered into the Ark but God opened the
Floodgates of Heaven and drowned the World; no sooner Lot was taken out of
Sodom, but the Lord rained fire and brimstone upon them and burnt the City:
what lamentation when good Josiah the blessing of the Country was taken from
them: methinks I see our Kingdom weeping Raehel like for her children that
have been lost, some by foreign invasions, some by domestic differences,
others by the plague and pestilence, and were it not for those Righteous
Persons amongst us, whose entire devotions have out cried the screeching of our
sins, we might justly fear the ruin of our Kingdom approaches. I shall wind
up all with an exhortation to such as are in authority over others, that they
not only be Patterns but Patrons of Religions: Rulers are a looking-glass
according to which most men dress themselves. Zenophon would have his Cyrus to
go before others in industry and wisdom, the common people are like a flock of
Cranes, as the first flies all the rest follow after, then authority is truly
arrayed when the superiority of the civil Power, is for the good of inferiors,
and therefore you must countenance Religion as well as practice it. It is not
enough to pull down Dagon, unless you secure the Ark. The main of your
Authority is to make Religion to flourish, keep as the Apple of thine eye, and
under the shadow of your wings, against all those malignant spirits that wish
all to our Sion: so the Lord shall be your reward, and crown your endeavors
herein with the crown of righteousness in his Heavenly Kingdom.

Thus having set you upon Mount Pisgah, to show you the glory of the Land that
is righteousness; I come now to set you upon Mount Ebal to show you the
sinfulness of sin, or the curses against it, which leads me to the second
general: Sin is a reproach or a shame to any People,

1. Here Is the Indictment, and that's against sin.

2. The Sentence, Sin is a reproach or a shame.

3. The extent, to any People, Sin is a shame to any People of these in their
order, and first of the first. Sin, If any shall start the Question that
started touching S. John baptism, is it of heaven or of men, touching sin is it
from heaven by Gods creation, or of men by man's defection? The wise Eccles. 7.
v. 24.
man determines the Question; God made man upright, but they have sought out
many inventions. Man by creation was of a Royal and Princely extract, chara Dei
soboles, the offspring of the Highest; beautifyed with choicest ornaments of
wisdom, righteousness and holiness, but those conditions which God made him
being not observed, and his title forfeited to Justice by disobedience, God
reenters, Genesis 3. 34.
and makes seizure of his Charter of happiness until the debt of Adam, and
those weighty arrears of disobedience were discharged: So that by one man Sin
entered into the Rom 5. 12.
World, and Death by Sin, and so death passed by all men, for that all men have
sinned: we all who have our descent from unclean seed, are from our birth
infected with the spreading Leprosy of sin, who can bring a clean thing Job.
14. v. 4.
out of an unclean? not one; but besides that Primitive sin of Adams
disobedience, there are other derivations daily brought forth by actual
transgression which seem so infinite as could we cast up the stars of the
firmament or the sands of the Ocean, we might pose all the numbers of
Arithmetic, yet we should come far short of an exact survey of our daily
impieties: and so is this guilt of this spreading evil as may make us liable to
the greatest mults and punishments: for let guilt go before, punishment will
follow it at the heels, which leads me to the second step of this second
general, sin is a reproach or shame, reproach and contempt make such a deep
wound in all those who have not whored their foreheads, as makes them cry out
with Cain, my punishment is greater then I can bear, for a wounded spirit who
can bear? how many to avoid this, have chose the worst of evils, nay death
rather than life, It is better to dye honorably than to live ingloriously: now
this is the fruit that this tree bears: what fruit had you of those things
whereof ye are now ashamed. Such are Subjects in Sin, must be Objects Romans 6.
21.
of reproach and shame: It it not the gibbet, the gallows or the worst of
deaths that can eclipse the memory of an innocent life; nor the vizard of
outward profession can take away the obloquies of a sinful life: it was a brand
upon Jeroboam (which neither age nor time can take away) that he made Israel to
sin: the memory of the just is blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot
and stink in the nostrils of God, and all good men; then if any shall revive
that old complaint, what is the cause that the former times were better than
these? the Text gives Resolution it is sin: sin is the snuff that dimmes all
our light, the leaven that defiles our passover, and renders us a Proverb, and
an hissing, and astonishment to all our Neighbors Nations round about which to
prevent, currat paenitentia ne praecurrat sententia: let us hasten our
repentance, that judgment do not overtake us before we be aware: sin is of a
shameful birth, It is of the spurious race of Satan, the Father is an Amorite,
the Mother an Hitite; ye are of your Father the Devil, and his lusts will ye
do, he was a murderer from John 8. 44.
the beginning and abode not in the truth because there is no truth in him,
when he speaks a lie he speaks of his own for he is a liar, and the Father
of it. Selivius the great Turk upon revenge of his loss received of the Battle
of Lepanto was resolved to put to death all the Christians within his
Dominions: and such is the Devils malice against all mankind for the loss of
the favor of God and eternal happiness, he seeks the ruin and destruction of
them all: your Adversary the Devil as a roaring 1 Pet. 5. 8.
Lion walks about seeking whom he may devour. An Athenian Curtizan boasted she
could get all Socrates Scholars from him, and he could never recover one of
them again, such as are the Scholars of Christ School had need take heed they
be not drawn from God to sin, for it is as hard to get out of his claws, as for
the Israelites to get out of Aegypts Bondage. Again sin is a shame to our
Profession, Religion never suffered greater eclipse then by the interposition
of the enormities of Christians: examples are the greatest load-stones to draw
our Souls, and of all none more prevalent that those that are evil. This was
the aggravation of David's sin, urged by the Prophet Nathan: by this deed thou
have given great occasion 2 Samuel 12. v. 14.
to the Enemies of the Lord to blaspheme, the enormities of Christians was a
main ^ause of the Mohammedan Religion if the light be darkness how great is that
darkness* if the Salt have lost his savor, that there is little hope that the
unsavory lives of Heathens, Pagans or Infidels should ever be reformed, Hell
is not more contrary to Heaven, than such prodigious impieties as swarm amongst
Christians are to the enlargement of the Kingdom of Christ, to purge out these
evil humors which endanger the mystical body of Christ, let us take out the
Apostles direction, let your conversation be such as becomes Phil. 1. 27.
the gospel of Christ. Sin likewise brings men to shameful ends, what became of
Pharaoh the tyrannical, Achittophel the crafty, Ahab the covetous,
Nebuchanezzar the ambitious, Judas the treacherous, their end was bitter as
Wormwood, and sharp as a two edged sword suitable to that of the Prophet, thou
do set them in slippery Psalm. 73. v. 18, 19, 20.
places, thou castest them down into destruction: how are they bronght into
desolation as in a moment, as a dream when one awaketh: Which made the Apostle
break through the cloud of his sins into this Emphatical exclamation: O
wretched man that I am! who sholl deliver me from Romans 7. 24.
the body of this death. O death how bitter is the remembrance of thee to the
impenitent, when this Sergeant arrests them: all the flowers of their Paradise
fade away; they that go out of this World without Christ's passport shall go
into another World without his welcome, shall be delivered up into the hands
of that fearful sentence: Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting flames
prepared for the Devil and his Angles. Consider with what shame and confusion
of face impenitent sinners shall then appear before Christ's Tribunal.

The Kings of the Earth and the rich men, and the Revel. 6. 15, 16.
chief Captains and the mighty men: and every bond man and every freeman hid
themselves in the Dens, and in the Rocks of the Mountains: and said to the
Rocks and Mountains fall upon us and hide us from the face of him that sits
on the Throne; and from the wrath of the Lamb: for the great day of the Lord is
come and who may abide it? Sin is like an old Bond that has long lain
uncancelled, when it comes to be called for the full will be exacted, and use
upon use: therefore very seasonable was that advice of our Savior: agree with
thine adversary quickly whilst thou art in the way with him, least Mat. 5. 25.
the adversary deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge to the Officer, and
thou be cast into Prison, thou shall not come out till thou have paid the
uttermost farthing.

Then let us be as fearful of the commission of sin, as of the shame and
punishment of it, and take heed of the love of sin as well as the commission of
it. Take away the cause, the effect will fall of it self, this was the Antidote
werewith holy Joseph expelled the poison Genesis 39. v. 9.
of his wanton Mistress temptation; how can I do this great wickedness and sin
against God? Sustinere as well as abstinere was a resolution becoming a
Christian if the fear of sin be once laid aside, we shall not want allurements
to invite us to it, Eve shall have an Apple, Esau a mess of pottage, Achan a
golden wedg, Jonah a ship, Judas thirty pieces of silver, but let us say to
such as Luther did to the Pope when he sent Cardinals to tempt with promises of
promotion, valde protestatus sum me molle sic satiari, I said flatly I would
not be satisfied with such things. So I come to the third and last step of this
second General viz. The extent to any People, sin is a shame to any People. No
Person of what quality or degree soever has any toleration for sin, nor
exemption from the shame or punishment of it: the revolting Jews Jer. 1. v. 9,
10, 11, 12, 13.
having tasted a full draught of Gods tender love, fall into the praemnuire of
his sharpest censure. I will plead with you says the Lord, and with your
Childrens Children, will I plead, pass over the Isles of Chittim and see, and
send unto Kedar and consider diligently, and see if there be such a thing. Has
a Nation changed her Gods for them that are no Gods: but my People has changed
her glory for that which does not profit, be astonished O ye Heathens at this
and be horribly afraid, be very desolate says the Lord; my People have
committed two evils, they have forsaken me the Fountain of living waters and
chosen to them selves broken Cisterns that will hold no water. Man's falling
into sin is like the Children of Isreal's going into Egypt, they had all the
favor that Pharaoh could extend to them, all the furtherance that Joseph could
contribute to them, the best of the Land, the Land of Goshen to invite them,
and to draw us into sin we have all that Pharaoh the God of this World can do,
all that Joseph our own flesh can do, the best of the Land, the glory of the
World to invite us; no wonder then if Noah, Lot, David, Peter fall like stars
from Heaven; the purest Diamonds is not without its flaw, the sweetest Rose not
without its prickles, the fairest Flowers not without their witherings; but
external privileges as they cannot exempt from the guilt: so neither from the
punishment of sin; to prove this let us call in the evidence of John the
Baptist, who has for^warned you to Mat. ^. 8, 8, 9.
flee from the wrath to come? bring forth fruits meet for Repentance, and think
not to say within your selves we have Araham to our Father.

To hold up sin was more than Atlas could do, who (as the Poets feign)
underprops Heaven; Heaven could not hold the Pride of Lucifer, nor Paradise
Adams disobedience, Cities, Gates and Walls were to week to keep the Old World
from the Deluge: or Sodom or Gomorrah from Fire and Brimstone; Sin changed the
Government at Rome, destroyed our Abbeys, Frieryes and Nunneryes, and without
Repentance it is to be feared will destroy us. Here then as in a glass we may
behold who are the greatest Enemies to the peace and prosperity of a Kingdom:
such as draw humility with cords of vanity, and sin as with a cart-rope. In the
days of Eli, Phineas Wife being with Child bowed her self and travailed for
pain came on her: and being near the time of her death she named the child
Icabo^, for said she the glory is departed from Israel, it is our national sins
that makes our Kingdom bring forth Icabods Sons of shame and contempt, David's
Adultery, Solomon's Idolatry, Ahabs oppression, Belt^shazars Luxury*
Nebuchadnezzars pride proves fatal to the subversion of their Kingdoms. When
Ahab saw Elijah, Ahab says unto him, art thou he that troubles Israel? and he
answered I have not troubled Israel, but thou and thy Fathers house in that ye
have forsaken God and served Balaim: we need not fear all our Enemies without*
us, were it not for sin within us, though the Sea roar and make a noise, and
the billows thereof arise: let us stop the current of our sins before they
overflow the Banks, and become a sad and fatal Deluge, and overrun the
Territories of our Kingdom.

Hear ye this then all ye People of high and low, rich and poor, one with
another; let the reproach and shame of sin invite you to amendment: how long ye
simple ones will ye love simplicity, and fools delight in scorning, turn you at
my reproof: break of your sins by repentance: arise from the sink of sin, and
dungeon of Death and wash you in the Laver of Repentance, if the tears of a
penitent soul cannot cleanse you, behold the Rivers of blood and the Cataracts
of Heaven stand open, there is a fountain opened for sin and for uncleanness
wash there and you shall be clean; through this red Sea all our Fathers were
wont to pass to the promised Land, having their Enemies, their sins all
swallowed up in those waters, unless these Vipers be shaken off, God regards
not your offering; repent therefore and be converted that your sins may be done
away when times of refreshment shall come from the presence of the Acts 3. 19.
Father.

Now unto him that is able to keep you from falling, and present you faultless
before the presence of his Father, to the Eternal, invisi^le and only wise God:
be ascribed as is most due, all Honor, Glory, Might, Majstey and Dominion, now
and for ever.

CONCIO AD CLERUM Presbiteri onus and honos. THE Ministers Duty, AND THE
Ministers Due. OR The Church Man's looking-glass, wherein he may behold the face
of his Office and the beauty thereof. As it was delivered in a Visitation
Sermon, preached at Chester-field in the County of Darby, April the 14th. 1671.
Written by P. Fullwood M. A. R. of South-Normanton in the County of Darby.

LONDON, Printed by John Lock for E. Calvert at the Black-spread-Eagle at the
West end of St. Paul's. 1673.

1 Timothy; 5, 17; Let the Elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honor
especialy they who labor in the word and Doctrine.
WE cannot without honor look back on the lines when Userpers pretend to
Moses rod; committed the crime that K^rah designed destroying the mirror of
Princes, and seeing that pleased a generations of factious and seditious
spirits, proceeded further to lay violent hands on the primitive order of the
Church, endeavoring to exterpate their Authority, and swallow up their
revenues, dooming likewise the rest of that sacred orders, perpetual silence:
who would not worship that golden Image they had set up? Thus have we fallen
amongst Thieves that have stripped us, wounded us and left us half dead, this
blessed Apostle with that good Samaritan, seems to pour in oil into our wounds
and to set us upon our own Beast again, and this he does in these words I have
read unto you.

Let the the Elders that Rule well be counted worthy of double honor:
especially such as labor in the word and doctrine.

The Text Rebceca like brings forth Twins, here is Presbyteri onus and honos, The
Elders duty, and the Elders due: First the Elders duty, let them rule well, let
them labor in the Word and Doctrine: and this I shall divide into the Parts of
a Demonstration; first the Elder subject Persons Presbyteri the Elders.
Secondly Affectione's, hear, what, let them rule, let them labor, how, let
them rule well, let them labor in the word and doctrine: secondly the Elders
due, let them be counted worthy of double honor. And this like the River of
Paradise runs into four heads. First, Honor. Secondly, double honor. Thirdly,
why they are worthy. Fourthly, how? let them be counted worthy; of these in
their order by Gods assistance and your Christian Patience leaving curiosity to
its Courtiers, and first of the Presbyteri, the Elders, Presbyteri seems to be
a Title annexed to the holy order of Priesthood, as appears by this subsequent
clause who labor in the word and doctrine: and this is signed with a Scriptum
est, v. 18. The scripture says, thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox
that treads out the Corn, and the labourer is worthy of his hire. Now that
the truth hereof may appear as clear as the Sun, let us take a view of their
Ordination; When they had ordained Elders in every Church, they commended to
the Lord, suitable to that prayer in our Churches Liturgy or the initiation of
Infants by Baptism; grant O Lord that whosoever is here dedicated to thee by
our Office and Ministry, may be endued with Heavenly Virtues, etc.

To which may be added the elder Induction into the 1 Pet. 5. v. 1. and 2, 3.
and 4.
Church by St. Peter viz, The Elders which are among you, I exhort who am also
an Elder, and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, and also a partaker of the
glory that shall be revealed. Feed the Flock of God which is among you, taking
the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly, nor for filthy lucre
but of a ready mind: neither as being Lords over Gods heritage, but being
examples to the flock, and when the chief Shepherd shall appear ye shall
receive a Crown of glory that fades not away. This then being confirmed we may
infer that the Elders are the Sons of the Church invested with the holy order
of Priesthood.

Nor without due consideration was the imposition of this name, but upon the
account of those qualifications which are entailed upon that holy order:
maturity of years as well as of Judgment be required in those that wait at Gods
Altar. Such blossoms as overrun the spring 1 Timothy 3. 5.
are usually knipt before the knitting; and how can those those that venture
before they know either Coast or Compass, avoid those dangerous Rocks against
which their own and Peoples Souls are subject to be split. The Ancient Romans
had a law called Lex annalis or Lex annarie, which prescribed a certain age,
before which none was admitted to bear office, the ground whereof was because
t^meritatem adoliscentiae verebantur, this Age it is less experienced, so prove
to rash and heady passions: which Edict was for a time so duly observed that
neither Birth nor Friends, Favor, nor affection could procure any
dispensation, which tended not more to the honor then benefit of the State;
nor were there wanting provisions wanting for the Church of the like Nature, we
read of many Decrees of Ancient Counsels, that none should attain to the Order
and Degree of a Presbyter before a certain age but Canons at the first were
duly observed; but yet through the rust and canker of times miserably
neglected, and violated to the great detryment of the Church: as woe to the
Land where the is King is a Child, so woe to the Church where the Priests are
children, St. Bernard in one of his Epistles complains that even in his days,
Scholares pueri, and nuberbes Juvcnes, School boys and beardle^s youths were
promoted to Ecclesiastical dignityes, and from the Ferula to bear rule over
others; Baroni tells us that Pope John the twelfth was preferred to the Popedom
in his nonage: and Benedict the ninth puer fere decennis, scarcely ten years
of age. But we need not travail into foreign parts to revieu this complaint,
sad experience in our own Kingdom makes it too evident; how many days, nay
how many years were we without a King, without a Prince, without an Ephod;
without a Teraphin? during which time Jeroboam set up his golden calves in Dan
and Bethel, he makes Priests of the lowest of the People, nay children tossed
to and fro with every wind of doctrine, an inlet to all Sects and Factions; but
now the Sun is risen, those shaddows must flee away: let these with David's men
first go to Jericho till their beards be shaven, first let them learn to speak
before they presume into public Auditoryes; to such as these the Apostles
advice to Timothy is very seasonable, let them give attendance unto reading
that their profiting may appear unto all, lest they fall into the praemunire of
the Churches censure, who shall visit their iniquity with rods, and their sin
with scourges: so I come to the second step of the first general let them rule.
Let the Elders that rule well etc.

Rule or Government is the Pillar of the Law, the Pedestal of Religion, the
Nurse of the Arts and Sciences: without which Bethel will turn to Babel, and
the house of God to a den of Thieves; When there was no Judge. 21. v. 25.
King in Israel, every man did that which was right in his own eyes. Amongst
the Persians after the death of their King, a lawless liberty was granted to
all Persons during the inter regnum, Oh! how Murder, Rapine and Plunder swarmed
amongst them like the Locust of Egypt, so that men were enforced to hide
themselves in the Caves of the Earth to secure them from the Violence of the
Enemy, and if we consider what myseries we endured whilst Annarchy usurped the
Crown and Mitre; what Violence to Churches what Indignity to the Ministry, what
Contempt of all Sacred and Divine Institutions, we may very well take up the
complaint of the Church: Behold and see if ever sorrow were like unto my Lam.
1. v. 12.
sorrow wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger:
but now the Rod of Aaron for the house of Levi is budded with ^uds, bloomes,
blossoms, and brings forth perfect Almonds: and so I pass to the third step of
this first general, the modus regiminis: let them rule well.

First, let them rule themselves well, let them rule their hands that they be
no strikers, let them rule their tongues well that they be no brawlers, let
them rule their affections well that they be vigilant, sober, given to
hospitality, apt to teach, and be examples to the Believers in word, in
doctrine, in conversation, godliness.

Secondly, let them rule their houses well, that their houses may be the houses
of God, wherein lodges wisdom, righteousness holiness: where the word of God
dwells plentifully, instructing the ignorant, reproving the obstinate,
convincing the erroneous, confirming the weak. Vttium primae concoctionis vix
corrigitur in secundae. That harm which is contracted in the first concoction
is scarcely cured in the second; and want of care to restrain enormityes in the
Family, Is a main cause that so many exorbitances appear in the Commonwealth;
those diseases that at first might admit of an easy cure, by long continuance
prove incureable: nor is this domestical rule more necessary than profitable;
Theodosius religious carriage in his Family made his whole court a seminary of
Religion; let us then take up the resolution of holy Joshuah, As for me I and
my house, we w^ll serve the Lord.

Thirdly, let them rule the house of God well: the best things being perverted
prove most hateful. The best Wine soonest turns to the tartest Vinegar, man's
body that is compounded of the purest Elements, being corrupted proves most
distasteful, the word of God which is the power of God to salvation, being
sophisticated by the cunning devices of Teachers, becomes the savor of death
unto death; and the Church of God which is the pillar and ground of the truth,
being out of order opens a gap to let in the Foxes to destroy the Vines, which
to prevent let the Elders besides the ruling of their own houses, rule the
house of God well.

First, respectu habito prudentiae, the Argo was only committed to Typhis
children, and such as are not acquainted with the Map, are not fit to guide the
Stern. Ezekiel must first eat and concoct the Roll before he be sent to
Prophecy, it was the direction our Savior gave to his Disciples before he
sent them to preach. Behold I send as Lambs among Wolves, be ye therefore wise
as Serpents, but innocent as Doves; The Prophet David fought first with a Lion,
then with a Bear, then with a Phillstine: but we must wrestle with
Principallities, Powers, the Rulers in dark places, here is the great Lucifer
of the Church of Rome, together with other evil Angels that have fallen the
Church by Apostasy: therefore let us walk in Wisdom toward them that are
without.

Secondly, respectu habito justitiae, It is a principle in moral Policy, that
corrupt execution of Law is as dangerous as unjust violation, it is a mercy to
have such in Authority: modo audeant quae sentiunt says Cicero, the Egyptian
Kings usually and solemnly presented this Oath to their Judges, not to swerve
from their consciences, though they should have a command from them to the
contrary; such an heart without affection, a mind without passion, a treasurer
which keeps for every man what he has, and distributeth to every man what he
ought to have.

Thirdly, respectu habito charitatis: the rigor of Justice is not to be
exacted without the sweet commixture of Mercy, Rulers must be like Cherabins to
have wings to shelter the innocent: as well as a flaming sword to drive out
offenders; he that is Judge of the whole world, his mercy like Nebuchadnezzars
tree spreads over the face of the whole Earth, or David's Sun which runs from
one end of the Earth to the other: therefore as God said to Moses see thou do
all things according to the pattern showed thee in the Mount.

So I come to the last step of this first general, let them labor in the word
and doctrine.

The office of an Elder as it is a work of great importance, so not to be done
negligently: such deserve not this double honor, but a curse rather, cursed is
every one that does the work of the Lord negligently: the Elders are compared
to Planters, Builders, Soldiers, Husbandmen: the Husbandman is never out of
work, redit Agricolae labor; but especially in time of Harvest: now is the
Lords Harvest, there is need of painful laborers to gather Gods wheat into his
Barn: but do I stand upon comparisons: there is no labor says St. Chrysostom
is comparable to the labor of the faithful Pastor: hence the Apostle here
adds (...) (as some take the word) not in apposition but in composition,
plurimum laborantes, laboring most earnestly, they must not (...) take an
easy and light yoke, but (...) use double diligence, they must labor in the
word and doctrine, they must labor but not in the affairs of this life, with
which they must not entangle themselves, that they may please him who has
called them; the inordinate cares of this World are a great distraction to any
Christian much more to such as are called to wait at Gods Altar: the Prince of
Philosophers has given this precept, let no Husbandman or Handy-crafts-man be
a Priest, it is a maxim grounded upon the Law of Nature, It stands not with
the honor of God that they that are employed in his service should be manuary
Trades. Such mechanical employments withdraw their minds from their holy
function and are repugnant to that knowledge, and other gifts that are required
in that holy order, they that spend more time amongst bea^ts then amongst
books, are fitter for the plough than the Pulpit: let us fix our thoughts on a
more noble object, let us labor in the word and doctrine, let us not labor
for the meat that perishes, but for the m^at that endures unto everlasting
life. Theodorus Beza in one of his Polemical Treatises, upon these two, Word
and Doctrine: has found a ground of upholding their new distinction betwixt
Pastors and Doctors, which he thinks so manifest as he says, quis not
videt? and yet never any before him could find it out: duae istae voces (says
Calvin) rem unam significant, as Joseph said of Pharaoh^s two dreams they are
both one: Carthusianus starts another distinction upon these two, Word and
Doctrine, they must labor in the word of exhortation, and in the doctrine of
instruction for the enlightening of the understanding, the word of exhortation
for the regulating of the affections, the one to dispel the darkness of the
mind, the other the rebellion of the heart, the doctrine of instruction with
the word of exhortation does commonly produce a cold and speculative knowledge
without practice, the word of exhortation without the doc^rine of instruction
begets a blind and pernicious zeal without knowledge. Other distinctions betwixt
these two, Word and Doctrine, have been noted in verbo scientibus, in doctrina
ignorantibus: so Aus^lmus in the word to them that know already, in doctrine to
them that are yet to learn, he must labor in verbo scientibus, in the
explication of obscure and difficult pieces of Scripture called by the Apostle
(...) which he that cannot unfold is like the ridiculous builder, of whom it is
said caepit ad ficare and no^ potu^t consummar^, this man began to build and
was not able to finish. He must labor likewise in doctrina ignorantibus, in
catechismes gathered from easy and plain places of Scripture, which were in
u^e in the Apostles time, and called a form of sound words, and the principles
of the doctrine of Christ and since the Apostles time both in the Greek and
Latin Church, the neglect of catechizing is the cause why so little good is
done amongst us by Preaching, Preaching without Catechizing seems Rachel like
beautiful but barren, making the Hearers like Pharaohs lean kine that devoured
the fat ones, and were never the fatter: Be we then like those Olive branches
in the Prophet Zachary which through these two golden pipes empty the holy oil
out of our selves.

Thus at the length we have measured the waters of this golden sea, viz. the
Elders duty: Oh! let the waves thereof beat a while upon your affections, and
then they will bring you to the Haven, to that honor, that double honor which
is intailed upon us. Let the Elders that rule w^ll be counted worthy of double
honor: especially such as labor in the word and doctrine. So I come to the
second general, the Elders: here is first, Quale? honos honor. Secondly,
Quantas! double honor. Thirdly, Quar^? they are worthy. Fourthly, Quomodo how?
let them be counted worthy: of these in their order, and first of the first.

The Heathens directed by the divine light of Nature ever had and still have
their Priests in great estimation; amongst the Romans, none were created
Pontificies but such as were of noble blood by the Mohammedan law if any outrage
be done to a Priest, if he be a Turk that so does, he loses his right hand;
if a Christian or Jew that so does, he must be burnt alive: there is no
greater blemish to us that Divines are less regarded amongst them in any Nation
in the World either Christian or Heathen.

And so I pass from thee quality of the Elders due, to the quantity, double
honor: a due answerable to the duty, as the reward to the merit, their duty is
double ruling and laboring, their labor double in the Word and Doctrine, so
that all these respects double honor is due to them, besides the honor of
reverence, their is the honor of maintenance due to them. as St. Chrysost^me
and others upon these words. See what a large patrimony God conferred upon
those that Ministered about holy ^eut. 18
things under the Law: no less has ordained under the Gospel, the Apostle by
seven irrefragible arguments proves Cor. 1. ^. 9. from ^. 9 to ^.
the maintenance of the Ministry, is not a beggarly alms given to them only in
charity or by way of ^enevolence, hut an honorable stipend due to them in
Justice for their works ^ake. And as we have an entail from the Lord of all,
so have we the continued usage of the Church time out of mind if we search into
former ages we shall find that this homage has been ever paid to the Church,
we cannot say of this, as our Savior said of the divorce; from the beginning
it was not so; M^lchesidick was tempore antiqui^r, without Father, without
Mother, without deseent, (...). 14. 20. ^at. 23. ^ 23.
King of Salem, and Priest of the most high God, and he received tithes of
Abraham. And this attested by our Savior to be paid in his time and approved
by him; nor can the Enemies of the Church plead any prescription since that. I
have read of a lamp that burnt a thousand years and afterward went out, but
these with the Mat. 25.
wi^e Virgins shall have oil in their vessels with their lamps, so long as the
Sun and Moon endures.

Thirdly, dign^ they are worthy.

First dignitate offic^, by the worthyness of their Office: in the Scripture
they are called Stars, Angels, Pastors of the Church, the Am^assadours of
Heaven, nihil in hoc l^^o exc^ll ^tius sac^rdot^bus. They that be wise shall
shine Chr^^.
as the ^rightness of the firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness
as the Stars for ever and ever.

Secondly, dign^ta^^ ^peri^, the worthyness of the work; this work is to work
out man's salvation, honor the Physician because of thy need says the wise
man, now these are only conversant about the body in saving it from death
temporal, much more should be h^noured these spiritual Physiti^ns who are
conversant about the Sou^ in saving it death eternal. The more excellent a
thing is in Nature, the more acceptable is the preservation of it, now the soul
is the express Image of God* the freeborn child and heir of eternal, it is
Gods choicest jewel, Christ's purchase and therefore what an honor is it to
save this soul from death, and therefore not without good cause was the
Apostles exhortation, We beseech you Brethren to know them which labor among
you, and are over you in the 1 These. 5 v. 12. and 13.
Lord, and admonish you* and to esteem them very highly in love for their work
sake.

Thirdly, dignatione Dei by Gods vouchsafeing mercy. The Saints shall be all
clothed with honorable robes, white robes shall be given unto them,
duplicibus vestientur, stola prima says St. Bernard: ipsa est fel^citas and
requies animarum, happiness and rest of Souls; secunda vero est immortalitas
and gloria corporum. Immortality and glory of Bodies, such honor have all his
saints: but as the elder Brother the beginning of strength, the excellency of
dignity, and the excellency of power, had sundry preheminences above the rest,
he was Lord over all his Brethren: he had a double portion and succeeded in the
double Office hoth Kingly and Priestly; so the Elders that rule well and labor
for the rest of their Brethren in the Church Militant shall have double honor,
a double portion in the Church tryumphant. The wise and faithful Steward whom
his Lord makes ruler over his household here, him will he make ruler over all
that he has hereafter; and of this they are worthy dignitate dei, non St. Ber.
dignitate sua, by Gods acceptance not their merit.

Fourthly, Quomodo? How? let them be counted worthy of double honor Here give
me leave to turn the Apostles direction into an exhortation.

First, I shall direct my speech to my Brethren of the Ministry, si qua
coelopictas quae talia curat. If there be any comolation in Christ, any comfort
of love, any fellowship of the Spirit, etc. mind ye not every one your own
things, but the things of the Church: let the honor of the Church and the
Ministry thereof be dear in your sight, he that touches it let him touch the
Apple of your eye. Gregor Nazienzen, Jonas like, desired to be cast into the
Sea so all might be calm and well in the Church, and let us labor to hold up
the great Authority of the Church and the honor of the Ministry against the
unjust censures and machinations of the common Enemy: and take we up that noble
resolve, If I Psalm. 137 v. 4.
forget thee O Jerusalem, let m^ right hand forget her cunning, If I do not
remember thee, let m^ tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth.

Secondly, a word or two to the Officers of the Church, the Churchwardens and
Sides-men, you are the eyes and ears of the Church and Court. Be ye not as the
Scripture speaks of the Idols that have eyes and see not, ears and hear not,
mouths and speak not, let not your presentiments be like the Spiders where
Hornets break through and smaller Flies are caught, but search Jerusalem with
candles, find out all those that have ill will at our Sion, and bring them to
condign punishment. You Lam. 1 v. 1.
shall not need to seek a knot in a Bulrush: I wish there was no cause to renew
the Churches complaint, how does the City sit solitar that was full of People?
Besides the Act. 10.
Ata^ie and disorder by reason of several gestures; making the Church seem
like the sheet knit at the four corners where were all manner of four footed
Beasts, wild Beasts and creeping things, and Fowls of the air: or the Altar at
Athens whereon was this inscription, to the unknow God: Let not these Beasts of
prey lurk within your Parishes to rent contumelies against the Church and the
holy order of the Ministry. I shall wind up all with an exhortation to all in
general: look not with an evil eye upon the dues and rights of the Church;
neither withold them from those to whom they are due: which of you by unjust
deteinure can add one Cubit to your statute, hereby your riches shall be
corrupted, and your garments moath eaten, your gold and your silver ankerd, and
the rust of them shall be a witness against ^on, and shall eat your flesh like
fire: the hire of those a^ourers who have labored in the word and doctrine
^ryeth and their cries are entered into the ears of the Prove. 3. 9, 10.
lord of Sabbath; to such as these I shall say no more ^hen what has been said
before: honor the Lord with ^hy sustenance, so shall thy Barns be filled with
increase. Consider of these things and the Lord give you understanding in all
things.

Deo trinuni gloria.
CONCIO AD PLEBEM OR THE Christians Guide Chalking out the way that leads to
Eternal Happiness. Written by P. Fullwood M. A. R. of South-Normanton in the
County of Darby.

LONDON, Printed by John Lock for E. Calvert at the Black-spread-Eagle at the
West end of St. Paul's. 1673.

Col, I. V. 10. That ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being
fruitful in every good work.
JUST Lot though he was vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked
Sodomites, yet how loath was he to desert those Tents of wickedness, or bid
adieu to those Sons of Belial, till God by his Angel leads him forth; and such
is our fondness of our darling lusts as though they war against our Souls,
and provoke Gods heavy wrath and displeasure, yet we are as loath to leave them
as the Raven was to return to the Ark hence therefore this blessed Apostle
seems to lead us out by the hand like Lots Angel; who like a wise master
builder having laid the foundation of repentance from dead works and faith
toward God, makes his address to the throne of grace in the behalf of the
Colossians that they might go on to perfection, and this he does in these words
precedent, we do not cease to pray foryou, and desire that ye might be filled
with the knowledge of his will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding: that
ye walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work.

The Text presents you with two general heads.

First the way to walk in, that ye walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing.

Secondly, The provision for the journey; being fruitful in every good work.

In the First, Quid, what? walk.

Secondly, Q^omodo, how? worthy of the Lord.

Thirdly, Qu^m ad finem, for what end? unto all pleasing.

In the latter here is first, Quid, what? being fruitful.

Secondly, In quibus, in every good work, of these in their order.

And first of the first, that ye walk, walking is a Metapher drawn from
Travelers, signifying the right ordering of our lives and conversations; for
the better explication of this Metapher, I shall present you with these three
considerations:

First, which is the way we ought to walk in.

Secondly, what diligence is required in walking.

Thirdly, what is the end we should propound to our selves herein.

First consider what is the way we ought to walk, it is the way of Gods
commandment: blessed are the und^filed in the way that walk in the law, in the
law of the Lord; they are much out of the way who so live as if there were no
God to direct them, coun^ing the Law of God as a strange thing and cry out with
those depart from us for we desire Job. 21. 14.
not the knowledge of thy ways: others there are that look for new visions or
revelations, to such as these I may say in the words of the Prophet, this is
the way walk in it. Isa. 30. 21. 2 Pet. 1. 10.


Secondly, what diligence is required in walking: give all diligence to make
your calling and election sure; if the clouds be full they will pour rain upon
the Earth to make it fruitful, if the spring be good, it will send forth pure
waters into the Cistern, good motions as they are stirr^d by the Spirit of God,
so they are fostered by practice, the good husband orders his land in due
season: fools and ding-thrifts trifle away the time, but wisemen employ it to
the best advantage: see then that ye walk circumspectly, Ephesians. 5. 15, 16.
not as fools but as wise, redeeming the time because the days are evil.

So I come to the third consideration, what is the end we should propound to
our selves, viz. the salvation of 1 Pet. 1. 9.
Souls: receiving the end their fa^^h, the salva^^on of their souls: the
seventy returned with ^oy, saying Lord, even devils are s^^ject unto us through
thy Name, if Moses and Miriam, L^k. 10. 17.
if D^borah and David did so shout and sing at their corporal conquests, how in
conceiveable is the joy of such as tread down Satan under their feet, yet
behold I show you a more excellent cause of rejoicing; notwithstanding in this
rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you, but in this rather rejoice
that your Names are written in Aug.
Heaven; cum accepta fuerit in ^ff^bilis illa l^titia, perit quodammodo men's
humana and sit divina: so soon as we receive this inconceiveable joy, our
mortality is swallowed with immortality, our humain soul is made caelestial and
Psalm. 16. 11. Psalm. 37. 25.
divine, in thy presence is fullness of joy, at thy right hand are pleasures for
ever more, to which may be added this pathetical expostulation* whom have I in
heaven but thee? there is none upon earth I can desire in comparison of thee.

Now that you may ascend this Jacobs ladder that will bring you to eternal
happiness, take these few directions,

First, begin betimes, now is the fittest season, it is dangerous to deferr it,
the time past is gone we cannot recall it, the time to come, is not in our
power, we know not whether we shall ever enjoy it, the time present is only our
own, therefore we should improve it, in the Pool of Bethsada lay a multitude
John 5. v. 3, 4.
of impotent folk, waiting for the moving of the water, forth* Angel went down
at a certain season and troubled the water, whosoever then after the troubling
of the water first st^pped in was made whole. Religion must have its seed time,
the seeds are sown, the harvest is hereafter, they that seek me early shall
find me.

Secondly keep the way, such as are out of the way are Ephesians. 2. 12^
Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, strangers from the Covenant of the
Promise without hope without God, in the World: but as for Christ's innocent
Lambs that keep the fold the eyes of the Lord are always over them, and his
ears are open to their prayers. He commands his Angels to be t^eir Guardians to
keep them in all their ways, and those that offend them, it was better that a
millstone was hand d about their necks and they drowned in the depth of the Saa:
Oh that our ways were so directed that we might walk in Gods statutes.

Lhirdly, persevere unto the end, it is the evening crowns the day, not he that
puts on his armor, but that puts it off 1 Cor. 15 v. 58.
may vaunt: be ye steadfast unmovable, always abounding in the work of the
Lord, forasmuch as you know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord, other
servants may change their master, but the served of the Lord with him in the
old law must be bored through the ear to ferve him for ever: be thou faithful
unto death, and I will give you a crown of Rev. 2.
life. If you want any further direction the Text suggests it in the words
following, worthy of the Lord which is the next step of this first general,
that ye walk worthy of the Lord? here worthyness according to the current of
interpreters, seems to note a correspondency of one thing to another, God is
the most exact copy for us to follow: Jesus Christ Ephesians. 5. v. 1.
came into the world to be an example as well as a Savior, be ye followers of
God as dear children, and walk also in love as Christ also has loved us: other
examples may be followed so far as they follow God without this lunitation,
they will prove but an ignis fatuus to lead us out of the way: Lucius Aemilius
looking upon the Image of Jupiter at first stood amazed, afterward burst forth
into this expression: solus profecto Jupiter Phidae Jovis Homerici expressit
imaginem: we make the applycation to God Almighty, such is his eternal weight
of glory, as the tongue of Men and Angels is not able to express it, yet we may
behold him in his back parts with Moses: so far as he has revealed himself to
us in his holy word; he becomes an exact copy not only for admiration but
imitation: there are four things wherein Gods example is set forth to us for
our imitation.

First, his wisdom and knowledge, in him are hid all the Col. 2. v. 3.
treasures of Wisdom and Knowl^dg: so glorious is this Suns luster, as might
dazzle the purest eyes to behold it in the perfection of its beauty, yet in
those beams descending thence it becomes obvious to our sight so precious a
Jewel is wisdom, the splendor whereof makes the Angels out shine all the
Worthies of the World it is the distinction betwixt man and man, and man from
beast, but this is but the trapings of wisdom, the beauty whereof does most
clearly appear in the saving knowledge of God in Christ: this is life eternal
John 17. 3.
that they may know the only true God and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

Secondly, purity and holiness: it is the quintesence of the divine essence,
the life of God, the character of his Laws, the qualifi^ation of his Subjects,
he is so jealous of the least tincture of impurity, as he hates the garments
spotted with the flesh, he that has the hope purifyeth himself as he is pure.
1 John 3. 3. Joh. 1. 29. Mat. 11. 29, 30. 1 Kings 12. v. 14.


Christ himself comes into the World as a Lamb in all his ^ermons he strives to
work meekness and humility, propounds his own example the preservative of
meekness and lawliness* take my yoke upon you and learn of me, for I am meek
and law^y, and you shall find rest unto your Souls, for my yoke is easy and my
burden is light. It was Rehoboams answer to old men's counsel* my father made
your yoke heavy, but I will add to your yoke, but Christ's yoke is easy and his
burden is light.

Fourthly, Love and Charity God is love, and is the fountain from whence all
those rivelets of charity do flow: he spared not his own Son, that he might
spare us, but delivered Romans 8. 32.
him up for us, that he might deliver us from death: amor sine exemplo,
charitas sine paralelo: love without an example, charity without a parallel and
as he is the fountain of love, so he ^^^ds us to draw water out of this well of
salvation our blessed Savior breathing out of the bosom of his Father his
will to us does stretch forth this duty like David's Sun Psalm. 19. 6.
from one end of the Earth to the other, not only to our friends and those that
have done us good, but even to our very Enemies, love your enemies, bless them
that curse you, do Mat. 5. 44.
good to them that hate you, pray for them that despitefully use you and
persecute you: how prone are we Elijah like to call fire from Heaven upon our
Enemies, hence our Savior seems to keep our mouth, as it were with a bit and
bridle and to temper our language that we may bless them that curse us, and
when our weening passion seems to bespeak us as God did Moses, let me alone
that I may be avenged of this People, Christ binds our hands and turns our
hearts to do good to them that hate us, and directs our prayers to pray for
them that despitefuly use us and persecute us: and all this is perfumed with
the sweet odor of love.

So I come to the third step of this first general: quem ad sinem, to what end?
unto all pleasing, and these words seem to be referred ad formale religionis to
the right ordering of our actions so as they may please God: we must so guide
the Stern of our actions as they may arrive at the Harbor of Gods acceptance:
we must not rest in opere operato, in the deed done, but look at the modus
agendi, let not formality Luke 12. 43. 1 Cor. 9. 24. 1 Cor. 11 28. Heb. 12. v.
1, 2.
swallow up the crown of your endeavors, God is much delighted in Adverbs,
blessed is that servan^ whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing. So
run that ye may obtain. Let a man examine himself and so let him eat of this
bread and drink of this cup. Then let us run with patience the race is set
before you, looking unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith.

So I come to the first step of the second General, being fruitful, The terms
seems Metaphorical, a tree not only buds and blossoms but brings forth fruit:
a Christians buds are holy thoughts, his blossoms godly words, his fruits is
in the power of godliness, we must not only be budded with good thoughts, nor
blossom in good words but bring forth fruit, the fruit of righteousness, yet
how few such trees of righteousness are there, some bring forth no fruit, and
fall Mat. 20. 6.
within the compass of our Saviors reprehension, why stand ye here all the day
idle? neglect of duty lets in all suggestion and holds in all pollutions,
idleness is a^horrent to Nature, the heart is always thinking, the fancy
always working, the Earth does bring forth herbs for the service of man, if
all this will avail nothing, consider that heavy doom denounced against the
unprofitable servant: cast ye the unprofitable servant Mat. 25 30.
into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, others
bring forth false fruits. How many such Jezebels there be that can paint over a
foul face with fair colors, and draw a fair glove on a foul hand; but the hope
of Job. 8. 13.
the Hypocrite shall perish. Others bring forth bad fruit this fruit Is not
more ancient than ominous, it entered into the world in the worlds infancy from
whom she sucked that poison Genesis 3. 10.
that proved the bane of her posterity, and the effects hereof appear as
terrible to succeeding generations: this is a Comet that portends the ruin of
whole kingdoms, the Plague, the Pestilence the Famine, the Sword, it turns
Rivers into blood, a fruitful Land into barrenness O then let us have no
fellowship with these unfruitful works of darkness Ephesians. 4. 20, 21, 22 23, 24.
but rather reprove them, ye have not so learned of Christ, if you have heard
him and been taught by him as the truth is in Jesus, that ye put off toneerning
the former conversation the old man which is corrupt according to the deceitful
lusts, and be renewed in the spirit of your mind, and that ye put on the new
maen, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness.

So I come to this last step of his last General, in every good work, being
fruitful in every good work: it is not enough to do some good works, but we
must be fruitful in every good work, without our obedience be universal it is
hypocritical. The grace of God which brings salvation has Tit. 2. 11, 12.
appeared unto all men, teaching us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, that
we should live soberly and righteously in this present World, you deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, if you do no impiety to God, nor injury to man,
yet innocence from ill, will not serve with negligence of good, as we may not
be wicked, so we must be godly, indeed the law of God required both. He that
keeps the law of God and fails in one point is guilty of all: our duties of
piety to Jam. 2. 10.
God cannot exempt us from the offices of our charity to (...) with such
sacrifices God is well pleased,: see then outward professions without suitable
actions are insignificant: God requires that we be fruitful in every good work,
if ye know these things happy are ye if ye do them good wine that is poured
into stinking Bottles spoils the wine. Joh. 13. 17.
and makes it unsavory, and good professions that are poured into a corrupt
heart stink in the nostrils of God Almighty. External professions are like
Nebuchadnezzars Image, whose head was of gold and the belly of brass; these
cannot reach the bliss pronounced by our Savior. The Pharisees prayer, Cains
sacrifice, Jizebels fast, Esau stears, Ananias offering avail nothing; though
they profess that they know God, yet in works they deny him, being abominable
and disobedient and to Tit. 1. 16. 1 Cor. 13. 1 2, 3
every good work Reprobate: would you a closer instance the Apostle suggest it,
Though I speak with the tongue of Men, Angels and have no charity it profits
me nothing: I am become as a sounding brass or a tinckling Cymbal; though I
have the gift of prophecy and understand all Mysteries and knowledge and
though I have all faith so that I ^^uld remove Mountains, and have no charity I
am nothing, though I give all my goods to feed the poor and have no charity I
am nothing, etc.

I shall wind up all with an exhortation: strive then to be perfect as your
Father which is in Heaven is also perfect, let purity and integrity be the
badge of your profession; and be distinguished from the common rank of this
world, by your conquest over sin, and embracing of virtue.

Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ
the great Shepherd of the sheep, make you perfect in every good work, working
in you that which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom
be glory for ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS,

