THE Marriage Night.

WRITTEN By the LORD Viscount FAVVLKLAND.

Scientia non habet Inimicum, Praeter Ignorantiam.

LONDON. Printed by W. G. for R. Crofts at the Crown in Chancery Lane under
Sergeants-Inne. 1664.

CASTILE.
The King. De Castro. Dessandro.
Counts Brothers. De Flame. A Count. Pirez. Sampayo.
Two Lords. De Loome. La Gitterne.
Attendants to the Duke. Silliman, Steward to the Duchess. Two Judges.
Claudilla, A Duchess. De Bereo, A Duke, Brother to the King. Cleara, Sister
to De Flame. Torguina. De Prate.
Ladies to the Duchess. Attendants.
Licensed,

October. 16. 1663. Roger L'Estrange.

THE Marriage Night.
Actus primus, Scena prima.
Enter Pirez and Sampayo. Pirez. POssible? -- Dessandro quit from his Command
oth' Citadel? so sharply too? Brushing times, my Lord: Pray, by virtue of what
offense?


Sampayo. It may be treason to ask their wisdoms that; But the huge Mountebank,
the vulgar Rout quarreled with his Religion, 'cause it is not in the smallest
Print: And the King was to say nothing.


Pirez Good King: I could wish something, and heartily if I durst: Well, from
grave hypocrisy and beardlesse wisdom, good heaven deliver us: Nothing in his
great Fathers Memory, to hold him worthy of his place?


Sampayo. That makes him taste it to the extremity of Sense and Anger.


Pirez* Let us but slight some Gull, or his gay dress (whose Clothes* and
Folly, are his sense of honor) how it will conjure up his blood, and bend his
Brow? And can Dessandro want a just and valiant anger to feel the merits of so
brave a Father, and his own (kept at a noble height) rendered disgraced and
fullied? he may believe a' has deserved better, both in his father and himself:
But how does his Resolution take it?


Sampayo. As Fire and Air comprest, when struggling they break forth in
Thunders; or the vexed wind amongst a Grove of Trees, spending his Scorn and
Rage.


Pirez. Men of his Soul and Constitution cannot play with their Passions; and
stroke' um tame, so provoked.

Enter Duke de Bereo, passing over the Stage, De Castro whispering with him: De
Loome; La Gitterne, and other Attendants. The Duke.


Duke. Let him be confident of me, in something more worthy of himself, then
the Command he has lost; and bid him use my Promise.


De Castro. We are the Creatures of your Favor, and but own our lives to
acknowledge it. --


[Exeunt.] Pirez. Here Is State embroidery: -- but pray'e, what holyday things
be they that spread so in his Train? I don't remember I left such faces in the
Court.


Sampayo. The first of them stalks in a knighthood, like A Boy in a Dutch
Burgers doublet; and it is as much too wide for him; a' his traveled, and
speaks Languages, as a Barbers Boy plays oth' Gitterne; And those gay Clouts
Sir came out on's Fathers Shop.


Pirez. His Remnants: the Other: that looks like the Age to come, which must be
worse then this.


Sampayo. His Fortune and Industry has preferred him to be Barber and Pimp; Two
men's places, till of late our Noblemen, growing frugal, do find one may do both
the Employments.


Pirez. It is both thriving and gentile.


Samp. Gentile indeed; for they have produced Knights, and made Statesmen of
broken Citizens (with the help of a Wife) But he whose youth and sorrow shows
him like a fair day, set in a Cloudy Evening is --


Pirez. The Lord De Castro; I know him, and me thinks some sparks of his
Father, great Valesco's Character, shines in this young man, through all the
darkness of his Fate.


Samp. That Name alone, has glory enough to make him a brave presage to us:
Duke's Fathers Character was derived and circled in himself; And a full age of
Men shall rarely show another of so much great and balanced Man in it.


Pirez. They are all Court Fancies: Pageants of State, and want allowance both
of Brain and Soul to make their Blood and Titles weight.


Samp. He was strangely shuffled to the Block.


Pirez. That Blow did bleed Castile too weak, and left us in a faint and sickly
pang.


Samp. The Pulse, Sir, of Castile beats in another temper then when you left it.


Pirez. I find it: The City wears a Cap, and looks as if all were not right
there.


Samp. Except their Wives.


Pirez. The Court me thinks has strangely changed Complexion too.


Samp. Those that deride us say --
The Clergy has caught the Falling Sickness;
The Court, a deep Consumption; and that
The Commons have the Spleen.

Pirez. I know not what disease the Court has; but the Lords look as if they
had over sat themselves at Play, and lost odds; so scurvily.


Samp. How does your Lordship find the Ladies?


Pirez. I have not been amongst um yet, to take up my Arrears; only had the
Court happiness to kiss her hand, who in her self, contracts them all for
Grace and Luster, the Widow Duchess Claudilla.


Samp. Why there my admiration leaves you; I Grant her a brave and Courtly
Girl: has trim and dazzle enough of white and red, to attract the eye, like an
indifferent Copy, Flourished with Golden trailes; but place your Judgment
nearer, it retreats and Cries you mercy for the mistake: At distances, she is a
Goodly Landscape.


Pir. Alas, her blooming beauties yet languish and Pine over her Husbands
Hearse, like Roses scattered from the Mornings brow, into the days Parched Lap.


Samp. Their Spring will shine again, Grow Glorious and Fruitful in the Arms of
her De Flame; It is my hearty wish to their Affections; That Count does bear an
honored Character from all that knows him.


Pir. A brave young man, and one that is more Honor to his Title than it to
him; But when must their Hymenial Tapers flame? and she offer her Turtle
Pantings at the Altar, Purpling the Morn with Blushes as she goes and scatter
such Bright Rays, as the Sun may dress his Beams with for that days Glory.


Samp. After he has Celebrated his Sister to Dessandros hand, he will not defer
those Minutes Long, and he thinks himself behind in some expression of their
Frienpship, until the knot meet there.


Pir. Cleara is a Lady of a sweet and honored Fame.


Samp. All other of her Sex are dull and sullied imitations, Pale Glimmerings,
set by her: What er'e the modest fictions of sweetened Pens has meant, she is
their Moral.


Pir. You speak like one that knows what Virtue is, and can love it.


Enter De Castro, and Dessandro to them. Dess. I thank the Duke, he has a Right
Soul; But, Prithee no more of these sad Consolations, they hang upon my heart
like pondrous w^ights at trembling wyres: Or like the dull Labourings of that
Clock which groaned our dear Father's Fatal minute.


De Cast. I have done.


Dess. I could chide this tame and phlegmy vapor from my blood: Our Passions
melt into soft Murmurs, like hollow Springes: -- the Manhood of cold hinds
would not be tempted to this sense, but leap with rage in their eyes; Brother,
it would; and wake 'um into Tempests; A wretched Fly, would show its spleen.


De Cast. This Anger will but show men where you bleed and keep the wound still
Green.


Dess. The Scar will stick for ever: -- Oh; the dark Hypocrisy and Juggling of
our Times? Great Men are Slaves to Slaves, and we are theirs: The Law's a Tame
Wolf, Cowards and Fools may stroke with Giving hands, while he shall Couchant
lie, and wagg the Tail; but show his Fangs at you and I: A Noble wish is
dangerous; is it not my Lord?


Pir. What Dessandro?


Dess. The Vulgar's a Kennel of black mouthed dogs that worry men's deserts and
Fame: my Curse fester in their Temples.


De Cast. Prithee Dessandro, collect these Scattered thoughts.


Dess. I Will hollow them through all the world, and say it again; Worth and
Honor now are Crimes, and Giants against the State: My Lords; shall's be merry
and talk something the Hangman may thank us for?


Pir. Treason? I vow Dessandro, I speak the worst ex tempore, of any man living.


Samp. I could mutter it well enough; but I Am to marry A City Widow, and buy a
Place at Court.


Pir. When I have sold my Land we will venture on A Merry Catch, and ever
subscribe your Servant Noble Dessandro.


Dess. I shall find a Time and Place to pay your Lordship the Account of my
engagements.


De Cast. Brother, my Attendance calls me to the King; I Will wait upon your
Lordship, if y' are for the Court.


Pir. Your Lordships Servant thither. --


[Exeunt.] Dess. So streams divide and Ruffle by their banks; My Brother's of a
safe contracted bosom; Can strangle his laboring Rages in their thought; When
they do tug like poisons at my breast, until I give them Air: But I Will observe
and Creep into Men's Souls: Hugg my dear Anger to my self, until it gnaw my
Intrails through, that men may Court my patience, and discourse, As now they
shun it. And when black night has stretched her Gloomy limbs, and laid her head
upon some Mountain Top (bound up in foggy Mists) then keep my haunts by some
dull groaning stream with screeching Owls, and Batts, there pay my broken
thoughts unto thy Ghost Valesco: Echo shall wake and midnight, to help me
Curse their souls that thrust thee to thy grave, whilst I will hang about
Nights neck until the Moon do wake to Rescue her.


Enter the Duke. Duke. Dessandro? You must not be angry my Power came short --
of my desires to serve you; We Will try some other way: You see by what Engines the
Times move; The King refers all to his Council; and though they do not tie his
hands, they hold 'em by a strange Courtesy: I Am but a single Looker on:
Perhaps they may take notice of me for his Brother; that is when they please
too: But this came nearest to me, upon the engagement of my honor to deny my
friend, and one whose single Faith had been enough for all the Kingdoms
safety, the holding of such a Trifle as the Citadel.


Dessandro. It has recompensed me in part to know where that Close annoy lay
which wounded me in the dark: I shall now collect my self against it, and know My
Lord, where my poor life and powers are to be prostrate: Could I enlarge them
to my wish they might appear Sir, to your Highness use.


Duke. I know how far you can, bravest Man; your worth has taken fire here,
where I Will preserve it in a Noble Flame. -- My greatest thirst of Fame is my
expression to Men of your Merit, who cannot want A friend whilst I have power
to be one: But I am scanted and weakened in my desires, else Famed Valesco had
not yet slept in his dust to please the Common hangman, nor Men of glorious
Parts live shrouded in obscute homes, like pamphlets out of date.


Dess. You are the Patron of our honored Actions, and all their Glory meets and
Circles in your Fame.


Duke. I will disengage you from this forced complement; It keeps me at too
great a distance from that bosom, where I would Lodge a friend, Dessandro: I
must take it unkindly too, that in the Scrowle of all your Friends, I stand dashed
out a stranger to your Joys.


Dess. My Lord?


Duke. But you shall not steal the Day so: I Will be one at the Ceremony, though
the Bride tell me in a blush, I came unwisht for.


Dess. It Is but the busy voice, that like the Nightmare rides men; And can
find strange Shapes and prodigies. in the Clouds: I must Confess, Cleara has the
engagement of all Her virtues and a Brothers on me; When it concerns me nearer,
it must not be A Secret to your Highness, to whom all thit's derived to my Poor
life and Fortune is a Just debt.


Duke. You know the way unto a Friend, If you can think I have power enough to
make me so.


Dess. Sir I was only showed to the world to be talked on: Fortune (I thank her)
has given me many knacks to play with in her mood, but taken um away again
scurvily, to tell me, I was not born to any real Purpose, And I wish nothing
she can give me.


Duke. She will acknowledge her mistake, and Put on her smiles to Court your
merits. La Gitterne? Is the King come from's sport?


[La Gitterne waits.] La Gitt. He dines abroad, my Lord.


Duke. Colonel, this Day you shall bestow on me: I owe the Dutchels Claudilla
a visit; Make ready straight; we will spend a dinner time there, and the afternoon
at Tennis.


[Exeunt.] A SONG. That done, Claudilla and De Flame discovered sitting in a
rich Couch; at each end a Lady waiting. De Flame. This does but find our
Melancholy out and cast it in a Minutes Trance; when one soft Accent from
Claudilla's voice leaves naught that is earth about me. My Souls in her Elysium
and every Sense immortal, dilated into joys: Heaven becomes attentive, and the
soft Winds put on their perfumed Wings to hover near those Lips: That Blush
does show the Sparkles of some incensed thought; My poor expressions Rob ye;
But I appeal to this white hand for pardon.


Cla. Sir, my thoughts are all acknowledgments of that delight I hear and see
you with, what dress so e're you please to send your Courtship in to try um: We
have outlived those Arts, and Common Charms, and need not seek our hearts in
scattered Flames, as those, whose Lesson yet, is at the hand or eye; our hearts
have read Loves deep Divinity, and all his amorous Volumes over; We must write
Stories of our Love, my Lord.


De Flame. And chaste ones, Madam: How glorious the Frontispiece would show
with great Claudilla's Name, tied in a true Loves knot to her De Flames: Though
the great distance of your shining Attributes both of Blood and Virtue,
considered in the poverty of mine, would draw squint eyes, and Envy to my
stars; but speak your Name Creat as the example of your goodness, and make it
worth the imitation of all Noble minds that shall but read your Love and
sweetness; which (most excellent of your Sex) Condescended unto me, who else
had Languish'd in a heap of Ashes.


Claudilla. My Lord; you have found an easy way into my heart, and won me from
my self e're I could call my thoughts to resistance; Such strength brought your
Deserts: But now I hope, nay can be Confident (best Sir) they are treasured in
a Breast, whose Virtues will preserve them with themselves.


De Flame. Oh Madam!


Claudilla. It may be some Discourse, that when first I entertained your Love,
I had not yet given the world, and my dead Husbands Earth, a full account of
sorrow, or paid his memory a years just rent of Tears: But I appeal to my own
heart; and you my Lord can say --


De Flame. Your heart has been but too Severe unto it self, And I can say, I
have not seen a beam, break from those eyes, but through dark Clouds and
showers; Or like the Sun, drencht in the swelling Main; Nor a Look with the
least Comfort of a Smile in it; Nay, Divinest Madam; Now you do but Chide Heaven
in your Tears; and cannot Raise the dead.


Claudilla. True Sir.


De Flame. Tears are but shallow murmurs of our Grief. I envy not his Grave a
Tear, but owe all Noble mention to it; yet Madam, I did hope You had discharged
the smart and Cruelty of Grief from your soft breast: And would call your
beauties to their Natural springs: -- Look on your self (rare Lady) in this
change With what high Flame and Rapture it becomes you: So breaks the Morning
forth of a crystal Cloud; And so the Sun ascends his glittering Chair, And
from his burnisht Locks shakes day about; The Summer puts not on more delights
and various Glory, than shines in bright Claudilla; And shall the Grave exhaust
their pride and Youth? --


Enter Torguina. Torguina. Madam, the Kings Brother gives you a visit.


De Flame. Who Is with 'em?


Torg. The Colonel, your Lordship calls Friend.


De Flame. Dessandro?


Claudilla. Let Us meet 'um Sir. --


[Exeunt.] Actus Secundus, Scena Prima.
Enter the Duke, Duchess, Cleara, De Flame, Dessandro, Attendants. Duke. I Am
in Arrears yet unto your Grace.


Claud. A Widows entertainment Sir, you please to honor.


Duke. I wish the hours but short that brings the Night you are to lose that
Name in; And then, to what Length your own desires wooed spin um: Widow, Madam?
There Is disconsonancy in the Name, me thinks: Claudilla Widow? Duchess, and
still Widow (like a Cypress cast over a bed of Lillies) darkens your other
Titles; It Is a weed in your Garden, and will spoil the Youth and beauty it
grows nigh: A word of Mortality, or a Memento Mori, to all Young Ladies: And a
Passing Bell to Old ones: Indeed, it is a mere Privation; and all Widows are in
the state of Out-lawes, till Married again.


Claudilla. Your Highness holds a merry opinion of us Poor Widows.


De Flame. I say Virgins are the Ore; Widows the Gold tried, and Refined.


Duke. A Fair young Lady and Widow, is A rich piece of Stuff Rumpled: An Old
one's A blotting Paper: A Man shall never write any thing on, she sinks so.
Dessandro? your Comment.


De Flame. Friend, you are dull oth' sudden.


Cleara. He is not well.


Claudilla. Not well, Sir?


Dessandro. Not well Madam.


Duke. Dull? Shall's to Tennis? I have sore Pissollets will pay your borrowed
time, Dessandro.


Dessandro. Your Pardon Sir; I am unfit to wait on you; My life hangs in a Dew
upon me; And I have drunk Poison.


De Flame. Ha? A Physician with all speed; Dessandro?


Cleara. Dear Sir?


Dessandro. Cleara? Lend me thy hand -- So -- I Am struck upon a Rock. --


[Sounds.] Cleara. He Is dead; I shall not overtake him.


Duke. Look to the Lady.


Claud. He swells like a stopped Torrent, or a Teeming Cloud; Have I no Servants
there? --


[Carry him off.] De Flame. What a sudden storm is fallen?


Duke. How fares the Lady?


Claudilla. Madam?


Cleara. As you are tender Natured, let no hand Close his eyes but mine: I am
come back thus far to take my farewell on his cold Lip.


[De Flame returns] De Flame. Sister, Let thy warm blood flow back: Thy
Dessandro lives, my Girl.


Cleara. Oh! may I not see him?


De Flame. You shall.


[Exeunt.] Duke. Give me leave to make this opportunity happy on your hand:
How? Not vouchsafe it?

[Dutchess goes off.] What a Tyranny shot from her scornful eye? Where have I
lost my self and her? There Is a cross, and Peevish Genius haunts my Hopes; A
Black and envious Cloud; and I must get above it; Not kiss your hand? Is your
blood surfeited? I Will quit this scorn: Indeed, I will, Coy Madam: Thou, that
art Lord of my proud Horoscope; Great Soul of Mysteries; kindle my brain with
thy immortal fires -- That if I fall, my Name may Rise Divine, So Casar's Glory
set, and so set Mine. --


[Exit.] Enter Silliman, a Bottle tied in a Ribbon to his Pocket. Silliman.
Brave Canary; Intelligent Canary, that does refresh our weak and mortal bodies;
I will have thee Canonized Saint Canary, at my own Charge: And call my eldest
Son Canary: Yet for a man to love thee at his own Cost is damnable, very
Damnable, and I defy it -- And Siss is the blithest Less in our Town For she
sells Ale by the Pound and the Dozen; Ale? hang Ale.


Enter a Messenger. Messenger. By your Worships leave, I would speak with
Seign'or Silliman, the Duchess Steward, an't like ye.


Silli. Would you speak with Seignior Silliman, an't like ye?


Messenger. Please God, and your Worship, an't like ye.


Sill. In what Language would you speak with him --


[hum.] Messenger. Yes verily, I would speak with him, an't like ye.


Silliman. At what Posture?


Messenger. Marry from a friend, an't like ye.


Silliman. Very good, my friend: Did ever say thy

[drinks Prayers in the Canary tongue?


Mess. My Prayers, an't like ye? Your Worship's disposed to be merry: I have a
Wife and seven small Children, an't like ye, to wind, and turn, as they say,
simple as your Worship sees me here, an't like ye.


Silliman. Pox a Wives; I Will not give a Gazet for thy wife; she is tough, and
too much Powdered: Fetch me thy Daughter, thy youngest Daughter, Sirrah, If the
Creature be a Virgin and desirable: Look ye! There Is money to buy her Clean
Linen: I Will have a Bath of rich Carnary, and Venus milk, where we will bath,
and swim together, like so many Swans, and then be Called Seignior Jupiter
Sillimano. But is she Man's meat? I have a tender Appetite, and can scarcely
digest one in her Teens.


Mes. Does your worship think I would be a Judas, an't like ye? She Is as neat a
Girl, and as Tite at her business as the back of your hand, an't like ye: But
Heaven bless ye, and Cry ye mercy: If you be his Worship here is a Letter from
the Lady De Prate, an't like ye.


Silliman. The Lady De Prate (mark me Sirrah) is a Noble Lady; we say so. --

[reads a letter.] I never knew what Bondage was till now, I fear the Gilded
Heart you sent me was enchanted -- (oh -- oh) I long to see you -- -- (hum --
hum) therefore let me have the happiness to know the Place and Time -- (even
so) as you love her that blushes to write this -- Yes, yes, I Will Inchant ye:
I Will Time and Place ye: Surely, there is something more about me, then I can
perceive: Grant that I may bear my Fate discreetly: I never knew what Bondage
was --

[reads.] till now: Well; It Is Heavens Goodness: For what am I silly wretch,
to such a Lady as she that writes so pitifully unto me: It would overcome even
a heart

[weeps.] of Flint: Good Gentlewoman -- As you love her that blushes to write
this --

[reads.] hum -- yes, yes; she knows I love her: It will work -- I cannot
contain my good nature. --


[drinks and weeps Enter La Gitterne, and De Loome. De Loome. Here he is, and
stands like a Map of sundry Countries.


La Gitterne. One would take him for some foreign beast, and that Fellow to
show him; how the Gander Ruffles and Prunes himself, as if he would tread the
Goose by him?


De Loome. It Is a pure Goat.


La Gitt. And will clamber a Pyramide in sent of's Female.


De Loome. The Wenches swear he kisses like a Giant still, and will ride his
heats as Cleanly, as a dieted Gelding: Let Us fall in: Seignior Silliman! My
best wishes kiss your hand.


La Gitt. Continue me worthy the Title of your Servant Sir.


Silliman. I am very glad to see you well, and hope you are in good health, and
sound Gentlemen.


La Gitterne. And when shall's draw Cutts again for a Wench, Seignior, hah?


Silliman. Your pleasure to say so.


De Loome. The Slave's rose drunk, of my life.


Sill. Please you to take Notice of my worthy Friend here.


De Loome. Your Admirer, Sir.


[salutes Messenger.] La Gitterne. Slave to your Sedan, Sir.


Mess. God bless the good Duchess, and all that love the King, I say
Gentlemen, an't like ye.


De Loome. Pray Sir, what News abroad, or at Court?


Messenger. News, quoth a? Indeed Sir, the truth is, I am a Shooemaker by my
Trade; My Name is Latchet; And I work to some Ladies in the House here, though
I say it my self; And yet the Times were never harder, nor Leather dearer.


De Loom. This winter will make amends; you shall have horse hides cheap; horse
hides, dog cheap.


Latchet. Cheap? quoth a; Why Sir, I Will tell you (for you look like a very
honest Gentleman) I am put to find a Pike my self; and must, the Parish
swears, or lose all the Shoes in my Shop.


De Loom. It Is very brave: Why you look like a Champion And have a Face, the
Parish may Confide in.


Latchet. Fide? quoth a; Sir; be Judge your self, if ever you knew the like: I
have been at the Trade this forty years, off and on: and those Childrens shoes
I have sold for six pence, or a groat, upon some occasion, we now sell for
twelve pence, as they say.


De Loome. Then the misery is, you get the mo^e.


Latchet. More? quoth a; Pray Sir a word? you are a Courtier, if I may be so
bold: They say we must all be fain to shut up shop, and mortgage our Wives to
the Soldiers: D' ye hear any such talk, Sir?


De Loom. Some buzzing: but the blades will not accept'um without special
articles, and a stock of money, and plate to keep the babies they shall beget
valiant.


Latchet. Valiant? quoth a; Truly Sir, I Will tell ye, on the truth of a poor
man: My Lady De Prates foot is but of the sixes; and yet we pay five Pistols A
Dicker.


Silliman. My Ladies foot but oth' sixes? you lie Sirrah; By Saint Hugh,
there is never a Lady in the Land has a Prettier Foot and Leg, if you ha not
spoiled um with your Calves skin, Sirrah.


La Gitt. Why? the sixes is a good han'som size for a Lady.


Latchet. Lady? quoth a; my life for hers, there is few Ladies in the Court goes
more upright: Nor pays better, I Will say that.


Silliman. You say that? Foh; I scorn to wear an inch of leather thy Nasty
flesh shall handle.


De Loom Oh, your worthy friend, Signior; and an elder in's parish; A Pike-man
too, for the Republique: Come, come, A shall be Shoemaker to us all: Can
trust?


Latchet. Trust? quoth a; My Name's Latchet, Sir, I served Eleven years to my
Vocation, before I could be free: and have drank many a good bowl of Beerith'
Dutchesses Cellar, since that.


De Loome. I like a man can answer so punctually to a thing,


Latchet. Thing? quoth a; It is our Trade, Sir.


De Loom. Spoke like the Warden of the Company.


[Exeunt. Enter Claudilla, and Dessandro in a Night Gown. Claudilla. I am at
extremity of wonder.


Dessandro. The story may deserve it Lady, when you shall Cast your thoughts
upon the Man it Treats on, the Circumstances, and progress of my Love: Nay, it
may raise your Anger bigher than your wonder, and work the modest pantings of
your breast into a Hectique Rage: I saw this tempest gathered in a Cloud dismal
and black, ready to break its womb in storms upon me: And I have cast my Soul
on every Frown and horror you can arm your passion with: I have held conflict
with the wilder Guilt and tremblings of my blood to rescue it: But Heaven, and
my angry Fate, has thrown me grovelling at your feet: And I want soul to break
the Charm.


Claudilla. This is a strange Mystery, to betray my virtue with your own, and I
shall sin to hear it.


Dessandro. If pity be a sin, lock up those beauties from the view of men, or
they will damn all the eyes that look upon you.


Claud. Has your blood lost all the virtue it should inherit? And think you by
this treacherous siege to take my Honor in? Let me shun you, or you will talk
me Leperous.


Dessandro. Do Madam -- Tear up the wounds your eyes have made -- I Will keep them
bleeding Sacrifices to your Cruelty; And when cold death has cast his gloomy
shade over this dust, perhaps you may bestow one gentle sigh to hallow it; when
you shall know The height of my desires was but to dye worthy of your pardon,
without the ambition of a bolder thought; And still had scorched, and smothered
here without a Tongue, only to beg your mercy to my Grave.


Claudil. Play not your self into a shame will rust your brightest worths, and
hide your Dust in Curses, and black Fame: I now shall think your valor
Flattered, that can sink it to such effeminate and Love sick Crafts for our
stale Women to mollify the Usher with. Dessandro has a Fame, high and active
as the voice it Flies on: And could you wander from your religious self in such
a Dream as this? Cleara's virtue has an Interest near your heart should wake
you to your first man again.


Dess. Cleara still is here in the first Sculpture of her virtues, and I their
honourer.


Claudilla. No more! -- My grief and shame are passionate to find so much bad
man, got near your heart, and show this sick Complexion in your honor, more
tainted then the Face of your Imposture -- you have played the excellent
counterfeit, and your skill does make you proud, you cannot blush. --


[Exit.] Dessandro. She Is gone; -- A Star shot from her eye, and lightened
through my blood: I must provide for Thunder, and thy Revenge De Flame, as
horrid as thought can shape it.


Enter Cleara. Cleara. Sir?


Dessandro. Proud Love? I Will meet thee with burning sighs and bleeding Turtles
at thy shrine.


Cleara. This is too bold a hazard for your health, which yet sits wan and
troubled on your Cheek.


Dessandro. Madam?


Cleara. Indeed I Will chide ye.


Dessandro. Oh, Cry ye mercy; -- some retired meditations.


Cleara. I shall observe 'um, Let me but leave you with the Joy to know I stand
not in the hazard of that Frown.


Dessandro. We'll kiss next time.


Cleara. Sir?


Dessandro. Or never.


Cleara. Ha? de'e know me?


Dessandro. So well, me thinks we should not part so soon: our hearts have been
more ceremonious, and hung in panting sighs upon our Lips to bid adieu: one
kiss must now sum up all, and seal their General Release: I know Cleara more
constant to her virtue, and brave mind, then to ask heaven idle questions --
It Is Fate, not Will --


[Exit.] Cleara. So -- I feel thy Marble hand lie here: It Is cold and heavy:
how my poor heart throbs under it, and struggles to find Air? Not one kind sigh
lend thee a gale for yonder haven? -- It Is gone -- Quite vanished -- beshrew me,
it was a most horrible apparition, I would not see it again in such a cruel
look for all my hopes; yet it held me gently by the hand, and left a warm
farewell there, as my Dessandro used: As my Dessandro? said I? oh! how fain my
hopes would mock my apprehension; and that my sorrow? I Will woe thy pity with my
Groans kind earth, and lay my throbbing breast to thine until I am dissolved
into a Spring, whose Murmures shall eternally repeat this Minutes story.


Enter De Flame. De Flame. Ha? --


Cleara drowned in her own Tears? Sister? Cleara?


Cleara I had a gentle slumber; and all the world (me thought) was in ^
midnight Calm.


De Flame. Dear Girl. (...) up those sad eyes and my cold doubts. Prithee tell
me, is our Dessandro dead?


Cleara. Heaven defend.


De Flame. Not? what then in all the volumes of black destiny and nature, can
throw you into this posture? -- Unkind Cleara; why do dissemble it? I see him
breathless on thy Cheek, and lost.


Cleara. Lost for ever.


De Flame. My fears did prompt me so; For ever? -- there is horror and
amazement in the thought: See Cleara; my eyes can over-take thee: Gone at so
short a farewell friend? Death, thou art the murderer of all our joys and hopes.


Cleara. Sir, Dessandro's well; very well; we parted even but now.


De Flame. What?


Cleara. Oh Brother? I have lost a jewel that he gave me and I shall vex my
eyes out.


De Flame. Beshrew this serious folly: you have vexed my blood into a sullen fit.


Cleara. You shall not chide me -- Tell me? did ever in thy life meet with a
Grief that made thy poor heart sick, and did divide thy sleeps and hours into
groans and sighs?


De Flame. Never; thank my indifferent Fate.


Cleara. Nor in the Legend of some Injured Maid that made thine eye to pause,
and with a Tear bedew it.


De Flame. I cannot untie Ridled knots, Cleara.


Cleara. Come; I Will but dry mine eyes, and tell you a story that shall deserve
a groan. --


[Exeunt.] Actus Tertius; Scena Prima.
Enter De Castro, and Dessandro. Dess. TUsh -- They had only tongue and malice;
and that great Zeal the seemed to owe to Rome, was unto themselves, and their
own Estates; what were they, but wranglers in Schools and Law? and studied
words to make men guilty. They lived at ease; and slept in purples and warm
furrs; But bold minded Cataline, threatened their wise sleeps.


De Castro. There was too much attempt and fact in it.


Dessandro. 'Twas fact then to look sour on a Gown-man: they were mere
Citizens: Jealous of their Wives, and Daughters: That Condemned um too: --


De Castro! there is a Lethargy in our blood: We sleep and dream away our Lives.
If such wore purple for well talking, what shall he merit that Cures the wounds
and smart his Country groans with?


De Cast. The People shall enshrine his Name with Reverence, and fill their
Temples with his Statues: It Is the great end we are all born to.


Dessandro. Which cannot be, whilst by-respect shall closely wound the bosom of
our Laws and Freedom: For what was it Less, that took our Father's life?


De Castro. In whose blow, the heads of all brave men were threatened.


Dessandro. Then if we dare not do a general good, yet let us secure our own
dear lives and honors.


De Castro. The State is full of dangerous whispers.


Dessandro. There Is an Impostume swells it.


De Castro. Would 'twere lanc'd.


Dessandro. Spoken with the soul of Cassius; we have the cure, and may do it
with a little stir: But then we must deal like true Physicians of State, And
where we find it ulcer'd, though in our selves, friends, and allies, not lay
soft effeminate hands on it: Nature has made us nearest to our selves: And I
would pay the last warm drop of blood from all these veins to see the hopes and
honors of our blood (that is now benightned in our Fathers fate) dawn on De
Castro's youth again.


De Castro. No Dessandro; Those hopes are lost upon a high and angry sea: And I
must see fools and stale Parasites (whose Progeny never bled one drop, nor had
a valiant thought to serve their Country) begin A spurious Issue on my
birthright, that will, on Tiptoes Collossus like, bestride us and graspe our
Fate.


Dessandro. Take me into thy bosom, brave man; we meet Like Amorous streams,
and as we ought; our honor, life, and fortunes, have but one heart: Give me
thy hand De Castro; This Sword --

[draws.] our Father h^th often made Glorious in the blood of De Castro's foes:
And I Will not doubt, how much it prompts thy valiant soul: Oh Brother! Tears,
and some sad discourse is all that we have paid him yet: Strangers can be far
braver in their sense unto his Fame: The tears we ought to shed, ought to be
blood, De Castro; Blood, warm from their veins, that made us weep in streams,
and mingle it with the dust of vulgar feet, as they did his. Swear by all the
Glorious acts of our great Ancestry, their hallowed Urnes, our Fathers injured
memory, and all the hopes and honor we derive from them, to pay his blood a
sad account in some revenge, worthy his Ghost, and our bold hands.


De Castro. All which religiously, I vow to.


Dess. And I: So; Now we are Brothers by as strong Divinity as Nature: I Will
not break open the design, till we shall hear't confirmed by higher warrant:
Anon, meet at the Duchess Dowager's.


De Castro. Claudilla's?


Dessandro. Yes, where you shall hear something worthy the encouragement of our
Fathers spirit in thee: I am now to wait upon the Duke; he that keeps us what
we are.


De Castro. The Duke? -- I have the Game in view, and now discern, what I must
pay him for my Place.


Dessandro. You are full of thoughts, my Lord.


De Castro. Brother, our Lives are on the Cast: But it is not that does
interpose 'um: There Is something in my fears still presents Cleara; Take heed
Dessandro -- A Virgins tears leave sad and Fatal prints.


Dessandro. Your wishes are a brothers: but those dreams chill not my sleeps:
Think on that concerns us near And be Active.


De Castro. I shall not fail ye: Farewell. --


[Exit De Cast.] Enter Pirez. Pirez. Colonel Dessandro?


Dessandro. Your Lordships pardon: Which way walk you?


Pirez. As you please to dipose me: My business now defigns it so: It Is there
in short --

[gives a paper which Dessandro reads.] I love his gallant mastery of a man's
self: I looked his temper would a flamed about my ears: Not a sparkle in his
brow, nor the least change of blood. Strange! I have seen him ruffl'd into a
storm, and all fury: Now, not a frown nor smile.


Dessandro. De Flame? -- well -- My Lord, this is a down flat Challenge.


Pirez. I brought it for one.


Dess. I accept it, with thanks to your Lordship, and shall be ready to serve
you in any power I have.


Pirez. It Is not worth it, Colonel.


Dess The Lord De Flame's angry, it seems that fortune should give me right
without his hand in it, h'as turned his style high and strangely on me: But I
shall coolly respite that, till we have room to argue it. That he is far more
worthy his expectation in the Duchess, I can Confess: that is no assent Sir
to my quarrel; nor yet a law to her: For those whom her thoughts please to
think most worthy, are so to her.


Pirez. But does not bind the opinion of another.


Dessandro. Nor that opinion her Freedom.


Pirez. Yet there be rules in virtue, from which all noble Judgments should
take their Level, even in love it self.


Dessandro. If it be thought she is too partial in her grace to me, I shall
dispute it, as it is questioned.


Pirez. I come not to add exceptions or to make any.


Dessandro. I stand not in so cheap a Rank, but that her favor may make my
services as meritorious as his Lordships: And can engage as much blood and Fame
for it.


Pirez. You know him of a Noble breast, and one that will not slatter weak
pretenses into Truths, nor let um work with such impressions on his Soul, did
not his Honor bleed in it? Sir, I come as one that ever honored your great
parts, and wish that you could think on it over again: Think how black you must
expect that morn to rise upon your wishes, When you lead her to the Altars;
where the faint Lights with blew and Ghastly Flames, will receive ye; And all
the things of Holy Ceremony Present pale Glim'rings to your eyes, to fright
your Bride back unto her first vows: And then, me thinks, each Tear and Groan
the Fair Cleara lends to over-take ye, should show a speaking Fury to untwine
your trembling hands.


Dess. No; Nor all the squadrons hell can spare, to aid them: though her
Brother led them on, and you brought up the Rear.


Pirez. Sir?


Dessandro. Pish -- The meanest thought Claudilla pleases to bestow here (under
this humble Guard) must be without the affright (my Lord) of all the dangers in
his Muster: Stare they like Giants on me, and in Armies: As for Cleara, If she
held flatering glasses to her thoughts which rendered um wide and Airy, they
must not forfeit me: you may deserve her better: I Will not start Sir a scruple
from his demands, and yours, expect it, and so farewell. --


[going off.] Pirez. Farewell? -- The Time?


Dessandro. I shall think on it.


Pirez. Shall? -- It must not so tamely be thought on.


Dessandro. How?


Pirez. I spoke it, Sir.


Dessandro. Are your sent to own the Quarrel?


Pirez. No; but look on it with so much Soul, as I think it as honor to wear a
Sword in it.


Dessandro. Go; Go hang it in your Mistresses Chamber, It stink* Sir of Perfume.


Pirez. It may Sir (for Destiny has many ways to the wood) Cut your throat;
And then I Will giv't your Footboy.


Dessandro. My throat, Pirez? that saucy thought has ruined thee. --


[Fight.] Enter Sampayo and De Loome. Sampayo. Hold, hold, Colonel.


De Loome. My Lord, you are hurt.


Pirez. I must owe him this fort't.


Dessandro. Can talk yet?


Samp. Command your passion: See how the Common herd come Gazing in: do not
become their talk and wonder: Noble Dessandro? Put up my Lord: -- thank ye --


De Loome. Sir, my Lord Duke sent me to tell ye he expects your Company.


Dessandro. I wait on him -- bid the Ladies tear their clean smocks to wrap you
in.


Pirez. Insolent Man.


Sampayo. Again? --


[Exeunt.] Enter 3 Townsmen as Watch. 1. Was not I about to tell you so? they
would be afraid of True men when we came.


2. Ber Lady, but that mun not serve their Turns; For we must know flatly which
was Plantan, and which Defendam or we shall discharge but a sorry Conscience to
the Kings Justice.


1. I Will take my Oath upon the Corporal Bible, I saw two glittering Swords run
a Tilt, and two to that, if need be.


2. Neighbors, I cannot tell; we are old men, or should be at least; some of us
have lived threescore years and upwards in a Parish, as they say, I name no
body; and therefore it is good to be sure, and make all our tales bonum fidrum*
For we are not all one man's Children: And yet, if I be not mistaken, I am sure
I saw three more, and Glittering ones indeed, as you call them: God bless every
good man and woman from the like: they even earned my heart, and yet by my Fay,
I am a hundred and two, come the time.


3. You tawke like sucking Infants: Neighbors, I Will be sworn If I were to take
my oath before the best man living, High or low, there was twenty drawn swords,
little and great; I Am sure, I might a seen um, like a fool, had I been worth my
head; but my little boy Jack did.


1. La there; And that same's a murrain wise boy, if you mark him; and will see
a thing, I warrant you, as soon as the wisest of us all, were he twice as old
again.


3. I could a seen too at his bigness, for all I Am Lame now, God help us; you
remember the Powder Plot.


2. Powder Plot? quoth a; I shall not forget while the world stands.


1. Nor I, were I to die a thousand deaths.


3. That very day was I working in our Garret.


2. Say you so?


1. Nay, Neighbors beshrew me this may be true, for I have known this man
here, able to do as tite a days work by noon, as the tallest fellow the King
keeps (God bless him) take him from top to toe.


3. All Is one for that; mark me; There has not been a glasse-window there, time
out of mind, since I came, nor after: And I tell you truly (I Am a false Liar
else) I smelt the Powder as hot as if it had been done the next day.


1. See, see, the wind; the wind neighbors is much God bless us.


3. Go too; I am no made fool, though a born fool my Masters; True, the wind
may be something as you say: but if there had not been something else, I would
not give a fart for it: I did not work at Court with a Master Carpenter, for
nothing, my boys; and see the Kings Grace fasting and full


as I did, to a hairs breadth, as they say: Let me alone for Casting my Cards,
give me but ground enough; And yet I can neither write nor read, Heaven make me
thankful.


2. Heaven make us all thankful; I have seen the King too, in my Prime, and
gave him a beck upon his milk-white Steed, as near as one should say what is this,
and all his Royal Lords and Ladies sporting.


1. I, I, those were the days (peace be with um) a poor man's tale might be
heard at Court: There is some Lords and Ladies now, were lousy then.


3. Go thy ways, by the Rood; Nay, he will have his old tawk, for all the world,
up and down.


1. It was ever my condition; I care not who knows it; And yet I never scath't
the least sucking Child that begs his bread: but little does another man know
where the Kings shoe wrings him, but those that wear it, as my Mother would
often say, and she lived long enough to know it.


3. Nay that is certain; The King's but a Man, as we three are; No more is the
Queen, if you go to that: Did you never hear of my Uncles observations? he is
but a poor knave (as they call him) but such a knave as Cares neither for King
nor Kaesar, the Least on um.


1. Then he may be hanged, Neighbor Palmer.


3. If he be, he is not the first that has been hanged for Treason, I hope.


[Exeunt.] Enter the Duke, and Claudilla. Duke. That frown was shot with pretty
tyranny from your brow; but this kiss shall sacrifice me to my Claudilla's
bosom.


Claud. You Will sully your honor in it: widows are but rumpl'd stuff.


Duke. That again? by all my hopes, and by thy self, the next and greatest --


Claudilla. Your Brothers Crown's betwixt us.


Duke. I did it but to sharp De Flame, into some expression of his Wit and Love.


Claudilla. Alas! he sighs all.


Duke. And like some Crude Chaplain, spits most of his mind.


Claudilla. Yet the Tame Dove can Tire me sometimes with penned speeches, when
we are alone, and flatter; I Am resolvd to bestow him on my woman.


Duke. Now he can come to hand: -- ha, ha* thinking men never Love heartily,
unless they be dank Powder.


Claudilla. His Courtship is like thick Embroidery upon slight stuff. I must
confess, I never loved the man; only as a Rich Gown out of Fashion, for a
days change sometimes at home when I take Physic.


Duke. You may wear him as you please, and to what purpose; his honest nature
was meant you so: but Dessandro is the Man of Men (I must confess) that I
could wish most near you now.


Claudilla. Dessandro!


Duke. And suddenly, before your honor blush too palpably: I have discovered
him, and his devotions.


Claudilla. Then your brains was in his Plot.


Duke. 'Twas his own.


Claudilla. Stolen from some Romance or Play, but for De Flame.


Duke. One wheel will move another to the Period.


Claudilla. Methinks his soft and easy spirit should be the fitter Engine, and
more pliant to your Aim.


Duke. He has too much of Venus in his mixture; all his desires would be at
home still, in the circle of those eyes: the other is all Fire and thinks that
Fame too cheap that is found so near; And there will want such men abroad.


Claudilla. But, where is my honor, Duke?


Duke. Locked in my heart and Cares: the King must die Claudilla, to smooth the
way, and lift us to our wishes.


Claudilla. That still is talked on.


Duke. His last Glass is now turned, and runs apace: He gives thee to
Dessandro; and is your Guest: and that Night receives eternal thanks for it:
Then (my Fair) Dessandro cannot want luster and honor for your bed: Nor thy
commands what all Castile can give.


Claudilla. I understand not, Sir.


Duke. Thou shall in time; oh my Claudilla! my best and nearest Joy, our Loves
have been entire as a flame: one Center to our thoughts and wishes, and Crown
our bosoms with delight and safety -- but they are come --


Enter De Castro and Dessandro. Claudilla. I have not known so little of his
Fame -- to be a stranger to his worth: Sir I honor it: Nor am I so proud and
dark in my opinion, to think I stand upon my self, but stoop in honor to one
of his deserts and blood: This is the way, my Lord, I ever sum'd up Man, and
sets his Titles down but for Ciphers.


De Castro. Observe.


Duke. Which will most clearly show his merits, and heighten them in value to
you: For, Madam, look on him in the Spring of his deserts, and you will say,
Titles are but narrow Spheres: And if honored actions be the soul and breath,
he is then above them and stands in the First Rank of men.


Dessandro. I shall want life to pay this debt.


Claudilla. But with your Graces favor, I must be tender here, For I stand a
tall Mark to Voice and Censure, and need not tell your Highness with what
strong expectation the Count De Flame has long time visited me.


Duke. If you will stand engaged, Madam -- I am silent.


Claudilla. No Sir -- But --


Duke. You expect honor, and Fortune to your Bed: I know Castile ownes not a
Subject (I Will not except my self, and had I another Freedom, I should not
speak my wishes in a second person) that Looks not with Ambition on you: But
Madam, weigh them all: Take but off their Grains of fortune he shall hoist them
into the air: And to my wish, he is come -- Dessandro, your name was mentioned
happily, I hope -- Let me present his value, to your Graces hand: And to a
Sister, Madam, I would say, her bosom.


De Castro. You purchase our poor Lives too highly, Sir


Duke. I would have rich Jewels set to their worth, and shall be proud to give
any advantage unto his: The Duchess shall not slight me in it: I will be heard
against the proudest Courtship that shall charm her. Come my Lord, what sport
will you win some Ducats at?


De Castro. I will lose some at any your Grace pleases.


Duke. My Brother has got a fortunate hand of late against all the Court: I
cannot rise at even terms from him.


De Castro. I saw him draw deep from your Grace, last night.


Duke. Two thousand Ducats; but I expect um with interest again.


Dessandro. I cannot pawn my self to the unworthy ends of Flattery and
Complement: but this honor out-bids value of a thousand Lives: what this poor
glimpse of expression can show me in: Saints, are not more unfeigned in their
prayers, then I to serve you.


Claudilla. I shall not doubt how much I may be indebted to your Noble wishes:
but let me add, Sir, He that Lays out for me without my warrant, shall
scarcely put it on my account for thanks, much less, Debt.


Dessandro. Not good devotions?


Claudilla. Them I desire, and shall repay.


Dessandro. Then pay back mine.


Claudilla. I Am not to learn my prayers, Sir.


Dessandro. Teach me yours, that I may turn the virtue of their charms back to
your bosom.


Claudilla. Colonel, mine would hardly please you: I never pray for wars.


Duke. You have back-friends, my Lord.


De Castro. That some malignant cloud does interpose the Kings cheerful Favor,
I am most sensible.


Duke. It would spread to me too, if they durst.


De Castro. Had they but so much virtue left, they durst own their names by, I
should make pale envy blush.


Duke. Come, we'll to Cards; and leave them to parl.


[Exeunt.] Dessandro. Madam, but mean it in a smile.


Claudilla. What?


Dessandro. Love.


Claudilla. Fie.


Dessandro. Yet stay; The air has busy wings: but give the thought Consent:
and I will take it in soft whispers from your Lip.


Claudilla. You will.


Dessandro. I feel it creep in Flames through all my blood.


Enter De Flame. Claudilla. Sir, the Count De Flame.


Dessandro. With a black Evening in his face.


De Flame. Oh! my faithful Achilles, I came to give you Joy.


Claudilla. Who? me, Sir!


De Flame. My virtuous friend, and you.


Claudilla, Of what?


De Fl. Of your entertainment under him: you have a brave Commander and he a -- I
cannot be angry enough to tell you what.


Claudilia. I begin to doubt his Wits, he looks so Ghastly.


De Flame. Yes; I see a Devil in those eyes that makes my hair. stare upward,
False woman: My love durst scarce doubt before, what now I find, and tremble
at. But Heaven has wrath in Ambush, and Scorpions stings.


Claudilla. For what? my Lord.


De Flame. Duchess, thy Perjury, and warm engagements to this -- this huge
Impostor.


Claudilla. Sir, a has Cracked his brains with Poetry -- pray forgive him --


Dess. Count? you know what privilege this Roof can give you, on my Anger; or
else, I should make your Frenzy Tonguelesse: Don't requite it barbarously on
her that gives you leave to live by it: gather your scattered wits up: Go home
Sir, and Repent.


De Flame. Privilege? -- I Will, meet thee in a Ring of flames, or on the Tempest
of some billow, upon whose back the raging North wind strides: Yet I Would not have
thee lose one spark of thy full man in Noise and Air: that when next we greet,
I may find thee worthy my Revenge. This Frailty, now protects thee.


Claudilla. Uncivil man! know the way back, or I shall let that Justice loose
upon ye, you deserve.


De Fl. Your Centaure there, you mean; he must stare bigger to move a hair of
mine.


Claudilla. Ye sha' not stir, Sir: As you love me do not: Let him die Mad.


De Flame. Do; kiss him; and clap his Cheek.


Claudilla. And circle him in my Arms from your Pale envy; does that make you
some -- Look ye --


[Kisses Dessandro.] De Flame. He shall not blossom there.


Claudilla. A shall, though thou do bribe the Fayries with thy soul.


Dess. Madam, your Commands will hold me till I scorch away; I am in Flames,
and Torment: And there is not so much mercy under heaven, but your own, would
let him use that Tongue a minute longer. Thou have seen this Sword reeking from
Hilt to Point, and sweating showers of Blood over thy head, whilst I bestrid
thy life and Rescued it against many gallant Foes, And durst thou tempt it to
thine own throat now? Prithee begone; And let us meet no more There Is something
in thy youth I still can love; and will forget to call thee to account for
this; be wise unto thy self; And ask this Lady Pardon.


De Flame. Oh my Blood! must I bear this? I am more cold then Marble sure.


Claudilla. Within there? where is his Grace?


Servant. At Cards, Madam.


De Fla. Oh cry ye mercy; your baked meats shall not cool for me; I only wish
that they may choke ye: That paper Sir I sent, would be worth your noble
Answer.


Dessandro. It Is there again, and has stopped the use I took it for.


De Flame. Ha? -- I Will make thy Name a boys Play, and kill thee on the
threshold of thy door.


Dessandro. Go, go, and take your Rest: when you are recovered, I may own you.


De Fl. Thou have not Blood enough to answer this --


[Exeunt.] Enter Pirez and Sampayo. Sampayo. You tell me strange ones.


Pirez. But true ones.


Sampayo. Nice windings.


Pirez. This Duke can strangely back his purposes where they like him: It Is a
fair lift to Dessandro's fortune: his stars shined.


Sampayo. True; sh'has a spacious Fortune; But I shall tell your Lordship, what
perhaps you know not.


Pirez. You may.


Sampayo. She has no blood: From her first, an honest Trades-mans wife, who
left her very rich and handsome: The Duke (as he still keeps a kennell for that
purpose) had her presented to him for his Game: Removed her from the Cucko'os
nest into another Sphere, but with all Caution, and private slight: And you
must Imagine, now she spreads a larger wing stirs not abroad, but studded like
the Night, with Flames: And at length becomes the Courts discourse and wonder;
but still kept the Country her retiring place.


Pirez. Unknown?


Sampayo. Or unsuspected, as the Dukes Instruments dealt it: And the young
Henriques being in those parts with our Kings brother for sport, casually (as
'twas plotted) visits her house: Falls in love and married her: This is the
Epitomie.


Pirez. I hope the Duke Bereo, had no dull hand in it.


Sampayo. It Is thought (only by me Sir) keeps his acquaintance to this day.


Pirez. It must be Fatally answered some where; heaven has a Justice.


Sampayo. The Preparation makes huge Noise.


Pirez. It Is well the King's a Guest; Their Triumph might miscarry else.


Sampayo: The King gives her in Church: Methinks the Count De Flame, must needs
be all Flame at it; And I believe Sir, your affront bleeds freshly in him.


Pirez. It must be put to an Account somewhere.


Sampayo. To return his Challenge and honor with such a scorn must work such a
spirit to high extremes.


Pirez. The saddest story is his Sister.


Sampayo. A Rose new Blown, and flung aside to wither in her sweets; Poor
Innocence; That has much changed my opinion of Dessandro.


Pirez. His Resolution, and Ambition, are like vast Trees whose spreading tops
hide their own Roots from the kind Sun.


Sampayo. Let out unto so vast a Pride, as shades all his natural virtues, or
makes 'um grow up rank and sower: The event will tell us all.


Pi. I wish it without blood. Your Lorships for the Solemnity?


Sampayo. My Attendance ties me to his Majesty's Person.


Pirez. My best wishes to your Lordship.


[Exeunt.] Actus Quartus, Scena Prima.
LOUD MUSIC. Enter the King, Cardinal, Duke, Duchess, Dessandro, De Castro,
Sampayo, Ladies bearing up her Train, Voices, Lutes, they pass over, Manet De
Loome and La Gitterne. De Loome. SO: By this time the confines Ring of our
great Solemnity.


La Git. She became his hand bravely, and with so skilful a brow, as if the
first Fruits of her honor, were to be gathered yet.


De Loom. Our Duke will lick his Lips at this nights sport.


La Gitternt. And wind her up for him, 'twill go hard else.


De Loome. That shall not hinder our sport, I hope.


La Git. Expect the Steward and his Bottles, I Will warrant you


De Loom. The Ladies too? we shall not tickle heartily else.


La Gitterne. When the great ones are bedded.


De Loome. In The old Place?


La Gitterne. It Is Corner Lobby.


Enter De Flame and Cleara disguised. De Flame. You belong to the Duke De Bereo
Sir?


De Loome. Who told you so?


De Flame. A Friend that would commend me with a poor suit unto you Sir, if you
be Signior De Loome.


De Loome. But this is no year for suit; Sir.


De Flame. Mine brings thanks ready told Sir, Look ye? All double Pistolets,
Signior.


De Loome. Sir, I shall try my Power, and be ready in any service te'e, for my
friends sake.


De Flame. De'e know who it is?


De Loome. Hum -- No matter; I Will undertake your business.


De Flame. Sir, can you please to pardon some light Gold?


De Loome. You shall find me a Gentleman in any thing for my friends sake.


De Flame. Nay Sir, It weighs a hundred pound at all Peradventures.


De Loom. And I Will tell you one thing of my self Sir, more then perhaps my
friend remembered; I am very honest where I take; and every man is not to be
trusted with matters of such Consequence: A very Fair purse, I assure you.


De Flame. Nest and Birds are all your own.


De Loom. Your business is done, beleev't Sir: Please you to kiss the Kings
hand into the bargain?


De Flame. At fitter opportunity, let me be ambitious of your offer: but I
shall woe your Courtesy to be only a looker on now.


De Loome. Any thing Sir, you can make worthy your request Nay-I hope you do
not wish me forfeit

[Complement for the dore] good manners -- As I Am virtuous --


De Fl. I am a stranger to the way: Gentlemen? know your selves, I beseech you.


La Gitterne. To obey you Signior.


De Loome. Sir you need not speak on it to this man: he is but my Lords Barber:
Since you command it so --


[Exeunt De Loome and La Gitterne.] De Flame. Light, light Revenge! heave up
thy gloomy Tapers that thou may see thy smeered Altar shine in blood: Come
my Cleara; my better soul, whose gallant mind will leave thy Name in the first
place of Women, And raise thee Temples (bravest of thy Sex:) I could expire on
thy Cheek, and pay thee reverence my most excellent Sister.


Cleara. Just heaven, and your brave virtue (my dearest brother) has wak'ned my
dull breast and trembling Sex: I do not feel one Pale or Coward thought: but
all high, and active to my wish.


De Flame. I see it Lovely in thy brow, like the Gleaming dawnings of the morn
when day first kindles; yet our Presage is fair.


Enter Duke whispering with De Castro. Cleara. The Duke --


De Flame. Now Innocence, guard thy self, the woolf is up: see how mischief
teems and quickens on their brow: some black thing is spawning: Night must be
Midwife to it: If we stay, my Poniard will break loose.


[Exeunt.] Duke. Who Is that?


De Castro. Some of the Duchess Servants, I believe Sir.


Duke. Your hand will lay a new foundation to a Kingdom; And I am busy how to
divide it with thee, when we can call it ours.


De Castro. It Is his last night with Mankind: The Poison Sir will do it so
subtly: whilst he but holds the Knife, the least warmth attracts, and so
dispreads


it self through his blood and spirits. Not any struggling for it with nature:
his life steals from him in a gentle slumber.


Duke. Grow in my bosom; till you spread to the first honors of your wish: My
fortune is too narrow for your merits to whom I owe it, and all my Power, brave
friend


[Exeunt. Enter Steward, Butler, Cook, and Maids. Steward. Come my Masters; The
great ones shall not have all to themselves: we will have a Civil bout or two, to
get us a stomach to Bedward, my sweet hearts.


Cook. Noble Mr. Steward!


Butler. Brave Mr. Steward!


Cook The Fire of my respects shall never go out unto you.


Butler. Nor mine be Quenched.


Steward. Here Cook? here is a bit for you to lick your Lips at And here is clean
Napery for you Butler

[gives each a wench.] take it --


A Dance. Ste. So, so; I am almost spent; every man to their Function


[Exeunt.] Enter King, Cardinal, Dessandro, Duke, Duchess, Attendants. King.
The Night begins to frown at our uncivil stay* And Hymen's Tapers do burn out a
pace: Good Night; you shall not stir a foot Dessandro.


Duke. All the wishes of a Bridal bed Crown your wishes and embraces.


Cardinal. And all the blessings of true Joy


Duke. To bed to bed.


[Exeunt.] Enter De Loome and De Flame. De Loome. You are as melancholy as day
when Sun sets; I hope you do not doubt my promise.


De Flame. No.


De Loom. Ye sha' not: I Will not leave you till the Grant be yours be Confident;
And that is more then a Courtier is bound to by his oath. Sir, where are you?
why you were living but even now; could speak, and sense too: have you seen any
thing against nature, or stomach? hum -- Sweet heart, has thy Master any fits
o'th Mother?

[to Clea. or Falling Sickness? Pretty knave; it is pity this face was made for
breeches.


De Flame. Ha?


De Loome. I am glad you are come to your self again.


De Flame. You are pleasant.


De Loome. I would ha'you so: I have provided some mirth and good company for
you: Please you but spare an idle hour from your sleep, we'll allow't again in
the total of your business (I must not lose his money) If you can smile you
shall not want a subject: besides, we shall have the wit of a handsome Lady or
two, and hear their voices.

Enter Steward, and a Man with bottles. Look ye Sir! here is the Imprimis of the
house Mr. Steward himself, whose Company may be worth your observation --
Seigniour Silliman, this Gentleman is a friend of my Lord Dukes; pray let him
know he is welcome.


Steward. I am but the Dutchesses poor Steward Sir, but my place is at your
Command, Sir: you shall not have me Claim kindred of her for all that: yet -- Sir
Thomas De Loome here, can say something if he please, Sir.


De Flame. Thank ye Sir.


Steward. Look ye Sir Thomas! I never fail; here be the perquisites of life and
good Company: There Is that will elevate voices; come, disburthen thy self, in
that Lobbie, my honest rational Camel; Is this Gentleman dumb? he can say
nothing but Thank you Sir.


De Loome. I fear he is Planet-struck.


Steward. It Is great pity: yet he makes very gentle signs.


De Flame. I Am got into a dark and slippery Labyrinth, and grope but by a
spark, whilst every pause is fatal -- No. It had miscarried; and the Kings
presence was a sacred guard: now to break in upon them, were to betray our
lives to nothing: sure Heaven will not lose the glory of such a Justice, and by
a hand so justly engaged.


Enter La Gitterne, Torguina, and La Prate. De Loome. The Ladies; Good Girls;
this deserves a double thanks -- Here Is a Gentleman whose merits may invite him
to your acquaintance, Ladies.


Torguina. I shall ever study that due honor, by all the Ambitiousnesse of
your humble Servant, Sir.


La Prate. You may please to pardon her, whose demerits makes her modest in
their expressions to honor you Noble Sir.


De Flame. You engage a poor Life to your virtue.


De Loome. What, Ladies? have you put um together for a brave Boy to night?


La Prate. That Is as the Dice run, Sir.


La Gitt. The Colonel will find a piece of service on it to night


La Prate. If he put her to the worst, 'twill be worth her pardon being so
tried a Soldier.


Torguina. If his valor should be short-breathed, a retreat may be honorable
sometimes.


La Prate. If he fight not flat Coward, and made it in policy.


Torguina. Sir, we have read over Aristotle's Politiques and Polibius, to that
purpose.


La Prate. Who calls Policy the very breath of all war.


Torguina. And so by your Ladyships good license, in all Battalions, leaguers,
skirmishes, sieges, invasions, parlies, treaties, truces, and other cessations.


De Flame. Excellent Ladies.


De Loome. For the Theorique.


La Prate. We can say some thing to the practique too, Seignior.


Torguina. Both concerning your postures and motions, as which may be necessary
for service: her Ladyship has written a small tract for her private experience
to show how they may be reduced, and a Man exercised with far less trouble,
but with as much Activity, and proportion of comfort.


La Prate. For body* and service, Madam?


Torguina. I mean so: I warrant you this Gentleman understands me.


De Flame. And will not your goodness bestow it on the public? It would rank
your Name amongst the illustrious benefactors of the general Cause.


La Prate. I know not what I may Sir, when the Press is fit for a woman of my
Quality: Is this Gentleman a Soldier?


De Flame. That ambition has grown with me from the Cradle, Madam.


La Prate. I shall render my self with more endeerment to your worth, and ever
subscribe to Soldiers as the bravest Men.


De Loome. The Duchess, I hope will use of your opinion; But Madam, had I the
use of that key for an hour or two, I would take some notes in shorthand
behind the hangings.


La Prate. You would?


De Loome. Yes indeed, my precious wit, I should.


De Flame. That Key?


Torguina. Seignior? pleases you to think our humble invitation, worthy the
grant of your society.


De Flame. I could wish the trouble of ten lives more, to be accepted in your
Command, Fairest of Ladies,


La Prate. Were all our days multiplied into years, and those years to lives,
'twere but a span of time to study our thanks in* --


[Exeunt.] Silliman. Madam? Lady? --

[manet Silliman and La Prate.] I never knew what Bondage was until now -- I
fear the Golden heart you sent me, was enchanted: I long to see you --


La Prate. What do you mean Sir?


Silliman. Ha, ha, ha: hum -- Nothing, Madam, but there be them that love a
good nature with all their heart: that have Four hundred pounds a year, and
money in their purse, to be Knighted, if need be.


La Prate. Wit and opportunity assist me -- The Thing will make an excellent
husband for the times: And Four hundred pounds a year is a Considerable fortune
to boot: I must take him at his bound, or perhaps dye in the Lift of stale
Chambermaids, A Court plague for a misspent youth and service.


Silli. I am a Gentleman already, else the Heralds took my money for nothing:
And methinks Madam, you and I might --


La Prate. What Signior?


Silliman. Be as wise as our Forefathers.


La Prate. You and I?


Silliman. Yes; what say ye to you and I? is not you and I good Spanish? Why
Madam, I am able to warm my own sheets, and get Children without the help of a
Doctor, and can kiss as warm and Close -- And you shall swear my breath is
sweet.


La Prate. You Are merry Sir, beyond my apprehension


Silliman. Pardon me Lady if I be: I mean no harm I protest.


La Prate. very witty.


Silli. I am, what I am: but I was never beholding to any living thing for thus
-- much wit: I might a been an arrant younger brother, but for my mother;
thereby hangs a tale Madam: And yet I cud a danced my Cinque pace in Greek at a
dozen: Alpha, Beta, Gama, Delta, cost me five shillings: can you believe me
Lady? By this Light you shall wear this Diamond: There; shat; shat have it; shat,
shat: shat have it,


La Prate. There is such sorcery in your words.


Silliman. No: No: No: Troth love me: come; thou shall; by this -- nay never
sigh, my dear, they are all orient, sweet wench: thou art worth all Spain for a
good disposition --


La Prate. You will undo me Mr. Steward.


Silliman. Pish: who I undo thee? My life, thou do wrong me: can find in
thy heart to think so? away away.


La Prate, But is this profession, honorable Sir?


Silliman. I scorn to deal upon dishonorable terms: Do I kiss like a man that
would Propound dishonorable conditions?


La Prate Men are so nice and cunning.


Silliman. Do think me a Jew? swear me to any thing.


La Prate. Well, you have taken a Poor heart at advantage and make me blush to
confess it.


Silliman. Kiss me; here is my hand till death us do part: Thine more then mine
own, Signior Bouche overte, Sillimano: Sealed, and delivered: but I hope Lady,
there is no Quit rent to be paid out of this Copyhold.


La Prate. Not for your life Sir.


Silliman. Lawful possession then, and thou art mine own


[Exeunt.] Enter De Flame and Cleara. De Flame. So; let um drench their souls
in Laughter: Kindle thy Noble heart into a Flame, my Sister: Fate cannot give,
nor we ask more unto our cause: All things conspire and Prompt us to it: Just,
and Divine revenge; I Will strew thy midnight haunts with Cypress wreaths, and
wear thee in rich Medalls: Propitious Goddess: This night thy wan, and meager
Cheek shall blush and smile with warm and wanton blood: Night grows heavy eyed
and droops her slumbering head in her dark bosom: And now their Rage and Lust,
will make them ripe to bleed: Let us embrace, and interchange a sigh or two,
Cleara: what e're become of me, thou will wear Chaplets in Elysium.


Cl. My hopes and Joys are yours (dear Sir)

[unlocks the door and discovers them.] And heaven I hope will not divide them.


De Fl. See what a modest blush, sleep has cast over their Guilt.


Cleara. Here is a look Tyrants would bashfully gaze at and fear to think it
mortal: Glorious hypocrisy! virtue is at wonder in her self, and looks pale,
to own what she has given.


De Flame. I should mock heavens Justice, to let um dream their souls away in
such a calm: We Will startle them into horror of their sin, and then let 'um see
the vengeance they deserve.


Cleara. Ye chaster powers, to whom I and my Virginity groans; May every drop
breath incense to your Justice, whilst thus I break their springs open.


[Stabs Claudilla.] Claudilla. Oh: -- Dessandro? -- oh -- whose hand's that?


Cleara. Cleara's, Cleara's, carry that name in thy last breath down to the
shades of Lust and Perjury.


De Flame. So quick, and brave Cleara?


Claudilla. Oh!


[Expirat.] Dessan. Cleara: Madam, Madam, your sleeps are troubled -- whose
there, De Flame?


De Flame. Raise not thy voice an accent: If thou do, by my eternal hopes and
soul, this strikes it back unto thy heart: See thou revenge sit Pale upon the
Point? It Is steeled with Virgins curses, and shall fly like lightning through
thy blood: And it is a Justice thy vast pride has lost thee to.


Dessandro. Oh! what have thou done? A deed that Flinty Scythians and curled
Ethiops would hide their eyes from.


De Flame. Our Revenge shall wear a Glorious title: Know thou that injured
face? It is Cleara's, injured Cleara's.


Dessandro. Cleara?


De Flame. What see thou on that brow?


Dessandro. Murder!


De Flame. Horror and Guilt unto thy soul.


Dessandro. I Will not be tamely butchered, Coward: without there? Help help help.


De Flame. Whirlewinds and Earthquakes cannot do it; think on thy sin.


Cleara. Thy Perjury.


De Flame. Thy Lust.


[Cleara stabs at him.] Dessandro. Cleara? Oh -- thou have a skillful hand in
Murder: Help, Help, Murder.


De Flame. So falls a wretched Statue from its haughty station: when Fate,
would make it ominous and fright a state. What a thick cloud steems from his
tainted blood: The Air shrinks back, and with dull wings fans it from heaven.


Enter De Loome, La Gitterne, Torguina, etc. Torguina. Murder! Murder! 'Twas
his voice.


De Loome. It was his voice.


Torguina. The Key?


La Gitterne. Gone!


Torguina. Cut from my side; I am betrayed.


De Loome. Look search the Room: where is the stranger?


La Gitterne. The Door is fast.


[knocks.] De Fl. You may come in; make up your wonder there


[op's the door Torguina. My Lady Murdered?


De Loome. You have astonished Heaven,


Torguina. And pulled eternal curses on your head.


De Flame. They Will fall like brittle shafts upon my shield.


Cleara. Unjust Dessandro! yet on thy Lip I Will tender my last vows, that the
world may tell, I loved thee Dead -- and this -- and this --


[kisses him, then stabs her self.] De Flame. Hold; hold that cruel hand:
Cleara? Sister?


De Loome. Cleara? This is a horrid Scene, my Lord.


De Flame. 'Twould not be worth my Name, did it not strike Amazement through
your souls, and leave a palenesse on his Cheek that hears it. But here; here I
could melt! Transfuse my brains through my sad eyes, till they wept blood, and
dropped their Jelly forth: She was a Jewel, too rich for our dull Orb: [Enter
more servants you need not multiply your fears: I am too proud of my Revenge to
start from't: Let the Law frown, and fall in Tempests on me: -- Cowards repent

When valiant blood never Pales at the Event.


[Exeunt.] Actus Quintus; Scena Prima.
Enter Pirez, and De Loome. De Loom. A Sad Court indeed, My Lord.


Pirez. As sad a Kingdom where the news is spread: men that hear it, stand
struck, as if their own passing-bells did call unto them.


De Loom. Kings Glasses are as brittle as their meanest subjects; their
footings as slippery, and uncertain: He was a brave Prince, and his Life will
be memorable in Castile.


Pirez. His death is much admit'd for the sudden strangeness of it: What
opinion give the Physicians on it?


De Loome. They Have a hard Name for it, if I could think on it.


Pirez. Not suspicion of Poison?


De Loome. How, my Lord? by whom would ye suspect it?


Pirez. Nay, I dare suspect none, nor don't: but such Quirks of State I have
read of, in the days of old.


De Loome. I never saw him discount a day with more content and freedom; his
very thoughts were hearty.


Pirez. 'Twas a fatal one, and will give a sad discourse to out Posterity; and
leave it on Record, in bleeding characters.


De Lo. The Count's resolution had too much blood and cruelty in it.


Pirez. Dessandro urged as much as mortal sense could groan with.


De Loome. I now call to mind, still as he spoke and glanced upon Cleara's
face, I had strange startlings in me.


Pirez. As the Times have.


De Loome. The Times? my Lord; For what?


Pirez. The King's Death, Sir.


De Loome. Why my Lord? the Times are not of the worst presage, though that may
cloud them a little.


Pirez. I am no Booker, Sir, nor Lilly; to prognosticate what seven years may
travel with: but I could with the price of knaves may fall.


De Loome. Your Lordships virtues command not a more humble and observant
creature.


[Exit.] Pirez. This Fellow must be muzzl'd.


Enter Sampayo. Samp. Who Is that?


Pirez. The Duke's thing; his trifle broker.


Samp. The King's now.


Pirez. Castile did never hear more news, I fear.


Samp. We shall now see the fine Turns and games of State.


Pirez. When Fools and knaves chase Trump.


Samp. Now Heads and Points will be the sport.


Pirez. The King will have the heads then, I believe.


Samp. Observe um.


Pirez. So near?

Enter Bereo, Nobles soliciting him with Papers. -- Heavens bless your
Majesty: he'vens keep your Majesty;

[within Please you to hear your most faithful Subjects?


Duke. Who are they that bark so?


De Loome. A Rout of Porters, Prentices, and Sailors Wives; with such a spawn;
who are modest Petitioners your Majesty would give'um leave to govern you in
some matters of State, and humbly pray, to be admitted of your Privy Council.
Here Is another Sir, from the most Reverend Bags of the City, to purchase all
the Churches of your Majesty, for Warehouses. And this, Sir, from the
Corporation of Weavers, Cobblers, and Feltmakers; that you would please to give
um leave to fire all Universities, and Schools of Learning, that the Profane
might better see the Truth.


Duke. No more -- Their stinking breath will stifle me: keep back their
Clamor: wealth and ease has made the Rascals wanton and profane their
Alligeance -- My Lord, [De Castro kneels] you need not kneel in a Cause that
equally concerns Us with you: the groans of your Brothers wounds echo unto our
sleeps: Our Honor and the Laws bleed in them, until a Justice stop their
Issues, which our own care shall take a speedy account of. -- -- Sampayo? --


[whispers.] Sampayo. I shall, my Lord. --


[Exit.] Duke. Oh! My Lords; we are circled in a Tide of Grief, where every
billow threatens a Grave: but in your Loves, out hopes takes new life, which we
as zealously shall sacrifice again to you, and you^s -- Let me be beholding
to ye for -- a minutes Conference with my own sad thoughts. --


[Exeunt.] Duke. So -- Take breath my hopes, whilst we with pride look upon
the world behind us, and then Survey the Glory of our progress, and success
-- The print of every step is glorious; and me thinks we stand like Rome her
self, in midst of all her Triumphs, when her threatened head Leaned on the
spangled breast of Heaven, and justled with the Gods: From whose Imperious
frown the world took all her Laws and Dooms: Yet her vast story shall look pale
to mine: and Time begins his great Example here: Castile, thou now shall blush
for thy neglect: I Will print thy scorns on thy own brow, till my revenge look
lovely as Romes in her bright Flames to Nero: And Nature shall repent, that she
mistook the man, Fortune meant thine. Then up my Soul, and from thy Glorious
stand, see thy proud hopes and wishes Court thee: Thou have been bashful yet,
and hid in blushes -- make room for thy more spacious thoughts --

And let the Petty world know this; all things Depend upon the breath of Gods
and Kings.


[Exit.] Enter two Officers. 1. There, there; Lay that in the place; so so;
here; help to spread this Carpet: Quick, quick.


2. Will our new King be here to give the forked herd an oration?


1. An halter: Thou do so fumble: -- but what is the general voice of the
Kings death? -- Here Is the mourning for that bat.


2. Marry, some think he di'd against his will, and others that his Brother --
where stands this? -- will bury him very Royally --


1. Hum -- And others think if thou were hanged when it is thy due, there would
be quickly a knave less; dispatch, dispatch, I hear them coming.


Enter Judges, the 2 Ladies, De Loome, La Gitterne, others; De Flame stands at
the Bar. Officer. Pray by your Leave; Make way; give back there, for shame,
Sir, you press so hard upon the Judges, they scarce have liberty to breath:
Clear the Bar: Peace.


1. Judge. My Lord -- Here Is none but knows you, and I believe do greive to
see you stand thus; and for a fact of such a bloody Nature; A Gentleman of your
fair hopes and Fortunes, blood and spirit, and other excellent Parts, all cast
upon untimely hazzards by such an Act (as indeed I know not how to name it) you
needs must therefore be worth our Grief: And I presume you are not now to know
the Laws and Customs of this your Country, with what Religious care they look
unto the safety of our Lives and our Estates, and with what strictness on
Perpetrations of such a Die --

2. Especially where innocent blood is shed: And therefore we being but the
Tongues of the Law, (my Lord) may hope you will interpret the Justice of it,
clearly from our Mouths --


De Flame. Please you, most Reverend Lords, Is there ought else but this, I am
to stand Accused for?


2. Judge. Not that we know.


De Flame. Then, my good Lords, you need not labor much to find out
Circumstances to condemn me: Nor do I wish or think, My Lords, to satisfy the
Law, by talking in my own defense: Nor will I brand my self with such a Fear,
much less hope, as to bespeak a melting Tear. That were to wish the Act
undone, and rob my Justice of a Glory, I would be torn to Atoms for: No; I
come to meet the Law: And if your Wisdoms can contract the spacious Volumes of
it int' one doom, I sha' not startle, or divide my breast. My resolution was
above't, when first I undertook to be my own Law and Judge --


1 Judge. I grieve to hear this Language from you* It tastes much from the man
that you have seemed my Lord, stain not your Noble and Religious Fame with such
an Atheism.


2. Judge. Look back into the deed my Lord: see what a Tide of blood persues
you, and breaks upon your soul in Angry Seas.


De Flame. Look back to our Fame, Grave Lords, the blood and honor of our
Family: Nor think it my vain Glory to urge it here since the cause does. There
has not yet in all the ages it has served the State, one stain fallen on our
Scutcheon: And although, my Lords, these honors are derived to us in a vast
circle of time and blood, the passage must be still through our veins; and so
are treasured here as heat in Fire; so as the least taint in us reflects a
blush on the First virtue of our great ancestors, and what has man called
sacred, but his honor? That dwells not in the smiles of Fortune: Nor can she
place the Fool or Coward in the rank. And can your wisdoms think ours so cheap
as to become the scorn of such?


2. Judge. My Lord, 'twould better satisfy all those that know you to hear
your Grief, then Passion.


De Flame. Oh? Cry ye mercy: he was your Lordships kinsman: yet I will add, he
basely did betray a Love and Innocence more noble then a thousand of their
Lives (Poor Cleara) Perjured his Faith and honor, and quite dissolved their
holy ties, in the Lascivious arms of her, whose name shall not take honor from
my breath.


2. Judge. We spend time; Pray give those Ladies leave to speak.


Enter De Castro. De Castro. My Lords, the King is come to fit amongst ye.


Officer. Stand back there ho; you; Goodman Roundhead, you would best breath in the
Kings face: Pull back your horns Sir -- de'e mutter? take that, and crowd
Further: The Rogues are as hollow, as a vault, and sound like one with a blow.


Enter Bereo, De Castro, Attendants, at the other Door, the King himself.
Within -- The King. the King, Whooe.

1. Judge. What Is the matter?


Duke. De Castro? is this a Mask, or Apparition?


King. -- seize on the Traitor --


Duke. Ha?


King. Hence; Monstrous thing.


Duke. Traitor?


King. Yes; and a foul one -- My Lords, suspend your wonder -- we thank ye --
Prodigy to thy blood we have given you leave to wanton in your Guilt, and see
at what mighty impiety it would reach, to fasten you the surer in your toil:
-- take your places; -- durst thou derive the Glory of our Grandsires to thy
self; whilst with unnatural hands thou tearst their Graves up, mingling blood
and shame with their blessed dust? Have we not shared our Kingdom with thee? Let
thee into our heart nearer then nature, if possible? And could all this beget
no better thanks then Poison? the very thought unnerves my Joints.


Duke. Treason? -- who dares avow it Sir? or Charge the least stain upon my
Loyal bosom, and make it good? I challenge all Mankind, and envy from the
nether Hells; It Is but some engine to betray me to you.


De Castro. I did but quit a sin which would have betrayed us both eternally,
and bore so sad a shape of horror, as it affrighted all within me, and like a
Frenzy held me till I had purged it from my bosom.


Duke. Had thy revenge no other way but this, to undermine the virtue of Nature
against it self? My Lords, there is forgery in it; Poison? and Treason? It did
amaze my innocence: Sounds, that my blood do shiver at: And did not I see his
Fathers Treason blush yet on his brow, I should not think Castile infected with
the thought.


1. Judge. My Lord De Castro? What proof or circumstance have you to urge this
Clearer to his Highness?


Duke. Grave Patriots of the Law: give me your leave in this, that would
blemish the honor of my Fame for ever. Let him produce but any that may accuse
me to your Reverend Judgments, and Bereo will lay down his head to the Block:
But I know your wisdoms will discern a plot in it: and how fair he stands
incompetent against me in Faith and Honor.


King. What say you my Lord?


De Castro. Sir, what I have told your Majesty, my Life shall make good on any
torture: My Brother being dead, Heaven only and my Conscience can clear it: And
to quit my Innocence of malice, your own Conscience must tell you, my Lord,
that when first you used my Brother to ensnare me, and pressed it in the
Duchess Garden, how much I argued to divert you: But then --


Duke. My Lords? I desire Justice and reparation on the Villain.


2. Judge. My Lord De Castro? -- The King has pleased to give us your Relation,
in which (though the least tenderness cannot be impertinent to his sacred
safety) there is nothing that can raise the Law to any Argument, which may reach
the Duke, scarce as a Peer, which looks upon him as the second man, in whom all
our safeties all and hopes are stored: Not to be touched with every Jealousy,
but at a high and Reverend form of Proof.


Duke. Let me appeal unto your self, Dread Sir! -- which of my actions or
Services of state can be suspected? and do you not perceive that where his
Father left, his Treason would begin?


De Castro. Help me, dear Truth, or else I shall suffer for my Loyalty: Great
Sir, be pleased --


Duke. That most Judicious Judge has well observed, there is an Envy in his
soul would reach from you to your Succession, and leave the Character of his
Fathers Treason on it in blood and Ruin: Wretched man! Trust me, I grieve for
thy slide from piety; and when I look upon the love and pity I have cast away
on such a thing, I repent my easy faith: Good Heaven! what will men fall to?


King. Take the Count unto the Citadel, and let none be admitted to him, upon
peril -- [Exeunt with De Castro.] Brother, they were no easy insinuations that
did engage our fears to this; but such as named a higher proof and
Circumstance: And we confess, it struck our nature with some passionate
struglings. Not that the wish of our ambition is fixed here, and would revive a
term of years to rob ye of one minutes glorious trouble: yet, my Lord, if our
Laws take care to preserve the meanest Subjects life, our own ought not to be
looked on with less Providence: And Fears are happy Cautions many times; but
mine retire -- Let our desires meet, and reconcile me to your arms -- [embrace]
his merit shall find the Justice it has scandall'd, if it stand guilty.


Duke. If? my Lord. Can yet that scruple stay behind?


Returns with De Castro and Dessandro, A Phycian and Chyrurgion, etc. De
Castro, See? Royal Sir, I have met a miracle, that [they kneel. heaven has
preserved and sent to Guard your sacred highness and the Truth.


De Flame. Dessandro risen from the Dead?


King. Dessandro?


Dessandro. The vilest wretch alive, who throws himself at your feet in tears
of blood, and so much horrid guilt as calls for all the wrath of this, and the
other world: Not daring to lift my hopes to any pardon; oh Sir! 'twas he
(backed by that bad Prince and other giddy hopes) that would have seduced my
Brother to that Act against your sacred Life.


King. Would it went no further? Duke De Bereo? Can now your brow change color?


Duke. It Is all Imposture.


King. Fie, fie; Don't glory against heaven that has left thy Sin no
subterfuge.


Duke. You would not fright me from my self?


King. Well. our Guard?


Doctor. May it please --


[kneels.] King. Rise. -- what would ye say Sir? --


Doctor. Under your gracious License this -- we found our princely Lady, and
the Lady Cleara cold in their clodded gore: This Colonel, so spent in expense
of blood, as we co'd not say alive: For that half spark of heat left in his
veins, was then even going out: our care having preserved and kindled it to
life again after his shattered Faculties could pant and breath, he called for
Pen and Ink, and caused us write what there contained.


[A Paper.] Dissandro. Of too much truth; And I blush for those few drops of
blood, I have left to expiate.


Duke. I am betrayed and Lost -- Could be in love with that faint Life, for
one poor minutes smile, to betray it to ignominy and Law? I cu'd trample on thy
skull, until thy reeking brain sparkled about the dust: See how busily they
contract their Dusky brows? Consult things safely, and let some reverend
Statute be ordained, in honor of all Cowards: De Castro? For this good service
know, 'twas I that laid thy fathers head upon the block: Complotted with the
Portuguez to make him guilty to the King: And envying that he spread with so
much shadow in the state, by a Close Faction rendered him odious to the people:
An Engine I knew cu'd not fail: I hurried thee to the Duchess wanton bed,
Dessandro; knowing De Flames high blood, would quit the debt I owed thee --


Dessandro. He Is proud all mischief can call him Patron.


Duke. Nor had I shared the pleasure of a kiss to you or him, but that our
purpose needs would have it so.


De Flame. Sir?


Duke. The Language is plain and true.


De Flame. Then Claudilla was your Court Mistress, Duke 'twere profanation to
say whore.


Duke. Young Lord, I can forgive that language in a suffering man.


De Flame. Forgive it?


Duke. Forgive it -- and had De Flame himself enjoyed her bed, and reapt the
scattered minutes of our love, he must a found another Gloss more safe and
honorable.


De Flame. Must? -- what saw you in me did promise so tame a thing, as to feed
on your high Scraps? Glorious mischief.


Dessandro. My Lord, I beg your mercy; And to deserve it will weep the remnant
of this unworthy Life unto Cleara's Name.


De Flame. All mankind has my Peaceful wish, but this black speckled Serpent,
whose Load does make the Earth to Groan and sweat.


Duke. My fair Claudilla? me thinks I see thee Lovely in that ghastly trim of
death, while yet thy soul was struggling through thy Cruel wounds.


De Flame. The day begins to frown and Creep into eternal night: We Will bed
together in one Grave, Cleara: Castile shall hide us in a golden heap, and name
me with her patriots for taking this foul monster from her bosom,


Duke. I Will find thee in the Myrtle Groves below, and leave a story that shall
tell the world how much I loved thee


[they stab each other. King. Desperate Atheists,


Duke. You were before hand Sir.


De Flame. You Have overtaken me -- the world is hid in a Cloud, and shrinks to
Chaos -- Oh -- whither must I wander in this mist? -- so, so -- I feel thee
glide away, and leave me sunk upon a Quicksand.


[Expirat.] King. What a thirst of blood burnt up their hearts that they must
Quench it in their own?


Duke. Have thou not Air enough, my panting Soul? -- Oh -- what a stitch is
coming.


[Expirat.] King. Would thou had better loved thy self and us: For while thou
prized the honor of that blood we prized thee with it: Oh Ambition? The
Grandame of all Sin, that strikes at stars with an undaunted brow, whilst thus
thy feet slide to the nether Hell* Like some vast stream that takes into its
womb all springs that Neighbor by it, and would proudly carry all their
Currents in its own; swells over its banks, and wantons like a Tyrant -- Take
hence the sight: It stirs our inclination.


[Exeunt cum Corporibus.] Omnes. Long live the great and good King of Castile.


King. We thank ye, and just heaven which has (unto wonder) unknotted all
these mischiefs, and kept us safe: And because we do not Love to use the Laws
in their extremity, or execute with Blood where we can moderate without* But
chiefly Dessandro, to endeer ye more to Heaven in your acknowledgement, We do
enjoin you to some Religious House of Orders: There by an humble Life, to
expiate your Guilt.


Dessandro. Upon my knees I do acknowledge your God-like mercy.


King. De Castro; Our thanks shall make your Loyalty exemplary to all times:
Nor with we to live longer than to gain the Faith of all: That we may find our
Self and Title most secure, and greatest in your Loves; which gives us more
than giddy Fortune can --

This is our Fate, and to the Wise is known,
All Goods without Us, are not sure our own.
In tenui Labor est; at tennis non Gloria.


FINIS.
London, Printed for R. Crofts, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Crown in
Chancery Lane under Sergeants-Inne, where you may be furnished with most sorts
of Plays.


