AGREEMENT Betwixt the Present and the Former Government: Or, a DISCOURSE of
This Monarchy, whether Elective or Hereditary?

Also, of Abdication, Vacancy, Interregnum, Present Possession of the Crown,
and the Reputation of the Church of England. With an Answer to Objections,
thence arising, against taking the new Oath of Allegiance. For the Satisfaction
of the Scrupulous.

By a Divine of the Church of England, the Author of a little Tract, entitled,
Obedience due to the Present King, notwithstanding our Oaths to the Former.

LICENSED,

Sept. 24. 1689.

J. Fraser.

LONDON, Printed for A. C. and are to be sold by Charles Yeo, Bookseller in
Exon, 1689.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
CHAP. I. AN Introduction grounded on a general Maxim, That unnecessary Changes
in Government are to be avoided as dangerous. page 3. CHAP. II. The chief
Maxims insisted upon as prejudiced by the late Settlement. p. 11. CHAP. III.
The Government, whether Elective or Hereditary, and how. p. 12. CHAP. IV. Of
Vacancy, and the supposed Interregnum thereupon, by the late King's Abdication.
p. 31. CHAP. V. Of ABDICATION. p. 32. CHAP. VI. Of Vacancy and Interregnum. p.
37. CHAP. VII. Of the Convention, and how it became a Parliament. p. 42. CHAP.
VIII. Arguing from the Possession of the Crown. p. 51. CHAP. IX. Whether a King
can make Laws, limiting the Crown. p. 58. CHAP. X. The Honor of the Church of
England, no just* Objection against our taking the new Oath. p. 60. The
APPENDIX: The Objection from the Word Allegiance considered. p. 66. POSTSCRIPT.
p. 75.
TO THE READER.
SCruple is an Ague of the Mind, it sometimes shakes it, and sometimes heats
and disturbs the Brain: If the Matter be unknown to the Patient and to Doctors,
we are not certain of the Cure; and the less, if the Stomach be untoward, and
the Appetite averse to Medicine: in such a Case, various Methods used to be
tried, and Remedies prescribed; but through Ignorance of the Cause, or some
latent Obstruction, Skill it self, a long time is thrown away; at length
perhaps a vulgar Medicine, given at a venture, hits the Distemper, and works
the Cure. After many learned Doctors charitable Endeavors to deobstruct and
ease some good Men's Minds, that are shaken with Scruples about the new Oath of
Allegiance, hitherto in vain, (if it be yet in vain); though I cannot boast of
my Skill, I make bold to try a new Practice upon them. And I hope my good
Reader has the like Reverence and Value, for the worthy Persons that yet
labor under (may I call it) the Disease, and the same Zeal and Affection for
the Health and Quiet of the Body Politic, that I my self have, and does join
with me, while I do heartily (that which I fear Physicians seldom do) pray over
my Patients for a Blessing from the Great Physician.

CHAP. I. An Introduction grounded in a general Maxim.
The general Maxim, Unnecessary Changes in Government are to be avoided as
dangerous.

UPON any great Revolution it seems much the Concern of the New State, so to
settle the Government, as may offer least matter or occasion of Discontent to
the People, and consequently to make as little Alteration in the former Maxims
and Customs, (that is, in the old Constitution) as is possible, lest the old
Leaven should work again to the prejudice of the new Establishment.

We may observe in our own History, that such public Grievances as from time
to time have been objected by the People to the disquieting, and sometimes
hazarding of the Government, have generally been aggravated with the charge of
Innovation, as being contrary to our ancient Liberties, Rights and Customs; and
for some Ages in Instances infringing Magna Charta, that great Record of the
Subjects Privileges, and Codex of our ancient and common Law, in which much of
our old and happy Constitution consists; indeed any Alteration in our
Constitution seems to shake the Foundation, and frightens the People like an
Earthquake.

This Maxim is commended by three great and wellknown Examples.

1. Our Savior's.
This Caution was sanctified after a mavelous manner by the Wisdom of God in
our great Examplar: Our blessed Savior, we know, was sent into the World to
put the Church into a new frame; now in his so doing, did he reject all that
was old, or leave out any thing that might be any way serviceable in the new?
Is it not remarkable, that he did resume and make use of as many of the old
Materials as could possibly be accommodated to the Edification of the
Gospel Church? Did he not take both the Sacraments, did he not collect the very
Petitions of his Prayer out of the former Usage, and allude much in the new
Government to be established to that which he found in the old? Did he not
preach and expound upon the Law of Moses, and the ancient Prophets, and appeal
for his Defense and Justification to their own Books? Indeed he seems to have
left out nothing of the old Dispensation but what was inconsistent with the
new, namely, that which was typical and expired in the Truth, and that which
was purely judicial, and therefore ceased with the temporal Government of the
Jews, which our Savior was not then come to take upon him.

Now, was not all this Accommodation of our Savior to Moses wisely as well as
graciously contrived, that the People, for whose sakes he was first sent, might
not be offended, or startle and fly from him upon the Scandal of Innovation?

Yea, so tender was our Savior of them in this Point, that during his whole
Life, both he himself, and his Disciples by his Commission, addressed only to
the Jewish Nation; that the greatest Scandal by the Call of the Gentiles might
be avoided, and they might still appear to be God's peculiar People, while
there was any the least hopes of them.

According to their Lord's method and example, we afterward find his Apostles
in a great Council, held and decreed it as a necessary thing for some time to
retain and to practice some legal Ceremonies, even after they were all really
abolished in the Death of Christ, that if possible they might thus gain, that
is, reconcile the stubborn People to the new Establishment, or at least, leave
them without excuse.

Afterward, the fear that possessed the Christian and believing Jews of too
great Alteration to be made by the Gospel, occasioned that sober Advice we
read of in Acts 21. 20, 21, 23, 24. of the Church to St. Paul, Thou see,
Brother, how many thousands of Jews there are which believe, and they are all
zealous of the Law: And they are informed of thee, that thou teach all the
Jews which are amongst the Gentiles, to forsake Moses, saying, That they ought
not to circumcise their Children, neither to walk after the Customs. Do
therefore this that we say unto thee. -- that all may know that the Information
against thee is nothing, i. e. of no moment; but that thou thy self walk
orderly, and keep the Law.

2. Of the Church of England in the Reformation.
Upon this ground some have thought it a Point of commendable Prudence in the
Church of England, that her Reformation at first, proceeded with so much
Moderation, and no greater Alteration, either in the Service or Government of
this Church; whereby she quieted the Minds, and drew into her Communion so many
of the moderate Papists, both in the Reign of Edw. 6. and in the beginning of
Q. Elizabeth's; and whereby, through the wonderful Mercy of God, she has been so
long preserved, even in the midst of her Enemies on both sides. Moderata
durant. And since that you have her candid Apology to this purpose in these
words; Accordingly we find (says her Preface before the Liturgy) that in the
Reigns of several Princes since the Reformation, the Church upon just and
weighty considerations has yielded to make such Alterations in some
particulars, as in their respective times were thought convenient: yet so, as
that the main Body and Essentials of it (as well in the chief Materials, as in
the Frame and Order thereof) have still continued the same unto this day.

And we may remember, that when some furious Zealots for Popery made a
Commotion and Rebellion in the time of King Edward 6. their pretense was, that
there were great and intolerable Alterations in Religion; and that in their
Wisdom, the King and his Council thought it a proper course to allay their
Heats, and to pacify and reduce them to Obedience, to let them know how small
and few the Alterations complained of were; and that their Service before in
Latin was now made English, that they might understand it.

The Reformation in England was carried on without Affectation of Novelty,
though it justly abandoned the former Superstitions and Idolatry.

3. The Example of William called the Conqueror.
This like Policy is observable in William the first: for though the Success of
his Arms, carried the Colors of a Conqueror; yet he seemed unwilling to trust
wholly to that Title: he shook all indeed, but endeavored too, that things
might go back as they could, and settle more firmly upon the old Basis. He
therefore added to, or Vid. Cron. Ecl. Licti. Seld. 171. Fortise. de Leg.
rather seconded his Sword with a Pretense of Right to the Crown; Jure
Haereditario vel Testimentario; and then, afterward, they say, he proceeded to
accommodate the Administration of his Government to the Humors of the English
People, and the ancient Rights and Customs; I mean so, as the time and present
State of things would give way: so that whatever his Title was, he accounted
the Satisfaction of his People the best Security to his quiet Government.
Certainly something he did to this purpose, since we find it disputed by some
learned Men, whether this William the first, was King by Conquest or Compact.
Petit. Brady, and others.

If the former Maxim be allowed, I may have leave to apply it to our present
Establishment, in two Inferences.

First, Seeing, as we have heard, upon such Revolution, a departing from the
former Constitution (beyond what is necessary in the very reason of the change)
is to be avoided as unsafe or dangerous; we hence seem to owe that Charity, yea
that Justice and that Honor to those great and wise Instruments in our late
Revolution, as to presume they have done it with Prudence agreeable to that
great Maxim; that is, that at least they intended not therein to depart farther
from our former State, or to alter any of our allowed Maxims or Customs, that
lie at the bottom of our ancient Constitution, as our Common Law; I mean,
beyond such Necessity, or beyond what has been declared by the King and
Parliament.

For if any thing contrary or dissonant to our Rule was discoursed in some
previous* Debates before the Settlement was made, and all such Debates were
determined in the Law; I say, if any such things then happened, they ought not
now to be remembered or mentioned as other than the motion of particular and
private Persons; and by no Rule can they be thought to pass into, or any way
affect the Public State, as it is now settled by Laws exclusive of them.

Again, If any thing should yet be thought doubtful in the Laws or Method of
our present Establishment, methinks by the help of the same Rule, all such
Doubts may be speedily resolved; I mean by an Interpretation favorable of our
former State.

Especially if it be seriously weighed, how far such a sense may contribute to
the Quiet of the Minds of a Multitude of Men among us, that perhaps are too
fond of old, and averse to new things.

But principally, for the saving of the Wisdom and Honor of our Governors; and
the better securing the Government, upon a tried Basis; and the more firmly
rivetting it in the Affections and Satisfactions of the Generality of the
Kingdom.

This is considerable, when Unanimity and Unity by such Satisfaction, cannot
but be thought at least expedient for our common Preservation from the subtle
Designs and threatening Attempts of our Enemies.

Pardon me if I make bold to demand, why the general Sense of Public Danger
by means of the Offense so many take from the disagreeableness of too strict an
Interpretation of some doubtful Words and Practices, touching our present
Settlement from our former; why may not, I say, so general a Sense and Fear in
the People, who were represented in the Settlement, be modestly thought to have
some Right to reconcile such Doubts (if such are left and not fully cleared by
our Lawmakers) to a Sense more agreeable to our former Constitution, and as
near as may be.

At least, where the Law is not express, it cannot in reason be interpreted by
private Persons to such a sense as is counter to general Satisfaction, and the
Public Safety, both of the King and Kingdom; and this we have heard is
hazarded by forsaking the old beyond necessity; and laying too much Stress upon
a new Foundation. We ought to be wary of wresting words or things that seem
doubtful, especially about Government, to such ill Consequences, as the
cherishing Faction, the Disturbance of Loyalty, the Reproach of our Rulers, the
Scandal of the Law, and the unsetling of the new Establishment, wherein all our
civil and religious Interests are undoubtedly concerned.

Secondly, From the Premises I must infer, that an Essay to reconcile our
present State with the former, is at least pardonable, if not reasonable and
expedient, not to say necessary.

Here I am encouraged to lay the ground of my Apology, for this bold Adventure,
and I hope no peaceable or good Man will be offended, much less any of our
Rulers be provoked, with a modest and well-meant Endeavor to prevent much
harm, and to do a great deal of good in my opinion. If I am mistaken, humanum
est; but I am sure I intend well, and pursue a good Intention sincerely
according to my own Apprehension: This satisfies my self, and methinks it
should offend no body.

But I must speak plain; For if unnecessary Alterations in the Frame of
Government be indeed dangerous, and we find an evil Surmise and groundless
Suspicion hereof with respect to our late Revolution, already fermenting among
us, and spreading the sowrness of Dissatisfaction, Discontent, and (I fear)
Faction, over too great a part of the Nation, and prevailing so far, as to
dishearten our Friends, to animate our Foes, to increase our Fears, to continue
our Troubles, and almost shake the Establishment.

If matters are thus with us, I must have leave to say that a Man can hardly do
better Service to the Public at this season, than by endeavoring to remove
such Popular Mistakes about the Method of our present Settlement, and the
nature of the Government, as seem to have such malevolent Influences, and
unhappy Effects.

Now I conceive this is to be done in a good measure, by showing that the
Alterations from our former State made in the present Government, are not so
great or many as our discontented Men imagine, and our Enemies suggest. But if
it be made evident, that in a fair and charitable Construction of things, we
stand firm upon the same Basis we ever did; and that the Constitution of the
Kingdom founded in our ancient Maxims and Customs, with respect to our
Government, is not altered or touched by the late Revolution; I say, if this
can be effected, I am apt to think many doubting and scrupulous Persons among
us, may be satisfied, and happily reconciled to a better opinion of the present
Government, and a more cheerful Submission to it.

If I knew any better Argument to justify our Rulers, to vindicate the
Government, to establish the Kingdom in Peace and Safety, and to defeat the
Designs and Forces of our Enemies (who live and are mighty) than this before
us, I would certainly use it the best I could; but I have no better, therefore
I crave Acceptance of this my Apology, and Leave to adventure upon my Task.

CHAP. II. The Chief Maxims insisted upon as prejudiced by the late Settlement.
IT may run in the Minds of some scrupulous Persons, that there are old Maxims
that lie at the Root or Foundation of the Kingdom of England; and that these
are destroyed, or subverted by the new Model; and consequently the Constitution
of the Government is quite altered.

Those old Maxims may be thought to be such as these. 1. That the Government in
England is Hereditary. 2. That it admits not of an Interregnum. 3. That nothing
binds the People of England, but an Act of Parliament.


Now perhaps it is thought that the Government is now made Elective, and
therefore is not Hereditary.

Again, that it having been declared, that by the late King's Abdication there
was a Vacancy in the Throne, therefore an Interregnum was admitted.

Lastly, that this new Change was made by a Convention, and not by a Legal
Parliament, and therefore we are not bound to own it.

Such kind of Suggestions as these, I fear have created Shyness and Aversion in
many good Men from a due Recognition of the present Government; if we can make
it appear, that in truth they are vain and groundless, I hope all good Men will
be easily entreated to lay aside that Aversion, and be sweetened to a better
Compliance, both for the Sake of the Public, and their own.

We proceed to consider every one of them in order, and the several Grounds or
Reasons they seem built upon, and whence they are alleged and objected.

CHAP. III. The Government, whether Elective or Hereditary, and how.
IT may be thought by some, that by the late Change, the Government is made
Elective, and therefore is altered, and is no longer Hereditary, as it was
before.

The Vanity of this Argument appears, if we make good these two Propositions.

1st. Our Government was never so absolutely Hereditary as to exclude Election
in all respects.

2dly. In our late Settlement, there was nothing done in Prejudice of our
Hereditary Government.

Prop. 1. The first of these Propositions, viz. That our Government was never
so absolutely Hereditary, as to exclude Elections in all respects, appears,

First, Because all along in our Histories, we find the Words [ Election and
Elected] used as previous to the Crowning of our Ancient Kings.

Some of them came to the Crown without any Color of Title. Some, though not
next in Blood, by the Nomination of the last King. Some only as being next in
Blood, without such Nomination. And lastly, Some both by Proximity of Blood,
and by the Nomination or Testament of the Predecessor.

Now if in History all these are said to be elected, certainly we have no
reason to be offended with the Word, or imagine that our Government abhors all
kind of Election.

But this is plainly acknowledged by the industrious Dr. Bradie, while he is in
pursuit of the Hereditary Succession; the Saxon Expression, says he,
concerning Succession and Successor, is always the same, Feng to Rice, rendered
usually successit, Electus est, he took possession of the Kingdom, he
succeeded, he was chosen, etc. Hist. of Success. p. 366.

Edgar left his Son Heir of the Kingdom, and the great Men chose him (
elegerunt) as his Father commanded.

Harold, Henry 1. and K. Stephen obtained the Crown (they say) by fraud and
Violence; yet by several old Monks are said to be elected.

They said some of our Kings that had undoubted hereditary Titles, were
elected, so K. Henry 2. ab omnibus electus; Brad. Gloss. p. 38.
so likewise K. John and Richard 3. are said to be chosen, as he observes in
his parallel, p. 412.

But to do the Doctor Right, I confess he contends earnestly, that however the
words were used in such cases, indeed there was no such thing as Election or
proper Election of any of those Kings; and that Election signified only
Recognition, Applause or Proclamation, and sometimes only a forced Submission;
at least they were never chosen by the Community of the People, as they are now
understood, but by the great Men of the Kingdom.

But that Controversy I leave betwixt the Doctor and his Adversaries; observing
only for my present purpose, that our ancient Kings, both Saxons and Normans,
are in the Chronicles of England frequently said to have been chosen or elected.

So much for the Word: and now with the Peace of the ingenuous and laborious
Man lately mentioned, I would modestly enquire whether we find not some strokes
in our History of a real Election of our Kings in some Instances at least, so
far as to interrupt the strict Opinion of hereditary Succession. And here I
have no need to assert the Election of the People, or go off from the Doctor's
own ground or concession, either about the ancient Practice, or the declared
Judgment of the Kingdom.

1. In the Saxons time, the Doctor says, he has discovered a sure Rule of
Succession; but this was double, either Right of Blood, or the Nomination of
the preceding King; it is confessed then that Right of Blood was not the only
Rule: hence he lays down his ordinary distinction of Jus Haereditarium and Jus
Testamentarium; yea he tells us, that the Testamentary Heir, that is, one that
comes to the Crown by the last King's Will, tho not next in Blood, is said to
inherit.

But to apply this distinction, methinks it does two great things; it first,
plainly yields the Cause so far, as to the necessary descent of the Crown in
Proximity of Blood: Secondly, It gives a shadow at least of Election, if not in
the People, yet in the King, if by his last Will he might pass by the next in
Blood, and name (that is, properly to choose) another to succeed him in the
Throne. Besides, if this was anciently done, both frequently and lawfully,
where shall we found hereditary Government in the strict sense of it in the
Constitution of the Kingdom? or how shall we defend it from being in no wise
elective?

Yea, if the King himself upon some considerations might choose his Successor,
and set aside the next in Blood, without wronging him, certainly upon great
Considerations, the like may be done by both the King and People. And we find
that Testamentary Heirs of the Crown, tho they were indeed named by the King,
are said to be chosen by the People, and yet are also said to inherit; and if
we observe it narrowly, we shall easily note, that the words Hereditary and
Elective, with respect to the Government, are sometimes confounded in History;
Successione Haereditaria eligere, was no contradiction. The Testament of
Ethelwoph, Florence of Worcester calls it Epistola Haereditaria; by which it is
said, he set aside his own two Sons, as the Doctor notes, p. 363. where he
tells us moreover, what the Law of Succession, as well as the Practice then,
was; the Saxon Kings, says he, might appoint a Brother's Son, or a Bastard, to
succeed them, before their own lawful Issue.

But to come a little closer: I may demand where, when, or how this Maxim [that
the Crown of England is necessarily annexed to Proximity of Blood in the Royal
Family] came to be of the Foundation or Constitution of our Government? That it
was never made so by Custom, or any other Law, or by any other means, the
learned Doctor yields us, by his Refuge in a Testamentary Heir.

I am assured under the hand of a very learned Lawyer, who is a great Friend of
the Hereditary Monarchy, that this Maxim (in contradiction to the former) [the
Crown was alienable and devisable] was retained, and never contradicted until
the Resignation of K. John: and since that time how has it been contradicted
or denied either in practice, or the declared Judgment of the Kingdom? It is
evident enough what the sense of the King and Parliament was in Henry 8th's
time, and since in Queen Elizabeth's, and since that in our late Parliaments.

And nothing to the contrary can I think be fairly inferred, either from that
Act of 7 Hen. 4. that limited the Succession of the Crown to his Sons in order,
and their Issue; or that of Hen. 7. that limited to the Heirs male of his Body,
and no farther: Or the Recognition of K. James the first: for by that of Hen.
7. it is plain the Parliament thought they had power to limit the Succession,
otherwise they would not have meddled with it; besides they limited it indeed,
by extending it only to the Issue male of his own Body. And as for the
Recognition made to K. James, it seems to be the clearest and fullest
acknowledgment of an hereditary Succession, yet we may observe how it is
expressed; it is indeed declared, that the Imperial Crown did belong to him and
his Royal Progeny and Posterity for ever; but it is not said of necessity,
notwithstanding any Reason to the contrary, it shall actually descend to the
next in Blood, in order for ever. Besides, they say in the same Act, that this
their Recognition could not be perfect, or remain to Posterity without the
King's Consent, that is, to make it an Act of Parliament. And does not that
imply, that hereditary Succession of the Crown was not accounted to be
fundamental to our Government before? For then it would have been perfect in it
self, without the King's Consent. Besides, it seems evidently to follow, that
the Kingdom at that time, judged that the Succession of the Crown was limitable
by Act of Parliament.

Yet lest after all this I should be mistaken, I make this observable from our
own Histories, that tho sometimes the next in Blood has been set aside, and
for ought I find to the contrary, upon Reasons of State may be so again, yet it
seems the Royal Family have Jus ad Rem, and have Right thereunto before any
other, if any Member of the Royal Family are capable of Government: so I think
we find it generally carried; that is, when the next in Blood has been
omitted, generally, some one either really or in pretense of the Royal Family,
has been advanced to the Throne.

This general Right to the Crown by Blood, has been sometimes pleaded by our
Kings, and allowed by the People and Parliaments, but never denied: and tho we
cannot say, the next in Blood has an uncontrollable and immediate Right beyond
all exception, to enjoy the Crown; tho we cannot find this Right in the
constant usage as Common Law, and a Fundamental of our Government, yet we may
grant that in all Turns and Temptations to the contrary, the Right of the Royal
Family seems to have countenance, if not plain and general Acknowledgment, and
to pass unquestionable with the silent Testimony of many Ages.

I am sorry to observe with Daniel, that (before this In Vit. Hen. 1.
last Age) seldom or never the third Heir in a right Descent, enjoyed the Crown
of England.

It cannot be denied, but that our Parliaments have frequently concerned
themselves about the Succession; and that our Kings, both such as came to the
Crown by proximity of Blood, as well as those that came to it otherwise, have
often applied themselves to the Parliament, not only for their own Security,
but to limit and qualify the Succession after them.

Yea further I think it must be granted (as one says smartly enough) That it is
a most dangerous thing to have an Opinion prevail, that the King in concurrence
with his Parliament, should not have power to change the direct Order of
Succession, though the Preservation of him and his People did depend upon it.

Yet after all this, if Common Usage be Common Law, and Rig^^^^^^ Royal Family.
continued Practice be our Rule of determining this great Point, I think the
Royal Family have a radical Right in the Government of England; and bids fair
for an Interest in the Constitution of the Kingdom; for it seems to have
governed the Disposition of the Crown all along, both before, as well as since
William the first; and that, generally, with our several Kings and Parliaments,
ever since we had any.

I shall leave this easy Observation, only take notice of two Concessions,
which I apprehend considerable: The first is that of Dr. Br. he says, the
Saxon Kings might appoint a Brother's Son or a Bastard (he does not say, any
other Person, or any one out of the Royal Family) before their own lawful
Issue, to succeed them in the Throne, p. 363. Succession of the Crown.

The other is of Hubert A. C. at the Coronation of K. John, he declares indeed
that the King ought to be elected by the Pople (perhaps a new Doctrine to many
that heard it) yet he qualifies that Election, and tells them, that if any one
of the Race of the late King was more deserving than others, the People ought (
pronius and promptius) more readily consent to his Election.

Now if the Descent of the Crown ought to be kept within the bounds of the
Royal Family, Is not this sufficient to constitute an hereditary Monarchy, in a
true sense, tho with the former latitude? Was it ever thought essential to an
Inheritance, to pass uncontroulably without any exception to the first in
Blood? Is it not enough for the nature of an Inheritance to be granted to me
and my Heirs? And may not Custom dispose it to the younger as well as the
elder? Has not the Parent liberty to give it to whom he will? Yea, is it
consistent with a Fee-simple to be unalienable? or with Salus Populi, in all
possible Cases, for the Crown to be so? especially in our own Kingdom, where
frequent Practice seems to have established as the Common Law of the Crown in
all Ages, that upon urgent Reasons for the safety of the Kingdom, the
Inheritance is alieuable from the next in Blood. Nay, I must presume, that tho
upon some extraordinary Revolution, and some absolutely necessary Reason of
State for our common Preservation, a Stranger should be advanced to the Throne,
for one or more turns, while that necessity continues; I presume, I say, if
when the Reason of that Violence is removed, if care be taken to have the Crown
restored to the Royal Family, or any of its Branches, capable of it, the
Hereditarines is not thereby extinct, or the Constitution of the Government
altered, things may then run again in the old Channel, and settle upon their
old Bottom.

And since we are gone so far, may I not without Offense advance one step
farther?

Is there no Privilege by Primogeniture? Does not Next Heir.
Nature and the general course of Inheritances, where there is no special
Reservation or Exception, point out the next Heir for the Possession? Yea, is
there not very much to be found in our Chronicles, and Laws, and actual
Succession of the Crown, in favor of the next Heir by proximity of Blood? Can
we find by our most diligent search of our public Records, that ever the next
in Blood was set aside, without some Reason or pretense of Reason? which very
thing seems to allow his Right, whilst it alleges something against his
Possession. Whence we may conclude, that tho for sufficient reasons the next in
Blood may be set aside, yet without such reasons it seems neither just nor fit
that he should.

The Royal Family have a Right in Actu primo; the next Heir seems to have it in
Actu secundo; namely, a Jus in re, and as much a Right as can be conceived,
short of Possession, if nothing can be justly objected against it from his
Unfitness for the Government. Immediately upon the Decease of the Queen (says
the Parliament in their Recognition of King James the first) the Imperial Crown
did by inherent Birthright, descend to you the next Heir of the Blood Royal.

Thus the Royal Birthright has the Acknowledgment of the whole Kingdom, or
the whole Body of the Realm, and every particular Member thereof, as the Words
of the Statute are; and this Birthright has been often claimed, and often
frustrated, but I think never denied, or so much as questioned.

Prop. 2. There was nothing done in Prejudice of our Hereditary Monarchy, by
our late Settlement.

This is the other Proposition I undertook to make good in defense of our
present Government; and reflecting upon what we have lately discoursed, we are
necessitated to take notice of, and to set our selves to answer a very
considerable Objection thence arising, as some strongly fansy.

Obj. Hence we are fallen upon the great Objection; It Is thus, If the Right of
the Crown be inherent in the next in Blood by Birthright, why upon the Demise
of the late King, did not the Government devolve on his Daughter the Princess
of Orange? By preferring the Prince of Orange before the Princess, whose right
it was, seems not agreeable to an Hereditary Monarchy, and so makes the
Government Elective.

Answ. I hope there are already sufficient Grounds laid for an Answer hereunto:
All that I have to do is to apply them in a few plain Propositions.

1. We have found reason to distinguish thus; The Crown may be thought
alienable, either absolutely, or in a qualified sense; that is, such a sense as
is consistent with its being Hereditary.

2. One may think that the Crown is not absolutely at the Peoples Disposal; in
our (or in any) Case, or alienable upon any Occasion, or to any Person; and yet
may conceive that upon plain necessity, created by Salus Populi the Supreme
Law, and the very end of Government, the Crown may be alienated from the next
in Blood, to the second; and upon the like reason to the third.

3. It Is further evident to me, That a Man of that Persuasion may yet judge that
the next in Blood that is capable of the Government, may of Right, and by the
Law of Inheritance claim the Crown, which without Injustice cannot be denied
him.

4. It hence follows, That the Supreme Power upon the Demise of the late
King, did not devolve upon the People, nor imediately upon the Prince of
Orange, but upon his Princess. Upon these grounds indeed it must be granted
that the Princess should have been Queen as Queen Mary was, that is, in the
place of the King; and next to her, the Princess of Denmark, unless some very
great Reason of State will justify the preferring the Prince, who is not next
in Blood, before them both.

5. Doubtless those whom we entrusted to manage and methodize our Settlement,
saw, as they judged, unanswerable Reasons to advance the third in order, before
the first and second, and methinks that should satisfy us.

6. But moreover we are morally assured that both those noble Princesses were
themselves satisfied of the Reason of it; yea, that both of them consented, yea
desired the Crown might be settled in the order as it is.

7. And may it not be very reasonably granted, that some great Considerations
(though we know not what they were) might move them cedere de jure suo, to wave
their own Right, and these such as might warrant and justify their so doing?

8. Yea, if there be such a thing as Abdication of Government, did not both
those noble Princesses expressly, and not only by Implication, so far abdicate
the Government, if they actually and voluntarily so far refused it?

Obj. But had not the Prince of Denmark some kind of Right in and by his Lady?

Sol. It seems to me he had; but it is very evident that he consented and waved
what Right he might have, as both the Princesses did theirs.

Obj. But the People of England seem to have a right to be governed by the next
in Blood of the Royal Family.

Answ. This too may be granted: but the People of England in this sense, are
the Lords, and the Representative Body of the Commons; and have not these both
consented to, and transacted the present Establishment for themselves and us?

To conclude this, Upon the late Demise, nothing could bar the Prince of Orange
from a just and immediate Title to the Crown of England, but the Right of his
Princess, the Right of the Princess, and in and by her of the Prince of
Denmark, and the Right of the Nation in these; but all these Bars are fairly
removed by the Consent and Desire of all Parties concerned, and none have left
them any cause to complain in that respect.

Now I hope here is nothing done destructive of the Hereditary Monarchy,
nothing that can infer the Government to be Elective purely in the whole
Transaction; much less so great an Alteration in the nature of our Government
for the future. What Principles some went upon in our late Change, we need not
guess, so long as we find nothing evident, either verbal by Declaration of our
Governors, or by any thing in the Change it self, but what is fairly
reconcilable to our ancient Constitution; we may, without troubling our selves
with other Men's Principles, cheerfully submit to the present Government, if we
have no more to object, but that the Nature of the Government is altered by the
Revolution. An evil Surmise without ground, ought to be laid aside.

CHAP IV. Of Vacancy, and the supposed Interregnum thereupon, by the late
King's Abdication.
WE are thus led to the second great Exception, which is this, It is delared by
the Lords and Commons in the Convention, that the late K. James the Second
having abdicated the Government, the Throne thereby was vacant; consequently an
Interregnum was admitted or supposed, contrary to the ancient and known Maxim,
That in the Government of this Kingdom there is no Interregnum.

For Answer hereunto, I hold my self obliged to do two things: first, to
consider how and in what sense the late King abdicated the Government; this may
justify the filling the Throne with the the present King and Queen. 2dly. To
show that there has been nothing said or done by the Convention, as such, that
has declared a Vacancy in the Throne in that full and absolute sense, as might
infer an Interregnum in the true meaning of the Word. And thus the present
Government will be vindicated and reconciled with the ancient, and this great
Exception I hope fully satisfied: and this methinks I am strictly tied to, by
my last Discourse of Hereditary Monarchy, as will presently appear more plainly.

CHAP. V. Of ABDICATION.
FOR the first, That the late King did really abdicate the Government, has
been so fully spoken to by others, that I need not much labor in the Proof of
it. My chief Intention is to reconcile the Word to the Notion of my Brethren
that are so much offended with it.

1. I desire them to consider, it is a Law-term, and but seldom used amongst
us; why should we not take the Signification of it from the Learned in that
Faculty?

2. But it is of greater Weight, that the Lords and Commons differing about this
Word at their Conferences, such a sense was beaten out, after much Debate and
Argument, upon the very same grounds upon which many seem now offended with it,
that the Wisdom of the Nation in both Houses acquiesced in this word, as the
fittest for the purpose. By our Election we entrust them with all we have, and
cannot we trust them with a Word?

3. That which seemed to reconcile the two Houses in the word Abdicate, was not
the critical notions of the Civilians, but the Explication of what was then to
be meant by it, which I am told was happily effected by one (who is a Wonder in
the learing of the Law) in these or the like Words, in which before they were
agreed.

That King James the 2d. by going about to subvert the Constitution, by
breaking the Original Coutract between King and People, and by violating the
Fundamental Laws, and withdrawing himself out of the Kingdom, has thereby
renounced to be a King, according to the Constitution, by avowing to govern by
a Despotick Power unknown to the Constitution at his Coronation; such a King to
whom the Allegiance of an English Subject is due: and has set up another kind
of Domination, which is to all intents an Abdication, or abandoning his Legal
Title as fully, as if he had done it by express Words.

Now if these things were true, as no body I think can deny, and amount to an
Abdication in the just, and publicly owned and explained sense of the Word,
how is it possible we should any longer scruple about it.

Obj. The Meaning of it then is, that King James thus ceased to be King; but
this is doubted.

Sol. But the Body of the Kingdom say he did; and you will not say but it is
possible: for a King may cease to be so, by a voluntary Resignation in Word or
Writing, which is formal Abdication; or, as Grotius seems to expound the Word,
by manifest habere pro derelicto.

2. Now if the late King did as much by his Actions as an express Abdication
amounts to, did he not virtually and as really relinquish or abdicate the
Government, as if he had in so many Words renounced it?

3. And that he did so, is too evident by what is before alleged against him,
especially if we add his putting down the ancient Defense of the Kingdom, the
Militia; and beginning to rule and defend his Arbitrary Government by an
illegal standing Army; if when he voluntarily departed from us, he dismissed
his Judges, threw away the Broad-Seal, and disbanded and let loose upon us his
illegal Forces, and left us in a perfect Anarchy; as was then apprehended, even
by such as now are offended with the Word Abdication.

The Caution of the Convention, to avoid all color of Offense, seems
admirable. If they had said the late King had forfeited the Crown, that would
certainly have more offended you; and if they had deposed him, much more: these
are both avoided, and it is only said he abdicated the Government; they do not
only say it was his own Fault, but his own Act.

Obj. But thus we make him Felo de se.

Sol. This seems to be no hard saying. It Is plain, though the King in his
personal or natural Capacity cannot, as you think, forfeit his Life, yet he may
die or kill himself: So in his politic Capacity, if we grant that the King
cannot forfeit his Government by male Administration, yet it is possible he may
extinguish and destroy it, and that by a real as well as by a formal
Abdication, as before explained. Government according* to Law, is essential to
our Government, otherwise our Lawyers are much out, that generally tell us our
Government is a Legal, Regal, or as Fortescue, a Political Government, in
opposition to Despotical, Absolute, Arbitrary or Tyrannical Government. Now
though a King do not intend absolutely to abandon all kind of Government, yet
when he leaves the proper Government, and assumes another kind of Government
abhorred by our Constitution, he plainly cease to be our Governor in any
sense; he refuses to govern politically; he would bring in another Species of
Government that is destructive of our Constitution; and begins in many odious
Instances, the Execution of Tyranny, contrary, not only to the Laws that make
and limit our Government, but contrary to the ends of all Government; and
instead of protecting, destroys his People; what can be plainer than that this
is to abdicate the Government as King of England? A King may kill himself, and
not intend it.

To this purpose we have several notable Collections made by others. I shall
note a few of them.

Among the Laws of K. Edward C. 17. de Regis Officio, the Liberties of the
People being mentioned, it is said, that the King is constituted for the
Preservation of them, which if he do not, nec nomen Regis in eo constabit, he
does not retain the Name of a King.

Bracton says l. 2. c. 24. Est enim Corona Regis facere Justitiam and Judicium,
pacem tenere, sine quibus consistere potest nec tenere; i. e. The Crown of the
King is to do Justice and Judgment, and to preserve Peace, without which he
cannot subsist.

But above all, the Words of K. James to his Parliament March 21. 1609. are
remarkable. The King is bound by a double Oath to preserve the Laws, tacitly as
being King, and expressly by his Coronation Oath: So as every just King is bound
to observe the Paction made with his People by his Laws, framing the Government
thereunto; and a King leaves to be King, and degenerates into a Tyrant as soon
as he leaves off to govern by Law, in which case the King's Conscience may
speak to him, as the poor Woman to Philip of Macedon, Either govern according
to Law, or cease to be King.

Answerable hereunto is the Civilians Maxim, Tyranni in Exarcitie decidunt Jure
sue Haereditario; i. e. Tyrants by their Tyranny lose their Hereditary Right of
Government; for the Ill of Monarchy is Tyranny; K. Charles's Answ. to 19. Prop.

From what has been said, it seems plain, that a King by relinquishing the
Legal, and usurping an Arbitrary or Tyrannical Government, does as effectually
abdicate the Government as King, as a Merchant that turns Pirate, abdicates his
Trade; or a Husbandman, that leaves off his Husbandry, and resolves to cast the
fortune of his Life upon robbing on the Highway, abdicates his Plough.

Lastly, it is so evident in those that give us the sense of the word, that
there is a real Abdication, as we have considered it in distinction to a
formal, that no body that will take the pains to examine can doubt it: Not only
Grotius, de Jure Belli and Pac. lib. 2. c. 4. s. 4. Non tantum verbis sed re
potest: but Calvin in his Lexic. Jurisd. tells us, Generum abdicat, qui Sponsam
repudiat; he that divorces his Wife, does abdicate his Son. So Homo liber qui
seipsum vendit, abdicat se statu suo, says Brissonius de verb. sign. that is,
he which sells himself, abdicates himself from his former state. And Budaeus
Comment. de Origin Juris, Abdicare se Magistratu est idem quod abire penitus
Magistratu.

1. For the Application of the Word so explained: And to all that had been said
to prove the late King's Abdication complete and undeniable, it ought to be
remembered, that in the 25 Ed. 3. Stat. 6. Praemunire Provisors. Ed. 1. Letter
to the Pope.
very times of Popery here, a submitting to Papal Usurpations and Authority
contrary to our Laws, was deemed a Disinherison of the Crown. What shall we say
of the late King's voluntary, studied and deliberate invading his own
Authority, and subjecting the whole Ecclesiastical State to a foreign Power,
to the utter Extirpation of our Reformed Constitution, so firmly settled in the
special Laws of the Land to that purpose? Considering also how this in a little
time must inevitably ruin the Civil State, which is intimately inter woven with
the Ecclesiastical in their just Liberties and true Religion; their very
Consciences and Lives not being safe from the Snares and Inquisitions, and even
Massacres of the most cruel, tyrannical and barbarous Religion in the World.

2. This, in conjunction with the late King's Proceedings in civil Matters,
needs no Aggravation. The Crown of England is glorious in a threefold
Excellency, the Legislative, Executive, and Military Power. Now sor one of our
own Kings to do that industriously, and by many designed deliberate Acts, which
is rank Treason against the King and Kingdom, which at least has a tendency to
destroy the King, with respect to his Crown and Dignity, what is this but to
destroy himself? For a King to divest himself of the Legislative Power by the
use of all Artifices of Fraud and Force, to destroy the fundamental Privileges
of Election, and consequently the very Being of a legal Parliament, his
executive Power, by refusing to govern by Law, and setting up an arbitrary
tyrannical Government. Lastly, his legal standing military Power; laying aside
the Militia, and resolving to stick to an illegal Army, what is this but to
relinquish the Government of England, to throw away all Regal Authority, to
violate, break in pieces, and trample upon the Crown; to declare to all the
World, he will be King no longer; and to abandon the Authority which he had to
govern by Law, according to the Constitution of the Kingdom, his Duty to his
People as King, and the special Bond upon his Soul in his solemn
Coronation Oath?

3. But at last, to crown all, when the Noise of the Prince's Coming had
brought him a little to himself, and he begins to feel the danger that his late
daring Pranks of Tyranny had brought him into, he advises with his wise
Council what to do: Should he trust his People in Parliament? No: Should he
trust his melting Army? No: Should he trust his dreadful Son in Law? No. What
then? as the evil Spirit rent and tore the Body when he was forced to leave it,
so he did all the mischief he could, (by calling in his Writs for a Parliament,
dismissing his Judges, carrying away the Broad Seal, and putting an end to all
kind of Government among us, as before) and then leaves us in absolute Anarchy,
and a way of Confusion, upon a necessity apprehended (of his own creating) of
dispossessing us, he flies to his trusty and wel-beloved the French King; thus
at once delivering his Person, and in consequence directly betraying his
Kingdom into the Power of the only Friend he has in the World, but his Kingdoms
only Enemy.

In a word, to put an end industriously to all Government at home, and as far
as in him lay, to deliver himself and his Kingdoms into the Power of a foreign
Enemy, seems to be an Abdication with a Witness, at least so far, as to leave
the Throne vacant.

CHAP. VI. Of Vacancy and Interregnum.
BUT it may be said, That if the late King did abdicate the Government, and
thereby the Throne became void; then we admit an Interregnum, contrary to an
ancient Maxim in our Government: But the Convention did declare, that the late
King did so abdicate, and the Throne was vacant; therefore they have altered
the Constitution of our Government.

Answ. 1. Hereunto I answer, first, That I for my part know no Law against the
possibility either of a Vacancy in the Throne, or an Interregnum; I mean, in
extraordinary cases, such as ours was; or when the Royal Family may be supposed
to be extinct, or all the remaining Branches of it are known to have imbibed
Principles directly against the Interest and Religion of the Kingdom, and
destructive of what should be preserved. I cannot say but the contrary Opinion
seems to consist with some ancient Transactions of our States.

2. For a Vacancy in the Throne, we have an express Precedent in the sense of
the Parliament about Richard the 2d; and if so, that will infer so much of an
Interregnum too.

3. I confess of later times, the Recognition of the Parliament made to K.
James the first, seems to exclude both a Vacancy and an Interregnum, that is,
at least when things proceed ordinarily and regularly; the words are,
Immediately upon the Decease of the Queen, the Imperial Crown did by inherent
Birthright descend to you the next Heir of the Blood Royal.

And this it concerns me to observe, as agreeable to the Hereditarines of our
Monarchy, as before I have declared it.

A Digression.
But before I proceed, I desire it may be always remembered, and that we still
carry this along with us, That tho the Crown be Hereditable, yet Government is
an Office and Service, or Ministry to us for good, Romans 13. and that by our Law
it is in the nature of an Office: that it may be lost three ways; either by
Insufficiency, or Forfeiture, or Cession, called Non-qualification, Abuser, or
Non-user: And how far these, or any of them, are applicable to the Possessor of
the Crown in England* may be considered in the ensuing Discourse.

At present we shall observe, that he that takes an Office, tho it be by way of
Inheritance, takes it with its Conditions and Burdens. Indeed, there are
Advantages and Profits annexed to the Office, and sometimes real Estates in
Land, which are inseparable from it, and cannot be lost while the Officer
continues in the Office: And thus it is with our Crown Lands, wherein the King
has rectum dominion in Right of the Crown; which no Man has in his Land
besides the King. Yet if the Government be an Office, and these Crown Lands be
in the King, as he is King, and has that Office, and not simply in him as Vid.
Blounts Law dict. F^^.
such a Person; he cannot lose them any way during his being King; but he seems
to hold in the nature of a Benefit, from and for another; i. e. his Kingdom, he
owes Duty for it, tho not Fealty for it: And the Statute 37 Hen. 8. cap. 16.
uses the word Fee of Lands invested in the Crown.

But leaving this Digression, we must return; and there seem two Doubts
depending here, that I must a little insist upon, Whether the Convention did
indeed declare the Throne vacant? and whether we are bound to believe that
Vacancy to be so absolute as to infer an Interregnum?

The first Doubt touching Vacancy, viz. First, Whether the Convention did
indeed declare the Throne to be vacant?
1. If it be plain they did, they did so as our Representatives, and why should
not that satisfy us? at least why should we be troubled at it, seeing their so
declaring passes not into our Allegiance, or the succeeding exercise of the
Government; besides, we are left at liberty to enjoy our private Thoughts about
it; and tho they declared so, we are neither required to declare it, or to
believe it.

2. But in truth (whatever might pass at the Conferences of the Houses about
it) their Words that give us their Act in public* do not express or formally
make any Declaration, that the Throne was vacant.

Their words are these, [ K. James the 2d having abdicated the Government, and
the Throne being thereby vacant] here is indeed a plain Supposition that it is
so, but no Declaration. So that if the Throne was not vacant by the King's
Abdication, they do nothing to make it so; all the Suppositions in the world
cannot make that to be that is not.

Therefore if that King had really abdicated the Government, and yet there was
no Vacancy, there was neither any Interregnum; but the Descent was immediate;
and the Succession regular in the present King and Queen.

But if the Throne was really void by that King's abdicating, and the
Convention was not mistaken in their Supposition, as we should not easily
imagine, then we are concerned to consider the second Doubt.

The second Doubt. Whether we are bound to believe that Vacancy to be so
absolute, as necessarily to infer in the meaning of the Convention an utter
Interregnum?
Sol. In general my answer is, There is no necessity for such a Belief, nor
indeed any reason for it in my apprehension.

The Convention, as I observed before, did not declare a Vacancy at all, only
they suppose it, as the undoubted Consequence and Effect of the Abdication;
having abdicated the Government, and the Throne being thereby void.

Now that the King's Abdication did or did not leave the Throne vacant, depends
upon the Nature of the things; and are not affected by the Declaration; neither
can we by our Jealousies or Imagination make things otherwise than they are of
themselves, or make the Declaration import another and a stricter sense than it
really does.

For a fuller answer therefore, three things are distinctly to be considered.

1. How far a Total Abdication may effect a Vacancy in the Throne.

2. Whether we have reason to think that the Convention did suppose a Vacancy
in any other sense.

3. Consequently whether that sense imply an Interregnum.

Quest. 1. How far a Total Abdication of the Government may (or does
necessarily) effect a Vacancy in the Throne.

Sol. For the clear answer to this, we must take our Measures from the Nature
of our Government, which has been supposed to be Hereditary.

1. Now if the Government be indeed Hereditary, though there be a Vacancy in
the Throne, truly wrought by the Abdication of the Government, as the
Convention supposed, it cannot be reasonably imagined to be an absolute and
total Vacancy, or such in all respects.

2. The Reason of the Consequence seems plain from this, because the Vacancy
was made by K. James, and he could not make it further than he could. He could
not prejudice his Heirs, or leave the Throne empty in all respects; for the
Statute of K. James the First declares, agreeable to all times, The Imperial
Crown by inherent Birthright, does immediately descend to the next Heir of the
Blood Royal upon the Decease of the Predecessor. The Royal Family have Jus ad
Rem, but the next in Blood, if without just Exception, has Jus in Re, and
wants nothing but Livery and Seisin.

3. This carries a plain Analogy with the Interest of others; and if it be a
Privilege, cannot be denied to our Princes. The Estate is in the Heir
immediately upon the Death of the Possessor; and if the Estate be forfeited,
it is immediately in the next Tenant, though in neither case they may have yet
got Possession. And we use to say, the Heir to the Crown is King before either
the Coronation or Proclamation; i. e. The Throne upon Demise is instantly
filled, and there is no Vacancy in that sense.

4. If the right Heir before entry be kept out of Possession, the Estate is not
in Obeyance, or in Nubibus, but, as the Lawyers All Land in Abeyance, or in Fie
of some Man. Rule in Law.
say, in Abatement; the Estate is really in the Heir, though they say the Law
favors the intruder, as the lawful Possessor, till the Right of the true Heir
is proved, which I have no reason to apply.

5. However, it is plain enough that the Convention supposed the late King by
Abdication left the Throne void in some respect; and what that was, must
certainly respect himself, and not his Heirs; he left the Throne void, as to
his own Person, and as to his Possession, and as to his own Right, by
relinquishing the Government.

6. Yea, he left it void as to any present Administration or Administrator; and
therefore it being so void, ipso facto, the great Men of the Kingdom first
desired the Prince of Orange to take upon him the Administration of the
Government, till the Convention should meet. This he did, and this Vacancy was
the natural Effect or Consequence of his Abdication; but we may not strain the
Word to the altering the nature of our Government; neither may we imagine a
Papist's Abdication should bar or prejudice his Protestant Children, or change
our Constitution.

7. I hope I have said nothing in prejudice of any Limitations or Conditions of
the Crown, either in Law, or from the necessary Nature of Government, or by Act
of Parliament; if according to such Conditions the next in Blood be not
qualified, the Throne may be filled by the Right or the next. When the Throne
was declared void upon the Deposition of Rich. the 2d. his Son was instantly
admitted; as were before the Sons of Edw. 1. and Ed. 2. upon their removal.

8. We are told that before the Stat. 25. Edw. 3. de natis ultra mare, it was a
received Maxim, that Edgar was set aside, being neither in Body or Mind fit to
govern. Ingulph. With full consent in Parliament the Queen of Scots was desired
to be disabled. Burl. Letter. And of late the Duke of York*
the next in Blood born beyond the Sea should not be King: and by that of Eliz.
23. c. 1. Persons opposing the Execution of that Act, are thereby disabled for
ever. Yet we still conceive, that the next Heirs after them, (better
capacitated, and not guilty or defective as they) might claim the Crown,
otherwise all other Persons are under the same Penalty, though not at all
guilty; and the Penalty is not restrained to the Person offending, or to the
Crime mentioned in the latter; or in the Incapacity in the former Instance. The
Statute of the Queen plainly supposes that some may claim, which cannot
consist with an Elective Government; and if the next in Blood are disabled by
Law to claim, it follows, the Right is some where else, and by Virtue of that
Right the Throne is so far filled, and Possession may be claimed.

Quest. 2. Whether we have reason to think that the Convention did suppose a
Vacancy in any other sense.

Sol. We may receive full Satisfaction in this, from what has been said upon
the first Query.

For what reason can we have in Justice or Charity to imagine the Constitution
intended any further Vacancy, than was or could be made by the late King's
Abdication? what reason is left us to think that they intended such a Vacancy
as was inconsistent with the nature of our ancient Hereditary Monarchy, or the
Interest of the Persons that are now advanced to the Throne in their own Right?
of which we have given account before; or why should we impose a groundless and
an unreasonable sense upon the Proceedings of our Superiors, as may forestal or
prejudice our quiet and due Submission to the Government?

2. For our further Satisfaction, we ought to consider, first the Persons whom
they admitted to the Crown, namely such as, upon Avoidance, upon their Inherent
Birthright might have claimed the Crown. Secondly, The Words of the
Declaration, by which they were admitted. [ The Throne being thereby vacant, we
do resolve that William and Mary be, and be declared King and Queen.] They do
not say they make them so, but resolve that they are so, and then declare them
to be what indeed they were.

3. And now I must have leave to admire the Wisdom, Foresight Noted before.
and Caution of that great Assembly: they do not lay hold of a Forfeiture of K.
James; they do not pretend to depose him; they do not insist upon his
Resignation; but they suppose and alledg strong Grounds of that Supposition,
that he had abdicated the Government so far, as that with respect to him, to
all Intents and Purposes, the Throne was void; and therefore to maintain the
Hereditarines of this Monarchy, they allow the Right of the next Heirs, viz.
William and Mary; and accordingly upon that their Title, they declare them King
and Queen.

Quest. 3. Whether the sense of Vacancy thus explained, imply an Interregnum?
This can be a Question no longer, if we consider the Premises; for such a
Vacancy we have upon every Demise of the Crown, yet no Interregnum.

CHAP. VII. Of the Convention, and how it became a Parliament.
The Third Maxim considered.

Obj. WE are arrived to the Consideration of the third great Exception, viz.
That it is a Maxim, that nothing binds the People of England but an Act of
Parliament: But the present Government was made by a Convention, and not by a
legal Parliament, therefore we are not bound to own it.

Sol. 1. To this, first, it may be replied, That tho this Maxim be generally
allowed, yet not without some Exceptions. For is not Custom and the Common Law
the Rule of Right and Justice betwixt Man and Man, yea and betwixt the Prince
and the People? Were there no Statute or Act of Parliament about Government and
Subjection? Yea, were there no Coronation Oath, or Oath of Allegiance, to be
taken by the King or the Subject? Yet, from the nature of our Government, and
by Common Law, the King ought to govern according to the Laws and Customs of
the Kingdom; and we ought to pay him our natural Allegiance. Yea, it is not
questioned by those that most scruple about the present Settlement, but now
there are positive Laws, requiring those Oaths, yet before they are taken, the
respective Duties both of King and People are to be observed by force of the
radical nature of our Monarchy, and the fundamental Constitution of Government
in our Common Law.

2. For a further Answer we must remind what has been said of our Hereditary
Monarchy, which if understood in no other sense, than these very Persons are
eager to maintain, methinks supercedes this Objection.

For if the Government in their own sense be hereditary; then, in consequence
of it, when the Throne is vacant of the Predecessor, it is in the same instant
filled by the next Heir, as to Right and Title, in Analogy with all other Cases
of Inheritance, and even from the nature of Inheritance. We need not here speak
over again what we have about the late King's Abdication, and leaving the
Throne void; we may be allowed here to suppose it; and then it is evident that,
upon this ground, upon that avoidance, without any intervention or Act of the
People, either in a Convention, or Parliament, the Crown immediately descended
to the next Heir of the Royal Family by Right of Blood, or Birthright.

3. So far for their Right. As to their Entry and Possession of the Government,
tho in all such extraordinary Revolutions it has been safest, to be admitted
with the Consent of the People; yet it is evident from the same Concession, that
it is their Inheritance; that the next Heir may claim and take possession of
himself, without the Consent or Act of the People; that is, he has right to do
so; and if he be hindered and kept by force from his lawful Entry, without just
Cause, or his own Consent, he is apparently injured. And this seems to follow
irresistibly, from the nature of an Inheritance.

4. Accordingly, the Duke of Lancaster came into the Parliament, and claimed
and challenged the Crown as descended unto him, by the right Line of the Blood
of Hen. 3. and his Claim and Challenge without any Dispute was immediately
admitted.

Upon the Resignation of Edw. 2. his Son Edw. 3. as the Walsingham Hist.
firstborn and Heir of the Kingdom, declares, that upon his Father's
Concession by the Counsel and Advisement (no other Act) of the great Men, he
assumed and took upon him the Government.

5. But I need instance in no more, when we have considered what passed in
Parliament, 1 Edw. 4. They declare the King was in Right, from the Death of the
King his Father, very just King; and that they take and repute the said Edw. 4.
according to his said Right and Title, declaring his Title was just and lawful,
as grounded upon the Laws of God and Nature; and also upon the ancient Laws,
and laudable Customs of the said Realm. Agreeable hereunto was the Recognition
of King James beforementioned.

6. Now if we apply this to our own Case, may I demand, What was there left for
the Convention to do? King James had relinquished the Government, and left the
Throne vacant; thereby there was an immediate Descent of the Crown by inherent
Birthright to his Daughter, if willing to accept it: I say, what had we to do
more, than to recognize and declare her to be Queen of England? Indeed, they
did join in their said Declaration the Prince her Husband with her: but they
seem not to pretend to make either him or her, King or Queen; their words are
these, The Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commens assembled at
Westminster, do resolve that William and Mary, Prince and Princess of Orange,
be, and be declared King and Queen of England, etc.

Object. But why do they not then declare the Princess as immediate Heir, to be
Queen only, or at least before the Prince?

Sol. This I hope has been fairly accounted for before, Consensus
tollit-Errorem; especially Consent grounded upon invincible Reasons of State in
that Juncture, or rather Confusion of Affairs. And if we look back upon former
times, we are not without instances in this particular, not much unlike it.

2. Edward the 2d denied himself of his Right, and actually relinquished the
Government, ('it is not material here upon what Motives) and his Son, with the
Father's liking, and the Advice of the great Men, was King of England during
his Father's Life; tho before he had sworn, invito Patre, he would never accept
of the Crown; yet when he does accept it, he declares he takes it not as the
Gift of the People, nor any other way, but as Primogenitus Regis, and Haeres.

3. Somewhat like it we read concerning Richard Duke of York; he was permitted
by the true Heir to the Crown, (tho his own Title to it was upon examination
sound defective) to possess the Throne, for the honor of the King, and to
maintain Peace during his Life: and the true Heir did cedere de jure suo, with
assurance to enjoy the Crown after the Decease of the King de facto.

4. It was indeed enacted 15 Edw. 2. that the things which shall be established
for the Estate of the King, and of the Realm and People, may be treated, moved
and established by the King, and by the Assent of the Prelates, Earls, Baerons,
and Commonalty of the Kingdom. And there is no doubt but this is the proper
course in ordinary Cases.

5. But that there is a necessity for a Convention, that is no Parliament, in
some extraordinary Cases, to meddle in these high Matters, none, I think, can
question. Namely, if we can suppose the Royal Family extinct, at least so far,
as there is no Heir appears to claim and take the Government, upon the demise
of the King. Is there not a plain necessity now to preserve all from Confusion,
for the great Men, etc. to meet, and to consider where to place the Government,
according to Right or Merit?

6. Again, we may suppose two or more Rivals for the Crown, As they did in
Rich. 3. that famous Case.
upon the King's Death, when there can be no Parliament, (that, if in being
before, dying with the King) should not the Great Men meet, and prevent the
Ruin of the Kingdom by Civil Wars, by acknowledging and assisting the right
Heir, as they are bound by their natural Allegiance?

Yea, I may add, If a Pretender, excluded by the Limitations of the Law, should
by violence invade the Government; what Remedy, if the People may not meet,
especially being invited thereunto, by the next Heir qualified by the Law, to
keep out the Pretender, and admit the lawful Heir to take the Government?

7. That there may be Limitations put to the Descent of the Crown, methinks
lies not only in the Nature of Government, but has been the declared sense of
the Kingdom, ( i. e. of King and Parliament) upon all occasions, and never
denied: And if those Limitations are necessary for the preservation of the
Whole, and our very Constitution, as they may be, or are clearly expressed in
an Act of Parliament; if any one would break through, and invade the Government,
he must be prevented by a Convention, or the Foundation of the Government is
subverted.

8. Lastly, The Throne being left empty of an Administrator lately in our own
Case, and we put into a state of Anarchy, and great Confusion upon the late
King's Departure, Did not every Man, that had any sense of our Danger, (and
that is, all that were not concerned in the late methods of our Ruin) Did not
they see then a plain necessity to meet together, and apply to the Author of
our Deliverance, desiring that he would take upon him the Administration of the
Government, till the Convention should meet, and to give out his Summons for a
Convention? And was not that Convention regularly, peaceably and freely chosen
and assembled? And what did they do, but consider where the Right of the Crown
now lay, and with the Consent of all Parties, as before is noted, declare
WILLIAM and MARY our King and Queen.

9. True, as yet they were no Parliament, but as soon as there was a Possessor
of the Throne, the Lords and Commons so freely chosen, by the subsequent
Consent of the King, of Themselves proceed into a Parliament; and being so,
recognize the King and Queen, and cause Proclamations thereof to be made
throughout the Kingdom. Which being done, we have a King and Queen de facto,
and no room left to dispute their Title according to Reason.

10. Give me leave to resume the Matter fair and plain. All saw a necessity
that the great Men should meet, (and some perhaps that now scruple) and desire
the Prince of Orange to take the Administration of the Government, and summon a
Convention; and in that Exigence what could they do more seasonable and wisely?
and how could the Prince proceed more regularly and nearer to our Constitution,
having the Exercise of the Government, than by summoning a Convention? Or, how
could the People transact the Election, to represent them more freely and
quietly than they did? And what had the Convention of Lords and Commons (so
elected) to do, but to consider where the next Title to the Crown lay, and to
declare and recognize the present King and Queen, with consent of all parties
concerned, as before was observed? by which Act of the People of England, they
took, and now have, as evident a Possession of the Throne, as ever any King of
England had.

11. I say, now especially, because, since the Declaration of the Convention,
the Body of the Kingdom in Parliament, have solemnly again recognized the
present King and Queen; and they have been since acknowledged by the People at
large, by Universal Proclamations throughout the Kingdom.

Obj. But the Assembly at Westminster may be thought but a Convention still,
and no Parliament, because not at first summoned by the King's Writs.

Answ. However, they truly represent the whole Body of the People, and the
Representers of the Commons, and University of the People, together with the
Lords, all concurred to the Proclamations of the King and Queen, and that is
enough certainly to render the Possession of the Throne by them undoubted;
besides the Solemnities of it at their Coronations, by the usual Methods, and
all Formalities of Law.

But let us consider this matter a little nearer.

2. I do not say a Parliament can make it self; but methinks it is evident
enough, that the Persons elected by the People on purpose to be their
Representatives, in Conjunction with the Lords, whose Right it is to sit in
Parliament, with the consent of the King sufficiently, expressed should have
both the matter and form of a Parliament: it is true we cannot conceive a proper
Parliament in England, without a King in Being or Possession; but the Writs
before can reasonably be supposed to have no further Influence into the being
of a Parliament, than only for the orderly Proceeding of the Election, and
signifying the King's Pleasure to have a Parliament.

To be short; if we find the Name and Power of a Parliament given by the Law to
Conventions, not chosen by the People; if we find the Definition of a
Parliament given by a Statute, to agree exactly to the present Parliament; and
lastly, if we have a Precedent in the case, why should we doubt whether the
present be a Legal Parliament?

First, That the Name and Power of Parliament has been formerly given by Law
to Conventions of the great Men, and the Community of the People, without any
Election of the People at all, and consequently not chosen upon Writs from the
King; this the learned Dr. Brady labors much to prove in favor of the Crown
before (as he says) Parliaments were settled as now they are. He says
Colloquium and Parliamentum, Conference and Parliament, were expressive one of
another; and in those great Conventions, sometimes only the great Men of the
Kingdom, as at Runnemede, are called a Parliament; sometimes also with them the
Communitas Populi; but these, he says, did not include the common sort, much
less imply the issuing out of Writs, and thereupon the Peoples electing their
Representatives, p. 72. Answ. to Mr. Petit.

Whence I argue, If a Convention heretofore (without the Election of the People
upon Writs from the King) had the Name of a Parliament, and concurred with the
King to make Laws binding upon the People; certainly now a Convention freely
chosen by Summons from a Person that had the Administration of the Government
in his hand, and was in the place of the King (though the late King had called
in his Writs, and left the Kingdom, and that Exigence of Affairs could not
possibly admit any other Remedy) I say, such a Convention, when allowed by the
King, does much rather deserve the Name, and challenge the Authority of a
Parliament.

The Argument receives much strength, if we consider that now the Election of
our Representatives, so essential to our Parliaments, is the great fundamental
Privilege of the People; and consequently the King's Writs to that purpose,
that we may have frequent Parliaments, is the Peoples Privilege also; besides
the present King cannot be supposed to suffer any thing in his Prerogative, who
(though in another Capacity) did in effect send out such Writs; and since he
took the Crown, has allowed the Election upon his own Summons for a
Convention, to serve in order to their being a Parliament, what can be thought
wanting to the making them a Parliament? The People have their Privilege, and
the King his Prerogative: and while we have the Substance, it is vain to
complain of the want of a mere Formality, impossible to be had, to the
Unsettlement of a whole Kingdom.

Secondly, The Definition of a Parliament agrees well enough with our present
Parliament, as we have it in 1 K. James the first.

A Parliament is, where all the whole Body of the Realm, and every particular
Member thereof, either in Person, or by Representation (upon their own free
Elections) are, by the Laws of this Realm, deemed to be personally present.
Wherein we have two Propositions:

1st. That every particular Subject, either in Person (in the House of Peers)
or by Representation in the House of Commons, are, by the Laws of this Realm,
deemed personally present in Parliament.

2dly. That where the whole of the Realm are thus, either in Person as Peers,
or by their Representatives, upon their own free Elections present, there is a
Parliament.

1. So that the Essence of a Parliament seems to consist in two things, with
respect to the two Houses: The Presence of the Peers in their own Right; and of
the Representatives of the People by Virtue of their Election, and to be
entire, without the Consideration of any previous Writs from the King.

2. Indeed we cannot well conceive that a Parliament properly so, can be so
without a King in being, not for want of Writs to summon, but for want of an
occasion, and reason of their being, if the King be the Person with whom they
are to parley, and caput Principium, and finis Parliament: But seeing the Peers
of the Realm, and the Representatives of the Commons, upon their own free
Elections* are assembled, and the King in being, allows, approves, and ratifies
their Assembly to be a Parliament by his subsequent Assent, as King, to that
manner of Summons, which he, before he was actually King, invited them to; and
advises with them, and makes use of them as his Parliament; It is plain to me,
that they have the entire Substance of a lawful Parliament; and that the King's
Writs in such a case are but a separable Accident; and that we should look upon
our selves, and the whole Body of the People, as present there, and acting or
consenting to all the Laws made by the King and them.

3. And lastly, we are not without a plain and direct Precedent in the case
upon King Charles the second's happy Restoration (as every one observes) which
is, in terminis, made the pattern by this King and Parliament in the late Act,
declaring themselves to be a Parliament, though it wanted the previous Writs of
Summons, which could not be had.

And though 23 of the Statutes made by that Parliament were afterward
confirmed, 13 Car. 2. c. 7. yet the rest of the Acts made by them have been
taken to be of as much force by the Judges, though not so confirmed: And this
of the 12 Car. 2. 1. is one of them; as all other Laws, made by our Kings,
whose Titles have been afterward questioned, (with the Peoples Concurrence)
have been ever held valid.

Thus we have the Public Judgment of two Kings, and of the Body of the whole
Kingdom in two Parliaments, that such Writs of Summons beforehand, are not
necessary in all Cases, and in particular in our Case, to the Constitution of a
true and Legal Parliament: And who have most reason to understand, and to judge,
and determine such public and high Points, concerning the Nature of
Parliaments, the King and Kingdom assembled together, or Men of a single and
private Capacity? How far our Consent and Sense is concerned in the
Determination of those we have chosen, and in some sort trusted with our
politic Interest; and in whom the Law lately mentioned, says, We are deemed
to be present; I urge not, but it may be worthy to be considered.

The Words of the Parliament, being about to declare the Right of Richard the
3d. are these, and I think them very pertinent; The Parliament is of such
Authority, and the People of this Land of such a Nature and Disposition, as
Experience teaches; that Manifestation or Declaration of any Truth, made by
the three Estates of this Realm assembled in Parliament, and by Authority of
the same, makes before all other things, most faithful and certain quieting of
Men's Minds, and removes the Occasion of Doubts and seditious Language. Which
God grant.

CHAP. VIII. Arguing from the Possession of the Crown.
I Have now finished the greatest part of my Undertaking; and how I have
vindicated the late Revolution, and reconciled our present State to our ancient
Constitution, as an Hereditary Monarchy, and admitting no Interregnum, my
Reader will be my Judge. As also of what I have said touching Abdication and
Vacancy in the Throne; of the Convention, and their just and regular
Proceedings, in their Invitation of King William and Queen Mary, to take upon
them the Government of these Kingdoms; and lastly, of the Legality of the
present Parliament; and thereby obviated or answered the Objections made
against the present Government. From any, or all of these, as I intended, I
submit to his serious Consideration and candid Censure.

2. But if all that I have hitherto said, fail of my end, in giving full
satisfaction to such as scruple the taking the new Oaths of Allegiance, to all
the Arguments that have been so well enlarged upon by others, I shall only
resume that, that has been often insisted on, taken from the Possession of the
present King and Queen, with the easy and just consequence of it.

If the Body of the Kingdom, as represented by the Lords and Commons duly
chosen, or scattered over the Kingdom by their open, uninterrupted, and general
Recognitions and Proclamations, and their Coronations, with all the Methods and
Formalities of Law can give, or can own and approve the Possession of the
Throne, and declare and manifest William and Mary, King and Queen (as no body
can doubt) they are certainly, and must be acknowledged to be our King and
Queen de facto.

Now hence it follows.

1. Then we owe them Obedience due by Law, for then we are their Subjects: And
we cannot conceive of Sovereignty without Authority, nor of Subjection without
Obedience. This the Statute of Hen. 7. plainly supposes due to the King in
being; and consequently, that such an one is not a King in Name only, but in
Dignity and Power. And the Subject may obey him, fight for him, and
consequently take the military Oath, an Oath to be faithful in that highest Act
of his Service; and does assoil him from any Crime in so doing, in Reason, Law
and Conscience.

2. Hereupon the learned Lord Coke, and Judge Hales affirm without Hesitancy,
That a King de facto, and not de jure, is within the great and ancient Statute
of Treason, 25 Edw. 3.

3. Now if we enquire why Treason may, according to Law, be committed against a
King de facto? the Reason is obvious, namely, because the Law looks upon him as
really our King. As Treason, they say, cannot be committed against a King by
Right only, and has not Possession, which must be upon the like Reason,
because the Law does not regard one out of Possession, and cannot protect us,
or administer Justice to us as King of England.

4. Hence it seems to follow, first, If the Subject may be guilty of Treason
against the King in being, it implies he owes the Duty that is contrary to
Treason, to the same King; and what is that but Fealty or Fidelity? that is, a
Principle against Treason, a faithful and loyal Mind, keeping Treason out of
its Seat, which we know is not so much in our Actions as in the Mind and
Imagination. 2dly. If Treason cannot be committed against the King that is out
of Possession, as he is not King according to Law; so we cannot be thought to
owe him our Allegiance, that is, Obedience according to Law, for he is not King
so as to rule or command us, and then there is wanting the very Reason of Duty,
or of Fidelity to that Duty.

5. It may not be unworthy our observation, That if any one yet can be so weak
or blind, as to imagine, that since the late King's Abdication, the Crown is in
Abatement, and the Right lies somewhere else; even in that case, they say, the
Common Law favors the Abator, and looks upon his Title to be good, until the
Right of the Heir be proved, and the Matter of the Title be decided by Law, and
consequently all Duties, in the mean time, are to be paid by the Tenants to the
Abator, as if he had Right as well as Possession. I need not apply it.

6. However there is nothing in the Law of the Land, or the Word of God, that
necessitates the Subject to trouble his Conscience with Scruples about the
Titles of Princes, or beyond the actual Possession and Administration of the
Government.

1. For the Word of God, that supposes Christians to be under the present
Powers; and strictly enjoins them peaceable and unscrupled Submission and
Obedience to the Powers that are: but this Argument has been sufficiently
enforced by others, even to Demonstration.

2. For the Law of the Land; this justifies our Obedience to the present Power,
yea requires it, and punishes the contrary; and will not endure any Scruples
about the Right, when the Possession of the Crown is once settled; and
terminates all Doubts of that kind in an Act of Parliament, which is the
public Judgment and Sense of the Nation.

'Twas said by the Parliament of Richard the 3d, after they had cleared his
Title, as grounded upon the ancient Laws and Dr. Brad. p. 390.
laudable Customs of the Realm, according to the Judgment of all such Persons
as were learned in those Laws and Customs; they proceed and say, Yet
nevertheless, forasmuch as it is considered, that the most part of the People
is not sufficiently learned in the aforesaid Laws and Customs, whereby Truth
and Right in this behalf, of likelihood may be had, and not clearly known to
all People, and thereupon put in doubt and question; and over this, how that
the Court of Parliament is of such Authority, that a Declaration made by the
three Estates, and by the Authority of the same, makes before all other things
most faithful and certain quieting of Men's Minds, and removes the occasion of
Doubts and seditious Language; therefore they declare that he was the undoubted
King.

Whence it is evident, that the Reason of this Law supposes that the Subjects
in general are not capable of understanding the Laws and Customs upon which the
Titles of our Kings depend: and that the best Satisfaction that the Generality
of the People can possibly have in those high Matters, is the Sense, and
Judgment, and Determination of the Kingdom, by Act and Authority of Parliament,
wherein they should acquiesce for the preventing Sedition, so much as in
Language.

But to be short here, the Law allows a King de facto the Name, and Dignity,
and Authority, and Defense of a King; And does it not require our Duty
according to Law? Was It ever known, the King being acknowledged to have the
actual Government, that the Subject was excused from Allegiance, or an Oath of
Fidelity, as occasion required it? Yea, If Obedience according to Law, be
acknowledged due to the present Government, as it now it seems is generally
granted, is not the Oath of Allegiance at this time required by Law, as well as
by the Relation of Subjects, and so made a plain part of our Obedience
according to Law?

Yet if the King in Possession be really our King, do not our own Laws return
upon us, requiring Loyalty and Fealty, forbidding Sedition, and Scandalum
Magnatum, and all Endeavors to alter the Government? that is, at least by our
peaceable and dutiful Carriage to acquiesce in the Work of Divine Providence,
in our late Revolution, and the Acknowledgment of our Subjection due to William
and Mary, who, as we have heard by the Laws of the Land heretofore made, are
our undoubted King and Queen, because in possession of the Government; their
Right also is unquestionable by private Subjects, being a Point determined
according to the ancient Laws and laudable Customs of this Realm; and their
Right as well as Possession openly declared by the highest Authority of the
Kingdom, in Acts of the present Parliament.

Object. But some are apt to say, This is to prove that the Sun shines; who
denies that the present King and Queen are such de facto, or that we ought to
obey them?

Sol. 1. This is so far well. But do we obey them without reserve for the late
King? Do we acknowledge that the Laws of the Land oblige us to give them our
Obedience? Or do we mean only, that they have the Name of Sovereigns, and a
Power in their Hands to defend themselves against, and to punish Disturbers of
their Possession? If it be so, we do not take right Measures of their
Authority, or of our own Duty according to Law.

2. For they are really King and Queen, by being in Possession, and invested by
the Laws with Regal Authority as well as Power; otherwise they could not be
within the purview of the Statute of Treason.

3. Consequently all their Actions that are politic, and for the matter
agreeable to Law, are as valid, and of as good Authority as the Acts of the most
rightful Kings.

They have Authority, and do effectually execute, and make Laws, while they are
in Possession, as they do protect us; so they administer Justice, dispose of
Offices, coin Money, make Peace and War, punish all kind of Offenses, as well
against the Subjects as the Government.

4. And such Acts of a King de facto only, without Right, as concern, and have
Influence upon the Kingdom, have ever been allowed and reputed good and valid,
though the Title to the Crown has been questioned and denied in after-Ages, as
we noted before.

5. That very Parliament that condemned the Usurpations of Vid. Dr. Brady, p.
386.
Hen. 4, 5, 6. and all Acts that had entailed the Crown, contrary to the course
of Inheritance, yet add these remarkable Words; Howbeit that all other Acts and
Ordinances made in the said Parliament since, been good and sufficient against
all other Persons.

I would infer hence, that Obedience is due to the present King, etc. in his
Authority, by Law acknowledged, as well as Power; and therefore not only for
Wrath, but for Conscience sake; Conscience, I say, not of their Title, but of
their Authority, and our own plain Duty (at least for Conscience sake, with
respect to the public Good) to take the Oath of Allegiance, which is part of
our Obedience, it being required by Law, and therefore our Duty.

Obj. Your arguing seems to persuade us only to Obedience, which we do not much
scruple, in the sense you explicate it. The Swearing to bear true Allegiance,
is that which troubles us, not knowing well the intended sense or meaning of it.

Sol. The Government has given us reasonable Satisfaction in this Particular,
though not so clear as may be wished; the very Title of the Oath, even in this
new Law, is the Oath of Allegiance or Obedience: Now if Allegiance in the sense
of the Law, as explained by the Lawmakers, be nothing but Obedience; and
Obedience in England, is to be measured by the Laws; what can Allegiance import
more than Obedience according to Law? which you say you are willing to yield;
and why now should you refuse to add this Sign and Security of such your
Obedience, by taking your Oath to do so?

2. Moreover, you find the Government insists not upon the Word Allegiance, nor
intends any strange or obscure Obligation upon us by it; for in the
Declaration, they require of Quakers, who refuse to swear, they express [Faith
and Allegiance] by those plainer Words; I will be true and faithful to King
William and Queen Mary.

3. And as one lately has very well observed, the Parliament have avoided all
occasion of Offense in wording this Oath that might consist with the Security
of the Government; for by omittting the assertory part of the former, it is
evident they do not require us by this Oath to assert the Title, but to secure
the Possession and Peace of the Crown, in King William and Queen Mary, by our
Obedience according to Law.

Indeed we may perceive in the whole Proceeding of our late wonderful
Revolution, so much Sweetness, Tenderness, and Condescension to the Prejudices
that the former state of things might leave in us, (both with respect to our
late King, and our own Obligations) as if the Government had industriously
studied to avoid all occasion of Offense, as much as the nature of the Change
suffered to be possible.

I have, I think, noted before, that the Convention did not depose the late
King; did not declare the Crown forfeited; did not require him to make a
Resignation of it: and tho they justly charge him with many intolerable
Grievances; yet they did not call the King to an Account for them. Nay, they
did not so much as declare that the King is accountable; so that the Minds of
such as boast of excessive Loyalty, have ease as to all these things, that bear
so hard a Contradiction to their Principles; and as for our selves, we have
noted some Kindness and Condescension with respect to the Oath required;
thereby it it is neither required, that we should abjure the Title of the late
King, nor assert the Title of the present. God forbid, therefore, that there
should be left any Prejudice in us from the hard Proceeding of the Government
in either kind: if it should, it is plainly as false in its ground, as it is
like to be evil in its Consequence, especially if we stiffen our Disloyalty
with the Continuance of a scandalous Impeachment of our Rulers and Legislators,
for Severity intended against the Church; and a designed Alteration or Change
of the ancient Constitution of this Hereditary Monarchy: the one I hope is as
true as the other.

Obj. The Statute of Hen. 7. so much depended on, was made by a King that had
no Title to the Crown himself.

Answ. What then? Does it follow that the Statute is not of force? Upon that
ground we must blot out a great part of our Statute-Book, which is full of Laws
made by such Kings; and the best of our Laws have no force, if the Observation
has any truth, that the worst Kings made the best Laws.

Object. But it is a Law mischievous to the Right of our Kings.

Answ. It is much this Mischief has not been discovered by our former Kings or
Parliaments; that so mischievous a Law should continue through so long a tract
of time unrepealed: it is confessed, it may be inconvenient, and prejudice the
Interest of a King de jure; but we ought in reason to set this against it, that
it is a Law at all times convenient, and serving the Ease, Quiet and Safety of
the Kingdom, for whose sake Kings themselves are: it is hereupon that the Lord
Bacon tells us, that the Spirit of this Law was wonderfully pious and noble:
upon this ground, as one says well, because they who had no hand in the Sin,
should bear no share in the Punishment.

And the Lord Bacon adds, That this wanted not Prudence and deep Foresight; for
it did the better take away occasion for the People to busy themselves to pry
into the King's Titles; for that however it fell, their Safety was already
provided for. And as the late Author, that cites my Lord Bacon for these Words,
adds very well, The meanest Capacity will not be wanting for a Rule of that
Subjection, which every Soul owes to the higher Powers: but if the Subject
ought first to satisfy himself, touching the Right of his Prince (especially in
such a time of contest as there was many Years betwixt York and Lancaster)
certainly every Soul could hardly be so well satisfied, as to be subject for
Conscience sake.

CHAP. VIII. Whether a King can make Laws, limiting the Crown.
Obj. THough it be acknowledged that a King de facto has Power to make other
Laws, viz. Laws for Peace and Justice, yet it is a Doubt whether a King that
has no right to the Crown, can make Laws for limiting the Succession of the
Crown, as is now to be done.

Answ. It is confessed, that when it was pleaded against the Title and Claim of
the Duke of York, that there were diverse Entails made to the Heirs Males of
Hen. 4. It was answered, There had been none made by any Parliament heretofore
as it is surmised, but only in the seventh Year of K. Henry the Fourth. -- But
that Act takes no place against him that is right Inheritor, etc. Howbeit all
other Acts made in the said Parliament since, have been and are sufficient
against all other Persons. Upon this Law, the foresaid Distinction seems
grounded; but I think very weakly for these Reasons:

1. Because this very Law mentions Henry the Fourth, with the Addition and
Title of King, without any Diminution, as appears in the Words cited.

2. The ground upon which that Entail was declared Null, was not a want of
Power in King and Parliament, to make a Law about the Succession; but as they
declare, in the Dukes first Answer, That no Oath, being the Law of Man, ought
to be performed, when the same is against the Truth, and the Law of God:
implying, as afterward they speak out, it was a Law, though of Man, it fails
not for want of Authority, being made by a King de facto with his Parliament;
but the reason why it could not oblige, was taken from the matter of it, it
diverted the Descent and Succession of the Crown, according to Right of
Inheritance.

3. The Argument that a King de facto has no Power to make Laws to limit the
Crown, because he is supposed to have no Right to the Crown himself: I say,
this seems not cogent. It Is true, it is supposed he had no Right at first, and
his Usurpation cannot be thought to create any just Title to the Crown, yet
when he has it, has not he Right, or rather Authority in Law, by his
Possession, to use it? that is, to make Laws. If not, then all the Laws he
makes, even those for Peace and Justice, are void, for want of Authority, which
this very Law against the Entail of Hen. 4. denies.

I grant, all positive Laws made by a rightful King, or by an Usurper, are
equally voidable, i. e. repealable. But if we speak of such Laws as are void of
themselves, it seems to me, they must be so, one of these two ways; Either for
want of due Authority to make Laws; Or, with respect to something in the Matter
of such Laws as is destructive of them.

For the first way, it is granted me, that a King de fact only, has Authority
enough to make Laws generally speaking: if his Laws therefore be not of force
to limit the Succession, it is for another reason mentioned before, taken from
that special Matter of the Right of Inheritance, which, it is thought, cannot
be infringed by any Law of Man.

Hence it is still a doubt with me, whether a King de facto has not an equal
Power with the most rightful King to make any Law, even touching the Crown, as
any thing else.

Suppose a King de facto, after some Contests about the Succession, settle the
Crown as it ought to go, Is not such a Law a good Law? Wherein can it fail?
neither in Matter nor As Hen. 8. did.
Authority. Again, the most rightful King, in and by his Law, limits the Crown,
as it ought not to be; Is that Law a good Law? No Power can make a Law that is
malam in se, to be bonam.

I confess, I see no difference in the Legislative Power of a King regnant,
whether with or without Right; especially, seeing the Parliament, which is the
Body of the Kingdom, choose the Matter, and give Authority to the Laws, as well
as the King.

But this Nicety need not trouble us under their present Majesty's, whose Title
to the Crown, I hope, is unquestionable as well as their Possession of it.
Besides, there is no room for this Objection among all our Scruples about the
Oath of Allegiance; for, in our private Capacity, we are not to answer for
Errors in Government. If the Succession can be supposed to be limited in any
Point amiss, how can we help it? What Is that to our Duty? how are we concerned?
The Law does not require us to assert or swear to the Act of settling the Crown
for the future, it requires only our Obedience to our present gracious King and
Queen; and we do our Duty, if we look no further.

CHAP. IX. The Honor of the Church of England, no just Objection against our
taking the new Oath.
Obj. I Have heard it offered by some, that tho it be lawful to submit to the
present Government, and to take the new Oath of Allegiance, yet by our doing
it, the Church of England suffers in her Honor, and her distinguishing
Character of Loyalty.

Sol. I have some Reason to hope, that with several Persons, not perfectly
reconciled or satisfied, this is the last Objection that remains unanswered. I
shall therefore briefly, with all the Strength I have at present, set my self
to remove it, and so conclude.

1. I confess, Loyalty has been reckoned the Character of the Church of
England, and in a great measure, very deservedly: but if we mean such Loyalty
as does distinguish her from all other Churches of Christians in the World, it
may be an Argument of Singularity, and Reflection upon all other Protestant
Churches, (as well as Popish) Principles and Practices, as some lately have
made manifest demonstration. And how honorable or laudable that is, I
determine not, but it may be considered.

2. I perceive the Movers of this Objection do not say, that it is unlawful to
take the new Oath: and indeed, that is granted in the nature of the Objection;
for if the Oath be refused only, because it is dishonorable to take it, it is
supposed to be in it self lawful, tho not expedient: And indeed, the Argument
would have force enough, if there were not some heavier Thing than Honor to be
put into the other Scale.

3. And thus the present Argument is not directly Matter of Conscience, but of
Prudence: For the Matter in genere, and in its first Consideration, is granted
to be indifferent; and it is to be determined to be good or evil by the Addition
of something to it, in our special and secondary Consideration. Now here you
lay Honor and Reputation in the Scale, and this has its Weight; but if we put
Necessity against Honor and Reputation, the Weight of these is inconsiderable;
and what is the Consequence? Why, that which we thought was not to be done,
because it was dishonorable, we see it must be done, because it is necessary:
This is the Law of Prudence; and Expediency changes sides: that which was
expedient not to be done, for the sake of Reputation; it is now expedient it
should be done, when the Necessity of it appears with its greater Weight.

4. You already perceive how easily this applies it self to the Case in hand,
admitting something of Dishonor may in general, and prima facie, attend the
Action; for the very granting it to be an indifferent thing in it self, whether
I take this Oath or not, plainly determines the Case, and puts an end to the
Controversy.

5. For I boldly and peremptorily pronounce, that if it be indifferent, it has
such Additions and Circumstances, as cannot but make it an indispensible Duty,
Rebus sic stantibus; from the Argument or Ground of Necessity, viz. both
Precepti and Medii.

6. First, There is a necessity of the Precept or Law that Necessitas Pracepti.
makes it to be our Duty to take this Oath, which is but the Security of our
Allegiance; it is required by the Nature of our Constitution, and immemorial
Custom, which is our Common Law; it is required from the Paction betwixt Prince
and People, to secure each other by their respective Oaths; it is required by
virtue of the Statute of Hen. 7. whereby we are to acknowledge the King regnant,
to whom alone we owe Allegiance, and must secure it. And lastly, It Is expressly
required in the Laws of our own making by our Representatives in the present
Parliament; in and by which Parliament the King and Queen have equally sworn
and plighted their Troth to us. Whence Protection and Allegiance are both the
natural and legal Results of the Relation betwixt King and Subject, which very
Titles do after a sort import so much.

7. Nor is the taking this Oath necessary only by the Law of Nature, and by the
Common Law of the Land, and Acts of Parliament, but by the Law of God. If we
should grant it to be perfectly indifferent without it, yet we must grant, that
if it be determined by the Word of God, it thereby becomes necessary. Now I
should think, that to obey the Powers in Being, is as clearly commanded by the
Law of God in the Holy Scriptures, as by any other Law whatsoever: And that we
cannot, or do not obey the Powers in being, if we refuse to take the Oath;
which, we say, is in it self indifferent, when expressly required by the Laws of
the Land.

8. I think it is the Sense, not only of the Church of England, but of all good
Christians, that the Word of God makes it our Duty to obey the Government in
all indifferent things made necessary by our own Laws: And that we are bound to
such Obedience, not only for Wrath, but Conscience sake: Conscience toward
God, his Ordinance, and Command: let us not misjudg it for our Honor or
Reputation, to change our boasted Loyalty into Disobedience, which is scarce to
be avoided without obeying the Laws of God and Man, and taking the Oath.

Secondly, But were there no other Law requiring us to take this Oath, Does not
the necessity of it, as it is a Means, make it Necessitas Medii.
our Duty? What if Reputation weigh something with us, does not the Danger of
the Public, continued by our Stiffness, weigh more? Do we talk of Honor, when
the Commonwealth lies at stake? Is it comely for a Soldier to be playing with
a Feather in his Cap, when Hannibal is at the Gates?

1. Pardon me, if Zeal has eaten me up, and I cannot contain: O Jerusalem, for
my Brethren and Companions Sakes, I will now say, Peace be within thee, yea,
because of the House of the Lord our God I will seek to do thee good.

2. Who considers how much is owing to niceness and strangeness to the
Government, for the Hazards and Blood of Ireland and Scotland already? Who
weighs the further Consequences of it both at home and abroad? Where is our
Compassion to our Protestant Brethren, our Concern for the Reformation, our
Charity to the Kingdom, our Justice to our Protectors, our Kindness to our
Friend, our Gratitude to our Deliverer from Popery and Tyranny? These are
substantial and weighty Things; And what are the Colors of a pretended
Reputation in comparison of these?

3. What do we mean, upon a point of Honor to throw a Glove to the Government?
Is it reasonable or fit for us to provoke the King to a quarrel, who has so
many Enemies already, and must stake three Kingdoms to our little Reputation?
Yea the Interest of the Protestant World too, of which he is made the Protector?

4. Is it not Satisfaction enough for you, that you have played the Men, and
stood it out as long as there was the least hopes of serving the Interest of
the late King, and so long vindicated your Loyalty to him? Is is not now become
morally impossible he should ever return but by the Assistance of the French
King? that is, without inslaving us openly to the Antichristian Powers (of
which he is the Head) under a haughty, cruel, and most barbarous Conqueror.

5. Besides, how unaccountable are Principles, that engage a Man against his
own, as well as the public Interest? as if a Man were bound to oppose and
fight with himself and all about him: certainly this is a miserable strait, and
such as one cannot imagine the wise and good Providence of God should bring us
into.

6. By disobeying the Law, and our Distance with the Government, we continue a
Breach, at which a common Destruction may enter; then we know we are lost in
the common Calamity. If God in Mercy prevent that, and preserve us with wonder,
against our own Averseness, as he has done, then there is yet a Breach betwixt
the Government and us: If we do not destroy the Public and our selves that
way, yet we may destroy our selves, when we might help it.

A man may be Felo de se, by destroying himself by our Dr. Done.
Law; and Fur de se, by depriving and stealing himself from him, to whom his
Service is due, by the Imperial Law; and Proditor de se, by the Law of Nature,
if he descend from the Dignity of Humanity, and submit to the danger which he
might avoid. I speak as to wise Men; judge ye what I say.

7. It Is a plain thing I am about to speak, which, if duly pondered, must needs
put an end to the whole Controversy; at least I think so; It Is this;

None can be ignorant that the late King has put himself into that condition,
that the French King is now actually endeavoring to serve himself of him, for
the Conquest of these Kingdoms; he has put himself absolutely into the
Monsieurs Power; he truckles under him in the Irish Commissions; he has either
sold his Dominions to that King, or so delivered up his Interest in them to his
Management, that it is a piece of Madness to imagine but that the French will
reap the Advantage of any Success God may suffer to be obtained against us.
Perhaps we may think the poor King James was forced to it; but I know you will
say, you had no hand in that force, and you could not help it; and is not the
thing de facto so? Is it any thing to you by what means, or upon what Motives
this came to pass? but it being certainly so, you cannot now think but that,
seeing the State of things is such, your Allegiance to King James is ceased;
unless you owe it also to the King of France, which God forbid; for while you
continue to discountenance the Government, you cannot do more to further the
Designs and Methods of our Ruin.

8. The Apostle makes Expediency the Rule of our Practice, in things
indifferent; so that some things are to be done, or not to be done, because
expedient, or not expedient; upon which this Objection is urged. Now if it be
indifferent in it self to take or refuse the Oath, I hope what has been said
is enought to satisfy us where the Expediency lies. All things are not
expedient; Why? Because all things edify not; much more if they ruin and
destroy. It is something, Non promovent publicum Ecclefiae bonum, if they do
not promote the public Good of the Church; much more si magis destruant, if
they tend to its Destruction, as Authors gloss upon the Text.

9. One would think this Consideration might fully convince us that our
Obligation to the present King, etc. is widely different from that which lay
upon the People during Oliver's Usurpation; Oliver's Vsarpation answers not our
Case.
they had reason to refuse, or at least to suspend the Recognition of a Tyrant,
whose Government was Arbitrary, and was never owned by the People in a Free
Parliament; who never took upon him the name of King, the proper Title of our
Sovereign in all our Laws; under whose Violence and great Oppression the
Kingdom in general groaned for Deliverance in the return of their rightful
King; and might laudably hazard their Lives and Estates, if there was any
hopes; the Accomplishment whereof by the wonderful Providence in its due time
was happily effected in the Restoration of King Charles the second.

But what is our case now? is it not quite contrary? We do acknowledge we are
now rescued even from Destruction as well as Oppression, And what can we look
for upon a new Change but a Scene of Blood, the Loss of all our Civil and
Ecclesiastical Liberties, under French and Popish Slavery? What can we hope
for, if the Lion bereft of his Whelps, thirsting after Revenge, be let loose
upon us? Will not his Rod that smarted before, be turned into a Scorpion, and
the latter end of his Tyranny be worse than the beginning?

10. Blessed be God, there is an unclean Spirit ejected, and our House is swept
and garnished; Is his Return to be courted, or indeed to be hazarded? If he
should re-enter, will he not pester us with more and worse Devils if possible;
when in vain and too late, perhaps we may wish we had never encouraged or
occasioned our renewed and aggravated Misery. It highly concerns us to do what
we can to prevent it; and I see no other way left us to show our Apprehension
of the danger, but by comforting the King who, under God, has dispossessed us;
and who only, under Heaven, is the visible Instrument of our Preservation from
that last Estate (to use our Savior's Words) that will be worse than the
first; which I hope we are yet sensible was bad enough; and how we can do this,
without assuring him of our grateful and cheerful Allegiance and Fidelity, by
taking the Oath, I cannot see, at least I doubt not but enough has been said
to demonstrate the Inexpediency of our continuing to refuse it, and
consequently upon that Argument; a Necessity of taking it; notwithstanding the
Objection of the Reputation of the Church of England for her singular Loyalty.

11. To conclude; I need not mind you, since the three Estates in Parliament,
with the Generality both of the Gentry and Clergy throughout the Kingdom, have
left you (perhaps three or four in a County, take one County with another) that
yet stand out; I say, I need not mind these very few in comparison, how fitly
they took to themselves the Name of the Church of England* or how likely a
thing it is for them, by scrupling the Oath, to preserve her Reputation of
Loyalty in their own sense. Let the time past suffice, that they have
endeavored it so long as there was any hopes to do it; but now if the case be
plainly desperate, it is time for them, upon all the Arguments, so many worthy
Men as have labored in Print for their Satisfaction, to cry Quarter, and to
yield to the prevailing Power; I mean to come in and submit, and give the
required Security thereof, by taking the Oath of Allegiance to King WILLIAM and
Queen MARY, whom God long preserve and prosper.

AN APPENDIX.
The Objection from the Word Allegiance considered.
AFter I had put an end to my former Discourse, I heard of the following
Objection.

Object. It is said, that Allegiance being the Word in the new, as well as in
the Old Oath; it seems, it ought to be understood in the same Latitude and
Sense in both: Then how can we safely swear Allegiance to the present King and
Queen in the same sense, in which we have sworn Allegiance to the former King,
while the former King is alive?

Answ. I hear this is the Scruple of some ingenuous Persons; for whose sake I
shall accommodate my Answer to their own Principles, as near as I can: first,
by showing, that those two Oaths, though both are called Oaths of Allegiance,
yet they are not of the same Latitude in the matter of them. Secondly, that
though in a great measure, they are admitted to have the same sense; and though
in that sense in which we have sworn Allegiance to the former King, we are
required to swear Allegiance to the present King and Queen, yet we safely and
honestly do it.

1. For the first. It is plain, that the former Oath, though it be called the
Oath of Allegiance, yet it has more in the matter of it, than can be imported
in the Word Allegiance; it has two manifest parts of a different Nature; the
first acknowledges the King's just Title to the Crown, as rightful King; and
is found in the form of an Assertory Oath.

The other is as plainly promissory; I will bear Faith and true Allegiance,
etc. Now though with respect to this promissory part of the old Oath, we should
grant, that by the new Oath we are to swear in the same words, and in the same
sense; yet it is more than evident, that these Words cannot be intended to
assert any thing about the Title of the Crown; and in all likelihood, the
Assertory part of the former Oath was left out on purpose in the new, to avoid
matter of Scruple or Offense.

Yet it is confessed that Argument suffers but little in its Strength, if both
these Oaths agree, or are the same in any substantial matter, while Men doubt
that the former Oath does oblige them to bear Allegiance to King James, in the
same sense in which we are required to take the new one. It behooves me
therefore now to prove the second thing proposed, viz. That though Allegiance
have the same sense and meaning in both, and we have before sworn it to King
James in that sense, yet we may safely and honestly swear to bear Faith and
true Allegiance to King William and Queen Mary.

Object. The Objection, in short is this, If Allegiance sworn to King James be
due to him by virtue of our Oath, it cannot be due to King William and Queen
Mary in the same sense it is due to King James.

Answ. The Answer is as short; for if Allegiance be due to King William and
Queen Mary, in the same sense that we swore to King James; then it is not due to
King James, tho we so swore: For our former Oath cannot oblige us to King
James, to the injury of King William and Queen Mary, it would then be a Bond of
Iniquity.

We see the Objection and Answer stand both upon the same ground, namely, That
Obedience or Allegiance cannot be due to two Kings in the same sense at once.
Therefore if I prove that Allegiance is due to the present King and Queen, it
must be yielded, that our former Oath to King James cannot oblige us to pay
such Allegiance to him.

My Argument is this; Allegiance is due to the Supreme Power in being,
therefore it cannot be due in the same sense to any other; because the same
Allegiance cannot be due to two Kings at once: but King William, etc. are the
Supreme Power in Being.

To this, what can be replied, but either, that King William and Queen Mary are
not the Supreme Power in Being, against all sense; or, that Allegiance is not
due to the Supreme Power in being, against all kind of Law, as I shall show
presently.

Object. But may it not be supposed, that there may be a King de jure, that is
not so de facto? And is there no Allegiance due to such a King, especially if
we have sworn it to him?

Answ. But was he not King de facto, as well as de jure, when we swore
Allegiance to him? Was that Oath ever taken, but to the King, and under that
very consideration, as actually our King? We suppose a King de jure, but what is
that? He has Right to be King: And does not that very thing prove that he is
not King, as he has Right to be? And consequently he has Right to our
Allegiance no otherwise, but as he has Right to be King, and dependently upon
it? that is, remotely, and upon the supposition, that he obtain his Right, and
be actually King again, as he was when we first swear Allegiance to him.

Here the Rule seems to have place; [ Rebus sic stantibus] we owe Allegiance to
the King while he is actually so: if he ceases to be so, we do not owe him that
Allegiance that is due to a King in Possession: if he have a Right to be King,
we do not therefore owe him actual Obedience, until he recover and enjoy, or
have that Right indeed, upon which depends our Obebedience. Our Oath at first
included that known Condition, Si res in eodem statu permanserint.

Object. But we have sworn to King James, and who can absolve us? or how can
our Obligation to him cease, or be dissolved?

Answ. The strict Question here, is not, whether that Obligation be suspended
only, or wholly taken off? that is, Whether there remains no Obligation upon us
to King James? but whether the Obligation be such as prevents or hinders our
lawful swearing Allegiance to the Powers in being? There is a Duty owing to the
present Government, which must be first allowed; and then the supposed
Obligation to the late King, what ever it be, must be such as may consist with
that Duty.

I need not here mention how many Ways our Allegiance to the late King is
ceased; From the removal of the Object, he ceasing to be King; From the Rule of
all Allegiance, the present Laws; the Reason and End of Government, or the
like. It Is enough to my present purpose to prove that Allegiance is due, and
consequently we may lawfully take the new Oath to our present King and Queen.
And therefore no consideration of any former Oath should make us deny or delay
the performance of our Duty to them.

This is the Point I am come to prove, which seems to me very easy to be done,
From the Law of Nature; the Law of holy Scripture; and the Laws of the Land.

First, Obedience to our Parents, civil as well as natural, is a 1. Nature.
Law of Nature. Our actual Governors are our nursing Fathers and nursing
Mothers: this is of moral and eternal Reason; and the Obligation thence upon
us, is antecedent to any Obligation, that we can be supposed to contract by our
Oath to any particular Person contrary thereunto; which, as our Law says, is
but of human Provision.

Our Law Books ground our Allegiance upon the same Reason; Protectio trahit
Subjectionem: Allegiance is founded in Protection Calv. Case.
upon moral Arguments of Justice and Gratitude. And the By Sanderson.
Casuist affirms, Allegiance is intrinsecal, and so essential a Duty, and as it
were, fundamental to the Relation of a Subject, ( qua talis) as that the very
Name of a Subject does after a sort import it. The Consequence is, that
Allegiance is not due to one, that has not Possession, and therefore has not
power to protect us, whatsoever his Right may be; but it is due to the present
King, etc. that does in fact protect us without any Consideration of his Right
to the Crown.

2. Allegiance (faith the Bishop again) is a Duty that every Case of Engag. p.
109
Subject, by the Law of Nature, owes to his Country, and consequently to the
supreme Power thereof; that is, to his Country as the End, to the King as the
Means of that End.

Now the End being more noble than the Means, for which the Means has both its
Use and very Being, as such; if that which is ordained to be a means of
Preservation of our Country, change its Nature and proper Intention, and
becomes a Means and Instrument of its Destruction, we cannot, in the Reason
Lect. 5. de leg. S. 19.
of things, be bound any longer to use it. For, as he says in another place,
Whatsoever is done for any End, is so far to be done, as it does seem necessary
and profitable for that End.

Now it is not denied, but that the Government in the hands of King James was
used, not for the Preservation of our Country, but its Destruction; and
contrary to the Ends of all Government: Yea, such as pretend some Allegiance
yet due to him, do they not rather fear than hope for his Return to the
Government? which, in all moral Assurance, they know would be more pernicious
to us than it was before he left us.

Besides, we are now under Powers that do actually and happily serve the Ends
of Government. We must hence conclude, that by virtue of our Allegiance due to
our Country, which is of first and greater Consideration, our Allegiance to our
late King, as contrary, or inconsistent therewith, is dissolved, and become due
to the present Government.

3. Further; By the Law of Nature, Salus Populi is both the supreme and the
first Law in Government, and the Scope and End of all other Laws, and of
Government it self. Now how this can be preserved by our Allegiance to any
other but the Government in being, is, I think, unintelligible.

Perhaps some are yet to learn, what that means, I will have Mercy and not
Sacrifice: What Sacrifice? Why, God's own Service: What Mercy? Why, to save
Life; either of an Ox fallen into a Ditch, or a sick Man. Now what was that
Service of God that must yield to that Mercy to Man and Beast? Was it the
Observation of the Sabbath? And what was that but, as it were, an Oath of
Allegiance to God? It is, says Exodus 31. 13.
God, a Sign between me and you; yet this Oath binds not, this Testimony is
invalid, this Service is no Duty, when it comes in competition with Charity or
Mercy to Man or Beast. The Reason is, There is a prior and eternal Obligation
to those moral Duties.

Is not then the Service of the King, though sworn in the Oath of Allegiance
(that Sign or Testimony between King and Subject) is not this discharged, or
dispensed with, when Salus Populi, the Preservation of three Kingdoms is
concerned and in danger; and the more by the Color of our pretended Allegiance?

I think there is much weight in the words of a late Author: I can be sure,
says he, of nothing, if I am out in this Notion, That no Oath can bind any
longer, than the Obligation thereof is consistent and reconcilable with Salus
Populi, the Welfare (the Spiritual and Temporal Welfare of the People) which is
the sole End of all Government.

And seeing the Safety and Preservation of the Community depends upon the
Promise of Allegiance to the supreme Governor for the time being; and the
Subjects are under a plain necessity, either to hazard or ruin the Public, or
to transfer their Allegiance; they may certainly do it lawfully; yea, are bound
to do it by the Law of Laws; Salus Populi suprema Lex.

Secondly, So much briefly for the Law of Nature. Now do not 2. Scripture.
the Holy Scriptures warrant the same? Do we find any, either in the old or new
Testament, that scrupled or were questioned for their Obedience to the Powers
in being? I think the present Reverend and Learned Dean of Sarum, Dr. Pearse,
has a Sermon in print, to prove Submission to Governments, a Fundamental of
the Christian Religion. I am sure our Savior, and more largely St. Paul,
require our Obedience to the Powers that are, without any Consideration of
their Title; merely, because of their Authority and Administrations; in which
the Apostle expressly founds the Duty of Subjection for Conscience sake. The
Arguments to this purpose, lately urged from Romans 13. by several worthy
Authors, I despair of ever seeing tolerably answered; to whom I refer my
Reader: only let us meditate those notable Counsels of God by the Prophet, Seek
the Peace of the City, (Babylon, where the People were Captives to their
Tyrannical Enemies) and pray unto the Lord for it; for in the Peace thereof, ye
shall have Peace. Jer. 29. 7.

Thirdly, Lastly, Is there not sufficient in our own Laws to 3. Our Laws,
justify our Allegiance to a King regnant, without our being satisfied touching
his Title? Have we not the Authority of former Ages? Is not our Statute-Book a
clear Testimony of it? In what time was it ever denied? Who was ever censured
or punished for granting it? Are not all such Kings who reigned without Right,
recorded as Kings of England, and their Laws as authentic and obligatory? Is
it not evident then, that Allegiance due to a King regnant (with right or with
none) is agreeable to the State and Principles of this Monarchy, and founded in
the Usage and Common Law of England?

But that which methinks should put the matter beyond Question, is the known
and often mentioned Stat. of 11 Hen. 7. 1. grounded, as it speaks the sense of
the Nation, upon Reason, Law, and good Conscience. And though the worthy Author
of Considerations and others, have with a great deal of strength, argued hence
to satisfy the Scruples of our Brethren, and it cannot be expected that I
should add any thing very considerable; yet I shall very briefly observe a few
things for our purpose from it.

1. It Is thereby acknowledged, that a King de facto has the Name and Style of
a King of England.

2. We are to recognize such a one as our Sovereign Lord.

3. That Allegiance is due to such a King from all his Subjects.

4. That by reason of the same Allegiance, they are bound to serve him, even in
his Wars.

5. That they are never hereafter to be questioned (tho the lawful King should
recover his Right) for so doing their true Duty and Service of Allegiance, as
the Words are.

6. That War made against such a King by his Subjects, is Rebellion. All these
things are plain in the Letter of that Law, which has continued unrepealed or
unquestioned for above two hundred Years; and consequently so long has been
the approved sense of the whole Nation, That Allegiance and true and faithful
Service is due to our sovereign Lord for the time being, whatever his Title be.

Hence it follows, that in the sense of the Law, a King de jure only, is not
King. The Statute says, the King for the time being; and seeing we can have
but one King, he that has only right to be King, is no King in being, or for
the time being. Hereupon I suppose the great Lawyers inform us, that the King
de jure only is not within the Purview of the Statute of Treason; is not, as
they say, Seignior le Roy.

Consequently, if Treason cannot be committed against a King de jure, while he
is out of Possession, Allegiance cannot be due to him: which is a Duty we owe
to the King as our Soveragin Lord; and none in the Eye of the Law is so, but
the King in Possession: thus the formal reason of the Oath of Allegiance to the
late King ceasing (if he be no King in Law, because out of Possession) the
Obligation of that Oath, with respect to him, cease also, besides much of the
matter of our former Oath is gone too, for we were sworn to bear true
Allegiance to him in revealing and preventing Treasons against him; and now he
is not an Object capable of Treason.

But they also tell us, Treason may be committed against a King regnant without
Right; and if so, it is thence evident that Allegiance is due to him: against
which Treason is directly contrary. Treason is an Offense against our natural
Allegiance; which appears from the form of Endictments; the words are, Contra
debitum Fidei and Ligeantiae suae, against the Duty of Faith and true
Allegiance; so near are they to the very Words in the Oath of Allegiance.

In a word, to apply it, Are not William and Mary now regnant and in full
Possession of the Government? To deny this, is to impose upon our Senses: Are
they not our Sovereigns also, to whom we owe Allegiance? This to question, is
against all kind of Law? May we be guilty of Treason against them? Then,
supposed Allegiance to their Enemy, seems to be a degree toward that Treason,
and to be a treasonable Principle, if brought into Act, it tends apparently to
the Death of the King and Queen; and how far the very Opinion is from
Imagination; and consequently from the Formality of Treason, should be soberly
considered, at least to abate our consure of the Government, that with some
Severity, requires our Allegiance; and if it may be, to persuade us to timely
Conformity therein.

The Sum is, I think we cannot justify our refusing to take the new Oath of
Allegiance to King William and Queen Mary, without destroying Acts of
Parliament, changing the Laws of England, and razing the Principles and Laws of
Nature.

The Words of II Hen. 7. cap. 1. bearing to our Purpose, are these.

The King our Sovereign Lord, calling to his remembrance the Duty of Allegiance
of the Subjects of this his Realm; and that they, by reason of the same, are
bound to serve their Prince, for the time being, for the defense of him and the
Land, against every Rebellion, Power and Might reared against him. -- And that
it is not reasonable, but against all Laws, Reason and good Conscience; that the
said Subjects -- any thing should lose or forfeit, for doing their true Duty
and Service of Allegiance -- It be therefore ordained, that from henceforth no
Persons that attend upon the King and Sovereign Lord of this Land for the time
being, in his Person, and do him true and faithful Service of Allegiance, be in
no wise convict, etc.
POSTSCRIPT.
IF in the foregoing Discourse I have abused the Law in Terms or otherwise (as
it is not unlikely, being out of my way) I beg pardon of the Learned in that
Faculty. I have nothing to plead in Excuse but an honest Intention.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 58. for Chap. VIII. read Chap. IX. Page 60. for Chap. IX. read Chap. X.
Books lately Printed for Awnsham Churchil at the Black Swan at Amen-Corner.
THE late Lord Russel's Case, written by the Right Honorable Henry Lord De la
Mere. fol. An Historical Account of making the Penal Laws by the Papists
against the Protestants, and by the Protestants against the Papists. By Samuel
Blucker^, Barrister of Gray's Inn. fol. Obedience due to the Present King,
notwithstanding our Oaths to the Former, Written by a Divine of the Church of
England. 4to. A modest Enquiry, Whether St. Peter was ever at Rome, and Bishop
of that Church? 4to. The Spirit of France, and the Politic Maxims of Lewis
XIV. laid open to the World. 4to. Memorials of the Method and Manner of
Proceedings in Parliament in Passing Bills. 8o. Dr. Burnet's Tracts in Two
Volumes. 12o. A Collection of Texts of Scripture, with short Notes upon them:
And some* other Observations against the Principal Popish Errors. 12o. Dr.
Daniel Whitby's Treatise of Worship of Images. -- Of Communion in one kind. --
His Treatise of Tradition, in two parts. -- His Consideration for taking the
Oaths to King William and Queen Mary. Dr. Worthington of the Resurre^ 8o. Mr.
Masters of Submission to^ Providence. 8o. Foxes and Firebrands, 8o. 1st and 2d
parts. A Third Part in the Press. Mr. Bold's Sermon on occasion of the Brief
for Irish Protestants. An Answer to Bishop Lake's (late of Chichester)
Declaration of his dying in belief of the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, etc.
Sir William Temple's Observations on Holland. 8o. -- Miscellania. 8o. Dr.
Carswel's Assize Sermon at Abingdon, August 6. 1689. Mr. Selden's Tabl(...)
4to. A List of the present Parliament, Lords and Commmons. Present Cases stated
about Allegiance to King William and Queen Mary. Debates of the late Oxon and
Westminster Parliaments. 8o. Monsieur Jurieu's Accomplishment of
Scripture-Prophecies, complete. New System of the Revelations. 12o. Voyage to
Syam. 8o.

