A SERMON PREACHED AT GRAYES-INNE, October 2. 1642.

BY THOMAS FVLWAR, Doctor in Divinity, and Bishop of Ardtfert, in the Kingdom
of Ireland.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1642.

To the worthy Gentlemen, and Inhabitants of the Parish of St. Andrews HOLBORNE.
I Hate Ingratitude as Witchcraft. To witness therefore to the world, both
your courtesy to me, and my thankfulness to you, I give you this Piece,
intended for your Pulpit; but being occasionally called to Grayes-Inne,
delivered there what you should have heard, and but once; you may please now to
see, and often, and in it the reality of my desire to retribute something: You
know what S. Peter said to the Creeple, What he had he gave him: you have been
the chief preservers of me and mine, since our escape out of Ireland, where we
had only our lives for a prey, and those lives your bounty has hitherto
cherished. Which yet, does not more obliege me, then the loving acceptance of
my weak endeavors; with which encouragement I shall cheerfully proceed still
in my poor labors, and shall think my self amid all my misfortunes very
happy, if you shall so esteem of me as I am, and desire to express my self,

Yours in all fair respect, THO: ARTEFERTENSIS.

LUKE 2. 48. Thy Father and I have sought thee sorrowing.
THE seasonablenesse of this Text, and how it suits our case at this time, I
need not spend many words to show: They are the words of the blessed Virgin to
her Son, and imply, and contain in them, The losing of Christ had; The seeking
of Christ lost; and the finding of Christ sought.

They had enjoyed their Son twelve years together, and now it was their hard
hap to lose him: Longer have we enjoyed him by far then they did. We have had
him in his Word rightly taught, in his Sacraments duly administered, and for a
sign and confirmation of his blessing upon these, more then fourscore years
of peace, to the wonder of our friends, and envy of our adversaries: But what
shall I say now* When the Angel said to Gideon, The Lord is with thee thou
mighty man; Gideon answered, O my Judges 6. 13.
Lord, if the Lord be with us, why then is all this evil befaln us? Surely, so
may we conclude, God has now withdrawn himself, because Peace, his greatest
blessing upon earth, has now forsaken us: Gideon, and the Israelites groaned
then under a forain Enemy; We for want of foes aborad, as if we were ambitious
of feud, weary of ease, and thirsty of our neighbors blood, must quarrel one
another: Of all plagues upon a Nation, War is the sorest; witness holy
David, who rather chose Pestilence, then the sword 2 Samuel 24. 14.
to destroy him: And of all Wars, Civil is the most destructive, the
miseries whereof are next to the torments of hell, which no tongue is able to
express* O then is God with us, when such unnatural discord is fallen between
us? When God was angry, he sent an Evil spirit Judges 9. 23.
between Abimelech and the Shechemites, which consumed them both: Here is an
Evil spirit now among us, and a flame breaking out, which if not quickly
quenched, will consume us root and branch. Our selves are going the way to
destroy our selves from being a people upon the Earth.

When Christ beheld Jerusalem, he wept over Luke 19. 41.
it, and said, O if thou had known in this thy day the things which belong to
thy peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes. He saw their sin, and foresaw
their sufferings, and the one as the other caused him to weep: oh! our sins are
hideous, and our sufferings will not come short of theirs, if we prevent them
not, our state will prove Felo de se, as your phrase is, and it will be
arraigned at Gods Tribunal, as guilty of self-murder. Whom will we spare, that
will not spare our selves? and who will pity us, that will not pity our selves?
We pray every day in our Letany, That God would deliver us from Battle and
murder, yet, good Lord, how inclinable are some men, even to that they pray
against! Nay, which is more, and I know not whether it be more to be deplored
or hated, There are of our Long-robe, whose feet Romans 10. ^^
should be beautiful for the glad tidings of peace they should bring with
them, that are preaching in the place of the God of peace for War. When the
Disciples would have had our Savior Luke 9. 44
to have fired a Town for their uncourteous refusal of him lodging, he forbad
them, and told them, They knew not what spirit they were of; Good Lord, what
spirits are these men of, that add fuel to this fire which flames too hot
already! Luke 10. 5.
The Apostles were commanded, that so soon as they entered a house, the first
word they should say should be, Peace be to this house: Whose Disciples are
these, that have nothing in their mouths, but Arm, kill, and destroy? Scatter
thou the people, says holy David, that delight Psalm 68. 30. Genesis 49.
in War. Cursed be their rage, for it is fierce, and their wrath, for it is
cruel; and into their secrets let my soul never come. We in Ireland have
already smarted under the misery of such War, God of his mercy keep it from
you here in England; But pro quo Orandum, Laborandum; They who sit at the
Helm, it is their Office to deal in matters of State, and seek the best way
of atonement, our endeavors must be in another kind, to settle peace above, to
show how to work a reconciliation between our incensed God and us, to stand
Psalm. 106. 23.
with Moses in the gap, and pray our selves, and by our devotion enkindle
others likewise, that we may all jointly say, If thy presence go not with us,
Exodus 33. 15.
send us not up hence: We are not I hope of the Gadarens mind, to desire
Christ to depart our Luke 8. 37.
Coasts, rather with the two Disciples we will say, Domine, mane nobiscum: And
if he be gone, Luke 24. 29.
as I fear he is, with these two holy Saints here, we will go in earnest
quest of him, seek him, and never give over till we have found him; for so the
blessed Maid implies in her speech, Thy Father and I have sought thee sorrowing.

I see that before I was aware, I have divided my Text already, and told you
the order how I must proceed in the handling of it:

1. The losing Christ had. 2. The seeking Christ lost. 3. The finding Christ
sought.
I told you but now, that Moses besought Almighty 1.
God not to leave his people, but go with them still. Though God be, as
himself says, Ego Deus and non mutor, unchangeable, and his delight Malachi 3
6.
is to be with the children of men, yet we need not go far to see the cause
why God that had brought that people with so mighty a hand, and outstretched
an arm from Egypt, would now leave them in the Wilderness. They embraced
Jonah 2. 8.
lying Vanities, and so forsook their own mercy; they left him by sin, and he
left them by Justice: He had not been true to himself, but contradicted his
purity, if he had stayed with them that had so trespassed; God will not be, but
either where no sin is at all, or where there is sorrow for sin; for, quem
poenitet peccasse, pene est innocens: The people he loved, but their sin he
hated, and that drove him away from them. But what sin had the blessed Virgin
committed? What evil was she now guilty of, that the joy of her eyes, and the
delight of her heart should now leave her? Elizabeth wondered, Vnde hoc quod
Luke 1. 43.
matter Domini venit ad me? May not we much more wonder that the Lord of that
Mother should now absent himself from her, of whom though we may not so much
dote as our Adversaries, to say she was as innocent as her Son himself, yet we
may without offense, I hope, say as the holy Text speaks of Zachary and
Elizabeth, that Luke 1 6.
she was just, and walked blamelesly, sine crimine, though not sine culpa; sine
querela, though not sine peccato? What cause should this harmless soul give?
Twelve years together she had enjoyed his blessed society, over whose
infant-yeares so indulgent was her care, as by her pains and travel she made
Egypt a Sanctuary to him, which had been a house of Correction to the
Israelites; and after her return, never did she wilfully transgress in ought
to displease him, or fail in ought, which should witness her dearest
affection to him.

To the annual celebration of the Feast she goes, nor would she go without
him, in whom her life did consist, and during the time of her abode there, he
was with her. But at her return, (the word, for sympathy of grief, will scarce
come out) he stays and leaves her. But why did she go to it? she had a
continual Feast, a quiet conscience within her self: besides, she had the
Lord of the Feast, her Son with her. For no other cause, but because she knew
not how to disobey authority: what her Son said afterward concerning his
Baptism, Suffer it to be so now, for so it becomes us to fulfill all
righteousness; Math 3. 15.
that the Mother now practiced: Her son, ne perderet obedientiam, perdidit
vitam; and so now his Mother, to show herself obedient, lost him that was
dearer to her then her life.

What is written, is written for our instruction, and the Saints practice
should be, if not our precept, yet our example, and should teach us that
public obedience to Laws established, is far more acceptable, then all
private sacrifices ^ Sam. 15. 22.
whatsoever.

Oh how palpably true is that of Solomon; It Eccles ^. ^.
is better to go to the house of mourning, then the house of feasting? for
here she loses him, whom she had so long kept with her: For us now to lose
Christ at feasts, is no new, nor strange thing, for we commonly lose our selves
at them, turning our laughter into so much folly, as we even Eccles. 1. 1.
make of our mirth madness.

The Minstrels, which I remember Christ once Mat. 9. 23.
shut out of doors in the Gospel, we with so much greedy delight entertain, as
their gingling quite hinders us from affording Christ either Matthew. 9 23.
room or audience among us. But for this Innocent Virgin, Full of grace, as the
Angel called Luke 1. 28.
her, that she should lose him, is still our wonder. I know sin separates
between our God and us; but Isay 59 2.
what sin do we read of that she offended in? careful she was of her son in
preserving him, and giving him the best breeding that she could; and the best
breeding was, that she brought him to the Temple; well might she say then, Fili
cur sic fecisti nobis? What offense had she ever given him? wherein had she
ever offended him? Is this the requital of her twelve years care? This the
guerdon of her unwearied love and labor, that now when his years should yield
her most content, he should leave her? Had he been mere man, we might have
excused it by the descent of love; The Angels of love come down faster and
oftener on the Ladder, then go up; but being God as man, our wonder is
heightened; Has God Psalm 77. 9.
forgotten to be gracious, and will he shut up his loving kindness in
displeasure? Will he absent himself from those that prize nothing so dear as
his society? He, who though he be provoked every day, yet is loving to all, yea
to his enemies: he that Psalm. 145 9.
sought out Adam when he ran from him, how Genesis 3.
comes he thus to his dearest mother? We must with silence lay our hands upon
our mouths, and knowing it was the Lord, conclude, That the reason of his
doings may be sometimes secret, but never unjust: He whose chair is in man's
heart, and sees there as in public, saw more then we can discern; May be that
ardency of affection 1.
was somewhat cooled by this twelve years constant fruition, she did not so
highly prize his company as was fitting; What the natural man spoke, the
Christian finds true, Beneficia carendo, blessings are sooner spied by want,
then by enjoying; Now then to set a greater price on his presence, that she
should esteem it according to its value, he is pleased to withdraw: How
welcome was the day after that multiplied night to the Egyptians? and how
highly was Jacob pleased with the news of his son Joseph's life, whom he
supposed dead? I will go down and see Genesis 45. 28.
him before I die.

Besides, she had a greater task then this to undergo; 2.
It was prophesied to her, That a sword Luke 2. 35.
should pierce through her soul; And that was, when she was to see him hang on
the tree, and to lie three days in the Grave; It did but prick her now only
to prepare her to her greater trial; She must learn to endure a far longer
absence, and must be weaned quite from his bodily presence.

And withal she must be taught that her Son 3.
had a Father in Heaven, whose business he must go about: All the world must
be profited, as well as she pleased, and they must be redeemed, as well as she
satisfied; therefore as our first Adam said, A man should leave Father and
Mother for his Wife, Genesis 2 24.
so this our second Adam, to express his infinite love to his Spouse, the
Church, having left before his Father in heaven, now leaves his Mother on
earth, to initiate that business which he must, and will afterward
accomplish, even by the laying down of his own life for their Redemption.

But did Christ leave her indeed? did not she rather leave him? Is not he that
came to seek that Luke 19 10.
which was lost, now lost himself? as Joseph was Genesis 37.
lost while he went to seek his brethren: Did not they leave him at the Feast,
and go away without him? May we not say, (with reverence to her person) here
was a kind of Inouria at best, a less care then ought to be? They went away
both, and both went by thoughts and suppositions: We say, Insipientis est
dicere, Non putaram; And it was some folly to say, Putaram, if it be true as
the Jews say, That the men went a part by themselves, and the women by
themselves, so Joseph thought he was with his Mother, and she supposed he was
with his Father. Would they yet travel a whole day without a sight of him, to
advance their opinion into a knowledge, and so to have been ascertained he was
amongst them? Thus even the best will grow sometimes remiss; Can a Mother
forget her child? It seems she can; Isay 49. 15.
the best of Mothers here forgets the best of sons, and so jealous is God of
those he loves, as he will not endure the least Act of unkindnesse or
undutifulnesse in them: Servants and strangers may go away with greater
errors, when the Son that is beloved shall find a lash for the least offense:
The not beloved ones, wicked and ungodly men, may run on in sin even till they
grow old, and sin like withered leaves shall drop and fall from them before
they leave it, and in all that time never meet with a whipping; but those that
are Zach. 28.
dear to God, dear to him as the Apple of his eye* his chosen ones, they
shall be snibb'd and curbed, and punished upon the least delinquency; which,
howsoever it may seem grievous for the Heb. 12. 11.
present, yet at last they will say with David, It was good for me that I have
been afflicted; for these Psalm. 119. 71.
afflictions instruct as well as correct, and as they punish, so they teach
them their duties.

Thus have we seen Christ lost. The Saints in heaven so happily have him, as
they cannot lose him, the Bridegroom cannot now be taken from them; the damned
in hell have so unhappily lost him, as they can never find him again, (...),
a great gulf there is, which they can Luke 16. 26.
never foord to find such a bliss, only we that live on earth, can both lose
and find him. It was carelessness at worst in them, but our wilful sins drive
him from us; He is a God of pure eyes, and Hab. 1. 13.
cannot endure to see any pollution; and how do we wallow in all uncleanness?
He is a holy God and will be sanctified of all that come near him, or Lev. 10.
3.
that he comes near unto, and what haste do we make to run into all
profaneness? He is a God of order, and how do we unhinge all by 1 Cor. 14.
40.
confusion? He is a God of love, and how full of malice are our hearts? He is a
God of peace, and 2 Cor. 13 11.
we dote upon strife and contention? He rests not but upon the meek and humble,
and how do we advance our selves even above all that is called 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
God? Let us never flatter our selves, and think these sins and Christ can
dwell together; God and 1 Samuel 5.
Dagon could not be in one house in the old Law, nor God and Belial in one
heart in the new. We 2 Cor. 6. 15.
see the shoales of these sins, which have driven him from us; God make us
sensible of the want of him, and wanting him, give us grace to seek him as
these did; And so I come to the second, The seeking of Christ lost: Thy Father
and I have, etc.

The night which curtains all things else, like 2.
a friendly and faithful counselor now discovers this want, which the
flattering day would not tell them of Then they were so full of discourse and
business as they had no leisure so much as to think him absent, the fairness
of the way, and the Company of their friends, did so pleasant their Journey as
they scarce minded him, till the day was spent, and they retired to their Inn,
and then when they thought to betake themselves to their repast and rest, they
perceived that he, without whom they could not rest, was wanting. Oh the
happiness of a silent night retirement! all the day we spend in turmoile in
the world, some Psalm. 78. 3^.
wandering, as some of the Jews, in the fields of Egypt, picking straws of
folly, things, which may Exodus 5.
perhaps please the sense, but I am sure cannot profit the soul, whiles others
with the rest of the Jews are busied in making brick, laboring as in Hab. 2.
13.
the fire for very vanity, and producing only such things of which we may ask
as the Apostle Rom 6. 21.
did, What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now ashamed? Others
with Jonathan and his Armor-bearer are climbing the steep and dangerous 1 Samuel
13. 13.
rocks of preferment, whiles others are scratching and wounding themselves even
to the Luke 8. 14.
quick, with the shiny cares of this world, and all to get that wealth which
they know not who shall enjoy; and amidst these things, profit, pleasure, Psalm
39 6
and preferment, there is no leisure to mind Christ; but when night comes, as
certainly it will come, and we are plucking off our clothes, and going to
bed, then we shall find the want of him whose company before we little cared
for: When any night comes, as there are more nights then one, the night of
sorrow, or the night of sickness, the Usher of that long-long night of death,
and we are left alone, and all those former witchcrafts of the day, like those
Reeds of Egypt, Isay 36. 6.
not only fail us in our need, but pierce our hands, and wound our souls,
and our jocond and blithe company, like vermin out of a falling house, run
away from us and forsake us, then we shall by woeful experience find, Quam
malum and amarum est dereliquisse Domi^^^, Ier. 2 19.
how evil and bitter a thing it is to forsake our God: When affliction nakeds
us of all those Figge-leaves, wherewith in the day of prosperity we did dress
and pride ourselves, and denudes us of all sinister and vain thoughts, and
redeeming us out of the throng and noise of the world, delivers us to a solid
consideration, whether Christ, which should have been not only our Companion,
but our guide through this Wilderness of Sin, and Valley of tears, be with
us yea or no, and if not, then we shall think it high time to go along with
these good people here to seek and find him out. Had the day been lengthened
out to that in the days of Hezekiah, ten degrees more, I make a question Isay
38. 8.
whether they had yet mist him, or been so happy as to have seen their
unhappiness; but now the darkness brings that to light, which the dazeling of
the day, and Sunshine before would not let them see, and being now made
sensible of their miss, they will not give their eyes any Psalm. 132. 4.
sleep, nor suffer the temples of their heads to take any rest, till they have
found him; Now they redeem their former carelessness by a careful seeking
him; what in their mirthfull journey they lost, their sad and diligent enquiry
makes abundance of amends for: It was never truer then now, that Extrema gaudii
luctus occupat, Sadness brings in the Voyder, where mirth lays the Cloth; nay
the grief for their loss, far resurmounts the joy of their Feast; and if
they severed before, Joseph in one company, and Mary in another, and so lost
him, they unite now, not failing either in the maine of seeking, which tells us
their industry, or in the object of their seeking, Him, and Him alone, which
shows their sincerity, nor in the manner, internal sympathy, both sorrowing,
and external agreement, both together, one teaching us unity, the other
uniformity; Thy Father and I, etc.

These are the branches which now should be shaken; but I shall but gather a
berry or two off of each of them, cutting off something, as he in Plutarch,
which I should say, not to offend in prolixity, their industry in that they
seek, their sincerity in that they seek him, their unity in that they seek him
both in sorrow, and their uniformity in that they seek him both together.

We are not to learn what it is to seek, when 1.
we lose any thing we highly prize; our eyes, and hands, and feet are all
employed: See but the Luke 15. 8.
poor woman in the Gospel that had but lost her groat, how diligently she
sought, and swept every corner of her house till she found it; and look upon
the good Shepherd, wandering all over Ibid. 4.
the mountains to find his strayed Lamb. Indeed if Christ be once lost, he
will not readily be found. What trouble did Saints of old put themselves unto,
when God hid his face from them? Thou hidest thy face, says David, and I Psalm.
30. 7.
was troubled. Troubled indeed in mind and in body, to get a glimpse of that
glorious countenance shine again upon him. He is not easily lost, but by
extreme carelessness and neglect, but when we will lose him, he is not
easily to be found* you may see it here, They lost him but one day, and it was
the the third day before they could find him again. The first and best
happiness is to keep him, to say as Jacob, Non dimittam te, I will not let
thee Genesis 32 26.
go unless thou bless me; but the next to that, is presently to miss him,
and upon that miss to seek him with all diligence, and without delay. We are
all, or would be thought to be, Generatio quaerentium, A Generation of Psalm.
24. 6.
those that seek God; but we seek not as we Cant. 3. 1.
ought, we seek as she did in the Canticles, I sought him in my Bed, I sought
him, but I found him not. Careless, slight, perfunctory seeking will not do
it; The sluggard lusts, Prove. 13. 4.
and his soul has nothing, says Solomon, because he does but lust. Bad men
though they live the lives of the wicked, yet with Balaam Numb 22. 10.
they desire to die the death of the righteous; but desires alone will not
avail, and yet I fear such is all the pains we spend about it.

Jesting Pilate asked, Quid est veritas? but he John 18. 38.
went away not caring to be resolved in a question which he thought of so small
concernment: so there are many, Qui noncurant quaerere, qui tamen Bern.
cupiunt invenire; cupiunt consequi, and non sequi. If we seek him upon the
downy Beds of rest and ease, it is impossible we should find him: Foxes have
holes, and birds of the air Mat. 8. 20.
have nests, but the Son of man has not whereon to repose his head. Pilate
was not satisfied that only made it Table-talk: Nor the woman that sought at
her ease, did not find; Watchman, what in the night? cries the Isay 21. 11.
Prophet: The morning comes, and also the evening, O si quaeritis, quaerite; If
ye will seek, do it indeed, and to some purpose, and do it both while ye may
seek, and he may be found: There is a time for every thing under the Sun,
Eccles. 3. 1.
says Solomon; The time which God allows us for our seeking, is Primum
quaerite, seek him Matthew 6 3^.
f^rst, while he may be found: for that speech in the Prophet, implies there is
a time when Isay 55. 6. Gen 27. 34. Mat. 27 11.
he cannot be found at all; Esau in the Old Testament, and the five foolish
Virgins in the New, show to their grief that he may be sought when he will not
be found. It is true I read in one place, That He is found of them which
sought him Isay 65. 1.
not; and S. Paul may be instanced in, whom Christ found traveling to
Damascus, and neverthinking Acts 9.
of it; But that is not to be made a precedent of no more, then because some
men have by chance found wherewith to keep themselves all days of their lives,
others should not labor upon the like hope of the same fortune: But our safest
and most warrantable course is presently upon the first miss of him to seek
him: Seek and seek him, cum, not aliud 2.
in eo, Him for himself, and for no other by-respect: The people in the Gospel
sought him, but it was for the Loaves wherewith they John 6 26.
were fed, and not for love, as himself told them; what S. Paul said to his
Corinths, Non vostra, 1 Cor. 12. 14.
sed vos, not yours, but you, that we must say to Almighty God, Thee, and thee
alone, O Lord, do we seek: Let us comply with David's Echo, Seek ye my face;
Thy face, Lord, says he, will Psalm. 77. 8.
I seek: Let Demetrius, and his fellow craftsmen, if they will, magnify Diana,
because they Acts 19. 25.
lived by making her silver shrines; but let Christians be otherwise minded,
and think that godliness 1 Timothy 1. 6.
is gain sufficient or them, and so with holy Job, trust in God though he
should kill them. Job 13. 15.
He loves not God at all, that loves any thing besides him; nor does he seek
God at all, who seeks ought but himself; and indeed, what need they seek any
thing else? for having him, they are sure of all things, (...), whereof they
have need, though peradventure not (...), which they may fancy a use of: All
are 1 Cor. 2. 23.
yours, for ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods, says the Apostle.

No marvel now if losing such an one, they 3.
were both sad; which is the third thing, and teaches us unity of affection,
according to S. Paul's Ephesians. 4. 3.
advice, to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.

How did Jacob mourn for the loss of one Son Genesis 37. 35. 2 Samuel 18. 33.
in twelve? and how did David lament for his lewd son Absalom? but when the
Text speaks of a grief not to be paralleld, it is as of one mourning Jer. 6.
26.
for an only son. Who of us loses a friend, a child, or a wife with dry eyes?
how incomparably dear beyond all these in Christ to a soul? Let us not
prodigally then lavish away our tears for such toys as these, (for so I may
call them in comparison) but reserve them for better purposes. Fruitless is
all grief in the world but this; 2 Cor. 7. 10.
I do not speak of that worldly sorrow which causes death, but even that
grief which we may take, for such losses as I spoke of can do us no good;
could we shed rivers of tears, it could not revive a dead friend, or recover a
lost estate, or an empaired health, only show how we love them, as John 11.
36.
they said of Christ weeping for Lazarus, but not profit us in the thing lost
at all. And abundance of tears which may blind our eyes, if spent for any
things here below, makes them more clear to find him, who will not be found
but in sorrow; he is vir dolorum, as Isaiah calls him, and so Isay 53. 3.
must be sought; In his presence is joy, and at his Psalm. 16 11.
right hand are pleasures for evermore: Needs then must there be sorrow and
discontents at his absence, which we are not sensible of, because we value
him not; but Da Christianum and scit quod Aug.
dico, he knows that there is no joy to the finding of him, nor no sorrow to
that when he is lost: Blame not these then to be sad, and to go both together
in pursuit of him, which is the last, They went together.

I will not trouble you with the signification of 4.
their names, Mary signifying a bitter Sea, and Joseph, fruitfulness; sorrow
for sin past, and fruitfulness in good works for the future, being the way to
find him; but only commend unto you, External uniformitie. They lost him when
they were asunder, and therefore go together to find him: and indeed, how
should they seek him that is all love and peace, but in love and peace? God the
Heb. 13. 20.
Father is the God of peace: God the Son is the Isay 9 6.
Prince of peace: God the Holy Ghost is the Spirit of peace: His Gospel is the
Gospel of peace, and Gal. 5. 22.
his Ministers are, or should be, the Ministers of Romans 10. 15.
peace. Can we think then of seeking him with sword in hand? First go and
agree with thine Adversary, Mat. 5. 24.
and then come and offer thy gift, says himself in his Gospel; no gift will
be accepted from those which are at strife: First make peace one with another,
and then we may hope to find the God of peace, and the peace of God.

But it concerns me to speak more of Ecclesiastical peace then Civil; O, for
the divisions in the Church, What great thoughts of heart are there! Jud. 5. 15.
S. Paul condemned the Corinthians when they said, I am of Paul, and I of
Apollos, and I of Cephas: 1 Cor. 1. 12.
Is Christ divided? says he: That seamlesse coat of Mat. 27. 35.
Christ, which the rude soldiers spared, how is it now rent in pieces by our
disorderly divisions? When every one does in the Church, as it was in the Book
of Judges, quisque quod rectum in oculis, Judge. 17. 6.
Every man that which is good in his own eyes: And it was so then and there,
because they had no King, -- Grief suffers me not to speak more of this, only
to pray with holy David, and say, Psalm. 102. 13.
The time is come that thou have mercy upon Sion, yea the time is come. With
such words and such grief we may at last find our lost peace, and serving God
in the Beauty of holiness, find Christ as these Psalm. 110* 3.
did: which is the last of all; The finding Christ 3.
sought. Thy Father and I, etc.

As we must seek Christ while, so where he may be found. Each thing has (...),
and (...), as his nunc, so his ubi: All was well hitherto in their seeking, but
now we shall find something was amiss, they sought right for the manner, but
wrong for the place: It is no blind man's work Ephesians. 1. 18.
to seek, The eyes of their understanding must be enlightened, or it will be to
no purpose: They sought him among their friends and kindred: He that consults
with flesh and blood (for they are our Mat. 16. 17.
kindred) can never find Christ. It is nor nature nor reason that can bring us
to him. Hence the wise Heathen seeking a Deity, in stead of one God found many,
and finding many, found none at all; and therefore at Athens there was an Altar
Acts 17* 23. Cant. 3. 2.
erected (...), To the unknown God. That Spouse in the Canticles that sought
Christ in her Bed, sought him likewise in the streets, and broad places, but
could not find him: So these, neither in the ways, the fields of pleasure and
delight, nor in the streets of Jerusalem, amid the throng and hurry of worldly
occasions, till they came to the Temple, and there they found him: God said in
his Prophet, Ye shall not seek me in vain; but at Isay 45. 19.
last, Laetetur cor quaerentium Deum: for God will not Psalm. 105. 3.
always forget the labor and love of those that seek him, but at last they
shall find him as these did, in Heb. 6. 10.
the Temple, among the Doctors, and in the midst of them. 1 The place, 2 The
company, 3 and his posture, of these in one word.

Thy way, O God, is in the Sanctuary, says David; Psalm. 77. 13.
non in penetralibus, non in deserto, says Christ himself, Mat. 24. 26.
not in the desert, not in private Chambers. We cannot go without bodies to
seek him now, but in Spirit, Seek him with our whole heart, as Moses Deuteronomy. 4.
29.
said, and so we may find him on earth, that is, bodily ascended up to heaven:
In his Temple, where Psalm. 29 9.
every man speaks of his honor; there we shall find him in our prayers, the
public prayers of the Congregation, and therefore it is called, A house Mat.
21 13.
of prayer for all people: We shall find him in his Word speaking to us, and
we shall find him in his Sacraments, wherein he offers himself to us; and all
these are duties to be performed publicly, no where, unless in case of
extreme necessity, but in Temples, places consecrate, and set apart for such
purposes; Here was Christ found at first, and here he is to be found still,
however our fond Sectaries, whose blind zeal mis-leads them, may think any
place good enough to seek Christ in, and so contrary to S. Paul, who puts a
flat difference 1 Cor. 11. 22.
between private houses and Churches, will yet confound them, grounding upon
words of Christ to the woman of Samaria, misunderstood, John 4. 21, 23.
That the time shall come, when they shall neither worship in Samaria, the
Temple built there, nor at Jerusalem, but in Spirit and Truth: What he spoke of
the worship in Samaria, who worshipped God in the likeness of a Dove, and so
not in Truth, and at Jerusalem, where it was in types and shadows, sacrifices,
and external things, even then when the Substance himself was come, and so not
in Spirit; that they misapply, that there should be no Temples at all; and so
they go even there to find him where Christ said directly he was not, non in
penetralibus, non in deserto; and so even despise the Church of God, as S. Paul
complained, or if they do 1 Cor* 11. 22.
come to it, how do they make it a common place, by their profane and rude
demeanor in it? Can we think this pleasing to Christ, that twice whipped the
prophaners out of the third Court, in the Jews Temple? At his first Passover,
Ioh. 2. 15 and at his last Passover, Mark 11. 17. And you must know that it
was the third Court into which those buyers and sellers came, and not into the
second, where none but native Jews, much less the third, where only the
Priests were admitted, and yet that outward Court would not he suffer to be
abused. God in the Old Law joined the Sabbath and the Temple together, Ye shall
keep my Sabbaths, Levit. 26. 2.
and reverence my sanctuary; and what God has joined we may not put asunder;
and yet these men Mat. 19* 6.
that are so careful in the observation of the one, how violent are they in
the neglect of the other? How do they despise even the most holy place, (if
there be in our Churches any place more holy then another) the place where, and
the holy Table whereon we receive his blessed body and blood, Mal. 1. 7.
even that I say as the Prophet complained, is despised: As those obstinate
ones that will not come, should be whipped in, so these abusers of it should be
whipped out: And I doubt not, but as this is not the least of our sins, so it is
not the least cause of our sufferings: Which God of his mercy amend and pardon.

In the Temple, and among the Doctors. 2.


As the Temple is the place, so these are the men with whom we shall find him;
not every one, but they that are set apart, (...), may or can Romans 1. 1.
show where Christ is; If the blind lead the blind, you know what will
follow. Those Fishermen Mat. 15. 14.
that Christ made Apostles of, he conversed with three years, and
miraculously inspired knowledge and language into them according to his
promise, Dabo vobis os and scientiam; But such miraculous Luke 21. 15.
infusion now ceases, and Artisans may not presume to take that business upon
them. It is observed, that doceo must have two Accusatives: doceo te scientiam:
They that take upon them to Teach, and have not the Key of knowledge, as it is
Luke 11. 52.
called in the Text, may wrest the Scriptures, as S. Peter says, to their own
destructions, but can never 2 Pet. 3. 16.
open them right, or show Christ.

With the Doctors he was then, hearing and posing them, and so he will be still
with such as he has appointed to be sent as Laborers into his Mat. 20. 1.
Vineyard, who must with their private endeavors, pains, and studies, get
knowledge first themselves; ( The Priests lips should preserve knowledge) Mal.
2 7.
and then derive it to others.

Sitting with them, and in the midst; which is 3.
the last.

Christ is still observed to be in that place; Luke 2. 7.
when he was born, in medio animalium; when he died, in medio latronum; In
heaven, in the midst Mark 15. 27.
of the seven golden Candle-sticks; and in the Rev. 2. 1.
Temple now in the midst of the Doctors; that is his place still: The Pharisees
they loved corners Mat. 6. 5.
in the streets, and uppermost seats at Feasts: The Luke 11. 43.
moral is, They were byast, partial, and sinisterly affected people, which
Christ loves not; and whosoever seeks to find Christ, must go with an eaven
mind, he must be like seasoned timber, neither warp one way for fear, or
another way for hope, nor lean a third way for any private respect, but go on
in truth and in sincerity, in unity, and in uniformity, and by such men, and
none but such Christ will be found: And peace (which always accompanies him)
even abundance of peace will Psalm 37. 11.
be restored to our Israel, and prosperity to our Sion; Which God of his
infinite mercy send.

Amen.
FINIS.

