A LETTER Sent from The Lord FALKLAND, Principal Secretary to His Majesty.

Unto the Right Honorable, HENRY Earl of Cumberland, at York. Sept. 30. 1642.

Concerning the late Conflict before Worcester, with the state of His Majesty's
Army now at Shrewsbury.

Together with His Majesty's Speech to the Gentry and Freeholders of the County
of Salop, September. 28. 1642.

Printed at York, October. 1. and now reprinted at London for J. T. October. 7.
1642.

A Letter sent from the Lo: Falkland, To the Right Honorable the E. of
Cumberland.
My Lord,
I Know ere this time you have diverse and several relations of Prince Roberts
encounter with the Earl of Essex Forces before Worcester the 23. of September.
I could have written sooner, but stayed till I could have an exact Relation,
which I now do from men of honor, and present in the action. The King being
informed of the Earl of Essex marching to Worcester, and knowing that town
not tenible against any considerable Forces, and desirous to put the best part
of his Army into one entire Body, sent to Sir John Biron to quit the place,
and join with Prince Robert, then at Bridgenorth. Prince Robert desirous to
fetch off so gallant a man as Sir John Biron, marched through Worcester with
his Troops, consisting of 700. accompanied only with Sir John Biron his Troops
remaining behind in Worcester. When they were out of the Town, Prince Robert
being informed that the E. of Essex Troops of Horse and Dragooners were at
hand, marched toward them, saying, We are now engaged for the honor of God
and your Country, fight valiantly: and immediately gave them a furious charge,
which was stoutly answered by the Parliament Forces. This courage of theirs
endured not long, for at the second charge they as fiercely ran away, in
pursuit were taken prisoners, slain, and drowned, above 400. diverse of which
betook themselves to the mercy of a River, wherein perished four score,
whereof the Lord Says son is said to be one, but that is yet uncertain, but
for certain both of them accompanied with Captain Brown a Scotchman, at the
first encounter ran away, leaving those men to be slaughtered, some Gentlemen
(more sensible of honor then the rest) fought valiantly, as Sergeant Major
Douglas, Col: Sands, Cap: Austin, Cap: Burrill, Cap: Berrey, Coronett Hamon,
Cornett West were slain in the field; Cap: Sands and Douglas lived some few
hours after: Prince Robert sent a Divine to Captain Sands, who told him the
Prince was troubled so gallant a man should perish in so unworthy an action, he
gave the Prince thanks and said, death did not so much trouble him as that he
had endeavored to defend so bad a cause, which he was drawn into as well by
his own ambition, as by persuasion of other men, he was not able to deny (he
further said) the flower of their Army was in this conflict, and wished all
their actions hereafter might have the like success, desiring that they would
all pray for him, and especially that God would forgive him this great sin of
rebellion, which troubled him the more, having dilucively persuaded others
thereunto by telling them that they fought against those that advanced the
rebellion in Ireland, and were now in the action, Col: Sands was encountered by
Comisary Wilmot, but received his deaths wound by a Frenchman, he asked how
Comisary Wilmot did, seeing him wounded, being told his hurt was not dangerous,
said, he was glad he had not his blood to answer for: Douglas likewise died not
suddenly, he was likewise sensible of his offense. I spoke with a Gentleman
that brought him out of the field, to whom he confessed this was the third
rebellion he had been in against the King, all which from his heart he hated,
but was drawn unto them for gain and sinister ends, and being taken prisoner in
the North he was discharged, and twenty pounds given him by the King: he was
desirous to live, that he might discover to the King something that might in
part expiate his former offenses, which was prevented by his death. I have been
the longer in the relation of these two Gentlemen's Confessions before their
deaths, to make you sensible that the hearts of these men go not along with
their actions, (their bloods will lie heavy upon those boutefeux that have
engaged them and others, and so many men to their ruin and destruction.)

There were taken in the Skirmish 50. or 60. prisoners, but none of note, and
quality, but Captain Wingate, (a Parliament man) who is brought to Shrewsbery;
The King was presented with 6. or 7. Colors, the bearers of them either slain
or taken Prisoners; Prince Maurice has received two or three scarrs of Honor
in his Head, but is abroad and merry; diverse of our part has received slight
wounds, as Commissary Wilmot, Sir Lewis Dives, Captain Byron, Sir Charles
Lucas, and some others: I dare not tell you they lost more Hundreds, then we
single men, least the former part of my Letter may gain the less belief: But
I assure you, it is confidently reported that there were slain on our part not
above three or four; those Prisoners that were taken except Captain Wingate
are discharged, taking an Oath not to bear Arms against the King,; most of
them were men of mean quality, and so raw Soldiers that they understood not
the word Quarter, but cried for mercy; being demanded of what condition they
were* some said, they were Tailors, some Embroyderers, and the like. By the
latter end of this week, I assure you our number will exceed those of the Earl
of Essex, of which we are now rightly informed by the several Prisoners we
have taken, And if God for great Sins, together with the slight esteem we
have of Parliament Forces, have not Vengance instore for us, and the whole
Nation: The King having no other Ambition, but the advancement of the
Protestant Religion, and establishment of the Fundamental Laws of this
Kingdom. We have public thanks for this Victory enjoined by the King; I have
all this while heard of, and seen the many lies permitted and contrived by
them; but I could never imagine men so irreligious, so impudent before God, as
to give public thanks for the great Victory over the Cavaleers; which is as
false as God is true: I know I can express my Duty in nothing more then
entreating your Lordship not to believe those false reports, which do as much
make London dishabitable, as the Plague wont to do.

Your Lordshipps Infinitely Obedient and Humble Servant. FALKLAND.
Shrewsbury, Sept. 27. 1642.
HIS MAJESTY'S SPEECH at Shrewsburie, on Michaelmas Eve last, to the Gentry and
Commons of the County of Salop, there Assembled.
Gentlemen,
IT is some benefit to me from the Insolences, and misfortunes which have
driven me about, that they have brought me to so good a part of my Kingdom,
and to so faithful a part of my people; I hope neither you nor I shall repent
my coming hither, I will do my part that you may not: And of you, I was
confident before I came; the residence of an Army is not usually pleasant to
any place, and mine may carry more fear with it, since it may be thought
(being robbed and spoiled of all my own, and such terror used to fright and
keep all men from supplying me) I must only live upon the aid and relief of
my people; but be not afraid, I would to God my poor Subjects suffered no more
by the insolence and violence of that ^^mie raised against me (though they have
made the (...) wanton even with plenty) then you shall do by mine, (...) yet I
fear I cannot prevent all disorders; I will do (...) best; and this I Will
promise you, no man shall be a (...) me if I can help it; I have sent hither
for a Mint, and (...) melt down all my own Plate, and expose my Land to (...)
or morgage, that if it be possible I may bring the (...) pressure upon you. In
the mean time I have Summ^^^^ you hither to invite you to do that for me and
your sel^^^, for the maintenance of your Religion, the law of the L^^^ (by
which you enjoy all that you have) which other men do against Us: Do not
suffer so good a cause to be lost for want of supplying Me with that, which
will be taken from you, by those who pursue Me with this ^^^lence, And whilst
these ill men sacrifice their M^^^^, Plate, and utmost industry to Destroy the
Commonwealth, be you no less Liberal to preserve it. And assure your selves,
if it please God to bless Me with ^^^cesse, I shall remember the particular
Assistance ev^^^ man here gives Me, to his advantage: however, it will (...)
after (how furiously the minds of men are now possess^^) be Honor and comfort
to you, that with some Charge and Trouble to your selves, You did your part to
support your King, and preserve the Kingdom.

I desire M. Sheriff, and the rest of the Gentlemen, ^^ distribute themselves
in that Method, that they may (...) receive the expressions which you shall
make of your best Affections, the which I will have particularly presented to
Me.

FINIS.

