A FAITHFUL AND Conscientious Account For Subscribing the ENGAGEMENT.

Discussed in four Sections.

1. Motives for just Expediency of giving such Account. 2. The Account truly
Stated and Explained. 3. Reasons justifying the Faithfulness of it. 4.
Objections against it, satisfactorily Answered
GAL. 6. 4. But let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have
rejoicing in himself alone, and not in another.

ACT. 24. 16. And herein do I exercise my self to have always a Conscience
void of offense toward God and toward men.

LONDON, Printed for L. L. and H. C. MDCL.

To the Right Worshipful Mr. Mayor, Aldermen and Inhabitants of Shrewsbury,
fearing God, and faithful to the Commonwealth of England; Together with my
ancient Neighbors, and Christian acquaintance in Cheshire, Lancashire, and
other parts: Love and Peace with Holinsse be multiplied unto you.
Most endeared Fathers and Brethren in the Lord Christ.
FOrasmuch as subscribing the Engagement required by Act of Parliament, is very
unworthily contradicted, and unjustly censured; not only by some men of corrupt
minds and perverse spirits, but also by some eminent persons professing the
truth which is after godliness; as if a declaring and promising to be true and
faithful to the Commonwealth of England, as it is now-established without a
King, and house of Lords, were unlawful. It has therefore seemed good unto
me, (who am concerned herein, as well as other prudent and piously
conscientious Christians throughout the Nation) to give a just and faithful
account of the Reasons grounded on the Word of God, persuading and swaying to
engage. This my undertaking is also the rather in the behalf, and for the sake
of several sorts of people, I being desirous according to the will of God, as
opportunity and capacity serves, to do good unto all; albeit, more especially
to the household of faith. Because some are, viz.

1. Malignant adversaries, who cease not to withstand and calumniate just
ways, and to speak evil of them that walk therein, as evil doers; even these
enemies of righteousness, have notwithstanding some offices of heighbourly
love, and Christian duty owing to them from Christ's Disciples, which ought to
be performed. See Mat. 5. 44. that so they may be convinced, and made ashamed,
and their ignorance may be put to silence, (1 Pet. 2. 15. and 3. 16.) if
peradventure they may repent, and obtain paidon of their sin. See Act. 8. 22.

2. Sullen malcontents, and refractory despisers of present Government,
transported by a spirit of delusion; who unavoidably taking notice of the Vial
of Gods Wrath powered upon the Sun, i. e probably, on an eminent nominall
Protestant Prince, but adhering fixedly to Romish Hierarchy, rooted in Popery,
so as they are scorched with heat, and gnaw their tongues for pain, and think
they do well to be angry even to death, not repenting of their deeds, nor
giving glory to God. Who knows whether it may yet please God, that these may
not hearken to that divine exhortation, Zech. 2. 13. Be silent O all flesh
before the Lord, for he is raised up out of his holy habitation; Yea, and take
up the acclamation of the Angel of the waters, Rev. 16. 5, 6, 7. Thou art
righteous O Lord, which art, and wast, and shall be, because thou have judged
thus; For they have shed the blood of Saints and Prophets, and thou have given
them blood to drink, for they are worthy. And of another Angel, Even so Lord
God Almighty, true and righteous are thy judgments.

3. Novices, and unskilful persons newly entered into the way of Christianity,
who are as children, and have not so fully attained the Spirit of Love, of
Power, and of a sound mind, nor yet are of capacity by use to exercise their
senses in discerning both good and evil, (Heb. 5. 13. 14.) such ought to be
dealt withal respectively and tenderly, and by some manuduction guided in
their way, even as a nurse cherishes her children in their minority. See Isa
66. 12, 13. Hos. 11. 3. 1 These. 2. 7.

4. Scrupulous questionists, and conflicting Christians in the school and field
of spiritual warfare, who being assaulted by the lustful devices of their
own deceitful hearts; and also by Satan, and his Agents cooperating
suggestions, may stand in need of brotherly and fellow souldierly assistance,
and mutual encouragement. See Gal. 5. 17. 1 John 2. 13, 14. Even as the brave
Captain General Ioab did most prudently in a Council of War, advertise his
brother Abishai in the war against the Syrians and Ammonites, 2 Samuel 10. 9.
10, 11, 12.

5. Fathers and grown men in Christianity, established in the truth, which is
after godliness, who are come to the Unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge
of the Son of God, and a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 13. even these may be excited and encouraged to
glorify God in their beholding the unanimity of their brethren, in their
actings according to the uncontrollable principles of the sacred Scriptures, of
both the Old and New Testament, See Exodus 20. 12. Romans 13. 1. compared, with
Galat. 1. 23. 24.

6. The Supreme Powers, and Fathers of our Native Country, may hence take
knowledge for their greater encouragement, (who have enacted Parliamentarily
the subscribing of the Engagement) in their well-governing; that the Christians
subject to their Authority, do with good reason submit themselves to a due
compliance therein, and are ready to render just grounds of their so obeying in
the Lord, according to the rule of Scripture. See Mat. 22. 21. Titus 3. 1.

This my plain and upright-hearted endeavor, I do humbly offer and dedicate
to your prudent, and impartial censures and patronage, who according to the
knowledge you have experienced of my doctrine and conversation amongst you, are
most able and meet to judge what I say, and in proving all things, to hold fast
that which is good, as indeed ye ought. See 1 Cor. 10. 15. 1 These. 5. 21. My
reciprocal and obliged Engagement mutually, I choose to express in the very
words of the blessed Apostle Paul, even as he testified his love and
faithfulness to the Saints at Corinth. See 2 Cor. 1. 12, 13. My rejoicing is
this the testimony, of my conscience, that in simplicity, and godly sincerity,
not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, I have had my conversation
in the world, and more abundantly to you wards. For I write none other things
unto you, then what you read, or acknowledge, and I trust you shall
acknowledge, even to the end. Now the God of peace that brought again from the
dead our Lord, Jesus, that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of
the everlasting Covenant: Make you perfect in every good work to do his will,
working in you that which is wel-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ,
To whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen. So prays,

Your servant in the Lord for Jesus sake, Thomas Paget.

A Faithful and Conscientious Account For Subscribing the ENGAGEMENT.
SECT. I.
Motives and Grounds for the Reasonableness and Expediency of giving Account
herein.

1. MOses and the Prophets in the sacred Historical Scriptures (written for our
instruction and admonition, on whom the ends of the world are come, Romans 15. 4.
1 Cor. 10. 11.) declaring the true state and Occurrences of Old Testament
Times, do give a just and faithful Account of their own faithful and
warrantable Deportment, and likewise of the faithful Deportment of others, the
good Servants of God in their generations occasionally made mention of by them,
viz. of Noah, Abraham, David, Asa, Iehoshaphat, etc. This is so plainly written
throughout their Books, that a man may run and read the same: To allude to
Habak. 2. 2. And surely they saw a reasonableness and expediency in so doing;
they being holy men of God, and writing as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, 2
Pet. 1. 20, 21.

2. The Apostles and Evangelists, who wrote the Historial Scriptures respecting
the state of New Testament Times, (which being compared with Old Testament
Times, are styled times of Reformation, Heb. 9. 10.) they also do give a clear
and perfect Account, not only of Evangelical Doctrine (the truth which is after
godliness, Tit. 1. 1.) but also of particular occasional Acts, wherein they
were exemplary for our Imitation, and following in the same, John 20. 31. Luke
1. 1, 2, 3, 4. Act. 1. 1. As may most fully appear in a short view of the two
remarkable Instances, beyond all exception; Viz.

1. Instance, Touching our most blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, our
Spiritual King and Prophet, his worthy acting and walking excepted against: 1.
By Pharisees, for his eating with Publicans and sinners, Mat. 9. 11, 12, 13. 2.
By the Disciples of John Baptist, about frequent fasting, Chap. 9. 14. 15, 16,
17. 3. By the multitudes, concerning John Baptists and his own Ministry, Chap.
11. 7, etc. 4. By the Pharisees, about the Traditions of the Elders, Chap. 15.
1, to 15. 5. By his own Disciples, ignorant of the meaning of Parables, Chap.
15. 15, to 21. 6. By the Herodians and Pharisees, about tribute to Caesar,
Chap. 22. 15, to 22. In all these it is requisite that Wisdom should be
justified of her children: See Mat. 11. 19.
2. Instance, Touching Apostolical Practices and Actings in the first and
purest Primitive Times, who were vindicated therein, albeit they were
contradicted: 1. By mockers at the fullness of the Holy Ghost given, Acts 2. 13,
14, etc. 2. By people wondering at the cure of an impotent man, Chap. 3. 11,
12. 3. By Rulers, Elders and Scribes, touching the same thing, Chap. 4. 5, 8.
4. By them of the Circumcision about the Gentiles Conversion, Chap. 11. 2, 3,
4. 5. By certain men from Judea, about Observation of Circumcision, Acts 15. 1,
etc. 6. By the Athenians, concerning the Resurrection, Chap. 17. 16, 17, to the
end. 7. See also more specially and fully the perfect Account of the Apostle
Paul himself, touching the main of his actings, Acts 22. etc. to the end of the
book.

3. There is a cloud of Witnesses, even of the Greek and Latin ancient Fathers,
viz. Iustine Martyr, Athenagorus, Tertullian, etc. (It may seem vain to amuze
the Reader with a Catalogue of their Names, and Titles of their Books,
respecting this matter,) who gave good Account of their Christian Actings
against Pagans, and Heretics of various sorts, and otherwise also, as emergent
cause and occasion called for, plentifully testified in their useful learned
Writings.

4. In the several Centuries, when gross Antichristianism dominecred for the
most part throughout all Europe, then God had his faithful Witnesses
notwithstanding, who did substantially and courageously withstand and testify
against the same, Apocal. 11. 3. This is most singularly evidenced by the
industrious Collection of the Magdeburg Centurists, by Mr John Fox in his book
of Martyrs, by the noble French Lord Philip Morney, in his History of the
Mystery of Iniquity, its progress and opposition; by Doctor Usher, in his Latin
Treatise of the State and Succession of Christian Churches, etc.

5. When our English Nation came out of Spiritual Babylon, the Mother of
Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, here
was John Jewel returned from Exile, a most learned and renowned Confessor, who
wrote an Apology for the Church of England for her forsaking Rome in the Point
of Doctrine. Here was also learned and conscientious Mr Thomas Cartwright,
Udall, and diverse others, who excellently declared and demonstrated against
Hierarchy, and Romish Superstitious Ceremonies, in their Judicious Treatises
against the same.

6. In the beginning of K. James his Reign in England (some Overtures being for
the reforming of Discipline and divine Service) there was arguing against
Corruptions in Discipline and Worship at the Hampton. Court-Conference by
profound Dr Reinolds, Mr Chadderton, and Mr Knewstubs: And besides that, many
godly learned and zealous Ministers of Lincoln Diocese, by themselves, of
Devonshire and Cornwall, of London, and sundry other Counties, each by
themselves, exhibited their solid Arguments against Episcopacy and
Superstitious Conformity, yea much was effectually pleaded in this kind by Mr
Bradshaw, Mr Sherwood, and other particular men.

7. After this Dr Morton becoming Prelate of Chester (looked on for great
dexterity in Popish Controversies) he resolved to try his strength against the
Non-Conformists in Cheshire and Lancashire, and to this purpose required some
of them (which he singled out) to propound their Arguments against the Cross in
Baptism, Surplace, and Kneeling at the Communion; which done by them, and yet
they in no wise convinced: The said Non-Conformists (amongst whom the now
Accountant was one) were commanded to give him their Arguments in writing,
which they also did; yet he finding his endeavor fruitless in Conferences
openly and privately, by how much they justified their Reasons, he then (as the
event manifested) wrote a Book in defense of those three nocent Ceremonies: But
howbeit the said Non-Conformists could not with liberty and safety reply unto
his Books, (which otherwise they were ready unto,) yet God raised up pious and
acute Dr Ames (who then was an Exile in the United Netherlands) to Reply unto
it; yea and whereas Mr Burges (a Doctor in Physic, and sometimes himself a
Nonconformist, however he declined therefrom, through the ensuaring Iniquity
of the Times, and became a conforming Minister) Rejoyned unto the Reply; yet
the said Dr Ames commenced a fresh Suit against his Rejoinder for these
Ceremonies, which as it is well known was an exceptible Service in those times
to the suffering people of God, although it were barked against by the
Prelatical Party.

8. Of late in K. Charles his Reign, swollen into extreme Tyranny, every one
almost of any observation, may have taken knowledge of manifold notable and just
Declarations and Remonstrances of Parliament, tending to undeceive the people;
yea and manifold effectual Petitions and humble Advertisements to the
Parliament from the Oppressed People throughout the Land, witnessing against
Oppressions by arbitrary Power in the Civil and Ecclesiastical State, and
submisly requesting and pleading for Reformation.

IX. In this present juncture of the perplexed scruples of many, by occasion of
the required Subscribing the Engagement, There are some eminent men of well
guided counsels, and composed temper of their public spirits, who have given
forth their judicious Considerations, endevoring meekly and learnedly to give
satisfaction to such as are studious to understand rightly in so grand a Case
of Conscience as it is pretended to be.

X. And hence it is that the Premises are effectual Motives (some
Commissioners having been designed by the Supreme Power to take Subscription to
the Engagement according to the Act of Parliament) unto the Accountant, having
declared his submission to Authority, to declare also that he acts according
to right Reason satisfactory unto himself, and for the satisfying of others,
who possibly may wonder and marvel, for want of information, at such his
compliance.

SECT. II.
The Account it self truly stated, and clearly explained, in its genuine and
proper sense.

THe form of Subscription to the Engagement, ordained by the Act of Parliament,
is expressed in these words; viz. I do declare and promise, that I will be true
and faithful to the Commonwealth of England, as it is now established without
a King, or House of Lords. Howbeit it must needs be acknowledged, that this
form of words has a most easy and clear sense to any ordinary capacity, so as
no doubt nor scruple can be contained in it: Yet notwithstanding, for our
better making use and improvement of the certain and unquestionable meaning of
it unto an effectual demonstration of its lawfulness and expediency, The
Contents thereof shall be resolved into the four parts or branches, which are
obviously remarkable, and each of them explained and considered by themselves:
viz.

1. The particular condition of the person concerned and engaged. 2. The Act of
subscribing in the peculiar nature thereof. 3. The object of this peculiar Act.
4. The modification and restriction of the object in its limits and bounds.
The Explanation of the Parts and Branches.

I. The condition of the person engaging, [I,] An English born Subject,
receiving benefit and protection from this present Commonwealth, as it is now
established, in the exercise of Christianity, and of my particular Calling unto
the Ministry of the Gospel in a Pastoral charge.

Note. [That which is said touching the condition of the particular person in
his Calling and Capacity specified, has the same sense (mutatis mutandis)
respecting all sorts of persons concerned in the Engagement, of what Calling,
state, degree, and condition soever; whether they be Noblemen, Gentlemen, or
Commons; whether they be subordinate Magistrates, Judges, Justices, Majors,
Sheriffs, Bailiffs, or Constables; whether they be Lawyers, Physicians,
Ministers, Schoolmasters, Soldiers, Merchants, Mariners, Tradesmen,
Husbandmen, or Artificers; and whether their habitations are in Cities, Towns,
or Villages, or whether of any other Province comprehended under the same
Government.]

II. The Act of subscribing in the peculiar nature of it, is in this
expression; [I do Declare and Promise, that I will be true and faithful to
etc.] Expla. The nature and sum of this Act consists in the exercising of
truth and faithfulness, and approving ones self therein as occasion offers;
in no wise giving way to an acting of falsehood and Treachery against the
Commonwealth; nor to an opposing or undermining the Peace of the English Nation
under the present Government by any means; nor to a contriving or practicing
directly or indirectly any thing to the disturbance thereof: For to this effect
the very Preamble of the Act of Parliament for subscribing the Engagement,
hinteth the sense. Vid. ibid. And the Lawgivers themselves are their own best
Interpreters.

III. The Object of the Act of declaring and promising to be true and faithful,
is, as it is expressed, [The Commonwealth of England.] Expla. Touching this
branch, it may be observed for the better understanding of it, God that made
the world, and has made of one blood all Nations of men to dwell on the face
of the earth, and has determinted all the times before appointed, and the
bounds of their habitation, see Act. 17. 24. 26. he has so ordered; and
brought to pass, according to the counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1. 11. that
even Englishmen for many generations, have as a Nation lived Nationally in
England, and been combined in a politic Body, or Commonwealth, according to
the Rights and Customs of this Nation, chosen and consented unto by the people
hereof: Thus is the Commonwealth of England to be estimated.

IV. The Modification and Restriction of the object of the Act of subscribing,
is limited and bounded in this expression, [As the Commonwealth of England is
now established without a King and House of Lords.] Expla. Concerning this last
branch it may be observed, that the Commonwealth of England is now established
without a King, and House of Lords, according to a Declaration of the
Parliament, entitled, A Declaration of the Parliament of England, expressing
the grounds of their late proceedings, and of settling the present Government in
the way of a free State: This was Ordered, March 17. 1648. by the Commons in
Parliament assembled, to be printed and published. And thus much briefly and
perspicuously for the sum, and parts, and sense of the form of the
Engagement.

SECT. III.
Reasons asserting and justifying the faithfulness and conscionablenesse of
Engagement.

I. REASON.
BEcause such subscribed Engagement is agreeable to the law of nature and
Nations revealed in the holy Scriptures, dictated and inspired by the Spirit of
the God of Nature and Nations, who is our King and Lawgiver, Isai. 33. 22,
even the one only Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy; see Iam. 4.
12. compared with 2 Timothy 3. 16. Ergo, It may and ought to be subscribed: This
Reason shall be evidenced and illustrated according to the four branches and
parts observed in the Form of Engagement.

1. The condition of the person subscribing, even one who is a Subject under
this established present Government of the Commonwealth of England, and
receives benefit and protection from the same, gives good evidence and
illustration to this first Reason: For it is both lawful and requisite that
any person, who is a Subject under any supreme power whatsoever, of what kind
soever the power is, whether it be Monarchical, Aristocraticall, or
Democraticall, and of what Nation soever the person and subject is, it is
necessary, I say, that such subject person be true and faithful to such
Supreme Power. This is demonstrable by an Induction of particular instances,
viz.

1. Joseph the son of the Patriark Jacob, an Hebrew fearing God, he by occasion
living in Egypt, (having been sold thither) did not only accept employment
under the Supreme Power there, but also was true and faithful thereunto, yea,
though Egypt was an house of bondage unto the Israelites, see Genesis 41. etc.

2. Mordecai, a truly religious Jew of the children of the captivity, did
witness his truth and faithfulness unto the Persian Monarchy, by his
ingenuous discovery of the treasonable and murderous design of Bigthan and
Teresh, two of the Kings Chamberlains against King Ahashuerus, reigning in
Persia at that time; see Esther 2. 21, 22.

3. Nehemiah, an eminent servant of God, served Artaxerxes the King of Persia,
and was true and faithful unto the supreme Power, both in submitting unto, and
observing of his directions and appointment; see Neh. 2. 6. and cap. 13. 6.

4. Our blessed Savior Jesus Christ in the days of his flesh here on earth,
declared his mind touching faithfulness to Tiberius Caesar, the Roman
Emperor, being at that time supreme Commander over the Jewish Nation, so far as
did concern that his supreme power, whatever difficulties and confusions the
Jewish Nation was involved into in those days; see Mat. 22. 19, 20, 21.

5. The holy Apostle Paul approving his Apostleship to the Gentiles, as became
him, instructs the Christians at Rome to submit faithfully and
conscientiously to the present supreme power there, though the Emperors in
those times were monstrous and bloody usurping Emperors; see Romans 13. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, etc.

6. The great Apostle Peter saw just cause that the brethren of the dispersion
throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and Bythinia, should submit
themselves unto the present power they were under in those several
Territories, what ever the power was for its kind; and this for the arguing
their faithfulness unto those Powers, and their Christian faithfulness in so
doing; see 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17.

These instances may beyond all exception, vindicate the person who is an
English Subject, and has his subsistence and livelihood in England, for his
engaging unto the now established Commonwealth of England, the tie of this
relation being more natural and fundamental then those before mentioned:
Hereunto might be added, of how good report it is, (Philip. 4. 8.) that in case
any prisoners amongst us have liberty to go abroad, upon their parole, and
engaging themselves to their Goalers and Keepers to faithfulness, that they
approve themselves unto them therein; how much more in the case in hand?

2. The second branch in the form of Engagement, is the Act of subscribing in
its peculiar nature, and it is expressed in these words, [I declare, and
promise to be true and faithful to, etc.] Now this peculiar Act does afford
another ground to argue the reasonableness of the Engagement, according to
Scripturall Reason: Since truth and faithfulness in any persons in any
concernments, does hear well on all hands, as on the contrary, falsehood and
treachery does hear ill. This may be manifested and evinced in these ensuing
assertions.

1 God himself is glorified by his Attribute of faithfulness, Deuteronomy. 7. 9.
Psalm. 36. 5. 2. Christ styles himself the faithful and true witness,
Apocal. 3. 14. 3. Gods gracious respect is unto faithful ones, Heb. 3. 2. 5.
Mat. 25. 21. 23. 4. Faithfulness is a character of approved ones: See
instances, viz. 1. A faithful man fearing God above many, Neh. 7. 2. 2. A
faithful Priest, doing according to Gods heart, 1 Samuel 2. 35. 3. Faithful
with the Saints, ruling with God, Hos. 11. ^2. 4. A faithful Ambassador is
health, Prove. 13. 17. 5. It is required of Stewards to be found faithful, 1
Cor. 4. 2. 6. A faithful and wise servant, Mat. 24. 45. 7. A faithful Martyr,
Apocal. 2. 13. etc.
5. Falsehood and unfaithfulness is a character of the wicked, Psalm. 5. 9. as
being, 1. Prohibited, Exodus 23. 7: 2. Reproved, Psalm. 1 20. 3. 3. Punishable,
Deuteronomy. 19. 18, 19. etc.

These particular assertions being duly weighed, are grounds and motives to
attract and persuade evermore to act truly and faithfully, as the nature of the
object does also further require, nextly to be insisted on.

3. The object of the Act of subscribing the Engagement, does give yet further
ground of evidence and confirmation of the first Scripturall Reason, viz. [I
declare and promise to be true and faithful to the Commonwealth of England.]
Since the Common wealth of England is the same Commonwealth that it has been
for very many ages and generations successively; as it may appear diverse ways.

1. It is of the same English language, and native Mother tongue.

2. It is the same Continent, and has the same borders and bounds.

3. It has the same great Charter of its Laws [Magna Charta.]

4. It acts in the doing of Justice and Judgment in the same way of open
Courts at Westminster, and in the several Counties of the Nation at Assizes,
and Sessions, and inferior Judicatories; and these transactions are managed by
the learned Judges, Justices of Peace, Stewards, Juries, and Witnesses, etc. as
has been anciently accustomed.

5. It professes and establishes the true Christian Religion, according to
the sacred Scriptures of the Old and New Testament.

6. And principally it enacteth Laws by Parliamentary Power, and it only,
enacting some new Laws, and repealing some old Laws, (pro re nata) as occasion
and cause requires, and as it has been wont to do: And herein the very form
of the Commonwealth consists.

Yea, and howbeit, there have been and are various conditions of persons, and
also of ways of governing by Britains, Saxons, Danes, and Normans, both in
Civil and Ecclesiastical Affairs unto this day, refining and reforming Laws
and Government as need has required; yet none of these variations may be said
to abrogate or disanull the identity of the Commonwealth of England. It is
true indeed, that as in some part heretofore, so in the later times very much
that was amiss has been amended not only in the expulsion of Antichrist in
the branch in Queen Elizabeth's time, but also in the root by this present
Parliament; as also, much good has been by the Parliament, in suppressing of
arbitrary power, taking away the High Commission Court, Star Chamber,
Hierarchy, and superstitious monuments of Popish Idolatry, etc. but yet
notwithstanding it is the same Commonwealth still, yea, and English blood and
spirits are yet remaining amongst us.

It is in great part with us in England, as it was with the Commonwealth of
Israel, Chronichled in the Canonical Scriptures of the Old Testament, viz.
They were the same Commonwealth of Israel, from their first establishment to
be a National Commonwealth in Sinai, Exodus 19. 1. etc. until the utter ruin
of their Commonwealth, foretold and prophesied of by our Savior Christ, Mat.
24. and afterward effected by Vespasian, the Roman Emperor, as may be seen in
these instances:

1. They were all along of the same Hebrew language.

2. They had the same great Charter of Moses Laws both for Civil and Church
Affairs.

3. They had the same borders and bounds still reckoned on, albeit sometimes
more or less extended or restrained.

4. They reformed amisses both in Church and State (as their condition did
admit) as occasion was, and their hearts bent thereto.

5. And although they had also sundry conditions of persons and ways of
governing, namely,

1. In the Wilderness by the hands of Moses and Aaron; see Psalm. 77. 20. 2. In
Canaan by Judges 450. years; see Act. 13. 20. 3. By Kings afterward till the
captivity, and these variously obtaining their regality; see Books of Samuel,
Kings and Chronocles. 4. By variously conditioned men after the captivity near
500. years, etc. and yet from Moses to Herod they were the Commonwealth of
Israel; see Luke 1. 5. - 68. and cap. 2. 25.
These instances being duly observed, there is just cause that English Patriots
in their love and zeal of their native Country, should show themselves to be
true and faithful to the Commonwealth of England, in whose hands soever the
Government is established; and this the rather, because true Israelites indeed
in whose spirits was no guile, (see John 1. 47.) were wont to be faithful in
their days to such their Commonwealth. Let some instances of a few such
Worthies of the Lords be remembered also herein, who did demean themselves
faithfully as present state required.

1. Joshua and Caleb encouraging the Israelites in the Wilderness, when many
others discouraged them; see Numb. 14. 6, 7.

2. Congregation of Israel, when there was no King in Israel, on occasion of
the horrid distemper mentioned, Judge. 20. 1. etc.

3. David a private man, when Goliath defied the Host f Israel, 1 Samuel 17. 32.

4. Hushai the Archite acting faithfully in the time of Absolons unnatural
rebellion, 2 Samuel 15. 32.

5. Obediah in the time of Iezabels persecuting malignity, 1 King. 18. 3, 4.

6. Iehonadab the son of Rechab adhering to Iehu, 2 Kings 10. 15.

7. Shecaniah stirring up Ezra to act in perplexed times, Ezra 10. 2, 3.

Certainly such examples ought to be presidents unto the people of God in
England, to act as such faithful servants of God did act in their generations.

4. Lastly, the modification and restriction of the object, viz: [The
Commonwealth of England, as it is now established without a King and House of
Lords,] being compared with such Texts of Scripture, as by just consequence are
to be made use of, will strongly argue its establishment to be agreeable to the
mind of God the Lawgiver; so as therefore there is good reason for subscribing
the Engagement: For this purpose let these three assertions implied in this
modification of object, be well considered.

1. The Commonwealth of England, as it is now established without a King and
House of Lords, is so established by the Parliament.

2. The Parliament that has declared and settled the Commonwealth of England
in a free State without a King and House of Lords, is the Sovereign Power in
England.

3. There is no just cause of refusing to subscribe the Engagement, because of
Commonwealths establishment without a King and House of Lords,

1. Assertion. The first of these Assertions may be manifested by the
Parliaments Declaration, March 17. 1648. expressing the grounds of their
proceedings, etc. of settling the present Government in the way of a free State:
The Parliament Declaration contains four remarkable Causes of such their
proceedings, and settling the Government, to be viewed in a short Synopsis, viz.

1. Cause. The first cause was in respect of Kingly Government, (set up in our
Nation by the agreement of the people for their protection and better
government, according to such Laws as they consented unto) which is taken away
for these Reasons.

1. Reason. Kingly Power was perverted by most of the Trustees, and most
notoriously by the late King, who by many degrees exceeded the rest. Such his
vile miscarriage is exemplified in the Parliament Declaration, by about fifty
undeniable pregnant instances, needless to insert. It were good that every
English Patriot had the Declaration by him in these confused times to peruse
frequently.

2. Reason. The Kings two eldest Sons appeared in actual arms against the
Parliament, so as no hope of future security could be expected unto the Nation
from them.

3. Reason. There is elder right of supreme power in the people of the Land,
then was in the Kings children.

4. Reason. If any Right or Title belonged to the Kings eldest son, the same
is forfeited by the Fathers treasonable Act; as in other cases, even in offices
of Inheritance, it is wont.

5. Reason. The Kings younger children equally forfeited upon the same account.

6. Reason. It is in the same power and authority which at first erected a King
for common good, and afterward finds him to pervert his Kingship to common
evil; it is in their power, whether they will continue his Kingly power, or
change it to a better.

7. Reason. God has specially blessed free States, who formerly were oppressed
by tyranny, as is seen in united Netherlands, and others.

8. Reason. There are manifold commodious advantages to people in Free-States:
Manifold oppressions and damages are under Monarchy: Vast expense is wont to
be by Court luxury and prodigality. Profuse Donations and pensions for the
promoting Tyranny; yea, and the Court (being the nursery of vices, and
corrupter of hopeful branches of noble Families) prevented in a Free State. See
Declarat.

2. Cause. The second cause of Parliament proceedings touched on in the
Declaration, respects the taking away of the House of Lords, for just
reasons, viz.

1. Reason. The Lords sat in an house by themselves, and did not represent the
people, and therefore might be well spared.

2. Reason. They exercised a negative Vote, tending to obstruct much.

3. Reason. They exercised a juridicall power over the persons, and estates of
all the Commons, whereof they were not competent Judges.

4. Reason. Their power did specially depend on the absoluteness of the King.

5. Reason. The Commonwealth could not well bear their delays in times of
exigency.

6. Liberty is left to such Lords, who have been, and shall be found faithful,
to choose, and to be chosen Representatives, as other competent persons have
their right unto. See Declarat.

3. Cause. Thirdly, the Parliament gives satisfactory answers to the obvious
main objections against their proceedings, viz. Anticipat.

1. It was intended, as it was declared April 1646. for governing the Nation by
King, Lords and Commons, in a confidence that the King and Peers would have
applied themselves, as had been meet; but they wholly and obstinately failing
therein, and there being no stipulation on both sides, it could not be esteemed
a contract; so that the Commons did most justly after their intentions.

2. Although some Members of the House of Commons had some force on them (it
having at any time rarely happened in times of Parliament, but some force more
or less has been exercised against them, or some of them, and they esteemed
to be Parliament for all this) yet no breach of Privilege can be charged upon
the remaining part in the House, which remaining part did far exceed such
authorized number, who do make an House beyond all exception.

3. The Parliament has declared that the Fundamental Laws of the Nation are
to be continued, as also Courts of Justice and Judicature in a due way. See
Declaration.

Cause. Lastly, the Parliaments Declaration shows their just and
well-grounded ends in the establishing the Commonwealth, as now it is without
King and Lords: Let the Declaration it self be exactly skanned in its full and
effectual expressions, and it may appear it was not force on some without the
Parliament doors, but the force of right reason on the Members within the
House, which has so declared: How forcible are right words? See Job 6. 25.

II. Assertion. The second Assertion touching the Sovereign Power of the
English Parliament is taken for granted, not only by the Parliament themselves,
groundedly demonstrated in their Declaration above mentioned in the first
Assertion, and likewise in their exercise of supreme power in issuing out
Commissions both to subordinate Magistrates for the doing of justice, and to
the Soldiery for defensive and offensive wars; but also it is taken for
granted by others, rational men in the Commonwealth, who have acted by their
Commissions; and this from year to year of late whilst the King lived, as well
as this present year, 1649. yea, and there are many who have published their
minds touching this matter: This has been done by Mr. Prynne (though now an
adversary hereunto) in four voluminous parts of one of his books, with a large
Appendix thereunto, entitled, The Sovereign Power of Parliaments, whither the
Reader may be referred: only I do observe hereabouts, That God the only
Lawgiver, and Sovereign King of Kings, and all supreme powers, having been
graciously pleased to preserve unto us in England the substance of our
Commonwealth hitherto, surely he has appointed and continued unto us the Law
of Nature, contained in the Decalogue to be our rule of life in our several
capacities of inferiority and superiority, whether supreme or subordinate, as
well in Civil Government, as in Church and Family; yea, to have a Magistracy
to be keepers of both the Tables; see Romans 13. 4. compared with Exodus 19. 6.
and cap. 20. 1. and 12. And therefore our transactions in England touching our
Laws, and the executing of them, areby lawful commissioned persons of
several sorts (otherwise the Law of Nature feemeth to fail) and so
consequently are lawfully administered by them. Oh that all men fearing God
amongst us, specially such as have complied with the Parliament, after the King
his leaving the House, and withdrawing from it, would consider soberly and
seriously hereof, and so take heed of daring to think, or speak, or act against
those in Authority, lest they do incur Gods fierce displeasure: See Numb. 12.
cap. 2 Pet. 2. 10. Psalm. 2. 12. It is hard for any to kick against the pricks,
Acts 9. 5. and to resist the Ordinance of God, Romans 13. 2.

III. Assertion. The third Assertion, That there is no just cause of refusing
to subscribe the Engagement, in regard of the present establishment of the
Commonwealth of England, without a King and House of Lords. It may be argued,
as otherwise, so from the rule of our own practice, who do profess our due
respects to Parliaments, viz.

1. It was not taken to be prejudicial, or dangerous to the Privileges of
Parliament, that the Lords spiritual (as they were styled) were cashiered and
expelled out of the House of Lords, albeit they had been called by Writ, and
had formerly and very anciently been esteemed and reputed Members of that House.

2. It did not infringe the nature and being of the Parliament, that the King
after a time withdrew himself totally from the House.

3. The Parliament did retain its perfect constitution and being when very
many, yea, most of the Lords, and when very many of the Commons withdrew
themselves, pretending to be a Parliament at Oxford, since a competent number
remained still in the House.

4. It is alleged out of approved Antiquaries, that in case all the Lords
after a due Summons should fail to appear and sit in the House, that their
total absence does not, nor cannot hinder or nullify the due Parliamentary
proceedings, whereas it is destructive to the being of the Parliament, if a
competent number of Commons constituted to make up an House, be absent, since
the Commons are the Representatives of the people; see Prynnes Sovereign Power
of Parliament, Part 1. Page 43. Edit. 2.

5. It is resolved and declared by the Parliament, that the King had not a
negative Vote.

These five particular instances being duly marked, together with that which
the Parliament has declared, March 17. 1648. as above, may abundantly
convince, that according to this third Assertion, there is no cause of just
refusal to subscribe the Engagement to the Commonwealth of England, as it is
now established: And so the first Argument justifying the faithfulness and
conscionableness of the subscription, is fully concluded.

II. REASON.
Because subscribing the Engagement has its due consistency and agreement with
the main scope and intention of former Oaths, Protestations, and Covenants
prae-ingaged in nationally unto the supreme Power of England, approved mostly
on all hands; so that as right reason did then require the taking of them in
their just sense, so does the same reason now require to take the Engagement.

For the more effectual arguing the case by this reason, these Conclusions are
to be opened and considered, viz.

1 Conclusion. It is presumed and taken for granted, that the Oaths of
Supremacy and Allegiance, the Protestations and solemn Covenants were made of
lawful things lawfully, and in the Lord, according to the sacred and divine
Rule, Thou shall swear the Lord lives, in Truth, in Judgment, and in
Righteousness, Ier. 4. 2. For otherwise there is an undoubted nullity of them,
ipse facto, since no man ought to perform what is irrationally sworn, and is in
it self unrighteous and unlawful. Of this sinful nature have been the
unlawful and unrighteous Oaths and Subscriptions of many, many Ministers in
this Land in the times of prevailing Episcopacy, and superstitious conformity;
for which things sake the Land mourns, Ier. 23. 10. And therefore the
swearers of Canonical obedience of the etc. Oath, and the Subscribers,
willingly (and ex animo) to the Articles by Cannon required to be subscribed
unto, have cause to set themselves to sorrow godly, so as they may evidence
their repentance not to be repented of, which will produce the effects of godly
sorrow mentioned, 2 Cor. 7. 11. for otherwise the, Lord will not hold them
guiltless that have taken his name in vain, Exodus 20. 7.

2. Conclusion. The main and chief scope and end of the oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance formerly; and of the Protestation and Covenant lately, and likewise
of the Engagement at the present was, and is the just safety and preservation
of the Commonwealth of England, against illegal and violent usurpations and
attempts, whether of Forreiners or Natives, of any sort and condition of
persons in what kind or notion soever, as may appear by the Statutes, Acts,
Declarations, and orders of those in Supreme Authority, that have required the
people of the Land to submit unto the taking and subscribing of them.

3. Conclusion. It is taken for granted that the Parliament Party who ordered
the Protestation first, and the Covenant afterward to be taken, did apprehend
and judge that the said Protestation and Covenant, did not contradict the Oath
of Supremacy and Allegiance; neither yet did the Covenantiers understand any
contrarinesse therein (however the Malignant Cavaliers and Royalists might
possibly think otherwise) but rather that there was a legal consistency and
agreement in their sense and meaning; inasmuch as at the same time, when
occasion required, there was a taking of the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance,
notwithstanding the taking of the Covenant, as it is well known. For it was not
the person of Charles Stuart that was sworn unto, but his Kingly legal Office,
to be administered by him according to Law for the safety of the people; Because
any man's person (and therefore the Kings also) being subject to such
occasional accidents and incident condition, as may justly disfit and disable
not only for governing, but also from being preserred alive; there is therefore
no just reason of swearing fealty simply and absolutely, but in the Lord only,
and according to Law. Now there is the same reason of legal consistency and
agreement with the Engagement, and with the Protestation and Covenant, as there
was of the consistency and agreement of the Protestation and Covenant; with the
Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance. And albeit several sorts of persons
exercised the supreme power at several times, viz. The King before the
Parliament was called, The King, Lords and Commons a space together after the
first sitting of the Parliament; The Commons alone at the present, yet
notwithstanding the safety of the Commonwealth was all along propounded, and
to be prosecuted, and still is.

4. Conclusion. Every lawful Oath, Protestation, Covenant, and Engagement, are
undoubtedly sacred Obligations, and ought to be kept and preserved inviolably.
For so God 1. Commands, Levit. 19. 12. 2. Approves, Psalm. 15. 4. 3.
Threatens otherwise, Exodus 20. 7. 4. Yea and punishes breaches when it is
otherwise, 2 Chronicles. 36. 13. Ezekiel. 17. 15. etc. whence it follows, that Oaths
of Supremacy and Allegiance; yea, and the Protestation and the Covenant
formerly taken, have in the maine scope and end of them, an obligatory force
still, even the safety of the Commonwealth, as has been already declared.

5. Conclusion. Subscribing the Engagement (having it is legal consistency and
agreement with former Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and also with the
Protestation and Covenant) does engage to perform and fulfill, what ^n the main
of the said Oaths, Protestation and Covenant was engaged; even the approving
truth and faithfulness to the Commonwealth, whereas refusing to subscribe the
Engagement argues a breach, at least a disposition unto the breach of those
Oaths, Protestation and Covenant.

These five Conclusions, as they have been laid open, are a sufficient way and
means of making good our second reason. Let us have grace whereby we may serve
the Lord acceptably, with reverence and godly fear. For our God is a consuming
fire, Heh. 12. 28, 29.

III. REASON.
Because the profit and advantage of subscribing the Engagement, may most
probably by Gods blessing, be much every way. See this in some instances.

1. Prevention of the ruin of the Commonwealth, which may be occasioned and
caused through disagreement and distance in point of just and requisite
compliances. For when a Kingdom is divided against it self, it is brought to
desolation, and every City or house divided against it self shall not stand.
See Mat. 12. 25. It is a token of Gods great controversy, when he sets
Egyptians against Egyptians, to fight every one against his brother, and every
one against his neighbor, City against City, and Kingdom against Kingdom.
See Isa. 19. 2. It was a difficult and perplexed state of times in the
Commonwealth of Israel, when civil wars were betwixt David and the house of
Saul, 2 Samuel 2. and 3. cap. but bettered and more happy when matters were
composed and a league made, 2 Samuel 5. 1, 2, 3. And so it was an exceeding
distempered state of times of late in England for some years together, when
their just Liberties were endeavored by the Parliament and their Forces
(protesting and covenanting thereunto) that then others of the Nation were up
in arms for tyranny, and protested for it. But the most infinitely wise and
gracious God, having now been pleased to grant deliverance from Tyranny unto
the Nation, by the Parliament and their Forces, why should not people come in
and engage together, as did the Israelites above mentioned. 2 Samuel 5. 1, 2, 3.
Oh that we of this Nation were affected as David was (most probably on that
occasion) to say or sing heartily, Psalm. 133. 1. Behold how good and how
pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity! etc.

2. Settled peace and prosperity (which religiously affected Common-wealths-men
ought to pray and seek for. See Psalm. 122. 6, 7, 8.) is likest to be effected
and promoted in the Commonwealth (as otherwise, so) by mutual engaging to be
true and faithful thereunto. For hence good and special encouragement may be
to the inhabitants to exercise husbandry, trade, merchandise, building,
planting, etc. there being in such case opportunity to live quietly and
peaceably without any disturbance, and to enjoy the administration of Justice
and Judgment, as occasion shall require, even as it fared with the flourishing
Commonwealth of Israel, at such times when they had rest in the days of the
Judges, albeit they then had no King: see Judge. 3. 11. 30.

3. Welfare of Church state (which consists singularly in special united
combinations of single Congregations in their Presbyteries, and of Presbyteries
combined in Synods, lesser or greater; see Acts 2. 47. Mat. 18. 17. 1 Timothy 4.
14. Acts 15. 2. 4. 6. etc.) shall be notably and effectually accomplished by
such Engagement: For thereby such as are Church Officers, and likewise such as
are Church Members, shall be disposed in their spirits, and composed in their
minds and hearts, to think and act humbly and soberly, as becomes members of
the mystical body, whereof Christ Jesus is the head; see Romans 12. 3, 4, 5, 6.
1 Cor. 1. 10. whereas when divisions do take place, then unavoidable offenses
and scandalls are occasioned, to the Churches very great damage, Romans 16. 17.
Alas, alas! how can it be much expected, that Presbytery shall be generally
settled throughout England, when so many as do pretend to affect and desire it,
are not only contrary minded to their brethren, who should combine together in
several associations, but do also walk contrary to the supreme power, who are
the Churches nursing Fathers, and to whom it belongs to establish and
patronize Church Government; see Romans 13. 4.

4. Silencing the mouths of ignorant and foolish profane men (who are
corrupt, and forward to be clamorously talkative, and babbling against the
waves of God and his people; see Prove. 9. 13. but it is Gods will, that by a
due Christian doing their ignorance and folly should be stopped, 1 Pet. 2. 15.)
shall be commodiously attained by a unanimous concurrence of brethren to engage
and act for common and public safety, even unto the vexing, disheartning and
daunting of adversaries; see the exemplification hereof in a pregnant instance
of the State of the Jewish Commonwealth after their return from the
captivity, and had no King at such time, applying themselves to reform
amisses, and repair breaches, when grudged at, and opposed greatly; for
whereas all sorts set themselves in their standings unto the work, as we have a
full Catalogue of their names, and order of their building the wall, Neh. 3.
yea, of the Tekoites repairing, though their Nobles put not their neck to the
work of the Lord, Neh. 3. 5.) it came to pass, that Sanballat, and Tobiah the
Ammonite, were wondrously and strangely exanimated and confounded thereat; see
Neh. 4. 1. etc.

5. Rejoicing of the spirits of Christians at home and abroad, both in our own
Land, and in neighbor Churches and Countries, and their glorifying of God in
such case, shall be the consequent of such Engagement, which is no small
benefit: How Christians at home are taken and affected, when with one accord
there is a joining and continuing together, and what is the fruit thereof, we
may see declared Act. 2. 42. -- 46, 47. yea, and abroad likewise, Act. 15. 31.
Gal. 1. 23, 24. That comfortable Prophecy and gracious Promise respecting
Gospel Times more specially, made mention of Isaiah 44. 5. viz. One shall say,
I am the Lords, and another shall call himself by the God of Jacob, and
another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by
the name of Israel: And another mentioned, Zach. 8. 23. Thus says the Lord of
Hosts, in those days it shall come to pass, that ten men shall take hold out
of all languages of the Nations, even shall take hold of the skirt of him that
is a Jew, saying, we will go with you, for we have heard that God is with you:
Even these Prophecies and Promises may be alluded unto by way of resemblance,
to denote the advantages by Englishmens concurrence unto the public good and
welfare of the Nation.

This fivefold profit insisted on, may well be an attractive to allure, and
persuade to seek and follow after it, since the merchandise thereof is better
then the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof is better then gold; it
is more precious then Rubies, and nothing that can be desired, is to be
compared unto it. And thus far of the three Reasons: And a threefold cord is
not quickly broken, Eccles. 4. 12.

SECT. IV.
Objections against subscribing the Engagement, satisfactorily answered.

ALthough that which has been already declared in the true stating of the
Account of subscribing the Engagement, and also in the evincing the truth and
faithfulness of it by the three Reasons which have been hitherto insisted on,
is of full sufficiency to give satisfaction to such persons as are cordially
inclined to a love of truth and peace; yet notwithstanding because there are
some Zealots found (having [therein] a zeal of God, but not according to
knowledge, Romans 10. 2.) who at least do think that they do God good service, in
refusing to act in that which they are warrantably called unto, (even as Peter
the Apostle did, Acts 10. 1^. etc.) and in acting contrary unto the way, which
it is meet they should walkin, (as the Apostle Paul sometime thought he ought to
do, Act. 26. 9.) It shall not there fore be grievous unto me (and I trust it
will not be irksome to the Reader) to add a few lines more for the further
convincing of obstinace gainsayers, and for the undeceiving of tractable
minded persons, who are willing to be instructed in righteousness; and this is
to be done in answering some Objections made against the Subscribing of the
Engagement.

I. Object. The generality of all sorts of persons in London, yes, and
throughout the whole land, are disaffected unto this subscribing.

Ans. It is no good argument against it, because it is said that it is
generally disaffected; as it were no good argument for it, if it should be
said, that it were generally approved, since it is not simply to the
commendation ordiscommendation of a course that it is generally observed, or
not observed; for sometimes a righteous way is generally spoken against, see
Act. 28. 22. and sometimes a notorious sinful way is generally cried up with
great acclamation; see Act. 19. 34. And yet notwithstanding it is well known,
that very many of all sorts in the Land, besides the supreme power requiring
it, are well-affected unto it, even reverend Judges, faithful justices,
knowing Lawyers, understanding Soldiers, judicious Preachers, and
conscientious religious People, etc.

II. Object. Subscription unto the Engagement is refused not only by malignant
Cavaliers and Royal^sts, etc. but also generally by Covenantiers and
Presbyterians in London Province, and likewise throughout the Land.

Answ. 1. It were to be wished affectionately, that this Objection might not be
declared in Gath, to the rejoicing and exulting of the Canaanite and Perizzite,
who do yet dwell in the Land. See Micah. 1. 10. Genesis 13. 7.

2. It does not simply, nor yet justly at all reflect disgracefully either on
the Presbytery, or on the solemn Covenant, that some or many persons who have
conformed to Presbytery, and Covenant, do now show themselves unconformable to
the Engagement; since it is no new thing for many to cleave unto others by
flatteries. See Dan. 11. 34. There were false brethren brought into Churches,
and amongst the true brethren. See Galat. 2. 4.

3. Albeit the Covenant and the Engagement being both of them rightly
understood, can well agree together, (as has been cleared in the second reason
of this account) yea and there is nothing in Presbytery sounds of any
discrepancy; so as neither Presbytery nor Covenant is any way trenched on by
engaging; yet notwithstanding, since Presbytery is of Ecclesiastical
cognizance, and Engagement is unto civil Power; this objection therefore
bears no proportion to the case in hand.

4. Many Ministers and people (through vulgar weakness, and too great a degree
of time-serving sinister respects) have been apt to Vote and Act after the mind
of some eminent ringleaders to faction (as well as by eminent Reformers unto
good ways: See Iosiahs days) asis to be seen in that preference of Barabbas
before Christ, through the persuasion of the chief Priests and Elders, Mat. 37.
20. How many Ministers were there in prelaticall times, who did swear
canonically, and subscribe implicitly, who yet did change also implicitly with
the times, covenanting against former ways? Thus it was also with many former
conforming, and late covenanting people following their guides. Not long since
there were very many (who have professed Christ's way of Presbytery) who did
subscribe Attestations implicitly, both in London Province, in Lancashire, in
Shropshire, in Cheshire, and in other Counties, touching several Opinions, and
books, and the Authors of them scarce known unto them in the very titles, much
less read and weighed by them (I speak what I know of several of them) but
were drawn and persuaded thereunto by a few chief sticklers and promoters in
those affairs. Whence it follows, that it is far the less considerable,
that a multitude is pretended unto in the case in hand.

5. It is undoubtedly true, notwithstanding that very many faithful
Pres(...)erians, and conscientious Covenantiers do subscribe the E^gagement
thouoh some others refuse to do it) and (...) ad(...)age is to be made of the
number of the Presbyteri(...) (...) (...)tiers argumentatively, who subscribe
the En(...) (...) ^t is probable enough that many such may have b(...)
(...)erly swayed thereunto. An estimate is to be made by the just reason, and
not by the great number of those that subscribe the Engagement.

III. Object. Some of the good old Non-conformists, do refuse to subscribe the
Engagement.

Answ. 1. And some of the old Non-conformists, who conscientiously refused to
subscribe some of the Articles, canonically requiring subscription to them,
(but then refused not to subscribe according to the Law of the Land, provided
in such case; See Eliz. 1^. 12.) even those non-subscribers can with good
conscience subscribe the Engagement.

2. It must needs be acknowledged, that the good old Non-conformists (who as
Judah in evil times, ruled with God, and were saithfull amongst the Saints,
when Ephraim compassed him about with lies, and the house of Israel with
deceit. See Hos. 11. 12.) are men subject to passions and error, as well as
others, Humanum est errare, Let God be true, and every man a lier, etc. See
Romans 3. 4. It is a known and lamented case, how temptation prevailed too much
with sundry professed Non-conformists in thetimes of Episcopacy, occasioning
them to shrink and give in, either through fear of men, or love of the world,
or for serving the times, after they had some ways professed otherwise: yea,
and this no doubt came to pass through divine permission for their humbling,
and that they might better know what was in their own hearts, it was in this
case with them, as it had been with some faithful servants of God, who were
duly affected to Presbyteriall and Synodicall principles, and yet by occasion
sometime fa^^ed to walk evenly therein, viz. The Apostle Peter at Antioch
withdrew himself from the Gentiles, (howbeit the Synodicall decree was
otherwise, Acts 15. 1. etc. and as David Dickson interprets in case in hand,
on Galat. 2. 11.) yea, and other Jews dissembled likewise, insomuch as Barnabas
also was carried away with their dissimulation. But the Apostle Paul adhering
to the Synodical dec(...) (...)stood Peter, Galat. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14. yea, and
the Apostle Peter (...) (...)erward making mention by occasion of the Apostle
Paul (...)leth him beloved brother Paul, and commends his wise and faithful
d^portment. See 2 Pet. 3. 15, 16. So well could the blessed Apostles act and
submit, and agree in Presbyterian ways, according to (...)ripture, when they
were themselves. Oh that we could duly observe and become advertised hereby,
who approved our selves conscientious Non-conformists under Prelaticall
trials. But to return to the answer more nearly after this short digression;
Let it be taken notice, that albeit some weaknesses do break ont from some old
Nonconformists, yet it concerns them, as well as those who hitherto escape
such temptations, to set our selves to walk by Scripture Rule, to be sober and
watchful in all things, for the approving the goodness of our consciences,
willing in all things to live honestly. See Heb. 13. 18.

IIII. Object. A Presbyterian Minister, and ancient Nonconformist, being now
grown aged above sixty year, howbeit through the grace of God, he approved
himself in the whole course of his Ministry hitherto, not only in holding fast
the form of sound words in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus, but also
in withstanding Prelaticall subscription, and superstitious conformity, unto
suspension, and exile, etc. yet now through infirmity of age may fail, and so
consent to subscribe the Engagement.

Answ. 1. It is both possible and probable, and sure also, (through the grace
and faithfulness of him that has promised) that those who are planted in the
house of God, shall still bring forth fruit in old age, Psa. ^2. 13, 14. as
having by reason of use, their senses exercised to discern both good and evil.
See Heb. 5. 14. Let wisdom, be justified of her children, and praised likewise
for free grace; yea and for confidence therein.

2. Albeit, God sometimes takes away the understanding of the aged, Job ^2.
20. so as they do not always understand judgment, Job 32. 9. yet sometimes it
may come to pass, that aged ones may have natural vigor and parts for going
out, and coming in in their callings, as well as they had, when they were
younger, Josh. 14. 11. Yea, and ordinarily it is an argument for chalenging
respect unto what is said or done, when it comes from the aged. The Apostle
Paul in pleading a matter with Philemon, uses this argument to persuade the
rather, because even Paul the aged did move therein, Philem 9. ver.

3. In the year 1614. an aged Minister of an hoary head, and silver hairs (M.
Tilecoat by name of B. M.) and myself then a young man, did both of us together
receive a sentence of suspension from the exercise of our Ministry, for our
refusing Hierarchicall subscription and conformity to Ceremonies, declared
against us by the then Chancellor of Chester, (under, which we remained for a
time) who added to that our suffering, his mocking and jeering of us, that the
one of us was very aged, and the other very young, as if therefore our
witnesse-bearing to the truth of the Gospel were less to be regarded. And yet
that which the Chancellor uttered reproachfully, became unto me for
confirmation and encouragement, having the good and grave old Father to be
exemplary; as others of good note in Cheshire did then also judge it well might
be useful to me; whatever now some do prejudicially conceit of the aged.

4. It is the less marvel, that some do detract from the authority of the
aged and hoar-headed, whenas the same persons are also self-willed and
presumptuous in despising and speaking evil of Government and Supreme Power,
(2 Pet. 2. 10.) whereas yet notwithstanding, God has revealed in his word that
it ought to be otherwise. See Levit. 19. 32. Romans 13. 7.

V. Object. It is doubted that an insnaring danger may lurk in the promise
declared of being faithful to the Commonwealth, forasmuch as the sense of the
word faithful may peradventure be strained afterward to entangle the
subscriber.

Ans. 1. One would scarcely have thought that any man of common capacity to
understand English, much less that any knowing Christian, and least of all
that any Minister of the Gospel, could have had such a scruple; since neither
it is notation, nor the obvious use of the word, as it is either in the
Scripture (which is full of it) or as it is in ordinary speech and acception
amongst men, can give any rise for such a groundless scrupulous fancy.

2. A doting about strifes of words produces no profit, but strife, envy,
railings, evil surmisings, perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, and
destitute of the truth, even to the subverting of the hearers; see 1 Timothy 6. 4,
5. and 2 Timothy 2. 14. let therefore the godly wise Christians and Ministers,
avoid such questions about words clear in themselves, studying to show
themselves approved unto God, etc. 2 Timothy 2. 15.

3. Let such wordy Questionists remember that the pious and prudent contrivers
of the Directory for the public Worship of God throughout England, Scotland,
and Ireland, established by our Parliament, in that part of it which directs
about the solemnization of Marriage, they thought it meet that the persons to
be married together should promise mutually to be faithful unto one another:
In the Directory for the Ordination of Ministers, it is Ordered, that such as
shall be ordained, do declare a promise of faithfulness, as well as of other
duties, in the exercise of their Ministry. I do hence demand, whether persons
to be married, or Ministers to be ordained, should, the one sort of them
scruple the accomplishment of their marriage, or the other sort scruple their
Ordination, because of the Engagement to be faithful in their relative
conditions? and whether they should surcease rather therefrom upon a
fantastical conceit, that the sense of the word faithful may be strained to
some insnaring afterward? I conclude therefore, that as in Domestical and
Ecclesiastical relations there is a requisitenesse of promising to be true and
faithful, so it ought to be likewise in the relation in the Commonwealth, that
there be an Engagement of faithfulness thereunto: If any man be otherwise
minded touching being faithful in the mentioned relations in Family, Church
and Commonwealth, surely he seems to give ground of just jealousy, that he
means not fairly; that I say no more.

VI. Object. There was a liberty granted and directed by Order of Parliament,
that Preachers in giving of the Covenant should explain it, and accordingly the
Preacher explained it in such sense, as he apprehends stands not with his
freedom of conscience to subscribe the Engagement.

Ans. 1. The liberty allowed and directed unto Preachers for explaining the
Covenant, ought to be understood of such explaining it, as stood with the just
and genuine sense of it, as all rational men will easily acknowledge: If any
Preachers took a liberty otherwise, they did abuse their liberty; yea, it was a
collusion and imposture in the Preacher whoever he was, to put a sense thereon
of his own not agreeing thereto, frustrating what in him lay, the end of the
Covenant and the taking of it.

2. They that thus object, do not speak out what the sense of the Preacher was
that he gave of the Covenant inconsistent with the Engagement, so as it cannot
be expected that a full and satisfactory answer should be made thereto; his
sense being in the dark, may be reputed an act of darkness, albeit confused
and uncertain speech be of it in the streets at noon day.

3. This Objection gives occasion to suspect that some persons (yea, some who
pretend for Presbytery, but are loosly minded thereunto, since such do thus
object) do make an advantage to put the Covenant to their own sense, to free
themselves thereby from the sacred bonds of it in its own sense and meaning.

4. Let such Objecters be pleased for the undeceiving themselves and their
adherents, plainly and punctually (in their own consciences and conferences
with their Associates) answer these demands without any tergiversation, for
arguing their sincerity toward God and toward men about the Covenant.

1. Whether the Covenant was not obligatory in its due sense and meaning in
every article of it, as well as in some branches of some of the Articles more
specially affected? 2. Whether there were not some main things primarily, and
other things subserviently covenanted? And what those maine things, and what
the subservient things were? that thus truth and faithfulness may be discerned
hereabouts. 3. Whether the chief ends of the Covenant were not Reformation, and
defense of Religion, and the safety of the People? 4. Whether the honor and
happiness of the King was absolutely covenanted, albeit he should remain
obstinate in his tyranny, and in other unnatural capital crimes, unto which
God had appointed temporal death? 5. Whether the grand Privilege of
Parliament, unto which others are subservient, be not, that above forty members
of the House of Commons acting freely in the House, do continue the being of
the House of Parliament? And consequently, whether by virtue of the Covenant
such House of Commons ought not to be acknowledged the Parliamentary supreme
Power?
FINIS.

