THE ART OF GRAVEING and ETCHING wherein is expressed the true way of Graueing in
Copper. also The manner and method of that famous CALLOT, and Mr: BOSSE. in
their Several ways of Etching.

PVBLISHED by WILLm: FAITHORNE. And Sold at his Shop next to ye. Sign of ye:
Drake* without Temple Bar. 1662.

To the Right Worshipful Sir Robert Peake Knight.
SIR,
THe Honor of having served his late Majesty (under your Conduct) in the
Garrison of Basing, has given me some reputation in the World, and the
happiness of having served your self, before the Wars, has given me a
Condition of living in it. in both, under the Regiment of your Command. you
changed the steel of my Tools into Weapons, and the exercise of my Arts into
Arms; when the service of the King challenged the duty of his Subjests, you
then prompted me unto Loyalty: that service unhappily ending, you re-advised a
return to my employment: the whole course of my life, having thus in some
measure been an Observancy of your Directions, to whom should I dedicate the
Issues of my Labors in it, but to you: and having now to present my Country
with something of use, profit, and delight, take occasion by these to speak my
gratitude, and preserve to my self the honor of continuing what I have been,

Sir, Your humble and devoted servant, William Faithorne.

To the Lovers of this Art.
I Have had the thoughts oft-times to publish this ensuing Treatise of Graving
and Etching, because it has arrived to such an height in these our latter
times, as it becomes a fit subject for our Kingdoms knowledge and practice. We
need no other witnesses to confirm this truth, than the Works of those famous
Masters* the Sadlers, Goltzius, Bleumart, Mellan; Natalis, Pontius, Poilly,
etc. And as for Etching, we are obliged to that Renowned Callot, and his
Disciple Bosse; who has not only practiced, but also has been so courteous as
to discover in the French Tongue, this Art unto his Country men. I have used
him as an Author in this Work, yet I have not traced him so closely as to make
it a mere Translation; but added something, making use of what I thought
necessary: So as (I hope) I am neither so tedious as to be troublesome, nor so
short as to be obscure.

I shall not trouble my self to speak in the Commendation of this Art, but (to
those that may seem to detract from it) give me leave only to say thus much;
that, the result of Air, the Symetrie of parts, the exact harmony of
Proportions, of lights and Shadows, may be performed to the height in Graving.
Therefore I recommend it to public view, hoping of it is fair Reception by all
Lovers of Arts; which is the utmost aim and expectation of

W. F.
To my ingenious Friend Mr. Faithorne on his Book.
SHould I attempt an Elogy, or frame
A Paper structure to secure thy Name;
The lightning of one censure, one stern frown
Might quickly hazard that, and thy renown.
But this thy Book prevents my slender pain,
One Line speaks purelier Thee, than my best strain.
Those Mysteries (once like the spightfull mold
That bars the greedy Spaniard from his Gold)
Thine ingenuitie reveals, and so
By making plain, thou do Illustrious grow.
That hand, whose curious Art protracts the date
Of frail Mortality, and baffles Fate
With Brass and Steel, can surely potent be
To rear a stately Monument for Thee.
For my part, I prefer (to guard the Dead)
A Copper Plate, before a sheet of Lead.
So long as Brass, so long as Books endure,
So long as neat-wrought Pieces, Thour't secure,
A Faithorne sculpsit is a Charm can save
From dull Oblivion, and a gaping Grave.
T. Flatman.
An Index directing to the several Sections contained in this Book.
HOw to make the hard Varnish, for graving with Aqua fortis. Page 1. How to
make the Composition or mixture of Grease and Oil, to cover those places in
your Plate where you would not have the Aqua fortis to eat in. p. 2. How to
prepare the Ingredients for making the Aqua fortis for the hard Varnish. p. 3.
How to make this Aqua fortis. p. 3. How to know good Copper from bad. p. 4. How
to planish and polish your Plate. p. 4. How to apply your hard Varnish on the
plate, and make it black. p. 7. How to dry or harden the Varnish upon the
Plate. p. 9. How to choose your Needles, wherewith to make your Tools to Etch
with. p. 10. How to whet the points of your Needles. p. 10. To preserve the
Varnish upon the Plate. p. 11. How to Etch. p. 11. How to guide your Needles
upon the Plate. p. 12. How to use the Oval points to make large strokes in
Etching or Graving with Aqua fortis. p. 14. How to prepare your Plate to
receive the Aqua fortis. p. 16. How to make the Trough and Frame, to hold the
Plate when you will pour the Aqua fortis on it. p. 18. The manner of casting
the Aqua fortis upon the Plate; as also how to cover the Places, that are
faintest, and most remote from the eye, with the forementioned mixture, as
occasion shall require. p. 19. How to take the ground, or the Varnish off the
Plate, after the Aqua fortis has done its operation. p. 25.
Of soft Varnish.
How to make it, and the uses it is to be put to. p. 27 The manner of laying
your soft Ground or Varnish upon the Plate. p. 28. How to border your Plate,
that it may contain the Aqua fortis. p. 32. The manner how to lay a white
ground upon the hard or soft Varnish. p. 35. Another way how to lay a white
upon the Varnish. p. 38. Here follows the manner after that your Plates are
eaten into by the Aqua fortis; how to touch up, or regrave that which happily
you may have forgotten, or that which you would amend or supply. p. 39.
Of Graving.
The several ways of drawing the design upon the plate. p. 41. The forms of
graving Tools, as also the manner of whetting your Graver. p. 43. The manner
how to hold your Graver, with other particulars. p. 45. The manner of governing
your hand in Graving, and other particulars. p. 47.
FINIS.
The Art of Graving* with Aqua fortis.
Sect. 1. How to make the hard Varnish for engraving with Aqua fortis.
TAke five ounces of Greek pitch, or (for want of that) Burgundy pitch, five
ounces of Rozin of Tire, or Colofonium, or for want of that) ordinary Rosine:
Melt them together upon a gentle fire in a new earthen pot, well varnished, or
leaded, and being very clean: These two things being first melted, and well
mixed together, put into them four ounces of the best Nut Oil; mix them well
together upon the same fire the space of a full half hour, and let them boil
well; Then let this mixture cool a little upon a softer fire; and afterward,
touching it with the end of your finger, it will rope (if it be boiled enough)
like a glewy Syrup. Then take the pot from the fire, and (the varnish being a
little more cooled) strein it through a fine Linen cloth, or Taffata, into a
well varnished earthen pot; or else put it into any thick glass bottle, or any
other thing that will not drink it up, and stop it well. Varnish thus made will
last twenty years, and it will be the better the longer it is kept.

It is reported of Monsieur Callot, that he had his varnish sent him ready made
from Italy, which was made there by the Joyners, who used it to varnish their
work: They called it Vernice grosso de Lignaioly: He gave some to the Author,
which he used a long time; but since made use of the varnish whereof you have a
description before.

Sect. 2. How to make the composition or mixture of grease and oil, to cover
those places in your plate, where you would not have the Aqua fortis to eat in.
TAke an earthen porrenger well leaded; put into it a quantity of Sallad oil,
and set it on the f^re, and when the oil is hot, put into it a quantity of
Candles-grease; when that is melted, take a pencil and dip it in, and let a
drop or two fall on a plate, or any cold hard thing; and if the drops be a
little hardened and firm, it shows that the mixture is well made. For you may
judge, that if it is too liquid, it is because there is too much oil; and if
so, then you must put in more grease; and by the same reason, if it be too
hard, you must put in more oil: having made it in this manner, boil it well the
space of an hour, that the oil and the grease may be well mixed together, and
that you may perceive them of a reddish color, otherwise they will be apt to
separate, when you should use them.

The reason why you melt the oil, and the grease together, is to make the
grease more liquid, and not cool too fast: for should you melt the grease
alone, you shall no sooner take it up with the point of your pencil to carry it
to the place where you would use it, but it will grow cold.

Put in a greater quantity of oil in Winter, then in Summer.

Sect. 3. How to prepare the Ingredients for making the Aqua fortis for the
hard varnish.
THe Aqua fortis is made of Vinegar, Salt Armoniack, Bay Salt, and Vert de griz.

The Vinegar must be of the best sort of white wind Vinegar; but if it be
distilled, it is the better, and not so subject to break up the varnish.

The Salt Armoniack must be clear, transparent, white, pure, and clean.

The Bay Salt must be also pure and clean.

The Vert de griz must be clean, and free from any scrapings of brass.

The Salt Armoniack and Vert de griz are commonly sold at the Druggists.

Sect. 4. How to make this Aqua fortis.
TAke three pints of Vinegar, six ounces of Salt Armoniack, six ounces of Bay
salt, and four ounces of Vert de griz; or of each according to this proportion,
as you will make your quantity more or less: put them all together in an
earthen pot well varnished, large enough, that it may not boil over: Cover the
pot, and put it on a quick fire, and let it speedily boil two or three great
walmes and no more: When you perceive it ready to boil, and not before, uncover
the pot, and stir it with a little stick sometimes, and take heed that it do
not boil over: Having thus boiled it two or three great walmes, take off the
pot from the fire, and let it cool; but keep the pot covered, and when it is
cold pour it into a glass bottle, and let it stand stopped a day or two
before you use it: and if you shall find it too strong in the etching, pour
into it a glass or two of the same Vinegar you made it of.

Sect. 5. How to know good Copper from bad.
COpper is best for graving with a Graver, or Aqua fortis; Brass is too
brittle. That Copper is best which is free from flaws, and not too hard, which
you may perceive by its yellowish color, almost like brass: and if it be too
soft, you may somewhat perceiv it by its too much pliableness in bending. When
you are to make use of it, you shall perceive (in that which is good) a firm,
yet easy force in the entering of your graver: and that Copper which is best
for graving, is also best for etching.

Sect. 6. How to planish and polish your Plate.
HEre in England you must buy your Copper ready forged from the Brasiers.

It is not necessary, that they which desire to engrave should forge and polish
their Copper themselves; but because in diverse places there is not convenience
of having it ready polished, I have thought fit to set down the manner how it
may be done.

Those Plates which you intend to forge and planish, must be fully as thick as
an half-crown, because in their forgeing and planishing they will become
somewhat thinner. You must planish your Copper cold, as the Silver-Smiths do
their Plate: And the more it is beaten or planished with an hammer, the firmer
it is, and less subject to holes or flaws.

Your Plate being well planished, make choice of the smoothest side for
polishing: Before you begin to polish it, fix it upon a board; and when you
polish it, let your board (to which the plate is fixed) stand a little
declining or sloping.

To polish your Plate, take a piece of a Grinding-stone about the bigness of
your fist, and fair water, and rub it firmly, and evenly all over; and in your
rubbing throw water often on it, and continue so doing, till you cannot
perceive any dints, or flaws, or marks of the hammer: Then wash it clean with
water* Afterward take a good Pumice-stone, and rub the same Plate with it and
water, till there appear none of the rough strokes, or marks of the stone: Then
wash it clean with water, as you did before.

Again, do the same thing with a fine smooth Hoan and water, till all the marks
of the Pumice-stone are quite rubbed out: This done, wash it clean with fair
water.

Then choose out a Chark-cole smooth, without any knots, or rough grain, and
put it in a well-kindled fire: let it be there, till you may perceive it red
hot; Then take it out of the fire, and immediately quench it in cold water;
Then take it out, and pair off the uttermost rind, and rub your Plate with it,
and water, till all the small strokes of the Hone be rubbed out: If the cole be
naught, it will only slide upon the Plate, and not rub out the strokes.

After you have thus polished it with a Chark-cole, if you perceive any small
strokes, or scratches on your Plate, then take a well-hardened piece of steel,
made somewhat roundish at the end, which is commonly called a burnisher; and
with it rub those places firmly and evenly, where you perceive any strokes, or
scratches. When you have done this, wash it clean, and dry it by the fire: and
if by any accident your Plate be foul or greasy, take the crummes of stale
bread, or fine-powdered Chalk, and rub your Plate over with it: The Plate being
thus polished and cleansed, is fitly prepared to lay on your Varnish.



Sect. 7. How to apply your hard Varnish on the Plate, and make it black.
TAke your Plate thus cleansed, and lay it on a chafing dish with a little fire
in it, and when it is indifferently hot, take it away, and take up some of the
Varnish with a little stick, and put a drop of it on the top of one of your
fingers; then lightly touch the plate with the top of your finger in several
places at equal distances; as the uppermost figure in the plate shows you,
the same being marked with the letter O: and lay no more on one place then on
another. And if your plate grow cold, heat it again as before, being very
careful to keep it from dust or filth. This done (having well-wiped the fleshy
part of the palm of your hand) tap it upon the Plate, till all the little spots
of varnish are equally spread upon the Plate.

After this tapping, wipe or slide your hand upon the Varnish, to make it more
smooth, and equal: Take great care, that there be not too much Varnish upon the
plate, and that your hand be not sweaty; because the sweat mixing with the
Varnish, will cause little bubbles, when it is applied to the fire, which will
become little holes in the Varnish.

Your Varnish being thus smoothed upon the Plate, the way to black it is thus.
Take a great tallow-candle lighted, which burns clear; let it have but a
short snuff; then place the corner of your plate against the wall, with the
varnished side downward, as the lower figure in the Plate represents it to you.

Take heed that your fingers do not touch the Varnish: then take your candle,
and apply the flame to the Varnish, as close as you can without touching the
Varnish with the snuff of the candle: guide the flame all over, till you see
it perfectly black; keep it then from dust or filth until it be dried.

Plate 1, 2.



Sect. 8. How to dry, or harden the Varnish upon the Plate.
KIndle a fire in a chimney of such chark-coles as are not subject to
sparkling, and when they are well kindled, range them in a square somewhat
larger than the Plate, as the letter P shows you. Before you place your plate
to be dried, hang up a cloth in the chimney to hinder and keep off any soot or
filth from falling down upon it, as you may see by the letters B C D. Then take
your plate and place it in the middle of the range upon two low Andirons, as
the letter O directs: this done, you will soon perceive the Varnish to smoke;
and when you perceive the smoke begins to abate, then take off the plate from
the Andirons, and with a stick pointed scratch near the side of your plate; and
if it easily take off the Varnish, then you must lay it again upon the Andirons
for a little space: Then take it off, and touch it again with your pointed
stick, and if it take off the Varnish not too easily, then immediately take it
from the fire and let it cool.

If the Varnish do much resist the point of the stick, then presently throw on
some cold water on the backside of the plate to cool it, so that the heat of
the plate may not cause the Varnish to be too hard and brittle.

Sect. 9. How to choose your needles wherewith to make your tools to etch with.
Pl. 3.
CHoose some broken needles of several sizes and bigness, such as break neat
without bending, and of a fine grain. Then take round sticks of a good firm
wood, not apt to split, of the length of half a foot or somewhat less, of the
thicknessse of a good large quill: at the ends of which sticks fix in your
needles, so that they stand out of the sticks about as much as you see in the
figure following.

Sect. 10. How to whet the points of your needles.
THere are two ways of whetting your needles, the one round, the other sloping.

You must have an oil stone with a fine grain to whet your needles upon. For
those you would have to be round, you must upon the oyl-stone whet their points
short, not as your sowing needles are, but as the Figure shows you. For the
other which you intend to make sloping, first upon the oyl-stone make it blunt,
then holding it firm and steddily, whet it sloping upon one side only, till it
come to a short roundish Oval, for the long Oval is not so good to work with.

You will need a soft brush-pencill, to brush off the varnish, which you work
off with the strokes of your needle, as is represented by the Letter A.



Sect. 11. To preserve your Varnish upon the plate.
YOur plate being varnished, place it upon a low desk or such like thing, and
cover that part which you do not work one with a sheet of fine white paper, and
over that a sheet of brown paper, whereon you rest your hand to keep it from
the varnish when you work.

When you have occasion to use your Ruler to draw straight lines, lay some part
of it upon the paper, that it may not rub off the varnish. But above all things
have an especial care that no filth or dust gets in between the paper and the
varnish, for that will cause some holes and scratches in the varnish.

Sect. 12. How to etch.
IN etching you will have occasion to make diverse sorts of lines or hatches,
some bigger, some smaller, some straight, some crooked. To make these you must
use several sorts of needles, bigger or smaller as the work requires. The
great lines are made these three several ways,

1. By leaning harder on the needle, and the point being short and thick makes
a larger passage; but the point being round it will not cut the varnish clear.

2. By making diverse lines or hatches, very close one to another, and then by
passing them over again with a thicker needle; but this way is both too tedious
and withal very difficult.

3. By making the lines with an indifferent bigg needle, and letting the Aqua
fortis lie the longer on it. Those needles which you whet sloping with an Oval,
are the best to make the large lines withal, because with their sides they cut
that which the round points cannot.

Pl. 4.

Sect. 13. How to guide your needles upon the plate.
YOu may perceive from what is said, that those points which you intend to make
use of, in graving with Aqua fortis, ought to be whet exactly round, that they
may turn more freely upon the plate. Some of those round points must be whet
very sharp, that they may cut the varnish and copper more easily. If you find
that your point cuts not freely and smoothly, it is because it is not whet
exactly round.

If you have occasion to make your lines or hatches of an equal bigness from
one end to the other, whether they be straight or crooked, as those two lines
in the letters A B represents, you must, as reason will tell you, lean on your
point with an equal force from one end to the other.

If you would make your strokes thicker at one end then at the other; as the
second letters A B shows you, then you must lean on your point with your hand
harder at the beginning, and by degrees lighter and lighter toward the end.

If you would have your strokes to be such as are represented in the third
figure marked also a b, that is to say, larger in the middle then at either
end, you must lean gently at the beginning, and then by degrees harder and
harder till you come to the middle, and then by degrees lighter and lighter
till you come to the end.

These three sorts of lines or hatches may indifferently serve for all manner
of hatching your shadows in any design what soever, as appears in the figures,
M N. O P. Q G R. T E V. wherein is manifest, that the shadowing is but a
reiteration of the same strokes close one to another.

If you desire that your etching with Aqua fortis should look as like graving
as may be, you must lean hard upon your needle in those places where you would
have the lines appear deep and large, that is, so hard that the needle may make
some impression in the copper. And by the same reason you are to lean very
light on those places which you would have appear faint and small.

If it happen that you have made some lines or hatches too small, and are
desirous to enlarge your stroke, you must pass it over again with a round
short point, of such a thickness as you desire your line should be of, and
lean strong and firmly on those parts of the line which you would have large
and deep.

If at any time, by reason of the large lines or hatches, which you were to
make, you have used an Oval point (which is the best to cut the varnish) you
must afterward, with one of your large needles whetted short and round, pass
in the midst of the said stroke firm and strongly, but especially in those
places which you would have large and deep.

Sect. 14. How to use the Oval points to make large strokes in etching or
graving with Aqua fortis. Pl. 5.
YOu may see in the figure A B C D the form of those Oval points, and that part
next to C describes the end of it, and B D the sides. The manner of holding it
is much after the manner of holding a pen, only the flat side whetted is
usually held toward the thumb, as is represented in figure iii. Not but that
it may be used otherwise, with the face of the Oval turned toward the
midle-finger as it is shown in Fig. iv. but I have found the other manner to be
much better, because that way you may more firmly and with more strength
enforce your strokes.

Now to show you how to make your strokes large and deep, and that these Oval
points are the most proper for it, take notice of the two upper first and
second figures, which are made the larger purposely, that you may the better
apprehend what shall be hereafter spoken of it. Your own reason will tell you,
that if you lean lightly in making your strokes, those strokes will accordingly
be less deep, smaller, and more faint; for the harder you lean, the deeper and
larger your strokes will be. Of this you have an example in the third figure
marked r n s; where leaning lightly at the beginning, viz. r. and then harder
by degrees to n. and afterward lighter by degrees to s. you make your stroke
bigger or smaller according to your leaning on it, as you find represented in
the said third Figure.

But if you would have your strokes come very small and delicate at the end,
then with the point of your small needle lengthen out your stroke, as you find
it represented in the two strokes of the fifth Figure.

Some will first make their stroke with a round needle, and then paste it over
again with an Oval point to enlarge it in those places which they would have
deeper and bigger; but the other is the better way.

They that know how to grave after they have done etching their lines with Aqua
fortis, may with the assistance of their graver make them more neat and deeper.

I shall only think it not amiss to advise you by the way, that in making your
strokes with your Oval points, you must hold them as upright and straight in
your hand as you can, and accustom your self to strike your strokes firm and
bold, for that will contribute very much to their neatness and clearness. To
do this the better, you must be very careful to have your points always well
whetted.

In those places which you would have appear in your piece by way of Landscape,
that is at the furthest distance from the sight, as also in those places which
approach nearest the light, you must use a very slender point, leaning so
lightly with your hand, as to make a small faint stroke. But when you come to
those places which you would have more shadowed, lean so much the harder, as
that when you come to eat it in with your Aqua fortis, you may cover most of
your faint places at one and the same time, for you must know that those
strokes, which you lean lightest on, do little more then raise up the varnish.
So that when you shall apply your Aqua fortis to etch it, it will appear much
fainter then in those places where you have leaned with greater force, though
the strokes are done with one and the same needle. Insomuch, that when you
shall have covered the greatest part of your faint places with your mixture,
those places, whereon you leaned more strongly, will appear deepest, though
they were all covered at the same time. In your working be careful to brush
off all the dust which you work off with your needles.

Sect. 15. How to prepare your plate to receive the Aqua fortis.
YOur plate being finished and ready for the Aqua fortis, brush off all the
rubbidge and dust that is in the strokes. And if there happen to be any strokes
which you would not have the Aqua fortis eat into, or any places where the
varnish is rubbed off, then melt your mixture of oil and grease which you have
made, and with a pencill, bigger or smaller, according to the proportion of
those places which you would mend, cover those places indifferently thick, and
the Aqua fortis will not eat in.

This done, take a brush or pencill, or ragg, and dip it into the said mixture
of oil and grease, and rub the backside of your plate all over, to prevent the
Aqua fortis from eating any part of it; but take heed that your mixture be not
too thin or liquid, for if it be, when you cast your Aqua fortis on the plate,
it will force it from those places whereto you had applied it.

When I find my mixture begin to grow cold, I commonly use to put some small
quantity of it on my left hand, thereby to keep it warm, to be used as occasion
shall require.

In the winter time, especially when the weather is cold and moist, before you
apply your Aqua fortis to the plate, it will not be amiss to warm it gently by
the fire, to dry up the moisture, which the plate is subject to by reason of
the distemperature of the weather. Nay if it be not warmed, it may happily
endanger the breaking up of the varnish, upon the first pouring of the Aqua
fortis upon the plate.

Sect. 16. How to make your trough and frame to hold your plate when you would
pour the Aqua fortis on it.
THe Figure opposite hereto represents both trough and frame. The letter A is
one entire piece of Elm or Oak, of about four inches thick and six inches
broad, and may be of such a length as you shall think fittest for your use. You
must cut this piece of wood into the fashion of a trough, as the figure sheweh
you, making it a little deeper in the middle, that the water running thither
may fall through a hole there made for that purpose. Set this upon a Tressel
with four legs as the figure shows you.

Under the hole in the trough, place an earthen pan well leaded on the inside,
as you see in the figure B; and therein put your Aqua fortis, let it not stand
too much below the trough.

The figure M N O P is one entire board of an indifferent largeness as you may
judge by the figure. About the two sides and top of which board you must fasten
a ledge about two inches broad, to keep the Aqua fortis from running off from
the sides, when you pour it on. The inside of this board and trough must be
covered or primed over with a thick oil-colour, to hinder the Aqua fortis from
eating or rotting the board. Place the lower end of this board in the trough
leaning sloping against a wall or any other thing. In the board you must fix
several peggs of wood or nails whereon to rest your plate.

How to pour ye: Aqua Fortis upon ye: Plate.



The figure Q describes a little earthen pot well leaded on both sides, which
you must have to take up your Aqua fortis out of the pan, and to pour it on
the plate.

Sect. 17. The manner of casting the Aqua fortis upon the plate; as also how to
cover the places, that are faintest and most remote from the eye, with the
forementioned mixture, as occasion shall require.
HAving observed the way of placing the plate for the receiving of the Aqua
fortis, there remains only to consider the method you are to follow in casting
it on as occasion shall require; for in some works it will be necessary to cast
it on several times, for the reasons hereafter to be mentioned. Having a
sufficient quantity of Aqua fortis in your pan, fill your earthen pot, and
pour it upon your plate, beginning at the top, and moving your hand equally so
that it may run all over the plate, taking great heed that the pot touch not
the plate. Having so poured 8. or 10. times, the plate being as in the posture
expressed in the precedent figure, you must turn it crosse-wayes, as is
represented in the upper part of the following figure marked C, and pour on it
as it lies that way ten or twelve times as before: That done, turn your plate
suitably to the posture expressed by the lower part of the following figure
aforesaid, that is to say, corner-wise, and as it lies so, pour thereon eight
or ten times; pouring the Aqua fortis thus at several times, for the space of
half a quarter of an hour, more or less, according to the strength or the
water, and nature of the copper. For if the copper be brittle and hard, there
must be the less time allowed for the pouring on of the water; but if soft,
the more.

And whereas you may not happily at the first be so well assured of the strength
of your water, and the precise quality of your copper, it will not be amiss to
give you some directions how to know both, that you may proceed according to
the strength of neatness which you expect to find in your work. For there are
some pieces require more force, and some more tenderness then others. To know
therefore the nature of your copper, and the strength of your water, that they
be such as the work you intend does require, pour of it on your plate, for the
first time, as is before mentioned, for the space of the fourth part of a
quarter of an hour. Then take away the plate, and cast on it a quantity of fair
water, holding the pot at a good height from the plate, to wash off the Aqua
fortis; for if it be not clean washed, the work will appear green, and
consequently, you cannot so well perceive the operation of your Aqua fortis.

That done, hold your plate before the fire, at such a distance, as that,
without melting the mixture which may be upon it, the fair water may be dried
up. Then take a little piece of charcole, and therewith rub off the varnish in
some place where the strokes are faint: and if you find that the Aqua fortis
has eaten deep enough in those faint places, melt your mixture, and having
placed your plate upon a desk or easell, take of the said mixture with a
pencill fit for your work, and cover therewith all those places which you
desire should be tender, and free from any further operation of the Aqua
fortis, taking great care that you bestow mixture thick enough on the places
which you would have covered, that is, that the mixture may fill up the
strokes. And it is at this first operation, that you are to cover all the
faintest and sweetest places.

Having held your plate so long to the fire that the moisture is quite-taken
off (a thing only necessary in the winter time) put it again upon your board,
and pour on your water as before, for the space of about half an hour, turning
your plate from time to time according to the several postures, as is before
expressed. That done, wash off the Aqua fortis with fair water as before, and
dry your plate by the fire, taking especial care that you melt not the mixture
which you had before put upon it.

Your plate being dried put it upon the desk or easell, as before, and having
melted your mixture, cover therewith those faint places and hatches that are
next in point of faintness to those that you had covered before. The several
degrees of faintness in the hatches you have several examples of in the
following figure.

You have been directed before how to guide your needles and Ovall points, and
I have told you how you were to lean strong and firmly on the places where you
would have the strokes to be black and deep, and slack and lighten your hand
where you would have them faint and tender, a thing which very much facilitates
the operation of the Aqua fortis. For instance, when you have at the first time
with your mixture covered that part which is enclosed by the line A B C D.
which makes a kind of an Oval: you come at the second time to cover that space
which is between the line A B C: and the line E O F. conceiving well, that
having suffered the Aqua fortis to eat in for the time requisite, it will have
an effect somewhat near that which you expected.

At the upper end of the plate you have the form of a woman's arm, wherein you
may perceive, by the line marked a b c d; as also by the other which lies yet
nearer the shadow, how the small hatches and fainter places are ordinarily
covered at two several operations, as occasion shall require; though in the
forementioned example of the arm, one time covering might happily serve.

I have also thought fit at the bottom of the plate, to set down four several
pieces of ground in landscape, the first marked m m m, is the first covered, as
being the farthest of all from the eye, then at another operation that marked n
n n; then that marked o o o: there being only that marked p, wherein the Aqua
fortis eats in full and deep.

It may be objected, that the light or hard leaning on the points in their
proper places in working, may make the strokes and hatchings so, as that the
Aqua fortis may eat in answerably to your expectation, without the trouble of
covering any places with your mixture: To this I answer, that the work will not
altogether have that effect, but will be like the second plate, which I have
purposely made after that manner: for though you can lean harder on some
places, and lighter on others; yet the Aqua fortis being poured equally all
over the plate, during the whole time, it must follow that some places will not
be so sweet and tender as they ought, and shall come far short of that
beautiful and lively continuity which you may perceive in those lines and
strokes where you use the mixture.

If it happen, that when you dry your plate by the fire to take off the
moisture, as has been said before, that the mixture for want of care, do melt
and run into those hatches and strokes where you would have the water to eat in
further; wipe the place with a soft cloth, then take the crum of stale bread,
and rub the place therewith till such time as you conceive you have taken off
all the greasiness. This remedy is only appliable in point of extremity; for
you are to note, that it is impossible to take out the grease so clearly, but
that it will somewhat hinder the operation of the Aqua fortis. And therefore
there must be the more care taken to prevent it.

Having thus covered your places as occasion requires, for the second time
place your plate on the board aforesaid, and pour on it your Aqua fortis for
another good half hour.

That done, wash it with water, and dry it as formerly, and cover the places
you think requires it for the third time, for you must know that the faint
places are to be proportionable to, that is, more or less, according to the
several designs and pieces you work upon. When you have done this, pour on
your Aqua fortis upon it for the last time, and it is at this operation, that
you are to bestow more or less time above the precedent, according to the
nature of your work.

For instance, if there be in your plate such hatches and shadows as require
much depth and fullness, and consequently must be very black, you are to pour
on the Aqua fortis for the space of an hour or better at this last operation
alone, that is proportionably to the precedent. You may well imagine that there
can be no certain rule given in general, either as to the convenient covering
of the places, or the precise space of time that is to be observed in casting
on the water: for it is not to be conceived that Callot poured as much water on
his little pieces as he did on those that were greater.

I told you before, how that you may rub off your varnish or ground as occasion
requires, with a charcole, to see whether the water has eaten in deep enough:
you are therefore to judge of the space of time that you are to employ in
pouring on the Aqua fortis, by the works you are to do, and where I tell you
that you may bestow an hour and better on the last operation, my meaning is, in
pieces that require much blackness. All which notwithstanding, it is to be
considered that all copper and all sorts of Aqua fortis not being of the same
strength, nature and equality, you are to proceed accordingly.

Having therefore poured the Aqua fortis upon your plate for the space of an
hour, more or less, as the work requires as is before said, wash it again with
fair water; but you shall not need to dry it as in the precedent operations;
but put it wet as it is upon the fire, till your mixture be all melted; and
then wipe it very clean on both sides with a linen cloth, till you have quite
taken away all the mixture.

Sect. 18. How to take the ground or the varnish off the plate, after the Aqua
fortis has done its operation.
TAke a char-cole of willow or some such soft grained wood, and take off the
rind of it, and pouring fair water on the plate, rub it with the char-cole
with an even hand, as if you were to polish copper, and it will take off the
varnish. Be careful that no dust or filth fall upon the plate; as also that
the char-cole be free from all knots and roughness, for it might occasion small
scratches in the plate which it would be difficult to get out, especially in
those places which are most faint and sweet. Note that you are not to use such
a burnt cole as you do to polish withal.

When the varnish is taken off, the plate is of an unpleasant color, by reason
of the operation of the fire and water upon it. To reduce it therefore to its
proper color, take some ordinary Aqua fortis, to which add two third parts of
fair water, and with a little linen ragg dipped therein, rub your plate all
over, and you will find it come to its ordinary color and beauty.

That done, take immediately a dry linen ragg, and wipe it all over so as to
take off all the foresaid water. Then hold your plate a little to the fire, and
pour on it a little sallad-oyl, and with the brims of an old beaver rolled up,
rub your plate well all over with it; then wipe it with a dry cloth.

This done, you will perceive plainly if there be any places that require to be
touched with the graver, as it for the most part happens, especially in those
places that are to be most black. For you may well judge, that when there are
many strokes and hatchings one close to another, there is so little varnish
between, that the Aqua fortis commonly takes it off, because it eats under it.

But if this happens when you cast on your water, you may presently cover those
places where you perceive the varnish to break up with the mixture, it being
much more easy to touch it afterward with the graver, then when the Aqua
fortis has made a pit therein, which at the working of it off at the press
causes a great black patch; but after some number of coppies taken off, the
said patch seems to be white, because there is not any thing for the ink to
fasten on.

Having therefore in good time covered that part, you have no more to do but to
perfect those strokes and hatchings to make them more firm and beautiful;
which done, your plate is ready for the Rolling Press.

OF SOFT VARNISH.
Sect. 19. How to make it, and the uses it is to be put to.
TAke an ounce and a half of virgins wax, the best and whitest, one ounce of
Mastick in tears, neat and pure, half an ounce of Spaltum; grind the Mastick
and the Spaltum severally very fine; then melt your Virgins wak in an earthen
pot well leaded, and when it is very hot, strew in your beaten Mastick all
over, and stir them together with a little stick till such time as you may
judge the Mastick to be well incorporated with the wax, and after that strew in
also the Spaltum, as you did the Mastick before, and stir the whole mixture
together upon the fire, till the Spaltum be likewise well dissolved and mixed
with the rest, which is likely to be done in the space of half a quarter of an
hour; Then take it off from the fire, and let it cool a little; Then pour in
the said composition into a basin of fair water, and first wetting your hands
(which must be very clean) in the water, take out the said mixture before it be
quite cold, and having well molded it to squeez out the water, roll it up into
pieces about an inch diameter, and two or three inches long.

You may if you please to make it the more free from any kind of filth, as you
pour it into the basin of water, pass it through a fine linen cloth; but it
is as well not to pass it through, but after it is molded to wrap it up in a
piece of fine linen cloth or Taffata, two or three times double, and so use it.

You are not to put in so much of Virgins wax in Summer as in Winter. There are
several other compositions of soft varnish that might be used, but this I
judge to be the best of any that I have found.

Sect. 20. The manner of laying your soft Ground or varnish upon the plate.
HAving your plate well polisht, and cleansed from grease, take the soft
varnish prepared as is before mentioned, and put the said plate over a
chafing dish wherein a moderate fire has been kindled, and heat it in such
sort, that the varnish may easily dissolve as it passes through that which
enwraps it: The plate being thus heated, take the varnish covered as aforesaid,
and applying it by the end of the roller, spread it upon the plate while it is
hot, carrying it lightly over from one side to the other, until the plate be
covered thin and equally all over: this being done, and having a quill that
has a smooth feather, take it, and with the broad side thereof sweep it gently
over the varnish and swiftly, to the end it do not burn. The first time, the
feathered end of the quill shall only serve to spread the varnish over the
plate; but afterward make choice of another, the best feathered quill you
have, and go it over again lightly, that the varnish may be extended very
equally all over the plate and very thin; for when it is laid on too thick,
your work cannot be so fine and delicate as otherwise it would; and if the
plate should cool, and consequently the varnish, you must heat it a little
again, to the end that it may receive the varnish as it passes through the
linen. Also take great care, for your better ease in the spreading of it, that
your plate, and by consequence your varnish, happen not to burn: Which that you
may the more easily perceive, take notice, that when it is too hot it casts it
self into little clots and pumples, by reason of over much heat of the plate.

As soon as you have evenly spread your varnish upon your plate, black it over
with the flame of a candle after the same manner as I have already mentioned in
speaking of your hard varnish: provided only, that the flame approach not too
near; this is to be done in one case rather then in another, and that is, when
having blackt it all over, you perceive that the smoke has not entered within,
by reason of its growing cold: Therefore it will be convenient to put your
plate again over your chafing dish, and you shall see, that as soon as the
plate is hot, the varnish will dissolve; and by consequence, the black which
the smoke has left upon the varnish, will altogether pierce as far as the
plate.

Be careful above all, in doing this, to have a moderate fire, and still to
remove your plate, in such sort that the said varnish melt equally all over
without burning.

After that, let your plate cool, and when you shall think fit to work upon it,
place your design altogether after the same manner, as upon your hard varnish,
(the backside thereof being rubbed with the dust of red chalk) excepting only,
that you must not lean so hard on with your point in drawing the out-lines of
your design, lest by so doing the needle cutting through the paper should raze
the varnish.

Next you proceed to work upon your plate with the same kind of points, as
those which are mentioned for hard varnish, excepting those Oval points, which
many that etch with soft varnish never use: Nevertheless they are very
commodious, especially for the working any piece of Architecture, or making of
large strokes; and it is at the choice of those that grave, either to use them
or not to use them: But there is one thing to be considered, of which you are
to have a very great care, and that is, how to keep the soft varnish upon the
plate, for it is very apt to be rubbed or razed off, if any thing never so
little violent happen to touch it: There are several ways of keeping it
unhurt; for example, working upon the plain, or on a desk, you may have on the
sides of your plate two little boards, of what bigness you please, or two
little books of the same thickness, and lay another thin board upon them, so
as that it may not touch the plate, and rest your hand upon this board as you
work.

There are some which work with their plate laid upon a kind of Easle, as a
Painter does when he paints; but all men cannot set themselves to this manner
of working, although it is very much approved of, for many reasons which
hereafter shall be alleged.

To work upon the said soft varnish, you must handsomely place your board upon
a desk, and then lay a leaf of brown or white paper upon it; so as it be fine
and smooth it imports not much: Lay then your plate upon it. Afterward take a
linen cloth without any kind of Seam, which has been often put to other uses,
to the end it may be the more gentle and soft. Then double it three or four
times in folds, and lay it upon your varnish; whereon rest your hand, as you
use in like manner sheets of paper upon hard varnish^^ And the reason wherefore
this caution is to be observed by you, is, lest the buttons of your sleeve
should rub off the varnish.

Be very careful, that there be no dust or filth found upon your varnish; if
you chance to spy any upon your plate, wipe it lightly off with one of your
large soft pencills, considering that there is much more care to be had for the
preserving of soft varnish then of hard; and that was the cause which made the
Author to leave it off, especially in pieces that required long time and much
pains, it being much more easy to make a firm winding-stroke upon hard varnish
then upon soft; for as much as the hardness of the varnish holds your point as
it were engaged, which makes the strokes to be the deeper, and better,
imitating the firmness and neatness of the strokes of a graver. Moreover,
when you are at work in soft varnish, you must have a special care, lest any
other person then a practitioner of your Art, touch or intermeddle with your
plate; and if any kind of greasy matter happen to drop upon it, your plate
will be incurable: but if it should chance to fall upon hard varnish, you may
then make it clean with a linen cloth, or crumms of bread.

Those that work upon soft varnish, if they put their plate on a desk or easle,
they are not in so much danger of rubbing off their varnish, nor do they need
so often to wipe away that which comes off in working; for as much as the plate
being placed obliquely, the superfluous matter falls away of it self. I have
not thought fit to make any resemblance of it, since it is not likely that any
of those who intend to etch after this manner, can be ignorant how a Painter
works upon an easle, there being no other difference but only this, that a
Painter uses a pencill, and a Graver his etching-tools. The truth is, that the
Artist ought to rest his plate very firm, especially when he is very intent
upon the making of any exact strokes.

Callot wrought upon hard varnish after the same manner, but it was to the end
that his health might be the less impaired, supposing that to sit stooping to
his work (though it were never so little) would be hurtful to him.

Sect. 21. How to border your plate, that it may contain your Aqua fortis.
GEt soft wax, either red or green; if it be in Winter, soften it at the fire;
in Summer it will be sufficiently soft of it self: In the managing of it, put it
round the brims of your plate, raised about half a quarter of an inch from the
surface of the plate, being as it were a little rampart; in such sort, as that
placing your plate very level, and afterward pouring your Aqua fortis upon
it, the water may be retained by the means of this border of wax, so as, that
the water may be equally diffused all over; but before you pour it on (to
prevent its soking through between the wax and the plate) if need require, heat
a little piece of Iron, and run it over on the out side where the plate closes
with the border.

Having thus bordered your plate, take common Aqua fortis, such as is used by
the Refiners, pure and good, and mingle it with common water, being in quantity
about the third part of your Aqua fortis; or if you have Aqua fortis, of which
you have made former use in etching, mingle it with the pure Aqua fortis in
stead of common water, and let the quantity be proportionable to the strength
of it; then pour it gently upon the plate, in such sort as that it may remain
upon it the thickness of half a fingers breadth all over: if you make use of
the strongest Aqua fortis, be careful to mingle it with the greater quantity
of common water.

Then you shall see that the water will work and bubble up in those stronger
hatchings that are most firmly stricken; as for those that are fainter you
shall perceive them clear at first, and of the color of the copper, the water
not making on a sudden any other operation than appears to view.

Afterward, when you shall have perceived the water to operate a small time,
pour it off from the plate into some vessel which is most proper to contain
it, as into an earthen dish well varnisht, or the like, then throw some fair
water upon the plete, to extinguish and wash away the remainder of the Aqua
fortis, which was upon the plate, then dry it by the fire, as you have been
taught before, when we discourst of hard varnish; and as touching your soft
varnish and Aqua fortis of the Refiners, be careful in especial manner to
cause to evaporate that moisture, which in the Winter time is commonly between
the copper and the varnish, before you lay on your Aqua fortis: The superfluous
moisture being evaporated from it, take your mixture of oil and grease, as is
before mentioned in the beginning of this discourse of hard varnish, and
therewith cover those places which ought to be most tender and sweet; and
having covered them the first time, lay on again upon your plate the same Aqua
fortis which you had taken away, and leave it on for one half quarter of an
hour, or a longer time, according to your discretion; then take off the Aqua
fortis, and cover with your mixture those next places, as you shall see
occasion: And as you would have your lines or strokes to be deeper and deeper,
so cover the sweeter part by degrees with your mixture, that the Aqua fortis
may ly the longer on the deeper strokes.

Lastly, lay on yet again the aforesaid Aqua fortis, and leave it on for the
space of half an hour, either more or less according to the strength of the
water and nature of the work, then take it away and cast some fair water upon
the plate again.

That being done, take off your border of wax, then heat your plate, so that
the oily mixture and the varnish may thoroughly melt; then wipe it well with a
linen cloth, afterward rub it all over with oyl-Olive, with a piece of old
beaver rolled up, and that being done, touch it over again with your graver in
those places where it shall be needful.

One thing I shall advertise you of, which is, that while the Aqua fortis is
upon your plate, you take a feather and dip it to the bottom of the said Aqua
fortis, sweeping it along to remove the froth or scum which gathers upon your
strokes or hatchings, while the water makes its operation; as also to give the
more way to the operation of the water, and to see if the varnish be not broke
up, which the bubling of the water hinders you from discerning.

You may also take notice that the Aqua fortis of the hard varnish, will serve
excellently well to eat into the work made by the aforesaid soft varnish, and
that the manner of applying the oily mixture, is all one with that of hard
varnish, and who ever uses it may be assured, that it is much more excellent
for this purpose than that of the Refiners; Moreover, it is not so subject to
cause the varnish to break up, nor to many other accidents, as the being
hurtful to the sight, or to ones health, as that of the Refiners is,
nevertheless every one may use which of them he pleases.

Sect. 22. The manner how to lay a white ground upon your hard or soft varnish.
THere is a way to whiten your varnishes upon the plate, instead of making them
black with a candle, which is thus.

When you have applied your hard varnish (as has been taught) upon the plate,
harden it upon the fire without blacking it, yet in the same manner as if it
were blackt, then let the plate cool; and having gotten white Cerusse and put
it into an earthen dish well leaded, with a little Flanders Starch in it, set
them upon the fire and melt them together, making them pretty hot, that being
done, take up the white Cerusse, which ought to be indifferently clear, with a
brush or great pencill of hoggs hair, and therewith whiten your varnish, laying
it as thin and as even as you can, then leave it to dry, laying the plate flat
in some convenient place; and if by chance in whitening it, the white be
difficult to spread, you need do no more, but put among the said white* Cerusse
a drop or two of the gall of an Ox, and so mingle them together in the dish
with your brush. And for the soft varnish, you shall need only to do the same
thing; after you have laid it upon the plate and extended it very evenly with
the featherd end of your quills; Some will say, that if they black it before
they apply the white upon it, when they come afterward to grave, the hatchings
will be the more black, and by consequence will appear so much the more
distinct to the eye. But to this I answer:

First, That when it is blackt, the white will not touch it, and that they must
not venture to put so much gall, for fear of spoiling the varnish.

Secondly, That if the white should spread well, yet it would not appear
otherwise then gray, by reason of the blacking of the said varnish, unless you
should lay it so thick that all would be nothing worth.

The marking of your design upon soft varnish, is performed with the dust of
red chalk (as is before mentioned) speaking of hard varnish, or with rubbing
well the paper or design with the dust of black chalk or black lead, when the
varnish is made white: for red chalk is most proper for a black ground.

When you shall have engraved that which you intend upon the soft varnish, and
that you go about to etch your plate with Aqua fortis; that which you have then
to do, is to take a little fair water, somewhat more than lukewarm, and to cast
it upon the said plate, and then with a soft clean sponge, or with the fleshy
part of the end of your finger, to rub upon the said white Cerusse to moisten
it all over; afterward wash the said plate to take off the whiting of it, and
then dry it. Lastly, you may lay on which of the two Aqua fortisses you please;
and for the preserving of the said white varnish, while you are working, you
shall only need to lay upon it a piece of soft linen in stead of paper, or
else of Damaskt linen.

If you shall choose rather to take away the said whiting, you must take some
Aqua fortis of the Refiners, tempered with fair water, lay it upon the plate,
dispersing it all over, this will soke and quickly eat in, after that you have
also thrown clean fair water upon it, having in this manner taken away the
whiting, you shall also let the water dry up, which shall remain upon it, and
lastly cause it to eat into your work as I have said before.

Sect. 23. Another way how to lay a white upon your varnish.
TAke Cerusse of the best and grind it very fine upon a stone with fair water,
that being done take gum-water, and pour a small quantity upon the stone and
mix it with the Cerusse, then take a large pencill of hoggs hair or the like,
provided it be not too stiff, with that pencill take it off the stone, and
spread it thin all over your plate; and immediate after, take a larger pencill
made of long and very soft hair, either of a Foxes tail, or Bears hair, and
with a very light and gentle hand pass it all over the plate, so as to make it
ly exactly even in all parts, that the streaks of the former brush may not
appear, then place your plate so, that it may ly very even, and let it dry.

By the way it will be necessary to give you this advertisement, that you are
not to mix too much gum with the white, nor too little; for if there be too
much it will break and crack the varnish, if there be too little it will easily
rub off: therefore you must be careful to use neither more nor less than will
just serve to bind the white upon the plate. Likewise you must have a care not
to lay it too thick, for if it be, you cannot work with that neatness and
curiosity as otherwise you may.

Sect. 24. Here follows the manner, after that your plates are eaten into by
the Aqua fortis, how to touch up, or re-grave that which happily you may have
forgotten, or that which you would amend or supply.
BEfore I make an end, I thought fitting to show you the manner, how to touch
over again many things according as need may require, by the means of Aqua
fortis, as when it happens that having made upon your copper any thing that
does not at all please you, and that for this cause having covered it with your
oily mixture, to the end that the Aqua fortis should not perform its operation,
or that you would add any ornaments either in Drapery, or any other thing which
might be thought on, upon several occasions. In this case therefore take your
plate and rub it over well with oyl-Olive, in those places where there is any
thing graven, in such sort, as that the blackness and foulness, which is
likely to be in the hatchings or strokes may be taken away. Afterward take out
the grease so thoroughly with crumms of bread, that there may remain no grease
nor filth upon the plate, nor in any of the strokes or hatchings.

Then heat it upon a char-cole fire, and spread the soft varnish upon it with a
feather, as has been said before. That which you are to take special care of
is, that the hatchings, which you would have to remain, be filled with varnish:
That being done, black it, and then you may touch over again, or add what you
intend. And lastly, make your hatchings by the means of your needls, according
as the manner of the work shall require, being careful before you put on the
Aqua fortis, to cover with your oily mixture (as is said before) the first
graving which was upon your plate; for in case that the varnish should not have
entered all over, that to be sure will: In so much, that if it should happen in
some places of the hatchings, there should be neither of the mixture nor
varnish, the Aqua fortis would not fail to enter and spoil all. Having then
caused the Aqua fortis to eat into your work, take away your varnish from your
plate, by the means of the fire, as has been said before.

THE ART OF GRAVING.
Sect. 25. The several ways of drawing your design upon the plate.
BEfore I speak of the manner of managing and whetting your Graver, I think it
will not be amiss to let you know the ways that are used in the drawing your
design upon the plate; which must be of the same bigness as your design or
print is, which you intend to copy.

Put your plate upon the fire and let it heat a little, then take a piece of
the whitest Virgin-wax and spread it thin over the plate, and with a smooth
feather gently stroke it all over, to the end it may lie the more even and
smooth; then let it cool. If you intend to copy a printed picture, and that
you would have it to print off the same way when it is graved, with your
pattern; then you must place your picture which you would grave, with the face
or printed side next to your plate, waxed over as is before mentioned; and
having placed it very exactly, rub the backside of the print with a burnisher
(or any thing that is smooth and round) and you will find that it will stick to
the wax which is upon the copper: When you have so done, take off the print
(beginning at one side or corner) but be careful you take it not off to
hastily, for by so doing you may tare your print or design; and also if you put
your wax to thick upon the plate, it will be a means to cause the same
inconvenience.

But if you would grave it the same way as your print or design is, then take
the dust of black-lead or black-chalk, and rub the backside of your drawing or
print all over therewith, and place it with that side so blacked toward the
plate so waxed, as is before mentioned; and with your needle or drawing-point
draw all the out-lines of your design, and you will find all those lines upon
your plate; but if you desire to preserve the backside of your design from
being blacked with the dust before mentioned; then take a fine thin piece of
white paper of the bigness of your design, and instead of rubbing the backside
of your print or design, rub one side of the said paper with the dust or powder
of black-chalk as is before mentioned; and placing it with the side so blacked,
next to the plate waxed, over-lay the backside of your design upon the paper,
and fix them both firm to your plate at each corner with a little wax, then
draw the outlines of your design: only note, that you must lean somewhat
harder with your needle in drawing.

There are other ways used for this purpose, which I think needless to
trouble you with; only this I shall tell you, that in case you desire to
preserve your design from being any way defaced by the marks of your needle in
drawing the out-lines: take a fine piece of white paper, and having oyled it*
hold it by the fire, to the end the oil may sooner penetrate it; and having so
done wipe it very dry with a linen ragg, and place the said paper upon your
design, making it fast at each corner; and you will perfectly discern your
design through the paper; then with a black-lead well pointed, draw all the
out-lines of your design upon the said oyled paper; when you have so done,
place it upon the plate in the like manner as is before mentioned.

Sect. 26. The forms of graving-tools, as also the manner of whetting your
Graver. Pl. 9.
THe upper part of this figure will show two sorts of Graving-tools, the one
formed square, the other lozeng: the square Graver makes a broad and shallow
stroke, or hatch; and the lozeng makes a deep and narrower stroke. The use of
the square Graver is to make the largest strokes, and the use of the other is
to make the strokes more delicate and lively. But I prefer a Graver made of
an indifferent size betwixt both these two; which will make your strokes, or
hatches, show with more life and vigor; and yet with sufficient force,
according as you shall manage it in your working: The forms of which will
appear in the I. and II. figures.

The III. figure shows you how to whet the two sides of your Graver, which is
to be done in this manner following; you must have a very good oylstone smooth
and flat, and having powered a little Sallad oil thereupon, take the Graver, and
laying one side of it (that which you intend shall cut the copper) flat upon
the stone, whet that side very flat and even; and to that purpose have an
especial care to carry your hand steadfast, and with an equal strength,
pracing your forefinger very firm upon the opposite side of your Graver; to the
end that you may guide it with the more exactness: then turn the very next
side of your Graver, and whet that in the like manner, as you did the other; so
that there may be a very sharp edge for the space of an inch or better; then
turning uppermost that edge which you have so whetted, and setting the end of
your Graver obliquely upon the stone, carry your hand exactly even, to the end
that it may be whetted very flat and sloping, in the form of a lozeng, making
to the edge a sharp point, as the figure IIII. shows you.

It is very necessary that you take great care in the exact whetting of your
Graver; for it is impossible that you should ever work with that neatness and
curiosity as you desire, if your Graver be not very good, and rightly whetted.

I cannot demonstrate it so plain and fully by figures, and discourse, as I
would: if you have acquaintance with an Artist in this way, you may easily
understand it in a short time.



Sect. 27. The manner how to hold your Graver, with other particulars.
YOu may see also that the uppermost part of this figure describes to you the
form of two Gravers, with their handles fitted for the whetting. They that use
this Art, do before they make use of them, commonly cut away that part of the
knob or bowl that is at the end of their handles, which is upon the same line
with the edge of their Graver; to the end it may not obstruct or hinder them in
their graving, as the figure II. shows you.

For if you should work upon a large plate* you will find that part of your
handle (if it be not cut away) will rest so upon the copper, that it will
hinder the smooth and even carriage of your hand in making your strokes or
hatches; also it will cause your Graver to run into the copper in such sort,
that you shall not be able to manage it at your pleasure.

The third figure describes to you the way of holding your Graver; which is in
this manner. You must place the knob or ball of the handle of your Graver in
the hollow of your hand, and having extended your forefinger toward the point
of your Graver, laying it opposite to the edge that should cut the copper,
place your other fingers on the side of your handle, and your thumb on the
other side of the Graver, in such sort that you may guide your Graver flat and
parallel with the plate; as you may see in the IIII. figure.

Be careful that your fingers do not interpose between the plate and the
Graver, for they will be troublesome, and hinder you in carrying your Graver
level with the plate, so that you cannot make your strokes with that freedom
and neatness, as otherwise you may. This I think fit to give you notice of in
this place, because the skill of holding your Graver is that which you must
first perfectly learn, and be able to practice without pain or difficulty; or
else you will not gain so great a readiness and command of your hand, as is
required in an accurate and skillful Graver.

Sect. 28. The mauner of governing your hand in Graving, and other particulars.
HAving described the way of holding your Graver, the next thing is to show you
how to guide your Graver upon the plate in making of your strokes, which are
straight or crooked; that you may work with the more ease and convenience, you
must have a strong round leather cushion filled with sand or fine dust; let it
be made about half a foot broad in the diameter, and three or four inches deep;
lay this upon a table which stands fast and firm; then lay your plate upon
the cushion, as is described in the II. figure in the former Section.

When you are to make any straight strokes, hold your Graver as is directed in
the former Section; and if you will have your strokes deeper or broader in one
place than in another, in that place where you would have them deepest, you
must press your hand hardest; but especially in making of a straight stroke,
be careful to hold your plate firm and steadfast upon the cushion.

And if you make any crooked or winding strokes, then hold your hand and Graver
steadfast; and as you work turn your plate against your Graver; for otherwise it
is impossible for you to make any crooked or winding stroke with that neatness
and command, as by this means you may, if you do not move your plate, and keep
your arm and elbow fixed or rested on the table.

If as you are working your Graver happen to break often on the point, it is a
sign it is tempered too hard; therefore take a red hot charcole, and lay the
end of your Graver upon it, and when you perceive your Graver to wax yellowish,
dip it in the water: If your Graver become blunt without breaking, it is a sign
it is nothing worth.

It will be convenient for you to have a piece of box or hard wood, that after
you have sharpened your Graver, by striking the point of it into the said box
or hard wood, you may take off all the roughness about the point, which was
caused by whetting it upon the oyl-stone. After you have graved part of your
work, it will be necessary to scrape it with a sharp edge of another Graver,
carrying it along even with the plate, to take off the roughness of the
strokes; but in so doing take heed of making any new scratches in your work.

To the end you may better see that which is graven, they commonly roll up
close a piece of a black Felt or Castor, liquored over a little with oyl-olive,
and therewith rub the places graven: And if you perceive any scratches in your
plate, rub them out with your burnisher: and if you have graved any of your
strokes too deep, you make them appear fainter with rubbing them with your
burnisher.

FINIS.

