man with horns on his head

man with horns on his head Sir Fardinando Fumbler, Clerk of the Company.


Fumblers-Hall, KEPT And holden in Feeble-Court, at the sign of the
Labour-in-vain, in Dee-little-Lane.

Wherein diverse Complaints and Agrievances, of the Feminines in Cornucopia, are
presented to the grave wisdoms of the Masters of that Company: concerning
Nonperformance, want of due benevolence, Deficience and Corporal Disabilities
in Mankind, whereby poor distressed Females Languish under a pressing weight
of misery, not only to the great decay of their Trade and occupations, but to
the Destruction of Generation it self.

Whereunto is Added the Second part, newly discovered and set forth for
information of delinquents that are to answer to these interrogations that
shall be objected against them.

Printed for I. Clarke, W. Thackeray, and T. Pass^nger.

The Summons being granted to Sir Fardinando Fumbler, Clerk of the said
Company, to Cite in these persons following, Viz.
Allice All-co^k. Complaints against Sir Nicholas Frible Ione Wou'd-have-more,
Complaints against Daniel Doe-little, Doll Hold-up, Complaints against Fran.
Fain-would, Kate Knockwel, Complaints against Will. D^y-bones, Nan Tickle-tail,
Complaints against Peter Bad-cosk. Bess Bear-up-stiff. Complaints against Simon
Silly-P --
Who are all to answer to What shall be objected against them.

Whereunto is added.

Margery Marall, against Jack Jolly-boy, Susan Shrews-face, against Dick
Draball, Cicilly Suc-pot, against Robin Rocks^by, Winney Wagtail. against
Joseph Wood-c^^k
All Delinquents, and to answer to their several crimes.

Fumblers-Hall.
The PROLOGUE.
Come you brave Artists of the horned trade
That boast how many marred how many made,
You need none but your own Artillery,
To advance the mystery of eniquity;
The Su^u^b^ are so f^ll you well may rally
From street, from lane, from court, form yard from alley
B^th tag and rag, both short as well as tall,
May ^ll-a-row n^w march to Fumblers-Hall:
There do your duties to prevent your scorns,
Pay tribute to the virtue of the Horns.
THe Females of Cornucopia, being a great number of agrieved Mortals that a
long time have Languished: gnaw Sheets, eat Oatmeal, and licked Walls for
satisfaction of their longing desires, and finding none to pity their cases,
but growing worse and worse in their desired faculty, resolved with one consent
to draw up their agrievances; and present them to the Masters of the
Corporation of Fumblers-Hall, The said Masters being Twenty four in number,
whereof twelve were Men-Midwives, the other, Sons of Apothecaries, that had
studied Aristotle's Problems, the Birth of Man, and diverse learned Authors, that
has treated largely on the Art and Occupation of the Femenines, in the way of
Fructification, and increase of their Members: these being head men of the City
of Cornucopia, having many complaints and Agrievances presented them from the
agrieved parties of Females in and about the City, resolved to build them ^ new
Hall, all the Timber thereof being horn-beam, and a roof of Unicorn Horn,
^^^hly gilded, Studded, and Imbosied with lesser Horns, of all sorts of
colors: the Table, Chair* and stools, being all of them of the same Livery:
This Hall for the curiosity thereof, as far exceeded a^l other Halls, as the
Cross in Cheap side did exceed the horned Pillar in Kent; being built in
Feeble-Court, at the sign or the labour-in-vain, near unto the Maidenhead in
Doe-little-Lane; where the Court being set, Sir Fardinando Fumbler called in
these persons following.

Clerk. Alice Allcock, and Sir Nicola^ ^rible, come into the Court, and answer
to those objections alleging each from other.


Master. Speak Allice, what can thou say against Sir Nicholas?


Alice. An't please this Honorable Table, I have been his obedient Creature,
waking and sleeping, these 3 long years, and yet am as pure a Virgin, as ever
lay by the side of a young Bridegroom; and so am like to continue for him,
whereby I receive many taunts and jeers of my Neighbors, who call me
Barren-Doe, and and a thousand such names: when 'ris known, Gentlemen, the
fault is not mine in the least: I have done my endeavor up and down, ever
since I was his Wife, fed him with Anchovis, Caviarre, bought bottles of
Muskadine, Montefisco Frontimack: ^nay, he has wanted nothing that the
industery of Woman could invent, to make him capable of doing his duty: Yet he
is no more to me, Gentlemen, than a straw in the Nostrils of a ^ow, a very
slug, a mere frible, an it please ye, Gentlemen hear what he can allege for
himself.


Mast. Sir Nicolas answer for your self, what can you allege against the
accusation of the Woman?


Sir Nicholas. So please your Grave Worships to consider of the Impudence of
this woman, who is more insatiate then the Grave, nay, Hell it self: no man
though never so lusty, being able to give her satisfaction: besides, one
fluttish nasty trick she has, that every night she Faris in her sleep, which
above all the rest of her bad qualities, is most hateful to me.


Mast. That is but a weak infirmity Sir Nicholas; you know he that refuses a
wife for a Fart, a Horse for a start, and a Groat for a crack, shall never be
well wiv'd, well Horsed, nor well moneyed; come, come, Sir Nicholas, you must
bear with her weakness, she is a woman, and your wife.


Ali^e. I, and will be a woman too in spite of his teeth, or else i will want of
my will, cannot I break wind when I catch cold, but you must mouth it?


Mast. A Woman's will indeed, is a resolute beast, and deserves a strong kirb;
if they once get a bit in their mouth they will run to the devil.


Sir Nick. Therefore i will fly them, as I fly from evil.
And shun bad women, as i would shun the Devil.

(Exit, Sir Nick. and Alice.) Mast. Clerk; Call in Ione Wood h^v^-more and
Daniel Doe-l^ttle, to answer what shall be objected each by other.


Clerk. Jone. Wood-have-more, and Daniel Doe-little appear in the Court, and
bring your Summons with you,

Enter Ione Wood-have-more, and Daniel Doe-little.
Mast. Ione, What can thou say against Daniel? is he not a loving husband to
thee?


Ione. I cannot say but he is loving enough, but love is not all that pleases
a Woman, will love beget such beautiful Children as my neighbor K. or my
neighbor B. has; no, no, Love will not do it alone: I must confess he is a
Musician, and as timbersome a man as any lives in Cock-Lane, yet has but a mere
Gut, a Chitterling, a Fiddle-string, that will make no music to a Woman's
Instrument; yet when I tell him on it, he pulls it out and shakes it, and puts
up his Fiddle-stick again, falls a kissing of me, and with a few other
Iack-Puddings tricks, thinks that sufficient satisfaction; but this is the
short and the long of the business, I have been his wife long enough, and have
found his performances to be mere fooling, and no real perfo^mance at all: as a
fine speech to a ro^^en Puppitplay; but I look for Reality Gentlemen, and to
have Children as well as my Neighbors: it is not now and then a Hoop-ring will
please me, No, no, i will get a Cooper i will warrant him, that shall not want an
Addze to labor withal.

No Woman can endure so vile a wrong,
As too too short, or have it too too long.

Mast. Daniel, what say for thy self?


Daniel. Will ye please to see, and if here be not enough to content any Woman
in England i will --


Mast. Fie on him uncivil beast, kick uim out of the Court, and commit him
close prisoner to his own Horn-Pipe, and grant Ione liscence of freedom, to use
and occupy for a a year and a day, and then this business to be called over
again.


Ione. I humble thank your good Worships, I shall not be unthankful to you.


D. This is a doom I little thought to have.
For natures gifts to be a woman's slave.
Exit Ione and Daniel.
Mast. Call in two more.


Clerk. Doll Hold up, and Frances Fainwould, appear in the Court.

Enter Doll Hold up, and Fran. Fain-would.
Doll. Nay, I can hold-up and hold forth too, I have been at the Mouth at
Aldersgate, and as loud as the best of them all; I have knocked down humane
Learning, and have a Spirit i will warrant thee that will teach thee something:
Brother P. will not come to it like a Bear ward, or a Fe^cer, or a rude
Cavileer that will swear dam him he will, but like a right spiritual Brother,
seasoned for the work, and according to the right Rule of Foundation of
Generation. O the rudeness of these wicked men, good People cast them from you,
let not the Wicked's Seed be sown in the ground of the Righteous, I beseech you
cast them from you: though the World calls them Husbands, they are Thieves and
Robbers, Men of this world, that shall have their Portion in the Lake, the foul
Lake.


Mast. This is a Quaker, away with her, if her Spirit be once raised, all the
Devils in Hell cannot lay it again.


Doll. Thou art a Liar, a D^g, a Toast of the foul Pit, the froth and seuin of
hell.


Master. Avoid Satan, i will not hear a word more.


Fran. I fain would have reclaimedher from her Meetings, but it is as good to
try to wash a Black-a-moor White, or to lade dry the Thames with a spoon, as to
seek to turn her from her perverse will. Please her I cannot, but she calls me
dissembling Lyat, Devil, nay; and makes Horns in derision.


Mast. An absolute breach of privilege, and deserv^s a severe punishment.
Clerk, make her Mittimus into Horn-Castle, where she may continue close, safe,
and strickt imprisonment for a year and a day: and for honest Frances, I one
Wood-have-more may do well to employ him to do her Noctural drudgeries.


Fran. If it be Digging or knocking, have at her. I can Humbore too, and have P
-- and praise abroad, though I can have none at home: but from all Quakers,
Iohn-a-bob-tails, Brownings, and shakers, Good Lord deliver me.

For when pretended Zeal does lead astray,
Virtue forsakes, and vice does show the way.

Mast, Sure the Devil would not marry a Quaker, if they be so perverse. Call in
some more of them and see what they are.


Clerk. Kate Knock-well, and William Dry-bones appear in the Court.

Enter Kate Knock-well, and William Dry-bones.
Mast. Come bonny Kate, what can thou allege against thy Husband, William
Drybones?


Kate. An't please your Worships I have been married these six years, and yet
can find no comfort at all be fitting a woman; he told me he was a Clerk, but
the Devil of one drop of Ink have I found in his Pen since I married him,
whatsoe^er he had before; He is dry, dry as a ^ix: Gentlemen, therefore I pray
consider of a poor woman, I am F^csh and blood as your Wives are, Gentlemen:
Therefore either grant me Liscence to use my own, or I will do it, and do it
again: we Women must and will have our benevol^nce.

The World was never yet so dull,
If one Koave will not another will.

Will. Were a Man's body a full Mary bone, thoud'st quickly draw it dry, I
warrant thee, thou wearest thy Magnetic stone under thy apron* that will draw
more then the succor of a well, or a team of Flanders Mares, and if it be true
that some say that love is a well, they will drain the s^ring dry, were it as deep
as hell.

But I know the worst, Horns are my fate,
And horns do sometimes deck a Iordly pate.

Mast. He has confessed himself a dry fellow, make Kate a commission to use her
Talent, while he has recruited his lamp, and then both parties will be pleased.


Kate. I am your Worships humble
Handmaid, and do tell,
He that knocks best,
Can knock at best but well.

Exit Kate and Dry-bones. Mast. Call in Nan Tickle-tail, and Peter Bad-cock.
(both enter.)

Come Nan speak for thy self, and speak truth.


Nan. So I will an it please your Worship, I have been married two years, and
had as good I had never been married at all, he has been at Burnt-Wood an't
please ye, the Barbar played the Jew with him, and instead of part, cut off all:
he has not so much as would satisfy a Duck at a mouthful, an it please you: I
hid it a long time for shame and reproach of people, but no^a I can hide it no
longer: at night he quarrcls with me in bed, but hang him ^ingling Rascal, all
the dogs in Cornucopia are little enough to bait him: Women are well hope up to
marry with such Geldings.


Peter. It is well known I was a sound man when I married thee, Nan Tickletail,
you have tickled me with the Pox when I was knocking at the Anvil, you were in
Conjuncton with Tom the Ioyner, and would come home as drunk as a Sow, and call
me at your pleasure: pawn Pettiroat, Smock, Wastcoat, and all to fre an
Attoorney to maintain your honesty, forsooth; though you have offended no less
then three times, since you were my Wife; and once in the Cage, when the
Tailors man in Blackfriars had taken measure of your hide for a young
bantling, you know who you was beholding too for a three-penny caudle, and a
halfpenny candle to stick in clay at the Bedshead, every feather i am sure was
an ell loug: then you would come creeping home, crying good Peter, sweer Peter,
receive in thy Nan, and I will work, and not desire a Penny of thee, but now
whose worse then Peter; but I believe Peter must be the best flower in your
Garden, when all is done.


Nan. To him my Dog, to him my Dog, hallo, hollo, to him my Dog.


Pet. The Devil is hunting, sure for why?
Women more loud then Dogs, their game will cry.

Mast. The business is very foul between both, let it be referred to our next
sitting, and call in the rest.


Clerk. Bess Bear-up-stiff, come into the Court and answer for thy self.

Enter Bess and Simon Silly.
Bess. As I am an honest and upright Woman, i will have Justice against him for a
Natural: this Simon Silly has enough on it, and enough to content any honest
woman, if he knew how to use it; and bid him turn to me, he grins in my fare,
like Pugg upon a Close-stool, and turn^ his breech upon me, says, he can play
by himself. O Gentlemen, you little think what shifts I am driven too, to
satisfy my longings.


Sim. You took the parsnip you Queen, and made me eat it without butter, when
you had done. Another time you put me to scour on old Copper, and lay with the
Tinker all the while: another time you sent me for Beer for the Weaver, when I
looked in at the window and saw all; and yet you persuade me the Moon was in
the twincle, and made the Glass show every thing double.

Well, well, i will say but little more,
No man was ever cursed with such a Whore.

Mast. Make her a pass for Jam^co, send for a yellow coat Francisco she shall
be banished.


men come with complaints that they ^vercome me with their clamours: some
scolding, some swearing, and some cursing their Husbands, and threatening the
Worshipful ^^^^h.

Women corrupt, enraged, denied their wills,
Consume like fire, and worse then worsest ills.

Master. I fear their rage, lest they over men should sway.
Adjourn the court until another day,

The Second Part
PROLOGUE.
YOu that are maimed in Venus Wars,
Never saw service, yet have scars;
You that play and never win,
At the Game of In and In:
Wives that draw as strong as Leeches,
Women that do wear the Breeches;
You that have your ground lie fallow,
Rachel Riggle, Susan swallow:
If your cases will bear action,
Here you may have satisfaction.
Clerk. I Perceive we must with speed call a new Court, therefore it shall not
be a miss to provide two horned Maces, that may spread themselves from one side
of the streets to the other, to clear all before us, and to procure some
attendance on Mars's Livery to guard us: and for that end I have bespoken a
Horn-work, that is already made, being a font of invincible strength to curb
those that shall insult over us; raise any Mutiny, o^ disturb the Proceedings
of our Court: and now, since we have all things ^^ readiness, let us proclaim
our Court, and proceed to Justice.

O Yes, O Yes, O Yes; If there be any Man or Woman, in City, Town or Country,
that has been Married a Year and a Day, and cannot have their desires of ea^^
other, in perfo^mance of Covenants, they have free liberty to d^aw up their
ag^i^vances, ^ud present them to Fumblers-Hall, an^ they shall have sp^edy
redress. Or if a^y ^e troubled with the Yellows, or Corns on their Fo^e-Heads,
or the Napes of their Necks, they shall (paying the Fees of the Court) be
suddenly cured of the same.

But I hear the Din already, that the Bench is sat, and the company crowding
in, and therefore I must make no delay, but proceed to read their Indiaments;
therefore Mary Mar-all and John Jolly-boy, appear in the Court, and answer to
your several Indictments, upon the forfeiture of your recognizances.

Enter Margery Mar-all, and John Iolly-boy.
Marg. I desire of the Court, that I may first speak for my self. I am a Woman
my Lord, and have nothing to defend me but my Tongue, and I am blessed with more
wit then my Husband, why should not I advance it to my uttermost profit? Yes, I
will in spite of Fate: and since I have Married a Fool, a Fool I Will make of
him; My Lord, he is not capable of ruling a Wife, and therefore it is fit a Wife
should rule him; it must be a wise Man that governs a Woman, my Lord.


John. Ant please you my Lord, I had good Lands and Livings, Houses, and
House-hold-stuff, Cattle, and Pullen abomination, all which I made her Mistress
of, though she had not a Smock to her breech, when I first married her:
presently after she engrossed all to her self, became a free state, and made me
(not a Duke of Venice) but a meet property, a John Hold-my-staff, an't please
ye: so that I could not be Master of a Penny I had: she made me Dine with her
Servants too, and lie above in the Garret, where she would lock me in every
night, and let me out at her pleasure. If this be fair my Lord, I appeal to the
Wisdom of your Court: nay, she kept retainers too, and would lock me up in the
Celler amongst the small-Beer, while she was above in the Chamber with her
Bottles of Wine, Sweetmeats, and other Iunke^s, Well my Lords, none knows where
the Shoe wrings but my self: If it where your Lordships case, as it is mine, I
am sure you would never endure it.

That Man that let us his Wife bear rule,
Shall be both Wittal, Cuckold, and fool.

Mast. Come, come, I say you shall submit to your Wife, and be a good Subject
too, you had best, or you shall hear from us.


Marg. I thank your Honor, I Will warrant you.


Clerk. Susan Shrews-face, and Richard Drab-all, appear in the Court, and
answer to what shall be objected against you.

Enter Seusan Shrews-face, and Dick Drab-all.
Susan. Gentlemen, they say a cursed Cow has short Horns, but they that meddle
with me shall find that I have Horns, Sting, and Venom too, besides these ten
Weapons at my fingers ends, call 'um what you will: if I charge, it is not with
false fire, but with Grenades, Wildfire, and the Artillery of Mischief, that
ever a Woman can invent; if I once give the Allarum, beware of my Gunshot with
power, i will fall on right or wrong; would I could see any sneaking Cuckold of
them all that dares to charge me: Uts Fut, I Will quickly make him know sorrow,
saw off his Horns, and put him to Grass; my Nicodemus follows Whores, an't
please ye, spends all, Pawns his very breeches from his arse for 'um, 'twould
make an Honest Woman speak, that had never a Tongue: they call me Shrew, but
better be Shrew then a Sheep, though I have a Sheeps-head to my Husband, that is
bewitched to dessembling whores whose faces are Lures, their Beauties Baits,
their looks Net^, and their Charms: and all to be witch silly Gulls and to
bring them to siuine.


Dick. Patience good Wife, it is thy ^urstness that undoes me, and makes me
run-out.


Susan. Sirrah, I Will thunder such a Peal in your ears, shall drive thee and thy
Whores from Bridewell to Newgate, and from thence to the Devil; I Will make C^ubs
Trumps: and therefore, look to thy Coxcomb. (beats him)


Dick. O good wife, spare but my life, and i will mend presently.


Susan. No, i will scratch, tear, and kick thee limb from limb: and blow thee
round the World as Attoms.


Dick. What greater misery breeds a poor man's curse,
Then a bad wife, a whore, or empty purse.

Mast. The Judgment of the Court is that for thy Fornication, thou shall live
wretched, and Dye a Beggar, thy wifes Tongue ringing thy dying Peal, Call in
the rest


Clerk. Sisly Suck-pot, Robert Rooksby, Winny Wagtail, Joseph Woodcock, appear
in the Court, and save your Bayl. (from without)


Mess. Sir, here is all the Scolds and Alley-birds in London, and the Suburbs,
for their Liberties and Freedoms, ^ot^ of ^ongues, and T^les: they th^e aren
and speak high words against this Court: there fore ^ight I advi^e you, you
shall adjourn the Court, for fear of further mischief: for they sing like
Parrots, are all Horn-mad, carrying the Midsummer-Moon in their Banners.


Mast. It Is good Council, Women a^e full of danger, and too subtle for we Men:
therefore we will take your Council. Clerk. Adjourn our Court ^ntif another
time, and give n^^ice to all the more civil Women, that they shall shortly
expect the Songs of these Alley-Birds.

Which if it can but once delight 'um;
The D^vil after cannot affright 'um.

EPILOGVE.
IN the mean time good Women all,
You Are welcome to our Fumblers Hall,
Of your own will you cannot fail,
To have content from head to tail.
FINIS.
The Summons.
THESE are to Will and require.

That upon present Summons by Virtue of these presents he forth with makes his
Personal appearance at Fumblers-Hall, in ^ee^l^-Court, at the sign of the
La^^ur-^^vuin, near unto the M^idenbead in Doe-l^^tle Lane, there to answer for
his corporal disabilities, and such other charge as shall be objected against
him by the present power, as he will answer the contrary at his peril.

Given under our Hands. Ben. Badcock. Dan. Doe-little. Fran. Fain-would W.
Would-do-more Peter Prickless.

Sir Fardinando Fumbler, Clerk of the Company.


