A PLAIN PROOF OF The true Father and Mother of the pretended PRINCE of WALES.
BY Several Letters written by the late Queen in France; The Earl of Tyrconnel,
Lord Deputy of Ireland, The Duchess of Powis, Governess to the pretended
Prince; Mr. Carrell, the Queens Secretary, and Father Lewis Sabran, Chaplain
and Tutor to the Prince. WITH Informations of several Persons of Note Plainly
discovering the whole Management of that Imposture. COLLECTED From the
Originals, as they were Intercepted and Delivered to his present Majesty. And
never before made public.

New Published by WILLIAM FULLER, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for the AUTHOR; And Sold by the Book-selers of London and
Westminster, 1700

A true Copy of his Grace the Duke of Shrewsbury's Certificate.
I Do hereby certify, that in November 1689. Mr. William Fuller came to me, and
did make several considerable Discoveries of the Intreagues of the Enemies of
the present Government, And he was by my encouragement sent into France; And at
his Return did perform very great Service for the Preservation of their
Majesty's Sacred Persont, and the Peace and Security of their Government^: And
that it was by his endeavors, that Mr. Matthew Crone was detected and
convicted of High Treason. Given under my hand this 15th. of April, 1692.

Shrewsbury

To the Right Honorable, Sir Richard Levett, Knight. Lord Mayor. And to the Right
Worshipful, the Aldermen and Sheriffs of the City of London.
I Hope the same Noble Disposition which has inspired you bravely on all
occasions, to demonstrat your Zeal for the Preservation of the present
Government, by supporting the best of Kings, will induce you favorably to look
on, and protect this short, but true Narrative of the most socret and subtle
Design of the late Reign; which was a Contrivance so deeply laid, to root out
the Protestant Religion, and all things else valuable to every true English
Man, that nothing but the mighty power and favor of God could deliver this
Nation from: I hope there can be no Danger of a Relapse; And verily believe
there will not, unless Sins and Ignorance rule the People of this Land into a
Lethargy of Security -- You, Gentlemen, are the Rulers over a great People, and
it is much in your power, by your Authority and Example, to preserve the
lasting Peace of this Kingdom: Therefore I humble beg your partronage of this
piece; which as a strange Mountain, bids Defiance to all its Opposers; And the
Truth thereof may at one time be more powerful than the Arms of a Popish
pretender; and thereby be of Use to you and your posterity.

May Almighty GOD long preserve the present King, under whose Care you and your
famous City are sure of peace and Prospetity, it is the Prayers of Your most
Devoted, and Obedient Servant W. FULLER.

The PREFACE.
SInce the happy Conclusion of the Peace, that many of your Nation have had
their Tours into France: It is very observeable, how strangely the Mouths of
some come back, are filled with the mighty Actions of that Heroic Gentleman,
pretended Prince of Wales; they seem so to adore him, that were he truly what
they pretend, King James's, or His Queens Son, (as he is neither) these
Gentlemen could not exceed their flattering Praises: It must be confessed* That
Pomp and Show often makes Men seem what they are not, and so it does here; For
this young Spark being by the late King and Queen owned as their Son, as soon
as Born of Mrs. Gray, it behooves them to mantain him as such, whilst there is
any hopes of imposing him to the Advantage of the Roman Catholic Cause, which
was the first Ground of their Design; and even at this day is no less than what
the Jesuits and Priests both at Home and Abroad, do very confidently affirm,
will answer their design of settling Popery in this Kingdom in a short time:
Being my self in July last at Antwerp, and conversing there with several
English Priests and Jesuits, particularly one Father Hunter, a Jesuit, the only
English in the great and famous College there; he told me plainly, That
however Matters seemed to stand against the Interest of the Church of Rome at
this time; He questioned not but to hear Mass said a Hundred times in St.
Paul's Church in London before he Died; adding for one Reason, That he was much
younger than King William, and hoping to out live him, he saw no other obstacle
in their way; most of the other Jesuits and Priests gave their Opinion to the
same Effect, and seemed to speak not of their own Judgment barely, but
according to their Advice from England etc. And did frankly tell me, That they
had now, notwithstanding the late Act of Parliament against them, above Seven
Thousand Priests in England: And I know very well, that there is every Week
very great Sums of Money remitted from England, for the use of the Religious
there. So much do Intreagues and Interest prosper, which if rightly considered,
is a sufficient cause for every true English Men, to join in the Suppressing
such a growing Evil: But to return to our Business in hand, since the most
unhappy, most unspeakable loss of His Highness the Duke of Gloucester, has
given new and strange Hopes to that Party of England's Foes. I^ cannot be a
miss, once more to remind them, whose Son, their darling Hopes, the pretended
Prince of Wales is, which is here done by several Letters, sufficiently
attested to be the true Copies taken from the Originals of the late Queen, and
her chief Persons of Quality's own Writing, and some of the Originals (as they
were sent from Ireland by persons of Quality their, that took them out of the
Duchess of Tyronnel's Trunk) are ye^ in being, and ready to be produced when
occasion offers* If it may be objected, why they were not published sooner? I
Answer, That I did intend it four Years ago, and hoping from time to time to
have brought the matter to a Hearing, before the Right Honorable the House of
Lords, I was constraind to delay the publishing of them on that Score only; But
having been beyond the Seas, and conversing with Father Lewis Sabran, who was
Chaplain to the pretended Prince, and one chief Manager of this Intreague, now
refiding at the English College in Liege. I do undertake to Answer the said
Father, by proving not only the Suppositious Birth of the pretended Prince, but
the whole Management in every particular, at the time of the late Queen's
pretending to delivered at St. James's the 10th. of June, 1688. with a
particular account of the true Mothers being cruelly Murtder'd in March 1690.

A Plain Proof of the true Father and Mother of the Pretended Prince of Wales.
ABout four Years since, I published a small Narrative, showing, by several
Circumstances* how Reasonable it was for every dis^^^^ing judgment impartially
to discern by those ^ruths I related, how cunningly the Transactions (...)
Reign were managed, by imposing a^ ^mp^stor Child to be H^ir to the Crowns of
these Kingdoms of Great Britain, and Ireland.

A short Time after my (...) was ou^, it bad so far convinced many that ^e^ore
were doubtful concerning that suppositio^ Birth, that instantly the whole Party
of ^apists, and hot^brain'd Jacobits ^ell har^ (...)* ^ut instead of disproving
any one Particular which I had all^^ed against ^he Legitimate Birth (as they
pretended to vindicat) a certain Author of Quality, (...) terms himself, (being
ashamed of His Name and Cause to^, as W^ have Reoson to believe) Scribbles a
few sheets, and sends them into the World, in Hopes to Banter Truth (according
to the Old Custom) and falls to a (...)* against Me, charging Me with Crimes I
never knew, and from these Inventions of His own Brain, endeav^^rs to dravv
Reasons to hinder or Invalidate the Truth of my Relation: But I shall not
trouble You with His ^^nter or Character, only say, I know Him; And though he be
a Man of Quality, he is also so well known by the People of England, esp^cially
the Tradesmen of London, that there is (...) that will Trust him on any Score.

(...) things material which I cannot but take (...)

(...), His bringing all the Depositions which were (...) Westminster by King
JAMES His Friends before (...) ^^^lution; and at the end of them this Author
(...) in Admiration, That so mean a Person (...) obtai^ any Credit against such
a Number of (...), made by persons of so high a Rank and Qu^lity (...) which
some were Protestants.

(...) ^nswer, That all their Depositions to my Ass^^tions against the true
Birth of this Child: For whoever (...) those Depositions, they will find th^^
(...) Person who says. They saw or sel^ the Child come from the Queen's Body,
though Mrs Wilks, the Popish Midwife, swears, she cut the Child's Navel-String,
which we verily believe she might; for, as We shall presently show, Mrs* Gray,
the true Mother of that Child, was Delivered by Mrs. Wilks, not many Minutes
before the Child was conveyed in the Warming-Pan into the Queen's Bed.

Secondly, This Noble Author would insinuate, That whatever I published at that
Time, (it being in the last Year of the late War with France) I should be
silent enough when once a Peace was concluded, and that the Persons I charged
with the management of that Imposture had the opportunity to answer for
themselves.

To this I Reply, That it is sufficiently known, the Wars have now been over
about the Years, and those Persons He would justify have had all the
Opportunities imaginabie to have made their Defense, and done themselves and
the pretended Prince, Right: if it had Injurd either. They could not be
ignorant of what I charged against them, by Reason many of my Books in English
were sent to France, and the same Book was Translated both into French and
Dutch, and Printed at the Hague and Amsterdam, and other Places beyond the
Seas, as is sufficiently known.

But to avoid Arguments, not material, and come close to the matter, I must now
tell the World, that I lately ventured my self abroad into Flanders, where I
met my form Tutor, Father Lewis Sabran, of the Jesuits Society, he being now a
kind of Superior to these English ones of that Society, who Reside at the City
of Liege. He was Chaplain to the pretended Prince of Wales, and one of the
chief Actors in the management of that Imposture (as You find him charged in my
former Book) With this Father I had some Disputes at the later end of July
last* and his Endeavor was to persuade me to return to the Church of Rome, and
live the Remainder of my Life in that Place, by entering my self into their
Society (that is to be a Lay Brother) but I could by no means yield to his
Inducements. Upon which, after a short sharp Disput, the good Father and I
parted with this Resolve, That to what I had formerly published, I would at my
coming to England expose his Letters, and all the remaining Passag-wherein he
was concerned, and send him them in Print, desiring his Reply and Confutation,
if I did him or others any Injury. He promised he would do it if I gave
Occasion. Therefore, with humble Submission, I think, I cannot proceed more
fairly to justify the Truth of my Narrative, than by setting down first what I
know concerning the Management of that Intrigue, which has been already, and
can at any Time be sufficiently proved as follows, viz.

First, That in May 1688. The Countess of Tyrconnel came over from Ireland in
the Monmouth Yacht, Captain Wright Commandder, and brought with her two Young
Gentlewomen big with child. This is proved by Capt. Wright, and others
belonging to the Yatch, as also by a great many People of Quality and others in
Ireland.

Secondly, I do aver, That one of these two Gentle^^^^n who came over with the
said Countess of Tyrconnel, ((...) was with her on the Road toward London)
fell on Labor, and lay in at St. Alban's, which is Testified by several on
that Road, and the Inhabitants as St. Albans.

Thirdly, I do aver, That the other of these Women that came over from Ireland,
and to London, with the Countess of Tyrconnel, (her Name being Mrs. Mary Gray)
was brought big with Child, and Lodged in two small Chambers over the Lady
Stricklands Lodgings, near to the Queens Apartment, in the palace of St.
James's, which said Chamber, joind also to the Marchioness of Powis's Lodgings,
and were the most private and convenient for their intended purpose in the whole
Palace.

Fourthly, I do aver, That on Saturday the 9th. of June 1688, the same Mrs.
Gray fell into pains, upon which Mrs. Wilks was brought to her, and that
Aftrenoon the Queen came privately to St. James's, and pertended also of a
sudden to find the Symptoms of her approaching Delivery, which increased
according as Mrs. Gray did in Reality; and Mrs. Gray being delivered betwixt
the Hours of Nine and Ten on Sunday Morning, the Tenth of June, the Child of
the said Mrs. Gray was conveyed in a Warming-pan, which I saw Mrs. Labaddie
carry from Mrs. Grays Chamber along the narrow Gallery, and so passed into the
back Room, next to that the Queen lay in.

Fifthly, I do aver, That this very same Mrs. Gray, three Weeks after the time
of her Delivery, was by Command sent to Dover in a Coach and six Horses,
accompanied by Father Lewis Sabran, the Marchioness of Powis's Woman, and my
self; and that she was there met by one Father Gray, a secular Priest, who
lived at Calis, and called her Sister, with whom she went on Board the Packet
Boat, in order to go for Calis, and from thence to the Benedictine Nunnery in
Paris: And this is proved by the Persons where she and we lodged, and is well
remembered by the Master of the^ ^acket Boat, who had often before and since,
both seen and Drank with Father Gray her Brother, at Calis, and heard him say,
his Sister, meaning this Mary Gray was gone to end her days in a Nunnery.

Sixthly, I do aver, That the said Mary Gray, in February 1690, (there being a
Breach in the Garden-Walls of that Cloister at that time) did make her escape
out of the said Convent of English Benedictine Nuns in Paris, and upon which, a
diligent Search was made after her in Paris, and after three days she was found
again.

This I prove by several Persons Inhabitants in Paris, who dwell near the
Convent, which will remember the Breach at that time, and the search which was
made after a Woman who had made her escape. And if our Enemies should here
allege it was another Woman, and not Mrs. Gray. I answer, It behooves them to
prove who that other Wowan was; And forasmuch, as in a few Days after Mrs. Gray
was carried to St. Germains from the said Convent, (where she was kept under a
strict Guard after her Escape) it likewise concerns them to demonstrate, what
became of her afterward.

And whereas, I do further charge them with Murdering her; certainly, if
they are no^ Guilty, it is easy to disprove my Assertion, by either producing
her, or proving where, and how she died.

And yet further, I do attest, That this Mary Gray was merely Murdered (she
being the true Mother of the pretended Prince of Wales) to prevent her
discovering the same to the honest People of England, whom they rerm the
Enemies of the late King and Queen: Therefore, if she were not put to Death,
merely on that account, it will be a mighty Justification to the Court of St.
Germains, if they please to show for what cause she was Murdered, so that
these my positive Assertions, being so answered, as I propose, I will not only
confess my Error, but shall freely lay my Life at their Mercy, though I am sure
to find none: As for Father Sabran, I verily believe I have left him little or
no Room for a Reply. But partly pursuant to a former promise of mine, in my
first and second Narrative, and to make the matter more apparent, I here
following present the Courtious Reader with a few ^^^e Copies of Letters, writ
by the late King James's Queen, and others, concerning Mrs. Gray; and the first
two Letters were wrote upon the occasion of a great Fright, which Mrs. Gray
gave the Queen, when she made her escape, which occasioned the Queen to order
me to go for England with the said Letters immediately; but Mrs. Gray being
taken, and exprss was dispatched after me, to call me back to St. Germains,
when I found the Queen overjoyed at taking of the lost Sheep, as the Queen was
pleased to term Mrs. Gray. The following Letter was wrote by the Queens own
hand, directed to me, to deliver to the Lord Montgomery in England.

LETTER I.
At St. Germains, Feb* 10. 1690.
I Desire You, my Lord, instantly to Repair to Rummy Marsh* and take with You
my Servant Ashton, with others whom You can trust; For Mrs. Gray is conveyed
out of the Cloister, no doubt, by the Help of our Enemies Agents at Paris. I
need not urge to You the dangerous Consequence of this Woman's ariving safly in
England: But, as You tender the Interest of Our Holy Mother and all things
else, which I believe are dear to You. I charge You not to fail to get her
dispatched at her Landing, which must be consequently in those Parts in a small
Vessel, Care being raken to prevent her Eskape otherwise; the Bearer will
inform You further. I shall pray for Your Success. Your assured Friend, Mary R.

This Letter was Writ by the late Queens hand, and copyed by Fuler, to whom the
Queen gave it to deliver to the Lord Montgommery; and the said better being
made up in the Pipe of a Key, he had the Opportunity of taking the Contents,
Which Mr. Fuler, deliverd to the present King on the 2 of March following, and
Deposed an Oath, that the Copy was truly taken from the Original, as the late
Queen in France gave it to Me with her own Hand, which Letter was by Me
delivered back to the Queen upon My being Recal'd to Saint Germans, as I was
upon My Journey to England upon the account of Mis. Mary Grey's being taken in
Paris, as You have it set down in My first Narrative.

OBSERVATION I.
By this Letter it is easy to discern how much the late Queen feared the
Consequence of rhis Woman's getting safely into England, and surely, were not
the Cause extraordinary, Her Majesty (whose Soul is haughty enough) would not
be so Frighted at her Escape: But the Interest of the Holy Church was as the
stake, that is, the Imposture, she feared, would be Exposed, and her
Masterpiece of Intrigue brought to nothing, but redound to her eternal
dishonor; So poor Ms. Gray must Die, whatever Trouble or Pains it cost, even
one of the best Friends the late Queen had in England, and that too at her
first Landing, before the mighty Secret was divulged, and what that Secret was,
surely her Majesty in this Letter does Her self fo plainly hint at, that it
needs no further Interpretation. The next was given me at the same time, and is
much to the some Purpose.

A Letter from the late Queen to the Right Honorable, the E. of Castlemain, on
the same Occasion: Dated at St. Germains, Feb, 10. 1690.

LETTER II.
I Never, My Lord, had any Occasion of greater Consequence (than what now
offers now) to try Your Disposition for the King's and my own Service* Nor do I
in the least question Your Diligence in executing my Will, when You know (as is
too true) that Ms. Gray, who came from Ireland with the Duchess of Tyrconnel in
1688 is by the same means stolen out of the Cloister, and upon Ezamination
appears too plain, that she must be assisted by some Agent of the Prince of
Oranges, and consequently designed to be conveyed to England, and made the
Instrument of Our Disgrace; which Motive obliges Me to desire You, with all
imaginable Speed, to go in Disguise with such a number of proper Persons as You
shall judge convenient to the coast of Kent, where most conveniently she may be
Landed near Deal. I have writ to My Lord Montgomery to go to Rumy-Marsh, and
wish You to confer together before it be too late. I hope the Goodness of Our
Cause will inspire Hour Zeal, to Act as becomes a Christian and Faithful
Subject. The Bearer will inform You more, from,

Your assured Friend, Mary R.

It was also copyed by M. William Fuller, being delivered to him by the Late
Queens own Hand, and made up in the Pipe of a Key, us the former to the Lord
Montgomery; and was Orderd to be delivered to the Earl of Castlemain in
England, but Returned back to the Queen at M. Fuller's being called back to S.
Germains.

This Copy was also delivered to his present Majesty King Will: by Me, ot the
same time with the former, when I Deposed on Oath that it is a true Copy of the
late Queens Letter.

Observation II. The Queen here speaks so very plain to this Lord, that nothing
can well Express a greater Concern: She terms it the greatest She ever had; And
no doubt but She thonght it so at shat Time; For the first News of Ms. Grey's
escape, put Her into a Fever; And its true that the Queen kept Her Chamber two
Days upon it. Her Majesty was much afraid of the Prince of Oranges Agents: So
true it is that Guilty Persons Tremble at evry shadow. The whole Letter is so
plain that I need say no more about it.

LETTRE III.
WHen I wrote last by Hays, I was under some Mortification concerning Mrs.
Gray, who that Morning made her escape, and gave us, upon some Examination, a
Jealousy that she was conveyed to England; but I am very Thankful to Almighty
GOD that we had no occasion to trouble you concerning her there: She is now
safe, past doing any Damage; but I fear that the Concern we were under, and the
Search we caused to be made after her, has a little taken Air, and is conveyed
to the Knowledge both of some of our Friends and Enemies in England, which is
proper to be stiffled: Therefore, I have given Directions to Carrol, to send
you full Instructions how to proceed with Mrs. Grey's Relations now in London,
to prevent their Resentment of our proceedings, which otherwise may be of ill
Consequence, and their Rashness (the common Defect of their Countrey-mens
Judgment) may give dangerons occasions to the never ceasing Watchfulness of
our Enemies: And at this time it much behooves us to prevent even the least
Disputes among our good Subjects: And to this purpose, I have ordered a
sufficient Sum of Money to be remitted amongst the Bills which F. brings over
to Ashton. I pray GOD to give a Gracious Issue to this, and all other your
Endeavors, for His Glory and the Defense of the King. I am

Your Friend, Mary R.

Mr. Crone coming from France with Mr. Fuller, the latter caused him for to be
apprehended; and the said Crone in June following being arreign'd at the Old
Baily for High Treason, by a Commission of Oyer and Terminer for that purpose,
before the then Lord Mayot, Sir Tho: Pilkin^on, and all the Judges of England,
after a long and most fair Trial, Mr. Crone was found Guilty of High Treason,
and received Sentence accordingly: And several Warrants were signed for his
Execution, which was from time to time put off by 2^ several Reprieves, until
the said Crone gave to the present Government a free Confession, of what he
knew of the designs carrying on against the present Government at that time;
all which he not only gave to His Majesty's Ministers of State in Writing, but
afterward deposed on Oath, That all the Matter contained in those Papers was
Truth, and that this and others were the true Letters which he he brought from
the late Queens own hand. And this Confession of Mr. Crone's was laid before
the Honorable House of Commons, according to an Address of that Honorable
House to His Majesty, in November 1692. for that purpose. Note. Mr. Crone
having obtained his Pardon in June, was let out of Newgate for his Health, the
Government not believing he ever would venture into France again, and after
having made so large a Confession and Discovery of the Court of St. Germains,
which was so very material, that Mr. Crone continued in England until His
Majesty's Attorney General had proceeded upon the Prosecuting such as Crone and
Fuller had given Information against, there is no doubt but it had prevented
several Conspiracies, which have since been carried on by the same conspyring
Hands: But But Crone went went for France, and some affirm it was by Invitation
from King James, with Assurance of His Pardon and Favor. Others affirm, He was
carried on shipboard by six Men disguised who came Armed by Night, taking him
by Force, and Gagging Him, conveyed Him into a Boat, and so off. But however it
were, he is now in France, and used kindly, which shows his being there is very
agreeable to the Court of St Germains^. And considering he was made a Major of
Horse o^ the Account of his being serviceable, in going betwixt France, England
and Ireland, the two first Years of the War, when the greatest Conspiracies
were on Foot; it cannot but be Imagined but this Crone was greatly Instrusted
by the Late King James and his Queen, even in their most secret Intrigues; and
what he did confess to to the Government was so plainly demonstrated, that
there is no Room for the least Particular. Besides, it confirmed every
Particular of what Fuler had given in Information before; And both were
afterward confirmed by the Viscount Preston, only this and some other Letters*
Mr. Crone was only privy to, which He confirmed on Oath came from the late
Queens own H^nds in France; and a more positive Proof surely cannot be
Required. So I proceed to make a short Observation from some parts of it, viz.

Observation III. Now the Queen writes the Letter, her Fears concerning Mrs
Gray being over, but yet some Jealousies Remain of their late Dealings with
Mrs. Grey's taking Air. The Queen is mighty Jealous of the Spies in France, and
knowing that King William and his Royal Consort, had some time before the
Revolution learnt something of this intreague, and the pretended Princes being
Mrs. Greys Son: Her late Majesty at St. Germains (who wants not thought)
instantly weighs how much it concerned her to keep this Murder and dealings
with Mrs. Gray, as secret as might be, well knowing, that the least Air or
Knowledge of it in England would put an end to her pretended Sons Right. The
Persons the Queen most dreaded* were Mrs. Greys Relations, who were some of
them in England, but all Natives of Ireland, and Priests: Her Majesty orders
her Secretary, Mr. Carrol, to provide and send over Means to stop their Mouths,
that was an Invitation into France, with the promise of Perferment and a Sum of
Money, the seldom or never failling Cure for all Mischief: Mr. Ashton* was to
pay the Money, he was Her Majesty's Treasurer in England, and since hanged for
his Zeal in a bad Cause, which the Queen terms, God's Glory and the Kings
Service.

The next is Letter wrote by Father Lewis Sabran, a Jesuit and Chaplain to the
pretended Prince of Wales, to the Duchess of Tyrconnel in Ireland, and was
sent by Fuller, who was sent to that Kingdom by the late Queen from France, by
the way of England, where F* opened the said Letter, showing it to the late
Queen of ever Blessed Memory, who ordered the Copy to be taken after which
Fuller went for Ireland, and delivered the said Letter as directed; Dated at
St. Germains, March 15th. 1689.

LETTER IV.
Madam,
IN obedience to the Commands I received from your Grace, I have several times
visited Mrs. Mary Gray. endeavoring to convince her, how inconsistent with
Reason her several requests to your Grace are; I assured her how kindly ready
you were to condescend to the doing her every good Office which might cond^ce
to her Eternal, as well as perfect Happiness; And I thought my self at first
happy, by having fully evinced her, how much she was mistaken by desiring to
leave the Holy Society, which she now enjoies, and the Dangers that attend a
Woman of her Constitution, by being abroad in the World, where all things
strive to wound the Soul: I urged to her the Co^^^eration of her former
Miscarriage; and much Reas^n^ she has continually to send up her prayers, and
to endure a continual Mortification to merit Blessings (...) Son, that by him
so many Millions might one (...) made happy: Much more I offered, and pressed
it home; but tho then she seemed satisfied, I am sorry to to tell your Grace,
that she is now run into the Extravagancy of mere Frenzy, and nothing will
content her, unless the Queen permit her leave to take some Employ that she may
attend the Price continually: I dare not let the Queen as yet know it, but have
left is to the Discretion of my good Lady, the Duchess of Powis, to inform her
Majesty, as she finds occasion (tho I heartily wish there may be none,) I have
twice obtained leave by the Queens Commands to my Reverend Lady A^^e^s, for
Mrs. Greys coming to St. Germains to see the Child, which, I fear, has done
more hurt than contrary wise; Malady seems to be much increased. I truly pity
her, and pray for her, begging your Grace to write frequently to her, for I
kn^w nothing that so much Influence with her as your Graces prudent
Admonutions. I bless GOD the Prince thrives even beyond Expection, and I hope,
the whole Course of his Life will be blessed to Crown their Majesty's, and your
Graces most worthy Endeavors. I am, Madam, your Graces most humble, and
Devoted Sevant, Lewis Sabran.

This Letter with the following, and several others were taken in a Trunk of
the said Duchess of Tyrconnel's, which Trunk was left at her Daughters in
Dublin, and being searched soon after the the Fight of the Boyne, the said
Letters were presented to the King, and afterward remitted to the Queen in
England; then by Commmand delivered to me, in order to the publishing them with
other Papers.

Observation IV. Mrs. Gray being a Relation of the E. of Tyrconnel's and by his
and his Ladys Istigation drawn ^^to this fatal Intreague, the Countess of
Tyrconnel to whom Mrs. Gray made her frequent Appeals from the Monastery,
injoyns Father Sabran to give her Advice; Mrs. Gray being uneasy for being
kept so Close from her Child, who no doubt, was very dear to her, though raifed
to such a height of Princely Honors, that she, poor Lady, begged only to be
his Minal Servant: But the Queen and others judge it not proper for these
Reasons; First, That the Women of Ireland are the most Passionat Lover of
Children in the World, which might have given Cause of Observation. Secondly,
The present King of England, as beforementioned, having some Notice of this
Intreague, might by some means, they at St. Gerami^s suspected, have found out
ways to get her off, which could not, they knew, be so easily done at the
Cloister. The Father in his Letter plainly calls the pretended Price her Son,
and sets forth what mighty Deeds he hopes to see accomplished by him; and
surely, were he not her Son, why should such Care be taken to gratify her, in
carrying her to St. Germaius to see him. The Latter is very plain and true.

The next which was found in the Duchess of Tyrconnel's Trunk. is a Letter
from the Marchioness of Powis, to the Duchess of Tyrconnel in Ireland, Dated
at Germains, Feb. 23. 1690.

LETTER. V.
Dear Madam,
I Wish to shun this Talk, and be assured that nothing but the Queens
indisputable Command could extort it from me, to tell you what Mrs. Greys folly
had at last wrought that, both you and I know, tha^ all her Friends feared
would in some measure happen to her. Indeed, my dearest Lady, it is unspeakable
how many Fears and Frights she has by her continual Uneasiness put the good
Queen into, and that by reason she was not admitted continually to attend the
Prince, which if it had heen allowed her, must have terminated in the overthrow
of all the Queens Genius, and the Glorious Design of our Holy Cause: And her
strange Uneasiness could not but give diverse Thoughts to the Queen to the Quen
and others; especially that unadvised Act of Stealing from the Convent, which
savoured too much of a secret Corrospondence with the Rebellious Subjects, who
saw too deeply into the Matter, when your Grace came to London with her; And so
miserably stuborn (if (...) worse) was her Temper, that nothing but her Death
could give Security of preventing the wretched Effects of her folly; and that
she must now under^o (I wish it might be ordered otherwise) but present it
seems impossible; And there is so many Reasons for hastening of her Death, that
fear it will not he delayed. Let not then the News, dear Madam, surprise you,
but the thoughts of so Glorious a Design supply the loss of one, I know you
dearly loved: For who indeed (...) nor themselves lay down a Thousand Lives for
(...) a Cause (if it were in their power) Let this then (...) your Repose, that
we cannot be Instruments of Gods Glory, and the Holy Churches Prosperity at too
dear a (...). The good Queen is much diurb'd that, that things (...) of
necessity urged to such a period, and would do anything (were it possible to
divert it) The Prince is very ^ell, and Mrs. Gray is now in my Lodging; so that
in a (...) Days, your Grace shall know a final event. I am (...) concerned at
the Fears you daily suffer, and hope (...) will shortly avert them, that we may
meet with Praise (...) the Divine Bounty* and unspeakable Joy to each other.
(...) give my Service to your good Lord and Family;

(...) Madam, your most* humble Servant. Powis.

(...) foregoing is a plain Demonstration of Mrs. Mary (...) being designedly
to be put to Death, in order to (...) any discovery she might make of the
pretended (...) of Wales, being her Son, of which the late Queen (...)
extremely jealous, and that not without sufficient (...), as does appear by Mr.
Carol. the late Queens (...), by her Maiestyies Command, the said Letter was
(...) in the Lady Tyrconnels Trunk, and sent over to (...) with the former, and
being exposed to several (...) of Honor of Mr. Carols Acquaintance is judged
(...) of them to be write by his own hand; and that (...) as found, in my Lady
Tyrconnels Trunk, is sufficienly (...) by several Witnesses that were at the
opening (...) same, it is dated at St. Germa^ns, Feb: 24.

Observation V. The Duchess of Powis [the Queens chief Confident]: here excuses
the Proceedings against Ms. Gray to the Duchess of Tyrconnel; Tells her plainly
the Queens Sentiments, and why Ms Gray must Die. This Duchess speaks plainly,
so I need observe no more but proceed to Letter VI.

LETTER VI.
May it Please Your Grace,
I Am commanded by the Queen to inform you, that of Necessity Ms. Gray must be
put to Death; for Reasons Your Grace has, I s^ppose, Received from the Duchess
of Powis, and Father Sabran: But however just, this may appear to Judicious
Person:, it may possibly (Notwithstanding all Endeavors used to the contrary)
Mrs, Gry's Relations, especially her Sister, whom the Queen supposes to be with
your Grace; and at least she in the hight of passion should let slip out that,
may do hurt; Her Majesty thinks it advisrble that your Grace should take a fit
occasion to inform her first in the Cause, and then the absolute Necessity of
her Death; and it is Her Majesty's pleasure, that no Encouragement should be
wanting to her Sister, either in Ireland, or if you Judge conveniant to send
her over to St: Germans As for other Relations in England, I have sent
Instructions to pacify them; And I have no more to add in this Matter, not
doubting your Grace 's Management in this as well as other weighty affairs, I
am Madam, Your Grace's most Humbly Devoted Servant.

W. Carrel.

Observation VI. Mr. Secretary Carrol by the Queen's command, further shows the
D. of Tyrconnel the necessity of Ms. Grey's Death, and greatly applauds the
Act, which He says al Judicious Men must aprove just (but certainly He means no
other for Judicious but those of St Germans Cabin Council) You see how careful
He is by His Mistress's command to secure Ms. Grey's Sister, who no doubt, must
hear of her Sisters death, and most certainly wuld be concernd much at it. But
here is nothing omitted to prevent a discovery of this horrid Deed, and it was
wisely thought on to get the Sister into France, where no doubt she would be
soon made as silent as her deceased Sister. If the Gentlemen or Ladies at St.
Germains found her prating. The Duchess of Tyrconnel, as well as others, has
her part to Act, to the very end of the matter: And for Intrigues, sutely. Onr
Roman Ladys surpass all others.

After these Letters, which are a plain Demonstration that Ms Gray is the true
Mother: I shall Lay before You a Letter which I received from Ireland, a short
time after the Publishing my former Books, it was writ by joint Consent of
Robert Fitz Gerald. Esquire and Mr. Roger Hamilton, both of Dublin, and Persons of
Honorable Families, and of good Report, they being Gentlemen of considerable
Fortunes. Their Letter is Dated at Dublin, Dec. 2' 1690.

Mr. William Fuller.
Sir,
WE whose Names hereunto Subscribed, do jointly assure You, That we are very
sorry we had not the Opportunity of knowing Your Design before. You Published
Your Narrative, relating to Ms. Gray, the ^ustly supposed Mother of the sham
Prince of Wales: But however, if You have Occasion to Publish any thing more on
that Subject, we desire that these our joint following Relation of her may be
published also, we being Ready to confirm the same upon Oath in any of his
Majesty's Courts of Judicature here, or before any Lawful Magistrate, if
called thereunto, viz. This Mary Gray is the second Daughter of Mr. James ^rey,
who lived at Kilkenny and left three other Children at his Decease, whih he had
by his own Wife, and who survived Him, and she being a Relation to the Earl of
Tyrconnel, the said Widow with her two Daughters were much Favored and
succored by the said Earl: And this Ms Gray, whom You mention, after her
Mothers Decease (which was in the Year 1686) was wholly mantained, and that in
much Splendour by the Earl of Tyrco^el, which gave a reasonable suspicion to
us, and several others, that he had debaucb'd her. But a little time after she
retired into the Nunnery, Which we had in this City, as she pretended, not with
a Design to ^e a proses'd Nun, but to take off the Cause of that Scandal which
was spread Abroad concerning the Earl visiting her often privetly in her
Lodgings, and to abate that Adversion which the Countess of Tyrconnel had been
observed at that time to take against Mrs. Gray, to whom the said Countess
before had alwise showed the greatest Kindness imaginable; And after her being
in a Cloister, to our most certain Knowledge: she was frequently visited by the
Countess of Tyrconel and her Daughters, when they were in Dublin; and that
Countess having been some time absent, at return, came the very next day to
see Trs Gray, and we whose Names are hereunto Subscrib,d, having been formerly
favored with her Company, as visiting our Wives frequently, did twice go to
the Nunnery and saw her; And hearing in May 1688, that she was going from the
Convent for England, we repaird thither, to wish her a good Voage; and our
Wives doing the same, and they only being admitted, told us, that certainly Mrs
Mary Gray was big with Child, and a going for England to ^ie in there: This
gave us a Desire to take the Opportunity of seeing her as she went on Borad the
Monmouth Yatch with the Countess, and with much difficulty we had the
Opportunity not only of seeing her on Board the Yatch but leave again to wish
her a good Voyag to England; and then we saw plainly she was big with Child,
This is what we can freely depon upon Oath, and there is many more In this
City, who know the same to be Truth. We have under written sen you our Wives
Informations, according to their Know^ledge; and hope this hidden Mystery will
be plainly-made appear to the World. We are, Sir, your most Aumble Servants,

Robert Fitz Gerald,
Roger Hamilton.

This Letter was brought to me from these Gentlemen, by John Smith, Gent, who
lives in Chappel-Street in Dublin.

WE whose Names are hereunto Subscribe'd do declare, and are ready to make Oath,
that in May 1688, we visited Mrs. Mary Gray in the Nunnery, in this City of
Dublin, and being private with lies (our most intimate Acquaintance) we
dis^rn'd her to be with Child, which me frankly charged her with? Upon which
after some Tears let fall, she ingeniously owned to us that she was with Child
by the Earl of Tyrconel, then Lord Deputy of Ireland, and that she was going
over with his Countess, in order to Lie in at London, In Witness hereof, we
have hereunto set our Hands this 13. of December, 1696

Mary Fitz Gerald Katharine Hamilton.


All I shall say concerning these Assertions, is, that u-En^uiry, the Persons
who, wrote them, are of unblemished Reputation, and so well known, that I
cannot hear of any (though many persons of Quality and others, have seen the
foregoing Letter) who can give the least Reason for Invalidating their
Testimoney, which is also confirmed by many more; so apparent is it, that the
late Earl of Tyrconnel was the true Father of the pretended Prince of Wales.

I have thus showed you part of the Letters I promised, and according as I have
occasion, I shall publish the Remainder, being a much greater Parcel: And these
being sufficiently proved Authentic, will begin, if required, on the strictest
Scrutiny imaginable; I am contented to see if my Adversaries will give any
Answer: which if they prove so candid as to do on plain honest Terms, I shall
be obliged to them, and think it my happiness, by publishing what remains, to
put this Matter (if possible) out of Dispute. Therefore, I would humbly beg
this favor of them to stick close the matter of Fact, otherwise I shall not
concern my self to make a Reply.

W. Fuller.

FINIS.

