A DIALOGUE BETWIXT PHILAUTUS AND TIMOTHEUS, In Defense of Dr FVLLWOOD's LEGES
ANGLIAE: Against the Vindicator of Naked Truth, Stiling himself PHIL.
HICKERINGILL.

LONDON, Printed for Rich. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred MAJESTY. 1681.

TIMOTHEVS and PHILAVTVS.
CHAP. I. Of the Author's Name, Phil. Hickeringill.
TImotheus, Well met, Philautus.


Philautus. Why, Philautus?


Tim. I know you call your self, Phil. Hickeringill, but that Dutoh-Hobgoblin
name, is so rugged and harsh in the mouth; and so unsuitable to the smoothness
of your Vindication of Naked Truth; that neither my self, nor a Thousand others
can endure it: at the first time they heard it, it brought a Curse with it; and
they wish, they had never heard it since, and are frightened at the very sound
of it, as if it were conjuring.

Indeed [Hickeringill] speaks ill, and hears worse, therefore as you have faced
about, and changed your countenance, as to Religion, or against it, I thought
it not amiss, to change your name too.


Phil. How now Tim! have an itchy endeavor to be witty forsooth, in Vindic. p.
35.
spite of Nature and thy Stars? enough of [Hickeringill] but why must Phil. be
added to [autus] why Philautus? thou think thou have a trick for that too.


Tim. To deal plainly with thee: every body perceives, that this Phil.
Hickeringill, is the same Person, that lies prostrate under the name of
[Edmond] at the foot of Naked Truth: and it is known, that Phil. and Edmond,
are all one, that is, Ned loves Hickeringill; and Hickeringill, is in love with
himself; and for this Reason, I have made bold (for the better sounds sake) to
call thee Philautus.

But prithee Phil. why art thou pleased with that throatling name Phil.
Hickeringill? is it not for the same reason? good wits may jump.


Phil. Say nothing Tim; and I will tell thee the naked truth; and whether I
thought of thy reason or not, I am resolved, upon good reason, to love my self:
for I see little in the world, that a Man should be fond of; and but few that
regard me as I deserve, or merit my kindness.

Nor can I expect otherwise, Plain dealing has few friends; and that is my
Talent: besides, I have flown at all sorts of People, Fift-Monarchists, p. 35.
Anabaptists, Quakers, Independents, Presbyterians, Papists; and, I trow in a
very civil manner, at our own Churchmen too: and thus have provoked them all
against me; and is it not time to take care of my self?

I had once some hopes of favor from the Church of England: but now I despair;
for I saw little was to be got by her kindness, and occurred her displeasure:
to speak the truth, she has always been a Stepmother Vind p. 2.
to the Author of the Naked Truth; and he never had any thing from her, but
frowns and blows; at best, but a Bitt and a Knock: and now, alas! she is in the
Wane, and not worth the courting: I found her, lately, in the Frontispiece of a
Book called, Leges Angliae, (a pretended answer to Naked Truth,) pictured in a
very low and weeping posture, groaning under the Cross: and I hate her in her
very picture; but seeing it is so sad with her, I will pity and love my self:
therefore call me what thou will, I am Phil. Hickeringill, and will be so, in
spite of the World and the Church too.


CHAP. II. Of the Title, Leges Angliae, one Fullwood, a libelling Pamphlet.
Tim. THou mentionest a Book called, Leges Angliae: prithee, what is thy opinion
of it?


Phil. That Book, I have not patience to speak of it; it so scandalously
handles my beloved, Naked Truth: it proves it to be all lies, and then, clothes
it with Bears-skins, and all shapes of Villainy: and then exposes it, and
hectors and beats, and kills it, and all that, under the detestable name of my
chief old enemy, the Laws of England.

Many years agon, these Laws of England, had like to have done me a mischief;
and I could never endure the name of them since; especially, when the wind
blows Westward: and I wonder at my heart, how these Laws, can give warrant to
others, in a Hectoring way, to say ^ind p. 6.
Come -- Clergyman -- deliver your Purse, your Purse.

But with what Title his pitiful Pamphlet can challenge so swelling a Title,
shall be considered only by the sequel. (...). 2.



Tim. Good Phil. why so angry? the Title did thee a kindness. Some think, had
it not been for this Title, and a small Jest, thou had had little to say to
the whole Book: and it seems to be true too, because thou so often make
mention, and make so much advantage of them.

But to speak my mind; a serious Book, that consists chiefly of our Laws, and
Vindicates a legal Government by Arguments of express Laws, may wear this Title
of Leges Angliae modestly enough: though I must tell thee, I am well assured
that that Title was put to the Book by another hand, and not by the Authors;
who knew it not certainly till he saw it in Print: He has often said he did
not like it, because he had twit Mr. Carry for stiling his lesser Book, The Law
of England, though that seems to be a greater Title.

But good Phil. why must thy Vindication carry so much folly and rage in the
front of it? Scornfully calling thy Adversary (one Fullwood) though he tells
the world both his Name and his Title, and Dignity: If he be a Doctor in
Divinity, and a Dignitary in the Church, or but an aged Spectacle-Divine, thou
should have used him with less disdain, if not with reverence. Some think he
honored thee too much, in condescending to take notice of, and answer thy
Book, and dishonored himself.


Phil. Why did he not let Naked Truth alone then? why did he write so libelling
a Pamphlet against it?


Tim. I know thou have betrayed thy wit as well as manners, in calling a
serious Book, touching lawful government, written by an Ancient D. D. a
libelling Pamphlet. But Phil. if he write that which is true, and set his name
to it, how is his Book a Libel?

That thou, against whom his Book is written were guilty enough, was evident;
because thou fled'st for it, not daring to put thy name, at first, to thy Naked
Truth, as the Doctor does to his Book. I say thou did thus fly for it: and
that out of a sense of guilt, or great fear: Fear, what, the men, or the Leges
Angliae, thou had offended by thy Naked Truth, would do with thee, should
they find thee out, as thou often confessest in that Book.

Indeed, when thou had got thy Friends about thee, I mean the Rabble, that
like not the Laws of England; and, as thou thought, secured thy self among
thy Abettors; then thou appearest, and show thy self, though sneakingly, at
the Tail of thy Book.

Seeing thy self then in the face of those moveable waters, thou seem to
fall in love with, and pride thy self, as the Author of a Book so highly
esteemed by the weak and disturbed Populacy; and had I not given thee a name
before, thou might well be called after thy great Grandfather, Narcissus.


Phil. Methinks thy way of concluding things with Verses is mavelous
edifying: Let me mind thee of what a Noble Pen has noted to purpose:

The people's love, with evil Acts is won:
And either lost or kept as it begun.
What wind then blows poor Man into this Sea,
But pride of heart and Singularity?

CHAP. III. A Taste of Phil's Rhetoric and good Manners.
TIM. So much for thy Title Page. Casting my eye into thy Book, I find it
strewn all over with such fair flowers, bestowed both on the Author and his
Leges Angliae, that I am tempted to pick them up, and dress thy self and thy
Vindication with them.

As for the Author, thou will not return him Railing for Railing, as thou
assurest him, page 21. those wonted attacks of effeminate and doting old men:
but thou observest, that he is an incomparable finder, and quick-sighted
Commentator for a man of his age, that cannot see without Spectacles: and that
old men can prate and scould, and so does he: Thou stilest him Dull fool;
Cursing railer; Prelatical champion; despicable opponent; fibling, quibling,
fribling, fumbling, scribbling Archdeacon: Greedy-gut; gormandizing, unthinking
Black-coat; stockt with a little superficial learning: Impertinent D. D. that
has not his fellow amongst them all for insolence and impudence, etc.

Thus thou adornest the Author; and his Book thou have so habited, that it
looks just like the Author; for, it is the insolent and the empty windy vapors
of a huffing Man; trifling entertainment; thin, futile and Cobweb contextures
and composures; insufferable and vainglorious petulancy; unparalleled
shallowness of expression; extravagances; impertinences; nauseous repetitions;
crazy principles; a great deal of prattle to no purpose, etc.

But to be serious Phil. is this thy way of answering Books? Should thou not
in all justice and Conscience, instance something, either in the Author, or his
Book, that deserves (at least in thy own singular opinion, if in no bodies
else) such scoundrel, Billings-gate Ribaldry, which turns the stomach of all
modest Readers?

I must tell thee Phil. what sober men conclude upon it: Thy despising the
Author and his Book, without Evidence, will provoke him and thy Reader to
despise thee; and that not without cause, both Logical and Moral: For it is
observed, that when passion begins to bluster thus, it is an argument, that
there is both need and want of Reason: And that where the breath stinks so
abominably, the bowels are rotten; there is rottenness within: for out of the
abundant superfluity of naughtiness in the heart, the mouth utters such
pestilent steams: And thus thou have shown thy self, in the judgment of all
wise and good men, both a bad Advocate and an ill man: This seems to lie heavy
upon thee, and how thou can shake it off, I know not.


Phil. Tim. art thou Mr. Dullman too? let me indoctrinate thee a little better.

Know then, that the kind of Cattle that stare at, and prick up their ears to
hear Hickeringill, are prepared to embrace any thing that I call Naked Truth;
and is thrown out bravely, and boldly against Churchmen, especially their
Courts.

My business is not to satisfy Reason (where there is none to deal with) but
to keep up and cherish prejudice, to foment and inflame passion and Faction,
and thus to carry on the grateful interest of the brutish Populacy: and we must
have Engines suitable to the work we are about: and what are they, but to
despise dominion, and to speak evil of dignities? and to throw dirt, with both
hands, at all that are Advocates for Government?

When a man is honored as the Head of the Herd, thus engaged and led on, the
enemies Reason shall never hit us; nor our Rage and Railing ever miss them: and
the Intrigue goes on.

Thou will find anon, that I grant his Arguments cannot be answered; therefore,
that is a work not to be undertaken in earnest (though here also I set up my
colors, and entertain some slight skirmishes) but while I hector, and rant,
and call Names, with impudence (enough, thou think) the people will find
sufficient reason to cry victoria: Say no more Tim. I know it by experience.


Tim. Phil. so wise and ingenuous discourse shall be crowned with a Verse.

Thus we discern, what courses they must hold,
That make this Humor of Applause their end:
They have no true, and so no constant mold;
Light change, is both their enemy and friend.
Herostratus shall prove, Vice governs fame;
Who built that Church, he burnt, has lost his Name.

Tim. But, Phil. I am not at all satisfied, why you should fall upon the Doctor
without Book: You do not find he serves you so; perhaps, he reflects severely
enough, yet he keeps within the compass of your writing: you can have no reason
to provoke to search too narrowly into what you have been.


Phil. What do mean?


Tim. I mean to blame you, for calling him, Paedagogue: you say, in his
Juvenile years, when he was (as indeed he was) a furious chastizing Pedagogue:
and, with no little scorn you add, another whipping Tom, he took pleasure to
lash and slash, p. 2.

What Confidence is this, thus to overlash, beyond your Knowledge, and contrary
to known truth! the Doctor was never either a Paedagogue, or Paedagogues Son:
yet, you say, Indeed, he was so: but perhaps you imagined this, from his
lashes, they fell so heavy from an old man.


Phil. I confess the smart made me a little outrageous: I mean, that which I
felt from the back-blows, in his Epistle: for the Clubb-knocks of his
Arguments, I could have born them, and said nothing, but Mum: however, thou
should not have made the Observation.


CHAP. IV. Phil's fondness or kindness to himself, and flattery.
Tim. BUT, Phil, I must observe, that thou art rude with the Doctor, thou art
over-kind to thy self; even to flattery and gross dawbing, usque ad nauseam.

Does not that sound sweetly out of thy own mouth, that, above all others, thou
have disarmed the Fanatics, etc. p. 2. Again, with great self-denial [it cost
me not seven days, I protest, to answer the six Months abortive throws of, etc.
p. 36. It Is miraculous thou could dispatch such a nothing in so short a time.
Again, how kindly do thou aspire, when thou breathest out [If I were Lord
Chancellor. Again, it is meekly said, what has already (speaking of thy naked
truth) got a verdict all England over; except such, etc. Lastly, not to glut
the Reader with such luscious fair, that incomparable tang of thy humility:
whereby thou intimatest, that the Doctor's end in his answer, was to be taken
notice of, for daring to grapple with the naked truth; thus, purchasing a name
and a fame, etc.

But prithee, Phil. what measures do thou use? certainly, such as others are
strangers to: nor is it possible thou should satisfy thy self for this
silly vaunt.

Let me whisper in thine ear; wiser, and better, and greater Men than thy self,
expressed their trouble to the Doctor, when they heard he was about to reflect
upon thy scandalous Book; (for so they called it) that he should condescend so
far, as to honor it with an Answer: and feared, that thou would value thy
self (those were the words) upon thy being taken so much notice of, by a
Dignitary of the Church of England: which, indeed, had almost prevented the
Print.

But at length, Phil. thou art a Gentleman; and will have the world know thou
have 200 l. per An. Land of Inheritance. Well Phil, be it so: but we must take
thy word for both, seeing thou live by ill neighbors.

We have thy Picture drawn to the life, by a Modern Dawber (no primitive
Painter) in all thy Books; but, it is well, that [Gentleman] is written by,
otherwise, a Man would swear, 'twere the Picture of a Cock or Bull rather than
a Gentleman: a Cock for his Crowing; or a Bull for his Rage.


CHAP. V. A Specimen of his Wit: Doctor's Expressions vindicated.
Phil. What Is the matter, Tim. art quite lost, and turned Enemy?


Tim. I had almost done with thee, but thy wonderful Witticisms, which I lately
discovered, have pretty well reconciled me: and made me amends for all together.

How smoothly runs that, viz. a Protestant Head must have a Protestant Face!
how Ingenuous that, [the Proem takes up too much room!] in another character,
least the best of Puns should escape unobserved, which, without the cost of a
costive Anagram, more than pays the Doctor for his Hobby Warr-Hawks: but,
there is no end of this Topic, every Line has its Salt: and therefore, passing
all the rest, I shall crown my observation with a little further notice of that
Anagram, we hinted at, which crowns thy wit at the end of thy Book: it is this
[Fra. Fullwood, war. dul-fool.]

Now, Phil. let us be serious awhile: and war-dull-fool, indeed, is his name,
as much too hard for thy wit, as his Arguments for thy Reason? what makes thee
deal so barbarously with it? O Phil. thy wit is cruel and short; for, War-dull
fool, can reach but to Fra. Vlwood: and short and cruel: what, cut off the
lower half of his Christian name, and the Head of his Surname? I now find thy
knack at capping of Verses and uncapping of Names: and am not much concerned,
though his Name thus suffers, seeing his reputation is above thy reach.


Phil. Would any Man alive beside thee have been such a fool in print? and
without shame have boasted of this subtle Sylly Anagram, as thou call it thy
self: such folly, calls for the fury of a chastizing Paedagogue, and whipping
Tom indeed.


Phil. What, because it is not true to a letter! the troth is, Tim, for a
fancy or a humor, we Wits, regard, neither truth nor sense, nor good manners.

But now I am provoked, I Will expose two such instances of the Doctor's wit,
that are strangers enough to sense, and as much as any of mine.

1. What do think of his rock of Sand; upon which he supposes me to triumph?
I never heard of a Rock of Sand before.


Tim. It may be so Phil. but I think the expression is at least pardonable: but
thy Reading in Philosophy is hardly so: have forgot or did never hear of that
question about the generation of Stones and Rocks?

But cease thy wonder: he never intended a natural real and firm Rock; for he
knew well enough, that thou had none such to stand upon: but he meant such as
thou had, and such as thy matter depended upon; a fictitious, false
counterfeit rock: and such a one may easily be made of Sand, mixed with the
slime and dirt which so much defiles Naked Truth.


Phil. But thou can never bring him off for his other extravagancy: for
lying, envy, malice, etc. he says, I am a very Angel of light.


Tim. What Phil. fail in thy Rhetoric too? have forgotten the figure that
warrants such manners of expression? I wonder, what thou would be called; for
such kind of virtues: as lying, etc. or any of thy other excellencies. An Angel
of Darkness, and Confusion; the Prince of the Air: the Accuser of the Brethren:
or a Devil-incarnate!

And in this Sphere, this Wilderness of Evils
None prosper highly, but the perfect Devils.

CHAP. VI. A previous attempt of Mr. Phil's Judgment and Logic.
SECT. I.
Tim. THough thou approachest toward the main battle timide, and with deal of
modesty even to despair; yet I observe thou make some on-sets, that give
tokens of some braveness in thee.

I acknowledge, thou art strangely qualified: with stoutness of body,
resoluteness of mind, invincible passions, haughtiness of expression,
accurateness in History and Law, especially against the Church and
Ecclesiastical Courts; all managed with a singular stream of wit and fancy, as
I lately noted. Yet to deal plainly with thee, Phil. there is a small gift or
two, that seem not to be altogether so complete in thee. I mean, that clearness
of mind and foundness of wisdom, and that dexterous faculty of reasoning, that
should crown a disput ant of thy strange adventure.


Phil. How man! why that is my glory: and in the knack of arguing I challenge
the world.

But if it should be with me, as thou say, yet thou may perceive, I am even
with this Archdeacon: for he lai'th out his whole strength in a little point,
which I denied and indeed argued against, with all my might and skill in Law
and Story: Namely, the Lawfulness of Ecclesiastical Government; and seems to
neglect those Weightier things, of Page ^
Procurations, Synodals, Fees of Courts, etc. and is not that as ill in him, as
for me, to show my manhood, in those noble points of resolution, passion,
fancy, story and expression; though I should be found less, and less concerned
in the inconsiderable points of wisdom and reason. However, Tim. I know no
Nakedness in my discourse, but the Naked Truth: If thou do, show it.


Tim. This Nakedness appears in the whole body of thy Book; not to prevent that
discovery, I shall here only instance in two of thy attempts.

1. The Doctor had said, our Laws exclude the purely Spiritual power of the
keys from the Supremacy of our Kings: except it be to see that Spiritual men do
their duty therein.

Here upon I am ashamed to see, how thou triumphs before the Victory, and how
pury like, how poorly, and fallaciously thou attack'st him.

First, Thou say K. Hen. 3. preached in Pulpit, ergo, etc. Secondly, Emperors
called Councils and approved their Canons: Ergo: Thirdly, Our Kings are
ordained Priests as Baker relates, therefore thou strongly concludest they have
the power of the Keys; but the conclusion should have been, that they have the
(purely Spiritual) power of the Keys: do not perceive it, Phil.

Our Laws do say that the King is mixta persona cum sacerdote: and all those
ensigns at his Coronation import as much: but in which of them is it said, Take
thou Authority to preach the word of God, or administer the Sacraments?

Here, Phil. thy understanding failed thee: the political power of the Keys, do
in a sense belong to our Kings, but not the purely Spiritual power, except
mediately, as at first was granted: the King is a Priest in tanto not in Toto.

But if thou can prove our Kings to be Priests in all respects: Look to it
Mr. Baxter: you are undone: for then we have a proper Spiritual head of the
Church of England: yea, look to it Phil. for, near thou have undone thy self,
in thy state Religion.

For if the Head be properly a Priest, what body can fit him, acting as a
Priest in making Canons and governing the Church, but a body of Priests? Is the
Parliament, with whom he makes other Laws, or the Judges, Sheriffs, Justices,
etc. by whom he governs the Kingdom, a fit body for a Priestly head? Do not
these act under him rather as a King? and a Convocation of Priests and
Spiritual Courts, more congruously act under him as a Priest (if he be, in all
points, a Priest, and have all the Spiritual power of the Keys) both in making
Canons, i. e. Spiritual Laws, and governing the Church, by them?

Poor -- Ape! why art thou venturing still
At this so subtle game, and play'st so ill?

SECT. II. Another piece of his Logic against Chancellors, etc.
SEcondly, We have another such trial of thy honest Logic upon a part of his
Proem; which, if thou had quite (as thou say thou had almost) forgotten,
little had been lost.

It Is this: the Doctor intimates that Chancellors, Registers, etc. are
Assistants by Law, allowed to Bishops, etc. and that in 1 Cor. 12. 28. we read
of helps in Government, which he intimates is a general warrant to the Law of
the Land, for such allowance.

Now reflect upon thy answer, Phil. in stead of an answer thou very honestly
imposest and intrudest another Conclusion: Thou say he would prove these
inferior Officers, to be all Church Officers Jure Divino: which was the very
objection he went about to remove: he does deny them to be Church Officers,
strictly speaking; neither does he affirm them to be Jure Divino: but he says,
and thou say nothing to the contrary, but a great truth (that Esquire Dun is
so too) he says, that if making and keeping Acts of Court; if managing and
ordering Causes aright; if serving Summons and executing Mandates of the Judge,
if these be reasonable things and expedient in government, then the persons
appointed by Law to perform these things, are useful in government, and
agreeable to that general word and warrant in Scripture: and upon the very same
moral and prudential ground, Deacons were at first appointed by the Apostles
(Acts 6.) and many other things justly practiced, even in the first 300. years;
though not found in use in the Apostles time: for the succeeding Ages of the
Church inherited Reason and prudence, whose proper use is to apply general
Rules in Scripture with particular convenience to times and places: but, Phil.
if thou have neither Reason nor Prudence, how shall a man beat this into thy
head? Page 25.


Thou say, the Doctor has no guts in his brains; one would think thou had
been in Devonshire, and that some body had taken out thy brains and put in
White-pot.

So much upon the Proem too.

CHAP. VII. A step toward the matter of the Doctors Book, and the main Battle.
Phil. THese things, Tim. are about the outworks only; but do not I quit my
self like a man, when I come into the open field, or, at least, like a crafty
combatant.


Tim. At present, I shall only remark to thy eternal honor, that thou
preparest thy self like a man of war indeed, and viewest thy enemy in all the
strength of his five Propositions (in opposition to thine, Page 5.
against Ecclesiastical Government) but durst thou have stood to any one of
them, thou had been a Man indeed.

But, instead of that, thou fliest from his and thy own Propositions too; and
leavest them to defend themselves: And as a man knocked oth' head, and stunned
with the blows received before, thou staggerest and ramblest from one
impertinent story to another, but always avoidest the main point.


Phil. Perhaps I had reason, the point was sharp.


CHAP. VIII.
PROP. I. Our Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was not derived from the Pope, but
from the Crown before the Reformation by Hen. 8.

Tim. NOW for the Rancounter, as thy Warlike word is; Is this Proposition true
or no? If it be not true, why do thou grant it at last? If it be true, why
do oppose it, and show all thy little Wit and impertinent story to obscure or
weaken it? thou art the Author of Naked Truth.


Phil. I will speak plain anon; but I Will have liberty to show my Parts and
Reading: therefore, quomodo probas, Domine D. D. Page 5.


Tim. The Doctor begins his proof, by minding thee of the Ancient Constitution
of the English Church: and teaching thee, if thou be not too old or too
stubborn to learn, That it was a known Law 25 Edw. 1. and 25 Edw. 3. long
before Hen. 8. that the Church of England was founded in Episcopacy by our
Kings, etc. and not in the Papacy.

To this great ground of truth, how wild an Answer have we, Page 5.

Thou say with equal ignorance and scorn, I always thought (till now) that
our Church of England (I know not for his Church of England) was neither
founded upon Episcopacy, nor the Papacy, but on Christ the Rock of Ages.

Would any man alive, beside Phil. have had so many blunders in so few words?

1. The Doctor says, as the Law says, that our Church was founded in
Episcopacy: thou provest by thy wise thought, (I always thought) that it was
not founded UPON Episcopacy: thou art it seems a thinking black-coat: however
that may pass for thy first Blunder.

2. And the second is like unto it: the Doctor says, our Church was founded in
Episcopacy: thou think it was founded ON Christ: as if the Church could not
be founded in Episcopacy and ON Christ too: thy second blunder.

3. A Church may be founded on Christ his Person, and doctrine principally, as
the chief Cornerstone: and yet mediately, secondarily, and doctrinally too, on
his Apostles and their Successors, the Bishops, thou wast not aware of this
Phil. thy third blunder.

4. A Church may be said to be founded two ways: in its constitution,
essentially considered, and so ours, was founded by Christ, through the means
of his Ministers, first calling us: secondly, Organically, by way of Donation,
Endowment, Investiture and Secular advantages: thus, our Church was at first
founded by our Kings, as the Law says: this not heeded, made thy fourth
blunder.

5. But the heaviest blunder is, thy stumbling over the main observation, for
which the Doctor cited that Law: Viz. that seeing our Church was founded by our
Kings, in Episcopacy, therefore the Bishops power did not originally, nor in
those times, according to our own Laws, depend upon the Pope, but upon the
Crown: Q. E. D. which was then the sense of the Laws, and all the States of the
Realm, long before Hen. 8. as also is noted and assented unto, and insisted on,
at the beginning of his Reformation.

To assert the contrary, is certainly to assert a Popish opinion, and one of
the greatest Arguments, the Romanists use to Justify the Papal Usurpation in
England; take it as thou can, Phil.

Leave off this club-way of arguing; thou will ensnare thy self: thy Talent,
Phil. lies another way: thou have no clear distinguishing Head; thou art better
at dividing: and more skilled in the methods of confounding than of founding
the Church of England.

What did mean Phil. by that non-sensical cant upon a place of Scripture: I
know it was not thy design to stumble upon the Rock of Ages, and fall upon St.
Peter's.


Phil. Enough of this, Tim. fool: thou know, to escape the Law, we may fly
to the Gospel: thou know Phil, well enough; he is for a Legal Scripture and
Religion; except when it is against him: besides, he finds canting on
Scripture, though never so impertinently, sounds very lusciously, in some Men's
ears, that I have a mind to gratify.


SECT. II. His other Arguments against our power before Hen. 8.
Tim. THen let us see how thou prosperest with thy other Arguments against this
point.

1. Thou say, the Pope was Head of our Church before Hen. 8. but it is evident
he was not so legally, either by Law or Construction of Law, or really so, in
the Constitution of the Church of England: he was only so in pretense, and by
illegal Usurpation: he had never possession by Law, but what he usurped was
contrary to Law, and the ancient Customs of the Land: as my Lord Coke
demonstrates; though he is not to be taken notice of by Phil. H. yea, his very
possession in fact, was never undisturbed for any considerable time together.

The Doctor informed thee better; that it was the sense of the whole Kingdom
that the Pope's Power and Jurisdiction here, was usurped and illegal: Contrary
to God's Laws, the Laws and Statutes of this Realm; and in derogation of the
Imperial Crown thereof: and that it was timorously and ignorantly submitted
unto before Hen. 8. vid. 28. H. 8. c. 16.

2. Thou say boldly and ignorantly, that H. 8. made Himself Head of the
Church by Parliament: that is another Popish opinion (the Law is open Phil.) and
Argument too, depending on the former: for both the Law, and my Lord Coke
affirm, that the Statutes in that behalf, were only declarative of the Ancient
Fundamental Rights of the Imperial Crown of England; which alone can Justify
the King's Title of the Head of the Church.

3. Thou arguest subtly: that before H. 8. Appeals were frequently made to
the Pope: and that then our Courts were Rome's inferior Courts: What then? why
then upon the Popes ceasing to be Head, the Courts were dissolved: i. e. Just
as our inferior Courts were dissolved upon the dissolution of the High
Commission: Thou ought to know, that our Laws never allowed or required
Appeals to Rome: and that our Courts continued in their proper Legal being,
under the Royal, as well as and better than, under the Popish head.

4. At last thou questionest, whether ever a Statute was made, from the
Conquest, or rather from Hen. 3. to Hen. 8. but by the consent of the Popish
Clergy: i. e. the consent of the Pope their Head?

Art stark mad Phil? were all our Laws Antichristian, before Hen. 8.? was no
Law made by the Nation or Realm as such, but only as Popish? Are all our
Ancient Statutes, the Popes Laws? Did the Pope consent to all the provisions
and premunire's in the Laws made directly against himself?


Phil. If my Arguments fail, take some Stories; and my free Concessions: and
then I hope thou will be pleased.

1. My Stories prove there was old Tugging betwixt our Kings and the Pope, from
time to time.


Tim. Well said, at last, Phil. and was not the Law on the Kings side? Then the
Pope had neither legal, nor full, nor quiet possession: Thy cause languisheth
in thy own hand; and it is time to yield to it: Thy Concessions are most
ingenuous instances of a good nature or a baffled cause. Speak out man.


Phil. I grant that the Laws of the Popish party were contrary to the sense of
King and Parliament: Well said in part Phil. therefore the King and Page 13*
Parliament were not altogether Popish: But prithee, what Laws could concern
us, contrary to the sense of King and Parliament? who made those Laws for us in
England?


Tim. But the matter is not clear yet. Speak out man.


Phil. It Is undoubtedly true, that the Crown of this Realm is and has been
before Hen. 8. Imperial: that is, de jure, not de facto: thanks to the wicked
Usurper, and his Legates -- it ought not to have been done -- it was commonly de
facto done before Hen. 8.


Tim. This is something more, but not all: Thou do imply, indeed, by
[commonly] that it was not [always] so done: And if the Pope before Hen. 8. was
a Usurper, he had not right here: and the Jus, the Law, was against him: For,
if he had had the Law on his side, how had he been a Usurper? Speak a little
plainer Phil. and all is well, so far.


Phil. I do ingenuously confess our Ancient Ecclesiastical Government and Laws
depended upon the Crown, and not upon the Pope, by the Laws Page 2^
of England, and in the Judgment of all the States of the Kingdom, before Hen.
8. and so did also the Execution of those Laws, by those Governors in the same
public Judgment: These are the Doctors words, and -- all this is true: and the
very Naked Truth in other words varied: which says, That all Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction till Hen. 8. was derived from the Pope: but my meaning was, that
it was not derived from the Pope, before Hen. 8. thus, thou see I have no
mind to quarrel.


Tim. It Is well enough: but why did not say so much at first? or excuse thy
obscurity and distinguish sooner? Yea, why did contend for so many pages,
against that which thou art compelled to yield at last? Art thou obstinate,
that thou must be pressed, before thou will confess? or had an Itch upon thee
to vent thy stories, as if the world had nothing to do but to hearken to thy
impertinencies? If storying were arguing; thou art a brave fellow, indeed; but
this way, it seems, thou art not formidable: The Doctor set thee up for a
Shrovetide-Cock (as thy phrase is) and thou have cut thy own Comb.

So much for the first Proposition.


CHAP. IX. The Doctor's Second PROPOSITION.
Hen. 8. did not make void the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: Neither was it void
before it was restored by 1 Edw. 6. 2.

Phil. I Hope I quit my self better here.


Tim. Much at one: First, thou opposest stoutly, by way of exception: and then
thou come off as mildly by way of Concession.

1. By way of exception, thou say many things to no purpose.

1. Thou repeatest thy illegal error; that Hen. 8. was (made) when he was only
declared to be Head of the Church by Act of Parliament: but had it been both a
truth and Law, what had that done to dissolve the Jurisdiction?

2. Thou recitest an impertinent Assertion, viz. That the King and Parliament
advised about new Church-Laws: must we have a new Government every time we have
new Laws?

3. Thou tellest, according to thy wont, some old stories about Abby-Lands, as
much to the business.

4. Thou laugh'st at a resemblance which the Doctor brought from a Manor,
where, though the Lord be changed, the Customs, Officers, and Courts may not be
changed: Here thou namest some particular Customs, that were actually changed
by Law in Hen. 8's. time; never considering, how thou undoest thy self: For the
change of those particular Customs mentioned, are a clear confirmation of those
Customs, much more, the Courts, and Officers, which are left unaltered.

5. Thou give us the old Crambe, that the Popish Convocation of Q. M. thought
otherwise, and that thou may think as the Papists do.

2. Phil. I see thou will not be convinced by Reason: nothing will please
except I yield the cause.


Tim. Now thou art kind and just too: what should a man do, when he can fight
no longer but cry quarter? But speak out man: for I love to hear thy
Concessions plain and full.


Phil. No body denies (as if Phil. had never done so) but K. Hen. 8. did enable
the Kings Courts Spiritual and Temporal -- but that Statute 24 Hen. 8. 12.
limits the cognizance of matters cognoscible in the Spiritual Courts, to these
three sorts, (reckon well, Phil.) causes Testamentary, Matrimonial, Tithes and
Oblations and Obventions.


Tim. This is pretty well; for 1. Thou here grantest what thou had denied,
that Spiritual Courts were allowed by Law after Hen. 8. had renounced the Popes
Supremacy. 2. Some matters (of moment) were legally cognizable in those Courts.
3. I find no reason to trust thee, Phil. for I find no words in that Statute,
limiting the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to those three causes.

Upon the whole, I conclude, that Phil. is a singular disputant: Some of his
friends are excellent, indeed, at confuting an Adversary by denying the
Conclusion; but Phil. by granting it.


CHAP. X. Of the Three other PROPOSITIONS.
Tim. IT has appeared, that the Popes headship was but a Lawless Innovation, a
lawless and needless usurpation upon the Crown, and a superinduction to the
confirmation of our Bishops, etc. and their power of Jurisdiction, that did
really operate nothing upon their efficacy and legality; and that they stood
firm enough, as having their power from the Crown and our own Laws, without any
real dependence on the Pope before Hen. 8. which was the clear sense of our
Laws long before Hen. 8. and of the whole Kingdom in his time, and since; as my
Lord Coke in Cawdries Case, and Sir John Davies in Lalors Case, have so fully
proved, that thou durst not look them in the face, though so often by the
Doctor urged to it.

It has also appeared, that thus the Bishops, etc. and their Jurisdictions
were continued and confirmed by Hen. 8. and the Doctors two first Propositions
are yielded by thee, under thy own hand: and thou have quit thy self bravely
Phil. in first denying them, and long contesting them; and at last honestly
yielding and granting both, with a boon-grace.

But Phil. where shall we find the Doctor's three other Propositions, that more
nearly concerned thee? Thou should have had courage to set them before thee,
as distinctly as thou did the former, though thou had treated them as
confusedly: But methinks, thou art more afraid of them.


Phil. I was in haste; and I had more important affairs in hand than to ^. ult.
spend much time with such a scribbling D. D. my Book is worth the reading, for
my useful Stories and Poetry: Thou will find upon a diligent search, that I
have said as much as I had a mind to, to each of those Propositions; though I
am sensible enough it is somewhat loosely.


Tim. For once Phil. I am content to rake among thy Rubbish, though no man else
would endure the scent: Indeed I find something or nothing about the third
Proposition; and by the by a lap and away (as Canis ad Nilum) in page 16.
though here I expected thy whole strength: Give me leave to set it down before
thee, and see how thou look upon it.


CHAP. XI. The Doctors Third PROPOSITION.
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is lawfully exercised, without the King's Name or
Style in Processes, etc. notwithstanding the 1 Edw. 6. 2.

Tim. THe Doctor thought himself concerned to prove this substantially, by
giving good evidence, that the 1 Edw. 6. 2. was repealed: He argued it largely,
from Authority, common practice, and Law; showing plain Statutes, now in force,
to maintain his Point. Here, Phil. the world expected thou should speak to
purpose, or be silent for ever: but how and where shall we find this
expectation or the Doctor answered?


Phil. I have not willingly omitted to give answer to all and every the idle
cavils and exceptions in his Book, page 26. My answer is, 1. I deny the
Authority of the Twelve Judges, that declared that 1 Edw. 6. 2. is repealed,
(...). 16.
(take in the King and Council too) my own is better: especially having a Vote
of the House of Commons in 1640. on my side.


Tim. Now Phil. I am afraid of thee and of thy cause: nay thou art afraid thy
self: what, fly to a House of Commons in 40? and to a vote of that House? and
to a Vote of that House that speaks not one word to the point in hand? the very
words of it, as set down by thy self, disprove thee to thy face: thou know,
that Vote has not a tittle in it, touching this Statute of 1 Ed. 6. 2. which
is the thing in debate: nor yet, concerning Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; and is
only, concerning the power of the Convocation to make Canons, without a
Parliament.

But thou closest the Point with a sweet Note: Indeed none are so fit to answer
the Archdeacon, as [such] a Parliament.

Reflect a little Phil. and see how this point stands, after all thy spite is
spent upon it: thou excepts against the Authority of those Twelve Judges; but
how do thou answer the reasons of their Judgment which they honestly set
down; as the Doctor showed out of my Lord Coke, upon Ja. 4.? not a word of
that: what say thou to the constant practice, both of the Crown, and all the
King's Courts, Civil and Spiritual, contrary to that Statute ever since, on
which the Doctor enlarged? Mum.


Phil. I am quite tired with his impertinencies, p. 26. he is such a prater! p.
16. I leave him to the Parliament, and the point too, p. 19.


Tim. Tired and sore: and art, I believe, heartily weary of the company of this
same Totnes Archdeacon; as thou have cause to complain, p. 35. but thou must
have patience a little longer, while we make Hue and Cry after the Doctor's
fourth proposition, lest if it should be lost, Page 21.
he sue thee for damages.

I have searched, Phil. as for a Needle in a bottle of Hay: and at length I
caught it by the skirts, in p. 26. and afterward, as cast out into the Page 14.
abstract of the premises.


CHAP. XII. The Doctor's Fourth PROPOSITION.
The Act of 1 Eliz. 1. establishing the High Commission Court was not the
foundation of ordinary Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.

Tim. THou can not but remember how fully and largely, the Doctor both
disproved and exposed thy singular Notion of this point; and now, with thy
wonted Front, taking little or no notice of the Author's discourse, thou say
the same over again.

That Branch which gave the Queen power to settle the High Commission, being
repealed by 13 Car. 1. 12. For my part, it is beyond my apprehension to find
out, where the Authority of Ecclesiastical Courts can or does consist.

For thy part! it is well thou speakst for thy self: who is the dull fool now?
what, not apprehend, what every body else apprehends? is a singular
non-sensical notion, and barrenness of Apprehension, sufficient strength or
warrant to batter Government?


Phil. I cannot beat it into my head, who gave them that Authority they pretend
to. Not the Pope, as of old, not the Common, I am sure: nor can possibly the
Canon Law or Statute Law. ^^g. 24.



Tim. Well fare thee Phil, what need of reason? thou have done all in a word:
and had not the Doctor demonstrated, 1. That the Pope did never give us that
Authority. 2. That Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is established by Common Law. 3.
By an infinite number of Statutes. 4thly, and lastly, By that very Statute that
takes off the power of the High Commission, we might have taken thy word: but
thou have opened a wide door; and set us in a large Field: wherein we shall
follow thee with patience, upon the Heads mentioned; and hasten to the end of
our pleasant Journey.


SECT. I. Our Ecclesiastical Courts not empowered originally from the Pope.
Phil. THat the Pope gave them their Authority of old, is evident: for the
Archdeacon rightly notes, that, till William the Conqueror, there were no
Bishops Courts in England, but the Hundred Courts: But the Pope made William
the Conqueror set up such Ecclesiastical Courts as were at Rome; to proceed
according to the Canons of the Pope: and was there ever any Statute made from
William the Conqueror, or rather Henry 3. to Hen. 8. but by the consent of the
Popish Clergy, that is to say, the consent of the Pope their Head? p. 6.


Tim. Thou art a bold undertaker Phil. but is it possible thou should be
ignorant, that the Conqueror was not so much a slave to the Pope? that he
confirmed and published the Laws of his Predecessor, that he maintained the
Ecclesiastical investiture in the Crown? (all which thou may find in
Selden's Notes upon Eadm. as also the Proclamation mentioned, for the
distinction of Courts, seeing thou art at a loss about it.)

Yea, does not that Law of the Conqueror suppose the prae-existence of our
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, though not in a distinct Court before the Conquest?
Yea, can imagine, that when Spiritual Causes were tried in Hundret, and at
the Civil Courts of Judgment, that Laymen had any thing to do with them, more
than to be present? quaere.

However, did not the Doctor rightly observe, that that very Law that divided
the Courts, was made by the King's own power, not the Pope's? and with the
Council of his own Realm alone?

Though William the Conqueror was a Papist, does it follow that he did nothing,
and made no Laws, but quatenus a Papist, and not as King of England? Do not the
Statutes of Hen. 8. and my Lord Coke plainly prove, that Canons and Foreign
Laws become the King's Laws, when confirmed by Parliament, or made so by
reception voluntary, consent or custom?

Must all our Laws before Hen. 8. and after the Conquest be thus damned for
Popish Laws, and the Pope's Laws, and those too that were directly made in
provision against the Pope himself and his Usurpations? as before.

Was ever such stuff vented before? it is well thou have a Salvo [rather from
Hen. 3.] though that also gives Sentence against thee.


SECT. II. Ecclesiastical Courts by Common Law.
Phil. BUT for him to say, they keep Courts by Common Law is the idlest of all
dreams: the Common Law of England is ancienter than our Christianity. But
Bishops, much less Archbishops and Archdeacons, as now in England, are of
later date; therefore their Courts can have no foundation in Common Law.


Tim. Thou art a Lawyer, Phil. now, with all thy Law, can thou deny this
Proposition, that long Ancient and general use is Common Law in England? as
says my Lord Coke: or can thou deny this Assumption, that our Ecclesiastical
Courts are of very ancient and general use in England? if not, as thou do not
dare: what hinders this Conclusion, that we keep those Courts by Common Law?

2. Again, Phil. If there was such a thing as Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in
England, before the Conquest (as most certainly there was) how stood it then?
thou grantest, not, by Canon Law, (it was exercised contrary to the Canons.) I
grant, it stood not by Statute Law, viz. before we had any Statutes, then it
must stand before the Conquest, upon Common Law.

3. And indeed since the Division of the Courts by the Conqueror, the same
ancient Ecclesiastical Authority, is continued in its exercise, as to its
substance by Common Law, though, in that new mode, as distinguished from the
Civil, and in distinct Courts: as matters of other nature, that have their
foundation in Common Law, though somewhat new modified by Statute, continue to be
Common Law still, so far as they are not altered, as no Man of sense will deny.

4. Yea the very Courts themselves, though divided by the Conqueror, continuing
afterward so long a time in general use, in England, before Statute Law, came,
thereby, to be customary, and contracted the nature of Common Law: and
certainly there is no necessity that every particular in Common Law should have
its beginning before Christianity in England, if it fall under the condition of
ancient and general use: and Phil. thou know that Statute that limits the
time, that is required to make a custom in England: and [before Christianity]
or [from the beginning] was never put into the definition of Common Law.

5. Lastly, That they were so, has thus further demonstration; That all the
Statutes, from Magna Charta, suppose the Spiritual Court's preexisting, i. e.
by Common Law, or ancient allowed usage of the whole Realm: And my Lord Coke is
express, that Spiritual Causes belong to these Courts by Common Law.

But to put this crotchet out of thy head for ever; I argue thus: That which
was found in general use when Magna Charta was first made, and was confirmed by
Magna Charta, and is not made void by Statute, stands confirmed both by Common
and Statute Law: for the great Charter is both.

But the Spiritual Courts were found in general use, when Magna Charta was
first made, and were confirmed among the liberties of the Church in their
Jurisdiction, as my Lord Coke assures us by Magna Charta; and are not made void
by Statute: therefore our Spiritual Courts stand confirmed, both by Common and
Statute Law, in the great Charter of England; as more at large appears in the
Doctors Leges Angliae, had thou had patience to understand it.

Object. Thou say Phil. the Doctor is an old Spectacle-dreamer of idle
dreams. I say Phil. thou art a better Seer, and see Visions, and Apparitions
both of things that are, and things that are not: and among the rest, thou
see the Charter of England, with its pendent, Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction,
torn all in pieces, by a thing of nothing, and thus it works, page 26.

Many things, say thou, that were before the rights of Holy Church, namely,
Peter Pence, First Fruits to the Pope, etc. are now taken away by Statute, and
are not continued by Magna Charta. Even just so, the Jurisdiction of our Courts
which was once the right of the Church, and confirmed by Magna Charta, and is
not taken away but confirmed by a multitude of Statutes since, is not continued
by Magna Charta.

4. Thus (thou art a wonderful Conjurer) the Apparition is gone whether thou will or not: How our Courts are confirmed in the Statutes, the Doctor showed
thee abundantly in his Book: but I find thou have no stomach to encounter any
longer with Leges Angliae, or to smell to the Statutes.


SECT. III. More Causes to be tried in our Courts than Mr. Phil. allows.
Phil. GRant they have Authority, it is but in three or four things, and such,
perhaps, they have cognizance of at this day. Page 34.



Tim. Honest Phil. is at granting again, when he can deny no longer.

Our Authority reached but to three sorts of Causes in page 18. To three or four
page 26. or, at most, but those ten things mentioned in 5 Eliz. 23. de Excom.
Capiend. thou go on apace, Phil. do but add those fifteen Page 34.
more which the Doctor enumerates out of Cawdries Case, and deny thy self
satisfaction if thou can.


CHAP. XIII. Of Canons; their force, and power of making them.
SECT. I. Of the Old Canons.
Phil. THough they may have Authority to keep Courts, and to try such Causes; I
cannot see how they can use that Authority, or try such Causes, seeing they
have no Canons to act by.

1. First, for the old Canons; they were all made void by Hen. 8. and to judge
and determine, was impossible, because they had no Canons, Decrees, nor Laws
Ecclesiastical, to judge and determine of them, page 20. It Is evident all the
old Canons were repealed in the Judgment of the House of Commons in the 37 of
Hen. 8. page 20.


Tim. Stout still, Phil. first thou deniedst their power; that would not do:
then thou would limit it in its Causes; that failed thee: and now thou
would incapacitate them to act in those, for want of Canons: and here keep
thy ground or thou art lost for ever.

But this must be well examined; for it springs from depth of skill, or height
of confidence, or extensive breadth of malice and ignorance: none so bold as
blind Bayard.

How Phil. ignorant of that plain Rule in the Common Law? That the Law does
appoint every thing to be done by those unto whose office it properly
appertains.

Do thou not know, that the Common Law requires and impowers the Spiritual
Courts, to give remedy in Cases belonging to them? Coke Inst. page 1.

Do thou not know, that the Kings Prerogative is a principal part of the
Common Law, which also flourishes in the Spiritual, as well as the Temporal
Courts? Coke, Cawdr. Case: and that Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction is part of the
Royal Supremacy, to which thou art sworn; and that he that denies it, denies
the King to be a complete Monarch and Head of the whole entire body of the
Realm; according to many Statutes in all Ages as well as the Common Law? ibid.

And dare thou yet affirm, that the Kings Supremacy is crampt, and can do
nothing for the relief of his Subjects in any Spiritual Cause, which cannot be
tried in the Civil Courts, because there are no Rules or Canons for such Courts
of the King to proceed and determine by.

It is strange thou did never heed that plain Statute of Hen. 8. it strikes
thy notion dead: It assures us that the body Spiritual having power, when any
Cause divine happens to come in question, the English Church, called the
Spiritualty, has been reputed, and also found of that sort, for knowledge,
etc. (without any exterior person) to declare and determine all such doubts,
and to administer all such offices as appertain to them.


Phil. When the Popes Supremacy was taken away, vanish also did the Canons, and
Episcopal Laws, page 14.


Tim. prithee Phil. how did they vanish? of themselves, like thy airy fancies;
or as appendants, with the removal of the Popes Supremacy? If so, tell me, why
did not all our other Laws vanish too, seeing the Pope had so great a hand in
them also, as thou said before? But especially, why should there be a
particular solemn Law made on purpose, for the rejection of any of the old
Canons? And why were such Canons (though old ones) that were not found
contrariant to the Kings Prerogative and the Laws, why were such Canons kept in
force by the Statute of Hen. 8. as thou confessest? page 14.


Phil. The House of Commons in 37 of Hen. 8. gave their Judgment, that all the
old Canons were abrogated.


Tim. What so soon forget thy self? Certainly thou had said otherwise [such
as were not contrariant, etc. to remain in force] page 14.

But thou art ingenuous Phil. the Doctor helped thee to the Objection, and gave
thee its answer with it: and now thou usest the objection against him, without
the least notice of the answer, or thanks to the observator. He gave thee
reason, why the words of the latter Statute were to be restrained to such
Canons, as being contrary to the King or Law, were abrogated by the former
Statute: and not to be extended to such as were not so, and therefore were not
abrogated.

But what a noise do thou keep: are not the Acts of Parliament, the Canons of
King James, and the ancient practiced Rules of Court agreeable to the Ancient
Canon, which are also allowed by the Common Law, sufficient means of proceeding
in and determining all Ecclesiastical Causes, that are triable in our Courts?
Phil. thou would bite like a Badger, but thou can only show thy Teeth:
thou had better keep them within thy lips, lest one time or other they be
struck out of thy Head.


SECT. II. Of King James 's Canons; and power of making new Canons, by the
Statute of Hen. 8.
Tim. Do not perceive Phil. our task is almost done: we have gained three
great points, easily, out of thy hard hand, and fairly out of thy foul mouth:
For thou have confessed, though sore against thy genius, 1. That our Courts
have legal Authority. 2. That certain Causes do properly belong to them. 3.
That the old Canons are kept in force by the Statute of Hen. 8. to try those
Causes by. I mean (with the Statute) such of them as are not repugnant to the
Kings Prerogative, and the Laws of the Land.

Now Phil. thou hangest but upon one twig, and if that fail thee, thou art
quite sunk: that is the denial of the force of King James 's Canons: and the
Kings power with his Convocation to make new ones.


Phil. It Is false what the Doctor would make the 25 Hen. 8. 19. speak, as
though by that Statute the Convocation has power reserved of making Page 19.
new Canons, provided the Convocation be called by the Kings Writ, and have the
Royal assent, etc.

If this be true, I do not know but the Lambeth-Canons (exploded and condemned
by Act of Parliament) and those of King James, are all Statute Law (i. e. Law
by Statute or nonsense) for they were so made.


Tim. Good Phil. discover his falsehood herein, with Naked Truth: Is not such
power reserved to the Convocation by the Statute, seeing they used that power
before, and seeing it is conceded, and not taken away by that Statute? What is
the meaning of reservation else?

Thy other paragraph is as modest as it is true: Are the Canons of King James
confirmed by the Royal assent, and never questioned by any Act of Paraliament,
of no more force than those of Lambeth: Which are, as thou say, condemned by
Act of Parliament? that is, no better than waste-paper: take heed Phil. of a
thing called crimen laesae Majestatis.


Phil. But is not this Doctor an honest man? when the Statute only binds them
to their good behavior; namely, not to presume without the Royal assent, but
does not enable them to make any new (Canons) with the Royal assent. Vid. Stat.


Tim. Meddle not Phil. with the Doctors honesty, that is above thy reach: mind
thy own morals and the Doctors Logic: his argument is from a legal implication
upon the negative in the Statute: He grounds his argument upon a known rule in
Law, Exceptio confirmat Regulam in non exceptis; the Statute was made on
purpose to limit the power formerly abused; and can any inference be plainer,
than that the Statute supposes and allows the power of the Convocation, so
far as it does not prohibit or limit them?

It Is evident, the Judges thought so, when at the Committee of the Lords, my
Lord Coke tells us, they declared, that those restraints (mentioned by him)
were grounded on the Statute, which Statute (he adds) was but an affirmance of
the Common Law. Rep. 12. p. 720.

I know Phil. if thou had been Lord Chancellor (and its pity thou had not)
that thou would have declared more roundly; there is no need of these
limitations: the Convocation has no power at all to make Canons, either
without, or with the Kings assent. So would those Judges, had they been of
Phil's mind.

Now Phil. bethink thy self, what a wild-Goose chase thou have run: thou art
out of breath sure, if not out of thy Wits: In this venturous course, thou
may, at length, without more heed, outrun the Constable, or be caught by
him, for thy running down the Doctor, my Lord Coke, all the Judges, the Kings
Prerogative, and Acts of Parliament.

In sober sadness Phil. what will thou do? thou see thou art dead in Law; thy
Fabric is ruined, thou art lost in the Rubbish, and have written thy own
Epitaph.

Here lies Phil. notorious for his pitiful Descants, his silly Cants, and
shameless Recantations: For after all his Bravadoes and Rhodomantades, he has
plainly allowed what he had condemned; and granted what he denied, and with all
confidence argued against; namely, these Five points: 1. That our
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was not really or de jure derived from the Pope
before Hen. 8. 2. That that King did not dissolve but confirm the same. 3. That
our Spiritual Courts have Authority by Law, at this day. 4. That Spiritual
Causes do belong to, and are to be tried in them. 5. That the old Canons (at
least) which are not repugnant to the Kings Prerogative or Law are still in
force.


Yet Phil. had thou gained thy Cause, I must say, thou had lost the credit
of a man and a disputant: Thou handlest the matter, the Doctor, and Authority
it self, so scoundrelously, and so far below the Rules of all Logic and
Morality, Religion and Humanity, as thou art a Just scandal both to thy
Profession and Nature.


CHAP. XIV. Of Procurations, Synodals, Canonical Oaths, Fees, etc.
Phil. SPare a little Tim. for though I have lost my weapons and quit the
field, I have some stones to throw back at my Enemy.


Tim. Thus Insects do riggle when their heads are off.


Phil. Peace Tim. I have seen the dying blow of a Cock of the Game, strike
home. I am sure my reserve has a sting in it; and my Pebbles will fall like
mountains upon their Courts; at least, in the opinion of my Friends and their
Enemies.


Tim. Mysterious Phil. speak plainly, what is the project?


Phil. To be plain then; the truth is, I had taken much pains to prove the
unlawfulness of the Spiritual Courts: with this I began my Naked Truth; and
laid it down first, as the foundation of my grievances: but the Doctor in his
Leges Angliae baffled me in that, and put me out of all hopes of doing mischief
that way. Now I declare boldly, that was not the main drift and design of Naked
Truth. I declare and proclaim boldly and frequently (no matter for Naked Truth
now) that the Doctor says not one word to my main design, namely, in answer to
the Vindication of the Canons Authority to keep Ecclesiastical Courts, etc.


Tim. Stop Phil. has not the Doctor ONE WORD? do not find a whole Chapter (c.
7.) to prove the Canons Authority? and, does not thy own Vindication take
notice of it, as has appeared, to little purpose? besides, was it not the
scope of the Doctor's Book, to prove their Authority to keep Ecclesiastical
Courts? Is thy memory bad too?


Phil. Or to impose Oaths of Canonical obedience upon the Clergy.


Tim. That Is proved with the Authority of the Canons: which have force upon the
Clergy, if any at all: besides, the Statute that confirms our manner of
ordering, etc. imposes the same, upon all that are ordained.


Phil. Or to impose Oaths upon Churchwardens.


Tim. I am ashamed of thy trifling: that is done, both by Canon and Common, and
Statute Law, as my Lord Chief Justice Hales, declared upon the Bench: if the
Wardens be not to swear against themselves.


Phil. Nor, one word does he write to vindicate their unjust and unconscionable
Impositions and Extortions upon the Clergy, in Procurations, Synodals,
Institutions, etc.


Tim. Now thou art in thy Element; but thy memory is unfaithful: Not one word!
Phil! about Procurations and Synodals: (the main thing wherein the Archdeacon
is concerned in the charge.) Indeed, he says nothing in defense of unjust and
unconscionable impositions and extortions; but he said enough to prove, to any
reasonable man, the lawfulness of taking the usual Sum for Procurations and
Synodals: which have been ever paid, so far as our Books can discover.

But this charge is at the end of thy Book; and it seems thou had forgot what
thou said at the beginning of it: there, thou say, that he produces not
one Reason or Argument, except the Statute of Hen. 8. for Synodals and Proxies,
to be granted from dissolved Monasteries, etc.

And, Phil, the Argument from Dissolved Monasteries to the ordinary Clergy is
potent a fortiori: the Reason in the Statute is the same, for both: the Bishop,
etc. pays First Fruits and Tenths as well for his Procurations and Synodals
received from the Clergy, as from the dissolved Monasteries: and the argument,
stronger: because the Clergy are visited, the Monasteries are not: and you
know Procurations are due, ratione visitationis.

But Phil. I ought to have an account, why thou say the Doctor gives not one
reason or argument for Procurations and Synodals besides the Statute: thus thou
leapest like a Squirril from one twigg to another, till thou fallest to the
ground: first [not one word] next, [not one Reason] except the Statute, both
alike honest and true: does not he tell thee plainly, and in more words, that
Procurations and Synodals are due by ancient Composition, upon a valuable
Consideration, and by undoubted long Possession and Custom, which is Law in
England: Sit liber Judex. Leg. An. p. 64. And, in a word, if any other fees are
taken or exacted, from the Clergy, or others, that are not warrantable by Law
or Custom, take thy remedy; the Law is open.


CHAP. XV.
CONCLUSION.
Phil. an Advocate for the Courts: his Reasons on their behalf: from the value
of money: abuses in civil Court: Peace: his Declaration.


Tim. WELL, Phil. I find at last thou have painted thy self too fierce for thy
Nature: I find some bias upon thy reason, inclining thee well; and it is pity,
but ye should be friends: for,

1. Thou notest, the value of money is so different from what it was in Hen. 8.
's time, when a Harry groat would have bought as much Victuals as half a Crown
now, that they cannot afford to keep Clarks, nor to write and to Register Wills
at this day for the Legal Fees.

2. Again, thou observest, and that in favor of Ecclesiastical Courts, that
other Courts are more abusive and excessive in fees: (I leave thee to make it
good;) and 'twas very kindly remarked on our side, though severely enough against
the Common Law Courts, according to thy manner of speaking: thus,

Indeed the Extortions of the Spiritual Courts are inconsiderable in Comparison
of those amongst the numerous Fry of Common-Lawyers, Attorneys, Clarks,
Notaries, Sollicitors, Splitters of Causes, etc. whose numbers are numberless:
and so goes on with the Cry -- p. 30, 31.

3. At length thou seem to have studied better politics, than thou have
lately practiced, for in the nature of a Conclusion, thou say: Therefore men
that try, will certainly find (perhaps too late) that seldom (...). 31.
comes a better.

This is very friendly indeed, Phil. a little more of this Nature might render
thee worthy of an Advocates place in the Spiritual Courts: and then thou
might go snips too: had thou writ, Finis, here.

But I find, thou can not end, without one fling more at the Doctor.


Phil. Thou see I can speak to thy sense: and indeed, I could say much more,
to please thee, and the Doctor, and the Bishops too, had I encouragement, as I
think I deserve: and this I had done before now, if the Lady at the beginning
of the Doctor's Book had made me a Courtesy, or thank't me for my pains, upon
Curse ye, curse ye MEROZ: but no such matter, Tim. too much Ingratitude and
envy raigns amongst a sort of unthinking Black-coats.


Tim. No such matter, Phil. the Black-coats did think: and thought, that thy
Text was well interpreted and justly turned against the Enemies of the Church
of England: but, they thought also, that thou playedst too wantonly with a
serious subject, in an angry Age: and indeed, thou actedst the part of a
Mountebank rather than a grave Preacher.

Well, but what is this to the Doctor, how shall he be satisfied?


Phil. He was severe with me, and I was rude with him: and there is an end.


Tim. Rude! Yea, barbarous and prodigiously scurrilous: and I should wonder, if
thou see not a necessity of giving both thy self and the Doctor, and the
Church of England, better satisfaction.

I have known many, that when they have taken up thy Vindication, and with a
cast of their eye, have perceived the mode of thy Scribble, have with disdain
and loathing cast it from them: and to deal friendly with thee, I think thou
ought to do something to recover thy self with the world.


Phil. I am sorry to hear that: prithee, what would have me do?


Tim. Thou have heard of an Engine, called, Pia fraus: but Phil. if thou have
not the skill to join Piety and Craft together: either of them, well used, may
do thee a kindness.

My first advice, and my best, is this; that thou would be meek and humble;
and give the world a Cast of thy Piety in an honest retractation, and ingenuous
peccavi.

But secondly, if repentance be too hard a Task; or thy Talent lie not that
way; the other part of my advice is; to use this craft.

Send to thy Gazetteer, (he that Printed the Title of thy Vindication) and
desire him to publish this following Declaration.

Whereas, there was lately Printed a very simple and malicious Pamphlet, called
a Vindication of Naked Truth, the Second Part, against the trivial Objections
of, one Fullwood, under the pretended Name of Phil. Hickeringill, that the
Scandalous Pamphlet might go off the better: These are to give Notice, that the
said Pamphlet, is so idle and trivial and rudely Barbarous, and so insolently
treats an ancient Doctor in Divinity, and the Laws of England, and our
Church Government, that the true Phil-Hickeringill, is ashamed of it; and does
hereby disown and disavow it; as the offspring of the windy vapor of some
(hot) Spanish Genet: or, to speak more truly, if not so properly, some wild,
English Ass.


Given under my Hand, Philautos: or the true Phil-Hickeringill.

THE END.
A CATALOGUE of some Books lately Printed for Richard Royston.
THE Established Church: Or, a Subversion of all the Romanists Pleas for the
Popes Supremacy in England: Together with a Vindication of the present
Government of the Church of England, as allowed by the Laws of the Land,
against all Fanatical exceptions; particularly of Mr. Hickeringill, in his
Scandalous Pamphlet, styled NAKED TRVTH, the 2d. Part. By Fran. Fullwood, D. D.
Archdeacon of Totnes in Devon.

(...) Or, a Discourse of the Morality of the Sabbath, being an Exposition of
Exodus xx. v. 8, 9, 10, 11. with Prayers relating thereunto, humbly offered to
this present Age. By John Gregory Archdeacon of Gloucester.

The New Distemper: Or the Dissenters Usual Pleas for Comprehension,
Toleration, and the Renouncing the Covenant, Considered and Discussed; with
some Reflections upon Mr. Baxter's and Mr. Alsop's late Pamphlets, published in
Answer to the Reverend Dean of S. Paul's Sermon concerning Separation.

The Lively Picture of Lewis du Moulin, drawn by an incomparable Hand. Together
with his Last Words: Being his Retractation of all the Personal Reflections he
had made on the Divines of the Church of England, (in several Books of his)
Signed by Himself on the Fifth and the Seventeenth of October, 1680.


