Cryptomenysis Patefacta: Or the ART OF SECRET INFORMATION Disclosed without a
KEY. Containing, Plain and Demonstrative Rules, for Decyphering all Manner of
SECRET WRITING. With Exact Methods, for Resolving Secret Intimations by SIGNS
or GESTURES, or in SPEECH. As also an Inquiry into the Secret ways of CONVEYING
Written Messages: And the several MYSTERIOUS PROPOSALS for Secret Information,
mentioned by Trithemius, etc.

By J. F.

Et varias usus meditando extunderet Arts.

Virg. G. 1. LONDON, Printed for Daniel Brown, at the black Swan and Bible,
without Temple Bar, 1685.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE CHARLES Earl of MIDDLETON, Lord Claremont and
Fettercairn, etc. Secretary of State for the Kingdom of England, and one of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council of both Kingdoms.
My Lord,
HAving Writ a few Sheets, to lay open the Incertainty of Cipher; and
Decyphering, being an Art consecrate to the Occasions of Princes, I do Humbly
prefix your Lordships name to them: The thing is designed for His Majesty's
Service, and that gives His Secretary a good Title to it: But my Lord I had
other Motives for this my Presumption, besides your Eminent Station; I mean,
the more Eminent Adherence of your Noble Family, to the Interests of the Crown;
at a time when he was accounted the only Traitor, that dared not commit
Treason. His late Majesty of ever Blessed Memory, and Judgment, next to
infallible, had so much Confidence in the Conduct of your late Father; That he
gave him the command of that Army in the Hills, which then only appeared for
his Majesty's Interest, and might have been the means to restore Him, had not
Providence suited a Bloodless Restoration to a Gentle Reign, tho Rebel's Blood
stains not. And when His Majesty, was Miraculously settled upon the Throne of
his Ancestors; He first chose the Earl of Middleton, out of all His Loyal
Subjects in his Ancient Kingdom, immediately to Represent Him, as His
Commissioner; the next Representation of Majesty it self a Subject is capable
of: And His Lordship died bearing part of that Sacred Image, as Governor of
Tangier. This leads me to your Lordship, and I have the Authority of Custom, to
go on, for Dedications are generally Panegyricks, and Authors either find, or
make their Patrons singular; But I forbear, because, though I should say nothing,
but Truths, within the small reach of my own Knowledge; as I might exceed, the
Belief of Strangers, so I must come short, of the Expectation of all, who know
your Lordship: And as the Subject treated of, (for the most part) lies out of
the common Road, so the manner of this Address to your Lordship is Suitable;
having here so far shunned the Imputation of Flattery, that I designedly shade
evident Truths, while others Blazon Palpable Formalities.

And now my Lord, though I Dedicate the following Observations to your
Lordship, I hope none can fancy that the Defects, under what Designation
soever may reflect upon you, I know it is a Critical Age, and Critics have
much of the Venom and Nature of Wasps, often observed, to make Sores where
there are none to fix upon. But their Ignorance, as well as Malice is
sufficiently ridiculous, that do not lay the Faults of this, whether Real, or
Imaginary, entirely at my own Door; and there is Ground enough to throw them
on: Let all, be imputed to want of years, or Judgment; and let this humble
Address, be called want of Discretion; Nay there are plenty of WANTS: But I
HAVE an entire Inclination, to serve my King and Country; and if this small
Tract, at this time, do in any Measure Evidence it, I HAVE my aim, and let it
remain upon record to my perpetual Infamy, if I do not cheerfully, and upon all
occasions venture the last drop of my Blood in His Majesty's Service; and
according to the Circumstances, Act of Suffer for one infinitely BETTER than the
GOOD OLD CAUSE. And next to the Royal Interest, I declare, That my great
Ambition in particular, is to be,

My Lord, Your Lordship's Most Humble, and Most Obedient Servant, John Falconer.

TO THE READER.
YOU will find amongst the following Observations, that by means of Secret
Intelligence, not only Armies, but Kingdoms and Crowns have been lost. Which
Things had never otherways, perhaps been attempted, at least not effected. And
particularly, That in the beginning of the late Troubles, of ever Cursed
Memory, the Canting ( I would say Covenanting) People of both Kingdoms, studied
a part of this BLACK Art, See Bakers Chron. of the Kings of Engl. p. 492.
as their first degree in the MYSTERY of Rebellion, which ended not before the
Faith's Defender was removed to make way for Religion, and the Laws of God and
his Vicegerent were overturned to secure property: In short until there was
nothing Consequential visible in some Men's actions, but only in that of
Providing Asses for the Pulpit, and sending Horses to Church.

And certainly he wants the Head or Brains of a Plotter, ( tho he may have the
Heart of a Traitor) that does not in the first place (before hereduce his
Intentions against an established Authority into Acts) consider, That it is
absolutely necessary, to fix some Method of Private Communication, betwixt
those that are to be the Instruments, in carrying on the Work. Now taking this
for granted, because undeniable, he must have a stock of Confidence to the non
ultra, who will deny a Probability, That their Letters may be intercepted: And
if Intercepted I dare trust the following Sheets to evince, That the most sure
Cipher practicable in a Current converse may make a Discovery.

The Rules delivered for Decyphering, are not taken upon Trust, nor were to be
had at the second Hand; but are the genuin result of Experience, and every new
Experiment, gave occasion of fresh Observations.

I hope it will be no unprofitable Digression, to give an Account of the
occasion of my Inquiries this way, which fell out thus.

A few years ago, having had some discourse with a Gentleman, concerning the
Possibility of Resolving any Writing in Secret Character, and the means to
perform it; I was taken with the Novelty of the Thing, and after some few
serious thoughts, ventured upon the Trial, which succeeding at first, I still
went further: And you have here the account of my Discoveries in this progress.

The Learned Lord Verulam, in his Advancement of Learning, reports the Art of
Decyphering as WANTING, and therefore I thought it worth the while to search
after it.

The Advantages, that may probably arise from the knowledge of it, I leave to
be Collected from the danger of Secret Practices, especially in this Juncture.
And as the late Earl of Argile 's later Designs, against the Government
(discovered in several of his Letters last year) determined me to undertake
this troublesome Task, so the open Rebellion now on foot added new Motives for
its speedy Publication, according to that of the Poet.

Et quoniam variant Morbi, variabimus Arts:
Mill malispecies, millesalutis erunt.
I have no mind to enlarge; but there is one convenience attending this Art,
that I cannot pass over (because attributed to Cryptography) and it is, the
Assistance it will give to the knowledge of the Tongues. Trithemius affirms, in
recommendation of his Polygraphy, ( and transposes this one into no less than
three or four Advantages.) Polygrap. p. 38, 39. de Cause. and Utilit, Operis.
That by it a Man, that understands none but his Mother Tongue, may understand
the sense of an Epistle in Latin, etc. But this I have considered, and the
Fallacy attending it Chap. V.

But if you once understand the Rules for Decyphering, in one Language, you may
really, and without any Reservation, in a few hours, understand as much of any
Language, as is needful to reduce it out of Cipher, as is observed in another
place. Now this must produce a desire of understanding the meaning of what is
so Decyphered, and Desire ( joined even with a Superficial knowledge) a
Facility of attaining it.

Note, in Page 21, a wrong Alphabet was by mistake insert, the true one is
this,

A b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t v w x y z

P q r s t v w x y z a b c d e f g h i k l m n o

Toward the end of the Introduction, for Lucis Ossores, read Lucis Osores. p.
11. l. 28. f. Propositions, r. Praepositions. p. 94. l. 4. f. In the order,
strings passing r. In the order of the strings passing, etc.

INTRODUCTION.
BEfore I enter upon any particular Enquiry into this occult Art, I conceive it
proper enough to make some Introductory general Remarks upon the whole Design.
And here I cannot but observe a very Mysterious Change between the Measures
taken by some Politicians of this, as also many past Ages, and those
universally received of Old.

Primitive Simplicity was Blessed with one Language, adapted for the
Advancement of Knowledge and Commerce, until our Forefathers undertook that
ungodly Expedition Heavenward, when they were divided into seventy and two
Parties, Vid. inter alios Cluv. Epit. p. 5.
A. M. 1758. and every one Genesis c. 11.
CURSED Master of a Language for his own use.

But of a long time the Policy-menders, or rather Plot-makers, have taken quite
another Bias: For instead of some generous Attempt to repair the old Breach of
a Catholic Converse, they debauch their Inventions, to frame and manage new
ways of Correspondence, that no Mortal, but a few joined in the Confederacy
should comprehend.

But this Project (such as it is) has been very far from obtaining an universal
Assent in any Age; though the Tongue was confounded, the Curse extended not to
the Brain: Reason remained entire, which by help of that great Schoolmaster,
Experience, taught them an useful piece of Philosophy, That the World is but a
large Society of Men, linked together by a Chain of Wants almost of infinite
Variety: Or as Dubartas elegantly expresses it, -- All Lands as God destributes
To the World's Treasure pay their several Tributes.


Now in a Defection of 71 parts in 72, Knowledge and Commerce were mightily
interrupted, and the public must be presumed very sensible of the Loss; and
Endeavors have been on all sides to remove this Obstacle, by which all Parties
became Losers.

A Reunion of Speech (considering the different Regions Mankind was divided
into) was not to be hoped for; and besides, as it might have proved a work
endless, so it had been needless; for Words (however modeled) require presence
of Time and Place, and cannot be conjured out of their little Sphere, being no
less unfit to enter the Ear, or (of themselves) inform the Understanding, at a
very few hours distance, than to satisfy a craving Stomach. Indeed Men are
sometimes said to eat their Words; but they grow but badly on the Diet.

These Inconveniences gave Occasion to the Invention of Writing: An Art, by
which we may not only transmit our Thoughts to an absent Friend, in respect of
place, but to Posterity, in respect of Time; and that at the Distance of
thousands of Years: An Art by which me may yet hear Moses, and the Prophets,
Witness his excellent Commentaries.
Julius Caesar, and the Conquerors, etc. without the Miracle of being raised
from the Dead; Polyd. Verg. de Invent. retum l. 1. c. 6.
Solo literarum usu, Memoria fulcitur Aeternitas, ab omnique oblivionis injuria
res memoriae dignae vindicantur. And as Rhodiginus has it, Quid hoc
magnificentius quid aeque mirandum, in quod ne mortis quidem avida rapacitas
jus ullum habet.

Who was the Author of this Invention, I shall not take upon me to determine;
but such an Improvement of Converse was thought to have something more than
human in it; and Polyd. Verg. ibid.
Mercury (who is by some thought to be the First, by others the Fifth that
taught the Use of Letters to the Egyptians) was thereupon Deified, Note, it is
most consonant to sound History, That the Egyptians had this benefit from the
neighborhood of the Israelites.
the usual Complement that the Men of those Ages put upon their Benefactors.
But so it is, after the manner of Men, that what they make, they love to use as
their Creatures: And thus they put new Gods in Commission at pleasure.

But to let that pass, whatever of supposed Divinity might be attributed to
this Invention, when (like the supposed Mercury.
Inventor) it had got Wings, and visited some parts of the World. It was not
long before some Men began to tamper with it; and to Writing add Secret ways of
Correspondence: The particulars of which are the Subject of this Treatise.

Letters in their Infancy were in themselves so Secret, that he that should
have taken them to task, to understand an Intrigue committed to their Trust,
might have worn his Eyes out of his Head, or sunk them so low in it, as would
give Ground to suspect them on their March to enlighten the Brain, and the
Writing as obstinate as ever. And I am apt to believe some Men could be
satisfied this Art had still continued in that State; at least confined to the
use of themselves and their Confederates, whose Necks are no longer safe, than
their Designs secret.

As for those things treated of by the Authors that have writ upon
Steganography, etc. which lead a man to the Knowledge of the Tongues, or are
subservient to other useful Sciences: No man in his right Wits will discommend
them, while such innocent Designs are made the ne ultra.

Neither would I be mis-understood, so as to condemn even the Use of Cipher in
general: For the Mysteries of State cannot perhaps be too well secured from
prying Eyes; but though Princes, and those in Authority, may have peculiar Signs
for secret Information, I hope there is no Consequence for a general Practice
that way. The Lord Bacon mentioned it as an Aggravation of the Earl of
Somerset's Crime, in his Charge, when Attorney General against that Peer,
concerning the poisoning of Sir Thomas Overbury, where, speaking of the Earl's
former Intimacy with Sir Thomas; Nay, (says he) they were grown to such an
Inwardness, See the L. Bacon's genuine Remains. Charge against Rob. Earl of
Somerset.
as they made play of all the World besides themselves: So as they had Ciphers
and Jargons for the King and Queen, and all the great Men; things seldom used,
but either by Princes, and their Ambassadors and Ministers, or by such as work
or practice against, or, at least, upon Princes. You have here this Learned
Author's Sentiment of Secret Writing, inter privatos; though in his Advancement
of Learning, he afterward published the most ingenious Method (in my poor
Judgment) that is extant: But of this afterward.

I have seen very few Authors upon that Subject, but have acknowledged it a
Detriment to the Public, to publish their Inventions of this kind. And
Trithemius in his Apology for Printing his six Books of Polygraphy (foreseeing
the Inconveniences) gives this Caution: Te, Lector, Polygraph. p. 83.
quicunque es, rogo memineris, quanta per hanc scientiam mala in Republica
fieri per malos and lubricos possent, si ad multorum Notitiam deveniret, etc.
But it was an Oversight to imagine, that his Book in a general Progress, Ad
Reges, Principes, Nobiles and Ignobiles, Sacerdotes and Laicos, Vid. p. 44.
Trit. Polyg.
Doctos simul and Indoctos; published in Latin, the most Universal Language,
might not meet with some ill designing Men: And his Confidence in this, (as
perhaps in other things) was but too great, to fancy, that his bare Desire
could be more prevalent upon such, than the Laws of God, or Man. I wish we were
all so much Stoics, as to consider, that, We come into the World as into a
Comedy, where we are not to choose the person we must represent, but perform
well the part given us, etc. And a little after, that Author adds to this
purpose, If of a Porter, like a Porter; for there is Honor in well performing
any in their Kind, and Disgrace in doing any ill.

Trithemius tells us (and indeed most of those that follow his Cryptical
Footsteps, want not this Pretext) That it was at the Desire, and only for the
use of a Prince, Duke of Bavaria.
that he began his Mysterious (I had almost said his Miraculous) Steganography,
Polyg. praef. ad Maximil, Imperatorem.
which was to fill the World with Wonder, if ever it should be published; to
which indeed he subjoyns an Absit. Polyg. p. 100. In manibus jam habeo grande
opus, quod si unquam fuerit publicatum, quod absit, totus Mundus mirabitur,
etc. And I am sure we may without any Violence upon the Sense of this Author,
make his Kindness to that Prince the Result of Conviction, Polyg. p. 22.
since he acknowledges, Operae pretium fuerit principes omnes singulari
praeditos esse sapientia, etc. And it were uncharitable to suspect him of
Flattery in an unanswerable Truth, even though his Designs and Doings (I mean in
what he himself has published to the World) do not seem to quadrate.

I confess, the Practice of Secret Information, inter privatos, may, without
any far Fetch, be derived from the same Original with good Laws, Ex malis
moribus oriuntur bonae Leges.
I mean from Corruption of Manners; and sometimes both may have an Eye at
Order; but their several Aims and Effects are generally in as direct an
Opposition as Light and Darkness.

What the Intent and Effects of good Laws are, is well enough known: And on the
other Hand, I hope it is, or shall be undeniable, that such Secret means,
without a Commission, do often tend to the Breach of some positive Command.
These black Intrigues have often carried on darker Designs; things buried, that
they may live: And I may, without any Solecism in Sense, affirm, That the
Lovers of Light, or written characters.
Philophoti, as well as Lighthaters, or occult characters, not at first
discernable to the Eye.
Misophoti, mentioned by Trithemius, are Lucis Ossores: But more of this in its
proper place. Tradition gives us the Story of a Basilisk mentioned by Pliny, l.
8. c. 21.
Creature that lurks in secret, and kills a Man if it gets the first View of
him. Now though I cannot swear to the Existence of such a Monster among the
Brutes, yet there have been brutal Contrivances that may give it the Authority
of a Parable, and the Author an Apology for this endeavor to crush it in the
Egg.

It is true, the unridling of such Mysteries, is more immediately the Province
of those who sit at the Helm of Affairs, Military and Civil: Yet if a private
Sentinel, by decyphering an intercepted Epistle, should save an Army, etc. it is
no Crime, I hope, that he be more clear sighted than his Superiors. And
besides, the Knowledge o Uncyphering should not be confined to a Corner: For
great Undertakings (according to the Exactness of Policy) require sudden
Action: And if a Cipher were to be carried some hundreds of Miles for its
Resolution, the Design might in the mean time discover it self, by an effectual
Execution: Nay, many times it may so fall out, that the Secret Writing cannot
be safely sent far from the place where it may be intercepted, as in open
Hostility, or so. These, and the like, are amongst the Motives that first
inclined me to send abroad the following Observations concerning the unridling
of such secret Signs, or Notes of Intimation, that are practicable in a
constant Correspondence: But that which entirely determined me, was the Time
and Pains spent in Decyphering the late Earl of Argyle's Letters, as you may
see in that Authentic Account of the Discoveries made in Scotland, of the late
Conspiracies against His Majesty and the Government, published by His Majesty's
Command.

And now to come to the Particulars contained in this small Tract:

First, I shall treat of the most material ways of Secrecy in Writing that have
been invented (termed by those who have dealt that way, Cryptographia,
Steganographia, etc.) and lay down plain Rules for Decyphering them without
any Key.

2. Of Saemaeology, or the several Methods of Secret Information, by Signs and
Gestures.

3. Of Cryptology, or that Secrecy consisting in Speech.

4. Of Secret MEANS of CONVEYING Written Messages, that have been practiced to
frustrate a Search; which Method may be called Cryptogrammatophoria, since
there is no Statute against coining of Words: And sure I have Precedents on my
side. And,

5. I shall enquire into the several astonishing Proposals for Secret
Information, mentioned in that Epistle of Trithemius, directed to Arnoldus
Bostius, concerning his eight Books of Steganography.

In this Distribution, I have not so much considered which are first in Order
of Nature, or in Order of Time, as what is first in Order for the Reader's
Ease: Whether Speech, or that dumb kind of Eloquence by Signs, be first Ordine
Naturae, is under Debate; and let it remain so: But without Controversy, for a
methodical comprehending the whole Rules of Discovery, it is most proper to
begin with Cryptography; being the Resolution of the rest of the Chapters, in a
manner, depend upon this:

Cryptomenysis Patefacta: OR, THE Art of Secret Information disclosed without a
Key.
CHAP. I. Of Secret Writing, and the Resolution thereof.
IN Secret Writing there are reckoned these Requisites: Requisites in
Cryptography, etc.


1. That it be void of Suspicion, if possible.

2. That it be difficult to be unfolded, if doubted.

3. That it be fitted for Dispatch (i.e.) easy to be writ, and Decyphered by
the Key.

From whence I shall here only observe, Note.
That every thing is to be Examined, that comes from a suspected Hand. The
particular ways of Trial will appear as we proceed.

This Art is by some Authors called Crytographia, (...), to hide, or keep
secret, Etymolog. of Cryptog. etc.
and (...) to write, carve or grave. By others Steganographia, (...), to
conceal, and (...). Trithemius entitles the six Books he himself published upon
this Subject, Libri Polygraphiae, from (...), because of the numerous, or
rather innumerable Differences it is capable of. And yet all will fall under
the following Sections, which I have digested after this Method.

1. I shall examine that way of Secret Writing, by Altering the Powers of the
Letters; as also by invented Notes, and Characters.

2. By changing the Places of the Letters, where the Powers are the same.

3. By using more Letters or Characters than are requisite to frame Words.

4. I shall enquire into that Secrecy which arises by writing with fewer
Letters than the words require.

5. I shall consider the Secrecy in Writing, that proceeds from a Deceit in
the Paper, or some other Material instead thereof: And,

6. That Fallacy where the Secret Intentions are concealed by a Deceit arising
from the Ink, or some other Liquor used for it.

SECT. 1. Of Secret Writing, by changing the Powers of Letters, etc.
1. Contains several Ancient and Modern Inventions of this kind.
THis way of Secret Writing, by changing the Powers of Letters, of purpose to
confound the true Intent of a written Message was very early in the World; Sec.
and Swift Mes. p. 69, 70.
and the Author of the Secret and Swift Messenger tells us much of the ancient
Jewish Learning is wrapped up in it.

Suetonius relates, See also Aul. Gell. noct. Atti^. l. 17. c. 9.
That Julius Caesar writ his Epistles of Moment, per quartam elementorum
literam, (as that Author has it) in this Order, D e f g h i k l m n o p q r s
t u w x y z a b c.
A b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z.
D being put for A, and E for B, etc. E, g.

Xlh Hqhpb mw mq kvhdx gmwrvghv. idoo ysrq xlhp zmxl do hashgmxmrq.

The Enemy is in great Disorder, fall upon them with all Expedition.

Augustus Caesar, in communicating his secret Intentions, secundum elementum
proprii loco substituit, (i.e.) He put B for A; for B, he put C, etc. and for
A, he used XX. thus; X X a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y.
A b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z.


This Transposition will appear fully as much a Stranger to the true meaning in
an Epistle as any; notwithstanding of the near Neighborhood of the Letters
that are expressed, and understood.

It is ordinary in Secret Writing of this nature, to make use of some word,
wherein one Letter is only once expressed, to frame their Alphabet by, writing
first the Word it self, and after it the Letters wanting to complete the
Alphabet; and that either by two Lines at length, or by the Alphabet divided.
E. g. Let Liberty be for the Key.

In two full Lines.

L i b e r t y a c d f g h k m n o p q s u w x z.
a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z.
By the Alphabet divided.

L i b e r t y a c d f g
h k m n o p q s v w x z.
So that in Writing, L is used for H, and again H for L; they use I for K, and
K for I, etc.

I have seen Transpositions of the Letters so ordered in framing an Alphabet,
that the seeming barbarous words in the writing could be well enough pronounced
in Speech, and would at first view appear to be some strange kind of Language.

But why should I enlarge upon Particulars? Trithemius his fifth Book contains
nothing but Tables for Transpositions: and tho he had employed the whole time
of his Life that way, he had left a vast variety untouched; for let the
Alphabet stand in its natural Order, viz. a b c d e f g h, etc. for an Index to
show the Powers of the several possible Combinations of the twenty four
Letters, to be placed opposite to it in Rows, and allowing five of these Rows
to stand in an Inch measure: One end of this Tabula transpositionis expansa,
(when writ in a Scroul,) if reached to the Man in the Moon: Nay, to go farther,
if Mercury, who once taught the use of Writing, had it, the other might remain
with us: And besides, the Transpositions, which must lie by the way thither,
abundance of different Alphabets left for the Use of this lower World upon
Occasion.

To be serious, (according to the following Rules for combining any Number of
Letters) you will find twenty four Letters have 620448401733239439360000
several Positions. And Schottus demonstrates, Steganog. Clas. 5. c. 5.
(tho the Calculation in his Book be not exact) that a thousand Million of Men
in as many years could not write down all those different Transpositions of the
Alphabet, granting every one should complete forty Pages a day, and every Page
contain forty several Positions: For if one Writer in one day write forty
Pages, every one containing forty Combinations, 40 multiplied by 40, gives
1600, the Number he compleats in one day, which multiplied by 366, the Number
(and more) of Days in a Year; a Writer in one Year shall compass 585600
distinct Rows. Therefore in a thousand million of years he could write
585600000000000, which being again multiplied by 1000000000, the number of
Writers supposed, the Product will be 585600000000000000000000, which wants of
the number of Combinations no less than 34848401733239439360000.

But those are not all; for the Alphabet put for the Index is capable of
620448401733239439359999 Variations to each of the former Positions.

And besides, many have used invented Characters, Arithmetical Figures, etc. to
express their Secret Intentions by. Thus Pharamund, King of the Franks,
invading the Gauls about the Year 424. Trith. Polyg. lib. 6.
devised a new Alphabet for his own use: Clodius his Son and Successor followed
his Father's Example in contriving new Characters, for communicating his
Intentions the more secretly: as also did Charles the Great and others. And
some will have it, that Ezra invented the Hebrew Character upon some such
Motives. Trithemius has been at the pains of collecting a great many invented
Alphabets, which you may see in his sixth Book de Polygraph.

Gasp. Schottus, Part 4. lib. 1. Synt. 6. Prop. 4. and 5.
in his Magia Universalis, proposes an Invention he had found amongst the
secret Manuscripts of Kircherus, how to write with Points or Arithmetical
Figures. It is to this purpose; They divide the Letters of the Alphabet into a
certain number of Parts; and to every Partition they subjoyn some different
sign or point, v. g. 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 5 a b c d e f g h
i l m n o p q r s t u x z,;:.?

Afterward when they come to write, they first mark down the number of the
Letters, as they stand in their respective Columns, that serve to express their
hidden meaning, and join to it the sign of that Column e: g: 4, 1; 3? 1? 3? 1:
4, 1; 2? Deus videt. But he thinks it better, to mark the several Divisions of
the Alphabet with Figures thus: 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4
a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z 1 2 3 4 5 6

By help of this Alphabet, if the following Words were put in Cipher, Princeps
insidiatur vitae tuae; fuge. they will stand in this order; 43, 51, 31, 41, 13,
21, 43, 52, 31, 41, 52, 31, 14, 31, 11, 53, 54, 51, 54, 31, 53, 11, 21, 53, 54,
11, 21, 22, 54, 23, 21. Here either the number of the Letters in their several
Classes, or the number under them, may be put first.

Nay, to come nearer, you may find three or four new Alphabets out of the Mint,
in the Discoveries made in Scotland: but since the same Rules of decyphering
will serve for all, I proceed.

SOLUTION.
First; Distinguish the Vowels from Consonants.
To proceed regularly herein, you must endeavor to distinguish betwixt the
Vowels and Consonants. And first, the Vowels generally discover themselves by
their frequency; for, because they are but few in number, and no word made up
without some of them, they must frequently be used in any Writing: however, it
may by accident fall out, that some of the Consonants shall be oftener found in
an Epistle. 2. Where you find any Character or Letter standing by it self, it
must be a Vowel; this holds in all Languages. 3. If you find any Character
doubled in the beginning of a word, in any Language it is a Vowel, as Aaron,
Eel, Jilt, Oogala, Vulture, etc. except in some English proper Names, as
Llandaff, Lloyd. 4. In Monosyllables of two Letters, one being a Vowel, you may
distinguish it from the Consonant joined with it by its frequency, etc. 5. In a
word of three Letters, beginning and ending with the same Character, some Vowel
is probably included; as, did, etc. except er'e, etc. but e is easily known,
being of greater use than any Letter, in the beginning, middle, and end of
Words; as see, ever, serve, deference, beseech, need, etc. This will not hold
in Latin; and as for the frequency of the Vowels in that Language, they are
computed to serve thus in any Writing: e and i of most use; next to these a and
u; and o not so often as any of them; but upon the whole, the difference is but
small. 6. When you find a Character doubled in the middle of a word of four
Letters, it is probably the Vowel e or o, as feel, good, etc. and consequently
the first and last Letters Consonants. 7. In Polysyllables, where a Character
is double in the middle of a Word, it is for the most part a Consonant; and if
so, the precedent Letter is always a Vowel, and very often the following. 8. i
in English never terminates a Word, nor a or u, except in sea, you, etc. tho
they be of much use in the beginning and middle of Words, as in advantage,
assassinate, diminish, and the like. 9. These Vowels, a, i, u, are seldom
doubled; and in this and the former, they are distinguishable from the
Consonants most frequently used, such as, d, h, n, r, s, t. Most of those
Remarks are calculated for the English Tongue.

Secondly, Distinguish Vowels amongst themselves.
To distinguish one Vowel from another, after you have made the most probable
Suppositions in separating them from the Consonants, 1. compare their
frequency, and e, as we observed before, is generally of most use in the
English Tongue, next o, then a and i; but u and y are not so frequently used as
some of the Consonants. 2. It is remarkable, that amongst the Vowels, e and o
are often doubled, the rest seldom or never. 3. e is very often a terminal
Letter, and y terminates Words, but they are distinguishable, because there is
no proportion as to their frequency: o is not often in the end of Words, except
in Monosyllables. 4. e is the only Vowel that can be doubled in the end of an
English Word, except o in too, etc. In Latin no Consonant can be doubled in the
end of a Word, and only the Vowel i. 5. You may consider which of the Vowels,
in any Language, can stand alone, as a, i, and sometimes o in English, a, e, o,
in Latin, or i Imperative of eo.

3. Distinguish the Consonants amongst themselves.
To distinguish one Consonant from another, you must 1. (as before) observe
their frequency. Those of most use in English are d, h, n, r, s, t, and next to
those may be reckoned c, f, g, l, m, w; in a third rank may be placed b, k, p;
and lastly, q, x, z. In Latin, the most frequent Consonants are l, r, s, t,
next to these c, f, m, n, then d, g, h, p, q; and lastly, b, x, z. 2. You may
consider what Consonants can be doubled in the middle or end of Words. 3. What
are terminal Letters, etc. and 4. The number and nature of the Consonants or
Vowels that can fall together, or do usually follow one another.

Note, that if the same Character be used for j when a Consonant, and when it
is a Vowel, it may a little perplex some of the Rules for decyphering: but this
Confusion cannot happen so often, as to excuse the prolixity of any other
Caveat than barely to have metioned it.

Additional Observations.
The great difficulty being once to come to the Knowledge of three or four
Letters, (those leading a man to the Knowledge of the rest) endeavor to find
out Words usual in Writing, that have something peculiar to them in the order
of Letters; such as, 1. A word of three Letters, beginning and ending with the
same, may be supposed, did. 2. A word consisting of four Characters, with the
same Letter in the beginning and end, is probably, that, or has. 3. A word
consisting of five Letters, when the second and last are the same, is commonly
which, though it may be otherways, as in known, serve, etc. And you may judge
of the truth of such Suppositions by the frequency of the Letters in the Word
supposed.

Next, you may compare Words one with another, as on, and no, each being the
other reversed; so of and for, the last being the first reversed, with the
addition of a Letter; for and from will discover each other, etc.

You may likewise observe some of the usual Propositions and Terminations of
Words, such as com, con, ing, ed, etc. or in Latin, prae, per, us, um, etc.
Note that t and h are often joined in the beginning and end of English, Words,
and sometimes in the middle, etc.

I have not meddled here with any Language but English; because of the designed
Brevity of this small Tract: However, by a little practice of decyphering in
one Language, you may decypher an Epistle in any, even tho the plain Speech it
self be a Mystery to you, if you first observe, the frequency of the Letters,
the terminal Letters, what Letters can be doubled, in the beginning, end, or
middle of Words; and such general Rules.

And as to English, I have hereunto subjoyned one Example.

39. 38, 31, 21, 35. 35, 14, 20, 18, 21, 19, 20, 35, 34. 20, 38, 39, 19. 32,
35, 31, 18, 35, 18. 22, 39, 20, 38. 13, 31, 14, 24. 20, 38, 39, 14, 37, 19. 31,
19, 20, 15, 20, 38, 35. 13, 31, 14, 31, 37, 39, 14, 37. 15, 36. 20, 38, 35. 31,
36, 36, 31, 39, 18. 18, 35, 17, 21, 39, 19, 39, 20, 35. 36, 15, 18. 24, 15, 21.
20, 15. 11, 14, 15, 22. 18, 35, 13, 35, 13, 32, 35, 18. 20, 38, 31, 20. 15, 14.
14, 15. 31, 33, 33, 15, 21, 14, 20. 24, 15, 21. 36, 31, 39, 12. 20, 15. 13, 35,
35, 20. 13, 35. 31, 20. 14, 39, 14, 35. 20, 15. 13, 15, 18, 18. 15, 22, 19. 14,
39, 37, 38, 20. 36, 15, 18. 22, 35. 13, 21, 19, 20, 14, 15, 20. 14, 15, 22, 34,
35, 12, 31, 24. 20, 38, 35. 19, 21, 18, 16, 18, 39, 25, 35. 15, 36. 20, 38, 35.
33, 31, 19, 20, 12, 35. 22, 38, 35, 14. 20, 38, 39, 14, 37, 19. 31, 18, 35. 39,
21, 19, 20. 18, 39, 16, 35. 36, 15, 18. 35, 23, 35, 33, 21, 20, 39, 15, 14.

By practicing the foregoing Rules, you will find that this method of Secret
Writing in plain Cipher, may with as much ease, if not with as much speed, he
deciphered as written.

The Secret Sense of the Example given is this:

I have entrusted this Bearer with many things as to the managing of the Affair
requisite for you to know: Remember that on no account you fail to meet me at
nine to morrows night; for we must not now delay the surprise of the Castle,
when things are just ripe for Execution.

Note. When you are to decypher any Writing, begin with the single Characters,
if any be; next go to the Monosyllables, or remarkable Words; take them out of
the Epistle, and mark them down in a Paper apart.

We shall next consider some ways that may be taken to frustrate the foregoing
Rules of Discovery: and several have been insisted on to this purpose, that
fall under this Section in the following Paragraphs.

2. An Improvement of the former methods of Secret Writing, by leaving out
Characters of least use, and putting others in their stead that shall signify
the Vowels.
This we have from the Author of the Secret and Swift Messenger: for (says he)
by this means the Number of the invented Alphabet will be complete, and the
Vowels, by reason of their double Character, less distinguishable.

SOLUTION.
As for this difficulty, I must confess I cannot well comprehend it; for if the
number of the Alphabet be perfect, how can one Character express two Letters?
and again, if one Character has a double power, viz. of a Vowel and Consonant,
it would appear to me rather more than less distinguishable, by reason of its
greater frequency: and having found one of the powers of a double Character,
you may discover when it is used in another power, and then proceed as before;
and withal, the common Particles, such as, the, that, of, and, etc. will be
written throughout all the Epistle, without any variation, in their respective
Characters.

But further, if only the Letters of less use be left out, it will not make any
great Alteration in an Epistle; and if you discover but one word in the whole,
the Sense will bring you through such little Intricacies, especially upon this
Advertisement, that an Epistle may be so contrived.

If Letters of greater use should be laid aside by compact, and others also of
great use put in their stead to express a double power, I believe the
Confederate might have an equal disadvantage by his means with the Discoverer,
E. G. If the same Character should signify o and n, they cannot distinguish on
from no, etc. but by the Sense of the Epistle, or some private mark: and why
may not the Decypherer be as good as the Confident at the Art of Discerning?

And besides the notice given, that an Epistle may be so contrived, I shall add
further, That any Writing contrived in this manner, may be easily discovered to
be so, because the usual number of Characters must be wanting, and because of a
more than usual frequency of some particular Characters; and you see that there
is no insuperable difficulty to decypher it when discovered to be so.

3. Of writing without any distinction between Words.
The way of concealing the sense of an Epistle by writing continually without
any distinction between the words, is mentioned by our last cited Author; and
of late very much practiced, particularly by the late Earl of Argyle. See the
Account of the Discoveries made in Scotland, etc.

SOLUTION.
By this Intricacy, I acknowledge those helps we mentioned from single
Characters, Teminations, or the like, are deluded; but you may however
distinguish, between the Vowels and Consonants, the Vowels one from another, as
also the Consonants amongst themselves: nay, you may make Suppositions for
Words, etc. and having found two or three Letters, or one Word, the difficulty
is over. I have often tried it, and never found any new difficulty to arise
from this Defeating way that requires other Rules, than what you have already
for Decyphering.

4. Of making false Distinctions in Secret Writing.
This way is likewise mentioned in the Secret and Swift Messenger, ibib. e. g.
if these words, There is no Safety but by Flight, were divided thus, The,
reisn, osa, fetyb, utb, y, fli, ght. and afterward put in Character.

SOLUTION.
When you have any suspicion of a Fraud of this nature, you may proceed as if
there were no Stop used.

5. Of inserting Nulls or Non-significants.
This Obscurity in Cipher is commonly proposed in Treatises for Secret Writing;
and amongst other Authors upon that Subject, by the Lord Advancement of
Learning. l. 6. c. 1.
Bacon. You will find it put in See Discov. in Scotland.
Practice too.

SOLUTION.
As to this, it is necessary, 1. That you take the number of the different
Characters in the Epistle: and if that exceed the Number of the Alphabet, it is
probable Mutes are intermixed with the significant Letters.

I have said probable, because there may be Characters insert to express
Relatives, Syllables, etc. of which hereafter.

2. Observe the frequency of the several Characters. And by this means you may
distinguish those Nulls from significant Letters; for it is obvious, that if
many insignificant Characters be used, they shall not be frequent; at least
most of them shall be but rarely insert, which will do no great feats: If only
a few in number, and consequently their places the more frequent, they are yet
by Supposition distinguishable from the Vowels and Consonants of most use in
Writing; especially if you consider the Order and Coherence amongst the several
Characters. This admits of no particular Rules; nor will the Judicious need any.

3. After you have found out the real Alphabet, or all the Mutes, there is no
new difficulty.

6. Of Secret Writing by the Key Character.
There is an Invention of Secrecy much insisted on (though none of the
swiftest) by the Author of the Secret and Swift Messenger, and others, beyond
any yet mentioned, for Intricacy, wherein each particular Line, Word, or
Letter, is written by a new Alphabet: but the cited Author himself acknowledges
it too tedious for a current Correspondence; which cannot be entertained this
way, but at a vast expense of Time and Trouble, to put it in, or take it out of
Cipher even by the Key; and secret Information, in several Exigencies must be
speedy or unprofitable: so that in effect it is unpracticable for the end it is
designed for.

However, lest it should obtain too much credit if supposed undecypherable, its
Difficulties shall be considered.

But first, the way of writing by it is this: The Confederates condescend upon
some Word or Sentence that shall lock and unlock their Missives; or the Key may
be sent in the Letter, in some Word or Sentence privately marked, or by compact
agreed on, such as the first or last Line, etc. to serve for the Key. Suppose
then it should be Policy's Pre-eminence, there must be several Alphabets framed
for each of its Letters in manner following.

1 A b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z 2 P q r s t u w x y z a b c
d e f g h i k l m n o 3 O p q r s t v w x y z a b c d e f g h i k l m n 4 L m n
o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f g h i k 5 I k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b
c d e f g h 6 C d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b 7 Y z a b c d e f
g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x 8 S t u w x y z a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q
r 9 P q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f g h i k l m n o 10 R s t u w x y z a b c d
e f g h i k l m n o p q 11 E f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d 12 H
i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f g 13 E f g h i k l m n o p q r s t
u w x y z a b c d 14 M n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f g h i k l 15 I k l m
n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f g h 16 N o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f
g h i k l m 17 E f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d 18 N o p q r s t
u w x y z a b c d e f g h i k l m 19 C d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y
z a b 20 E f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d

If they agree, that the Lines only shall be writ by a new Alphabet, the first
line shall be made according to the first Alphabet A. P. the second line
according to the second Alphabet, viz. A. O. the third Alphabet is A. L. etc.
the first Line being an Index successively to all the rest. And when they have
gone through the Table, they may begin anew, or go backwards again, etc.

If Words are only writ by one Alphabet, then every new word is writ by a new
Alphabet: and so of Letters. I have hereunto subjoyned an Example for each: viz.

1 Example in the Lines.

Y pb vdgrts id ztte ixt Hadasytgh
idcb wofr rihm obr rihm rxsh
dfaawi fd zc espi gtww cpfzwe ez
cqn Nwuxg bynnmrtg. qibc.
I am forced to keep the Soldiers
upon hard duty and hard diet:
Supply us, or they will revolt to
the Enemy speedily. Have.
SOLUTION.
1. When there is only one Alphabet used for a Line, the Writing might be
discovered as in plain Cipher, if you make a new Operation for each line. But
there may be other ways to decyper any such Writing: for,

2. If you find out but one Letter in a Line, (and that may certainly be done
by a few Suppositions) it will of it self give an Alphabet for that whole Line,
as you may perceive by the Counter-Table, which follows: for, the Confederates
Table being framed, so as the first line may be an Index to all the rest of the
Lines which are ordered by some Word or Sentence that is the Key, every Letter
of such a Word or Sentence must be once supposed to stand for A. Now in the
Counter Table you see all the Letters in the Alphabet to be once supposed A:
Therefore you need only to search for I in the upper line of it, and try in
what line Y is opposite to it; and those two Lines give you an Alphabet. Or set
down the Letter found under the Letter that expresses its true power, and
completing the last line, you have the Alphabet. E. g. If you supposed Y in
the Example given to express the power of I, first write down the twenty four
Letters in their usual order, and under I place Y; then going on in order, your
Alphabet is this for the first line.

A b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z
L m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f g h i k
The Counter-Table.
1 A b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z 2 B c d e f g h i k l m n o
p q r s t u w x y z a 3 C d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b 4 D e f
g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c 5 E f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x
y z a b c d 6 F g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d e 7 G h i k l m n o
p q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f 8 H i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f
g 9 I k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f g h 10 K l m n o p q r s t u w
x y z a b c d e f g h i 11 L m n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f g h i k 12 M
n o p q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f g h i k l 13 N o p q r s t u w x y z a b c
d e f g h i k l m 14 O p q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f g h i k l m n 15 P q r s
t u w x y z a b c d e f g h i k l m n o 16 Q r s t u w x y z a b c d e f g h i
k l m n o p 17 R s t u w x y z a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q 18 S t u w x y z
a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r 19 T u w x y z a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p
q r s 20 V w x y z a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t 21 W x y z a b c d e f
g h i k l m n o p q r s t u 22 X y z a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w
23 Y z a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x 24 Z a b c d e f g h i k l m
n o p q r s t u w x y

This Table needs not much Explanation, being but a Collection of such
Alphabets as you may frame by your self upon every new supposition.

Having found one Alphabet for the first line, you have likewise by this means
the first Letter of the Key. e. g. In the fifteenth line of the Table, Y
standing against I, and P beginning that line ( as you may perceive) P must be
the first Letter of the Key; and if you peruse the following Collection of what
Letters can be joined in the beginning of Words, you will find a, e, h, i, l,
or o, etc. must follow P: so that at worst to get another Alphabet for the next
Line, it will cost but so much Pains as to make Trial of all those Letters by
Supposition; as first, what Letter in the first Line is against i, in the fifth
Line beginning with E, (for A cannot regularly follow P in this particular
method, else the Letters in the second Line of the Writing, should have their
usual Signification without any Transposition;) and finding that E cannot be
the second Letter of the Key, because the Cipher from that Supposition is in as
great confusion as ever, next try what Letter is opposite to i in the line H.
Still supposing a new, until you find the second Line to produce Sense. And so
of all the rest.

Or you may take the same Measures from the Letters or Syllables found, in the
Writing it self.

Or you may proceed to find the Alphabet of the second, third, or any other
Line, as you did for the first; viz. searching after the Power of some Letter
in the second Line, by the ordinary Rules; and according to the greatst
Probability, in that search; from the frequency of the Letter, or other help,
to make Trial by your Counter-Table.

2 Example in Words.

Y oa qzcnpo cx mggr rfc Lgdwbxkl
kedc zriv hzyc hvl mewh puqf
bdyytg hf sw gvrl ylnn wizspy id
hws pypxi bynnmrtg. kcvw.
SOLUTION.
When the Alphabet is changed at every word, you may either make Suppositions
from Words, or from Letters that fall in the end or beginning of the several
Words in the Writing, until you have made some progress in the Letters of the
Key; and then proceed as before.

You may likewise find out by Supposition, the number of Letters in the Key,
etc. which will much facilitate the work. Thus:

1. Having found an Alphabet for the first, second, or indeed any word near the
beginning of the Epistle, go through all the immediate following Words, until
you find another that is decyphered by the same Alphabet.

2. From the last found Word count the like number, and you have a new word
decypherable by the found-Alphabet: and thus you may go on until you have once
gone through the whole Writing, marking the whole Series with some peculiar
mark: And then,

3. Begin the Epistle again at some Word immediately before or after that which
was first found, and count forwards as before, until you come to the end of the
Epistle.

4. Afterward observe the same method, until you have distinguished the whole
Writing, giving each respective Series of Words some particular mark of
Distinction. And in end having found out but one Letter in such a Series of
Words it gives an Alphabet to decypher all that Series by, as was observed in
Lines, etc. e.g. Y therefore, the first Word in the Example, expressing the
Power of I; you shall find the twentieth Word id decypherable by its Alphabet,
viz. A. P. and consequently hws, the one and twentieth Word in the Writing, but
twentieth after oa the second Word, to have one Alphabet with it; and in the
same order pypxi to have one Alphabet with qzcnpo; and bynnmrtg and cx to be
denoted by the same Alphabet, etc.

Now if the Writing were long (as it must be to contain Proposals, Emergencies,
and other Circumstances) the use of the foregoing Observation will be worth the
consideration.

But there is an Exception to these Rules; for Note.
you will see in the Example, that the first Word Y and the seventh Word
Lydwbxkl are are writ by the same Alphabet, but not the seventh from that, viz.
puqf, nor the seventh from oa, viz. kedc, etc. and the reason, is, because the
Letter P is twice repeated in the Words of the Key. So that when you find this
happen in decyphering, leave such Words, and go to the next, until you find the
true number of Letters that make up the Key by the former Rule; and then this
difficulty becomes a help in the Operation, etc.

Example in the Letters.

Y ox oqpvtv yw oqnc yvg Xdzorgpl
kgsn mmaq hhwc pbo qcpw saib
xgycpl xx df eqgw oycp, zigxyy gq.
yxs pwgkq hgimhvtl: mnvy.
SOLUTION.
To decypher this last kind of Secret Writing, you must begin with
Suppositions; and

1. Extracting out of it the Monosyllables, etc. you may suppose all the Words
in it of three Letters successively to stand for the, or and, etc. and you may
prove your several Suppositions thus: viz. 1. Mark down the Powers supposed. 2.
Observe in what Lines of your Counter-Table the Letters expressed in the Cipher
are opposed to them in a perpendicular Line. 3. Observe the first Letters of
those Lines, and you will soon find whether they can be joined to make up a
part of the Key: e. g. Let yvg in the first Line of the Example be supposed,
the, y, is opposite to t in line fifth, beginning with E; h to v line thirteen,
beginning N; and e to g line third, beginning C. So that having found enc in
the beginning of these several lines, it is probably some part of the Key.

2. You may proceed in the same manner to other Monosyllables, etc. in any part
of the Epistle; or you may consider what Letters can follow enc, and thus e
being most probable, look in that Line of your Table beginning with E, for x
the following Letter in the Cipher, and its opposite Letter in the upper Line,
which is S; and afterward you may go on with probable Suppositions, either
from the Letters found in the Key or in the Writing.

Perhaps these Methods will not so readily give you the entire Key, yet they
are good helps.

You may otherways begin your Suppositions with the first Letters in the
Writing; and for that end, I have hereunto added, in an alphabetical Order, the
Letters that can be joined together to begin Words.

And from all together, you may in a short time find out the number of Letters
in the Key; and here that is of as much use as in the other ways of writing by
the Key Character, since thereby you have the several Returns of each Alphabet.
Now follows the Table.

A Beginning a Word is regularly followed by most of the Letters. B Beginning a
Word is regularly followed by a, c, i, l, o, r, u, y. C Beginning a Word is
regularly followed by a, e, h, i, l, o, r, u. D Beginning a Word is regularly
followed by a, e, i, o, r, u. E Beginning a Word is regularly followed by most
of the Letters. F Beginning a Word is regularly followed by a, e, i, l, o, r,
u, and sometimes y. G Beginning a Word is regularly followed by a, e, h, i, l,
n, o, r, u, y. H Beginning a Word is regularly followed by Vowels only. I
Beginning a Word is regularly followed by most of the Letters. K Beginning a
Word is regularly followed by a, e, i, n. L Beginning a Word is regularly
followed by Vowels only. M Beginning a Word is regularly followed by Vowels
only. N Beginning a Word is regularly followed by Vowels only. O Beginning a
Word is regularly followed by most of the Letters. P Beginning a Word is
regularly followed by a, e, h, i, l, o, r, s, sometimes t, u, y. Q Beginning a
Word is regularly followed by only by u, and QU by a, e, i, o, R Beginning a
Word is regularly followed by a, e, sometimes h, i, o, u, y. S Beginning a Word
is regularly followed by a, c, e, h, i, k, l, m, n, o, p, q, t, u, w, y. T
Beginning a Word is regularly followed by a, e, h, i, o, r, u, w, y. U
Beginning a Word is regularly followed by sometimes d, and g, l, m, n, p,
sometimes r, s, t, x. V Beginning a Word is regularly followed by Vowels only.
W Beginning a Word is regularly followed by a, e, h, i, o, r, y. X Beginning a
Word is regularly followed by sometimes a, or e. Y Beginning a Word is
regularly followed by e, sometimes i, o. Z Beginning a Word is regularly
followed by e, sometimes o.
Here I have only insert the Letters of the Alphabet on the left hand, and such
Letters, as can immediately follow any of them, beginning a Word opposite to it.

It had been the least part of the Trouble of this Undertaking, to have
contrived Tables for Monosyllables, Terminations, etc. and that in most
Languages; but I rather feared a Censure, than hoped for Thanks from the
Ingenious, to crowd Tables into this small Tract: and if it be reputed a
Defect, it is such an one that a very ordinary Capacity may supply by help of
Dictionaries only.

But to return to the method of Secret Information in hand, it is easily
discernable from any other. e.g.

When the Alphabet is changed for every Word or Letter, the Frequency of the
Letters will not agree with that in an Epistle writ in plain Cipher, where one
Character always expresses the same power: For, as to this last, you shall but
rarely find two or three Characters of the same frequency; but by a continual
altering of the Alphabet you shall have a great many, e. g. In the last Example
you have no less than seven different Letters twice repeated, viz. a, b, d, k,
s, t, z, three Letters thrice repeated, two Letters four times repeated, three
Letters five times repeated, three Letters seven times repeated, and two
Letters nine times repeated.

Again, in one line of an Epistle where the Alphabets are continually altered,
you shall have more differing Characters than in two where one Alphabet is only
used in the whole Writing. e. g. In the Example you have the complete number of
the Alphabet, whereas in the Writing ( viz. I am forced to keep the Soldiers
upon hard Duty and hard Diet:
Supply us, or they will revolt to
the Enemy speedily. Have.)
there are wanting, b, g, q, x, z.

We have already observed, that this method of Cryptography requires too much
time to be put in practice: but besides, it is not only unpracticable upon that
score, for by the least mistake in Writing, it is so confounded, that the
Confederate with his Key shall never set it in order again; and withal, it is
liable to suspicion: so that it has none of those things required in Secret
Writing, except that there is difficulty in decyphering it; and that not
insuperable, as is made apparent.

7. Of communicating any Secret Intention with the ordinary Letters, by help of
a few Figures.
The following way of Secret Writing is proposed by Schottus, Schott. Mag.
Universe. part 4. page 65, 66, etc.
who tells us, that he had it of Count Gronsfeld: It would seem to frustrate
the Rules for decyphering already mentioned, and therefore have I insert it.
The Method is this:

1. The Confederates dispose the Letters of the Alphabet in a Line or Circle,
over which they place any number of Figures, v. g. 436. in this manner.

436
a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z.
2. They write their Secret Intentions on a Paper apart, and over the tops of
the Letters they place the number of Figures agreed on. Let the Words be these.

The Governor of the City is beyond Corruption, so that we may conclude there
is nothing of Bribery will serve the turn.

Which Words, according to the Example, will stand thus: 436 436443643 64 364
3643 64 364364
The Governor of the City is beyond
3643643643 64 3643 64 364 36436436
Corruption, so that we may conclude
43643 64 3643643 64 36436436 4364
there is nothing of Briberie will
36436 436 4364
serve the turn.


3. Observe what Figure stands over the first Letter of the Writing, (viz. T)
which is 4. and counting forward as many Letters, write down the fourth, viz.
x; again see what Figure is over the second Letter (v. g. h.) which Figure is
3; then counting three Letters from h, the third is k, next write down the
sixth Letter from e, which is also k; and so they proceed, always observing the
Letters in the Writing to be secretly communicate, and the Figures above it,
until they come to the end of the Epistle. The Example being finished will
stand thus:

xkk kqahtsrt ti wnh eoxa ow dkbqsg etvtasworp yr wndw bh ofb etqeqyfk xkkvg ow
ptxkoqi ti dxmdkvlk zlqo vkvxk xkk xxxq.

SOLUTION.
To decypher this kind of Secret Writing, you may,

1. Transcribe the Cipher out of the Epistle, keeping the lines and letters at
such a distance one from another, that each letter may admit of a Figure
distinctly above it.

2. Endeavor to find the number of Figures in the Key which must be enquired
into by several Suppositions.

3. The number of Figures being supposed, E. g. 3. take any three Figures, v.
g. 123. and place them above the tops of the Letters in Cipher in this order.

123 12312312 31 231 2312 31 231231
xkk kqahtsrt ti wnh eoxa ow dkbqsg
2312312312 31 2312 31 231 23123123
etvtasworp yr wndwbh ofb etqeqyfk
12312 31 2312312 31 23123123 1231
xkkvg ow ptxkoqi ti dxmdkvlk zlqo
23123 123 1231
vkvxk xkk xxxq.
4. Observe where the same Character and the same Figure happen to fall
together, and you will find that thus it always expresses the same Power as in
the Example; K with 3 placed above it has the Power of E through the whole
Writing; X with 1 upon the top of it signifies H, etc. But,

5. The same Letter when its Figure is altered cannot express the same Power,
e.g. Q with 1. expresses N; but Q with 2 signifies O, and Q with 3 L, etc.

6. One and the same Letter will be expressed by different Characters, e.g. Q
with 2, R with 1, and T with 3, express severally O in the Writing.

7. Two Letters of the same power cannot be joined together in the same
Character; and consequently, where you find any Character double in a Writing
of this nature, it expresses different Powers.

8. Having made these or the like general Remarks, you may proceed to discover
particular Syllables or Words as in the preceding Paragraphs; and having one,
you will find with it the true numbers that are contained in the Key, at least
some of them, which will discover the rest.

It is almost superfluous to add, That in your several Operations you must
count the Letters backwards, since I have told you, that regularly the Cipher
is writ forwards: but because the Cipher may be otherways contrived, you may
try both ways, etc.

8. Of Secret Writing by Points, Lines, etc.
The Secrecy in an Epistle may consist in Points, Lines, etc. which are
distinguishable one from another by their place, not their figure; all of the
same Situation (whatever the nature of the Figure be) expressing the same
Character. v. g. Suppose the Paper to be writ upon, be secretly divided into
twenty four equal parts, according to the breadth of a plate upon which the
Letters are described; and then by Application of this to the Epistle, it is
easy to conceive the way of writing it. This is published in the Secret and
Swift Messenger, p. 92.

SOLUTION.
This contains no great nor new Intricacy; for you may extract the Points, etc.
that fall in the first perpendicular Line in any Character, and the Points that
are in the next perpendicular line by a differing Character, and those Points
in the third line by a third Character; and so for all the rest, until you come
to an end or rather the side of the Epistle, toward the right hand; and then
it is resolvable by the common Rules.

Having now removed the most material Difficulties under this Section, I
proceed to

SECT. 2. Of Secret Writing, by altering the Places of the Letters, where the
Powers remain the same.
BIshop Wilkins observes, Sec. and Swift Mes. p. 88.
That the Difference of Characters in the World, is part of the General Curse
upon their once one Tongue; and from the Parity of Reason we may infer, that
the different methods of writing those Characters is so too.

The Oriental Languages, Hebrew, Chaldaick, Samaritan, Syriack, Arabic,
Persian, Coptick, etc. are writ from the right hand to the left, only the
Ethiopick and Armenian proceed from the left to the right hand.

As also do all the Occidental Languages, Greek, Latin, French, Spanish,
Italian, German, English, Sclavonick, etc.

At first the Greeks writ from the left to the right hand, and again from the
right to the left, forward and backward: Hence Literas exarare signifies to
Write, a Metaphor taken from Plowing of Ground.

Thus the sense of an Epistle in a known Language might be perplexed, if the
writing should be contrived after the method of writing some Foreign Tongue.
And we have this Example from the Secret and Swift Messenger.

T i l w e l d f r e h t l s s o o t e i e s e u h h u u s l p h n t a o t o h
p e t c s l t t h a p s o r g l e h t n u t d e n n l e i d s i e a o o b s w s
y l c s m t a i e p d e n e a b e e g e e

Here the Rows are put instead of the Lines: And if you begin at the first
Letter toward the left hand, and read down that Row of Letters, then read the
next upward, and the following down again, and so to the end, you will find
these Words:

The Pestilence does still increase amongst us; we shall not be able to hold
out the Siege without fresh and speedy Supply.

This is said to be the ordinary way of writing amongst the Inhabitants of the
Island T^probane, China, and Japan.

This manner of Secret Writing is but slenderly touched by any Author I have
seen on that Subject: and had it not gotten greater Perfection by private
Practice than open Instructions, I had saved the Reader and my sel^ the Trouble
of exposing it to the Public.

1. Of the Combination of three or more Letters.
The first remarkable Improvement I find of this kind of Cryptography by
altering the places of Letters, is by the regular Combination of three, four,
or more Letters: I had it of a Gentleman, who (I am fully satisfied) would put
it to no bad use; but since it may fall into bad hands, I have his leave to
provide against its harm. And that we may proceed regularly therein, it is
necessary, first to enquire, How many several ways any given number of Letters
may be combined? (i. e.) How many different Positions they can regularly admit
of. And for that end I have hereunto subjoyned the following Table.

Table of Combinations
Letters Several ways 1 May be combined 1 2 2 3 6 4 24 5 120 6 720 7 5040 8
40320 9 362880 10 3628800 11 39916800 12 479001600 etc.

Construction of the Table.
1. At the left hand of your Table stands a Rank of Figures expressing the
number of Letters to be combined, increasing in an Arithmetical proportion from
Unity, or 1. and by the common excess of 1, or Unity.

2. To the right hand of these stands the number of Combinations, or several
ways they can be combined.

3. As for 1, being it has but one Position, I set 1 opposite to it in the Rank
of Combinations.

4. I multiply 1, in the Column of Combinations, by two, in the Column of
Letters, and set the Product, viz. 2, opposite to it, which shows how often two
Letters or Things can be combined, viz. two times.

5. I multiply 2 in the Row of Combinations, by 3 in the Column of Letters; and
over against it I set 6 the Product, which shows that three Letters have six
regular Positions or Combinations.

6. I multiply 6, the last number of Combinations, by four, the number of
Letters, marking down 24 the Product, as the Table. And thus I proceed,
multiplying each last product by the next superior number of Letters, and
writing the several Products against their respective Multipliers; and these
Products show how many Positions their opposite number of Letters have, as 5
have 120 several Positions, 6 admits of 720, etc.

Demonstration.
1. It is manifest, that one Letter or Thing has but one Position, and two
Letters have twice the Position of 1, viz. once before and after it. e. g. A B,
B A.

2. From the Combination of two Letters we find that of 3, for the new Letter
added is three times applicable to the former Positions, viz. in the beginning,
middle, and end, e. g. the Letter C being joined with A B, the first
combination may be C A B, and the second CBA. Again put C in the middle, and it
yields other two differences, viz. ACB, BCA. And when C is put in the last
place, you have a fifth and sixth Difference, viz. ABC, BAC.

3. From the Combination of three Letters arises that of four Letters; viz.
ABCD: for D can be four several times applied to each of the former six
Differences; e. g. in the first, second, third, and fourth or last place.

4. From the twenty four Combinations arising from four Letters, you have that
of 5; e. g. if the Letter E be added, it is five times applicable to each of
the former twenty four regular Positions: and so for any other Number in
infinitum.

I have said Regular Positions, because any number of letters or things may be
irregularly varied in their Positions very much above this Order; as for
Example, A B is capable of these irregular Variations, AA, AB, BA, BB; and at
this rate, three Letters have no less than 27 Positions in all, viz. six
regular (as before) and twenty one irregular Positions. But of this when we
come to treat of Secret Writing by more Characters than are usually required to
the framing of Words.

2. A new Method how to Write Secretly by the Art of Combinations.
1. To write Secretly by the method proposed, a certain number of Letters are
combined to lock and unlock the Epistle. The differences of writing down the
Positions, as, which shall be first, which second, which third, etc. in order,
may be varied to a vast number; e. g. three Letters ABC, having six regular
ways of Combination; these six Positions are capable of 720 several Orders, for
the Rows may be combined amongst themselves, the same way as Letters. Therefore,

2. The Order of the Rows is agreed upon at parting.

3. The number of Letters combined, which is the Key, may be expressed in the
Epistle by some Mathematical Figure, as for three Letters, for 4, etc. or by
some other private Mark.

4. They frame a Rectangular Table of as many Columns as there are Letters
combined.

5. The Letters so combined, are placed in their natural order upon the top of
the Table.

6. Having determined of how many lines the Table shall consist, the order of
the Combinations agreed upon is set down in a Row, in the first Column toward
the left hand; as you may see in the following Table.

7. The Table being thus prepared for Writing, they observe the order of the
Combinations, and write according to its Direction.

8. When they have placed one Letter in every Column of all the lines, they
begin a new, and so go on until the Writing be finished.

9. And lastly, they take the letters out of the Table according to their
Partitions, as so many barbarous Words, upon a Paper apart, and send it to the
Confident.

Example.
Let the Key for the number of Letters combined, be a Triangle; and the Subject
of the Writing,

We are big with Expectation to know the Success you have had, whether the Arms
you have undertaken for will be ready upon Occasion. Let your next be writ by
the square Key.

From of the Table for Writing.
Order of Positions A B C 1 CBA a t s a s k d e t e c e h m a a l i y w e h e r
t e n r e 2 CAB e t c w o n u y y b i c h u f p o t r a u d y e y t b 3 ACB j o
e e h o o u h w t s v w o n s g n s t a r n r e 4 BCA h n u t n l a t a i o y e
e i c e q t k o r u l c x u 5 BAC x w a e e e i e e e o h h d b s b r p t v a r
r o w k

A further Explication of this Table.
CBA, being the first Position, (W) the first letter in the Writing is placed
under C in the last Column, and E, being the second letter, is put under B in
the next Column, and A the third letter, under A.

CAB, being the second Position, the fourth Letter in the Writing, r, falls in
the second line under C, the fifth Letter, e, under A, and the sixth, b, under
B in its Column, all in the same line.

ACB. being the third Position, the seventh letter in the Epistle, i, is put
under A in the third line, the eighth letter g, under C, and the ninth letter
w, in the Column B.

And so they go through the writing, always beginning again, when they are at
the end of the Table; so long as there is any thing to write.

The writing taken out of the Table will stand thus:

The terminal Letters may be so marked to prevent Confusion.

I have insisted the more upon this Method, because the manner of Combining,
and the way of Writing by such Combining, and the way of Writing by such
Combinations being once perfectly understood, the Rules for Decyphering may be
the more succinct, and the more easily comprehended.

SOLUTION.
1. If the Figure of the Key be prefixed to the Epistle, expressing the number
of Letters combined, take as many Letters out of the first places of seeming
Words in the Epistle, as shall be equal to that number so expressed; and you may
soon find out their true Order without the trouble of a new Combination, tho
the trouble of combining be not so very great, as the discovery of a
treasonable Design may be of Importance to the Public.

Thus in the Example given, you have (which being supposed to show that three
letters are combined) extract the three first letters from the three first
seeming words of the Epistle, viz. a e. w, here at first View you may perceive
the Order. Then taking out the next three Letters, e. b r, you have a for the
first letter of the word from the first line, and e for the last letter; and
then you are only to consider whether b or r is the middle Letter, which is
easily determined; so b (being lest out there) must be the first Letter of the
next word: Thus you may proceed; for it is needless to enlarge in a Case so
plain.

2. If there be no Key given, take the number of Partitions of seeming words in
the Epistle, and find out their several Divisors, which may be performed by the
following Rules.

How to find out the equal Divisors of any Number.
1. Divide the Number given by some Prime Number (i. e.) such a Number that
cannot be divided, but by it self, or Unity; and the Quotient by some or other
prime Number, and the last Quotient again by a prime Number; and so go on until
the last Quotient of all be one; and thus you shall find a certain Number of
prime Divisors.

2. Make a rectangular Table that shall consist of as many Columns as you have
prime Divisors, which you must place one after another at the Tops of the
Columns; and by help of them you will find all the rest of the Divisors, viz.

By multiplying the first prime Divisor toward the left hand of the Table by
the second, and writing the Product under the second. Next, By the third prime
Divisor, multiplying all the Figures in the Table toward the left Hand,
setting the several Products in the third Column: And so forth, throughout all
the prime Divisors; but with this Caution, That one Product be not written
twice. And in end, the several Numbers in your Table will be all the Aliquot
Parts, or just Divisors of the given Number.

Example to find out all the Divisors in 450.
450 225 75 25 5 1 2 3 3 5 5

The first Line contains the first Dividend, and the respective Quotients; the
lowest line is the several prime Divisors.

Now 450, the Number given, being divided by 2, a prime Divisor, the Quotient
is 225, which being divided by 3, you have 75 for a new Quotient; and that
again divided by 3, you have 25 for another Quotient. This last divided by 5,
gives 5, which being a prime Number, you have 1, or Unity in the last Quotient
of all: So that your prime Divisors are, 2, 3, 3, 5 5, all which set down in
the Tops of the Columns, and multiplying them according to the Rule given, the
Operation will stand thus.

2 3 3 5 5 6 9 10 25 18 15 50 30 75 45 150 90 225 450

All the Divisors of 450, are 2, 3, 5, 6, 9, 10, 15, 18, 25, 30, 45, 50, 75,
90, 150, 225; and one of them (supposing the Epistle to have consisted of 450
seeming words) should have been the number of Letters combined for the Key: For
the number of seeming words in such an Epistle, is equal to the Rectangle made
of the Figure of the Key, or number of lines; and consequently the Figure of
the Key, or number of Letters combined, is some aliquot part, or equal Divisor
of the number of seeming words.

But to save all trouble in search of the Key, you may take out a certain
number of letters out of the first places of the seeming words: Write them down
in a line; next, take just as many Letters out of the second places of the same
Partitions, and then the Letters out of the third, fourth, fifth places, etc.
placing them directly one under another in order; or rather for Dispatch, take
out the seeming words, and write them down in Rows, beginning at the first, and
then proceed to the second, third, fourth, fifth, etc. until you have gone
through them; and if the Number be too great, take as many as you think fit at
a time, placing all the Dots you find above the Heads of the letters at their
sides. E. g. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 1. A e. w e. b r i w g. h. i t
x e p 2. t c e t i a o t n. n o. k w. o t 3. s e. h c c u e s. s u. y o a h v
4. a h e. w h d. e h t t e r. e. h a 5. s. m r o u. y h v a n e. u e d r 6. k a
t n. f e o w r. l. i l e. b r 7. d a e u p y. o o n. a c c i s o 8. e l n. y o
t. u n r. t. e x e. b w 9. t. i r y. t b h s e. a q u e. r k 10. -- y. e -- --
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --

I have marked the Lines and Rows with Figures for their more easy distinction.

Having brought the Writing into this Order;

1. Search in the several Lines for some of the Particles of that Language you
shall suppose the Epistle to have been writ in: If in English, make
Suppositions, E. g. for such little words, as, the, that, for, of, to, and,
etc. and the like, without some of which no man can well express Business of
any moment.

2. Having supposed in any of the Lines for some one of those mentioned, or the
like Particles, you may prove the Truth of your Supposition, by taking out the
opposite Letters of all the other Lines: And if they do not make up Words, or
Syllables, or produce such Letters as can probably follow one another in that
Order, your first Supposition is false, and you must suppose anew.

3. Having by fresh Suppositions found some usual Word: And the letters of the
other lines (in the same Order) agreeing, the Words or Syllables arising from
them, will direct you to some new Row that goes before or after in the true
Order: And thus you may proceed till you have found out the whole Writing,
which by this time will be no great difficulty.

Example.
In the sixth line you have f once, o once, and r twice; so that probably
amongst these Letters you may find the Word for; and upon Trial, the
Supposition is proved by the other lines, e. g. Line 6. by lines 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
7, 8, 9.

Rows 5 7 9 6. f o r. 1. b i g. 2. i o n. 3. c e s 4. h e t 5. u. h a 7. p o n.
8. o u r. 9. t h e.

Here in the fifth line, you find u a terminating Letter, which must then have
before it the Vowel o, as in you, or e, as in Lieu: And in this line you have
o, once, and e, twice; so that in three Suppositions at most, you shall have
the preceding Row in its natural order, thus supposing it, o, in the fourth
Row that joins the Vowel u, the Writing will stand thus; 4. 5. 7. 9. 1 e. b i
g. 2 t i o n. 3 c c e s 4 w h e t 5 o u. h a 6 n. f o r 7 u p o n. 8 y o u r. 9
y t h e.

Now having ou, it is most probable that y is wanting to join with it; which
standing in the sixth Row of the Line, write down that Row in order thus; 6. 4.
5. 7. 9. 1 r e. b i g 2 a t i o n. 3 u c c e s 4 d. w h e t 5 y o u. h a 6 e n.
f o r 7 y. u p o n 8 t. y o u r 9 b y. t h e.

And so you may go on until you get through the whole Writing; which will in
end stand thus; W e. a r e. b i g. w i t h. e x p e c t a t i o n. t o k n o w.
t h e. s u c c e s s. y o u. h a v e. h a d. W h e t h e r. t h e. A r m s. y o
u. h a v e. u n d e r t a k e n. f o r. w i l l. b e. r e a d y. u p o n. o c c
a s i o n. L e t. y o u r. n e x t. b e. W r i t. b y. t h e. s q u a r e. K e
y.

There are sometimes other helps obvious to discover the sense of an Epistle
obscured by this Invention, e: g: you see only two Letters falling in the last
Line of the Example, whereby I not only conclude that the Epistle ends with
them, but may also infer from the Supposition of a Regular procedure in Writing
it, that the Letter began at some of the seeming Words, that composed those two
Rows, viz. Ecehmaaliy, or wehertenre: The reason is evident, etc.

This Method of Secret writing is at first sight distinguishable from any
other, Note.
only by observing the equality in the Division of its Letters.

There are great variety of Inventions of this kind more easy to the
confederates. Whereby they only write their secret intentions in a
Parallelogram or other Mathematical figure, and confound the sense, by the
Method of extracting it, I shall inquire into a few.

3. Of Secret writing by help of a Parallelogram, where the Letters are
extracted out of that figure Diagonally.
To perform this a Man needs only form a Parallelogram or Table, and without
any Combination or other obscurity in the writing, insert his secret intentions
therein; e: g: let the sense of the Epistle be,

I suppose that things are so forward by your diligence that we may adventure
at all, once next week. Meet me toward ten to morrow's night at the old place.

It is first insert in the Table thus. I. s u p p o s e. t h a t. t h i n g s.
a r e. s o. f o r w a r d. b y. y o u r. d i l i g e n c e. t h a t. w e. m a
y. a d v e n t u r e. a t. a l l. o n c e. n e x t. w e e k. m e e t. m e. t o
w a r d s. t e n. t o. m o r r o w s. n i g h t. a t. t h e. o l d. p l a c e.
b x y f q.

Here the last five Letters b, x, y, f, q, are of no use to fill up the void
Places in the Table.

The first Method I have observed in practice, of obscuring the meaning of such
an Epistle, is by Copying it out of the Table Diagonally, upon a Paper apart
(i. e.) by supposed Lines extending from the second Letter in the first Row
toward the left Hand, to the second of those in the uppermost Line, and from
the third Letter in that Row to the third in the upper Line; next from the
Letters of the last Line, to those in the upper Line that remain, and then to
the last Row toward the right Hand, etc. Diagonal is a Mathematical term, from
(...), and (...) an Angle or Corner.

Example.
They first write down I. beginning at the upper Corner of the Parallelogram,
next they take the other two Letters that are next in order to it, viz. g s,
then they extract the next three in order, viz. y s u. And so they go on until
they come to the last Corner, viz. q. The whole Writing being extracted in this
manner, will stand thus.

I. g s y s. u t. o a p t. w u r p m a e. r. e. o b h t e a x t. e k. y a n f
t. q.

Rosolution.
For Resolution of this and the like manner of Secret Writing, the only
difficulty is, to find out the number of the Lines and the number of Rows. And
here you may observe that the number of Letters in the Epistle is equal to the
Rectangle made of the Number of Lines and Rows, so that if you take the
Divisors or Aliquot parts of the number of Letters, you may find out the number
of Lines and Rows by a few suppositions and consequently the involved meaning.

Nay you may soon discover any Writing of this Nature, by reducing the Letters
of the Epistle into Diagonal Lines, as if you had found out its true Figure. e:
g.

First you may mark down I. the first Letter in the Writing by it self, I. I. s
g I. s u g s. y
as in the Margin. Next write the two following Letters, g s by it thus, then
to these join the three following Letters y s. u thus, afterward the following
four Letters t o a p thus, and so of the following five Letters, I. s u p g s.
a y o t.
etc. You will perceive when Words or Syllables appear, and withal if you
observe the Cohaesion of Words or Letters, between the end of the first Line,
and the beginning of the second, you will find out where these two Lines join
in the sense, and consequently where the first line ends, thus you shall have
the number of Rows, by which if you divide the whole Letters, the Quotient
gives you the number of Lines, etc.

This way of Decyphering may seem to be deluded two ways.

1. By beginning (when they Copy the Epistle out of the Table) at some of the
other Angles.

2. By inserting Nulls before the Epistle.

As to the first, if they begin at the lower Angle toward the left Hand, the
Words will discover themselves as before. Only the order of the Lines will be
reversed in the Operation, viz. The first Line, last in the true order, etc. 2.
If they begin at the upper Angle of the Parallelogram toward the right Hand,
the Lines will be in their true order, but the Writing must be read backwards.
3. If at the lower Angle toward the right Hand, the order of Lines will be
reversed and the Writing must also be read backwards. This holds by the
ordinary Operation, but you may frame your Figure for Discovery, according to
these three Suppositions, viz. Beginning it at any Corner, etc. Yet I judge the
ordinary Operation will give the speediest Resolution.

Note, That by the last Supposition, viz. By beginning at the lower Corner
toward the right Hand. You are not to expect Words or Syllables in the
beginning of the first Line, by your Operation, being it is last in the true
order, and Mutes, perhaps, may be insert to fill up the void places in the
Figure, so that you may observe the other Lines.

As to the second by inserting Nulls before the Epistle, they may in process of
time be discovered thus;

When upon Trial, you find the Writing in the Epistle will make nothing of
sense, lay aside the first Letter, and make a new Supposition with those
remaining, if nothing yet appear, lay aside two Letters and proceed as before,
then leave out three, four, etc. until you perceive Words, etc. But to leave
this.

4. Of Argile 's Method for confounding the sense of an Epistle by altering the
places of the Words.
As by changing the places of Letters, so by altering the Natural Order of the
Words, the sense of an Epistle may be obscured. Yet since both are Decypherable
by the very same Rules, we shall not make any destinction; but take either as
they come to Hand. And therefore have I subjoyned this Method of the late Earl
of Argile's to the preceding Paragraph, which is in effect but a new
alteration in Copying out the Writing from the Table, in which it was at first
contrived. Perhaps he had in his Eye, that way of Writing we have observed
before, to proceed from the top to the bottom, and then upwards again, etc.
Wherein the Rows are instead of Lines, and said to be usual in China, Taprobane
and Japan.

Of this recent instance we have the following account in the Discoveries made
in Scotland. P. 18.
The words in the long Letter were so Ordered that 254 words in course were
interposed betwixt the first and second word in sense, and as many between the
third and fourth, and so forth to the last word of the Letter. Then beginning
with the second word, there were 252 words between that and the next in sense,
and so forth till they came to the penult word; Again beginning with the third
word of the Letter, bewixt which and the next in sense intervened only 250
words, and so forward to the end. In the short Letter 62 words were interposed
betwixt the first and second, and so to proceed as in the other, etc. The
reason of this inequality was his manner of transcribing his Missives, from
that Parallelogram, he contrived them in at first; for having distributed them
into a certain number of Columns and Lines (which numbers were subjoyned to the
end of the writing for a Key: E: g: there rest just 32 l. 8 s. (i. e.) 32 Lines
8 Columns, Steganog. p. 100.
The Total sum is 128 Gild. 8 st. etc. A piece of Policy taught by Schottus in
his Schola Steganographica.) He begins at the Head of the first Column, and
proceeds to the Foot of it, Account of Discoveries in Scot. ibid.
th^n beginning at the bottom of the 2d Column he rises to the Head thereof,
thereafter begins at the top of the third Column, etc.

We need not go far for an Example.
I know not the grounds our Friends have gone upon which has occasioned them
to offer so little Money as I hear neither know I what assistance they do
intend to give and till I know both I will neither refuse my Service nor do so
much as object against any thing is resolved till I first hear what Mr Red or
any other you send shall say only in the mean time I resolve to let you know as
much of the grounds I go on as is possible at this distance and in this way I
did truly in my proposition mention the very least sum I thought could do our
business effectually not half of what I would have thought requisite in an
other juncture, etc.

The Words are Argile's, and after his way of obscuring them, they will stand
thus.

I gone so I and refuse object first you time much is way the our would have
business very I possible of I send hear against my till what little upon know
not which Money assistance I service any what shall resolve the at did least
effectually thought requisite not sum truly this grounds to say Mr thing nor
know they as has the grounds occasioned I do both do is Red only let I
distance in I half in an of thought my and go you in or resolved so I intend
hear them our Friends to neither to will much till any the know on in
proposition could what other juncture I do mention this as as mean other I as
neither give know offer have.

SOLUTION.
Here the great difficulty is the same, as in that of the preceding Method
concerning the number of Lines and Columns, for these two Numbers being given,
as in Argile's Letters; or found out by the Rules already delivered. There
remains nothing, but to reduce the writing in the Epistle to such a form as you
suppose it to have been writ in at first.

Now as to the Example, we shall grant that no intelligible Key is given;
however the number of Words being 128, and supposing it to be equal to the
rectangle made of the number of Lines and Columns, you may take it is several
equal Divisors or Aliquot parts, which are 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, which you may
set down reversed one to another thus; 2 64 4 32 8 16 16 8 32 4 64 2

Some of these number is that of Lines, and the number opposite to it (being
its equal Divisor, or Dividend, as it falls greater or lesser) is the number of
Columns, and if you make Trial by all, you cannot miss of your aim.

But supposing Nulls were by compact joined in with such an Epistle. Its equal
parts or Divisors are by that means altogether obscured.

To removed this difficulty, (besides what has been said concerning the former
Method) I shall further add, that you may proceed by Suppositions at random, as
to the number of Lines or Columns beginning very low as at two or three for
Security, or going first through what is most probable for Expedition. When you
have the true number of Lines, if their order be perplexed (which may happen by
Nulls) it is true the meaning will be as intricate as ever, yet if you make a
different position for each supposed Line, abating always one Letter in every
new Position, you shall in some of those have the sense of the Epistle
unmasqued, whatever the number or places of these Mutes shall be, the
Demonstration is obvious. Take this Example.

The whole design is laid open take your measures as the knowledge of this
shall direct you fare you well

Suppose there were Nulls insert in the Table, where you see the Words marked
by a different Character thus; The whole you design is laid open take his your
measures as the knowledge kindred of this shall direct you my fare you well

Nay to render the Writing more intricate after it is extracted, let new Mutes
be added. e. g. Affection Love Passion Mystical Honor the open the direct you
knowledge take whole you his kindred my fare of your design is measures this
you well shall as lady Father Sister Pounds etc.

Now this Epistle once supposed to consist of 4 Lines the first Position, with
all the Words will be false. e. g. Affection the direct kindred my this as laid
Love open you his fare measures shall Father Passion the knowledge you of is
well Sister Mystical Honor take whole your design you Pounds

But at the second Position abating one word you shall have those added Nulls
all by themselves in this order, viz. Love direct you my fare you well Passion
the knowledge kindred of this shall Pounds Mystical open take his your measures
as Sister Honor the whole you design is laid Father

Here the order of the Lines is inverted, which is occasioned because the Nulls
or nonsignificant Words in the beginning make an odd Row, so that the second
Row being first in sense, you proceed from the bottom upwards, whereas had it
likeways been first in the Writing you should have begun at the top, etc.

4. The former Method of Secret Writing rendered more intricate.
This way of Secret Information may be yet further obscured by confounding the
order of Columns according to compact, when they extract the writing out of the
Table.

Example in Letters.
The Example in 3. is sufficient to illustrate any new difficulty arising from
this.

5 11 3 16 1 8 6 12 2 13 4 15 7 10 14 9 1 I. s u p p o s e. t h a t. t h i n 2
g s. a r e. s o. f o r w a r d. b y. 3 y o u r. d i l i g e n c e. t h a 4 t. w
e. m a y. a d v e n t u r e. a. 5 t. a l l. o n c e. n e x t. w e e k. 6 m e e
t. m e. t o w a r d s. t e n. 7 t o. m o r r o w s. n i g h t. a t. 8 t h e. o
l d. p l a c e. b x y f q.

You see the order is this, 5, 11, 3, 16, 1, 8, 6, 12, 2, 13, 4, 15, 7, 10, 14,
9. When they Copy it out of the Table, they begin at the top of the Row at
number 1, and so proceed successively to Numbers, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc. The Row of
Letters, which is first in order, is 5th by compact, those that stand in the
second Row, are 11th in the Order of extracting the Writing, etc. thus; p e. d
a o m r l t o g v n w s. a u a u e. l e m e. a w n n x r i e. I. g y t. t. m t
t s o. l a c t o p t r e. u w s. h x o s i y. n e. r d. n y. a a k. n. t. q h
d. t r e t t. y s s. o w a e o. h e. f i d e. o w l h r e c e a n c i b h e. e
e a f t. a c t t. d g b p r r. m l. t. o o.

SOLUTION.
What is already proposed for finding out the number of Lines and Rows, and for
Separating the Mutes from significant Letters, will reach this Method; and what
is said in the Solution of 2. for reducing the Rows into their Natural Order,
will hold good her likewise. e. g.

When after (perhaps) several false Suppositions as to the number of Lines, you
have at last supposed the Table of the Epistle to consist of 8 Lines, tho there
were 100 Nulls in the Writing, in one of eight Positions you shall have them a
part, as in the former instance and the Writing in the following order.

p t u a I. s t o n h s e. h i t. p e. o a w g o. r s y. d. s. f r b a r d g u
n y l e. i. a t o i e h c r. a v e. n t. a u y. a r w d e e. t m. o n l x t. c
w n k. e a e. e e t. l. m w e r m t s. e. n. t e o a e d t. r s. m i t o h r t.
t. o. w n a g o l a e. e. t p x d. q y h l c f b o. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
13 14 15 16

Now in the first Line you find t thrice, b twice, a once, and e once, and
probably amongst these Letters you may have the Word the or that, upon Trial
you will find t in the second Row, h in the 13th, a in the 4th, and t in the
15th Row to favor your Supposition, by the agreement of the other Lines.

And having come this length you may proceed backwards or forwards, as the
imperfect words shall best direct you. e. g. 2. 13. 4. 15. t h a t. o r w a g e
n c v e n t n e x t. w a r d s. n i g a c e. b.

Note. In this Method if you have once the true number of Lines,
notwithstanding nonsignificants be added you will in the Operation perceive
Words and Syllables appear in one half of the Lines at least, even though their
order be perplexed.

There are other Observations, which for brevity I leave to the Ingenious
Readers perusal of the Example given in its several positions.

Upon the whole it is observable. 1. That this kind of Cryptography by changing
the places of the Letters or Words (however contrived) will still be liable to
suspicion.

2. You may certainly distinguish it from any other kind of Secret Writing, by
the frequency of the Letters, e. g. If the Vowels be often used, etc. Or in
short, if the Letters have their usual frequency as in plain Writing.

3. You may probably judge of the Language it is writ in, either from the
frequency of the Letters, or by some of the Letters themselves: e. g. w is only
used in English, Dutch, or some branch of the Teutonick, k is never used in
Latin, etc. nor q frequently in English: And if the Terminal Letters be given,
you may with much certainty find out the Language.

In these last remarks there must be an exception for proper Names, and I hope
it is enough to have mentioned it. My method leads me next to treat

SECT. 3. Of secret Writing, by using more Letters or Characters than are
requisite to frame Words.
HAving gone through the most material kinds of Secret Writing, by Equal
Letters or Characters in the two preceding Sections, I come now to enquire
into that arising from More Letters than are required to make up Words: And
here I shall pass by what may not be worth the Enquiry, such as that common
Distich.

Mitto tibi caput Veneris, ventremque DiAnae,
Latronisque caput, posteriora CanE.
(i. e.) VALE.
And that wherein the first, middle, and last Letters or Syllables are only
significant: e. g. Fildy Fagodur windeeld arare discogverantibrand, which is
put to express these words, Fly, for we are discovered.

This is from the Secret and swift Messenger; but every Body may see it
Nonsense and unpracticable; and sure it is enough in all Conscience to have
mentioned it.

A Writing may be so contrived, Secr. and swift Mes. p. 77. out of Bed. l. de
Sybil.
as that one letter in a line shall only be significant, as in that remarkable
Acrostick made by one of the Sybils, where the first letters of each Verse
being put together made up these words, (...). Plautus contrived the names of
his Comedies in the first Letters of their Arguments. Schola Steganog. clas. 7.
Erot. 5.
Schottus relates a way of Secret Writing out of Trithemius, whereby the first,
second, third or last letters of the words may serve to express the secret
Intentions; but I leave these, and many more to this purpose under a general
Caveat.

1. Of secret Writing by Dots, etc. in an ordinary Epistle.
The first remarkable, Sc. Steg. Class. 5. c. 1, 2, 3. etc.
and a very ordinary Contrivance in Secret Writing, by more letters than
usually go to the framing of words, is that insisted on by Schottus, viz.

1. The Confidents at parting frame an Alphabet of Figures to write by, v. g. A
b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t v w x y z 4 22 10 9 1 11 13 18 3 19 12 8 20
2 21 23 7 6 5 15 14 16 17 24

2. Having writ down their secret Intentions on a Paper apart, they contrive an
Epistle of some ordinary Business in any Language.

3. They search for the Numbers of the Alphabet that express the letters of the
secret Writing; and counting the letters in the common Mssive from the
Beginning, they subjoyn some private. Mark under every Character where the
respective Numbers end.

E. g. Let the secret Intimation be this;

3 6 18 4 12 12 6 1 1 16 2 15 5 18 3 6 20 3 I s h a l l s e e y o u t h i s n i
13 18 5 4 5 16 2 15 7 12 2 9 13 3 20 13 6 g h t a t y o u r L o d g i n g s

And the Epistle to run thus:

Having understood that I could not be safe any longer where you are, I have
chosen rather a voluntary Banishment to wander with my Liberty abroad, than to
lie under the daily Hazard of losing it at home: It Is in my opinion the least
of the two Evils. It Is true, I am innocent; but Innocence is not always a
Buckl^r; so that I hope you will not condemn, even though you cannot approve my
choice, at least, till you have the particulars of my Case; which expect per
next.

You see the Figure for the first letter, to be put in Cipher, is 3; therefore
a secret Mark or Point must be placed directly under (or above) the third
letter of the Epistle, viz. v. and number 6, expressing the second letter in
secret Writing, a Dot must stand under the 6th. letter from v. viz. under n,
and 18 letters from n, will stand another Dot, etc.

Example.


The Points may be so ordered, See the last Section of this Chapter.
as that they shall not be visible, till held by the Fire, or dipped in Water,
etc.

SOLUTION.
For Decyphering this you have no more a^^o, but to take the number of Letters,
from the beginning of the Epistle to the first point, from that to the second,
and so from point to point until you come to the last; Writing down the several
Numbers, distinctly one after another, and then you have it in a plain Cipher
resolvable by the former Rules.

Nich. Machiavel tells us, 7 Book of the Art of War.
that in his own time a certain Person designing to signify some Secret
intention to his Friends, interlined private marks in Letters of
Excommunication that were to be Publicly affixt, by which the Secret was
afterward communicate to the Confederates, and this has in all probability
been performed by the former or the like Method of Secret Information.

2. Contains several ways of Inserting Nulls to Prevent or Divert Suspicion.
I have already considered the obscurity arising from the Insertion of Nulls at
random, as to several of the ways of Secret Writing mentioned: But here I shall
enquire into them, as insert by compact to prevent or divert suspicion, and
indeed their great design, who use them in the following methods, is generally
one of the two.

When they would quite Remove suspicion the Epistle is so contrived, as that to
outward appearance, it may appear to have nothing in it but some Trivial
Business, as news, etc. or a Private Concern, as borrowing of Money, paying of
Bills, etc.

But if the Person will render the Paper suspected, they may endeavor to
divert that suspicion, by Inserting a false design to cloak a true one.

The nature of this Secrecy will more fully appear in the following Examples.

Example 1.
Suppose two or more Confederates had agreed to confine their Secret Intentions
to one side of the Paper in the Writing, according to some Private Compact.
Thus if upon discovery of Plot a speedy flight were designed, and to be
communicated by this contrivance, it might be writ at first in manner following.

The design is not Secret there is now no safety but by flight do not fail to
meet me half an hour hence let the next meeting be just without the Gate if my
Senses are sound we may conclude to have infallible Evidence the snare is
prepared effectually to entrap you and

Your, etc.
POSTSCRIPT.
Prithee expose not thy self to imminent danger.




Now to obscure the sense and prevent suspicion the void parts of the Lines may
be supplied with something foreign to the design; and afterward the Epistle
pointed according to the seeming sense, v.g.

The design is not in danger, to all it is as yet Secret; There is now nothing
in view to threaten our safety, but by flight we should ruin all our designs.
Do not fail to meet me by six in the old manner in half an hour hence, I intend
to be at the Consult, let the next meeting be where they will, I Will have notice
just without the Gate, was the Governor this Morning (if my Senses are sound)
secure as we could wish him, we may conclude to have hit right on the means,
and more infallible Evidence is not on this side Conjuration, the Snare is
prepared they are misted, and see not that it is effectually to entrap them and
on their Ruin to raise you and

Your, etc.
POSTSCRIPT.
Prithee throw off those vain fears, expose not thy self to scorn, when there is
not any imminent danger.




Here to divert the suspicion what is designed for the Confederates particular
knowledge is divided from the rest of the Epistle, by a supposed perpendicular
Line, but however it be divided, the sense cannot well escape a discerning Eye;
and to propose a SOLUTION would be superfluous.

Example 2.
The former Method for Secret Correspondence may be further obscured, (...)
by cutting out equal Holes in two or more Sheets or half Sheets of Paper, and
each of the Confederates at parting keep one, when there is any Secret concern
in agitation, they lay the cut Paper over that they are to write upon, and
express their mind through the Holes, which done, the void places are filled up
(as before) with any thing to prevent or divert suspicion; and when it comes to
the Confederates Hands. He becomes acquainted with the hidden meaning by
applying the cut Paper he kept, to the Writing in the Epistle.

SOLUTION.
This method can hardly have any positive Rules for Decyphering, nor will the
Judicious World need any, were not such ways of Secret Writing fair to pass
unsuspected, I am confident they should be abandoned as useless.

First, to solve this new Difficulty lay aside the seeming sense of the
Epistle, and afterward a Man's Reason will furnish him with more light into
the Business than a whole Volumn of Instructions. The project is fairly laid
down, and it is but going through the whole Epistle to find it out, nay you will
find many occurring circumstances to help you in the search e. g. suspicious
words, which may be first extracted, and afterward you may make Trial what
will best join with them. At worst you may begin with the first two, three, or
more words in the Epistle, and perusing the whole add what will make up sense,
from thence to the next words and combine as before, etc.

It Is true this way of Resolving is not so infallible as others, because you
may find sense and perhaps a design contrary to the true intent of the Epistle,
yet for security you may extract all out of it that will stick together, and
and thus suppose you could not certainly know which of them may be the real
meaning, yet all may be secured against, and tho such a discovery could not in
Law amount to a proof against the Criminal. It may however serve to provide
against the attempt.

It Is observeable that this Method of Crytography may occasion a mistake
amongst the Confederates themselves, without a great exactness in Acting their
several parts in Writing and Reading, especially if the Holes be so contrived
as that they can only contain Words, Syllables or so, for we must suppose the
Receiver of the Epistle to give an implicit Faith to what is delivered him in
this manner, and one false step on either side, may give STAY instead of RUN,
etc. quite confounding the measures laid down. And if the Holes be large enough
to contain Sentences it facilitates the Discoverer's work.

Example 3.
To prevent but especially to Divert Suspicion (by Non-significants) there is
an improvement of the last Methods of Secret Writing too Pulick, tho not by way
of the Press (for any thing I know) viz. By contriving a Writing according to
any of the last Examples, in Secret Characters, containing a Plot, or perhaps
some little Sham, a Love Entrigue, or an Ingenious Cloak of no Ingenuous
dealing, as a pretense of broken credit amongst Merchants, and the like, and
locked up by Cipher and a Seal: This Epistle when Decyphered, (which is no more
than perhaps the Confederates had agreed on) would give great probability that
you had seen clearly into the Mystery, (finding a Plot or other tender concern
put in Cipher,) when in truth, you have made no further Progress than they
designed for you (in case of surprise) and as to any real intention you are
still in the dark.

This Obscurity when it is once suspected falls under the Observations upon the
last two Examples.

Example 4.
From the Lord Verulam we have one Secret way of Converse to Divert suspicion
by inserting of Nulls, Advanc. of Learn. p. 265.
in these Words. As for the shifting off Examination, there is ready prepared a
new and profitable Invention to this purpose; which, seeing it is easily
procured, to what end should we report it as Deficient? The Invention is this:
That you have two sorts of Alphabets, one of True Letters, the other of
Non-significants; and that you likewise fold up two Letters; one, which may
carry the Secret; another, such as is probable the Writer might send, yet
without Peril. Now, if the Messenger be strictly examined concerning the
Cipher, let him present the Alphabet of Non-significants for true Letters; but
the Alphabet of true Letters for Non-significants: By this Art the Examiner
falling upon the Exterior Letter, and finding it probable, shall suspect
nothing of the Interior Letters.

SOLUTION.
The Difficulties here are not very great: It Is true, if this Contrivance had
never been published, it might have had the desired Effect; I mean, to divert
Suspicion: But being made public by an Author, so universally received, I
cannot see, but that the Examiner (even finding the exterior Letter probable)
should take a View likewise of the interior, tho its Alphabet might be
delivered him for Non significants.

But supposing no Alphabet in the Case, the Writing is decypherable without it.
v. g.

1. You may discover from the number of Characters in the Writing, whether two
Alphabets be used.

2. After you have found out, that two Alphabets or more are used, you may from
the frequency of each particular Character, etc. observe the differing letters
that express the same Power.

3. And having by several Operations distinguished the Alphabets one from
another, any thing of new Difficulty vanishes.

3. Of expressing all the Letters of the Alphabet, by any two, or three, or
five of them, etc.
Examples 1. Of five Letters resolved into two places.
AA, ab, ac, ad, ae, ba bb, bc, bd, be, ca, A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, K, L,
cb, cc, cd, ce, da, db, dc, dd, de, ea, eb, ec, ed. M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, T, V,
W, X, Y, Z.

According to which, Bd aacb abacdddbaaecad. I am betrayed.

Example 2. Of three Letters transposed through three places.
Aaa, aab, aac, aba, abb, abc, baa, bab, bbb, A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, bba,
bac, bca, aca, acc, acb, bbc, bcb, bcc, K, L, M, N, O, P, Q, R, S, cca, cab,
cba, ccc, cbb, ccb. T, V, W, X, Y, Z.

Babaaabcccaaabbaca.

Hasten.

Example 3. Of a Bi-literary Alphabet.
Aaaaa, aaaab, aaaba, aaabb, aabaa, aabab, A, B, C, D, E, F, aabba, aabbb,
abaaa, abaab, ababa, ababb, G, H, I, K, L, M, abbaa, abbab, abbba, abbbb,
baaaa, baaab, N, O, P, Q, R, S, baaba, baabb, babaa, babab, babba, babbb. T, V,
W, X, Y, Z.

Aababbaabbaabbaaabaa.

FUGE.

From these Examples you may perceive how a man may express his mind (at any
such distance wherein the Eye and Ear may immediately officiate) by any thing
that is capable of a double or triple difference: But of this in the following
Chapter.

All these Alphabets are composed by an irregular Position of the Letters,
which differs very much from a regular Combination of letters, as is observed:
For,

1. By an Irregular Position, all the Letters to be used are not insert in all
the Places; and thus you see aaa, bbb, baa, etc. in the Alphabet of three
Letters.

2. The Number of Letters, and Number of Places need not be the same: And thus
in the first Example you have 5 letters resolved into 2 places; and in the last
Example two letters transposed through five Places, etc.

Note, by Places is understood the Number of Letters in the several Ranks, as
in the Examples.

But in a Regular Transposition or Combination, e contra, All the Letters to be
combined must be insert in every Position; and consequently the Number of
letters, and Places equal: As you may perceive from the Explanation of the
Table of Combinations, in the preceding Section.

Having mentioned these things, I shall for the Satisfaction of those that are
curious, leave some Remarks, to find out how many times this Irregular Method
varies the Positions of any. Number of Letters in their several Places: And,

1. As to the Number of Places and Letters, take the Number of Letters given;
multiply that Number by it self, and the Square, or Product arising from the
Multiplication, gives their Variations in two Places: E. g. In the first
Example there are five Letters in two Places: Now 5 the Number of Letters,
multiplied by it self, gives 25, the Number of different Positions, 5 letters
resolved into two Places can have.

2. When the same Number of Letters is disposed, three in a Rank, or in three
Places, multiply the Square by the Root, or Number of Letters, and the Product
will give you the different Positions of the letters in three Places: E. g.
multiply 25, the last Product by 5 the Root, the Result, or Cube, 125 shows,
that 5 letters in three Places may be so many times varied in the several
Positions.

3. If you would know how many Irregular Positions 5 letters in 4 Places can
have, take the fourth Power from the Root or Number of letters, (i. e.)
Multiply the last Product by the Number of letters, v. g. 5, and the new
Product gives you the Resolution. And thus you may proceed to 5 Places, by
finding out the Fifth Power; and so go on as far as you please.

Again, if you would find out how many Positions two letters have in any Number
of Places desired: First. Multiply 2 by it self (as before) which shows, that 2
Letters in 2 Places, have 4 Positions. 2dly. Multiplpy 4, the Product, by 2,
the Root, and you have 8, the Number of Different Positions that 2 letters have
in 3 Places: 2 Letters in 4 Places have 16 Irregular Positions, and in 5 Places
they have 32: And so for any Number in Infinitum.

I need not say much for SOLVING any Difficulty in the former Examples: For
this way of Secret Writing (alone) will signify very little, unless to spend
Time and Paper to the Writer: For if you put a Mark of Distinction between
every two, three, or five, etc. of the Characters (as they make up a
significant Letter) they are liable to Discovery the same way with an ordinary
Cipher.

And it is easily discernable when two, three, or five Characters express one
Letter, either from the Number of Characters in a Word, or in the whole Writing.

1. From the Number in a Word: For when two Letters go to the Composition of
the Alphabet, there must be five Places; and the Words will consist of 5, 10,
15, 20, or 25 letters, etc. If three letters in three Places, you will find 3,
6, 9, 15, or 18 Characters, etc. in each word, if five Letters in two places,
the words shall have 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, or 12 Characters, etc. a piece.

2. From the Number of the letters in the whole, as if two be only used in one
Rank, you shall have five differing Characters in the whole at least: E. g. a,
b, c, d, e. If three in a Rank, then you may have 3 Characters: e. g. a, b, c,
and if 5 in a Rank, you shall possibly have but 2 Characters in the Writing,
etc.

There might be other Observations made, as from the number of like Characters
falling together, etc. were it not superfluous.

4. Of Secret Writing by a By formed Alphabet.
This way of Secret Writing is mentioned by the Lord Verulam, Adv. of Learn. p.
267.
jointly with that in the preceding Paragraph, only as preparatory to the
Secret Contrivance immediately following, but is insisted on by it self in
Bishop Wilkins his Secret and swift Messenger, and therefore have I insert it
seperately here. For Example.

First Alphabet.

A a, B b, C c, D d, E e, F f, G g, H h, I i, K k, L l, M m, N n, O o, P p, Q
q, R r, S s, T t, V v, W w, X x, Y y, Z z.

Second Alphabet.

A a, B b, C c, D d, E e, F f, G g, H h, I i, K k, L l, M m, N n, O o, P p, Q
q, R r, S s, T t, V v, W w, X x, Y y, Z z.

In Writing by this Invention of Secrecy, the Body of the Epistle is to consist
chiefly of the second Alphabet. And as Occasion offers, the Secret intentions
may be expressed by the Letters of the first Alphabet; this I find illustrated by
the following Example, viz. From those that are besieged.

We prosper still in our affairs and shall without having any further help
endure the siege.

Here the Letters of the first Alphabet contain these words;

We perish with hunger help us.

I do not mention this for any thing of intricacy, but only for Information
that such Methods may be taken.

5. Of the Lord Bacon's Invention of Writing OMNIA PER OMNIA.
1. For performing this, they must have at Hand a Bi-literary Alphabet as in 3.
And a Bi-formed Alphabet as in 4.

2. They write down their Secret Intentions or the Writing to be infolded on a
Paper apart.

3. They make a Supposition, that all the Letters in the first Alphabet 4. do
express A, and those in the second Alphabet B. And thus they may write what
they please, for the Writing enfolding, so it bear a quintuple proportion to
the Writing infolded at least.

Or in that Learned Lord's own Words: To the interior Letter which is
Bi-literate you shall fit a By formed Exterior Letter, Adv. of Learning l. 6.
c. 1.
which shall answer the other, Letter for Letter, and afterward set it down.
Let the exterior example be,

Manner te volo donec venero.

And the interior be,

FUGE.



Example.

F U G E Aabab. baabb. aabba. aabaa. Manner te volo donec venero.

I have hereunto subjoyned an Example for further Illustration out of the
Secret and Swift Messenger.

Exterior Epistle.

All things do happen according to our desires the particulars you shall
understand when we meet at the appointed time and place of which you must not
fail by any means the success of our affairs does much depend upon the meeting
that we have agreed upon.

Interior Letter.

Fly for we are discovered, I am forced to write this.

The Example illustrated.

Aabab, ababa, babba, aabab, abbab, baaaa, F L Y. F O R. babaa, aabaa, aaaaa,
baaaa, aabaa, aaabb, W E. A R E. D abaaa, baaab, aaaba, abbab, baabb, aabaa, I
S C O V E baaaa, aaabb, abaaa, aaaaa, ababb, aabab, R' D. I. A M. F abbab,
baaaa, aaaba, aabaa, aaabb, baaba, O R C E D. T abbab, babaa, baaaa, abaaa,
baaba, aabaa, O. W R I T E. baaba, aabbb, abaaa, baaab. T H I S.

This Method wants nothing of Ingenuity in the Contrivance, and contains the
Highest degree of Cipher, which is to signify omnia per omnia, without any
other Restriction, than that the outward Writing must bear a quintuple
proportion to the Inward. Nay, there may be a Tri-formed Alphabet, contrived
and Regulated by the Tri literary Alphabet in 3. Example 2. And then the
Epistle enfolding will bear but a triple proportion to the Writing infolded:
Either of which ways is preferable, to that tedious way of Secret Writing
without suspicion, insisted on by Trithemius, in his first four Books of
Polygraphy, and all the emprovements it has met with as shall be made manifest.

Note, that by the invention of Secret Writing with Dots mentioned 1. a Man may
write omnia per omnia, or express any intention by any Writing; but the
proportion, between the Exterior and Interior Letter will be much greater than
in this Noble Lord's contrivance. But to leave this Competition, I proceed.

SOLUTION.
We shall not need to enlarge much upon the Resolution of this kind of Secret
Writing, for if you once find out whether two or three Alphabets be used, (and
the different kinds of Letters in the Epistle will inform you of that,) you may
suppose one Alphabet A, a second to stand for B, and if there be a third, let
it be supposed C. Afterward extract the Writing out of the Epistle, as if
these Letters A, B, or C, were only insert, and then it falls under the former
considerations.

It is nothing to the purpose, whether your Supposition and the Writers be the
same, or not; for if you suppose always A for his B, the Operation will be
alike easy.

And here I shall leave this kind of Cryptography by more Letters, etc.

SECT. 4. Of Secret Writing, by fewer Letters than are usual in the framing of
Words.
THe Art of Abbreviations in Writing, is mentioned by Trithemius and most
Authors who have treated of Cryptography, but pursued by very few or none.

There has been great variety of these Contractions invented, and their first,
and, for any thing I hear, their constant use amongst the Romans was for
Expedition, Pier. Hier. lib. 17. c. 23.
such as A the mark of Absolution, Pier. ibid.
C of Condemnation, (...), Pier. Hierogl. ibid. and lib. 42. c. 53. Vid. Schot.
Techn. Cur. lib. 7. c. 3.
N. L. Non Liquet, and N. D. Neci Datum. And thus did the Judges write their
several opinions upon a little Stone or Tessera, in Cases Capital. Hence it is
that A was called Salutis Litera, and C Litera Tristis. But there were other
Abbreviations amongst the Notaries, which more properly may be said to have
been used for Expedition, v.g. A. T. M. D. O. Aio te mihi dare opportere, B. A.
bona actio, B. E. bonorum emptor, B. F. bona fides. B. J. bonum judicium. Ca.
M. V. causa memorati viri. C. C. causa cognita, etc. This way of Writing was
retained in the Civil Law, until the number of Abbreviations was augmented to a
Confusion, and L. I. Cod. Tic. 17. leg. 12.
Justinian discharged the use of them in Statutes, etc.

To this we may subjoin those later inventions, for Expedition by Tachygraphy
or Short-Hand-Writing.

In the first, certain Characters expressed whole Words; and to reduce this to a
ready practice for Secret Information, the Confederates must allow a great deal
of Time and Pains, for Contriving it, and Instructing their Confidents in it.
Trithemius, speaking of Cicero's notes, gives his Judgment of the invention
(after he had proposed it as a mean for Secret Converse) in these words --
Horum Rex tutissime uti semper potest Obsequio, quamvis non sine magno labor,
manifestaque Bacuceorum suspicione.

And the second is in effect but an improvement of the first, rendering it a
little more practicable; for in Tachygraphy Notes are used to express
Syllables, and sometimes Words. And herein if you understand but one kind of
Short-Hand-Writing, you may Decypher any; for you may judge of Syllables, when
expressed by single Characters, by their frequency, etc. as of Letters. But,
besides, you have the advantage of distinguishing the Vowels, See Masons or any
other upon Shorthand.
which are not expressed, but understood by the Places of the Notes, that
(together with their own proper powers) express those of the several Vowels.

It is Observable that this kind of Writing has not so much as the name of
Secret, for it is termed, Tachygraphy, or Brachygraphy, not Cryptography, etc.
agreeable (as is already Observed) to the design of its Invention.

I know it is very Ordinary in Secret Writing, to have an Alphabet of Words
signified by single Notes; Discov. in Scotl. p. 11, 12, etc.
and in the Lady Argile's Letter, Decyphered by Mr. Gray, 43 or Dexprest the
Relatives He, His, Their, Him etc. But the meaning of a few such Characters may
be resolved by the sense of the rest of the Epistle.

And now having taken a few Observations here of the Method of Writing by fewer
Letters than custom requires for framing Words, as it may respect Secret
Information, I leave it to be improved by others to more regular Intents; and
certainly the knowledge of Ancient Abbreviations alone, wants not its
advantages for understanding the Religious worship, as well as Civil Laws, of
the Ancient Romans, for generally their Consecration of Places or Things was
expressed by the first Letters of the Words understood; such as Mer. S. Mercurio
Sacrum, M. J. Maximo Jovi. D. Im. S. Diis Immortalibus Sacrum, D. O. Diis
Omnibus, D. P. Diis Penatibus, J. O. M. D. Jovi Optimo Maximo Dedicatum, etc.

SECT. 5. Of Secret Writing, by a Deceit in the Paper, or some Material used
instead of it.
1. Of the Lacedaemonian Scytale.
THat Secrecy arising from the Paper in a written Message, most early, and,
perhaps, most universally received, was the Lacedaemonian Scytale, contrived by
Archimedes, who lived about the Year of the World 3735, we have this Relation
of the Experiment from Bishop Wilkins, Secr. and Swift Mes. p. 38.
There were provided two round Staves of an equal Length and Size, the
Magistrates always retaining one of them at home, and the other being carried
abroad by the General, at his going forth to War: When there was any secret
Business to be writ by it, their manner, was to wrap a narrow Thong of
Parchment about one of the Staves by a Serpentine Revolution, so that the Edges
might meet close together: Upon both which Edges they inscribed their Epistles;
whereas the Parchment being taken of, there appeared nothing but pieces of
Letters on the Sides of it, which could not be joined together in the right
Sense without the true Scytale. Vel Lacedaemoniam Scytalen imitare libelli,
A^son. ad Paulin.

Segmina Pergamei, tereti circundata ligno,
Perpetuo inscribens versu, deinde solutus,
Non respondentes sparso dabit ordine formas.


Resolution.
As for this piece of ancient Ingenuity, I find it freely Sec. and Swift Mes.
ibid.
confessed, That a little Examination might have discovered it (as Scalig. L.
de subt. excre. 327.
Scaliger in a few words clearly demonstrates:) For do but put the Edges of the
Paper or Parchment (so writ upon) together, by a Serpentine Revolution, so as
both pieces of the first divided letter may be joined, and it gives the Compass
of the Scytale to frame one by: And it were no great Task to frame Staves of
all Sizes, and have them in readiness: Nay, such a Staff may be augmented in
Bulk by Wax-Paper, etc. As it may be diminished by taking these off again: But
indeed you may find out the Sense without any such Trouble: For after the first
letter is joined, you may successively add piece to piece in Order, as they
naturally follow, even in your Hand.

And here you may observe, That so much of the Paper as gives the Measure of
the Scytale, will be void of any parts of letters, because it must go once
round the Staff before the Edges can meet.

If such an Epistle were writ in Cipher, there is no great Difficulty in joining
the Edges rightly; and if copied from them on a Paper apart, it is liable to
the ordinary Rules of decyphering Characters.

2. Improvement of the Lacedaemonian Scytale.
This may be performed by a Thread first dipped in Alum Water, Bapt. Port. Mag.
not. l de Ziph. c. 5.
then rolled about a small Rod or Staff, in a Serpentine Revolution, and writ
upon.

SOLUTION.
And the Sense may also be discovered as before: For the Distance between the
first and second Mark, which the Thread receives from the Ink, gives the
Measure of the Scytale.

Here it is the same thing what end of the Thread you begin at: For if you begin
with the last Leater, turn only the Rod, putting that end downwards which was
uppermost, and you have it in Order.

3. Of expressing any secret Intention by a String and Tablet.
There is a way of expressing any private Imitation, Sec. and swift Mes. p. 44.
by drawing a String through the Holes of a little Tablet, or Board: These
Holes must be of the same Number with the Letters, unto which, by Compact, they
should be applied: The Order of the Strings passing through, may serve to
express any Letter, etc.

SOLUTION.
As for the Resolution, it differs nothing from that of Secret Characters: For,
if from the Differences in the Order (...) Strings passing through the Holes, you
copy it out in supposed Letters or Figures, on a Paper apart, you have it
written in an ordinary Cipher; of which already.

4. Of expressing any Intention by certain Knots tied upon a String.
There is another way to this purpose of Secret Information, Secr. and Swift
Mes. ibid.
by diverse Knots tied upon a Thread, according to certain Distances, by which a
man may distinctly express any Meaning. The manner of performing it is this:
Let there be a square piece of Plate, with the 24 Letters described on the Top
of it, at equal Distances, on both the opposite Sides; and let there be little
Teeth, on which the Thread may be fastened for its several Returns; and the
Knots to be made at the Letters; required, etc.

Instead of Knots, Scho. Mag. Cryptog. p. 19.
if the Thread be first dipped in Alum water, they can make little Marks with
Ink.

SOLUTION.
To discover any meaning so involved, the Difficulty is to find out the true
Breadth of the Plate, or Table: And to effect this,

Take the Exact length of the Thread, which you may reduce to Inches; or, if
needful, even to Degrees upon the Line of Chords.

This done, find out all its equal Divisors, or Aliquot parts by the Rules
formerly delivered.

Now one of these Divisors gives the breadth of the Tablet, and which of them
it is you may find out by two or three Suppositions at most.

But there may be other ways for discovering the breadth of the Plate, viz.
Take all the several Distances between the Knots or other marks of Distinction;
or between some few of them if the thread be long: Compare the Differences, and
you shall soon find out the common Distance between the Letters of their
Alphabet, and consequently its breadth.

You may easily perceive when your Suppositions are false, for then there will
but few Knots fall in a Perpendicular Line upon the Tablet, whereas when ever
you suppose true the Knots expressing the same power will be all in a direct
Line, opposite to one another, and then you may Copy it out thus, Begin at the
Left Hand, mark all the Letters you find in the first perpendicular Line A, and
those in the second Line B, etc. And at worst you have it in an Ordinary Cipher.

Here you may observe that when you have the true breadth of the Tablet, it
will be no Difficulty, tho there be some part of the Thread Mute, or useless in
Reading, and only sent to amuse the Discoverer.

This may likeways be Decyphered without the breadth of the Tablet, thus:

1. Take all the several Distances between the Knots, and set down two
different Characters to express every Variation.

2. Copy out upon Paper the whole Thread, according to the Figures you took to
express it.

Example.
Suppose your first distance should be 16 degrees, and your mark for it a b,
the second 14 degrees. and your mark for it a c, the third distance 4 degrees. and its
mark a d, the fourth distance 16 degrees. marked as before a b, etc. The Writing
will stand thus a b, a c, a d, a b, etc. Again suppose the first two Knots to
express t h, the fourth distance is likeways t h: And wherever these two
Letters fall together you shall have the same distance. And so from the
frequency, etc. you may find the hidden meaning.

5. How to write Secretly upon the Edges of a new Bound Book.
Baptista Porta tells us, Mag. Not. l. de Ziph. cap. 5.
how we may write our Secret Intentions without suspicion, upon the Edges of a
new Bound Book, by drawing back the Leaves, until by degrees the Edges of the
Paper fall awry, then write your mind upon it, and nothing shall appear but
such small blots, as are usually thrown upon a new Book for Ornament, or fall
accidently by mistake, until the leaves of the Book be put in the same Figure
again.

SOLUTION.
This needs no more for its discovery, but only to be suspected.

6. Of Writing upon the Edges of Cards, etc.
Baptista Porta relates, Port. ibid.
the former way of Secret Information may be performed with playing Cards, or
upon cut Paper, etc.

As for this way by Writing upon the Edges of Cards, etc. placed in an oblique;
or, perhaps, a straight Figure. It appears to have something more of Intricacy
in it, than that last mentioned, Schot. Steganog. Clas. 12. c. 5.
because the order of placing the Cards, may be confounded when employed upon a
Message, for what Card shall be first, second, etc. is by compact agreed upon,
however this can only prolong, not frustrate a discovery, for you may take any
Card that comes first to Hand, and search into the rest of the Pack, etc. until
you get another that will exactly join with its broken pieces of Letters, and
afterward you may with great ease find the Cards that must go before and after
those that are truly coupled, and this I hope needs no further illustration.

SECT. 6. Of Secrecy in Writing that arises from the Ink or other Liquor.
THere are likewise several ways of Secrecy arising from the Ink, or the Liquor
used instead thereof. I shall only name them, since that carries along with it
the means of Discovery.

Thus when I tell you from experience, or a second Hand assurance, That if a
Man write with Salt Ammoniack, dissolved in Water, or with the juice of Limons,
etc. The Letters will only be visible when held by the Fire, there needs no
other Rule for Discovery; but indeed the heat of the Fire only detects, Port.
Mag. Not. l. de Ziph. c. 2.
that which in a little time had disclosed it self, for such is the nature of
those acid and corroding moistures, that they cannot be long good Secretaries.

Letters written with dissolved Alum, Port. ibid.
etc. are not discernable until the Paper be dipped in Water.

Letters witten with Urine, Goats fat, Sch^t. Steg. p. 304.
etc. do not appear until dust be scattered upon them. And it is thought that
Attalus used this piece of Policy, to encourage his Soldiers, before he engaged
in Battle with the Gauls, his Enemies, Superior in number. The Story goes thus;
Attalus having appointed a day for Sacrifice, as he pulled out the Intrails of
the Beast, described these words upon them, Regis Victoria, which he had before
writ backwards in his Hand with some Gummy Juice, and as the Intrails were
turned up and down by the Priest to find out their signification, they gathered
so much dust that they appeared legible, which Omen so encouraged his Soldiers
that he got the Victory indeed.

To this purpose likewise is that of Ovid. Tuta quoque est, fallitque oculos e
lacte recenti
Littera: Carbonis polline tange, Leges.
Fallit and humiduli quae fiet acumine Lini,
Et ferret occultas pura Tabella notas.


There is a Secret way of Writing with the Yolk of a raw Egg, Sch^t. Steg. p.
303.
dissolved in Fountain Water. The Letters whereof being fully dry, the
Confederates black the whole Paper with Ink, which being likewise dried, the
Ink falls from the Letters first described when scraped gently with a Knife.

Schottus tells us, p. 301.
how we may write Secretly with two several Inks, the method is this, mix a
little Common Ink with so much Water, that little or nothing of Blackness
appear in it; with this write your Secret intentions upon clean Paper: When it
is thoroughly dried, write an Ordinary Epistle with another Ink, (made of
Gunpowder, beat and mixed with Rain water) upon the very Letters you described
before. The last Ink will wash off with a Sponge dipped in Water boiled with
Galls, which will also blacken the first.

Baptista Porta, Mag. Not. lib. de Ziph. c. 1.
has another way to this purpose, whereby he affirms, the true Writing will not
appear until wet with the juice of Unripe White Grapes.

Letters that are Writ with dissolved Tragacanth and White Lead, Schot. Ste.
304.
will not be visible until the Writing be held between the Sun, a Star, or a
Candle, etc. and the Eye.

Schottus affirms, Schot. Mag. Univer. part. 4. l. 1. p. 13.
that a Writing may be so contrived, that the Letters shall not be Legible
until the Paper be burnt black: And the written parts of it do still remain
White. Which is performed by mixing Vinegar made of Wine, and the white of an
Egg, with Quicksilver or white Lead: and Writing therewith, or with Gum or any
kind of Salt, etc. Or with such Liquors, as render the Letters described
incombustible.

There are some contrivances whereby the Letters appear not but in the dark,
but such are not yet practicable in communicating Secret designs, for it being
a Material Flame in the Nocteluca, that gives light on such parts of the Paper
as it adheres to, in a short time it consumes it self. It is only visible in
the Dark, because its Light is drowned by any that is greater.

I leave this beaten Road, with a Caution, that most Methods in this kind of
Cryptography, may be interlined with some Ordinary business in an Epistle, or
writ on the backside, or other part of a Letter; for of themselves they have
two grand inconveniences. 1. To be very liable to suspicion; for who can
imagine that a piece of clean Paper, or where the^e is nothing but one blot,
when intercepted should have no occult meaning? And 2. They are very easily
discovered when doubted.

And this is all I shall add, upon Cryptographia or the Art of Secret Writing.

CHAP. II. Of Secret Information by Signs and Gestures and its Resolution.
TO come now to the second Part of Secret Information mentioned, viz. By Signs
and Gestures; it is called * Saemaeologia, from (...) a Sign, Etimology.
and (...) to read or comprehend.

This way of Converse is complete in its kind without the help either of Words
or Letters, as was observed in the preceding Chapter; and to borrow the words
of an Eminent Author. L. Bacon Advanc. of Learn. p. 258.
For this is certain, whatsoever may be distinguished into differences,
sufficient for number, to express the variety of notions (so those differences
be perceptible to sense) may be the Convey of the Cogitations from Man to Man.
And a little after, he adds:

NOTES therefore of things which without the Mediation of Words (or Letters)
signify THINGS, p. 259.
are of two Sorts; whereof the first is significant ex CONGRUO, and the other
ad PLACITUM. And according to this Partition I shall here treat of them.

SECT. 1. Of Information by Signs and Gestures Emblematical.
Gestures and Signs, are said to signify ex Congruo, when there is some natural
Analogy or resemblance between the action expressed and thing signified. Of which
we shall adduce some Examples.

1. Of Transitory Signs of Information.
The Noble Author last mentioned speaking of such Transitory Signs tells us.
Ibid.
As for Gestures they are, as it were, Transitory Hieroglyphics. For as Words
pronounced vanish, Writings remain; so Hieroglyphics expressed by Gestures are
Transient; but painted, permanent. As when Periander being consulted with, how
to preserve a Tyranny, bid the Messenger stand still, and he walking in a
Garden, topt all the highest Flowers, for which he cites Herodotus.

Bishop Wilkins calls it a Parabolical way of discoursing by Gestures, Sec. and
Sw. Mess. p. 111.
and relates a Story to the same purpose, if not the same. Thrasybulus, being
consulted (says he) how to maintain a new Usurped Tyranny, brought the
Messenger into the Fields, and in his sight cut of the higher Ears of Corn
overtopping the rest, bidding him tell his Master what he had seen him do.

Others will have this to have been done by Tarquinius Superbus, Vide inter
alios Front. de Stratag. l. 1. c. 4.
seventh and last King of the Romans, when consulted by his Son Sextus. And all
do agree that the thing signified, was the cutting off and keeping low of the
Nobility.

2. Of Permanent Signs such as Hieroglyphics, etc.
Hieroglyphics, (i. e.) (Holy Sculptures, from (...) Sacred and (...) to
Carve) are Natural or Historical. The use of them (especially of the first) was
very early in the World, and they would appear to have been a first born
Writing, elder than the Elements of Letters.

They were both significant from Congruity, and therefore I have mentioned them
here; being in effect but a kind of Emblems.

Hieroglyphics were had in great Veneration amongst the Egyptians, and were
Engraven upon their Pyramids and Pillars: Their way was to express any Writing
by the Pictures of such Creatures or Things, as did bear in them something of
Similitude to the thing signified.

Many Treatises have been writ upon this Subject, and kindly received by the
Learned World, and I hope it will not be repute, as beside the purpose, that I
have subjoyned a short account of some that are remarkable in this ancient way
of expressing things.

A small Collection of ancient Hieroglyphics.

The representation of a LION, (according to the differing Postures, as
Passant, Couchant, etc. Or the Pictures of other Creatures placed with him)
expressed severally, Magnanimity, Strength, Punishment, Power, filial Obedience,
Clemency, Religious fear, etc.

The Lyon's Clemency is commonly noted, Plin. lib. 8. c. 36.
Pliny tells us, Leoni tantum ex feris Clementia in supplices, prostratis
parcit. Hence that of Ovid.

Corpora magnanimo satis est prostrasse Leoni.

When the Lion is made the Hieroglyphick of fear, they present a Cock by him,
whose crowing is said to be so formidable, Plin. ibid.
that it puts him to flight.

By the several Postures of an ELEPHANT, they used to express a King, Piety,
Temperance, etc. A King, because he never bows the Knee, etc.

By the RHINOCEROS or UNICORN, a severe Revenger, but not easily provoked, etc.

By the BULL, Continence, plenty, etc.

By the HORSE, War, Empire, Lechery, etc.

By the DOG, a Priest, and sometimes a Flatterer, etc.

By the STAG or HEART; Fear, Lasciviae Poenitentia, a Preparation of Arms
without the Heart, etc.

By the ANT, Foresight, indefatigable labor.

By the HEDGEHOG, a Man armed against dangers, the danger of delays, etc.

By the HOG, Sensuality, a Sophist, a profane Fellow, Luxury, a Chaos, etc.

By the GOAT, a Promptitude of Hearing, a Whore, Lust, etc. This Beast was
likewise the Hieroglyphick, and Sign of Pan, by whom the whole Universe was
understood. It is amongst the reasons given, that a Goat should signify Pan,
and Pan the World; Huic (i. e.) Panw* (...) l. 10. c. ^.
illa in Nymphas procacitas attributa, and nunquam satiata Libido: Mundus
siquidem assidue rerum species progenerat, and humore plurimum utitur, materia
quippe Generationi in primis and apta and commoda, etc.

By the SHEEP, Innocence, or sometimes Foolishness, according to the Proverb
(...). Like a Sheep. Yet of old this Creature was in great esteem, and tho
Hercules carried no spoil but Sheep from his African Victory, he is said to
have brought back Golden Apples. So that this was more properly the
Hieroglyphick of Riches, fertility, etc.

By the RAM, War, the envy betwixt Rivals, fierceness, etc.

By the WOLF, the Egyptians represented, a Man that was fearful at little, for
it is reported of this voracious Creature, that it flies the noise of a few
Stones, when it dares encounter a Man armed cap a pe, (...)
this Pierius confirms from his Fathers experience. The Wolf was likewise the
Hieroglyphick of Apollo, Mars, Improbitatis Meretriciae, etc. hence Lupa is
sometimes taken for a Strumpet, Cic. in Milon.
as in that of Cicero, Clodius semper secum Scorta, semper Lupas ducebat. A Man
holding a Wolf by the Ears, is the emblem of one involved in difficulties.

By the TIGER devouring a Horse, Revenge, the Tiger is also the Hieroglyphick
of Parental affection, etc.

When they were to express one very Ignorant, they represented him by the
Picture of a Man with ASS's Ears, which commonly is termed Aselliceps homo; and
this the Poets feign to be the punishment of Midas for his bad judgment. Old
Israel in his 17 years abode in Egypt, Genesis 49.
having seen into the Learning of the Egyptians, couched many of his
predictions concerning the future state of his Sons posterity, under
Hieroglyphics, and particularly concerning Issachar, he says, Issachar is a
strong Ass, etc. Herein he made use of an Hieroglyphick Transient. Cic. in
Pisonem.
Cicero says concerning one very dull, Quid nunc te, Asine, literas doceam, non
opus est verbis, sed fustibus, etc.

By the MULE, the Egyptians expressed Barrenness, others have signified a
Bastard, etc. by it.

By the HARE, Vigilance, because she is said to sleep with her Eyes open; she
is also the Hieroglyphick of Fear, etc.

I do not find the FOX recorded amongst the Egyptian Hieroglyphics, but
amongst the Geeks and Latins his Picture expressed, craft and deceit, etc.

By the VIPER, Conjugal or filial ingratitude.

By the EAGLE, Royal Majesty, etc.

By the PHOENIX, the Restoration of any thing that had been laid aside, etc.

By the HAWK, God, the Sun, etc.

By the RAVEN, one that disinherits his Children.

By the BE, a King, Obedience to Authority, etc.

By the DOLPHIN, speed, dispatch, etc.

By a young STORK nourishing its Dame, Filial Gratitude.

By the HEAD, the Egyptians and others expressed Empire, etc.

By the BACK, flight.

By the SHOULDERS, strength, etc.

By the EYES, God, Justice, a Guardian, etc.

By the TONGUE, Mercury, Discipline, etc.

By the HEART, Counsel, Life, etc.

By the HANDS, Authority, etc.

By a CIRCLE, they represented Aeternity, etc.

By a QUADRANGLE, the Solar year, etc.

By a CAP, Liberty.

By a SHOE, the progress of things.

By a RING, Trust, Confidence, etc.

By the ADAMANT, Fortitude, etc.

By an EMERALD, Virginity.

By the SUN, God, etc.

By an ANCHOR, Deliberation, etc.

By a HOOK, Deceit.

By the HARP, Concord.

By a DOLPHIN Painted upon an ANCHOR, Festina lent, Deliberation in Counsel,
and dispatch in Business.

Plutarch, Lib. de Isia and Isid.
relates there was a Temple in Egypt, dedicate to Minerva, that had these
Pictures Painted in the Front of it, viz. An Infant, an Old Man, a Hawk, a
Fish, and a Seahorse, which is thus interpreted, YOUNG, and OLD, GOD,
(signified by the Hawk) HATES, (by the Fish, their Ordinary way of expressing
Hatred,) IMPUDENCE (understood by the Seahorse.) Young and Old know that God
hates Impudence.

Idanthura, Sch. Mag. Crypt. c. 2. out of Clem. Alexander.
King of the Scythians, in War with Darius, sent him a Mouse, a Frog, a Bird, a
Dart, and a Plough; threatening, thereby that unless the Persians could hide
themselves in the Earth, or Water as Mice and Frogs, or fly as Birds, they
should not escape the Scythian Arrows, or Slavery, etc.

The Sign of Secrecy amongst the Romans, was by lifting up the Picture of a
Minataur, intimating thereby, that the thing communicate, was to be kept as
Secret as the feigned Habitation of that Monster.

But there are Historical Emblemes or Hieroglyphics, which likewise signify ex
Congruo, viz. Such as relate to some common History or Fable: As by the Picture
of Prometheus gnawed by a Vulture, is understood the Reward of too much
Curiosity, etc.

For SOLUTION of all such Riddles, little can be said: There is a good
Judgment, a knowledge of History, and a Natural Faculty (which cannot admit of
Rules of Art) required in him, that would thus Secretly express his mind, or
comprehend this way of Information so expressed. I have mentioned it here partly,
because much of the Ancient Learning, especially of the Egyptians was veiled
under such mysteries, and that is no frivolous subject for the speculation of a
modern Philosopher: And withal the knowledge of Hieroglyphics and Emblems, as
it may be useful to complete a Decypherer, so it is no great burden, but an
Ornament to any Gentleman.

SECT. 2. Of Signs and Gestures significant ad placitum, or by Compact.
This way of Secret Information by Signs or Gestures, ad libitum, is capable of
as great Variety, as the fancies of Men shall impose significations upon all
such Signs and Actions, as are capable of sufficient Differences. I shall only
take notice of what is most remarkable, but I hope clear All.

1. Of Characters Real, that have nothing of Emblem in them.
I have already observed, that the old Hieroglyphics, always had something of
Similitude to the thing signified, and were really a kind of Emblemes. But now
it is certainly known, that in China there are certain real, (and not nominal
Characters) that express things and Notions, abstracting from any Naturnl
Analagy, between the thing expressed and signified. And tho the several
Countries, in those large Territories, be altogether ignorant one of another
Language, yet they entertain an intelligible way of converse by Writing; and
there wants not those who have attempted to introduce this Method of an
Universal Correspondence nearer home, particularly Bishop Wilkins, Schottus,
etc. I should be very unjust if I did not approve of the design, but I cannot
conceive how this can be well accommodated to our new Magia Cryptographica; for
it is evident, that there must needs be a vast number of these dead and dumb
Signs invented, at least so many as there are radical words. And this new
collection of Signs significant ad Libitum, requires too much time and trouble,
to adapt it to SECRET Information.

And seeing it is not consonant to the Requisites and Design of Private
Intelligence, I shall even leave it to be improved to better purposes.

2. Of Arthrology.
Arthrologia, or the Art of Discoursing by the joints or remarkable parts of a
Man's Body, (from (...) and (...)) is observed by most Authors that treat upon
Secret Converse, and particularly by Schottus, Steg. Class. 12. c. 10. 1, 2.
who inserts an Arthrological Alphabet, in Latin and High Dutch, I have
hereunto subjoyned one in English, viz.

A The Ear. B The Chin. C The Hair. D The Teeth. E The right Eye. F The Fore
Head. G The Throat. H The Shoulder. I The Forefinger. K The Middle-Finger. L
The Lip. M The left Hand. N The Nose. O The Knee. P The Breast. Q Any two
Fingers stretched. R Three Fingers stretched. S Four Fingers stretched. T The
Tongue. V The right Eye-Brow. W The left Eye-Brow. X The left Eye. Y For Y, the
mark of I. Z For Z, the mark of C.
The Practice of this would appear to be as old as Ovid, who was not wanting in
such Observations.

Verba superciliis sine voce loquentia dicam.
Verba leges digitis, Ovid de Art. Ama.
verbaque vultus habet:
And again: Saepetacens vocem, verbaque vultus habet.

I have known Children at School use it, and I am sure they must be still
Children, or else something endued with a less degree of Knowledge, that
practice it in Company; and out of Company it is good for little, because so
small an Object as a particular Joint, etc. is not perceptible at any
considerable distance.

SOLUTION.
But however if you would Solve this, go aside, and mark every particular
Action by a Distinct Character, and it is liable (when so noted down) to the
common Rules of Decyphering.

3. Of Dactylogy.
Dactylogia ((...), or from (...), and (...).) Is an Art of discoursing by the
Fingers, and noted for its Antiquity; the Ancients used to express any number
under 100 by the Fingers of the left Hand, and those numbers above 100, and
under 9000, Hierog. l. 37. c. 1.
by the Fingers of the right Hand. Sat. 10. de Pylio.
Pierius gives us an account of their particular ways of Reckoning from 1, or
Unity to 9000. And hence Juvenal.

Rex Pylius, magno si quicquam credis Homero,
Exemplum vitae fuit a cornice secundae,
Foelix nimirum, qui tot per saecula vitam
Distulit, atque suos jam dextra computat annos.
Now these Postures may serve to express Letters and Words, as well as Figures
or Numbers. And Schottus is not wanting in an Alphabet this way too, e.g.

A Expressed by The little Finger of the left Hand. B Expressed by The little and
Ring-Finger. C Expressed by The little, Ring, and middle Finger. D Expressed by The
little, Ring, middle, and Forefinger. E Expressed by All the five Fingers. F
Expressed by All the Fingers of the left Hand, and little Finger of the right. G
Expressed by All the Fingers of the left Hand, and the little and Ring-Finger of
the right. H Expressed by All the Fingers of the left, and the little, Ring and
middle Finger of the right Hand. I Expressed by All the Fingers of the left Hand,
and of the right except the Thumb. L Expressed by All the Fingers of both Hands.
M Expressed by The Thumb of the left, and little Finger of the right Hand. N
Expressed by The Thumb, the little and Ring Finger of the left Hand. O Expressed by
The Thumb and three last Fingers of the left Hand. P Expressed by The right
Thumb. Q Expressed by The right and left Thumbs. R Expressed by The left Thumb, and
the Thumb and Forefinger of the right Hand. S Expressed by The left Thumb, and
two first Fingers of the right Hand. T Expressed by The left Thumb, and three
first Fingers of the right Hand. V Expressed by The left Thumb, and all the
Fingers of the right Hand.
The Letters wanting may be supplied as before.

This falls under the former Observation for SOLUTION.

4. Of several ways of Secret Information by the species of Sight or Sound.
Amongst the Secret Signs for Information ad Placitum, that by Smoke in the day
time, and Fire in the night, is very remarkable, and so Ancient, that a great
many Authors affirm, that this was the Sign to unlock the Wooden Horse at the
Siege of Troy; especially Diodorus Siculus, I cannot now call to mind the
particular Citations.

The Turks of Chios in the Island of Lesbos in Asia Minor, give notice from
their small Watch Towers along the Coast, of such Vessels as they see
approaching. etc.

There are latter Inventions of Secrecy by Torches, etc. much insisted on, viz.

The Letters of the Alphabet may be contrived in two Tables, each of the
Confederates to have one. e. g. 1 2 3 4 5 1 A F M R Y 2 B G N S Z. 3 C H O T 4
D I P U 5 E L Q X

When they communicate their Intentions by this Table, there must be ten
Torches, five on the right Hand, and five on the left. The sign of
Advertisement being given and returned, they first lift up as many Torches, as
is the number of Colums, wherein the Letter to be expressed, stands; then so many
to the left as is the number of the Line. v.g. Suppose the Confederates would
express the Word VENIEMUS: First the Informer holds up 4 Torches (...) the
right Hand, to signify, that the Letter to be expressed, viz. (U) is in the 4th
Column, then other 4 Torches to the left Hand, to show that it is in the 4th
Line: Next he lifts up one to the right Hand, and 5 to the left, intimating the
Letter expressed is in the 1st Column, and 5th in order, Weck. de Secret. l. 14.
cap. 1.
viz. E and so of the rest as Weckerus has it.

Now this difficulty is easily SOLVED, for if at the first up-lifting of the
Torches, you mark down 4, the number of Torches, and at the next motion 4, at
the third 1, and at the fourth 5, etc. You shall have it in Cipher at last,
thus:

4415322415314442.

Which may be RESOLVED by the Rules given in the first Chapter. Here you see
that two motions go always to the composition of one Letter, thus,

44, 15, 32, 24, 15, 31, 44, 42, V E N I E M U S.

Be sure to observe every different Sign by a particular mark, for if you lose
one motion, you may render your labor useless, but if you take all, you shall
not only have the Secret, in Character; but you will find out by the marks of
Advertisement when any word ends.

Schottus proposes a way how this may be performed with one Torch only. v. g.
One elevation to express A, 2, to signify B, 3, C, 4, D, etc.

But this contains no new Difficulty in its SOLUTION, and therefore I pass it
over.

There may be other Signs for Secret Information, viz. at Sea by Flags of
different Colors, as White, Red, Blew, etc.

By a Trumpet, a Drum, a Bell, etc. in reference to the Ear. As also by Musical
Notes, etc.

The order of managing either may be understood by the Tri-literary or
Bi-literary Alphabets. Chap. 1. Sect. 3.

Other Observations than what you have already for DECYPHERING are needless;
only in marking the particular differences as to the species of Sound and
sometimes of Sight, you may write down the first Letter of the thing used for
Information, as B. for Bell, T. for Trumpet, C. for Cannon, R. for Red, W. for
White, etc.

CHAP. III. Of CRYPTOLOGY, or that SECRECY consisting in SPEECH.
I Have already observed, that the Method of Treating of things here, is only
in order for the Readers ease; for if I had pursued this Design from the order
of Nature, or Time, there must have been several returns; but as things now
stand, there is a clear Progress (I hope) without any thing of impediment in
the way; and the further you go, you have the clearer prospect of what is
before you.

This Art is termed Cryptologia, Etymology.
from (...), and (...), Secretly to communicate our Thoughts by SPEECH. The way
of Communicating our Thoughts, is reckoned threefold; or, there are three means
of Converse, viz. By SPEAKING, by WRITING, or by SIGNS and GESTURES. Words are,
or ought to be the Picture of Conceptions, as Letters are the Images of Words,
the Tongue speaks to the Ear, but the Gesture to the Eye, etc. As King JAMES
elegantly expressed it.

To each of those three ways of discourse, human Policy has added, a deceit,
viz. CRYPTOLOGY, CRYPTOGRAPHY, and SAEMAEOLOGY by Compact, the two last are
already considered.

And to return to the first, the common use of Language is twofold.

1. That others may discover their Intentions to us.

And 2. That we may unfold ours to them, so that the Tongue was designed for an
Interpreter of the mind, but that it is often very unfaithful to its trust, is
not to be doubted much less denied. It is storied concerning the French, that
they neither Write as they Speak, nor Speak as they Think. And it is pity that
they are not singular especially in the last part. But this Moral Defect of
Veracity lies at present out of my Road, for a Man may truly (tho Cryptically)
express bad Conceptions, and it is the Discovery of that Art is now my Province;
yet it borders so near upon the former, (while both have one general aim to
DECEIVE) that I could not altogether pass it.

Cryptology or the Secrecy in Speaking may consist, 1. In the Matter: 2. In the
Words.

SECT. 1. Of Secrecy in Speech in respect of the matter.
CRyptology is said to consist in the MATTER, when the thing we would utter is
concealed under the expression of some other matter, that is not of obvious
conceit, so Bishop Wilkins has it.

Now as to this particular kind of Secrecy, by which one thing is said and
another understood, the Words in themselves, have some Relation to the thing
signified by them, either Natural or by Compact.

1. Of Cryptology, wherein there is some Analogy between the thing said, and
the matter signified.
This differs little or nothing from Permanent, or Transient Hieroglyphics,
except only that by the last, the Secret Intention is communicate by some
Actions; as in that of Tarquinius Superbus. For if he had told his Son, those
Higher Ears of Corn, (or as Frontinus relates it Poppy) that overtopped the
rest must be Cropped, the Words were capable of the same Interpretation, as when
he actually cut them off himself, etc.

To this Head are reducible, Vid. Sec. and Swift Mes. p. 19.
Metaphors, Allegories, Parables, Fables, and all that Aenigmatical Learning
the Egyptians, and others were so much addicted to, Macrob. in Some. Scip. l.
1. c. 2.
Quia sciunt inimicam esse Naturae apertam, nudamque expositionem sui, quae
sicut vulgaribus Hominum sensibus, intellectum sui vario rerum tegmine,
operimentoque subtraxit, ita a Prudentibus Arcana sua voluit per fabulosa
tractari.

It is requisite in this Art to make choice of such a Subject, as may bear in
it some proper Resemblance to the business in Hand, and to make the several
parts of the Similitude fitly answer the several Passages of greatest moment.
And this requiring a Natural Faculty, it is clear, that such ways of Secret
Information cannot be accommodated to all Persons, and consequently not to all
Exigences. Besides that it cannot be safely adventured on, before a Man of
sense, who may trace the meaning through the several parts of the Similitude,
etc.

But Allegories, etc. have in other things a more genuine use, being observed
to excite the Fancy upon an Argument, and often to bring the Adversary over
unawares to an acknowledgment, while plain Arguments and Moral precepts are
more flat in their Operation. I remember Knolls, in his History of the Turks,
Relates, That Bajazet, one of their most fiery Tyrants, having resolved to
destroy a great many of his Chief Officers, about the time when Tamerlane was
on his March to invade him; (at least when Tamerlane's Designs were known at
the Ottoman Court.) Alis Bassa, the Chief Minister at the Port, dared not open
his Mouth for their Reprieve: And if he had, he had undergone their Sentence.
And though thus forced to lay aside as weighty Arguments for their Lives as any
Circumstances of Reason or State could afford: The Tyrant's unruly Passion was
overcome by a kind of Metaphor out of his Jester's Mouth; who appearing before
Bajazet with a great Drum, bid him, Cause hang those Villains presently that
had offended him: For (says he) you shall have no Use for them: You and I will
fright that Numerous Army of Tartars that are approaching: For I can beat a
terrible March upon this Drum, and you may come up with a dreadful Countenance,
and the day's your own.

When Cyrus had put the Medes to Flight, their Mothers and Wives upbraided them
in their Flight by a homely Metaphor, related thus by Justin. Justin. l. 1.
Matres and Uxores in Praelium contra Cyrum fugi^ntes, occurrunt; sublata
vest, obscaena corporis ostendunt, rogantes number in uteros Matrum vel Uxorum
velint refugere. But this being Foreign to my Design, I leave it.

2. Of that Secrecy in SPEECH wherein the Relation between the Words Expressed
and understood, is merely by Compact.
That there may be Contrivance of Secrecy, wherein the Relation betwixt the
thing expressed, and the thing signified, is by Compact agreed upon, is beyond
Controversy. Instances of this Nature have been but too frequent.

The Powers, or usual Signification of Words, may be altered as well as that of
Letters: And by this Fallacy, the Sense of any Writing or Discourse as much
confounded; yet you must suppose that this way can only cloak some Persons, or
things, not a whole Design, if rendered practicable. He that reads Argile's
long Letter decyphered (as in the Discoveries in Scotland) may easily perceive
in the several Steps, the Lines of an intended Rebellion, though without all
doubt, he at first, when he framed his Alphabet of Words, provided as much
against a Discovery of the Sense of his Epistles, as could be, when adapted to
a current Correspondence: But Humane Policy cannot foresee all future
Contingencies: And tho here we chiefly mention this in Reference to Speech, yet
you see it has been committed to Writing.

And having mentioned Argile's Long Letter, I shall insist on some of the
PARTICULARS, contained therein. He is more than shortsighted, nay, more than
half blind, that does not see in it a Design of raising Money; and that this
Money is to be employed upon Men and Arms, against the Forces; and consequently
the Established Government of BRAND. What is to be understood by BRAND, viz.
Scotland, the occurring Circumstances do sufficiently evince,

1. By the Number of Standing Forces there, viz. 1200 Horse and Dragoons and
2000 Foot.

2. From the Station, these Standing Forces would probably take up, viz.
Stirling.

3. From the Aid of the Standing Forces, viz. a Militia of 20000 Foot, and 2000
Horse, and the Heretors, etc. to the Number of 50000.

Thus having by the concurring Circumstances discovered BRAND, to signify
SCOTLAND, That might help to understand some other of his Canting Terms, E. g.
And tho we had at first the greatest Success imaginable, yet it is impossible
but some (of the Forces) will keep together, and get some Concurrence and
Assistance, not only in Brand, but from Birch and Ireland, etc. From this one
Expression, it is easily conceiveable, that by BIRCH, is understood ENGLAND.

Next, As to BROWN, it must signify True Dissenting Protestants, from the
following words. How can BROWN employ so much Money, Note, THEIR denotes the
plural Number.
and so many Horse better for THEIR own Interest, tho the Protestant Interest
were not concerned, etc.

And these, at present, shall be all the Animadversions I will make to discover
the Fallacy of this Method, equally applicable in Speech, or an Epistle.

3. Of Cryptology, without any Alteration in the Words.
This is performed by using Words in Speech, that are insignificant as to the
Confederates, yet have a natural Cohesion amongst themselves, and guard that
which is really secret from Suspicion, the Pane of Secret Speaking; and that
either in an Oration, or even in common Discourse, e. g.

Suppose the words immediately following any animate Being mentioned, should be
only significant, and the Words that follow such Pronoons, etc. as relate to
Animate Beings.

Schottus proposes the Method, Steg. p. 320, 321.
and does demonstrate it by the following Example.

Let the Speaker's Secret Intention be to admonish the Confederates to make
their Escape, and the Words these; Sumus in periculo; cavete.

The Discourse might run thus:

In manu DEI sumus ubicunque versamur. Hanc ob Causam NOS in rebus adversis
nequaquam pusillanim^s esse debemus; quoniam DEUS periculo omni eripere potest.
Ergo AUDITORES cavete, peccata, and curam rerum vestrarum permittile DEO, etc.

Here the words which express Animate Beings, are DEI, NOS, DEUS, AUDITORES.
And the words immediately following, Sumus in p^riculo; cavete.

I have hereunto subjoined an Example in English. Suppose the words to be
communicated, were, Fly, you are discovered.

The Discourse may be to this Effect, Let every MAN fly to his Duty. GENTLEMEN,
you now see what PEOPLE are, and may do in their Madness: But WE discovered
long since their Folly, etc.

The Words that direct to the Meaning, are, MAN, GENTLEMEN, PEOPLE, WE. And
this, I hope, is sufficient for Explanation.

1. I know this Method is sufficiently capable of Variation; for Terminations
of Words (instead of Animate Beings) may be the Index.

2. Words may (by private Agreement) be remarkable from their place, as the
first, fifth, tenth, fifteenth, etc. to be only significant. But this (except
in a premeditated Discourse, which requires time to frame it) is hardly
practicable.

3. The Words that express the private Intimation, may be distinguished by some
secret Sign, etc. But this, if observed, will give ground for Suspicion; and
being once suspected, it is not safe; and needs no other Rule but Attention for
to find out the hidden Meaning.

For RESOLVING the other ways mentioned in this Paragraph, the most sure way
were to take the whole Discourse in Short hand; or if you can remember it
verbatim, it will save so much trouble: And afterward having writ it out,
first, join the Words together that go before or after Animate Beings, and
Relatives that belong to such: And if that will not resolve the Riddle, join
other Words that follow the particular Terminations, etc.

However, I believe, there might be as many found to unriddle all such politic
Mysteries without any other Trouble than that of Attention, as they are that
can handsomely frame them upon any occasion.

SECT. 2. Of Cryptology, Or that secrecy in Speech which consists in the WORDS.
1. Of Invented Words.
That Secrecy in Speech, by inventing new Words, Secr. and Swift Mes. p. 21.
is mentioned in the Secret and Swift Messenger: And to this the Author refers
the Canting of Beggars, Charms of Witches and Magicians, etc. And I must
acknowledge my Ignorance in both.

But if by Inventing of new words he understands a new Language, it would
require too much Time and Trouble to invent and learn it (as is observed in
another place:) And withal, the Confederates should to better purpose practice
upon some of the Eastern Languages, etc. already invented to their Hand, and
perhaps fully as intricate to the Company they intend to impose upon: Nay, why
might they not whisper; or speak apart in their Mother Tongue? Either of which
are as little off the road of common Civility, as the new Language, and all are
alike liable to Suspicion.

If by Inventing new words, he means some few that may be serviceable upon
Occasion, its difficulties are considered in the second Paragraph of the
preceding Section, etc.

2. Of the Alteration of any known Language in Speech.
The Author last mentioned, Sec. and swift Mes. p. 23, etc.
Proposes four ways for altering the Words of a known Language.

1. By Inversion, and that either of Letters as Mitto tibi METULAS, etc. (i.
e.) SALUTEM; or of the Syllables, as Tishos estad, veca biti, (i. e.) Hostis
adest, cave tibi, etc.

2. By Transmutation of Letters as in CHAPTER 1.

3. By contracting some Words in Pronunnciation, according to the Common
Abbreviations used in Writing as Aa for Anima, H^o for Homo, Raalis for
Rationalis, Aal for Animal, etc.

4. By Augmenting Words, as in doubling the Vowels, etc. E. G. Ougour Plogot,
(i. e.) Our Plot, etc.

Most of which are so Childish that perhaps it is too much to have mentioned
them; and I am sure no Body would thank me for my Pains to insist upon them.

3. Of Secret Conveyance of Words.
Schottus, Steganegraph. p. 327, 328, etc.
mentions several ways of Secret speaking to this purpose, and to be performed
without Suspicion, even tho there be several People in Company; in most of
which the Requisites are enough of themselves to create a Jealousy.

One is, Si eligantur Ambulacra, etc. There must be a long Gallery with Arches,
etc. Where if one apply his Mouth, and the other his Ear, to the opposite sides
of the Arch, he shall distinctly hear the least whisper, the other utters and
thus he would have them behave, for fear of Suspicion.

Another Requisite is a long Trunk or Pipe to convey the Words, etc.

In short, all he mentions have more of Ingenuity in the Contrivance, than use
as to the Communicating any Secret concern in Agitation.

There is an Experiment for Secret Conveyance of Words, Walch-Fab. 9.
insisted on by some, thus, Let there be a Trunk or Pipe contrived, and one of
the ends of it closed up, so as no Air can have the least entrance or egress:
At the other end which is to be the only Orifice; they are to convey in, what
Words or Sentence they intend to communicate: And these being instantly secured
in the Pipe, from taking harm by Air, they Fansy the Articulate Words by this
means are entirely preserved in good Order, and may be carried hundreds of
Miles; until the Confederate open the end of the Trunk agreed on, and receive
the Message. And this puts me in Mind of that very common and known Fable of a
violent Frost in a cold Climate, that arrested Words in the Air, which were
never heard of again until a Thaw came, that loosed them very orderly from
their un-natural or rather supernatural Captivity.

Bishop Wilkins himself condemns the folly of proposing, and credulity of
believing such Propositions for Secret Information: Being, the Species of
sound, are multiplied in the Air, by a kind of Continuation, and Efflux from
the first ORIGINAL, as the Species of Light from a Luminous Body: either of
which once separated from their CAUSES do presently vanish, etc.

But tho no Engine can be framed to preserve the Voice; yet there are several
Improvements in directing it, as by speaking Trumpets. The Emperor Severus
fortified the North of England, against the Incursions of the Scots and Picts,
with a Wall extending from Carlisle to the River Tine, the Wall had Towers at
every miles-end, and betwixt every Tower, there were small Watch Houses at a
convenient distance one from another, and between these Watch-Houses a Trunk or
Pipe of Brass passed in the Curtains of the Wall, so that in a short time, all
those in the Towers had notice of any approaching Enemy, as Cambden relates;
but this was rather a Contrivance for Swift than Secret Intelligence.

I know there have been speaking Statues, and for a good token, Albertus Magnus
having spent thirty years in framing one to express Articulate sounds, Aquinas
designedly broke it, and in a Minute ruined the Labor of so much time. But I
cannot see how this can contribute much to the Design of Secret Information:
And sure it is nothing of kin to Walchius's Fable.

Weckerus de Secretis, Lib. 14. cap. 1. proposes several ways of Secrecy in
Speech, but anticipates any other Man's Observations by condemning the Methods
himself, except what we have considered in other places.

Upon the whole; Cryptology where it is liable to Suspicion (as it can hardly
be otherways) is impertinent, and a public abuse upon those present, if the
Confederates be at Liberty: Nay, Schottus himself censures it, Steganog. p. 328.
Modus, quo aliqui utuntur, spectantibus alijs, insusurrando submisse in aures,
quod audiri ab adstantibus nolunt, rusticus est, and indecorus, ideoque
fugiendus: and subjoins the following story, Johannes Basiliades, Magnus
Muscoviae Dux, gladium stringi jubebat in ejusmodi Collocutores in praesentia
sua. And further adds, Idem judicium esto, de modo, quo aliqui, nutibus,
gestibus, etc. sibi quidpiam mutuo indicare nituntur.

And when one or more of the Confidents are confined, and under the constant
Eye of Keepers (who will not admit of ambiguous or unknown Language, etc.) it
is useless. I proceed next to.

CHAP. IV. Of Secret Means for conveying Written Messages.
THIS part of Secret Correspondence I call Cryptogrammatophoria from (...) and
(...). The Practice of it is of an old standing; and I believe it was from the
Inconveniences that Secret Conveyances alone were liable to, the other Methods
of Secret Information in the particular ways of Discourse mentioned, were first
invented.

In this Chapter, I shall not tie my self up to any Method, but only give you a
mixed account of those Secret ways of Conveying Messages, I have met with in
any Author of Note, and recommend Circumspection, as the only means of
Discovery; for the Subject will admit of no other SOLUTION.

Harpagus the Mede, Justin. l. 1. etc.
when he would exhort Cyrus to a Rebellion against Astyages the King, his
Grandfather; conveyed, his Letters to that intent, in the Belly of a Hare, and
sent them by a Servant in disguise of a Huntsman, who got an unsuspected
passage to Cyrus: And by this Treason was the Empire translated to the
Persians, Cluv. Epitom p. 56.
till then an obscure People. This fell out about the year of the World 3400.

The like Stratagem is related of Demetrius, Son of Antigonus, one of the
Successors of Alexander the Great.

Epistles have been often delivered to Persons in their Food, thus Polycretes
deceived Diognetus the Phaenician General, having given notice of their
Confusion upon a Plate of Lead, and sent it in a Tart, and by this Stratagem
Diognetus's Army was cut to pieces by a despised Enemy. Lib. de Ziph. c. 6.
Steg. p. 299.
This is related by Baptista Porta, and Schottus, etc.

Epistles may be concealed into unbaked Leaven: And afterward that part which
contained the Message, cut off, and given to a trusty Servant in disguise of a
Beggar to be conveyed to the Confederate: And to this purpose, Schottus
relates, Steg. p. 297.
That in the late War betwixt the Swedes and Poles, a Polish Soldier employed
on such a Message, having past most of the Swedish Troops, and Garrisons with
private Instructions, which he had untertaken to carry for Dantzick, and
concealed in a Loaf of Bread, was at last robbed of his Provision by a hungry
Soldier belonging to the Swedes: And by this means the Secret was accidentally
disclosed.

The same Author has another late passage concerning a Person of Quality, Steg.
p. 298.
Prisoner in the Netherlands. This Gentleman's Friend enclosed an Epistle into
a very fair Pear, which he sent him with other Fruit, not doubting but he would
choose it first, and so receive therein the Message: But the event answered not
the Expectation, for that Pear was left untouched, and with the private
Epistle, fell into the Keeper's Hands, for whom it was least designed.

He likewise proposes two several ways of conveying an Epistle into an Egg.

As also, Baptista Porta, Weckerus, etc. have a great many Methods of
Imprinting Secret Intentions upon an EGG, without any Suspicion. Such as,

1. How the Impression will not be visible until held between a Light and the
Eye.

2. How the Letters shall only appear upon the White of the Egg when boiled.

3. How Letters described upon the Shell of an Egg, shall not be perceived, but
in Water.

4. How nothing shall appear until the Egg be held by the Fire. And

5. How the Writing shall continue invisible until Dust be scattered upon the
Egg.

Porta, Schottus and others likewise tell us, Lib. de Ziph. c. 3. etc.
That if we Write with Gum-Arabick, or Traga^anth, dissolved in Fountain Water,
upon Crystal or Glass, the Writing will not appear until Dust be thrown upon it
also, and Porta adds that this being a Transparent Body, cannot be liable to
Suspicion, tho they themselves render it suspected by publishing it.

Epistles have been sometimes concealed in Cloths, which practice is noted by
Ovid, de Art. Amandi.

Conscia cum possit scriptas portare tabellas,
Quas tegat in tepido fascia lata sinis,
Cum possit solea chartas celare ligatas,
Et vincto blandas sub pede far notas.
Schottus cites several Authors who give an account, Steganog. p. 286, 287, etc.
of Secret Epistles hid betwixt the Soles of a Man's Shoes, and intercepted,
the Writing is generally cut out upon Lead.

Epistles have been likewise concealed in a Woman's Hair.

Some have Writ their Secret Intentions upon the inside of the Scabbard of a
Sword; Machiav. Lib. 7. of the Art of War.
as also upon Swords and other Armor.

We hear of an Epistle wrapped up in a Wax Candle, and sent to the Confederate
with this verbal Message, Secr. and Swift Mes. p. 29.
That it would light him to his Business.

Baptista Porta, Lib. de Ziph. Chap. 6. proposes a way to conceal an Epistle
within an Artificial Stone.

There is likewise a way of Writing upon a Stone, with Goat's Fat, which
Letters will not be visible till dipped in Vinegar.

Letters may be described upon a Tablet of Wood, a Napkin, or Hankerchief,
which will not be legible until Dust be first thrown upon them.

Schottus mentions an Ingenious way of concealing an Epistle in a Glass Bottle,
or Viol, Steg. p. 289.
viz. by taking the Bladder of a Hog or Calf, and having blown it to the utmost
extent, when it is thoroughly dried, they Write on it their Secret Intentions;
afterward pressing out the Air, they convey it into a Viol or Bottle, leaving
the Neck without, by which they extend it a second time, when in the Viol, with
Air: And filling it with Oil, they seal all up, and send it to the Confederate;
the Oil will appear in the Bottle, but not the Writing. Note, the Viol must be
prepared with some Glutinous Moisture before hand, otherways the Bladder should
not continue extended to receive the Oil into it.

This Author proposes another way of concealing an Epistle, in the Wax that is
used to Seal One, the Method is this; 1. They write an Epistle of any ordinary
concern. 2. Having contrived their Secret Intention in as few words as is
possible, they write it down upon a small piece of thin Paper. Then 3. having
folded it up, they dip it in Oil, that the Wax may not adhere to it. And lastly
conceal it within the Wax of the other Letter.

Note. The Seal must be very large, otherways the Secret Writing cannot be
contained within its impression; or in case the Letter were intercepted, the
Secrecy might be detected in breaking it open.

Demaratus, King of Sparta, being dethroned upon suspicion of Bastardy,
banished his Native Country, and received into the Persian Court, betrayed the
Counsels of Xerxes, to his Countrymen in this manner, He cut out the Secret
Information in a Tablet of Wood, and then covered the Letters with Wax, and
sent it by one of his Servants unto the Magistrates of Lacedaemon, who knew not
at first what to make of it; they could see nothing written, and yet could not
imagine, but that it should import something of moment. But at last the Kings
Sister having accidentally discovered the Writing under the Wax, Justin. l. 1
Cluv. p. 64. Flosc. Hist. Arco. 7, etc.
and the Writing the Intentions of Xerxes, to make War upon Greece; the
Grecians were so well provided for the War, That they gave a defeat to an Army
of 3235220 Men, according to the Historian's Computation.

Hamilcar feigning himself to be banished by the Carthaginians, Justn. l. 21.
was kindly received by Alexander and Great, and in the same manner gave notice
of his Intentions.

I meet with several Improvements of this Stratagem.

As 1. There may be a Tablet made of Poplar, or some other soft Timber, and the
Confederates having provided a set of Iron Letters, they imprint upon it to a
considerable depth, what they intend to communicate; then they cut down the
Timber until nothing of the former Impression appear, Bapt. Porta. Li. de Ziph.
c. 5.
and having smoothed it, they may perhaps paint it over to prevent suspicion,
and send it whither they will. The way taken by the Confident (to whom it is
directed) to find out the hidden sense; is by steeping it for some time in
Water, until those parts of the Tablet that were contracted by the pressure
swell above the rest, and discover the former Impressions.

Note. The Timber may be contrived (after the Letters are imprinted) into
Timber Vessels, etc.

2. This Author teaches, not only how to write Secretly upon Timber, but also
by what means a Man may conceal a Written Epistle within Timber, and instanceth
that experiment of Theophrastus, by incision into a growing Tree, first
carefully taking off the Bark, then putting the Epistle into the vacuity, and
lastly by binding up the Bark again in its old place, until nature sufficiently
conceal the Secret. But even against the Possibility of this there are
considerable doubts, which I shall not stay to propose: Yet granting a
Possibility, this way is inconsistent with dispatch, the life of Secret Designs.

3. Porta affirms, this might more commodiously be performed in dry Timber,
e.g. in a Firr Tree, by cutting the Bark, and making a vacuity (as before;) for
the Bark may be affixt to its former place by a kind of Glue, which resembles
the natural Rozin of that kind of Timber.

4. In Baker's Chronicle, Baker's Chron. of the Kings of England, p. 492.
Schot. Steganog. Class. 12. c. 2.
we have an account of one Frost who carried Letters in a hollow Staff, between
the Rebels of both Kingdoms, in the beginning of the late troubles.

Schottus gives several Historical Instances to this effect; and particularly
relates from his own knowledge, that very lately some Travelers had been
apprehended in Moravia, and Treasonable Letters found in their Canes.

5. The Learned Author of the Secret and Swift Messenger, affirms, That some
have used to write upon leaves of Trees, and with these to cover Ulcers, etc.
Which is likewise observed by Schottus.

6. And this brings to my remembrance a Stratagem, which I had from a very good
Hand. A Gentleman being employed to carry Letters of very great moment, with
all privacy; he affixt them by a Plaster to some Fleshy part of his Body,
which afterward he caused to be Artifically painted over in the Natural color
of his Skin.

Letters have been sometimes inscribed upon the Messengers Flesh, a Device not
unknown in Ovid's time.

Caverit hoc custos, pro charta censcia tergum
Praebeat, inque suo corpore verba ferat.
And long before Ovid's time, viz. about the year of the World 3539, Histiaeus,
the Tyrant of Mil^tus, choosing one of his Servants that was troubled with sore
Eyes, pretended that for his recovery, his Hair must be shaved and his Head
scarify'd, in performing which, he took occasion to imprint upon his Servant's
Head his Secret Intentions, viz. about revolting from the Persian Government;
and keeping him at home until his Hair was grown; he afterward sent him to
Aristagoras the Persian General then in Greece, to whom his design was to be
communicate, under pretense of his Servant's perfect recovery, and (says he)
When you come to Aristagoras, tell him, That I desire he may Shave you with his
own Hands as I have done, for it is the only means to restore you, etc. The
Message went safe, for the Messengers Head faithfully delivered the Secret that
never troubled his Brain, but in the end Histiaeus lost his own Head, Aul.
Gell. Noct. At. lib. 17. c. 9.
the due reward of his Treachery. This is related by Herodotus, and out of him
in Aulus Gellius. See also Flosc. Histor. Areol. 7. etc.

As in this, so in most of the other Contrivances mentioned, the Messenger may
be altogether Ignorant of the Message he carries; as in a Bottle which he knows
to contain nothing but Oil; or Secret Intimations upon, or within a Stone or
Timber, etc.

But as to this way of Writing upon the Messenger's Skin, Porta promises great
Security, Mag. Not. Lib. 16. Cap. 18.
his Words are these: Sed nos possumus Epistolas mittere, and scribere loco
etiam, ut non possit ab aliis, nisi iis quibus Literae destinantur, intelligi;
and qui eas fert ad quamcumque distantiam; etiamsi in via comprehensus fuerit,
and interrogatus per tormenta, nil possit fateri, quia nil ei penitus constat,
and Epistola semper manebit Occulta. Nec tempus aut itineris labor Charactares
abolebit, quia nec a pluviis, nec ab ipso sudore aboleri possunt; unde nec
refert si Lator per mare and flumina transeat, etc.

In short, Porta endeavors to prove by the best Arguments (which must
necessarily in this Case proceed from Experience) that Letters may be imprinted
upon the Messenger's Back, etc. which shall be indelible by Sweat, Water, See
the last Sect, of the first Chap.
or any Mosture; until Dust, or other things applicable to Paper, be made use
of.

He likewise proposes a way, how the Letters writ upon the Messenger's Skin,
may in a few days vanish: And treats of several Soporiferous Medicaments, to
throw him into a deep sleep, or insensibility, during the Operation. The whole
may be liable to several doubts, but it lies out of my road to examine them.

(...)

Messengers Conscious of their carrying Secret Messages have Metamorphos'd
themselves in very differing shapes; upon Occasion.

Euoullus the Roman Praetor coming to the Relief of the Cyziceni (besieged by
the Famous, Front. de de strateg. l. 3. c. 13.
tho Unfortunate, Mithridates, King of Pontus) sent one of his Soldiers to give
the Besieged notice of Relief; who, being to pass a River, did Swim over
supported by two Bladders, in disguise of a Sea Monster, and preserved the
Letters he carried in one of them.

The like Contrivance is related to have been practiced by Hircius, Front. ib.
to Decius Brutus (two Roman Consuls) the last being besieged by Anthony, only
the Epistles were inscribed on Lead Plates.

Bishop Wilkins in his Secret and Swift Messenger, speaks of Inventions,
whereby a Man may pass under the Water, if there were a long Trunk or Pipe
likewise contrived to let down fresh Air to the Messenger: But withal he tells
us that to prevent such Conveyances the Enemy used to cross the Rivers with
strong Nets, and to fasten Stakes in several parts of the Channel; but it is a
great question whether this Experiment be practicable. And the same Author in a
Treatise he published, a considerable time after his Secret and Swift
Messenger, speaking of sub-marine Navigation, and the Requisits for performing
it, does not mention any Contrivance for letting in fresh Air: The three things
he reckons considerable in the Case are these; Mathemat. Magic. Lib. 2. Chap.
5.
1st. That the Vessel it self should be of a large Capacity, that as the Air in
it is corrupted in one part, so it may be purified, and renewed in the other:
Or if the mere Refrigeration of the Air would fit it for breathing, this might
be somewhat helped with Bellows, etc. 2dly. That the Lamps or Fires in the
middle of it, like the reflected Beams in the first Region, rarifying the Air,
and the Circumambient Coldness toward the sides of the Vessel, like the second
Region, cooling and condensing it, would make such a vicissitude and change of
Air, as might fit it for all its proper uses. 3dly. He cites Mersennus, and
tells us, That there was in France one Barrieus, a Diver, who had lately found
out another Art whereby a man might easily continue under Water for six hours
together, and whereas ten Cubical feet of Air will not serve another Diver to
Breath in for half an Hour, he by the help of a Cavity, not above one or two
foot at most, will have Breath enough for six Hours, and a Lanthorn scarce
above the usual size to keep a Candle burning as long as a Man pleases. By what
Means he arrived to this Art I hear not.

In the Secret and Swift Messenger, we hear of Messages conveyed by Persons in
Coffins as dead, etc.

There are many Relations in History, of Brute Creatures, that have carried
Intelligence betwixt Confederates: I shall mention a few.

Aelianus, l. 6. cap. 7. relates that one Menthes a King of Egypt, kept a Crow
he had made so very tractable, that having received from him the particulars of
its Commission, it would carry a Message to any part of the World.

In Trithemii. Polygraph. page 96. It is related that Hircius and Decius Brutus
(already mentioned) kept a Correspondence by the help of Pigeons.

Saladine, the Sultan of Egypt, is said to have used this way of giving and
receiving intelligence at the siege of Ptolemais, about the year 1194, etc.

There are other Modern Relations to this effect which I pass over. See Front.
Lib 3. cap. 11.13. de Stratag. As also Schot. Ste. began. Clas. 12. c. 2.


Dogs have also been used for Messengers upon Urgent Occasions, having Epistles
fixed to, or rather enclosed in their Collars, etc. See Justus Lipsius Cent. 1.
Epistolarum ad Belgas, 44. and out of him in Schottu's Steganographia, etc.

Baptista Porta has a cruel kind of Device secretly to convey Letters, Mag.
Nature lib. de Ziph. c. 6.
viz. to give a Written Message rolled up in a piece of Bread to a Hungry Dog,
whose Belly the Confederate is to rip up before he receive the Secret.

Arrows, Darts, etc. have long since been used for greater Destruction, than
the killing of single Enemies; for whole Cities have been attempted by means of
one Shot out of a Bow, Cleonymus King of Lacedaemon at the Siege of Troezen,
caused shoot Arrows into the Town with notes affixt to them containing these
words, Polyae. l. 2.
(...), I come, that I may restore Liberty to this City. And the Citizens were
so Credulous, I dare not say Good natured, as to believe this common Topique,
and opened their Gates to him and his Army.

But instead of tying Epistles to an Arrow, there are later Contrivances,
whereby the Letter may be put conveniently enough within one, or in Bullets,
etc.

Keckerman relates, and let him answer for the truth of it, that
Rhegiomontanus, at the coming of the Emperor Maximilian to Nurenburg, made a
Wooden Eagle, which flew a quarter of a Mile out of the Town to meet his
Imperial Majesty, and returned back again to accompany him of its own accord:
And if this obtain belief so may that of Horace, Horat. Lib. 1. Od. 28.
as to the Artificial Dove, contrived by Archytas, Citizen of Tarentum, the
Pythagorean Philosopher.

Rhegiomontanus is likewise said to have contrived an Iron Fly of which
Dubartas. 6. Day 1. W.


Once as this Artist more with Mirth than meat,
Feasted some Friends whom he esteemed great,
From h^s Learned Hand, an Iron Fly flew out;
And having flown a perfect round about,
With wearyed Wings returned unto her Master,
And as Judicious on his Arm he placed her.
Bishop Wilkins in his World of the Moon, proposes an Experiment of a flying
Chariot, and in his Secret and Swift Messenger: Mat. Mag. l. 2. 6. 8.
He mentions it as an Excellent Contrivance, Secretly, Safely and Swiftly to
convey any Message: He again insists upon it in his Mathematical Magic, and is
at a great deal of pains to answer the Objections may be urged against it (says
he) We see a great difference betwixt the several Quantities of such Bodies as
are commonly upheld by the Air, not only Gnats and Flies, but also the Eagle
and other Fowl of vaster Magnitude. Cardan and Scaliger do unanimously affirm
(and this is almost as wonderful as the flying Chariot) That there is a Bird
amongst the Indians of so great a Bigness, that his Beak is often used to make
a Sheath, or Scabboard for a Sword, etc. And a little after, adds, The main
difficulty and Labor of it will be in the raising of it from the Ground; near
unto which the Earth's Attractive Vigor is of greatest Efficacy. But for the
better effecting of this, is may be helped by the strength of Winds, and by
taking its first rise from some Mountain, or other high place: When once it is
aloft in the Air the Motion of it will be easy, etc.

But yet for all this, I do not hear, that any part of this Mechanical
Learning, has been very guilty of the Cryptical Conveyances we speak of,
however if they should attain to that Perfection (which I do very much
question) they may be subservient to bad Designs, and therefore I mention them.

CHAP. V. Of the several Proposals for Secret Informations, mentioned by
Trithemius in his Epistle to Arnoldus Bostius, etc.
HAVING gone through the several ways for Secret Information in Writing, by
Signs and Gestures, and in Speech; and having taken notice of the most
remarkable ways for Secret Conveyances, that are recorded in History, I come
now to enquire into the wonderful Proposals with which Trithemius has amazed
the World; not only in that Epistle of his to Arnoldus Bostius: but in his
other Writings.

There are some Treatises upon Steganography have come out under Trithemius's
Name; but whether Genuine, or Supposititious, I shall not determine.

From the affected Obscurities, under which Trithemius veiled his Methods for
Secret Information, he had the ill Fortune to lie under the Suspicion of
dealing with bad Messengers: And Frederick the 2d. Prince Palatine, etc. caused
Burn the Original Manuscript even of his six Books of Polygraphy, That in my
thoughts contain just as much of Witchcraft, as that Opinion held by Vigilius
Bishop of Saltzburg (concerning Antipodes) had of Heresy, who was condemned
for it in the beginning of the 8th. Century.

It is questioned by some, whether those Books of Polygraphy Trithemius himself
published were a part of the Steganography he proposed, and there wants not
Reasons for the Affirmative. But here I wave this, and all other Debates of
this nature.

And that we may proceed regularly, take his own Words concerning his
Steganography.

The Epistle of Johannes Trithemius to Arnoldus Bostius.
In manibus jam habeo grande opus, quod si unquam fuerit publicatum, quod
absit, totus Mundus mirabitur, cujus primi libri titulus est Steganographia.
Erunt autem quatuor libri, quilibet ad minus centum capitulis distinguentur.
Incepi hoc opus ad instantiam unius magni principis, quem nominare non opus
est. Quaeris quid hoc opus docet? Maxima docet, omnibusque nescientibus
stupenda and incredibilia, quae a saeculo nunquam sunt audita.

Primus enim liber continet plusquam centum modos occulte scribendi, quicquid
velis sine omni suspicione, sine literarum transpositione, sine omni timore,
ita ut non sit homo in Mundo, qui naturali Industria scire, vel suspicari
quidem possit, quid in meis literis contineatur, praeter eum, qui artem novit
ex me, vel ex eo quem ego docuero. Verba sunt plana and familiaria, omni
suspicione carentia, sed intentionem meam nemo sine art percipere poterit in
aeternum, quantumcunque sit doctus, and est res vere stupenda.

Secundus liber multa mirabiliora continebit, per ignem videlicet in hac art
possum mentis meae conceptum notum facere artem meam scienti ad quantamcunque
distantiam, ad centum milliaria vel plura secure, sine verbis, sine scriptis,
sine signis per quemcunque nuncium, qui si comprehensus in via fuerit, si
interrogatus etiam per tormenta durissima, nihil potest fateri de nuncio meo,
quia nihil sibi penitus constat de illo, quicquid occurrat, nuncium meum semper
manebit occultum, nec omnes totius Mundi homines si simul essent congregati
possent illud vestigare virtute naturali.

Quod etiam facere sine nuncio, dum volo, possum, voluntatem quoque meam
indicare possum sedenti in carcere artem scienti, etiam long absens
quantumcunque custodiatur, etiam si tribus milliaribus sub terra sederat. Et
haec omnia latissime and universaliter quando and quotiescunque voluero possum,
naturaliter sine aliqua superstitione, vel adjutorio spirituum quorumcunque.
Mira sunt fateor, sed audi mirabiliora.

Tertius liber docet artem, per quam possum hominem idiotam, scientem tantum
linguam maternam, qui nunquam novit verbum Latini Sermonis in duabus horis
docere, scribere, legere and intelligere Latinum satis ornate and diserte,
quantumcunque voluerit, ita ut quicunque viderint ejus literas, laudent verba,
intelligant Latin composita.

Quartus liber continet multa stupenda experimenta, sed pure naturalia. Mentem
videlicet meam indicare possum scienti artem meam inter edendum, vel sedendum
cum aliis, sine verbis, sine nutibus quam latissime voluero, etiam inter
loquendum, praedicandum, ludendum in organo, vel cantandum, sine impedimento
actionis alterius cujuscunque, ita ut praedicando bona and sancta indicem, non
verbis, non signis, non nutibus, cuicunque scienti latissime quicquid voluero,
etiam clausis oculis, and alia multa quartus liber continebit arcana, quae non
sunt in publicum proferenda.

Mirantur haec omnes, qui audiunt, e quibus multi sunt viri nobiles atque
doctissimi, existimantes ista aut esse impossibilia, aut penitus supernaturalia.

His ego tibique respondeo, quod multis respondi: multa naturaliter esse
possibilia, quae nescientibus viris naturae impossibilia, vel etiam
supernaturalia videntur. Et ecce coram Deo meo loquor qui omnia novit, quod ea
quae praedixi miranda, multo sunt excellentiora, profundiora and majora, quam
ego scribere, aut tu crederepossis, and tamen omnia sunt pure naturalia, sine
deceptione aliqua, sine superstitione, sine magica art, sine invocatione seu
ministerio quorumcunque spirituum.

Haec ideo dixerim, ut si forte aliquando rumor ad te pervenerit, me aut scire
aut posse miranda, non me Magum dico existimares, sed Philosophum. Nam quod
Alberto Magno profundissimorerum naturalium scrutatori contigit, ut propter
miranda quae occulta virtute naturae operatus est, Magus a vulgo sit habitus,
mihi sum certus similiter contingere posse.

Si quaeris, unde mihi ista quae nemo alius novit, audi. Non ab homine, neque
per hominem ista didici, sed per revelationem nescio cujus; cum enim praesenti
anno, quadam vice cogitarem quid novi possem invenire quod omnes lateret, coepi
cogitare si ea possem excogitare quae dixi miranda. Cum post longam phantasiam
tanquam de re impossibili penitus desperarem, dormitum eo, me nocte reposui,
fatuitatem meam ipse m^cum deridens, quod impossibilia quaerere tentaverim.
Eadem nocte mihi astitit quidam dicens, non sunt vana, o Trithemi, quae
cogitasti, quanquam tibi sint impossibilia, quae nec tu, nec alius tecum, poter
is invenire; dixique ad eum; Si ergopossibilia sunt, dic, obsecro, quomodo
fiant. Et aperiens os suum, de singulis, per ordinem me docuit, ostendens
quomodo fieri, quae multis diebus frustra cogitaveram, de facili possent. Ecce
coram Deo quia non mentior, sed veritatem dico, neminem ista adhuc docui,
quamvis multi permittentes magna, saepe rogarint, praeter unum principem cui
scribo, quem de possibilitate artis manifesto argumento feci certiorem, nec
decet ista alios scire, quam principes; alioquin multa per ea fierent mala,
traditiones, deceptiones, fornicationes and alia quaecunque vellent homines
mali. Sed been utentes art multa per eam bona Reipublicae facere possent;
possum autem ista omnia docere in omni lingua totius mundi quam nunquam audivi.
Haec tibi, Bosti, propterea significare volui, ne me crederes otiosum.


In this Epistle Trithemius speaks of four Books only; erunt autem quatuor
Libri, etc. But in his Preface to the Emperor Maximilian, he mentions eight;
and out of this Preface I have hereunto subjoyned his Apologetick account of
his, Steganography in his own Words.

Ad memorati Principis and Domini Electori Philippi Comitis Palatini,
Pavariaeque Ducis instantiam, ego Johannes Trithemius, nunc Abbas Monasterii S.
Jacobi apud Wir^eb^^g, tunc vero D. Martini, Praesulis in Spanheim, Moguntiae
dioecesis, octo mysteriorum libros in St ganographia scribere coepi. Me autem
in tertio jam libro ejusdem operis lucubrationem continuante, res contigit,
quam breviter, si potero, sum dicturus. Anno Dominicae nativitatis millesimo
quadringentesimo nonagesimo nono, indictione Romanorum secunda: sciscitanti per
Epistolam Arnoldo Bostio Carmelitae Gandavensis oppidi, quid novi ederem,
quibusve studiis occuparer, altera Palmarum die per mercatores ut amico
rescripsi me habere sub incude novum and mirandum Steganographiae opus, and
quid in singulis contin retur libris, per ordinem reseravi. Verum prius quam
epistola mea pervenisset Gandavum, Bostius in diebus Paschalibus e vita
migravit ad Christum. Cujus loci Prior literas accepit, aperuit, legit,
p^omissorumque novitate (ut reor) attonitus, multis aliis rogantibus legendas
and rescribendas communicavit. Hine est factum quod ipsa epistola mea, brevi
tempore, per totam pene Germaniam and Galliam divulgata, saepiusque a pluribus
rescripta, multos etiam doctissimos viros convertit in stuporem and
admirationem, usque adeo ut quid cum veritat^ s^ntire deberent, de me
haesitarent. Ex his fu re nonnulli qui meas in dicta Epistola Pollicitationes
constanter asseverarent frivolas, impossibiles, atque mendaces, and a me inanis
gloriae causa impudenter excogitatas.

Alij vero dicebant* Magna and miranda pollicetur iste Abbas Trithemius, quae
si potest, non aliter quam Daemonm ministerio potest, cum naturae metas procul
videantur exced^re. Si vero non potest, quis eum dubitabit esse mendacem, and
ab omnibus viris bonis and doctis merito refutandum: Sed absit procul utrumque
a me, quoniam naturalia promisi. Omnium vero incognita mea t^mere judicantium,
maxim temerarius, and iniquissimus rerum aestimator tandem prorupit in medium,
Carolus Bovillus, natione Picardus, qui cum superioribus partibus Alsatiae
peragratis, ad me gratia hospitij venisset in Spanheim per Treviros rediturus
in Galliam, qua poteram humanitate ipsum tractavi, and omnia hospitalitatis
b^n^ficia, quamdiu mecum fuit, hilari vultu exhibui. Cumque ut fieri solet
inter amicos maxim literarum studiosos, omnia mea gratissimo hospiti
exhibuissem videnda, cum aliis se obtulit etiam memoratum opus Steganographiae,
nec dum eo tempore consummatum. Vidit Bovillus, and obiter legit mente aliunde
occupatus se adinventum mirari dixit, laudavit, nec quo intelligeretur modo,
curavit. Unde cum non peteret intelligentiae clavem, nihil eorum, quae
continebantur ipsa lucrubatione nostra, meruit audire vel p^r^ipere. Reversus
p^st haec in Gal^am, malum bonis pro bono reddidit, and Christianae foedus
amicitiae turpiter violavit. Interrogatus ^nim per dominum Germanum de Ganay
communem amicum, post^a Episcopum Aurelianensem quid apud me reperisset,
vidissetque in Spanheim, falsa pro veris, mendacia pro beneficiis rescripsit,
damnans and temere judicans ea, quae comprehendere intellectu minime valebat.
Nam cum doctrinae sibi palmam invidia and mendacio crederet fore conferendam,
epistolam ad memoratum virum doctissimum falsitate, mendaciis, injuriis and
comtumeliis multis plenam rescripsit, in qua non intellectae Steganographiae
mentionem faciens, me pravis artibus deditum Magum and Necromanticum fals^,
mendaciter, and nimis injuriose temeraria praesumptione proclamat. Cujus
mendacissimis injuriis and Blasphemiis, Deo miserante, brevi taliter sum
resp^nsurus, quo intelligat omnis posteritas and me innoc^ntem, and Povillum
impium, crudelem, and temerarium esse in hac part mendacem. Constanter
affirmo, v^raciter dico, and confidenter in animam meam juro, cum Daemonibus,
pravis ac perniciosis, magicis vel necromanticis artibus me nullum unquam
habuisse c^mmercium: sed omnia and singula, quae vel scripsi, vel scripturum me
sum pollicitus pura esse, sana, naturalia, and Christianae fidei in nullo
penitus adversa. Unde non vereor mea promissa coram viris bonis and doctis,
quando and qu^ties opus fuerit, dare examini quorum determinationi nullatenus
intendo reluctari. Quod hanc Eovillanae temeritatis h^storiam huic praefationi
meae interposui, causa rationabilis fuit, vt intelligant omn^s maturo factum
consilio, quod hact^nus manet in tenebris opus Steganographiae sepultum, n^n
quod temeraria Fovilli judicia metuam: sed ne causam pluribus videar dare
similibus de me similia suspicandi. Enimvero quantum ad me attinet, malem
aemulos meos placare silentio, quam literis irritare, vel scripturis ad
insaniam provocare. Satius enim judicavi, omnia mirabiliter inventa perpetuo
damnare silentio, quam Magicae vel Necromanticae perniciosae superstitionis
notam, falsa etiam hominum aestimatione incurrere. Lateat ergo Steganographia
in tenebris, nec fiat Bovillanae Societati mendaci communis, quae de rebus
judicare consuevit incognitis, and depravare famam boni viri sola libidine
pravitatis. Veruntamen cohortantibus amicis, ut cum Bovillo intelligant aemuli
nostri, quam temeratam and ementitam nobis injuriam fecerit (manente suis in
terminis Steganographia) subjectum opus, quod Polygraphiam nuncupamus, per sex
libros distinctum in lucem edere consentimus. Legant qui volunt, and sine
stomacho legant hoc volumen amici, cujus cum latentia mysteria intellexerint
omnia, ipsi absque invidia sint judices, naturalia sint an superstitiosa. Scio
enim and certus sum omnia esse syncera, pura, naturalia, and ab omni studio
superstitionis malae remota.

Quoties autem sermo procedit obscurior, ea fit ratione, ne gladio defensionis
vesanus abuteretur ad interitum, quem animo and mente sanus ad sui d^fert
munimentum. Nihil tamen propterea in eo continetur mali, cum bonis etiam rebus
in malum abutantur perversi. Quisquis autem hanc editionem nostram condemnare
praesumpserit, ipse sibi conscius est and testis, quod eam nunquam veraciter
intellexit. Celantur sub aenigmatibus mysteria ne bacuceis fiant bubonum arcana
quomodolibet manifesta. Si quem haec scire delectat, remota procul invidia
Lector accedat.

Sum enim Christianus, sum Presbyter, sub norma Divi patris Benedicti and
Monachus, Christum diligo, and qua possum sinceritate mentis, devotus semper
adoro, nulla mihi sunt, nulla fuerunt, and protectore Deo nulla erunt cum
daemonibus commercia, nulla in Magicis, Necromant cis, seu profanis artibus
studia, nullae occupationes, nulla documenta. Qui de me aliter sentit, male
sentit, injuriam facit, and apertum Bovilli mendacium defendit.


And now having made Trithemius his own Advocate for the Lawfulness of his
Steganography, etc. We may the more safely deal with his several Proposals
therein contained; and to come to Particulars.

1. INQUIRY. How Trithemius might have performed without any unlawful Compact,
what he promises in his first Book?
Primus enim Liber continet plus quam centum modos, etc. The first Book (says
he) contains more than a hundred ways of Secret Writing, without all Suspicion,
without any Transposition of the Letters, without any fear of discovery, for no
Man by human Industry can know, nay or suspect the involved meaning of my
Letters, except he who knows the Art from me, or from him to whom I shall teach
it, etc.

SOLUTION.
Having already taken notice of several ways of Secret Writing, that would
never have given ground for Suspicion, if such Methods had not been first made
Public, much of the wonder now ceases. The Lacedaemonian Scytale, Julius and
Augustus's Inventions of Secrecy by Transposition of Letters: The Invention of
new Alphabets, in short none of the old Inventions of Secret Writing had this
Requisite, and before Trithemius employed his time that way, very few or none
ever thought of Preventing Suspicion in Secret Writing, or of the po^sibility
of it; and besides, the Art of Decyphering was then altogether unknown; so that
there might be some appearance of reason for his too confident Assertion; but
That it was no way answerable even then to the stress he laid upon it, will I
hope appear.

Those particular Methods that in great Probability he refers to, in the Words
cited, have nothing but hard Words to guard them against discovery, the
Invention has little of extraordinary contrivance in it; for it is only by
making the first Letters in the exterior Letter serve to express the inward
meaning, as I have observed, page 67. cap. 3. Or by intermitting one Word, so
that the first Letters, of the first, third, and fifth Words, etc. will be only
significant.

Schottus has several Examples to this purpose, and that I may not seem, Steg.
Class. 7. Erotem. 5.
quite to neglect any thing so much insisted on, by so great Authors, I have
insert one. v. g.

Let the Secret Intimation be, Hac nocte post XII. veniam ad te, circa januam,
que ducit ad Ortum, ubi me ecspectabis; age ut omnia sint parata.

Which by the former Artifice may be involved in the following Words.

Humanae Salutis Amator, qui creavit, omnia nobis indixit Obedientiam
Mundatorum, cui omnes tenemur obedire and obsequi. Praemium Sanctae Obedientiae
erit Sempiterna faelicitas timentibus Deum. Christi Obedientiam in omnibus
imitari Studeamus ut Vitam Aeternam promissam nobis Mereamur Ingredi cum
Angelis per Misericordiam Dei agamus Paenitentiam dum possumus; tempus vitae
est brevissimum; cito Mors imparatos offendet, repent Negligentes consumet,
Judici Animas transmittet. In Paenitentiam agenda Fratres non tardetis:
Velociter enim ad vos Mors veniet quam nemo vestrum diu evadere potest. Dies
ergo vestros transeuntes conspicite, Paenitentiam inchoate dum tempus habetis.
Ad quid diutius Negligitis? O Mors rerum horribilium terribil issima, quam
velociter nos miseros consumis! Vester incolatus Brevissimus est, Judicio
abnoxius, Mors omnes examini submittit. Exaudi nos Christ piissime Salvator.
Nobisque paenitere cupientibus esto propitius. Concede nobis Timorem and Amorem
tuum benignissime Redemptor, Indulgentiam Peccatorum Supplicantibus tribue.
Alme Creator Generis Humani exaudi nos, veniam nobis tribuens Scoelerum. o
Pater misericordissime, esto nobis Misericors! Infirmitatem nostram adjuva
clementissime; succurre misericorditer infirmis Animabus nostris, quoniam tui
sumus. Pater indulgentissime Animabus fidelium requiem concede, Angelis
conjunge, timentibus te adesse digneris.

Schottus, takes notice of a great many ways of varying this Secret
Contrivance, such as, by Beginning at the 2d. Word of the Exterior Letter, and
from thence to the 4th. 6th. etc. or to begin at the 3d. word, and proceed to
the 4th. etc. Or by interposing words betwixt some of the Letters in the Secret
Writing, and the rest to follow one another immediately, Or otherways by
intermitting sometimes two words in the Epistle enfolding, and sometimes one,
etc.

All which are very Laborious to write, and very easily decyphered, if
suspected.

Now that this Method of Secret Writing, was the Subject of Trithemius's first
Book of Steganography, there are good Arguments. For,

1. It is published in a Book entitled Clavis Steganographiae that goes under
Trithemius his Name.

2. Tho Schottus seems to question whether this was really, Steganog. ibid.
any part of Trithemius's Writings; yet he tacitly acknowledges it. (Says he)
Qui Clavem edidit, Artificium non intellexit, etc. He who published the Clavis
has not understood the Artifice; for the Old German Words in the Example are
altered into the Modern Dutch, which change, confounds the Sense, etc. Now
certainly if the Publisher had been Author, he must be supposed to have
understood his own Example; but it is acknowledged he did not.

2. On the other hand I see no improbability, but that this Clavis
Steganographiae Trithemii is Genuine; for since others of his Writings were
published long after his Death, which are acknowledged by all to be his own,
why might not this Manuscript fall into the Hands of some Person, that
particular and private Considerations might induce to send it abroad for
Company? And withal his peculiar Style in obscuring plain Things, is a
convincing Argument of the Truth of it.

3. And withal this way of Secret Writing, can easily admit of a hundred and
odd Variations, and agrees with his Proposition in all Things, except the
Intricacy, he attributes to it. But this is not, the only Hyperbole, he makes
use of.

INQUIRY II. Into the 2d. Book of his Steganography.
Secundus Liber multa Mirabiliora continent, etc. (i. e.) The second Book
contains many things more strange, viz. By this Art I can communicate my
Intentions (by Fire) to any one instructed in it, at any distance, a hundred
Miles or more, without Words, without Writing, and without Signs, by any
Messenger, who, tho he be apprehended by the way, and examined by the most
severe Tortures, he can reveal nothing of my Message, because he knows nothing
of it. Nay whatever occurs it can never be discovered, and all the Men on Earth
if assembled together, can ever unmask it without more than natural help. This
I can at pleasure perform without a Messenger: I can express my Mind at a great
distance to a close Prisoner, three Miles under ground: Let him be under the
strictest Custody; all this I can do effectually, and at all times, when and
how often I will, etc.

By what Methods Trithemius could perform all this, has been enquired into, by
Schottus, Kircherus, and many others; and it will be found a very bard task to
give any satisfactory account of the means; for the whole Propositions can most
naturally be RESOLVED into Contradictions: For,

1. There is a way of Converse proposed, abstracting from all means of
Discourse: Without WORDS, without WRITING, and without SIGNS.

2. He proposes to inform his Confident without a Sign, and yet by a Sign, viz.
Fire; for if Fire or Smoke when used for Secret Information, be not truly
significatory Signs both Reason and Grammar are at a great loss.

3. He pretends, that he could express his Mind to a close Prisoner at a great
distance, and three German Miles under ground, whenever, and how often he
pleased; And this I am persuaded he had omitted, if he had tried the
Experiment, upon one, in a Gulf, but half a German mile, below the surface of
the Earth, etc.

As for the Conjectures for reconciling the last Propositions to Sense, they
want not their own Difficulties: But since we must necessarily grant, that his
Words are aenigmatically proposed, there must be the greater allowance given.

His Propositions in the second Book are reducible to three.

1. To Communicate his Secret Intentions by any Messenger to his Confederate at
any distance, without any Writing, etc. And that by Fire.

2. To Communicate his Intentions (by Fire) without a Messenger. And

3. To signify his Mind to a close Prisoner, under ground, etc.

By the first, Schottus is of Opinion, that Trithemius understood that way of
Secret Writing mentioned, Chap. 1. Sect. 6. which will be only Visible when
held by the Fire. He says the Messenger cannot reveal the Message, because he
knows not the Contents of it: And if intercepted, nothing could be understood
by it, because the Artifice was at that time known to few or none, except
Trithemius: And when it comes to the Confederate's Hands, he may find out the
meaning by Fire, without any word or sign, made by the Writer, upon the Paper,
by Fire.

If you approve of this Resolution; by the words, without Writing or Signs,
must be understood, apparent and visible Letters or Signs. And indeed this is
the most natural Construction can be put upon them.

But there is another, wants not some kind of probability, viz. That these
words may signify, some Secret Conveyance by Writing upon the Messenger's
Skin, such as that we observed, Chap. 4. concerning Histiaeus: This conjecture
is likewise mentioned by Schottus: For by (FIRE) Trithemius may understand a
Virtual Fire, viz. Aqua Fortis, etc. And WRITING and SIGNS may be explained as
before.

As to the second Proposition it may be referred to that Secret way of
Information by Torches, or by Fire and Smoke, etc. mentioned Chap. 2. Sect. 2.

The other Conjectures here are Fabulous, particularly that of Cornelius
Agrippa, Lib. 1. Philosoph. Occult. Cap. 6. viz. By opposing a Glass with
Letters writ upon it to the Full-Moon, which being magnified in the Air, and
carried back to the Moon with her reflected Beams, are there perceptible.

And as for the third, it may respect the Species of Sound, because of the
Supposition of being so strictly shut up, unless he had an Eye at some of those
Secret ways of Conveyance mentioned Chap. 4. which last, I rather incline to
believe, as being the more easy and safe Contrivance, considering the supposed
Circumstances of a close Prisoner; nor does Trithemius propose the Performance
of the last by Fire, or without Writing, etc.

And this Conjecture will appear the more probable, when we come to consider
the barbarous and strange Terms, he wrapped up those known Experiments in.

I know there are likewise Fables here confidently related, of means for
entertaining a Correspondence at any distance, by help of two Needles of an
equal size, touched by the same Loadstone, moving in a circle, whereon the
Letters of the Alphabet are described, etc. And that by the mutual Insition of
Blood or Flesh, between two Confederates, etc. But the Performance of either is
impossible in Nature; as Kircherus Schottus, and other great Naturalists have
clearly demonstrated.

INQUIRY III. Concerning the third Book of Steganography.
Tertius Liber docet Artem, per quam possum Hominem, etc. The third Book
teaches an Art, by which I can instruct a Man Ignorant of Letters, only knowing
his Mother Tongue, tho he never understood one word of Latin, in the space of
two Hours, to Write, Read, and Understand Latin, ornately and eloquently, etc.

This Art agrees exactly with that he afterward published in his Polygraphy,
only in the last he explains some ambiguous Words in the former, v. g. These
Words, to write, Read and understand Latin, ornately and eloquently, etc. Are
rendered in the exposition of his first Book of Polygraphy to this purpose, In
paucis Diebus non dicam horis informare poteris, etc. In a few days, not to say
hours, you may teach one ignorant of the Latin Tongue; to read, write, speak
and understand it; indeed not every thing in it, but to such a degree as any
exigence in his affairs shall require.

Now a part of the Fallacy in his Epistle to Arnoldus Bostius lurks in that
expression, that he could make a Man, read, write and understand Latin,
ornately and eloquently, without any exception. Whereas on the contrary, his
Scholar shall only Read, or Communicate any Secret Message in his
Mother Tongue, concealed under certain Forms of Prayers or Exhortations in
Latin; of which he neither understands the natural meaning, nor can he change
the Forms given him, upon occasion: Now to explain this ingenious Art a little,

1. There must be a vast number of common Alphabets writ down.

2. And to each of the Letters of every particular Alphabet, must be joined
Words that are Synonyma, or of the like signification, and these Words serve to
express the Letters unto which they are opposite.

3. If all the Words expressing A, in the several Alphabets, do make up an
Oration; and all the Words in each rank be of like signification. And if A in
Writing by this Method, begin orderly at the first Alphabet, taking one Word
thence, and another from the second, and the next from the third, etc. as they
shall express the Letters of the Secret Intention: It Is easy to conceive, how
a Man that is Ignorant of Latin must yet ornately write Latin. But that this
may be further Evident, I have hereunto added a few of Trithemius's Alphabets.

ALPHABET. 1.
A Deus B Creator C Conditor D Opifex E Dominus F Dominator G Consolator H
Arbiter I Judex K Illuminator L Illustrator M Rector N Rex O Imperator P
Gubernator Q Factor R Fabricator S Conservator T Redemptor V Auctor W Princeps
X Pastor Y Moderator Z Salvator
2.
A Clemens B Clementissimus C Pius D Piissimus E Magnus F Excelsus G Maximus H
Optimus I Sapientissimus K Invisibilis L Immortalis M Aeternus N Sempiternus O
Gloriosus P Fortissimus Q Sanctissimus R Incomprehensibilis S Omnipotens T
Pacificus V Misericors W Misericordissimus X Cunctipotens Y Magnificus Z
Excellentissimus.
3.
A Creans B Regens C Conservans D Moderans E Gubernans F Ordinans G Ornans H
Exornans I Constituens K Dirigens L Producens M Decorans N Stabiliens O
Illustrans P Intuens Q Movens R Confirmans S Custodiens T Cernens V Discernens
W Illuminans X Fabricans Y Salvificans Z Faciens
4.
A Coelos B Coelestia C Supercoelestia D Mundum E Mundana F Homines G Humana H
Angelos I Angelica K Terram L Terrena M Tempus N Temporalia O Aevum P Aeviterna
Q Omnia R Cuncta S Universa T Orbem V Astra W Solemn X Stellas Y Vitam Z
Viventia
5.
A Impendat B Conferat C Donet D Largiatur E Concedet F Condonet G Tribuat H
Distribuat I Retribuat K Contribuat L Indulgeat M Exhibeat N Praestet O Offerat
P Deferat Q Ostendat R Revelet S Manifestet T Insinuet V Aspiret W Restituat X
Reddat Y Administret Z Faveat
6.
A Omnibus B Cunctis C Universis D Credentibus E Nobis F Christianis G
Fidelibus H Petentibus I Expetentibus K Orantibus L Exorantibus M Postulantibus
N Expostulantibus O Quaerentibus P Christicolis Q Inquirentibus R Requirentibus
S Exquirentibus T Optantibus V Exoptantibus W Praeoptantibus X Exspectantibus Y
Sperantibus Z Desiderantibus
7.
A Vitam B Amoenitatem C Jucunditatem D Consolationem E Laetitiam F Gloriam G
Foelicitatem H Beatitudinem I Visionem K Jubilationem L Quietem M Requiem N
Mansionem O Habitationem P Recreationem Q Fruitionem R Lucem S Exultationem T
Claritatem V Pacem W Tranquillitatem X Glorificationem Y contemplationem Z
Securitatem
8.
A Permansuram B Aeternam C Sempiternam D Coelestem E Supercoelestem [cum
Omnibus] F Perpetuam G Beatissimam H Angelicam I Seraphicam K Immortalem L
Immarcessibilem M Ineffabilem N incomprehensibilem O Inaestimabilem P Luminosam
Q Splendidam [cum Universit] R Lucidissimam S Amaenisimam T Perrennem V
Sanctissimam W Interminabilem X Dulcissimam Y Perfectam Z Futuram
9.
A Sanctis B Electis C Praedilectis D Sanctissimis E Justis F Justificatis G
Praedestinatis H Angelis I Arch-Angelis K Amatoribus [suis in] L Cultoribus M
Amicis N Apostolis O Prophetis P Discipulis Q Martyribus R Sanctificatis S
Dominationibus T Dilectis V Civibus W Servis X Famulis Y Ministris Z
Confessoribus
10.
A Coelis B Coelestibus C Supercoelestibus D Aeternum E Perpetuum F
Sempiternum. G Saecula Saeculorum H Aevum Sanctum I Saeculum K Regno Coelorum L
Altissimis M Excelsis N Paradiso O Olympo P Paradisiacis Q Olympicis R
Fulgoribus S Foelicitate T Foe^^citatibus [Amen.] V Gloria W Honor X
Magnificentia Y Luce perpetua Z Patria Coelesti.
The first four Books of Trithemius's Polygraphy, contain nothing but a
Continuation of such Alphabets, only in the third and fourth, they are
conceived in Barbarous Words: I have insert these few only, and given no
Example, because the manner of Writing by them is by this time obvious.

Note the Words writ in a different Character at the side of the rest, signify
nothing to the Confederates; but are added in the outward Writing to make up
the seeming Sense, and when there are two of them, one is only used.

Remarks upon the foregoing Method of Secret Writing.
I have not hitherto insisted upon this Method of Secret Writing: Nor do I here
pretend to SOLVE the Difficulties in Decyphering it: But I have made some
occasional Remarks as to the practice of it. And

1. According to Trithemius, there must be a new Alphabet for every Letter in
the private Epistle.

2. These Alphabets require a more than ordinary Ingenuity in their Contrivance.

3. When the Alphabets are exactly framed; the least mistake in the Writer,
turns the Secret Intimation into a Chaos.

4. But suppose there were nothing amiss in the whole Design, (which is enough
in all Conscience freely to grant) yet there is more Time, and Pains required
in Writing and Reading, by this Artifice, than a Man in Business, can dispense
with: For (as we have observed) according to, Trithemius, the Key must contain
as many Alphabets, as the Secret Epistle has Letters in it: Now in Argile's
long Letter insert in the Discoveries made in Scotland, there are upwards of a
thousand Words; and if he had taken Trithemius's way of concealing it, there
had been five or six thousand Alphabets used in the Key: And I leave it to
ARITHMETIC to RESOLVE. How much Time a particular Search into each of those
Alphabets will amount to. And to STOCISM (for none, but of that Sect will try)
how much Patience.

Athanasius Kircherus in his Steganography Endeavors to improve Trithemius's
Method. The alterations I observe are these.

1. Kircherus contrives his Key in form of an Ordinary Epistle: Whereas
Trithemius conceives his, in forms of Prayer, which is more Liable to
Suspicion, especially in an age, when the greatest Villainies are committed
under a Form of Godliness.

2. Kircherus has Alphabets of several Languages, whereby a man may choose what
speech he pleases for his Exterior Letter, tho he understand not the Genuine
meaning of one Word of it. But this was proposed by Trithemius.

3. Kircherus's Key consists not of many Words so that if the Secret or
Interior Epistle be not conceived in a few, it gives Ground of Suspicion and of
Resolution too.

For the Words that express every particular Alphabet (as before) being of like
Signification, (that the outward Writing may have a seeming Sense,) at every
return you shall have the same sense, tho not in the same words, which gives
ground to suspect, and if the Writing be long, and many returns, to Solve it.

Again, suppose that several Letters, writ by the same Key were seized, (which
is no great improbability) the Sense of all shall be to the same purpose, and
that gives cause enough of Jealousy, and facilitates the Discovery.

And having considered Trithemius's tedious Method, and Kircherus's way of
abbreviating it, both are liable to so many Inconveniences, that it is evident,
many of the Proposals for Secret Information considered in the first Chapter,
and particularly that of the Lord Bacon's by Writing omnia per omnia is
preferrable to it.

INQUIRY IIII. Into the Contents of the 4th. Book of Steganography.
Quartus Liber continet multa stupenda Experimenta, etc. The fourth Book
contains many wonderful Experiments, but simply Natural, viz. I can fully
communicate my Conceptions to my confident, when we are eating or sitting with
others, without Words, without Gestures: As also in Discourse, in Preaching,
Playing upon the Organ, or Singing, and that without any Impediment of either
Action, so that in Preaching things good and holy, I can reveal my mind
Secretly without Words, Signs or Gestures, etc.

These Words to my thinking may be reduced to three Propositions.

1. A Secret way of Converse in Company is proposed (inter edendum vel
sedendum) without Words or Gestures,

2. By a premediated Oration, or any Discourse, to reveal an Intention; without
Words, Signs, or Gestures. And

3. By Musical Notes, to inform a Confederate.

And I suppose they are all so jumbled together of Design, that these Words,
without Words Signs or Gestures, might be attributed by the unwary, to every
one of the particular Proposals. And certainly by SIGNS, etc. must be
understood Signs PERCEPTIBLE, or else his Words fall under the first
Contradiction, that was observed in the Preceding Inquiry. And having noted
this, I proceed.

As to the first, In eating or sitting in Company, everry Action may be
significant by Compact, that is necessary or usual, as calling for Drink,
wiping of the Mouth, or Hands, etc. And he does not Exclude Signs in the first
Proposition.

As to the second Proposition, it is very naturally reducible to that kind of
Secrecy in Speech, we have considered Chap. 3. Sect. 1. Paragraph 3. So that in
Preaching Bona and Sancta, one may couch any Intimations, WITHOUT any Sign or
Gesture; or Words (i. e.) Words extrinsick to the outward Sense of the
Discourse; but this savors too much of Impiety.

As to the Third, That the Differences of Sound, and particularly of Musical
Notes, either in Music, Instrumental or Vocal, may be applied to the Letters
of the Alphabet, is already observed.

And now having Inquired into the Mysterious Difficulties, that relate to
Secret Information contained in the Epistle to Arnoldus Bostius, I shall examine
a few other of the Obscurities mentioned by Trithemius.

INQUIRY V. Into the several Mystical Expressions, Trithemius has left upon
Record in his Polygraphy.
Trithemius in the Preface of his Polygraphy, Polyg. page 17.
has these hard Words. Magnus Romanorum Caesar Augustus, t^nebroso cupiens in
arduis uti nunciorum ministerio, spiramina vocis conceptae mutavit ex lucidis
in Opaca, quorum barbariem votis renitentem, Metatheseos Orchemate pulchra
inventione, ad nutum convenientem effecit, and iste receptivus and quasi
perpetuus ordo thelemati nihilominus and temporis rationi subjectus, quanquam
nuncios ab incursione Bacuceorum conservet in via securos: sui tamen regulatas
non custodiens metas, intuentes faciet omnes de suspicione rei sollicitos.

All the Mystery is no more, than that Augustus by Transposition of the Letters
of the Alphabet, Polyg. page 45.
changed their Powers, as we have it from his own Authority in his Exposition
to Maximilian.

Again in his Preface, he tells us, Archimides ille Syracusianus Mathematicorum
facile Princeps, P. 17, 18.
albam suis convenientem institutis Volucrem, nudam per Caput and Pedes, bactro
in formam Tetragoni reciso circumferenter affixit, ordinatisque debita
proportione Ministris, opus volatili commendavit instrumento, donec in picam
Imago Volucris albae mutata comparuit. Quo rite peracto, resolvit affixam sua
manu, quam ut avolare permisisset, facta est subito inter familiares
penetralium facies disjunctio magna, surrexitque mox tortuosae imaginis
monasticae prius monstrum nimis vagabundum, cujus in aspectu nemo quod erat
potuit cogitare. Nec prius conquievit bubonum dissensio, donec Imago Magistri,
picam site religasset Tetragono consimili.

This Wonderful Monster, at last by his own Metamorphosis is turned into that
Invention of Secret Writing by the Lacedaemonian Scytale, mentioned page 91.

Alii enim Familiares ministerio Artis praepositae, Page 50.
Bubones habebant Philophotos alij Misophotos, etc.

By Bubones, he all along expresses Secret Writing, and what Philophoti and
Misophoti do denote, is clear from the words themselves, viz. Philophoti,
Apparent Characters from (...) and (...); Misophoti, Occult or Invisible
Characters from (...).

The Hieroglyphick he takes to Express Secret Writing, in General, by the Owl,
is very Natural: But when he says habebant Bubones Philophotos, the Expression
is not so very agreeable; for Owls have no great kindness for the Light; as
also Light and Secret Information were ever at variance.

A Little after Speaking of Visible and Invisible Characters, he says, Trith.
ibid.
Modiv^ro Characterum Visibilium, pro scriptura occulta nimis sunt multi, ac
paene innumerabiles, etc. Invisibilium autem tria sunt genera inter Mortales
hodie magis usitata. Primum nuncupatur Dermaticum, quod fit in Dorso Nunciorum,
Scriptura quedam Artificialis per Loturam cujusdam hum^ris duntaxat visibilis,
quam penetrarenemo sufficit; qui artis nescierit arcanum. Secundum vero
Hyphasmaticum dicitur, quo rebus certis in Panno scribitur, quod exsiccatum,
videri potest minime; donec Madefactum in aqua frigida cernatur. Tertium genus
nominatur Aleoticum, quod est multiplex and varium, tam in forma, quam in
Materia, habetque modos occulti scribendi paene Innumerabiles; ejus autem
Scriptura fit in Charta, vel sine Charta, cum Nemilua, and Cala cum Raphocam,
Lapolce, alijsque rebus diversis. Scribuntur item Literae, ac varijs modis
absconduntur and Locis, ut sub Race Tabulata, sub Rofirila cubior, in Leopi, in
Necoflas, in Ceocali, Locubat, in Ratera, in Lispilia, and aliis similibus
paene infinitis, etc. Of all which in O^der.

And First, he himself explains the meaning of Dermaticum, to be an Artificial
kind of Writting on the Messengers back, not visible until washed with a
Certain Liquor. The word is dirived from (...), which signifies the skin: By
what means this may be performed Baptista Porta, Kircherus, Schottus, and many
more give an account; Plin. lib. 26. cap. 8.
but for Antiquities sake, I shall only Repeat Pliny's words in his * Natural
History, to the like purpose. Tythimalum, Nostri berbam laclariam vocant, See
the preceding Chapter.
alii Laclucam caprinam: Narrantque lacte ejus inscripto Corpore cum inaruerit,
si cinis inspergatur apparere Literas. Et ita quidem Adulteros alloqui maluere
quam codicillis.

2. Trithemius likewise explains Hyphasmaticum to be an Experiment, whereby a
man may write upon Cloth, and the Letters to be indiscernible, until the Cloth
be wet in cold Water. Hyphasma is a Greek word, signifying Cloth, or Weaving.

3. The third kind of Writing secretly by Latent Characters mentioned, he calls
Aleoticum I know none that have given any Account what it is, but it may be
derived from (...) to avoid. Trithemius only tells us that it is Manifold and
various, both as to the Form and Matter, and has almost Infinite ways of Secret
Writing, and that either with or without Paper, etc. That a man may write
secretly without Paper, we have already given several practicable Instances in
the 4th Chap. We shall now proceed to those adduced by Trithemius in this
place. And,

1. A man says he may write cum Nemilua, Schot. Steg. Class. 7.
which in all probability is put instead of these words cum Alumne (i. e.) with
Alum, for the one is only a transposition of the Letters of the other; an
Obscurity Trithemius did very much affect.

2. By Cala may be understood Lac, Schot. ibid.
(i.e.) Milk, and the Redundant Letter perhaps has been added Euphoniae gratia.

I have already considered secret Writing with Alum and Milk, Chap. 1. Chap. 6.

3. Cum Raphocam (i. e.) Cum Camphora, Schot. ibid.
Camphire, a kind of Gum.

4. Cum Lapolce, is interpreted cum Cepolla, (i. e.) an Onyon.

Now after these Instances Trithemius comes next to treat of another part of
his Aleotical kind of Secret Information. for (says he) as Epistles may be
secretly written, so they may be several ways, and in several places Concealed.

1. Sub Race Tabulata (i. e.) Sub Tabula cerata, Schot. ibid.
viz. The Letters inscribed may be covered over with Wax, as in that Instance
we Mentioned of Demaratus, etc.

2. Sub Rofirila cubior, Schot. ibid.
some interpret this sub floribus Rubi; but Schottus is not pleased with that
Interpretation, but thinks it may perhaps be read, Sub Rofirila Mubios, sub
foliis Arborum, a Concealing of Letters under the Leaves of Trees.

3. In Leapi, (i. e.) in Pileo, or to hide Letters in a Hat, Helmet, or Cap.

4. In Necoflas (i. e.) in Flascone, to conceal Epistles in a Bottle or Viol.

5. In Ceocali (i. e.) in Calceo, only the last Letter is redundant.

6. In Locubat (i. e.) in Baculo, the last Letter being again redundant.

7. In Ratera (i. e.) in Terra, under ground.

8. In Lispilia (i. e.) in Palliis, in Cloths.

And now having in the last place Inquired into the Wonderful Proposals for
Secret Information mentioned by Trithemius first in an Epistle to Arnoldus
Bostius; and afterward in his Polygraphy to the Emperor Maximilian, I shall
not insist further at this time.

FINIS.

