A Faithful Remonstrance, Of all the chief matters of Note which have
happened in and about Dublin, and other parts of Ireland, from the 26 of
January, to this present, being the 1 of March, 1642.

Wherein is truly set down, 1 An exact Relation of several great Discomfitures
given to the Rebels by the Protestant Army, with the number of men slain, and
taken prisoners on both sides as near as could be gathered. 2 How Sir Nicholas
white, Alderman Ianes, and some others, all rich men both for lands and money,
were committed prisoners to the Castle of Dublin, by the L. Chief Justices of
Ireland. 3 The names of diverse Towns which the Protestants have been forced to
burn, to take away from the Rebels the benefit of housing, and to punish the
inhabitants who concurred with them. 4 A ver^y remarkable passage concerning
Carnow Castle, which having been long besieged by the Enemy, was at last
relieved and totally freed by the Politic invention and courageous adventure
of a Gentlwoman by name Mistress Rochford. Lastly, how 65 chief Officers and
Commanders over the Irish Rebels, with all and every of their partakers,
ayders, or Confederates are proclaimed Traitors and notorious Rebels, against
our most gracious Sovereign Lord King CHARLES, his Crown and Dignity, which
Proclamation was read in both Houses of Parliament, on Tuesday the 22 of Feb.
1641.


Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by a perfect Copy, for J. Wright, dwelling in the Old-Bailey,
1642.

FROM DVBLIN.
January 26.
AT Swords, Fingals, Santry and other Towns thereabouts were lately burnt to
take away from the Rebels the benefit of housing, and to punish the Inhabitants
who concurred with them. So now Rathcoule and Tasagard are burnt by 200 of our
Horse, sent out for that purpose. The two troops divided themselves, so as tho
one half were at Rathcoule, and the other at Tosagard; those at Rathcoule were
encountered by 1000 Foot of the Rebels, whereupon our Horses seemed to retreat:
The Rebels pursued them. And when our Horse came to a place of advantage, to
the small brook on this side Rathcoule, where two ways meet; the one to
Rathcoule, the other to Tosaggard: there our Horse met and charged them, and
the Rebels betook them to their heels, and so were routed: Our Soldiers
followed the executioners and therein slew 60 of the Rebels; and among them a
Captain of 200 Foot, namely, Mr. Andrew Ley, brother to Mr. Ley of Rathbride in
the County of Kildare, an English man's son. Andrew married to Sir Richard Cooks
daughter, sometime Secretary of State here. These Rogues had hardly any powder,
and for match used weeks of candles.

January the 27, 1641.
THe last night some of our Horse sallied out to Racoule 6 miles from Dublin,
where they met with 5 or 600 of the Rebels, which made as though they would
have stood to a Skirmish, being the greater number by many hundreds: but proved
otherwise, for our men slew 80 or 100 of them, and the rest ran away, our men
brought in some pillage of Cattle sheep and swine, and came all safe in again,
blessed be God for his gracious protection.

I writ of a report of a late onset of the enemy made upon Droghedagh which is
yet continued to be true, which was to be done this day 7 night, but the Rebels
have cut off all our passage by land, so that what we hear is by their own
relation, which is, that our men have given the Enemy a great overthrow, having
slain 1500 men, whereof 2 were Lords, and one that was of estate in Lands,
better than some of the Lords, in which as they themselves report, we lost not
above six men, the Lord grant it may prove true.

This week our Lords Justices and Counsel have committed to the Castle of
Dublin, Sir Nicholas White Alderman, Janes and Sedgrave of the Caberagh, all
rich men, both for lands and money, and many in this City deserve the like, had
they their due desert.

Carnow Castle has been long besieged by the Enemy, and yet holds out, but
driven to a great strait, but in hope to be relieved by a Gentlewoman which was
in it, she being formerly well acquainted with the chief of those Rebels: the
plot was this; that she should go forth to him, with a complaint of their
misery, not being able to endure it: she having a sister within the Castle in
the like case, that if they might be freed, she would be a means that the
Rebels might take the Castle, of which they were glad to hear of: she
propounded the way, which was, that should he send with her, according to her
directions, 5 or 6 of the chief, which she named, which she would undertake to
bring into the Castle, and the rest to be ready, that when the Iron gate was
opened for her to come in, these 5 or 6 should follow close to her, and keep
the gate open, till the rest were come in, all which was performed, but with
such a devise, which those in the Castle with her had devised with Iron
Chains, that when the few with her self were come in, they kept out all the
rest, by which they in the Castle have got good prisoners into them to make
their own conditions for what they want, or to hang their prisoners over the
wall, which the Rebels will be very unwilling of, they being prime men amongst
them, these Gentlewomen are of the Rochfords, who have 2 brothers here, the one
a Captain, the other a Lieutenant, both of them valiant Soldiers, good
Commanders, and true and faithful subjects.

January 31.
Colonel Hugh, M. Phelym Birne, Colonel Roger, alias Rory O Moore, Colonel
Sutton and others, to the number of 200, kept about the Haas, Lions Newcastle,
Oughterard and Kill. The Earl of Ormond attended by the L. Lamble, Sir Charles
Coote, Sir Simon Harcourt, Sir Tho. Newcomer and others, to the number of 2000
Foot, and 300 Horse, with 3 or 4 Field pieces, marched to Newcastle and burnt
it to the ground: and also Lions, Rathcridan, and Oughterard, and burnt also
the roofs of the Castles in those parts, whereof there are many. Then they
marched to the Haas (where the Rebels were so heartily entertained) plundered
the Town, as it well deserved, burnt Tipp, Midlaghcash, Newland, Killcullen
bridge, Castlimtin, and in their return Johnston and Kill and returned home on
Thursday, the Soldiers laden with pillage. In all which places the Rebels
that bragged so much of their number and valor, had not the courage to look our
men in the face. I cannot yet learn that Edward Allen that is in possession of
Castlewarming was met with, but I believe his fathers house in Oughterard
escaped not.

Feb. 1.
This morning some of our Army both Horse and Foot, marched with 8 pieces to
new Castle Lions, 7 miles from Dublin, a Town wherein are 7 Castles, in which
the Enemy kept their Camp, but before our Army came to the Town, the Enemy
were sled and had taken away with them all the pillage, but our Army marched
forward to the Nase where the Enemy had another Camping place 5 miles farther,
but of their success we yet hear no certainty of: The Lord, in mercy prosper
them, and send them a victorious and safe return, of which we hope and pray
for.

This last night Captain Scout, with his horse all volunteers went forth
toward Clantarffe, and returning about break of the day to Drumconran, which
is but a mile from Dublin, they were beset by the Enemy both horse and foot, to
the number of five hundred, and our men being not forty, yet they came off with
honor, not loosing one man nor horse.

The good Lady Offalie, with the young Lord and your brother, with the rest in
that Castle, have been driven to great distress, by reason of two of her
servants, that would have betrayed them by a Rope from off the wall, one night
when he should have watched went to the Rebels and told them, how to cut off
the water from them in the Castle, which was done, whereupon they in the castle
were forced to put their lives upon it to sally out, which they did, and when
they had slain ten or twelve of the Rebels the rest sled, so that by Gods good
providence they in the Castle had liberty, and opportunity to relieve
themselves, not only in water but in Corn which the Rebels had threshed for
themselves, but none of their own, those in the Castle burnt the houses and
Church, so as if they come again there will be no shelter for them: since I
have not heard from them, for they cannot send to me, nor I to them; the enemy
lying in such abundance between them and Dublin, the Lord in mercy look upon
us all.

Feb. 3. 1641.
This day our Army blessed be God, are safely returned home, where they have
done good service in burning fifteen or sixteen Rebellious Towns and
Castles, which harbored the enemy, and brought with them Cattle and other
pillage, but the Rebels themselves fled before our Army came to them, only one
Castle where they discharged once, and so ran away; We have so many Papists and
Spies on their part amongst us in this City, that we cannot do or intend to do
any thing, but they have present notice given them: The Lord in mercy remove
them all.

Our Army have brought these prisoners, Mr. George Aylmer of Lions, Mr. Tho.
Ash and Tra. Ash of the Haas, and Higgam the Friar, and they had another of
quality, Mr. Bendly Britten, who married the widow Aylmer of Lions, but he
escaped.

February 9.
Sir Nich, White is committed close prisoner, and Alderman James it is thought
it will go very hard with the Alderman, he is charged with sending
intelligence to the Rebels.

This day grand Iuries are summoned to appear for the Counties of Kildare,
Wicklo, Mead, and other places, and I believe the Lords of the Pale, and most
of the prime men who are active in the business will be indicted of Treason.

Our Army has not had any pay these three weeks, but are deferd upon the City,
which does prove very heavy and burdensome. God turn the wind, that we may
have some ease and comfort by the Treasure, least we should be ruined, as the
poorer sort are already, some being forced to diet 6.8.10. some more, some
less.

February 12.
This day 1000. of our men commanded by the Lord Lambte, marched to the Deames
Grange, 5. miles off, where were above a thousand of the Rebels; our men fought
with them, routed them, and slew above a hundred of the Rebels: and among them
some, Captains, and Lievtenants of the Cavenaghs, Sir Morgan Cavenagh himself
was not there, but was gone to Art Cavenaghes at Threecastles three days
before. Our men took one of quality, Edw. Walsh second son of old Master
Walsh of Clonmanim, who looks now like a Rogue, and some fifteen more, who are
inconsiderable persons. He and they will be hanged, which is a death too good
for them; there was not one man killed on our side, and but one hurt. I hope Sir
Morgan Cavenaghs son, who is now a prisoner in the Castle, will be hanged,
seeing his fathers ungrateful treachery now appearing in Rebellion, discovers
it, his and his sons coming hither 23 October. under the pretense of taking a
house there was for no good.

February 14.
Here is nothing but spoil and destruction on both sides, and when there will
be an end of it God only knows, so many of all sorts in all places are
involved in this fatal business, which will be the destruction of most of the
ancient families in this Kingdom; many whereof were never oucht with the least
touch or blemish of disloyalty before these unhappy times. In the County of
Kildare, we have near 300 indicted of Treason in the Kings Bench and the Bills
found, among which are most of our prime Gentlemen, as Eustug of Castlemertin,
Newland, Mollaghcash, and Cradockeston, Sutton of Tipp. Owgan of Rathcofsi, Sir
Andrew Aylmer, Aylmer of Lions, the old Countess of Kildare, Sir Nich White,
and his son Captain Nich. White, (whose Officers with his 100. Soldiers and
Arms went to the Rebels in November. last) and who not?

In the County of Mead, all the Lords, and in that, and in the Counties of
Dublin, and Wickle, most of prime men. God send a good issue, this Kingdom was
never at such a pass: No man is sure of any thing in his own possession; and
of what is in the hands of others, nothing can be had on any terms.

February 15.
Captain Cadogan came from Sir Fr. Tichborn by boat on the 5. of this Month,
and then he was well, though in some want of victuals and other necessaries;
and now he returns with those provisions, God grant them a safe passage. He
assures us that Sir Fr. has at several times since he sat down in Drogheda
flaine 1000. of the Rebels, and has not lost by the hand of the enemy above
six men.

February 22.
This day there was a Proclamation read in both Houses of Parliament, beating
date the eight of February 1641. wherein Sir Philem O Neal, Sir Con Magenis,
Patrick mac Cartan, and 62 more of the chief Commanders, and other Officers
over the Irish Rebels, with all their and every of their Partakers, Ayders,
Maintainers, Comforters, Confederates, Accomplices and Associates, were
proclaimed apparent, notorious, ungrateful, wicked, vile and unnatural
T^aytors and Rebels, against our most gracious Sovereign Lord Charles, by the
grace of God King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defendor of the
Faith, etc. His Royal Crown and dignity. Willing therefore, requiring,
warranting and authorizing all his Majesty's good and loving Subjects, to
pursue and plague with fire and sword, apprehend, destroy, and kill by all the
ways and means they may, all the said persons, their partakers, etc.

Declaring also to all men, as well good Subjects as others, that whosoever
shall betwixt that time and the 25 day of March next, kill or cause to be killed
any of the said Rebels, shall have for their reward as follows, viz. For the
head of Sir Philem O Neal 1000. l. Sir Con Magenis 600 Rory Magwire 600 Philip
mac Hugh mac Shane O Rely 600 Collo mac Brian mac Mahon 600

And for the rest of the notorious Rebels nominated in the Proclamation, 300 l.
a head, and pardon for all his or their offenses that shall kill and so bring
in, or cause to be killed, and so brought in the said head or heads.

This Proclamation issued forth under the hands of the Lords Justices and
Counsel of Ireland, whose names are as follows, Ormond Ossory. R. Dillon.
Cha. Lambart. Ad. Loftus. Cha. Coote. Tho. Rotheram. Fra. Willoughby. Rob.
Meredith. J. Temple.


FINIS.

