A further ACCOUNT, OF THE PROCEEDINGS AGAINST THE REBELS in the West of
ENGLAND; Who on the 10th. of September, 1685. To the Number of Two-Hundred
Fifty One Received Sentence of Death, at Dorchester for High Treason Of which
Number 67. were ordered to be Executed at Lyme, Bridport, Weymouth,
Melcom-Regis, Sherborn, Pool, and Wareham, and the Remainder respited till
farther Order, September the 11th, 1685.
IT might have been reasonably imagined that former Examples should have been
sufficient, to have put a stop to those Factious Spirits; who have all along
made it their business to disburb the Peace of this Nation, but it is Evident,
(either transported with Malice, or a desire to advance themselves upon the
Ruin of their Country;) they have been of late, more and more restless, pulling
off by degrees the Veil of dissimulation, and in the end, diverse of them; to
their Shame and Confusion, have drawn that ruin upon themselves which they
intended to others, by enterprizing an unnatural Rebellion against the best of
Princes, though altogether without success; for on the 6th, of July last being
utterly broken and subdued; a great part of them there, or soon after taken
Prisoners: Those that were taken, were secured in diverse Prisons, of which,
these whose Names follow having been put into the hands of Justice, diverse of
them upon their Arraignments confessed the Indictments, and the rest putting
themselves upon Trial were found Guilty of the High Treason as laid in their
Indictments, it appearing they were either taken on the 6th. of July last, upon
the defeat of the Rebels Army near Bridgewater, or soon after; and they having
nothing material to offer in their own behalf, received Sentence of Death for
High Treason, on the 10th of this Instant September, 1685. Sixty Seven of them
were at that time, ordered to be Executed at Seven adjacent Towns, as thus,

At Lyme in the County of Dorset twelve, viz.
Abraham Holms. Josia Askew. William Hewling. John Hays. John Kidd. John
Marders, Constable of Crookhorn Sampson Lark. Christo. Battiscomb. Leonard
Jackson. Henry Wats. Benjamin Temple. Robert Matchet. The first Nine of these
Persons, came from the Prison of Newgate and the Gate House.
Thirteen to be Executed at Bridport; the Sheriff to see Execution done
according to his Orders, viz.
Robert Bull and John Bull of Axminster. Benjamin Sandford of Combepine. John
Lee of Buckrel. William Quinten of Shute. Thomas Clap of Sidemouth, Thomas Cook
of Killington. George Collier of Vplime. Robert Fawn of Corstombe. John
Beamont, Sen. of Lyme. John Sprake and Azarias Pinney, of Axminster.
Malachie Malacke ordered likewise to be Executed at Bridgport, but since
Reprieved.

Twelve ordered to be Executed at Wey-mouth and Melcombe-Regis, viz.
Thomas Forte. John Beavis. Tristram Elliot. Robert Slade. William Lancaster.
John Burridge. John Hartley. George Smith. George Willmot. John Robins. Edward
Leggit. Roger Satchell.
Twelve ordered to be Executed at Sher: born; the Sheriff to see it done
likewise according to his Order, viz.
Samuel Glisson. William Heart. John Leggit. Francis Skinner. William Alstone.
George Puckeridge. Henry Row. John Lawrence. Michael Abbot. Richard Hall. John
Savage. Robert VVhorwood.
The first of these were brought from Newgate.

Twelve ordered to be Executed at Pool; the Sheriff to see Execution done; but
no certain day assigned, viz.
William Dilling. Andrew Tozier. William Hardiman. Thomas Jenkins. Robert
Salter. Thomas VValdron John Pulling. Andrew Ellis, alias Cozens. Josias
Restrick. Phillip Cocks. William Martin. Nicholas Hoar.
At Wareham Six were ordered to be Executed; the Sheriff to see Execution done;
but no day appointed, viz.
Samuel Robins. William Cock Sen. John Holloway. Adam Hawley. Thomas Tyler. and
Tho. Lawrence who is since reprieved
The Persons that received Sentence with the former, and no place nor time then
ordered for their Execution, were to the Number of 184. viz.
John Smith. Edward Lewther. John Downs. John Edwards. Nathaniel Swapper. John
Winniby. Benjamin Bryan. Henry Plotworthy. John Lo. William Pippin. John
White. James Pomray. Robert Shaw. Thomas Gammidge. Stephen Cook. Thomas
Bennet. John Manning. John Fisher. Robert Lumber. William Watfield. George
Plumley. Richard Keach. Thomas Allen. John Reason. George Speering. Matthew
Porter. Robert Spurway. Peter Row. John Lovering Robert Foard. John Beamont Ju.
Eliah Stephens. Daniel Parker John Bridle. Thomas Parsons. Nicholas Palmer.
John Davis Thomas Williams. Matthew Hutchins. Nicholas Smith. -- Mallet. John
King. Edward Towel. Edward Lane. John Vincent. John Pits. Evan Gammidge. Andrew
Robson. William Cozens, Thomas Townsend Jasper Diamond. Thomas Gregory. John
Allen. Robert Hellier. Thomas Allen. Thomas Hellier. Thomas Best. John Mark.
John Mitchel. John Madders. Thomas Hallet. John Alsop. George Massey. John
Pinney. Charles Strong. William Pead. William Sanders. James Spence. John
VVillson. Edward Adams. John Adams. Anthony Billing. Arthur Lusher John
Hutchins. John Lawrence. Thomas Bovet. Henry Beesley. Robert Baker. John Duran.
James Fowler. John White. Francis Langley. Thomas Moor. John Moggridg. Thomas
Quick. Nicholas Salter. Francis Smith. Richard Green. William Marters. John
Pacey. Thomas Greenway. John Prew. Richard Daniel. Peter Kent. John Skinner.
Adam Clark. Christopher Jewel. Abraham Thomas. John Baker. Daniel Pitson.
Robert Gough. George Hempton. Andrew Tosier Samuel Dollier. Peter Baggwell.
Benjamin VVhicker. John Whicker. John Bagwell. Oliver Hob. John Ipsley. John
Itchcock. Nicholas Betts. Thomas Fosset William Gyles: Joseph Gay. Thomas
Perry. John VVinnely. William Grove. Samuel Walden. John Bulling. Robert
Mulling. Roger Bryan. Charles Broughton. Richard Parker. John Hayn. Joseph
Downing. John Cornet. Matthew -- John Glover. Emanuel Collins. Roger Hobbs.
John Gay. John Trottle. Chri. Marriot. Joseph Hallet. Nath. VVebber. Edward
Morton. James Salter. William Lowrey. Ambrose Ashbourn. Roger Prince. Joseph
Belts. Nicholas Warren. Robert Sandey. William Wills. John Pryer. William
Tucker. William Brown. Samuel Lawrence. John Hutchins. Zachariah Brown.
William Clark. John Brown. Thomas Dolling. Edward Mash. George Tucker. John
Eastman. Robert Burridge. John Allenbridg. Henry Tucker. Thomas Burridge.
Thomas Cornelius. William Burridg. Humphrey Moulton. A -- Lacy. To. Dale.
Edward Willmot. William Williams. Thomas Marshal. Richard Paul. Hugh Willmot.
John Johnson. Joseph Paul. Richard Allen. James Hock. John Gadbey. Edward Ben.
Richard Pine. Thomas Pester. William Cox. Jun. Richard Cox. Peter Troket. John
VVellman. John Samm. Henry Sing. William Deal. William Clark. Walter Osborne.
Richard Hoar. William Hayns. Thomas Franckling. Thomas Lawrence. John Jones and
Joseph Strong, were set aside.
All which were carried back to be kept in safe Custody till further Orders are
taken for their disposal: And thus by their rash and unadvisedness they brought
themselves to disgrace, who otherwise might have lived peaceably and happy in
their Stations and been profitable to their Country.

By this it is to be perceived how much Loyalty and Obedience is to be prefered
before Disloyalty and Stubborness, how much a calm and peaceable Temper exceeds
a restless and unsatisfied Disposition, such a one, as commonly predominates in
these kind of People, whom no mildness can win nor favors oblige, even to be
kind to themselves; for what more can be expected by Subjects than to live in
Peace and Tranquillity under a gracious Prince, whose benign influence
dispences to all good Men an entire satisfaction, encouraging them cheerfully
to proceed in those measures that continue and increase their good repute and
felicity, making them detest and abhor that Itch of Rebellion which has ever
transported the Faction to a degree of disquiet and discontent, though it is
plain that God has often blasted their wicked machinations and contrivances in
private and public, and given them tokens of his displeasure, though hardened
in themselves, they have refused all reproof, notwithstanding their pretensions
are Conscience and Religion, but what share or just claim they have to either,
they have made apparent to the World, and outdone in their attempts (to promote
their wicked purposes) the very Mahometans, who though Infidels hold their
Prince sacred, that their Governors ought to be obeyed, and the peace of the
Government they live under preserved inviolate amongst themselves, as far as
their endeavors are capable of rendering it happy, and keeping matters in good
order; and in that far out doing our pretended Zealots.

This may be Printed, R. L. S. September the 17th. 1685

LONDON' Printed by E. Mallet in Black Horse-Alley in Fleet Street, near
Fleet-Bridge.


