A Further Narrative of the Passages of these times in the Commonwealth OF
ENGLAND.

An Act for renouncing and disanulling the pretended Title of Charles Stuart;
and for the taking away of the Court of Wards and Liveries, the Judgment of the
House of Commons, pronounced by Mr. Speaker against James Naylor the Quaker;
WITH The Trial of Miles Sundercombe, being indicted of high Treason for
conspiring against the life of his Highness the Lord Protector, Feb. 9. 1656.

A DAY

Of Public thanksgiving for the mavelous goodness of God to this Nation in
the Island of Teneriffe under General Blake, and giving them great success
against the Ships of the King of Spain, 16. fier'd and not one of ours lost.

An exact relation of the manner of the solemn Investiture, or happy
Inauguration of his Highness the Lord Protector at Westminster, June 26. 1657.
With his Oath, and the Oath of the privy Council, and every person who now is,
or hereafter shall be a Member of either House of Parliament before he sit
shall from and after the first of July 1657. take the same.

With a particular account of the taking in of the Fort of Mardike in Flanders
by Dunkirke, with the names of the House of Lord. And some heads of the speech
made by his Highness to both houses, Jan. 1657.

Which Parliament was dissolved the 4th of Feb. 1657.

Printed by M. S. for Thomas Jenner, at the South entrance of the Royal
Exchange.

AN ACT FOR Renouncing and disanulling the pretended Title of CHARLES STUART,
etc.


FOr the better establishment of the peace of this Commonwealth of England,
Scotland and Ireland, and the Territories and Dominions thereunto belonging,
and for the prevention of the designs and attempts of the enemies thereof; The
Knights Citizens, and Burgesses in this present Parliament assembled, Do in the
name of all the people of this Commonwealth, fully, freely, absolutely, and for
ever Disclaim and Renounce all Fealty, Homage or Allegiance, pretended to be
due unto Charles Stuart eldest Son of the late King Charles, James Stuart, second
Son of the said late King; Henry Stuart, third Son of the said late King; or
any other the Issue or posterity of the said late King, or any person or
persons pretending, or which shall at any time hereafter pretend Title by,
from, or under him, them, any, or either of them, to hold or enjoy the Crowns
of England, Scotland, and Ireland, or of either or any of them; or to have the
Name, Title, Style, or Dignity of King or Queen of Great Britain, King or Queen
of England, Scotland and Ireland, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, Prince of
Scotland, Duke of Albany, Duke of Rothesay, Duke of York, Duke of Gloucester,
any or either of them; or to have and enjoy the Power, Government, or supreme
Magistracy of this Commonwealth, or of any part thereof, or of any the
Territories or Dominions thereunto belonging, or to have or enjoy as King or
Queen of England, Scotland and Ireland, or of either or any of them, Prince of
Wales, Duke of Cornwall, Duke of Albany, Duke of Rothesay, Duke of York, Duke of
Gloucester, or Prince of Scotland, all or any the Honors, Manors, Lands,
Tenements, Possessions and Hereditaments heretofore belonging or appertaining
to the said Crowns of England, Scotland and Ireland, or to any or either of
them; or to the Principality of Wales, Duchy of Lancaster or Cornwall, or any
or either of them.

And be it declared and Enacted by his Highness the Lord Protector and this
present Parliament assembled, and the Authority thereof, That the said Charles
Stuart, James Stuart, Henry Stuart, and all other the Issue and Posterity of
the said late King, and all and every person and persons pretending, or which
shall or may at any time hereafter pretend Title or Claim from, by, or under
him or them, be, and are, and shall for ever be absolutely and utterly excluded
and debarred from holding or enjoying the Crown of England, Scotland and
Ireland, or any or either of them, or any the Dominions or Territories
thereunto belonging; and from holding, or having the Name, Title, Style, or
Dignity of King or Queen of Great Britain, King or Queen of England, Scotland
and Ireland, or any or either of them, or of any the Dominions thereunto
belonging, Prince of Wales Duke of Cornwall, Prince of Scotland, Duke of Albany,
Duke of Rothesay, Duke of York, or Duke of Gloucester; and from all Title,
Claim or Right, as King or Queen of England, Scotland and Ireland, or of either
or any of them, Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, Duke of Albany, Duke of
Rothesay, Duke of York, Duke of Gloucester, or Prince of Scotland, unto all or
any the Honors, Manors, Lands, Tenements, Possessions, or Hereditaments
heretofore at any time belonging or appertaining to the said Crowns of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, or any or either of them, and also from having,
exercising, or enjoying any Power, Authority, Government or Magistracy, in or
over this Commonwealth, or any the people thereof: And that all such Right,
Title, Claim, or pretense of Right, Title or Claim, which they or any of them,
at any time heretofore, at present, or in time to come, have, do, shall, or
may make, is hereby declared and adjudged, and shall for ever hereafter be
adjudged and taken to be utterly void and of no effect.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, and it is enacted, That
if any person or persons shall endeavor, or attempt by force of arms or
otherwise, or shall be aiding, assisting, comforting, or abetting unto any
person or persons, that shall by any ways or means whatsoever, endeavor or
attempt the reviving or setting up of any pretended Right, Title, or Claim of
the said Charles Stuart, James Stuart, Henry Stuart, or of any other the Issue
or Posterity of the said late King, or of any person or persons claiming under
him or them, to any the Offices, Style, Title Dignity, or Authority aforesaid,
or any of them; or shall declare, publish, or any way promote such pretended
Right, Title or Claim; or shall give or contribute any sum or sums of
Money, or other aid or assistance to the said Charles Stuart, James and Henry,
any or either of them; That then every such offense shall be, and is hereby
deemed and adjudged high Treason, and all and every the Offender and Offenders
therein, their Counselors, Aiders and Abettors, being thereof convicted within
three years after such Offense committed, shall be deemed and adjudged
Traitors, and shall suffer and have such pains of Death and forfeitures, as in
case of high Treason is used and ordained.

Hen. Scobell,
Clerk of the Parliament.
AN ACT For the taking away the Court of Wards and Liveries.
WHereas the four and twentieth day of February, in the year of our Lord, one
thousand six hundred forty five, the Court of Wards and Liveries, and all
Wardships, Liveries, Primer-seizins, and Oustrelemaines, and all other Charges
incident or arising for, or by reason of Wardships, Livery, Primer-seizin, or
Oustrelemain; and all Tenures by Homage; and all fines, Licenses, Seizures, and
pardons for alienation, and all other charges incident thereunto, was by the
Lords and Commons then assembled in Parliament, taken away, And all Tenures by
Knights service, either of the King or others, or by Knights service, or
Capite, or Soccage in Capite of the King, were turned into free and common
Soccage; For the further establishing and confirming the same, Be it declared
and enacted by his highness the Lord Protector, and the Parliament, that the
Court of Wards and Liveries, and all Wardships, Liveries, Primer-seizins, and
Oustrelemaines, and all other charges incident and arising, for, or by reason
of any such Tenures, Wardship, Livery, Primer-seizin, or Oustrelemaines, be
taken away, from the said four and twentieth day of February, One thousand six
hundred forty five: And that all Homage, Fines, Licenses, Seisures, Pardons for
Alienation, incident or arising, for or by reason of Wardship, Livery,
Primer-seizin, or Oustrelemain, and all other charges incident thereunto, be
likewise taken away, and is hereby adjudged and declared to be taken away, from
the said four and twentieth day of February, One thousand six hundred forty
five: And that all Tenures in Capite, and by Knights service of the late King,
or any other person, and all Tenures by Soccage in chief, be taken away; And
all Tenures are hereby Enacted and declared to be turned into free and common
Soccage, from the said four and twentieth day of February, One thousand six
hundred forty five; and shall be so construed, adjudged, and declared to be for
ever hereafter turned into free and common Soccage.

Neverless, It is hereby Enacted, That all Rents certain and Heriots, due to
mean Lords or other private Persons, shall be paid, And that where any Relief,
or double ancient yearly Rent, upon the death of an Ancestor, was in such cases
formerly due and payable, a double ancient yearly Rent only in lieu thereof,
shall now be paid upon the death of an Ancestor, as in free and common Soccage;
And that the same shall be recovered by the like remedy in Law, as Rents and
Duties in free and common Soccage.

Hen: Scobell, Clerk of the Parliament.

A Brief Relation of the late dangerous Plot, and traitorous Design, for the
destruction of his Highness Person.
THe Common Enemy having failed in all their former Plots and Conspiracies for
the ruin of his Highness and the Government, resolved (it seems) at last to
bring about their intended Mischief by a vigorous and bloody attempt upon his
person. For this end and purpose, they sought out and gained to themselves
instruments in all points fitted for the execution of their inhumane Cruelty.
The principal man employed, was a notable desperate fellow named Sindercomb,
one who heretofore had been a Quartermaster under Sir John Reynolds in the
Army, and was about two years ago cashiered by General Monck among others, in
Scotland. As Assistant to him in this wickedness, he associated to himself one
Cecil; and many others were engaged in the Business, whom we hope time will
discover; in the mean time only these two persons are in custody.

For the carrying on their work, they held correspondence with some in
Flanders, received directions thence from time to time, and for their
encouragement, Don Alonso the late Ambassador of Spain in England, returned
them over sums of money, with which they were enabled to proceed. The most
likely way (as they conceived) to accomplish the devilish purpose was, to
contrive some means how to dispatch his Highness as he should be going to
Hampton Court, and that they might do it with security to themselves by having
an opportunity to escape after the fact committed, they took a House at
Hammersmith, which house has belonging to it a little banqueting room, which
stands upon the Road at the said Town, in a narrow durty place of passage,
where Coaches use to go but softly, and that Room they meant to make use of,
by planting an Engine in it, which (...) charged, would have upon occasion torn
away Co^^^ and person in it that should pass by, and they had such an Engine
preparing. And because it was necessary for them to have information of the
times when his Highness should go abroad to take the air, and the places
whither, Sindercomb cast about in his mind which way to draw in some one person
near his Highness to be a partaker in the design; and acquaint them in what
part of the Coach his Highness should sit, going to Hampton Court, that so they
might be sure not to miss him; and when the execrable Deed should have been
executed, they intended to have made an escape.

For this purpose, they had bought up diverse of the fleetest Horses about
London, which they kept in that House at Hammersmith, and for convenience of
escaping, the House they had hired stood down at some distance from that Road,
and had an outlet to another Road, The person whom they made sure (as they
thought) to be their Informer touching the Out goings of his Highness, was one
of the life Guard, who had formerly been an acquaintance of Sindercomb in the
Army, and they gave him ten pounds in money at first to engage him, adding
thereto a promise of Fifteen hundred pounds, This was one way that they
resolved on, by making use of the place at Hammersmith;

But they were not negligent in seeking other opportunities besides, and
therefore (as occasion offered many times) they were wont to thrust themselves
in among those that rode abroad with his Highness: Once they thought to have
don their work as his Highness was taking the air in Hide-Parke; and to make
way for their escape; they had in one place filed off the Hinges of the Gates,
and rode about with the Train attending his Highness, with intent then to have
given him a fatal Charge, if he had chanced to have galloped out any distance
from the Company.

After several attendances of this nature, and pryings up and down, (having
also recourse many times to White Hall) and finding no occasion as yet to
favor their purpose, thereupon they resolved to (...) Correspondent a proof of
their (...) White hall. To this end, they cut a hole in (...) of the doors of
the Chapel, and so unbolting it, they on the eighth of this month went in and
placed the materials for firing, which were discovered about nine a Clock that
night for in one of the Seats was found upon the Floor a Basket filled with a
strange composition of combustible stuff, and two lighted matches, aptly
placed, which matches had been rubbed over with gunpowder, on purpose to keep
them surely burning, and by the length of them, it was conceived they would
have given fire to the Basket about one a clock in the morning. The Basket
being removed, and trial made of some part of the ingredients, it appeared to
be most active flaming stuff.

The next day, the two persons being apprehended, they were found to have
scrued Pistols, which upon trial, appear notable instruments to do execution
at a distance more then ordinary; and they had also a strange sort of long
Bullets, in the nature of slugs, contrived on purpose to rend and tear.

These things are made manifest not only by many particulars of discovery, but
by the confession also of one of the Parties, viz. Cecil, who has cast himself
upon the good grace and mercy of his Highness.

The seve^^^ Passages and proceedings at the Trial of Miles Sindercomb, alias
Fish, at the upper Bench Bar in Westminster Hall, on Monday, February 9. 1656.
before the Lord Chief Justice Glyn, and Mr. Justice Warburton, being indicted
of high Treason for conspiring against the Life of his Highness the Lord
Protector, he was found guilty by the Jury, and received Sentence to be hanged,
drawn, and quarted at Tyborn, according to Law.
The Indictment was for High Treason, to this effect; viz.
THat Miles Sindercomb, alias Fish, and one William Boys, with diverse other
Rebels and Traitors against the Lord Protector, and Government of the
Commonwealth, not having the fear of God in their hearts, but moved and seduced
by the instigation of the Devil on the It was the first day of the Parliament.
17 of September 1656. and diverse other days and times as well before as after
at Westminster, and diverse other places in the County of Middlesex, falsely,
maliciously, and traitorously did conspire, compass and imagine the death of
the said Lord Protector, and to subvert and alter the Government of this
Commonwealth, and to raise War within the same.

For effecting whereof.

1 They took a Room in the house of one Edward Hilton, and diverse Rooms in the
house of one James Mydhope in Westminster, whether they brought Guns,
Harquebusses and Pistols, charged with leaden bullets and iron Sluggs, to
shoot, kill and murder him.

2. January 1. 1656. they provided Horses and Weapons of War; And

3 Took a house and Banqueting house at Hammersmith, of one Henry Busby for
the same purpose.

4 January 9. 6. 6. they conspired to burn White Hall, where his Highness was
in his own Person; and to that end brought a basket filled with Match,
Brimstone Gunpowder, and other combustible Stuff and materials, and set the
same on fire in the Chapel there; to the great danger and disquietment of his
Highness, and ill example of others, in contempt of the Law, against their due
obedience to his Highness and Government, against the Peace, and form of the
Statute, etc.

Thus far the Indictment

Whereupon being arraigned, he pleaded Not Guilty, and for his Trial put
himself upon his Country, and the issue being joined, there was immediately
impanelled a Jury of Gentlemen of worth and quality to pass upon his life and
death, he challenged several of them; and twelve being sworn (with his own
consent) His Highness Attorney General (the Indictment being opened)
proceeded to the Evidence, which was very full and clear, and two Witnesses at
the least to all the points of the Indictment, with many aggravating
Circumstances: The particulars whereof are herein after mentioned.

The evidence to prove the Indictment.
1. THat there was one Toope of his Highness Lifeguard who was drawn into the
business; and he proved fully, 1. What person Sindercomb is, how he inveagled
him the said Toope, with money in hand, and promises of more, and great
preferment, to join with him to murder his Highness, saying, Spain could
never obtain a peace with us until he were taken out of the way. 2. The
circumstances of Time, Place, Means and manner designed for this murder. 3.
That he the said Toope, was to give notice when his Highness went forth; and at
what end of the Coach he sat. 4. Their buying and keeping of fleet Horses. 5.
Their intent to fire White Hall, the Firework placed in the Chapel; and other
Circumstances, 6. Sindercombs resolution if the fire did not take, to kill the
Protector what ever came of it.

Also one John Cecil proved the whole design of Sindercomb and Boys, how long
it was in hand; That Sindercomb engaged him the said Cecil in it; what words
were used, how it should be done; what the consequence of he murder would be;
the money provided, and that when it should have been done; he the said Cecil
was designed to go to Col. Sexby, and to share with Sindercomb in his honor
and profit. That the first thing agreed on, was to provide good Horses. What
moneys were paid by Sindercomb* Sindercomb's resolution to assassinate his
Highness when he went abroad; and the manner how. That they were upon the Road
5, or 6 times on purpose: and in Hide Park with Swords and Pistolls charged,
and had notice given them by Toope of his Highness coming. That the hinges of
Hide Park Gate were fyled off in order to their escape. That they took an house
with a Banqueting house at Hammer smith, to shoot him with Guns made on purpose
to carry 10, or 12. Bullets at a time. That Toops was to give notice of his
Highness passing that way, and at which end of the Coach he sat. That he the
said Cecil saw one of the Guns provided, which would carry 12 Carbine bullets
and a slugg. He spoke fully to the design of firing Whitehall: described the
fire work prepared and the nature and intention of it, and other circumstances.
Moreover, that Boys assured them, That when the Protector should be
dispatched, Forces would come from Spain and Flanders, and a great part of the
Fleet would fall off, And that he believed Sexby to be the main Agent herein at
Brussels, He proved also, the discourse Boys had about seizing Portsmouth or
some other Port in the West, and of a great sum for that purpose, That 30 or
40 are engaged in this design to kill the Protector, and it was so ordered,
that not above two should know each other, until the matter should be ripe for
execution. And that Boys knew the whole number.

He spoke fully to that design to kill his Highness the first day of the
Parliament; and their taking houses for that This Sundercomb had engaged to
kill General Monk in Scotland. and would have engaged the said Mr. Cecil
therein also.
purpose at Westminster; and bringing Arms thither, and other Circumstances.

That Boys goes by several names, and in several habits; sometimes as a poor
Priest in raged clothes; sometimes well Clad as a Gentleman.

It was further proved, by the said John Cecill, and Coll: James Mydhope, That
in order to the destroying of his Highness, he the said Cecil, Sundercomb and
Boys; took the said Mydhopes House near the Abbey at Westminster, and when
they took it, Sundercomb called himself John Fish, Clark to one Mr Havers a
pretended Gentleman of Norfolk; and Cecill went by the name of Mr Havers
Coachman.

It was proved likewise, That the first day of the Parliament after they had
taken Mydhops house, he being there, Sundercomb and Cecil went thither to him
from one Edward Hilton a Sempsters house in Kingstreet Westminster, where they
left a great Hilton deposed fully concerning the Viol case and Trunk of Arms.
Trunk full of Arms brought from Flandors; and carrying with them in a Violl
case, one Harquebuss, and some Pistols, charged with leaden bullets, and
slugges, about Sermon time, to Mydhopes house, which they found very convenient
for their purpose, and resolved to buy it, and to build a Room in the yard next
the street: there being several back yards and doors, and resolved also to
secure Mydhope, or otherwise to deal with him that he might not discover them,
nor hinder their design.

It was proved moreover, by Cecil and Mydhope, that Sermon being ended, all
three of them viz. he the said Cecil, Sindercomb and Boys, went into the yard
of the House next the Abbey, to shoot his Highness; as he passed from the Abbey
to meet the Parliament, in the painted Chamber, and to that end, he the said
Cecil stood on the wall with his Pistol charged, and Sindercomb walked in the
Yard, but other Company coming in thither, they were prevented, and Boys went
out of the Yard into the throng of people.

It was further proved by Cecil, that this enterprise not succeeding they
resolved to murder his Highness some other way, to wit, to furnish themselves
with fleet horses to kill him as he rode forth. That Sindercomb engaged Toope,
who constantly gave him notice of the life-guards going abroad, or of the
sadling of the Pad Nags.

That the first time they rode forth to kill him, was the latter end of
September last (viz the Suturday after he had left going to Hampton Court.

That the second time was when he rode to Kensington and thence the back way to
London.

The third time, when he went to Hide Park in his Coach.

The fourth time, when he went to Turnham Green, and so by Acton home, at which
time they rode forth to kill him, and resolved to break through all
difficulties to effect it.

The fifth time, when he rode into Hide Park, where his Highness alighting,
asked him the said Cecil, whose horse that was he rode on, Sindercombe being
then on the outside of the Park; and then Cecil was ready to have done it but
doubted his horse, having at that time, got a cold.

That Sindercomb rode forth once himself to kill his Highness, and told Cecil
of it.

That all proving ineffectuall, they resolved to desist till the Spring, and in
the mean time to fire White Hall.

That the said Cecil put on a thin Holland Shirt, and thin clothes for his
better escape, when he rode forth to kill his Highness, and prepared his horse
as if he had been to run a race.

To prove the taking of the house and banqueting house at Hammersmith, of
Henry Busby, Coachman to the Earl of Salisbury, there was beside Cecil, the
testimony of Henry Busby himself, William Page, and William Neal, Sindercombs
servant.

To prove the Basket of stuff for firing the Chapel, there was the testimony
of Cecil and Toope, and others who were persons of quality.

To prove the buying and keeping of the Horses, there was the testimony of
Henry Busby, who sold them one Horse for fourscore pounds, also of William
Page, and William Neale, Sindercombs servant.

To prove the Hinges of Hide-Parke gate filed off, and the Pales cut, there was
the testimony of John Cecil, and Thomas Shell.

The prisoner seeing the evidence so clear against him, had nothing material
to say for himself by way of defense, yet carried himself very insolently at
the Bar, and when the Court asked him touching any of the matters proved
against him, he would confidently deny what was laid to his charge; And after
all the evidence given and the prisoner heard what he had to say for himself;
the Court summed up the whole to the Jury of Life and Death, and declared, That
by the Common Law to compass or imagine the death of the chief Magistrate of
the Land, by what name soever he was called, whether Lord Protector or
otherwise, is high treason, he being the Chief Magistrate, and the spring of
Justice, in whose name all Writs run, all Commissions and Grants are made; and
that the Statutes of Treason made 25 Ed. 3. as to this, did only declare what
the Common Law was before the making of that Statute, and was not introductive
of a new Law, and more to that effect; and then proceeded to Judgment against
the Prisoner, in this manner.

The Sentence.
IT is considered by the Court that the said Miles Sindercomb, alias Fish, be
sent from hence to the Prison in the Tower of London, from whence he came, and
from thence be drawn upon a Hurdle through the streets of London to Tyburn,
there to be hanged on the Gallows until he be half dead, and then to be cut
down, and his Intrals and bowels taken out and burnt in his own sight, and his
body divided into four quarters and be disposed of as his Highness the Lord
Protector shall think fit.

Tower of London, February 14.

Sindercomb having upon his trial by a Jury in the Upper Bench, received
sentence to be hanged drawn and quartered at Tyborne, for his treisonous
design against the life of his Highness, and having some days time afterward
given him for the preparing of his soul for another world, care was taken by
the honorable Sir John Barkstead Lieutenant of the Tower, to send unto him, at
several times, diverse eminent and Pious Ministers of the City to conferr with
him touching his concernments in the life to come. Two things in his discourse
were observable; that when any of the Ministers came to him, he would first
condition with them, that they should not treat with him at all touching the
crime for which he stood condemned. The other was, that he told them always,
as an entrance to his discourse, that he was for the Universal point; and being
pressed to explain his meaning, he told then he believed that all men were
brought into a saveable estate by the death of Christ, and he doubted not but
himself should fare as well as others, Which expression shows him to have been
infected with that un-Evangelicall conceit of Universal Redemption. Little
good could be wrought on him by any of the Ministers: And no marvel, if it be
considered what discourse passed from him to others, since the time of his
condemnation; for he was of the same opinion with many others that have slipped
into Liberti^ism; viz. That when man dies the soul sleeps with the body,
and (said he) it may be it shall rise again. This is that wretched opinion of
that sort of men whom we (in English) call Soul* sle^pers, persons so far
unworthy the name of Christians, that the ancient Heathens will rise up in
judgment against them; and in the tendency of it so destructive to the
convenience of Government, that it disposes these who embrace it, to attempt
any wickedness whatsoever, any Treason Sedition or Assassination, and to
despise virtue, seeing it at once destroys both the hope of reward and the
fear of punishment, after this life is ended.

During the daves allotted him for his preparation, he made several attempts,
with promise of a good sum of money (700 pounds first and last) to persuade
his Keeper to permit him to escape and that not being yielded to, he tempted
him to procure him some poison; and not prevailing with him, he solicited his
own sister (who was permitted to attend him) to the same purpose.

On Friday the 13 instant, betwixt seven and eight a Clock at night, the writ
being brought and read unto him for his execution the next day, he trembled and
quaked very much at the apprehension of death, as was visible to them that were
present, yet said he was not so much troubled at death as at the infamous
manner of it.

What happened afterward is as follows. Immediately upon this sad news, his
sister was heard to say in the house below stairs, that nothing troubled her so
much, as that he should be hanged, etc. but she had rather see him die before he
went out of that room.

He having discoursed a little with the men in his Chamber; (which were about
four or five to attend him) called for a Bible, and having read a little while,
he then desired them to withdraw out of the Room for about half an hour, that
he might have liberty to pray alone. The Attendants withdrew, and putting the
door to, they stood there at the top of the stairs; but before the half hour
was over, he came himself to the door and pulling it open, bade them come in,
in a cheerful manner, rubbing his hands together, and then about his mouth and
his nose, saying, I have done, and now pray you come in. Not long after he
undressed himself, and springing lively into Bed, well (said he) this is the
last night that ever I shall lie in Bed. Being in bed, he had some discourse a
while with the company, without any sign of sickness. Then drawing his
Curtain, and lying a while silent, and afterward snorting, one of the Company
observing so, went and drew the Curtain gently to look on him, and found him in
a dying senseless condition. All ways were used to recover him; but nothing
could avail, for he was in a manner dead by a eleven a clock that night, or a
little after, though he languished till twelve.

This death of his happening so suddenly and unexpectedly, and there being
strong presumptions of poison, his body was opened on Saturday, February 14. In
the presence of Sir Richard Rapier Doct. of Physic; and Doctor Fern Anatomy
Reader at Gressum-Colledge by Mr. Charles Stamford, and Mr. Nicholas Brethers,
Wardens of the Company of Chirurgions, and Mr. Laurence Lo, all able and known
persons in their profession; who opening the Skull, found the brain much
inflamed, red, and distended with Blood, swollen as full as the Skull could well
contain; besides much Extravasal, g^umous, and Clotted Blood, which they judged
to be the ^ffect of some very violent and preternaturall cause; and their
opinions were, that the said Prisoner had caused the same by some extraordinary
means, for the hastening of his death.

February 15. Being the Lords day, Sundercombs Keeper taking care for the
airing and cleansing of the Chamber where he dyed, and the Close-stoole being
removed, under it was found a Paper written and subscribed with his own hand as
follows.

GOD knows my heart, I do take this course, because I would not have all the
open shame of the world executed upon my Body, I desire all good People not to
Judge amiss of me, for I do not fear my life, but do trust God with my soul,
I did this thing without the privity of any person in the World; I do before
God and the World clear my Keeper, my Sister, Mother, or Brother, or any of my
Relations, but it was done alone by my self. I say by me.

Miles Sindercomb.
13 Day, 1656.

February 16. The Testimonies of the Physicians and Surgeons as also
Sindercombs own Paper, being considered by the Coroner and Jury, they
unanimously resolved and agreed, That he by some extraordinary means had caused
his own death, and that they verily believed the same to be by poison.

Miles Sindercom having Murdered himself, was Drawn upon Tower Hill at a
Horse tail with his Head forward and there under the Scaffold he was turned
into a hoale Stark naked and a stake spiked and plated with Iron was driven
throug him into ye earth for ar to all Traitors, for tune to Come: seb. 17 1657



February 17. Their Verdict was given in as follows.
Middles. ss.

WE find that upon the thirteenth day of February, in the year of our Lord,
1656. about the hour of Nine in the night, Miles Sindercomb otherwise Fish,
late of the Parish of Peter in bonds, in the County of Middlesex, not having
God before his eyes, but by the instigation of the Devil, being moved and
seduced at the Tower of London, in the Parish and County aforesaid,
Feloniously, wilfully, and of his malice toward himself aforethought, as a
Felon against himself, then and there feloniously upon himself, did make an
assault. And that the said Miles Sindercomb otherwise Fish, then and there,
certain poisoned powder, through the nose of him the said Miles, into the head
of him the said Miles, Feloniously, wilfully, and of his malice toward himself
aforethought, a Felon of himself, feloniously did snuff and draw, By reason of
which snuffing and drawing of the poison aforesaid, so as aforesaid, into the
Head of him the said Miles Sindercomb, he the said Miles Sindercomb, by the
strength and opperation o^ the poison aforesaid, himself did mortally poison;
of which said mortal poisoning, he the said Miles Sindercomb otherwise Fish,
within three hours after died. And so we find that the aforesaid Miles
Sindercomb otherwise Fish, the said Thirteenth day of February, in the year
aforesaid, at the Tower of London aforesaid, in the Parish and County
aforesaid, in manner and form aforesaid, Feloniously, wilfully, and of his
malice toward himself aforethought, as a Felon against himself, Feloniously
himself did kill and murder. We find no Goods or Chattels that the said
Miles Sindercomb otherwise Fish had, at the time of the felony and murder
aforesaid, in manner and form aforesaid, upon himself, done and committed, In
witness hereof, we have hereunto set our hands this seventeenth day of
February, 1656. etc.

And thereupon the said Coroner issued forth his Warrant for Burial of
Sindercomb, the Copy whereof follows.

Middles. ss.

WHereas the Jury Impaneld and Sworn to inquire of the Death of Miles
Sindercomb otherwise Fish, did present upon their Oaths. That the said Miles
the Thirteenth day of this instant February, did Feloniously poison himself.
These are therefore in the name of his Highness, the Lord Protector of the
Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, To require you to bury the
Corpse of the said Miles Sindercomb, according to Law, in the next Common
Highway; hereof you are not to fail, as you will answer the contrary at your
perils. Dated the Seventeenth day of February, 1656.

Thomas Evans Coroner.
To the Constables and Headboroughs within the Liberty of the Tower of London.
On the same day, February. 17. Miles Sindercomb aforesaid being found to have
murdered himself, his Body was according to Law drawn to the open place upon
Tower Hill, at a Horses Tail, with his head forward, and there under the
Scaffold of Common execution a Hole being dug, he was turned in Stark
naked, and a Stake, spiked with Iron, was driven through him into the earth;
That part of the stake which remains above ground, being all plated with Iron;
which may stand as an example of terror to all Traitors for the time to come.

A narrative touching Col. Edward Sexby, who lately dyed a Prisoner in the
Tower.
Tower of London Jan. 20.

COl. Edward Sexby was by Warrant dated the 24 of July, 1657. committed to the
Tower of London close Prisoner for High Treason, who within Ten days after he
came in thither, fell sick of an Ague and a Vomiting, conceived to be the new
disease then predominant, which turned into a Feverish distemper; in which
sickness he continued about nine weeks, the strength thereof being so great,
that it brought him into many distracted fits for a great part of that time, in
which condition he would Cry out often, That he was damned, and in Hell, and
utter such like Expressions; and his usual answer to them that spoke any thing
to him, was, That it was a Lie; yet notwithstanding lie was under that
condition of (...) he had some-intervalls, wherein he spoke very rationally
(...) several times when he thought himself in a Condition like to dye, he
would send for the Lieutenant of the Tower with all speed, and sometimes late
in the Night season, causing him to be called out of his Bed, affirming that he
had something of secrecy to reveal unto him in reference to the State and
Commonwealth before his death; But when the said Lieutenant of the Tower was
come to him, and that he found his fainting Qualms over, and that he was a
little better, he would fall into other discourse, and say, The Devil would
not let him speak out the Truth, nor let him reveal any thing, although he had
before resolved to it, and had much to speak to by way of Discovery; yet one
day, viz. the 12. of October, 1657. being well come to himself, and having sent
for the Lieutenant, he was so ingenious as to confess in part, saying unto
him; "Sir John, I sent to you to tell you, that I am guilty of the whole
buisiness of Sindercomb, as to the design of killing the Lord Protector, etc.
and to that purpose I furnished Sindercomb with about 500 l. in Money, and also
with Arms, and tied him to an Engagement that he should not reveal the design.
And further he said, The Letters they have of mine, they could not prove them
to be mine, but by my own confession, which I now confess, and acknowledge
that they are mine, and that I was with Charles Stuart, and acquainted him that
I was an Enemy to the Lord Protector; and I also declare, that I received a
large sum of Money from the Spaniard to carry on my said design, and to make
what confusion I could in England, by endeavoring the Klling of the Lord
Protector, and by what other ways I had in design; and to the end, the better
to effect it, I came into England in a disguised habit, and was the principal
in putting on others in the said design.

Many other like passages were spoken by him in presence of many credible
witnesses; and within two days after, in the presence of Mr. Caril, Minister,
and others, he did acknowledge the former confession to be truth, but said it
was indiscreetly done of him to acknowledge the letters which they had of his
at Whitehall, to be his own, seeing they could not otherwise prove it; and
before he had again seen and viewed them, And then he again confessed, That he
was the only man that put on Sindercomb to kill the Lord Protector; and that
the Book called Killing no Murder, he owned; and said, he was (...) of that
judgment; yet said, it was both foolishly and knavishly done in that book, to
charge the Lieutenant of the Tower, touching Sindercombs death: With several
other passages, which for brevity sake are omitted

As to his condition in his sicknesses, He falling sick (as is before
mentioned) sent for his own Physician, which was of his acquaintance, viz.
Doctor Brook, who finding him under a Feverish distemper, caused him to be let
blood and blistered, by attractive Medicines laid to his Feet and Arms, to draw
forth the malignity; and he was thereby reasonable well recovered again: But
not observing his Doctors directions -- And although his Physicians and Nurses,
and all people that were held conduceable to his accommodations in all his
sicknesses, from first to last, were made choice of by him, and his wife, and
other relations, Yet as to his Diet, he wilfully humored and pleased his own
appetite, whereby he fell into a relapse, which brought him into the height of
madness for a time. But after a while, by following his doctors prescription,
he was recovered out of that distracted condition by application of Medicines,
only he continued disconverted in mind, and used many subtle shifts and wiles
to have the Guards taken from him, and was something perplexed, because he could
not effect it, although he was in a great measure recovered from his bodily
weakness for some season, till about the last of December, that he complained
of something rising in his throat, and had stoppages that he could scarce
breath, and feared an Imposthume to be gathered in his throat, and broken, and
that he should not have strength to bring it up. His Wife then sent for a Woman
to wash and cleanse his throat, but his distemper increasing and coming up to
the height of a malignant Fever, Doctor Brook, his former Physician, was sent
for, who, when he came to him, upon the fourth of January instant, found him in
great sweats, and his throat sore and inflamed, and that he was in a high
Fever, having red spots, or Pustules, with white watery wheyish matter in them,
like the Chicken Fox, upon his Breast, Neck, and Arms. All which the said Doctor
judged to come from the putrefaction of his humors, heightened by the violence
of his former madness.

The Lieutenant of the Tower being made acquainted in what a dangerous
condition he was, ordered another Doctor and a Surgeon to be sent for to
view him, and to advise with Doctor Brook what they judged of him, and what
was best to apply to him, who judged that he was in a very weak condition, and
that it did arise from the Malignity of his Disease as aforesaid, in a way of
natural causes; in which weak condition, he continued a day or two more under
violent inflammations and Sweatings, which so weakened him, that by reason
thereof upon Wednesday morning the 13 of this instant January, having said,
Lord have mercy upon me, I am very sick; about five of the clock he breathed
out his last, and died; after which his wife desired his body of the Lieutenant
to bury it; to which the Lieutenant answered, she might have it to bury, within
or out of the Tower, after the Coroner and his Jury had enquired of his death
according to the custom of the place; whereupon the Coroner summoned a Jury to
view the body, and to give in their verdict concerning the manner and cause of
his death accordingly, and the Doctors and Chirurgions having viewed the dead
body together with the said Jury, found blackness and settling of blood about
his shoulders which they judged to come from the violence of the Fever and the
inflammation of those parts; which great distemper the said Jury was by them
fully satisfied in, as also of his former condition; and also having examined
several other persons upon oath besides them, as his Keeper, his Nurse, and
his Uncle, (who was often with him in his sickness) his Apothecaries and a
Soldier that guarded him the night he dyed, his wife being present before them
also, (who was constantly attending upon him in his imprisonement, except when
she lay in, and then were none with him but Nurses of her own appointment.)
They upon clear and full Information, gave up their verdict on Thursday the 14
day of this instant January, 1657. as follows in haec verba. We find that
upon the last day of December in the year of our Lord, 1657. Edward Sexby late
of the Parish of Peter in bonds, in the County of Middlesex Esquire at the Tower of
London, in the Parish and County aforesaid, fell sick of a certain disease
called a Violent Fever, and lived languishing from the said last day of
December, until the 13th day of January in the year aforesaid, at the Tower of
London aforesaid, in the parish and County aforesaid, of the Fever aforesaid,
dyed. And so we find that the said Edward Sexby dyed by Gods visitation in
manner and form aforesaid, and by no other ways or means, In witness whereof
we have hereunto set our hands, this 14. day of January, 1657.

It also appeared to the said Jury upon oath that the Lieutenant had ordered
that the said Colonel Edward Sexby, in his several sicknesses, should have
what Doctors, Chirurgions, Apothecaries, Nurses, he pleased as aforesaid, and
all those that had to do with him concerning food, Physic, or necessary
attendance, were always of his own choice, and by the Order of him, his wife,
and friends; and that he was very well accomodated in his chamber with what
necessaries were requisite for him; and when the Jury had given up their
verdict as aforesaid, the Lieutenant of the Tower sent away a Warder and a
Lieutenant to Mris Sexby, being then at her Mothers, who lived in White-Fryers,
to acquaint her and her said Mother, that the Jury had done their office, and
to know her further desire as to his burial, and whether she desired his body
or no, which then she might have if she pleased; who returned answer, that they
had sent their maid with forty shillings to his Keeper for his Burial in the
Tower, seeing he was Prisoner there; whereupon he was put into a coffin, and a
grave made for him in the usual burying place near the Tower chapel, and the
Bell having been rang for some space of time; and those that repaired to the
Warders where he was to accompany him to his grave, being met together, which
were diverse of the Warders, Officers, and Soldiers of the said Tower, the
Corpse was in a seemly way carried to the said grave and intered upon the 15 of
this instant January, about 12 of the Clock of the same day in the Tower
aforesaid.

A Day of Public thanksgiving, on Wednesday the Third of June next; For the
Great success God has been pleased to give the Navy of this Common wealth
under the Command of General Blake against the Spaniard. Together with a
Narrative of the same Success, as it was Communicated in a Letter from the
said General.
A Narrative Of the Action at Sancta Cruz.
AFter taking in the Supply of Victuals that was brought us the latter end of
March, we spent two or three days before the Town of Cadiz, and finding the
Enemy there in no great forwardness to come forth with a Fleet as was
expected; The General on the 13th of April, One thousand six hundred fifty
seven, called the Commanders together, and communicated his thoughts ^o go for
Sancta Cruz on the Island of Tene^iffe, laying before them the reasons that
induced him to it, which they all approved of, and a favorable Gale-just at the
time presented to carry us thither. On the Eighteenth following in the evening
we discovered Land, supposed to be Point Negro. but being thick and hazy, could
not certainly make it till Noon the next day, whereby the Enemy had longer
notice of our being on the Coast, then we designed he should before we came to
Action.

On Monday the twentieth of April one thousand six hundred fifty seven, we
were by break of day fair in the Offin of Sancta cruz, and, as soon as 'twas
light, perceived by a signal from one of our Frigots a Head, that the West
India Fleet were in the Bay. Whereupon after a short conference how to order
the attempt and earnest seeking to the Lord for his presence, we fell in
amongst them, and by eight of the Clock were all at Anchor, some under the
Castle and Forts, and others by the ships sides, as we could birth our selves
to keep clear one of another, and best annoy the Enemy.

They had there five or six Galleons (whereof were Admiral, Vice Admiral, and
Rere-Admirall, with their Standart and Flags aloft) and other considerable
ships making up the number of sixteen, some having Goods brought from the
Indies still on board them, others had taken in Goods and Provisions to carry
back again: Most of them were furnished with brass Ordinance, and (as we have
been informed since) had their full companies of Seamen and Soldiers kept
continually on board them, from their first coming thither, which was about the
beginning of February last, their General himself in all the time lying but
one night out of his Ship: they were moared close along the Shore, which lies
in the manner of a Semicircle, commanded, as far as the Ships rid, by the
Castle, and surrounded besides with six or seven Forts, with almost a continued
line for musketeers and great shot, as the Ground between admitted; And we
were forced to come so near to do our work, that many of the men we have
slain and wounded, were shot by the Musketeers from the shore; Notwithstanding
it pleased God that in four hours time their men were beaten out, and all the
Ships put a shore, except the Admiral, and Vice Admiral, who made the most
considerable resistance. About two of the Clock the Vice Admiral was set on
fire, and the Admiral, by some happy shot, or other accident, suddenly blown
up; having as we perceived just before) many men on board her; by the evening
all the rest were fired, only two that sunk down to rights, and had little but
their Masts appearing above water.

It remained to complete this Mercy, that our own shi^s should come off well,
wherein the greatest hazard and difficulty lay; for some riding near into the
shore and being sorely maimed, did require to be warped off, others when we
came to weigh, drove with the wind all the while blowing right into the bay,
and one of our best Frigates struck: The enemy in the mean time supplied fresh
men into his Forts for those we had killed and beaten out in the heat of the
Action* and from them and the Castle continued plying upon us, till about seven
of the Clock at night, every Ship and Vessel belonging to our Fleet, were by
the good hand of God got safe out of Command.

In this service we had not above fifty slain outright, and one hundred and
twenty wounded, and the damage to our ships was such as in two days time we
indifferently well repaired for present security. Which we had no sooner done,
but the Wind veered to the Southwest (which is rare among those Islands) and
lasted just to bring us to our former Station near Cape Mary's, where we
arrived the second of May following: For which merciful appearance all along
with us, we desire the Lord may have the praise and glory, to whom only it is
due, And that all thar hear of it may turn and say (as of a truth we have
found) that among the gods there is none like unto him, neither are there any
works like unto his works.

The Names of the Commanders of the New Spain Fleet and of the other Ships that
were burnt in the Sancta Cruce Road on the 20th of April, 1657.

Don Diego Diagues, General. Don Josepho Sentenno, Vice Admiral. Roque
Gallindo, Rear-Admirall.

Gasper Goteras, in the Great Campeachan. Martin De Laxando, in the little
Campeachan.

These Commanders with their Ships came from Lavela Cruce in New Spain.

John Quintero. Francisco De Esto^ta. Pedro Fegoroa. Don Francisco Velasques.
Pedro Oreguel.

Commanders of the Admiral and Vice Admiral of Hundoras. Francisco Martines.
Francisco De Arana.

Pedro Sorrilio Commander of the Ship which came from Sancto Domingo.

These Commanders with their Ships were in Sancta Cruce before their Fleet
arrived from the Indies.

Gregory Gomes. Francisco Marcadel. Fernando Sohes.

An exact Relation of the manner of the Solemn Investiture, or happy
inauguration of his Highness the Lord Protector at Westminster.
Mr Speaker in ye name of ye Par: presented Several things to his Highness
Viz: a Robe of Purple Velvet Lined with Ermine: a Large Bible Richly Guilt and
Bossed: Next a Sword and Lastly a Septer of Massi^ Gold: and then administered
ye Oath to his Highness: June 26: an:1^^^:



FRiday the 26 of June, 1657. being agreed upon for the Investiture of his
Highness the Lord Protector, and a large place being raised and prepared at the
upper end of Westminster Hall, for that purpose, there was in the midst thereof
under the great Window, a rich cloth of Estate set up, and under it a chair of
state placed upon an ascent of two degrees; covered with carpets, and before it
a Table with a chair appointed for the Speaker of the Parliament, and on each
side of the Hall upon the said structure, were seats raised one above another,
and decently covered for the Members of Parliament, and below them, seats on
one side for my Lords the Judges of the Land, and on the otherside for the
Aldermen of the city of London.

About two of the clock in the Afternoon his Highness came from Whitehall by
water, and Landing at the Parliament stairs went up into the chamber called the
Lords house, where having retired himself a while, Mr. Speaker and the members
of parliament being come to the Painted Chamber his Highness attended by his
Council, the Officers of State, and the Judges met them, and gave his consent
to the Additionall and Explanatory Petition and advice of the Parliament, and
all such other Bills as were then presented to him.

From thence the Speaker, with the Members of Parliament departed to the great
Hall at Westminster, where they seated themselves, in the places provided for
them.

His Highness after a short retirement in a Boom, near the Painted Chamber,
returned into the Lords House, the Lords Commissioners of the great seal, the
two Lords Chief Justices the Master of the Rolls, and the Judges, in the
interim, placing themselves on one side of the said House, and the Lord Major,
Recorder, and Aldermen of the City of London, on the other. From the said
House, his Highness passed toward the Hall in manner following.

In the first place, went his Highness his Gentleman, and other persons of
quality? next an Officer of Arms going before the Recorder and Aldermen of
London, in their Scarlets; next, another Officer of Arms went before Master
Attorney General, and my Lords the Judges in their Robes and Order; next them,
Norroy, King of Arms; then four Searjants at Arms with their Maces, going
before the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury, and of the Great Seal, (the
Lord Commissioner Fiennes bearing the Seal) and the Lord President of his
Highness Council; Then came Garter, principal King of Arms, before the Earl
of Warwick, who bare the Sword before his Highness: on whose left hand went
the Lord Major of London, by his Highness special favor bearing the City
sword: After whom came his Highness, being attended by his Council, the
Principal Secretary of State, and diverse of the Nobility, and other persons of
great quality.

His Highness being entered on the place, and standing under the Cloth of
Estate, Master Speaker did in the name of the Parliament, present several
things (ready laid upon the Table) to his Highness, viz. A Robe of purple
Velvet, lined with Ermine, being the habit anciently used at the solemn
investiture of Princes. Next, a larg Bible richly guilt and boss'd; next a
Sword; and lastly, a Sceprer, being of Massy Gold: which being so presented, Mr
Speaker came from his Chair, took the Robe, and therewith vested his Highness,
being assisted therein by the Earl of Warwick, the Lord Whitelock, and others.
Which being done, the Eible was delivered unto his Highness; after that, Mr
Speaker girt about him the Sword; and lastly, delivered his Highness the
Scepter.

These things being performed, Mr Speaker returned unto his Chair, and
administered the Oath to his Highness, prepared by the Parliament, the form
whereof is as follows.

I Do in the presenec and by the Name of God Almighty, promise and swear, that
to the uttermost of my power, I will uphold and maintain, the True Reformed
Protestant Christian Religion, in the purity thereof, as it is contained in the
Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, to the uttermost of my power and
understanding; and encourage the Profession and Professors of the same: And
that to the utmost of my power, I will endeavor, as Chief Magistrate of these
three Nations, the maintenance and preservation of (...) and safety, and just
Rights and Privileges of the People thereof. And shall in all things,
according to our best knowledge and power, govern the People of these three
Nations according to Law. The speech of the Lord Widdrington, Speaker of the
Parliament, at the Investiture of his Highness the Lord Protector, 26. June
1657.
May it please your Highness;
YOu are now upon a great Theator, in a large Chore of People. You have the
Parliament of England, Scotland, and Ireland before you; on your right hand, my
Lords the Judges; and on your left hand the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Sheriffs
of London; the most noble and populous City of England. The Parliament, with
the interposition of your suffrage, makes Laws, and the Judges, and Governors
of London, are the great Dispensers of those Laws to the people.

The occasion of this great convention and intercourse, is, To give an
Investiture to your Highness in that eminent place of Lord Protestor: A name
you had before, but it is now settled by the full and unanimous consent of the
People of these three Nations assembled in Parliament. You have no new name,
but a new date added to the Old Name; The sixteenth of December, is now changed
to the 26 of June.

I am commanded by the Parliament, to make oblation to your Highness of Four
things in order to this Inauguration.

The First is a Robe of Purple an Emblem of Magistracy, and imports
righteousness and justice: When you have put on this Vestment, I may say (and
I hope without offense) that you are a Gown man. This Robe is of a mixed color,
to show the mixture of Justice and Mercy, which are then most excellent when
they are well tempered together. Justice without mercy, is Wormwood and
bitterness; and Mercy without Justice is of two soft a temper for Government.
For, a Magistrate must have two hands, Plectentem and Amplectentem.

The Next thing is a Bible, a Book that contains the holy Scriptures; in which
you have the honor and happiness to be well versed. This is the Book of life,
consisting of two Testaments, the Old and New. In the first we have Christum
velatum Christ in Types, shadows, and Figures; in the latter, we have Christum
revelatum, Christ revealed. This Book carries in it the Grounds of the true
Christian Protestant Religion; its a Book of Books, it contains in it both
Precepts and Examples for good Government.

Alexander so highly valued the Books of his Master Aristotle, and other great
Princes other Books, that they have laid them every night under their Pillows.
These are all but legends and Romances to this one Book; a Book to be had
always in Remembrance; I find it said in a part of this Book, which I shall
desire to read, and it is this.

Deuteronomy. 17. And it shall be when he sits upon the Throne of his Kingdom,
that he shall write a Copy of this Law in a Book, out of that which is before
the Priests and the Levites. And it shall be with him, and he shall read
therein all the days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord God, and
to keep all the words of his Law, and those Statutes, to do them.

That his heart be not lifted up above his Brethren; and that he turn not aside
from the Commandment, to the right hand or to the left, to the end he may
prolong his days in his Kingdom, he and his Children in the midst of Israel.

The next thing that I am to offer to your Highness, is a Scepter, not unlike
a Staff; for you are to be a staff to the weak and poor. Its of ancient use
in this kind; its said in Scripture, in reference to Judah, the Royal Tribe,
That the Scepter shall not depart from Judah. It was of like use in other
Kingdoms and Governments: Homer the Prince of the Greek Poets, calls Kings and
Princes Scepterbearers.

The last thing is a sword, not a military, but a civil sword, a sword rather
for defense then offense; Not to defend your self only, but others also. This
Sword is an emblem of Justice. The noble Lord Talbot in Henry the VI Time,
wrote upon his Sword, Ego sum Talboti propter occidendum inimicos meos; This
Gallant Lord was a better Soldier then a Critiek. If I might presume to fix a
Motto upon this Sword, it should be this, Ego sum Domini Protectoris ad
protegendum populum meum.

I say, this Sword is an Emblem of Justice, and is to be used as King Solomon
used his, for the discovery of the truth in points of Justice. I may say of
this sword as King David said of Goliahs sword, There is none like this,
Justice is the proper virtue of the imperial Throne, and by Justice the
Thrones of Kings and Princes are established. Justice is a Royal virtue, which
as one says of it, does employ the other three Cardinal virtues in her
service.

1. Wisdom, to discern the nocent, the innocent.

2. Fortitude, to prosecute, and execute.

3. Temperance, so to carry Justice that passion be no ingredient, and that it
be without confusion or precipitation

You have given ample testimony in all these particulars, so that this Sword in
your hand will be a right sword of justice, attended with Wisdom, Fortitude and
Temperance.

When you have all these together, What a comely and glorious sight is it to
behold A Lord Protector in a Purple Robe, with a Scepter in his hand, a Sword
of Justice girt about him, and his eyes fixed upon the Bible!

Long may you prosperously enjoy them all, to your own comfort, and the comfort
of the people of these three Nations.
His Highness standing thus adorned in princely State, according to his merit
and dignity; looking up unto the Throne of the most High, who is Prince of
Princes, and in whom is all his confidence, Mr. Manton by prayer recommended
his Highness, the Parliament, the council, his Highness forces by Sea and
Land, the whole Government, and People of these three Nations, to the blessing
and protection of God Almighty.

After this the people giving several great shouts, and the trumpets sounding,
his Highness sat down in the Chair of State holding the Scepter in his hand.

At the right Elbow by his Highness Chair, sat his Excellency the Lord
Ambassador extraordinary of France; at the left his Excellency the Lord
Ambassador extraordinary of the states General of the United Provinces: On
the right side of the chair, stood the Earl of Warwick bearing the Sword; and
on the left side, the Lord Major of London, with the City Sword: Near to his
Highness stood the most noble Lord, the Lord Richard Cromwell, his excellency
the Lord Fleetwood, Lord deputy of Ireland, the Right honorable the Lord
Cleypool Master of his Highness Horse, his Highness council and all the
officers of State attending. There stood also upon the lower descent, near the
Earl of Warwick, the Lord Viscount Lisle, and General Montague; and on the
otherside the Lord Whitelock, each of them bearing a drawn Sword.

While his Highness thus sat, a Herald stood up aloft, giving a signal to a
Trumpet to sound three times; after which, he did by authority and direction of
Parliament, there publish and Proclaim his Highness Lord Protector of the
common wealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto
belonging, requiring all persons to yield him due obedience.

Hereupon the Trumpets sounded, and the people made several great acclamations
with loud shouts, God save the Lord Protector Then an officer of Arms,
standing upon the top of the stairs, made proclamation again after the same
manner; which was followed with shouts and loud acclamations as before.

After little pause, the whole Ceremony being ended, his Highness saluting the
Ambassadors and public Ministers, proceeded thence in his Princely habit, the
train whereof was born up by several noble persons, among whom was the Earl
of Warwicks Granchilde; the Lord Sherwood, and the eldest Son of the Lord
Roberts of Truro. The Aldermen, Recorder, the Judges, with the officers of
State, and the rest, proceeded in the same order as they came from the house of
Lords, and passed through the Hall to the great Gate leading into the New
Palace Yard, where his Highness entered into his Coach of state, being in his
Robes. The Earl of Warwick sat in the other end of the coach, and the Lord
Richard Cromwell and the Lord Whitlock in one side, the Lord Whitelock having
one of the drawn swords in his hand On the other side sat the Lord Viscount
Lisle, and General Montague bearing the other two drawn swords in their hands,
The Lord Cleypool Master of the Horse, led the Horse of Honor in rich
Caparisons, the coach was attended by his Highness Lifeguard, and other
guards, with the Officers of Arms on Horseback; the Officers of State Judges,
Lord Major, and Aldermen, all waiting on his Highness in their coaches to
Whitehall; the whole being managed with state and magnificence, suitable to so
high and happy a solemnity.

The Speaker with the Members of Parliament, returned to the House, where it
was.

Resolved, that it be recommended to his Highness the Lord Protector, as the
desire of the Parliament, that his Highness will be pleased to encourage all
christian endeavors for uniting the Protestant churches abroad, and several
Members were appointed to present this Vote to his Highness.

WHereas the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses of the parliament of England,
Scotland and Ireland, taking into their consideration, the duty incumbent upon
them, to provide for the future peace and settlement of the Government of these
Nations, according to the Laws and customs of the same, by their Humble
petition and advice, have presented their desires into his Highness Oliver
Lord Protector, that he should by and under the name and Style of Lord
Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ireland, and the
Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging, Hold, and Exercise the office of
Chief Magistrate of these three nations; Whereunto the Lord Protector, upon
due and mature consideration of the said Petition and Advice, has consented:
And his Highness the Lord Protector and the Parliament, judging it necessary,
that publication be made of the premises; have thought meet, and do hereby
strictly charge and command all and every person and persons, of what quality
and condition soever, in any of the said three Nations, to take notice of the
premises, and to conform and submit themselves unto the Government so
established, And the Lord Major of the City of London, and all Sheriffs,
Majors, Bailiffs, and other public Ministers and officers, whom this may
concern, are required to cause this proclamation, together with the said
Petition and Advice to be forthwith published in the City of London, and the
respective Counties, Cities, Corporations and Market Towns, to the end that
none may have cause to pretend ignorance in this behalf. Given at Westminster,
June 26. 1657.

Westminster, June 24. A true Copy of the Oaths to be taken by his Highness
privy Council and the several members of Parliament.
It was resolved by the Parliament, That all such persons who now are or
hereafter shall be of the Privy Council of his Highness. or Successors, before
they or either of them, do act as Counselors, shall respectively take an oath
before persons to be authorized by his Highness and Successors, for that
purpose; in the form following, viz.

I. A. B. Do in the presence and by the Name of God Almighty, promise and
swear, that to the ultermost of my power, in my place I will uphold and
maintain, the True Reformed Protestant Christian Religion, in the purity
thereof, as is contained in the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament,
and encourage the Profession and Professors of the same; and that I will be
true and faithful to his highness the Lord Protector of the commonwealth of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereto belonging as Chief
Magistrate thereof, and shall not contrive, design, or attempt any thing
against the person or lawful authority of his said Highness; and shall keep
secret all matters that shall be treated of in Council, and put under secrecy,
and not reveal them but by command or consent of his Highness, the
Parliament, or the Council; and shall in all things faithfully perform the
trust committed to me as a Counselor; according to the best of my
understanding, in order to the good Government, peace, and welfare of these
Nations. Resolved that the same Oath be taken by the Members of his Highness
Council of Scotland and Ireland.

The house resumed the debate upon the report this day made for an Oath to be
taken by the Members of Parliament. And it was agreed, That every person who
now is, or hereafter shall be a Member of either house of Parliament, before he
sit in Parliament, shall from and after the first day of July, 1657. take an
Oath before persons to be authorized and appointed by his Highness and
Successors, for that purpose, in the form following.

I. A. B. Do in the presence, and by the Name of God Almighty, promise and
swear, That to the uttermost of my power in my place, I will uphold and
maintain the true reformed Protestant Christian Religion in the purity thereof,
as it is contained in the Holy Scriptures of the Old and New Tostament and
encourage the profession and Professors of the same: And that I will be true
and faithful to the Lord Protector of the Common wealth of England, Scotland
and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto belonging, as Chief
Magistrate thereof, and shall not contrive, design, or attempt any thing
against the person or lawful anthority of the Lord Protector, and shall
endeavor as much as in me lies as a Member of Parliament, the preservation of
the Rights and liberties of the people. His Highness upon the day of his
Inauguration, meeting the Parliament in the painted Chamber before the
Solemnity, passed all such Bills as were presented to him: The Bills concerning
private persons I omit. Those that are of a public nature were as follows.

1. The Additionall Explanatory Petition and advice. 2. An Act to adjourn this
Parliament, till the 20th of January.
London, July 1.

This day his Highness the Lord Protector was proclaimed in the City with
great solemnity.

About ten a clock in the morning at Whitehall Gate, the persons met who were
to give attendance upon this Ceremony.

First, the Messengers belonging to the Council; next Trumpetters; next them
the lifeguard of his Highness; after them other Trumpetters; next, his
Highness his Gentleman; after them more Trumpetters; next, diverse officers of
the Army, gallantly mounted; then Trumpetters again; next the Searjants at
Arms, and the Heralds of Arms, and Garter, principal King of Arms betwixt
two Gentlemen-Ushers, before his Highness Council in their Coaches,
proceeding in this order to Temple Bar.

At this place they were met by the Lord Major mounted on horseback, in his
Crimson Velvet Gown, and his Colle^ of SS. with the Recorder and Aldermen of
London, all in their Scarlet on horseback, attended by his Officers,
Trumpetters, and the loud Music of the City.

From thence an officer of Arms proceeded before the Aldermen, then next before
the Lord Major his Mace-bearer, the Sword Bearer, with his cap of maintenance,
and a Herald of Arms.

Then proceeded several Sergeants at Arms belonging to his Highness and
council, with Norroy King of Arms; next after them, Garter principal King of
Arms, between two Gentlemen Ushers, going immediately before the Lords of his
highness council, and the principal secretary of State, in their coaches.

In this manner they proceeded toward the Royal Exchange, making two stands by
the way.

First, at chancery lane end over against the Inner Temple gate, where
Proclamation was made by the common crier of London, according to the tenor of
the proclamation already published by act of Parliament, the Lord Major,
Council, the Aldermen of London, and all Officers standing bare.

The second stand was made in Cheapside at the end of Woodstreet, where
proclamation was made as before.

Thence they proceeded in order to the Royal Exchange, ariving there at
Exchange time, where Proclamation was made (as in all other places) by sound of
Trumpet, in the form aforesaid; and the humble petition and advice was
published: after which, the Trumpets sounding, three loud acclamations were
made by the people, Long live the Lord Protector.

Whitehall, November. 5.
The fury of the Jesuited popish party in Poland; having of late, with all
violence, been executed in a barbarous manner upon the reformed professors, who
are of the Bohemian confession in those parts, insomuch, that the Churches are
dispersed, and the poor christians forced to fly into foreign parts for safety
of their lives; diverse of their exiled Pastors being come into England to seek
for relief, the case of the poor exiles stands referred by his Highness and
the Council, to the consideration of those worthy and pious persons
(Ministers, and others) who are the Committee for Piedmont.

The most inhumane persecutions lately acted by the Papists and their party in
Poland, against our Brethren of the Reformed Religion are some of them) as
follows.

The first remarkable is that of Lesna, a populous wealthy city, and the great
refuge of the Reformed, who frequently came thither from other parts for
shelter. The church there was divided into three congregations, the Bohemian,
the Polonian, and the German. This City they first set upon, intending to put
all to the Sword, and destroy it with fire; but the Citizens having notice of
their coming on, quitted the City leaving all their wealth behind, flying
through Woods and Boggs into Silesia: so that the enemy entering without
resistance, found none but aged and bedrid persons, whom they barbaroufly flew;
and after they had plundered the City, they reduced it to ashes.

In other places, they cruelly murdered diverse Minister; of the Word, and
people of all ages and Sexes, making them to end their lives by exquisite
tortures. The Pastor of the Church of Czvirzin had his eyes first pulled out,
because he would not renounce the faith; then they pulled off with Pincers, the
Joints of his fingers; but he still remaining constant, they poured moulten
Lead into his mouth; and lastly putting his head between the shuts of a door,
they severed it from his body.

The Pastor of the Church of Dembnick, and two others, after many vilanous
abuses offered to their persons, had their throats cut. Finding also a young
Minister in the field, they cut off his head with a Sith, and afterward
mangled his body. The like cruelty they acted also upon a citizen of Lesna, and
worse upon many others, not sparing even the weaker sex, nor children.

A pious Matron of Lesna, with her three children, not getting quick enough out
of Town, was murdered in the open street, her hands and feet cut off, and two
of her children with their heads cut off laid upon her breasts, the third by
her side.

Another also having her hands and feet chopped off, and her tongue cut out,
being afterward tied up in a Sack, lived so two days in a most lamentable
condition, Nay, their cruelty extended to the very carkases after persons were
dead, haling them out of their graves, and dragging them up and down the
streets; some of the carkases they chopped in pieces, and some they exposed naked
for spectacles, as the dead body of the Landgrave of Hessen, who was first
slain at Kotzchi in a Barbarous manner, but buried at Lesna, and by them taken
out of the grave. The like usage had the body of Arcissenski, heretofore
Admiral of the hollanders in Brasile. A Divine burnte in the middell of his
books his Child pulled from ye breast and tossed on a spear.

Cords drawn through the legs and Arms.

Men's guts pulled out of there mouths

Add to these inhumanities those of burning men alive, and casting great
numbers with stones tied about their necks into rivers. They caused Pastors to
fly for safety of their lives, demolished their Churches, or else burnt them
down. At Skoki there was ^ church of the banished Bohemians, where sixty five
men and women were miserably massacred, the numbers of the banished are very
great being scattered (most of them) through Silesia, the Mark, Lusatia,
Hungary, etc. exposed to hunger and cold, and nakedness: The Ministers and
people are fain to hold their meetings in close places, or else Woods, enduring
the utmost of misery, being exposed to the rage of unreasonable men in all
places where they wander. Innumerable are the particulars of cruelty exercised
by those Vassals of Rome in several places, and too large to be recited;
therefore let this serve as part of the account transmitted hither by Letters
out of Foreign parts.

A Catalogue of the names of those Honorable Persons, who are by writ summoned
to sit in the other house of Parliament.
THe Lord Richard Cromwell. The Lord Henry Cromwell, Lord Deputy of Ireland.
Nathaniel Fiennes, John Lisle Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal. Henry
Lawrence Lord President of his Highness privy Council. The Lord Charles
Fleetwood. Robert Earl of Warwick. Edmond Earl of Mulgrave. Edward Earl of
Manchester. William Lord Viscount Say and Seal. Lord John Cleypole, Mr. of the
Horse. Philip Lord Viscount Lisle. Charles Lord Viscount Howard. Philip Lord
Wharton. Thomas Lord Fauconbridge. Lord John Disbrow, Lord Edward Montague
Generals at Sea. George Lord Evre. The Lord Whitelock. Sir Gilbert Pickering.
Col William Sydenham. Sir Charles Wolseley. M. G. Philip Skippon. Lord
Strickland. Col. Philip Jones. Sir William Strickland. Francis Rous Esquire John
Fiennes Esquire Sir Francis Russel. Sir Thomas Honywood. Sir Arthur Hesilrigg. Sir
John Hobart. Sir Richard Onslow. Sir Gilbert Gerard. Sir William Roberts. John
Glyn, Oliver St. John, Lords Chief Justices. William Pierrepoynt Esquire John Jones
Esquire John Crew Esquire Alexander Popham Esquire Sir Christopher Pack. Sir Robert
Tichborn. Edward Whalley Esquire Sir John Barkstead Knight, Lieutenant of the
Tower. Sir Thomas Pride. Sir George Fleetwood. Richard Ingoldsby Esquire Sir John
Hewson. James Berry Esquire William Goffe Esquire Thomas Cooper Esquire Edmond Thomas Esquire
George Monck, Commander in Chief of his Highness forces in Scotland. David
Earl of Castils. Sir William Lockhart. Sir Archibald Johnston of Warriston.
William Steel, Lord Chancellor of Ireland. The Lord Broghil. Sir Matthew
Tomlinson.

In number Sixty, The Reader is to excuse this List, if the names be not set
down in their due order, because the Copy came to my hand as here you see it.

Some Heads of the Speech made by His Highness; January 1657.
HIs Highness said, He met them there in that Capacity, by the Advice and
Petition of this present Parliament after so much Expense of Blood and
Treasure, to search and try what Blessings God has in store for these Nations.

That he could not but with gladness of heart remember and acknowledge the
labor and industry that is past, which has been spent upon a Business worthy
of the best men, and the best Christians. That it was not unknown unto them
all, what difficulties we have past through, and at what we are now arived, and
that he hoped it might be said, we have arived at what we aimed at, if not at
that which is much beyond our expectations. That the state of this cause, and
the quarrel at first, was, the maintaining of the Liberty of these Nations, our
Civil liberties as men, and our Spiritual liberties as Christians. That it was
well known, the first Declaration after the Beginning of the late War that
spoke to the life, was a sense held forth by the Parliament, that for sometime
before, Designs had been laid to Innovate upon the Civil Rights of the
Nations; to Innovate in matter of Religion; and those persons who a man would
have thought should have had the least hand in meddling with civil things, did
justify all irregular Transastions in Pulpits, Presses, and otherwise, which
they thought would be a means to shelter them while they innovated upon us in
matters of Religion also, and proceeded so to Innovate, as to eat out the Core,
and power, the heart and life of all Religion, by bringing on us a company of
poisonous Popish Ceremonies, and imposing them upon those that were called and
accounted the Puritans of the Nation, and professors of Religion among us,
driving them to seek their bread in a howling Wilderness; they were forced to
fly into Holland, New England, almost any whither, to find liberty for their
Consciences. That if this thing has been the state and sum of our Quarrel, and
of the late ten years Wars, and the good hand of God has brought this
Eusinesse thus home unto us, as it is stated in the Petition and Advice, then
that He and they have all cause to bless God, and the Nations have cause to
bless him. And if the enjoyment of our present peace and other men's Mercies
may be witnesses for God, we feel and we see them every Day. That the greatest
Demonstration of his Favor and love appears to us in this, that he has given
us peace, and the blessings of Peace, to wit, the enjoyment of our Liberties
civil and Spiritual. That when we were plunged in the midst of our Troubles,
it could not before-thought that ever the people of God should have had liberty
to worship God without fear of Enemies; yet this is the Portion which God has
given us, and he hoped we shall for ever heartily acknowledge it, it being our
glory that we have a free possession of the Gospel.

That notwithstanding this, we are not without the murmurings of many people,
who turn all this Grace and Goodness into Wormwood, who indeed are
disappointed by the Works of God, and those men are of several ranks and
conditions, great ones, lesser ones, men of all sorts; men that are of the
Episcopal Spirit, who gave themselves a fatal blow in this place, when they
would needs make a Protestation, That no Laws were good which were made by this
House, and the House of Commons, in their absence; and so without injury to
themselves, they cut off themselves. That we have now a Godly Ministry, a
knowing Ministry; such a one, as (without Vanity be it spoken) the World has
not the like, Men knowing the things of God, and able to search into the things
of God, by that only which can fathom those things in some measure, to wit, by
the Spirit of God. That the reason why men slip in this age is, because they
understand not the Works of God, and consider not the operation of his hands:
They consider not, that God resisted, and brake in pieces the powers that were,
that men might fear him, might have liberty to do and enjoy all that he had
been now speaking of. Thence it is, that men slip, and engage themselves
against God; and for that very cause (as it is in the 28 Psalm) He shall break
them down, and not build them up. That if we would know upon what foundation we
stand, we should own our foundation from God; he has set us where we are; he
has placed us in the enjoyment of our Civil, and of our Spiritual Liberties.
That upon this foundation of a cause and Quarrel thus attained, and wherein we
are thus estated; he told the Parliament he should be glad to lay his bones
with theirs, and would have done it with all heartinesse, and cheerfulness, in
the meanest capacity that he ever yet was in, to serve the Parliament. His
Highness concluded, That he had been speaking of but what they had done; and
that if God should be pleased to make this Meeting happy upon this account,
They would be called the blessed of the Lord; the Generations to come will
bless them, etc. That having some infirmities upon him, he had not liberty to
speak at large, but had desired an honorable person present, to discourse a
little more particularly what might be more proper for this occasion, and this
meeting. Which particulars were afterward delivered in a Grave and Eloquent
Speech at large, by the Lord Fiennes, one of the Lords Commissioners of the
Great Seal.

Thurs. Feb. 4. 1657.

The House of Commons this Morning resumed the Debate, touching the Appellation
of the other House, viz. the House of Lords, betwixt ten and eleven his
Highness came to the House of Lords, and Commanded the Usher of the Blake Rod
to acquaint the House of Commons, that his Highness was come to the Lords
House, and there expected them the Usher of the Blake Rod being called into the
House of Commons, signified the same accordingly, whereupon the Speaker and the
whole House coming into the Lords House, and standing without the Bar, his
Highness standing under the cloth of Estate, made a Speech to them, wherein he
declared several urgent and weighty reasons making it necessary for him in
order to the Public peace and safety, so passed to an immediate dissolution of
this Parliament, and accordingly his Highness dissolved the Parliament.

Articles of Peace, treated on by the Commissioners of the two Northern Kings
of Sweden and Denmark, proposed and resolved on, Feb. 27. S. N.
THERE shall be betwixt the two Kings and their Kingdoms an upright eternal
peace, all the mistaken and misunderstandings to be removed, and taken away and
buried in oblivion, and never remembered any more. II. That no alliance be made
with other Potentates, tending to the prejudice of each other. III. That the
one ought not to make Alliance, without the knowledge of the other, nor to
assist the enemy without the consent of each other. IV. That neither party
shall permit (as much as is possible) any Fleet of men of War to pass the sound
or Belt, coming from an Enemy. V. The Bromsberish Treaty shall be in vigor and
force, except in such points, which were expressly excepted against in that
Treaty. VI. If any Kings, Princes and Potentates will come into this Treaty,
they may seek for it from these Kings, who are ready to embrace them: VII. All
such ships as belong to Sweden and to the Subjects of the Crown of Sweden, are
to pass the Horizont or the Belt, without paying of Custom, or without being
searched, as soon as they have showed the Sea pass granted at the Custom, house
of the PIETATE ET CONSTANTIA
King of Denmark: but in case the Swedish ships have taken in any Foreign
Goods, then they are to be dealt withal according to the Tenor of the
Brombergish Treaty. VIII. The King of Sweden for the restitution of such places
gotten and taken in this War, is by way of acknowledgment to have for ever the
Provinces of Holland, Bleke, and Schoneland and the Island of Bornholm, with
the adjacent places. Item, the Castle Bahuys and the Fees belonging, to that
Jurisdiction, which formerly did belong to the Crown of Denmark. IX. The King
of Denmark gives to the Crown of Sweden the jurisdiction of Dronthelm situated
in Norway, together with all the appurtenances belonging thereunto, and that
for ever. X. On the other side, the King of Sweden is to restore to the King of
Denmark all such Territories and strong holds he took in this War, whether they
be in Denmark or Norway, Sleswick, Holstein, or in the County of Pinnenburg,
and all the claims he pretended, in the Dukedom of Bremen, and the County of
Delmenh^rst and Ditmarsh, to renounce them, and resign them to the King of
Denmark and his Heirs. XI. All prisoners, high and low, what condition soever
they are of are to be set at liberty on both sides, without paying any ransom.
XII. The King of Sweden is to clear the King of Denmark his Countries, as soon
as possibly he may, and to be gone at the furthest on the 12 of May; in the
interim he is to have quarters, and to keep good order and military discipline.

XIII. All the states, Noble and Ignoble, spiritual or Clergy and secular men,
are to enjoy fully their privileges in such places, which by way of
satisfaction are made over, whether they be in Denmark or Norway, and the Crown
of Sweden is rather to enlarge their privileges then to infringe or diminish
them. Item they are to enjoy without molestation and hindrance all such Goods
which they either purchased lawfully or are fallen to them by inheritance.
XIIII. The King of Denmark is to restore also to the King of Sweden all such
places he took from him in this War, and the three ships taken from the Swedish
in the Sound are to be prized, and the value thereof is to be restored to the
Crown of Sweden. XV. The King of Denmark is to resign to the King of Sweden
all the claims, which he pretends to any place in the Island Rugen. XVI. The
King of Denmark is to be reconciled with the Duke of Hostein, upon such terms
as may stand with justice and equity, and make an agreement answerably.

XVII. The Forts and castles, taken by either party, are to be restored, but
not any Artillery and Ammunition, and the Subjects of Denmark are to carry the
Swedish Artillery to such places, as the King of Sweden shall appoint. XVIII.
Count Vlefield is to be restored to his goods, and all his Revenues and charges
shall be paid back from that time, as the Commissioners shall determine; His
Lady, and Mother in Law, shall have liberty to dwell in Denmark where they
please; the Fees which he and his Son had, as Hursholm, Moene, Hellingen, and
St John's Cloister, he is to enjoy again, according to the privilege which they
had there; and his Lady also is to be restored to her due title of Honor. XIX.
The published Minifestor of the King of Denmark is to be revoked and neither
printed nor sold any more. XX. The King of Denmark is to let the King of Sweden
have 2000 Horse, and 2000 Foot.

Whitehall, March 12.

This afternoon, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common-Councill of the City of
London, came hither in a Body, to attend his Highness; as also the Commanders
and Officers of the Army: And being admitted to his presence, his Highness was
pleased in a Speech at large, to represent unto them the danger, wherein they
of the whole City, and the whole Nation, were involved at present, by reason of
the new designs of the old Enemy, Charles Stuart and his confederates abroad,
and his party here at home, who have been at work secretly to imbroil the
nation again in Blood, as soon as he should be able to make his intended
invasion. His Highness also told them, that he knew this to be true; That he
knew it by Letters of theirs intercepted, by certain intelligence from abroad
of their proceedings, and by information from the mouths of such persons as had
been engaged to act with them. He acquainted them likewise, that the Lord of
Ormond whom some now call the Duke of Ormond, in person had been lately here
for three weeks together, being come over on purpose to promote the design, by
encouraging and engaging as many as he could in and about this City; and that
he went away again on Tuesday last. Also, in order to this invasion, Charles
Stuart was waiting in Flanders, having about eight thousand Men quartered in
several places near the water side, as at Brugges, Brussells, Ostend, etc. And
that two and twenty hired Ships, were in readiness to transport them, waiting
only for the opportunity of some dark night to slip by our Fleet; which they
may the more easily perform, ours being ships of great burden, drawing much
water, and so not able to ride upon the Flats. And therefore seeing a real
danger so near at hand, and that the peace and safety of the City; and the
whole Nation is Highly concerned in it, he desired the Citizens might be
sensible of it, and how much it behooves them to provide for their own and the
Nations security. And to that end, his Highness recommended to the Lord Major,
and the Body of the City, the settling of their Militia: and that it might be
settled in the hands of Pious and sober men, well affected to the present
Government and such as are free from discontent and faction; persons that may
carry on the work with alacrity and discretion; to put the City in a posture
of defense, that they may be in a condition to suppress tumults and
insurrections, designed by the Enemies of our Peace and Prosperity, Many other
particulars his Highness insided on, to give them an account of the present
state of affairs, and of diverse past transactions; but having no notes to help
my memory, and being afraid lest I may already have fallen short in relating the
Heads of what was more copiously and much better spoken, I have only this to
add. That the citizens expressed much cheerfulness in the presence of his
Highness; and departed with very great satisfaction.

Whitehall March 27.

These following persons having been lately presented from the City to his
Highness and the Council, to be added to the Committee of the Militia in
London, they are accordingly approved. Sir Thomas Foot Knight, William Thomson,
Walter Big, John Frederick, Tempest Milner, Thomas Chaundler, Aldermen.
Charles Lloyd, Therphilus Biddulph, William Gower, Esquires. Mr. Maurice Gethin,
Mr. Thomas Steynes, Mr. James Edwards.

This day a Presentation was made of the following Addresses to his Highness,
and it was presented by the hand of the noble Lord the Lord Charles Fleetwood,
attended by the Officers of the Army.

To his Highness the Lord Protector of the Common wealth of England, Scotland
and Ireland, etc. The Humble Address of the Officers of your Highness Army.
WE being deeply sensible of the continual dangers from the common enemy that
have attended your Highness person, and of the immense weight of business for
the good of the Nation, that has lain and still lies upon you; together with
the great opposition from several sorts of enemies that you have met with,
ever since you were pleased to undertake the Government, for the procuring the
quiet, and promoting the prosperity of this Commonwealth, do judge it our duty
to contribute as much as in us lies to strengthen your Highness hands, and
obviate the designs of your enemies. And therefore do, as one Man, with
plainness and sincerity of heart, declare unto your Highness; That
(notwithstanding the base Calumnies and Lies, your and our enemies have cast
upon us, and dispersed throughout the whole Nation, That your Army is divided,
and much of it from your self) We do remain, through the mercy of God, firmly
united one to another, and all of us to your Highness, as our General and
Chief Magistrate; and hope that God has so in love and faithfulness cemented
us together, as that neither the subtilty of Satan, nor the malice of crafty
and ill-affected men, shall be able to severe us. And we make it our earnest
and humble request to your Highness, That as a mighty man strengthened by the
Lord, you will run and not be weary in that race God has set you in, till it
please the Lord you have settled the great ends of all our former engagements,
our civil and spiritual liberty: which we hope is already in a good measure
well provided for, by The Humble Petition and advice. And in all your actings
tending thereunto, We do freely and heartily engage (the Lord strengthening us)
to stand by your Highness with our lives, and shall not be wanting to improve
our interest with the Lord, for his gracious and mighty assistance with you, in
the further prosecution of the great work he has called you to.

Charles Fleetwood. William Goffe. John Barkestead. Howard, Richard Ingoldsby,
Thomas Pride. James Berry. Thomas Cooper. Philip Twisleton. Edward Grosvener.
John Disbrow. Henry Ingoldsby. Thomas Talbot. George Sedascue. Thomas Kelsey.
Tobias Bridge. John Nelthorpe. William B^teler. Hezekiah Haynes. Edward
Whalley. John Clarke. Thomas Sadler. Ralph Cobbet. Edward Salmon. John Mill.
William Stane. Henry Whalley. Thomas Margetts.


By the Committee for the affairs of the poor Protestants in the Valleys of
Piedmont.
THe All wise and Holy God, whose ways of Providence are always righteous,
though often secret and unsearchable, has made it the constant lot and portion
of his people in this World, to follow the Lord in bearing his Cross, and
suffering persecutions, thereby holding forth and verifying that
irreconcilable Enmity between the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the
Serpent, which was visible betimes in the Blood shed of righteous Abel, whom
Cain (though his Brother) slew being of the wicked one, yea and for this cause,
for that his own works were evil, and his Brothers good: Thus they that are
born after the flesh, persecute them that are born after the Spirit to this
day, and so will do while the World lasts. In which Cause and Quarrel the
Lord has very many glorious ends. But scarcely have any sort of the Churches
Enemies more clearly followed the pernicions ways of Cain herein, than has
the Antichristian Faction of Rome done, that Mother of Harlots and
abominations, whose garments are died red with the blood of Saints, which they
have always cruelly shed, and made themselves drunk with, even the blood of
those holy Followers of the Lamb, chiefly who would not receive Antichrists
mark, nor worship his Image, nor drink of the Golden Cup of his Fornications,
but rather come out from them, and witness against them, though they did it in
sackcloth, and were slain for it. Among those chosen and faithful Witnesses,
the Lord seemed very signally to have raised up those Christians, who (though
dispersed in diverse Countries) have been commonly known by the name of
Waldenses, who for some Centuries of years have lived among their enemies as
Lambs among Wolves, to bear their Testimony for the truth of Christ, against
the Apostacies and Blasphemies of Rome, for which they have been killed all the
day long, and appointed as sheep for the slaughter. Nevertheless the Lord, the
great Shepherd of the sheep, has made their blood thus shed, to become a
constant seed of faithful and Valiant witnesses for him; which is indeed, the
more mavelous in our eyes, that this Bush has so long burned, and is not yet
consumed. This little flock and remnant which the Lord has left and reserved,
are scattered in the Valleys of Piedmont, of whose tragical sufferings we
have not long since heard, and have drawn forth our bowels to them, whereof a
very faithful account is given to the World, both for satisfaction of Brethren
and Friends, and for stopping the mouths of all Calumnies. The other part of
this poor, yet precious Remnant, has been dispersed in the Kingdoms of Bohemia
and Poland, whose sufferings, together with the Lords signal providence about
them have been very eminent and remarkable, as has been made appear unto us by
three godly persons, delegated by those persecuted Churches, which are now the
sad Monuments of their Enemies rage, and of the Lords sparing Mercies. These
have made their addresses to his Highness the Lord Protector by Petition,
declaring the deplorable estate wherein this persecuted Remnant now lies, and
with loud cries importuning the Christian Bowels and Bounty of this Nation,
which cannot but be moved to mourn over them, and to show mercy to them. And
indeed upon a due sense and consideration of this lamentable subject, even
common humanity, but much more christian charity should provoke us to a fellow
feeling of their present distressed condition. These sometimes flourishing
churches, where by degrees worn out by the constant underminings and open out
rages of the Antichristian party, being first driven out of Bohemia into
Poland, then after their taking root and spreading in Poland unto a numerous
company, were forced out of the chief Cities there, and now at last by the
Jesuited and enraged Polish Army persecuted in their few hiding places, with
fire and sword. Their Ministers were tortured to death by most exquisite and
unheard of Barbarism, by cutting out of the tongues of some, pulling out the
eyes, and cruelly mangling the Bodies of others; nor did their rage and Brutish
Cruelty reach only to Ministers, but to others, yea even to women and young
Children, whose heads they cut off, and them at their dead mothers breasts.
Nay, their rage brake out, not only upon the living (not one of whom they
spared that fell into their hands) but also upon the dead, plucking the bodies
of honorable persons and others out of the graves, tearing them to pieces, and
exposing them to public scorn.

But the chief Eye sore and object of their Fury was the City of Lesna, which
(after plundering and murdering all whom they found therein) they burned to
ashes, and laid in rubbish, only the Lord in his mercy having alarmed the City
of their enemies approaching March, the greatest part of the Inhabitants (being
three famous Churches) saved themselve by flight, and are now wandering up and
down in Silesia, the Marguifate of Brandenburg, Lusatia and Hungary, poor,
destitute, afflicted and naked. His Highness and the Council having referred
unto this Committee the Testimonials and Petitions sent by the said Churches,
We finding upon examination thereof, their case to be thus deplorable, which is
more at large stated and declared in their own Narrative, have caused the said
Narrative to be translated, and here with published, thereby to stir up the
Lords people in these Nations to put on bowels of mercies toward these their
exiled and afflicted brethren, refreshing their hearts by your love, and the
tokens of it in a cheerful and liberal supply; which will not only preserve
this holy seed from perishing, that has a blessing in it, but also uphold
among them the Purity of Religion and power of the Gospel. The rather
considerng the present freedom from these bloody outrages, we the people of
these Nations do by the blessing of the Lord enjoy, the continuance whereof we
may the more comfortably hope for, by how much our compassions are more freely
extended to those in misery. And if a cup of cold water given to one disciple,
as such shall not lose its reward; how much more when a bountiful relief is
given to more then five thousand disciples? Which we should be the more forward
to advance, because they acknowledge they have received much confirmation in
the Religion for which they suffer, by light received from our Country man John
Wicklof, that famous witness of Christ against Antichrist, even in the darkest
times of Popery. And I doubt no: but that God who has lately opened your
bowels to so large and eminent a Contribution toward the persecuted
Protestants at Piedmont, for which many Thanksgivings have been made to God on
your behalf will again draw out your hearts upon this like sad occasion, to the
like bountiful liberality, it being our duty to cast our bread upon the
waters, and to give a portion to six and also to seven, not being weary of
well-doing, because in due time we shall reap if we faint not. Considering also
how honorable it is to ^ct grace, and to lay out our selves upon such
occasions, we recommmend i^ again as the work of God accompanied with his own
voice, calling aloud upon us to enlarge our selves in this ministration, and
withal to pour out our hearts in faith and prayer, that the Lord would yet
please to raise up S^on upon the Ruins of Babylon, hastening his work, and
blessing means to it.

John Trevor. Christopher Pack. Will. Puref^y. Edward Cresse^. Thomas Viner.
Joseph Caryl. John Owen. Will. Jenkyn. Philip Ny^. Will: Cooper. Edmond Ca^^^y.



A Breviate of the impeachment of high Treason exhibited by Mr. Attorney
General against John Hewet, Doctor of Divinity, consisting of these heads.
1. THat to embroyl the Commonwealth in new and intestine troubles, and to stir
up Sedition and Rebellion within the Nation; He, together with others,
Traitorously and Maliciously raised force, and levied war against his highness,
and the government, to subvert and alter the same. 2. That he traitorously
declared, published, and promoted Charles Stuart. Eldest Son of the late King
Charles, to be King of England, Scotland, and Ireland, etc. 3. That he held
correspondence with the said Charles Stuart. And declared the same by these open
deeds. I. By conferring with one Trelawney, Jo. Stapely, and Henry Mallory, how
to effect the same. II. By appoynting places of meeting to consult for
effecting the same. III. By encouraging Stapely and Mallory thereunto. IV. By
delivering Commissions to several persons in the Name of, and as from the said
Charles Stuart, concerning the raising of forces, and leavying the power
aforesaid, against his highness and the Government, and this contrary to the
statute in that case made and provided.

The substance of Sir Henry Slingsby's speech, at Tower Hill, June 8. 1658.
THat he stood condemned by the court of justice as contriving and endeavoring
to withdraw diverse officers of the garrison of Kingston upon Hull from their
duty, and persuading them to a surrendering and yielding up of that Garrison, and
one that held correspondence with some beyond Sea to that end. That it was
true, he had conference upon that account with the officers of that Garrison;
and that he gave Major Waterhouse a commission signed Charles R. but that it was
but an old one that had lain by him, though he thought fit to make use of it to
the Major. Many passages he said there were which he would not insist on, That
some friends of his had made application to his Highness for the saving of his
life, but it seems it was thought fit not to be granted, etc. and therefore he
submitted and was ready to dye, etc.

He spoke but low, and very little, and kept himself in a very even temper,
both in words and behavior. Then addressing himself again to his friends, he
called for the executioner, who having received his reward by the hand of a
friend, came to him, placed the block in the middle of the Scaffold, which Sir
Henry beheld with his arms folded, and a settled countenance; an officer
standing by with the Ax. Then the prisoner declaring he had no more to say,
stripped himself. Before he put off his band, he desired a friend standing by;
to take off a Ring which hung in his Bandstring, 'twas in the form, and about
the breadth of an ordinary seal; but instead of a seal engraven, it had the
Picture of the late King done in little and very exactly. When the Gentleman
had taken it off, he said these words to him, Pray give this to Harry. His
doublet being off, he kneeled down before the block, and lifting up his hands
as before, he again prayed privately to himself, but was very short. Then
rising up, and embracing his friends one after another, took his leave of them
all. After this kneeling down, and placing his neck upon the block, the
executioner struck off his head at one blow. The Head was immediately taken off
the Scaffold, and put in a black Scarff, the Body into the Coffin, and the Head
with it; which being nailed up, and covered, was conveyed off the Scaffold into
a Hearse drawn by six horses, which stood ready to receive it.

The sum of Doctor Hewet's Speech on the Scaffold;

Viz. That he had never been in such a Pulpit as this was; and that he came
thither, within a few minutes to suffer death for the Truth, and to bear
testimony thereto, according to that saying of our blessed Lord and Savior,
For this end was I born, and for this end came I into the world, to bear
witness to the Truth. And that in two respects; First, as a Clergyman; and
secondly, as a Member of the community in which he lived. As a Clergyman, he
blessed God that had called him to the office of the Ministry, though unworthy;
and that he had been baptized into the true faith and doctrine of the Gospel,
and thereby made a member of the Catholic Church, especially of that part of
it, the Church of England, which he looked upon as the purest for sound
doctrine and orderly discipline, of any in the christian world; and disowned
all others walking contrary thereunto. [Here the Reader is to observe, that the
Doctor was not questioned for any point of Faith he held, but for being a
Traitor; and so he dyed not for truth, but for Treason.] In the second place,
as one of the community or civil state, he looked upon himself as borne a
free Englishman, and in that capacity had a right to the Liberties and
privileges of this Land, and to the Laws thereof. Here he took occasion to
speak of passages at his trial before the Court of Justice saying that having
been advised by persons learned in the Law, and being furnished with some books
of Law cases and reports, he was thereby instructed to make several demands in
court; as that he might be satisfied about the jurisdiction of the court; then
that he might have counsel allowed; afterward being told in court that they
were to try him in matter of fact, to which he ought first to plead; he in the
next place said he desired that the matter might be heard by the Judges, and
thereupon appealed to them; which would not be admitted; he being told the
court had a full Jurisdiction by Act of Parliament; That he had always
insisted that he might have a Jury to be tried by, but that was not granted
him, but the court being erected according to Act of Parliament; they supplied
a Jury. These things he insisted on as the Rights and Privileges of an English
man, and being denied him, he thereupon refused to plead.

That the President of the Court, did indeed read the Clause in the Act, which
declared, That in case he stood mute, he must be taken as guilty upon default
of answer; and that he having made three defaults, was at last taken from the
bar, then when he intended to have pleaded. [One would wonder such words should
proceed from a dying man, whereas all persons present, and at his trial, do
know that the Court had patience with him some hours, and in a great deal of
tenderness toward him, caused the Clause in the Act which concerns default of
answer to be read to him several times, and to the very last advised him to
plead, but he still refused, and never uttered so much as one Syllable that he
would plead.]

That he said, he the next morning made application to the Court, sitting in
the Painted Chamber, by Petition, that he might have liberty to plead; which
being presented, and found to be defective as to the due Title, it was laid
aside: Then another petition was drawn up, with the Title amended, which
himself Sr. Hen: Slingsby; and Dr. Hewet. Beheded at Tower Hill. June the 8th.
1658: Col: Ashton. and John Betteley. hanged Drawn and quartred. Ashton at
mark*Lane end ye other in Cheep side

subscribed, but that the return made to this, was, That he should have his
answer in Court: Which answer was, that Sentence of condemnation which brought
him to this place; and that being now to dye, he might say, He was to dye the
Martyr of the People, and that he did from his very soul freely forgive those
that were the occasion of his death.

[Here I cannot but observe, that this dying man's Charity was greater then his
memory; because, what he says here, clashes with what he said before, it
appearing by his own very words, That if he were a Martyr for the people, it
was much against his will, seeing a little before, he tells us, he would have
pleaded to be Court, and so have owned their jurisdiction; and that if the
owning of them had been to have given up the rights of the people: It seems by
his ow^ confession ^ere, he would have done it, in hope to have escaped this
kind of Martyrdom, ^s he calls it] Then he proceeded to this effect. That
having declared what passed upon his trial in Court, he would next proceed to
clear himself of some imputations laid upon him: one whereof was, That he was
one engaged with those, who were said to have designed the firing of the City:
to this he protested, That had he been engaged amongst such persons that should
have ^ntended such a horrid business, he would have been the first that should
have discovered them. Another was, That it was reported he should entertain the
Duke or Marquis of Ormond, and harbored him in his house, when lately here in
England: to which he protested, That (to his best remembrance he never saw his
person, A third was, that it was reported he should be preaching at St.
Gregory's one Sunday, and that the next after, being absent, he should be at
Brudges in Flanders, and there have communication with him whom he called the
King, and kiss his hand: In answer to this he said, That for these three years
past, he had not been threescore miles from this City, and I am sure said he,
that Brudges in Flanders is a great deal farther.

[This pains the Doctor might have spared, seeing none of the particulars he
was pleased to dilate upon, were ever charged upon him by any Authority, but it
is very observable, that in all his discourse upon the Scaffold, he never made
any pr^^^station to declare his innocence, concerning the matters charged in
Court against him: It being a time (he thought) wherein he might make more b^ld
to strain his Oratory then his conscience, and yet sure, that was no time to
stand confuting the Tattles of the Town.]

In conclusion he said, That having now spoken to the people, he would also
pray for them, and bless them in the name of the Lord: and so kneeling in
their view, he made a long prayer, (the three Ministers kneeling behind him)
which seemed by the contexture of it, to have been penned on purpose for the
occasion; because of the very many passages of the Common Prayer Book, that
were interwoven in it. His prayer consisted of several parts.

After which the Executioner asking him if he were ready, he answered Yea, and
his head was severed from his body at one blow and a little raze of the Ax upon
a small piece of the skin. His head also was put up into a scarf, and with his
body put up into a coffin, which stood ready on the Schaffold.

A Breviate of the charge of High treason exhibited against Summer, and the
rest, for plotting, contriving, and endeavoring, together with John Hewet,
late of London, Doctor of Divinity, deceased, Henry, Mallery, late of London,
Gentleman, Hartgil Baron, Francis Mansel, and other false Traitors and enemies
to his highness and this Commonwealth.

1. TO levv war and raise force against his highness, and the Commonwealth.
2. For declaring, and promoting Charles Stuart to be King of England. For
holding intelligence with Charles Stuart. And they declared these Treasons by
several overt acts. I. By appointing several places of Meeting. II. By
conferring amongst themselves and others their accomplices, how to effect their
said Treasons. III. By designing to fire the City of London, or some part
thereof. IV. By providing and furnishing themselves with barrels of Powder, and
other habiliments of War. V. By delivering commission in the name of, and as
from Charles Stuart. VI. By appoynting several Officers of War. And this against
the form of the Statute in that case made and provided.

London, July 17.

This morning between nine and ten of the Clock, Col. Ashton, who was by the
Court of Justice sentenced to suffer death as this day, was accordingly
conveyed in a Sled from Newgate, drawn with four horses (Dr. Warmistry sitting
in the Sled with him) to Tower-street, over against Mark lane end; where a
Gibbet was erected, being come to the place of Execution and taken off the
Sled, at his going up the Ladder, he desired r. Warmistry to pray with him. And
just as he was going up the Ladder, the doctor used these following words to
him: [Almighty God who is a strong Tower, be with thee, and make thee know and
feel, that there is no other name under heaven, whereby to attain everlasting
life, but by the name of Jesus. The blessing of God the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost be with you hence forth and forever Amen.]

When he was upon the Ladder, he spoke thus. Ashton. I hope I see my Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. Dr. Warmistry. I hope so (says the D^.) pass on from
the cross to the Crown. Remember who went before you.

Ashton. I am brought here to a shameful death. I am an English man born* and
(as many know) a Gentleman born; I am brought here by occasion of two fellows
that corrupted me, namely, Topham and Langhorn, who were the men that brought
me acquainted with one Manley. And Manley and the rest told me they would raise
a Regiment for me, and then I told them I would command it. I was drawn into
the business. And now I am brought here for my former sins; God has delivered
me several times from several judgments; he has visited me at this time,
because I slighted, and did not follow that Repentance that I promised.
Therefore I desire all protestants to leave off their sins for Christ his sake,
and become new men, for it is that that brings all men to ruin; I beseech God
of mercy have mercy upon my soul, Lord God, I come to thee, Lord the Father of
heaven have mercy upon me, O God the Son Redeemer of the World have mercy upon
me. O God the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son, have mercy
upon me. Remember not my offenses, but spare me, good Lord God. I beseech thee
spare thy servant whom thou have redeemed, for thy dear Sons sake. I have no
more to say, but desire the prayers of all good people. Doctor. One word,
remember that saying of the Psalmist, Thou shall answer for me O Lord.

Ashton. The Executioner asking him, if he had any more to say, he answered,
No. But concluded thus; I commit my spirit into thy hands O God; the Lord have
mercy upon my soul Which being said, the Executioner turned him off the Ladder;
and afterward being cut down, he ripped up his bel^y, took out the bowels,
and burnt them in a fire ready prepared upon the place. Then his head was cut
off, and his body divided into four Quarters.

Execution being done upon Colonel Ashton, and his Quarters conveyed away in a
Basket upon a Cart, to Newgate; The Sheriffs officers went to the Tower, to
fetch John Betteley to his Execution, (who was likewise drawn upon the same
sled) into Cheapside; (where formerly the Cross stood) where was likewise a
Gibbet crected.

The manner of the execution of John Betteley in Cheapside.
Being come to the Gibbet on a Sled with a Minister, the Minister read, and the
people sung with him a Psalm beginning thus, O Lord consider my distress etc

Betteley. I trust in him that he will certainly save me. Then he went up the
Ladder. His confession follows.

LOrd receive my Soul, and be merciful to me: I commit my Soul into Almighty
Gods hands; for he is my Protector and Redeemer. I am not ashamed to live nor
afraid to dye; for, my conversation has been such, in Christ Jesus I hope I
shall find mercy. As concerning them that are my enemies, I pray God forgive
them their sins, I freely forgive them all that have done me wrong. As for the
late Plot, I was never but once in company with them concerned therein: I did
know of such a thing, but deny that I acted therein. Shall I damn my soul at
this instant? I will speak the truth. I do acknowledge I offended God in it,
and wronged this Nation in hearing it, and not discovering it. One Brandon that
was one of them, drew me into the business, and his man. I carrying work to
him, could not refrain his house, he so often enticed me thereto, and would
not let me alone, till he had got me into a house where we drank together. I
have no more to say as to the plot, but desire mercy from God. Having thus
done, the Executioner turned him off, and the rest of the Sentence was executed
upon him, as before upon Col. Ashton, and his Head and Quarters were conveyed
also to Newgate.

As for the third man, Friar, who was to have been executed this day in
Smithfield, he was drawn on a Sled also from the Tower in the afternoon to
Smithfield, where after he had performed his Devotions, being upon the ladder,
and the Executioner ready to turn him off, a Reprieve came, and he was carried
back again to the Tower by the Officers in a Coach.

Articles of surrender of Dunkerke, June 20. 1658.
1. That the Town should be yielded up, with all their great guns, their stores
of victual, Magazins of arms, and ammunition, without any imbesilment

2. That all Officers and Soldiers should have liberty to march out with their
Arms, Drums beating, Colors flying, two pieces of Ordnance, and their baggage.
3. That they should have the liberty to march with a convoy to conduct them to
St. Omers. 4. That the inhabitants should remain indemnified in their persons
and goods, and enjoying their former custom and privileges for 2 years, and
not be molested touching the exercise of their Religion. Hereubon they
accordingly marched out on Tuesday the 25 instant, being 1000 horse and foot,
and 700 more that were wounded men, and at the same time the besiegers entered
into the Town; the King himself also in person, with the Cardinal, and the
Lord General Lockhart: And his Majesty, desirous to give due testimonies of
real friendship and good correspondence with England, put the Town into the
possession of my Lord Lockhart: on the behalf of his highness the Protector,
our English being entered in here for that purpose, and more we expect for the
preserving it in our hands. This will (we suppose) be acceptable news to the
Merchants who have formerly suffered so much by this place, the obtaining
whereof must be attributed (next under God) to the prudence of his highness,
and to that happy success wherewith it pleases the most High to follow him in
all his enterprises and Actions, whereas on the otherside it is observed, that
nothing but mischief and misfortune has accompanied the Spaniard in this
Country, ever since he gave entertainment to, and joined Interest with that
Family, which has a fate entailed upon it, sufficient to sink whole
Kingdoms, as hitherto it has done, and ruined likewise all its particular
followers and partakers. Which was also most observable even in the late
victory, wherein the deadliest storm fell upon the Regiment of Charles and his
Brother, so that very few or none of them escaped with their lives. The French
Army is since marched to Bergen: but what they have done, or will do there, we
yet here not. The Spaniard left behind in this Town about one hundred and forty
great guns, all brass, except 7 or 8

An Oath to be administered to the Inhabitants of Dunkirke was passed by the
Council, being as follows, vix.

I. A. B. Do in the presence and by the name of Almighty God, promise and
swear, that from hence forth I shall bear faith and true Allegiance, and
shall be true and faithful unto Oliver now Lord Protector of the Commonwealth
of England, Scotland and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereunto
belonging, and his Successors, as chief Magistrate thereof, and shall not
design, Contrive or Attempt any thing against the person or Authority of the
Lord Protector, or against the safety, just defense, or necessary preservation
of this Town or place of Dunkirk, in and for its safety, defense and
preservation, under the Government of the Lord Protector and his successors,
against all Conspiracies and attempts whatsoever; and will do my best endeavor
to make known and disclose unto the Protector and his successors, or the
Commander in chief in this place, under his said Highness for the time being,
all Treasons and Traitorous Conspiracies which I shall know or hear of to be
against his Person or Authority, or against the safety of this Town or place of
Dunkirke, or for the betraying of it into the hands of any other persons, or
that tends to the withdrawing of any the persons or people in it from their
fidelity, to the Lord Protector or to his Government.

FINIS.
Oliver Cromwell L. Ptor: of Engd: Scotd: and Ierld: borne at Huntington of the
name of Williams of Glamorgan and by K: H: 8. changed into Cromwell was
educated in Cambridge afterward of Lincons Inn at the beginning of the Wars
Cp: of a Troop of Horse raised at his own charge and by the Parlimt: made
Com^ander in chief reduced Ierld: and South wales overthrew D^: Hambletons
Army the Kerkes Army at Dunbar reduced all Scotland defeted ch: Stewards Army
at Woster he had two Sons Ld: Richard Protector in his fathers room Ld: Henery
now Ld: Debty: of Ierld: and 4: Daughters Ly. Bridget first married L: Ierton
afterward Lt. C: Fleet^^od Ly: Elizabeth married L: Clapole Ly: Mary married
Ld: ^icount Fauconbrige Ly: Francis married the Rt. Hoble: Rob: Rich Granchild
to the Hoble: E: of Warwick was declared L: Ptr: of End: Scd: and Ird. 16: of
December: 1653. died 3. Sep: 1658. after. 14. days sickness of an agew with
great assurance and serenitie of mind peaceabley in his bed. Natus. 15. Ap:
1599.

Dunkerke in Flanders surrendered to him 20th: of June. 1658.




