LOVE IN THE DARK, OR The Man of Business.

A COMEDY: Acted at the THEATER ROYAL By His MAJESTY'S Servants.

WRITTEN By Sir FRANCIS FANE, Junior; Knight of the BATH.

Naturam expellas furca licet, usque recurret. Hor.

In the SAVOY. Printed by T. N. for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at the
Anchor in the Lower Walk of the New Exchange. 1675.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, JOHN, Earl of ROCHESTER. Gentleman of His MAJESTY'S
Bedchamber.
My LORD,
OFFenders, long connived at, come at last to be tried for their Lives, and are
forced to call upon their fatally indulgent friends to bring them off: for
Volunteer Poets are at least as mad as those who, out of wantonness play
themselves into the Galleys. It Is high time to cast my self at your Lordships,
Feet, and humbly beg your Protection to this ride Piece, which grew the bolder
by your encouragement. All Poems in their Dedications, ought to return to your
Lordship, as all Rivers to the Sea, from whose depth and Saltness they are
seasoned and supplied: none of them ever coming to your Lordship's hands,
without receiving some of the rich Tinctures of your unerring Judgment; and
running with much more clearness, having past so fine a strainer. If this
receives any approbation in the World, I must ascribe it principally to your
Lordship's partial recommendations, and impartial corrections. Your Lordship is
the first person in the World, by whom I have been Highly and Heroically
obliged: and if the first Impressions of Gratitude, may be as strong and
captivating, as those of the first Love; they must needs be much more lasting
and immutable, in my Passion for your Lordship; since the World affords no
object so high and admirable, ever to work a change; your Lordship being the
most accomplished of all Mankind, that I ever knew, read, or heard of, by
Humane testimony. Eminent Beings are as hard to be believed, as they are to be
understood: and no Man can speak Truth of your Lordship's Superlative
Endowments, without suspicion of Flattery; nor conceal them without conviction
of Ignorance. That famous Temper of weight, so rarely found in Bodies, appears
most Illustriously in your Lordship's Mind. Judgment, and Fancy, seldom
concurring in other Men, in any small proportion, are possessed by your Lordship
in the highest degree that ever was allowed the Soul of Man; yet with so happy
and harmonious a mixture, that neither of them predominate nor usurp; but, like
two peaceful Colleagues in Empire, agree within themselves, and govern the rest
of the World; acting in your Lordships noble, and elevated Mind, like Fire and
Air in the upper Region, whose Purity makes them easily convertible, and
mutually assistant, whilst they are always quarrelling and preying upon each
other, in gross inferior Bodies. What was favorably said of my Lord Bacon in
his time, may much more justly be affirmed of your Lordship, in yours; That if
ever there were a beam of Knowledge, immediately derived from God, upon any
Man, since the Creation, there is one upon your self. Others, by wearisome
steps, and regular gradations, climb up to knowledge; your Lordship is flown up
to the top of the Hill: you are an Enthusiast in Wit; a Poet and Philosopher by
Revelation; and have already in your tender age, set out such new and glorious
Lights in Poetry, yet those so Orthodox and Unquestionable, that all the Heroes
of Antiquity, must submit, or Homer and Virgil be judged Nonconformists. For my
part, I account it one of the great felicities of my life, to have lived in
your age; but much greater, to have had access to your Person, and to have been
cherysh'd and enlightened by the influences, and irradiations of so great a
Luminary. For, I must confess, I never return from your Lordships most Charming
and Instructive Conversation, but I am inspired with a new Genius, and improved
in all those Sciences. I ever coveted the knowledge of: I find my self, not
only a better Poet, a better Philosopher; but, much more than these, a better
Christian: your Lordship's-miraculous Wit; and Intellectual powers being the
greatest Argument that ever I could meet with, for the immateriality of the
Soul; they being the highest exaltation of humane Nature; and, under Divine
Authority, much more convincing to suspicious Reason, than all the Pedantick
proofs of the most Learnedly peevish Disputants: so that, I hope, I shall be
obliged to your Lordship, not only for my Reputation in this World, but my
future Happiness in the next. Reflect then, my Lord, I beseech you, on your own
sublime perfections, the profuseness of your Favors, my powerful (though
presumptuous) inclination to your Person, and judge if it be possible, for any
other Man living to pay your Lordship so sincere and affectionate a Veneration,
as

My Lord, Your Lordships most Devoted, Obedient, and Humble Servant, FRANCIS
FANE.

PROLOGUE.
WHat though 't has been the Genius of this Age,
Tame Pegasus to fetter on the Stage;
TO imprison in close Rimes, well-governed Rage?
Alas it is easier much for them in France,
The English do but Walk, when Frenchmen Dance,
Rhyme comes to them by Nature, Wit by Chance.
Rhyme is a cheating Vapor, which unseen
Ill Poets, like ill Spirits, pass between
To good Wits but a shade, to bad a Skreen.
Then since our Heroes rowz'd with French Allarms,
Have beat the Mounsieurs at their own slight Arms,
With lofty Sense, in Verses gingling Charms.
Our Poet hope's you will not expect to day,
TO have all his downright thoughts dressed up so gay,
If his Coin chinks too much, you will doubt allay.
But oh! the hungry Critic longs to bait
And thinks, like Men on Scaffolds, we Dilate
Preaching to stop irrevocable Fate.
Lean Wit! who like some indigesting Eater
With Wolf in's Stomach, preys on all fresh Matter
By his ungrateful Gutt, never made the fatter.
No no, our Author hopes you will excuse
The yielding Parties of his Virgin Muse.
Who learns to Court, practicing to refuse.
For Modesty's the Daughter of Desire
An Artificial Ice that is made by Fire.
That does at first deny, at last require.
Pardon the struglings of his Maiden Pen.
Embrace her briskly, the first time, and then
She Will never leave you, till you do it again.
Persons Represented.
By Loredano, Doge of Venice. Mr. Lydal. Cardinal Colonna, the Pope's Legare.
Mr. Burt. Hircanio, Procurators of St. Mark. Mr. Cartwright. Grimani.
Procurators of St. Mark. Griffin. Cornanti, an old jealous Senator. Mr.
Wintershul. Intrigo, a curious formal Coxcomb. Mr. Lacy. Count Sforza,
Gentlemen of Milan. Mr. Kynaston. Trivultio, Gentlemen of Milan. Major Mohun.
Visconti. Gentlemen of Milan. Mr. Hayns. Jacomo, Cornanti's Man. Mr. Charlton.
Circumstantio, Intrigo's Man. Mr. Shotterell. Satana Advocate-General. Mr.
Harris. Proveditor. Mr. Powel. By Parbelia, the Doge's Daughter. Mrs. Vphill.
Bellinganna, Cornanti's Wife. Mrs. Bowtel. Aurana, Daughter to Hircanio. Mrs.
James. Melinda, Daughter to Grimani. Mrs. Slade. Vigilia, Bellingana's Duegna.
Hircanio's Wife. A Confessor. Senators. Officers and Servants.
LOVE IN THE DARK: OR, THE Man of Business.
ACT I.
SCENE I. The Piazza of St. Mark.
Trivultio Solus. THe Carnival's begun; the Feast of freeborn Souls,
Where Nature Reigns, and Custom is deposed:
That Magistrate of Fools, Wisemen's Usurper;
And yet no news from Milan!
Enter Visconti harkening. Was ever Man so disappointed? I have no less than
Fifteen Marriages on foot; four of 'em are already consummated, by the help of
some flight Vows, without the solemn Perjury in a Church: five or six more are
finely warmed and softened, and ready for the Seal; and all are at a stand, for
want of these same little scraps of Paper, called Bills of Credit: and,
besides, now I think on it, I am to pursue my Legitimate pretensions to my rich
Mistress Anrana; but a Pox; these Marriages in earnest come time enough, and
spoil the others. The Oaths and Promises of Batchelors pass current, and are
not disproveable; but a married Man, that swears Virtuous Love to others, is
perjured in a Court of Record.

Visc. Come, Sir, for all your Perjury and Idolatry,
It Is Money makes the shortest way of Courtship.

Triv. Who the Devil sent for thee to condole?


Visc. How many Letters, Legs, Cringes, Compliments, does this Money save you?
most Women's Pride is greater than their Lust, and if they Love to see
themselves admired, how much then must they needs love them that make 'em
admirable!

The supple Worshippers are but Slaves to Beauty:
The Givers are superior Deities.
That send the Jewels and fine Clothes, guilty
Of half the Murders those plumed Females cause.

Triv. I Sir, and make 'em insolent and inaccessible to themselves. Those that
give fine things to their Mistresses, like Dutchmen, in time of War, sell
Weapons to their Enemies.


Visc. Faith, Sir, I believe the Ladies need not fear your Liberality at this
time. But, to be plain (Friend) if thou have received no Bills of Exchange, try
the old Banquer Cornanti, your Father's Friend, who (by the way) has a lovely
Woman to's Wife, and is as jealous of her, as becomes old age, that knows its
own Wants: he will lend at first, for fear you should come twice.


Triv. 'S life, so I will; but is she to be seen?


Visc. Nay, stay a little. Now has he as clearly forgot the thought of Money,
as if he had the Indies in his pocket. Don't you consider that you must put
your self in Equipage, to do Honor to your Countryman Sforza, who is this day
designed to be Gentleman of Venice, and Admiral of the Galleys, for his
exemplary service the last year, against the Turks, in Candia; where you know,
he slew two Bassa's with his own hands? After his Election, he intends to Feast
the Senators a week, and desires our assistance at the entertainment.


Triv. Is this the day designed? Faith, it is a noble fellow,


Visc. He is the very Soul and Quintescence of Honor; and has reduced that
wandering Science, made up of Vice and Virtue, ana from Moot-points, to judged
Cases: he has tamed that Monster got betwixt Pride and Justice.


Triv. O, I; he is a Man of so much Honor, one would not be troubled with it:
it is as squeamish and as sore as a tender Conscience. But who told you this?


Visc. I just now parted from him, and Intrigo.


Triv. Ha, ha, he; Intrigo! that insufferable Coxcomb, that Ape of Wisdom and
Gravity, that haunts the Court and Council of Ten, and places of Judicature,
and brings away all the Shells of business, and leaves the Kernels behind?


Visc. I, the very same; He will sit you seven hours alone in the Lobby, next
to the Doge's Bedchamber, to be thought a Privado; and, for the most part,
when the Doge and all the Court's abroad, but Turn-keys and Bed-makers: he will
watch you a Twelvemonth to pick up Papers that drop from Senators and Ladies,
though torn in pieces for the worst of uses; and has a Frame like a
Bone-setter, to put those disjoynted fragments together; and when, with much
labor, he has traced out the insignificant Sense, Glories as much as a Country
Parson, that has found out a piece of Hebrew, to make an easy Text the harder.


Triv. Oh, I! he has all the mechanic parts of a Statesman: he is a notable
Herald too, an Antiquary, and Cabalist; and affects all those conjuring
Studies, that fools cannot easily judge of, and wise Men will not take the
pains to enquire into. How do I long to see this fellow again!


Visc. Mistake him not; his company is not so cheap to such hair-brained light
fellows: unless you can pretend some great affair, or can raise his attention
with some reverend Lie; he is as busy, as if his Head were a Bee-hive.


Triv. I, as secret, as if his Mother's Confessor got him.


Visc. And as formal, and full of ceremomy, as if he was descended from one of
Moses his Gentlemen-Ushers. But his principal Virtue is his love to Decency,
and Order. As others at their Festivals, have their Lords of Mis-rule; so he
has his Muster-masters of the Movables, and his Clerks of the Uniformity.


Triv. That Is more than ever I heard.


Visc. If a Dish comes up to his Table out of its rank and file, he will eat no
more meat that day; if his Cheese be cut awry, he is ready to cut his own
Throat: his Stools and Chains move like Chess-men; if one of 'em be removed by
chance out of its walk, which his Servants know by privy Tokens; he is in a
cold sweat, and never forgives the Male-factor. He turned away a Servant
the other day, for not making him three Legs, at his coming in; though he came to
tell him his House was on fire. If he were called away in haste to Heaven, he
would not stir a foot, till he had out on a clean Band, a pair of white Gloves,
up to his Elbows, brushed his Clothes, and erected his Mustacho's.


Enter Sforza and Intrigo, walking together: Trivultio and Visconti spy them.
Yonder Is Intrigo with the Count.
Triv. I, and he walks as stately as an affronted Turky-cock. As sure as I
live, the Doge has spoke to him, if it were but to call him Rogue or Rascal, or
bid him stand out of the way.


Visc. He takes no notice of us, because he thinks he is in better company. Your
servant Signior Intrigo. Intrigo nods like a Grandee.

Scarce to be spoke with! Let Us hearken a little.

Int. Pshaw! the loss of Candia was inconsiderable; a Plot of the Grand
Council, to betray the Turks into a greater security: Of My knowledge, a mere
Trap. But do you hear the news?


Sfor. What, Sir, I beseech you?


Int. Marry, Sir, the Great Doge of Venice yesterday morning and no longer
since, about eight of the clock, in a most admirable grave, prudential Temper,
put on a pair of great French Pantaloons.


Sfor. Is It possible! but what will the people say of these innovations?


Int. I'marry, Sir, that is the worst on it. I Am afraid (under the Rose) pray let
it go no farther, 'twill breed no good Blood with the ill-affected. An high
point of the Prerogative, to alter the sumptuary Laws, without advice of the
Senate. There are some persons about his Highness -- Well, I Will say no more;
yet, if it appears to be done, with the approbation of the Grand Council, I
warrant you it is an Hieroglyphic that imports something.


Sfor. Not otherwise --


Int. What did Agesilaus ride on a Hobbyhorse for, but to teach his Children
Humility? What did Augustus lie with Senators Wives for? not for his Lechery, I
warrant you; but to discover their Councils, as Tacitus Trivultio falls a
singing and dancing. admirably has it. -- O brave! do you ever think to be a
Privy Counselor, at this rate? -- He sings on. Well, Trivultio, I pity thee:
thou have a great deal of Wit, but no Judgment at all.


Triv. Then I should be a madman.


Int. Thou Wilt never make a Statesman.


Triv. I Am sorry for it. But shall I ever make a Courtier?


Int. I Am afraid not. Let me see. Measures his height with his Hand and Cane.
Scarce tall enough; he must be a proper, straight, or at least, a stiff-going
uniform Man, that undertakes that Province; else no hopes of him: he must
strive to be always in the Prince's Eye, and seen in a Crowd.


Triv. Sejanus lost himself with a pair of low heel'd Shoes.


Int. Very right, Sir: Moreover, give me leave to tell you, you understand not
the language of the upper Sphere.


Triv. What Is that, good Sir?


Int. Marry, Sir, under the Types of Balls, Plays, Hawking and Hunting, and
such small matters, are comprehended the greatest secrets of State: and you
seldom hear Courtiers talking of any thing else.


Triv. That Is true enough.


Int. And do you think Courtiers so ignorant, as a man would take 'em to be? by
no means: they appear so only to deceive us: As for example; in the Parable of
Hunting, Horses signify Princes; Hounds, Soldiers; Foxes and Hares, Rebels and
Sectaries; Gunners and Pochers, are Jesuits: and if ever you chance to hear 'em
talk of on old grave Man in the Field, with a great Montero Cap on, then you may
swear the Pope has a hand in the business.


Triv. Bless us all! very strange!


Enter Masquerades upon the Piazza, with all sorts of ridiculous Disguises.
Int. Oh horrid! the scum of the Earth, the reproach of the Republic, an
inundation of Vanity!


Triv. Well said Boys, to him again; He offers to go away; they push him to and
fro to keep him in. these fellows know him as well as we.


Visc. How properly they abuse him!.


Triv. To him again long Nose; this fellow will never outlive the Carnival;
come, now let us away to Cornanti's.

Intrigo runs out from him. Exeunt Trivultio and Visconti.
After the ridiculous Habits, come in Ladies of all Dresses; and after them
Enter Parhelia the Doge's Daughter, with Aurana and Melinda, with Attendants.
Aur. But, in good earnest, Madam, did you never acquaint the Count with your
Passion, by words, or Message?


Parh. Never; but now will I appear to him in Dreams and Visions, and make him
love by Inspiration: I Will haunt him in as many shapes as a Spirit, that invites
a Man to find out a hidden Treasure: I Will try his Love, by all the Arts of
Woman.


Mel. What needs that torture, Madam? Men on the Rack will still out-talk the
Truth; Swear, Lie, Blaspheme, for present ease.


Aur. To your Guard, Madam; the Count comes up toward us, but our Gallants are
fled.


Parh. That Is as I would have it; clap on your Masks, and let us give him a
broad side.


Sings a Song to the Theorbo.
LEt us turn Usurers of Time,
And not mispend an hour;
The present, not the future's in our power.
To think to spend what is not our own's a Crime.
He whose soft life's in mirth possessed,
Enjoyes his time with interest,
Love, and a Muse,
Brings Use on Use;
For Money's but the Slave, and Time the Measure,
And Wit the Handmaid, Love the Queen of Pleasure.
Parh. Sir, if this rude address may find from you,
Or Credit, or Excuse, there is a Lady
Has often wished you happy: whether through
Love to Justice, which would cease to be so
Were she not tributary to your Merits;
Or some kind secret Charm which strongly ties
All unconcerned Spectators to be partial,
I Will not determine: yet in all dubious sports
As well as War, where Art and Courage rule,
She wished you still victorious, and you proved so:
Therefore she thanks you, for her joys received.

Sfor. Madam, did not my faith in you outweigh
The opinion of myself, and unbelief
Were not a greater sin than arrogance;
I never should harbor such a flattering thought:
Yet had I dared to hope my abject Fortune
Could move the precious cares of a fair Lady;
Sure I had spurred Ambition, though I Would tired her.

Parh. If Passion's bitter Throes frail Women hide,
They silence Love through Modesty or Pride.
My thoughts from such accusers are exempt.
This keeps off other's laughter, your contempt. Pointing to her Masque.
I shall no longer then suppress my fires:
Sublime Deserts may justify Desires.
If Love's a Virtue, it is by all Men known
Useful to show, and Glorious to own:
If it is a Vice that Women should detest;
Yet Crimes become less sinful when confessed. Exit.

Sfor. Methinks I find some Lightning piece my Heart!
Heavens! what a Voice, a Wit, a Shape, an Air!
The Face is kept for nothing but despair,
And yet she seems to love, but gives no hopes
Of seeing her unmasqu'd. Well, it is no matter
How a Man plays his Cards, if Women show their Hands.
Oh I Am content she may be ever veiled;
My Heart's too narrow to contain more Love:
It will boil over like some flaming Mountain,
And burn the Vital Regions round about it.
Religion's veiled in Types from vulgar Eyes;
None e're returned to tell Celestial joys,
If Heaven were left for every one to see,
Heaven would be Hell, with too much company. Exit.

The SCENE Cornanti's House.
Enter Bellinganna and Vigilia. Bell. This Trivultio is a pretender to my
Cousin Aurana; He Is a handsome young fellow, and talks well.


Vigil. And the other is Signiora Melinda's Servant.


Bell. The very same.


Vigil. But I think their Mi stresses are kept up so close, That the Gallants
are at liberty.


Enter Cornanti furiously. Cor. Hell and Damnation! nothing draw out
But Airy Bankrupt, gaudy Butterflies,
The Apes of chattering Frenchmen, that boast
Of every Ladies favor they once saw,
Or once but heard of!
I Will stop your peep-holes, and your Jalouzies;
And here is my Justice for thy next offense. Shows his Dagger.

Bell. Oh Heavens! be pleased to hear,

Cor. I Will no more,
Impudent Strumpet; stir not from thy Chamber,
Nor you from her, Vigilia: Eunuch, lock 'em in,
And guard the door; and you, Jacomo,
See that the Eunuch execute his charge.
Let no man enter upon pain of death,
But Father Scrutinio the Confessor, he may secure
Unstable airy Minds, with strong preservatives
Of Holiness, and wisely throw in Seeds
Of Virtue, pregnant Grounds to keep from Weeds. Exeunt Bell. and Vigil. the
door shut upon them.

Knocking without. Enter Scrutinio the Confessor. Oh, here comes the searcher
for prohibited Goods.
Yet it is well, if this Confession have not the effect of vomiting,
To make Men the more ravenously hungry afterward.
Welcome, reverend Father, thrice welcome, and in season.
Scrut. I Am glad, Sir. you are one of those, that give our Coat
It Is primitive esteem: 'twill not be lost, Sir,
'Twill not be lost, nor unrewarded long.

Cor. I hope some years yet. Aside.
My Wife attends your Fatherhood within.
Oh, Sir, Confess her strictly: there has been
Of late some secret practice, I can tell you, -- Draws it out ridiculously.
That should not be. -- May not a Husband have
A little Item, or so, how things do go?

Scrut. Wicked, and blasphemous! repent that thought.
In what storms is this poor Man tossed, wanting
Religion's Ballast!

Cor. Oh what a feeble Fort's a Woman's Heart,
Betrayed by Nature, and besieged by Art!
Oh represent the horror of the Crime;
Give Vice the darkest and the ugliest shade,
And put the Devil in a Masquerade.

Scrut. Sir, we can add wry Mouths, and Horns, and Claws.
And Prayer-provoking Tails; as we see cause;
But, Sir, it is strange you should instruct me thus
In an employment so well known to us.
Is Jealousy than Conscience more severe?
My Duty less Religious than your Fear?

Cor. Well, it is enough Boy, guide the Reverend Father in. Exit Scrut.
Well, now the Guards are set, the Garrison secure,
I Will go ramble, and enquire after this Purchase
Trivultio spoke of. Yet hold -- not to Trivultio,
Lest he come hither again a visiting,
With a Pox to him: I Will treat with him by a Friend.
Hold again. -- But if Offers to go, and stops.
This secrecy be a Gallants highest quality,
To please the Femals, curbed by Fear and Honor;
May not these Priests be held secure Offenders,
Whom fear of Death obliges to be silent?
Or, were there no such Law, why, then
They Are Favorites of necessity; not choice,
Or Prudence: like to chief Ministers of State,
Who dive so far into their Masters Secrets,
It Is dangerous to refuse to show 'em more.
Well, search no farther, Reason; Faith, take place:
Old Age and Piety resolve this Case. Exit.

The SCENE, The Piazza of St. Mark.
Enter Intrigo and Circumstantio. Well, Circumstantio, now give account of the
Message I gave you this morning, and all the memorable occurrences of your
journey; but remember withal, that you must make your approaches regularly to
your Betters, and in due form: not leap upon 'em, and take 'em by assault, or
storm 'em.

Circ. Then, Sir, with due submission to your Honorable prudence. --


Int. Or rather thus. Striking sail to your intellectual Gravity.


Circ. Striking sail to your Hectical Gravity --


Int. Why, I hope it is no Disease, Circumstantio, but the most perfect state
of mind.


Circ. Why, did not your Worship bid me make my reproaches regularly to your
Honor's Worship?


Int. Still erroneous. Well, go on to thy Message.


Circ. Well then, Sir, going to go, according to your Worships Command, as much
as to say, according to my Duty, as much as to say, to fetch the Naples
Wastcoats of Don Henriquez the Spanish Merchant; I had no sooner got to the end
of the street, but, as sure as my Grandfather was at Lepanto, who should I meet
with but honest Lorenzo, Count Sforza's Man, my old Comrogue; if your Worship
chance to see him, he is a Red-headed fellow, and goes with his Hat turned up on
one side, with a silver Button, and a brown Suit of Clothes, a little out at
the Elbows.


Int. Wondrous exact! Aside.


Circ. So in we went into a little House, to take our mornings draught
together; by the same token there was in the room we sat in, an old Worm-eaten
Cup-board, two Tables, with a greazy Curtain betwixt 'em, four Forms, and three
Joyn'd-stools.


Int. Admirably punctual! He improves daily. Aside.


Circ. And on the Walls were decypher'd certain Warlike Instruments, like
Cannons or Battering Rams, which I conceive to have been done with the smoke of
a Candle.


Int. Alas! some ancient Fresco-piece of a Roman Battle: I Will enquire farther
of it. Aside, shaking his Head.


Circ. Our Liquor exhausted, and our reckoning paid, out I went into the street
again toward Don Henrique's as fast as ever I could run, but, as sure as my
Grandfather was at Lepanto, who should I meet with at the next turning, but a
whoreson Chimny-sweeper --


Int. Well, Circumstantio, I Am a little in haste, I will dispense with any
farther occurrences: go on to the point, and give me an account of the Naples
Wastcoats.


Circ. Oh Lord, Master, are you mad, to interrupt me? why, then my story's at
an end; I cannot tell one syllable more, it I were to dye for it, unless I begin
again, word for word.


Int. Nay, prithee proceed for once; I Am in haste.


Circ. Why, I tell you it is impossible, Your Worship commanded me to forget no
circumstances of my journey, and my Head is so full of 'em, and they are ranged
in such order, that, being once put out of it, I cannot speak one word more
forwards, if I were to be hanged.


Int. Believe it, I fear this admirable method turns to an infirmity. Well, we
will rectify this at another time. Exeunt.


Enter Scrutinio, Trivultio. Scrut. I Am sorry, Sir, to find you so incredulous.
Were there no evidence of future Worlds,
Yet it were worth the while to wave a little
The uneasy sins of over-acted Life,
And play at Hazard for such high rewards.
Who would not stake a Cottage for a Kingdom?

Triv. Sir, there are few grow rich at Lotteries,
But those who keep 'em; yet I am all faith,
But cannot think that Nature prompts to crimes.
Would Heaven make Laws on purpose to be broke?
Put Cats and Mice into a Chest of Glasses?

Scrut. Oh, Sir, forbear, forbear; in these dark points.
The more we seek, the less we find:
Like Men that Hunt in wide and shady Forests,
Pursue the Game till they have lost themselves.
In this deep Gulf, short Reason's Plummet cannot
Sound to the bottom, till by Faith it is lengthn'd.
But, Sir, set Faith aside; you are a Man
Of Honor, and of noble Blood, you fear
To do an injury, more than take one?

Triv. I, were there no Religion.


Scrut. You would not
Defraud your neighbor of the meanest good?

Triv. No, not the least.


Scrut. And yet you will take away the greatest.
Then do you think a Woman no great good?

Triv. No, faith, don't I.


Scrut. Not a Wife?


Triv. No, work of all,


Scrut. Not a beloved one, or a Mistress?


Triv. That may require Reflection.


Scrut. Then know you not the fair and young Wife of old Signior Cornanti.


Triv. I hope, if she be so, he is too wife t'expose her to be known.


Scrut. Alas, who can be secure from inquisitive Adultery?

Did not you attempt her Honor?

Triv. Who, I, Sir, -- What the Devil means this? Aside,


Scrut. Add not one sin to another, by denying it: the circumstances will
convince you.


Triv. It Is true, Sir, I saw her at her House this morning, and put the jealous
Coxcomb her Husband into a cold sweat; but, what more?


Scrut, Oh, Sir, deny it not, for Heaven's sake. The truth of this was
witnessed by her Tears. You came afterward to her Window, which looks to the
Strada Nuova, and gave her some Music.


Triv. Oh, are you there, Sir? I never did this; but it seems she has a mind I
should do it. Rare Wench. Aside.

Well, Sir, it is a folly to deny such manifest proofs.

Scrut. Are you a man of Honor now, and Justice,
To catch at that which cannot be restored?
Oh, Sir, conceive the horror of the crime
If acted, doubly mortal.
The Highway Thief, that bids a man deliver,
Though valor, or some accident, frees the assaulted,
By most of Humane Laws shall suffer death,

Triv. Lovers are rather, Sir, blind Highway Beggars,
That nothing ask, but what the Ladies in the Coach
Are able both, and willing to be rid of.

Scrut. Compare not Charity with vicious Love.

Triv. Lance me no farther, Father; I feel already
Most sharp compunction, and beg the salve of Penance.

Scrut. If you be serious, find me in my Cell:
I have discharged my Message. Exit.

Triv. And an excellent one, in faith, for thy Coat! Oh most Divind Bellinganna!
this was a Masterpiece: there is Lechery in the very contrivance. As sure as I
live, her Husband has so straightly confined her, that she can make use of no
body else. A man had need to have his wits about him, in this quick-sighted
Philosophical Age, wherein whoring is improved to a liberal Science, and
deserves the consideration of a Society. I Will lose as little time as I can, but
to the Window by and by toward the Strada Nuova.

Oh I! there it is. Exit.

Enter Sforza walking alone. Sfor. The State decrees me Honors and Commands;
Nor want I wealth, the Dregs and Lees of Virtue,
Its grosest part, but that which keeps it working:
Fame is my Waiting Woman, everywhere so officious,
That she is troublesome; yet cannot I suppress
A newborn Passion, for an unknown Lady.
This Love usurps upon, and baffles all enjoyments else:
It Is like Religion, or is a kind of one,
Which makes us dull and senseless to all other things;
While we are wrapped in splendid Contemplations:
And this Amor of mine is a high piece of Faith,
Unseen Perfections, undiscovered Worlds!
I Am like the worst of Prodigals, that Sign to Blanks,
And blindfold pass Estates without all power
Of Revocation. Oh! these Passions
Are but the cracks and splinters of the Soul,
Shattered and bruised by some external Power,
Which might securely lie in its own Haven.
Men's minds, like Kingdoms, never so much flourish
As when they raise the price of Native Goods,
And set low values upon Foreign Wares.

Pathelia appears at a Grill unmasqu'd, then she Masks herself, and speaks to
him. Parh. Sforza, Sforza.


Sfor. Ha! A Woman's voice! Starts.


Parh. I, and a Friend's: draw near;
Disdain becomes a Lover more than Fear.

Sfor. My Goddess too, I think; it is hard to know
Our Friends revealed; disguised, it is much more so.

Parh. If Actions more than Looks, the mind declare,
Then learn to love; but who it is, take no care.

Sfor. Madam, the Eye as well as Ear, would feast:
Carve not for one alone, but every Guest:
Or, if some wait, yet Love would see at least.

Parh. Why should thou think that pleasure to confine
Which all Men that have Eyes, must share with thine?
The beauty of the Soul's the ground of Love,
And her Ideas, in the face do move:
For no Man is to White and Red inclined;
But to the Air, the Picture of the mind:
Then, if the Soul will show itself as clear
Without the Face, her weak Interpreter;
Sure he is wise that with the Sovereign Treats:
Courtiers and Mediators often prove Cheats.

Sfor. Soul, with all her Maids and Spies,
Comes down to Dance, and Revel in the Eyes;
And shall we trust the Tongue, the falsest part
In Womankind, next to the Heart?

Parh. I scorn to be adored the vulgar way:
If fair, I you; if foul, my self betray.
But hope the best, true Love will pass a Veil:
Your Faith may save you, when your Works do fail.

Sfor. When the Soul grants what Reason makes her see;
That is true Faith, what is more's credulity.

Parh. Despair more Souls, than does Presumption slay;
And Hope sends Men to Hell the sweeter way.

Sfor. Fight not so weak a Foe, and use a Shield:
Youlye in Amoush; I, in open Field
It Is I that Fight upon unequal Ground.

Parh. It Is you that Fight, and can receive no Wound.

Sfor. Oh! I am wounded; but shall lingering dye:
Give me the blow of Mercy from your Eye. [ One calls within Madam

Parh. I Am called away, Farewell:
In the afternoon you will find me here again.

Sfor. Oh, admirable, Divine Person! Oh I am all, on fire! If this Lady should
have an ill Face, to so excellent a Soul, it were the greatest Cheat that ever
was put upon the World. But, if it be so, it is in mercy to Mankind; an Antidote
to her poison, as most destructive Creatures carry with them:

Or else the World would be destroyed once more;
Now, by her Flames, as by the Waves, before. Exit.

ACT II.
SCENE I.
Trivultio, and Boy. THis is the backside of Cornanti's Palace, and this his
Ladies Chamber Window the Confessor spoke of. There is no failing of Women it
their critical minutes, if you do, they will hate you ever after, and think you
want vigor, or apprehension. Counsels in Love, like Stratagems in War, are to
be taken on the sudden, when you find the Enemy in disorder, or your own Men
sit for action. I Will give her a Song; but none of your whining Ditties to
Women of experience. Boy, play the Tune I told you of. The Boy Plays, and
Bellinganna appears at the Window, Vigilia her Duegna in a Veil and Muffler
peeping after her.

Bell. It Is Trivultio.


Boy or Trivultio Sing.
CUpid, I scorn to beg the Art
From thy imaginary Throne;
To learn to wound another Heart,
Or how to heal my own.
If she be coy, My Airy Mind.
Brooks not a Siege: if she be kind,
She proves my Scorn, that was my Wonders;
For Towns that yield I hate to plunder
Love is Game, Hearts are the Prize,
Pride keeps the Stakes, Art throws the Dice:
When either's won
The Game is done.
Love is a coward, hunts the flying Prey;
But, when it once stands still, Love runs away.
Enter Intrigo. Int. Ha! now shall I find one of his Mistresses Lodgings, and
be revenged of him for his Dilapidations. Trust me, it is the backside of
Cornanti's Palace. A brave Lady indeed.


Bell. [Looking out.] A very indifferent Lover! What, Trivltio attempting the
Honor of a Senator's Wife? Here Is a penitential Note for you. Throws down a
Paper and retires.


Triv. Blessed Vision, stay a little, She Is gone: but that is her Body, here is her
Soul. Takes up the Letter and opens it.

My Husband fears no Devils but your White ones: therefore for the security of
his Person, he has just now sent out his servant Jacomo, to buy a Negro Slave:
put your self into that Color and Habit, and find means to be sold to him, and
you shall be assu'rd of a kind Reception.

Ha! a Negro Lover? for ought I know to abude mr. I Will not leave my self wholly
to your discretion, Madam, for all my great Passion; I Will find a cleanlier way
than that, sure; Let me see: I Will send for the old Gossip that appeared at the
Window, and corrupt her: there is none of 'em proof against ten Checquins; and
Sforza has supplied me with Money enough. How Sanctify'dly shall I look in
along Veil and a Chin-cloth!


Boy. Oh, Sir, I know a Chare-woman that haunts the House everyday.


Triv. Send her away presently, and let her promise the Duegna ten Checquins to
come to my Lodging. In the mean time will I go see what divertisement the
Church affords, where I shall meet all the good company. I love to shoot at a
whole Covey at once; ten to one but some drop. Trivultio puts his Note toward
his pocket, and drops it, and Exit with his Boy. Intrigo comes and takes it up,
and reads it to himself.


Int. What a Jewel is here neglected by this idle young fellow! no wiser than
AEsop's Cock. Oh the giddiness of these Kickshaw-Gallants! it is a high point of
Wisdom to take occasion by the forelock: take heed of her bald Pate as long as
you live. I must not let this slip however. Exit.


The SCENE, A Church, full of Ladies.
Enter Parhelia, Aurana, and Melinda, walking. Mel. Your Courting the Count in
a Masque, is the whole Town-talk.


Aur. And everybody's guessing who you are.


Parh. And no body right I hope.


Aur. I Am sure we suffer for it, and could hardly get leave to come to Church to
day.


Parh. Alas, poor prisoners; I Am in perfect freedom.


Aur. But do you hear how Cornanti guards my poor Cousin Bellinganna?


Parh. I hear from her hourly. But hark you Melinda, shall I ask you a hard
question? will you lend me your Gallant for an hour or two, for a design I have?


Mel. Content, Madam.


Parh. I am informed Count Sforza will be here presently. In this new Habit
it is impossible to know me: I Will pretend to be another Woman, and try his
constancy.


Mel What a pretty device will that be!


Parh. I Will leave you, that he may not guess me by my company. Puts on her
Masque, and slips into the crowd.


Enter Visconti: comes up to Melinda. Visc. Madam, well met.
Must I owe this to Fortune, or Design?

Mel. Oh, Sir, Devotion brings unthought of Blessings; But happinesses here on
Earth are short.

We have spies upon us:
As their Devotions end, so must our Conference.

Visc. Ah my dear Saint, these fleeting Heavenly Visions
Serve but to increase our pains by their privation:
A broken Interview
Is worse than absence which may quench desire:
This serves to blow up, not enjoy the Fire.
Raising a Passion, leaves us to its fury,
There Is no such torment as too short a joy.

Enter Trivultio, and comes up to Aurana. Mel. The sweetest Meats are the most
apt to cloy
But I have found, out an expedient:
My Father has been inquiring out a French Master for me;
Disguise yourself presently like one, and come and offer your
service to him: 'twill take my life for it.
When you have got free admission to our House.
The Princess Parhelia desires your assistance
In some of her affairs.

Visc. I Will about it strait.

Aur. Such swarms of Beauty fill this Carnival,
That you must needs be stung that are so ventrous.
I am too happy that I hear no more
Your frolicks nor your flatteries at my Window.

Triv. I hate to see our Mistresses at Grates
Look like cooped Chickens piping for their Meat,
Or like poor Prisoners, begging for an Alms.
And Lovers in the Streets, like helpless friends
Who may uncharitably entertain 'em
With a discourse of their miseries,
But must not lend a farthing to their Purse.

Aur. It Is Men that are the Canting Mimic Beggars,
Whose Art, not Misery, attracts relief.
I Have said too much, Trivultio, were observed. Turns away.

Triv. Whither so fast?


Aur. I cannot choose but love this young fellow, for all his, indifference: I
love a Man that knows how to value his own Sex, and cheapen slight-wrought
Woman.


Triv. Here are Riches, but Marriage attends it: a Golden Trap. My freeborn
Genius moves for Bellinganna. Lying with another Man's Wife, is like invading
an Enemies Country: there is both-Love and Ambition in it; it is an enterprise.
fit for a great Spirit.


Enter Visconti and Sforza, who-comes up to Trivultio. Sfor. Heigh ho! What a
Stream's here!
I wonder much what makes these Females so devout;
Is it their Fear or their Credulity?

Triv. Oh, no. Two other Graces: Pride and Lechery.
I wonder more that Men, who searce allow them Souls,
Will give 'em leave to crowd into our Churches,
Where they have as ill an efflect as fine strangers
In Grammar-Schools: for, though the Boys keep on
Their hum-drum still, yet none of 'em mind
Their Lesson for looking about 'em.

Visc. Oh, Sir, this is the great Market of Matrimony:
Here it is begun, made up, and broken too.

Triv. Matrimony! for Heaven's sake name it not.
I do not love to hear the sound of Fetters.

Sfor. Oh, pray let us humor him a little, I think indeed the strictness of it
was but a kind of juggle, betwixt the Women and the Friars.


Triv. True, Such a devilish thing could never have been found out else. 'Twas
worse than the invention of Gunpowder; and 't has altered the course of Love,
more than the other has done of War.


Visc. Imparity of Minds is worse than Bodies:
And which two are of the same mind for ever?

Triv. I, or at any time. If People love well, there needs no Marriage to
confine 'em, if not, it is cruelty to couple two churlish disagreeing Curs, and
sin not to unloose 'em. I would not use my Dogs so. True; Men are chained in
Galleys, Horses bridled, and Oxen yoked to work:

For slavish Offices and things ungrateful,
Constraint is necessary, but for the Sweets of Love,
To have a Task imposed; to have Men, like hired Town Bulls,
Made amorous by force, and beating to 't!
Do Men chain up themselves at Dinner to their Tables?
Or do they Hunt, or Bowl, or Dance in Shackles?
If Marriage is a sport, confinement makes it les;
If it is a work, are drudgeries the better for being endless?

Parhelia, Masqu'd, comes up to Sforza. Parh. Sir, if you please to withdraw
into this private Chapel, I shall acquaint you with a thing that may concern
you. They withdraw.


Triv. So, faith, he is engaged, the Lord knows with whom; whether my Mistress,
or another Man's Wife, no matter. The World runs round, and I Will be behind hand
with none of 'em, But I must slip away to the old Woman. Exit.


Visc. Another Familiar! Let me see, Who may this be? or who may it not be? OF
my conscience, this credulous Man of Honor, will have his Throat cut, by one of
these Curtezans. Looks nearer.


Parh. to Sfor. Sir, your accomplishments have wearied Fame,
Employed Men's Tongues, and Ladies Hearts; you keep
A correspondence with all Female Breasts;
Yet some deserve that influence more than others:
And how can they deserve't, that are ashamed
Of their defects, and dare not show themfelves?
Sir,, your Adventure's blazed about the Town,
Your meeting since, and with you know not whom:
Your Prudence suffers in it, and others Passions;
Amongst them, mine I Will be as free in all things,
As she is reserved: I Am jealous of your Fairy,
And am resolved to break all her Enchantments,
If Beauty, Place, or Riches can uncharm you
Equal to hers I Am sure. Your Eyes shall be
My Judges, before you sleep Exit. Sforza following: Visconti stops him.

Visc. What does she say to you?


Sfor. I Will tell you presently. Let me go. Death, how is she lost in the crowd!


Visc. Let her go, with a pox to her; she will come again, when the fit's upon
her. Look, look, here is a pretty Woman, without a Mask.


Sfor, Thou have undone me. Walks a turn or two melancholy.
Now am I like a Partridge betwixt two hooded Hawks,
Peck'd at by both, and killed outright by neither
I fare like to some guiltless Great one
Whom armed, injustice brings to his destruction,
By Executioners in Vizors tortured,
Ashamed, or fearful, of the impious Act. Persians.

Visc. You Will rather dye the death of Tub'd and pickled
With Honey first anointed, then Fly-blown to another World.
These Masquerades are all Trapans and Cheats:
It is the Cause, not pain, that makes the Martyr;
I never had loved, had I not viewed Melinda.

Sfor. I grant she is lovely; but she is to be seen.
Tell me of Angels, those are my Amors:
Those things are mean, are forced to court the Eyes,
The Porters of the Soul, to give 'em entrance.
Give me the Charms that enter without knocking;
The intellectual Graces, that, like Lightning,
Pierce, and inflame the Soul, before they 'reseen. Exeunt

The SCENE, Cornanti's House.
Intrigo like a Moor, Eunuch. Eun. Here, will you play at Cards? Shows him
Cards.
Will you play at Mora? Opens his Hand, and throws out his Fingers.

This fellow's no better company than one of my Master's Statues. A murrain of
this jealousy, we shall never have but Mopes and Owls in our House.

Enter Trivultio like the Duegna, with a Muffler on. Oh, are you come? then my
Lady may come forth. Runs and opens the door for his Lady
Enter Bellinganna. Bell. Oh, Vigilia, how does thy swelled Face?


Triv. Something better, Madam, with a Medicin I had from the Speciale.
Curtsying.


Intr. May not this be an occasion Adaequate, or Quadrating to my Design? She
is never to be spoke with, without her Duegna; and if she over-hears, they are
all one. Aside.

Oh, Madam, it is I. Coming close to Bellinganna.

Bell. Who are you?


Intr. Oh, it is I, it is I, it is more discreet not to name Trivultio. Aside.


Bell. Which of the I's? there is many of the name, Sir.


Intr. It Is I my self.


Bell. Better and better: but who are you yourself?


Intr. Oh, Madam, I tell you it is I my self; who should it be else? Your Beauty
is the cause of my present deformity.


Bell. Well, Sir, I Am sorry I could not contrive a better disguise; my Husband
is so extremely careful of my conversation, a less would not have blinded him.


Triv. So, so, in faith, the next word is into the Bedchamber; But I Will forbid
the Banes. Aside.


Intr. Madam, to my Conception, this Disguise is a most prudent Veil for
illicite Love.


Bell. Methinks Trivultio talks a little idly:
Pray Heaven he have the Wit I fancied. Aside.

Intr. And, withal, let me tell you, Madam, under the Rose, (pray let it go no
farther) you are not the first Lady, whose Secrets I have participated; and,
though I say it that should not, managed with circumspection and taciturnity.


Triv. Ha, ha, he! Under the Rose! nay then I smell a Rat.

Oh, I shall burst with laughing. -- Aside.
Madam, methinks this Man looks not like Trivultio.

Bell. Trivultio! why Trivultio? Seems strange.


Triv. Why, Madam, you walk not in the dark to me.
Did not you invite him by your Confessor?
'Twas a pretty invention.

Bell. Ay me! Nay, if these Confessors betray us, what will become of us poor
Women: But who could have thought this Man of Heaven could have picked out the
meaning of an amorous Message?


Triv. And did not I see you throw down a Note to Trivultio.?


Bell. I, to abuse him.


Triv. I take it very unkindly, that I, that have been employed by you, upon so
many difficult occasions, should now be left out. Turn out your Black, that we
may talk more freely.


Bell. Pray, Sir, stay without, and have a little patience.


Int. Patience, Madam! there lies my Talent. I have waited seven years for the
kiss of a fair Lady's Hand, and when it came, 'twas with her Glove on too. Exit.


Bell. Oh admirable!


Triv. God b'ye, good patient Pack-Horse. Well, Madam, you sent for Trivultio,
it seems; but suppose he were here, would you not discover him to your Husband?


Bell. No, indeed: I would employ him about some business; but, it may be, not
such as he imagines. He shall have free Ingress and Regress: that is as much as
a civil Woman can say.


Triv. Why then here he is. Pulls off his Disguise.


Bell. Trivultio here and there too!
May I believe my senses?

Triv. The very same.
How could I think you loved an AEthiop?

Bell. Oh, any shape that carried you within it Drollingly.
But where is the old Serpent, whose Skin you wear?

Triv. At my Lodging.


Bell. Oh the crafty old Queen! you paid her well for this. Who would have
thought this wild fellow would have come upon so slight an invitation! But I Will
make use of the occasion, for my Cousin Aurana's sake, and to plague my Husband
for his jealousy. Aside.

And who is this Black?

Triv. Oh, I shall dye! -- Oh, it is I, it is I Laughs. It Is he himself, indeed,
Madam; the first of the name. An Original. Who should it be else?


Bell. Oh, I know him: the Statesman and the Courtier! Laughs.


Triv. And the most peerless Coxcomb that ever Nature made, or Art improved;
but how he came hither in this reverend Form I was designed for, I cannot
guess; unless it were by instinct to be jear'd.


Bell. It Is strange, unless my Husband sent him for a spy.


Triv. No, no, 'twas his destiny: no conceited trick could escape him.


Bell. Put on your Veil, and call him in. Calls him in.


Re-enter Intrigo Come hither, Sir; why do you injure your self so much, by
concealing your name? your grave and wise deportment, speaks you to be an
excellent person, whom Fame has made known to me, by the name of Intrigo.

No Clouds can keep the Sun from shining through 'em.
How could your Parts and Prudence be obscured?
Those Essences betray you.
Intr. Well, Madam. that you may not think your Favors mis-plac'd, I will not
say I am the person you speak of, but never a man in Italy could have managed
this design with so much dexterity, as the person you wot of: and, now I have
said so much of him, I must beg your pardon, I shall say no more.


Bell. You're a modest Man, Sir. Well, you are better read in Women, than to
doubt my kindness to you. But this kind of Amors must be managed with much
Prudence, Circumspection, and Taciturnity.


Int. Taciturnity! my own words! It Is a sign she likes them Aside.


Bell. Here is my Duegna, without whose consent we can do nothing. The greatest
tie upon her secrecy, will be to make her party to the crime: make your
addresses to her first, and oblige her with your Love. You know the Outworks
must be taken, before the main Garrison: when that is done, I will not say you
shall command me, but I leave you to guess it.


Int. Oh, Divine Madam. Malvezzi, nor Paruta could not have deliverd a more
Political Precept. Let me alone for this Province. Now the God of Love and
Prudence assist me.

Comes up to Trivultio, and waits on him out most ceremoniously. Bell follows.
SCENE, Grimani's House.
Aurana, Melinda: two, Duegna's attending them. Aur. With much ado I got leave
to make this visit. Well, let us make the best use of our time, since our
Fathers let us be together so seldom. How goes it with thy Heart, sweet Cousin,
Does thy Lovers go true to 't?


Mel. As punctually as two Watches that are seldom wound up together.


Aur. My Cousin Bellinganna has just now sent me word to come to her House,
where I shall meet my wandering dear Trivultio, and fix him.


Mel. How comes he there?


Aur. Nay, I know not.


Mel. And I Will tell you something more: we must all meet at the Doge's Villa;
whence, if we ever part uncoupled, may opportunity never favor Flesh and Blood
again.


Aur. Right; we are no frozen Lovers here in Italy. In lukewarm England,
they will slabber, kiss, make Love like Cats at midnight, break Gold, promise,
contract, and sometimes never enjoy, or Marry seven years after.


Mel. I, I, they will sit at dinner when their Meat is cold: Italian Stomachs
scarce will stay for Grace.


Aur. Indeed I have heard 'em say, they are an odd sort of puling people in
those parts, though they are something mended of late years.


Enter Grimani, and Visconti like a Frenchman. Mel. Now, Cousin, to let you see
I Am as forward as you can be, do you know this Genleman? a French Master of
mine.


Aur. Ha, ha, he: Visconti! how odly he looks!


Grim. Well, Mounsou, what wind brought you into these parts?


Visc. De natural inclinaseeon dat me have had from a Shilde to see de Vorld,
and de Pays Estranger.


Grim. Very good. Of other Nations, none travel but rich Men, but the French go
a begging all over the World, and live better than at home.


Visc. Me have ver good Estate in France, but me had de mal heur, to have a
kerelle wid mien Cousin Germain, and had de good fortune to wound him
dangerously wid de Boutevilles trust, Comme sa! (Fences with his Arms.) So me
is retire for a littel, and in de mean teem, me do chercher de condiseeon.


Grim. A true Frenchman; for at their first acquaintance, they will tell you
all the Quarrels, and all the Claps that ever they had, and show their Wounds
in any part. -- Aside. Well, Mounson, besides the speaking your own natural
Language, what are the qualities you are good at?


Visc. Oh, me be good at de many ding; me can make de Perukes.


Mel. This speaks my Master a Man of Quality.


Visc. Me can sing as well as de Eunuch Italien.


Grim. I would he were one too, then I might securely admit him into my Family.
-- Aside. Well, what else Mounsou?


Visc. Oh, me can Fence, reed de great Oarse, me is good Barbier, good
Cuisinier, good Button-makere; and in case de necessite, me can mend de
Breeshes, de Stockings, and de Ladies Cowns.


Grim. Oh the Monster! from riding the Great Horse, to Footing of Stockings!
these traveling Frenchmen are like their Pottages, made up of every thing.


Aur. He Acts it rarely! -- Aside.


Mel. But, Mounsou, methinks all these good qualities should maintain you in
cleaner Linen.


Visc. Oh, de Nobless de France never put on de under Shirt but once in de
half year; but for de Jentilesses dat appear, de clean Sleeve, and de clean
Crevat, every oder month. Exeunt.


The SCENE, Cornanti's House.
Enter Cornanti, Jacomo, Intrigo. Cor. Where had you this Black?


Jac. I bought him at the Porto Santo,


Cor. Methinks he is a better favored Moor than ordinary.


Jac. I, Sir, his Nose is not so flat as most of theirs, and he has not
altogether such a black Mossy Pate.


Cor. I like him never the better for his good Features: but speaks he not our
Language?


Jac. Not a word, Sir.


Cor. Oh, then it is well enough. But, a pox, these straitchin'd Moors will make
plaguey signs to a Woman.

Did thou ever hear him speak?

Jac. I, and understand him too. -- My Master, I Am sure, speaks no Morisco;
I Will pass for a Learned Man. Aside.


Cor. How did thou come to learn their Language?


Jac. Oh, Sir, I was a Slave fourteen months at Algiers. I was taken in
Cavalier Strozzi's Ship, about twenty years ago, and learned their Language so
perfectly, that I was made Interpreter to the Ambassadors that came to the
Governor.

Oh, Sir, you shall hear. Have at you, Sir.
Andiboron hoblicon hu.

Int. Now for some hard words or I Am undone. Aside pausing.

Tirenatum tenoch comti.

Cor. What Is that now?


Jac. Why, marry Sir, I told him, that you said he should be well used; and he
made an answer, that showed a great deal of Respect, but little manners: in
fine, it is a great compliment in their Country.


Cor. Come, come, what is it?


Jac. Why, Sir, the Sense of it is, He takes it to be an Honor to be employed
in your most contemptible Offices.


Cor. Come, you're a Rogue: this is no humane Language; but the Dialect of the
Barbary Stallions. Say that over again.


Jac. Dilloron losicon hu.


Cort. You Rogue you, that is not the same.


Jac. Pox of this dull memory of mine. Aside scratching his Head. It Is very
near the same, Sir. I confess I cannot now speak it so well; but never a man in
Italy understands it better.


Cor. You're a bold Knave, Sirrah. I Will go in, to my Wife, and bring her to see
her new Servant. Exit.


Int. This Steward, be like, is a grave well-Letter'd Man. He was Interpreter
to the King of Algiers. Upon second thoughts, he must needs know that I speak
not good Morisco. Now is the Critical time, in the absence of his Master, to
bribe him to silence. Pray Sir, come near, here is something for you. Shows him
a handful of Money.


Jac. Oh Lord, all Languages! this is sure the Devil himself. Trembles and
starts. Nay, I see his cloven Foot too. Begins to run away.


Int. This fellow's going to tell. Runs after and catches him. Jacomo trembles.
Intrigo offers him Money again.


Jac. Indeed, good Signior Diavolo. I dare not take it; for I am afraid I must
give a Note under my hand for it, I have heard of many a good Soul lost by that
means. Trembles.


Int. Come, come, I am no such person as you take me for: I am come hither, as
many Heroes have done, upon a certain Politic, private account, or rather
(under the Rose) Amorous one.


Jac. Indeed your Worship has got a very fine wooing Face. I guess who this may
be. Looks upon him, and takes heart. (Aside.) Well, if the Devil will make a
man a Present, without a dangerous condition, I know not what should hinder him
to take it. Takes the pieces. These are not Air neither, there is Flesh, and
Blood, and Bones in 'em. Well, I will cut one piece of knavery into two pieces
of honesty. First, I will take his Money, and let him make my Master a Cuckold:
that is a valuable consideration; there is my Justice. Then will I dutifully
acquaint my Master with it: there is my Fidelity. (Aside.) Well, Sir, I Will do
your business for you. I thought indeed your Worship did not speak good
Morisco. Laughs.


Enter Cornanti and Bellinganna. Cor. Come, Wife, how do you like the
countenance of your new Servant?


Bell. It Is hard to read a Book that Nature has so blotted: His Soul, I hope,
is white and innocent.


Cor. It were not amiss to take the Latitude of his Capacity by his experience
of our Fashions. Show him the Glass. Jac brings a Glass. Intr. looks in it.


Jac Your Negroship is rarely well adjusted.
You want nothing but a white Peruig:
Oh, 'twould set off your sweet Westphalian Hogs-face. Intr. looks for his Face
o'th backside of the the Glass; and does many Apish things.
Oh, do you want your scurvy Wainscot chops?
I, there they are, my pretty sweet Baboon.

Int. You might use some moderation in your abases. Intr. whisp. to Jack.


Jack. You look like an Ass, and you don't love to be told on it. Whispering.


Cor. What Is that he says? the poor fool's afraid
I should understand his Gibberish.

Jac. Truly, Sir, I am afraid your Worship and my Lady will be offended with
me, if I tell you.


Cor. No, no.


Jac. Will you not indeed?


Cor. Upon my Honor I will not.


Jac. Why, then, Sir, he asks what Devil that is that stands by you, meaning my
Lady.


Cor. Oh the innocent wretch!


Jac. Sir, in their Country the Devil's painted White, and their Beauties are
all Blacks: you must excuse his ignorance.


Cor. I, that I will, much rather than his knowledge.
Come, come away, Wife. Exit with his Wife.

Jac. This Master of mine is one of the most prudent Cuckolds that I have
known. He will stave it off a little longer. I wonder married Men do not more
patiently submit to destiny: for these same Lovers will invent strategems; and
those are more talked of, than the feat it self; nay, they are writ of to
Posterity, when many thousands of easy Cuckolds sleep in their Graves
forgotten. Exit.


Enter Hircanio and Trivultio. Her. Have you acquainted your Lady with my
passion for her?


Triv. So; in faith, here has been tampering with my Predecessor. -- ( Aside.)
I, I, Sir, and she receives it very well.


Her. Has she appointed a meeting?


Triv. Not yet, Sir; but I Will go in and ask. If she is kind to him, it is more
than I could obtain for my self. Exit.


Her. So, so; she will open to the Golden Key.
Oh the happy fortune!

Re-enter Trivultio. Triv. She will meet you this afternoon, in General
Moccenigo's Wilderness, in the Walk of Statues; but you must bring your
Passport along with you.


Her. I understand thee: I Will present her nobly. Exit.


Triv. Farewell, Sir.


Enter Bellinganna. Bell. Was there ever such an old Goat as this Hircanio?


Triv. Was there ever such a frolique Saint as Bellinganna! Pulls off his Veil.

Why do we dally thus with sacred opportunity?

Bell. Oh, Sir, I will serve you another way.
You have a Passion for my Cousin Aurana,
A rational desire at least: she is rich.
My Husband's gone out, and will not be back a great while, and your Mistress
will be here presently: put off all this ugly Habit, and appear like your self.
I hear the last time you were at the Church, you talked very coldly to her; now
Court her with the Passion she deserves.


Triv. What a Witch have I made of my self, to no purpose! Would I were hanged
if I grow not weary of these Fatigues of Fornication. Well, I Will take her
counsel: Marriage is convenient. If my old humor return again, a rich Wife
makes an excellent Bawd.


The SCENE, a Street.
Four Armed Men, whereof Visconti is one, in his French Habit, ridiculously
Armed. Visc. The Princess Parhelia has engaged me here upon one of her
froliques: and I cannot play the fool in a better Habit.


1 Man. Why, Mounsou, you are provided for a seven years War.


Visc. How do me ken-now but me must feeght wid de Regiment des Espagniol; and
begar, me do deseer to have de honeur of the first Sharge.


2 Man. Pray let him have it, for they seldom charge twice.


Visc. Me have de natural Antipaty to des Spagnols, and de Milanees, de Sujets
of de Roy d'Espagne, and me de love to chercher l'occasion. Begar, dare is no
man in de verld can feeght in de partees like a de French Academists, and de
Meter Fence, and de Meter Dance, Francois. One Man will beat twantee. De
agilite of de Hoarse in de Academiste, and of de Fout in de Meter Dance, and
Meter Fence, Sa, Sa, here, dare: sometime de grand Saut de recule, de pyroiste,
de caprioles; de animee can no tell how to level de Muskets, nor de Guns.


3 Man. I, Mounsou, I know he that kills a Frenchman, must shoot flying.


Visc. I begar: den dare is an oder ding, to kill a man wid de good grace, de
bonne mine, and de address; 'twill do good to de anemee to be kill so.


1 Man. Here comes Sforza: now we shall hear some of the Lovers Litany. Clap on
their Visors.


Enter Sforza, and knocks with his Key on his Hilt. Parhelia appears, Masqu'd,
at the Window. Sfor. Still overcast? when will my Heaven appear?


Parh. Oh, Sir, this Mift will make the day more clear.


Sfor. I need not beg for flames to increase my store;
Yet Love is covetous, and would have more.

Parh. Is Love a Miser? he shall feed his Eye:
Still look upon his wealth, but never enjoy.

Sfor. Oh cruel Saint! that fatal voice revoke.


Parh. Then learn to hope for Fire, and Court the Smoke,
Beauty's the Book of Fate, Fear my intent:
It Is better not to know, than not prevent.

Visc. De Diable is in dis Love; no ding but de feere, de flame, de smock, de
wound, de death, and de Bougre de Lovere is ver vell, ver gay, fresh, frolic,
and feel no pain in de vol verld! Ke Diable est Sa! They seize Sforza behind.


Sfor. Villains stand off. Visconti flies back.


Parh. Ai, Ai! Shrieks.


1 Man. How now, Mounsou? you have a natural Antipatee to the King of Spain's
Subjects, you dare not come near 'em.


Visc. Dat is ver true, me do keep my self for de Reserve, dat is de kalitee of
de good Soldat.


2 Man. Oh, I know the reason now, de Spagnol cannot kill you wid de good grace.


1 Man. Stand still, or you're a dead Man.


Sfor. Slaves, Dogs.


Parh. Murder, murder, Help, help. Sforza struggles to get his Sword, they
disarm him.


Sfor. Cowardly Slaves, give me but leave to fight.
The odds shall make no difference. Chair brought in.

1 Man, Into this Chair, Sir, quick: it is a mercy showed you.


Parh. Murder, murder, Help, help. Sforza is carried off, they guarding the
Chair.

She unmasks, So, is he gone? I Will be with him presently, and and Laughs search
him to the quick. How bravely Visconti performed his part! Little does Sforza
know, what pains Parhelia takes to cheat him of the Doge's Daughter. Woman
scarce knows her self:

Then who can search the Mazes of a Heart
Where natural imperfection joins with Art? Exit

Enter Circumstantio and Intrigo. Cir. Mr. Black, you belong to some Nobleman
of this quarter, did you not see my Master Signior Intrigo hereabouts.


Int. A new Trial! Pray Heaven he know me not.
How should I know thy Master?

Circ. Oh every body knows him.


Int. However, 'twill be some delight to hear my own Character from a
Domestic: Germanicus disguised himself in a Calfe-Skin to hear the
commendations of his Soldiers, without offense to his modesty.

Why, truly, when I was upon S. Mark's,
He was there too; we came away together:
But where he is now, you that are his Servant
Ought to know better than another. This is no lie now.

Cir. But pray, Sir, let me know; I have some earnest business with him from
the Doge's Lock-smith, that makes his Keys for the Privy Garden, and the
Anti-Cameras,


Intr. I Am overjoyed I shall prevail for a Key; but this is no time to take
notice of it. Aside.

Why, honest friend; possibly your Master is in close Council with the Doge, or
the Council of Ten; and therefore not to be spoke with.


Cir. Think you so indeed? I never knew any Man pretend to so much familiarity
with the great ones, as he does: every morning our House is full of
under-Clerks and Door-keepers; and they get a world of Money of him, by feeding
him with Lies, or impertinent Truths, by telling him how many Caps, and what
Clothes the Doge puts on every day; what he eats and drinks, and how many
Stools he has.


Int. Your Masters a discreet Man, I will not say wise and grave: you do ill to
abuse him.


Cir. What Is that to you, Sir? I need none of your teaching, Goodman Black,
'Twas never a good World, since there were so many Black moors and Frenchmen in
the Nation.


Int. You're a saucy Knave, Sirrah.


Cir. Call me saucy Knave, who am chief Man to Signior Intrigo, you whoreson
Blackmore Dog you! No, Sir, I Would have you know, though my Master be one of the
simpler sort of wise Men, yet, being his Servant, I Will take the Knave of never a
Man in Italy. Call me knave, you saucy Jack! Boxes him.

Int. shruging up his shoulders. Poor Circumstantio! yet he shows some respect
to me in even his wrath: he glories in being my servant, and quarreled with me
in my own behalf, to uphold my Honor.

These afflictions are incident to these great designs of going Incognito.

Cir. Incognito! do you steal my Master's words, you impudent Rascal you? my
Honorable Master's own words? are such words fit for your mouth, you pitiful
Rogue? have at you once more for your fine word Incognito, forsooth! Incognito,
with a vengeance, Incognito. Beats him off. Exeunt.


The SCENE, Cornanti's House.
Enter Trivultio, Aurana, Bellinganna. Triv. Ah, Madam, if my Sighs and Tears
prevail not In a passionate posture.
To expiate my last and fatal coldness,
That undissolving Frost in so much Sunshine,
That blindness caused by such excess of Light;
Let Death the faithful services prevent
Of one unpardoned, not impenitent.

Aur. Trivultio, how thou striv'st to undo thy self!
You Act this part well; but your first's most natural.
All sudden Converts are to be suspected.
Maintain your Character:
Be constant to your self, if not to me.

Enter Hircanio at a distance. Her. I have watched my Cousin Cornanti out, and
now is a good time to talk farther of my business to the Duegna. -- Ha! what
Trade's here, my Daughter!


Bell. Come, Sir, we fear you not: this mettled Hern
Shall spoil your Falcon for any other Game,
And bruise his Wings. Your swellings and imposthumes
Must be cured by constant strong Revultions.
We'll open a great vein shall stop your heats,
And bleedings at the Nose.

Triv. Say you so, Madam? Then, faith, dear Aurana, I love thee to that
desperate extremity, that, if you will take me in the humor, I am resolved to
undergo the scorn of all wise Men, and my own repentance, and sneakingly submit
to that solemn Conjuring Cheat called Marriage; though my Reason kecks at it,
and I shall certainly swoon at the sight of a Priest.


Her. Ha! what do I hear? as if this young fellow was to marry my Daughter? You
impudent Slut, you, are these your harmless frolicks?


Aur. Aim, my Father! Shrieks.


Her. Will nothing serve but Matrimonial Gambols? Come away with me, Huswife.
Do you think to steal Procurators Daughters so easily? Exit with Aurana.


Triv. Oh, she is lost for ever.


Bell. I warrant you we'll retrive her.


Enter Cornanti, peeping. Cor. Ha! Trivultio! have I caught the wild Beast in
my toils? Exit.


Bell. How soon Hircanio forgot the errand he came about!
In men of his age, their Avarice starves their Love.

Enter Jacomo and Cornanti, with a Sword ridiculously long, and a Target bigger
then his Body. He stalks and looks toward Trivultio. Cor. Death and
destruction, and a thousand torments
Attend thy sinful Carcass, thou Planet-struck,
And mis-begotten Mortal! Have at thy lecherous Chine. Makes at Trivultio when
his back is turned, who turns about, retires a little, takes up a Cushion, and
makes him run back to the end of the Stage.
'Sdeath, these Whoremasters, the Devil's in 'em
At their Rutting time. He runs behind Jacomo, and pushes him on, peeping over
his Shoulder.
You Are a Knave, Trivultio stand to him, Jacomo.

Jac. O Lord, Sir, I have never a Sword; but I Will talk to him. Thou 'rt a
Knave, Trivultio. Stand to him Master. Runs behind Cornanti, and then Cornanti
behind him, shifting two or three times.


Cor. 'Slife, I think this Man of mine is an errant Coward.


Jac. Oh Lord, Master, I Am afraid of your Worship's Sword behind me, and would
not take the Victory out of your hands,


Cor. 'Twould anger a Man to be a Cuckold, and be killed too. I Will go call for
help. Jacomo, lock the door upon 'em. Exeunt. Jacomo locks the door.


Triv. Did you ever see such Cowards! I Am sorry I did not force my way out: but
now the door's locked, what shall we do, Madam? shall I leap out of the Window?


Bell. No, the Bars are too close.


Triv. Or hide my self? Can you find no way for your self and me? Now for a
Woman's Wit at a dead life.


Bell, Put on your Duegna's Clothes, quick, quick.
Let Us make haste, his Bandogs live but at next door. He catches up the
Clothes, and she helps him

Triv. But, Madam, he will know I cannot get out of the room.


Bell. No matter, dispatch. Now your Hoods and Muffler. Noise at door.


1 Man. We'll maul the Rogue.


2 Man. We'll make him sure.


3 Man. No, take him alive, and kill him by degrees. The door unlocked.


Enter Cornanti, with half a dozen Neighbors: himself and Jacomo in the rear of
them. 1 Man. Where Is the Rogue?


2 Man. Where Is the Rogue?


Bell. What Rogue, Sir,? what do you mean?


Cor. What, have you hid him, Witch?


Bell. There has been none but I, and my Duegna here these four hours.


Cor. That shall not serve your turn, seek in the Alcove. They search within,
and come back then search the Closets, Beds, and Trunks, and under them.

I Am sure he could not get out here. Goes to the Window.

Bell. Are you distracted: Sir? whom do you seek?


Cor. Peace, Strumpet. Vigilia, do thou know where he is?


Triv. Indeed, Master, I neither heard nor saw any body; I was in the Closet,
Preserving, when your Worship and Jacomo was here: but I Will endeavor to find
him out, an't be possible. May Not he be here? or here? or here? Looks up and
down in the Cupboard, and the Chest of Drawers.


Cor. I, Marry, a likely place!


Triv. Now I Am confident we have searched is much as is possible: there is only
one Box more in the room.


Cor. Search it, search it.


Triv. Here it is, Sir. Gives him a Snuff Box.


Cor. What a Snuff Box! You Whore, do you abuse me: Kicks him.


1 Man. Pray, Sir, be patient; sure there is no body in the room, nor the
Closet, nor Alcove.


Bell. It Is strange, Sir, you should trouble your Neighborhood, and abuse me
for such a fancy.


Cor. Well then, now I find it, in faith. Jacomo has betrayed me, and let him
out. Oh you treacherous Villain!

It Is you, Sirrah.

Jac. No indeed, Sir, not I, nor any body else; for I stirred not a foot from
the door, after I locked it.


Cor. Go, go, Sirrah, no excuse: provide your self of another service. A fine
juggle indeed! Walks about, and his back turned, Bellinganna comes to Jacomo.


Bell. Say you saw him not, and save your self and me.


Jac. Turned away from the best service in Venice, for my honesty! -- Why, Sir,
I believe your Worship's mistaken; for I saw no body here, but my Lady and your
self, Sir.


Cor. Why, you impudent Rogue you, did you not see him, and speak to him by his
name, and was afraid of him too?


Jac. Indeed I heard your Worship call one Trivultio all to naught, and I
thought it was my duty to call him so too, and be afraid of him too; (how did I
know but he might lie in Ambuscade, in the Alcove, and shoot us?) but the devil
a'bit of Mankind did I see, but your self, Sir.


1 Man. This is strange!


Cor. Say thou so? The plain truth of it is, I did not hear him speak a
word; but I Will swear I saw him, or his Ghost, as plain as I see thee.


2 Man. Then't must be some Spirit.


Cor. Think you so, friends? Verily, I must confess, I had an extraordinary
fear and trembling came upon me; an Army of Men could not have frighted me
worse.


3. Man. Why, then, it is as clear as the Sun, neither your Lady, nor your
Servants saw him, and your self did not hear him speak, nor touch him.


Cor. Methoughts I ran him through and through, yet he never cried oh for it;
and then, indeed, I began to be a little afraid.


2 Man. A body of Air, of the Devil's compounding: 't could be nothing else.


Jac. Why, Sir, Did you never hear the House was haunted before?


Cor. Never.


Jac. Why, Sir, we were loath to tell you on it; but, Sir, though I never saw
any thing worse than my self in my life, yet I Will take my death on it, I have
heard some things walk at midnight, when we have all been a bed and asleep.


Cor. OF my word it is more than I heard ever.


Triv. I believe so, if you were asleep. This is a rare Rogue, make much of
him. Aside, to Bellinganna.


Cor. Well, Neighbors, I thank you. Exeunt Neighbors.


Jac. Madam, you're in my debt; but my Master much more. To her, Aside.

Happy's the Man whose just doubts are defeated;
Cuckolds are never glad not to be cheated. Exeunt.

ACT III.
SCENE I The Doge's Villa.
A Scene of Paradise, and Glorious Shows, with Music. Sforza walking in it
alone. Sfor. NOw indeed the Lady in the Church is as good as her word. How
suddenly these Women execute their designs! and how impatient they are in
Love affairs! Looks about.

A Glorious Prison! it is wondrous magnificent!

After some Music, a Cupid, or Angel held in the Air sings this Song. SONG.
Take, Hero, take.
The Presents, Wealth, and Beauty make:
There Is nothing else, that Mortals know.
Is worth receiving here below.
Time runs, Love flies;
He that thinks least, is the most wise:
And Fortune ever did approve.
A present Wit in War, or Love.
Stay, Hero, stay;
The Gods grow envious at thy Prey;
Or steal what is rare
In haste; for Heaven does seldom care.
Love and Ambition should conspire
Mortals to please in one desire.
After this a Dance of Angels, Sfor. Sure this is Paradise it self!


Enter Parhelia gloriously dressed, attended with her Maids, all in Masks: she
comes up to Sforza. Parh. Sir, you may judge, by th'actions of this hour,
That I can keep my promise, use my power.
Perhaps my Rival, by her needy Art
And first assaults, has prepossest your Heart;
But though my Person, nor my Wealth, should find
A room unfurnished in your well built mind:
I Will rather be for plain defects despised,
Than for low cheats and false Perfections, prized. She and all her Women
unmask: Sforza seems surpised.

Sfor. A most Celestial Beauty! Assift me, Virtue! Aside
Madam.
Great were my fortune, had it power to climb,
And changing for the better, were no crime.
Victorious Princes, Traitors do disdain,
Though by their Treason they do profit gain.
Ah! what rewards can his black thoughts suggest
That makes a Present of a faithless Breast!
A Ship full fraught with Stones, or worthless Sand,
Should it take in a Prize of Plate, 'twould sink it.

Parh. Cast out your trash, make room for richer lading:
Virtue may be an Hypocrite, and so may Beauty;
But Riches never were: the Goods of Fortune
Are visible, and wear no Masks. Points to the Furniture.

Sfor. Pity the Man that wars in every part:
Eyes, with his Ears; and all against his Heart.

Parh. Silly Believer, can thou take delight
In a dark Mistress, 'cause she says she is bright?
Did ever see a Beauty always Masked?
A Wit that never spoke? a Saint that never prayed?
A Courtier never dressed? A Sun never out of shade?
Would thou not, for a Palace, quit a Cell?
For Scepters, Spades, or for a Heaven, a Hell?
Or would'dst thou not thy Soul to Heaven restore
Because thou would signed the Devil's Bond before? Exit in a rage

Sfor. She Is gone. Brightest of Angels, in form and intellect, could thou not
find some nobler Mansions, uninhabited, to fix thy glories in, but thou must
claim a Cottage all on fire already? Oh what a conflict's this? You Gods, that
make unchangeable Decrees, assist my wavering constancy. I Will try if I be
Captive still.


Goes to the door, and is stopped by the Vizor'd Men, that carried him away
before. Guard. Whither now?


Visc. Whider now, Bougre Espagnol Milanois? Begar, me vill be revenge for me
Meter de King de France. Cent coups de pieds, Bougre.


Sfor. The armed Masquerades here still! How can this be answered to the
jealous Senate? a capital Crime.


Guard. Sir, you may have leave to walk in the Gallery, if you please. Here Is
your way. Exit Sforza and the Guard.


The SCENE, Cornanti's House.
Bellinganna, Trivultio, Intrigo. Intr. courting Triv. Why do you thus Eclipse
so quaint a Beauty?
That radiant Face under such envious clouds,
Enter Cornanti and Jacomo. And stop the current of your fragrant breath?
Cor. Bless me! what do I hear? oh horrid! insufferable! The Moor in discourse
with the Duegna? Treason, Jacomo, Treason.


Jac. What, is the fool talking to her, and sees not my Master? Aside.


Bell. What does she come on apace?


Int. Oh I, she softens; she will come Piani piano.


Cor. Oh Heavens, my Wife tool Execrable Villain: fetch me my Dagger; I will
let out his filthy black Soul. --. But stay! -- may not he have some privy
weapons about him?


Jac. Believe it, Sir, there are few Men that come about these stolen-Love
businesses, but bring along with them sufficient Weapons.


Cor. Then call the Sbirri that live hard by.


Jac. There are two of 'em sitting at the door. Exit.


Int. Shall I approach this lovely Citadel? Taking Trivultio by the Hand


Triv. You are too bold, Sir, with the Sentinel.


Int. When shall I seal my Happiness, on these Vermillion Lips?


Bell. And yet he sees 'em not. Aside.


Triv. Indeed, Sir, I dare not venture the cold Air; but you may squeeze the
Wax through the Paper, if you please.


Cor. Kissing too! fine work, in faith! He Curt'sies, and Intrigo kisses him
with the Muffler on.


Enter Sbirri and Jacomo. Intr. When shall we interchange the duty of the Sexes?


Triv. Dear Sir, will you please to walk into a more private room?


Int. Oh, the easy conquest! See what it is to Court regularly! As he is
leading ont Trivultio with great ceremony, the Sbirri clap him on the back.


Sbirri. I Arrest you of Treason, at the information of Signior Cornanti.


Intr. Me of Treason, that have (under the Rose) for these seven years, by my
vigilance, preserved the State from Foreign Invasions, and Domestique Plots? I
Arrested for Treason?


Sbirri. Rose me no rosing, but come away.


Int. Oh the disappointment! Breaking hands with Trivultio.


Bell. Oh Lord, my Husband! Starting back. Intrigo seeing Cornanti nods at
Jacomo, who winks, and nods at him again. Intrigo cries out in a lamentable
Gibberish.


Intr. Queki sini baski. Ahi puli tinderis.


Cor. Did not I observe this Rascal talking to my Wife and Vigilia?


Intr. Cajiski oli melan. Ahi poluki, Ahi.

Nodding and winking at Jacomo, who nods and winks again.
Jac. Alas, good Signior Intrigo, this is worse than A hone, Ahone. No, Sir, I
scorn to betray my Master. To come a spy thus from Taffaletta, Under the Rose,
it was not well.


Int. Oh the false knave! Aside.


Cor. Bless me! is this Intrigo?


Jac. It must needs be he by his way of speaking.
Never anyman was so deceived by a Rogue.

Cor. That grave knavish Fop! Away with him to Prison, away with him. -- Ah you
Whores! you Devil-ridden Witches! The Women run away. Knocking without. They
open, Enter the Messengers of the Council of Death, with black Caps, like
Deaths Heads, with Maces and Tip-staves. They mome up, and show Cornanti their
Maces.


1 Mess. In the name of the Duke and Senate, we Arrest you.


Cor. Arrest me! for what?


1 Mess. For Treason, in keeping intelligence with the Turkish Ambassadors.


Cor. Heavens guard my innocence.


1 Mess. And you are to appear before the Council of Death within this half
hour.


Cor. Short warning, Heaven knows, for a man so spotless,
And so deserving of the Common wealth.
Oh! oh! Bewails himself.

Int. I, Sir, it is present death. On the admirable wisdom of the Senate, to
prefer the Public before the Private still that gives no time to any, though
innocent, to defend themselves, when it is for the public good!


Jac. Honest Intrigo still!


Int. Oh, Sir, I could have told you of all this before; I knew the whole
design of your Treason, the time, the place, your Confederates, the Orders of
the Senate, the Critical Minute of your surprisal, and the utmost date of your
miserable life.


Cor. Oh good Sir, I am so free from any open act,
I never wronged the Senate in my thoughts.

Int. Take heed what you say, Sir. Do not I know the whole model of your
business have not been employed, as an instrument, to convict you? and a spy
upon your actions? Don't you see, under the Rose, how I disguised my self on
purpose? Do you think this was a wooing Face?


Jac. Here Is a turn in faith! This Intrigo will prove a plaguey fellow.


1 Mess. Say you so, Sir? Then we summon you to appear before the Council.


Int. I shall most readily attend the Clarissimo's.


Cor. Oh, good Sir, pardon my misapprehensions of you; speak but the truth, and
no more, and endeavor to support my oppressed innocence. Alas, Sir, you may
have free access to my House, at anytime, and what sort of conversation you
please with any of my Family, none excepted; very intimate, unrestrained
conversation.


Jac. Very good in faith, Oh that my Master could compound for one night's
Lodging!


Bell. Ah, Husband, I doubt this was a judgment upon you, for your causeless
jealousy. How could I prevent this?


Triv. I, and your distrust of your poor old Servant.


1 Mess. Come, Sir, the time draws on.


Jac. But hold a little, my Masters. A fools bolt is soon that By what
authority do you do this?


1 Mess. What authority, Sir? To satisfy your fools head, here is our Commission.


Shows a Writing with the Seal of the Senate: Jacomo reads it, and Cornanti
trembles. Jac. reads. Dominieo Loredano, the most Serene Doge of Venice, to the
Officers of the Council of Death. Whereas we are informed, that certain wicked
and disloyal persons have attempted most unchristianly to betray the secret
Deliberations of this Senate, to the Ambassadors of the Grand Signior, and have
seduced, into their couspiracy, a certain Senator, Aulo Foscarini -- Is
Foscarini the man you seek for?


All Mess. I, the very same.


Cor. But my name is Cornanti.


Jac. Look in your Commission.


2 Mess. I cannot read.


1 Mess. reads I, Sir, it is Foscarini indeed, and there is no other name in the
Commission.


2 Mess. 'Sdiggers, I remember 'twas a long name, and had four Syllabubs to it,
as they call 'em. -- Fos-ca-ri-ni: Cor-nanti; that is too short. I Will take my
death on it 'twas Foscarini.


1 Mess. But we were told this Foscarini lived here.


Jac. The mistake was easy; he lives within three doors.
Have a good Heart, Master, all is well.

All Mess. kneel. We humbly beg pardon of your Magnificence.


Cor. I, I, it is well enough. 'Slid, I can hardly recover my self to talk to
these Rogues. Sirrah, take heed -- hereafter how a man of my Robe --


Jac. Avaunt, you Rogues; we'll trounce you.


Cor. But, hark you, friends; though I Am clear of this Treason, here is a
certain Gentleman knows of a Treason, the time, the place, the Confederates;
and was employed, under the Rose, as a spy; to betray a Senator in his House,
as you may see by his Face: you had best seoure him.


Jac. It Is pity indeed he should lose his labor: let him be hanged first, and
examined after. It Is all for the public good still.


1 Mess. Indeed our Commission extends not so same; but if your Magnificence
please to command us, or so, we'll venture.


Intr. Oh, good Signior Cornanti, let me rather go with my friends here, the
Sbirri.


Cor. Oh, by no means. This could be no wooing Face; but a most dangerous
Politic Calves Face.


Intr. You will I exercise my patience, and not betray my Mistress, nor the
ocassion of my coming. Why should Harebrain'd fools triumph upon my infidelity.
Aside.


Cor. You would not aim so low as a Woman! the Public! over as long as you
live, before the Private. Therefore good Sbirri, take him for once; and be sure
you let him have no private room, but the abominable, public, stinking hole,
amongst the poor prisoners: there let him lie, under the Rose, still. -- This
was a judgment upon me, Wife, and you, old Witch, for distrusting you, was it
not! Messengers, you may be gone. Sbirri, away with him. Exit Messengers.


Int. I thought I should have no good luck this day, for putting on my Breeches
before my Doublet, and saying my Prayers before I washed my hands.

Exeunt Sbirri, Intrigo, and Jacomo.
Cor. After a turn or two with his Wife, Well, Wife, it is enough; I believe
you: this fellow's fool enough to attempt any ridiculous thing without
encouragement, and Jacomo might be deceived in him. But, deal ingenuously with
me, was you never Courted by Trivultio?


Bell. Good Sir, be patient, and I Will tell you all. That there was ever any
allowance to his Courtship, on my part, I utterly deny; but that he has made
some addresses to me, I will not be so unjust to you as to conceal it.


Triv. Now shall I go th'pot next in faith.
Plague of all Womankind. Aside.

Cor. But how, and where?


Bell. Why, Sir, at my Chamber Window, with Serenades.


Cor. But was he never within doors?


Bell. Did not you find that was a mere delusion?


Cor. True; but it runs in my head still. He Is a wicked fellow, the Devil would
never have come in his shape else. But go on.


Bell. At last, tired with his importunity, I appointed him a meeting this
afternoon about this time, in General Moccenigo's Wilderness.


Triv. Ha! what means this? A Man can never dive to the bottom of these Women,
Aside.


Cor. How a meeting? an unlawful meeting?


Bell. No, good Sir, no unlawful one: there is to be none but us two there.


Cor. A dangerous lewd Conventicle.


Bell. But you know I have no power to go out, unless you give me leave, for
once, or so.


Cor. Oh rare!


Bell. Come, Sir, in short, the whole scope of my design is, to give you
satisfaction; therefore go along with me, and when you find his intentions,
vindicate my Honor and your own, with all the severity Revenge can dictate.


Triv. Oh, now I understand her.


Bell. Meet me there, in your own Habit if you dare; To Trivultio apart.
You have made my Husband jealous, you are bound
To cure him of it, or suffer for it.

Cor. Brave wench, now I see thou art honest; but if thou had not a mind to
be so, all the Devils in Hell could not compel thee to it. Come away. Exeunt.


SCENE, A Gallery in the Doge's Palace.
Sforza walking alone in it. Sfor. Sure, if this Carnival continued long.
The Women would run mad: three to one Man?
The Ravisher, the Admonisher, the Courtier.
Two Suns reflected streaming from the true one:
Yet those two last could never be the first;
But sure one Person, her Rival, or Opposer.
The Lady in the Church, she threatened what she 'as done.
Well, my Dear first made the most decent Courtship:
She did more Love, and they more Rage express;
Her Heat was greater, though her Flame was less.
Yet I could wish her Beauty equaled this. Pauses a little.
I Will never doubt Nature could err so much
To take ill Lodging for so great a Guest
The Face is but the Copy of the mind,
Then sure it is glorious.
The Structure's noble; sure the Front is fair.
Suppose it were not, must I then recede
From first Engagements, without just offense?
Love, like a weight, thrown in by force, prevails;
But Honor weighs more in unshaken scales. One of the Guard steps to him, and
delivers a Letter.

Guard. Sir, an old Gentleman, that past by the Gate, gave me this, with ten
Checquins, and the promise of as many more, to deliver it safe to your hands:
but the discovery may cost me my life. Pray be secret.


Sfor. Hold.


Guard. I dare stay no longer.


Sfor. reads. If your Love be equal to mine, your resentment is as great for
our violent separation. You are a Prisoner to no less a person, than the
Princess Parhelia, the Doge's Daughter, who will spare no desperate attempt to
give her self satisfaction. But I will suddenly redeem you from this
Captivity, if your constancy deserve so great a favor. Kisses the Letter.

Ah, my dear Saint, then the debate is ended.
No, no, she shall not; I can free my self:
He that dares dye, can never be a Slave,
But cheats a Tyrant of his sweet revenge.
Yet there is hope still, she may send some Men
To force the way in; I can second 'em.
But though I were alone, shall I be forced to do
What Honor chides me for? Great God's 't shall never be.
I should not fancy to be forced to Heaven;
At least, by any Earthly Power.

Enter two Ghosts of Bassa's, with their Turbants, and Winding sheets, and a
great many other Turkish Ghosts attending them. Thunder and Lightning, and the
place darkened like Hell: Sforza starts, then recollects himself. No, nor
Infernal. They stalk dismally about him, with their Scymeters drawn,
brandishing at him. Sforza looks for his sword, and finds none.
And must I be their naked Prey?
Caesar, unarmed, veiled with his Robe his Face,
And was ashamed, but not afraid to dye:
So let me perish; but sure I know these Ghosts.
Turks all; and their brave Leader Achmet.
Ibrahim too; both slain with my own hand.
No mercy now sure.
Ach. Prepare, prepare, To turn thy self to Air. Sings to a dismal Tune.
An injured Turk, made fiercer by the shades,
Thy life invades.

Ibra. Stay, Achmet, stay; For I will share the Prey:
The Blood of Man's too sweet. As thou drankst mine,
I Will quaff off thine.

Chorus of other Turks. Heroic Dust, Be not Unjust;
Each Mussleman, that his vile hands have stain,
A piece obtain.
Altogether. By Pluto sent, we draw Terrestrial breath,
And offer thee too fair, or Love, or Death.

Sfor. Is this your business after Death, great Souls?
I thought you had been rolling among heaps
Of naked Beauties, with Eternal vigor!
Then know, fierce Ghosts, Devils improved to Turks,
If your own Hell were open, I Would sooner leap in it,
Than do a crime that should deserve it. The Ghosts walk off leisurely as they
came in, with Thunder and Lightning. Sforza walks about a little.
The Doge's Daughter turned a Sorceress!
A brighter Angel yet than any fell
With Lucifer's illustrious train of Rebels.
Oh that the virtuous Prince could hear of this!
But I must never live to make relations.
All power's continued by the same ways 'twas got;
Then doubt not Death, or Marriage. Pauses.
Death, it is the least of evils, or a good,
Because it ends 'em; courted by Boys,
For loss of Pins and Counters; and by Females,
For lesser toys: mastered by every passion,
Love, Revenge, and Grief. Shall it obey
The Slaves of Reason then, and not their Master?
Death's the dark entry to more pleasant Mansions,
The opening of the Scene to show us things more glorious;
The first flight of the mewed and hooded Soul.
It is the starting place, and not the Goal.
What is it we live for? tell life's finest tale?
To eat, to drink, to sleep, to fill, and empty,
Love and enjoy, to enjoy and love no more?
To talk of things we know not, and to know
Nothing but things not worth the talking of,
Insipid Acts, by repetition, nauseous?
Who would not dye for curiosity?
A Female, sickly, childish, puking Vice,
Faith, Fortitude, Affliction: cease your Trumpets,
For Nature's errors fright such Enemies.
My Soul is but in Lodgings for a Term,
Nature, her Landlady, may turn her out.
True, were the House my own, I would take care
T'imbellish it, and keep it in repair,
Make it impregnable against Force and Time,
To Dye were Folly, and to Fight a Crime;
But since Death's unavoided Arrow flies
From Foes, Diseases, and from Women's Eyes:
Let Us nobly court our Fate, sweet'ning the Race,
With the full Gallop, not the fearful Pace.

Enter Parhelia gloriously dressed: She comes toward him. Parh. What, can you
love, or dye, Sir?


Sfor. Both, Madam. Love
They says our only business after death.

Parh. And it is the great and noblest cause of life
Cannot the greatest fortune in the State persuade you
To quit your passion for a killing Mask?
Pray go to the Tire-Shops, you may chance to find
A better featured one.

Sfor. You're very pleasant, Madam,
If Love want Rhetoric, how shall Fear persuade?

Parh. 'Twas Fear that moved your choice to such an object,
That would provoke no Rivals.
No, Sir, you need not doubt that we will force you:
'Twas but to try how wise a man you would prove,
How fit to make a Sovereign in Venice.
You may have liberty to court your Vizor;
Yet know you're in my Net still. Guards let him pass.

Sfor. That grant of liberty, sweetens all your sharpness. Guards let him out
at one door. Exit Parhelia at the other.


The SCENE, General Moccenigo's Wilderness by the Walk of Statues.
Cornanti and his Wife, with six or seven Bravoess Armed, following him. Bell.
This is the place I appointed to meet Trivultio at Lay your Men in ambush
hereabouts, and stand you behind this Arbor, and when you discover the
wickedness of his intentions, call out the Bravo's to pistol him.


Cor. But you must appear to be very forward and kind, to make him the bolder,
that I may have the juster cause to kill him.


Bell. Very well thought of; but take notice, I Will make you some sport before,
which you must not be angry at.


Cor. No unlawful sport, I hope?


Bell. Fie, fie, Sir; I mean with another business. Cornanti gets behind the
Arbor, and his Bravo's under the Hedges.


Enter Hircanio. Her. This is the Walk in the middle of the Wilderness, I was
to meet her at -- And there she is. Oh the blessed Image! Madam,

For the redemption of my Captive-Heart,
Or its good usage in its slavery,
Be pleased to accept this knot of Diamonds:
Too small an offering to so fair a Shrine.

Bell. A very fair Jewel. Taking, and looking on it.


Enter Hircanio's Wife. Wife. I had notice from a friend, that my Husband was
to meet a Lady here. I, here is the Rogue presenting her with something.


Her. Death, here is my Wife Sees her and begins to steal away.


Wife. Ah you old Goat you, have I caught you?
Did I ever deny you at home, you false Man?
Oh thou impudent perverter of Mankind! Turns to Bell.
Have thou the conscience to defraud an Honest Woman of the dues that her
portion paid for?
Follows her Husband off stolding. When they are gone off, out comes Cornanti.
Cor. Brave Wench, in faith! Ha, ha, he. Did not thou send for his Wife?


Bell. I, I Sir; take the Jewel, and to your place again. He retires.


Enter Trivultio in his own Habit. Bell. coming up to Trivul. Dear Sir, I Am
sorry my pretended coyness
Has so long exercised your patience.
Triv. Oh, Madam, such high blessings deserve some expectation.


Bell. But, Sir, I shall no longer torture your desires.


Triv. Faith, Madam, Lovers are hard laborers,
It Is pity to keep back their wages.

Bell. Dear Trivultio, I am wholly thine. She runs to him and embraces him


Triv. How can that be, when the illustrious Senator, Starting.

Your Husband may plead an elder Title?

Bell. His was by purchase, Sir; but yours free gift.


Triv. You're very liberal of what is not your own.
I Will never grow rich by robberies: Venetian Commons
Are well stocked; I Will never break enclosures.

Bell. Dear heart, what needs this nicety? this is not
A place for complement, but execution.
Cornanti may appear here, peeping ridiculously from behind the Arbor.
Triv. Oh, impudence! Know, Madam, then I came to try what I could searce
believe; but knowing it, abhor the injury, intended against my noble friend;
which I durst not acquaint him with, till by this circumstance assured. I say,
against my friend, and my Father's old Friend. It Is true, he refused to lend me
Money; but I know he did it for my good.


Bell. Well, well, thou wilt never leave thy drolling, Trivultio.


Triv. No, no Madam, the Dignity of a Senator is not so cheaply to be valued.
Were I disposed to those voluptuous sins, I Would quench my Flames in common
Waters, and not corrupt the noble Streams, to viciate a Race of Princes.


Bell. Come, come, Sir, you do but jest. She hangs upon him, he shakes her off:
she comes and fawns again.


Triv. Nay, then I Will be in earnest. Oh you vile Strumpet; abuse my noble
friend, and an illustrious Senator! It Is: private justice, and it is public
too, to scourge thy sinful Carcass. Seems to beat her violently with his Cane.

Cornanti comes out from behind the Arbor, and interposes.
Cor. O spare my Wife, spare my Wife, she is Honest, she is very honest.


Triv. Bless me! the noble Clarissimo! How came you here, Sir? you're too good
natured; no, no, it cannot be. Goes to beat her again.


Cor. Hold, hold, for the Lord's sake: she is indeed, and placed me here to
watch you.


Triv. She place you? 'twas a cunning honest trick of her. A man had been
finely served that had come with a dishonest intent, la.


Bell. I could do no less than acquaint my Husband with your solicitations.


Triv. Nor I, than to vindicate his Honor. Pray, Madam, pardon my Zeal to your
Husband.


Cor. Dear Trivultio, now shall I esteem thee, as the most faithful friend that
I have in the World: my House and my Coffers are all open to thee.


Triv. Oh, good Sir, Virtue's its own reward.


Cor. That ever I could imagine there should be any baseness in my old friend,
Cavalier Trivultio's Son, that noble Gentleman! Dear Wife, I am sorry for thee:
how is it, Honey?


Bell. Well enough, if it may tend to your satisfaction.


Cor. I shall never harbor an ill thought of thee, as long as I live again.
Such a Wife and such a Friend! Kisses her. But this old Satyr Hircanio! I
cannot choose but laugh at him How his Wife peppered him! Come, come away, my
dear sweet Rogue! -- to my House, to rejoice with me and my Wife, upon this
admirable confirmation, and settlement of my thoughts.


Bell. Now have I honestly accomplished one of my designs, to cure my Husband
of his causeless jealousy: the next is, to help this wild young fellow to a
Wife, to reclaim him.


Cor. Come let us away. Such a Wife, and such a Friend! Exeunt.


ACT IV.
SCENE I. Cornanti's House.
Cornanti in a modish Habit, broad Hat, open Breast, stiff Pantaloons, etc.
Corn. HOw easy and light do I find my self, since I shak'd off this lazy
disease of Jealousy! methinks I am not the same man. Let me see. ( Takes out
his Pocket-Glass.) Why, no: thou lie in thy throat, old Cornanti, if thou
say so. I renounce thee and thy Works. Well, now that I am new rigged and
trimmed, will I launch out into the Ocean of Bravery, and rout whole Squadrons
of jealous Cuckolds. Woe be to the yellow Flags. What a world of Mistresses
might a Man make, while he sits brooding over, and watching one Wife!


Enter Bellinganna. My Wife has not seen me in my new Clothes yet.
I Will try if she knows me. Pray, Madam, what is become of the jealous Cockscomb,
your Husband?
Bell. You're very bold with him, Sir. Not at home. This is some intimate
acquaintance of my Husband's; Aside. they will abuse him sometimes. It Is a
flat-nos'd ugly fellow: he looks like one of my Husband's Bastards.


Cor. Abuse me! I Will try my Rhetoric.


Bell. 'Slife, I think it is my Husband himself! How these fashionable Clothes,
and white Peruigs, (the great Levellers of Faces) alter Men! But I Will take no
notice of him.


Cor. Is It possible so exquisite a Beauty
Can rest contented in such frozen Arms?

Bell. Oh very well, Sir: I love to lie cool.


Cor. Troth, Madam, to be plain with you, your Husband's my old acquaintance,
and friend, my second-Self, and I have a great inclination to oblige him with a
pair of Horns.


Bell. Have you indeed, Sir? I know not what you see in me, can justify this
liberty of talking. Be mannerly, or begone, Sir.


Cor. Well, well, Madam, I Will talk of something else. I was something the more
free to droll with you, because they say your Husband, that was one of the most
jealous Owls in nature, is now perfectly cured, and convinced of your honesty.
I am the most contented Man the Earth bears.


Bell. Why, are you such a man?


Cor. I mean, Madam, He said he was. What a Block-head am I!


Bell. Now will I torment him a little. You're a goodly Man indeed to talk of
being my Gallant! If I would be concerned with any man in the World, it should
be Trivultio. Ah, what a Genty man is this Trivultio!


Cor. Hell and Devils, Oh the crafty Strumpet! It Is too true I see. Goes to
draw his Sword: she runs up to him.


Bell. Why, Husband; pretty, smug-fac'd Husband, did not I know thee? why
would thou conceal thy self? I was resolved to vex thee a little for it.


Cor. Oh, was it nothing else? well enough. I did begin to relapse.


Bell. Why, Husband, you're another manner of Man. Pretty smirking Rogue, come
kiss me.


Cor. That I am in faith: I defy all the young fellows in Town for a Gallant.
That I do, so I do.


Enter Eunuch. Eun. Madam, yonder is Signior Hircanio without.


Bell. Very good: bid him come in; I Will leave you. Exit.


Cor. I, I; that will make rare sport.
This Jealousy, what is it? A dream of Horns.
What if I dreamt of Tails, or cloven Feet,
And had no real blemish?
Suppose the Feat was done, what is it then?
A wound of Honor, but without a pain:
The running through of a Ghost, the letting blood of Air,
The killing a Chimera.
Honor's a Shadow, that a Shadow's Dream.
Uncharitable Error, Vice of Plenty,
A senseless fright
That you want that of which you have too much.
Is a Face worse for being seen: a voice for being heard
By others? A Hand, an Arm, a Mouth, and so the rest,
For being touched, if they be unremov'd?
Did I imagine that I wanted Arms, or Legs,
And had them still, were I not more ridiculous
Than loss of them could make me monstrous?
It was not so, when Men in Commons ranged,
When every Male had Herds of hungry Females,
When Leachery was ruled by public Votes,
And Lovers, chose like Magistrates
In cautious Commonwealths,
The shorter time, the better for the Public;
Then from full Meals they interchang'd their Dainties,
But since we were restrained to little Chops.
And slender Messes, it is our poverty
That makes us narrow-Soul'd, and envious,
Snarling at every Passenger comes near
Our stinking close-pick'd Bone.

Enter Hircanio. Her. May I make bold to interrupt your Solitude?


Cor. A worse diversion were a favor, Sir. Faith, Sir, it is ill halting before
a Cripple, I believe you're of my mind, you take an opportunity to visit the
Lady, when her Husband's out of doors.


Her. Oh fie, Sir, she is a person of Honor,


Cor. Be not so over-wise, grave Sir; I Will deal frankly with you; I Am before
hand with you: look, Sir; do you see this knot of Diamonds? A small gift of
hers.


Her. Death? my Jewel. This the happy Favorite: we spend to maintain others.
But pray, Sir, did you ever obtain the Favor?


Cor. Why, is not this a great one?


Her. I, I; but the favor to enjoy her, Sir.


Cor. Why, what do you think, we are no such Lenten-Lovers here in Italy, Jove be
praised: I Have layn with her five hundred times.


Her. Oh the happy Man! but is she not a rare Bedfellow?


Cor. Faith, so, so: if it were not that she smells a little too much of the
Frangipani in hot weather. But did you never kiss her too?


Her. Never but in a civil Salute, or so.


Cor. Oh then she stops her Wind: but she has a breath more poisonous than the
Pump-water of a Ship that never Leaks. The Devil's in him if he likes her now.
Aside.


Her. Oh pray, Sir, then spare your leavings, and speak a good word for me: I
may chance to find you a Buona-Roba in another place.


Cor. Say you so, Sir? I Will go about it strait.


Her. Do, good Sir.


Cor. But remember your promise to Pimp for me, good grave Senator: it is an
Honorable employment, and fit for none but Statesmen. Exit.


Her. I Will not fail, Sir. This is the most hopeful way; for I fear her
appointment in the Wilderness was treacherous.

Exit at the other door.
The SCENE, A Street.
Sforza walking in it, and stopping over against the Prison where Intrigo is.
Sfor. So, now I know where I am: here dwells my Goddess. Knocks on the Hilt,
then Hems, Intrigo appears at the Grate.

Oh, now my Heaven appears; but clouded still.
Dear Saint,
Did ever mortal suffer so much violence?

Int. Trust me, this noble Count, with Candor and Familiarity, owns my
afflictions, is come to see me, and calls me Saint, because of my persecutions.
Aside. Certainly, Sir, it was a most unexpected and inhumane restraint.


Sfor. I, to be hurried and hall'd away by force,
And mewed up in a kind of enchanted Castle.
The Lady has caught cold by her voice. Aside.

Int. I, and terrefy'd and threatened, and kept prisoner, without any Ground or
Reason. Parhelia looks out at a window hard by.


Parh. Yonder Is the Count has stumbled upon some other Masqu'd Lady: some
mistake. I must go to him: is he mad?


Intr. Verily, dear Sir, this was the most unjust captivity that ever was,
since the Jews were in Babylon.


Sfor. I, or the Spaniards under the Moors, in Granada.


Int. Ha, Moors! does he abuse me? It Is true, I could not get out this Black
yet. Aside. What ever the occasion was, is more then every body's aware of; but
some shall hear on it on both sides of their Ears.


Sfor. Nay, pray forget it now: Ladies hands strike gently.


Int. Well considered indeed, and it is good manners to kiss the Rod, and bear
it patiently.


Sfor. Why do you reproach me with my patience?
Where shall I find the Offenders? I Will tell you the whole story.

Int. How, can you tell my story better than my self?


Sfor. Methinks the Lady speaks not pertinently. Aside.
True, there was a Letter sent from a Lady.

Int. Now does he abuse me, for taking up Bellinganna's Note. Aside.


Sfor. Which I took to be yours. You might hear something; but you saw nothing,
but the beginning of the business.


Int. What means this? Aside.
But I hope I shall see an end on it shortly.

Sfor. Of what, dear Madam? Why do you speak so mystically? Must your Sense, as
well as Face, be still obscured from me?


Int. Does he call me, Madam? Without doubt he abuses me. Aside. For all your
scoffs, Sir, some Ladies may have worse Faces; tho, I confess, I am a little
Sunburned at present.


Sfor. Oh pardon me, Divinest Beauty, my Faith's as strong as ever.


Int. Why, worse and worse? I can endure no longer.


Enter Parhelia veiled. Sfor. I have incensed my Goddess.


Parh. Well, what is the matter, Count?


Sfor. Here comes the Enchantress.


Parh. Another Mistress? What, are you mad; or turned inconstant?


Sfor. Avoid, Satan: you impudent Magician, Sorceress; the Earth shall swallow
me, before I Will leave my first Engagements.


Parh. Why? I Am your first.


Sfor. It Is salfe, you Witch, Medaea, Conjurer.


Parh. There Is, no talking to him now; but I Will stay to see the event.


Sfor. Concealed Divinity, offended Goddess Falls down on his knees toward the
Prison.
Once more impart thy Glorious Rays,
And visit thy immutable Adorer. Plays and makes most loving Grimaces.
Pedro, my Guittar.

Int. Ha! some Music! Putting out his Head farther than ordinary.


Parh. Ha, ha, he! Intrigo in Prison, black as he was at my Cousin
Bellinganna's, which you take for a Masque; and here is the Prison. Come, view
your Mistress nearer.


Sfor. Death, it is the grave fool indeed!


Int. Abuse me still! Oh the ignorance of Mankind, that judges all things by
the event! Withdraws.


Parh. Look here, that is my window I spied you from.


Sfor. True, this is the place undoubtedly: now I remember it. Falls on his
knees to her.
A thousand pardons, Madam, if it be you.

Parh. Nay, I Will convince you. Come, go in with me into my
House, and thence into some public place,
Where you shall see her who your faith has tried,
And judge, if well or ill, your Virtue was employed. Exeunt.

Enter Jacomo, knocks at the Prison door, the Jailer opens the door. Jac. Sir,
Signior Cornanti has ordered you to release Intrigo.


Jay. Very well, Sir. Exit.


Jac. Methinks this imprisonment should, have so mortified him, that we shall
hear no more of his Love-Adventures at our House: but it is ten to one but he
will be launching out upon some new design. He can no more conceal his
counterfeit Wisdom, then a beggarly Gallant can stay within doors. with a
Copper-Lac'd Suit.


Enter Intrigo and Jailer. Grave Signior Intrigo, you are enjoined not to speak
a word of the occasion of your coming to our House. Farewell, Sir, Exit.

Int. This release was certainly procured by some overture from the amorous
Lady, and the mollify'd Duegna,

I will patiently expect another Summons. Exit.

The SCENE, the Doge's Palace, with the same Furniture as before.
Sforza walking in it with his veiled Mistress. Sfor. Bless me, great Gods,
what do I see, my glorious Prison! the very same Room, the same Furniture, and
the same Guards in Masks! The Princess unveils, and he falls on his knees.

Oh Heavens, the self-same person!

Parh. What, will you yet adore your shame-fac'd Idol?
(Sure she is an Angel, 'cause invisible)
Or must I force you once again? Drollingly,

Sfor. Mysterious Goddess,
Blame not my disobedience, misled by duty.
I Am yours by such a cloud of Titles, that I Am lost in it:
Slave to your Beauty, Subject to your Wit,
And Captive to your Power, but as wise Princes
Who conquer Kingdoms, though by Law their own,
Claim by the Sword as the sublimest tenure,
And scorn all other wrangling competitions:
So let me be the Vassal of your greatness;
(Though Wit and Beauty, Empires without Arms,
Chain me too fast) kept in material Shackles;
And in the meanest Drudgeries employed,
Where I may view my Tyrants glorious Image.

Parh. I Will not mistrust your Virtue, nor my Charms;
Your constancy has made me value both;
Nor call him Captive that is invincible:
Love's no Usurper, but a Natural Prince;
So good, he needs no Laws nor Customs to
Restrain him; nor to protect him, Arms:
Harmless with Forces irresistible;
Invulnerable with naked Innocence.
Then you shall be my Prisoner, but at large;
Confined from nothing Love invites you to

Sfor. And Honor shall be judge what Love shall do.


Enter Cornanti leading Aurana, and Trivultio leading Bellinganna. Corn. A
jolly company in faith, if we had the Fiddles. Walks about Singing.


Parh. What, broke loose again, Cousin?


Aur. Pray, Madam, how came you to hear of my escape?


Parh. Oh, my Consin Bellinganna and I, have kept a constant correspondence.
Well, Count, that you may not be miserable alone, here are some other
Fellow Prisoners to Matrimony.


Sfor. If happiness may be increased by participation, or if I can receive any
addition to what I have already, it is to see my friend Trivultio so.


Triv. Thanks, dear Count.


Sfor. But, Madam, one doubt remains yet unresolved;
Who were your Angels, and who your Ghosts?

Parh. These were my Ghosts: Pointing to her Guards.
And these my Angels. Pointing to her Women and Pages.

Cor. I have a pretty crochet just now come into my Head: Yonder Parhelia and
Bellinganna talk together. Trivultio, of my conscience, is very honest, and
would not cuckold me, if he might; and my Wife's a Woman of Honor: I have tried
'em both; therefore will I cuckold him. Ah quil est doux de fair, son cher amy
Cocu. Come hither pretty Soul, I do intend to make Trivultio my Heir: will you
give me leave to visit you, when your Husband's from home?


Aur. 'Twill be the greater favor, Sir, that you will own me in his absence.


Cor. So, so; Done and Done; as plain as up and ride. Look how the poor fellows
looks at me! As jealous Triv. and Bell. pry at him, and counterfeit a
jealousy. as a Goose! And my Wife too! I, Sir, if you knew how near you were
being a Cuckold! (Laughs.) How sneakingly a man looks that is jealous! (Aside.)
But, me thinks the Rogue begins to look a squint at me.


Triv. I Will fright him a little. Hark you, Sir, do you endeavor to corrupt my
Mistress? Angrily.


Cor. 'Slife, what shall I say? Thy Mistress! not for a world? I Am not such a
Rogue. Make a Whore of her I intend shall bring Heirs to my Family!


Triv. It seems you intend to get 'em your self. Come, come, Sir; it is no
jesting matter; I overheard you.


Cor. Ha, ha, he. Was it not fit for me to try whether she were honest, or no?
Thou should never have had her else: my Son and Heir marry a Whore! I Would see
her burnt first. If it had been any other Woman, I had been in earnest, la.


Triv. Was it only so? I Am satisfied.


Cor. Oh, are you so? There Is wit for you, at a dead pinch, la!
Poor easy Milk-sop, that shall not serve thy turn.
Thou art already Listed and Enrolled
Into the Honorable Society.
Corna, Corna, Corna chi vuol hauer di Corna Sings.
Hark thee, Trivultio, I have forty thousand Crowns to spare;
let me see, how many Whores will that make?

Triv. Faith, Sir, I want Arithmetic to count 'em. Shall I reckon by Julio's,
or Half Crowns?


Cor. Half Crowns. A good Market-rate. Let me see, about eight hundred
thousand of 'em. That Is all. I have a project, that every one of these Women
shall bear me two Male Children at a birth every year: so that about twenty
years hence, I shall be able to bring every year a fresh Army of Sixteen
hundred thousand fighting Men into the Field, out of my own Loins, Boy. The old
Patriarchs were Asses to me: poor impotent broken-belly'd Fumblers.


Triv. But, at this rate, you must get more Children in a night than Hercules.


Cor. Hercules! Why, Hercules never eat French Pottage, nor Jelly, nor
Champignons. A poor Carret-eating Rogue! I Will have all the Cordials and
Elixirs, that Nature treasures up for the industrious, paid by the rich. My
Physicians shall study nothing else but the Art of Procreation; I Will have none
but those that can turn all Nerves into Bones, and all Meat into Marrow.


Triv. Right, Sir. You shall have all the three Concoctions in a minute, and
the time gained from them shall be employed to lengthen Generation.


Enter Visconti with Melinda; Visconti, in his French Habit, stuck with
Pistols, and a Musquetoon at's back. Parh. Well escaped, Madam. I see you're as
good as your word.


Mel. Oh, Madam, I am as it were at home, under the wings of my Tutor here.


Visc. And, Begar, me vil now teache you de finest leson in de vol vorld.


Mel. No other Lesson, Mounsieur, but the French Song: Sings a ridiculous
French Song.


Cor. What the Devil's this fellow that Melind has got?


Visc. Me be de Exant of de Guard to de Princess: vat is dat to you?


Cor. Ex:ang, with a pox to it! what is that? Aside.
Good Mr. Exang be patient. -- Turns his Head always at the word Exang, and
laughs, for fear the other should see him.

Visc. Do you laughe at me?


Cor. Pray excuse me, Sir; it is new word I had not heard before, a fine word:
but I honor your Person as much as any man living, good Mr. Exang. Turns his
Head and laughs.


Sfor. We shall have some Bloodshed by and by, between these two Heroes.


Cor. If I might be hanged, I cannot forbear talking to him Hark you, Mounsieur
Exang, -- (Turns his Head and laughs.) are not you some Dancing Master, or some
such kind of fellow? pray throw off your fighting Tools a little, and teach me
a Corante. Walking about, and singing.


Visc. Me Dancing-Metre! Begar you lie in de troate; me corn dat. Me Meter
Dance?


Cor. What are you then? a Fencing-Master? will you teach me the Stocade? the
Sa, Sa?


Visc. Morbleu: de affront to de Noblesse. Me no Metre-Dance, Metre-Fence, no
Artizan, no Burgeois, no Fout-man. Me be Gentil homme. You be de Son of de
Whore, and de Beech, and de Kishen Wench, to say so: me marry dis Lady de grand
kalite. Me vil have satisfacseeon.


Triv. 'Slife, what have you done? The Frenchmen are all Gentlemen abroad,
unless their Clothes disprove 'em. The Ladies never question it. We shall have
a Challenge presently: will you please to accept of me for a Second?


Cor. No, no; I hope, no need of that. Trembling.


Visc. Me Bourgeois! Me Roturier! Me Meter Dance! Walking angrily.


Cor. I did not care neither, but that I strained my Arm the other day, fighting
with the Watch: I can hardly stretch it out. And you know the chief Thrust lies
in the Allongee. I hate to kill a man by halves.


A Dance; in the middle of which, Enter Parson. Bell. Come, come, we lose time:
are you ready to be married?

To the work presently, Mr. Parson. The three Couples join hands, Sforza and
Parhelia; Visconti and Melinda; Trivultio and Aurana. A great noise without.
(stand off, stand off; Traitors, Traitors.) Clashing of Swords, the Women
squeak.

Parh. Oh Lord, we are undone! who would have thought. of any bodies coming
here at this time?


Aur. Heaven defend us.


Visc. Que Diable est sa!


Triv. Have a good Heart, man, it is nothing. Cornanti trembles.


Cor. Say thou so, Boy? Some frolic I warrant you.


Some of the Vizarded Men, are upon the Stage, others come running in. Enter
the Doge and the Procurators, the Yeomen of the Guard going before. Doge. Seize
on the Conspirators.


Yeomem. Deliver, deliver. They seize 'em.


Doge. If I had not come hither by accident, contrary to my custom, what a
scandal had I layn under!

Bless me! my Daughter!

Parh. I humbly beg your Highness pardon: 'twas but harmless mirth.


Doge. With Armed Men in Vizards? and in my Palace too,
To wound my Servants, and oppose my Entrance?
I grieve at the dishonor of my spotless Race.

Her. Just Heaven, my Daughter with her hair-brained Gallant so soon again! Oh
the wandering Whore!


Grim. And mine too with her sharking Frenchman!
You Powers above, why am I not struck blind?
Degenerate Strumpet, could thou find none to make
Thy Paramour, but this poor Mushroom?

Visc. Begar, me corn your word: me no Mushroom, no Stool-toad.


Grim. If you be his Wife, you shall soon be Widow: I Will have our French Cock
roasted alive, with his Gizards and Sausages about him there.


Mel. Oh Lord!


Doge. I Am sorry Sir, to find you here, after so late an Honor given by the
Senate.


Sfor. Sir, you will find Ingratitude a stranger to my thoughts.


Doge. A Parson too? The Trumpet of Rebellion!
But, what ranting modish Gentleman's that?

Sfor. It Is old Signior Cornanti in disguise.


Cor. No, it is false, Sir, it is young Signior Cornanti.


Her. How have I been abused then.


Doge. The Metamorphosis!


Cor. What, you're but in jest, Cousin! 'will you never ha done? you will fright
the poor Wenches out of their little wits.


Grim. 'Twill prove a sad jest, good Mounsieur.


Cor. Come, come, what a pox, this'll not pass. Ha, ha, he. Do you think to
make a fool of me too? How you leer now! Do you think, if there had been any
Treason in it, I, as a Senator, would not have discovered it? Have not I as
great a love for the Commonwealth, as your self, Sir? -- Hark you, Sir, have
you found out a Buona-roba for me yet? To Hircanio.


Doge. This Gentleman's strangely altered, from a penurious Melancholy, to an
exorbitant gayety. Sure he counterfeits.


Her. No doubt on it, Sir, -- I know this poor fellow's folly; but let him be
hanged however, that he may tell no tales. Aside.


Cor. Trivultio, do thou see how finely they act their Parts! as if it were a
Stage Play.


Doge. I cannot guess what this design may be.
These two are Subjects of the King of Spain.

Her. The Case is plain, these strangers have designed
To whore our Daughter, cut our Throats, and put
A Spanish Yoke upon this freeborn State.
I hear there is an Army ready, marching from Milan:
It Is no time to think, Sir.
Now, with this lie, will I come even with my Daughter's Ravisher, and my happy
Rival though she hang for it too, no matter. Aside.


Sfor. Great Gods, assert our innocence,


Doge. Gentlemen, this is no time time to defend your selves,
The danger urges. I must speedily
Provide for the safety of the Republic. Visconti slips away.
Guards look to the Prisoners, and keep 'em all in several Rooms, with a Guard
to each, that there may be no contriving, or packing of set Tales. And you,
Tipstaves, let the Council of Forty be Assembled immediately; and let the
Pope's Legate, Cardinal Colonna, though he arrived here but last night, and has
not yet appeared in public, be desired to attend the Senate, in case of
Ecclesiastical Censure, upon the lesser Offenders of this numerous Riot:

That our neglect, Posterity condemn not,
Nor the least Wheel in this rare Frame be shaken,
Though to the ruin of our private Houses. Exit.

Her. Look especially to this wild Traitor Trivultio.


1 Gua. I Will warrant you, Sir. Exit with Triv.


2 Gua. What Is become of the Frenchman?


3 Gua. I believe he is run away.


2 Gua. That Is like 'em. Exit.


Cor. What a pox means this? Hark you, Ladies, if they should be in sober
sadness after all, 'twould vex one.


Parh. It Is too true, Cousin.


Cor. Pox o'these grave fellows, there is more malice in one of 'em, than in
twenty of us young merry scabs.


3 Gua. Come away, Sir, do you rail at his Highness?


Cor. What, I warrant you, you're in good earnest, are you, you will be hanged as
soon.


3 Gua. I Will try that. Takes him.


Cor. Nay, prithee good Beef-eater, stay a little; prithee, prithee.


3 Gua. Come aloft, Sir.


The great fellow tucks him under his arm, and goes out with his heels
foremost. Cor. Do you know who I am?
A Senator, a Senator, a Senator, Kicks and strugles. Exeunt Guarded.

The SCENE, A Street.
Enter Tipstaff and Circumstantio. What a coil's here about this Master of
thine? I tell thee he is not here.

Cir. Why there can be no affairs of State transacted without him.


Tipst. Honest Circumstantio, I see thou have little to do, and I have a great
deal of business, prithee take my Tipstaff, and summon the Cardinal.


Cir. Oh I know the House that was taken for him in the Strada della Chiesa;
I Will do it for you. Takes the Tipstaff.] Exit.


Enter a Watchman, with many of the Rabble about him. Visconti passes by
hastily in his French Habit: the Watchman comes up to him. Watch. Stand;
Whither so fast? Are not you one of the Conspirators?


Visc. Me be poor Estranger:


1 Man. A Frenchman, a Frenchman.


2 Man. A French Dog; all the Plots come from thence.


3 Man. Knock him down.


4 Man. Brain him. This is he that set my House of fire. 'T could be no body
but a Frenchman.


6 Man. This is he that got my Daughter with Child.
That was a French trick too,

Watch. Keep the Peace neighbors, and let us bring him before the Senate. He
was in as much haste, as if he had been coming from Candia or Gygery.


All. I, I, away with him, away with him. A Plot, a Plot: the French, the
French.


1 Man. They Will burn the City.


2 Man. They Will worry our Wives and Children.


3 Man. They Will let in the Sea, and drown us.


5 Man. It Was they that brought the Plague into Venice.


7 Man. I, and the Pox too, formerly.


Watch. What Is your name?


Visc. Me he Meter de Language to Signior Grimani.
Me be no Frenchman, me be Italieen.

1 Man. No matter, you shall be hanged for looking like one


2 Man. I, for clipping the true Language.


3 Man. You shall be hanged Al-a-mode de France.


Watch. Come, come away.


All. Away with him, away with him.


Boys follow him crying. A Mounsire. A Mounser. A Munchir. A Mister Mownseer.
Exeunt all in a hurry, haling him away. The SCENE A Prison with a Bed in it.
Trivultio in his Nightgown and Cap. A Table, with bottles of Wine, and
Glasses upon it. A Soldier to guard him. Triv. Come, honest Guard, take thy
Glass in thy hand.

Gives him one.
Guard. God bless your Worship.


Triv. Now let us sing the Catch I showed thee.


SONG.
HOw happy's our Fate,
To live thus in State,
With our Guards at our Gate!
None can have access
But must Court and Address
And their business confess:
Then take off thy Glass on thy dutiful Knee, Guard kneels and drinks.
For Princes are Prisoners as well as we.
Triv. Now fill my Glass: faith, if we must dye, let us dye merrily however.


Guard. I have heard 'em say, Sir, that Drinking's the cure of all Diseases.


Triv. No, you are mistaken.
It sweetens sorrow, but removes it hot,
Unless the mind be made Serene before,
With sublime preparations: then it is the highest
Leachery to dye, and, next to that, to be in prison.

Guard. Troth, Master, methinks you make very light on it.
If I were sure there were good Drink in the other World,
I did not care if I were dead too.

Triv. Why do thou doubt it, man? They say every thing is more plentiful
there, than here; and all Men are alike, and no poor.


Guard. Oh Lord, Master, how can you tell?


Triv. Why, there are several that have staid in the other World a little time:
as some that have been in long Swoons, Apoplexies, and praeternatural Sleeps;
others, that have been halfe-hang'd, cut down again, and recovered. The other
world, they say, is just such another place, as the Countries of America,
Brazile, Mexico and Peru: there are few that venture to go there, but such as
can live here no longer; but, when they come thither, they find every thing so
good there, that they never think of coming back again.


Guard. Oh Lord, what would I give to speak with one of those Men that have
been in the other World!


Triv. This fellow's deadly simple, and drunk to boot. Aside. Why, thou shall
speak with one presently. I Am a dying man, thou know, and if I were hanged
outright now, 'twere but some hours sooner; and a toy takes me in the head, to
have thee put my Garter about my neck, and half hang me, that I may see what
the other World is, we are going to: but be sure you leave pulling when I make
signs to give over.


Guard. Oh that would be fine, and pleasant, indeed, if I did not hurt you.
But, Master, if I should hang you in good earnest, I should be hanged for you.


Triv. Oh, never fear that. Here, take my Garter, make a running knot, and on
with it. (Guard puts it on.) Now according to the laudable custom of
Malefactors, will I give this wicked World a short exhortation.


Guard. Oh, pray Master, do.


Triv. Good People, I am come hither to be a spectacle to Men and Angels,
Critics, and Devils; I am to pay a debt to Nature, which she has made over to
a greedy Huswife called Fortune, who calls for it in before the day of payment.
But Death is Honorable, Advantageous, and Necessary: Honorable in old Men, to
make room for younger; Advantageous to those that get Legacies by it: and
Necessary for Married people, that have no other Jayl-delivery. I am most
justly brought hither to suffer this ignominious death, and as my Legacy, do
beqneath you an useful caution, concerning that horrid and crying sin, that has
brought me to this most Tragical end. My Godly Parents brought me up most
virtuously, in hopes to have sold me to a Wife to the greater advantage: but at
fifteen years of age, the Devil, the Devil grew powerful in me, and tempted me
to a sin, Nature would never have thought of (good people: I tremble to name
it) Speaks softly and quivering. getting my Mother's Maid with Child. Ah,
Bettina, Bettina, thou taughtst me a trick I could never leave since. Thy
Sweetmeats, and thy Sugar-plums, have brought me to the Gallows. Hangman, I
freely forgive thee; and more freely, than ever any dying man did. Do thy
Office.


Guard. Oh Gemini! what a brave Speech will he make when he comes to it in good
earnest!


Triv, Pull down my Nightcap that I may not fright thee, and that I may see
more inwardly into the other world. Pulls down his Cap, and pulls the Garter.


Guard. What do you see now, Master?


Triv. Nothing yet, but a Mist. Pull harder. Triv. puts his fingers between his
Throat and the Garter.

Now pull of God's name. Guard pulls a little; then asks.

Guard. What do you see now Master? The Rope's very close: pray God he recover.


Triv. I see Rocks and Mountains, and He counterfeits a rattling in his Throat.
craggy places, and Men crawling upon 'em, like Snails or Maggots. Now I am come
into a fair Plain, all set with Orange Trees, Jessamin, and Rose-Trees: the
most delicious place that in my life, I ever saw. But oh, oh, oh, now I see --


Guard. What, Master, what? he speaks mighty plain to be three quarters hanged;
but it is a lightning before death.


Triv. Oh the blessed sight! At the end of this Plain, I see a great huge pair
of blew Stairs, as broad as all the whole World, made all of Turkey Stones, and
Lapis Lazuli's, and they are stuck as thick with Checquins, as ever they can
hold, with many broad Portagu'us, and English Jacobus's amongst 'em; and there
is one piece of huge bright Gold, as broad as from hence to Padua, and another
paler piece, as broad as from hence to Malamocco.


Guard. Now, of my conscience, these same blew Stairs are the Skies; and the
Stars, it seems, are nothing but Checquins; and the Planets, Portugu'us, and
Cobus's: and the Sun and Moon are those same great gallant pieces. Pray Master
let me be hanged too, and go to Heaven presently.


Triv. No, no; I will see a little more. Oh the lovely Vision! Now do I see a
great many of my old acquaintance, and some poor Tenants of my Father's, that
are dead, going up and down these Stairs, and taking out the great pieces, and
playing with 'em at Coits, and tossing about the little ones like Tennis-balls.


Guard. Oh Lord, Master, let me go to Heaven too, for God's sake: I can stay no
longer. I will slacken the Rope.


Triv. Now the Devil take thee for a cross fool: its all gone again.


Guard. Nay, good Master, ben't angry, but hang me a little too.


Triv. Come, and thou will, on that condition thou wilt hang me again. Pulls off
his Cap.


Guard. I will indeed, Master. Trivultio puts the Garter about his Neck, and
the Cap on his Head, and pulls hard.


Triv. What do thou see now?


Guard. Nothing yet Master but a black Mist: Speaks as if he were almost
strangled. Triv. picks the key of the door out of his pocket, shows it, and
runs and unlocks the door, and and locks it again upon him.
And yet methinks the Rope is hard enough.

Triv. Oh 'twill clear up by and by.


Guard. Pull a little more. I see nothing in the World yet, but a great Fog.
Pull, for God's sake, Master. Why don't you pull? Master, where are you? Pulls
off his Cap, and misses him.


Triv. Here, Boy, here: is the Mist cleared up yet? Peeping in at the Gate.


Guard. How the Devil got you there? Feels for his Key and misses it.


Triv. How many Checquins have you got in the other World? will you play at
Coits, or Tennis with 'em? Are they as heavy as Venetian Money? sure they are
light, they could not toss 'em so nimbly else. Guard goes to the door, and
finds it locked.


Guard. Oh the Traitor! stop Thief, stop.


The Scene changes to a part of the Senate House.
Enter Intrigo and a Doorkeeper. Door-k. If you be discovered I shall be sent
to the Galleys; for none are admitted into the Senate House, but Gentlemen of
Venice.


Int. Fear not, here is twenty Checquins for you.


Door-k. Here, Sir, you may lie at large in this great Trunk of Records: it is a
little Dining Room. Shows him the Trunk. I Will get a hole made on purpose to put
out your Head and Hands, that you may listen and take Notes.


Int. Very well, How shall I hug my self, to hear the condemnation of these
imprudent Revellers! and besides, dive into the fresh Intrigues and Cabinet
Councils, that come piping hot from Rome! How freely will this Cardinal empty
himself into this bosom of mine, and know not who has drained him! This Art do
we Politicians call pumping by Proxy, or the Magical Screw. The Scene shuts
upon 'em.


Enter Trivultio. So so, I am got off clear. Now for another device to help my
friends. The Cardinal Legate is newly come to Town, and scarce known to any man
in Venice. Great Bodies move slowly, and he does not think the Senate is in
such great haste; I will have a trick to prevent this Cardinal. The greatest,
difficulty will be, to get Hircanio's Daughter; But Cornanti is bound to make
the Match for me, for the kindness I did, in curing him of Jealousy. And shall
I then attempt his wife again? Ungrateful God of Love! Pox on it, in matter of
Women, the deceit is Trivial. Civilized Mankind that live in Towns, lie with
one another Wives, as Gentlemen cheat in Horses, by a Tacit compact, and rule
among themselves. Let Cornanti pursue his inclinations, I Will follow mine.

Man's Gratitude may sometimes rise from Pride.
Friendship to others from the first writ Law
Of pleasing of himself; why may not I endure
The burden of a wilful obligation;
And not be tossing it still back again
To one who throws it upon me to ease himself?
For why should Mankind live by Rule and Measure.
Since all his Virtue rises from his Pleasure?
ACT V.
The SCENE, The Senate House.
The Senate sitting, the Doge and Procurators of S. Marks and all the Officers:
the Prisoners at Bar: Sfor. Parh. Cor. Bell. Visc. Mel. Trivultio disguised
like the Cardinal Legate. All in form of Judicature.

1 Sen. The boldest frolic this wise State has known,


2 Sen. It Is Treason in a high degree.


3 Sen. 'Twas nothing but an amorous Gambol.


4 Sen. One of Cupid's Conspiracies,
The God that drolls at Law.
But hear the Advocate-General. Signior Satana arises up in his Bar-Gown.

Sata. Most Gracious Fathers,
I thank auspicious Heaven I find you here,
That no black unprevented crime has caused
Your absence, or Adjourned your Session to another World.
For since this Infant-Commonwealth first strugled
Out of its Chaos, and assumed this glorious form,
There never was such dark, such hellish practice,
Not to be spoke of, if not acted first,
Nor told to listening Children, but with sharpest vengeance,
Lest they should conne the Crimes, or hate their Fathers.
For their supine Indulgence. But what was this design?
Naught but subversion of the State. A Peccadillo.
Naught but the breaking the most curious frame
The World can boast of, since the Heavens were built.
A Love toy.
Making a Chaos of a Firmament,
A pretty fidling, dancing, kissing Treason.
But where was this? even in the Doge's Palace,
The sacred Fort, and safeguard of the Prince.
And when?
Even in the Carnival, that time of License,
When all Men may turn Traitors. And by whom?
Even by Soldiers, and by Foreigners:
Men that have Interest in the Camp and Closet;
None in the Senate. Men that have no Bowels,
Nor native tenderness for this our Mother.
But you will say 'twas but
A merry meeting with some Women in it.
A Play with Snakes to make it innocent.
No Vice is perfect, but a Woman's in it:
Women, the Lures of Schismatics and Rebels,
The Pleas of Nature, in the mouth of Grace
Those Cables twisted round with silken Threads
Of immaterial Doctrines that would quickly break
But for the strong attractives under-woven.

Her. True, Learned Satana, 'twas a horrid Treason;
And should the Senate wink at this great Crime,
Like Manlius, with these Hands I Would Sacrifice
My Offspring to just Vengeance.

2 Sen. Spoke like his Ancestors.


1 Sen. This was a foreign project.


2 Sen. The King of Spain's,

The Universal Monarch. Intrigo putting his Headand Handsout of the Trunk,
unseen to the Senate.

Int. Like enough, the King of Spain a hand in
Stealing the Man's Daughter. Notes it in a Table Book.

4 Sen. This it is to favor Strangers.


3 Sen. Yet, some not stick to say, 't was but a Wedding;

The more suspicious. Was not the execution
Of Protestants at Paris, acted at one?

4 Sen. But, were there no design,
Yet, in the rigor of the Law, it is death
To go disguised in Arms: expressly against
The Letter of the Act of Ordelafo,
For Swords and Vizors never were worn together
But in believing England, where Saints turn Rebels.

2 Sen. Let 'em dye then. A Proveditor, or Senator rises up.


Prove. Illustrious Fathers, did I think this riot.
Had the least face of Treason, or of Murder,
None should more blindly Censure, deafly Judge;
But since the root of this so deep design
Is the weak Passion Love, whose follies are
Its Wisdom, Crimes its Virtues: shall we be so severe
T'inflict such punishments, as these disorders, backed
With bloody'st mischiefs, only could deserve?
Had these poor Lovers undermined your Senate,
Killed some chief Magistrate, or fired your City,
Seized on the Arsenal, or but contrived, or hoped for.
The least of these; then had we justly trembled:
But they, fierce Wights, were in an open Villa,
Their Bulwarks were their Hedges, Orange Trees their Blinds,
Their Trumpets, Fiddles, Banners, Ladies Scarfs;
And Petticoats their Trenches. Monstrous Treasons!
Dark Machinations! Dreadful Spanish Plots! Intrigo peeps out again.

Int. Bulwarks Hedges, Peticoats Trenches?
My life for it, some modern way of Fortification;
How this age improves! Notes it again.

Prove. Best torture 'em, and mortify those Limbs.
Which Love would have made suppler before morning:
Make 'em confess, and choose to dye, for death.
Is less to them, than or delay, or pain.
Extort how many dangerous deep Intrigues
What Junto's they have had to blow up hearts,
How many Towns they have taken, plundered, fired, and slighted,
And which of them by Storm, and which by Treaty,
And give a List of the Confederates.
'Twould cause some blushes in the Senate House.
But you must know all! These were bloody Plots
To blow up Virgin-Treasures: not S. Mark's.

Cor. Brave Boy!


2 Sen. Pshaw! now I am clearly convinced, there was no Treason in it.


3 Sen. No, none at all.


4 Sen. Yes, a treasonable piece of Leachery.


3 Sen. An inconsiderate Frolic.
Count Sforza has deserved well of the State.

2 Sen. The Ladies could have no design to betray their Fathers.


Doge. The severity of the Act of Ordelafo, has been mitigated by two
subsequent Statutes, in Gradonico and Friuli's times; so that now the Law
stands thus. This Fact is death without mercy, if proved intentional for
Treason, or for Murder; if otherwise, the Galleys, or Ecclesiastical Censure,
according to the circumstances, which heighten or extenuate the crime,
Gentlemen, which of these three are you resolved on?


All Sen. Ecclesiastical Censure, Ecclesiastical Censure.


Doge. Your Eminence is desired to give your Sacred Sentence.
And with the sparks of your derived Infallibility,
To light our stumbling Reason.

Cor. How bloodily this Cardinal looks! 'Twould troubble me to dye in the very
Flower of my Age thus.


Visc. And, begar, me have de Fievre quarte.


Cor. Hark you Mr. Exang, you shall have the Honor to be hanged first, because
of your Command; Mounsieur Exang, la Precedence Monsou.


Crier. Silence at the Bar.


Triv. Most Honored Senators, I much commend your charity. Rising up.
And Christian tenderness, in case of Blood.
Your Infant State required that cautious rigor.
Strict Laws, are like Steel Bodies, good for growing Limbs;
But when the Joints are knit, they are not helps, but burdens.
That which now seems to have caused this great disorder,
Is that wild passion Love, which is not tamed,
But with much Prayer and Fasting, by us Men in Orders;
And secular Men must be allowed some grains.
Most Laws exempt Mad Men from Executions;
Their death breeds pity more than terror. All these errors
Were done by chance, when Love had banished Reason.
To put to death six Lovers on their Wedding day,
When they are going to give life to others,
Would be a Massacre, not execution.

Int. Peeps out. That Is to say, People in the solemn Act of Generation ought
not to be disturbed A pious Cardinal.


Triv. Poor easy Souls, they were going to betray
Themselves, not you: you fright 'em from the snare
They Are running in such haste to thrust their Heads in.

Cor. 'Slife, this'll prove a brave Man of God!


Visc. O de good man of de Shourshe.


Cor. This fellow talks as if he were frighting away Crows; it is pity you
should escape hanging, good Mr. Exang.


Visc. Begar old Man, if me be no hanged, me vil have satisfacseon for de
affront in the Hoose of the great Dogue.


Cor. Bear witness, Gentlemen, he threatens me, I shall go in dread of my life;
therefore for the security of my Person, good Mr. Cardinal, hang us both
together.


Crier. Peace in the Court; Peace, Peace.


Triv. Four punishments the Church allows us,
Fire, Galleys, Inquisition, Excommunication:
Or other Penance at the Priests discretion.
And, to conclude, they need
No other Flames to burn in, but their own:
Love is no Heresy, but a Catholic Doctrine;
The same way made and finished over all the World;
Needs no Inquisitors, but cautious Parents.
Hard Oars were never made for such soft Hands.
Soul-wounding Excommunications
Are blows too Airy for such stiff-neck'd Riots,
Bordering on Treason.

Sfor. Whither now! shall we be transported?


Triv. Love was the cause, it is fit that Love should suffer.


Sfor. I had rather dye, than lose my Mistress.


Triv. Then I decree, by virtue of the Holy Chair's,
And this Republick's Laws, that first the Prisoners
Implore the pardon of the offended Senate;
And, farthermore, I solemnly condemn 'em
To the perpetual Prison of the Nuptial Sheets.
Late Councils hold, Marriage from Heaven was sent,
Not the reward of Love, but punishment.

All Sen. Agreed, agreed. Admirable Divine Sentence!


Doge. The Judgement's very mild; but I submit,
To the Reverend Church. Count Sforza's Virtue is
A double Fortune.
Daughter, are you contented with your choice.

Par. The State has tried his Service, I, his Faith,
With some experiments not less distracting
I dare not now dispute your Highness Sentence.

Grim. My Daughter married to
A wandering Frenchman! Your Eminence be pleased
To pause upon that Judgment.

Int. peeps out. A Frenchman too in the Plot! of my word, a shrewd
deep-thinking Nation: they cover internal Wisdom, with external Folly.


Triv. It is irrevocable.
'Twas first her choice, and now her punishment.

Visc. Begar old Fader in de law, me noe Vagaboon, me noe Rogue wandering.


Int. Mark his politic Accent, and his craftily transposed Sense. Who sees the
bottom of this?


Visc. to Grim. Sir, to perplex you no longer. I am not the first
French-Master, that has run away with a Gentleman's Daughter. Pulls off his
Disguise.

Your Daughter's wondrous apt to learn the Language.

1 Sen. Of Nature, Sir.


2 Sen. Visconti!


Cor. Why, my dear friend, and no Exeng! Hugs him.


3 Sen. A good Match for your Daughter.


Grim. I have had better offers; but I acquiesce
In Sacred Justice, with my Daughters liking.

Mel. Our Vows are sealed long since, Sir.


Her. Here Is mad work in faith!
I Am glad the Reveller is not here, to marry
My Daughter.

1 Sen. How does your Eminence dispose of the married Couple?


Triv. Their punishment shall be to live at home
Together; and that is enough for her;
His, to return from a glittering Gallant, to a Threadbare
Usurer, and to tell,
All his own Money till his fingers ache,
Without a Deputy Scraper.

Cor. I Will throw't away first!


Triv. And for the credit of his forsaken Dignity,
To have his Senator's Gown stitched to his Back.

Cor. This whoreson long gown will utterly spoil my Boon mien.


Int. Nay, if the Clarissimo's begin to go in Quirpo once farewell Christendom,
unless it be done upon design.


Bell. No matter, Husband, if your Reverend jealousy return not.


Cor. The Devil lodge such Guests, Cornanti never.


1 Sen. But, Reverend Father, there is yet one of
The chief Malefactors that has broke prison,
And left his Mistress Aurana behind him.
How do you Sentence him?

Triv. To be married to her, as soon as e're he is caught. I have heard 'em say,
he is a wandering Gallant; 'twill be a true punishment to him: if an ordinary
Prison will not hold him, clap him into the Dungeon.


Aur. Oh that Trivultio was here, to thank this good Cardinal.


Her. Nay, Reverend Sir, let not so rude a fellow
Enjoy my only Heir, his Fortune too, uncertain.

Triv. I do not use to have Decrees so Canvas'd.


Her. Then, if I must consent to lose a Father's power,
Let 'em inherit wrangling poverty.
I Will never bait her Misery with my Fortune.

Cor. He a rude fellow? It Is false, Sir. OF my knowledge he is as honest a young
Man of his Body, as any's within a hundred mile of his Head, though I say it,
that should not. I have tried him, Sir if you go to that, and you too. Hold
your prating, Hircanio: shall I tell all? Puts his finger to his Nose.


Her. Betrayed, and shamed!
Come, come, Sir, what is this to his Fortune

Cor. It Is thus much, Sir: I have enough for him, and for my self too; and he
shall have your Daughter, in spite of your teeth, if you go to that, la! say I
told you so.

Tara tang. Sings.

Int. This old Gentleman's much improved of late in his Parts and Elocution: He
has been an unknown wise. Man these forty years. Heaven guard the State.


Her. Was ever Man thus Hectored by a Priest and a Lunatic!


2 Sen. How does your Eminence adjudge the Accomplices?


Triv. Alas poor hirelings! Let 'em all be pardoned.


All Sen. Excellent Sentence!


Doge. Let all those Decrees be entered in the Journal.


All Sen. I, I, I. Great cry.


Her. -- No. Faintly, after all.


1 Sen. Do you observe the malicious feeble Negative?


Enter Cardinal Colonna, the Pope's Legate. What another Cardinal?
2 Sen. There Is never a Cardinal at Venice more;
But old Grimaldi, that lies Bedridden.

1 Sen. True. Cardinal Bragadino is at Rome,
In his waiting upon his Holiness.

2 Sen. But it is the same I think.


3 Sen. An Apparition!
Do my Eyes see double?
Here Is another Cardinal Colonna!

4 Sen. All old Cardinals look alike, as all old Women do.


Card. Ha! What do I see? another in my place! Comes forward.
Honored Senators, I come to attend your pleasures.

Doge. What, a double Cardinal Colonna! Many Senators rise up as frighted
Sure this is some Impostor.

Grim. Rather a Spright: one of the Devils Prelates. Trivultio rises up.


1 Sen. That he may be, and yet be Flesh and Blood.


Int. I knew it would not pass thus.
I warrant you, wise Rome keeps a Counterpart
Of every Cardinal she sends abroad.

Triv. Most worthy Sons of the Church;
I beg your Justice from the Holy Chair,
Upon this Sacrilegious Impostor,
For abusing our Sacred Habit Legatine.

Card. Why, Gentlemen, would you make me believe
I am not my self?
Impudent Monster, you are a Cheat,
An Anathema, to abuse the Church,
And to usurp my Seat. If thou 'rt a Cardinal,
Thou art no Legate from his Holiness. Goes up to him furiously, as if he would
pull him out.

I will Dethrone thee.
Triv. Fathers, look to the Honor of the Christian Faith.


1 Sen. Right, Such violence becomes not his Profession.


Doge. Forbear to affront his Eminence.


3 Sen. No rude action till the thing is known.


Int. These Cardinals are spies one upon another, and know it not.


Doge. Tipstaff, Who was it that was sent to summon his Eminence?


Tip. A fellow that is without.


Doge. Call him in. Tipstaff goes to the door, and brings in Circumstantio.

What did you summon the Cardinal here? Pointing to Trivultio.

Cir. With due submission to your Honors Worship,
And striking sail to your intellectual Gravity,
And without offense be it spoken to his
Cardinals Worship, if I may take the boldness to say so,
I did.

Int. My man entered into the grand Intrigue! OF my word, he was always a
hopeful fellow.


Doge. A very formal Coxcomb. Well then, turn about.
Did you fetch this Cardinal too here? Pointing to the Cardinal.

Cir. I marry did I, as I told you before, Looks at one, then at another, as if
he were frighted. will you not believe me? what are you skipt hither so soon?


Card. Honest friend, did not you fetch me?


Cir. I, I Am sure I fetched you, if you be the same with the other; for I fetched
but one: but if your Worships be two of you, I know not which I fetched.


Card. Why, do thou not know me? and did thou not come to me, to my House
in the Strada della Chiesa?


Cir. I, that I Will be sworn I did, and I know your Worship very well: but,
beshrew my heart, I think your Worship's a Strologer, or a Negromonster, that
can make two people of one.


3 Sen. Strange Labyrinth?


2 Sen. The fellow himself cannot know it.


Doge. Nothing but circumstance of time and place,
Can clear this doubt. Tipstaff, did you employ this fellow?

Tip. May it please your Highness, not I; but he told me, that one of our
fellows did, who should have gone himself.


Doge. This may be a Rogue, then. Come, come, sirrah, tell the whole story,
with all the circumstances of it, how, where, and from whom you received your
Message; and how long since you delivered it, and where you met with the
Cardinal, with other particulars.


Cir. I shall, Sir, tell you in short. Going to go this morning toward a Club
we have kept these two years, as much as to say a merry meeting, as much as to
say, at the Three Tuns in the Piazza dei Jardini, as fine a Sign as any's in
Venice, and as well Painted, by the same token, we had bespoke to Supper, a
dish of stewed Chestnuts, five stumps of Capons Legs we had borrowed of our
Masters, a Fricacee of Frogs, and a dish of buttered Snails; I had not gone
half way, but as sure as my Grandfather was at Lepanto, who should I meet with
by the way, but a great crowd of people with Halberds, and Staves, carrying
Thieves or Traitors to prison.


Int. An excellent Narrative! Little does the Senate know, by whose Precepts he
was formed to this perfection.


1 Sen. A very impertinent fellow! Aside,


Cir. So, I stepped aside into a Shop, to see 'em pass: the Shopkeeper asked me
what I would buy; But, intending my Money for other uses, out I went into the
Street again; and, as sure as my Grandfather was at Lepanto, the company was
almost lost: yet I had a mind to follow 'em; but, for all my haste, I was
resolved to take a dram of the Bottle by the way.


Card. Honest friend, come to the point. You know where you found me, and what
you found me doing, who was with me, and how I promised you to come presently,
as soon as I had dispatched my business with the Canons of S. Mark, whom you
saw there.


Cir. Oh Lord, Sir! what are you mad, Sir? -- Scratches his Head. Now have you
clearly put me out, that I cannot remember one word more, if I were to be
hanged for it; unless I begin again, word for word.


Int. Alas-a-day, his old infirmity! 'tmay spoil his State-course.


Doge. So so: this is a made tale.


1 Sen. A mere juggle, and contrivance between 'em.


2 Sen. And the fellow makes himself simple, to be the less suspected.


Cir. Indeed, my Lords, what I speak is very true; but I am a little out in may
story, and the Lesson I learned of my Master.


Doge. So, so, he confesses the Master and the Scholar.


1 Sen. It Is now as clear as day.


4 Sen. A mere studied Lesson, and the fellow could say no farther; for he had
it only by roat.


Doge. Away with the Mock-Cardinal, and his Man: clap the Master and Scholar
close in Irons, till farther order.

The Tipstaves seize 'em.
3 Sen. Disrobe and whip him.


4 Sen. No, let him be sent in this Habit to Rome, and there punished.


2 Sen. A most impious Act.


4 Sen. Profane.


2 Sen. Abominable.


Card. Is there no Justice here?
Then I appeal unto the Holy Chair.

1 Sen. We allow no Appeals. Away with him.


All Sen. Away with him, away with him.


Triv. Most Honored Fathers, I thank you for your Zeal
To the Holy Church; but since this is a day
Of general jolity, I freely here
Forgive all the affronts done to my self,
As Christian Charity Commands, and humbly
Beg your pardons for the Mock-Cardinal.

Doge. Oh, Reverend Sir, you are too mortified;
Our Zeal to the Holy Church cannot pass by
So great a scandal.

Triv. I beg it once again, with earnest Prayers.
And hope you will not envy me that meritorious Act.

Doge, Well. Since your Eminence is pleased to be
So merciful, we have no reason to
Be more severe.

3 Sen. No, not at all.


4 Sen. It Is a day
Of public mirth: the Carnival time too.

2 Sen. Let him be pardoned, and confess his knavery.


All Sen. I, I, I. Trivultio pulls off his Disguise.


Triv. Great thanks, Illustrious Fathers, for your Gracious Pardon.


Doge. Is It possible?


Cor. Trivultio! whough!


Int. Look you there now; I knew 'twould end in this. But the poor fellow will
be hanged. This comes of his capering and Dancing without design still. This
it is to have the Bark of a Frenchman, but none of the Sap.


1 Sen. This was a Masterpiece, in faith. Trivultio runs from his Seat, and
falls upon his knees before the Cardinal.


2 Sen. Deserves Reward as well as Pardon.


Her. A Cheat, a Cheat, a new Sentence:


Triv. Your Pardon, Reverend Sir.


Card. Bless me! the wanton wag Trivultio!
I am beholding to the Impostor however,
For his good Nature: Heaven forgive you. Cornanti snatches him away from
before the Cardinal, and kisses him.

Cor. Ah, my dear Boy, have I found thee again!
Thou haft more wit than the whole Senate.

Her. How now, Sir?


Cor. I marry has he, Sir, for all you, if you go to that.


Doge. Will It please your Eminence to assume your Seat? Cardinal goes up to his
Seat.


Her. The Sentence now is void, though the Impostor's pardoned.


Card. Pray, Sir, let us hear the Case.


Doge. It is, in short, a Riot against our Laws,
Though the intention reached no farther than
Honorable Marriage; and it pleased the Senate,
In mitigation of their punishment,
To leave 'em to the mercy of the Church:
This Youth steps in disguised; Ordains 'em Marriage;
And though the Fact was bold and illusory,
Yet the whole Senate has approved the Judgment.

All Sen. I, I, I.


Her. This 'll not pass. My Lord, we are abused and cheated, And our Daughters
ruined.


3 Sen. No, no, my Lord,
It Is mere malice: the Matches are suitable.

Cor. If you talk more, Hircanio, your Daughter shall not have him, if she would
down on her knees to him.


Card. Shall I please one, or all?
As it is the States civility to give
The Church this Power; so it is his Holiness's Order
In all things, to comply with this Illustrious House,
Where Reason or Religion do not suffer.
I Will not recede one tittle from the former Sentence,
Though 'twas irregular and monstrous;
Yet happy in the approbation of
This most Judicious, Honorable Senate.

All Sen. Thanks to your Eminence, thanks, thanks.


Doge. Inroll the Judgment, and this day's transactions.


Int. Shallow proceedings! if I would but appear now, I could turn the whole
business again.


Her. Baffled again! Well, is not this business to be cured Aside to Satana.


Sat. Not possibly.


Her. No quick in Law left? Try, good Satana.


Sat. It Is in vain, Sir.


Her. Come, here is your Fee.


Sat. By no means, Sir, it is not for that.


Her. Pray, Sir, take it. Presses him.


Sat. Not in this place, indeed Sir.


Her. Well, well, then I Will keep it for you.


Sat. Who would have thought he would have pocketed it again! but I shall have
it. Let me see


Her. How this Fee works!


Sat. I have found a most material objection. Hark you, Sir. Whisper together.


Doge. What means this Caballing in Court? The Senate's ready to Adjourn.


Her. Gentlemen, I humbly conceive this Sentence is voids For I conceive --


1 Sen. This Lawyer has infected him with their Dubious Salvo.


Her. The Pope's Ordinary is not a Judge, but Minister of the Court; and I
desire the Records may be searched, to see if there were ever any Precedent of
this Nature.


Int. How Is that?


3 Sen. What power soever the Legate has, the Judgment has been confirmed by us.


Doge. Nevertheless, let us search the Records for his satisfaction.


Int. Now shall I be rewarded for this my inquisitive care of the State.


Doge. Clerk, make a search.


2. Sen. I, we cannot deny that. One of the Clerks opens the Trunk, and takes
out Records.


1 Clerk. Bless me! the Parchments move.


2 Clerk. If ever Book breathed in this World, here is one. Another looking in.


1 Sen. What, are you mad?


1 Clerk. A Spirit, a Spirit?


2 Sen. Some Rat that stirs among the Papers.


2 Clerk. Oh Heavens! a Ghost, in humane shape!


Her. A miracle, a miracle! The Lawgiver,
Great Ordelafo, come himself in person,
To vindicate his ancient God-like Law.

Sat. If Earth be silent, see just Heaven will speak.
No less a wonder than a Resurrection,
A man laid in his Grave six hundred years
Now rises up, to wake our drowzy Justice.
Let us prepare to adore the reverend Ghost,
And welcome him unto his ancient Seat.

1 Sen. It Is strange! All the Senators seem afraid, and express nothing of
contempt, but reverence


2. Sen. What may this mean?


4 Sen. A general Consternation!


Doge. Strange fright!


Card. What e're thou art, Ghost, Devil, Angel,
What e're thy dreadful message is to Earth,
IN the name of Heaven arise. Intrigo puts up his Head a little, and his white
Peruke appears.

Sata. See, see, his glorious Head!
So rises, by degrees, great Ordelafo,
Like the all-piercing Phoebus from his Eastern Couch,
To give us light in these most dark affairs.
See how his hoary Hairs, grown white in the service of
This Commonwealth, are perfect yet upon
His watchful Temples. His Face as black as Mummy, Intrigo's Face appears a
little.
Yet firm and solid, and seems pensive.
He Is pond'ring something for the public good. Intrigo starts upright in the
Trunk.

Int. I, that I am, grave Senators. A general laughter. And, let me tell you,
under the Rose. 't has been my sole employment for some years, though I have
little thanks for it: and, though I am not Ordelaso.

Yet take my cautions as not less authentic;
Which are, to keep your Laws in violate.

Doge. Still in the right Intrigo:
Wise, virtuous Intrigo,
Those ills are fatal where no pain's endured,
The wiser sort of fools are never cured.

Grim. True; he has such a politic Lethargy upon him, he cannot feel the Pricks
and Lancings of ill fortune.

He has been listening here, to increase his prudence,
Notwithstanding his late affronts at Seignior
Cornanti's.

Corn. Was there eversuch a fool as this fellow?
We natural fools are nothing to him.

Triv. Why do you thus eclipse so quaint a Beauty? [To Intrigo.]
That radiant face! Exit.

Corn. Sir, I perceive you're a great Virtuoso;
Will you teach me the Receipt to get Blackamoor Children,
That a man may know 'em to be his own?
All hail, great Ordelafo! [To Hircanio.]
If Earth be silent, see, just Heaven will speak. [To Satana.]

Enter Trivultio, leading in Circumstantio. Triv. Look, here is your Master.


Circ. 'Sfoot, I think it be. Makes three legs.
With due submission to your horrible prudence,
And striking sail to your infernal gravity,
I am almost out of my little wits.
To see your worship again.

1 Sen. So, so, here is the lesson
That deceived the Senate.

Crier. Silence in the Court.


Doge. How came this fellow here?


Clerk. An't please your Highness, I cannot imagine, unless he clapped the Keys in
Clay, or bribed the Lock-smith.


Doge. Was there ever such a curious Coxcomb!
Clerk of the Presidents, how do you find the case?

2 Clerk. The Ordinary in this case is Judge,
From whom lies no appeal, but to the Pope:
The Decimo tertio of Gradonico,
And the Octavo of Andrea Grittio

Doge. Master Procurator, you see your remedy.


Card. Which will be worse than the disease: His Holiness
Will trust the Senate, and my self in weightier matters.

Her. Well, I submit. However, this marriage will take off
Trivultio's edge from my Mistress Bellinganna,
And the old fool Cornanti, may do something for him.

Corn. Oh Sir, is your stomach come down?
Did not I tell you, I would make you do it?
Well, Sir, I Will remember Trivultio in my Will;
But I don't intend to die these forty years yet.

Her. Lawyer, this search was not worth a Fee.


Sat. I Will take heed of being Mealy-mouthed hereafter.


4 Sen. (Clapping his hand on his breast gravely.) In good sadness this was but
a foolish trick
For such a wise man as Signior Intrigo.

1 Sen. Why, there is it; every man knows him not.
These invisible fools are the destruction
Of private Families, as well as States.
Nor are they easily to be prevented
By wiser men, because their follies are
Always in disguise.

2 Sen. Right. This sort of fools walk always with dark Lanthorns; and they
ought more to be fined for wearing Vizors over their follies, than others over
their faces.


3 Sen. I think, indeed, they ought to be as punishables
By Law, as men that cover their Wells and Coal-pits
With rotten Wood and Briars, not solid Boards,
That will not keep men from falling in, but
Decoy 'em to their ruin by security.

Doge. Gentlemen, it is time to adjourn: There only rests, What punishment upon
this grave offender?


Grim. Troth, Gentlemen, my opinion is, That all extraordinary fools ought to
have Pensions, instead of Punishments, especially those that bring up a new
Mode of Folly. There is Honor due to Eminence in all things, and rewards for
new inventions.


2 Sen. True; if all men were wise, there would be none to make sport with.
Fools serve for honest men to laugh at, as well as Knaves to prey upon.


3 Sen. If it were not for the amorous Foot in Tragedies, and the merry Fool in
Comedies, what would become of the Players?


1 Sen. I, more than that; if there were no Fools, there would be no Wits.
Every new Fool begets a new Play; either as the Subject, or the Composer.


Doge. No question but they are as necessary in a Commonwealth, as wiser men,
for variety.

Nothing so well Mankind's diversion Fits,
As difference of Sexes, and of Wits. Exeunt omnes.

EPILOGUE, As it was spoke by Mr. Haines.
AS Charms are Nonsense, Nonsense seems a Charm,
Which hearers of all Judgment does disarm;
For Songs and Scenes, a double Audience bring,
And Doggrel takes, which Smiths in Satin sing.
Now to Machines, and a dull Mask you run,
We find that Wit's the Monster you would shun,
And by my troth it is most discreetly done.
For since, with Vice and Folly, Wit is fed,
Through Mercy it is, most of you are not dead.
Players turn Puppets now at your desire,
In their Mouth's Nonsense, in their Tails a Wire,
They fly through Clouds of Clouts, and showers of Fire.
A kind of loosing Loadum is their Game,
Where the worst Writer has the greatest Fame.
To get vile Plays like theirs, shall be our care;
But of such awkard Actors we despair.
False taught at first --
Like Bowls ill biased, still the more they run,
They Are further off, then when they first begun.
In Comedy their unweigh'd Action mark,
There Is one is such a dear familiar spark,
He yawns, as if he were but half awake;
And fribling for free speaking, does mistake.
False accent and neglectful Action too
They have both so nigh good, yet neither true,
That both together, like an Ape's mock face
By near resembling Man, do Man disgrace.
Through paced ill Actors, may perhaps be cured,
Half Players like half Wits, cannot be endured.
Yet these are they, who durst expose the Age
Of the great Wonder of our English Stage.
Whom Nature seemed to form for your delight,
And bid him speak, as she bid Shakespeare write.
Those Blades indeed are Cripples in their Art
Mimmick his Foot, but not his speaking part.
Let them the Traitor or Volpone try,
Could they --
Rage like Cethegus, or like Cassius die,
They never had sent to Paris for such Fancies,
As Monster's heads, and Merry Andrew's Dances.
Withered perhaps, not perished we appear,
But they were blighted, and never came to bear.
The Old Poets dressed your Mistress Wit before,
These draw you on with an old Painted Whore,
And sell like Bawds, patched Plays for Maids twice over.
Yet they may scorn our House and Actors too,
Since they have swelled so high to hector you.
They cry, Pox of these Covent Garden Men,
Dam 'em, not one of them, but keeps out Ten.
Were they once gone, we for those thundering Blades,
Should have an Audience of substantial Trades,
Who love our muzzled Boys, and tearing Fellows,
My Lord great Neptune, and great Nephew Eolus.
Oh how the merry Citizen's in love
With --
Psyche, the Goddess of each Field and Grove.
He cries in faith, methinks it is well enough,
But you roar out and cry, It Is all damned stuff.
So to their House the graver Fops repair,
While Men of Wit, find one another here.
FINIS.

