THE Famous and Renowned HISTORY OF Amadis de Gaul CONTAINING The Heroic
Deeds of Arms and strange Adventures, as well of Amadis himself, as of Perion
his Son, and Lisvart of Greece, Son to Esplandian Emperor of Constantinople.

Wherein is showed the Wars of the Christians against the Turks; the death of
Armato King of Turkey, and the strange death of Melea the Enchantress, the love
of Perion de Gaul, otherwise the Knight of the Sphere, to Gricilerea, Daughter
to the Emperor of Trebisond, and of Lisvart of Greece, sometimes called the
Knight of the true Cross to Onolorea, another Daughter to the Emperor of
TREBISOND.

Together with the Acts and strange Adventures of many other great Lords and
Princes, as well Christians as Pagans; Being the sixth Part never before
Published.

Translated out of French into English, by Francis Kirkman.

LONDON, Printed by Jane Bell and are to be sold.

The Translators EPISTLE TO THE READER.
I H^^^ published this ancient History (Gentle Reader) partly, at the entreaty
of some of my familiar friends, and partly, through the desire which I hid to
put to light, so worthy a work. There has been as yet, but five parts thereof
published in English, although, there are to the number of twenty four parts
thereof in most of other Languages. Wherefore thinking it in my apprehension,
as well worthy the translation as any other Histories of the like nature, I did
so far presume upon my own abilities (and to benefit my self in the Language)
as to begin the Translation thereof: Yet I had not the least intent to have it
come into the public view. But being (as I have said) instigated and
earnestly persuaded thereunto, I have now presumed to publish the same. Not
having so much confidence of my own weak abilities, as to imagine, that it
will be accepted of and liked by all, but rather hoping that some will look on
it, and value it not according to the worth, but the good will of the writer.
As for such, as either rashly condemn without judgment, or lavishly dislike
without advice: I esteem them like feathers, soon dispersed with every blast,
accounting their discontent my content, not caring to please every Momus.

All that I desire is, to have the good opinion of the well-affected to
Learning, and that I hope (Gentle Reader) you will favorably afford me; which
if you do, I shall account my self much obliged to you, my labor and time well
employed, and my self (by my future engagements to my ability, in somewhat of
the like nature, or some more worthy work) bound to be always ready, and
willing to requite your kindness.

But if I shall find the contrary, (and that I too boldly building on your
courtesies, he wounded with repentance, and brought to despair) then you will
render me altogether useless, not daring to venture any more being blasted in
my first designs. Thus hoping that you will peruse this (as an earnest of my
further travailes) with so favorable an aspect, as that I may be emboldned to
proceed in the following parts of this History,

I rest Yours as you like him Francis Kirkman Jun.

To the ingenious Translator F. K.
OUr Love is well, our labor ill placed, since
Thou can not stand in need of our defense,
Our weak Pygmie-defence, in whose just right
So many valiant Knights are proud to fight.
Champions thou can not want, who writes their glory
Theyr' bound in honor to protect thy Story.
Come hither then ye Heroes of our age
Who have this ten years acted on Wars stage,
Compare your deeds with ours, and blushing see
Your selves out done in feats of Chivalrie
What is it, you ever did, deserves a name
In competition set with Perions fame?
Great Perion, who his Prowess does display
Far and as freely as Hyperion day.
By which our Perions deserts appear
Great as Hyperions, for the golden Sphere.
In the next Orb of Worthies Lisvart hight,
Vaillides and Quedragant shine bright:
But what surpasses all, and's above words
There Is no oppression follows our Knights swords.
We know no plunder we, no itch of Sway,
Our aim is only honor, and the day.
We for oppressed ones hold forth a shield,
Giants to us are Pygmies and must yield.
But it is in vain particulars to write
Concerning this adventure, or that fight:
This only I will say, they doubly live,
One life their sword, a new thy pen does give.
In one atchievment thou have all out-gone
Even Amadis himself, and his bold son:
For Amadis, Brittain's King, so long a Gaul
Thou have to Britain brought from Language-thrall.
Who then dislikes thy Book, Vid. chapter 2.
we have a hull
To ship away to the land of -- such a gull.
Thomas Snelling Gent.

Upon the Translation of the sixth Book of AMADIS de GAUL, performed by his
loving friend F. K.
AS in a Mirror here you may behold
Successful Virtue, joyfully to hold
A Crown of Laurel; whilst dejected Vice
Vanquished and trampled on, receives the price
Of feigned pleasures; lively setting forth
The latter's vileness, and the former's worth.
Both thus rewarded, we are hereby taught
To imitate the good, to avoid the naught.
This Paragon, which France of yore did boast,
Was no where to be found, but in her coast,
Which France did so long time monopolize,
Is here presented (Readers) to your eyes
In English dress, which if he chance to find
Your censure Candid, eetertainment kind,
May thereby be provoked to desire,
Her sisters presence in the same attire.
And now, Ingenious Franck, I must be bold
(Avoiding adulation) to unfold
In part thy merits, whose industrious pains
Yield's us such gainefull pleasure, pleasing gains.
This Gallick Lady is by the Translation
So neatly decked, and dressed in the English fashion
That (though thy unripe years might thee excuse,
For what erratas Momus may infuse
Into the (Reader's mind) yet do not thou
Need such defense against the lowering brow
Of Carping Critics, then prithee English all
The rest of the story of Amadis de Gaul.
Your loving Friend J. W.

Know Readers all,
That to my loving brother,
And unto none other,
On this Translation of his,
Of the sixth Book of Amadis de Gaul.
I do indite
These verses which I write.

COme all ye Hero's of our warlike age
And learn of Perion, and of Lisvart stout,
Who soon will teach you how for to engage
With all your Foes, and put them to the rout.
Here you may read of fights and most strange news,
As wars between great Emperors, Kings, and Sultanes:
How Christians always vanquished Turks and Jews,
And streams of blood did run like living fountains.
Here you may see the deeds and famous Acts
Of Chivalrie performed by worthy Knights,
As good as e're wore Armor on their backs,
Or e're were seen in mortal cruel fights.
Here you may read of many most strange things,
As th'Isle of Apes, and Apes that Sailors were,
And sometimes carried Knights, and Queens, and Kings
In their great Barque, which was a thing most rare.
Here you may read of Lisvart's gallant fame
And Perion's, who by none surpassed were
In Prowess, Wisdom, Virtue and in name,
And often was known by the name of th'Knight of the Sphere.
Here you may read of Ladies of great beauty
Who courted were by many valiant Knights,
And you may read of some who did their duty
In many warlike deeds, and cruel fights.
Great praises you deserve for your Translation,
And bringing of such famous deeds to light,
It having done so much good to our Nation,
Which now accustomed is so often to fight.
Your Loving Brother Robert Kirkman,

To my loving friend Francis Kirkman. The good Success And usefulness Of
Translations In all Nations.
BEspeak esteem of this book made complete,
Not Cobbler like, but like Translator neat,
Heroic hearts come read in polisht words
Puissant actions of old Warlike Swords,
And learn for ever how to make your names
Glitter as Starlight, or Sol's brighter flames:
Come Cupid-smitten Carbonado'd hearts,
And fresh your selves with amorous pleasant parts.
The work was great delight to The Authors mind,
As great delight the Readers all may find.
The words are well exchanged, not put to rout,
Nor shall you find at all their brains dashed out.
From all true Lovers of desert and Learning
Acceptance of the work's the workman's earning:
Then set aside all doubting and disdain,
And buy out right this blossom brave amain.
Proceed young Kirkman, thus improve thy Reason,
And publish rare Antiquities in season,
And so become an happy Constellation
To pour a strong influence on our Nation.
Chi parla semina The speaker sowes.
Chi tace raceoglia The hearer reaps.
La volunta supplice a la faculta The good will does supply want of Ability.
Yours Thomas Heath.

THE SIXTH BOOK OF Amadis de Gaule' Which largely treats of the great Deeds
of Arms, and strange Adventures, as well of PERION his Son, as of LISVART of
Greece, son to Esplandian, Emperor of CONSTANTINOPLE.
CHAP. I.
How PERION of Gaul, second son of Amadis departed from London, with seven
other young Princes, hoping to go into Ireland, to receive the order of
Knighthood, at the hands of the old King Cildadan, and of that which happened
to them.
THE news of these Princes and Lords, Ladies and Gentlewomen, enchanted in the
firm Island, as you have heard, was soon known by little PERION of Gaul, son
of Amadis, who had been left by his father in Great Britain, under the
Government of good old Arban, King of Norwales. This young Prince being then
about the age of twelve or thirteen years, had a resolution in himself, to
receive the Order of Knighthood at the hands of his brother the Emperor
Esplandian, and of none other: but seeing himself frustrated of his purpose, he
lingered until the fourth year following: when two of the sons of Don Florestan
King of Sardinia came to visit him, at London. The one whereof was called
Florestan, as his father, the other Parmenir, in whose company were also
Vaillides son to Don Bruneo, King of Aravigne, Languines and Galuanes children
of Agries King of Scotland, Abies of Ireland son to King Cildadan, and
Quedragant Lord of Sansuegue, who were departed from their several Countries,
hoping to be made Knights by the same hand, of whom Perion should obtain this
honor. The young Prince received him as welcome; as the neernesse of their
kindred rendered him affectionate toward them, especially having heard occasion
of their long voyage. To satisfy which desire, they resolved to take their
journey to Ireland, toward King Cildadan, there being at that time no Prince
more worthy to supply the place of the Emperor Esplandian in his absence.
Perion having a desire, so soon as he should have the means, to bear Arms,
and follow strange adventures, and imitate his father in Prowess and
Chivalrie: wherefore desiring to have Yrguian the son of Gandalin for his
Squire, he dispatched a Gentleman of his toward Gandales (who at that time
lived in the Castles of Archelaus which Amadis had given him) earnestly
entreating him to fend Yrguian to him, wherewith Gandales was content. He
therefore being arived, and these young Princes having provided all things
necessary for their journey, taking their leave of King Arban, they went
strait to the Port of Fenuse, where they imbarqued: And as they were on the
Sea, they discovered a Barque with four oars, green as emeraulds, wherewith
four Apes did row: and there was with them a very fair Damsel, costly
adorned. These Barques followed one another so closely, that they were joined
and landed together. And as Perion and those of his Company were ready to mount
on horseback, the strange Damsel approached near to them, carrying on her neck
a sword excellently garnished, and in her hand a black shield, in the middle
whereof was painted a golden Sphere. She addressed her self to Perion, and
kneeling on the ground, spoke thus. Gentle sir, God forbid that I should ever
part from your feet until you have granted me the Boon which I shall ask you.
Perion whom she much pleased, readily answered, Ask it then, and you shall
not be refused. Truly said she, I hoped for no less. She rising from the
ground, took him apart, and they talked so long in walking together, that they
came near to the barque where the Apes were: into which the Damsel prayed him
to enter alone. Then Perion knew very well, that by too rashly promising he had
lost his company: And although he was as much troubled at it, as at any thing
that could happen to him whatsoever, even seeing himself frustrated of his
purpose, and hindered from his voyage into Ireland: nevertheless (knowing that
his honor would be questioned, if he did not accomplish that, in which he had
voluntarily obliged himself) he passed on, and called his Companions, to whom
he declared, that which the Damsel had requested him, and the cause wherefore
he followed her, wherefore he entreated them earnestly to excuse him. You may
easily judge whether they were well pleased: But seeing that they could not
remedy it, they recommended him to the keeping of our Lord, assuring him that
so soon as they had received Knighthood, they would put themselves in search of
him, wheresoever he should be. They had hardly spoken these words when the Apes
began to row, and the wind sat so fair, that in a small time they were far
from Land, and they lost the sight of him. So let us leave him to the Seas at
the pleasure of fortune, and return to the others, being resolved to pursue
their enterprise: And therefore they went to the Court of old Cildadan, who
knowing of their arrival, honorably received them, and after they had sojourned
a small time in his Country, he gave them the order. Then they took leave of
him, and entering into their ship, they set sail to Constantinople, where they
sound Lisvart, son to Esplandian, who was then esteemed the most fair and
accomplished Gentleman in the world. The old Emperor (who by reason of the
absence of his Children had left his solitary life, and taken upon him the
Government of Thrace) knowing that they were arrived at the Port, went down
and welcomed them: add from thence conducted them into his Palace, where he
and young Lisvart feasted them for the space of twelve days: who, having
understood the loss of his Uncle Perion, and the enterprise of these new
Knights which was to go seek him where ever he was, he resolved to keep them
company. And for that purpose, the thirteenth day afterward, as the Emperor
arose from Table, he came and cast himself upon his knees before him, humbly
entreating him to grant him one boon. The good man having the tears in his
eyes, took him up, and granted him whatsoever he would. Sir said he, I have
understood by these Knights, that my Uncle Perion of Gaul, has been lead by a
strange Damsel, and no man knows whither: May it therefore please you not to
be displeased, if I go my self to seek him; for I never had a desire to
receive Knighthood of any other then of him: being sure that of a better I
cannot attain to such honor, seeing that he is the Son of King Amadis, Father
to my Father, who has surpassed all others in great prowess and wisdom. My
Son, answered the Emperor, this parting will be very grieveous to me; for your
presence gave my old years some comfort in the absence and loss of your
Parents. Nevertheless seeing that I have agreed to your demands, I am willing
that your will be accomplished. At this time Lisvart might be about the age of
seventeen years: he was so great, and well formed, that one would have
esteemed him more then twenty. He therefore having the Reins on his own neck,
to do what seemed him good, he endeavored in all diligence to provide and
furnish three great ships, into the one of which he entered, accompanied with
Florestan, Parmenir his Brother, and Galuanes brother of Languines: in the
other Vaillades and Quedragant; and in the third Languines with Abies. Then
having taken leave of the Emperor, they commanded to weigh anchors, and hoise
the sails; and sailing in the maine Sea, in an hours space they lost the sight
of the great City. So we will return to Perion, and the fortunes which he had,
we will leave the others alone until we shall have more leisure.

CHAP. II.
How the Damsel Conducted Perion of Gaul to a place where he received the
Order of Knighthood, and of that which happened to him.
ONe week and more sailed Perion in the barque of the Apes with the strange
Damsel; and the seventh day following, they drew near to the shore of the
fairest Country that could be possible. There they took Port, and soon after
the Damsel, named Alquefa took out of her Coffers a black Harness, embelish't
with the like Spheres, as those of the Shield which she carried; then she said
to Perion: Gentle sir, It is meet before we pass further, that you arm your
self with these Arms: for behold the place where you must begin the
accomplishment of the promise which you have made me. And what will a shield and
arms profit me said Perion, I not being a Knight? You shall be made a Knight
quoth she when God and the time shall permit, wherefore do not delay. Which he
agreed to, in such sort that he put on the Coat of Maile, and the rest of the
Harness except the Helmet, which she took between her arms: and issuing out of
the barque, they began to go up into the Island, so long that they came into a
great plain, where Perion asked her in what place they were; but she answered
him no otherwise but that he should know hereafter. And so discoursing, they
saw a great City, the circuit whereof seemed in appearance to contain more
then three miles: and the nearer they came to it, the more lofty the place
seemed to Perion, were it in highness of Walls, strength of Towers, or great
Bulwarks. And he would very willingly have pressed his guide to tell him the
name of the place, but her former answer contradicted his desire to enquire
further: in such sort that he held his peace until they entered into it. Then he
very well knew that the excellency of it without, was nothing comparable to
that which he saw within, as well in fair Houses, as golden Palaces; as well
of people, as of magnificent Temples, Collosso's and things of antiquity that
he knew not what to think. Which the Damsel knowing, she said to him: Now it
is good for your profit and honor, that you speak not one word to any man who
shall talk to you, before that I command you, otherwise evil may happen to
you Damsel answered Perion, I will hold my peace then, seeing that it is your
pleasure. And so discoursing, they came to the entrance of a Palace, being the
Principal of them all, as it might easily be perceived: before which many
Knights and other persons walked, who seeing Perion and the strange Damsel go
up the steps, followed them to see what adventure it might be. And entering into
a very great Hall hung with Tappestry, Perion perceived under a Canopie of
cloth of Gold an honorable old man, having on his head an Emperors Crown;
and near him many Kings, Dukes, Earls and Barons, who all did greatly honor
and reverence him; and toward whom Alquefa (holding Perion by the hand)
approached; and kneeling on the ground, said to him, Most high excellent and
redoubted Emperor, my Father (your humble servant) kisseth the hands of your
Majesty, and humbly entreats you, that without delay you bestow Knighthood
on this Gentleman, for he shall as well employ it as any other living. The
Emperor presently knew the Damsel, as her whom he had many times scene with
her Father Alquif the Negromancer: wherefore he kindly received her; and
casting his eyes on Perion, he seemed so fair, and of so goodly a stature, that
he was moved to speak these words: Truly it is easy to believe, that of so
excellent a person, should issue no other then fair and Knightly deeds;
wherefore Damsel I will satisfy your Fathers will, seeing that he prays me.
And so addressing himself to Perion, he asked him from whence he came, but he
answed never a word, according to the promise which he made to Alquefa, who
spoke for him, saying to the Emperor: Sir, I entreat you to pardon him; for
without falsifying his faith, he cannot at present discourse with you, or any
other of this Court Well answered he, he shall another time; in the mean time
lead him to the Ladies, to the end that they may see him; and to morrow after
the watch, I will give him the Order. Alquefa arose and was led with Perion
into the Chamber of the Empress, whom she saluted, as she knew well how to
do; then she said to her, Madam, my Father has sent you this Gentleman, whom
he prays you to receive, as him who deserves, being issued of a Lineage very
well known amongst the best Knights in the world. Then Perion approached and
kissed her hands. By my God answered the Empress, if Knighthood be as well
accomplished in him, as his beauty: he will be (by all reason) the most
accomplished in arms, as has been these hundred years. Perion made great
obeisance to her, without speaking one word, and at that instant came Onolerea
and Gricilerea, Daughters of the Emperor, esteemed such, that in all Asia,
their equal in beauty could not be found: which Perion marvelling at
especially for Gricilerea, could not forbear, but he said in himself: Good
God! Ladies, in whom nature has taken great pleasure to make fair! for I
never thought in all my life, to see that amongst all living, which I now see
in you two. Then being surprised with an affection not accustomed; he so
changed his color that Aquefa perceived it. Wherefore addressing her speech to
Gricilerea, who was the youngest, she said to her; Madam, my Father sends you
word by me, that he has chosen this Gentleman to serve you as your Knight,
and advises you to receive and accept him for such a one, for he will obey you
even as your greatness deserves. She rightly touched the disease of this
Princess, for Love had at that instant bound her by the presence of Perion, in
such manner that she answered to Alquefa: Your Father has long since made me
this promise, I believe him and follow his advice, seeing that it pleased the
Emperor to command me the same day that he took leave of him: And that he
assured me of what I see, which is the fairest Gentleman in the World. But for
all this, Perion spoke not one word, but made his eyes serve as an interpreter,
which carried to the heart of this princess all the thanks which the tongue
could express exercising its office: Nevertheless there was none of them, who
were not astonished to see him so dumb, and amongst others Onolorea, who (being
surprised with a certain jealousy for the good of her Sister) said to
Alquefa: I pray you Damsel advertize your Father, that my sister will be very
harsh, if she should refuse the present which he has sent her by you; at which
I am not angry, but I would that he would have as good remembrance of me, as
he has had of her, although that the Gentleman cannot excuse himself for the
rigor which he uses toward us, not deigning to speak to any of us. Madam,
answered Alquefa, it is at present forbidden him, some other time he shall make
amends for this fault: And as for my Father, he knows what is needful for
you; also he has commanded me to tell you, that he has in guard such a one,
that you shall wish well to him all your life; and he will bring him in short
time. He shall be very welcome answered she. During this loving discourse, love
gained place by little and little in the hearts of Perion and Gricilerea, in
such manner that he possessed himself of all, rendering them so united in
perfection of Love, that there never was two more true lovers, as by our
History you shall know hereafter. Then the Emperor came into the Chamber, who
after he had a long time discoursed with the Ladies, of that which Alquife
father to the Damsel sent him, concerning Perion; considering the pains which
he had taken to come armed from the Sea side on foot to the Palace, he called
a Master of his household, to whom he gave command to lead him to refresh
himself, the which he did. Then about the evening certain Knights came to him,
which conducted him to the Chapel, where he watched (according to the
custom) until the next morning, the Emperor came to find him, accompanied
with the Empress, the two Princeses Onolorea and Gricilerea, and a great
company of Knights, Ladies and Damsells. And as the Mass was celebrated, the
Emperor came to him, and gave him the Order: But he perceived that he was well
armed with all Arms but a Sword, and for this cause he willed one to go
presently and fetch one of his. But Alquefa who held that which she had always
carried with the shield, said to him; Sir, My Father has dedicated this to his
service, which shall be gi^ded about him if you please, by my Lady Gricilerea;
and I am charged humbly to desire it of you: In good faith quoth the Emperor,
it does please me well. Then my Lady, said Alquefa to the Infanta, do your
part. At this word, Gricilerea took the Sword, and put it to the side of the
Gentleman, saying to him: Thus I receive you for my Knight, God make you happy,
and a wise man. Madam, answered Alquefa, seeing that he has received such
honor at your hands, it is reasonable that he acknowledge it without delay.
Then taking a great Diamond, and giving it to Perion: Present her said she this
Jewel, in witness of the service which you owe her for the future, and for
the cause that she may have remembrance of you. Perion obeyed to her commands,
and Gricilerea received it with a heart, putting it on her finger. Then going
from the Chapel, the new Knight was conducted into the great Hall of the
Palace, where the Clothes were staid for dinner. Then the Emperor and Perion
sat right against the Princes's; truly there was no Viands could be thought on,
that were not there served; and nevertheless he did eat but very little, being
(as he thought) filled enough with the beauty, and good demeanor of his Love,
who took all the pains in the world to entertain him, hoping to get some
word from him, which she could not get, in such sort that she was much
discontented at his disdain; nevertheless Alquefa appeased all so well, that
this little anger afterward turned to no other but great love.

CHAP. III.
How Perion of Gaul vanquished Alpatrafie Duke of Orcalea, who maintained his
Lady to be fairer, then all the other Ladies or Damsells in the World.
AFter the dinner was ended, and as the Clothes were taken away, there entered
into the Hall a Knight armed at all points, except his hands and head: He was
of very great stature, and was followed by ten Knights, twenty Squires, and one
Damsel, in very good Order. He had hanging at his neck a very rich shield, in
the middle whereof, there was portracted a Lady of most excellent beauty. He
being come before the Emperor, put his knee to the ground; and all the company
approached together to hear what he would say. Then he spoke in this manner.

Most Mighty Emperor of Trebisond; the cause which at this time, causes me to
present my self before your Majesty; is to let you know that I who am Duke of
Orcalea, by name Alpatrafie, do love a Damsel, named Dialestrea, Daughter to a
Knight, a great Lord my Neighbor. And as I have diverse times told her the good
will which I bear her; So she has assured me that she would not love me,
before that I have been in the Courts of all the Kings and Princes of Asia, to
maintain that her beauty exceeds all the excellency which other Ladies and
Damsells are endewed with; and if any contradict it, let them touch the Image
portracted in this shield, the which is her Figure; and I will combat with
them, and bring them to that condition, that they shall yield themselves
Prisoners to my Lady, to whom I am bound to send them. And if fortune shall
enable me to remain vanquisher of all those who shall enterprise the combat
against me, then I shall enjoy her love, otherwise not. And to the end that she
may have good assurance of what shall happen, she has given charge to this
Damsel, named Estreliene to follow me, to make her a true report of my
actions. I have already traversed many far Countries, and fought with above
fifty Knights, whom I have all sent to her: and Sir I hope to be no less
prosperous in this your Court, then I have been in others: and therefore if
there be any one who will contradict the beauty of my Lady, let him come
presently and touch the shield, and prepare himself for the Combat. Then the
Knight held his peace, looking on the countenance of those who hearkened to
him: but there was none so hardy to open his mouth to speak one word, although
that the most part of them had before their eyes, those whom they hold for
their Ladies and loves. Yet the greatness of the adventurous Kinght, made them
lose their hearts, speech, and force; at which Perion being astonished, cast
his eyes on the Infanta Gricilerea, and seeing that she looked upon him as
though she called him to succor her, being moved with an exreame desire to do
her service, he altogether forgot the promise which he had made to Alquefa, not
to speak without her leave. And so approaching near to the Duke of Orcalea,
he laid hands on the shield with such great force, that he pulled it from his
neck, casting it with so great stength to the ground, that he broke it in
pieces; saying so loud that ^^^ry one hear^ (...). By my head Sir Knight, this
is too great blasphemy against so honorable a Company. And if it please God
this injury shall not be done them in my presence, so long as I have the
means to defend them! These words so bravely spoken by Perion, did very much
please all that heard him: and more especially, her for whose love it had been
enterprized: Nevertheless Alpatrafie as modestly answered: In good faith
Knight, you use so little courtefie that you deserve to be greatly blamed, but
the means that I intend suddenly to take in open battle, hinders me at this
time to say that which I think. Perion held his peace: For Alquefa mightily
reproved him for speaking without her license. Nevertheless quoth she, seeing
that you have so much forgotten your self, go forwards, and with Gods help
you will end all with honor: Wherefore Sir said she to the Emperor, may it
please you to give him a horse, for I have brought him hither as you know on
foot. Truly answered he, that is a very reasonable request, seeing that he
himself will defend the honors of so many Ladies as are here present. Then he
commanded a Squire to fetch him one of the best horses in his stable: In the
mean time the Duke alighted and provided himself for the Combat, and as soon
Perion was conducted into the field by the Dukes of Ortelensaude la Fonta. The
Emperor, together with the Ladies placed themselves at the windows, and as the
two Combatants were ready to do their devoir, the Trumpets began to sound,
wherefore they ran one against the othher with so great force, that the Duke
broke bis lance on the new Knight, who failed of his attempt: But in passing,
they encountered with bodies and heads with such force, that horses and men
measured their length on the ground, that every one thought them to be dead.
Which Gricilerea seeing she became extreme sad: and as the tears came from her
eyes, she perceived Perion to rise up, being ashamed of his mishap. So he
quickly (...) bold (...) his Shield, and drawing forth his sword, he marched
toward his enemy, who was likewise got upon his feet. Then there began a most
cruel Combat between them, during which time, they behaved themselves so well
one against the other, that by the space of an hou^e or more, it was hard to
judge to whom the victory would happen. But in an instant the Dukes chance
altered: for he began to faint, and on the other side the new Knight seemed
more quick and nimble then before. Certainly, he who had then taken notice of
the countenance of Gricilerea, the visage which she bore gave testimony enough
of the pleasure which she had in her soul, seeing her Lover ready to have the
victory: who lifting up his head, espied her from among all the others. For
which cause he redoubled his forces in such manner, that he reached the Duke
such a blow on his helmet, and wounded his head so rightly, that he fell down
astonished. Then he advanced him, and by his strength broke the buckles of his
Helmet: and disarmed him, ready to kill him: when Estreleiene entered into the
field, and casting her self on her knees, she entreated Perion to have mercy
on him. Nevertheless he seemed to be deaf to her demands, and for this cause
she being very much discontented, addressed her self to Alquefa, entreated her
with doubled hands to entreat for her. Which she refused not, but said to
Perion, Knight, content your self with this victory, and for my sake save the
Duke. At these words Perion retired back, and wipeing his sword on the green
grass, he put it up in the sheath. Go quoth Alquefa to Est^eliene, and look
after your Knight; for, for as much as I can perceive, he has great need
thereof. The strange Damsel humbly thanked her, and at that present Perions
horse was brought to him, upon which he mounted, but before he departed out of
the field, Alquefa spoke softly to him, Sir Knight, it is requisite that
without any further delay we return into our Barque, (from whence (if you keep
your promise) you may not depart without my consent: And likewise I pray you,
that from henceforth you cause your self to be called the Knight of the
Sphere: for he who has sent unto you by me Arms, the which you bear, has
all his confidence in you. And for this cause I did forbid you at our entrance
into this Court, to speak to any, doubting least you should be stayed, and my
enterprise hindered: So then, let us not stay here any longer, and let us take
this way to the Sea side. Saying so, she struck her palfery, and Perion
followed her with great grief, seeing himself so soon barred from the presence
of his new Lady: of whom he could not by any means take any other leave, but
only by passing by the window where she and her sister were seated, there he
looked upon her with so pitiful a Countenance, that she might easily know the
grief wherewith he was accompanied; And from thence he and Alquefa rode to the
Barque, into which he entered, And the Apes began to row. The Emperor and those
of his Company being abashed at their so sudden departure, did not know at the
first what to think, nevertheless considering that all this had happened by the advice of the sage Father of Alquefa, they made the less wonder at it. And
during these passages, the Duke was carried out of the field, who without any
long stay in the Country, where he had been so illy handled, he (with his
Company) took the way which he had come so sad, that death had been very
agreeable to him. But surely, Gricilerea suffered not less on her part, for the
so sudden absence of her Perion: Nevertheless, we will not at this hour give
her any remedy, but only being in hope to see him another time: and we will
alter our discourse, to the end we may tell you that adventure happened to
those, which departed from the Port of Constantinople, to enter into search of
their Companion.

CHAP. IV.
How Lisvart, Florestan, and the others sailing in the Sea, in search of
Perion, the vessel wherein Vaillides and Quedragant were, was cast by storm on
the Isle of the Giant Argamont, against whom they combated and vanquished.
YOu have not long fince heard, how Lisvart, Florestan, Parmenir, and Galuanes
embarked themselves in one ship: Vaillides and Quedragant in another:
Languines and Abies of Ireland, in like manner separated. They having then
taken leave of the old Emperor of Constantinople, causing to hoise the sails
and weigh the anchors, they sailed in the maine Sea, they had not long sailed
so, but such a tempest happened, that the Pilots, Steers-men Mariners
themselves, thought to perish; for they had not left them Sail, Maine Masts,
nor Rudder, that was not broken in many pieces, for which cause they were so
scattered by the space of three weeks, that without any hope, they followed
fortune, as it pleased the wind and the waves to guide them. And in this
distress the ship wherein Vaillides and Quedragant were arived at the break of
day, very near to a fair Isle, which was soon known by the Mariners to be the
Isle of the Fueille Blanch, and the Lord of it was one of the cruellest Giants
in the world, named Argamont the valiant; This Argamont had a daughter named
Dardadie, who was very well known of Ardan Comile: he which Amadis de Gaul
vanquished in the town of Fenuse, as the second book largely declares. And to
let you know what knowledge he had of her, know, that one day amongst others,
as he went to search for strange adventures, making trial of his person in all
Countries, he arived in this Isle, where he combated against the Giant
Gandandell, the father of Argamont: but at the instant they found themselves
allied, and so they became so great friends, that the Giant would have
delivered his sword to Ardan, giving him the honor of the victory, which the
other refused. And so striving to whom this glory should remain, they arived
at the Castle of the Fueille Blanch, where Argamont (father of the Damsel of
whom I lately spoke) kindly welcomed him. Especially, when they understood the
alliance and parentage which they had together. But it happened that the
thirteenth day following Gandandell departed this life, he had been so sorely
wounded by Ardan Comile, who was very much grieved therefore, especially for
the love which he bore to the daughter of Argamont: of whom he was so much
enamoured, that forgetting the honor, and affinity of Parentage, he wholly
discovered his affections, to her, and hey jumbled their fidles so well
together that they envied on another that which some have called the woman's
merciful gift: in such sort that nine months after this Damsel had a son, who
was named Ardadile Canile, so called for the love of his Father. And know says
the Mariners to Vaillides, that this Argamont and his little son, are at this
time reputed the valliantest, and cruellest Knights under the Cope of heaven:
So that none arives in this Isle that are not killed or taken by them. By God
answered Quedragant, this shall not hinder us from going to s^^de them. And he
commanded to put the ship a land, which was done not without the great fear and
horror of all those of the ship; So the two Knights armed themselves, and
taking their horses out of the Vessel, they marched toward the trees; and they
marched so long that they arived at the entry of a great plain, from whence
they could easily see the Castle of the Fueille Blanch. But they had hardly
cast their eyes on it, when they heard a horn sounded from the highest Towers
by the watch, which the Giant had appointed: to give him notice when any
strange ship should take Port in his Marches. And they tarryed not long before
Argamont came out from his Fort, and armed with plates of fine steel, mounted
on a great Horse, came before the Knights, to whom he said in a great bravado:
Poor unfortunate ones, how dare you appear before me? Yield your selves
prisoners, and content your selves with the foolish enterprise which you have
done, to enter thus armed into my Country. Quedragant was greatly moved to hear
himself so injured; wherefore he answered him: By my head, great villain, you
are far from your guess; for we hope for future honor in breaking your head,
and to vanquish you as you deserve: and although fortune should be ill on our
side, and we should dye in the field; this would be more glory to us to end our
days with our Swords in our hands; then through fear to accept of your
proffers; wherefore lay aside these threats, and now employ your time (if you
can) more in Knightly deeds, then in such foolish words. During this discourse,
the Giant contemplated on the person of Quedragant, who seemed to him a fair
Knight. And for this cause, he somewhat appeased his Choler, and said to him;
Truly I do believe that you are a good Knight, nevertheless you may easily
know, that your strength in respect of mine, is little or nothing. And seeing
it is your desire to come both together, you shall soon see what honor you
will purchase by trying your selves against me, so as you brag. And having
spoken these words, he lifted up a great Mace which he had in his hand,
thinking to strike Quedragant: Then Vaillides, who was somewhat behind, knowing
his will, couched his Lance, and giving spurs to his Horse, charged Argamont so
directly, that he was ready to fall from his Horse. But in his passage, he
rececived such a blow with the Giants Mace, that would he or not, he was cast
on the ground. Quedragant being greatly angered, thinking to revenge him, ran
straight upon Argamont, and broke his Lance on him, without doing him any hurt:
At the which, the Giant being glad, cried at the end of his Course with a loud
voice; And well Sir Knight, had not your fellow gained more by rendering
himself my Prisoner, then to get that which he has attained to, as you may
see? If my companion says he, has been hardly handled by you, you shall
presently see that I know how to revenge him, and my self also. Saying so, he
came near to Argamont, and gave him a blow on his ear: And the other thinking
to revenge himself, he stroke his Mace with so great strength against
Quedragant, that if he had hit him, he had killed him without doubt; so he
shunned the blow, and advanced forwards, meeting with the ear of Argamonts
Horse, and stunned him, and in falling he fell on the knee of the Giant, at
which he received so great pain, that from thence forwards he was forced to
fight upon one leg. At that in^^nt Vaillides came to himself, at which
Quedragant was greatly pleased, for he thought he had been killed; but seeing
him whole, he was in great hopes to vanquish his Enemy; and therefore they both
ran on him. His Mace was fallen out of his hand, wherefore he took a great
Cimiter (which he had about him) in his hand, and with a stern countenance he
endeavored to defend himself: nevertheless Vaillides came upon him, and with
one blow struck his Helmet into his head; at which the Giant was more
astonished then before: for the blood began to ran down his eyes. And as one
ill turn seldom comes alone, as he was about to revenge himself, and strike
him who had hurt him, he advanced his Cymmiter, which by good fortune fell upon
a stone (wherewith Vaillides had made him a shield) and with the great force of
the blow broke it in pieces, there remaining in his hand no more bu^ the
handle. Then the two Knights were assured of the Victory: wherefore they
encompassed him on every s^^e, so nearly pressing on him, that they put him out
of breath; and seizing on his neck, they took the Helmet from his head Now you
are a dead man quoth Vaillides, if you do not acknowledge your self
vanquished, and obey our commands. I am quoth he dead if it so please you, not
vanquished: for he alone is vanquished, who through faint-heartedness cease
to do his endeavor; and you know that I have not spared my self, so long as
fortune gave me the power. But as for the accomplishing of your pleasures, in
that I will willingly obey you, on condition that my honor be not interested;
otherwise I had rather loose my life. Truly said they, you speak even as you
ought; we will save your life, and will command you nothing, but what shall
redownd to your honor and reputation. If it be so quoth the Giant, I will obey
you. Then said the Knights, this is that which you must do, that forgetting
your Idollatrous faith, you from henceforth believe in Jesus Christ, true God
and Man; who for you, and for us all, received death and passion, and rose
again from the dead the third day after. And in this faith you shall make your
Son Ardadill to believe, then you shall go together to the Emperor of
Constantinople; and as from us, you shall faithfully declare to him, the manner
of our Combat; and from henceforth you shall be his and our perpetual friends
and servants. Sirs, answered he, I do promise and swear it to you; for long
since I have been of this mind. Upon this assurance, Vaillides and Quedragant
took him by the arms, and as they led him to his Castle, they met Almatrafa
his Wife, who having seen him fall, came to entreat the Knights to have mercy
on him: but seeing that they were made friends, she asked him if he were
mortally wounded: No answered he, thanks to our Lord Jesus Christ, in whom I
now do and will always believe, and so shall all those that wish me well. O
Jupiter! cried the Giantesse, what do I hear? will you loose your self, and
yours so foolishly? Wife said the Giant, you your self shall be the first that
shall obey me; and after you, all others of this Island, as well as you, shall
believe in that God which I now adore, And for what occasion said Almatrafa? By
reason says he, that the Combat which I have had against these two Knights,
has given me experience, that their God is the true God, and ours are false
and liars: and therefore be satisfied without any further enquiry. So they came
to the Castle, and from thence he was led into his Chamber, and put between two
Clothes, where Almatrafa (who was skillful in the Art of Chyrurgery) looked to
his wounds; and he was so carefully provided for, that she assured him of his
sudda in health; wherefore he earnestly entreated the two Knights not as yet to
leave him but to stay with him for a certain time; during which time said he,
I will honor you as you deserve; which liked Vaillides and his Companion very
well, that they might refresh themselves of the travel which they had
undergone, by reason of their so long tempest: for which cause they sent for
their Mariners, who hearing good news of the Victory which they had obtained of
Argamo^^, they praised God with all their hearts; nevertheless wondering at the
prowess of Quedragant and Vaillides, who whilst their ship was in repairing,
remembered to ask of their Host, where his Son Ardadile Canile was. Sirs
answered he, the great Souldan of Lygnea not long since, sent a Gentleman in
all have to me with express Letters, by which he entreated me to give him my
Son, to make him Lieutenant General of a great Army, which he newly mustred
with the Souldans of Persia, of Alapa, of Babylon, and many others, hoping to
ruin the Emperor, and Empire of Constantinoplo; forasmuch as they knew for
certain, that Amadis de Goule (one of the best Knights in the World) is
enchanted, together with Esplandian his Son, and ^great many of the
principal Knights of Christendom, by whom Thrace was helped in the last
expedition. And now this Amadis, and his friends are so sure, as it is
believed, it is sure that the Empire may casily be subdued, and the Emperor
taken Captive; which is the cause why all Pagan Kings do muster so great
force, hoping in short time to meet together at the Port of Tenedos in Phrigia,
where I think my Son Canile is already arived, with those of Asia the less,
and some other of the nearest Borderers: for it is impossible he should have
any more as yet, in regard of the far Countries from whence they are to come,
that they may meet together, as they think sooner then the latter end of
August. It was as yet but the beginning of March: wherefore Quedragant and
Vaillides hearing this news, resolved (that if they did not find their
Companions before July) to go directly to Constantinople to aid the Emperor.
But least we should too long forget him whom they were in search of: we will
leave them with the Giant, whom they baptized, and all his Family, and we will
tell you what happened to Alquefa, and the Knight that she conducted.

CHAP. V.
How the Barque, wherein Perion of Gaul surnamed the Knight of the Sphere, and
Alquefa sailed in, came to shore at the foot of a very fair Isle, and of the
adventures which happened to him,
YOu have already heard the manner how the Knight of the Sphere, and the Damsel
reentred into their Barque where the Apes were, in which they sailed eight
days, without happening on any adventure. But the ninth following the Vessel,
drew nee^ to the foot of a high Rock, where there was a little pathway which
led to the top. So Alquefa showed it to Perion, and said to him, Sir Knight, I
pray you by the faith which you owe to God, and the thing which you love best
in this world, that you will follow this way, which will lead you to the top of
the Rock: where you shall find a plain Country, and a Fountain in the middle.
Tarry for me there, and whatsoever happen to you, do not depart from it,
before you have news of me to the contrary, and remember your self of the
promise you have made me. Damsel quoth he, you may assure your self that the
fear of death shall not cause me to falsify my word to you. Then he landed,
and taking his horse by the reins, he mounted on him, and rode on to the top
of the Rock, until he found the Plain, even as Alquefa had told him. It was at
that time sunset and near night, wherefore he resolved to go no further, but
to stay till the morning: and therefore he alighted from his horse, and did eat
something that he had brought with him, then he slept until the break of day,
when as he mounted on his horse. And when he had rid about half the day, he
saw the fountain, in the most pleasant and delectable place that could be
imagined, and the water issued from twelve pipes, a cross, a pillar: upon
which was erected the Effigies of a Knight, armed at all points, except the the
Helmet and Gantlets, and he held in his left hand an Emperors Crown, and in his
right a Roll of Coper Gilt: Wherein was ingraved latin letters, which said, In
the time that this Crown shall be in the greatest danger of his estate, and
that the horrible cries, and great yelling shall be assuaged, the flower of
Chivalry shall flourish, abasing the pride of many, with the new conquered
Sword. Perion read and read again, very often this Prophecy, and in the
reading he took singular pleasure in the antiquity of the Image: For he had
heard it told to King Amadis his Father, that in Constantinople, upon the Hell
gate, there was just such another, which was certainly believed to be erected
by A Polidon himself. Thus the Knight of the Sphere contemplating on the
strange things which he beheld, he saw two of the Apes of his Barque who
erected him a fair Arbor: whither they brought such abundance of victuals,
that there was sufficient to keep him twelve or fifteen whole days. But at
that instant he heard the neighing of horses; wherefore he looked about him on
all fides, to see what it was. Then he saw a very great Giant on horseback,
holding in his hand a tough and strong Javelin, and he had ten men very well
armed following him, and in a Chariot drawn with four horses: wherein was
bound and fettered an old man, having his beard so while and long, that it
reached below his girdle, and besides him two Knights also covered with their
arms, shackled with fetters, and great irons on their feet. The Giant did not
see Perion till he came very near him; but so soon as he saw him shaking his
Javelin, he began to cry. Unfortunate Creature! what Devil has brought you to
this place, to end your life so unfortunately, and the Knight of the Sphere was
no whit danted at his threats, but suddenly drawing forth his Sword answered
him: By my head great villain you have good reason to threaten me, in respect
of the ill which you shall receive at my hands: for Jesus Christ who is my
guide, being angry at the tyranny wherein you have so long lived, promises me
strength to revenge those whom thou have troubled all thy life, who I will
presently destroy, to send thy soul to the Devil, of whom thou lately did
speak; The Giant was so angry at these words, that he spurred his horse to run
upon the Knight of the Sphere: but he went forwards, giving him such a blow
with his Lance on his right shoulder, that the pain constrained him to let
fall his Javelin: nevertheless he quickly laid bands on a Mace of Iron, which
hung at his saddle bow; And as they both turned about at the end of their
Course for to join together again, the Giants horse set his foot in a hole,
and fell so heavily under his Master, that he broke his neck. Which the Knight
of the Sphere seeing, he suddenly alighted, and cut of his head, then he
mounted again; for he heard those who led the prisoners, cry with a loud voice,
Traitor, Traitor, you shall die without remedy, and it shall boot you nothing
to sly. Then they ran upon Perion, who in good time for him was unexpectedly
succored by three Knights, each of them carrying a shield of Gold, in the
middle whereof was a great Cross red as blood, those of whom I speak, seeing
so great ods, as ten against one, resolved to aid the weakest: and for this
cause plucking down the visor of their Helmets, just as those of the Giants
partly charged the Knight of the Sphere, they entered pell mell, and at their
arivall they unhorsed three that they never spoke again. The Knight of the
Sphere being abashed at so ready aid, would make them to know, that he had a
part in the practice, in such manner, that they four played their parts so
well, that in the end they all ten lost their lives, the three Crossed men
wondering who he should be that they had aided; for they never saw a Knight
fight more hardily and better. One while they had an opinion that it was
Amadis, or Esplandian his son, then on a sudden knowing that they were
enchanted, they altered their mind, and rather thought him to be Norandal, or
the valiant Frandalo; but they had often seen them in such skirmishes, and they
never came near him in valor, toward whom they advanced, praying him for
courtesy to tell him his name. Sirs answered he, the Cross which you bear
betokening you to be Christians, and the good aid which I have received of you,
obliges me to satisfy your request. My name (so long as it pleases a Damsel
who has sent me hither) is the Knight of the Sphere, as those who are
acquinted with me, call me Perion of Gaul, Son of Amadis King of great
Britain. He had no sooner ended his words, but the three crossed came to
embrace him, praising God for so happy a meeting. How? said Perion do you then
know me? Know you? answered one of them, yes truly, and for good cause, seeing
that I am your kinsman Talanque, son of Galaor, brother to the King your
father, and this is Mancly, a well esteemed Knight amongst the best in the
world. Truly said Perion, this adventure is the best for me that I could have
wished for: but I pray you tell me who is the third. Sir answered Talanque, this
is she who keeps me from marrying Queen Calafea of whom you have sometimes
heard. Yes, by my faith said he, although that I never thought to have seen a
woman endowed with so good a heart, and o great Prowess. Then Talanque called
the Queen, and said to he^: Madam, you have now in your hands the brother of
that Christian Prince, which you hate most, as I have often heard you say. And
he said this for sport, for she oftentimes published, and in all companies,
that she was more beholding to the Emperor Esplandian, then to all the men of
the world, as well for the honor and good cheer which he made her at
Constantinople, as for giving her a husband so wise, virtuous, and full of
Prowess. Wherefore knowing that it was Perion, she cast down her shield: and
setting her knees to the ground she would have kissed his hands; But he lifted
her up, and said to her, how Madam, is this the fashion at Californ^s, thus to
welcome those whom they hate for the love of their Kindred? Sir said she, wives
are obliged to perform the commands of their husbands, otherwise be sure that
without death, or cruel imprisonment you should not escape from me. They all
fell alaughing at the good grace wherewith the Queen spoke these threatenings.
And as they were thus talking, the Prisoners who were bound to the Cart (as you
have understood) found the means to cut the cords, and come to the Knight of
the Sphere, who going to the old man that went before them all, he said to
them: Alas old man, what sinister fortune have you to be brought into such
misery in your old years! Sir, answered he, I will always praise the Lord, and
bless him for you who have delivered me from death. And before I tell you any
further, I humbly entreat you for Gods sake to grant me one gift which shall
cost you little, and which you cannot refuse as I think: considering your
goodness, who has compassion of poor, miserable afflicted persons, as I am.
Father, said the Knight of the Sphere, you shall have your pleasure of me. That
which I require of you, answered the good man, is, that you give me my liberty,
and that for this time you enquire of my Estate: and I will at one time or
other acknowledge the favor which you have done me. Truly said Perion, seeing
that it is your pleasure to hide your self from me, I am content. Then he
asked the others who had so chained them; but they were so ill, that they could
not suddenly know him who spoke to them, although that to find him they were
entered into search with Lisvart. They had been hitherto covered with their
Helmets: wherefore it was no marvel, if Perion himself did not know them,
until they took heart, and as they thought they had dreamed, lifting their
hands to Heaven, and stretching forth their arms, they cried: Ah God! is this
which we now see with our own eyes possible to be true? Saying, so, they
pulled off their Helmets, and stooped down to kiss the feet of Perion, who
knew them to be Languines and Abies of Ireland, two of his Companions; he was
so glad, that in embracing them, he said to the Crossed Knights, My friends, if
you knew who these Gentlemen are, perhaps you would have part of my great
pleasure. Then he related to them how they departed out of great Britain
together, and what adventure had separated them. Talanque, Manoly, and the
Queen Calase a did much marvel: all which the Knight of the Sphere led into the
Arbor: Nevertheless, before they arived there, the old man departed from them:
and monnting on one of the horses who had lost their Masters, he sled with a
great gallop through the Forest, at which the Knight of the Sphere began to
laugh, saying to the others: I think this good man thinks he is pursued by the
Giant. See I pray, if fear do not sharpen his spurs, which I would forgive him
with a very good will, if I knew his name. But you who have been with him, said
he, to Languines and Abies, cannot you resolve me in this point? In good faith,
answered they, we have as little knowledge of him as you, for know, said
Languines, that my Companion and I departing from the Port of Constantinople,
to go in search of you, so soon as we had set sail, there arose such a
tempest, that at the end of three weeks we were at Palestine^ near to Joppa,
where we landed to give order to repair our ship, and take in fresh water
which we wanted. In the mean time we took out our horses, and armed at all
points, we went to visit the Country, in such manner, that by fortune we
happened upon a shadie place: on one side whereof there did run a most sweet
and fair Fountain, wherewith we drank, and washed our hands and faces. And
at an ill time as we were a refreshing our selves, we were charged by fifteen
Knights, who issued out of a Grove, they surprised us before we were ready:
Nevertheless we defended our selves a long time against them. But in the
conclusion, knowing we must die, we were forced to lay down our arms, and obey
their comma^ds, although that this was not without great loss; for o^ the
fifteen we left five of them for a gage, and the ten likewise had somewhat to
do, when the Giant who lies dead there, arived conducting in the Chariot he
who is fled now. Then our resistance was of little force, and we remained his
prisoners causing us to be changed, just as you have found us in the good
hour. By my head answered Perion, I never heard of so mavelous an adventure,
where the event is so good, God be thanked. They had not as then eaten all the
day, wherefore finding the victual which the Apes had provided, they began to
eat, not without lamenting for Lisvart, and the rest of their Company whom the
storm drove, as you shall presently hear.

CHAP. VI.
How the Vessel, wherein was Lisvart, Florestan, Parmenir and Galuanes was cast
near to the great City of Trebisond, and of the discourse which they had with
the Emperor and the Ladies.
FOrtune was so averse and contrary to those who embarked themselves to go in
search of Perion, that their vessels were separated, and so they lost sight of
one another. The ship wherein Parmenir, Galuanes, Lisvart, and Florestan were,
escaping the danger of many shipwracks, happened (by Gods good pleasure) to
arive at the Port of Trebisond, where they found a Venetian ship, laden with
Merchandise, and waited for nothing but a fair wind to sail into Italy.
There the Knights enquired of the custom of the Country, and what news there
was. Sirs answered the Merchants a few days since, we saw the strangest
adventure that could be imagined. And what was it? said Lisvart, I pray let us
entreat you out of courtesy to let us understand what it was. Know then said
one of them, that the Emperor being in his Palace in the Company of the
Empress, and their two daughters, there entered a Damsel richly clad, carrying
on her neck a Shield and Sword richly garnished: and this woman did lead by the
hand one of the fairest young Gentlemen that ever I beheld, being armed at all
poin a with a black harness, except his head which was naked. Then he recounted
every thing that happened to Perion of Gaul and A^quefa: and by that means
Lisvart and his Companions did easily know that the Merchants did speak of him,
for whom they had taken so great pains to find, nevertheless marveling what
adventure should bring him thither. And for this cause they thought good to
Land, and go to the Emperor, of whom they might have more certain tidings.
So they furnished themselves so well as they could, especially Lisvart who was
one of the fairest Creatures that could be; and mounting on Horse back, they
went into the Town, and came to the Palace where they did alight; and passing
further, they came into a great Hall, where the Emperor was in company of many
Knights, and wise men. At their arivall every one did reverence them, and gave
way to them to approach near his Majesty; Lisvart who marched before them
all, spoke thus to him; Sir, your high renown and great bounty, known
throughout the whole world, has moved my Companions and me, to come into this
your Court; not only to do you reverence, as your Majesty's greatness does
deserve, but also in hoping to have good news of a young Gentleman, who (as it
has been told us) you have made Knight not long since, at the request of a
Damsel who lately brought him hither to you. And Sir, for as much as I never
had intention to receive Knighthood, at the hands of any other then his; and
that my age summoneth me to take more upon me then I have heretofore done: I
humbly entreat you to tell us what you know, to the end that having found him, I
may have that which I hope for, and desire above all things. The Emperor
(being a gracious and affable Prince) answered Lisvart, that he and all his
Company were very welcome. And as for the young Knight, said he, which you
seek, assure your selves, my friends, that at present I know no news of him: at
which I am grieved; for I love and esteem him, as much as any other that I
know because of the great beginning of Knighthood which I saw in him; and
assure your selves, that I am altogether ignorant of the rest of his Estate:
for he left this Court after so strange a manner, that when I think thereof, I
believe to have dreamed. Sir, answered Lisvart, I will certify unto you, that
he is son to the hardy Knight Amadis de Gaul, King of great Britain, tain,
and the fair Oriana. Aha, said the Emperor, you tell me wonders, that he to
whom I have given Knighthood, should be the Son of the most renowned Prince
in the World. By my faith, I never had more desire to recover any man, then I
have to get him: wherefore if I can once more get him, he shall give me
satisfaction for the little courtesy he has shown me in so hiding himself.
And looking upon Lisvart very earnestly, I believe said he, that you are of his
kindred: for you are very like him. Sir, answered Lisvart, until it shall
please God to make me such a one, that I may by my deeds dare to name my
Parents, I have no intention to be known further. Wherefore the Emperor
enquired no further; but called Dukedelafonte, and commanded him to lead him
and the other strange Knights to the Empress, and say to his Daughter
Gricilerea, that she should do them all the honor she could, especially to
Lisvart: for they came in search of her Knight. The Duke obeying to his
commands, took Lisvart by the hand, who being come before the Empress kissed
her hands, and she embraced him, telling that he and his companions were
welcome. And Lisvart seeing the Infantaes, Onolerea and Gricilerea, made great
reverence to them; and the Duke Delafonte told them what the Emperor said. In
good faith answered Gricilerea, he has good reason to command me to honor
this Gentleman, for besides his being one of the fairest that ever I saw, I
think him to become of high Lineage; at the least, I do not remember that ever
I have known a person more resembling my Knight then he, which causes me with
a better will to obey his commands. And therefore fair Sir, said she to
Lisvart, I would entreat you to let me truly know who he is that you seek,
and would by no means speak to us. During these speeches, Love, who is not a
respecter of persons, wounded the hearts of Lisvart and Onolerea with one and
the same shaft, to whom the eye being messenger of the heart, would give
pre^ent remedy. Contenting both their minds, by a regard which promised them
cure and contentment. The which Perion endeavored to dissemble, answering to
Gricilerea; Madam, the Knight whom you have a desire to know, is Son of King
Anadis de Ga^'e, and his name is Perion. To tell you further would be time
lost, for the prowess of his Father (who has so many times encompassed the
world) causes his Son to be praised with the beginning, which he has made
at arms. Fair Sir, said Onolerea, has no other occasion brought you into
this Court, but only to find him? No Madam, until this present said he; but I
well see that for the future, there will be more causes; if I knew that thereby
I should do you any earthly service. Onolerea did most affectionately thank
him, the better to disguise what she thought she said to him: Truly you were
well counseled to come hither, if so be you desire ready news; for the
Damsel that brought him hither, is very familiar at this place, and she will
not tarry long before she return to us; and then you may know of her what is
become of him. And Onolerea spoke this, whereby to hinder Lisvart, and stay him
with her. There was at that time near her, Griliana, Daughter to the Duke of
Ortilens^, who had steadfastly regarded the countenances of the two new Lovers;
whereby she soon suspected of what had happened to him, and thinking to do them
pleasure, she said to Onolerea: Madam may it please you (to the end that you may
avoid some envy, which may bear to my Lady your Sister, by reason of her knew
Knight) to receive this Gentleman for yours, who as I understand is about to
follow Arms; and believe me, I do not speak this without cause, for it is very
reasonable that so fa^r a young Gentleman should be servant to so fair a young
Princess as you are. The Infanta did somewhat blush at these words, which did
only increase her beauty, and emboldened Lisvart to answer to Griliana: Madam,
I humbly thank you for the good which you wish me, nevertheless knowing the
smalness of my deserts, not having as yet done any thing worthy of so great a
Princess, I dare not undertake to be hers; but if she will do me that favor
to accept of me for such a one, I shall think my self the happiest man under
the Cope of heaven. Yes truly, said Onolerea, and from this day forwards I
will, and pray for you; Lisvart set his knee to the ground, and kissed her hand
as the beginning of his service; at these passages the Emperor came in, who
after he a long time had talked with the Ladies, he called a Master of his
household, and commanded to lead these Gentlemen to their lodging, in one of the
best Chambers in his Palace. Then supper time being come he sent to seek
them, and royally feasted them until it was bed time. But Lisvart took little
rest, for all the night he ceased not to sigh, thinking on her who had called
him to her service, of which he esteemed himself unworthy, notwithstanding the
assurance the Infanta had given him. For which cause after he had long tumbled
and tossed himself, he could not forbear, but he said within himself: Ah,
ah, unfortunate Lisvart! what is this? hopest thou to gain the place whereunto
the merits of thy Father, nay thy Grandfather Amadis, were not sufficient to
attain? And thou who ar^ but yet as a simple Gentleman, not so much as a
Knight; do thou think to do more then they dared to undertake? No, no, you
abuse your self, find some sudden means to retire out of this Labyrinth,
before you get in further. Then he suddenly changed his mind, but could not
take rest on one side or other, but remained in strange pain. Onolerea was no
less on her side; for all the night she ceased not to sigh, having always the
great beauty of her Lover before her eyes, for which cause she burned with an
unaccustomed fire, causing her an unaccustomed ilness. Thus these two Lovers
were handled, until the next morning, that Lisvart put himself into the best
equipage he could, whereby to return to his former course: and so did Parmenir,
Galuanes, and Fl^^^st^n: who being advertized that the Ladies were at Ma^s,
they went to find them, and as they entered into the Chapel, they perceived
Onolerea in so good equipage, that she seemed to have somewhat of divine nature
in her. She had on her a yellow Golden Lock, and a Circle of great Pearls which
served her as a Carkanet, and upon it a vail of yellow Taffaty, which adorned
her most excellently: Gricilerea was near unto her on her knees, who seconded
her so well, that laying aside all affection, it was a hard matter to tell to
whom nature had been most favorable: and a little on one side was Galiana, and
Bridelena, and many other Ladies and Damsels. But had they then asked Florestan
and Galuanes what they thought, without question Florestan had been for
Griliana, because he loved her; and Galuanes for Bridelnea, rather then for the
two Infantaes; for indeed much might be said of them. But I pray think with
what devotion these Knights did hear Mass^; surely all their prayers and vows
were addressed to those who had (as they thought) power of their life or death;
and they would willingly have chosen their Paradise in this little place; on
condition the Goddesses whom they in spirit adored, might be made equal to them
in affection. And as they were in these terms, the Priest having performed his
Office, the Emperor arose: wherefore Lisvart and his Companions went to give
him the good morrow, and they were conducted from thence into the Hall, where
the Tables were covered for Dinner:

CHAP. VII.
How a forange Damsel arived before the Emperor of Trebisonde, demanding a
gift of the Infanta Onolerea, which she too rashly granted, whereof she
repented at leisure.
THis brave Company of Lords and Ladies, making the best cheer that could be
devised, just as the Musical instrument^ did give notice unto them to rise
from the Table: there appeared before them a brave Damsel, but of an
extraordinary stature; but so fair that it was admirable. She was clad with a
Garment of white cut Satin, and fastened with Buttons of Gold, and great knobs
of Oriental Stones: she had on her head a Garland of Flowers, under which
Garland was seen so great excellent and incomparable ravishing beauty, that it
was sufficient to entertain the most accomplished man in the World. At her
side went two old men, having their Beards reaching down to their Girdles,
being excellently well set forth with threads of Gold and Silk: and behind them
was three Knights armed at all points. This Damsel being come before the
Emperor, did put her knee to the ground to kiss his hand: but he seeing her in
so good equipage, graciously took her up, and asked her what she would have.
Sir, said she, I humbly entreat you, that you would be pleased to hearken to
me, and aid me in what I shall most humbly entreat of you. Yes truly answered
the Emperor; Sir, said she, the renown of your great bounty has emboldned me
to depart from my own Country, and come into this your Court to find remedy in
an affair which is of great importance to me; nevertheless, seeing that your
custom is to help the afflicted (as I have understood) I hope not to be the
first that shall depart from the presence of your Majesty discontented. No
truly answered the Emperor, and you may freely ask what you please, and I will
to my power satisfy you. The Damsel most humbly thanked him. Sir said she,
seeing that you do me so much favor, I would entreat you to permit me to ask
one boon of my Lady Onolorea your daughter, and join with me in prayer to her
to grant it. Damsel answered the Emperor, I will that my daughter be no less
liberal in this case then I am, and I believe you will find her so. At these
words the Damsel addressed her self to Onolorea, and with an humble
countenance said to her: Most virtuous and excellent Princess, I humbly
entreat you not to take it ill at my hands, if I address my self to you, as to
the most courteous and fairest this day living, to entreat of you one gift
which will cost you little: nevertheless it concerns me so nearly, that my
life depends thereon. The Infanta having already heard the will of the Emperor,
answered to her: Damsel my friend, you shall have of me all that is in my power
to grant you. By my God said she, I always thought so: therefore then there
remains no more, but that you entreat this fair young Gentleman who sits near
you, that he alone, and without delay, follow me whither I shall conduct him, I
being certain that he will obey you whatsoever you shall command him. Onolorea
knowing the fault she committed, by so unadvisedly promising, remained pensive,
and in great perplexity, to forsake so soon the thing which she loved the best
in the world: To shun which, she answered the Damsel: In good faith, he is so
lately come to the Emperor, and I have done so little for him, that he has
good reason to refuse me: but entreat him your self, and it may be he will
agree to your request. As for me, I have no power over him, as to command him.
But Lisvart being willing to assure the contrary, suddenly arose, and putting
his knee to the ground, said to her: Madam, seeing that you have granted one
gift to this Damsel, may it therefore please you to grant me another.

Fair Sir, said she, I am very willing. I entreat you then Madam, said he, to
satisfy this which she has requested of you, and permit me that I follow her
by your Command. Onolorea knew well that she was beset on every side: wherefore
not being able to recoile, she answered him: Go then, and God be your guide.
Lisvart humbly thanked her, and said to the Damsel, that he was ready to mount
on horseback when she pleased. That shall be presently then answered she. And
at that time they both taking their leaves of the Court, departed: But they had
hardly passed out of the City walls, when an Esquire presented himself before
the Emperor, and said to him: Sir, the Duke of Dardarie has been defeated by
the King of Breigne, and he is now besieged by him, in the Town of Autrusque,
being ready to be ruined, both he and his people, if you do not send him aid.
This news did much trouble the Court, and the Duke of Ortilensa was suddenly
commanded to take with him ten thousand Horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen
to go presently, and raise the siege: for which he wisely provided. And in
these passages Parmenir, Florestan, and Galuanes, Companions of Lisvart,
tarrying for his return, determined to go in this expedition. And they
entreated the Emperor to tell them the cause, wherefore this war had been
enterprized between him and his enemy. My friends answered he, he has rebelled
against me, and has usurped and taken from me by treason, the Towns of Breigne
and Teredie, being ready to do worse, if he should be suffered. Sin said
Florestan, to do you service, my Companions and I will go in this service,
and will be employed in whatsoever your Lieutenants shall command, wherefore
the Emperor thanked them: Nevertheless, before they departed, they went to the
Ladies, and Florestan addressing himself to Onolorea, who was then talking
with Griliana, said to her: Madam, in waiting for the return of the fair young
Gentleman, I will go (if it may so stand with your good liking) into this war
as your Knight: Yet under this Condition, that he being returned to you, you
shall restore me to Madam Griliana, whose I am, and until then I will leave her
my heart in hostage to dispose of, as it shall please he. At these words they
began to laugh: and be use the Emperesse came near them, Onolorea answered him
no otherwise but thus: that God grant they may all return in short time in good
health. Nevertheless Galuanes entertained Bridelena, and said to her with great
affection: Madam, command me then, that as yours I may employ my self in this
enterprise, to the end that being yours, I may with the more ease vanquish your
enemies. In good faith, answered she, you shall not be refused in this demand,
I do therefore pray and require you. And taking a Ring from her finger, she
gave it him, in confirmation of their alliance. Truly the pleasure which they
took in talking together, had been longer: But there entered a Dwarf, the most
deformed that could be: who without doing any reverence to the Emperor, or any
other, presented to him a Letter, sealed with sixty seven Seals, which was
read before all the Company. And it contained that which follows.

MELIA Lady over all Magicians, enemy to the Christian Faith, and diligent in
daily increasing the law of our Gods. Know Emperor of Trebisond, that
Constantinonople shall in short time be besieged by sixty seven Princes of the
Pagan Law, where I will be in person, to take the pleasure to see it burned,
and the wicked man that kept it, even he to whom all Christendom looked for
favor, as its Refuge and principal aid. But it shall happen otherwise: For she
to whom thy Daughter has delivered him, having put him in her power, shall
deliver him into so sure guard, that neither Amadis his Grandfather, nor
Esplandian his father, although they were not enchanted, should have the power
to succor him. And yet that is little in regard of what I intend to do: for
by little and little I will have the rest of your other Knights, to dispose of
them at my pleasure, forceing the rest of the Common people to turn to our
Faith, be it either by love, or by force: and doubt not of this: for I will do
all without difficulty.


The Emperor, and all the Court were very much troubled at such pitiful news,
knowing this Letter to be assuredly written by Melia the Enchantresse, and
sealed with her seal amongst others, whereon was engraven a woman holding a
naked sword in her hand, and a Cross at her feet. And that which augmented the
grief of many was the loss of Lisvart, who under the shadow of equity, went
joyfully to his death, whereunto the strange Damsel led him; for which cause
the Infanta Onolorea was so passionate, that she being retired into her
Chamber, cast her self on her bed, and began to lament with the greatest grief
in the world, saying with continual sighs and tears: O Lord of all the world!
how has it pleased you to permit, that I alone should be the cause of all the
ill that is to happen to Christendom? Alas cruel death, longed for, and loved
by the afflicted! wherefore do you consent that I live one whole hour,
knowing in me the evil that shall redound to so many perions? And speaking
these words, Griliana came, who knowing part of her affections, doubted that
she would fall from bad to worse: for she was ready to swound at every word.
Wherefore taking her in her arms to comfort her, she said: Madam, I did never
yet think that you had so little constancy, and I wonder that you will give so
much credit to a false witch, who hates and is enemy to all virtue. Do you
think that our Lord (who is goodness it self) will consent to the ruin of so
fair a young Gentleman as is yours? and less to the destruction of the holy
Faith? These are mere vanities, do not believe them, and I pray be not so sad
before the time. Alas said Onolorea, the fear which I have makes my heart so
doubtful, and I would to God that this which you tell me were more true, then I
think it to be; for I fear the worst. Madam said Griliana, as you are a great
Princess, you ought to be more perfect then simple maids, who are commonly
less endued with Constancy and Magnanimity of Courage, then they who have the
title of daughters to a King, or great Princes: therefore be comforted: for if
the Letters of Melia are such as I think them, you may be very much blamed in
doing thus as you do, and afterward you may consider of it with repentance.
Griliana knew so well how to give her so many reasons, that from thenceforth
she carried her sadness with more modesty then she had begun. And in the
mean time the Emperor consulted about the Army, that he should raise, to go
to the aid of Constantinople; the which was retarded until the return of the
Duke of Ortilensa, who dislodged that very same day, and marched so long with
his Army, that he encamped within a days Journey of the town of Autrusque. Of
which the King of Breigne being advertised, he raised the Seige, and
accompanied with an Army of fifteen thousand horsemen, and twenty thousand
foot, he marched directly to fight him. Dardarie who was besieged had news of
this in short time: and for that cause, leaving a good garrison in the Town, he
marched on the flancks of his enemy, as well to hinder him from provisions, as
to be in the battle, if the Duke of Ortilensa should give him battle.

CHAP. VIII.
How the Duke of Ortilensa gave battle to the King of Breigne, and of what
happened thereupon.
THe Duke of Ortilensa, with his Army marched so far into the Country against
the King of Breigne, that they had soon tidings by their Scouts of one
another, what they purposed to enterprise, which was to meet one another, and
give battle. And for this cause the King of Breigne raised his Seige, and came
hastily against his enemy, who not being willing to be surprised, or otherwise
circumvented, he ordered his battle as you shall presently hear. To Floreston
and Galuanes he gave the Vanguard with four thousand horsemen, and eight
thousand footmen: and he had the maine battle for himself, and the Earl of
Alastra, a Gentle Knight which consisted of three thousand horsemen, and six
thousand chosen soldiers; leaving for the Rear-guard three thousand Soldiers,
and other six thousand adventurers, gentle Companions; for whose Leader he
ordained Parmenir, and Alarin of Ortilensa his son, to whom the Emperor of
Trebisond had given the order of Knighthood, the day before he took his leave
of him. And in this equipage they marched by little and little near to the King
of Breigne, who had likewise divided his Army into three Squadrons; The first
was led by Groter his Son; The second by himself; and the third by the Duke of
Alinga. Thus they lodged within two miles of a little Village, where the Duke
of Ortilensa staid: and setting a good watch for all that night, they did not
disturb one another until the next morning when they dislodged. And the King
sent word to the Duke by a Trumpet, that before noone was passed he would make
him to know, that he had too rashly enterprized to come seek him. The Trumpet
arived at the Camp of his enemy, at the same time that their Captain was in the
midst of them, exhorting them in general, and particular of what they ought to
do, and the better to move them to fight, he set before their eyes the treason
of of the King, who having falsified his faith was entered into arms against
his Prince, and Liege Lord. But so soon as he had seen the Trumpet, and had
known the cause of his coming, he sent him back with this answer. Trumpet, say
to thy Master that if he were as well endued with Loialty, as he is with pride
and presumption, I should account him one of the gentlest Knights in the world:
But because it is impossible to excuse him of his treason against his natural
Prince, I have such assurance of his threats (that with Gods help) before the
hour that he sends me, I shall have him at my mercy. At that time Florestan
was present, when the Duke made him this answer, and as the Trumpet was about
to return the way he came, he called him back, and said to him: Trumpet, tell
thy Master, that if the Duke had known my will, he should have made no answer,
for a person taxed with treason as he was, did not deserve the speech of so
wise a man. And if he inquires who I am, tell him that I am called Florestan, a
strange Knight, and am resolved to break his pate this day, being a mortal
enemy to all such wicked men as he is. The Trumpet told him that he would obey
his commands, and took special notice of what Coat of Arms Florestan had on,
it being of an azure turquin color, embroidered with flowers of Gold. Then he
made haste away, and went to the King, to whom he faithfully related all which
you have heard: at which he was so greatly angered, that he presently sent to
his son to advance, and march forwards with the Vanguard. And so in less then
an hours space, the two Armles came so near together, that they were within a
Lance push, when Groter sent a Herald to ask for Florestan; who presently
appeared to know what he would have with him. Sir said the Herald, Groter the
Captain of this Troop, being the son of the King of Breigne, desires to know
whither or no you are endowed with as much valor at with injurious speeches:
and for that cause he earnestly desires, that before the two battles do join,
he and you may have one single combat. My friend said Florestan, let him then
withdraw his forces as I will do mine, and let him come so soon as he will,
to find (perhaps) that which he shall not hereafter look for. So the Herald
tarried not to carry this news to Groter, for which cause Florestan on the one
part, and he on the other left their guards; and couching their Lances, Groter
wounded Florestans horse on the shoulder: But Florestan hit him so lively, that
piercing his Shield and Halbert, the Iron went into his body, that through
pain he was forced to leave his saddle, and measure his length on the ground.
And as he had ended his course, thinking to turn his horse to perform his
enterprise, the beast being very much wounded died between his legs: in such
manner that he found himself on his feet, wherefore he soon laid his hand on
his Sword, and coming near to Groter, who likewise got on his feet, there began
between them two a most dangerous combat. For they were gentle Knights, and of
so good heart, that Groter said to him in derition, so loud that many did hear
him. By God Knight of the flowers, if I have as bad luck with the Sword as I
have had with the Lance, I shall be a good man to day instead of a better. And
this word pleased Florestan so well, that for a long time after he caused
himself to be called by that name which his enemy had given him then.
Nevertheless he did not make him any answer, but laying fast hold on his
Shield, be endeavored with utmost power to vanquish his enemy, but if he did
so, his enemy did the like, in such manner, that every body did admire how they
could hold out so long. Groter wondered how his enemy could make so long
resistance, wherefore lifting up his sword, and with all his strength, thinking
to take his enemy at advantage; he gave him so great ablow, that if Florestan
had not allayed the (...) of it with his shield, his life had been in very
great danger. Wherefore being determined to reveng himself, he lifted up his
arms, and as Groter endeavored to pluck the sword from the place it was
entered, Florestan wounded him so deeply on the head, that he fell down dead,
the blood running down his face: which the Breignians seeing, they marched
directly against their Enemies, and so the two Armies joined together;
nevertheless Florestan was first remounted. Then began the heat of all the
Battle; for there dyed on both parts, more then two thousand men. At this
first charge, Galuanes, and one of the Kings Conzens broke their Lanoes on one
another: but Galuanes thrust his Lance into his Enemies body. The King who led
the Battle, seeing his Vanguard discomfited, and ready to turn their backs,
he advanced with his Battle, and the Duke of Ortilensa did the like, and also
the Rear guards on both sides. There might you have seen many good Knights
thrown to the ground (...) and as many Footmen wounded and killed, which was a
most pitiful thing to behold. Galuanes, Florestan, and Parmenir, ranged about
the field, and they met not any, but they went under the edge of their Swords.
The Duke of Ortilensa and his Son, were not in the mean time idle, but did
perform memorable deeds of Arms: And on the other side, the King of Breigne,
and the Earl of Aligne, Captain of his Reare-guard, showed well wheresoever
they went, that their Arms were not idle. The Earl of Alastra, met the Earl of
Alingas son, and with one blow with his Lance, he sent his soul from body;
which his Father seeing, He, and ten Knights of his, charged on the Earl, who
being encompassed on all sides, was disarmed and borne down to the Earth. But
Florestan came there with a good Troop, and remounted him by force, not without
great slaughter; for there was no place throughout the whole Army where there
was more blood sheed. The Earl of Alinge gave Florestan such a great blow, that
his eyes sparkled: of which he soon after revenged himself, knocking him to
the ground with one blow of a Mace. Then those of the King of Breignes Party
came hastily to succor him, and the Duke of Ortilensaos party came to take him
Prisoner. Then the Conflict began in such manner, that the Horses were up to
the Pastorns in blood. And as these two Armies were thus a striving for the
Victory, the Duke of Dardary who had followed the Breignians all night with his
Troop, seeing so fit a time to employ himself, came upon the flanck, and gave
them such an Alarm, that from that time they began by little and little to
faint. At this time the King of Breigue was joined with the Duke of Ortilensa,
thinking to revenge the injury he had done him, calling him Traitor: but the
ill fell on himself, and he lay there dead. For as he traversed throw the
Battle, striking on every fide, and performing deeds worthy to a Prince; by
fortune he met the Duke, whom he called to the Combat; the which the other
refused not, although he were very old. And to say the truth, the party had
been ill maintained, without the arivall of Florestan, who soon adventured
his person to the succor of the Father of his Lady who had by love taken him
Captive. For which cause he ^ushed in between them, and with one blow he so
wounded the King, that he separated his soul from his body, at which his
Soldiers were so affr^ghted, that as well through this occasion, as for the
arivall of the Duke of Dardarie, they fled, leaving the hopes of their lives to
some adjoining Woods where they might save themselves. But their Enemies did
slaughte^ so many, that they were forced to be content to pardon their lives,
being weary with fighting and killing them By this means the Duke of Ortilensa
won the field, who received the Duke of Dordary with great joy; and at that
instant they sent a Gentleman toward the Emperor, to whom they sent wo^d of
the good fortune that God had been pleased to bestow on them. But now it is
time to turn our course, where we have left Lisvart, and the Infanta Onolerea,
and her sister Gricilerea: they being both in great sorrow for the absence and
loss of those, whom they had chosen for their Lovers, as you have formerly
heard.

CHAP. IX.
How Lisvart was led to Melia the Sorceresse, and of the bad entertainment and
ill usage she gave him.
YOu have already heard the sorrow and sadness, which the Infanta Onolerea
made, as well for the Letter which Melia the Sorceresse sent by the Dwarf to
the Emperor, as for the absence of Lisvart, to whom she was so affectionate:
Now I think seasonable to let you know who she was that led him, and the
occasion why she used this deceit. Know then that the enterprise of the fixty
seven Pagan Kings, upon the City and Empire of Constantinople, was divulged in
so many places, that the King of the Giant Island purposed to be of the number:
not for any ill which he wished to the Emperor: but to the end that one only
Daughter which he had, might learn of Melia, part of the skill for which she
was so renowned; and therefore he would carry her thither, and present her to
her. This Damsel of whom I speak, was so excellent in beauty, that there was
no woman in all the adjoining Isles that could equal her, and her name was
Gradafilea. So the King of the Giant Island departed from his own Country, and
carried his Daughter with him, being accompanied with two thousand Knights,
with whom he traveled so long, that at last he came to King Armat^ and Melia:
of whom he was kindly welcomed; especially of the Sorceresse Melia, who seeing
the perfect beauty of Gradafilea, she purposed to put that soon into
execution, which she had a long time before projected, which was the taking of
Lisvart. And to come to the point, this was Gradafilea who led him from the
Court of the Emperor of Trebisond, as you have already heard. And to say
truly Melia could not have found amessenger so fit to execute such treason.
for she was such a one as I have told you, and as well spoken as any Damsel of
her time: for which cause it was easy to make him believe her, and obey her.
Know then that the occasion which moved Melia to wish this young Prince so much
harm was, because she knew for certain by her damnable and divelish art, that
he would be the ruin of the Pagans, and a sure Rampart to all Th^ace: to
hinder which, she sent Gradafilea into Tsebisend, to the end she might bring him
thither; but she hid from her her resolution, which was to kill him soon after,
which God would not permit; but rendered this Damsel so affectionate toward
him, and so taken with his love, that day and night she thought of nothing
more, then how she might gain him, and make him her husband. And thus they
journied so long together, that they arived at the Camp of the King Armato; and
until then, Lisvart did not know unto what part he was led. So the King was
very joyful at his arivall, for he had understood of Melia, the danger
whereinto the Pagans should fall if he lived. And as Gradafilea did present him
to him; Cruel Melia being impatient, arived; who caused him presently to be
taken by four villains, and putting a great chain of Iron about his neck, she
said to him; wicked villain, now you shall have the order which you deserve;
afterward I will lodge you in a place, where I will answer for you when I
please. Lisvart being greatly astonished at this entertainment, looked on
Gradafilea with a pitiful eye, and could not forbear saying thus to her:
Truly Damsel, I never thought treason could be harbored with so great beauty
wherewith you are endewed; but seeing that disloyalty is so familiar there
where it should be strangest, I will never trust any creature where I am not
better acquainted. So Gradafilea could not answer him one word; for she was so
much greved at his ill usage, that she could willingly have been dead, for she
loved him with all her heart. Wherefore seeing that she could not succor him,
unless it were by entreaty, crying tenderly, she cast her self down at the
feet of Armato, and said to him; Sir, I humbly entreat of you, that he who has
confided in me, may receive no injury: for you will do me wrong, and I may
justly be accused of treason, which never happened to any other of my Lineage.
But the King turned his head on one side, and without answering, he commanded
to imprison Lisvart, and that he should be put in the furthest part of the
Dungeon. Sir, said she, I will never depart from your feet, if you consent to
such an outrage; at least do me this pleasure, that his person be in an
honest place, and without being chained as a Rogue; otherwise assure your
self, that I will complain of you all my life, and in all places wheresoever
I shall come. And as she was in these vehement passions, her Father arived, who
being abashed to see his Daughter so sad, and the injury which was done to him
that had followed her, he was not afraid, but freely spoke his mind; for which
cause, Armato fearing to anger him, agreed to his Daughters request, although
said he, this be contrary to all reason: for if you or she should know of what
importance the death of this Rascal is, you would both give judgment of death
against him. So Lisvart was unchained, and put into a strong Tower, of which
Melia kept the Key: and besides she appointed thirty Knights for his guard, of
which fifteen watched until midnight, and the rest until day: So God give
him patience and provide for him, otherwise his death is near, as we shall
recite in the following Chapters.

But first know that the Gentleman sent from the Duke of Ortilensa to the
Emperor, arived at Trebisond. and related to him at large; the Battle that
had been between his Army, and that of the King of Breigne, and the death of
Him, and his Son; and lastly, the total defeat of his Enemies. For which the
Emperor greatly praised our Lord, and for the great care which he had, he
caused it to be often times related by the Messenger, even before the Ladies:
and believe me, he did not forget the great deeds of Arms, and prowesses of
Florestan, Galuanes, and Parmenir. If then Gri^ian^ and Bridelen^ were well
pleased, do not doubt, they loved these Knights as their own proper souls.
And for this cause, being retired into the Chamber of Onolerea, they began a
debate between them for pleasure who was the best loved; and this they did to
please the Infanta; who ever since the loss of Lisvart, ceased not to grieve.
Their debate lasted so long, that at the last Bridelena being more pleasure
then any of the rest, took a Pillow, and being of a light heart, threw it at
the head of Griliana, saying to her: My Knight loves me best, and I will prove
it with the blow of my Mall; Griliana took another, and this Combat began so
fierce, that it forced the melancholic to laugh, for there was not a Pillow
that was not thrown without great laughter. Then being out of breath,
Gricilerea went between them, and so this tourney ended: therefore we will
leave them to rest, and so will return to Perion of Gaul, of whom we have
been silent so long.

CHAP. X.
How Perion of Gaul, surnamed the Knight of the Sphere, met the Infanta
Tiriaxa; and of the many fair adventures which happened to him.
YOu may remember that we formerly left Perion with Languines, Abies of
Ireland, and the three crossed Knights, refreshing themselves in the Arbor
which had been made by the Apes, being Pilots and Leaders of the Barque of
Asquefa. Now then (prosecuting our History) as these Knights related their
passed fortunes; Perion asked of Talanque if he heard any news of Garinter and
his brother, who had been made Knights by the hand of Esplandian, as you have
heard in the fifth Book, and afterward they passed into the Island of
Galifurnus. Sir, answered he, we have now left him in hard and strong war
against a certain King, and my near Neighbor, and they have already conquered
many fair places from him. And what adventures then brought you in these
Marches? Quoth Perion. No other, answered Talanque, but the renown of this
Fountain, where it is reported there does ordinarily happen mavelous and
strange adventures: and although that it was our intention to return presently
to Galifurnus, we will not now depart so soon from you, seeing that God and
fortune has caused us to meet. I like this well, said he, you will do me a
pleasure: for I cannot depart from this place, until she who brought me hither
comes again to find me, and so I have promised her: but she being returned,
I will so far prevail with her, that I will follow her, or she shall give me
leave to go with you. And as he spoke these words he perceived a Heart greatly
wounded, followed by a Gentleman, having a horn about his neck very richly
garnished, and between his legs a Turkish horse running mavelous swift. So he
was closely followed by another Gentleman, clothed with the like habiliments:
but not altogether so brave. These two rode so fast after the Heart, that they
did not see the Knights, until the beast was dead: they were in their Arbor,
out of which nevertheless they issued, and mounted on horseback, when they saw
the first Gentleman alight, and draw his knife to have the head of the beast.
And as they looked about them, the other discovered Perion, and the rest of his
Company, bearing signs of Christians on their Harnesses: wherefore he rode
straight to them, and the first to whom he addressed himself was the Queen
Calafea, to whom he cried ere he came near: Ah good Knight! for Gods sake pity
me and save me; for I am of the same Law that you are of: Gentleman, answered
the Queen, there is none in this Company, that will not willingly do you
pleasure. The other who heard this speech, lifted up his head, and seeing such
a company, left his prey: and thinking to put his feet in the stirrup to fly,
he was held by his companion, who said to him; At this time you shall be my
Prisoner, as well as I have been yours. And as the one endeavored to escape,
and the other to hold him, there issued out of the thick wood six Knights armed
at all points, whom eight Gentlemen without Harness followed, conducting a
Damsel fair in every perfection: who was accompanied with two women, mounted
and furnished as the Daughters of great Lords, as they were. The six Knights
seeing Perion, and those of his Company at the first sight that they were
Christians: wherefore pulling down the visor of their Helmets, they cried out
aloud, that they were dead. I know not said he of the Sphere what may come, but
God be thanked, now there is none of us sick. And because the others couched
their Lances against them, they placed themselves to resist them, and they gave
the Pagans such blows with their Lances, that they were all thrown dead to the
ground at the first attempt: wherefore the eight that were disarmed fled, as
fast as their horses could run. Thus the Ladies remained without guard, to the
principal and chief of them Perion first addressed himself, and graciously
said to her: In good faith Madam, I never obtained any Conquest as I know, that
pleased me so well as this. Of one thing I will assure you, that all the prison
you shall have with me, it shall be this, that I will employ my utmost power to
do you service, as I am accustomed to do to all fair ones as resemble you.
At these words Tiriaxa, so was this Lady called, did begin to cry extremely,
and in sighs, she answered Perion: Alas! I know well, pleases it me or no,
that I am your prisoner, at which I am grieved: nevertheless, I have so good an
opinion of your honesty: that so long as I am with you I shall not be
dishonored: No upon my soul, said he, but I will put my life in danger to
guard you, that no dishonor be done to you; wherefore I pray you follow me and
your women also. Then he took her by the reins of her Palfrey and led her to
the Arbor: but as she passed by where the former Combat had been, she saw the
Giant and the others lie along on the grass, at which she was sore grieved,
that she cried with a great cry, saying, Alas! now I esteem my life less
then I did before: when I saw with my eyes Brutillion the valiant, and his
Knights dead, and defeated! And for Gods sake, said she, to the Knight of the
Sphere, recount unto me how this ill fortune has come unto them. Madam said
Perion, these are hazards, and fortunes which often happen to them that seek
them; And then he declared to her the manner of the fight, and how it began,
and what was the issue. And as they were in this discourse, the Crossed Knights
brought with them the two Gentlemen that hunted the Heart. Then Perion leaving
Tirixa with Calafea, took apart the eldest of them, and asked him what he was,
and the Damsel also. Sir answered he, she and he who was taken with me are the
King of Jerusalems Children: who to give them pleasure and recreation sent them
to the Fountain, under the conduct of Brutilon the Giant, to see the marvels
which happen here daily: And believe all said he, your long tarrying here may
redound to your great danger, for the King their father is not above half a
days journey from hence, who will not fail to have news suddenly of those
that fled, of the misfortune happened to his Children, of which he will soon
be ^evenged, as he may well do, being accompanied with a great company of
Soldiers, even of three strong Giants, brothers to him whom you have killed,
which he has caused to come out of the Desert of Lybia, to accompany him to
the Seige of Constantinople, where all the Princes of Asia, great and small,
even beyond the Mount Gaucasus and the great Armenia, have sworn to destroy it
and race it: therefore if you be well advised, you had best to retire before
worse happen to you. And you, said the Knight of the Sphere, are you of their
kindred? no, answered the Gentleman, I am son to the King of Naples, and was
not long since taken by Brutillion, who romes on the Sea, as I was agoing to
the chase, in the Company of six of My Knights Perion. was greatly grieved,
having heard the enterprise of the Pagans on Thrace: nevertheless he did not
discover his grief, but went down into the Grove with the rest. Whether
Alquefa came soon after, who being arived, cast her self at the feet of
Perion, to kiss them, but he graciously took her up, and said to her: By my
God, Damsel, your return has very much gladded me, you are very welcome. Good
Knight answered she, my Father desires humbly to be remembered to you, as he who
is more obliged to you, then to any other living. Your father said Perion? I
never saw him as I know. Ahah! answered she, it was the old man that was bound
in the Cart, who was near unto his death; had it not been for the good aid
which he received of you: but you have delivered him from the most cruel
torment that ever any man of his age endured. And know sir Knight, that he by
his skill foreknew all his misfortune, which he could not remedy, only by the
head of one of the Sons of Amadis de Gaul: for which reason he commanded me to
go seek you, and prevail so far, that I might bring you hither at the day and
hour as you have found him. Now you may know why I commanded you not to speak
in the Court of the Emperor of Trebisond, fearing that by knowing you, my
enterprise would be hindered, which is now effected, for which I praise God and
you. I wonder said Perion, that he did not discover himself to us. Ah ah sir!
said she, you shall see him another time at more leisure, so it is that he has
commanded me to tell you, that he is gone into the Isle of Apes', which is his
own; but in what Country soever he is you shall find him to be an
affectionate servant to acknowledge the pains, that you have taken for him,
and the good which he has received by your means. And as for the promise
which you have made me, it is so well performed, that from henceforth you may
go whither soever you please. Damsel answered Perion, if I had known him, I
promise you, that for your sake, I would have done him all the honor which he
deserves: Nevertheless that shall be an other time, when he shall please. And
seeing that you give me leave, to morrow, if it please God, I will go seek the
Company, wherein I was when you saw me first.

CHAP. XI.
How the Knight of the Sphere and his Companions met the Souldan of Liquie, and
of the Combat which was between them.
SO long did Perion and Alquefa talk together, that after they had eaten of
such victuals as they found, they went to sleep, and likewise so did the rest
until the next morning, when as they prepared themselves to mount on Horseback.
Then the Knight of the Sphere asked Languines and Abies of Ireland, what way
they intended to take. Sir answered Abies, I think it best that Languines and
I go strait to C^nstantinople, to aid the Emperor. Truly said Perion, I am of
your opinion. And you said he, to the Cro^sed Knights, will ye be on their
side? No truly answered they, not at the present; for we will go directly to
Califurnus, and there we will assemble men from all parts, with whom we will
come after to find them, if it pleases God if so be the news of the Seige
continues. I assure you said Perion, I will be there, and therefore I pray do
not fail. Then they mounted on horseback, taking their way to the Seaside:
but they had not gone far, when they heard a noise and neighing of horses, and
soon after they saw ten Knights issue out of the wood, being well mounted and
armed, before whom marched one who was greater then any of the others, holding
in his hand a great and strong Lance, at the end whereof did hang a very fair
and complete streamer. His arms were all black, covered with Gold and
Diamonds, and many fair precious stones: and his Countenance declared him to
be a great Lord, and Captain of all the rest. The Knight of the Sphere had an
extraordinary great desire to know his name. The Queen Calafea had oftentimes
seen him, wherefore she easily knew him, and assured Perion that it was Radiare
great Souldan of Liquie: with whom said she, I entered the field, by reason of a
Defiance which we sent to Constantinople, to two of your nearest parents,
Amadis and Esplandian. By God answered Perion, this makes me have the greatest
desire to combat with him. And at that instant he laced his Helmet, and took
his Lance, marching strait to the other, who seeing him, cried out to him very
loud: Knight who art arived black as I am, before you and I enter into Combat,
I would entreat you to tell me your name, and of what Country you are of.
Truly said the Knight of the Sphere, you shall not in any wise be refused for
so small a matter: My Country is great Britain, and at this time I serve the
fairest Lady in the world, and as yet I neither know her name, neither have I
as yet deserved so much favor for the beginning. By my head, said Radiare, thou
speak like one of a stout heart, and I am very glad that I have met at so
good a time, a Knight of a Country of which commonly there comes none but
valiant men, and I and mine have many times found them to be such. And to the
end that you may not think my speeches to be feigned, if you will follow me and
be mine, I will make you captain General of the Army which I have raised, to
go to Constantinople; but if you disdain my side, instead of so much good you
shall presently dye by my hands. See how ill it is, said Perion; it may be you
may have more occasion to threaten me then you think for, for you cannot have a
greater enemy in the world then I. Is it possible answered the Sultan, then
keep your self from me if you can: nevertheless you shall receive this
courtesy at my hands, that none of my men shall assail you, but only one by
one. Then he called him that was nearest to him, to whom he commanded to fight
with Perion, and not one jot to spare him: But he reckoned without his Host,
for at the first meeting the Pagan was disarmed, and remained stretched out on
the grass, moving neither hand nor foot. Wherefore Radiare commanding another
to come who was handled as his fellow, and so were five more that followed
after: At which the Sultan wondered, having brought (as he thought) the flower
of Chivalry of his Country, he then commanded the eighth in whom he put much
confidence, to revenge his Companions: And presently he and the Knight of the
Sphere broke upon one another, in such manner that their Lances flew into
pieces, and in passing they met together with their shields, bodies and heads
so strongly, that the Pagan fell down astonished in the place. Which the Queen
Calafea seeing, she could not forbear longing, and she sent Alquefa to carry
her Lance to Perion, praying him on her part, Seeing his own had been so well
employed, that he would endeavor to do as much with that other. Perion humbly
thanked her by the Damsel, and by reason that the ninth Pagan was ready to run,
he used no long discourse with her, but only he sent word by her to the Queen
that he would esteem himself one of the best runners with the Lance in the
world, if he knew as much as she had forgotten. And at this point the Pagan and
he charged one another, and their Lances flew in pieces, Perion remaining on
Horseback, and the other thrown down so heavily, that he thought he had
broke his neck: wherefore the tenth came to the sport, who did hit Perion so
rightly, that he made him to stoop, but he soon after revenged himself; for
he thrust his Lance through his body more then a handful in length, and he
fell down to the ground dead, the Trunchion remaining in his Guts. This is
wonderful said the Queen Calafea to Talanque. I never saw a fairer Just; I
pray you saire Sir, send him also your Lance, to the end that he may perform so
glorious an enterprise. To the which Talanque agreed, wherefore she called
Alquefa, and said to her; Damsel, return to the Knight of the Sphere, and say
to him, that he has much honored the wood wherein you have brought him, in
hitting the Pagan so right on the belly, and that for the love of his Lady, he
would yet do as much to this other. So Alquefa tarried not long to carry this
message, which so greatly augmented the force of the Knight of the Sphere, that
he assured the Messenger to employ his whole power, until he had the Souldan
his prisoner, or he would lose his own life in the adventure: But Radiare
thought much otherwise, and prepared himself to revenge the death of Grimante,
which was the forenamed Knight that was last foiled, swearing by his great
God, that Perion should do Penance for this offense. To obtain which, he
approached to him, and said, Knight, I have more cause to hate you then any man
that I know, and nevertheless for the great prowess that is in you, I am
constrained to esteem of you, and bear you this honor, that if you will be
on my side, as I have not long since told you, I will utterly forget the evil
which I owe you; and I will likewise do much good for you. Truly answered the
Knight of the Sphere, I will counsel you a great deal beteer, if you will
believe me. How said Radiare? Leave thy foolish Faith, answered the Knight, and
acknowledge Jesus Christ to be alone God; not the Idols, and Devils which
abuse you; and instead of doing hurt to the Emperor of Constantinople as you
have enterprized, aid and help him with all your power, then will we be
friends, and not else. You need not doubt whether Radiare was inflamed with
Ire, as he soon made the Knight of the Sphere understand in saying to him:
How, do you give counsel to those that do not ask? do you think to tame
me so? No, no, before you escape my hands, I hope to chastise you in such sort,
that you shall never speak so rashly to a man of my quality. And nevertheless
before we enter into Combat, hear the Covenant that I propound to those
against whom I sight, then if you like it, you may agree to it; if not, I leave
it to your discretion. Say what you will said Perion, and I will willingly
hearken to you: The vanquished, said Radiare, shall be slave to the vanquisher,
in such manner, that he shall obey him in all things: Consider then if you will
consent to it. By God, answered Perion, you speak like a Prince of a good
heart; and I love this custom so well, that I will perform it on my part
without falsifying my word. Then guard your self from me said the Souldan.
Then they separated themselves, and giving the Careere to their Horses, they
met so strongly, that Radiare and his Horse were bast to the ground; and
Perions Horse had his shoulder broken; for which cause he stopped, and fell
down under his Master: but first their Lances flew in pieces. And as both
their falls were strange, so they relieved themselves so lighty, as if they had
not endured one blow nor buffet: and marching with great fierceness, they laid
their hands on their swords; beginning a Combat so furious, and with so heavy
blows, that none saw them that were not astonished: For they so labored and
renewed their strengths, as it seemed that the grass was dyed with their
blood, and the ground covered with the broken pieces of their Armor; so that
every one thought that their deaths was near. And they maintained themselves
in this estate, without taking breath, until it was noone, but the Souldan
went on one side, and said to Perion, Knight, I think that we should not take
example of wild beasts, angered with one another in our Combat: but the common
custom of Knights that bear Arms do use; therefore I pray you let us take
breath, then let us begin again when you please. I am content, answered
Perion, not that I seek for rest, but you have showed your self so courteous
to me, in forbidding your Knights not to assail me altogether, that I shall
think the better on you the longest day that I live. So they remained still,
resting themselves on the pummels of their swords: Nevertheless this stay
lasted not long, for soon after they recharged one another better then before;
and the Souldan pressed on Perion so near, that the blood ran down on all
sides, whereof he soon revenged himself, giving him such a blow with his sword,
that it entered more then a handful in length into his shield, which he cut in
twain; and as he employed all his force to pull it out, he constrained him to
set his knee to the ground. Nevertheless he soon arose, and in rising, he
gave the Knight of the Sphere so great a blow, that had it not been for the
goodness of Armor, he had cleaved his head in twain. Then Perion knowing the
danger wherein he was, took his sword in both his hands, and rushed on Radiare
with all his force, in such manner that both his eyes sparkled, remaining so
stunned that he began to reele, and Perion took hold of his Collar, throwing
him so heavily to the ground, that he had the means to take of his Helmet, and
threw it away, Radiare being stunned, perceiving the air, began to recover.
How? said the Knight of the Sphere, does your courage fail you for so small a
matter? Where is now this glory and magnanimity of courage, for which you are
so renowned in so many places? At these words the Souldan opened his eyes; and
as he saw himself in danger of death, and the sword lifted up, ready to fall
on his head, he answered him: The magnanimity whereof you speak, remains in
the heart of the Souldan of Liquea, from whence it shall neither depart nor
lessen, for whatsoever peril may happen. Yes, but said the Knight of the
Sphere, do not you remember the Covenant sworn between you and I? I know it,
answered he; and I would have you to know, that if I have my carriage firm, my
speech is as much, or more stable and certain: in such manner, that I had
rather lose ten lives, if I had them, then the least thing of my promise,
should not be executed in the least point. Therefore make use of me as of your
slave: for I am ready to endure whatsoever your pleasure shall be. Truly said
Perion, you do manifest your self to be such a one as you are renowned for;
so I will use you with the honesty which you deserve: Therefore rise, and
remount on Horse back, and afterward we will take of the rest: which they did,
and soon after the crossed Knights approached. Then the Queen Calafea came
near, and her head being bare, she came to embrace the Souldan, crying to him:
Seignior Radiare, seeing that you and I have so well tried the strength of the
Christians as you know, (...) pray you assure your self that you can have no
advantage over them, they being supported by a God who is alone Master and Lord
of all things: Likewise it was a folly for you to join your self in Combat
with this Knight, who is brother to the Emperor Esplandian, and son to the
most renowned Amadis de Gaul, by whom you and I were vanquished io the last
seige of Constantinople, as you may well remember. Madam, said he, If I
committed folly, I have dearly paid for it; and although that it is a grief to
me, so likewise I have great pleasure to see you in good health, remembering me
as yet of the fortunes which we had together even in the last voyage into
Thrace. And by reason that they lost blood which came out of the wounds of both
their bodies, before they went further, they had them bound up; and from
thence, fearing the arivall of the King of Jerusalem, and the succor of the
Children which they had taken, they went toward the Seaside, where they then
found the V^^sells in which they had taken Port, even that of Abies of Iraland,
and Languines, into which the Knight of the Sphere embarked himself. And
because that Alquefa would return to her Father, who staid for her in the Isle
of Apes as you have heard; she humbly entreated of Perion to give her leave. My
great friend said he, I pray God guide you: but if you will do so much for me
as to grant me one gift, which shall cost you little, there shall be no day of
my life wherein you shall not have of me a Knight ready to obey you. How?
answered she, do you think that I will refuse any thing that you shall please
to command me? no truly, were it to adventure the greatest part of my life.
Then Perion took her apart, and they two being alone, he said to her in sighs:
Ah, ah, Alquefa! I thought to have taken an other course, and return toward
Madam Gricilerea, to serve her, as she to whom my heart is so affectionate,
that thinking on her I die, and not thinking on her I cannot live! God grant
then that this beginning take so good a conclusion as I hope for, and do me so
much favor that she may name me hers; for testimony whereof, I have thought to
send her by you the Infanta Tiriaxa, with her bother, and the Souldan of
Liquea, whom I pray you to carry to her, and present to her on my part: for
even as I am hers, it is reasonable that those things that are mine and which I
have conquered should serve her, and be hers* You shall tell her that my
return unto Trebisond shall be the soonest that I can possibly, and that in
the mean time I hope not to strike one blow with a Lance, nor to do an act
worthy a Knight, but what shall be for the glory and love of her. Sir, answered
Alquefa, I will wholly perform that which you command me; and I will serve you
with her, with so much loyalty, that you shall perceive it. I entreat you do
it said Perion. Then approaching near to the Souldan, who in the mean time
discoursed with Tiriaxa, complaining to her, that for the desire which he had
to see the King her Father, he was fallen into the hands of his enemies. But
the Knight of the Sphere interrupted them in their talk, causing them to
understand his pleasure: in pursuance whereof he said to the Souldan, you shall
go with your Knights, and you Madam with your Brother, and you women, whether
this Damsel will conduct you, and there you shall be welcome for my sake. When
Tiriana heard these words, she redoubled her tears, and she sorrowfully
answered: Sir Knight, I am in your power, and so unwilling to live, that I
would I were now dead. Madam, said Perion, I hope you will have more comfort
then you think for: And for your part Seignior Radiare, according to the
promise which we have jointly made together, I will (that you being arived at
the place whereunto I send you) that you suddenly dispatch two of your men, to
go advertize your Subjects that none of them stir against the Emperor of
Constantinople, but rather that they favor him in all that they can. Pardon me
answered he, my word was obliged to another before you. You may command me
whatsoever you please, but as for my faith it is more then my person. I have
promised and sworn to succor the King Armato, in all and through all: and as
I have told you, my life shall sooner end then my faith be broken. Truly said
Perion, and then I will not do it, and I should be very sorry that through my
occasion the word, of so great a Lord, and so wise a man should be falsified*
But follow the Damsel, and until I shall see you again, I commit you to God.
Then the Souldan, Tiriaxa, and the others, took their leaves of him, and
entering into the barque of Alquefa, the Knight of the Sphere said to her, I
humbly entreat you Damsel, humbly to salute on my behalf the Princess
Onolerea, and all the other Ladies of the Court: having said so he approached
near her, and secretly gave her a Letter to present to Gricilerea. Then the
wind being fair, the Apes began to row, taking the best way for their journey.

CHAP. XII.
How the Knight of the Sphere, Abies of Ireland, and Languines, arived at
Constantinople; and of the great good welcome which the Emperor made them.
ALquefa being thus dispatched, conducting to Trebis^^d the Souldan of Liquea,
Tiri^xa and her Brother, accompanied with their Train, The Knight of the Sphere
embarked with ^^i^^ of Ireland, Languines, and the King of N^p^^^ his Son,
recommending to Gods keeping those who would return to Cali^urnus. So they
driven by a South west wind to so good purpose, that without happening on any
adventure, they ariv^d at Constantinople the eighth day following: Of which the
Emperor being advertized, was mavelous and exceeding joyful, for he thought
that Lisvart his Grandchild was in his Company: wherefore he went to receive
them. And as Perion, Abies, and Languines did reverence him, Frandalo advanced
to embrace Perion; and in embracing him, he said to him: Sir Knight, I am so
much yours, that you may command me, as he who desires to obey you for the
honor of King Amadis, and Esplandian your Brother, whose friend a very much
affectionate servant I am. The Knight of the Sphere had never seen him;
wherefore the Emperor said to him, my son, you may well have heard speak of
the Earl of Frandalo; this is he who presents you his service, and he is the
very same to your friends, as he has witnessed to you. In good faith Sir,
answered Perion, he presents me with nothing but what he shall have of me when
he pleases, and that not without cause, for his great goodness and prowess is
so known and recommended throughout the world, that he may account himself
happy that has his acquaintance. By my soul, said Frandalo, in embracing you,
I may well say I have within my arms, the true effigies and portracture of the
flower of all Chivalrie, And this he said, for as much as Perion did wholly
resemble Esplandian his brother, the remembrance of whom struke the Emperor to
the Heart, that the tears came from his eyes, and at that instant the Knight of
the Sphere presented unto him the Prince Adariel, saying to him: Sir behold the
Heir of the King of Naples, who, if it so please God may one day do you
service; The Lad set his knee to the ground, to kiss his hands: but the
Emperor graciously took him up, making him very welcome: then they went up
into the Palace, and leading the Knight of the Sphere by the hand, he lead him
toward the Empress, to whom the Emperor in entering said: Madam, behold your
son returned, nothing is now wanting but your daughter, who in time we shall
have. The Knight of the Sphere made great obeisance to her, and the Emperesse
arose for to kiss him, and in kissing him, she said to the Emperor: By my God
Sir, you have done well, to bring me that thing which of all things in the
world I most desire to see, and so I know certainly that my son is enchanted,
all the world together shall not make me believe, that this Knight is not
Esplandian. Then she came to embrace Adariel, Languines, and Abies of Ireland:
and because it was dinner time, the Emperor commanded the Tables to be covered
in the great hall: for he would eat in public, for the love of the new come
Knights. Frandalo was come but that same day, and he was sent for the occasion
of the Pagans great preparation to return into Thrace, for which cause all the
Court was very sorrowful: But that which troubled them more was, that as the
last course was serving, a great whirlewinde beat against the windows, and
soon after a great clap of thunder mingled with lightning, that all the
Company thought they had been buried quick: and not without cause: fot the
darkness continued for above a quarter of an hour so black, that the cleerest
sighted there could not see the greatest of the Company. And as his darkness
vanished, there appeared in the air, in the middle of the Hall, a flaming
Sword, tainted with blood, at the end whereof hung a writing of Parchment,
sealed with a great seal of Gold, which the Emperor caused presently to be
reached down, to see what was therein contained. And there was found written
these words.

MELIA the Infanta, the cruellest enemy of all Christendom, to thee Emperor of
Constantinople, ruin and entire curse. Know that you shall in short time
perceive the evil, which is prepared for you through my occasion, such as the
like was never heard spoken of: for thou shall see with thine own eyes the
death of thine, the destruction of thy Country, a strange martyring in the
person whom thou love best in this world, and lastly, the end of thy life in
misery. In Testimony whereof, this Sword shall remain in the air near thy
great City, until that a Prophecy of Apolidon, which remains to be
accomplished, shall be effected. Then shall it vanish and be no more seen.


This writing being read, every one remained abashed, and the sword flew
upright, remaining in the air fixed as a true Commet. But this rumor was
hardly appeased, when another was heard through the Town, and it proceeded by
reason of two Giants: who are entered even as far as the Palace: leading a
Giantesse so richly habited, that the Diamonds and Pearls of her Robes were
unesteemable. And she had on her head a Circle of Gold, so well wrought, and of
so rare workmanship, that it was reported the workman had been ten years in
working of it, and had done nothing else. These Giants were armed at all
points, except the Head piece and Gantlets: and they were accompanied with
twenty other Knights of the same furniture. Which being come to the Emperors
knowledge, he doubted of treason, wherefore he and his ran hastily to arms:
and in the mean time the rest wrapped their mantles about their arms, and
holding their swords in their hands, they purposed to keep the entrance of the
Palace. Where soon after the Giants arived, in such equipage as you have
heard; the ancientest of which gave sign of Peace, praying some body to
conduct him before the Emperial Majesty, the which was done. And being arived
there they set their knees to the ground, and the old Giant began to speak in
this manner. Most puissant Emperor, those who know me commonly call me Argamont
the valiant. This Lady which I conduct, is my wife, named Almatrasa, and this
other is my Granchilde, son to my Daughter named Ardadil Canile. And we all
have not long since adored false and lying Idols; but now we believe in jesus
Christ by the means of two Knights, the one called Quedragant, and the other
Vaillides; with whom I combated, and they vanquished me in the Frontiers of the
Isle of the Fueille Blanch, which is mine: and they were so courteous to me,
that I having the worst in the Combat, they saved my life, under this
condition, that I should obey their good pleasure. Then he declared how all
happened between them. To which the Emperor took a singular great pleasure:
and they did them great Honor, and made them very welcome, especially by the
Knight of the Sphere and his Companions, praising with great affection the good
beginning of Knighthood, which was in Quedragant and Vaillides, of whose
affair they being desirous to know further, they requested of the two Giants
to tell them where they had left them. Sirs, answered Argamont, as soon as they
saw me out of danger, and my wounds closed, they prayed me to come, and attend
them in this place: at that instant they embarked themselves to go in search
of a Knight, for whose absence they were grieved, assuring me nevertheless,
that if within four months they had no tidings of him, they would without
further delay come to this City, attending the Seige of the Pagan Princes: of
which sir, said he, to the Emperor, you have been already advertised, and
behold my son, who can tell you for certain, as he who has been present in a
great Muster and Assembly which they had; I have scarcely known the half said
the Emperor, I pray God help me. And in saying thus the tears fell from his
eyes, for he much doubted the threats of Melia: For as much as the writing
contained the ignominious death of the person which he loved best in the world.
He well knew the Enchantment as well of his son as of his Daughter, and
therefore he feared that this injury would fall upon Lisvart, whom he thought
to be safer then in the hands of the Enchantresse: but he was deceived, as you
have formerly heard. So the Giants and their train were magnificently
received, and the Emperor gave them fair presents, even having understood of
Argamont that he would not depart from thence so long as he should have need of
them, but that they would faithfully serve him, according to what they had
sworn to Vaillides and Quedragant. And as they were in this discourse, news
came by a Scout, that without doubt the Pagans were already assembled in great
Companies in the Isle of Tenedos, and purposed to dislodge about the end of the
ensuing month, for which cause the Emperor called his Council, where it was
concluded, that Messengers should be dispatched, some to Sardinia, and Scicilia
(and in their passage they should inform the King of Naples, Adarials father,
the good fortune of his son) and others toward the Emperor of Rome, the Kings
of Spain, of Gaul, and of great Britain. Then from thence to Quedragant, and
to the Kings Cildadan, and of Bohemia, to advertise them of the great
enterprise of the King Armato: and to entreat them for Gods sake, to send them
the greatest Company of great Vessels that they can possible to succor
Thrace, which otherwise would be ruined. And by reason that this voyage would
be long, it was thought fit, that in the mean time, that Frandalo should
retire to the Port of the defended Mountain, and with the King Norandell, who
ordinarily staid there, they should stop (if they could possible) all Merchants
ships or others: to the end that they might hinder their enemies from victuals,
if they should march forward without forcing the places. And that the Emperor
should remain in the City, attending the news of the other Christian Princes,
to whom Messengers were sent, who were embarked that very day; and with
pitiful Letters, as well of the Emperor, as of the Knight of the Sphere;
Languinea Abies of Ireland, and others, they made such diligence, that their
legation had the fruit, as you shall hear hereafter. But first I will tell you
of some and ventures that happened to Garinter and Perion sons of Galaor: of
whom we have not as yet spoken, since they departed from Constantinople.

CHAP. XIII.
How Garinter and Perion combated against the King of Sibernea, and his
Nephews, whom they vanquished in open field.
YOu have heard in the fifth book of this present History, how Garinter and
Porion sons of Galaor, received the order of Knighthood by the hands of
Esplandian, who soon after embarked themselves, and passed into the Isle of
Californus, where they had war a long time against some, who inhabited the
borders of their Country, especially with the King of Sibernea whom they chased
unto the principal town of his Kingdom, where they held him besieged, at
that time that Talanque, Manely, and the Queen Calafia arived at Californus,
returning from their voyage where they had found Perion de Gaul, as you have
heard. So the Queen would go no further, nor go to the Seige: But Talanque
and Manely, without sojourning, came to find them, using their utmost endeavor
to go thorough with their enterprise. The pleasure which these four Knights
had in meeting together was great, Talanque and Manely being arived in so good
time, to see the Combat that was agreed of between Perion, Garinter, and two
of their men, against the King of Sib^rnea, and three of his nephews: under
this condition, said Garinter, if the victory remain on his part, that his
Country shall remain as free unto him as it was before the war, and if we are
vanquishers, he must leave it unto us peaceably, without quarrelling at any
time: Now we know for certain that he is a good Knight, and his three Nephews
are accounted the best of this Country: but if you please to be on our side, I
hope with Gods help, that our fortune will be wholly prosperous. In good faith
answered the others, we will do it truly, and we will stay until the day be
come. That will be to morrow, said Talanque, therefore rest your self for to
day, that you may be the fresher about your business. And so at that time they
would enterprise nothing, but attending for the time to fight, they spent the
time in discoursing of the skirmishes and assaults which they had given the
Town, during the Seige, until the next morning: when a Trumpetter brought the
Hostages from the King of Sibernea. For which cause, after the oaths and
Ceremonies in such cases observed on both sides, those who were appointed to
fight, entered into the field, and the King addressed himself to Perion, whom he
met in such manner, that without the help of his horse neck, he had been on
the ground. But it happened worse to the King: for Pe^ion disarmed him, and
threw him down to measure his length on the grass. Garinter did as much to one
of the Kings nephews, and Talanque to him that he charged, although that
himself was forced to a light; for his horse was so shaken at the Shocke, that
he stayed in half the way: and as for Manely, he leaped from the saddle, and
likewise he against whom he ran. Nevertheless less none of them showed
themselves dismayed, but aro^e with great celerity, and laying hands on their
swords, there began between them a hard and cruel battle. It is very true, that
the King of Sibernea, and one of his Nephews, forced Perion and Garinter,
otherwise they would have cut their horses bridles: and their skirmish endured
so long, that by the space of four hours, it could not be discerned, who
would have the better or the worse. For the King of Sibernea had given such
blows to Perion, that making fire come from his eyes, he was forced to set his
knee twice to the ground, at which he was so animated, that taking his sword in
both his hands, he hit the King between the neck and the shoulders, where he
wounded him so soarely, that he never after stirred, but died. Talanque on the
other side did not sleep, but fought courageously with his enemy: and he was so
much favored of fortune, that finding the joint of the Gantled, he gave such a
blow, that he separated his hand from his Arm. Then through pain he gave a
great cry, and thinking to have recourse to a swift slight to save his life,
he turned his back which gained him but little, for he was thrown down by his
enemy, and shamefully put to death. Which Garinter seeing, he received so much
virtue, that with one blow he cut the nail and armor of him who had so long
resisted him: and the sword entering three foot into his body, he gave up the
ghost. And the like happened to the fourth, against whom Manely had much to
do: for he cut off his head most bravely. Behold how it happened to the King
of Sibernea and his Nephews, who lying dead on the field, Garinter and his
Companions retired into their Tents, leaving the cries, and complaints to those
who were thereby endamaged, as well for the loss of their friends, as of their
town, which was rendered, and put into the power of Perion, according to the
sworn agreements. And the day after by the advice of all, Garinter remained
crowned King, to which charge, nevertheless he left Polinas for Governor, that
he might follow strange adventures when he pleased. Wherefore so soon as he
had received the homages and oaths of fidelity of his Subjects, leaving good
Garrisons where there was need, and Polinas for Viceroy, he returned with his
Companions into the Isle of Californus, where the Queen made them welcome. But
they sojourned there but a few days: For so soon as they had, men and
vessels, to go to the succor of Constantinople they went to embarque
themselves. So we will leave them in the keeping of our Lord, and we will
return to the Duke of Ortilensa, who being exceeding joyful of so fair a
Conquest, as he had had over the King of Breigne, took his way to Trebisond.

CHAP. XIV.
How the Duke of Ortilensa, having vanquished the King of Breigne, he returned
to Trebisond: and of the arival of Alquefa at the Court of the Emperor.
IN the former Chapters you have heard, that after the pursuit and slaughter
of the Soldiers of the King of Breigne (who fled in the P^out) the Duke of
Ortilensa and his Company returned to the Camp: and by reason of the night
which drew forwards, they could not know the dead until the next morning, when
they went to revisit them, and they found Groter son to the King of Breigne,
wounded with ten mortal wounds, and so trodden with horses, that the form of
his face could not be seen: a little further on the right hand, was also the
King his father stretched out at his length. Then as they were esteemed for
Traitors, so they were separated from the others, and by reason of the honor of
their Royal dignity, they were honorably interred. The booty then being
taken, and the Country reduced to the obedience of the Emperor of Trebisond,
the Duke of Ortilensa took his way toward his Master, and he was very well
received: and not he only, but Floreston, Parmenir, and Galuanes for whose
sake the Emperor held open Court six whole days; for which cause the three
Knights had convenient opportunity to entertain the Ladies: who made them
understand by effect the extreme pleasure which they took in their so soon
return. One amongst them all showed her self to be sad and pensive. Alas!
this was Onolore^, who died an hundred times in an hour, by reason of the
Captivity of her love! which she nevertheless dissembled to her power: but love
pressed her so near, that tears were as familiar in her eyes, as water in the
pipes of a fountain. And that which more increased her Martyrdom: Alquefa (of
whom our History has so often mentioned) arived with the Prisoners, which
Perion sent to Onolorea, and presenting her self to the Emperor as dinner was
ending, humbly recommending to him the unknown Gentleman, whom he had armed
Knight. Ah! said the Emperor, Damsel my friend, I pray you be so courteous to
us, as to tell us, where you have left him, and whether he purposes to make us
amends for the injury which he did, in not discoveting himself to me. Sir,
answered she, if he has done you any injury, it was not by his good will, and
therefore he is the more to be excused: but if you please to know further of
his estate, suffer me to perform that which he has commanded me to say to
Madam Gricilerea your daughter. Yes truly answered the Emperor. Then Alquefa
addressing her self to the Princess, said to her: Madam your Knight (who
surpasses all others in Prowess and Chivalry) salutes you, as he whom he
desires to serve all his life, in testimony whereof he sends you by me, that
which he has conquered since the time he departed from you in much heaviness.
Then Alquefa presented to her the great Sultan of Liquie, and the King of
Jerusalems two children. This Gentleman said she, is a most renowned Prince
amongst the Pagans, and that for good cause: for he when he is in liberty, can
command the Country of Liquie, as much as the Emperor your father can his. And
these others are children to the King of Palestine, brother and ^ister, whom he
entreats you to receive, and dispose of as your own. He has given me in
charge to assure you, that in using them well he shall be much pleased, by
reason of the greatness of their births, and the Conquest which he had made of
them in his beginning. Then she recited to them, how she had conducted him from
the first day that she found him in Ireland, the deliverance of Alquif her
father, the aid he gave to Languines, and Abies of Ireland, and particularly
all that which happened until the very hour, that he and his Companions were
embarked to go to Constantinople, to succor the Emperor, who expected the
Seige of the Pagans: in good faith Damsel, answered Gricilerea, the honor which
he has done me is so great, that I have good reason to wish him well: but he
has displeased me to enterprise so long a journey; before he came to me, if he
be so much mine as he boasts. Of one thing I will assure you, that I will
never pardon him, until he comes to me in person to ask pardon, and then it
may be he may be refused. Madam, said Alquefa, you shall see him here in short
time, as he has promised me, for he desires your presence and favor more then
any thing in this world. Then addressing her self to the Empress, and the
Princess Onolorea, she delivered the message of Perion. You may easily imagine
whether Florestan and his Companions were not well pleased, to hear so good
news of him whom they sought for, but this was nothing in respect of
Grioilereas joy, who ceased not to entertain Alquefa all that day in such
manner, that she had an opportunity to deliver the Letter to her, which the
Knight of the Sphere had sent, the tenor whereof follows.

I Know not, Madam, how I can recompense the great good which you granted me
that day, that you accepted me for yours: seeing that the best Knight in the
world ought to esteem himself worthy to serve so great a Lady and
Princess. And I then poor dumb Creature, without having as then done any
knightly act, having attained to such honor, it is a marvel, if my heart has
desired to enterprise a thing, by which (with reason) it has hopes to remain
in so high a place, separating from it all fear and peril of death by the
continual remembrance that it has of your good favor, which has in such
manner cap^^vated my liberty, that my eyes are chained to your happy presence,
from that very day wherein they saw the splendour of your divine face. But this
prison is mingled with great Liberty, that it causes me to live, for the
desire which I have always to obey and serve you; being assured that otherwise
my soul being afflicted with your absence, could not remain one hour in this
passionate body. Therefore Madam, I humbly beg of you, to command me that which
your pleasure is with me, and having pity on your poor slave, send him your
pleasure by this faithful Damsel.

From him who kisseth the hands of your greatness in all humility.


Gricilerea then having read this Letter was so surprised, that she changed
color three or four times, not for displeasure which she had: but (to the
contrary) with the force of love, which encompassed her courage so much, that
Alquefa perceived her ready to sound; wherefore she embraced her, demanding of
her what feebleness had overtaken her. Ahah! My great friend said she, when
shall I see him? who endures so much for me, and whom you have chosen amongst
the best Knights of the World! Madam, said Alquefa, my Father who has promised
you, will find the means to send him to you, when it shall be time; in the mean
time content your self as well as you can, and let him hear from you as often
as he can. And then at that time, a Damsel came to tell them, that the
Empress asked for them: wherefore altering their discourse, they returned into
the Hall, where all this great company was at that time, assembled. And in that
very hour the Emperor was advertized by a Venetian Brigantine, that the Army
of Pagans was on the Coast of Natolia, with more then ten thousand Vessels,
going to the straits of Propontide: for which cause following his purpose, he
commanded to raise men from all parts, for he would in person go to aid
Christendom.

CHAP. XV.
How the Emperor of Trebisond embarked to go against the King Armato, and
the sailing of the Pagans to Constantinople.
THe Emperors Army being ready to embarque, and all his Vessels being
furnished for War, and well fraught, he established for his Lieutenant
General, Pardarea, Duke of Antelea, who he commanded before he embarked, to
make a general Muster of his Soldiers. And sinding them to be the number of
sixty thousand Horsemen, and fifty thousand resolute Soldiers: wherefore the
Emperor was so glad, that at that very hour he crowned Pard^rea King of
Breigne, who was his Brother-in-Law, to the great content of all the Company.
And the next day according to the advice of the Masters and Captains, every
one entered into his Ship; for the wind was fair to set sail, and the Emperor
himself have left the Duke Delafonta with the Empress, for Governor of his
Country, commended her to the keeping of our Lord, and caused to weigh anchors.
Then he who had seen at their departure from the Port this great equipage,
surely he would easily think the greatness of this Lord and Prince; for the
Sea was in a manner covered with Vessels, being hung with Flagges, Banners, and
Streamers, with so many Trumpets, Fifes, and Drums, that it was a thing almost
incredible. So then Alquefa would make no longer abode in Trebisond, seeing the
departure of the Emperor; but so soon as he had left the Port, she went to the
Empress, of whom she took leave, and likewise Gricilerea, assuring her, that
so soon as she had made one voyage to her Father, she would go in search of
the Knight of the Sphere. For which cause the Princess delivered her a Letter
to present on her part, praying her with great affection, to persuade him to
come to her as soon as he could possibly, which she promised to her: And
re-entring into her Vessel, she set sail. So let us leave her on the Sea, and
let us return to the Messengers who went to advertize the Christian Princes of
the seige of Constantinople; who had so fair wind, that they gave Order ^o
what they had enterprized. And the Emperors of Rome, King of Naples, and the
rest were ready to dislodge, at the time that they had knowledge, that the Army
of Armato might go into Thrace. For this cause entering into their Vessels,
according to the Region and Climate from when they dispatched, traversing so
many Seas, that at last (not without great travel) they met in the Defended
Mountain, where they waited for the Earl of Frandalo and Morandell, with
their equipage. At this very time, the King Armato accompanied with Almirin,
brother to the Souldan of Liquie, the King of Jerusalem, and Soldans of Persia,
of Alapa, of Babylon, the Califs of Egypt, Taborlanes, and many other great
Lords of the East, parted from Tenedos with so great a number of Ships,
Brigantines, Galeaces, Galleys, and Foists, that the Sea seemed to be covered.
But they found not the Emperor so unaccompanied, but he had thirty thousand
Horsemen, and fifty thousand bearing Arms Nevertheless he seeing so great a
number of his Enemies to approach so near to the great City, and not having had
any news of them from whom he expected aid, he was somewhat grieved, which he
hid: and the better to assure his men, he was of advice that they should (as
much as they could possible) hinder the King Armatoes Army from Landing, giving
them continual Alarumes to vex and trouble them. For which purpose were
appointed the Knight of the Sphere, Languines, Abies of Ireland, Argamont, and
his Son, with ten thousand Horsemen, and two thousand chosen Soldiers. Who
having had notice of the place where the King Armato would take Land, they
issued out in good equipage, and the same day they discovered the Vanguard of
the Pagans, with the King of Jerusalem, accompanied with three Giants' Brothers
to him whom the Knight of the Sphere had killed at the Fountain, where he had
delivered Alquif the Damsells Father. So the Christians remained close and in
ambush, to see the countenance of the ochers; but they made there no long stay,
before they saw the Pagans Vessels by little and little to approach the Land,
and lastly to throw Planks, and descend into Cock-boats, Skiffes, and other
little Boats, whereby they might Land their men. I do believe that those who
were the most diligent, were not the bestused; for Perion and his company ran
upon them, and defeited a great many, before they could be succored, and
until their battle and Rear-guard could join together, and with full sail
gained the shore, in such manner that Perion and his company were forced to
retreat, and close themselves, until the three Giants with a great band of
Palestines, rushed on them with so much boldness, that he who had seen them,
would have judged no otherwise, but that they had a desire to perform their
utmost. Nevertheless they found much to do when they came to Land, by reason
that Perion and Argamont with their squadron held together; and at that time
there was so great a Conflict, that many on both sides lost their lives there.
And by reason that the Pagans gained I and, and forced ther^ ^^^llously,
Argamen^ went to the Knight of the Sphere s^^wing him the eminent peril and
danger they should fall into, (...) it were not provided for. Wherefore, he (as
a wise and advised Captain) began from henceforwards to retire, nevertheless
they sustained the heat of the skirmish: which the Califfe of Egypt
understanding, re-advanced, and entering further in the press then he should,
he was met by Perion, who gave him such a blow on the head, that he separated
his head in twain. For which, one of the King of Jerusalems Giants that
followed him, was so angered, that he lifted up his sword with both his hands,
thinking to give Perion the like payment; But Argamont saw the blow coming,
set his shield before him, which entered into it above a foot and a half.
Surely this force was esteemed mavelous among others: for Argamonts shield
was of fine steel, and nevertheless it was cut as it were in half; and as the
Giant assayed to pull out his sword, Argamont gave him so great a blow with an
Iron Crow which he had, that he bowed his head to his saddle, and in rising,
Perion separated his shoulders from his sides, of which he dyed. When Golfon
his brother saw him in such extremity, never was wild Boar so mad with Dogs,
and he soon made Argamont understand it, for he sought for him out amongst
them all: and at his arivall, he gave him so many blows with his Mace, that
without the help of his Son Ardadile Canile, he had lost his life: but be
took Golfon at an advantage, and he thrust his sword through his body. What
will you that I say? God did well declare this day, that he would aid the
Christians: and it was so to be wondered at, how any one of them could escape,
they being encompassed with the whole power of the Pagans. Nevertheless they
found means to save themselves, and retreat with their honors unto the very
walls of the City. There Abies of Ireland, Languines triumphed; for although
they were wounded, yet they did as great Deeds of Arms, as any Knights could
do, and great part of the honor of so fair a retreat, might (without
injuring the others) be attributed to them. The Pagans having then pursued the
Knight of the Sphere, and his company even to the trenches of the Town; they
had so many darts thrown at them by those that were within, that they were
forced to retreat, without daring to pass any further; and by this means, the
Christians might enter with ease, not without great loss: for there was killed
twelve or fifteen thousand on their side, and more then twenty thousand of the
others. Then the Gates were presently rammed up, and a strick watch was set in
all parts: and that same day the enemies encamped on the Sea shore, leave the
Kings of Rabie and Galoffe, for Captains of their Army on the Sea; with
necessary equipage. And the night following they began to draw near to the
Town, and fortify their Camp; in the midst whereof Melia commanded to erect
her Tents and Pavillions, and next to her were those of the King of Giants
Island, and Gradafilea his Daughter, who had been to fetch Lisvart out of
Trebisond as you have heard. During these transactions, the Emperor of
Constantinople, and the befeiged did continually labor, expecting every hour
the battery of the place, and the assault thereof: but that was not so soon as
they thought: for Melia (without whose counsel nothing was enterprized) willed
that those who had wearied themselves on the Sea, should first refresh
themselves; and in the mean time she commanded a great number of double
Ladders to be made, to mount the Walls withal, when she should find
opportunity, And although this was one of the occasions, why the assault of the
Town was so long delayed, yet there was one greaten. The villainous woman would
have Lisvart burnt before all: for she knew by her devilish act, that so long
as he lived, the Emperor of Constantinople would be invicible: which she
declared to the chief of the Anmy: but she purposed, God prevented it
otherwise, as you shall hear.

CHAP. XVI.
How by the means of the Infanta Gradafilea, Lisvart had his life saved, and
reentred into Constantinople.
THe Infanta Gradafilea was present at the Counsel, that was held by Melia and
the Captains of the Army, to advise of forcing the place, where the Sorceress
resolved on the death of Lisvart, who according to her advice should be burnt
to ashes, in the most eminent place, that he might be seen of the besieged, to
which the Pagan Princes soon accorded. But if Gradafilea had been of the
Counsel, and might her verdict have swayed, the love which she bare to Lisvart
had hindered the judgment; for she could willingly have laid down her own life
to save his. And therefore she purposed in her self, seeing she had been the
greatest means of his bringing from Trebisond; that she would likewise save
him, and put him in the custody of his greatest friends in Constantinople. To
perform which, she resolved to cheat her own Father, who was newly made
keeper of Lisvart: therefore the day before Lisvart should suffer, she went to
her Father, and told him that she had a matter to tell him of, which did not
only concern his life, but also his honor. The old man giving too great
credit to his daughters speeches, left all until the evening, and gave command
to the watch not to hinder his daughter in going in and out. She then knowing
the Commands of her father, and the liberty she had to go to him at any hour
of the night, she deferred it until the changing of the watch, and then she
would take one of her women with her, to the end that Lisvart might put on her
woman's apparel, and so pass the watch unexamined; and thus she concluded, and
executed it, so that at the time appointed, she and her woman did set forwards
with all things requisite. And passing through the watch, she came to her
fathers chamber where she communed with him so long, that in the end he fell
asleep, and so did all the rest. Gradifilea hearing them snore, she retired
into a wardrobe, where Lisvart lay, whom she found very pensive and solitary:
wherefore coming near him, she said: fair Sir, I pray you be content and arise.
He seeing a woman at such an hour, could not at the present tell what to
think: nevertheless, at the last he answered her: Truly Madam, you pray me to
do that, which to me is impossible, seeing that you alone and no other (as I
think) have been the cause of all the evil that I have endured, and am like to
suffer. My imprisonment does not so much grieve me, as to see my friends so
straightened, and I not having the power to help them. In good faith, said she,
you shall pardon me. It is most certain that I brought you from Trebisond; but
did not know of the ill you were to suffer, and have since suffered: and to
make it appear for truth, if you will grant me one boon at any time that I
shall ask it of you, I will use my utmost endeavor to release you. Madam,
said Lisvart, I will deny you nothing if I may have my liberty. Then said she,
arise, and put on the clothes which this woman shall give you, and follow me,
but be sure that you do not forget your own clothes to put them on when you
shall have occasion. Lisvart performed her will, and in the mean time
Gradafilea watched least any body should come: Great part of the night was
spent before Lisvart and his guide were ready, but a little before day, they
left the Pavilion secretly: and passing through the watch, one who was more
watchful then the rest demanded who was there. I said, Gradafilea, The watch
who knew her gave her the good morrow, and so they passed on until they came to
the Trenches, where she was again stopped; but she was not much hindered, for
the watch reverenced her, and asked her if she would have any company. No said
she, I will have none but these two Damsels. I will go and seek for the
weakest place of the walls, where a breach may be made to morrow. Go then
Madam, said the watch, and make no noise, that you may not be heard of those of
the City. Thus she performed her enterprise, and brought her Lover near the
City, which he soon knew. Then he being extreme joyful, began to give God
thanks, when Gradafilea said to him: Now it is time to save your self, take
your clothes and get out of danger. Ab ah Madam! answered he, I have great ca^^
to confess, that next to God I hold my life at your ^ands! and therefore in
what place soever I shall be, you may be sure to find me a ready servant to
obey and serve you. Saying so, he threw off his long garments and put on his
own. Gradafilea could not forbear ki^^ing and embracing of him with tears in
her eyes: and fearing to be discovered, without dareing to stay there, she
committed him to the protection of his Gods. And returning back, Lisoart passed
on, until he came to the City Gates, where the Sentinel discovered him, and
cried out aloud to him: Who goes there at this hour, return or I will make
you. Friend, said Lisvart, I pray open the gate, for I am such a person that
the Emperor will be glad of my return: The watchman knew well that he was his
Countryman, and therefore he spoke more mildely to him then he did the first
time: Saying to him, it is impossible to let you in until it be day: for the
Knight of the Sphere, who is Captain of this Company has the Key. And I am
sure he will not deliver it to any man unless he comes himself: and it is too
soon to awake him. I pray thee friend, said Lisvart, tell me who this Knight
of the Sphere is. The Centinell being wearied with so long discourse, snapt him
up and bid him go walk abroad. Upon these speeches a Captain of the band
came, and demanded of the Sentinel what was the matter: Captain said he, there
is a man who would come in, but if please you, I will set him away. At these
words the Captain went forwards, and said to Lisvart, friend, have patience
until day, for you cannot enter any sooner. Captain, answered Lisvart, if the
Emperor knew of my arival, he would be more joyful then you think for. I pray
you (out of courtesy) go tell him that I have brought him news that will much
content him. When the Captain had taken some notice of Lisvarts speech, he
began to remember him; for he in his younger years had been brought up near the
Emperor: wherefore he could not forbear, but he said aloud to him. Either your
speech deceives me, or I know you to be our Prince Lisvart. Friend, said
Lisvart, speak low, and do not name me again, for I am the same, and go to
the Emperor presently, and cause the gate to be opened. Ah, ah, ah Sir! said
the watch, stay a little, I will but only go and come. And saying so, he ran
to the Knight of the Sphere, whom he found asleep, but he awakened him, and
said to him: Sir, your Nephew is just now come to the foot of the wall, and
desires the Gate to be opened. How? answered the Knight of the Sphere, my
Nephew? I think you dream. Sir, said the Captain, I know him by his speech,
it is he without doubt. When Perion heard him speak so confidently, he took
the keys and went strait to the wall, and there he had some talk with
Lisvart. Then after he knew it was he, he went himself, and let him in. Then
they embraced one another, with great friendship, for Perion discovered
himself to be his Uncle. Sir, my Nephew said Perion, I think it b^st to
retire into my lodging until the Emperor rises, who will be very joyful of
your return. Let us go then said Lisvart. And so they retired: then they
being together alone, Lisvart told Perion how he went from Constantinople,
thinking to be made Knight at his hands, but said he, Milan sent for me by a
Damsel, who has since saved my life, when I was prisoner. Then he recited to
him all the usage he had received, and lastly, how he had escaped. By my God
answered Perion, see this wicked woman, she thought assuredly to make you die.
She shall miss of her purpose said Lisvart (if I can help it) but is there any
here that is called the Knight of the Sphere, for this night when I came, it
was told me the Knight of the Sphere had the keys, I pray tell me who this is
that has so much trust reposed in him. Thereupon Perion laughed, and told him
why he had this name, and the adventures he had with the Damsel Alquefa. In the
mean time Armato and Melia slept at their case, but in the morning, finding
Lisvart absent, they were ready to die with vexation and madness.

CHAP. XVII.
How Melia knew the loss of Lisvart, and of the displeasure that she and Armato
had, because he was saved in Constantinople, and of that which happened.
GRadifilea having (as you have heard) set Lisvart at Liberty, she soon
returned into his fathers tent, who she found awake. Then she told him what she
had done, nevertheless she hid from him the principal occasion, why she had
done it: and told him, that for her life she would not have had him to have
suffered, seeing that she brought him from Trebisond, under a fair shadow. The
King was so angered and vexed, that he was ready to come out of his bed to have
killed her, and that not without cause; for by this means the enterprise of so
many Lords upon Constantinople was broken, and he had likewise engaged himself
to deliver him up, whenever he should be demanded at his hands. Gradafilea
seeing him so angered, had no other means but only to fall at his feet on her
knees, and ask him pardon; for said she, he not deserving death I am ready to
die for it if you shall think fit. Ah ah! said the King, you have undone me,
for so soon as Armato shall know of it, he has good reason to take away my
means and my life also! Sir said she, Armato shall know that you are in no
fault, but that it was I alone, as I will confess to him, and let him do to me
what he think good. And she knew so well how to appease her fathers anger,
that he held his peace, and arose and went to Armatoes tent, and awaked him to
tell him of the folly of his daughter. And as he gave him the good morrow,
Armato asked him what good news he brought him so soon. Ah sir, said he, rather
what misfortunes? How said Armato? So the King told him of the loss of Lisuart,
and the whole enterprise of Gradafilea. Oh ye Gods! cried Armato, have I so
highly offended you, that I deserve so great a punishment? then in great
choler he commanded the King to fly from his presence; for said he, there
shall none of you depart this Country without suffering death, and perpetual
captivity. Armato cried so loud, that Melia who was lodged in the next
Pavillion heard the noise: wherefore she arose in her smock, and went to the
King who was much displeased: but she was more when she understood the cause*
she having known of Lisvarts flight, began to tear her hair, and her smock
and her very flesh. This noise being heard of some, and they thinking their
enemies had surprised them, they cried the Alarnm, that on a sudden all the
field was in arms. So the Souldans of Persia and Alapa came to Armato, to know
what was the matter: and when they knew the cause, as wise men by fair speeches
they found the means to appease Armato and Melia: telling them that they might
be the cause of frightning the whole Army. For said these Lords, seeing that it
is the pleasure of our Gods, what will you do? will you contend with Jupiter?
do you think he will do any thing but for our good? and it may be we have
offended him. Therefore let us go to him, and appease him with our prayers,
and not anger him more. You may say what you please, said Armato: but the Rogue
that had the keeping of him shall die, and also she that conducted him. Sir,
said the Souldan of Persia, you have to deal with men, he is come without
entreaty, or sending for from a far Country, and has carried himself, as
every one knows, it may be when he has been heard to speak, he will be found
more innocent then you think for, therefore let him be heard, then if he has
offended, he may be punished by the advice of the Princes of this Camp, and it
may be of his own men. These Lords of Persia and Alapa did so much that they
somewhat appeased the King Armato and Melia, And in the mean time the Camp
continued in form of Battle, whereupon it happened, that they who went the
Rounds on the City walls heard the noise of the Trumpets in the air. It was as
then but at the point of day, wherefore doubting they should be surprised, and
that the enemies would storm the place, they suddenly advertised the Emperor,
the Knight of the Sphere, and the principal Captains, who ran hastily to their
charge, and remained there until Sunrising, when they saw the Pagans retire.
The Emperor did not then know any thing of the return of his Son: but soon
after Perion brought him to him, and with a grace said to him in presenting
him: Sir, the last night I took this Spy, what is your pleasure shall be done
with him? You may well imagine if the good Prince were well pleased: for the
tears fell from his eyes in embracing him. During these passages, Languines and
Abies of Ireland came, who embraced him, and asked him what good Angel had
brought him thither. Then the Emperor asked of him how he came thither, and
from whence he came. Then Lisvart recited to him his whole passed fortunes
since Gradafilea carried him from Trebisond, until that present, and said he,
the Alarm which you have heard has been only for my loss. Oh God! said the
Emperor, let us go to the Empress, for I am certain she will be very glad of
this good news. Then he took Lisvart by the ^and, and went to the Empress, whom
they met going to Mass: but she stayed when she saw the Emperor who presented
Lisvart unto her, saying. Madam, do you know this Gentleman? This is your son
said she, who may account this adventure the strangest and dangerousest that
can happen in all his life. Praised be God! said the Empress. And kissing him
a thousand times, she would not suffer him to go out of her sight until it
was dinner time, and then he related to them all that which had happened in the
Army of the Pagans, and part of their Counsels. And so falling from one
discourse to another, the Tables being withdrawn, he spoke to Perion, saying:
Sir, my Uncle and I departed from this Country (as it is well known) to go
in search of you who was reported to be lost. And my chiefest purpose was to be
made Knight at your hands, not knowing of whom better to have the same, you
being brother to my Father, and Son to my Grandfather Amadis. Therefore let me
entreat you to let me obtain this honor at your hands to morrow, and that
without the City Gates, that thereby the enemies may see it, and of which they
will be very sad. Sir, said Perion, there where the Emperor is present, I may
lawfully be excused of your request: The Emperor will pardon me if he pleases,
and I will humbly entreat him to entreat you on my behalf. I pray let it be
so, said the Emperor. Seeing that it pleases you both said Perion, I will to
morrow do what lies in me to perform, therefore I pray said he, prepare your
self, and watch this night, as is the custom: Lisvart kindly thanked him,
then night being come, he entered into the Chapel, and accompanied with many
high persons, he remained at his Orisons until the Sun arose.

CHAP. XVIII.
How Lisvart received the Order of Knighthood, and of the great mervails and
adventures that happened the same day.
LISVART having watched, as it is the custom, the Emperor came to him in the
Chapel, being accompanied with the Knight of the Sphere, two Giants, and many
other great persons. And the time being come for the accomplishing of this
enterprise, which was to be done without the City gates: he commanded the
Soldiers to stand to their Arms, and be ready on the wall, least the Enemy
should (during the solemnity) assail them. And the Emperor kept only twenty
thousand men for his own Guard: then he caused the Gate to be opened, and close
to it was erected a high Theater, upon which he ascended, with Lisvart, the
Knight of the Sphere, and Argamont: and the Ladies stand upon the wall, where
they could see all that was done. The Pagans seeing so great a company of
people, they gathered together more to look on them, then to assail them. Then
Lisvart kneeled on his knees before Perion, who gave him the Order: but when he
came to gird on his Sword, they found that it had been forgotten: nevertheless
that did not hinder them a jot: for the Emperor bethought himself, that with a
better he could not begin to do deeds of Arms, then with that of the declared
King Lisvart, which he caused after his death (in remembrance of him) in the
hand of an old Statue of Apolidon which was on the Gates; And therefore he
prayed Argamont (who was taller then any of the rest) to take it down, but as
he lifted up his arm, there fell from the Sky so great a flash of Lightning,
mingled with such a thunder, that the Statue was torn in pieces, and there
issued from thence a Lion, the fiercest that could be seen, carrying in his
body a Sword, which had the pummel of a Carboncle flaming like fire. And that
which most frighted the beholders, the beast began to roar, and make such
pitiful cries, that every one was astonished: and at the same instant there
fell from the Clouds at the feet of the Emperor, a little Emerauld Coffer,
wherein was a Letter containing these words.

THe great wise and good Knight Apolidon, has forged with his own hands the
sword which this Beast presents to the good Knight, (who at the time that it
shall appear) shall be armed by the hands of the son of the brave Lion: and
therefore let no others enterprise to take the Sword from him, otherwise ^vill
may happen to him; then it was apparently known by reading of this writing,
that this Sword was allotted to Lisvart, and to none other. Wherefore the
Emperor said to him, Perform this adventure which is appointed for you. And
thereupon the new Knight approached near the Lion, and calling on his Lady
Onolorea for help he set on the Lion to take the Sword, and then there happened
an other flash of lightning, and so great thunder, that they thought the Sky
would have cloven in twain, and then the Sword that Melia had placed over the
City was seen fall down, and sink into the earth, and there issued from the
place the most hideous spirit that could be seen, that the most assured of the
Company was in great doubt: For this fantasy ran directly to Lisvart, who was
then so near the Lion that he snatched the rich Sword from him, and in
snatching it away, the Heaven, the earth, and the Sea were so troubled, that
there was not any living creature in ten miles space that was not astonished
for a quarter of an hour. A thing almost incredible, for this noise was heard
throughout all the Countries of Asia, Europe, and Africa: and the air was so
obscure, that neither Lisvart, the spirit, nor the Lion was seen, until the
Sun dispersed the darkness with its incomparable brightness. Then the Be^st ran
unto the Sea, and the new Knight remained stretched out all along, holding in
his hand the rich Sw^rd: and near him (instead of the fantasy) was the body of
Melia, as black as coal. Then Perion approached, who thought verily that
Lisvart was dead: But he found it otherwise, for he was but in a swound,
wherefore the Emperor commanded him to be carried to the Palace, and that the
Sword should be taken from him, until he was well, which was impossible to be
done. And as they were in these passages, a Knight brought the Scabberd and
belt, whereon was certain Characters, which at that time could not be
understood. And the Knight said, that he found them amongst the ruins of the
Statue of Apolidon. Lisvart being then laid in his bed, the Emperor consulted
what should be done with the body of Melia, and after diverse opinions heard, it
was at last concluded that she should be burnt in the public place, and her
ashes thrown into the air, which being come to the knowledge of Armato, he was
mervellously vexed.


CHAP. XIX.
How the Pagans purposed to assault the town, and of the great means they
used to storm it.
THe Pagans being abashed, and that not without cause, having seen so many
strange adventures in so short a time, could not tell what to think, especially
when they heard of the death of the Enchantress Melia. The news of whose
shameful death being come to the knowledge of Armato (by the means of a
Grecian Spy) did so much stir him up to wrath, that he swore he would never
depart from the City until he had raced it, and put all within it to the edge
of the sword. At last the Captains of the Army to appease him, promised to
assail it on the morrow morning, and to take it, or else to leave their lives
there in the place, and to that end they made their intent known to the
Officers of the Army, that every one might be ready with ladders and other
necessaries to fill up the trenches, and likewise their pioneers to undermine
the walls, that they might enter in on foot. The King of Jerusalem in the
Company of three Taborlaves, and a hundred thousand men had the charge of the
first on set; having for his aid the Souldans of Persia and Alape, if he should
be repulsed. And for the third onset was the King Armato in person, with so
great a number of Tures, that the earth was in a manner covered therewith. And
for the Sea, word was likewise sent to the Kings of Bugie and Giloffe, that so
soon as they should hear the sound of their Trumpets, then they should assault
the Port, and use their utmost endeavor to force the town on that part. The
Emperor of Constantinople knowing of this purpose, soon made it known to his
Captains, to the end that they might be in a readiness to do their endeavors.
deavors. Lisvart was not come to him self until then, but then he began to
speak, and news was carried to the Emperor, who came to him to know how he did.
Very well sir, answered he, although for a time the noise of the great thunder
has made me loose my understanding. I do not know said the Emperor, but I
think, you always think you are a fighting, for you would by no means let
go the sword which you have conquered. By my faith said Lisvart, I neither
thought of peace or war, nor scarce of my self. Truly said the Emperor, there
is no man living ever heard of the conquest of a sword so strangely as this
which you have, and behold! here is the Scabbord and belt. One thing
displeases me much, which is to think that you are not able to approve your
self against your enemies, who intend to come visit us to morrow morning. How
said Lasvart, do you think me to be so weak? No (with Gods help) I shall make
them know, that I am as well as ever I was, and thereupon he presently arose.
Then the Emperor said to him. My Son, the Knight of the Sphere, you and
Argamont with their Troop, shall have the guard of the Dragons gate, which is
the weakest place of all, the King of Hungary and the Earl Salader, that of
the Eagle, accompanied with the Prince of Brandalie, Abies of Ireland,
Languines, and Ardadile Cainle, for that place is almost as weak as the other.
And ye shall have both ten thousand men a piece, to sallie out upon them, if
you shall find it requisite. And I with a good number will remain in the
highest place of the City, to succor those that shall have most need, and I
will likewise place the women, and those of least defense to carry oil,
boiling water, stones, pitch, Sulphur, brimstone, and all manner of timber to
hinder the enemies entrance. Sir, said Argamont, it is requisite that some may
stand near the walls, ready to make up the breaches in the walls, that they
shall make, as they intend, but I will by Gods help do so much, that they
shall not escape so well as they think for: for I will tell you how I will do;
so soon as I know at what place they intend to enter, I will make a trench just
against the place, which shall be filled with faggots, Sulphur, Saltpeeter, and
pitch, and so I will give fire to it so soon as they shall enter upon it. Thus
they all consulted on what they would do on the morrow, and at that night they
placed a strict watch. So about the break of day, they who were to storm the
place, having double ladders, departed every one with his bundle out of their
trenches, and they made such a cry, that they were heard three miles about, and
so they ran straight to the wall, and placed their Ladders in so many places,
that they almost surprised those within; for they had soon made a breach
sufficient to enter in at, but before they got it, the trenches was almost
filled with dead Pagans, nevertheless they being covered with their shields,
and their swords in their hands, they ran to the Combat. Thus they gave the
assault in two sundry places, and the first and the strongest was where
Lisvart was, and where Argamont had done what he intended and thereby there was
cut off about six thousand, at which the rest being frightened, fall back as
fast as they had formerly approached. Which Lisvart seeing, he issued out at a
false gate, with a certain number of the most valiant, and fell upon the rear
of them; so that the stoutest of them lost heart, giving such fear to the whole
Army, that they who assailed the part where the Prince Brandalie was fled, and
were routed. But Armato came with his squadron, who made them turn their
faces, though against their wills; and in the mean time, they who had issued
out of the Town re-entered, and that without the loss of ten men. Armato then
being much animated with courage, purposed to revenge himself, and with ten
hundred thousand Turks which accompanied him, gave so strong an assault to the
breach where Perion was, that he had well nigh carried it; but the Emperor
came with so good aid, that the Combat lasted without breathing, for the space
of three hours. There Lisvart showed himself in his colors, for he stroke not
any Turk or Pagan, but he killed him. There triumphed the Knight of the
Sphere, Argamont, and Ardadile Canile, to whom approached the King of
Jerusalem: and as he purposed to cleave his head in twain, Argamont put
himself forwards, and gave him such a blow that he stunned him. Nevertheles he
was succored by one of his Giants, who purposing to kill Lisvart, took his
sword in both his hands to st^ike him, but Lisvart held up his shield, and had
his hand so nummed, that he thought he had lost it. Wherefore he soon revenged
himself: for he struck him who had so hurt him, and with one back blow he cut
off half his neck, and cast him dead at his feet. At which the King of
Jerusalem was so grieved, that he ventured into the press, and seeing Perion
(being the man that he hated most in all the World) he set upon him on his
back, and he reeeived three great blows before he could turn his face. And in
setting on him, he cried, Rascal, through your means my Children are
imprisoned; but I will soon be revenged of you, for you shall die without
remedy, and that presently. So Perion knew then, who it was that he dealt with,
wherefore he ran upon him, and at his arivall, struck him on the back so
strongly, that his eyes dazeled, and he staggered ready to fall. Thus the
Pagans and Christians handled one another, a great number whereof lay dead, as
well without the walls as within; for the assault hourly increased, but it was
well assailed, and well defended, in such manner that the King was thrice
repulsed, and he recharged them three times anew. Yet he knew that it was a
folly for him to strive with his fortune at that place, therefore he commanded
them to retreat; and he commanded the Archers to shoot continually. In the mean
time the Souldans of Persia and Alape, with their new mustred men, marched up,
and endeavored with all their might to storm the place, where they behaved
themselves so valaintly, that in the end they conquered the wall, and
constrained Abiet of Ireland and the rest to retreat. Which the Emperor
knowing of, he ran thither in person, and with twenty thousand men he forced
the Enemies to fall back into the Trenches. Never^helesse the number of the
Pagans was so great, that they continued in Combat hand to hand, for the fpace
of three hours; and there was so many slain, and so much blood spilt, that it
seemed to be a fountain. In the mean time, the Kings of Giloffe and Bugie,
forced into the Port in such manner, that thre^ thousand Arabians took Land,
and the fight lasted a long time: News whereof came soon to the Emperor; but
he had so much to do else where, that he could not lessen his Forces on the
Land, to aid them at the Sea, where they cried, the town is won, the town is
won: Nevertheless this joy lasted but a little, for they were soon driven back
by the Archers, who did shoot continually out of Houses that were near the
walls: In the mean time Ardadile Canile, came with three thousand fresh
Horsemen; yet all this help had been in vain: For God looked on the Town in
mercy, and the night came on, which was so black and rainy, that neither the
Pagans nor Christians, could discern one another. For which cause the
assailers were constrained to retire, and sound a retreat, being sorry that
they had missed of their purpose, which they hoped neverthelefs to execute on
the morrow; but they within provided in such sort, that instead of resting
themselves, they rested not all night from repairing their breaches, and the
Emperor himself went about to encourage them, in such manner, that by the
morning all the breaches were well repaired, and were in condition to resist
the enemy. Then the Emperor called a Counsel of Officers, and there they
resolyed, that Lisvart the Knight of the Sphere, Argam^nt, and Ardadile Canile,
with six thousand fresh men should defend the breach that was made the day
before: and that the King of Hungary, Abies of Ireland, Languines and ten
thousand footmen should keep the Gate. And the Emperor would stay as he had
done before, with ten thousand men, whom he would divide as necessity should
require, and thus they ordered their business. So let us leave them there,
until the next morning, when we shall see how things were carried.

CHAP. XX.
Of the aid that came to the Enemies, and of the great Fleet of Christians
which came to raise the Seige at Constantinople.
THe Pagans being retired, as you have heard, were very sad for their great
loss, for they had either killed or wounded the number of fifty thousand men.
But two things comforted them, the one was the certain hope to take the town,
and to sack and pillage it, and put all within it to the Sword, and so revenge
themselves for the death of their friends: the other was, that Pintiquinestra
Queen of the Amazons, came to their aid, accompanied with six thousand women,
as good warriors as could be possible. And Grifilan King of the Savage Island,
with five thousand Savages, bearing bows and arrows which they could use
singularly well. These two, the King and Queen, neighbors to one another,
hearing of the great preparations made by the Levant Princes, to invade the
Empire of Constantin^ple came especially, to try themselves against some
Christian Knights, who were bruited to be so valiant. The King Armato and those
of his host kindly welcomed them, and they continually discoursed to them the
assaults that they had made that day. And they so much bragged, that they told
them the Town had been taken had it not been for the night, wherefore then the
King Grifilan and the Queen were much grieved they had not made more haste. But
they therefore desired of Armato that they might give the first assault to the
Town on the morrow, which he soon granted to them: On the other side, they in
the Town labored to fortify themselves, resolving to keep the Town with
their lives, from those, at whose hands they expected no mercy. So soon as day
came, the King and Queen went strait to the breach, where the Pagans had the
day before entered the Town, and making a hideous cry (according to their
custom) they ran upon the Rampart. But the Archers that were in the breach so
well entertained them, that many Savages, and women lost their lives there in
cruel manner, nevertheless, that did not stop them; for they ran on straight
to the place, where Lisvart, the Knight of the Sphere, Argamont, and the rest
attended them. the Queen Pintiginestra being willing to show her renowned
Prowess, ran on the first, and combated with the Knight of the Sphere: but she
had like to have been thrown down, had it not been for the aid of her women who
came on so fast, that the Christians were forced to fall back, and the Amazons
cried out, the Town is won. But Argamont, Lisvart, and the Knight of the
Sphere, and the rest of the forces coming forwards made them leave that they
had conquered In the mean time Armato and the Califfs who assailed the other
part of the Town, were not sparing of their persons, but used their utmost
endeavor to storm it, but they found the Princes Saluder, and Brandalie more
active then they expected, in such manner, that more then ten thousand Pagans
lay dead in the place. Nevertheless, for the space of three quarters of an
hour, it could not well be judged who should have the best, for two Taborlanes
brought thither fresh men, and the Souldan of Alape came thither in person with
forty thousand men, who came so resolutely, that they had well nigh conquered
the place. Which the Emperor knowing sent aid thither presently, and this which
did most hurt them was the great store of pitch faggots, Sulphur, boiling
water, and Salt peeter, that the wall was all on fire, wherefore they were
forced to retire, and let the flame take its course. Behold how the poor City
was distressed by Land, and much more by Sea, when the watch of the King of
Bugie discovered in the way of the Defended Mountain a puissant Army at Sea,
sailing directly toward them: of which they came presently to inform those
who assailed the Port. Wherefore the King of Giloffe sent forth a Brigantine to
go see who this might be. And doubting it to be some aid to their enemies,
they retired from the Combat, and keeping their vessels in form of battle,
they marched toward the Pontique Sea, to the end that they might defend the
entrance of the Gulf if they should think fit. The Brigantine did what lay in
its power, to carry certain tidings, and tarried a long time without appearing
at all: and it had so good fortune that a little ship of Christians, which
thought to land to ge^ fresh water, fell into her hands. Wherefore turning
sail, she carried this Vessel into the place from whence she ^^me: and by the
Master of the ship they knew that the Army of the Christians were near, and
purposed to come raise the Se^ge at Conflantinople, and give their enemies
battle, before they should compass the means to retreat. This news did not a
jot dishearten or astonish the King of Bugie, but he asked if there were many.
Sir answered the Master, yes more then you think for. And of what Country?
said the King. Some of Gaul, said he, others of Rome, of Sobradise, of Spain,
of great Britain, of Ireland, of Scotland, of Norway, Sansuegue, Bohemia,
Mongoze, Su^^e, and Thesefame. Truly said the King, a fair company. Sir said
the Master, a few days since the Emperor of Trebisond, and the Kings of
Californus, and Sibernie, have joined with us, and I can assure you, that he
who has not seen this company of Ships, cannot boast of seeing the fairest
sight in the world. When the Kings of ^ugie and Giloffe had heard this
discourse, and that it was requisite diligently to provide for it, they gave
notice thereof unto the King Armato, and the other Souldans of their Host,
advising that seeing the enemy was so strong and so near them, they should
leave the straights of Pontus, and keep the Goulfe of Propontide, as well to
have provisions more easily from Natolia, as to defend themselves more
commodiously. Thus the news of the arivall of the Christians did quickly spread
abroad amongst those who did assail Constantinople. For which cause being
surprised with a mavelous fear, the most assured began to lose heart, and by
little and little to retire out of the Press. Which the Princes of the Army
perceiving, they caused a Retreat to be founded, and so retired unto their
Fort. Those of the Town being much abashed at these passages, could not at the
first tell what to think, until that a Citizen who watched at one of the
highest steeples, came to inform the Emperor, that toward the way of the
Defended Mountain the Sea was covered with Vessels, coming with full sails
directly toward the City, and that without doubt the Kings of Bugie and
Giloffe with their ships and furniture, were entered into the Gulf, going to
Natolia. I leave to your Judgments whether or no this news were well received.
And the Emperor doubting of the truth thereof, went in company of some of his
to the Port, where he saw the so long hoped for aid: before all which marched
one ship being of the largest size, where in was scene no other Mari^^^s ^or
Soldiers then Apes as green as Emeraulds, ev^^^ (...) holding his bended bow,
and arrows at his girdl^^ ^^d the nearer the ship came the more did those of
Constantinople admire, and that not without cause, for it was likewise built
after the true Pourtract of the firm Island. It staid not but landed, and
without any disturbance did cast Anchor, and threw plan^ks on the shore. Then
Alquefa came forth, accompanied with the other Damsels, all clothed in crimson
Taf^^^, each of them carrying a Harp, wherewith they ^^^de a harmonious noise.
And there followed near unto them, the most Puissant Amadis King of Great
Britain leading Oriana by the hand, clad with a vestment of figured cloth of
Gold, and behind, and next to them Vrganda the unknown; The Emperor Esplandian
and the Empress Leonorina: Then Cormella, and next to them, Don Galaor,
Briolanea, and King Florestan, and his wife, King Agries and Olind^, the King
of Bohemia, Grasandor, and Mabila, then Gandalin and his wife, and behind all
the rest came Mr. Elizabeth, and Ardan the Dwarf, carrying the Helmet of
Amadis, and his vermillion Shield, which Alquefa had given him. Now you are to
take notice that this strange Vessel had not above an hour since overtaken the
Christians, and by force of Oars had outgone all the other ships: without any
of them having the power to board her, to know who sailed therein. They who saw
them did much marvel from whence so many Apes came, and wherefore: but all was
done by enchantment, as you shall hereafter hear: let this satisfy you, that
it came so near to Constantinople; thus the Emperor knew by their Flags and
streamers, that all this Fleet were Christians, wherefore being exceeding glad,
he went with a good company to receive those who came to aid him. Nevertheless,
before I pass any further, I think you ought to hear and know, how these Lords
and Ladies of the Firm Island were disinchanted; and who gave them a vessel
so opportunely to come to the succor of the Emperor.

CHAP. XXI.
How the Kings, Lords, Ladies, and Damsels enchanted in the Firm Island, were
awakened, and of their travels into Thrace by the means of Alquif.
APOLIDON (who in his time, nor since ever had any one equal to him for
Magic, and Astrology) foreseeing the affairs which should happen to the old
Emperor of Constantinople; made the enchantment of the Lion, and the Sword,
that Lisvart conquered, when he received the order of Knighthood, and he could
so well work in his science, that at the time that this sword should be drawn
out of the body of the beast, and the great thunder heard (as it has been
already recited to you) all enchantments in the Firm Island, and many other
places should cease, and Melia should dye, who was kept beyond the course of
nature, more by the art of Negromaney, then any other means: she had of long
time in her custody, the chiefest of Apolidons books, and so much practice of
them, that she was second to none, in reference to this art, by which she
assuredly knew, that ske must leave this world and go to all the devils that
very day that Lisvart should be knighted: and therefore he fell in danger of
death many times: but seeing him escaped out of her hands, she raised a spirit
from the infernal deep, by the aid of which she hoped to hinder him in the
conquest of the sword, which the Lion bare. This is that fantasine (whereof you
have been told) who not being able to resist the will of God, instead of
binding Lisvart laid at his feet the body of the Sorceresse, and carried her
soul to the Devil: Now understand that at the same time that these things were
effected in Thrace; King Arban of Norwales was arived at the Firm Island,
where he often times went to see the Country, and pray to God to have mercy on
the poor enchanted creatures, who had so long time remained in the Palace of
Apolidon, which was so covered with darkness, since Vrganda had there made her
conjuration, that it was impossible to see any appearance of walls, or of any
other thing resembling a building; but he was in amazement, that the dark
cloud that covered him, fell like a mist, and by little and little, this proud
edifice returned into her first form (wherefore without fear of any danger)
he came into the defended chamber, where he saw Amadis being a sleep: yet
holding his naked sword in his hand, then Arban drew him by the hand so
strongly, that he awaked him on such a sudden, that Amadis being enraged, asked
of him, what he would have. Sir, replied Arban, it is now above ten years that
you have forgotten your self, for Gods sake go forth of this misery. How?
said Amadis, is it possible that I have slept so long? yea, verily, replied
Arban: and for proof of it, do you see my Lady Oriana, and these others what
countenance they have, then he approached near unto Oriana, much amazed at this
wonder, and did so much that he awaked her: saying to her, Madam, you have
liked sleeping as well as I, for it is, as it seems to me, you have slept
enough. Oriana who verily thought that Vrganda had placed her in the chair the
same day, asked Arban who he was, who related to her all that was past: and
that so it is so, said he, see you yet these other Lords and Ladies taken with
a most deep sleep. By my God answered she, Veganda has very much deceived us;
then coming to Galaor and Esplandian, and all the other whom she awaked, and
she told unto them all that Arban had told her; certainly never people were
more astonished, and scarce could believe it; when they perceived Ard^n the
Dwarse in such equipage; that none of them could forbear laughing: then Amadis
gave him a kick with his foot, saying to him; Ardan thou take too much
pains, bridle my horse: Ardan quite giddy arose, and thinking to find the
door, began to run round the chamber as though he had been drunk, then their
laugh increased when they heard Mr Elizabeth to snort, holding as yet in his
hands the book that Vrganda gave him; wherefore Esplandian took him by the
sleeve, and drew him very rudely, saying to him, in good faith sir, you dream,
you have taken so much pleasure in this book, that you have slept too too long;
awake you good sir, and tell us what news you have found there. Mr Elizabeth
marvelling, as if he had fallen from the clouds, opened his eyes, and finding
himself in such a condition, answered the Emperor; by my faith sir, I never
had book so long in my hand, and studied less then I have done in this, of one
thing I can assure my self, that since Vrganda put it into my hands, I have
been so sleepie that I can do nothing but snort. And as they were thus all
awaked of this strong sleep, the Governor of the Island came to tell Amadis,
that two Vessels were arived at the Port: in one of which was Vrganda the
unknown, and in the other a Damsel, who was accompanied with no other Mariners
or Pilots, but Apes, and the Vessel that they had brought, was the bravest and
best sitted in the world; but scarcely had he done his message, when Vrganda
entered in where they were. Then these Lords and Ladies consulting, came to
receive her, and as she kissed them one after another, she laughing, said to
them: truly, though I laid you here, my intention was no other (as I would have
you understand) then to prolong your lives; and hinder the perils and dangers
of death, which were likely to come upon you, without the sleep that you have
had. Now it has pleased the Lord to recall you into the world, by the Conquest
which your son Lisvart has obtained (said she to Esplandian) of a sword, which
the wise Apalidon had of long time destined to him. And because I know
certainly, that Alquif the greatest Magician in the world has sent to you his
daughter, with a ship and Apes which are arived in the Port, to carry you into
Constantinople, which the Pagans have besieged, I will not make you any large
recital of the things that have happened since the day that I let you in here,
but I council you, that you go to Sea as the Damsel will pray you, and follow
her and I will keep you company. Saying these words, the Damsel Alquefa entered
in, and with great reverence said to Amadis, and to the other Princes, that
Alquif her father would pray them, for their good, and the good of all
Christendom to enter into her ship, and she would conduct them unto the place,
where they should have both honor and pleasure: to this request they willingly
consented, and through the advice of Vrganda they embarked without delay: in
such sort, (that to be brief) they arived at Thrace the same day that the
company of Christians approached to Constantinople. So this Vessel guided by
the Apes passed among them, yet none of the company did euterprize to board her,
to know who was in her: yet they wondered to see beasts so well taught; yet it
was no marvel, for all was done by the industry of Alquif the Magitian; but if
they found this strange Amadis, and the other of the Firm Island (seeing such
an Army, and they so near Constantinople, did much more wonder) nevertheless
being landed (as you have been told) and seeing those of the City come forwards
to reeeive them, they praised God for the mercy which he had bestowed on them;
and instantly the Emperor who came first, espied Amadis and his son Esplandian.
Then greatly wondering at so strange an adv^nture, ran with open arms to
imbrac^ them, and addressing himself first of all unto Amadis, said to him,
with tears freely trickling from his eyes: Sir, my brother, the Lord be praised
for your so much desired return. Alas! who would ever have thought, that I
should see such an happy hour before I die? Sir, replied Amadis, he who never
forgets those that trust in him, well knew what would be necessary both for you
and us: and for this reason has delivered us out of darkness, to come to
revenge you of this most cursed people, who has done you so much wrong. Then
Oriana set forward, to salute the Emperor, who kissed her very graciously, and
in kissing her, said to her: by my faith Madam, I now well know, that I was
never more happy then now I am, having so sure and good a succor as yours. Sir
replied she, considering your great goodness, we women ought to bear arms, as
well as men, and come to succor you. So the Emperor held her no longer in
discourse for that time because the other Kings, Princes, Ladies, and Damsels
of the company approached to do him reverence: and in the mean while the
Knight of the Sphere, and Lisvart, who went not forth of the City so soon as
the Emperor: but being informed that the Christians were landed, they came with
their swords as yet bloody, to see if they knew any one of the company: and at
the very first sight they found them of the Firm Island, who had been so many
years bound in the Castle of Apolidon, by the force of Vrgandas Conjurations.
Then the two Knights, Perion and Lisvart went forward, giving great reverence
to Amadis, desiring to kiss his hand. Now he knew them not at first sight,
neither did Esplandian, Oriana, and much less Leonorina, at which the old
Emperor could not hold from laughing, asking them, if that they had never seen
them. God take me, Sir, said Amadis, not that I know: yet so it is, that to see
their coats of maile painted of such a color, it gives good proof and
testimony that they are both bold and valiant Warriors. So they are truly,
said the Emperor, and sons of the most valiantest men in the world: and do you
know them? this (pointing at Perion) is son of the Knight of the green sword,
who heretofore conquered the Endriague: and is my daughter Leonorina mother to
this other? At these words Oriana, and the Empress ran to embrace them, as if
they had been ravished with too great delight, the tears fell from their eyes,
which the Emperor seeing, said to them with a good grace: by my soul Ladies,
their presence has done so much service here, that Constantinople might be
called happy for having them for her defense: and I more fortunate for the
company and succor which they have done me at so good a time: for it is most
certain (seeing mine old age) that I could not have had the strength that is
requisite, to sustain the miseries and woes which have happened to me, since the
day that you did depart from me, and I took upon me the Government of this
Empire, in the absence of my son Esplandian; This good old man was as yet
armed, and had not left of one piece of his harness, for he was in fear, least
the Pagans should begin some new enterprise against the City: and his Armor
was bloody since the fight in the morning. Wherefore Galaor answered him: truly
sir, he should have a bad judgment, which should maintain that you have
continually slept during these affairs; for these arms are witness enough,
that your enemies have found, that your old age has nothing lessened the
strength of your courage, and that there is more strength in you, then in
younger age: and yet they should had worse, if I had been by you, to make them
feel the desire I have to do you service. Sir, Galaor, said he, they are not
so far off, but that they may come to see us, it may be before night: But
seeing that God has had so much remembrance of me, as to bring you hither, I
hope the misfortune will fall on them; especially being accompanied with these
Angels (said he, embracing the Queen Briolania, and the other Ladies) who are
sufficient to chase the devils out of this world if they should come out of
hell to inhabit here Ah, ah sir! said she, if those the care come to endammage
Thrace ought to be driven out by women, I will be the first that will take
Lance and Helmet to break their heads: at this speech the Emperor laughed, and
kindly thanked her for it: then he came to embrace Florestan, who kneeling
down on the ground to kiss his hand. But the Emperor lifted him up, and said
to him: by my faith, good King Florestan, your noble acts are as reciprocal to
your name, as it is possible, and it is likewise true, that to make your praise
always flourish, you have taken the pains to come and help this good old man,
being weak and lame; Sir, answered he, to do you service I shall always be
green and flourish. God will love you the better for it, said the Emperor:
then looking a little aside on the Queen, Sardamira, Alabila, and Olinda, he
went to salute them, and seeing Olinda fairer then the rest, he said to her,
Madam, those that have much traveled in Spain have heretofore informed me,
that Linda in that Language, is beauty in ours, and truly I believe it rather
then ever: for if beauty were ever lost, it would b^ found in you, as much as
in any Lady that I have seen to my knowledge: at this the young Princess
blushed, but Agries answered the Emperor on her behalf: Sir, she has taken
this fair countenance, as also these three Ladies, to present themselves
before you, as Cosen, said he, you have done so much for me, as I well perceive
that it is impossible for me to repeat what you have deserved, and ending this
speech, he cast his eyes on the King of Bohemia, Grasandor, which he did not
until then see: and coming toward him, he embraced him courteously, saying
to him; truly my good friend, I always thought, that in so good a business,
the neighborhood of us two should not easily be lost. No sir, replied
Grasandor, and much less I desire I have to do you service: and here is your
Lady Vrganda, who shall swear to you on my behalf. Now the Emperor knew her
not at first, so he excused himself very well for that time in entertai^ing her
kindly, saying to her, ah Lady, you have too long disappointed us of this good
company: when you please, you shall amend this wrong which is not small. Sir,
answered she all that I have done hitherto, has been to a good end: and you
may now know better then ever, that our Lord forgot you not, having brought
them at such opportune a time. Truly I believe it, answered the Emperor. So
this good old man received them one after another, showing them all the honor
that they deserved: and even to Gandalin, the Damsel of Denmark, Carmelle, Mr
Elizabeth, yea and Ardam: but he being amongst them was so little, that the
Emperor saw him not, when the Dwarf came to pluck him by the Cloak, saying to
him. Sir, I am come to be at your service as well as the others, wherefore
shall not I be embraced as well as they? by my head, said the Emperor, Ardan
my friend, there is no good reason for it: but thou appearest so little so tall
personages that I could not see thee. Sir, said the Dwarf, I have a little
body, but I have an unmeasurable desire to do you service, who will neve hide
himself in any place, were it among the greatest Giants in the world. The
grace that the Dwarf spoke these words with, and as it were in a choler,
caused every one to laugh: during this discourse, Alquefa caused many horses
and hacknies to be taken out of her Vessel: then addressing himself to the
Knight of the Sphere, she said to him, Sir Knight, my Father your humble
servant has sent you these horses, and prays you to distribute them as well
to the King your Father, as to Madam Oriana, and others, who kept company with
them so long in the chamber of Apolidon. So Perion quickly knew her, wherefore
he embraced her, and made her welcome: not only for her Fathers gifts, but for
the hope that he had that she brought him news from her, whom he could not
forget neither day nor night: Nevertheless, the Damsel as wise and well
advised, dissembled for that time what she thought: then Perion answered her:
Damsel, my friend, it is not the first courtesy that I have received of the
hands of sage Alquefa: but if God willing, I shall have opportunity to do him
some good service. Sir said she, he has provided these Knights with arms,
which I have given them before their imbarquing, and now he perhaps (as I have
said) that you give to each one of them one of these horses, especially to
these Ladies, to whose good graces he now humbly recommends himself. Sir, said
Perion to Amadis; you hear the request of this Damsel: ought I to deny her? oh
no! to deny? answered Amadis, therein you should do her wrong, and Alquif
also, who have wished us so well: seeing that it is so, said Perion, then
divide the present that he has sent you, and let Madam Oriana have as many for
her Ladies: to which they both agreed: and immediately Alquif drew forth of a
Chest, (which two Esquires carried on their shoulders) a tent of an Inestimable
value, which she presented to Lisvart, saying to him: most happy Knight, and
more fortunate then any that has been heretofore, my Father saluteth you in
all humility, and has sent you this tent, being the fairest in all Afia, in
which he entreats you to lodge (as long as this war shall last) with King
Amadis your Father, and these other Lords, who were enchanted in the Firm
Island with him. And further he acquaints you by me, that you shall be better
contented on the day that you shall meet him, then if you should conquer the
one half of Europe. Damsel, answered Lisvart, I never saw him of whom you
speak, to my knowledge: nevertheless I have a great desire to be acquainted
with him, to do him some courtesy, wherein he should employ me: not only for
the Presents and promises, that you have made me on his behalf, but having
heard him esteemed of in many places. Then Alquif unfolded the tent, which was
found so fair and rich, that never heretofore had the like been seen: and this
rumor was so much spread, that the King of Spain, Brian of Monuiste, he of
A^avigne, Don Bruneo, Quadragant Prince of Sansuegue, and Gasqui^an King of
Fuisse (who made the Vanguard of the Sea Army) heard the news thereof by a
Skiffe that they sent before, to know where they were that had taken Land in
the Apes bark, but when they heard this report, never were people more glad,
and more abashed, and they suddenly commanded their Soldiers to land, and
continue in form of a battle on the Land* until they should have further
Order from them And entering into the Skiffe, they went to seek out Amadis and
the rest. Great was the joy that was made for so happy a meeting: in the mean
while the enemies (instead of defending the landing of those that came to
succor Christians) made all possible expedition to fortify their Camp, for
their Spies had informed them, that without doubt, the next day they should
have battle, which was the cause they kept themselves together: In the mean
while that these things were a doing, the Emperor of Trebisond and his Army
after they had for a long time sailed on the Pontick Sea, and for the more
security kept a far off from the parts of Natolia, and gained the entry of
the Straights, a mile from the place where the Kings of Giloffe, and Bugies
forces were floting, then not any of them having the boldness to stop the
passage: but the Pagans lying at anchor, for fear of being assaulted behind,
by those that came toward the Hellespont, as they understood by the Master,
who was taken in the little ship; as we have formerly told you, it was not long
before the Emperor of Constantinople had tidings thereof, wherefore he
consulted with Amadis, and the rest, that the Ladies should return back again
to the City, and that themselves should go to receive this foreign Prince;
But all their diligence was not so timely but that he was out of his ship,
accompanied with young Florestan and Galuanes, Parmenir, and Dardary King of
Brignie. Truly the honor that these two old Emperors showed to one another,
and the entertainment that these Knights showed to one another cannot be
represented by writing, as also the goodness which the Emperor of
Constantinople expressed, to humble himself before the Emperor of Trebisond,
to give him thanks for the assistance which he had received from him. Wherefore
he said to him with the tears in his eyes; I know not Sir by what means to
acknowledge the pains that you have taken to come hither, to help this poor
old creature out of misery, assaulted on all sides, and in a manner ready to
fall to ruin, and in the greatest misery that ever was disinherited Prince. By
my God, your presence so much delights me, that I may this day call my self
the happiest man in the world, or that was borne of a woman. Ah sir, my
brother, said the Emperor of Trebisond, I have done but my duty: for we are
naturally bound to help each other, and your so much renowned goodness
obliges all Princes that are able to help you, principally against the common
enemies of our faith: and as he had ended this speech, he perceived Lisvart,
and the Knight of the Sphere very near him: then addressing himself first to
Lisvart, he said to him, truly Knight, I very much rejoice to see you in so
good health, considering the wicked speech of that most unhappy Melia, which
she sent us since your departure: but as for you (said he, merrily speaking to
the Knight of the Sphere) I shall never in all my life forget the wrong that
you did me, the day that you went from my Court, without daigning to speak to
me, nor any other, as I know, and is the principal reason why I am come to
find you, to avenge my selse for it. Sir, replied Perion, I humbly entreat you
to pardon me, for I am ready to suffer for it, what punishment you please,
although there is no fault in me, as you may know, having truly understood of
all that is past, during the conference between them, the young Florestan,
Galuanes, and Parmenir discoursed with Amadis, and the other Knight of their
acquaintance, relating to each other their passed fortunes. It began to grow
late, wherefore the Emperor of Constantinople invited the Emperor of Trebisond
to lodge in his Palace: but he bravely excused himself, because he had no
intention to enter into the City, (as he said) before the enemies were expulsed
out of Thrace: and for this cause commanded his tents and Pavilions to be made
ready. Nevertheless Amadis so much entreated him, that he lodged in that which
Alquif gave to Lisvart, which was such, as you have heard. And after a long
conference between the two Emperors, giving the good night each to other, the
Emperor of Constantinople returned to keep his City, and the other to his
Camp, where Amadis, and those of the Firm Island kept him company:
nevertheless they took a walk into Constantinople, where he went to salute
the old Emperesse, which they yet found troubled with a swouning, which had
taken her, for the great joy she had to see her daughter in good health, which
she certainly thought to be dead. And as the Emperor entered in, where they lay
on her bed, he began to speak to her. Madam, you now have the company of your
daughter and other Ladies: but see, if I am ill provided of Knights. Then
Amadis, Lisvart, and the others went forwards to do him reverence. If then this
Lady rejoiced, it is you may think, especially, when she saw her son in Law,
who she held in her arms above a quarter of an hour, without being able to
speak one word: But for this night they had no time to discourse much longer
with them, because the time pressed the Knights of the Firm Island to return
toward the Emperor of Trebisond: wherefore taking leave of her and the
Emperor, they went forth of the City, and entered the Camp. Now the Knight of
the Sphere had not yet had an opportunity prvately to discourse with Alquefa,
to know in what estate she left the Princess Gricilerea, for whose sake he
died an hundred times a day: but as soon as Amadis and the others were
departed, he and Lisvart retired to their quarters, where she came to find
them. Nevertheless, at first she very well forbore to speak that which she had
in charge, for she did not know whither Perion was content that she should
discourse thereof before his companion, which Perion perceiving, both assured
and persuaded her, that it would be pleasant to him, considering the great love
which he bore him. Wherefore she drew forth a Letter which she had in her
bosom, and presented it to him, saying to him, my Lady recommendeth her self
very kindly to you, see here what she has written to you, and then I will
tell that which she has commanded me to acquaint you withal. Perion took the
Letter, and breaking the Seal, therein he read that which follows.

THe great pleasure that I have received by your Letter, and the presents that
you have sent me by this Damsel, has renewed in my sad heart the desire which
my soul suffers for your long absence. And dear Friend, believe me, were not
the continual presence of your Phisiognomy in the eyes of my remembrance, it
would be impossible to resist the hard assault of so many days, which love
has brought me to, which was in the same day that you came dumb into this
Court, and would not deigne to speak unto me: But the hope that I have of your
sudden return (as this Messenger assures me) admininisters some strength to
me, to bear that which I now endure without intermission. Now to conclude, and
to the end that you may with the more convenient opportunity come to see me*
which I hope you will, I entreat you to keep near the person of the Emperor my
Father: who will not fail (as I hope) to bring you with him, your affairs
being done. In the mean time I would very earnestly desire you, that by all
means you would endeavor to release the fair young Gentleman Lisvart out of
danger: being certain, that if you will do so much for her, and thereby you
shall come to as much honor as the most favored of fortune, and renowned
Knight which this day bears arms. The which I do very earnestly request of
you, for the good of my sister, who is so much affectionate of him, that she
could not survive except our Lord comfort her, in the sorrow that she has
taken from the day that she lost the sight of him; and she dies hourly for
his sake. And because I have given in charge to Alquefa, to relate to you what
I have above written, I beseech you to believe it, as coming from her who is
more yours then her own.

Gricilerea.


Perion having read this Letter over and over, entered into such deep thoughts,
that he continued a long time without speaking one word, which Lisvart seeing,
could not forbear, but spoke to him: how now Uncle, I thought that this Damsel
had brought you pleasant news, but I think they have made you sad. I pray you
tell me, whether Madam Gricilerea has sent you any thing that should make you
so melancholy. They did always communicate to one another all things that
happened, although they were never so secret, and of never ^o great
concernment: wherefore the Knight of the Sphere said to him: You are in the
wrong, for I thought of the pleasure I shall one day enjoy when I go to
Trebis^nd, and of what my Lady has written, who speaks of you as you may see
in the Letter. Then Lisvart read it, and was much more ^ensive then Perion had
been, when he understood the pains that Onol^rea endured for him. Wherefore
with tears in his eyes he said to Alquefa, Ah! the imprisonment that I
suffered was not so grievous to me, as the remembrance of the thing that kills
me alive! How? said she sir, do you complain of the good that is wished to
you? No, said he, but for the evil that she indures by whom I live. Then said
the Damsel, no news will be more welcome to her, then when she shall hear of
you, for when I left her, she did despair of your life. Therefore you may both
rejoice, for never was two Knights so well beloved (of two such Ladies as they
are) as you are. And as for you, said she to the Knight of the Sphere, you
shall bear these arms no longer: for I will give you such arms, as I gave
this day to King Amadis, and the others of the Firm Island, which my Father
sent them. My great friend, said Perion, I am so much obliged to you, that I
will be always yours, on condition you tell me how you left my Lady
Gricilerea, and what discourse you had with her whilst you staid there. In good
faith said Alquefa, that I will do. Then she discoursed all to him in such
manner, that it was near day when they went to sleep.

CHAP. XXII.
How the Pagan Princes met in Counsel, to consult what they were to do,
knowing the great aid come to the Christians: and of the resolution which they
took.
THe Pagans Army that was at Sea went by the Straights toward Natolia. And the
Land Army that was with Armato fortified themselves in their Camp. And knowing
of the great aid that was come to the Emperor of Constantinople, they met
together in Counsel to consult what they should do: where it was concluded
that their Camp should be fortified, and trenches made, and so they should
remain to see what their enemies would do, and in the mean time they would
bury their dead, and heal the wounded, which indeed were many. And to the end
(said Armato) that our enemies may not affright us; I am of opinion that all
this night the Trumpets and Drums may sound with great joy. During this
Counsel the Christians on the other side did so well, that all their forces
were landed before break of day, and were in good order to receive their
enemies, if they should come to assail them. Then there came to the Tent of
Amadis, the Emperor of Rome, the Kings of Sobradise, of Sardinia, of Ireland,
of Scotland, Bohemia, Spain, Naples, Sansuegue, Mongaze, of Suesie, the Queen
of Calafea, and Norandell, all which had brought with them good store of
Soldiers, as well horse as foot, and passing the Hellefpont, Norandell, and
Frandalo had joined with them, with the Army of the Emperor of Constantinople,
which staid to conduct them. The reason why they came to Amadis, was to consult
about what they had to do: but they concluded on nothing at that time, but
only to entreat the Emperor of Trebisond to be their Commander in Chief, and
Captain General in this their enterprise. And therefore they went to him, to
entreat him to take that charge upon him. But he would not, but thanked them
and excused himself, and said that the Emperor of Constantinople was fitter by
reason that he had already known the force of the enemy. Wherefore it was
concluded to send to the Emperor to know his pleasure, who no sooner heard
thereof, but he mounted on horseback, and went to them, where when he came,
they told him what had been done amongst them, and to that end they all
entreated him to accept of the charge, and they would obey him in all his
commands. But he knew so well how to excuse himself that in the end, and by
the advice of all the Emperor of Trebisond remained Captain of the Army in the
field, and the Emperor of Constantinople was Captain General of the Forces
in the Town, as he was before. It was now dinner time, wherefore the Tables
were covered in Amadis his Tent; but the first course was hardly eaten, when a
Damsel armed at all points came before them, carrying in her hand a bow of
Ivorie, and a sheaf of Arrows hanging at her side. Then without saluting any
of them, she demanded which was the Emperor of Trebisond, and Amadis King of
Gaul, and of great Britain. So they were both shown to her, wherefore she
addressed her self to them, and with a great boldness said to them: Here, take
this writing, and give me answer that shall become you. Then she gave to each
of them a Letter, and another to Queen Calafea, saying to her: Madam, your
habit declares what you are, read this paper which is sent to you and consider
of it. So these three Letters were read, and that to the Emperor contained
that which follows.

ARMATO King of Persia mortal Enemy of the Christians, servant of our Gods, a
chief Protector of their holy Law: to thee Emperor of Trebisond. Know that to
have the Empire of Constantinople I have lately entered the field with so great
a force as is well known. And because I understand that you are lately arived
to the aid of my Enemy, I thought good to send a Challenge to thee, who art the
principal defender of the Grecian Empire, against me who am the chiefest
desirer of its ruin: Let not thy old age be an excuse unto thee, for if thou
art old, I am older. The Combat that I desire is only to get honor, and try
with blows of Lance and Sword, which of us two is the mofi favovred of
fortune: wherefore make me an honorable answer.

Armato.


In good faith said the Emperor, Armato desires the Combat, and he shall have
it, but instead of increasing his renown he shall lessen it, as I hope, for he
shall know by the strength of my arm, which (it may be) is more strong then he
thinks. Then Amadis took that which was sent to him and read it, wherein was
contained that which follows.

GRIFFLANT Lord of the Savage Island, Servant of the great Gods of the Sea,
desirous of the ruin of the cursed Christians, of whom you Amadis King of
great Britain art Defendor: nevertheless that has not so much moved me, as
the great desire I have to try my self against thee, who art so much renowned
throughout the world. The principal occasion why I am come out of my Country,
has not only been to aid the great King of Turks, but also to get reputation
and same by Arms. Wherefore seeing that fortune has so much favored me to
let me fitly meet thee: I pray let us enter the field against one another, and
I assure thee that if my Gods give me the victory, I shall esteem my self the
happiest Knight that ever was born, and although I do not vanquish thee, yet I
shall no whit loose my renown, for it is well known how many able men thou have
overcome and vanquished. And at the furthest I can but loose my life which I
value not at all. Therefore grant me this request, in doing whereof thou shall
do me and thy self honor.

Grifflant.


I wonder at this (said Amadis) I never knew Grifflant as I know: but I think
him to be a gentle Prince, which his Letter well witnesses. And you Madam,
said he to Calafea, is yours a Love Letter, or a challenge? you shall know
presently said she. Then she began to read that which follows.

PIntiquinestra, Queen of the Amazonian women, to thee Calafea who governest in
the strange Island of Califurnus. I adverrise thee, that to make known my
Prowess, to these that continually follow arms, I have lately left my
Country, and am arived in this field, where I understood that thou art newly
arived, to defend those whom we hope utter^y to destroy. And because thou art
esteemed so valiant in fight, I do think that if I cAn vanquish thee in open
Battle, it will be immortal renown unto me. And there is no ods between
woman to woman, therefore try thy force with mine, when it may be judged who
has best to a Crown, and Government of women, who gain men by love and by
force.

Pintiquinestra.


These Letters being thus read, the Messenger desired an answer. Damsel said
the Emperor of Trebisond, we will erenoght send one of ours to you, and
therefore you may depart when you please. Wherefore the Damsel took her leave
of them, and mounting on her palfrey, she rid unto Armato, who was in the
company of Grifflant, Pintiquinestra, and many other good Knights. And in the
mean time the Christian Princes went to council, whither the Combat should
be accepted, or refused with some h^n^rable excuse? there were diverse opinions,
in such manner, that the most part concluded, that considering the old age of
the ancient Emperor of Trebisond, he might, and ought without dishonor refuse
Armato, being a thing demanded by him more through pride of heart then any
reason: but the Emperor himself would not agree to this Judgment, but desired
the combat above all things: wherefore the Queen Calafea and Amadis thought
good, that a Knight should be sent to Armato to accept of the field. But the
old King Arban of Norwales declared that it had been presented by a Damsel,
and the efore a Damsel should return an answer, and therefore Carmella was
sent for, who being arived, a Letter with these instructions was delivered unto
her. You must go said Amadis to the Kings Armato, Grifflant, and the Queen
Pintiquinestra, to whom you shall present this writing on the behalf of the
Emperor of Trebisond, the Queen Calafea and me. You shall tell them that we
accept of the Combat as they have desired, and at what day and hour they
please we will be ready: as for the rest agree with them, as you know well how
to do. Carmella being prompt and wise in the execution of such affairs,
suddenly mounted on horseback; but apppoaching near to the Camp of the Turks,
she was staid by the watch, and carried to Armato, who was then in a great
Tent, in Counsel with chief of the Army. These Lords being advertised that a
Damsel Messenger had brought them news from the Christians, commanded that she
should have entrance. Then she (according to her custom) which was not to
reverence any but Esplandian) saluted neither King nor State, entered into the
Tent, and presented the writing unto those she was commanded, the tenor whereof
follows.

WE by the grace of God, Emperor of Trebisond, Amadis King of Gaul and great
Britain, and Calafea reigning in the Isles of Califurnus, where Gold and
precious stones do grow in abundance ( in answer to three writings, which you
Armato King of Persia, Grifflant, Prince of the Savage Island, and
Pintiquinestra Lady over the Amazonian women, have sent us) do let you know,
that our voyage into this Country of the Levant has been caused in defense,
and for increase of the Law of Jesus Christ, in whom we believe, and to destroy
those who be contrary thereunto. Wherefore when we had received your writings,
we have been content to agree to the Combat which you demand with such weapons
as you shall choose: as for the field, we think fit that it be before this
great City: hoping by our God alone (in whose hand are victories) that he will
give it us over you, to the confusion of your Idols, and damage, and dishonor
of your persons. And because this Damsel has in charge and power from us to
agree, to the rest we leave it to her: and thus far we swear, and promise by
the word of a King, that during this Combat, none of our Camp shall stir to
hurt or damage you, on condition that you do the like on your part, of which
we will have assurance, and promise sworn as it is reasonable.


This writing being read before all the Assembly. Armato spoke for them all,
and said to Carmella, Damsel, indeed we did expect no answer: and you may
inform them upon my honor, that during the Combat, there shall not a man in
my Camp stir to help us, or endamage them, and let the victory remain where
it shall please fortune. After Carmella had taken the assurance requisite, she
returned to the Camp of the Christians, where she then found these Lords
together. To whom she related the resolution of the whole matter. Then they
(after some conference) departed out of the Tent, and mounted on horseback to
go visit the Ladies whom the Emperor of Trebisond had not seen since his
arival. They being then entered the Town, entering into the Palace, the two
Empresses mother and daughter, and the Queen Oriana, and all the rest went
before to receive the Emperor of Trebisond: then being conducted into the great
Hall, they discoursed of many things in such manner, that it happened that the
Kings of Hungaria and Cildadan (who discoursed with Oriana) about the Combat
that was to be the next day, between two Christian Knights and Calafea, against
the two Pagans and the Pintiquinestra. Which so much daunted the good Lady,
that she changed color in short time, two or three times, doubting that some
mishap might happen to her Lord: wherefore she said, what reason is there that
he should try himself having so often tried his person already, he has sons
that may do in his stead. But they had not Iong discovered, when a Spy came
from the Enemies Camp to advertise the Emperor of Constantinople, that the
enemies had sent Irish men to the King of Giloffe, and Bugie, to enterprise the
Christians, whilst the two Camps remained at the Combat which Armato had
demanded. And for this cause these Lords were forced to leave talking with
these women, and enter into Counsel: where they concluded that the Duke of
Ortilensa, the Earl of Alastre, and the Prince Alarin should have the charge
of the Vessels of Trebisond with twenty thousand fighting men, besides those
that were already in them. And that the Earl Frandalo and Norandell should
likewise take care of those that they had brought from the Defended Mountain:
and as for the rest they were looked unto as occasion required. Then they sent
to the Captains and Soldiers that every man should stand on his guard,
telling then what they had heard, to the end they might not be surprised,
nevertheless this information was false. It is very true that the Pagans had
questioned such a treason, but it was broken by Almanix of Liquea, a gentle
Prince and Loyal Knight, who would in no wise consent thereunto, in respect of
the oath made to Carmella. A few days after these two Sea Armies encountered
one another, and there was such a fight, that the like was never known in the
Levant Country.

CHAP. XXIII.
How the Emperor of Trebisond, Amadis, and the Queen Calafea, fought with the
Kings Armato, Grifflant, and the Queen Pintiquinestra.
THe Emperor of Trebisond, and those who accompanied him, having given the good
night to the Ladies, retired for that evening into their Pavillions until the
next morning, when they were to fight as it had been agreed on. They slept not
all the night, but watched continually in devout prayers, praying God to grant
unto them that which should be most for his honor and glory. Then at break of
day, Amadis sent to the Captains of the Army, praying them that each of them
should keep his men in readiness, to resist the Enemies, if by chance they
should stir, breaking the promise which they had made together. And soon after
the Message was solemnly celebrated by the Patriarch of Constantinople: which
being done, A^quefa gave to each of them a harness, like to those which she
had presented us from her father to the Knights of the Firm Island, wherewith
they armed themselves, and mounting on their horses, they were conducted to the
place assigned for the Combat. The old Emperor of Constantinople carried the
Emperor of Trebisonds Lance, and Esplandian carried his Helmet. Arquifil
Emperor of Rome, Amadis his Lance, and Galoar his Helmet, Lisvart carried the
Queen Calafeas Lance, and the Knight of the Sphere her Helmet. They being thus
furnished and accompanied (with a great number of Kings and valiant Knights
(entered the field, which was near the City, that the Ladies who sat upon the
Fort, could not only see the Combat but also hear the talk of the
Combatants. So the three Pagans being well accompanied came soon after, and
this day Armato did wear a black harness, riding on a black horse, in
testimony of the grief which he had for the death of Melia his sister. The
Souldans of Alape and Persia served him as Squires, the one carrying his Lance,
and the other his Helmet. The King Grifftant was armed to the contrary, with
green arms and Serpents with two heads separated from their bodies, and did
ride on a great Horse, the fiercest that could be seen. And he had not this
device without cause: for in his younger years he had fought with a Serpent,
and valiantly killed it, to the great profit of the Country wherein he dwelt
Almenice brother to the Souldan of Liquea carried his Lance, and the King of
Jerusalem his Helmet. The Queen Pintiquinestra sitting on a Turkish velvet
harness, with frenge of Gold, and in her shield was figured a dead Giant
representing the Victory, which she had sometimes had over a neighbor of hers,
the greatest man was to be found in his time. And this Queen was so dextrous on
horseback, that none would have accounted of her otherwise then of an
accomplished brave Knight, so long as she had her Helmet on her head, but when
it was on, her beauty was so great, that it would move the greatest man in the
world to desire it. The King of the Giant Island carried her Spear, and the
Infa^t^ Gradafilea her Helmet, Thus these brave warriors ^ntr^d the field,
with a noise of Trumpets. And they ^u^ th^ms^lves in readiness to encounter
one another, and met together with so mavelous a force, that without failing
they stroke right against one another, and their staves stew up in pieces into
the air: and so they met with bodies, Shields and heads so fiercely, that they
fell down in the field, except the Queen Calafea who was forced to bow with
the shake. They who were the Spectators of this first encounter did verily
think that Amadis was wounded to death, for he had a trunchion of a lance in
his shield, which put Oriana into such a fear, that she had well nigh swouned,
but she soon saw him on his feet, and march on bravely toward his enemy, who
was likewise got up. And as Amadis advanced to charge him, the Queen Calafea
came to him on horseback, to ask him whither he was wounded. No Madam, answered
he, God be thanked, I am no otherwise then well for as far as! know) fortune
has been more favorable to you then to any of us; but they ended their
discourse, their enemies approaching: wherefore Calafea dismounted from her
horse, because she would have no inequality between her and Pintiquinestra, who
had lost her horse, as you have heard Then there began a sport between them,
not childrens play, but of two persons who endeavored by all means to defeat
one another: and on the other part, the two old men, the Emperor of Trebisond
and Armato used one another so roughly, that the field was bestrewed with
pieces of their shields, and Coats of Mayle, and the green grass was died with
their warm red blood. But if these two made the beholders to be abashed it was
nothing comparable to what they saw Amadis and Grifflant do: for even as two
Smiths take pleasure to beat the hot Iron on the Anvill, even so these two
warriors continued smiteing on one another without any breathing. But in the
end Grifflant found himself somewhat astonished, because he had never dealt
with a man that had so put him to his shifts. Pintiquinestra and Calafea were
not in the mean time idle, but all the Spectators were so taken up with
beholding Amadis and Grifflant, that they minded no others, especially the
Knight of the Sphere, and ^is^^rt, who until th^n had not seen by effect the
cause of their fathers renown. For which cause they spoke to Gala^r in this
manner. Sir, what do you think of these two Combatants? are they not fit to
be a president to all those who desire to follow arms? Do you see how the King
h^ndleth Grifflant as he speaks. He does said Gala^r as he is accustomed to
do in the like cases. The two Queens were then so weary, that leaning on
their swords to take breath, they took so great pleasure in looking on Amadis
and Grifflant, that they took truce with themselves, the better to behold this
Combat, until the one or the other should be vanquis^ed And to tell the
truth, they maintained themselves so well, that by the space of one hour or
more, it was not possible to tell to whom fortune was most favorable. For
Grifflant was a puissant man, and of a great heart. Nevertheless in the end he
began to faint through loss of his blood, and every one assured themselves that
Amadis would have the victory. Therefore Amadis desired him to have pity on
himself, and he would save his life and honor, if he would be ruled by him.
And how shall that be said Grifflant? as for my life, I value it not, for death
is common to all, but if it now stand with my honor and renown, I will obey
you. I pray you then said Amadis, leave this ungodly and wicked Law, and take
ours which is the true and perfect, and never do damage to the Emperor of
Constantinople, but help him with all your power. By Mercury answered
Grifflant, you preach very well! do you think to vanquish me sooner with your
words then with your weapons? therefore guard your self from me, for I hope
before I die to carbonadoe you handsomely if I can. Then he took his sword in
both his hands and thought to have given Amadis a blow on the head, but he
defended himself with his shield, and gave Grifflant such a blow on the leg,
that he was forced to fall on his knees to sustain himself, which Amadis
seeing, he took him by the Helmet, and thrust his sword into his body, and so
he fell down dead: then giving him a blow with his foot on his belly, he
marched toward Armato, to whom he cried: King, thou shall presently dye by my
hands, for you have reigned too long to hurt this Country. Armato being afraid
to hear himself thus threatened, by him who he most feared of any man in the
world, began to complain to him against whom he had enterprized the Combat,
saying to him, I know not Emperor if you will suffer a second with you, to
endamage me, considering the agreement we have had together, if you do so you
will procure your self the name of a Traitor. That shall not be if it please
God, said the Emperor. And addressing himself to Amadis, he desired him to
retire. Then began the fight between them two to be more cruel then ever. The
two Queens had remained quiet un^ill the Combat of Amadis, and Grisflant was
ended, which when it was finished, and Pintiquinestra seeing the Emperor to
refuse the aid of Amadis, and Armato himself to stand greatly in fear of
him, she was afraid least he should come to her. Wherefore she prevented him,
and marching toward him, she said to him with a good grace, Sir Knight, it is
well known of all the endeavor that the Queen Calafea and I have used to
vanquish one another: nevertheless we have been so equal in our fight, that
no man can give certain judgment to whom the honor must remain. And I have
now seen that with my own eyes which I did hear by your renown, and I have
known so much Knighthood in you, that to have your friendship and acquaintance
I am determined not only to leave the Combat, but also to be baptized, and
believe in the God of your Law: upon Condition, that during the war begun by
the Pagans, against the Emperor of Constantinople you be content that I
accompany you, and as soon as it be ended, you give to me in marriage some
Knight of your Linnage worthy of me, who am Queen and Lady of so many
Countries, that I command all my neighbors: When Amadis understood the will of
Pintiquinestra, he was more glad then if he had conquered the best City of
Asia: wherefore he answered. Truly Madam, I am very joyful of your good will,
that I may this day name my self the happiest Knight of Christendom, God
having given me the means to bring out of the way of damnation so noble a
Queen as you are. And as for the Covenants which you demand, either to
acccompanie, or to provide you a husband: you may assure your self that I will
obey you, not only in a matter so reasonable, but also in what else you will
require of me, even to name my self your Knight all my life wheresoever I
shall be. By my Faith said the Queen, it is good reason that you are esteemed,
and the most Courteous King in the world. Saying so she set her knees to the
ground to kiss his hands: but Amadis lovingly took her up, and graciously
embraced her. When Queen Calafea saw them upon these points, she suddenly
pulled off her Helmet, and throwing it on the ground, she took her sword by the
point, and presenting the pummell thereof to the Queen Pintiquinestra, she said
to her: Madam, seeing that you have vanquished your self, and that without
doubt I could not have resisted you; it is good reason that I render unto you
the honor which you deserve. Ah! Madam, answered Pintiquinestra, you do that
which I ought! and so strving to give their sword, to one another, Amadis went
between them, and caused them to exchange swords, that their honors might be
equal. During these passages, the two old men, Armato and the Emperor of
Trehisond labored very much to perform their Combat. But Armato had somewhat
fainted since Grisflant had been vanquished. Wherefore the Emperor charged him
nimbly, and in such manner, that he gave him so great a blow with his sword,
that it entered through armor, and went a handful into his flesh just at the
joint of his left shoulder, so that in small time his soul departed, and he
fell down dead in the place. Which gave such great joy to the Christian Army,
that every one praised God, especially Oriana and the other Ladies. The
Trumpets and Fifes did sound with great joy, and horses were brought to the
Conquerors, who took their way to their Tents, where they were accompanied by
many Kings and great Lords, who honored Pintiquinestra as much as they could
possible.

CHAP. XXIV.
How Almirix of Liquea was chosen General of the Pagans Army: and of a Dwarf
which he sent into the Host of the Christians, to Queen Pintiquinestra.
THese victorious Knights being descended into the Tent of Amadis, with the
Queen Pintiquinestra and Calafea, they were soon disarmed, but they had no
dangerous wound found about them. The principal of the Army did much wonder
what caused the two Queens to parlie, being in the midst of their Combat:
wherefore they prayed Pintiquinestra to tell them. So she told them
particularly what had happened, and their discourse was so long, that it was
high time to go to dinner. And so they spent the rest of the day in discourse
about their enemies. She was as eloquent a woman in her speech as any in the
world, and had so good a grace accompanied with a beauty so excellent, that
Perion son of Galaor fell in love with her, and in time enjoyed her, as you
shall hear in this our History. Not long after there arived at the Tent a
Dwarf, who was soon known by the Emperor of Trebisond; for it was the same
that brought the writing from Melia, when Lisvart was carried away by
Gradafilea, as you have formerly heard. Then the Dwarf went to the Queen
Pintiquinestra, and with great audacity said to her, Queen Pintiquinestra,
Almirix of Liquea (who is newly chosen Commander in chief by the decease of my
Sovereigne Lord) has sent thee thy fix thousand women, because he is resolved
not to have any aid of those whose Leader and Chief is a wicked Traitor. And
he had put them all to the Sword, but that he considered the pains they took
to gain the City the second day of thy arivall: but if for the future any of
them shall happen into his hands, he will make them examples of Justice. And as
for thy self he is ready to prove his person against thine that thou art a
Traitor, therefore give me answer to justify your self. Dwarf my friend,
answered the Queen, I am glad of the return of my women, and if he has a
desire to make me know that which I never yet did know, nor never will, (if
please God) which is treason, let him come to the place from whence he came
this morning, and there he shall find me ready to make him confess that he
has hid in his throat. This answer of the Queens was commended by all the
Knights present, especially by Lisvart who said to the Dwarf. My friend when
thou have related to Alminix the answer of this fair and wise Queen, I pray
tell him that a Knight in her Company sends to him that he did not well, to
send such injurious words to the Queen, being in company with so many valiant
Knights, but rather to them, not that I have a small esteem of her, but for
the honor of Chivalry. And if he thinks good, tell him I will take arms for
her, and will perform what ever she has promised by thee. The Dwarf hearing
him speak with so good a confidence, looked earnestly on him, that he might
know him again. Then taking his leave of the Company, he returned to Alminix,
where he staid but little before he carried an answer to the Queen, how his
Master accepted of the Combat, but not said he this day, for it is now late,
but to morrow by break of day, upon Condition that you give him assurance of
Christians, as he will of his Camp. And as for you (Knight of the true Cross)
said he to Lisvart, he sends word to you, that to satisfy the desire which you
have to fight, he will bring with him a King of no less esteem then was
Armato. And you shall find him so good a Champion, that he will put you to it,
for he is much greater in body then you are. Now he called Lisvart by this
name of the true Cross, because he had a red Cross in his Shield, but Amadis
knowing that he had another like that between his two teats, he found this name
so conformeable to his nature, that he prayed him not to change it from thence
forwards, in such manner, that for a long time after he was always called so.
Lisvart then hearing the Dwarf summon him to the Combat, spoke thus to him:
Dwarf, thy Master does very much for me, in giving me occasion to accompany
the Queen in so good a business. You may tell him that I accept of the Combat
with him that he promises me, and if he be great as you say, men are not
measured by the ell, but by the good heart and courage. So the Dwarf stayed
not any longer, but took his leave of the Christian Lords, to return to
Alminix, and the other Kings who had sent him, whom he found embalming the dead
bodies of Armato and Grifflant to send them into their Countries, waiting a
better opportunity to perform their furnerals: but so soon as they heard the
report of the Dwarf, they were extreme joyful, especially the King of the
Giant Island, father to Gradafilea, who was he against whom the Knight of the
true Cross had to do, and he had enterprized the Combat in hopes to vanquish
him, and make him publicly confess the manner of his deliverance: for which
cause Gradafilea was very sad, for she loved Lisvart more then her own self,
and knowing the Prowess of her Father, she thought it impossiible that he
would withstand him: so that she did continually think how she might break
this enterprise. Once she remembered her self that Lisvart owed her one gift,
and that it was best to pray him to defer the Combat. Then again she
considered, that for so small a request he would remain quit to her, and she
should remain out of hopes to have his love. Thus she could not tell what to
do, but she thought at the furthest, if her father should vanquish him then
she would beg his life, and so he would be more obliged to her then before, and
in this resolution she slept, until the next morning, when things happened, as
you shall hear.

CHAP. XXV.
Of the Combat that was between the Knight of the true Cross, and the King of
the Giant Island, the Queen Pintiquinestra and Almirix of Liquea, Captain of
the Pagans Army; and of the discourse which Gradafilea had with Lisvart, about
the saving of her Father.
THe night which puts every thing to silence, gave some rest to those who
were to fight; but soon as the day came on, after the Knight of the true Cross
had heard Mass, he went to Arm himself in the Tent of Amadis, where was
already arived the Queen Pintiquinestra. And as his Armor was putting on his
back, Alquefa entered the Tent (who had been sent by the Ladies of
Constantinople, to know at what hour they would enter the field) and spoke
thus to him in his ear. Sir Knight, I am sure that Madam Onolorea will soon
hear of this fight, and therefore carry your self well, that you may gain
honor, and not lose your love and life together. This troubled the Knight of
the true Cross so much, that he could not speak one word: And Amadis prayed
Alquefa to return into the Town, to bid the Ladies get on the walls, for they
would presently enter the field Pintiquinestra was then ready to m^unt on
horseback, but she complained for want of a good sword. Madam, said Amadis, I
have one which I have conquered, and tried in many good places, therefore I
pray let it serve your necessity; and I would not present it to you, but that I
esteem you as my second self. Sir said she, I would not take it, but that I
will deliver it to morrow safe and sound with many thanks. So Amadis girded it
on her, and soon after she and the Knight of the true Cross went out of the
Tent, and their horses at the entrance whereon they mounted, accompanied with
many valiant men, as Amadis, that served the Queen that day as a Squire,
carrying for her to the place of the Combat, a shield and Lance, and Calafea
her Helmet. The Emperor of Trebisond and Constantinople did the like for
Lisvart; and because they found within the List, Almiries of Liquea, and the
King of the Giant Island waiting for them, they made no long Ceremonies before
they began the Combat. These Pagan Princes were armed with black Arms for
grief of Armato; and the King of the Giant Island had a large shield, whereon
was portracted two wounded Giants dead, and he did seem by his countenance to
be a very valiant man. The Trumpets soon began to found, and the Knight of the
true Cross, and the King of the Giant Island came against one another, and the
King of the Giant Island was cast from his horse, and the Knight of the true
Cross had had the like fortune, if he had not gotten hold of his horses maine.
On the other side, the Queen Pintiquinestra, and Almirix, were not the mean
time idle, although their fortune differed from the others, for they broke
their Lances, and neither of them was moved out of their saddle, to the wonder
of the beholders. In the mean time Lisvart turned his bridle, and seeing his
enemy on his feet, he left his horse also; then there began a most cruel
conflict, and they charged one another so fiercely, that they were often forced
to kneel on the ground. Thus they spared one another so little, that the field
was in many places dyed with their blood, and with the pieces of the Harnesses;
when the King retiring on one side, spoke thus to his enemy; I think sir
Knight, that the day is long enough for us to end our controversy, I pray you
therefore let us take breath a little. Lisvart had not forgotten what was said
to him of Onolorea, and therefore he would not make any answer, but redoubling
his blows, he gave the spectators to understand that his strength was
redoubled. Yet his enemy was not a jot astonished, but like a wise and hardy
Champion, he defended himself, and assailed his enemy. The Queen
Pintiquinestra used her utmost to gain the Victory, her sword was so good, that
she gave never a blow to Almirix that did not cut to the quick. Wherefore he
was so angered, that he struck her such a blow, that she was forced to step
backwards, but she soon revenged her self, for she struck him so right between
the Helmet and the shoulders, that his soul presently departed, and left his
body dead in the place. When she had done thus, she retired under the shadow of
a tree, to see what would happen to the King of the Giant Island, and the
Knight of the true Cross, who were then striving to throw one another down.
Gradafilea was very joyful to see the great prowess of the Knight of the true
Cross, whom she loved with all her soul. One thing troubled her, which was to
think that the death of the one or the other would be grievous to her, the one
being her Father, and the other her Lover. The blood which the King of the
Giant Island did continually lose from his wounds, did make him very feeble, as
it was well known by all the spectators. Not long after, the King of the Giant
Island thinking to ward a blow, retreated somewhat back-wards, and in the
going, he fell down in such manner, that every one supposed him to be dead:
wherefore the Knight of the true Cross went forwards, and in all diligence set
his foot on his neck, and endeavored to break the buckles of his Armor,
whereby he might cut off his head. But he heard a voice crying continually, Ah,
ah, Lisvart, Lisvart! at this cry he looked about and saw the fair Gradafilea,
who being come to him, cast her self at his feet, and with tears in her eyes,
said thus; Alas Knight, if you are now so pitiful of me, as I was of you when
I delivered you out of Prison, save the life of him that begat me, and this is
the boon which I desire of you as you promised me, otherwise let us both die by
your hands. The Knight of the true Cross knew her very well, wherefore leaving
the King who was under him, he went to take up Gradafilea who was on her knees,
and in taking her under the Arm, he said: By my faith Damsel, the Obligation
wherein I am indebted unto to you is so great, and the power which you have
over me is so much, that the least messenger you could have sent had beed more
then sufficient. One thing I entreat of you, that is, that you and he go along
with me, and I assure you that you shall have as good entertainment as I can
possible. There was then come to them the Emperor of Constantinople, and
Trebisond, Amadis, Pintiquinestra, and many other great Personages, to hear the
discourse between the Knight of the true Cross and the Damsel, to whom he
said, that through her means alone he was then alive. For said he, it was she
and none other that delivered me out of the hands of cursed Melia. For which
cause there was none in the Company that did not respect her and her Father,
whose Horse was brought; then they all mounting, did ride to the Tent of Amadis
where they alighted. But they had hardly put their feet to the ground when
Alquefa arived, who addressing her self to the Emperor of Constantinople,
entreated him kindly on the behalf of Oriana, to bring Lisvart and the King of
the Giant Island to the City, for she would have Mrs. Elizabeth to look to
their wounds, and she likewise desired to see Gradafilea, and Queen
Pintiquinestra which all the Lords present, consented to. Wherefore they
accompanied her unto the City, where they were royally welcomed. And all the
Kings wounds were dangerous; yet Mrs. Elizabeth looked to them so well, that he
began to be well in few days after.

CHAP. XXVI.
How the Pagan Princes, after they had been so illy handled, sent to the
Christian Princes to demand truce, who refused them, and of which happened.
THe Pagans Army was much troubled, seeing Atmirix of Liquie dead, and the King
of the Giant Island out of their power, wherefore knowing that there was no
remedy, they entered into Counsel. Where it was concluded to send to the
Christians to ask truce for fifteen days, wherein they might make the
deceased Kings Funeral, and send their bodies into Asia to be buried.
Wherefore they dispatched Ambassadors for that purpose, who came to Amadis, who
having known the reason of their embassage, informed the other Princes thereof,
who would not say any thing until he had declared his judgment: wherefore
being forced thereunto, he said thus; It is very certain sir, that this wicked
people are come into this Country, more to offend true Religion, and the faith
of Jesus Christ, then the Country of Thrace and Consiantinople; wherefore I
think that we should not hearken to them in any such request, and that rather
we go to find them out and fight them, and drive them to the furthest parts of
Tartaria: And if it be objected that they are great in number, I say that they
are most of them weak in body, and much disheartened; and which is more, we
fight for the faith of Jesus Christ, in whose power are all Victories; and
therefore we shall be sure to vanquish them. This opinion was approved of by
all: Wherefore the Emperor of Trebisond gave this answer; Sirs Ambassadors, we
will have no truce with you; but if you do not depart before to morrow, we will
drive you out; and thus you must enform those who sent you. This news pleased
them not, and it did less please the Princes of the Army, for they had in the
former assaults lost the chief of their Soldiers, and the rest were much
discouraged. Wherefore the Captains of the Army resolved to try their fortunes
once again, before they should be more diminished, and therefore they gave
order to the Soldiers to be ready by Sun rising to go fight their enemies. But
they were not so secret, but the Emperor of Constantinople heard thereof by
his Spics, and therefore told the other Princes thereof that they might be
ready. In the mean time those that had been wounded were recovered, and their
forces were ordered in this manner. The Emperor of Constantinople had the
guard of the Town, accompanied with Quedragant, King Arban of Norwales, Angrot,
and Estrevaux, Bruner son to the Giant Balan, and Gasquiles King of Suesse,
with a number of footmen. And as for the rest of the Army, they mustred
together in one squadron, except the King Don Florestan, and the Emperor of
Rome, who had thirty thousand Horsemen, and sixty thousand Footmen, to go on
the Enemies Baggage, and to put them in disorder if they could And as for the
Sea, the King Norandell, the Earls, Frandalo and Plastre, followed by the Duke
of Ortilensa with their Furniture, who found the means to surprise the Kings of
Bugie and Gil^ff^, who were come into Thrace to hinder the Christians Army from
going further, but it fell out far otherwise as you shall hear.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of the cruel Battle that was between the Christians and Pagans, as well by
Sea, as by Land, and of that which happened.
YOu have (not long since) heard how the Christians ordered their affairs: but
the Turks and other Lords of the Levant were not in the mean time idle: but by
the advice of the Souldan of Persia, they counseled that about midnight their
soldiers should set forwards secretly. Wherefore they diligenty provided for
all things necessary. And the King of Jerusalem followed by five other Kings,
and Califs with a hundred thousand fighting men had the charge of scaling the
wall. So they likewise sent to their Sea Army, and gave order to them, that so
soon as they should see a Signal of fire, they should affaile the Christians
sleet, but if the worst should happen on their part, they should remain on the
Coast of Thrace, whereby they might save their men. But they did not give the
onset until the day break. But if they had they would have found the
Christians ready. In the mean time Yrguion son to Gandelin, (whom Perion of
Gaul had brought from great Britain to serve him as an Esquire) presented him
before Amadis: and being armed at all points, said to him. Sir, I am son to
Gandalin your ancient servant. I humbly entreat you to give me honor of
Chivalrie: seeing that it is impossible (as I think) that at a better time I
can enter into arms being the day of the Conflict. Amadis had never before
seen him, nevertheless, when he knew who he was, he welcomed him for his
fathers sake. And sent for his father, and in his presence gave him the order
in so reasonable a time, that he had hardly remounted on horseback when the
Enemies marched a great pace toward them. And at their first meeting their
Lances breaking in pieces on their armor made such a noise, and the continual
flames of fire as was a pitiful thing to behold, and more especially to hear
the complaints of those that were wounded, some on their heads, and on their
arms, some on their bodies, as it was their ill fortunes. Amadis, Esplandian,
Perion, and Lisvart threw four Kings dead to the ground at the first onset,
and entering into the battle, being followed by many good Knights, performed
marvels. And there was killed at the first onset on both sides more then
thirty thousand persons. There the Knights of the Sphere, and of the true
Cross triumphed: for before they laid hands on their Swords, they disarmed
fifteen Pagans, of the bravest of the Army. The two Queens Calafea and
Pintiquinestra did as well behave themselves, slashing, and throwing to ground
all those that they m^et in their way: when Amadis saw five Giants amongst
others, whom King Grifflant had caused to come from his Country, for the
safety of his person, but they did him but little service as you have heard.
These five Devils gave never a blow but death followed: at which Amadis being
angered, he went with Galaor, Florestan, Argamont, and Ardadile Canile: who
having all recovered new Lances, ran upon the Giants, and broke their Lances in
them, without moving them in their saddles. The slaughter was great on both
sides: for Amadis being followed by ten or twelve thousand french horse men,
was charged by the Souldans of Babylon and Alape who had more then thirty
thousand Turks and Tartarians. And as Amadis followed on in all diligence, an
old man having a white beard down to his girdle, staid him, and said roughly to
him, King Amadis leave this Chase, and go aid thy Children, if thou will not
loose them, seeing they are well nigh defeated. He had hardly pronounced these
words, when he vanished, wherefore Amadis being a bashed, cast his eyes on all
sides, and saw Gandalin who carried his Ensign so torn, that the greatest
part was hardly sufficient to cover his head: and after him was Yrguian his
son, doing such deeds of Arms, that he this day got as much houour as any new
Knight within ten years time had done. So Amadis drew near to them to know
news of what he sought: but Yrguian taking him, and showing him the Knight of
the Sphere, and Lisvart said to him, Sir, let us go and aid them which you see
in such dangers. Follow me then answered he; And spurring of his horse, making
his passage with his Sword, he met Galaor, the King Cildadan, Quedragant son of
Quedragant, Talanque, Garinter, and many other Knights, to whom he said in
passing by, Lords, for Gods sake let us aid Perion, and Lisvart who are beset.
Saying so, he went forwards, and for all the Pagans resistance, he joined with
them: nevertheless before they arived there, Lisvart and Perions horses were
slain under them, and the Queens Calafea and Pintiquinestra were thrown down
and brought to great extremity. Nevertheless they had found the means to help
themselves, and they four fought on foot so valiantly, that neither Turk nor
Arabian dare approach near them, without the help of ten Giants, who came to
enclose them: with whom they had so much to do, that at the time that Amadis
arived they were well nigh spent, who sceing his Children in such danger, he
was so enraged, that laying aside all fear of death, he entered Pell-Mell
amongst their Giants, so that four of them were slain at that houre^ And in
the conclusion, he and his had the worst, by reason of the arivall of the
Souldan of ^ers^^, who was well accompanied, and began to have the better, had
it not been for the arivall of the Kings Cild^d^n, Brune^, Gatu^te, Brian,
Mancly Lis^^ran, F^restan, Languines, Abies, Talanque, Agries and many others,
who came to their aid: who being arived, the Pagans retreated, and so the two
Queens, Lisvart and Perion were remounted, not without great loss on both
sides. And these two Armies did fight so valiantly, that had it not been sor
the night which separated them, there had not one escaped. In the mean time
the King of Jerusalem with his troop, used all diligence to take the City: and
after he had prepared all things in diligence, he went with fifty thonsand
chosen Soldiers to fire the Gates: but bravely repulsed, by a Sally which was
made by Gasquilon King of Suesse, Bruneo, the son of Balan, Angriole L'
Estrevaux, Sarquiles, and a great number of Knights, and others who behaved
themselves so well, that the King was taken Prisoner, more then six thousand
Palestines defeated, ten Elephants overthrown, and seven or eight thousand
Ladders broken in pieces. Nevertheless a good part of the wall was at last
thrown down by force of their Rams, and other Engines. When the Pagans ran
directly to the Bulwark, and there they fought hand to hand, putting those
within well nigh out of breath, if the Emperor had not then arvived, but at his
arivall he did perform such deeds of Arms, that he stopped his enemies, and
made them somewhat retire. You have now heard what was done on the Land, now it
remains to tell you what was done at Sea. Norandell and the Earl Frandalo,
coming near to the Kings of Bugie, of Giloffe gave sign of Battle to their
soldiers: and they had so fair a wind, that at their arivall they did much
hurt to the Turks by their Lances of fire, and Grenades, wherewith fifty
Vessels were spoiled presently. And the Dukes of Ortilens^ and Alastre did
make it evidently appear, with what affection they served their Master. And
the Apes that were in the great Ship that brought Amadis and those of the Firm
Island. This nimble beast as is well known, who were about two thousand in
number, did get a top of the Ship, and did continually shoot arrows in such
great abundance that it was as thick as hail, and they were so nimble that
none could come at them to offend them. But the conclusion of this fierce
battle was thus, that in less then an hours space there was more then five
hundred Vessels of the Enemies suncke, but this was not done without the loss
of many good Christians. During these passages, the Emperor of R^me, and the
King of Sard^ine, Don Florestan, who were appointed to set upon the Enemies
baggage, seeing them somewhat disheartened, set upon them, and put them in such
disorder, that that was one cause why the enemies lost the battle. Who finding
themselves so hotly charged both before and behind, that some fled, and others
thought to rally again which was impossible: for the Queens Pintiquinestra
and Calafea with their women gave them so much to do, that the Emperor of
Trebis^nd, Dardarie King of Breigne and many others that followed them, said,
that they never law better warriers. And as they traversed through the Ranks,
they found out Amadis, Esplandian, Perion, Lisvart, and most part of the
Knights of great Britain and Gaul, amongst a Squadron of Persians, who were
rou^ed and fled with their Souldans, Taborlanes, Califs and others both foot
and horse. But there was a great slaughter, in such manner, that the blood
covered the fields, just like the overflowing of a River in the time of a
flood, and had it not been for the obscure night, there had not been one of the
Enemies saved. Then Amadis commanded to sound the retreat, hoping the next day
to pursue their good fortune. Those who gave the assault to the Town had won
it, had it not been that one reported to them, that the battle was lost,
wherefore (being seized with cold fear) they retired in bad order. Which the
Emperor knowing, he chased them, so that he did slay ten thousand of them, then
being constrained to leave the Chase by reason of the dark, they entered into
the City, resolving to pursue their enterprise so soon as day should appear.
But it was not the determination of those that fled, for they resolved to take
shipping so soon as they could, and depart. And this determination they soon
put in execution. And by good chance they found their ships, whereinto they
entered, not standing upon Complements who should first enter, so that six
thousand of them were drowned for haste, and six thousand more remained on the
Land, having no shipping. So the Moon shining bright and clear, they had the
better means to weigh anchors, and depart. Which Frandalo understanding, he
presently pursued, but the wind was fair for those that fled, and contrrary
to those that pursued. Nevertheless they were overtooke by the swiftest
Vessels, and forced to fight with as much vigor as they could to save their
lives. Thus you may see what happened to this great Army of Pagans. Whereby was
fulfilled the writing which the Knight of the Sphere found written in the Roll
of gilt Copper, at the fountain, where A lquefa caused him to stay, as you
have heard in the fifth chapter.

CHAP. XXVIII.
How the Christian Princes who came to the aid of the Emperor of Constantinople
purposed to return into their Countries, and of the Enterprise which some
Knights undertook to conduct the Queen Mabila.
THese Captains of the Sea being returned from the purtuit of their Enemies
and the sick being healed who had been wounded, during the Seige of
Constantinople, every one determined to depart to his wone Country, of which
they informed the Emperor. Who after a thousand good thanks, told them that for
his part he would enter unto the solitary life which he had lead, before the
Enchantment of his son and daughter. Vrganda the unknown was the cause of this
sudden departure, for she told the King Grasander that some of his Subjects
were about to choose a new King, thinking that he was dead, or quite lost. For
which cause he purposed to depart the next morning. Of which the Knight of the
true Cross, Perion and others being advertized, they assured them that they
would bear them company to their embarquement. And well, what do you think of
us? said the Queens Calafea and Pintiquinestra, do you think that we will stay
behind? we will (if it please) you go as well to accompany you as to recreate
our selves. So the next morning they all met, to the number of fifty at
Orasand^rs lodging, who taking his leave (with the Queen his wife) of the
Queen Oriana, the other Princesses, Ladies, and Damsells, they set forwards,
and the three Emperors Amadis and Espl^ndian accompanied them half a m^le cut
of the Town, where leaving them to the protection of God, they returned and
left to conduct them further: the two Queens, the Knights of the true Cross,
and of the Sphere, the King Don Galaor, Florestan, Agnes, and the King Don
Bruneo, King Don Brian, and King Grasandor, King Gasquilan, and King Cildadan,
King Garinter of Dace, and the King of Hungary, King Talanque, and the King of
Jugarte Garinter, King Arban of Norwales, and King Dardanie of Breigne, Don
Quedragant Lord of Sansuegue, Galu^nes Lord of the Isle of Mongaze, and the
Earl of Alastre, Alin, son to the Duke of Ortilense, Manly the Sage, and Ambor
of Gandell, Angriole L' Estrevaux, and Sarquiles his Cousen, Prince Brandalie,
and the Marquis Saluder, the valiant Admiral Frandalo, and King N^randell,
Braror, son to the Giant Balan, Garante du Xallo Cranitif, the Giant Argamont,
and the son of his son Ardadile Canils, Quearagant and Abies of Ireland, as
also Vaillides, Languines, F^orestan, and Parmeni^ his brother, Galuanes and
Perion sons of Galaor, Dragonis, Balonir, and the Earl Gandaline, with Yrguian
his son, T^luis the Fleming, and Guileiris cousen to Frandalo, with Giants a
near kinsman to the good King Lisvart deceased. These fifty, as well Kings as
valiant Knights, with the two Queens, Pintiquin^stra and Calafea, accompanied
Grasandor and Mabila to the Seashore: and carrying with each of them a Squire,
who carried their Lance and Helmet, they passed over this day with flying the
Heron, remitting their hunting until the morrow: when they came into a very
fair plain, wherein did run a river, whereon was a bridge, and on the other
side there was a Castle, where they saw two Knights armed with black armor,
who took two Lances, and marching to the foot of the bridge, they sent a
Damsel before them, to defend the passage to passengers. This woman made no
delay in performing what she was commanded, for she met the Knights, and
inquired who was the chief amongst them. Damsel answered the King Don Galaor,
we are all alike, and Companions. Well then said she, hear the message that I
have brought to you. They defend said she (pointing to the Knights of the
Fortress) the passage over this bridge, which they have enterprized to keep a
whole year, by the Commandment of those whom they love, without suffering any
Knight to pass by, if it be not on these conditions. None that is alone shall
pass by without justing with one of them. And if they be two, they shall each
deal with one of them. And if they be two, they shall each deal with one, who
if they be cast from their horses, and ours remain on horseback, in this case
they shall lose their sheilds and horses: but if the ill fortune fails on their
part, they shall have the like loss, and may no more enterprise to guard this
bridge. But if it happen that both the assaylants, and the Defendants are
thrown down at the first encounter, they may all four come to the Combat of
the Sword, under the same condition of the Lance. And if none are unhorsed,
then they are to assail one another until they be and not to fight with the
Sword. Thus I have told you the Covenants, which you are to peforme if you will
paste any further: which they pray you not to take ill at their hands. Truly
said Galaor, the Knights have reason to obey the Commands of their Ladies:
nevertheless, it displeases me that they have undertaken such an enterprise.
Wherefore go tell them that we will pass over the bridge, according to the
agreement which they have sent us: So the Damsel departed to the two Knights.
They had come two by two: wherefore they agreed together, that they would in
the like manner go to the Just, in such manner, that Belleris Nephew to the
Admiral Frandalo and Siontes were the first, who came against the Knights, and
their encounters were such, that Belleris and Siontes broke their staves, but
the Knights of the bridge disarmed them, and threw them on the ground. Then
there came four Squires, who seized on their horses and Sheilds. So they stood
still to see what would happen to Brunette, and Teluis the flemming, who were
as illy handled as the others. Then Gandalin and Yrguian his son set forwards,
but their horses was likewise seized on by the Squires: wherefore Dragonis and
Balonir hoped to revenge them, and therefore they met the Knights of the bridge
so rightly, that their Lances flew into shivers, but they were unhorsed as well
as the rest, losing their sheilds and horses. Then Perion of Sobradise and
Galuanes advanced against the black Knights, who broke their Lances but were
thrown to the ground, and their horses seized on by the Squires: Then Florestan
and Parmenir his brother went forwards, who met those of the bridge so bravely,
that they all four broke their Lances: and therefore no Lances were brought
them, when they recharged one another in such manner, that Florestan and
Parmenir were dismounted, and the Spectators did think their necks had been
broken. By my faith said Queen Mabila, I think I shall be a Prophetess, and
that they will dismount you all: Then Vaillides and Languines came to the Just,
who at the first encounter were dismounted: at which the Knights of Sphere, and
the True Cross were vexed. But there came presently Quedragant and Abies of
Ireland who broke their Lances, and met with their bodies in such manner, that
Abies and Quedragant fell on the ground. Then Argamont and Ardadile Canile set
forwards, whom the two black Knights met with two of the strongest Lances, and
moved the Giants in such manner, that they lost their stirrops and broke their
Lances in more then twenty pieces, in such manner, that against their wills
they had the like fortunes as their fellows, and the Squires took their
horses and sheilds, which they carried where the others were, The black Knights
in the mean time took new Lances, attending for Draror son to the Giant Balan,
and Gatuate du Val Cranitif against whom they broke, nevertheless their meeting
was such, that Braror and Gatuate had no better fortune then their fellows.
Wherefore the King Norandell, and valiant Frandalo presented themselves, and
their fortune was so good that they all four broke their Lances, which the
Squires seeing, they ran hastily and brought them new Lances, wherewith they
met with such puissance, that Norandell and Frandalo did again break their
Lances. But they that guarded the bridge did much better: for their Lances
remaining whole they threw down the others most rudely on the grass. Then the
Prince of Brand die, and Marquis Saluder advanced, who at the first encounter
were dismounted, the others Lances remaining whole. So soon after Angriole
L'Estrevaux, and Sarquiles advanced in such manner, that they remained on
horseback for three Careers: Nevertheless in conclusion, they left their horses
and arms as a gage: and Manly with Amber of Gandell came to the Joust; these
two made no great resistance, no more then the Earl of Alastre, and Alarin,
whose horses and sheilds were carried to the others. Wherefore Quedragant and
Galuanes came with such fierceness to the black Knights that their four Lances
flew into the air, and nevertheless Galuanes and Quedragant were thrown to
the ground: but soon after came Dardanie King of Breigne, and Arban of
Norwales, who were no better handled then the rest. Then came the two Queens,
Calafea and Pintiquinestra, who broke their Lances on the two Knights: yet
nevertheless they were forced to measure their lengths on the ground What
shall I say further? Garinter and Talanque had the like fortune, as also,
Garinter, King of Hungary, Gasqui^on and Kings Cildadan, Brian, and Grasandor,
then came Ag^^s and Don Bruneo, being much vexed at such strange an adventure,
and they ran with such choler, that they broke each of them three staves, but
at the fourth course they were dismounted, and their horses and sleilds seized
on by the Squires. Then Galaor, and Florestan the good Juster advanced, and
they did so well that seven Lances were broken before any of them could be
unhorsed, but at the seventh course they all met with such force, that the two
black Knights had been forced to fall had not they held by their horses necks,
but Galaor and his Companion were thrown down. Wherefore Mabila being abashed,
was desirous that Perion and Lisvart should not just, for said she, you two on
horseback may soon go and fetch Coaches for them that are on foot. Nay, God
forbid? I will either lose my own horse, or win another, and so said the Knight
of the Sphere. So they gave spurs to their horses, and met together without
breaking their Lances with such force, that they were all four thrown to the
ground, but they soon a rose and laying their hands on their Swords, there
began a most cruel fight, so that fire came from their harnesses, and blood
from their bodies in such manner, that the green grass changed color, and
they charged one another so long, that at length they had no armor
wherewithal to defend themselves: Wherefore they came to handie gripes, hoping
by that means either to end their Combat or their lives: But there happened a
dark cloud which wrapped them up in such manner, that they could not be seen.
And soon after the Sun did shine, and the four Combatants were seen without
Helmets, the two sons embracing the two Fathers, Amadis and Esplandian, and
between them old Alquif, who said to them, My Lords, it was not reasonable that
any of you four should have the honor of this Combat, for you are all of one
flesh. Then Amadis remembered that this was he that appeared to him on the day
of Battle, when he rescued his two Children. And Perion knew him having
delivered him from the Giant in the Island that Alquefa had conducted him to.
So soon as Perion and Lisvart had seen the fault they had committed to their
fathers, they put their knees to the ground, and humbly entreated them to
pardon them. Then Queen Madila, and the other vanquished Knights came together
(who seeing so cruel a Conflict converted into so much pleasure) were very
glad, and said to them: In good faith sirs you have done us much wrong, in
beating us, and taking away our horses and arms both, you may say what you
please, said Amadis, but one thing I must confess, that we have been the
strongest witness, the blows that we have on our shoulders. At these wo^ds
they all laughed, and taking their way to the Fortress, they had hardly entered
when Vrgande the unknown, and Mr Elizabeth came, whom she had brought to look
to their wounds. Then the four Knights were disarmed, and laid in rich beds,
where their wounds were carefully looked to: and Amadis told them that they had
done this unknown to any, but one Esquire who furnished them with Armor, and
said he we did ride all night to stop your passage, where I was better beaten
then ever I was in my life.

CHAP. XXIX.
How Amadis, Esplandian, Perion, and Lisvart returned to Constantinople leaving
Queen Mabila, in the Company of the other Knights, who conducted her.
THe second day after that Amadis and Esplandian had been absent, many Knights
left Constantinople to go in search of them, but they soon found them,
wherefore by the advice of all they were carried to Constantinople, to put
Oriana and Leonorina out of pain. And the Emperor of Trebisond purposed to
abide there until they were well, that he might carry with him the Knights of
the Sphere, and of the true Cross. The old Alqnif was in the mean time much
honored, and the Infanta Gradafilea took great pleasure to keep the Knight of
the true Cross company, for she loved him extremely. In such manner, that a
young man of honor (belonging to the Emperor of Trebisond, and son to the Duke
of Alafonte) perceived it, and conceived that there was mutual love between
them, but in that he was deceived: nevertheless this fantasy of his turned to
great consequence, as you shall hereafter hear. But to return to our purpose,
the Emperor of Trebisond (knowing that the wounded Knights would not be healed
so soon as he expected) purposed to send his train before with the Duke of
Ortilensa, to advertise the Empress with the cause of his stay. The Duke being
di^patched presently set sail with his Fleet, and had so good a wind, that in
a few days he arived at Trebisond, where he was welcomed by the Empress, the
two Infantaes Onolorea, Gricilerea and others. Now they had already known all
that had happened during this war, as well in Constantinople as to the Knight of
the true Cross, and all by the means of Alquefa, who had been sent with two
Letters from Lisvart and Perion to their Ladies, and therefore when the Duke
arived the two Princesses (thinking that their Father and friends were
returned) did not know with what countenance to carry themselves: for they had
sent Alquefa back again, to bid the two Knights not fail to come with the
Emperor. Yet they were deceived, and knowing of the Duke the cause of their
fathers stay, they lived in hopes. It happened that one day Bridelnea daughter to
the Duke of Alafonte called her brother (he who had taken notice of the love of
Gradafilea to Lisvart) and as Bridelnea discoursed to him about the Ladies of
Constantinople, he happened to say that to his knowledge, he had not seen one so
fair as she who had delivered Lisvart from the hands of Melea. But believe me,
said he, the good she did him is greatly recompensed, for I believe they enjoy
one another as much as any two Lovers. And how do you know it said Bridelnea?
Then he told her all that he knew, and more. And as he was in this discourse,
Onolorea chanced to come who heard more then she should. Wherefore she
presently entered into her chamber, and having recourse unto her tears, she
grieved so much that her heart was ready to leave her body. Gricilerea had not
heard any of this, but entering into her fisters chamber, and seeing her in such
a condition, she asked her what she ailed. She was not able in a good while to
answer her, but at length she recited to her all which she had heard of
Bridelen^es brother, and said she, I will repay him in his own coin if I can
possible. And although Gricilerea took great pains to comfort her, yet she
would not hearken to her: but she resolved to write a Letter to him. And
therefore taking pen and paper, she put her determination in execution. Then
calling an Esquire son to her Nurse (in whom she confided) she said secretly to
him: My friend, you must do me a Message. The Squire who desired nothing more
then to serve her, answered her, that he was ready to obey her. You must (said
she) go to Constantinople to find one, who is called the Knight of the true
Cross: deliver this Letter to him as from me, and by all means look on his
Countenance when he reads it, and after he has read it. The Squire was ready
to obey this Command, so that very day he embarked, setting sail for Thrace.

CHAP. XXX.
How Lisvart having received the Letter of the Infanta Onolorea, departed
secretly from Constantinople, and of the return of the Christian Princes into
their Countries.
THe fifty Kuights being returned to Constantinople, and the wounded being
healed by the great care of Mr Elizabeth: Old Alquif being desirous to return
unto his Isle of Apes, took his leave of the Company, telling them that he
would see them another time more conveniently. My great friend answered Amadis,
I am much behold^ng to you for the great aid you have given me, being in so
great danger: therefore I pray you let me see you in my Country, where I will
do you all the honor that I can. Alquif departed that same day. Soon after a
Page came secretly to tell the Knight of the true Cross (who was then with
Amadis) that a Squire would speak with him. Lisvart followed the Page where the
other staid, who kissing a Letter presented it to him, saying: Madam, Onolorea
sent me to you, see what she says, Lisvart said to him: My friend, I pray stay
till I have read my Ladies Letter, and written an answer. Then going into his
chamber he opened this Letter, where he found that which follows.

Seeing that your disloyalty, Knight (the most ungrateful living) is so
apparent, that no excuse can cover the fault of your heart, I command you on
your life, that you come not into my sight, nor that I hear not from you. For
you do not well to dissemble with me, (who am of so high birth) under the
color of Service. I much wonder how you were so bold to tell me that which you
did before your departure, and do much more wonder that you did send so to me,
as you gave in charge last of all to Alquefa. Henceforwards I pray deceive
simple wenches, and not such Ladies as I am.

Onolorea.


He had no sooner read the Contents of this Letter, when he swouned, but he
soon recovered his senses, and fell to cursing his ill fortune, and he would
ofrentimes have killed himself with his dagger, had not the thoughts of the
loss of his soul hindered him. But he resolved to depart that night, where his
Lady nor no other should ever hear of him. Then wiping his eyes, he caused
Onoloreas Squire to be called, and said to him: friend, I would have thee take
a horse, and carry it this night without the City, at the Eagle gate, and stay
for me there, that I may put in execution the desire of your Mistress. And so
soon as he had said so, he returned to the Emperors Lodgings, where he found
the Knight of the Sphere, Florestan and his other Companions, discoursing about
their departure. At night he told the Knight of the Sphere that that evening he
must depart about an affair newly happened. And soon after he went to an old
Knights house, whom he entreated to lend him some Arms. The Knight gave him
his sons, wherewith he armed himself, and soon after secretly departed, and
went to the place where the Squire staid with his horse, whereon he mounted:
then he said to him, My friend, return to thy Mistress, and tell her that I
have fulfilled her commands, and I charge thee on thy life let none but her
self know hereof. Then leaving him to the protection of God, he spurred his
horse, and did ride directly toward the Forest, into the thicket, whereto he
entered, that he might not be found by any that should seek him: Then finding
himself alone in so solitary a place, he wept so much that the fore part of
his armor was covered with water. Thus he passed away the night. Here we will
let him go and return to those of Constantinople, as to Perion who did not
much mistrust any thing until the next day at Supper, when Amadis asked for
him, but he could not hear of him. This report was so common through the
Palace, that the most part of them did resolve to go in search of him, if he
did not suddenly return. But Vrganda told them that this would be in vain.
This news was no ways pleasing to his friends, and Perion resolved after he
had once visited Gricilerea, never to leave searching until he had found him.
But Gradafilea did as much grieve hereat as any of them, who did resolve not to
depart from the Empress until he should return, but to stay with her father,
and the King of Jerusalem who were both Prisoners. The day being come for the
departure of all these Kings and Princes, they did all of them take their
leaves of the old and new Emperors, and the other Princes of Thrace, and the
Emperor of Taebisond other Princes of Thrace, and the Emperor of Taebisond took
shipping, in the company of the Knight of the Sphere, Florestan and Parmenir
his brother, Galuanes and Abies of Ireland, Vaillides Quedragant and Languines,
who were all contented to go in this voyage, hoping after one months stay to
find Lisvart, or never leave fearching through the utmost parts of the whole
world.

CHAP. XXXI.
How Lisvart traveling as fortune guided him, entered into a Barque, and of the
Combat he had with some Pirates who carried Alquefa prisoner.
YOu have formerly heard the manner, and the occasion why the Knight of the
true Cross was departed from Constantinople, who traveled all that night, and
until the next evening without refreshing himself, but then he turned his
horse to feed, and he himself fell into so melancholy a humor, that he
purposed to leave all and turn Hermit for the rest of his life; but he heard
a voice which cried aloud, Lisvart, follow Chivalrie to which thou art called
by nature, otherwise thou will much displease God. When he heard himself named
he looked about, and through the brightness of the Moon, he perceived a woman
on the top of a tree, who said to him, Unfortunate Knight, have a care that you
put not your thoughts in execution, for God has not given you these abilities
to employ them in idleness. Lisvart was affrighted with this vision,
nevertheless he purposed to give credit thereunto, and therefore so soon as it
was day, he took his shield, and mounting on his horse traveled through the
Forest, and marching forwards a Knight met him, who seeing Lisvart would follow
him to see if he were foolish or mad; but he had not long accompanied him,
before he heard him give a great sigh crying, Alas Love, how ill have thou
known my Loyalty! at this word the other Knight advanced, and said to him, Sir
Knight I think you are in love. Lisvart casted his eyes on him (who had not
till then perceived him) and without answering him he would have departed: but
the other stopped him, and took hold of his bridle, saying to him: By God sir
Knight you shall stay, will you or not? and I will know the cause of your
foolishness. How said Lisvart? will you force me to a thing that does not
please me? Yes said the other, for I never thought to find a man so foolish as
to be subject to a Sex so false, and malicious as women are. I wonder said
Lisvart, you have no reason to blame them, the least whereof you are not worthy
to serve. In good faith said the Knight, you might have been contented to have
been a fool without being a Sott, as you are; now Lisvart being surprised with
Choler suddenly laid hands on his Sword, and gave the Knight so great a blow
on the hand, that he cut it off, and said to him: Infamous Rascal, receive the
Guerdon which thou deservest for equalling thy self to her, who has no
second. And as he thought to strike him again, the wounded Knight fled as fast
as he could, lamenting and crying pitifully. So Lisvart chased him not but
followed his way. But he had not gone far, before he heard a voice behind him
crying, turn, turn thee. At this cry he looked back round about, and saw two
Knights conducting the lame Knight, who said to Lisvart: By God you shall now
pay for your wickedness. Then they set on him, but he soon killed one of
them, and had killed the other, but that six villains came forth of the
thickest of the wood, but he soon dispatched four of them, and the other did
run away as also did the last Knight, who being provided did kill his fellows
horses before he went, that Lisvart might not pursue him, Lisvarts own horse
being killed before. Thus Lisvart was forced to travail on foot, until he
came to a vallie (where was a pleasant Fountain shadowed by many spreading
trees) where he staid as well to rest himself from travel, as to drink, he
having not drunk since he departed from Constantinople. Then there came three
Shepherds, who seeing one in armor were afraid: but he called them, and they
sitting down by him, they gave him such victuals as they had to eat. Then they
left him, for he began to sleep. And as he was asleep, he heard a voice which
called Lisvart: at this cry he lifted up his head, and saw a young child near
him, and the child said to him: Lisvart do not despair, and follow the
Counsel that has been given you this night: when you go from hence go
toward the right hand, which will lead thee to the top of this Rock, where you
shall find a hermitage, and there you shall be provided with a convenient
remedy; therefore arise. The child, having said thus, left Lisvart in great
doubt from whence these visions should come, but at last he supposed that it
was Alquif, or some from him. Therefore he gave credit to these speeches, and
went to the top of the Rock, and there in the house he found a black armor,
and a writing in a Parchment, the contents whereof follow.

Solitary Knight arm thy self with these arms: then go along the Seaside,
where you shall find a barque ready to set sail, enter thereinto, and leave
the guiding thereof to Fortune. Remember thy self that it is impossible to
hinder the things that God has determined.


Lisvart having read this Letter disarmed himself, and put on those arms,
which were as fit for him, as if they had been made for him. Then leaving the
Hermitage, he went the way that he was directed, and found the barque whereinto
he entered. And by reason that he was alone, he purposed to name himself the
solitary Knight, a name agreeable to his solitude. So he sailed four days and
four nights, and on the fifth he perceived a great Barque coming strait
toward him. In this Vessel was four Knights armed at all points, and a
Damsel bound with great chains. And when these two Vessels joined, he saw
Alquefa, whom the sour Knights badly used: who being arived, cried out to him:
Sir Knight in the black armor, yield your self to our mercy, and we will save
your life: but they tarried not long before they had a cruel combat, where
the Solitary Knight killed two of them in short time, and the other two were
forced to crave mercy, which he would not grant them until he knew whether the
Damsel would agree to it: who would not have him pardon them their lives
unless it were upon condition, that they should conduct her whither she should
go. And said she, they have hindered me from doing service to two of the best
Knights in the world, and whom if they know you, you may hereafter thank for
the good which I have had by your means. Sir said the others to the Solitary
Knight, we will do whatsoever you please to command us, and we will swear to
perform it: the solitary Knight knew Alquifa, and he knew certainly that she
was returned from Trebisond to him and Perion, and therefore he said to her, I
pray you Damsel tell me, who are these so esteemed Knights to whom you are
going? sir Knight answered she, they are children to King Amadis, and the
Emperor Esplandian, and for their sakes I humbly pray you, that according to
the promise which they have made you, that they carry me to Constantinople;
truly Damsel, my friend said the Solitary, they being the children of two such
Princes, as you have told me, I desire greatly to serve them, and as for this
voyage to Constantinople, I will and command these two Knights under faith that
they obey you: having so said, he commended her to the protection of God, and
they being entered their Vessels, Alquefa bethought her self to ask his name,
which he told her being called the Solitary Knight? At this word the Barques
severed, and that wherein Alquifa and the two Knights were, sailed straight to
Coast: so the Solitary sailed other five days without happening of any
adventure, and continually thinking on the talk which he had with Alquefa, he
thought that this messenger had brought him some pardon, for his immerited
offense, but being much grieved, he sailed until the sixth day, where he
arived at the Isle of Serpents.

CHAP. XXXII.
How Lisvart took Port in the Isle of Serpents, where by the treachery of a
Dawsell, he entered into a Castle and was imprisoned.
THe Solitary Knight sailed six days in the Barque, until one morning he came
near to one of the fairest Isles that ever he had seen. And there the Barque
staid of it self, then taking of his shield he landed, and traveled in a path
that brought him to a Castle that was environed with water. He had not long
traveled before he met with a Damsel, who acted the mad part, tearing her hair
and crying most pitifully: wherefore he having pity of her demanded the cause,
which she told him, that a Knight that was in the Castle had abused her, he
then desired her to conduct him to the place, and he would use his best
abilities to revenge her cause, but she would not return least she should be
worse handled then before: wherefore he went himself, and left her to attend
his return, so soon as he came near to the Castle, he saw an old woman out
of one of the windows, who demanded of him what it was that he sought, which
he told her: wherefore she told him that he might enter if he pleased: for the
door was open: wherefore he went to enter, but he had no sooner set his foot on
the bridge but he fell down into a Cave or dungeon, where he had like to have
been killed with the fall: when he came to himself he walked about, and found
nothing but bones of men which he did tread on, and himself enclosed with
strong walls, but at last he perceived an Iron door, and he soon after espied a
little window opened: and the old woman above who said to him: Knight tell me
now (seeing you are my prisoner) who you are. Lady said he, you have done me
so ill a turn, that I will never obey you in any service whatsoever. Then by
my faith said she, I will make you die the most cruel death that ever any man
did. I fear not that said the Solitary for death is common to all. It is true
said the old woman, then see what will happen: then she did shut the window,
but he could see by reason of the Carboncle which was at the handle of his
sword, as you have heard. She being departed, left him in such choler, that he
broke open the Iron door, and thereby entered into another vault where he heard
a great hissing, he having gone a little further met a great Serpent, having a
head as big as an Oxes, and very large and long ears, then gnashing its teeth,
it advanced toward the Solitary, who perceiving the peril he was in drew
forth his Sword, and gave the Serpent such a blow that he smote off one of its
ears, wherewith the Serpent being enraged ran upon the Knight with open mouth,
thinking to devour him, but there was so much virtue in his sword, that no
venomous Creature could approach them that carried it. wherefore the Solitary
thrust his sword into the ear of the Serpent and so pierced its brains. The
Serpent perceiving it self wounded to death, did uncessantly cast forth its
scales and teeth with such force, as if the strongeh archers in the world had
shot arrows; but the Solitary did avoid all damage and hurt that might happen
by them, by standing behind the door that he had opened, and thus the beast
continued, until at length the sword pierced so far its brain, that it fell
down dead: wherefore the Solitary Knight fell down on his knees, and gave most
devout thanks unto God, and then approached near unto the beast, and drew forth
his sword with both his hands, setting his foot to the head of the beast. Then
he broke open a door, and so went up stairs, and in the end he came into the
Court of the Castle, where he found some Knights with the old woman, who did
suppose him to be dead, but seeing him so near them, and his sword in his hand,
they ran away as fast as they could, and amongst them there was the Damsel
that had betrayed him. Wherefore he said to her, Wicked woman thou shall never
betray any more: saying so he pursued them, but he was stayed by some
Halderdiers who did defend the passage, but he in short time killed some of
them, and pursued the rest who fled into a Hall, where he found a great Knight
armed at all points, who said to him: Infamous Rascal (you shall repent the
time that you entered into this Castle.) Ah wicked fellow said the Solitary
Knight art thou he who forcest Damsells? At these words they charged one
another, and the Combat lasted so long between them, that in the end he of the
Castle had the worst, and lost his life. Which they of the Castle seeing did
all submit themselves unto him: then the old woman came who did make great
lamentations for the death of the Knight, who was her son: but in the
conclusion she threw down the keys of the Prisons, where her Prisoners were,
and two of her servants went down into the Prisons, and fetched them up who
had been Prisoners there for the space of eighteen years, and had not in all
that time seen the day light. The Captives being come before him (and he
having put off his Helmet) they fell down at his feet, and because he did much
resemble his Grandfather Amadis, two of the Company took for Amadis, and said
to him: Ah Seigneur Amadis the succor and aid of all disconsolate ones, you
are arived here in very good time. My friends answered he, you are mistaken, I
am not Amadis, neither did I ever see him, Sir, said one of them, I do believe
that he is older, but I am confident that you are kin to him. And who are you
said the Solitary. I am said he, Gastiles Nephew to the Emperor of
Constantinople, and this other is Tartarie his Admiral. The Solitary Knight
had formerly heard of them, but it was supposed that they had been dead twenty
years before, wherefore he said to them, my friend, I am very joyful that I
have delivered you out of prison, for the sake of the Emperor. And as they
were thus discoursing, the old woman came, who having heard them talk of the
Emperor, who was the man in the world that she hated most, she made a great
complaint, however said she, I will content my self, for the good and noble
King Armato does now besiege Constantinople, and is ready to conquer it. In
good faith Madam, answered the Solitary Knight, the Army of the King of whom
you speak has been defeated, and he himself is dead, and the rest of his Army
is fallen into the hands of this Emperor your great Enemy. Oh ye Gods (said
the old woman) what is this that I hear? I will not live after that most
puissant King Armato: then she took her sons sword, and set it to her breast,
and fell thereon, and so sell down dead. At which they all laughted, and that
which increased their laughter, they saw the Damsel (who caused the Solitary
Knight to come to the Castle) come forth, and with great force throw her self
into the water, where she was soon devoured by Crocodiles, and such other
gentle birds, who repaired thither. Then the Solitary demanded of one of them,
what was this old woman's name, and how she came to take so many Knights, Sir
answered he, she was neice to the King Armato, and Lady of this Isle, called
the Isle of the Lake of Serpents, and so called for the great number of such
beasts who are nourished in this water, and from thence came this great Serpent
who lies dead there, who did much damage unto this Country, until our Lady by
the means of her Aunt Melea found the means to enclose the beast, where you
found it. And for the ill will she bore to the Emperor, she used all means by
the help of the Damsel to take all Christian Knights, whereby many were killed
by the Serpent. B^ my head (said the Solitary Knight) I never heard of the like
wickedness. Then he asked Gastiles if he had been served so? yes truly, said
he, and we have continued here above seventeen years in great misery and
calamity, having but little to eat, and that little but bad. Thus he through
their persuasions stayed there all that night, when the next morning he told
Gastiles that he would depart, and desired him (seeing the old woman was so
great an Enemy of the Emperor, to let the Emperor have the place as for
himself, he could not tell what to do with any possession. Then he telling
Gastiles that his name was the Solitary Knight) departed, and victualling his
barque (and taking one of the best horses) he entered thereinto, and the barque
began to sail of it self.

CHAP. XXXIII.
How Gastiles and Tartarie embarked to go to Constantinople, to carry the
head of the Serpent.
THe Solitary Knight being departed, Gastiles and Tartarie with the help of the
Inhabitants of the place drew the Serpent up out of the vault, having provided
themselves of a ship, they entreated the others who had been prisoners there to
look to the Island, whilst they went to Constantinople, and they taking the
head of the Serpent along with them departed, and set said (...) Thrace, where
they arived the eighth day after: when they arived at Constantinople they
landed, and went directly to the Palace (being followed by much people) where
they found the Emperor Esplandian, and they cast themselves down at his feet.
But he soon took them up, not knowing them: but when he and the rest knew them,
they were all very joyful, and they declared unto the Emperor the manner of
their Enlargement, by the means of the Solitary Knight. The Emperor hearing
them speak of the Solitary Knight of whom Alquefa had before spoken, did much
marvel who it might be, and did say that he was the best Knight in the world.
After that the Empress Leonorina had seen Gastiles. Esplandian (sent him to
the old Emperor, who he knew would be very joyful to see him, and in the mean
time, Esplandian recounted unto the Empress all that he had understood of the
Solitary Knight: wherefore the Empress said unto him, I am persuaded that this
is our son, and that makes him not discover himself. Madam answered the
Emperor, I do not think so, he went without any arms, nevertheless, be he
who he will be (as for my part) I account him the valiantest Knight in the
world. Alquefa was there at that time present, and therefore she desired the
Emperor to let her have the head of the Serpent: whereby she might carry it to
Trebisond, that they might see the Prowess of the Solitary Knight, which
desire the Emperor granting, she presently set sail for Trebisond.

CHAP. XXXIV.
How the Solitary Knight sailing on the Sea, was by fortune cast at the foot of
a Rock, wherein Amadis, Oriana, and others were prisoners, whom he delivered.
THe Solitary Knight was so driven by a Tempest (after his departure from the
Isle of Serpents) that one monday morning he arived at the foot of a great
Isle, where he saw a ship, and many Mariners and Soldiers dead, floating on
the waves. Wherefore he resolved to land, and taking forth his horse, he took
his Lance, Shield and Helmet, and set forwards until he heard a voice saying
pitifully. Oh sovereign God! How is it that you consent that the best King and
Queen in the world should this day do so miserably! at this lamentation he
looked about, and saw a Lady richly clad, who was pursued by a great villain,
holding an Ax in his hand. But he staid when he saw the solitary Knight, and
asked of him which way the Lady was gone, for he had lost fight of her; why
said the Solitary, you would hurt her, I and you too. At this word the Solitary
couched his Lance, and thrusting the villain on the stomach, threw him down
dead to the ground. Then he hearkened whether he could hear the Lady, which he
could not, neither could he find her: wherefore he set forwards in the way
that he had seen the villain come, until he arived at a very fair plain, at
the end whereof he found a Castle, seated upon a high Rock. And approaching
somewhat nearer, he saw four Knights without arms, whom two Giants armed at
all points, drew along by force into the Fortress. Wherefore the Solitary had
an extraordinary great desire to know who they were, and riding a great gallop,
he found a man unarmed at the foot of a Rock, who asked him if he were any of
the Kings Company who was led Prisoner. No said he, but I pray you tell me who
it is. By my faith answered the other, I know no more but thus, that I have
seen him and three other Knights roughly handled, with one of the fairest
Ladies that ever I saw, bound together with great Ropes, which does much grieve
me. The solitary Knight did desire the man to guide him to the place that would
bring him to the Castle, which he did, there being but one way, and that so
strait, that he was forced to leave his horse behind him, and he also forgot
his Lance: when he came to the gate of the Castle, he stood still to hear what
he could, or till some body should come forth. And he heard one of the Giants,
who said: King, thou art come in good time, for me to revenge the death of my
brother. Then he heard another, who answered, Giant, if thon art a Knight
desiring renown, revenge the death of thy brother with honor, give me arms and
then do thy utmost. He having said thus, he heard a Lady make pitiful
lamentations. The solitary Knight not being able to endure any longer, knocked
at the Gate, calling aloud to those that are within. Then one of the Giants
looked out of one of the towers, and asked him what he would have, and what he
was. I am said he a strange Knight, who desire to see the King that is prisoner
here, and therefore open me the Gate. By Mahomet said the other, I think thou
art out of thy wits: when he had said thus, he soon came down and opened the
Gate, and bid the solitary Knight guard himself: then they set upon one
another. but the solitary Knight knowing that he had another to deal with all,
when this was dispatched, he quickly killed him: when the other knew thereof,
he was so enraged that he presently came forth, thinking quickly to vanquish
the Solitary. But he was deceived, for he soon found the contrary: for the
Solitary behaved himself so well, that he also vanquished this other Giant,
and entering into the Castle, he saw in the great Hall King Amadis, Oriana,
Angriole, D'Estrevaux, Sarquiles, and Gandalin tied by the necks with great
cords, whereby he was much moved, and ran strait to unbinde them, but the
villains of the Castle had assembled together to assail him, which he seeing,
he first unbound Amadis, and then defended himself. Amadis and Angriole with
the rest soon recovered weapons, and so behaved themselves against the
villains of the Castle, that with the help of the Solitary, they soon slew
above twenty of them, and the rest came to mercy. They being vanquished Amadis
went toward the Solitary to give him thanks for his aid, and earnestly
entreated him to discover himself unto them, but he at the entreaty of Oriana
only told them that he was a Frenchman, and his name was the Solitary Knight,
but he would not disarme his head, but desired leave to depart, which Amadis
granted him, having first got him to promise to come visit him in great
Britain. He having taken his leave of the Company, departed, and in his way
he met with the Lady, whom he had formerly rescued from the villain with the
Axe, whom he knew to be countess of Denmark, to whom he told, how Amadis and
Oriana with the rest were all in safety, and he desired her to tell him how
they happened on that Island, which she did, for said she, we were shipwrackt
at Sea, and driven by tempest upon this Island, where we were no sooner landed,
but we were set upon by thirty villaines^ and two Giants who finding us
unprovided of resistance, slew all our men, and took only Amadis, and the rest
that you have seen to mercy, only I escaped, and am now agoing to die with
Lady Oriana, rather then to remain here, and perish alone. The Solitary having
had this relation from her, left her, and departed, going to his barque,
wherein he found the man that had taken his horse, but he soon entered
thereinto, and threw him into the Sea. Thus having the Giants shield instead of
his own that was broken, he departed, sailing on the Sea in great grief, for
his Lady who had so banished him her presence, that he often times wished to be
dead. In the mean time Amadis remained with his company, who were altogether
ignorant of the Country they were in, until he asked an old man of the place,
who told him that it was called the Castle of the Rock, and was the borders of
the Savage Island, which Griflant of late possessed, whom said he, you did
slay, as I have heard at the Seige of Constantinople, and the Giant that was
killed last by the Knight that delivered you is his brother, and the other his
cousen German who accompanied the King Armato, and the Pagan Army into Thrace,
so long as they said there. And as Amadis was making this inquiry, the
Countess of Denmark came, which put Gandalin out of a great deal of care and
fear; for he thought that he had lost her. The next day after they discovered
a ship; wherefore they went to the Seaside to see who was in it, which they
soon knew: for it was Argamont with the Prince Ardadile, with many of their
men, for which Amadis was very joyful, for before they could not tell how to
do for a ship, with which they being furnished, they soon departed for Great
Britain, leaving Sarquiles for Governor of the place, and they arived at
Great Britain, and were received with great joy.

CHAP. XXXV.
How the Emperor of Trebisond took Port in his Ceuntrie, and of the discourse
between the Princess Gricilerea and of the Knight of the Sphere.
BY the discourse of our History it has been recited unto you, that after
Lisvart departed from Constantinople, a great part of the Princes which came to
succor Thrace, embarked themselves to return into their Countries, amongst
the rest, the Emperor of Trebisond accompanies, with the Knights Florestan and
Galuanes, but they had not sailed a thirty leagues in the Sea, when the
tempest and wind tossed them so impetuously, that they thought to perish, but
finally at the end of the subsequent month, they attained the Port of
Trebisond, of which the Empress and the Infanta Gricilerea being advertised,
received a delectable contentation, and likewise all the other Ladies but
Onolorea, the which for the jealousy she had conceived against her friend, was
in mavelous pain, so that she passed her time in extreme dolor, but great
was the joy and good cheer by all in general, for the return of their good
Prince, insomuch that for the space of eight days, not any one desisted from
making bonefires, and public banquets; In the mean while the three Knights
strangers, Perion, Florestan, and Galuanes entertained their loves, to declare
their affections, friendship and service, that they bore them, which daily
augmented the sadness of the Infanta Onolerea, for the suspicion which she had
conceived in her soul against Lisvart, whom Gricilerea enquires for of Perion
ordinarily, but he could not give any other reason, but that he departed one
night he knew not whether, neither had he since heard any thing of him, at
which he was greatly astonished, truly this news was little agreeable to
Onolorea, who began thence forward to repent her self of the letter which she
had so slightly written, which might be the greatest injury in the world,
seeing that so unadvisedly she gave credit to that which was brought to her of
Gradafilea: many days thus passed, till that Alquefa returning from
Consiantinople, entered the Hall, accompanied with four men, bearing the head
of a Serpent, and after reverence made, putting her knees to the ground, said
to the Emperor, Sir, I bring yon certain news of the best Knight in the world,
and of whom I will recount unto you strange things: know then sir, that
returning from the Country of Thrace, I was taken by four Gally-slaves, and
put in this ship, but God be thanked I did not long sojourne there, by the
means of him I now speak to you of, who named himself the solitary Knight:
then she recounted to him the combat which he had had, the opinion which she
held of him since the death of the Serpent, the deliverance of Gastiles and
Tartarie, and finally, all that which you have heard of him, at which every one
was astonished, and it fell into the heart of Perion that it was Lisvart and no
other, which to pass the better unknown had changed his name, all the while
that Alquefa was recounting his adventures, every one assured themselves that
his name was not concealed from her; then every one regarded with admiration
the head of the beast, which the Emperor caused to be fixed to the principal
gate of his Palace, and to paint the manner how he had defeated him, at the
Evening Alquefa finding Perion at leisure, demanded of him what usage he had of
Gricilerea: By my faith friend said he, without you I know my affairs grow
worse, for every day the amity decreaseth on her side; believe not that said
she, I hope though you think the contrary, before that two days are expired
you will tell me another tale, the next day she addressed her self to the
Princess, of whom she inquired secretly, what good cheer she has made her
Knight since his return: ah my great friend answers she I cannot by any means
yet compass that which my heart so earnestly desires, for I have not had yet
means to speak to him in private, neither to show him any sign of friendship,
for you know that I am little estranged from the Empress, and less from my
sister: In good faith Madam, said Alquefa you have wrong, it is said that
necessity is the Master of arts, but love strong young and more lively: you say
that you have not had means to speak to him, seeing that you know him yours,
it will be very easy to cause him to come in the night into this garden, nigh
adjoining to these windows, to devise there privily as much as you please: You
say well, replied she, I never yet thought of it, but seeing you have given me
so good an occasion, I pray you to tell him of it: the wall then is low, and
the window of my chamber easy, I will not fail to find him there this
evening about midnight, for God sake persuade so that he might come there;
leave that to me said Alquefa, I promise you for him, and if Onolorea had not
approached, they had continued their discourse longer, but they referred that
till the evening: in the mean time Alquefa went to advise Perion of all that he
had to do, Florestan and he did at that time lie together, and although that
they were great friends, he would not tarry with him, by reason of the good
news which he had understood, insomuch that seeing him asleep, and the hour
approach which he had been assigned, took his sword, and covered with a
scarlet mantle went secretly from his chamber into the garden, where she entered
upon the wall approaching the window which he he held open, in which he saw the
Princess Gricilerea only. and in such equipage, that he had thought to have
had Acteous fortune, but that his head was not cornuted, but he was such a
bondslave to her service, that he would not complain against her, but would
rather suffer death and death again, if it might be possible, rather then
offend her, and although through the ardencie of his love he trembled like an
aspen leaf at her sight, nevertheless she which had caused this evil, gave
him such facility of speech, that making great reverence to the Princess, he
said to her, I may well at this day name my self the most happiest Knight in
the universe; receiving this favor from you, which is more gracious then would
be expected from such a Princess, to one endowed with so small merits, as I am.
In good faith my friend replied she, you ought to own that to your self, and
not to me, for God has endowed you with so many affections, that you have
power to force any Lady, be she never so fair to love you: so then I beseech
you that (reserving my honor) you content your self with that which you have
already acquired upon me) assuring you my shind, that I will take both pain
and pleasure to speak to you in this place at any time, when opportunity
presents it self; Ah Madam said he, for Gods sake pardon me, and esteem me
not I beseech you so irrational, as not to know this favor to be such, that
all the Knights of the earth together merited not such good fortune:
Nevertheless, if it please you yet to permit me to kiss your hands, you will
render the obligation which I owe you in such extremity, that I have neither
body, soul or puissance, which does not glorify it self to be assured of
such beatitude: my friend answers the Princess, you may not be refused, for
seeing that my heart is yours, the rest of me as far as my honor may permit is
ready at your disposal, then she presented to him her right hand through the
iron gate, so that Perion having kissed it, she being vanquished with love
embraces him with her other arm, which Perion feeling, advanced himself, so
that he joins his mouth with hers, contenting their spirits for an hour,
according as the place would permit them, which struck Perion into such an
ecstasy of joy, that put him to tremble more then he did before, and caused him
to lose the facility of his speech, and I believe certainly, if you had
demanded of him what good or evil he then Endured, he could not have told you,
love so much alienates the senses of those which she handles well, for the
certainty of which I could give you many examples of others which were in his
coudition, Perion being returned into his first power, fearing to show himself
so unadvised before Gricilerea, for the familiarity which he had used toward
her, began to say to her, Madam, I humbly entreat you not to take in ill part
the incivility which I have used toward you, and impute not this fault but to
love, which has constrained my affection to obey it, nevertheless, if you
judge me worthy of any punition, I am ready to endure it, if it be not the
estrangement from your good grace: my friend replies she, the punishment which
you shall receive of me is that, I pray and command you that you love me above
all things, without ever parting from this Court without my leave, for the
molestation which I have endured formerly for your absence, which had almost
brought me to my grave, how many times did I inquire for you, (knowing you were
gone to Sea, and attending your return) what Rocks, what Culfs were in this
Coast which might cause your peril? how many sage Pilots have I commanded to
come to me, to learn of those the names of the proper wind^s, whether contrary
to advance you or retarde you? how many tears have gone out of my eyes, seeing
the sea tempestuous, the wind and the heaven troubled, dancing in a thousand
millions of danger, which happen commonly to loving persons? In good faith my
friend, the fear which I had to lose you, made me daily complain, which are
commonly incident to those which are attached with the like malady, as I was
since the day that you received the Order of Knighthood in this Court: and thus
falling from one thing to another, she came to speak of Lisvart, the which said
she, has had great injury in address^ng himself to my sister, for to make you
know it, I will endeavor to recount all whereof he is accused: how Madam
answers he? I thought not that he had offended her, if she has not taken any
offense at the extreme affection which he bears her: I know not said
Gricilerea how you take this frienpship, but I know not how to excuse him, sce
the promises which he made before his departure, that he would not any way
revile her, then she recounted to him all that you have heard, as the Damsel
Brother of Gridelena had reported to her: In good faith says Perion, I know
now that was the cause which made him depart without speaking unto me, and
nevertheless I took it upon my soul, that the accusation is false, which gives
me more sorrow for his absence then before, seeing he has been so ill
entreated for loving so loyally: alas said Gricilerea, what is that you tell
me? is it pofssible that the page should thus misinforme us? yes upon my faith,
replies Peri^n, I assure you that disloyalty had no part in him: truly said
she, my sister has been evilly advised, and I think not but she will much
displeasure him when she is ascertained of the truth of this: Madam replies he,
if you please, I will go in search of him, and I will travel in such sort,
that either I will bring him back, or loose my life in the attempt: I pray you
says Grlcilerea be assured that my sister (knowing her fault) will receive him
at his return with much amity; they had continued longer in these discourses,
but the day breaking, forced them to retire, taking a gracious farewell one of
the other, going together to return into that place again, the third night
following; the Infanta then retiring into her chamber went to bed, on the other
side the Knight of the Sphere taking the way as he came, went to bed with
Florestan, esteeming himself the happiest Knight in the world to have made
such a choice: the morning appearing, he being in good equipage returned to the
Palace, where already the tables were covered for dinner, where it pleased the
Emperor to honor the Ladies so much, as to place him and his companions among
them.

CHAP. XXXVI.
How the Knight of the Sphere followed the Duchess of Austria, to combat
against two of her Vnekles, who had taken her Country from her.
THe Napkins being taken away when water was presented to wash, there entered
the Hall a very fair Damsel, clothed in mourning, conducted by an old man,
who led her under the arm, accompanied with twelve Damsells, twenty Knights,
and as many Squires at her arivall, this Lady cast her self at the feet of the
Emperor, demanding if the Knight of the true Cross, or him of the Sphere were
in the Court, or one whose renown is now through all Countries named the
solitary Knight, who not long since, by force of arms delivered King Amadis,
the Queen, and their retinue being imprisoned: then she recounted all, as you
have heard, whereat they were astonished: the Emperor answered her, Damsel, of
all those which you demand for, there is no other here but the Knight of the
Sphere, whom you may see. The Damsel regarded him as one expecting succor,
and answered the Emperor, in truth fir I believe it is true, at these words
Perion advanced, and demanded of her if he would do her any service, truly
Knight said she, I do believe you was only borne to give succor to such
distressed Damsels as I am: Lady answers Perion, I am ready to succor you, and
all other distressed ones to my power: therefore I desire you to tell the
eccasion of your sadness; fir Knight said she, I am daughter to the Duke of
Austria, who dying and leaving me in my nonage to the tuition of two of my
Unckles, according as their Reason or honor should direct them; seeing me only
here, and a woman besieged of Vienna, which after a long siege was constrained
to yield on these conditions, that if I would find a Knight who would combat
against those two, and vanquish them, I should be restored to my right,
otherwise not: to this agreement I condescended, and taking my Journie from
thence I heard of the renown of two Knights which were in Constantinople: the
one being you, the other the Knight of the true Cross, now sir I humbly
entreat you (seeing you know the occasion) to pity me, and undertake my
quarrel just and reasonable; Perion being at a stand, by reason of the promise
he made to his Lady, not to depart without her leave, but she quickly eased him
of that, saying to Perion, in good faith Knight you ought to grant this Lady
that which she demands: Madam replied he, I am ready to obey your Command, then
the Damsel thanked him, desiring him to go with her presently, hopeing that
having so good a Knight, the issue would be according to her expectation: so he
taking leave of the Emperor and of his Lady, went with the Duchess and
embarked himself, hoising sail toward Austria, the Duchess doing him all
the honor that she could: but they had not long sailed, when Fortune showed her
self unconstant, tossing them so outragiously for twenty days entire, that
they knew not where they were, but one friday morning they were cast nigh a
shore, to which adjoined a saire City, encompassed with walls and strong
towers, out of which they saw approach a great number of Ladies and Damsells,
but especially one well habited, and very beautiful, whom they supposed to be
their Lady and Mistres; at that time came out a Giant, armed at all points,
upon a bay horse, holding in his hand a Lance, marching with a slow pace
toward a pavillion, which they saw pitched upon the green, out of the which
suddenly came a Knight well accoutred, mounted on a whire horse, armed with
green arms, bearing in his shield a rampant Lion, having its head divided, and
many other Knights accompanied him: the Knight of the Sphere knew well that the
fight with the Giant was as much as against two ordinary men, he said to the
Duchess, I desire greatly to see the end of this combat which the Green
Knight has enterprized against that Devil, the Duchess to please him obeyed
his will, in the mean time commanding the Mariners to cast anchor, the Giant
and the Knight met each other, the Giant encountering, the green Knight gave
him so dangerous a thrust with his sword, that every one thought he was a dead
man; but it was not so, for the sword passed between the body and the arm, the
green Knight gave the Giant a great wound, and their horses encountering each
other, tumbled down with their Masters under them, notwitstanding he with the
green arms being quick and nimble, in continently recovered his feet, taking
his sword in his hand he went against the Giant, who was newly risen, being so
bruised by the fall of his horse upon him, which advantage the Knight of the
green arms espying, gave him such a blow with his sword upon his arm, that he
thereby received a great Battleax which he carried at his girdle, put himself
in duty, to render the green Knight that which he had ready, but the wound in
his arm prevented his intended purpose, which by little and little so weakened
him, that the green Knight consorted his enemy with the dead, praising the Gods
for the Victory which he had so happily gotten the fair Lady, which was at the
tower, seeing the Giant dead instantly sent two of her Damsells toward the
green Knight, who having spoken to him presently returned, bringing their
Mistress accompanied with a great number of Gentlemen and Citizens, and others
which kindly embraced the victorious Knight, she her self conducting him into
the City, from whence she sent to know what Vessel that was which newly
anchored there, the messenger approaching the seaside, saw Perion upon the
hatches of the ship, to whom he graciouslly said, sir Knight, the Infanta
Listria Lady of this Land sent me to know who has anchored in her harbor, fir
said Perion, it is a strange Knight, and a Damsel cast upon this Thrace by the
fury of the winds and tempest, he of the City having this answer returned to
his Mistress: the Duchess seeing they might hinder their intended purpose if
they stayed any longer, commanded the Mariners to hoise sail: but the sea was
yet so tempestuous, that they were of advice rather to remain to the mercy of
men then of the waves, notwithstanding at all times they were in readiness, if
they should chance to be assailed; at that time there streined to come toward
them nigh a hundred men from the town, well armed, who seeing Perion yet upon
the hatches, cried to him that he should yield himself prisoner, if he would
save his life; but he answered them that so long as he could hold his sword, he
would not endure their captivity: at the end of these words, they entered into
a great ship which was at the Port, and by force of sails and oars joining
with Perion began a cruel combat, at this aboording; for the Knight of the
Sphere never struck any but he killd him outright, at last, he cleft the head
of their Chieftain, which so affrighted them, that they durst not again
undertake to assail Perion, but shamefully fled toward the City to the old
Lady mother of Lystria (who was then talking with the green Knight) and said to
her, Madam, I bring you as strange news as ever you heard, your men which you
sent to assail that ship at the Port are all routed by the valor of one only
Knight and the Mariners. the old Lady would have gone to have seen what he
was, but was hindered by Lystria, who prayed her to entertain the Knight,
whilst that she undertook that voyage: and so taking six Damsells to accompany
her, she went toward the shore, where she stayed some time for to see the
Combat, but hardly had she sojourned there half an hour, but she saw eight
of her men reversed, at which she was marvellously displeased, and entering into
a Squiff, she approached the ship, causing her men to retire, addressing her
self to Perion, to whom she said, I pray you render your self my prisoner,
assuring you that it shall be both for your honor and profit: Madam said
Perion, if you command me to do it, I must obey, but if prevented to deteine
me by force I had rather loose my head then suffer you to do it: Knight said
she, if you please you may come along with me, under such condition as you
shall think fit to accord to, for the people of this City are numerous, and you
know well you cannot resist them long: so Perion and the Duchess entered into
the Skuiff which had brought Lystria (when they were aware the Knight of the
Sphere took off his Helmet to refresh himself, then the Infanta seeing the
great beauty which he had, could not contain her self, but said to him, In
good faith Knight you are endowed with as much beauty as valor and courtesy:
and Lystria holding him by the hand brought him into the Palace, where she
presented him to her mother, saying to her, Madam, I can assure you that this
Knight has alone done that which a thousand durst not enterprise: I think as
much said the old Lady, then the Green Knight seeing Perion run to embrace
him, crying out my God what is this I see? what adventure has brought you into
these parts? Perion seeing himself so embraced, knew not at the first sight
who he was: but suddenly recollecting himself, he knew that it was Garinter
King of Jaguetha: then he embraced him and said, truly my great friend, I am no
less astonished at your presence then you at mine; Lystria and her mother
seeing the contentment with which they entertained themselves, prayed them them
to favor her daughter so much as to tell them from whom they had received so
singular a pleasure, specially Lystria hoping to have Garinter for her husband:
and for this cause did all that she could to please them, but because both of
them were very weary, they were disarmed, and conducted into a fair chamber,
where they were used as well as they merited: then being in their chamber,
Perion desired the King to tell him the occasion that incited him to combat
against the Giant, my friend said he, know that the old Lady mother of Lystria,
remaining a widow (after her husband was dead) by whom she had one child which
is this Princess, heir of this Realm great and opulent, who was a neighbor,
and being enamoured of Lystria, requires her many times in marriages, but she
put him off with this honest excuse, saying she would never love any man: the
Giant having this answer, waged war against this land, but by good hap I
traveling nigh Countries, hearing of it, undertook the Combat against the
Giant, what success I had it will be needless for me to recount, seeing you
know it already. Returning then to my purpose, the Knights being healed of
their wounds, and Perion knowing the will of Garinter, who was no less amorous
of her then she of him: one day as the mother and the daugher were advising
with them, Perion addressing himself to the Infanta, began to say unto her,
Madam, it seems to me, yon are very much bound unto the King for hindering the
marriage of you to him, in whom nature has placed so much deformity: In good
faith replies she, you say true: Madam said the King pardon me if it please you
for my presumption, thinking my self so happy in serving you, that I would
not change my felicity for any content the world can afford: you may think as
it pleases you answered she, for I shall think my self honored, if you please
to accept me for your wife with this Realm, that I shall attain the
perfection of my desire, knowing well, that if I was Lady of all the world, I
could not cancel that obligation in which you have bound me: this speech
proffered so graciously by one to so fair and beautiful a Princess, enflamed
so much the heart of this young King, that he said to her, Madam, I should be
very unwise, if I should not accept of the favor which you present unto me,
and making a great reverence unto her, kissed her at that time in sign of
matriage, of which the Knight of the Sphere was marvellously glad, so that as
much for the good and advancement of his Cosen, as to follow the Duchess in
her enterprise: he caused the Nuptials to be celebrated the fourth day
following, with great memory and solemnity, Garinter being crowned King,
receiving homage of the Realm of the Isle of Cytherea, and Lystria (from which
the Queen took her name, being Sovereign Lady both of the one and the other: a
little while after Perion and the Duchess taking leave of this compony,
reentred the Sea, following the coast of Almanie.

CHAP. XXXVII.
How the Knight of the Sphere forced the Town of Vienna in Austria, and rendered
the Durchesse free with all her Country.
THe Knight of the Sphere and the Duchess being reentred into their Vessel,
coasted along Almanie before they arived at Austria, passing always their time
at the game of Chess, at which they took pleasure, chiefly the Duchess who
vanquished with the love of Perion was seldom out of his sight, but he thought
of no such matter: but at last love worked so strong upon her senses that she
fell sick, which the Prince noting demanded of her how she did, Knight replies
she (in sighing) very ill, for thinking to recover my Land I hove lost my
self, alas! if pity be in your heart, for Gods sake leave rather the loss of
my Countries, and render me my liberty, for under color of purchasing my
good, you have ruined my life, Love has already so inflamed my heart with your
beauty, that if you do not pity me it is impossible I should live, having said
this, she follows him, embracing his arms, and kissing him so affectionately
that it seemed she would swound, at which the Knight of the Sphere marvelled,
but he had more pity to the Duchess, then loyalty to his Lady, in such
manner; that after he had kissed her he put himself in possessiion of the best
thing she had, rendering her that very hour Mistres of a work where she not
yet began her apprentiship, so passing all the night till the day approached,
he retires himself into his chamber, leaving the Duchess amongst her women,
they not perceiving any thing: at last the discovered the Country of Austria,
taking Port before the great City, where her Subjects held the Seige, who
received great joy at her arivall: the same day by the advice of the Knight of
the Sphere, Briantes was sent (being one of the ancientest in her troop)
toward Bortin and Alintes (so were her two unckles named) to whom he recounted
the return of their Lady, and the arivall of her Champion, who according to
the promise which they had sworn, was ready to combat both of them: Bortin
and Alintes hearing this message, laughed heartily, and said to him, Briantes
return to thy Mistres, and tell her that it would be a great folly in us, to
adventure our lives to hazard that which we hold sure, and that if she has
taken much pains to find a Knight for her, her travel is our pleasure, and
her labor is lost. Ah firs said Briantes! will you break both the faith and
the oath to which you so solemnly swore? depart said Bortin, and tell us not of
those things: then Briantes returned to the camp of the Duchess, who hearing
the issue of his legation was very much troubled at it, and complained so
pitifully, that every one had great compassion of her, but the Knight of the
Sphere comforted her saying, do you esteem these Rascals safe within the walls
or no? I assure you that within a little while, both the City and Country
shall be rendered into your hands. This promise gave hope to the Duchess, and
from that time the Knight of the Sphere sought by all means possible how he
might accomplish his enterprise, for the town was strong, well walled, and
furnished with men and necessary munitions: then knowing it impregnable he
called together all the Captains to know how they stood affected to their
Mistress, and after he heard their accuser in general, he said unto them my
friends, the Moon now is old, and the obscurity of he night very great, arm
your selves, and bear upon your harness a white cloth, by the which you may be
known, you have also in this Camp as I have heard, a great number of Ladders
very fit to mount the wall, I will depart upon the ninth hour, and will find
means to enter into the Town alone, fail not so soon as you hear the rumor to
come to the gates well prepared: for I have an intention to make ready work
for the enemy, and to hinder them from defending the walls and gates, if you be
diligent: this advice was well liked by some and blamed by others, nevertheless
it was accepted, and at the appointed hour the Knight of the Sphere took his
arms and went afoot toward the town: when he came to the Centinells they
demanded who marched there, friend said he, go I pray you, and tell the Duke
Bortni and his brother Alintes, that I wonld speak with them, about a business
of concernment; at this word one of them who went the round promised him to do
his message, and a little after returned, praying him to mount the wall, for
said the soldier, the Duke has commanded that the Gates shall not be opened:
well, replied the Knight, I shall obey his command, and when he was entered into
the Town, some soldiers conducted him to the Palace, and finding there Bortni
and Alintes, the Knight of the Sphere made them a great reverence: friend said
Bortni, take off your helmet, and speak to us in surety, sir replied he, I
will take it off if you please to command, all withdraw themselves except you
and your brother: the Dukes Bortni and Alintes who suspected nothing, commanded
every one to withdraw, which being done, they said to the Knight of the Sphere:
now sir you may put off the helmet, stay said the Knight, I will tell you that
you are Traitors: having so said, putting his hand to his sword, gave such such
a blow to Bortni that he cleft him to the shoulders, which Alintes seeing was
astonished, escaping himself and began to cry aloud, Arm Arm, for we are
betrayed; the Knight of the Sphere purposed to gain the entry of the Chamber,
and he himself gave the Alarm by the windows to cause those of the City to
forsake the walls, that his men might scale them with more facility: the rumor
was incontinently dispersed every where, and all ran toward the Palace
thinking to take Perion, and cut him in pieces; but his men ascended, entering
into the town like an impetuous torrent, killing all before them: for the
enemies pressed so to the Knight of the Sphere that he could not have long
resisted, if his men had not arived to his succor: but they being come quickly
freed him from danger, making such havoc of their enemies, that they soon
gained the town: the City being thus taken, they searched about for Alintes
whom at last they found in the head of a small Hie, who after some small
bickering they subdued, leaving him dead in the place, the other forces seeing
their Captain slain yielded themselves to Perion, on condition that he would
save their lives, which he granted: the Duchess having news of the surprisall
of Vienna, accompanied with a goodly train of Knights, Gentlemen and Ladies
entered the City, taking all those to mercy which had so unjustly bore arms
against her; the Duchess being thus possessed of her Right, feasted every day
him from whom she had received so exceeding a pleasure, but for all that she
could do, she could not detain the Knight of the Sphere, who deliberated to
take leave of the Duchess, and if she would not counsel him to go to depart
secretly: and as he had determined to put it in execution; humbly intrearing
the Duchess, that seeing now her business was concluded, she would permit him
to depart in quest of a kinsman of hers, but she would not condescend, doing
all she could to honor Perion: therefore according to his determination, the
new Knight after he took his arms, mounting upon his horse took a by-path,
that he might not be found; the Duchess advertized of his departure, was
ready to die with grief, but one thing recomforted her, feeling her self
great with child, that though she had lost the father she might preserve the
fruit. At the end of nine months she was brought to bed of a son, which she
named Florelus, who proved one of the b^st Knights in the world, but because
the subject of our History tends not to speak of him, we will leave him till
another time, to declare unto you that which happened to the Solitary Knight.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
How upon the end of the year the Solitary Knight departed from the Coast: and
he after he had finished many strange adventures, encountered the Knight of the
Sphere, with whom he had combat, the one not knowing the other.
THe Solitary Knight having left Amadis, as it has been told you, entered his
Barque, by which he was conducted through many strange Isles, and during that
year vanquished many Giants, with a great number of Knights, which we will not
mention to avoid prolixitie: the fifth day after his imbarquement he arived at
a Port, where he took land, and taking his horse mounted upon him, armed at all
points to defend himself, if he should be assailed; riding along he went into
a great Forest, where finding two cross ways he determined to take the most
used: but he had not rid long, when he heard great lamentation proceed from a
woman as he thought: then taking that way as he thought from whence he heard
the cry; he espied a Damsel tied by the hair of the head to the branch of a
tree, and approaching more nigh, he saw that it was Alquefa: therefore putting
his hand hastily to his sword he cut the branch: then she knew him as he which
had delivered her once before from the hands of Pirates, and bending her knees
to the ground to thank him she said: Ah Knight! succourer of all Damsells
blessed be you, and he which has endowed you with so many graces, who had
brought you unto this condition answered he, Alas sir said she! a Rogue met me
as I arived in the wood, and because I would not obey his lust he used me as
you see, and took his way along this valley traveling toward the right hand;
God never help me said he, if I do not make him dearly pay for his great
incivility, and attend me I pray you, sir Knight replies she, there is not far
off hence a Castle, where I dined yesterday, there I will stay for you if you
please; no said the Knight, I will not go thither before I have chastned this
Knights insolency; having thus said, he leapt upon his horse, taking the way
which Alquefa had showed him: and about the setting of the Sun he discovered
him whom he searched at the side of the Forest, whom he called, but the other
made no account of it: therefore the Solitary pressed his horse very much:
nevertheless he attained not him before it was night, saying unto him, damned
Knight who would force Ladies, now you shall not escape me before you have
received payment for your wickedness; at this word the Knight turning about his
face without any answer to the other, put his Lance in his rest, and went
against the Solitary, who encountered him in such manner that he dismounted him,
and scorning to have any advantage of his enemy, alighted also, and began a
mavelous combat, which endured not long, for the Solitary at last left him
dead upon the place, the Solitary seeing the night very much advanced,
deliberated to repose himself by a clear fountain, till it was day, but the
thoughts of his Lady obstructed him from sleeping until he heard a noise of
horses, and a little after perceived a Knight armed armed at all points, who
descending from his horse went to the fountain: but he had not long staid
there, but sighing said, oh love love! you have put me in so high a place, that
I may name my self the most happy Knight in the world, and best loved of one
who holds the soveraigntie of beauty; by my head Knight said the Solitary, I
will not endure such blasphemy against Madam Onolorea: which he at the
fountain hearing, demanded who he was, I am said the Solitary, one which would
know of you the name of her you love, what profit shall it be to you said the
other? such profit answers the Solitary as shall turn to your Damage, for I
will not endure so great injury against my Lady; oh audacious fellow, will
you nominate her to be Queen of beauty whom many far surpasses? before that
thou and I part I will make thee wiser: then encountering one another by
starlight, they handled themselves so cruelly in a little time, that their
Sheilds and coat of armor were hackt and broken in so many places, that the
field was all covered therewith: nevertheless they maintained themselves so
well the one against the other, that for the space of two hours or more, they
took not breath, nor did they know to whom the victory would incline, which
gave no small amazement to the Solitary, not having found at any time so hardy
a Champion as would withstand him, who had killed and vanquished many strong
and cruel Giants, they having already combated about four hours without any
advantage; day began to appear, the Solitary being outrageous went toward his
enemy, and taking him by the Choler was ready to take off his head: when he
perceived in the Shield wherewith he was covered, the Sphere which was there
painted, and thereby he saw it was his Uncle, at which he was very much
displeased, casting his sword to the ground, crying out: ah fortune! how
adverse art thou against me in all things? and putting his knees to the ground,
taking off his Helmet, said to Perion: Sir my Uncle, for Gods sake pardon me,
truly I had enough knowledge of the valor which is in you, not to adventure as
I have done, Perion knowing him, embraced him saying: in good faith my Nephew,
the approaching of the day was well for me, for if you had not known me without
doubt my end had been nigh, and as they were in those terms Alquefa came, who
had walked all the night to find the Solitary, at the sight of them she
kissing them both, their heads being deformed, and therefore she cried out, oh
God! what adventure have I encountered, seeing with my eyes the two best Knights
in the world: then she demanded of them the occasion of their combat, friend,
said the Solitary: fortune which is not only content to follow and molest me,
treats also by despite of me) those which are not unlyable of my mishap: but I
pray you f^nde some means to stanch our wounds: then she took her
handkerchief, tearing it in pieces to bind up their wounds, which she having
done they mounted on horse back, riding toward the Castle, where she had
lodged the precedent night, where being arived, the Lord thereof knowing their
adventures, treated them so courteously, that in a short time they recovered
their former estate,

CHAP. XXXIX.
How the two Knights took leave of their host and reentring in the Sea were
cast into great Britain, where they had combat against Florestan and Parmenir
not knowing them.
THe two Knights being healed of wounds, and able to bear travel, Perion on
day among others devising with Alquefa, prayed her to tell him what adventure
had brought her into those Countries: In good faith replies she, know that
after my departure from Trebisond going in search of you, by the Commandment
of my Lady Gricilerea, I took you in Austria, where I was advertised that the
Duchess by your means was inthronized in her territories, and that not six
months before my arivall there, you departed from her without her leave:
therefore traversing Almaign^, I ran to Constance, where they told me that you
having combated a Knight which would have forced a Damsel, after you had
defeated him, took this way, which I having understood did the like: but my
journie had been hindered if by good fortune the Solitary Knight had not arived,
when he delivered me from the hands of a villain, who would have deprived me
of my honor, hanging me to the branch of a tree: Now having found you, I desire
you to return back again: for my Lady having heard from her sister that you
were gone in search of Lisvart, received mavelous contentment: for I assure
you that after you return, you shall receive better usage then you had before:
my great friend replies he, I will perform her commandment, and believe that
my Nephew ^all be also ready to return with me: then they went to find
Lisvart, who was in another chamber, and Alquefa so well acted her part that
she brought to pass all that you have declared, at which he was so pleased,
that he seemed to be departed from hell into Paradise: and nevertheless
remembering himself of that which he had endured, would not contein himself:
but said aloud: Ah my Lady! that so much evil as I have suffered without
meriting it; Alas! not having offended you had I need of so cruel
chastisement? which without doubt had been too gracious, if I had committed the
fault imputed to me: Ah Gradifilea! you have delivered me from death: but truly
before this comfortable news, what afflictions? what pains? what dolors? did I
suffer, and all for your occasion: in truth my great friend Alquefa said he,
embracing her, I am not of power sufficient to acknowledge your benevolence
toward me: for if I have saved your life by one blow, you have saved mine a
thousand times a day; Sir said Alquefa, leave this purpose, and deliberate with
your self to take your way toward Trebisond: then she recounted to him all
that passed since his departure, which our History has before newly declared;
I believe said Perion, that we shall find yet there Florestan and our
Companions: she answered he was departed from the Court maleeontent, because
that the Emperor has married Griliana with the King of Breigne, and Parmenir
Galuanes and the others that have followed this occasion, are retired to the
Defended Mountain, toward King Norandell, against whom the Turks wage strong
and cruel war: In good faith says the Solitary, they have had reason, and
Griliana could not excuse her self, that she had passed her word to another
and could not recede from it: Alquefa answered, let us embarque where we will
discourse more at leisure: therefore the next day following having thanked
their host for their good entertainment, they took their way toward the barque
of the Solitary: but before they dislodged, the Knight of the Sphere chused
himself to be called the Knight of the Almane Knight, and for that occasion
prayed the Knight of the Castle to give him new arms, which he willingly
accorded to, giving him one of azure adorned with stars of Gold, and a horse to
the Solitary as fair as possible, to whom they acknowledged themselves greatly
obliged: and as they traversed the Forest to go to the Sea, the Solitary
recited the fortunes that he had passed since his departure from
Constantinople: the vision that he had had the night following, and the
counsel that the fantosme gave him, to enter the barque which he had since
managed without any Pilot, at which the Almane Knight was abashed, but Alquefa
assured them that it was conducted by her father, who curious of Lisvarts
safety, appeared to him, and made ready for him that Vessel, in which said she
we will embarque our selves: for we shall navigate then more surely then if we
had the best mariners of the Sea to conduct us; about the evening they arived
at the barque, and entering therein found it victualled, with all that was
necessary, and from that very instant began to sail so swiftly, that they lost
sight of the land eight days, during which thinking to go into Asia, they
were cast from the Medite^ranean Sea into the Ocean, and traversing the Columes
of Hercules, found themselves one Sunday at the break of day nigh a rich fair
Haven, where they demanded of some Fithermen the name of the Country: Knights
said they, you are in great Britain, and in the King Amadis of Gauls
Territories, whose name is spread through all the universe, and although at
first such news was little agreeable to the two Knights: nevertheless the
Solitary prayed Almane to land, and to go see the Country, which having done,
they taking their horses out of their barque, mounted upon them armed, either
to assail or defend, and to the end that they might not be known by the means
of Alquefa, they prayed her to keep her self as much covered as ^he might
possible: so taking their way toward a great Forest they espied two Knights;
the one of them armed with black Armor, bearing in his shield the like color,
but that in the middle there was painted a divided Heart, and the other had
Armor all white, with a shield of the same: he with the black Arms addressing
himself to the Solitary, spoke graciously unto him, saying: I pray you Knight,
let us break a Lance together for the love of Ladies, you will not refuse me,
as I think, at least if you be he as I think you to be by your shield, whose
Prowess is renowned in all places: and moreover you are now in a Country, where
those that have desire to acquire honor by well combating, find enough to
employ them: Sir Knight replies the Solitary, seeing the color you bear, I
think rather for a companion then any other think; it is not that said the
other, I desire to give my self against him with whom I cannot acquire that
honor: therefore sir I would not have you impute blame unto me; but accept of
the request which I ask you: Knight replies the Solitary; I desire you to
excuse me at this Lance, and demand of me any other thing and you shall not be
refused: seeing that you will have it so said the other, I recommend you to
God: having said thus, passing from the Solitary he said to his Companion: upon
my faith these two Knights seem to me valiant men, and I would willingly know
who they are: I know not said the other. The Solitary and his Companion rode a
long time in the Forest ti^l they arived at a fair shadie place, where they
dismounted to refresh themselves; for the heat was great, and then they
satisfied their appetite with that which Alquefa brought, after they had
refreshed themselves, they remounted, traversing the wood till they all came at
a cross way, where they espied under a Fountain an armed Knight, who talked
with a Damsel, and laughed together as it seemed to them: nevertheless, so
soon as the Knight discerned them, he put on his Helmet, and holding his Lance
at the point came toward them, saying: Knight, pass not beyond this place; if
you will not give me the Damsel as you conduct, to serve her which attends
me under this tree; Alquefa who went before answered him: I believe Knight,
that I am in a safer guard then if I were with you, How answers the Alman? we
are two and you alone, do not you provoke us to combat said sir Knight: leave
the Damsel in peace, and us also: to these words said the other, I will have
her whether you will or no, to whom the Solitary answered, have I guarded her
thus long to let you have her? leave you her, and go search other servants for
your Mistres; the other shaking his head, said; she shall serve me and you
also: saying thus, hasping his Helmet he came toward the Solitary, and
encountered him so strongly that he broke his Lance to the point; but the
Solitary so rudely handled him that he killd him at the first stroke: at which
the Damsel was wrath, and cried pitiously: ah Villain! who has killed the
thing in the world as I loved best: this fortune you shall dearly buy, and so
tearing her hair, as desperate she mounted upon her horse, and took her way
through the wood, the two Knights not following her, but went another way,
riding along till the night surprised them: therefore they dismounted them:
then having satisfied their own stomachs, they laid themselves down to sleep
until the morning, when being ready to get a horseback, they heard one call
them, and a little after knew her to be the Mistres of the dead Knight, who was
accompanied both with the black and the white Knight, which without any other
defiance, encountered each other; but the Alman and the Solitary received them
so well that they would not much boast of their entertainment, everting them
rudely from their horses: Nevertheless they lifted themselves up lightly, and
putting their hands to their swords, said to the others: Knights, descend from
your horses or we will kill them, and for that cause alighting, began between
them four such a combat, that the two Damsells thought that they had never
seen a more perilous, and so they maintained themselves one against the other a
whole hour and more, that it would have been a hard matter to judge who had
the better of the Combat: but in the end, the Alman handled him with the white
Arms so well, that he began to wax feeble, without making other resistance
then to shun the blood of his enemy: and on the other side, he with the black
Arms, knowing well that he had one of the best Knights in the world to deal
with, gave him so great a blow with his sword, that made him put his hand to
the ground to sustain himself: at which the Solitary being very angry,
recharged him so lively, that in less then an hour the field was covered with
pieces of his Harness, and the grass dyed red with his blood: nevertheless he
defended himself as he which was full of great Prowess, although he had left
but one part of his Shield, with which he covered himself so well as he could:
then she saw easily that she had lost her Lover, and that she could not be
revenged of him, despairing of remedy, cast her self from her Palfrey to the
ground, and taking a truncheon of a Lance, said aloud that every one heard her:
I have not pleased the Gods, that I live after him which loved me better then
himself, and finishing these speeches, cast her self upon the truncheon,
peirc^ng her stomach, that she fell down dead: at which the Solitary was
astonished, knowing his victory certain, said to his enemy: Knight what
induced you to enterprise this Combat against me? I did it said he, to fulfill
the will of the deceased Damsel, to whom I promised to kill you, or die in the
attempt; she is said the Solitary now with God or the Devil, and by her
decease you are acquitted of the Combat: whereof I pray you for the esteem
which I have of you, to tell me your name, and although that he to whom he
spoke was in danger of death; notwitstanding these speeches having instamed him
so with revenge, that he answered, brandishing his sword: By God I will first
try yet mutable fortune, and rushing upon the other, gave him two such blows
that he felt himself greatly outraged: at whose choler he marvelled, and said
to him: how? what by my head then you shall loose your life, and oftending his
arms, if the sword had not turned in his hand he had killed him; but it only
cut the laces of his Helmet: so that it fell from his head: Then knew the
Solitary that it was his Uncle Florestan, son of the King Sardinia:
Nevertheless he feigned not to know him, saying: Knight, I will not that you
hold your self vanquished: seeing you have pursued your enterprise so much as
the forces you are accompanied with would permit you: Notwithstanding, I desire
you to tell your name: Florestan who by reason of the loss of his blood was so
much debilitated, that he would hardly speak, answered him, truly Knight, if I
have contested more then I ought to have done, thinking not to have found that
in you which I had heard to be; but now I find it too true to my cost, it is
the courtesy you have used toward me, not regarding the outrage I have done
you, I assure you I am son to the King Florestan, and named as my father: Sir
said Lisvart, I have many times heard speak of your great valor, although I
would never have believed it to be such, but that I have tried it: therefore I
pray you let us remain friends, at the charge that I will serve you faithfully
all my life, Ah said Florestan! is it of me you demand mercy? and whilst that
they held these gracious speeches, Aleman threw the Knight with the white arms
to the ground, and taking off his Helmet, thinking to kill him, saved him for
his Nephew Parmenir; Aleman very sorry to see him in that extremity, said
unto him without making any semblance of knowing him; that for the good
Chivalrie which was in him, he gave him his life: amongst other discourses the
Solitary demanded of Florestan, who was the Knight with him, replied he it is
my brother, but I pray you who is that Knight that has vanquished him, he
names himself replide the Solitary the Almaigne Knight, and from Almane we
ran together for company: then we mounted all four on horseback, and taking
leave one of the other retired our selves: Florestan and Parmenir to an
adjoining Castle, where they were carefully healed of their wounds, not with
out much discourseing of the valor of the two Knights whom they had assailed;
but because it does not appertain to our History leave them; and only tell
you that Florestan bore black arms, because Griliana was married, as has been
before recited, which did not at all extenuate the affection which she had
toward him; for they loved as much as it was possible for any hoping if he
lost the name of a husband he should recover that of a friend, and for this
cause bore in his shield a divided heart, as you have heard.

CHAP. XL.
How the Solitary Knight and the Alman traversing the Forest with Alquefa, the
son to the Emperor of Rome, sent to pray the Solitary to break a Lance with him
for the love of Ladies.
LIsvart and Perion being separated from Florestan and Parmenir caused Alquefa
to look to their wounds, which she did so well, that they did not hinder them
from traveling: so that at the end of the wood they met a train of Knights,
and others that belonged to the Empress of Rome, and the King and Queen of
Sardaigne, who were then come to visit the King Amadis, and Queen Oriana. The
Empress was conducted by a Knight armed with white armor, and embelished with
rich precious stones, and a bright shining shield with seven letters of B.
After her King Florestan and Queen Sardinara marched, and after them the other
Lady and Knights. This Company marched very near the Solitary, and the Alman
and the Knight in the white arms sent a Damsel to the Solitary, to entreat
him to do him the honor to break one Lance with him for the love of Ladies, it
being the first day that he had borne arms since he had been Knighted, to
which message the Solitary returned answer that he did willingly accept of his
offer, if he or some others would lend him a Lance, of which he was at that
time unprovided. Don Florestan King of Sardaigne soon sent him a Lance which
he accepted of, and therefore the Knight in the white arms being ready, the
Solitary gave spurs to his horse, and the two Knights encountered together: but
at their meeting the Solitary lifted up his Lance and he in the white arms
encountered him so strongly, that his Lance flew into shivers: then turning his
bridle, he said: By my God sir Knight, your courtesy is greater then is
published, and it is no wonder that your renown increases so as it does,
seeing that without touching me, you can so well vanquish me, that for the
future you may command me, as he who desires to serve and honor you: Knight
answered the Solitary, it is you your self who has vanquished me by your
virtue, which is sufficient to subdue the proudest Knight in the world. And
therefore I would entreat you to discover your self to me: I am said he son to
the Emperor of Rome, and my name is Pinerpie. Thus I am forced to leave you to
the protection of God to follow the Empress. Thus they parted, and the Empress
and the rest s^t forwards, in the way to Fenuse, where King Amadis sojourned,
and the Solitary returned to Perion and Alquefa, and recounted the discourse he
had with Pinerpie.

CHAP. XLI.
How the Solitary and the Alman sent Alquefa to King Amadis, and what discourse
she had with him.
THe Solitary Knight and his Company staid that night in the Forest, and the
next morning they remounted on horseback. They had not long traveled when they
met a Knight very weary, and his arms tainted with blood: wherefore they asked
him where he had been so handled, who told them that he had rescued a Damsel
from two Knights, and had killed one, and in pursuing the other he had lost his
Squires: they then asked his name, sir said he, I am called Angriole, D'
Estrevaux, and am great Master of King Amadis his house, by whose command I am
agoing to London, to inform the Knights how to honor and receive the Empress
Leonorina, he would keep open Court at the next Penticost, and he will then
arm the Prince Adriell, and one of the sons of King Norandell Knights (who
lately arived here for that purpose) and therefore I pray you sirs, if you meet
my Squires show them the way that I am gone. Then taking his leave of them, he
left them displeasant to see him in this danger, for they loved and esteemed
him greatly. They traveled not much further before they saw the Knight that
Angriole had killed, and a villain by him, of whom they asked how far it was to
Fenuse, who told them two miles or thereabouts, and said he, I did this day
direct a great company thither, and amongst them there was Agries King of
Scotland, and Mabila his wife, who are gone to visit King Amadis. So they
departed, and the next morning they sent Alquefa disguised to the Court, to
King Amadis, to inform him, that the Solitary Knight according to his promise,
at the Castle of the Rock was come to visit him, and did desire to have a Tent
without the Town, where the Tourney was to be held, because he and his
Companion would not be known, which the King granted unto her with many thanks,
and thereupon ordered Gandalin to provide a Tent, and every thing necessary,
which he did, which being done, she (promising that the two Knights should be
there on the morrow) departed and went to the Knights.

CHAP. XLII.
How the Solitary and the Alman requested of the King, to permit them to keep
the Field, against all those who would come to the Joust, and break Lances, for
the space of eight days.
ALquefa being returned, as you have heard, and having recited the sum of her
answer to the two Knights, she presently departed to Fenuse, where they were
greatly welcomed by King Amadis, and the rest of the train, and in the
conclusion, because King Amadis did know that the two Knights would not
willingly be discovered, and the night drawing on, he gave command unto
Gandalin to conduct the Solitary, and the Alman unto their Tent, and see every
thing provided for them, which he did: and after they had taken their leaves of
King Amadis and the rest of the Court, Gandalin conducted them to their Tent,
where they being provided with all things, he left them, knowing that they
would not disarme themselves before he was departed. Then they refreshed
themselves, and the next evening they repaired to the Court, where they found
King Amadis discoursing with Argamont; but so soon as they came in they left
their discourse, and the Solitary Knight approaching near the King, kneeled on
the ground, and said to him so loud that every one could hear: Most puissant
and Sovereign King, the occasion of our coming into this your Country, has
been especially to do you service: and after we had heard of the Court you
intend to keep this next Pentecost, we thought good to make one request to you,
which we humbly entreat you to grant us: which is; that you permit us to
maintain a Joust for eight days, against all those that will try themselves
under the condition you shall hear. We will (it so it please you) hang two
sheilds such as our own are, on a post, and that Knight that shall touch either
of them shall be obliged to joust against us, and I for my part purpose to do
nothing, but what shall be for the honor and service of Madam Brisenna your
daughter: for so long as I abide in this place (if she pleas to accept of me) I
shall and will be her Knight, but none shall call us to combat with the Sword,
for what we do is only for pleasure: therefore if we be all thrown down we
will mount again, and so joust until some of us be cast on the ground, and
the others remain in their saddles, and those that do so remain mounted,
shall be obliged to maintain these conditions: for the rest of the said eight
days, and if it happen that one Knight does dismount us both, one after
another: then he shall be obliged to maintain and continue these Articles for
the rest of the said eight days. And further if so stands with the pleasure of
my Lady Brisenna, she shall send for every Knight, that we shall vanquish, the
name of that Knight that shall be vanquished, in testimony that this justice
is enterprised by us for her praise and honor. In good faith answered the King,
you shall not be referred: but if you think good I will be third: so that if it
shall happen that you be both dismounted, then the vanquisher shall be bound to
joust with me; and this shall only be for all strangers. This pleased all the
Assembly except Pinerpie, who was as much discontented as Brisenna was joyful
of the enterprise that was done for her sake. Pinerpie was greatly in love with
Brisenna, and therefore he bore in his Shield seven B. as you have formerly
heard: and was come purposely from his own Country at the report of her
beauty. This discourse being ended: Yrguian son to Gandalin had the charge of
erecting Scaffolds without the Town, as the Solitary had appointed.

CHAP. XLIII.
How King Amadis being in the Company of many wise men, Olorius Prince of
Spain arived at the Court to entreat him to give him Knighthood.
AS they were thus discoursing together about the enterprise of the Solitary, a
Gentleman entered the Hall clad with garments of the cloth of Gold covered with
pearls, and rich precious stones: he was fair and of a good stature. In this
Company was twenty Knights and as many Squires, and at his arivall making
great reverence to King Amadis, he set his knee to the ground and kissed his
hands. But the King graciously received him, and asked him who he was. Sirs
replied he, my name is Olorious of Spain, and I am son to King Don Brian your
singular good friend, who at my request sent me to you to reverence the order
of Knighthood, which I humbly entreat of you to bestow on me, being confident
that I cannot receive this honor of a better hand then yours. Amadis
understanding who he was, kindly welcomed him, and presented him to Queen
Oriana, and the Empress Leonorina, saying to them: Ladies see the King of
Spaines Son, I pray make him welcome: he then humbly saluted them, and a chair
being brought, the Queen caused him to sit down. And because the Solitary and
the Alman would retire, Amadis left him to discourse with the Ladies, to give
the good night to the two Knights, until the next day of Pentecost they came
to the Court, it being late and their Helmets on their heads, because they
would not be discovered; and they found the Princess of Spain and Naples, and
King Norandells Son richly armed with white arms, as it was the custom for
new Knights. Thus they were conducted to the Church to watch whither they were
attended by the Empress, the Queens Oriana, of Scotland, and of Sardaigne, the
Infanta Brisenna, and other Ladies and Damsells, who left them there until the
next morning: when Amadis in the company of the two unknown Knights, and many
other great Lords, Ladies and Damsells went to them. Then he gave them the
Order, and Oriana girded on the Sword of Olorius, the Empress Prince Elinie's,
and the Infanta Brisenna Adariells. Then soon after the Mass was solemnly
celebrated by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and from thence they went to the
Palace, where the great Hall was hung with much rich Tapestrie, which the
deceased King Lisvart had caused to be made in his time: in the one whereof was
described the Combat of Amadis against Ardan Canile, in the others that of the
Endragus, the trial of the Arc of Loyal Lovers, the Defended Chamber, the
proof of the Sword, and the Scarf with flowers, the cruel battle of one
hundred to one hundred between King Lisvart and Cildadan at that time, that
Amadis lost the name of the fair forlorn, and likewise how he vanquished the
two strong Giants Famongornad and his son Barsigant, who carried the Infanta
Leonor Prisoner. But the Solitary and the Alman returned to their Tent, where
the Infanta Brisenna sent them horses and all manner of other provisions, as
Cloth of Gold to cover their Sheilds, with which they all did, and so taking
their Lances they went unto the place appointed for the Tournie, whether soon
after came King Amadis accompanied with most of the Lords and Ladies of the
Court; they had not staid there long before they saw six Knights very well
armed, and mounted, who came out of the Forest; four whereof retired, and the
other two (having touched the two Sheilds that were placed on the pillars)
prepared themselves for the Encounter, which they presently performed so, that
their Lances broke into shivers, and they were forced to measure their lengths
on the ground: which Fortune likewise happened to the other four only, the two
last ran twice before they left their horses. Then there came those who were
ordained for the keeping of the Tourney to know their names: but before they
arived they had pulled off their Helmets: so that they saw the two first to be
Teluis the Flemming, and Yrguian son of Gandalin, the two others Dragonis and
Balonir, and the others Garnate of the Dreadful dale, and Ambor of Gandell son
to Angriole D'Estrevaux. Soon after the Infanta Brisenna sent the names of the
vanquished Knights according to the agreement, and soon after that fourteen
Knights were seen to come out of the wood, and a little while after ten others,
who came all to touch the sheilds; but the two Knights rewarded them all so
well, that he soon made them all measure their lengths on the ground. Thus
these two Knights (after they had done with these) remained ready to assail
or defend as occasion should happen, until it grew dark: and therefore the
King Amadis with all his train departed to supper, where all their discourse
was about these two valiant and victorious Knights.

CHAP. XLIV.
How Urganda came by Sea to Fenuse, and of the fear she put the Town in.
THe same night as supper was almost ended, there entered some into the Court to
inform King Amadis that there was the strangest sight on the Sea that ever was
beheld: whereupon the Knights of the Court being somewhat affrighted with this
adventure, presently armed themselves, and ran to the Seaside, in the company
of the King, where they saw about a mile of a Mountain of fire in the Sea, and
from thence there came so much thunder and lightning that the Inhabitants of
the town were greatly frighted therewith: so that they thought it was the
judgments of God to punish them for their former sins: wherefore they fell on
their knees to ask and implore Gods aid: this Mountain approached near the
Shore, and the nearer it came the more the fire went out, and at last all the
Mountain vanished, in lieu thereof they only saw a great Ship with Apes, and
every one of their Apes held a burning Torch, and there was seen twelve
Damsels, and in the midst of them sat one Lady, who was soon known to be
their Mistress, and they made the rarest Music in the world: and this Lady was
soon known by Amadis and others to be Vrganda: wherefore Amadis having a
Skiffe boarded her ship. And then after their usual manner of greeting, she
began to recont unto Amadis and the rest the cause of her coming, which she
said was only to do him pleasure, and partly at the desire of the Sagee
Alquefa who had lent her that ship with Apes to conduct her thither. Then
Amadis led her under the Arm unto the shore, and so into the Town, where she
was welcomed by Oriana, and the other Ladies of the Court. It was late, and
above midnight before they had ended their discourse, and Vrganda prayed the
King to let her lodge with the Infanta Brisenna, to keep her company, which he
consented to: wherefore giving her the good night, she was conducted thither,
and every body went to sleep.

CHAP. XLV.
How the two Knights carried the honor of the second, third, fourth, fifth,
and sixth days of the Tourney.
THe day following after dinner, the King and Ladies went to the Scaffolds, to
see what would happen to the two Knights in this days adventure, where they
had not long stayed before there issued twenty Knights out of the wood, who
having touched the Sheilds were all soon dismounted to the great honor of the
two Knights, and so they continued until the fifth day of the Combat, still
vanquishing all that they encountered with all. Wherefore Pinerpie and the three
other new Knights entreated the King to let them try themselves against the
two Knights, which request the King at last granted, and that evening there
arived before the King a Knight, that was armed at all points, except Helmet
and Gantlets, who was soon known to be Sergill, sometimes Esquire to
Esplandian, who brought news that the Empress was newly brought to bed of a
Daughter, named Luciana, and she was so called, because she bad a shining Star
on her left breast. Olorius of Spain being at that time present, and hearing
hereof did presently resolve to choose no other device but the flaming Star,
which he caused to he made against the next day: when he purposed to try his
valor. The next day the four Knights being entered the field against the Alman
and the Solitary, they all jousted bravely, especially Olorius who ran eight
times without being dismounted, and the ninth time they were both thrown from
their horses: when presently fresh horses were brought them, and at the tenth
course Olorius was cast from his horse, with his saddle between his legs, and
that night he dismounted above forty more, amongst whom there was Sergil,
Mareince and Garnate of the Dreadful dale, Siontes nephew to the deceased
Lisvart, Listoran, and many others, whose names I think good to omit: Then the
Infanta Brisenna sent her accustomed messenger, who desired the two Knights to
be at supper with the King, which they accorded to.

CHAP. XLVI.
How as King Amadis was risen from Supper a Damsel entered, who brought him a
Message from two strange Knights.
AS supper was ended there entered into the Hall a Damsel, who soon cast her
self down at the feet of Amadis, who desired him to suffer two Knights who
were newly arived in his Country, to fight with swords (with the two Knights
that maintained the Joust) in the great Hall of his Palace. for as then it was
so dark that they could not possibly see to joust within the Lists. Which the
King would not grant, unless the two Knights defendants would consent unto it,
which they presently did: wherefore the Messenger departed, and soon after
there arived two Knights with a most gallant train, being very rich, and
having Heralds with Crowns borne before them: they soon began their Combat,
which was bravely maintained on both sides for above half an hour; but a
Knight that came in their company had a golden staff in his hand went between
them, and cried out aloud: Hold Knights, hold, you do not fight in good
earnest, only in jest, and to please Ladies: then the Heralds approached, and
taking off their Helmets placed Crowns on their heads, and Scepters in their
hands, and he with the Golden staff was soon known to be Perion of Sobradise,
and the two Assailants were Galafea and Pintiquinestra, and the first that
began to dance was Mancly the Sage: All the others were black and white women,
which spectacle made the King and all his train to laugh heartily. And the two
Knights Perion and Lisvart went to excuse themselves for fighting with the
Ladies. The King Amadis kindly welcomed them, and they related unto him the
cause of their coming to his Court, which was only said they to visit your
Majesty, Madam Oriana, and your daughter Brisenna, together with this your
honorable Court. In good faith my friends said the King, you have done me much
honor and pleasure, and I thank you with all my heart. Pintiquinestra was at
that time so fair, and of so good a favor by reason of a vermilion color
which was mounted in her face, that there was none in the company, but did
judge her more worthy to force men at a Combat between two Courtaines, then to
handle the Arms of Mars: for what dexterity soever she had to aid her in a
Combat, or in the field, that of Venus was much more proper, and peculiar to
her.

CHAP. XLVII.
How the two Defendants bore away the honor of the seventh day, and of those
that they vanquished.
THe next day at the accustomed time which was after dinner, the King Queen and
Ladies went all to the Scaffolds where the two Knights jousted with many
valiant Knights, as Perion of Sobradise, and Mancly Gandalin, Listoran,
Branfill, Tuntiles the Proud, Carine of Carsante, Autalie son of Olivas,
Bracete son of Brandoyvas, Garamont son to the King of Norewales, Brandany of
Gaul, and many others whom they vanquished, and after they had unhorsed all
these, there came eight others out of the Forest, who were a company with one
Lady and six Damsells, with whom the two Knights jousted, after they had
touched the two sheilds on the Pillars; but they were all of them in the end
forced to measure their lengths on the ground, after they had first jousted
very well; for the eigth Knight who jousted with the Solitary broke eleven
Lances, and at the twelfth they met with their bodies with such force, that the
Solitary lost one of his strings, ready to fall if he had not laid hold of the
neck of his horse; but the other was thrown down, quite bereft of his senses:
but when he came to himself, he and his Companions pulled their Helmets from
their heads, and saluting the King and Ladies, the first that jousted was known
to be Galaor of Scotland, and Arandalie his brother, the others Calsegue, the
baughtie, and Galfary of Rome, the fifth and sixth Surssie of Ireland, son of
King Cildadan, who had newly received the Order of Knighthood, and Angriole D'
Estrevaux, who was newly come from London; the seventh was Quedragant, and the
eighth Galaor King of Sobradise, all Knights, Errants who conducted Briolanea:
who with this little train of women came to visit Queen Oriana, and had
casually met these Knights. Great was the welcome that King Amadis made them.
Soon after they saw ten Knights more come out of the Forest, who were all
thrown from their horses at the first encounter, and so the night drawing on
they lest off for this night. Then the King and the Ladies departed, conducting
his brother and Queen Briolana to the Palace, where they found supper ready,
during which time Galaor d manded of Mancly if he knew any news of his two sons
Talanque and Garinter, who answered him that Talanque staid in Californus, and
that Garinter had married the Queen of Listrie, and Citherea being a puissant
Queen, which he had done by the victory he had had over a Giant in open
Battle, the Knight of the Sphere being present. This news greatly pleased
Galaor, and all the company, and all that evening they had no other discourse,
only a little before they went to bed Amadis happened to speak of the Prowess
of the two Knights: who (said he) have done so well these few days p^^^, that
if they continue to morrow, I shall acco^^^ (...) for the best runners at the
Lance that ever I saw, and I will know, if it be possible, wherefore they hold
themselves thus. But the Solitary and the Alman purposed otherwise: for they
intended so soon as they had finished this enterprise to depart from this
Country.

CHAP. XLVIII.
How the two Defendants had the honor of the eigth and last day, and of the
arivall of the green Knight who disarmed them, and Amadis himself.
YOu have heard how the two Knights behaved themselves the seven days; now you
are to hear what they did on the eigth. The Mass being celebrated betimes in
the morning, they all made have to the Scaffolds to behold the joust, where the
two Knights unhorsed many Knights, who came in abundance to the feast that was
to be holden at Pentecost. A little before evening there issued out of the
Forest a Knight in green Armor, who by his arms was known not to have been
idle: for they were so battered and broken, that he scarce had any thing
wherewithal to defend himself: he having made a great reverence to the King
and Ladies touched the shield, and presently the Alman ran against him, and at
the first course their Lances flew into shivers; but at the second encounter
the Alman was thrown from his horse, and the Green Knight remained unmoved in
his saddle: at which adventure all the assembly greatly wondered, and Amadis
suspected that it was Esplandian: yet he held not this opion long, but armed
himself so fast as he could; for his mind gave him that he should be forced
to encounter with the green Knight. The Alman being dismounted the Solitary
prepared for the encounter; but he at the first course was unhorsed, the green
Knight only loseing one of his stirrops. Then Amadis being armed, and coming
unto the Lists, the green Knight received him bravely: so that at their first
encounter the King was forced to leave his horses back. Then the Solitary
seeing this earnestly-desired the green Knight to come to the Combat with the
Sword, which he at last did, and alighting from his horse, and being coverd
with his shield, and so they assailed one another, but the green Knight at the
first blow that he gave the Solitary cleaved his shield in twain, at which he
being enraged gave the green Knight so great a blow on the Helmet, that there
was heard a great thunderclap, and so great a darkness that the two Knights
could not be seen: but Amadis, and the green Knight remained on horseback, and
the green Knight was soon known to be the Sage Alquif, which being known the
laughter was great, and Amadis kindly welcomed him, and above all things
desired him to discover who the other two Knights were, which he would not do
by no means, excusing himself to the King for that particular. They had in
this time of the joust disarmed three hundred twenty assailants, amongst the
rest there was Don Galaor King of Sobradise, Olorius Prince of Spain, Pinerpie
of Naples, Perion Prince S^br^d se, Prince Elinie Suyssies, of Ireland, Son to
King Cildad in, Mancly the Sage, and his brother Ambor of Gandell, Don
Quedragant of Ireland, Angriole D'Esirevaux, Garuate of the Dreadful dale, the
Earl Gadalin, Lieoran of the white Tower, Listotan of the Silver bridge, the
King Dragonis, Balonir his brother, Branfill, Pomplante, Tantiles the Haughty,
Carinee of Carsante, Atalie of Olivas, Branele son of Brandaguas, Garamonte son
to the King of Norwales, Vfeny of Almanie, Brandanie of Gaul, Talamane his
brother, Teluis the Fleming, Amadarie of Bretaigne, Silvestrie of Hongarie,
Mancly of Suesse, Galphorie of Rome, Galaor of Scotland, Amandalie his brother,
Galfegne the proud, Marcine son to Garuate of the Dreadful dale, Siontes
Nephew to King Lisvart, Silercie son to Don Grumedan, Pintinel of Carsante, son
to Balays Yrguian son to Earl Gandalin, Pilerte of the Vermelin Tower son to
Bravor, and a Spanish Knight named So^tans. And by reason that these were
better known then the others, therefore I thought good to name them, according
to the names that Brisenna sent to the two Knights by her messenger, who
likewise entreated them to be in the Kings lodging that evening, because she
would speak with them, to which they accorded.

CHAP. XLIX.
How by the means of Urganda the two Knights were known, and of the marriages
of Perion son to Galaor, with Queen Pintiquinestra and the Sage Alquis with
Urganda the Unknown.
THe Jousts being ended for this day, the King and his train went to the great
Hall of the Palace to supper, where they found every thing ready: then Amadis
sitting at the table with Alquif and Vrganda desired her to give them some
pleasure by her skill, which she promised to do. Soon after the Alman and the
Solitary entered the Hall, who being armed as they were accustomed, went to
salute the Company: but there appeared over their heads two hands which had
maces, and went to assail the two Knights: at the first blow that was given,
all the Candles and Torches went out, and all the place remained in obscurity:
but by chance the false scabbord that was on the sword of the Solitary fell
off, and thereby, by virtue of the stones there was so bright a light, that
Lisvart and Perion were both known, who were then without Helmets on their
heads: at which adventure every one was execeding joyful, especially Pinerpie,
who until then had been jealous of Lisvart, and Lisvart excused himself unto
Amadis and the rest, for his so long time going undiscovered, and Vrganda
desired pardon for her offense: this adventure caused much joy unto all the
Court and the Ladies, and the Queen Oriana and all the rest came to embrace
them. The next day the Queen Pintiquinestra declared unto Amadis in the
presence of all the Court the cause of her coming thither, which is (said she)
to Amadis, to put you in mind of your promise made to me at Constantinople, to
bestow a husband on me, and one that is of your own Lineage. Pintiquinestra
having finished her speech, Amadis who had hearkened to her discourse made
answer that her request was reasonable, and therefore he would endeavor to do
that which should be to her liking: and having often perceived the affection
which Perion son to Galaor had borne unto the Queen, he thereupon asked of him
his consent, which he very willingly agreed to, and so concluded a marriage
between Perion and Pintiquinestra, and caused them presently to salute on
another in sign of marriage, leaving the perfecting thereof until the next
morning: when the Archbishop celebrated Mass. All the Company was very joyful
of this alliance, especially the King of Sobrodise, who seeing the Sage Alquif
and Vrganda coming together with great affection, he purposed to conclude a
marriage between them two: wherefore he entreated their consents, which they
willingly granted, and so the Marriage rites were performed for them: and
Perion and Pintiquinestra both together.

CHAP. L.
How on the day of St John Amadis being in the Company of many great Lords, the
Governor of Sicilia arived at the Court, leading with him a King and Queen
enchanted, and of that which happened thereupon.
THe Solemnity of these Weddings continued for the space of eight whole days,
during which time Perion was crowned King, and Alquif and Vrganda having taken
their leaves of Amadis, and the rest, departed. As the King was one day in the
company of many noble men, there entered a Knight clad in mourning his beard and
hair being white, and hanging down as low as his girdle, and he carried in his
hand a roll of parchment, with Letters in Gold written thereon, and a Knight
followed him armed with very rich Arms, having a Helmet made of a polisht
Diamond: near unto this Knight there went a very fair Damsel, having very
rich ornaments. She had on her head a Crown garnished with great Emeraulds and
Rubies, and she was accompanied with twenty Knights, who had all black armor.
He that marched before them all made great reverence to King Amadis, and
related to him the cause of his coming into his Court, which was to try, if
any of the Knights and Ladies of his Court could finish a most strange
adventure, which was this. The Prince of Sicilie, whose name was Alpatracie was
enchanted, together with Miraminea his wife, and they could not be disinchanted
but by the loyallest Knight and the beautifullest Lady unmarried in the world:
and therefore this old man went into all Princes. Courts to try if he could by
any means happen on such a Knight, who by combating with Alpatracie should
conquer him; and such a Lady who could obtain the Crown which she had on her
head. And the Roll of Parchment that was in the old man's hand was to this
effect: The old man having delivered his mind unto Amadis, he presently
granted unto him his desire, which was to suffer this adventure to be tried in
his Court: wherefore there were many Knights that tried this adventure: the
first was Ad^riel who was soon vanquished by the enchanted Knight: then came
Pinerpie, Olorius, Suyssie of Ireland, Ambor of Gandell, Marsinie of the
Dreadful dale Pintince of Carsante, Siontes, Silercie son to Don Grumedan, and
Fallorefte son to Bravor: no sooner had these Knights tried this adventure, but
news was brought to the King that three ships had taken anchor at the Port:
wherefore he sent presently to know who they were, and they reported that it
was the Infanta Brisenna daughter to Don Bruneo who came to keep her cosen
Brisenna company. Amadis with his train went out, and he brought her into his
Palace where Trison was ready, and there soon entered two Knights unknown, who
after he had saluted the King and Ladies, went to combat with Alpatracie; but
they were both after a short fight vanquished, and then they discovered
themselves to be Quedragant son to Quedragant, and Abies of Ireland, whose
arivall increased the pleasure of the Company: and Amadis inquired of them how
they had left the Defended Mountain: who answered him that King Norandell and
the Admiral Frandalo had taken truce with the Turks for six months, and that
in the mean time they had been in search of a Knight called the Solitary; but
now they heard of him and found him. In this time the Queen Calafea had armed
her self against the enchanted Knight: but she coming to assail, he instead
of drawing forth his weapon to defend himself kneeled down on the ground:
which King Amadis seeing he said to her: Madam, I think he loves you better
then to fight with you. Truly said she (...) do believe it. Then Perion of
Gaul advanced to assail the Enchanted Knight: and the Combat lasted for the
space of two hours, but in the end he was vanquished: Wherefore Lisvart set
forwards, and balling on his Lady to aid him, he drew out his sword, but the
Enchanted Knight would not draw forth his; but the nearer Lisvart approached
him the more he fled from him: so it was impossible to overtake him: then
Lisvart put up his sword in his scabbard, and pursued him so fast as could, but
he could by no means come near him, he fled so fast, which they all seeing
were abashed at it: and Friston himself said that he had never seen the like.
Wherefore he desired that the Ladies might assay to get the Crown of
Myraminea, so the Infanta Brisenna began, and following the old man's directions
kneeled down before the enchanted Queen, and said to her: Madam, may it please
you to give me that Crown whereby you will make me the happiest Lady in the
world? Miraminea took her by the hands, and took her up, and took her and
left her in the midst of the Hall, which constrained Brisenna to blush with
shame, and cosen Elisenna came in her stead, who as well as many others were
denied; Some were served worse; for she gave five or six such thrusts with her
fist against their stomachs that she threw them on the ground, causing great
laughter. Friston having taken his leave of the King, departed with his
Company, being sorry for his no better success. And Alpatracie and Myraminea
remounted into their Charret covered with cloth of Silver: and being followed
by twenty Knights armed with black armor, in sign of sadness followed on
their way, leaving Lisvart much troubled that he could not finish this
adventure. In the mean time Quedragant kept in the company of the Infanta
Elisena of whom he was enamoured, and she was as much on her part after she had
seen him combat with the Enchanted Knight.

CHAP. LI.
How a Knight came to desire Amadis on the behalf of the King of Sanvagine,
and of the return of those who were newly come to Court.
THe day following there came to the Court a Knight almost as big as a Giant,
who being come before the King delivered him a Letter, sealed with four
Seals, wherein was contained as follows.

SUlpicie King of Sanvagine ( by the death of our Uncle Grifflant of good
memory whom our Gods feed with Ambrosia and Nectar) Grafante and Bostrose our
dear and well beloved brethren, do let the Amadis the King of great Britain
know, that the Gods having given us forces and power, we are resolved to
revenge the death of our late dear Uncle; upon this condition we present you
the Combat of us three against three of yours whom you shall choose, and if we
are vanquished we will then deliver up all the rest of our Countries without
ever laying claim thereunto hereafter; but if we do vanquish your three, then
we shall expect that Sarquiles, whom you have left in the Castle of the Rock
shall depart, and leave us peaceable possession of our Country.

The King having heard this Letter, demanded of the Messenger if he had any
thing now to say, to which he answered no; but only he desired to have safety
for his Masters, if the Combat were accepted of that they might come to the
place appointed. Lisvart being present desired the King to let him be one of
the three, and to suffer him to choose the other two, which the King granted.
Lisvart chosing his Uncle Porion, and Olorius of Spain, and the place of the
Combat was appointed to be at Trebisond six months after that day. These
things being agreed upon, the Messenger departed, and the sixth day following
Lisvart Perion and Olorius departed, accompanied with Alquefa Adariel and
Elinie; these Knights had Vermillion Arms: they being on the Sea soon lost
sight of Britain, and the other strange Princes who had been at the Court of
King Amadis, likewise departed, amongst whom there were the Queens
Pintiquinestra and Calafea, who being arived with their husbands in the Isle of
Californus, found Ialanque and King Garinter, who were come thither to see
them, where after some small stay, Garinter made a present of the kingdom of
Jugurte to Mancly: but Quedragant who was passionately in love with Elisenna,
remained in great Britain, where he soon after married her. And as for the
Empress of Rome she returned into Italy, where being arived, the Emperor
dispatched Ambassadors toward Amadis with express charge, to demand the
Infanta Brisenna for Pinerpie, which the King and Oriana willingly agreed to,
in such sort that she being arived at Viterbe, the Marriage was solemnized.
Thus Amadis remained with very little Company: so that being one day at the
chase he heard a voice, which called Knight of the Green Sword, when he looked
about he saw nothing, but soon after he heard himself called Gentleman of the
Sea, and fair forlorn, and not knowing from whence this voice should come, he
heard himself called Grecian Knight. By God said he to himself, I am much
called upon: wherefore he rod on further thinking of the strange mobilities of
fortune that had happened to him, and riding on his horse slipped down, and in
rising again he saw a young child, which seemed to be about three years old,
who said to him: Amadis what do you think on so much, I tell you, that one
shall come very suddenly who shall rob thee of what thou have, and thou and all
thy lineage shall die by his hands, he had no sooner said thus, but he
vanished, and Amadis resolved to reveal this to none, and presently after
lighting on his huntsmen which he had left, he returned to the Town of Fenuse.

CHAP. LII.
How Lisvart and his Companions were cast by Tempest in to Spain, and of the
Succor which they gave to King Don Brian of Moniaste against King Miramamolin.
LIsvart and his Company being departed from Fenuse, the tempest was so great,
that they all thought they should perish. And after they had floated on the
waves for the space of one month and a half, their Vessel was cast on the
Port of Carthage, which being known by the Mariners, they were very joyful,
and thereupon they purposed to stay there until it should be more ca^me:
wherefore they sent their servants unto the Town to seek Victuals, who being
returned, reported to the Knights that they had heard it published from the
King of Spain, that all those that could bear arms should within fifteen
days repair to the City of Tolette. And said they had enquired whither they
were to go, and we were told that Miramamolin King of Marveces accompanied
with ten other Kings, as well Africans as Arabians, were ^entred Spain, and
have already forced many Cities in revenge of the death of King Armato, and
they do now besiege Cordove with very great force. This news being heard by
these Knights, they all purposed to aid King Brian in the battle unknown, and
so if the King had the better to depart unknown, and therefore they left
Alquefa in the ship with the Mariners, and went into the Town. And then taking
their arms they went toward Cordove, and they made so much expedition, that
within eight days they arived at the Spanish Camp, where they carried
themselves as closely as they could, and the Army being come near to their
enemies, the King Brian set his Army in readiness to assail his enemies, and
so did the King Miramamolin: when after they had encouraged their soldiers to
fight, and were ready to join battle, there arived a Herald from King Brian
to Miramamolin, who said to him: Sir the most mighty and redoubted Prince Don
Brian of Moniaste, my Sovereigne King and Lord sends me to you, to command you
to depart his Country, otherwise he is resolved to give you battle without
taking any of you to mercy. Miramamolin being somewhat stirred up with this
Message, answered without delay, Herald, return to thy Master, and tell him
that I am not come hither for that purpose, to return without fighting, and
that I fear not the threats of those whom I make account to vanquish, and that
I will have him at my mercy, before it be night yet. But it happened otherwise,
for the Herald had no sooner taken leave of him, but they began to skirmish on
both parts, and so they continued until night: when they were forced to leave,
hoping to begin the next morning.

CHAP. LIII.
How the two Hosts met, and of the aid which Lisvart and his Companions gave to
the King of Spain.
ALl that night the two Camps watched diligently, and about the break of day
they dislodged, marching against one another with great fury. Lisvart and his
Companions had hid themselves, until they came to break Lances, and then these
five unknown Knights entered into the battalion of the Africans, which was under
the command of the King Fez: and at their arivall they dismounted five of the
bravest that they met, which the Earl Medine seeing, was very joyful, and
crying Spain; Spain, entered with his Trooppell-mell, where they were so well
received, that on both sides there was thrown down more then a thousand, who
never stirred any more. There Lisvart, Perion, Olorius, Elinie, and Adariell
performed marvells, leaving in all places where they came, great testimony of
their great Prowess, and Chivalry: King Brian himself acted wonders for the
renown of his name and freedom, and good of his Country: so that after a long
and terrible fight the Pagans were forced to retreat, their King Miramamolin
being slain by the hands of Brian and Adariell, and most of the Giants and
Kings of the Pagans being vanquished and killed, the Pagans being put to flight
could not run so well, but six thousand of them remained Prisoners, and the
rest passed under the edge of the Sword: the night gave an end to the pursuit,
and by the darkness thereof the five Knights had good opportunity, and means
to retire unto an adjoining Castle, where the Lord thereof honored them, and
kindly welcomed them. There they abode until their wounds were healed: and
then they departed to Carthagene, where Alquefa staid for them. But the good
King Brian, who caused search to be made for them, that night that the
batttaile was, and seeing that he could by no means find them was much
grieved. But Lisvart and his Company presently imbarqued themselves, and set
sail for Trebisond. It happened that eight days after they discovered a ship
that had the Arms of Constantinople: wherefore Lisvart commanded his Pilot to
enquire who was aboard therein, and answer was made that it was Gradafilea and
her father, who not having any news of Lisvart returned into their Country.
This answer put the Solitary to a stand, to consider of the evils that he had
endured by means of the Page: wherefore he would not manifest himself, but
commanded to pass on.

CHAP. LIVE.
How the Vessel wherein Lisvart and his Companions sailed, was cast by storm
on the Isle of Apes, where they saw Marvells, and of the welcome that Alquif
and Urganda made them.
THese two Vessels passing by one another, as you have heard, about midnight
the Sea swelled in such manner, that (by the fury of contrary winds) those
who had sailed all their life time were altogether without hope of safety. But
about the dawning of the day they discovered Land, in one of the fairest
Islands that ever they saw, where they landed, and taking forth their horses
mounted thereon, and left Alquefa in a ship, because they did pursue a Villain
that did beat a Damsel: they pursued him so far, that they came to a Lake,
whereinto he entered, and they could not possible come at him; but the water of
the Lake began to rise in such manner, that they were forced to flee to the
highest Mountains in the Island, least they should be drowned; but the water
arose so much, that they thought that they had been at the end of their lives.
And as the water began to move their feet, they heard in the air a sound, and
a long the most the melodious that could be, and they perceived a woman naked,
being from the middle downwards in the form of a Fish, who did sing and play
on a Harp, and did swim in the water where she took great pleasure. This
harmony was so delectable to them, that they forgot the fear of death to
hearken thereunto, and fell down asleep (as they thought) being half covered
with water: nevertheless at their awaking they found themselves in a great
Hall, furnished with all manner of pleasant Viands, and every one of them
thought his companion to be of Marble, and nevertheless they were so hungered,
that they did eat disorderly. They remained in this opinion an hour and more,
until they had slept; at their awaking they found themselves sitting at the
Table in in their former natural shapes. Then they saw at the two ends of the
Hall two Statues of Alabaster; the one of an old man, and the other of a woman
about the same age, each of them holding a great burning Candle in their hands,
then there came two Giants who assailed the Statues of Alabaster, and the first
stroke that they gave caused such a thunder, that every thing was in obscurity;
but the light began soon after to appear, and the five Knights saw instead of
the two Statues Alquif and Vrganda the Unknown: thus their fear was turned into
joy, and Alquif and Vrganda came to embrace them, telling them that they were
welcome: soon after came Alquefa, who after they had left her landed likewise,
knowing that it was her fathers Island, and that her father would feast them
before they departed. Then Alquif and Vrganda led them out of the Hall to see
the excellency of the house, and the Library, where the old man showed them
the Prophecy of Apolidon, and that of the Sword, which Lisvart conquered the
Invention of the Arc of Loyal Lovers, the strangeness of the Sword, and the
Garland of Flowers, how Amadis was enchanted by Archelans from whence Vrganda
brought him; the manner how he and others slept in the Firm Island. He
likewise showed them diverse books of Medea, wherein was contained the Prophecy
of Alpatracie and Miraminea enchanted, as you have heard. And said he, I
knowing the things that have happened unto you this day, and great part of the
future, will take the pains to register in writing the adventures that have
happened to you, and what shall happen hereafter: for it is not reasonable that
they should remain in the darkness of forgetfulness, nevertheless I am
certain, that after I have chronicled them; there will be a thousand years
before they will be remembered. But the thousand years being passed, yea,
fifteen hundred, they shall be published, and your memory shall shine
throughout the world. Wherefore the Knights kindly thanked them, and from
thence Alquif and Vrganda conducted them throughout the Island, where they
showed them an infinite number of green Apes, and other Beasts. Then they
returned to the Castle, and there they stayed about two days. About which time
they re-entred their ship, and thanking their Host and hostess for their kind
entertainment, and weighing anchors they departed, and set sail for Trebisond.
They had not sailed twenty four hours before they saw a ship taken by
another, and they saw amongst the prisoners Master Elizabeth: wherefore they
made ready to succor him, and soon after the ships joined together, and there
was a great fight between them; for there was twenty fighting men in the other
Vessel, besides Mariners. But Lisvart and his Companions soon dispatched most
of them, and the rest they took to mercy, and then they discovered themselves
to Master Elizabeth, who had been sent by King Amadis to follow them, fearing
that they should stand in need of him. The Prisoners which they took to mercy
swore to depart to great Britain, and declare before King Amadis how they had
been taken, and therefore they let them go.

CHAP. XLV.
How Lisvart and his Companions arived at Trebisond, and of the welcome that
was made them by the Emperor and the Ladies.
MAster Elizabeth being retaken, as you have heard: they presently set forwards
for Trebisond, and they had not sailed long before they arived there. They
being arived, Lisvart and Perion took Alquefa apart, and they consulted
together what they had best to do in this affair: at last they concluded that
she should go before to tell Onolorea and Gricilerea of their arivall.
Wherefore they advised to tell their Companions that they would send Alquefa
before, to tell the Emperor that they were in the Port, which they consented
unto. Alquefa having a Skiffe, in short time took land, and she had not gone
far before she met with Bridelnea, who being very joyful to see her, went
presently into the Chapel, where the Queen was at Mass, with Onolorea and
Gricilerea to inform them hereof, which they knowing came presently forth to
see her, she soon told them that their two Knights Lisvart and Perion were at
the Port, and were come to render their service unto them, which caused such
joy to the heart of Onolorea, that she had almost swouned: they continued in
their discourse so long that word was brought to the two Infantas, that the
Queen was ready to depart: wherefore they left Alquefa, having first desired
her to remember them to the two Knights, and Gricilerea having desired her to
tell Perion, that she desired him to bring his Nephew to the windows in the
Garden, on the next night, they might commune together: so the Infantaes left
Alquefa, who presently went to the Emperor to inform him of their tidings:
when she came before the Emperor, he demanded of her where she had been so
long time, to which she answered, and told him all the passages that had
happened to her since her departure, and how she had found the Solitary, who
was Lisvart, son to the Emperor of Constantinople, and lastly, how she had
brought him and Perion together, with three other great Princes unto the Port,
ready to come and offer their service to them. This news was exceeding
pleasant to the Emperor, and all his Court, especially to Onolorea, who had
now heard that her Knight was the Solitary: so much renowned. Wherefore the
Emperor desired her to entreat them to come to Court, and the night drawing on,
the Emperor bid her good night, and so she departed to the Knights to tell them
the effect of her Embassy, who having heard thereof by her could not sleep
that night for thinking of their Ladies.

CHAP. LVI.
How the five Knights reverenced the Emperor, and of the discourse which Perion
and Lisvart had with the two Princesses.
THe Knights having made themselves ready to go to the Palace, did ^c^
forwards, but they had not gone far, before they saw the Emperor coming toward
them in the Company of the Kings of Breigne, the Dukes of Ortilense and
Alafonte, with many other Princes and Knights. Great was the welcome that the
Emperor made to these Knights, and they contiued in coming so long together,
that they came to the Empress and Ladies, who gave them as good entertainment
as the Emperor had: if any were glad of this meeting, the Infantaes found great
cause to rejoice: but they nor the two Knights could not by any means speak
with one another, until it was evening: they passed the time away until it
was evening, and then they went to the place appointed them by Alquefa, where
they were no sooner come but they found the two Infantaes in readiness to
receive them, expecting their coming. The Infanta Gricilerea showed very much
courtesy to her Knight, and gave him many thanks for his bringing Lisvart
thither, and Onolorea did endeavor to excuse her self for her cruelty showed
to her Knight, and did now make him part of amends by her gracious and
favorable aspect to him; here they used much familiarity, and nothing so much
grieved them, as the so soon approach of the day which forced them to part
here: at their parting were many sweet kisses and imbracings on both sides, and
at last the two Knights were forced to leave their Ladies and depart to their
own lodgings, where they arived without being perceived.

CHAP. LVII.
How the Emperor of Trebisond keeping open Court, Friston with his Company came
thither, and how Lisvart and Onolorea put an end to this adventure.
FRiston having traversed many Countries, and been in many Princes Courts: at
last came to the Court of the Emperor of Trebisond, and there according to his
custom, desired that this adventure might be tried in his Court, whereunto the
Emperor consented, and therefore many Knights tried their valors, hoping to
get the victory; but they were all vanquished: so that there remained none to
try their forces, but Lisvart and Perion, who would not adventure themselves,
because they had once before done it: then according to the Emperors desire the
Ladies began to try the adventure, and it happened as bad to them as it had
done to the Knights, until all had done, except Onolorea and Gricilerea, who
purposed likewise to try their fortunes. Then Gricilerea advanced, and making
great reverence to the Enchanted Queen, said to her: Queen the fairest that
ever I saw, may it please you to give me this Crown? Myraminea took her gently
by the hands, and inclined her head so low to her that she kissed her, and then
she left her in her place. Wherefore she being somewhat ashamed retired amongst
the Ladies, and Onolorea advanced, who looking on Lisvart asked the Crown of
Myraminea, who taking it off of her own head, and kneeling on the ground,
placed it on the head of Onolorea, who being glad hereof, would have risen up,
but it was impossible, for she could not stir, and so all the company could not
stir one jot from the places where they were, at which they wondered. And that
which made them the more to wonder was, this Alpatracie came near to the
Emperor, and would he or not, took him by the hand and led him out of the hall.
And the enchanted Queen did as much to Onolorea, and these who saw it could not
succor them: for they could not come near them by twelve paces. Which Lisvart
and Perion and his Companions seeing, they ran hastily to their arms, and
Lisvart at last came near the enchanted Knight; but it seemed to him that the
place was full of armed men who assailed him, notwithstanding he at last did
hit the Enchanted Knight such a blow on the helmet, that there was so great a
flash of lightning and thunder, and darkness in such abundance, that Lisvart
nor the Enchanted Knight could not be seen: and at last there was seen a
Chariot drawn with Adders, who took the Helmet from the head of the Knight, and
the enchanted Knight called to Friston his Governor, and said: Governor
return, if you think good into my Country, and there you shall find me. And
having said thus, the Adders flew into the air so high that they lost sight of
them, and the Emperor remained in Liberty: Onolorea being crowned with the
Crown of Miraminea; and the Adamant Helmet at the feet of Lisvart, which he
soon took up, and beheld the rarities thereof. Friston having thus lost his
Company, departed to his Country; but before he went he had many fair presents
given him, and so he returned into Sicilie with less Company then he came.

CHAP. LVIII.
How a Messenger brought news to the Emperor of Trebisond, that a King of the
Savage Island and his two brothers were arived in his Country, to combat with
Lisvart, Perion, and Olorius, according to the agreement made before King
Amadis.
SCarce had Friston departed the Hall before a Messenger came to the Emperor,
to tell him that the King of the Savage Island was come with his brothers to
combat with Lisvart, Perion, and Olorius, and likewise to have the Emperors
safe guard, which he soon granted. The next day the Emperor (knowing that the
strange Knights were come into his Dominions) sent before the King of Breigne,
and the Duke of Ortilensa to meet them, who met them and conducted them to the
Court of the Emperor, who welcomed them, as also Lisvart himself did, which
the King of the Savage Island perceiving, and knowing Lisvart by conjecture,
wondered hereat, and seeing him so young, of so fair a Countenance, he told
him, that if his three Companions were such as himself, he advised them to
bring a handkerchief to wipe away the sweat, if they should chance to be hot in
their harnesses. Those who are my Companions answered Lisvart have sometimes
abased the pride of as lofty as you are, and behold them both said he
(prostrating to them) What (said Bostrosse the third brother of the King) have
we crossed the Seas thus for to fight with women? as for my part I will have no
other weapons but a distaffe to chastise mine. Then said Lisvart, you call us
women because our faces are fairer, and we are more affable then you are: but
you shall find our hearts high, and our arms strong enough to make you change
this opinion. And because the King has threatened me, this Knight showing him
Perion shall combat with Grafante; and for you Seigniour Bostrosse, Olorius
who is not to be handled with distaffes, as you boast, but in recompense of the
Counsel which you give us, to bring handkerchiefs with us, I advise you to
leave nothing behind you: for all your forces, your bravadoes, glorious and
threatening menaces will not be sufficient to save your life. The Emperor knew
very well that choler began to reign in them: wherefore he prayed them to
leave these speeches to the event of the Combat. During these speeches,
Onolorea and Gricilerea were retired into their Chambers, weeping and lamenting
for the eminent peril that was prepared for Perion and Lisvart; for they had
seen the King of the Savage Island, and his brothers, who in their opinion
seemed rather to be Devils then men. But Alquefa comforted them very well, by
telling them how many and dangerous Combats they had had, and had always been
victorious. The Emperor the more to honor the Combatants, caused a new field to
be railed in, it being a place where they might be seen by much people. The
King of the Savage Island sent to the Emperor, to entreat him to suffer Radiare
Souldan of Liquea to be one of the Judges, which he accorded to, and he
likewise ordered Dardarie King of Breigne to be the other. This being done, the
three Christian Knights retired into the Chapel, where they watched and
prayed, making themselves ready for death, if it should please the Lord to send
it them.

CHAP. LIX.
How Lisvart, Perion and Olorius entered the field, and of the Combat which
they had against Sulpicie King of the Savage Island, Garfante and Bostrose.
THe night being passed, by break of day the six Combatants prepared themselves
to enter the field, and the three Christian Knights entered the field in this
manner. The Emperor carried the Helmet of Prince Lisvart, and the King of
Breigne his strong and tough Lance; the Duke Ortilensa carried Perions Helmet,
and the Prince of Alasome his Spear. The Earl of Alastre carried the Helmet of
Olorius, and Alarin his Lance. And in this Equipage they entered in at one of
the gates of the field, and the King of the Savage Island with his brothers at
the other. Who were armed with black Arms, and their Helmets on their heads
and their Lances in their hands. At a Scaffold adjoining, there was the Emperor
and the Empress accompanied with Onolorea Gricilenea, Griliana and Tiriana,
with many other Ladies and Damsells. Then Radiare and Dardarie Judges of the
field placed the Combatants one against the other, and the Trumpets sounded,
the Herald proclaiming three times that the Combatants should do their devoir.
Nevertheless it was first agreed on between them (according to the advice of
the Souldan of Liquie) that they should run one after another, to the end that
it might the easier be known who did best, and those said he who remain on
horseback shall afterward alight, that they may pursue their enterprise with
their swords. Thus they all ran against one another in such manner, that they
were all dismounted, except Lisvart, and Bostrose, who were much shaken with
the force of the thrust, but they alighted according to the agreement, and
there began a most cruel Combat between these six in such manner, that
Lisvart was at the last in danger of his life, as you shall hear. Sulpicie who
was his adversary, thinking to dispatch himself of his enemy, gave Lisvart
so great a blow with his sword on his Helmet of Adamant, that the sword brake
in three pieces, and none but the handle remained in the hand of Sulpicie,
hereupon Lisvart found himself so charged with the blow, that without the aid
of his knee he should have been forced to kiss the ground. Nevertheless he
arose up with great nimbleness, and ran against the King, who was without
weapons; saying to him so loud that every one heard: King, know now the
difference between ill speaking and well doing, yield thy self, or thou shall
die without remedy. What joy now had Onolorea which lasted but a little while:
for as Lisvart thought to cleave Sulpice in twain, the sword turned in his
hand so unhappily, that it flew out, and the King soon got the possession
thereof, against the will of him who had threatened him. Then Sulpicie said to
him, Lisvart, Lisvart, now I will revenge the death of my Unckles, and carry
thy head to the Rock. Onolorea more dead then alive, thought that she should
have fallen from the Scaffold: but her sister comforted her as well as she
could. Lisvart then seeing himself in this condition losed never a jot of his
virtue, but being somewhat desperate ran upon his enemy, and put by the sword
with his left hand, and took hold of his choler with his right hand, and then
quickly repossessed himself of his sword. And said to the King, Vanquished
King, thy head shall go to the Castle of the Rock instead of mine, and having
said so, he assaulted him so fiercely, that he quickly cured him of all
diseases: and Olorius handled his enemy so well, that in short time he likewise
vanquished him. Grafante who was assailed by Perion, seeing his two brothers
slain, became faint hearted, in such manner, that he did nothing but recoyle,
and in recoyling he fell down backwards: but in falling, Perion cut his throat,
to the great contentment of Gricilerea, and of all the Company: Then the
Trumpets and Fifes began to sound, and the Judges came into the field to bring
Irish horses to the Vanquishers, whom they conducted in triumph to their
Lodgings, where Master Elizabeth took them into custody, assuring the Emperor
(after he had visited their wounds) that they should soon be healed. In the
mean time the servants of the King Sulpicie took the dead bodies, and with
great ceremony and lamentations embalmed them; and then they set sail for
their Country, where they finished their funerals, and the Emperor dispatched
a Gentleman toward Amadis, to inform him of the issue of the Combat.
Wherefore Amadis sent Argamont for his Lieutenant, and revoaked Sarquiles, to
whom he afterward bestowed as many good gifts.

CHAP. LX.
How after the three Knights were healed of their wounds, Lisvart and Perion
went to speak with their Ladies at the Garden window, and of that which
happened.
THe three Knights kept their Chambers one whole month, until their wounds
were closed up, Alquefa kept them Company, bringing secret Message from Lisvart
and Perion to Onolorea and Gricilerea: for they spoke not to them themselves,
unless the Empress was present; but one time they had so much opportunity to
speak to them, that the Infantaes appointed to meet them at the accustomed
window in the garden that night. The time being come that every one went to
rest, they alone departed out of their Lodgings, and went to the place
appointed, and Lisvart, and Perion obtained so much of their Ladies that night,
that they appointed them to come the next night, and against that time the
Infantaes promised to get a key made to a door that came out of their Chamber
into the Garden, and so they might have the more privilege to come together,
this being agreed, and the day breaking, the two Knights took their leaves of
the Ladies, and departed to their Chambers: the next day they passed away in
the Company of the Emperor, and when night came they went to the place
appointed. The two Knights marched along softly without making any noise: when
Gricilerea who watched for their coming perceived them: And as they passed on
to go to the window, the two Ladies came out of their ambush, and laying hold
of them, said: stay Knights, you are our prisoners. Perion and Lisvart kneeling
on the ground kissed their hands, Perion taking Gricilerea went apart from
Lisvart, who holding Onolorea embraced, said to her: Madam, the pleasure which
I now have is such, that with too great ease, my heart (which is yours) cannot
contain in it self the joy which is offered thereunto, by the sweet
entertainment which you please to give me with so much privity, that I am
constrained humbly to require of you to pardon my temerity, and excuse my
indiscretion. My friend answered she, let us sit down on this grass at our
ease, and seeing that I have so much forgotten my self to trust in your
goodness, I pray you that this familiarity may require as much respect as if I
had been more cruel. But whilst she prepared this honest excuse, Lisvart by
degrees gained the possession of her lips and breast, and being about to pass
further: Ah my friend said she, content your self to take as much of me as I my
self can command, which is to see and to touch my person, without your taking
the pains to bereave me of that, which you, nor no other know how to render to
me. Madam, answered he, you know the time that I sailed in this Sea of Love,
and now that I am ready to enter into the sweet Haven of mercy: for Gods sake
do not hinder me. My friend said Onolorea, will it not suffice you that I am
yours, and content your self with the exterior, which is the proper fruit of
Lovers, without desiring a pleasure which is so soon passed, and which brings
(as is said) nothing but sadness. But so much the more she proffered these
excuses, the less she persuaded Lisvart to give credit to her, but letting
loose the bridle to his passions; he cropped the first flower of her Rose, which
was found to be a thorn. In this time Perion and Gricilerea did their work at
leisure. I know not, if they had such Covenants, it is very true that the end
of the sport turned to promises and oaths to return on other nights to the
same place, a witness of so happy sport: in which they exercised themselves a
week together, without being perceived or discovered, no, not by Alquefa,
although she knew of most of their private affairs: but of this she was
ignorant.

CHAP. LXI.
How the Emperor and Perion hunting in the Forest found a Damsel weeping, and
of that which happened.
THe Emperor (being a most affable Prince, not knowing what pleasure to give to
the three Knights who had been lately healed of their wounds) purposed one day
to go hunt in the adjoining Forest, and therefore he sent his hunters to make
preparations. And as they were in the heat of their sport, the Emperor and
Perion being together, there came forth a Bear, which they pursed so much that
they killd it, and they heard a most dolorous voice toward the seaside:
wherefore they advanced thither wards, and there they saw a Damsel pitifully
lamenting, and a Knight lay by her dead, and do Perion and the Emperor what
they could, they could not cause her to leave her lamentations: then they were
very desirous to know her misfortune: alas sir Enight answered she, let me
alone, or promise me one gift, and I will recount unto you what you desire to
know. Perion being ready to promise soon agreed to her: Then seeing it so said
she, arm your self with the Arms of this dead Knight who is my Father, and
follow me unto an Island four miles from hence, where the Rascal that killed
my Father promised to stay, until I bring one to fight with him. Perion being
willing to pursue this enterprise armed himself, and entered into a Barque that
was there adjoining, and the Emperor went along with him to bear him Company.
Then the Damsel made such speed, that they soon lost sight of land. We will
leave them hear until another time, and return to the others who hunted in
the Forest, who having much venison, and seeing the night approach used great
diligence to find the Emperor and Perion. Yet they could hear no tidings of
them; but a certain footboy told them that he had seen them pursue a Bear,
and he showed them the way that they went, where they found the beast dead: but
they could hear no tidings of the Emperor nor Perion, but only they found
their horses unbride^ed: then they being at the Seaside saw a Skiffe, wherein
there was two Damsells, then Lisvart courteously saluted them, and said to
them, Damsells, I pray you tell us news (if you knew any) of two Knights, the
one very old, and the other as young. Do you speak (said they of the old
Emperor of Trebisond and of he who accompanies him? yea truly said Lisvart, I
pray you tell us what is become of them. If you have a desire to find them
said they, enter with us and we will conduct you toward them, upon condition
that you grant us one boon, otherwise hold your selves assured that they are
lost, and you shall not find them in a long time. Lisvart who desired to serve
the Emperor for the love of his Lady, willingly granted them what they
required, demanding of them if he might carry more company. No answered they,
unless it be one. Olorius was present, who earnestly entreated Lisvart to let
him accompany him, which he granted him: in such manner, that they two being
entered into the Barque, we will leave the King of Breigne, and the rest on the
land.

CHAP. LXII.
How the Emperor and Perion of Gaul were arested by the treason of the Damsel
which conducted them.
NOw we will return to the Emperor and Perion, whom the Damsel conducted, as
you have heard; after they had sailed until Sun set, they took Port in a
little Isle, where there was two great Tents erected: at the entrance of one
there was a Lady, with a Knight armed at all points, whom the Damsel showed
to Perion, saying: Sir Knight, behold him with whom you must fight, and who
has by great treason killed my Father, Damsel answered he, I promise you that
I will revenge him if I can. Then they three issued out of the Barque, and
soon after the Knight advanced, who asked of them whether they went, and what
they searched for. Knight answered Perion, you have promised this Damsel to
stay here, until she should bring a Gentleman to fight with you, and revenge
the death of her Father, whom you have murdered. And well said the other, what
of that? nothing said Perion, but I will only have your life in recompense of
his. In good faith said the Knight, your enterprise is folly, and I will
chastise you before you escape my hands. Having said thus he laid hands on his
sword, and Perion did so likewise: when holding forth his shield to defend
himself from the blow of his enemy, his shield was cut in twain, and he
striking the Knight one blow his sword broke in three pieces. Rascal said the
Knight, now shall your head be lodged in the place where you enterprized to
place mine. Perion seeing his extreme danger, ran upon him with great courage,
and took hold of his choler, but there issued six great slaves out of the
Tent, whereof four seized on Lisvart, and two on the Emperor, whom they
suddenly chained. Then the old woman knowing the Emperor said to him: Wicked
Emperor, seeing that you are now in my power, I will make you an example to all
others, who go about to hurt the friends of Armato, and now I will revenge the
death of him, and many other great Lords which you were the cause of. Lady
answered the Emperor, I know not what you speak of: but there was never so
great reason as this, which you have used unto us.

CHAP. LXIII.
How Lisvart and Olorius were taken prisoners by the same parties that staid
the Emperor and Perion.
LIsvart and Olorius had hardly put to Sea before the night overtooke them:
Nevertheless they left not sailing until they arived at the Island where the
Emperor was, and there they landed. One of the Damsells counselling them to
repose on the grass until day. Which they agreed unto: nevertheless, a little
while after they demanded of Lisvart if he remembered the boon which he had
promised them. Yea truly answered he, follow me then said the younger, and I
will tell you apart what it is: for I would not have any know it besides us: It
was then very dark, nevertheless Lisvart and she walked together, and the
Damsel seigning to be weary, prayed him to sit down on the grass, and talk
together, which he agreed to, not doubting of what after happened: for the
false queen took him behind as he was stooping, and throwing him down took his
sword from his side, and running away, cried help me, Knights help me, help me:
Lisvart being astonished to see himself thus deceived, ran after her as fast
as he could: but he was soon stopped by seven Knights who were in ambush who
surprising him, carried him away to the place where the Emperor and Perion were
chained. Then he knew that there was treason: for they soon put great Irons on
his legs, which grieved him to the heart, and as he stoopt he gave one of the
Villains such a blow on the mouth, that he broke out four of his teeth. In the
mean time the cries of the Damsel came to the ears of Olorius, who was a
discoursing with the other, and he went toward the Pavillion to see what was
the matter. But in entering he saw Lisvart the Emperor, and Perion, in that
estate that I told you, Wherefore being moved to anger, he laid hold on his
sword, and without regarding the danger he was in, he cleaved the first that he
met to the ears, and he did as much to the second: then he came to the third,
against whom Perion had combated, and the first blow that he gave, his sword
broke to his fist. Then he saw well that he could no longer resist: for he was
encompassed so on all sides, that he was taken and bound as the others were,
who were carried near the Sea, and there they were separated, and put into
diverse Vessels, without knowing whither they were carried, nor wherefore they
were so illy handled.

CHAP. LXIV.
How the Empress was advertised that the Emperor Perion, Olorius, and Lisvart
were lost, and of the sadness of Onolorea and Gricilerea, when they found
themselves big with child.
THe King of Breigne, Adariell, Elinie and the rest were much grieved, having
so unfortunately lost the Emperor, and seeing that Lisvart did not return,
neither as he had promised, these three therefore purposed not to return into
the Town without knowing further news of them. And therefore finding a small
ship fit for their purpose, they embarked, praying the Dukes of Ortilensa and
Alafonte to return to the Empress, and declare unto her this great
misfortune, which being understood, many Knights entered in search of him, and
traversed so many strange Countries, that Greece, Thrace, Almanie, Italy,
Great Britain, and Gaul were advertized thereof; for which cause there were
many sad hearts; but this was nothing in respect of the two Infantaes, Onolorea
and Gricilerea who entered into so great Melancholy, that they were weaker and
weaker every day, and their great bellies did help them to be more weak: now
paying use for the pleasure, which they had sometimes received in the garden
with Perion and Lisvart. They had carried themselves so prudently in their
loves, that none had perceived them, and the Empress her self thought that
their debility proceeded from the loss of their father: wherefore she
comforted them with certain hope, that by the aid of our Lord he would shortly
return. This was not the right point that troubled them most, but the little
child which they perceived to move in their bellies. Wherefore she obtained
leave of the Empress to dwell a little while in the monstarie of Sophie, which
was near thereunto, and the ^ster of the Duke of A^afonte was Abbess, and they
would have no women with them, but only Sirt^nse and Garinde daughters to
their nurses, in whom they had much confidence, and there they staid as
covertly as they could, until the time that they should be delivered. Then
they discovered all to Sirense and Garinde, who thought fit that the Children
should be carried to the Port Town called Filine, where they should be nursed
by the mother of Garinde, as if they were hers. Onolorea was the first that was
delivered of a fair son, which was wrapped in rich clothes, and given to her
mother to ki^s, who in tears gave it her blessing. And recommending it to the
keeping of our Lord, she prayed Garinde in baptizing it to give it the name of
Amadis de Greece, in favor of King Amadis his great Grandfather, and the
Emperor Esplandian. This being done, the Damsel departed by a back door with
the child, over a wood to Filine; but the little Creature was so feeble, that
Garinda thought it would die, and therefore ariving near a Fountain she put it
in the water, saying these words: Little child receive the name of amadis de
Greece. She had scarcely ended these words, and thrown the water on his head,
when she heard the noise of a people coming directly to her: wherefore being
surprised with fear, leaving the Child, she ran into the thickest of the woods
to hide her self. And know that these were Rovers, Black-Moores, who came to
the Fountain to get fresh water, where seeing little Amadis in rich Clothes,
they were mavelous glad, and much more abashed when they saw that he had
brought from his mothers womb a Sword, of a Vermillion Color, the Pommell
whereof was on the right knee, and the point right at his heart. And there was
upon it certain Characters, or Letters, white as snow, which they could not
read nor understand: wherefore without looking on him any further, they wrapped
him up, and carried him into their ships, where by good fortune they had women,
amongst whom one named Esquisea newly brought to bed, had the charge to nourish
this little Amadis, whom they called the Gentleman of the flaming Sword. In the
mean time Garinda somewhat assured returned to the place where she had left
him, but not finding him there, she thought that Beast, had devoured him, for
which she was extremely sad, nevertheless she puposed not to tell Onolorea
hereof: but to tell her that she had left it in the town of Filine, and so she
did at her arivall, when she found Gricilerea delivered of another fair son,
whom she called Luceneio. These two triumphed in their time, as you shall hear
at large, if God and the time permit, in the seventh and eight Books, where
their Deeds and Chivalries are amply recited, with as much grace as any book or
Chronicle that was ever published. And thus we will make an end of our present
work.

The end of the sixth Book.

