XXX. SERMONS LATELY PREACHED AT THE PARISH CHURCH Of Saint Mary Magdalen
Milkstreet, (...) TO WHICH IS ANNEXED, A (...) PREACHED AT THE FUNERAL OF Sir
(...), Knight, Sometime Lord Mayor of the City.

By (...), B.D.

(...). Nolo Lectorem meum mihi esse deditum, and Correctorem nolo sibi.

(...) 15. Some preach Christ, even of envy and strife, and some also of good
will.

18. -- Notwithstanding every way, whether in pretense, or in truth, Christ is
preached, and I therein do rejoice, and will rejoice.

printer's device (not found in McKerrow)

LONDON, Printed for (...) and are to be sold at his shop in Saint Dunstan's
Churchyard, Fleetstreet. (...)

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL and MUCH HONORED JOHN ROBINSON Esquire; Alderman of the
City of LONDON.
SIR,
WHen I had yielded up my modesty (or rather my consciousnesse of my too many
and too great defects) as a spoil to the wills and importunity of others, and
had hearkened to them so far as to venture and expose these Sermons and my self
to censure, I did then without any deliberation or study tell my self to whom
they were due; nor did any thought interpose it self, but this one, that they
were not worth your eye or owning. I had once resolved to have sent them naked
into the world without any name before them but my own; and could have been
well content to have left that out also (for I am not over-proud of them) But
then I conceived that though they could speak but little for themselves, yet
they might for me (who dare not do so much for them) and at least be as a
witness or Manifesto of my deep apprehension of your many noble favors, and
great charity to me and mine, when the sharpness of the weather, and the
roughness of the times had blown all from us, and well-neer left us naked. And
to this end with all the heartinesse, and height of thankfulness I here
present them, and humbly put them into your hands, that when you turn them
over, you may read something besides my imperfectios, even that truth which
will make you happy, and with it my gratitude. I would not be the grave of that
charity which can never dye, but when we are dead will follow us; and (I thank
God) I understand a benefit, and can behold it in all its circumstances; and to
me it appears fresher and fairer every Day, putting me in mind from whence it
came, and by what hands it was conveyed, and it fills me with Prayers and
Praises, and Gratulations; and I bless God, and cry Grace, Grace, unto the
hand and instrument. Worthy Sir, this is the fairest and best return that my
poverty can make, and (I nothing doubt) but you will look upon it as the
fairest and best; for this I can make, and by the blessing of God you want no
other. I see my self deeply obliged to you, and by your favor to many other
Noble and Religious Gentlemen, and I have but the same payment for all which I
will ever pay (for a thankful man is always in debt) even to my last payment,
when I shall render up my soul to God that gave it. The same God who put it
into your hearts, fill your hearts with that Joy which is the purchase of
Charity. I cannot end, but with my hearty prayer to the God of blessings for a
blessing on you and your whole family, which is the daily prayer of

Sir, Yours obliged to serve and honor you, ANT. FARINDON.
April. 20. 1657.
THE PREFACE.
THat the way of man is not in himself, Jer. 10.23.
That it is not in him to direct his steps in that way which he chalks out, I
have found true in my self, and am made an instance of it in the truest and
most natural sense of the words: and that our purposes sink and fail almost
as soon as they are up; that in matters of this indifferency (and would it
were not so in those of the greatest concernment) we think we resolve when we
do but think; and what strength has such a thought against a friend, and
Importunity?

I saw well enough the hazard before me which I was to run: I knew there was
too much of this kind of work abroad in the world already, and if there were
none, yet there would be too much by mine. I saw the roughness of the times,
and the uncertainty of the weather, and what a weak and thin bottom I put out
in, and could not hope for that security abroad, which my cell and silence will
scarcely afford me. I could not be ignorant how many several winds, and out of
several coasts, might meet and spend themselves against me; I conceived in my
self that it was in vain to hope to charm the reader, and to as little purpose
to court him into a favorable opinion, as it was for Xerxes to fetter the
Hellespont, or to write letters to mount Athos. For after all pretenses, all
Apologies, all insinuations, he will be the same, and think and judge as he
please, when we have said what we can. All this I foresaw, or thought I did,
and that Apologies were like complaints in this, and were never welcome, no not
then when they were necessary, which was enough, one would think, to have
strengthened and reinforced my first thoughts, and so sixed them against all
other temptations, all foreign assaults whatsoever.

But so it is. I see them now shaken, and turned another way, even to that
which I was most afraid of, and must now prepare and arm my self against. I
that suffered my self to be persuaded into the danger, have now but one task to
undergo, and that is to persuade and work my self into an immovable patience,
if it overtake me; and to sit in silence when the noise is loudest, when those
hailstones of censures fly about me. Yet thus much I have to say for my self,
that had I not placed a higher esteem on other men's judgments then mine own,
had I not been advised so to do, by some, in whose judgment I was ever willing
to rest (and yet sometimes affection gets over it, even in the wisest) and had
I not been by nature of an easy and ductile disposition, too apt to be drawn
out at length to any purpose (which has no evil upon it) by the hand and
direction of those, whose worth and goodness have wrought themselves an
interest in me: Had not the very name of friend been more powerful with me
then my own thoughts; I who could never yet shoulder it in a throng, but had
rather quit my place then struggle for it; who am more addicted to the forest
and retirement, then to the City and noise; I who have no other business now
to do, but to agree and sit down quietly with my poverty, and to draw down my
mind within that narrow compass in which the iniquity of the times has left
me, should not have thus taken my self from my self, nor took so much pains to
draw on more, which though it may begin and end but in words, yet words
sometimes are troublesome, as the barking of a dog may be to a bird, though on
the wing, and out of reach: I should not certainly have thus put my self upon
my Country, nor ventured my trial there where the judges may be of several
minds, and diversely biassed, and yet meet at the same mark, and join in the
same sentence of condemnation, which I will not say envy (for what matter can
my low fortunes, or these sorry papers yield for that humor to gnaw on?) but
the disesteem of my person, the low conceit of my abilities in some, the
dislike of the matter in others, and of the method and manner of handling it in
many, and ignorance in not a few, will soon make up and pronounce against me.

But I have past over my Rubicon, and left it behind me, and must now stand
censure, the shock of all that opposition which can be but breath and words,
but darts made up of air, pointed peradventure with wit, and envenomed with
some droppings of malice; against which there need no other buckler then this
thought, that whatsoever I shall appear, yet I am still the same, not higher,
not lower, in all the demonstrations and fullness either of Praise or
Detraction. Or this, That Censure for the most part is but Pride in its
wantonness, self-pleasing, and not much displeasing any that are wise, who
may be strong enough to hear without disgust what others are ready to vent with
so much delight, what Wit suggests to their Passion, and what Passion utters by
the Tongue.

And such Readers I may have, and too many such, some of the same faith and
opinion, who yet will mislike something; others not alike principled, who will
condemn all. To the first I have nothing to say; and to these but this, That I
cannot be of their opinion, nor move as they do, till more weight of reason be
hung on. Yet, I nothing doubt but to find many more candid and charitable, and
who will give fairer welcome and entertainment to these Sermons, then
peradventure they do deserve, and peruse them with an eye no more severe and
averse, then their ear was when they first heard them from my mouth. And for
satisfaction to these I shall give up this account for my self, that they are
now published to the eye with the same mind and intention which first breathed
them forth unto the ear; and that was first, to work men off from those errors
which are so common in the world, and have gained honor, and kindness, and
reception because they are so; secondly, to draw up their love and industry to
necessary truths, that they may not spend and waste them there where they may
perhaps satisfy their humor, but not fill their souls, but fix and tie them
to that which is most essential, which has the favor of God, and happiness
evermore annex unto it, and ready to Crown it; thirdly, to draw up the means
to the end, the duty to the reward, by that necessary relation which is betwixt
them (this being the way, and there being no other unto it) and this with that
plainness and evidence laying it open as near unto the eye, as the matter
being spiritual would permit, and my weak abilities and diligence could bring
it. In which if I have failed, or come short (as I must needs do) of those who
have a more quick and searching eye, and a greater art and felicity in clothing
and uttering their conceptions, I must make use of that Apology of an
Apocryphal writer, Concedendum est mihi, Match. 2. 15.
If I have done slenderly and meanly, it is that which I could attain to, and I
have no other argument but my good will and endeavor to speak for me.

And first, how weakly soever I have carried it on, yet I made it my aim and
principal intendment, to lay all level before me, and to remove those
practical errors which are most common and regnant, which men walk in as in
the ways of righteousness, and glory in as in the truth it self; which grow
up in the world like those weeds which run and spread themselves over the
surface of the water, but have no root, even those errors which are the proper
issues of lust and idleness, with which men infect, and in which they applaud
one another, and so move together with content and danger; which are improved
by custom, and at last raised up to the power and dignity of a Law. It was
well observed by Seneca, Cum error singulorum fecerit publicum, errorem
singulorum facit publicus, the beginning of errors is from private persons,
but the continuance and life of them is from the multitude, who are first
dazzled with the authority and practice of some few, and then take it from one
another, and hold it up as a ball from hand to hand, and the publicknesse of it
gains authority, and interchangeably prevails with private men to receive and
embrace it; it first steals or begs an entrance, and when it is common and
public it reigns. From hence are those noxious yet beloved errors, of which
men are so tender and jealous, that if you do but breath against them, or but
look toward them with an eye which betrays but the least dislike, they
presently swell and rage as against an enemy, and are never at ease, but in his
snare who is so. Proficit semper contradictio stultorum ad stultitiae
demonstrationem, says Hilary: the perverseness and contradiction of weak and
wilful men is violent and impetuous, to gain ground, and outrun that truth
which should stay and moderate it; but the greatest progress it makes in these
its easy and pleasant journeys, is to make it self more open and manifest,
like Giges wife, who was seen naked of all but herself. From hence have those
errors crept into the Church which have lessened her number, and filled her
up, not with members but with names; from hence it is that God is made more
cruel then man, and yet more merciful then he is; that men are Saints, and
yet the Law impossible; that the beginnings of obedience are set down for
perfection; that men are made perfect, and yet sin oftener then they obey; that
our endeavors are performances, and our weakest and most feeble thoughts are
endeavors; that hearing is faith, and faith fancy; that imputed righteousness
is all, when we have none of our own; that we may be reputed good when we are
notoriously evil; that our election may be sure, though we do not make it so,
and that we must assure our selves, when we have more reason to despair; that
assurance is a duty, and to work it out is none: from hence it is that
Christian liberty is let loose against Christ himself, and the spirit brought
in to contradict it self; and God, to do himself what he does command; that
grace is miraculous and irresistible, and the will is but a word which
signifies nothing, or if it do, it is that which cannot will. All these we find
in the books and writings of some who have gained a name and repute in the
world, presented indeed in a veil, but so thin, and with so little art of
concealment, that they are understood by too many in that sense which the flesh
will soon admit and make use of to all its purposes; and though when they are
urged with the danger of such positions, and the horror of such consequences
which naturally issue from them, they seem to disown and reject them as none of
theirs, and do many times in their Postills confute their Doctrine with their
Use, and their Premises with their Inferences; yet it is with that art which
Tiberius used in the refusal of the Empire, Susprusa semper and obscura verba
etc. Tac. 1. Annal.
with doubtful and perplexed words, and as he, naming but one part when they
mind the whole, will not and yet would say all, as he would not and yet would
be Emperor. And after all shifts and evasions, after so many affirmations and
negations, after so many limitations and distinctions, and riddles, Sol Apollo,
and Apollo Sol, as it is in the proverb, we have but several expressions for
the same thing; and what they would have and what they would not have, what
they do say and what they will not say; to be perfect yet most deficient; to
think and to endeavor; to begin in the Spirit, and to end in the Spirit; to be
forced and to be led; to be willing and not to will; to be irregular and to be
free; to be certain without assurance, and assured without diligence; to be
Saints and yet unholy, to be Adulterers and to be members of Christ, differ no
more in their sense, then the Sun and Apollo do in the Poets, which are but
several names of one and the same planet.

I thought it therefore, and took it upon me as a work not unworthy of my place
and calling, and which might bring some advantage to my Auditors, to endeavor
at least the removal of those errors, which to me seemed to come so near as
to take part with men's lusts and affections, and worser part, and to flatter
and feed our corruption, which is wanton of it self, and ever ready to break
forth without such incitements; and which did give it so much power and line in
many, though through Gods preventing grace it wrought not the same so
pernicious and killing effect in all. And I considered not what did always,
but what if we respect the errors themselves, and the inclinations of the
flesh, was most likely, and would most naturally flow from them; to which if I
have not brought so much strength as some may look for (who stand as much at
distance, and are as much afraid of them as my self) or as the work it self may
require; If I have left them something to say, who will never want something to
say though they can say nothing, yet I looked upon it as my duty; and though I
do not rise so high as to the satisfaction of others, yet some satisfaction it
will bring to my self that I did endeavor it.

And I was the more forward in this work, because I saw men not only entertain
these doctrines, but love them, and prejudge all others which look from them
another way, as those which lead from that truth which is saving, into danger,
and so to labor almost irrecoverably under prejudice, whose Tyranny keeps men
in more awe and obeisance, then the sway of those affections which are sudden
and mutable could do. For we see the affections are blind, and when they carry
us along with violence they do not judge but choose: unicuique sua Cupiditas
tempestas est, every man's inordinate affection is not only as a wind to drive
him forward, but a tempest to whirle him about from error to error, which
commonly is like that affection that raises it. But the Philosopher will tell
us, no tempest is long, but soon breaths it self forth; Nulla tempestas diu
durat. Sen. N. Q.
and when the cloud is removed the eye is clear. In his wrath Esau will kill
his brother, but when time had worn that out, he is a brother again, and he
meets and kisseth him. David's lust brought him to the for bidden bed, but the
voice of a Prophet makes him wash it with his tears. It is open to our
observation, that what men do out of passion they do they know not how; and
the greatest reason they have, is, that they do it: and if in passion we pass
any judgment, it is not long-lived, but wastes, and decays, and dies with it.
But Prejudice is a rooted and a lasting evil, an evil we are jealous of,
because we think it good, and we build upon it as upon a sure foundation; so
that he that looks but toward it, that does but breathe against it, appears as
an enemy that comes to dig and cast it down. Sometimes we see it is raised by
the affections, sometimes the affections intermingle and weave themselves with
it, but most commonly they come in the Rear of Prejudice, and follow as the
effects of it, and help to strengthen and continue it. And thus we love him who
is of our opinion, because it is ours; and we hate him who opposes it, upon
the same reason: we are afraid of every proffer, and angry with every word that
is spoken against it. And this gathers every Conventicle, this molds every
Sect, coins every Heresy; and it is that Sword which our Savior speaks of,
Mat. 10.34. which makes division of a man from his Father, and a daughter from
her mother, and makes enemies of those who are of a man's own household. It is
that East Wind which brings in the Locusts which cover the face of the Church,
and make it dark, and eats up those fruits of Peace and Holiness which
otherwise we might gather. And indeed it works most trouble in the House of
Peace, Odium Theologerum. A Proverb in Luthers time.
in the Church, in Controversies concerning Religion; for in Philosophical
Treaties, new Discoveries are very vvelcome, and if there rise any debate, it
goes no farther then to cursed words, and seldom breaks out to personal
hazard; but these of more divine speculation, which should be managed with
peace and charity, are commonly held up with great heat, and pride of Wit,
which some call Shame, which men have to seem to have erred. Which may be the
reason why we have so few instances of Retractation, but Augustine.
one amongst the Ancients, and of later days Bellarmine.
one more, but such a one as did but like some Plummers, make his business
worse by mending it. So harsh a thing it is to the nature of Men to seem to
have mistaken, and so powerful is Prejudice; for to confess an Error, is to
say we vvanted Wit.

And therefore we should fly from Prejudice as from a Serpent, for it deceives
us as the Serpent did Eve, gives a No to Gods Yea; makes men true, and God a
liar, and nulls the sentence of death. You shall dye the death, when this is
the Interpreter, is, Your eyes shall be opened; and to deceive our selves, is
to be as Gods, knovving good and evil. And it may well be called a Serpent,
for the biting of it is like that of the Tarantula, the working of its venom
makes us dance and laugh our selves to death, for a settled prejudicate though
false opinion may build up as strong resolutions as a true. Saul was as zealous
for the Law, as Paul was for the Gospel; a heretic will be as loud for a
fiction as the Orthodox for the truth; the Turk as violent for his Mahomet as a
Christian for his Savior. Habet Diabolus suos Martyrs, for the devil has his
Martyrs as well as God; and it is prejudice which is that evil spirit that
casts them into the fire and the water; that consumes or drownes them; that
leads them forth like Agag delicately to their death.

And this is most visible in those of the Church of Rome, and we may see even
the marks upon them, obstinacy, insolency scorn and contempt, a proud and high
disdain of any thing that appears like reason, or of any man that shall speak
it to teach and recover them; which are certainly the signs of the biting of
this serpent prejudice, or (as some will call it) the marks of the beast. Quam
gravis incubat? how heavy does prejudice lie upon them who are taught to
renounce their very sense, and to mistrust, nay to deny their reason? who see
with other men's eyes, and hear with other men's ears, Apuleius de mundo.
qui non animo sed auribus cogitant, who do not judge with their mind but with
their ears? the first prejudice is, that theirs is the Catholic Church and
cannot err, and then all other search and enquiry is vain, as a learned writer
observes: for what need they go further to find the truth, then to the high
priests chair; to which it is bound? and this they back and strengthen with
many others of Antiquity, making that most true which is most ancient, and yet
omnia vetera nova fuere; Quintil.
that which is now old was at first new, and by this argument truth was not
truth when it first began, nor the light light when it first sprung from on
high and visited us. And besides, truth though it had found professors but in
this latter age, yet it was first born, because error is nothing else but a
deviation from the truth, and comes forth last, and lays hold on the heel of
truth to supplant it. Besides these, Councills which may err, and the truth
many times is voted down when it is put to most voices; Nazianzen was bold to
censure them as having seen no good effect of any of them; and we our selves
have seen, and our eyes have dropped for it, what a mere Name, Nunquam tam been
cum ebus humanis ag^batu^, ut plures essent meliores. Sen. de Clement. 1.
what prejudice can do with the many, and what it can countenance: and many
others they have of Miracles, which were but lies of Glory, which is but
vanity; of Universality, which is bounded and confined to a certain place: with
these and the like, that first prejudice that the Church cannot err, is
underpropt and upheld; and yet again these depend upon that, such a mutual
complication there is of errors, as in a bed of snakes. If the first be not
true, then these were nothing, and if these pillars be once shaken (and they
are but mud) that Church would soon sink in its reputation, and not fit so high
as magisterially to dictate to all the Churches of the world.

And as we have set up this Queen of Churches as an ensample of the effects of
prejudice, so may we hold it up as a glass to see our own. She says we are a
Schismatic, we please and assure our selves, that we are a reformed Church,
and so we are, and yet prejudice may find a place even in the Reformation it
self. Rome is not only guilty of this, but even some members of the
Reformation, who think themselves nearest to Christ, when they run farthest
from that Church, though it be from the truth it self. And this is nothing else
but prejudice, to judge our selves pure because our Church is purged, to be
less reformed because that is reformed, or to think that heaven and happiness
will be raised and rest upon a Word or Name, and that we are Saints as soon as
we are Protestants. Almost every Sect and every Faction labors under this
prejudice, and feels it not, but runs away with its burden; and too many there
be who predestinate themselves to heaven, when they have made a surrendry of
themselves to such a Church, to such a company or collection, nay sometimes but
to such a man. I accuse not Luther or Calvin of error, but honor them rather,
though I know they were but men; and I know they have erred, or else our Church
does in many things, and it were easy to name them. But suppose they had
broacht as many lies as the Father of them could suggest, yet they who have
raised them in their esteem to such an height, must needs have too open a
breast to have received them as oracles, and to have lickt up poison it self if
it had fallen from their pens; since they have the same motive and inducement
to believe them when they err, which they have to believe them when they speak
the truth, and that is no more then their name. Orat. pro Muraena.
Toll Catonem de causa, said Tully; Cato was a name of virtue, and carried
authority with it, and therefore he thought him not a fit witness in that
cause against Muraena, for his very name might overbeare and sink it. Toll
Augustinum de causa, take away the name of Austin, of Luther, and Calvin, and
Arminius, for they are but names, not arguments. There is but one name by which
we may be saved, and his name alone must have authority, and prevail with us,
who was the Author and finisher of our faith. We may honor others, and give
unto them that which is theirs, but we must not de^fie them, nor pull Christ
out of his Throne, to place them in his room. Of this we may be sure, there is
not, there cannot be any influence in a name to make a conclusion true or
false; and if we fix it in our mind as in its firmament, it will sooner dazzle
then enlighten us. Nor is it of so great use as men may imagine; for they who
read or hear, can either judge, or are weak of understanding. To them who are
able to judge and to discern error from truth, a name is but a name and no
more, and is no more esteemed, for they look upon the truth as it is, and
receive it for it self; but for those who are of a narrow capacity, and fail
in their intellectualls, a Name will sooner lead them into error then into
truth; or if into truth, it is but by chance, for it should have found the same
welcome and entertainment, had it been an error, for the names sake; for a
name is their rule and not the thing. All they now gain is, that having such a
leader, they shall fall with more honor into the ditch.

It will be good then to be wary and watchful against our selves, and so to
deprehend our selves, and not to love our selves so as to be the greatest
enemies we have; not to take that upon trust to which we entrust our souls,
and on which we depend as our surest guide to that happiness which now our
hope and expectation looks on; but to try and examine even the truth it self,
and to know what ground we stand on; whether our foundation be firm and sure,
whether that which we have been taught, be not now to be unlearned; whether we
have not took up that which we should have run from; delighted in that which we
should hate; loved that which we should have feared; whether we have not been
too long familiar with that which will undo us; whether our natural temper
and complexion, education and custom have not carried us so far from our
selves with that swift but insensible motion, that we had no leisure to look
back and consult with our reason, which was given us for our best help and
guide; whether delight, or profit, or honor, and security did not make up our
Creed for us; whether in our pursuit of the truth, they were not the only lure
which we did strike upon, and now adhere to as to the truth it self: it will be
good thus to try and examine every conclusion which we have have made our rule,
to let one day teach another, and maturity oversee and judge our greener
years, and the wisdom of age correct the easiness of our youth, reason
recognize our education, consideration control custom, judgment censure our
delight, and the new man crucify the old. In a word, to think that we may have
erred, and not to be so wise, as, because we are deceived, to be so for ever.

Of this we may be sure (for it is obvious to our eye) that our education can
be no forcible motive to bind us everlastingly to any conclusion; for our
pupillage does too often most unfortunately fall under such tutors, who instill
not any principles into us but their own, which are not always true, but more
often false, being such which they also took up upon trust from their
instructers. And then custom prevails more in evil then in good, and in those
ways, in which the flesh is carried on with a swindge and violence, then in
those in which we use to move but heavily; and there be a thousand false fires
at which we kindle our delight, and can be but one true one. And therefore in
these conclusions which we our selves deduce and draw out of known principles
(in which all agree, and in which out first judgment is our last) we must be
free and disengaged, not in subjection to any man, or any thing, not under the
awe of our first Instructers, or of Custom, or any Name under the Sun; or of
our satisfaction and delight, which we so often misplace; or of profit and
advantage, which name we commonly give to that which undoes us. Nor must we be
so positive, so wedded to our own decrees, as to be averse and strange when a
fair overture is made of better, because having no surer conduct then these,
it is more probable we should err then judge aright; and from hence error has
multiplied it self, and is that monster with so many heads, even from this
presumption in men, that they cannot err; and we see many most conclusive and
confident in that which they have but lightly looked upon, but never came so
near as to survey it, and so discover what it is. For if men were either
impartial to themselves, or so prudently humble, as to hearken to the
judgment of others, and to try and examine all, the Prince of this world and
the Father of lies would not have so much in us, nor should we be in danger of
so froward a generation. If men were not so soon good, they would not be so
often evil; if they were not sure, they would not err; and if they were not so
wise, they would not be so much deceived.

Nor does this submission and willingness to hear reason blast or endanger
that truth which reason or revelation has planted in us, but improves it
rather to a fairer growth and beauty, as we see Gold has more luster by its
trial. And this readiness to hear what may be said either for or against it,
is a fair evidence that we fell not upon it by chance, nor received it as we
do the devils temptations, at the first show and appearance, but have maturely
and carefully deliberated, and fastened it to our souls by frequent
meditation, and are rooted and established in it. Neither does it argue any
fluctuation or wavering of the mind, or unfixednesse of judgment; for mutatio
sententiae non est inconstantia, says Tully, to disanull a former judgment
upon better evidence, is not inconstancy, nor does he stagger in his way who
follows a cleerer light. And had not Tully forgot himself, and what he here
said, which may well go for a rule, he would not have made it a part of that
elogie and commendations which he gives to another orator, -- Nullum verbum
emisit quod revocare vellet --
that he never spoke word which he would recall; which in Saint Austins
judgment is truer of a fool then a wise man; Quae lous creaibilior est de
nimio futuo quam desaperte perfecto August. Epist. 7.
for who more positive and peremptory then fools, who being what they are,
will be ever so? No, to be willing to hear, to learn, and prove every thing,
is the stability rather, and continued act of reason; it is its natural and
certain course to judge for that which is most reasonable; and the mind in this
does no more wander, then the planets do, who are said to do so, because they
appear now in this now in that part of the heavens, but yet keep their
constant and natural motion. Thus it entertaines truth for it self, nor
suffers error to enter but in that name and resemblance; and when truth
appears in its rays and glory, and that light which does most thoroughly and
best discover it, it runs from error as from a monster, and bows to the
Scepter and command of truth; is never so wedded to any conclusion though never
so specious, as not to be ready to put it by and forsake it, when another
presents it self before it, and has better evidence to speak for it, and
commend it to its choice and practice. Thus Saint Paul was a champion of the
Law, and after that a Martyr of the Gospel. Thus he persecuted Christians, and
thus he dyed one. Thus Saint Peter would not converse and eat with the heathen,
as polluted and unclean; and when the sheet was let down, and in it the will of
Christ, preached unto them and baptized them, Acts 10. And this is the mother
of all repentance; for what is repentance but the changing of our mind upon
better information? This, if it were well practiced, would fill the world
(which is now full of error) with Recognitions and Recantations, which are not
only confessions, but the triumphs over a conquered error, as the rejoycings
and Jubilees of men who did sit in darkness, but have now found the light.
This would be an Amulet and sure preservative against prejudice, and those
common and prevailing errors to which it gives life and strength, and which
spread themselves as the plague, and infect whole Families, Cities, and
Nations. In brief, this would make our errors more venial, and men more
peaceable; for he that seeks the truth with this impartial diligence, is
rather unfortunate then faulty if he miss it; and men would never advance
their opinion with that heat and malice against dissenters, if they could once
entertain this thought, that it is possible that they themselves may err, and
that that opinion (in which they now say they will dye) may be false; if they
did not rest in the first evidence as best, and so suffer it to pass
unquestioned, and never seek for a sure word of prophecy, or a well grounded
assurance that this is one. For if this were done, as it should, either error
would not overtake, or if it did, it could not hurt us.

But this is an argument of a large compass, a subject full and yielding much
matter, and I was but to declare my mind and intention, which may better
thrive, and be more seen under the manage of more nimble and ready wits, and
the activity of a better hand and pen.

Second; and as I thought it worth my pains and endeavor to strike at those
common errors at which so many stumble, and into which they willingly fall,
and with great complacency; so did I set up (in the course of my office and
ministry) this desire (and I could not bring much more then desire) to present
(in as fair an appearance as I could) those more necessary and essential
truths, by the embracing of which we lay hold on happiness, and come nearest
to it; and to set them up as a mark at which all men's actions should especially
aim. For if this be once obtained, the other will follow of it self, because
these truths are not so obnoxious and open to prejudice, and men would not run
into so many obliquities, if they did principally and earnestly intend that to
which they were everlastingly and indispensably bound; nor could they so often
err, if they were willing to be good. It was as wise counsel as could have
been given, to those who sat to solve knotty doubts, and to determine
controversies in Religion in the Council at Dort, Beati pacifici. King James
his Motto or Dicton.
and it was given by a King, and it would have made good his motto, and styled
him a peacemaker, though there had been nothing else to contribute to that
title; Paucissima definienda, quia paucissima necessaria, that they should not
be too busy and earnest in defining and determining many things, because so
few were necessary; which counsel, if men had thought it worth their ear and
favor, and willingly bowed to it, had made the Church as Jerusalem, a City
compact within it self, and there would have been abundance of peace so long as
the moon endures. For questions in divinity are like meats in this, the more
delicate and subtle they are the sooner they putrify, and by too much
agitation and sifting anoy and corrupt the rule; whilst men are more swift and
eager in the pursuit and advance of that humor that raised them, then in
following of those truths which are but few and easy, and with which they
might build themselves up in their holy faith. Lex nos innocents esse jubet
non curiosos, innocence, and not curiosity is the fulfilling of the Law; Senec.
Controv.
as it is not luxury which raises an healthful constitution, but temperance,
and those meats which are as wholesome as common.

The sum of all Christianity is made up in this, to level and place all our
hope where it should be, on God through Jesus Christ our Lord, to love him, and
keep his commandments, which are both open and easy when we are willing. In
other more nice then useful disquisitions, I am well pleased to be puzzled and
to be at loss (and yet am not at loss, because I cannot lose that which I
would not, which I cannot have) and I resolve for God, and not my self, or
indeed for my self because for God; and my answer is most satisfactory, that I
believe the thing, and God only knows the manner how it is, and does not
therefore reveal it because it is not fit for me to know.

When I am to appear before God in his house, and at his table, I recollect my
thoughts and turn them upon my self; I severely inquire in what terms I stand
with God and my neighbor; whether there be nothing in me, no imagination which
stands in opposition with Christ, and so is not suitable with the feast, nor
with him that makes it. And when this is done, my business is at an end (for
to attempt more is to do nothing, or rather that which I should not do) but I
do not ask with the Schools, how the ten predicaments are in the Eucharist,
how the bread is con -- or transubstantiated, or how the body of Christ is
there; for they who speak at distance most modestly, and tell us it is not
corporally, but yet it is really there, yet do not so define as to ascertain the
manner, but leave it in a cloud and out of sight. I know that my redeemer
lives, and that he will raise me up at the last day, for he has promised who
raised himself, and is the first fruits of them that slept; but I do not
enquire what manner of trumpet it shall be which shall then sound, nor of the
Solemnity and manner of the proceeding at that day; or how the body which shall
rise, can be the same numericall body with that which did walk upon the earth.
It is enough for me to know, that it is sown in dishonor, and shall be raised
in glory, and my business is to rise with Christ here, and make good my part
in this First Resurrection; for then I am secure, and need not extend my
thoughts to the end of the world to survey and comprehend the Second.

To add one instance more in the point of justification of a sinner, in which
after sixteen hundred years preaching of the Gospel and more, we do not yet
well agree, and yet might well agree, if we would take it as the Scripture has
reached it forth, and not burden it with our own fancies and speculations, with
new conclusions forced out of the light to obscure and darken it; for when this
burden is upon it, it must needs weigh according as the hand is that poyseth
it. And what necessity is there to ask whether it consist in one or more acts,
so I do assure my self that it is the greatest blessing that God ever let fall
upon the children of men? or whether it be perfected in the pardoning of our
sins, or the imputation of universal obedience, or by the active and passive
obedience of Christ? when it is plain that the act of justification is the act
of the judge, and this cannot so much concern us as the benefit it self, which
is the greatest that can be given; (I am sure) not so much as the duty, which
must fit us for the act. It were to be wished that men would speak of the acts
of God in his own language, and not seek out diverse inventions, which do not
edify, but many times shake and rend the Church in pieces, and lay the truth
it self open to reproach, which had triumphed gloriously over error, had men
contended not for their own inferences and deductions, but for that common
faith which was once delivered to the Saints. And as in justification, so in
the point of faith by which we are justified, what Profit is it busily to
enquire whether the nature of faith consists in an obsequious assent, or in
appropriating to our selves the grace and mercy of God, or in the mere
fiduciall apprehension and application of the merits of Christ? whether it be
an instrument, or a condition; whether a living faith justifies, or whether it
justifies as a living faith; what will this add to me, what hair to my
stature, when I may settle and rest upon this, which every eye must needs see,
that the faith by which I am justified must not be a dead faith, but a faith
working by charity, which is the language of faith, and demonstrates her to be
alive? My sheep hear my voice, says Christ, (...), says Basil, they hear
and obey, and never dispute or ask questions, they taste, and not trouble and
mud that clear water of life. It is enough for us to be justified; it is
enough for us to be saved, which we may be by pressing forward in the way which
is smooth and plain, and not running out into the mazes and Labyrinths of
disputes; where we too often lose ourselves in our search, and dispute away our
faith; talk of faith and the power of it, and be worse then infidels; of
justification and please our selves in unrighteousness; of Christ's active
obedience, and be to every good work reprobate; of his passive obedience, and
deny him when we should suffer for him; of the inconsistency of faith and good
works in our justification, and set them at as great a distance in our lives
and conversations, and because they do not help to justify us, think they have
no concurrence at all in the work of our salvation. For we are well assured of
the one, and contend for it, and too many are too confident of the other. There
is indeed a kind of intemperance in most of us, a wild and irregular desire to
make things more or less then they are, and remove them wellneer out of sight
by our additions and defalkations; and few there are who can be content with
the truth, and settle and rest in it, as it appears in that nakedness and
simplicity in which it was first brought forth, but are ever drawing out
conclusions of their own, spinning out and weaving speculations, thin,
unsuitable, unfit to be be worn, which yet they glory in, and defend with more
heat and Animosity then they do that truth which is necessary, and by it self
sufficient without this additionall art. For these are creatures of our own,
shaped out in our fancy, and dressed up by us with all the accuratenesse and
curiosity of diligence, that we fall at last in love with them, and apply our
selves to them with that closeness and adherency which dulls and takes off the
edge of our affection to that which is most necessary, and so leaves that
neglected, and last in our thoughts which is the main; as we read of Euphranor
the painter, Val. Max. 8.12.
who having strecht his fancy, and spent the force of his imagination in
drawing Neptune to the life, could not raise his after and wearied thoughts to
the setting forth the majesty of Jupiter; for when we are so lively and
overactive in that which is either impertinent or not so considerable, nor much
material to that which is indeed most material, we commonly dream or are
rather dead to those performances which the wisdom of God has bound us to as
the fittest and most proportioned to that end for which we were made.

And these I conceive are most necessary, which are necessary to the work we
have to do, and will infallibly bring us to the end of our faith and hopes.
Others which our wits have hammered and wrought out of them, may be
peradventure of some use to those who are watchful over them to keep them in a
pliablenesse and subserviencie to that which is plain and received of all; but
may prove dangerous and fatal to others who have not that skill to manage
them, but favor them so much as to give them line and sufferance to carry them
beyond their limit, and then shut them up in themselves, where they are lost to
that truth which should save them, which they leave behind them out of their
eye and remembrance, whilst they are busy in the pursuit of that which they
overtake with danger, and without which the Apostles of Christ, and many
thousands before them have attained their end, and are now in bliss. Certainly
it would be more safe for us, and more worthy our calling, to be diligent and
sincere in that which is plainly revealed; to believe, and in the strength and
power of that faith to crucify our flesh with the Affections and lusts (Hic
labor, hoc opus est) then to be drawing out of Schemes, and measuring out the
actions and operations of God; safer far to make our selves fit to be
justified, then too curiously to study the manner how it is wrought; in which
study we are many times more subtle then wise: in a word, to make our selves
capable of favor and mercy; for then the work is done, and the Application
made, for all Gods promises are yea and Amen, and fall close with the
performance of the duty; and as to apply them to our selves, is our comfort and
joy, our heaven upon earth; so to be able and fit to apply them is the work and
labor of our faith and love whilst we abide in the flesh.

But besides these points of doctrine (which are but inferences and deductions
made by men) whereof some are easy and natural, and hold correspondence and
affinity with the truth as it was first delivered, and are upon that account to
be received as faithful sayings of all men; other are more forced, and
therefore Rejectaneous and unprofitable, as begetting more heat then love, and
raising more noise then devotion; besides these there be conclusions in point
of discipline and Church-Policie, in the defense of which we see much dust
raised by men of divided minds and apprehensions, and many times both parties
well-neer smothered in the buzzle. For though discipline and government be
necessary, yet the best form that was ever drawn cannot be absolutely
necessary, because it cannot always find place wherein to show it self, and
the holy Spirit of God never laid an absolute necessity but on those things
which, as the Stoics speak, are (...), which are within our reach and power,
or which we may do or have when we will; it is necessary to bring into
captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, but it is not necessary to
be under this or that discipline though the best, further then in affection and
desire; for in the midst of the changes and chances of this world we cannot be
what we would, nor be governed as we please.

We see well enough (for it is as visible as any thing under the sun) that
the sword which has no edge or point against the essential parts of Religion
(with which we may be certainly happy, and without which it is most certain we
cannot) as it makes its way, dictates and appoints what it please with a non
obstante notwithstanding all contrary constitutions, though never so ancient;
and discipline is either quite cut off, or else drawn out with the same hand
which did form and shape the Commonwealth. We have seen what a flow of troubles
and dispute in matters of this nature has passed on, and carried away with it
our Peace and Religion it self, and then left it as it were upon the sands to
shift for it self in the breasts of some fevv, who by divine assistance are
able to raise and cherish it up to some growth in themselves, without these
helps and advantages, and to give it a place and power in them even in the
foulest vveather; being forced to be their own bishops and priests, when the
hand of violence has buried those their Seers either in silence or in the
grave. We have seen Religion made an art and craft, and that which was first
set up to uphold and promote it, struck at and trod upon as the only worm
which did eat it out; we have seen the axe laid to the very root of it by
those sons of thunder and noise which is heard in every coast which these
clouds hang over; we cannot but observe, what art and diligence has been
used, what fire and brimstone has been breathed forth to cast it down; we
needed no perspective to look through the disguise under which they walk, or
to behold with what slight and artifice they wrought themselves into the
hearts of the people, who are never better pleased then when they are led as
beasts to the slaughter, and do flatter and pride themselves most, when they
are under the yoke. We see it has been the work of an age to shatter, and then
blow away that form of Policy in the Church which showed it self to the
Profit and admiration of the best, in so many; and was the fairest bulwark the
Church had to secure her from the Incursions of Schism, Heresy, and
Profaneness; of which (if we had no other argument) the frenzy of this
present age, the wild Confusion and medley of the Sects and Factions which we
see, may be an unquestionable evidence: And now we have seen it laid level
with the ground. All this we have seen, but yet we do not see that discipline
which did emulate and heave at it, and was placed in equipage with the Gospel
of Christ; we do not see that which was so much extolled as yet set up in its
room: Nay, we scarce see any thing left but the Idea of it, which they still
carry with them with expectation and great hopes, which prophesy to them the
building up of this second Temple of this new form, which might it obtain,
would, they say, be far more glorious then the first. All this art and
endeavor has been used to make them great and supreme on earth, the one half
of which might have wrought out a Crown for them in a better place. For that
may be had if we will, and if we be faithful to the death it will fall upon
our heads. But in what ground our lines will fall, or how they will be drawn
out is a thing so far out of our reach and power, that no humane providence can
design and mark it out. Day unto day teaches us, and the experience of all
ages has made it good, that they who like not what is, but only what they
would have, and propose it to themselves and others, do many times open and
pave a fair way to it, and walk forward toward it as full of hope as desire,
and yet when they are come so near as even to touch and lay hold of it, may see
it removed as far from them as before, and their hopes in their blossom and
glory to fall off; may live to see themseves in umbrage, under a more mild and
friendly toleration, and behold that past by and sunk lower which they so
longed to see in that height which might amaze and awe all about them, and
bring them in that harvest which was already gathered in their expectation. I
should be unwilling to stir the blood, or draw upon me the displeasure of any
who have cast in their lot with those who have been earnest in such a design;
and I have no other end but this, to show the vanity and deceitfulness of such
attempts, and how dangerous and vexatious a thing it is, to drive so furiously
after that which has come toward us so often, and then turned the back; which
we overtake and lose at once. For it is so in the world, and will be so even
till the end of it, that which is mutable in its own nature may and will be
changed; nor is there any thing certain but Piety and bliss, the way and the
end. And therefore those things which are not so essential to Religion as that
she cannot stand without them, and are essential only when they may be had,
being exemplified and conveyed to us by the best hands, must not take up all
that labor which we owe to the heat of the day, and those duties of
Christianity which are the sum of all, and for which the others were
ordained. When they may be had, we must bless God, and use them to that end
for which they were given, and when a stronger then we comes upon us, and
removes them, look after them with a longing eye and bleeding heart, follow
them with our sorrow and devotion, use all lawful and peaceable means to
bring them back, bewail our own ingratitude, which raised up that power which
took them from us, and was the greatest strength they had; and so press
forward in that open and known way which no power can block up, in that
obedience to the Gospel which the sword cannot reach, which no violence can
hinder. For this alone can restore us to the favor of God, and restore to us
those advantages which we first abused, then lost, and now seek carefully (as
Esau did the blessing) with tears. In a word, these helps which we would have,
and cannot always have, we may yet always have in our remembrance and
affection; but we must not so seek after them as to drive down all before us,
and the Gospel it self, in our motion and adventure toward them, but fix our
eye and desires upon that heaven which is presented to us in the way, and in
those divine rules of life from which no power on earth can absolve and
disengage us, and for the neglect of which no necessity can be brought in as an
Apology; and thus bless God in all things, even in those which are gone from
us, and cleave fast to that which is most essential and necessary to the end,
which is out of reach and danger, and which the power of darkness it self
cannot take away.

Third; and now I am come to the foot of my account, and to this all that I
have to say is but what I can but say (for this preface is swollen beyond that
compass which my first thoughts drew out) and it is this, that as I was
careful to press those doctrines which I conceived to be most necessary, so I
did it without any affectation, unless it were of plainness and perspicuity,
of which indeed I was most ambitious, as knowing that the Majesty of divine
truths is best seen in the stole and gravity of a matron, and most times quite
lost in the studied gaietry and light colors of a wanton. I could have wished
for the happiness of Isidor the Philosopher, of whom it was said, that he
spoke not words, but the very substance and essences of things, (...). Damasc.
in excerptis Photi God. CCXLII.
that I might have displayed the glory and happiness which is always before
true Piety, and pointed out to Piety as with a finger, showing how it works
toward it, till they both meet and are made one in eternity. And this I did
endeavor (though I come short of it) to draw our in so plain and lively a
character, that he that runs might read it; that the sight of it might ravish
the Beholder, and force him to a love of that which so visibly draws toward
that end which has no end, even the vision of that God which is blessed for
evermore. We speak, says S. Paul, the wisdom of God in a Mystery, the hidden
wisdom, and the Gospel is the revelation of that Mystery, Romans 16.25. and if
it be revealed it is no longer hidden; if it be known, as far as it is known it
is not a Mystery, and if it were yet a hidden Mystery it could not concern us,
because that can have no influence upon our will which yields no light at all
to our understanding, which is as a Counselor to the will, and should convey
the light unto it. The light is no more light to me then darkness it self,
when it is put under a bushel; and Mysteries when they are hidden are to us as
nothing. I know now no Mysteries in Divinity, for it is agreed on all hands,
that whatsoever is necessary to the end, is perspicuous and naked to the
understanding: I may say Mystical Divinity is an art of teaching nothing; of
moving and standing still; of striving forward and winning no ground; an art of
filling men with thin and empty speculations, in which they are lifted up aloft
to strange sights and apparitions, as they say witches are (and as they
themselves think) when they do but dream; sometimes it is made a vail to cover
something which we would not have seen, and we call that the Mystical sense of
Scripture which is none at all. For men are too ready to draw a vail again over
that which is now made manifest, to obscure that which cannot be too plain, nor
made plainer then it is. Quaerunt quod nusquam est, inveniunt tamen the seek,
Pennae acumen dividitur in uo, in toto corpore servata unitate, credo propter
mysterium. Isid. Orig. l. 6. c. 14.
for that which is no where to be found, and yet they find it out, but as he
found Juno, who embraced a cloud; Whatsoever they see is a mystery, and yet
they see it as Isidore found out a mystery, The Old and New Testament, in the
nose and cleft of a pen.

I know there be in Scripture, and frequently in the New Testament, many
Metaphorical expressions, from Bread, from Fire and Water, from Sovving and
Planting, Quint. l. 8. instit. c. 6.
from Generation Adoption, and the like, which were used not to make
mysteries, but to open them, signandis rebus and sub oculos subjiciendis, to
set a mark upon things, and to declare and unfold them to the very eye, that so
they might enter with more light and ease into the mind, which (as the
Jevvish Rabbis were wont to say) was to find out the lost pearl with a
candle of an halfpenny, and with these common and familiar resemblances to
dive into the Cisterne of Truth, and dravv it out. Christ who came down to
teach us was the light of the World, and what he taught was as open as the
Day to all but to those who loved darkness more then light and it will shine
in its full strength to all that will look up upon it, to the end of the World.
Nor could it be his will who came to save us, that his saving Truth should be
shown by half and dark lights, or that Divines (who call themselves his
Ministers) should be like those Philosophers who did Philosophiam ad syllabas
vocare, Senec. Epist. LXXII.
(as Seneca complains) who drew Philosophy down to words and syllables, so that
at last it was shut up and lost in phrases, and second notions, and terms of
Art, which brought little improvement to the better part, and made men rather
Talkative then Wise. For we may observe, that the same noisome and pestilent
wind which so withered Philosophy, till it was shrunk up into a name, being
nothing but a body of words, has blown also upon Divinity, and blasted that
which was ordained to be the very life of our souls; which was more pure and
plain when men's lives were so, but is now sullied with much handling, and
made much unlike it self, dawbed over with glosses as with untempered mortar,
wrought out into Questions, beat out into Distinctions, and is made an Art,
which is the Wisdom of God to Salvation. The Schoolmen did feaze and draw it
out, and then made it up in knots; The Postillers played with it, and made it
well-neer ridiculous (and we have seen some such unseemly Jiggs in our days)
and there have been too many Theoricall Divines, who have stretched beyond
their line, beyond the understanding of their hearers, and beyond their own;
wrought darkness out of light, made that obscure which was plain, that
perplexed which was easy, have handled Metaphors as Chemists do metalls, and
extracted that out of them which Christ never put into them; made them less
intelligible by pressing them so far, and by beating them out have made them
nothing; more obscure then the thing which it should show, and yields us (...),
a sea of words, but not a word of sense; and to be regenerate is something more
then to be made good who were evil; and to be a new creature is something more
(if we could tell what it were) then to be a just and righteous man; and we are
born and made what we are against our will. And what has followed this bold
obtruding of our own thin and forced conceits upon the Church under the high
commanding form of necessary truths? even that which has been observed of
philosophy; when men made wisdom the only aim and end of their studies, then
philosophy was it self, in its prime and natural glory, being drawn up unto
its proper end; but when they applied themselves to it only to fill up their
time, or satisfy their ambition, or to delight their wits, then she lost her
native complexion and strength, and degenerated into folly; then Epicurus
raised a swarm of atoms, and Diogenes made him a tub, the Stoics brought in
their decrees and paradoxes; then there were Mill familiarum nomina, so many
Sects that it is not easy to draw them into a catalogue; and some there were
who declared their different opinions, and disputed one against the other by
outward signs alone, as by Weeping and Laughing; so we find it also in the
Church of Christ, that Divinity never suffered so much as when it was made a
matter of wit and ambition, and policy and faction became moderators and
staters of questions. Then every man became an interpreter of Scripture, and
every interpreter had need of another to interpret him: Then men taught the
Law, as Moses received it, out of a thick cloud, and darkness was drawn over
the face of life it self, and men received it as it was taught, and did
understand them who did not understand themselves, received it as news out of a
far country, and conceived of it either more or less then it was; received it
in parcells and fragments, which hung like meteors in their fancy, or as
indigested lumps in their minds, which soon broke out into sores and ulcers,
and one was a Libertine, another an Anabaptist, another a Leveller; and some
there were who did distinguish themselves by the motion and gesture, and some
(which is strange) by the nakedness of their bodies; and thus mischief grew up
and multiplied through the blindness or deceitfulness of reachers, and the
folly and madness of the people; which evil had not certainly so far overrun
the Church, if men would have kept themselves within their own limits, and not
took upon them to be wiser then God; if the truth had been as plainly taught as
it was first delivered, and not held out by men's ignorance or ambition, and set
forth with words and phrases, and affected notions of our own; if all men would
have contended for and rested in that faith alone which was once delivered to
the Saints.

And this I marked and avoided, and in the course of my ministry run from as
far as a good will with my weakness could carry me; and as I struck at those
errors which are most common, and did strive to set up in their place those
truths which are most necessary, so I did endeavor to do it to the very eye,
with all plainness and evidence, and as near as I could in the language of him
who for us men and for our salvation did first publish them to the world, to
which end and to which alone (next to the glory of God) these my rude and
ill-polished papers are consecrate; and if they attain this in many, or few, or
but one, I have a most ample recompense for my labor, and praise and dispraise
shall be to me both alike; for the one cannot make these Sermons better, nor
the other worse. I know others before me have raised themselves up to a higher
pitch, and struck at error with more art, and brought more strength to the
building up of the Truth; and I have seen it exalted, and Falsehood led in
triumph gloriously by those whom God and their industry has more fitted to the
work, and I have but offered my self up to it, as some succors, which come
when the day and heat is over, who though they do not help, yet show their
good will, and we know that even they who bring on the baggage do some service.

(...).

Naz Orat. 20. The God of patience and Consolation grant that we may be like
minded one toward another according to Christ Jesus, that we may with one mind
and mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Romans 15.5,6.
A TABLE DIRECTING TO THE TEXTS OF SCRIPTURE Handled in the following SERMONS.
Four Festival Sermons.
On Christmas Day. HEB. 2.17. Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made
like unto his brethren. page 1. On Good Friday. ROMANS 8.32. He that spared not
his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him give us
all things? 23 On Easter Day. REV. 1.18. I am he that lives, and was dead, and
behold I live for evermore, Amen, and have the keys of Hell and of death. 45
On Whitsunday. JOHN 16.13. Howbeit, when He the spirit of truth is come, he
will lead you into all truth. 67
Twenty six Sermons more.
Sermon. 1. JAM. 1. Ver. ult. Pure Religion and undefiled before God and the
Father is this, to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and
to keep himself unspotted from the World. 1. Sermon. 2. 1 SAMUEL 3.18. And Samuel
told Eli every whit, and kept nothing from him. And He said, It is the Lord,
let him do what seems him good. 21 Sermon. 3. COLOSS. 2.6. As you have
therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in him. 45 Sermon. 4. JOHN
6.56. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in
him. 67 Sermon. 5. EZEKIEL. 33.11. As I live, says the Lord, I have no pleasure in
the death of the wicked. Turn ye, Turn ye from your evil ways: For why will
ye dye oh House of Israel? 87 Sermon. 6. EZEKIEL. 33.11. Turn ye, Turn ye, etc.
111 Sermon. 7. EZEKIEL. 33.11. -- From your evil ways, etc. 133 Sermon. 8. EZEKIEL.
33.11. -- From your evil ways, etc. 155 Sermon. 9. EZEKIEL. 33.11. -- Why will ye
die, etc. 177 Sermon. 10. EZEKIEL. 33.11. -- Why will ye die, Oh house of Israel?
203 Sermon. 11. EZEKIEL. 33.11. -- Why will ye die, Oh house of Israel? 225 Sermon.
12. EZEKIEL. 33.11. -- Why will ye die, etc. 247 Sermon. 13. GAL. 4.39. But as then
he that was born after the flesh persecuted him that was born after the Spirit,
even so is it now. 271 Sermon. 14. MATTHEW. 24.42. Watch therefore, for you know
not what hour your Lord will come. 293 Sermon. 15. MATTHEW. 24.42. The Lord will
come you know not what hour, etc. 311 Sermon. 16. MATTHEW. 24.42. Watch therefore,
etc. 333 Sermon. 17. GAL. 1.10. the last part of the ver. For do I now persuade
men or God? or do I seek to please men? For if I yet pleased men, I should not
be the servant of Christ. 357 Sermon. 18. A Preparation to the holy Communion. 1
COR. 11.25. This do ye as often as you drink it, in remembrance of me. 391 Sermon.
19. 1 THESE. 4.11. And that you study to be quiet, and to do your own business,
and to work with your own hands, as we have commanded you. 416 Sermon. 20. 1
THESE. 4.11. -- And to do your own business, and to work with your own hands,
as we have commanded you. 437 Sermon. 21. MICAH 6. v. 6, 8. Wherewith shall I
come before the Lord, and bow my self before the high God? Shall I come before
him with burnt-offerings? etc. -- v. 8. He has showed thee, O man, what is
good; and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, to love mercy,
and to walk humbly with thy God? 459 Sermon. 22. MICAH 6.8. He has showed thee,
O man, what is good, etc. 479 Sermon. 23. MICAH 6.8. -- What does the Lord
require of thee, etc. 503 Sermon. 24. MICAH 6.8. -- But to do justly, etc. 527
Sermon. 25. MICAH 6.8. -- To love mercy, etc. 553 Sermon. 26. MICAH 6.8. -- And to
walk humbly with thy God. 577
A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of Sir George Whitmore, Knight, PSALM.
119.19. I am a stranger in the earth, hide not thy commandments from me. 601
blazon or royal coat of arms of England and Wales HONI ^T QVI MAL Y PENSE

A SERMON Preached on Christmas Day.
HEB. 2.17. Wherefore in all things, it behoved him to be made like unto his
brethren --


THis high Feast of the Nativity of our blessed Savior is called by Saint
Chrysostom (...), the great Metropolitan Feast; For as to the chief City the
whole Country resort, Thither the tribes go up, says David, even the tribes
of the Lord, Psalm. 122. So all the Feast-dayes of the whole year, all the
passages and periods of our Saviors blessed economy, of that great work of
our Redemption; all the solemn commemorations of the blessed Saints and Martyrs
meet and are concentred in the joy of this Feast: If we will draw them into a
perfect Circle, we must set the foot of the Compass upon this Deus similis
factus, God was made like unto man; but if we remove the Compass, and deny
this Assimilation the Incarnation of Christ, there will be no room then for
the glorious company of the Apostles; For the Noble Army of Martyrs, the
Circumcision is cut off, the Epiphany disappears, our Easter is buried, and the
Feast of the holy Ghosts Advent is past, and gone from us, as that mighty wind
which brought it in. Blot out these two words, Puer natus, a Child is born, the
Son of God made like unto us, and you have wiped the Saints all out of the
Calendar.

We will not now urge the solemn Celebration of it, that has been done already
by many, who have thought it a duty not only of the Closet, but the Church,
and a fit subject for Public Devotion, and upon this account Antiquity looked
upon it with joy and Gratitude, as upon a Day which the Lord had made, and
Saint Austin commends this Anniversary Solemnity, as delivered to after-Ages
either from the Apostles themselves, Vel ab ipsis Apostolis, vel plenariis
conciliis instituta etc. Aug. p. 118.
or decreed by Counsels, and devoutly retained in all the Churches of the
world. But we do not now urge it; for when power speaks, every mouth must be
stopped, Logic has no sinews, an argument no strength, Antiquity no
Authority, Counsels may err, the Fathers were but children, all Churches must
yield to one, and the first Age be taught by the last; speech is taken from the
faithful Counselors, and judgment from the Aged, Job 12,20.
and but yesterday that monster was discovered, which the Churches for so many
Centuries of years heard not of, and so made much of it, and embraced it,
which they must have run from, or abolisht, if their eye had been as clear,
and quick as theirs of Aftertimes. I do not stand up against Power, I should
then forget him, whose memory we so much desire to celebrate, who was the best
teacher, and the greatest example of Obedience; what cannot be done, cannot
oblige, and where the Church is shut up, every man's Chamber, every man's Breast
may be a Temple, and every day a Holy Day, and he may offer up in it the
Sacrifice of praise and Thanksgiving to the blessed Son of God; who came and
dwelt amongst us, and was made like unto us, which is the only End of the
Celebration of this Feast: Christ is made like unto us, is as true, when every
man tells himself so, and makes melody in his heart, as when it is preached in
the great Congregation; but it sounds better, and is heard further, and is the
sweeter Music, when all the people say Amen; when with one heart, and one
soul, and in one place they give glory to their Savior, who that he might be
so, factus est similis he was made like unto them.

Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his Brethren.

My Text is (...) a principle in Divinity, and is laid down unto us in the
form of a Modall proposition, which, as we are taught in our Logic, consists
of two parts, the Dictum, and the Modus; 1. the proposition, Christ is made
like unto us; 2. the modification, or qualification of it with an Oportuit, or
Debuit, It behoved him so to be: In the Dictum or proposition our meditations
are directed to Christ and his Brethren, and we consider, quid Christus, quid
nos, what Christ is, and what we were. God he was from all eternity, in the
fullness of time factus similis, made like unto us.

Nos viles pulli, nati infoelicibus ovis.
We miserable naked sinners; Enemies to God, at such a distance from him, so
far from the least participation of the Divine Nature, that we were fallen
from the Integrity and first Honor of our own, facti similes made like indeed,
but if a Prophet, and a king, if David draw our picture, similes jumentis quae
pereunt, let our sorrow and shame interpret it like to the Beasts that perish,
but now facti filii Dei by Christ's assimilation to us, made like unto God,
exalted by his Humiliation, raised by his descent, magnified by his minoration,
Candidati Angelorum, lifted up on high to a sacred emulation of an Angelical
estate; with songs of joy and Triumph we remember it, and it is the joy of this
Feast fratres Domini, the Brethren of Christ.

Thus with a mutual aspect Christ's humility looks upon the exaltation of our
Nature, and our exaltation looks back again upon Christ, and, as a well made
picture looks upon him that looks upon it, so Christ drawn forth in the
similitude of our flesh looks upon us, whilst we with joy and Gratitude have
our eyes set upon him: They answer each other (...) and are parallels. Christ
made like unto men, and again, men made like unto him, so like, that they are
his Brethren: Christ made like (...) in all things will fill up the office of a
Redeemer, and men made like unto God (...) in all things which may be required
at the hands of those who are Redeemed; his obedience lifted him up to the
cross, and ours must lift us after him, and be carried on by his to the End of
the world; And as we find it in Relatives they are (...) there is a kind of
Convertency in these Terms, Christ and his Brethren, Christ like unto his
Brethren, and these Brethren like unto Christ. Christ is ours, and we are
Christ's, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3. and Christ Gods. And in the last place,
the modification, the Debuit, It behoved him, carries our thoughts to those two
common Heads, or places, the (...), the Convenience, and the (...) the
Necessity of it, and these two in Civil Acts are one; for what becomes us to
do, we must do, and it is necessary we should do it: what should be done, is
done, and it is impossible it should be otherwise say the Civilians, because
the law supposes obedience, Impossibilitas juris
which is the Complement and perfection of the law; and this Debuit looks
equally on both, both on Christ, and his Brethren, if in all things it behoved
Christ to be like unto his Brethren, which is the benefit, Heaven and Earth
will conclude, men and Angels will infer Debemus, that it behooves us to be
made like unto Christ, which is the Duty.

My Text then is divided equally between these two Terms Christ and his
Brethren: That which our devotion must contemplate in Christ is, First, his
Divine: 2. his Humane Nature: 3. the union of them both; for 1. we cannot but
make a stand, and enquire quis ille? who he was who ought to do this; and in
the 2. place enquire of his Humane nature; For we find him here flesh of our
flesh and Bone of our Bone, Assimilatum made like unto us; what can we say
more? Our Apostle tells us (...) in all things, and then will follow the union
of them both expressed in this passive fieri in this his assimilation, and the
Assumption of our Nature, which all fill us with admiration, but the last
rayseth it yet higher (and should raise our love to follow him in his
Obedience) quod debuit, that it behoved him that the dispensation of so
wonderful, and Catholic a benefit must be Translated tanquam ex officio, as
a matter of Duty. The end of all, is the end of all, Our salvation, the end of
our Creation, the end of our Redemption, the end of this assimilation, and the
last end of all, the glory of God, which sets an oportet upon Man as well as
upon Christ, and then his Brethren and he will dwell together in unity: Only
here is the difference, our obligation is the easiest, it is but this, to be
bound and obliged with Christ, to set our hands to that bond, which he has
sealed with his Blood; no heavy Debet to be like unto him, and by his
condescension so low to us, to raise our selves nearer to him, by a holy and
diligent imitation of his obedience, which will make up our last part, and
serve for application.

And in the first place, we ask with the Prophet, quis ille? who is he that
comes? who is he that must be made like unto us? what is done? and who did it?
of so near a relation, that we can hardly abstract the one from the other; and
if one eye be leveld on the fact, the other commonly is fixed on the hand that
did it; Magnis negotiis ut magnis Comediis edecumati apponuntur actores; Great
Burdens require equal strength to bear them, matters of moment are not for
men of weak abilities and slight performance, nor every Actor for all parts; To
lead Captivity Captive, to bring prisoners to Glory, to destroy Death, to shut
up the gates and mouth of Hell, these are Magnalia, wonderful things, not
within the sphere of common Activity. We see here, many sons there were to be
brought unto Glory at the 10. v. but in the way there stood sin to Intercept
us, the fear of Death to Enthrall us, and the Devil ready to devour us, and
we, what were we? Rottenness our mother, and worms our Brethren, lay us in
the balance, lighter then vanity, (...) men fallen below the condition of men,
lame and impotent, not able to move one step in these ways of Glory, living
Dead men; quis novus Hercules? who will now stand up for us? who will be our
Captain? we may well demand quis ille? who he is? Some Angel we may think,
sent from Heaven, or some great Prophet; No: inquest is made in this Epistle,
neither the Angels, nor Moses returned; The Angels, (...) in no wise, Glorious
Creatures indeed they are, Caelestiall spirits, but yet Ministering spirits, in
all purity serving the God of purity, says Naz: not fit to intercede, but
ready at his Beck, Nazianz. Orat. 43.
with wings indeed, but not with Healing under them, (...) but second lights
too weak to enlighten so great a Darkness; their light is their Obedience, and
their fairest Elogium, Ye Angels, that do his will; they were but finite
Agents and so not able to make good an infinite loss, they are in their own
Nature mutable, and so not fit agents to settle them who were more mutable,
more subject to change then they; not able to change our vile bodies, much
less able to change our souls, which are as immortal as they, but are lodgd
in a Tabernacle of Flesh, which will fall of it self, and cannot be raised
again, but by his power, whom the Angels worship; In prison we were, and Cui
Angelorum? written on the door; miserable Captives, so deplorably lost, that
the whole Hierarchy of Angels could not help us.

And if not the Angels, not Moses sure, though he were nearest to God, and saw
as much of his Majesty as Mortality was able to bear; the Apostle tells us, he
was Faithful in his House (...) as a servant, but Christ (...) as a son;
smite he did the Egyptians, Heb. 3.5.
and led the people like sheep through the wilderness, but he who was (...)
the Captain of our salvation as he is styled at the 10. v. was to cope with
one more terrible then Pharaoh and all his Host, to put a Hook into the
Nostrills of that great Leviathan, to lead not the people alone, but Moses
himself through darkness and death it self, able to uphold and settle an Angel
in his Glorious estate, and to raise Moses from the dead. Not Moses then, but
one greater then Moses; not the Angels, but one whom the Angels worship, who
could command a whole Legion of them; or if a Prophet, the great Prophet which
was to come; if an Angel, the Angel of the Covenant, Certe hic Deus est; Ask
the Devils themselves, and when he lived, they roard it out. Ask the Centurion
and they that watched him at his Death, and they speak it with Fear and
Trembling: Truly this was the Son of God.

Christ then our Captain is the Son of God; but God has diverse sons, some
by Adoption, and then he is made so; some by Nuncupation, and then he is but
called so; and some by Creation, and then he is created so; for they who rob
and divest him of his Essence, yet will yield him his Title, and though they
deny him to be God, yet will call him his Son. We must follow then the
Philosophers Method in his description of moral happiness, proceed (...) by
way of Negation, and to establish him in his right of filiation tell you, he is
not a Son, not Adoptivus filius his, Adopted son, who by some great merit
of his could so dignifie himself, as to deserve that Title, which was the
Dream, or rather Invention of Photinus. -- Imitatur adoptio prolem.


Adoption is but a supply, a grafting of a strange Branch into another stock,
but he whose name is the Branch grows up of himself, of the same stock and
root, Deus de Deo, God of God, very God of very God, made manifest in the
flesh, 2. not Nuncupativus, his son by Nuncupation, his Nominall son, such a
one as Sabellius, and the Patro-passiani fancied, as if the Father had been
assimilated, and so called the son, impiously making the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost not three persons but three names: Lastly, not filius
Creatus his Created Son, (...), a mere Creature, and of a distira^t Essence
from his Father as the more riged Arians, nor the most excellent Creature (...)
in substance like unto the Father, but not consubstantiall with him, as the
more moderate, whom the Fathers called (...), half Arians conceived; To these
Heretics we reply non est Filius Dei, he is not thus the son of God; and as
Aristotle tells us, that his Moral happiness is the chiefest good, but not
that good, which the voluptuary fancieth, the Epicures good; nor that which
ambition flies to, the Politicians good; nor that, which the contemplative man
abstracteth, an universal Notion and Idea of Good; so may the Christian by the
same Method consider his Savior his chiefest bliss and happiness, and by way
of Negation draw him out of these foggs and mists, where the wanton and
unsanctified wits of men have placed him, and bring him into the bosom of his
Father, and fall down and worship God and man Christ Jesus. Behold a voice from
Heaven spoke it, This is my beloved son; we may suspect that voice, when
Photinus is the Echo, an Angel from Heaven said vocabitur, he shall be called
the son of the most High. Our Faith starts back and will not receive it, if
Sabellius make the Gloss; our Savior himself speaks it, Ego and pater unum
sumus, I and the Father am one. The truth it self will be corrupted, if Arius
be the Commentator, to these we say he is not thus the Son of God (...), Naz.
Or. 39. (...).
to contract the personality with Sabellius, or to divide the Deity with Arius
are blaspemies in themselves Diametritrically opposed, but equally to the
truth. The Captain of our salvation is the son of God, begotten, not made,
the brightness of his Father, streaming from him as light from light; his
Image, not according to his humane Nature, but according to his divine (...),
the Image and Character not of any qualities in God, but of his person, the
true stamp of his substance, begotten as brightness from the light, as the
Character from the Type, as the word from the mind, which yet do not fully
declare him; quis enarrabit? says the prophet, who shall declare his
generation? And who more fit to teach us, then he who came out of the bosom of
God? who more fit to give us laws, then God himself? what tongue of men or
Angels can so well express his will, as the word which was made flesh, and
pitched his tent, dwelt amongst us, opened a School as it were, to teach all
that would learn the way unto Happiness? or what expectient could Wisdom have
found out so apt and powerful to draw our Love out of these labyrinths and
mazes wherein it wanders and divides it self, to take it from these painted and
false Glories, and bring it back and fix it on that which is eternal, as this,
to bow the Heavens and come down, and in our flesh, and as man to instruct men,
to gain them in their own likeness, to tell them he was not that only, which
they saw, but of the same essence with his Father, which they could not see? so
that here is Majesty and Humility joined, and united in one to draw them out of
darkness, into that great light, which shall discover and lay open unto them,
the deformity, the ugliness, the deceitfulness of those flattering objects, in
which our thoughts, desires, and endeavors met as in their center. And if this
infinite and unconceivable love of God in manifesting himself in our flesh, do
not draw and oblige us, if these bonds of love will not hold and fetter us to a
regular obedience, which must begin and perfect our peace, then we are past the
reach of any Argument which men or Angels can bring, and no chains can hold
us, but those of Everlasting Darkness.

And indeed his eternal Generation by it self would but little avail us, for
Majesty is no medicine for our Malady, we who are children of the Time, have
need of a Captain which must be born in Time; we were sick of an Eritis sicut
Dii, a bold and foolish ambition and affectation to be Gods: and this disease
became Epidemicall, we all would be Independent, be our own Lawgivers, our
own God; Pride threw us down, and Nothing but Humility, the exinanition of the
Son of God could raise us: And we may observe in the 7th. of Esaias, God bids
Ahaz ask a sign not only e coelo, from Heaven, but e terra, from the earth
beneath, e profundis, from the lowest depth, quia utrumque copulavit (it is S.
Basils note upon that place) because at the Union of the Godhead with our
Nature, there was a near Conjunction with Heaven and Earth. A sign from Heaven
is a great Grace, but we would have a sign from earth too; and here we have it;
Factus similis, he was made like unto his Brethren, (...), a God amongst Men, a
God on the Earth is a sign indeed.

And therefore in the next place as he is Deus de patre, God of his Father, so
he is Homo de matre, Man of his Mother; the Son of God and the Son of Mary.
Will you have a sign? here it is, a sign to be adored, and a sign to be
wondered at, and a sign to be spoken against, says old Simeon, a sign e
profundis, we may say from the deep abyss of his mercy. Ecce expectat nasci sua
membra quae fecit, Behold the Heavens are the work of his fingers, yet he
suffered himself to be fashioned in the womb of a Virgin, took of Man what he
abounds with, to be Born, and Dye, digested into members, knit together with
sinews, built up with bones, covered with our flesh, inveloped with skin,
raised up to the perfect similitude, nay drawn down to the low condition of his
Creature; he would be any thing but sin, to redeem him from Sin, and save him,
and descend so low as the Grave, and as Hell it self, to raise him to a
capability, and hope of Heaven and Immortality. Mira (...) a wonderful
condescension, a wonderful fall from his Throne to the Womb, from his dwelling
place on high to dwell in the Flesh, from his Angels Gloria in Excelsis, Glory
be to God on high, to the Shepherds, vidimus in praesepi, we have seen him in
the Cratch, from the Seraphins (...) Holy, Holy, Holy, to the Jews bitter
Sarcasme, Come down from the Cross, from riding on the Cherubin to the hanging
on the Tet, Mirabilis descensus, this was a wonderful descent, nor could we
think God could do it, but that we know, he can do more than we can think.
Where was that hand that made and fashioned us, that meated the Heavens and
measured out the Waters, that weighed the Mountains in scales? where was that
voice which thundered from Heaven, that mighty voice which broke the Cedars of
Libanus? where was that God that was from everlasting? Do we not stand at
gaze, and put on wonder? Do we not tremble to say it? and yet to say it, as we
should, is Salvation. Latuit in Humilitate majestas, That Majesty lay hid in
Humility, that Power was in Frailty; That Hand in the Crotch, and in the
Clouts, that Voice in an Infant not able to speak, (...), says Naz. Nazianz.
orat. 38.
The God of Spirits was incarnate, he that was invisible was seen, he that
could not be touched, handled; we have seen with our eyes, we have heard him,
our hands have handled him, says S. John; He that was from everlasting had a
beginning; he that was the Son of God Factus similis, made the Son of Man like
unto his Brethren.

We cannot put on too much caution and reverence when we speak of God; De Deo
vel serio loqui periculosum, ne forte Deo indigna loquamur. Our tongue will be
as the pen of a ready writer, and run too fast, if fear do not hold it, and it
is very dangerous to speak of that Majesty which is at such an infinite
distance from us, that it is far safer to adore, than discourse of it; the
Christian world has been too daring and bold with him, to speak of him what
they please, and then to teach him to speak, to make a language of their own,
and say it is his; although the words be such, as were never heard from Heaven,
nor can be found in the Book of the Generation of Jesus Christ; If we be his
Disciples, when we speak to him, or of him, let us use his own words, for then
he will better understand us, and we shall better understand one another; for
when we set up a Mint of our own, and take to our selves the royalty of
coynage, whatsoever we work out, we send abroad as current, though the
character and stamp present more of our own Image, than his; when we will be
over-witty, commonly we are over-seen; God is made like unto Men: if the words
were not his, we should not dare to speak them; but this is (...), the
submission and minoration of Christ, and if he will descend so low, if he will
take our likeness, (...), he takes it in good part, Naz. 16. ^b.
and is well pleased to learn these words from us, because they are his own:
Like a man, a man of sorrows, a worm and no man, a despised, rejected man, he
will have us call him so, he has put it into our Creed, and counts it no
disparagement. He set a time for it, and when the Appointed time came, he was
made like unto us, and all Generations may speak it to his glory, to the end of
the world. Before he appeared darkly wrapped up in Types, veyled in Dreams,
beheld in Visions, that he appears in the likeness of our Flesh, that he
appears, and speaks, and suffers in our Flesh, is the high prerogative of the
Gospel. And here he publishes himself in every way of representation, (...) in
our Image, or likeness, in the form of a servant, our very picture, a living
picture, a picture drawn out to life indeed, such a picture, as one man is of
another, (...) by way of Comparison; for how has he spread and dilated himself
by a world of comparisons? He is a Shepherd to guide and feed us, a Captain to
lead us, a Prophet to teach us, he is a Priest, and he is the Sacrifice for
us, he is Bread to strengthen us; he is a vine to refresh us; he is a Lamb,
that we may be meek, he is a Lion that we may be valiant, he is a Worm, that we
may be patient; he is a Door, to let us in; and the way through which we pass
into life; he is any thing, that will make us like him; sin, and error, and
the Devil has not appeared in more shapes to deceive and destroy us, then
Christ has to save us. Lastly (...) by his exemplary virtues, and those raised
to such a high pitch of perfection, that neither the cursed Heretics, nor the
miscreant Turk, nor the Devil himself could reach, and blemish it; never was
righteousness in his vertical point, but in him, where it cast not the least
shadow for envy or detraction to walk in, for amongst all the Heresies the
Church was to cope withal, we read of none that called his piety into
question; and all this propter nos for our sakes; that in his Meekness we may
shut up our Anger, in his Humility abate our Pride, in his Patience still and
charm our Frowardness, in his Bounty spend our selves, in his Compassion and
Bowels melt our stony hearts, and in his perfect Obedience beat down our
Rebellion: not in the Cloud, or in the fiery Pillar, not in Darkness and
Tempest, not in those ways of his, which are as hard to find out, as the
passage of an arrow in the air, or a ship in the sea, but in tegmine carnis,
as Arnobius speaks, under no other Covert, than that of our Flesh, so like us,
that we may take a pattern by him.

This indeed may seem an indignity to God, and in all ages there have been
found some, who have thought so; not only (...) the Heathen, who in Tatianus
in plain terms tell the Christians they did (...) betray too great a folly in
believing it, but even Christians themselves and children of the Church, (...)
as Naz: calls them, ill lovers of Christ, who did rob him with a complement,
and to uphold his honor, did divest him of his Deity; and whilst with great
show of piety and reverence, they stood up to remove from God the Nature, they
unadvisedly put upon him the weakness of man, drew him out to our distempers
and sick constitution, as if God were sicut homo as man, like unto us in our
worst complexion, who are commonly very tender and dainty what likeness we
take, and affect that similitude alone, which presents us greater, and fairer
than we are; For our pictures present not us, but a better face, and a more
exact proportion, and with it, the best part of our wardrobe; we are but
grasshoppers, but would come forth and be seen taller than we are by the head
and shoulders; in the largeness and height of an Anakim. This opinion we have
of our selves, and therefore are too ready to persuade our selves, that God is
of our mind; and, that God will descend so low, or take the likeness of a
mortal; though he tell us so himself, yet we will not believe it, which is to
measure out the immense goodness and wisdom of God, by our Digite and
Scantling, by the imaginary line of a wanton and sick fancy, to bound and limit
his determinate will, to teach God, and put our own shapes upon him, to
confine him to a Thought, and then Christ has two Persons, or but one Nature,
a Body, and not a Body, is a God alone, or a Man alone, the whole body of
Religion and our Christian Faith, must shiver and fly to pieces.

Nos autem non sic: but we have not so learned Christ; not learned to abuse and
violate his great love, and call it good manners, and then urge our fears, and
unprescribed and groundless jealousies; (...)? shall his honor be the less
because he has laid it down for our sakes? Naz. ib.
shall he lose in his esteem because he fell so low for our advancement? or can
we be afraid of that Humility, which purchased us glory, and returned in
triumph with the keys of Hell, and of Death? He made himself a Sheepherd, and
laid down his life for his Sheep, and shall we make that an argument, that he
is not a King? He clothed himself with our Flesh, he lights a Candle, he sweeps
the House, descends to low Offices for our sake, so far from being ashamed of
our Nature, that he made have to assume it, (...)? and do thou impute this to
God? No: to us his Humility is as full of wonder, as his Majesty; Non
erubescimus de Christo, we are not ashamed of the man Christ, expecting the
leisure of nine months Travel, passing through and enduring the loathsome
Contumelies of our Nature, born in a Stable, cradled in a Cratch, wrapped up in
Clouts, poor and despised, non de crucifixo Christo, not of our crucified Lord
hanging on the Cross, but wonder heighteneth our joy, and joy raises our
wonder, and we cry out with S. Austin, Oh prodigia! oh miracula! Oh prodigy,
oh miracle of Mercy! (...)! oh the strangeness of this New Birth! with the
Wise-wen, we open our Treasuries, and present him gifts, and worship him as a
King, though we find him in a manger.

And this is signum e terra, a sign from the depth, from the low condition of
our Flesh; factus similis, says the Apostle, Psalm. 40.
made like unto his Brethren; corpus aptasti mihi, says he himself in the
Psalm, a Body have thou prepared me, so like us, that the Devil himself as
quick-sighted as Marcion or Manes took him for no other, and was entrapped
(...) with the outward garment and veil of his flesh, and venturing upon him
as man found him a God, Naz. Or. 39.
and striking at the First Adam was overcome with the Second, beat down and
conquered with that blow which he levelled. But as he has taken our Flesh,
must he take our Soul too? may not his Divinity as Apollinarius fancied, supply
the place of our better part? shall we not free him from those passions and
affections, which when they move and are hot within us, our common Apology is,
Humanum est, that we are but men? No: to S. Hilaries Corporatio we must add
the Greeks (...), and if S. Hilaries incorporating of Christ will not reach
home, their inhumanition will (...) draw them together, and unites them both,
both body and soul; he came to save both, and both he took, to free the body
from Corruption, and the soul from Sin, to refine our Dross into Silver, and
our Silver into pure Gold, to raise our Bodies to the Immortality of our Souls,
and our Souls to the purity of the Angels, perfect God and perfect Man, of a
reasonable Soul, and humane Flesh subsisting.

And now being made up of the same Mould and Temper, having taken from man what
makes and constitutes man, being the same wax as it were, why may he not
receive the same impressions of Love and Joy, Grief and Fear, Anger and
Compassion, affectus sensualitatis, even those affections which are seated in
the sensitive part? Behold him in the Temple with a Scourge in his Hands, and
you will say he was angry: Go with him to Lazarus his Grave, and you shall see
his Sorrow dropping from his eyes: Mark his eye upon Jerusalem, and you shall
see the very bowels of Compassion. Follow him to Gethsemane, and the Evanglist
will tell you, he began to be grievously troubled. Ecce tota haec Trinitas in
Domino, says Tertull. Tert. de Anim. c. 1.
Behold here is this whole Trinity in our Lord; 1. Rationale, the Rational
part; for he teaches what he learnt, disputes with the Pharisees, and
instructs the people in those ways which reason commends as the best and
readiest to lead them to the End. 2. Indignativum, the Irascible power which
breaths it self forth in woes and bitter Invectives against the Scribes and
Pharisees. 3. Concupiscentivum, the Concupiscible Appetite; for he desires, he
earnestly desires to eat the Passover with his Disciples: We may be bold to
say, and it is Gratitude, and not Blasphemy to say it; angry he was, and joy he
did, and breath forth his desires, and grieve, and fear, similis (...) like in
all things, but with this huge difference; In all these no ataxie or disorder,
not the least stoop nor declination from reason; no storm in his Anger, no
frenzy in his joy, no woman in his Tears, no wanton in his Love, no coward in
his Fear, like unto us in passion, but not bowed or misled by passion like
unto us. In us they are as so many several winds driving us to several
points; and almost at the same time, our Fear has a relish of Hope, and our
Hope is allayed with some Fear; our desires contradict themselves; we would and
we would not, and we know not what we would have; our sorrow will ebb out into
Anger, our Anger flows uncertainly, sometimes it swells into Joy if it be not
checked, and if it be, and we miss our end, it frets, and wastes, and consumes
it self, and is near lost in that flood of sorrow which it brought in; nunquam
sumus singuli, we are never long the same men, but one passion or another rises
in us, and troubles us a while, and so makes way for another, such a perplexed
middle, such a lump of contradictions is man. Thus it is in us; but in him they
are straight and even lines drawn to their right center: his anger on Sin, his
love on Piety, his joy on the great Work he had to do, his Fear was his
Jealousy lest we should fall from him; when he grieved it was that others did
not so; when he seemed most moved, in better temper than we are when we pray.
All our qualities he had, which were indetectabiles, as the Schools speak,
which employed no defect of Grace, nor detracted from his all-sufficient
satisfactory righteousness, poenam sine culpa, those affections which might
make him sensible of Smart, but not obnoxious to Sin, and in him they were not
properly passions, Eusebius. Episc. Thessal. apud Phot. Biblioth. cod. CLXII.
says Eusebius Bishop of Thessalonica, but rather (...) natural operations,
which did show him to all the world, as it were, with an Ecce, Behold the man,
and thus he condemned sin in the flesh, Romans v. 3. that is in those punishments
which his flesh endured; he that tells us he was like unto us in all things,
brings in his exception, at the fourth chap. v.3. yet without sin, for his
miraculous conception by the holy Ghost was a sure and invincible Antidote
against that poison of the Serpent, and so presented him an innocent and
spotless Lamb fit for a Sacrifice.

We have now filled up S. Paul's (...), and found our Captain God and Man
Christ Jesus like unto us in all things; we have beheld him in intimis naturae,
in the very bowels, as it were, and entrails of our nature, nay in sordibus
naturae, in the vileness of our Nature; searching and purging the whole Circle
and compass of it, and working out our corruption from the very root; we have
considered him in that height, which no mortal eye can reach, in his Divine
nature, and we have looked upon him, where he might be seen, and heard, and felt
in his Humane nature; we must now with a reverent, and fearful hand but touch
at the passive sieri, which points out to the union of both the Natures in one
Person, the Apostle tells us, Debuit fieri similis, That it behoved him to be
made like unto his brethren.

And to the apprehension of this union, as to the knowledge of God, we are led
by weak and faint representations drawn from sensible things, and we are led by
negations, the (...), the quomodo, is best answered by non hoc modo, not after
this manner; Factus est, he was made like unto us, it is true, but not so as
flesh and Blood may imagine, or a wanton and busy wit conceive; not (...), not
(...) says Basil, not by any mutation of his divine essence, Basil de Hum.
Christi Genesis
sine periculo status sui says Tertull. without any danger of the least
alteration of his state, his glory did not take from him the form of a
servant, nor did this Assimilation lessen or alter him in that, by which he was
equal to his Father, nor did the mystery of godliness bring any detriment to
the Deity. G. Nyssen calls him (...), and Tertullian, Deum carne mixtum in his
Apology, (and Austin, Greg. Nyssen. Cath. or. c. 27.
and Cyprian, and Irenaeus use the same phrase) a God mixed with our nature, but
not so as a drop of water cast into a vessel of wine, and turned into that
substance, in which it is lost, as Eutyches fancied, but as the soul and body
though two distinct Natures grow into one man, so did the Godhead assume the
manhood without confusion of the Nature, or distinction of the persons; united
as the Sun and the light, says Justin Martyr, as a graft to a plant say
others, (...) says Basil: as in a fiery sword, there are two distinct Natures,
the fire, and the sword; two distinct acts, to cut, and to burn; and two
distinct effects, cutting and Burning; from whence arises one common effect,
to cut burning, and to burn cutting; all which with all the representations
which the wit of man can find out, cannot express it, but leave us in our gaze
and wonder, whilst the manner of it is hid from our eyes, and removed further
out of sight, then when we first looked after it. Those beasts which came too
near to this mountain, this high mystery, were stricken through with a Dart,
and staggerd in the very attempt, and left to walk uncertainly in that mist and
darkness, which their too daring curiosity had cast (...) etc. says
Nazianzen, Naz. orat. 26.
hot and busy wits they were; Arius (...) a subtle sophister; Nestorius of a
quick wit and voluble tongue; Apollinarius, the stoutest Champion the Church
had against Arius, in comparison of whom some thought the great Athanasius to
be but a child in understanding (not to mention Cer inthus, Valentinus,
Eutiches) these pressing too forward upon this great mystery, were struck blind
at the door, and running contrary ways, met all in this, that they ran the
hazard of their own souls, and of that which should be as dear to them, the
peace of the Church. Be not then too inquisitive to find out the manner of this
union, for the holy Father seals up thy lips, that thou may not once think
of Asking the question, Just. Mart.
and tells thee (...), that thou art not like to meet with an answer; and what
greater folly can there be then to attempt to do that, which cannot be done? or
to search for that, which is past finding out? or to be ever a beginning, and
never make an end? Search the scriptures, for they are they that testify of
him, testify that he was God blessed for evermore; that, that word which was
Godw, as also made flesh, that he was the Son of God and the Son of man, the
manner how the two Natures are united is (...), Basil. ib.
unsearchable, unfoordable, and the knowledge of it, if our narrow
understandings could receive it, would not add one hair to our stature, and
growth in Grace; that he is God and man, that the two Natures are united in one
person, who is thy Savior and mediator, is enough for thee to know, and to
raise thy nature up to him. Take the words as they lie, in their Native purity
and simplicity, and not as they are hammered and beat out, and stamped by every
hand, by those who will be Fathers, not Interpreters of Scripture, and beget
what sense they please, and present it not as their own, but as a child of God.
Then Lo, here is Christ, and there is Christ, this is Christ, and that is
Christ, thou shall see many images and characters of him, but not one that is
like him, an imperfect Christ, a half Christ, a created Christ, a fancied
Christ, a Christ that is not the Son of God, and a Christ that is not the Son
of Man; and thus be rolled up and down in uncertainties, and left to the poor
and miserable comfort of Conjecture, in that, which so far as it concerns us,
is so plain and easy to be known. Do thoughts arise in thy heart? do doubts
and difficulties beset thee? (...), says Justin Martyr, thy Faith is the
solution, and will soon quit thee of them, and cast them by; thy Faith not
assumed, or insinuated into thee, or brought in, as thy vices may be, by thy
education, but raised upon a holy hill, a sure foundation, the plain and
express Word of God, and upheld and strengthened by the Spirit. Christian, do
thou believe? Thou have then seen thy God in the Flesh, from Eternity, yet
born; Invisible, yet seen; Immense, and circumscribed; Immortal, yet dying;
the Lord of life, and Crucified; God and man Christ Jesus. Amaze not thy self
with an inordinate fear of undervaluing thy Savior; wrong not his love, and
call it thy Reverence; why should thoughts arise in thy Heart? his power is not
the less, because his mercy is great, nor does his infinite love shadow or
detract from his Majesty; for see, He counts it no disparagement to be seen in
our flesh, nor to be at any loss, by being thus like us; our Apostle tells us,
(...), there was a Decorum in it, and it behoved him to be like unto his
Brethren.

Debuit; It behoved him.

That Christ was made like unto us, is the joy of this Feast, but that he ought
to be, is the wonder and ecstasy of our joy; that he would descend is mercy, but
that he must is our astonishment: Oportet and Debet are binding terms and
words of Duty. Had our Apostle said, It behoved us that he should be made like
unto us, it had found an easy belief, the debuit had been placed in loco suo,
in its proper place, on a sweating brow, on dust and putrefaction, on the face
of a captive; All will say it Behoved us much; but to put a Debet upon the Son
of God, to make it a Decorum, a beseeming thing for him to become Flesh, to be
made like unto us; to set a Rubie in Clay, a Diamond in Brass, a Chrysolet in
baser Metal, and say, it is placed well there, to worry the Lambs for the
Wolf, to take the Master by the throat for the Debt of a Prodigal, and with an
Oportet to say it should be so; to give a gift, and call it a Debt, is not out
usual language on earth: on Earth it is not, but in Heaven it is the proper
Dialect, fixed up in Capital letters on the Mercy Seat, the joy of this Feast,
the Angels Antheme, Salvator Natus, a Savior is born, and if he will be a
Savior, an Undertaker, a Surety, such is the Nature of Fidejussion and
Suretiship, debet, he must, it behooves him, as deeply engaged as the party,
whose surety he is.

And let us look on the aptness of the means, and we shall soon find that
this Foolishness of God (as the Apostle calls it) is wiser than men, and this
weakness of God is stronger than men, 1 Cor. 1.25.
and that the oportet is right set. For medio existente conjunguntur extrema,
if you will have extremes to meet, you must have a middle line to draw them
together, and behold here they meet, and are made unum, one, Ephesians. 2.14.
says the Apostle, the proprieties of either Nature being entire, and yet
meeting and concentring themselves, as it were, in one person; Majesty puts on
Humility; Power, Infirmity; Eternity, Mortality; by the one he dies for us, by
the other he rises again; by the one he suffers as Man, by the other he
conquers as God; in them both he perfects and consummates the great work of our
redemption.

And this Debuit reaches home to each part of my Text, to Christ as God. The
same hand that made the vessel, when it was broken, and so broken, that there
was not one sherd left to fetch water at any pit, to repair and set it
together again, that it may receive and contain the water of life, ut qui fecit
nos reficeret, that our Creation and Salvation should be wrought by the same
hand, and turned about upon the same wheel.

Next we may set the debuit upon his person, and he is media persona a middle
person, and the office will best fit him, even the office of a Mediator; and
then, as he is the Son of God, who is the Image of the Father, and most proper
it may seem to him to repair that Image, which was defaced, and well near lost
in us. For we had not only blemished this Image, but set the Devils face and
superscription upon Gods coin; for Righteousness there was Sin; for Purity,
Pollution; for Beauty, Deformity; for Rectitude, Perverseness; for the Man, a
Beast; scarce any thing left by which he might know us, venit filius ut iterum
signet, the Son comes, and with his blood revives again the first character,
marks us with his own signature, imprints the Graces of God upon us, makes us
current money, and that his Father may know us, and not cast us off for refuse
silver, shows him his face.

Lastly, it reaches the (...) the assimilation it self, and lays hold on that
too; made like he was, and debuit, he ought to be so, to satisfy in the same
nature which had offended, carnem gestare propter meam carnem, to take flesh
for my flesh, and a soul for my soul, (...), to purge and refine me in my own,
to wash and cleanse the corruption of my flesh in the immense Ocean of his
Divinity, and (...) in all things to be made like unto his Brethren. Debuit
looks on all his Godhead, on his Person, on his Assimilation. God, no Man or
Angel; The second person in Trinity, not the Father, or the holy Spirit; made
like unto his Brethren; his bare naked Divinity, though it might have saved us,
yet it was not so fit, and at too great a distance for us. Debuit slumbers
every storm, answers every doubt, scatters our fears, removes our jealousies,
and builds us up in our most holy faith; Though he be God, though he be the
wisdom of God, though he be the Son of God, yet debuit he ought to be made
like unto us to restore his Creature, to exalt his Nature, and in our own shape
and likeness, in our own flesh, to pay down the price of our Redemption.

So then debuit fieri, here is an aptness, and convenience, but debet he
ought, vox ista importat necessitatem, it behoved him, implies also a kind of
necessity. That God could be made like mortal man is a strange Contemplation,
but that he would is a rise and exaltation of that; but debuit, that he ought,
superexalteth that, and sets it at a higher pitch, but that he must be so, that
necessity in a manner brings him down, were not his love as infinite as his
power, would stagger and amaze the strongest faith; who would believe such a
report? But he speaks it himself, and it was the fire of his love that kindled
in him, and then he spoke it with his tongue, oportet, he must die, and if die,
be born; not only is, but would not would; but ought; not ought, but of
necessity must be made like unto his Brethren. I say, a strange contemplation
it is, for there need no such forcible tie, no such chain of necessity to hold
him, libere egit, what he did he did freely; nothing more free, and voluntary,
more spontaneous then this his Assimilation; for as if he had slacked his pace,
and delayed his Fathers expectation, and not come at the appointed period of
time, he suddenly cries, Lo, I come, in the volume of thy book it is written of
me, that I should do thy will, oh God, Psalm. 40.7.8. verse. he calls it his
desire, and he had it written in his heart; It Is true, libere fecit, this
condescension, this his assimilation was free, and voluntary, with more
cheerfulness, and earnestness undertaken by him, then it is received now by us
(it is our shame and sin, that we dare not compare them; that he should be so
willing to be like us, and we should be so unwilling to be like him) but if we
look back upon the precontract which past between his Father and him, we shall
then see a Debuit, a kind of necessity laid upon him, our Savior himself
speaks it to his Blessed mother, (...), Luke 2.49.
I must go about my Fathers business; we may measure his love by the Decree,
that is, we cannot measure it, for the decree is eternal; before the
foundation of the world was laid was this foundation laid an everlasting
foundation to lay Gold and Silver upon, all the rich and precious Promises of
the Gospel, to lay our obedience and conformity to him, upon; and upon them
both, upon his love, and our obedience raise our selves up to that eternity,
which he has purchased and promised to all his Brethren that are made like
unto him. Infinite love, eternal love, that which the eye of Flesh may count a
dishonor, was his joy, his perfection, his love, which put a Debuit upon him,
a necessity, and brought him after a manner, under the strict and peremptory
Terms of an obligation, under a necessity of being borne, a Necessity of
obedience, a Necessity of dying; Debuit takes in all and presents them to
our Admiration, our joy, our love, our obedience, and Gratitude; (...) every
way, and in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his Brethren.

The application.
We have now run the full compass of the Text, and we find our Savior in
every point of it similem (...) like in all things; and now to apply it; If
Christ be like unto us, then we also ought to be like unto him, and ought to
have our Assimilation, our Nativity, by the way of Analogy and by the rules of
proportion, answerable to his. For to this end was he made like unto us, you
will say, That he may save us; nay, but that he may present us to his Father by
the virtue of his assimilation made like unto him; for without this he cannot
save us. Behold here am I, and the Children which thou have given me; Holy as I
am holy, Just as I am just, Humble as I was humble; A man conformable to Christ
is the glory of this Feast. Father, I will that they whom thou have given me
(and he gives him none, but those who are like him) may be, where I am: Heaven
has received him, and it will receive none but those, who are like him, not
those that name him, not those who set his name to their fraud, to their
malice, to their perjury, to their Oppression; not those many Antichrists,
whose whole life is a contradiction to him: All that he requires at our hands,
all our Gratitude, all our duty is drawn together, and consists in this (...),
to be like unto him. To be like unto him? why, who would not be like unto him?
who would not be drawn after his similitude? Like him we all would be in his
Glory, in his Transfiguration on mount Tabor; oh by all means build us here a
Tabernacle; but like him in the cratch, like him in the wilderness, like him
in his daily converse with men, like him in the High priests Hall, like him in
the Garden, like him on the Cross, here we start back and are afraid of his
countenance: In humility, in hunger, in sweat, in colors of Blood, few there
be that would be thus drawn: But, if we will be his Brethren, this is the copy
we must take out, these be our postures, these our Colors; bathed in his
Blood, it is true, but withal bathed in the waters of Affliction, bathed in our
own tears, and bathed in our own Blood; we meet and cope with the Devil in
this our wilderness; we walk honestly, as in the day; in that day, which he
has made. We have our Agony in our Contrition; and in our Regeneration we hang
upon the Cross; There our lusts and affections are fastened as it were with
nayls, their strength taken from them, that they cannot move in any opposition
to Christ, but our anger turns from our brother who is like him, and is
levelled on sin, which is most unlike him; our love shuts it self to the world,
and opens it self to receive him; The hardship we undergo, brings in our
fellowship with him; our suffering with him does assimilate us, and in a manner
Deify us; our following him in all his ways draws us as near to him, as Flesh
and Blood can approach; and our joy, our greatest triumph is in this our
Assimilation, and thus we come forth like unto him.

And in the next place, as he was factus made like unto us, so are we facti
similes made like unto him; we are not borne so, we are not so by chance, we
cannot think our selves, we cannot talk our selves into his likeness, nor will
he imprint it in us whilst we sleep, or do worse; this picture, this
Resemblance is not drawn out with a thought, or a word. How many be there who
take his name, yet are not like unto him, because they will not be made so?
Christians they are sine sanguine and sudore, without blood or sweat, drawn out
not by an obedient will, but a flattering fancy; they struggle not with
Temptation, for they love it, they fight not against their Flesh, but nourish,
and cherish it, make it their labor and ambition to please it; they have no
fear, no Trembling, no Agony, no Cross, nay they beat their fellow servants
and persecute them, because they are like him; crucify him in his members
every day, and yet present themselves to the world as his children, as the very
pictures of our Savior, and so soon like him, that they will never be made so.
When we see men fast and pray, not that they have done evil, but that they may
do more, (the Pharisees did so) when we see men bowing before him, when they
are ready to lift up their heel against him, when we hear their Hosannas to
day, and their Crucifyes to morrow (the Jews did so) when we see men follow
him as his Disciples, and call him their Master, and then sell him for some
pieces of silver, deliver him to their Lusts, their Ambition, their
Covetousness, ( Judas did so, the son of perdition, and so nothing like unto a
Savior) when we see men wash their hands as if they were clear of all guilt,
and yet in a Tumult leave Christ and his Religion to be tom in pieces, and trod
under feet, and to make their peace, care not what becomes of him; ( Pilate did
so) when we see men tempting Christ, to turn stones into bread, to do that by
miracle, for which he has fitted its ordinary proper means; (the Devil did
so) when we see these men (and the world is full of such) shall we say that
they are like unto Christ? we may say as well, that the Pharisees were like
him, and the Jews were like him, and Judas was like him, and Pilate was like
him, and the Devil himself was like him, as they. No: a Christian is not so
soon made up, does not grow up a perfect man in Christ in a moment; For though
our first conversion be in an instant, yet it is not so in an instant, but that
it is wrought in us by means, and a new making there is, whenever we are
made Christians. To be like unto Christ is a work of Time, and we grow up to
this similitude by degrees; our Faith meets with many rubs and difficulties to
pass over; For how often do we ask our selves the question, How should this
be? and then when by prayer and meditation, and our continued exercise in
piety, we have got the victory, we build and establish our selves in our most
holy Faith. Our Hope, what is it but a conclusion gathered by much pains and
experience, by curious and watchful observation, by a painful peregrination
through all the powers of our souls, and actions of our life? and when with
great contention we have settled these, and see an evenness and regularity in
them all, then we rest in hope. And for our Charity, it is called the labor
and work of Charity, for we must force out the love of the World, before we
bring in the love of our Brethren; we must deny our covetousness, before we can
give a penny; deny our appetite, deny our selves, before we can taste of the
powers of the world to come; we must maintain a tedious war against the flesh,
and be unlike our selves, before we can be like unto Christ; as he was made
like unto us, so must we be made like unto him: and this is our union with him,
and we are made one, even as he, and his Father are one.

To draw the Parallel yet nearer; as there was a debuit upon Christ, so there
is upon us, as it behoved him to be made like unto us, so it behooves us to be
like unto him: In the volume of the book it is written of him, and in the same
volume we shall find it written of us, that we should do his will, and have
his law in our heart, and in this as in other things, Nihil prius intuendum,
quam quod decet; our first thought should be what will become us; To see Nero
an Emperor with his Fiddle, or Harp, or in his Buskins acting upon a Stage; to
see Domitian catching of Flies, or Hercules at the Distaffe; what an
incongruous thing is it? An humble Christ, and a proud Christian; a meek
Christ, and a bloody Christian; an obedient Christ, and a traitorous Christian;
Christ in an agony, and a Christian in pleasure; Christ fasting, and a
Christian rioting; Christ on the Cross, and the Christian in a Mahometicall
Paradise, non been convenient, there is no decorum in it, nothing but
Soloecisme and Absurdity, which even offends their eyes who commit the same, so
boldly, as if it carried with it some elegancy; no: debet, and oportet, we must
act our parts with art, and a decorum, do that, which behooves us, and it is a
debt, and a debt which we must be paying to our lives end, to our last breath,
and then we shall take our Exit with applause.

Lastly, to draw the Parallel to the full; Oportet, it is not only becoming
us, but Necessary; for if a kind of Necessity lay upon Christ by his contract
with his Father, to be made like unto us, a great necessity will lie upon us,
by our covenant with him, to be like unto him; a Necessity, and woe unto us, if
we be not. It is unum necessarium, it is that one thing Necessary, and there is
nothing Necessary for us, but it. For run to and fro the world, and in that
great Emporium and Mart of Toys and Vanities, find out one thing that is
necessary, if you can, though you search it, as the Prophet speaks, with
Candles: Is it necessary to be rich? Behold Dives in Hell, and Lazarus in
Abraham's Bosom. Is it necessary to be Noble? Not many noble are chosen. Is it
necessary to be Learned? where is the Scribe? where is the disputer of this
world? Every thing has its Necessity from us, not from it self; for of it self
it cannot show any thing that should make it so: It is we that file these
chains, and fashion these nails of Necessity, and make her hand of Brass:
Riches are necessary, because we are covetous; Honor is necessary, because we
are proud, and love to have the pre-eminence; Pleasure is necessary, because we
love it more than God; Revenge is necessary, because we delight in blood. Lord,
how many Necessaries do we make, when there is but one? one, sine quo non
debemus, without which we ought not, and sine quo non possumus, without which
we cannot be happy, and that is our assimilation, and being made like unto
Christ, in whom alone all the Treasuries of Wisdom, and Riches, and Honor,
all that is necessary for us, are to be found.

And now, to conclude, we have two Nativities, Christ's Nativity and ours; he
made like unto us by a miraculous Conception, and we again made like unto him
by the same spirit of Regeneration, ad illum pertinuit propter nos nasci, ad
nos propter illum renasci, says S. Austin: his love it was to be born for us,
and our Duty it is to give him Birth for Birth, and to be born again in him;
And then as thou art merry at his Feast, he will rejoice at thine, even
celebrate thy birthday, Come let us rejoice, says he; and (...), It was meet
we should make merry, for these my brethren were dead, but are alive, they were
lost, but they are found; they were like unto the Beasts that perish, but they
are now made like unto me: Ands as Christ had an Antheme at his Birth, a full
quire of the Heavenly Host praising God, so shall we at ours, Joy and Triumph
at the birth of a Christian, at his assimilation to Christ; for every real
resemblance of Christ is an Angels feast, and Angels, and Archangels, and
Dominations, and Powers, shall triumph at these our (...), an this Feast of our
Regeneration, and be glad spectators of our growth in Christ, rejoice to see us
of the same mind, every day liker and liker to him, till we grow to ripeness
and maturity to be perfect men in Christ Jesus, and being made like unto him,
at last be (...) equal to the Angels, and with Angels and Archangels, and all
the Company of Heaven cry aloud: saying, Salvation, Honor, Power,
Thanksgiving, be unto him that sits upon the Throne, and to him that was
made like unto us, even to the Lamb for evermore. Amen.

blazon or royal coat of arms of England and Wales HONI ^T QVI MAL Y PENSE

A SERMON Preached on Good Friday.
ROMANS 8.32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all,
how shall he not with him give us all things?


The Introduction.
GOds benefits come not alone, but one gift is the pledge of another, the grant
of a mite, the assignment of a Talent; a drop of dew from Heaven is a
Prognostique of a gracious shower, which nothing can draw dry but Ingratitude;
the Father might well say, S. Dionys. de divin. Nom. p. 200.
that the love of God was as a constant and endless Circle from Good, to Good,
in Good, without error, or inconstancy, rolling and carrying it self about in
an everlasting gyre.

He spared not, but delivered up his son for us all, says the Text, but how
many gifts did usher in this? for he gave him often in the Creation of the
world; for by him were all things made, and without him was made nothing that
was made: when God gives, Joh. 1.3
he gives his Son; for as we ask, so he gives in his name whatsoever we ask;
every action of God is a gift, and every gift a tender of his Son, an art to
make us capable of more. Thus the Argument of Gods love is drawn a minori ad
majus, from that which seems little, to that which is greater; from a Grain to
a Harvest, from one Blessing to a Myriad, from Heaven to thy Soul, and from thy
Creation to thy Redemption, from his Actions to his Passion, which is the true
authentic instrument of his love.

Here his love was in its Zenith, in its Vertical point, and in a direct line
casts its rays of comfort on his lost Creature: Here the Argument is at the
highest, and S. Paul draws it down a majori ad minus, and the Conclusion is
full, full of all comfort to all. He that gives a Talent, will certainly give a
Mite; he that gives his Son will also give Salvation, and he that gives
Salvation will give all things which may work it out, qui tradidit, he that
delivered his Son is followed with a quomodo non? how shall he not with him
give us all things? quomodo non? It is impossible it should be otherwise, so
that Christ comes not naked, but clothed with Blessings; he comes not empty,
but with the Riches of Heaven, with the Treasuries of Wisdom and Happiness;
Christ comes not alone, but with troops of Angels, with glorious Promises and
Blessings; nay to make good the quomodo non, to make it unanswerable,
unquestionable; It is his Nakedness that clotheth us, his Poverty that
enricheth us, his no Reputation that ennobles us, his minoration that makes us
great, and his Exinanition, his emptying himself that fills us, and the
tradidit is an instrument of conveyance, his being delivered for us, delivers
to us the possession of all things.

Qui non pepercit, who spared not his own Son, but delivered him, etc.

In which words there is a cloud, and a cloud of Blood, the cloud of Christ's
Passion, for so most interpreters in plain terms expound the tradere by in
mortem exponere, making his delivery to be nothing else, but an exposing him to
shame, and misery, and death: we need not stand upon it; a tradidit were
enough, for he is no sooner out of his hands, but he becomes a man of sorrows:
a tradidit were enough, but here is a non pepercit, he spared him not, so
spared him not, that he delivered him up, and so delivered him up, that he
spared him not, (...) the same thing expressed by two several words to make it
sure. A cloud then there is, and a cloud of Blood, but it distills in a sweet
shower of Blessings, and we see a light in this cloud, by which we may draw
that saving conclusion, quomodo non? How shall he not with him give us all
things?

Here then is an assignment made to Mankind: 1. Christ given: 2. Given for us
all: and last of all the full stream of his Blessings issuing out with his
blood; with him we have all things.

The Division.
Or, because it is a work of infinite love, we will call it scalam amoris, the
scale, or ladder of love; and then the steps, the parts considerable will be
these: 1. The person delivered, Tradidit proprium Filium, he delivered his own
Son. 2. The delivery and manner of it, tradidit and non pepercit, he delivered
and spared him not. 3. The persons for whom, pro nobis omnibus, for us all; And
these will in the last place, the end of all, the end of his Delivery, the end
of all his Sufferings, and make us bold to challenge the Devil and all the
world, and ask the question, quomodo non? how shall he not with him give us all
things?

Qui tradidit proprium filium, Who delivered his own Son.

He spared not, but delivered his Son; Tradidit proprium filium, his own Son.
and this though we make it the first step, yet indeed it is the top of the
ladder, and the highest pitch of his love, from which the light of his
countenance shines upon us, and shows us that he loved us as his own Son, nay
more than his own Son; and in this his manifestation of his love, is rather a
Father to us than to him; de suo periclitatur, ut nos lucretur, says the
Father; to gain us, he is willing in a manner to be himself at a loss, and to
win us from slavery, endanger his own, quasi orbitatis haurit doborem; he will
spoil and rob himself to enrich us, and to make us his children, deliver up
his own. Naz. or. 38.
A strange contemplation it is, and Nazianzen shuts it up in admiration,
counsels us to sit down and reverence it with silence. For can God delight to
make his own Son a Sacrifice, who would not suffer Abraham to do his command,
and offer up his? or might he not have taken an Angel for his Son, as he did a
Ram for Isaac? (...); what reason can be given for this his Delivery? Here
the object is so radiant, that it confounds the sense, and we scarce can see it
when we look upon it; his love at such an height, that our contemplation cannot
reach it; and though in plain terms we are told that it was done, yet we are
slow of heart to believe it; and therefore Photinus adopted a Son, Arrius
created one, horruit Marcion, Marcion was afraid of the very thought: Deliver
up he might an adopted Son, some excellent creature, or a phantasme, but
started back and would not come near to subscribe that he delivered up his own
Son. His own Son in their Divinity, was a Son by Creation, or a Son by
Adoption, or a Son in Appearance, which is not a Son. But this groundless and
indiscreet care of Gods Honor, was a great sin against it, and S. Ambrose
observes, that they who denied this for fear, were far worse, and more
injurious to Christian Religion, than they who denied it for stomach; this
pretense of his Honor more dangerous than perverseness and pertinacy: for
when pride, or vainglory, or ambition, shape and polish an Error, it is as
soon discovered as the hands that wrought it; but when a show of love, and
piety, and zeal, paint and commend it, and send it abroad in this glory,
uncautelous and ignorant men are soon taken with it, never doubt, but yield,
and are quickly deceived, and count it their Duty and Religion to be so. But
why should we fear where no fear is? why should we fear to disparage him, when
he is so well pleased to humble himself? why should we be wiser than God? why
should we offend and scandalize Christ as Peter did? Be this far from the Lord,
from the Son of God, that is, let God forbid that which he will have done? why
should we check his Wisdom? or be troubled at his Love? when God will deliver
him, to talk of improbability, or incongruity, or impossibility, is to speak
against God; If he will deliver him, his will be done, and he that rests in
Gods will does best acknowledge his Majesty.

It was his will to deliver him, and this cleares all doubts, and beats down
every imagination that exalts it self against it; If he will do it, we have
but one word left us for answer, Amen, let it be done: he has wisdom and
power to attend his will, and who are we that darken counsel with words without
knowledge? when we fall down at his footstool and acknowledge his infinite
power; when we say, He only can do wondrous works; when we in all humility
acknowledge that he can do more than we can think; that he can uphold us when
we are ready to fall, enrich us in poverty, strengthen us in weakness, supply
us with all necessary means and encouragements in this our race; when we
preach it on the house tops, that he can tread down all our enemies under our
feet, and bind Satan in chains; when we believe and rely on it, that he is able
to immortalize our flesh, to raise us out of the dust, and set us in heavenly
places, we think we have raised our magnificats to the highest, and indeed a
Christian need not set his Songs and Hallelujahs to a higher note; but yet we
do not rise so high, nor so fully express him, as when we give him an absolute
will; He does what he will in Heaven, and in Earth; non vox hominem sonat. This
can belong to none but the highest, to God the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords; and this makes him Lord paramount, and commander of all. For even his
omnipotency seems to submit and veil to his will, and is commanded by it; for
many things he does not do, not because he cannot, Dei posse velle est, T^r^l.
advers. Praxeam. c.x.
and non posse nolle, says Tertull, he can do what he will, and what he will
not do, we may say he cannot do; quod voluit, and potuit, and ostendit, but
what he would do, he could and did: what his Son? his own Son? his beloved Son,
as infinite and omnipotent as himself? shall he be delivered? yes, tradidit
illum, he delivered him, because he would, quia voluit; his will is that which
opens the windows of heaven, and shuts them again; that binds and looses, that
plants and roots up, that made the world and will destroy it; his will it was
that humbled his Son, and his will it was that glorified him. He might not have
done it, not have delivered him; he might, without the least impairing of his
Justice, have kept him in his bosom, and never showed him to the world; but as
he begatus again of the word of Truth, so he delivered up his Son (...) quia
voluit, because he would. For as in the Creation God might have made man as he
made the other creatures by his dixit, by his word alone, but would not, but
wrought him out of the Earth, and was the Potter which formed and shaped him
out of the Clay with his own hands: so in the great work of our Redemption, he
did not send a Moses, an Angel, a Cherubin, or Seraphim, but tradidit proprium
filium, delivered up his own Son, and in this delivery gave a price infinitely
above that which he brought, motal, sinful men, which were of no value at all,
but that he made them; and he pays down not a Talent for a Talent, but a
Talent for a Mite, for Nothing, for that which had made it self worse than
nothing; his Son, for those who stood guilty of Rebellion against him, and his
love for the world, which was at enmity with him. And thus he was pleased to
buy his own will and love in us, and by this his infinite love to bound as it
were his infinite power, his infinite wisdom, and his illimited will; for here
his power, his wisdom, his will, may seem to have found a non ultra, he cannot
do, he cannot find our, he cannot wish for us more, than what he has done in
the delivery of his Son.

And now, if we ask, what moved his will? not sure any loveliness, or
attractivenesse in the object; there was nothing to be seen but loathsomeness
and deformity, and that enmity which might sooner move him to wrath, than
compassion, and make him rather send down fire and brimstone, then his Son:
That which moved him was in himself, not to be found in the world, which stood
out against him, and when he did come, would not receive him, but was bound up
in his own bowels of mercy and compassion; he loved us in our blood, and loving
us he bid us live, and that we might live, delivered up his own Son to death.
For his mercy was the Orator to move his will, and being merciful, he was also
willing to help us; Mercy is all our plea, and it was his motive, and wrought
in him a will, a cheerful will, (...) says Saint James; it rejoices against
Judgment; though we had forgot our Duty, yet would not he forget his Mercy,
but hearkened to it, and would not continere misericordias, Psalm. 77 ^.
shut up his tender mercies in Anger, which is a Metaphor taken from martial
affairs; for in a siege an Army does compass in a Town or Castle, that they
may play upon it in every place, the Greeks call it (...) to shut it up as in a
net. This is it which the Prophet David calls claudere, or continere, to shut
up his mercy in anger; the Septuagint renders it (...) to make a trench about
it and besiege it. Now the goodness of God, and his love to his Creature,
would not suffer him thus to shut up his tender Mercies, as a Fort or Town is
shut up to be undermined, and beat upon, and overcome; but as the besieged many
times make sallyes upon the enemy, so the love and mercy of our God brake forth
even through his anger, and gained a conquest against the legions of his wrath.
Let the World be impure, let Men be sinners, let Justice be importunate, let
Power be formidable, and Vengeance ready to fall, yet all must fall back, and
yield to the Mercy and Love of God, which cannot be overcome, nor bound, nor
shut up, but will break forth, and make way through all opposition, through
sin, and all the powers of darkness, which besiege and compass it about, and
will raise the siege, drive off and chase away these Enemies, and to conquer
Sin, will deliver up his Son for the Sinner. And this was aenigma amoris, says
Aquinas; this was the riddle, or rather the mystery of his love to pose the
wisdom of the world: I may say, being Love, and infinite, it is no riddle at
all, but plain and easy: for what can love do that is strange? what can it
do amiss? that which moved him to do it, shows plainly that the end for
which he did it, was very good: Dilexit nos, he loved us, is the best
commentary on Tradidit Filium, he delivered his Son for us, and takes away all
scruple and doubt; for if we can once love our Enemies, it is impossible but
that our Bowels should yern toward them, and our will be bent and prone to
raise them up even to that pitch and condition, which our love has designed;
and if our love were of that nature, Heavenly as he is Heavenly, or but in some
forward degree proportioned to his, we should see nothing that were difficult,
nothing that were absurd, nothing that might misbecome us, which might promote
or advantage them: if our Love have heat in it, our Will will be forward and
earnest, and we shall be ready to lay down our lives for them. For Love is like
an Artificial Glass, and when we look through it, an Enemy appears a Friend;
Disgrace, Honor; Difficulties Nothing. When he saw us weltring in our blood,
his love was ready to wash us; when we ran from him, his love ran after us to
apprehend us; when we fought against him as enemies, his love was a Prophet;
Lo all these may be my children. What speak we of Disgrace? his Love defends
his Majesty, and exalts this Humility of his son: (...), etc. says Plato, Love
has this privilege that it cannot be defamed, and by a kind of Law has this
huge advantage, to make Bondage, Liberty; Disgrace, Honorable; Infirmity,
Omnipotent: who can stand up against Love, and say, why did thou this? Had
Marciou, and Photinus, and Arrius, well weighed the force and privilege of
Love; their needless fear, I may say, their bold and irreverent fear would
have soon vanished, nor would they have denied Christ to be the Son of God,
quia tradidit, because he delivered him up for us, but have seen as great glory
in his Humility, as in his Glory, and would have fallen down and worshipped God and
man, even this crucified Lord of life, Christ Jesus. Love will do any thing
for those whom it looks, and stays upon. If you ask a coat, it gives the cloak
also; if you defire her to go a mile, she will go with you twain, and is
never weary, though she pass through places of horror and danger; if you be in
the most loathsome dungeon, in the valley and shadow of death, she forsakes you
not, but will go along with you. Must the Son of God be delivered? Love sends
him down, Charitas de coelo demisit Christum, it was Love that bowed the
Heavens, when he descended; must he suffer? Love nails him to the Cross, and
no power could do it, but Love. Must he be sacrificed? Love calls it a
Baptism, and coarctatur, how is Love straightened till the Sacrifice be slain?
Must he dye? Must the Son of God dye? Love calls it (...), his perfection, Heb.
2.10. So, though he be the Son of God, though we were his enemies, yet Love
reconcileth all these seeming contradictions, resolves every doubt, tunes these
jarring strings, and out of this discord makes that melody which delights
both men and Angels, and God himself; even that melody, whereof our love should
be the resultance. He loved us, and then the Conclusion does sweetly and
naturally follow, Non pepercit, he spared not his own Son, but delivered him
up. And so from the Person, we pass to the Delivery it self, Tradidit, and non
pepercit, He delivered, and spared him not. Tradidit et non pepercit.




The Economy and glorious dispensation of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ is
here termed (...) a delivery; and delivered he was, First, into the Virgins
womb, for that was a strange descent, and even then began his passion; Nasci se
patitur, says Tertullian, Tert. de patient.
he suffered himself to be fashioned in the womb, took of man, what is proper
and natural to him, to be Born and dye. Here he was drawn out and fitted, made
an object for the malice of men, and the rage of the Devil to work on; here he
was made a mark for his enemies to shoot at, here he had a back for the whip,
and flesh to be ploughed, a face to be spit upon, a body to be nayld to the
Cross; here he was built up as a Temple, to be beat down again with axes and
Hammers, with misery and Affliction. Mira traditio! a strange delivery it was
of the son of God into the womb of a Mortal, yet tradidit illum he thus
delivered him.

And being Borne, what was his whole life, but (...) a delivery of him, from
sorrow to sorrow, from misery to misery, from poverty to shame, from derision
to malice, from malice, to death? this was the pomp and Ceremony, with which he
was brought to his Cross, and from thence to his grave. Deliver me not into
the hands of my enemies, says David. Behold, his friends were his enemies:
what creature was there to whom he was not delivered? Delivered to the Angels,
to keep him (you will say) in all his ways; but what need had he of an Angels
assistance, whose wisdom reached over all? what need he an Angels tongue to
comfort him who was Lord of the Angels, and who with his voice could have
destroyed the Universe? but now he, who could turn stones into Bread, who
could work it out of nothing, as he did in the multiplying of the loaves, is
content toreceive an Alms from the hand of his Minister. Delivered to Joseph
and Mary, Luke 2.51. subject to them.
to whom, says the Text, he was obedient: Delivered from Annas to Caiaphas,
from Caiaphas to Pilate; from Pilate to Herod; from Herod to Pilate again, and
from Pilate to the Jews, to do with him what they pleased; delivered to all
the creatures, to heat, and to cold, to the thorns which gored him, to the
whip which made long furrows in his flesh; to then ails, which fastened him; to
the spear which peirced him; to the Cross which racked him; to the grave,
which swallowed him; delivered to the Devil himself, and the power of
darkness: No creature from the highest to the lowest, to which he was not
delivered; delivered in his body and his soul; in every part of his body, in
those, which seemed to be free from pain, his tongue, which their cruelty
touched not; for he that was man, yet had nothing of the impatience of man,
complained of Thirst; he said I thirst: Delivered up to a quick and lively
sense of pain, for many times extremity of pain takes it away, and it is lost
in it self, but here pain did quicken his sense; the more he endured, the more
sensible he was; the more he suffered, the more feeling he had; his last gasp
was breathed out (...) with a strong loud voice; delivered he was to envy which
delivered him, says the Text; to treachery which betrayed him; to malice,
which laid on sure strokes; to pride, which scorned him; to contempt, which
spet upon him; to all those furious passions which turn men into Devils; from
such a delivery we all cry Good Lord deliver us.

But thus delivered he was not only to men, but to the passions of men, to the
wild and brutish passions of his enemies, to the rage of Devils; and in the
next place, not only to their passions, but his own, which as man he carried
about with him, (...) my soul is troubled, John 12.27. (...) in an Agony, Luke
22.44. quae sentitur prius quam discitur, which none can tell what it is, but
he that has felt it, and none ever felt such an Agony but he, (...) he is
grievously vexed. Matthew. 26.38. (...) his soul was very heavy, for these
several expressions the Evangelists give us; Trouble, vexation, an Agony,
heaviness in his soul, these were the bitter ingredients which filled up his
cup so full, that he made it his prayer to have it taken out of his hand; the
consideration of which has induced some to conceive, that the sense of his
pain had so weakened his intellectual faculties, that he forgot himself; non
fuit haec meditata Christi oration, says Calvin, Calvin. Harm^. and in locum
his pain was so great that it gave no time or leisure to his reason, to weigh
what he said, which in effect is, he spoke he knew not what. But we may truly
say, non fuit haec Interpretis meditata oration, this Author did not well
understand, nor consider what he wrote, and might seem not well to have
advised with his reason, that would leave wisdom it self without the use of
it; no question it was the language of a bleeding Heart, and the resultance of
his grief, for grieve he did and fear; and he who as God could have commanded
a Legion of Angels, as man had need of one to comfort him. He was delivered up
to his passions to afflict, not swallow him up; no disorder, no jarr with
reason, which was still above them; no sullenness in his grief, no despair in
his complaints; no unreasonableness in his thoughts; not a thought which did
rise amiss; not a word which was misplaced; not a motion which was not
regular; he knew he was not forsaken, when he asked, why have thou forsaken me?
the bitterness of the cup struck him into a fear, when his obedience called
for it; he prayed indeed, that this cup might pass from him, which was not, as
some think, the cup of his Cross and passion, but this cup of his Agony; in
which prayer it is plain he was heard, for the Text tells us, there stood by
an Angel from God to comfort, and strengthen him, Luke 22.43. For being of the
same mould and temper, he was willing to receive the same impressions, which
are so visible in man, of sorrow and fear, even those affections which are
seated in the sensitive part, and without which misery and pain have no tooth
at all to bite us; for our passions are the sting of misery, nor could Christ
have suffered at all, if he had been free from them; if misery be a whip, it is
our passion, and fancy that make it a Scorpion: what could malice hurt me, if I
did not help the blow? what edge had an injury, if I could not be angry? what
terror had death, if I did not fear? It is opinion and passion that makes us
miserable; take away these, and misery is but a name. Tunde, Anaxarchum enim
non tundis, you touch not the Stoic though you bray him in a mortar. Deliverd
then he was to these passions, to fear, and to grief, which strein'd his body,
which rackt his joints, which stretched his sinews, which trickled down in
clods of blood, exhaled themselves through the pores of his flesh in a bloody
sweat; the fire that melted him was his fear and his grief.

Da si quid ultra est; is there yet any more, or can he be delivered further?
not to despair, for it was impossible; not to the torments of Hell, which
could never seize on his innocent soul; but Irae Dei, to the wrath of God,
which withered his heart like Grass, and burnt up his bones like a Hearth; and
brought him even to the dust of death. Look now upon his countenance, it is
pale and wan; upon his heart, it is melted like wax; look upon his Tongue, it
cleaves to the roof of his mouth: what talk we of Death? the wrath of God is
truly (...), the fearfullest, and terriblest thing in the world; the sting of
sin, which is the sting of Death. Look into your own souls; That weak
apprehension of it, which we sometimes have, what a night and darkness does it
draw over us? what a night? nay what a Hell does it kindle in us? what torments
do we feel, the Types and sad representations of those in the bottomless pit?
how do our delights distaste us? our desires strangle themselves? what a Tophet
is the world? and what Furies are our Thoughts? what do we see, which we do not
turn from? what do we know which we would not forget? what do we think, which
we do not startle at? or do we know what to think? now what rock can hide us?
what mountain can cover us? we are weary of our selves, and could wish rather
not to be, then to be under Gods wrath; were it not for this, there would be no
Law, no Conscience, no Devil, but with this the Law is a killing letter, the
Conscience a Fury, and the Devil a Tormentor. But yet there is still a
difference between our apprehension and his, for alas! to us his wrath does not
appear in its full Horror, for if it did we should sooner dye, then offend
him. Some do but think of it, few think of it as they should, and they that are
most apprehensive, look upon it as at distance, as that which may be turned
away; and so not fearing his wrath, treasure up wrath against the day of wrath.
To us, when we take it at the nearest, and have the fullest sight of it, it
appears, but as the cloud did to Elias servant, like a man's hand; but to Christ
the Heavens were black with clouds and winds, and it showred down upon him, as
in a tempest of fire and brimstone; (we have not his eyes, and therefore not
his apprehension; we see not so much deformity in sin as he did, and so not so
much terror in the wrath of God.) It were Impiety and Blasphemy to think that
the blessed Martyrs were more patient than Christ, Cujus natura patientia,
Tert. de patient.
says Tert. whose very nature was patience, yet who of all that noble Army
ever breathed forth such disconsolate speeches? God indeed delivered them up to
the saw, to the wrack, to the teeth of Lions, to all the engines of cruelty,
and shapes of death, but numquid deseruit? they never cried out they were
forsaken; he snatched them not from the rage of the perescutor by a miracle,
but behold a greater miracle.

-- Rident superantque dolores
Spectanti similes -- Sil. It (...). 1.

In all their Torments they had more life and joy in their countenance, than
they who looked on, who were more troubled with the sight-than they were with
the punishment; their Torture was their Triumph; their Afflictions were their
Melody; of Weak they were made Strong.

Tormenta, carcer, ungulae, Prudent. Eubal.

Atque ipsa poenarum ultima
Mors, Christianis ludus est.
Torments, Racks, and Strapadoes, and the last Enemy, Death it self, were but a
recreation and refreshment to the Christians, who suffered all these with the
patience of a stander by. But what speak we of Martyrs? Diverse sinners (whose
ambition never reached at such a Crown, but rather trembled at it) have been
delivered up to afflictions and crosses, nay to the anger of God; but never yet
any, nay not those who have despaired, were so delivered as Christ; we may say
that the Traitor Judas felt not so much, when he went and hanged himself; For
though Christ could not despair, yet the wrath of God was more visible to him
than to those that do, who bear but their own burden, when he lay pressed
under the sins of the whole world. God in his approches of Justice, when he
comes toward the sinner to correct him, may seem to go like the Consuls of Rome
with his Rod and his Axes carried before him; many sinners have felt his rod,
and his Rod is Comfort; in his Frown, Favor; and in his Anger, Love; and his
Blow may be a Benefit; but Christ was struck as it were with his Axe; others
have trembled under his wrath, but Christ was even consumed with the stroke of
his hand. For being delivered to his wrath, his wrath delivers him to these
Throws and Agonies; delivers him to Judas, who delivers, nay betrays him to
the Jews, who deliver him to Pilate, who delivered him to the Cross, where the
Savior of the world must be murdered, where Innocence and Truth it self hangs
between two Thieves. I mention not the Shame, the Torment of the Cross, for
the Thieves endured the same. But his soul was crucified more than his body,
and his heart had sharper nails to pierce it, than his hands or his feet.
Tradidit and non pepercit, he delivered him, and spared him not.

But to rise one step more; Tradidit and deseruit, he delivered, and in a
manner forsook him, restrained his influence, denied relief, withdrew his
comfort, stood, as it were a far off, and let him fight it out unto death; he
looked about and there was none to help, even to the Lord he called, but he
heard him not, (...), Mat. 27.46.
he roared out for the very grief of his heart, and cried with a loud voice, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? And could God forsake him? when he hung
upon the Cross, did he not see the joy which was set before him? Yes he did,
but not to comfort, but rather torment him, Altissimo Divinitatis consilio
actum est, ut gloria militaret in paenam, says Leo. By the counsel of the
Godhead it was set down and determined, that his Glory should add to his
Punishment, that his Knowledge, which was more clear than a Seraphins, should
increase his Grief; his Glory, his Shame; his Happiness, his Misery; that
there should not only be Vinegar in his Drink, and Gall in his Honey, and
Mirrhe with his Spices; but that his Drink should be Vinegar; his Honey, Gall;
and all his Spices as bitter as Mirrhe; that his Flowers should be Thorns; and
his Triumph, Shame. This could sin do, and can we love it? This could the love
and the wrath of God do, his love to his Creature, and his wrath against sin:
And what a delivery, what a desertion is this, which did not deprive him of
strength, but enfeeble him with strength; which did not leave him in the dark,
but punish him with light? what a strange delivery was that, which delivered
him up without comfort, nay which betrayed and delivered up his comforts
themselves? what misery equal to that which makes Strength a Tormenter,
Knowledge a Vexation, and makes Joy and Glory a Persecution? There now hangs
his sacred Body on the Cross, not so much afflicted with his passion, as his
Soul was wounded with compassion, with compassion on his Mother, with
compassion on his Disciples, with compassion on the Jews who pierced him, for
whom he prays, Tantam patienteam nemo unquam perpetravit. Tert. de Patientia.
when they mock him, which did manifest his Divinity as much as his miracles;
with compassion on the Temple, which was shortly to be levelled with the
ground; with compassion on all Mankind, bearing the burden of all, dropping his
pity and his blood together upon them; feeling in himself the torments of the
blessed Martyrs, the reproach of his Saints, the wounds of every broken heart,
the poverty, diseases, afflictions of all his Brethren to the end of the world;
delivered to a sense of their sins, who feel them not, and to a sense of theirs
who groan under them; delivered up to all the miseries and sorrows, not only
which he then felt, but which any men, which all men have felt, or shall feel
to the time the Trump shall found, and he shall come again in Glory. The last
delivery was of his soul, which was indeed traditio, an yielding it up, a
voluntary emission or delivering it up into his Fathers hands; praevento
carnificis officio, says the Father, he prevents the spear, and the hand of
the Executioner, Tert. A pol.
and gives up the Ghost. What should I say? or where should I end? who can
fathom this depth? The Angels stand amazed, the Heavens are hung with black,
the Earth opens her mouth, and the Grave hers, and yields up her dead; the veyl
of the Temple rends asunder, the Earth trembles, and the rocks are cleft, but
neither Art nor Nature can reach the depth of this wisdom and love; no tongue,
neither of the living nor of the dead, neither of men or Angels, are able to
express it. The most powerful Eloquence is the Threnody of a broken heart, for
there his death speaks it self, and the virtue and power of it reflects back
again upon him, and reaches him at the right hand of God, where his wounds are
open, his merits vocal, interceding for us to the end of the world.

We have now past two steps and degrees of this scale of love with wonder and
astonishment, and, I hope, with grief and love, Tradidit pro nobis. For us
sinners.
passed through a field of Blood to the top of mount Calvarie, where the Son of
God, the Savior of the World, was nailed to the Cross, and being thus lifted
up upon his Cross, he looks down upon us to draw us after him. Look then
back upon him who looks upon us, whom our sins have pierced, and behold his
blood trickling down upon us; which is one ascent more, and brings in the
persons for whom he was delivered, First, for us. Secondly, for us all.

Now this pro nobis, that he should be delivered for us, is a contemplation
full of delight and comfort, but not so easy to digest; for if we reflect upon
our selves, and there see nothing but confusion and horror, we shall soon ask
our selves the question, why for us? why not for the lapsed Angels, who fell
from their estate as we did? They glorious Spirits, we vile Bodies; they
heavenly Spirits, we of the earth earthly, ready to sink to the earth, from
whence we came; they immortal Spirits, we as the Grass, withered before we
grow; yet he spared not his Son, to spare us, but the Angels that fell he cast
into Hell, and chained them up in everlasting darkness, 2 Pet. 2.4. We may
think that this was munus honorarium, that Christ was delivered for us for some
worth or excellency in us; no, it was munus eleemosynarium, a gift bestowed
upon us in mere compassion of our wants; With them he deals in rigor, and
relents not; with us in favor and mercy, and seeks after us, and lays hold on
us, when we were gone from him, as far as sin and disobedience could carry us
out of his reach: It was his love, it was his will to do so, and in this we
might rest; but Divines will tell us, that man was a ritter object of mercy
than they, quia levius est aliena mente peccare quam propria, because the
Angels sin was more spontaneous, De Angelis quibusdam sua sponte corruptis,
corruption gens Daemonum evasit. Tert. Apol. c. 22.
wrought in them by themselves; man had importunam arhorem, that flattering and
importuning Tree, and that subtle and seducing Serpent, to urge and sway him
from his obedience; Man had a Tempter, the Angels were both the temptation and
tempters to themselves; Man took in Death by looking abroad, but the Angels by
reflecting upon themselves, gazed so long upon their own Beauty, till they saw
it changed into horror and deformity; and the offense is more pardonable,
where the motive is ab extrinseco, from some outward assoile, than where it
grows up of it self. Besides, the Angels did not all fall, but the whole lump
of mankind was leavend with the same leaven, and pity it may seem, that so
noble a Creature made up after Gods own Image, should be utterly lost. These
reasons with others we may admit, though they may seem rather to be conjectures
than reasons, and we have not much light in Scripture to give them a fairer
appearance; but the Scripture is plain, that he took not the Angels, Heb. 2.16.
he did not lay his hands upon them, to redeem them to liberty, and strike off
their Bonds, and we must go out of the world to find out the reason, and seek
the true cause in the bosom of the Father, nay in the bowels of his Son, and
there see the cause why he was delivered for us written in his Heart; it was
(...) Tit. 3.4. the love of God to mankind, and what was in mankind but enmity
and hostility, sin and deformity, which are no proper motives to draw on his
love? and yet he loved us, and hated sin, and made haste to deliver us from
it; Dilexisti me, domine, plusquam te, quando mori voluisti pro me, says Aust.
Lord when thou dyedst for me, thou made it manifest, that my soul was dearer
to thee, then thy self; such a high esteem did he set upon a Soul, which we
scarce honor with a thought, but so live, as if we had none. For us men then,
and For us Sinners was he delivered, the Prophet Esaias speaks it, and he could
not speak it so properly of any, but him, He was wounded for our
transgressions, and broken for our Iniquities, So that he was delivered up not
only to the cross, E^ 53.
and shame, but to our sins which nailed him to the cross, which crucified
him not only in his Humility, but in his glory, now he sits at the right hand
of God, and puts him to shame to the end of the world. Falso de Judaeis
querimur, why complain we of the Jews malice? or Judas's treason? of Pilates
injustice? we, we alone are they, who crucified the Lord of life; Our Treachery
was the Judas which betrayed him; Our malice, the Jew which accused him; our
perjury, the false witness against him; our Injustice, the Pilate that
condemned him; our pride scorned him; our envy grinned at him; our luxury spet
upon him; our covetousness sold him; our corrupt blood was drawn out of his
wounds; our swellings pricked with his Thorns; our sores launced with his
spear, and the whole Body of sin stretched out and crucified with the Lord
of life. Tradidit pro nobis, he delivered him up for us sinners; no sin there
is, which his blood will not wash away, but final impenitency, which is not so
much a sin, as the sealing up of the body of sin, when the measure is full;
pro nobis, for us sinners; for us? for us the progeny of an arch-traytor, and
as great traitors as he, take us at our worst; if we repent, he was delivered
for us, and if we do not repent, yet he may be said to be delivered for us, for
he was delivered for us to that end that we might repent.

Pro nobis, Pro nobis omnibus, so us all.
for us men, and for us sinners he was delivered; pro infirmis, for us when we
were without strength; pro impiis, for us when we were ungodly; pro
peccatoribus, for sinners; Romans 5.6,7. for so we were considered in this great
work of our Redemption, and thus high are we gone on this scale and ladder of
love. There is one step more, pro nobis omnibus, he was delivered for us all,
all, not considered as elect, or reprobate, but as men, as smners, for that
name will take in all, for all have sinned. And here we are taught to make a
stand, and not to touch too hastily, and yet the way is plain and easy; pro
omnibus, for all; this some will not touch, and yet they do touch, and press
it with that violence, that they press it almost into nothing, make the world
not the world, and whosoever not whosoever, but some certain men, and turn
all into a few, deduct whom they please out of all people, Nations, and
Languages, and out of Christendom it self, and leave some few with Christ upon
the Cross, whose persons he bears, whom they call the elect, and mean
themselves; sic Deus dilexit mundum, so God loved the world, that is the Elect,
say they, John 3.16.
they are the world, where it is hard to find them; for they are called out of
it, and the best light we have, which is of Scripture, discovers them not unto
us in that place; and if the Elect be this world which God so loved, then they
are such Elect, which may not believe, and such elect as may perish, and whom
God will have perish, if they do not believe. It Is true, none have benefit of
Christ's death but the Elect, but from hence it does not follow, that no other
might have had; theirs is the kingdom of heaven, but are not they shut out
now, who might have made it theirs? God, says Saint Peter, would not that any
should perish, 2 Pet. 3.8. and God is the Savior of all men, says Saint Paul,
but especially of those that believe, 1 Timothy 4.10. all, if they believe, and
repent; and those who are obedient to the Gospel, because they do; the blood
of Christ is powered forth on the Believer, and with it he sprinkles his heart,
and is saved; the wicked trample it under their foot, and perish. That the
blood of Christ is sufficient to wash away the sins of the world, nay of a
thousand worlds; that Christ paid down a ransom of so infinite a value, that
it might redeem all that are or possibly might be under that Captivity; that
none are actually redeemed, but they who make him their Captain, and do as he
commands; that is, believe and repent; or to speak in their own language, none
are saved but the elect: In this all agree, in this they are Brethren, and why
should they fall out, when both hold up the privilege of the believer, and
leave the rod of the stubborn Impenitent to fall upon him? The death of Christ
is not applied to all, say some; It is not for all, say others; the virtue of
Christ's meritorious passion is not made use of by all, say some; it was never
intended, that it should, say others; and the event is the same, for if it be
not made use of and applied, it is as if it were not, as if it had never been
obtained; only the unbeliever is left under the greater condemnation, who
turned away from Christ who spoke unto him, not only from heaven, but from his
cross, and refused that grace which was offered him, which could not befall
him, if there had never been any such overture made; for how can he refuse that
which never concerned him? how can he forfeit that pardon, which was never
sealed? how can he despise that spirit of grace, which never breathed toward
him? They who are so tender and jealous of Christ's blood, that no drop must
fall, but where they direct it, do but veritatem veritate concutere,
undermine, and shake one truth with another; set up the particular love of God
to believers, to overthrow his general love to Mankind; confound the virtue of
Christ's passion, with the effect, and draw them together within the same narrow
compass; bring it under a Decree, that it can save no more then it does,
because it has its bounds set, hitherto it shall go and no further, and was
ordained to quicken some, but to withdraw it self from others as shut out and
hid from the light and force of it, or having any Title to it, long before ever
they saw the sun; And thus they shorten the hand of God, when it is stretched
out to all; bound his love, which is profferred to all, stint the blood of
Christ, which gusheth out upon all; and circumcise his mercy, which is a large
cloak, says Bernard, large enough to cover all; and the reason is no better
then the position, quod vis esse charum, effice ut sit rarum, to make salvation
more precious and estimable, it must be rare; Then it is most glorious when it is
a peculiar; when it is entayld on a few; why should the love of God be a common
thing? I answer, why should it not be common, since he is pleased to have it
so? why should he cast away so many, to endeare a few? and can there be any
glory in that privilege, which is writ with the blood of so many millions? why
should it not be common, since he would have it not only common, but
communicated to all, and expresses himself as one grieved, and troubled, and
angry, because it is not so? why should we fear Gods love should be cast away
by being proferd to many? His love of friendship and complacency to those whom
he calls his Friends, cannot be lost, but is as eternal as himself, it
assists, and upholds them, and will crown them everlastingly. Nor is his
general love of good will and affection lost, though it be lost; for it is
ever with him, even when the wicked are in hell. Plus est bonitas Dei, quam
beneficentia; Christ's blood is ever in the Flow, though there be but few that
take the Tide, and are carried along with it; Gods goodness is larger then his
Beneficence; he does not do what good he can, or rather, he does not do what
good he would, because we fall back, and will not receive it; we will not
suffer him to be good, we will not suffer him to be merciful, we will not
suffer him to save us. This is the condemnation of the world, John 3 19.
that light came into the world, and men loved darkness more then light. Ap^l.
Flor. 1.
The Philosopher will tell us of the Indians, ad nascentem solemn siti sunt,
tamen in corpore color noctis est, they live at the very rising of the sun,
yet their Bodies are black and swarthy and resemble the night; so many there
be, who live in the very Region of light, where the Beams fall upon them hot
and pure, and are darted at their very eyes, and yet remain the Children of
darkness: Facit infidelitas multorum ut Christus non pro omnibus moriatur, qui
pro omnibus mortuus est, says Saint Ambrose; Christ was deliverd for all, is a
true proposition; it is Infidelity alone that can make it Heretical, and yet
it is true still, though to him that believes not, it is of no more use then if
it were false; he was delivered for thee, but thou will not receive it; his
passion is absolute, but thou art impenitent; he dyed for Judas who betrayed
him, but will not save Judas that despaired, and hanged himself: Infidelity,
and impenitency are the worst Restrictives which limit and draw down to
particulars, a proposition so profitably general, and bound so saving a
universal, that contract and sink all into a few.

To conclude this; Christ's hanging on the Cross looks upon all, but all do
dot cast an eye, and look up in faith upon him; he was delivered to deliver
all, but all will not be delivered: Omnis natura nostra in Christi hypostasi
invixit, Our whole nature was united in Christ's person; not the persons of a
few, but our whole nature, and our whole nature is of compass large enough to
take in all; and in that common nature of man he offered up himself on the
Cross, for the sin of all, that he might tollere peccatum mundi, take away
the sin of the world, destroy the very species and being of it; which though
it be not done, cannot be imputed to any scantnesse, or deficiency of virtue in
his blood, which is of power to purge out sin wheresoere it is, if the heart
that fosters it, be ready and willing to receive and apply it: And in this
common nature of man, not from Abraham or David, but from the first man Adam
himself, as Saint Luke carries up his Genealogy, did Christ offer up himself
upon the Cross; and in this common nature, he presents himself before his
Father, and now God looks upon Christ and mankind, as our eye does upon light,
and colors, which cannot be seen without light; before this light came into
the world, we were covered over with darkness, and deformity, and God could
not look upon us, but in anger; but through this common light we may be seen
and be beloved, we may be seen with pleasure; for as he was delighted in his
Son, so in him he is well pleased in those sons which he shall bring with
him to glory; but it we will fully withdraw our selves from this light, then
does his soul hate us. Christ is the brightness of his Glory, light enough
for God to look through upon a thousand worlds, multiplied a thousand times;
and if we do not hide our selves from it, hide our selves in the cavernes of
Earth in the world; If we do not drown our selves in the bottom of the Sea,
in the deluge of our lusts; if we do not bury our selves alive in stubborn
impenitency; if we do not stop up all the passages of our souls, if we do
not still love darkness, and make it a pavilion round about us; he will look
upon us through this light, and look lovingly upon us with favor and
Affection, he will look upon us, as his purchase, and he that delivered him for
us, will with him give us all things; which is the end of all, the end of this
his being delivered, and offers it self to our consideration in the last place.

The end. With him he gives all things.
He delivered, he sent, he gave him, for all these expressions we find to make
him a Gift: He is the desire, and he is the riches of all Nations, so that, as
whatsoever we do we must do, so whatsoever we have we receive in his name: The
name of Jesus, says S. Peter of the impotent man, Act^ 3.
has made this man strong; by his name we are justified, by his name we are
sanctified, and by his name we shall enter into glory, with him we have all
things, for in him are all the treasuries of Riches and Wisdom; we may think
of all the Kingdoms of the earth and the glory of them, but these come not
within the compass, nor are to be reckoned amongst his Donations. For as the
Naturalists observe of the glory of the Rainbow, that it is wrought in our eye,
and not in the cloud, and that there is no such pleasing variety of colors
there, as we see; so the pomp and riches, and glory of this world are of
themselves nothing, but are the work of our opinion, and the creations of our
fancy, have no worth, nor price, but what our lusts and desires set upon them,
luxuria his pretium fecit, it is our luxury, which has raised the market, and
made them valuable and in esteem, which of themselves have nothing to commend
them, and set them off. My covetousness makes that which is but earth a God;
my ambition makes that which is but air, as heaven; and my wantonness walks
in the midst of pleasures, as in a Paradise; there is no such thing as Riches
and Poverty, Honor and Peasantry, Trouble and pleasure, but we have made them,
and we make the distinction; there are no such plants grow up in this world of
themselves, but we set them, and water them, and they spread themselves, and
cast a shadow, and we walk in this shadow, and delight or disquiet our selves
in vain. Diogenes was a King in his tub, when great Alexander was but a Slave
in the world which he conquered; how many heroic persons lie in chains,
whilst folly and baseness walk at large? and no doubt there have been many,
who have looked through the paint of the pleasures of this life, and beheld
them as monsters, and then made it their pleasure and triumph to contemn them.
And yet we will not quite exclude and shut out riches, and the things of this
world, from the sum, for with Christ they are something, and they are then
most valuable, when for his sake we can fling them away; for it is he alone
that can make Riches a gift, and Poverty a gift; Honor a gift, and Dishonor a
gift; Pleasure a gift, and Trouble a gift; Life a gift, and Death a gift; by
his power they are reconciled and drawn together, and are but one and the same
thing; for if we look up into heaven, there we shall see them in a near
conjunction, even the poor Lazar in the rich man's bosom. In the night there is
no difference to the eye between a Pearl and a Pibble-stone, between the
choicest beauty and most abhorred deformity. In the night the deceitfulness of
riches, and the glory of affliction lie hid, and are not seen, or in a contrary
shape, in the false shape of terror where it is not, or glory, where it is not
to be found; but when the light of Christ's countenance shines upon them, then
they are seen as they are, and we behold so much deceitfulness in the one,
that we dare not trust them, and so much hope and advantage in the other, that
we begin to rejoice in them, and so make them both conducible to that end for
which he was delivered, and our convoyes to happiness.

All things is of a large compass, large enough to take in the whole world,
but then it is the world transformed and altered, the world conquered by Faith,
the world in subjection to Christ; All things are ours, when we are Christ's;
for there is a Civil Dominion and right to these things, and this we have jure
creationis, by right of Creation, for the earth is the Lords, and he has given
it to the sons of men; and there is an Evangelical Dominion, not the power of
having them, but the power of using them to his glory, that they may be a Gift;
and this we have jure adoptionis, by right of Adoption, as the sons of God,
begotten in Christ. Christ came not into the world to purchase it for us, or
enstate us in it, he did not suffer that we might be wanton, nor was poor that
we might be rich, nor was brought to the dust of death, that we might be set in
high places; such a Messiah did the Jews look for, and such a Messiah do some
Christians worse than the Jews frame to themselves; and in his name they beat
their fellow servants, and strip them, deceive and defraud them, because they
fancy themselves to be his, in whom there was found no guile, and they are in
the world as the mad Athenian was on the shore; every ship, every house, every
Lordship is theirs; and indeed they have as fair a title to their brothers
estate, as they have to the kingdom of Heaven, for they have nothing to show
for either. I remember in 2 Corinthians. 4.4. S. Paul calls the Devil the God of
this world, and these, in effect, make him the Savior of the world; for (as if
he had been lifted up and nailed to the Cross for them) to him every knee does
bow, nor will they receive the true Messiah, but in this shape: for thus they
conceive him giving gifts unto men, not spiritual, but temporal, not the
Graces of the Spirit, Humility, Meekness, and Contentedness; but Silver and
Gold, dividing Inheritances, removing of Landmarks, giving to Ziba
Mephibosheths land, making not Saints, but Kings upon the earth; and thus they
of the Church of Rome have set it down for a positive truth, that all civil
Dominion is founded in Grace, that is, in Christ; a Doctrine which brings with
it a Pick-lock, and a Sword, and gives men power to defraud or spoil whom they
please, and to take from them that which is theirs, either by fraud or by
violence, and to do both in the name and power of Christ. But let no man make
his charter larger than it is, and in the Gospel we find none of such an
extent, which may reach to every man, to every corner of the earth, which may
measure out the world, and put into our hands any part of it, that either our
wit or our power can take in; for Christ never drew any such conveyance, the
Gospel brought no such tidings, but when labor and industry have brought them
in, sets a seal, imprints a blessing on them, sanctifies them unto us by the
Word, and by Prayer, and so makes them ours, our servants to minister unto, and
our friends to promote, and lift us forward into everlasting habitations.

Our Charter is large enough, and we need not interline it with those Glosses,
which the Flesh and the love of the World will soon suggest; with Christ we
have all things, which work to that end, for which he was delivered: we have
his commands, which are the pledges of his love, for he gave us them that he
might give us more, that he might give us a Crown: we have his promises of
immortality and eternal life; Faciet hoc, nam qui promisit est potens, he
shall do it, for he is able to perform it: with him every word shall stand, he
has given us faith, for that is the gift of God, to apprehend and receive
them, and hope to lift us up unto them: He has given us his Pastors to teach
us (that is scarce looked upon as a gift) but then he has given us his Angels
to minister unto us, and he has given us his Spirit, fills us with his Grace,
if we will receive it, which will make his commands, which are now grievous,
easy; his Promises, which are rich, profitable, which may carry us on in a
regular and peaceable course of piety and obedience; which is our Angel, which
is our God, and we call it Grace. All these things we have with Christ, and the
Apostle does not only tell us that God does give us them; but to put it out of
doubt, puts up a quomodo non? challenges, as it were the whole world to show,
how it should be otherwise, How will he not with him give us all things? And
this question adds energy, and weight, and emphasis, and makes the position
more positive, the affirmation more strong, and the truth of it more persuasive
and convincing, shall he not give us all things? It is impossible but he
should; more possible for a City upon a hill to be hid, than for him to hide
his favor from us; more possible for Heaven to sink into Hell, or Hell to
raise it self up to his Mercy-seat, than for him to withold any thing from
them to whom he has given his Son: Impossible (...), as most inconvenient, as
that which is against his Wisdom, Naz. Or. 36.
his Justice, his Goodness, and (...), as abhorrent to his will to deny us any
thing: In brief, if the Earth be not as Iron, the Heavens cannot be as Brass,
God cannot but give, when we are fit to receive, and in Christ we are made
capable; and when he is given, all things are given with him, nay more than all
things, more than we can desire, more than we can conceive; when he descends,
Mercy descends with him in a full shower of Blessings to make our Souls as the
Paradise of God, to quicken our Faith, to rouse up our Hope, and in this Light,
in this Assurance, in this Heaven we are bold with S. Paul to put up the
question against all Doubts, all Fears, all Temptations that may assault us,
He that sparede not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he
not with him give us all things?

The Conclusion.
And now we have passed up every step and degree of this scale and ladder of
love, and seen Christ delivered and nailed to the Cross, and from thence he
looks down, and speaks to us to the end of the world, Crux patientis fuit
Cathedra docentis, the Cross on which he suffered was the Chair of his
profession, and from this Chair we are taught Humility, constant Patience, and
perfect Obedience, an exact art and method of living well, drawn out in
several lines, so that what was ambitiously said of Homer, that if all
Sciences were lost, they may be found in him, may most truly be said of his
Cross and Passion, that if all the characters of Innocence, Humility,
Obedience, Love, had been lost, they might here be found in libro vitae agni,
in the Book of the Life, nay of the Death of the Lamb, slain from the
foundation of the World, yet now nailed to the Cross.

Let us then with Love and Reverence look upon him, whothus looks upon us, put
on our Crucified Jesus, that is (...) as Chrysostom. every Virtue, his Humility, his
Patience, his Obedience, and so bear about with us the dying of our Lord, and
draw the picture of a Crucified Savior in our selves. To this end was he
delivered up for us, to this end we must receive him, that we may glorify God,
as he has glorified him on earth, for Gods Glory and our Salvation are twisted
together, and wrought as it were in the same thread, are linked together in the
same bond of Peace, I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Thus it
runs, and it runs on evenly in a stream of love.

Oh, how must it needs delight him to see his Gift prosper in our hands, to see
us delivering up our selves to him who was thus delivered for us; to see his
purchase, those who were bought with this price, made his peculiar people! Lift
then up the gates of your souls, that this King of Glory may come in: If you
seek Salvation, you must seek the glory of God; and if you seek the glory of
God, you shall find it in your Salvation: Thou may cry, lo here it is, or
lo there it is, but here it is found: The Jew may seek salvation in the Law;
the Superstitious in Ceremony, and bodily exercise; the Zelot in the Fire and
in the Whirlwind; the fantastic lazy Christian in a Thought, in a Dream; and
the profane Libertine in Hell it self: Then, then alone we find it, when we
meet it in conjunction with the glory of God, which shines most gloriously in a
Crucified Christ, and an Obedient Christian, made conformable to him, and so
bearing about in him the marks of the LORD JESUS.

To conclude then: Since God has delivered up his Son for us all, and with him
given us all things; let us open our hearts and receive him, that is, Believe
in his name, that is, be faithful to him, that is, love him, and keep his
Commandments, which is our conformity to his Death, and then he will give us;
what will he give us? he will heap gift upon gift, give us power to become the
Sons of God. Let us receive him, take in Christ, take him in his Shame, in his
Sorrow, in his Agony, take him hanging on the Cross, take him, and take a
pattern by him; that as he was, so we may be troubled for our sins, that we may
mingle our Tears with his Blood, drag our Sin to the Bar, accuse and condemn
it, revile and spit in its Face, at the fairest presentment it can make; and
then nail it to the Cross, that it may languish and faint by degrees, and
give up the Ghost, and die in us, and then lie down in peace in his Grave, and
expect a glorious Resurrection to eternal life, where we shall receive Christ,
not in Humility, but in Glory, and with him all his Riches, and Abundance, all
his glorious Promises, even Glory and Immortality, and Eternal life.

blazon or royal coat of arms of England and Wales HONI ^T QVI MAL Y PENSE

A SERMON Preached on Easter Day.
REV. 1.18. I am he that lives, and was dead, and behold I live for evermore,
Amen, and have the keys of Hell and of Death.


WE do not ask, of whom speaks S. John this? or who is he that speaks it? for
we have his character drawn out in lively colors in the verses going before my
Text. The Divine calls him a voice, ver. 12. when he means the man who spoke
it. I turned to see the voice that spoke with me; and in the next verse tells
us, he was like to the Son of man in the midst of the seven golden
Candlesticks, governing his Church, setting his Tabernacle amongst men; not
abhorring to walk amongst them, and to be their God, Le^. 26.11,12.
that they might be his people.

Will ye see his Robes and Attire? Clothed he was with a garment down to the
foot, which was the Garment of the High Priest, and his was an unchangeable
Priesthood, Heb. 7.24. and he had a golden Girdle, or Belt, as a King, v. 13.
for he is a King for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be no end:
Righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and Faithfulness he girdle
of his reins, Es. 11.5. His head and his hairs were white as wool, v. 14.
and as white as snow, his Judgment pure and incorrupt, not biased by outward
respects, not tainted or corrupted by any turbulent affection, but smooth, and
even as waters are, when no wind troubles them; His eyes as a flame of fire,
piercing the inward man, searching the secrets of the heart, nor is there any
action, word, or thought, which is not manifest in his sight: His feet like
unto fine brass, sincere and constant, like unto himself in all his
proceedings, in every part of his Economy; his voice as many waters, v. 15.
declaring his fathers will, with power, and authority, sounding out the Gospel
of peace to all the world: and last of all out of his mouth went a sharp
two-edged sword, v. 16. not only dividing asunder the soul, and the spirit,
but discerning the thoughts and intents of the heart, and taking vengeance on
those who persecute his Church. His Majesty dazzled every mortal eye; his
Countenance was as the Sun shining in his strength; and now of him who walks in
the midst of his Church, whose Mercy is a large Robe reaching down to the feet,
who is girt with Power, who is clothed with Justice, whose Wisdom pierces even
into darkness it self, whose Word is heard from one end of the world to the
other, whose Majesty displayes its beams through every corner of it, we cannot
but confess with Peter, This is Christ, the Son of the living God.

And can the Savior of the world, the desire of the Nations, the glory of his
Father; can Beauty it self appear in such a shape of Terror? shall we draw
out a merciful Redeemer with a warriors Belt? with eyes of Fire? with feet of
Brass? with a voice of Terror? with a sharp two-edged Sword in his mouth?
Yes: such a High Priest became us, who is not only merciful, but just; not
only meek, but powerful; not only fair, but terrible; not only clothed with
the darkness of Humility, but with the shining robes of Majesty; who can dye,
and can live again, and live for evermore; who suffered himself to be judged
and condemned, and shall judge and condemn the world it self. S. John indeed
was troubled at this sight, and fell down as dead, but Christ rouzeth him up,
and bids him shake off this fear; for he is terrible to none, but those who
make him so; to Heretics, and Hypocrites, and Persecutors of his Church, to
those who would have him neither wise, nor just, nor powerful, non accepimus
iratum, sed fecimus, he is not angry till we force him, and it is rather our
sins that turn back again upon us as furies, than his wrath, that makes him
clothe himself with vengeance, and draw his sword: To S. John, to those that
bow before him, he is all Sweetness, all Grace, all Salvation, and upon these,
as upon St. John, he lays his right hand, quickens and rouzeth them up: Fear
not, neither my girdle of Justice, nor my eyes of fire, nor my feet of brass,
nor my mighty voice, nor my two-edged sword; for my Wisdom shall guide you, my
power shall defend you, my Majesty shall uphold you, and my Mercy shall crown
you. Fear not, I am the first and the last; more humble than any, more
powerful than any, scorned, whipped, crucified, and now highly exalted, and
Lord of all the world. I am he that lives, and was dead, and behold I live for
evermore, etc.

Which words I may call (as Tertullian does the Lords Prayer) breviarium
Evangelii, the breviary, or sum of the whole Gospel, or with Austin, symbolnm
abbreviatum, the Epitome and abridgement of our Creed, and such a short Creed
we find in Tertullian, which he calls Regulam veram, immobilem and
irreformabilem, the sole, immutable, unalterable rule of Faith, and then

The articles or parts will be these -- 1. The Death of Christ, I was dead. 2.
The Resurrection of Christ, with the effect and power of it, I am he that
lives. 3. The duration, and continuance of his life, which is to all eternity,
I live for evermore. 4. Power of Christ, which he purchased by his death, the
power of the keys; I have the keys of Hell, and of Death. And these,


1. Are ushered in with an Ecce, Behold, that we may consider it. 2. Sealed and
ratified with an Amen, that we may believe it.


That there be not in any of us, as the Apostle speaks, an unbelieving heart to
depart from the living God: I am he that lives, and was dead.

And of the death of Christ we spoke the last day: Par: 1.
we shall only now look upon it in reference to the Resurrection, consider it
as past; for it is fui mortuus, I was dead; and in this we may see the method
and proceeding of our Savior, which he drew out in his blood, which must
sprinkle those who are to be saved, and make them nigh unto him to follow in
the same method, a morte ad vitam, Luke 24.25 Heb. 2.20
from suffering to glory, from death to life. Tota ecclesia cum Christo
computatur ut una persona, Christ and his Church are in computations but one
person; he ought to suffer, and we ought to suffer; they suffer in him, and he
in hem, to the end of the world; nor is any other method, either answerable to
his infinite Wisdom and Justice, which has set it down in indelible
characters, nor to our mortal and frail condition, which must be bruised,
before it can be healed; must be levelled with the ground, before it can be
raised up; quicquid Deo convenit, Tetuil.
homini prodest, that which is convenient for Christ, is profitable for us;
that which becomes him, we must wear as an ornament of grace unto our head;
there is an oportet set upon both, he ought, and we ought first to suffer, and
then to enter into glory; to die first, that we may rise again.

And first, it cannot consist with the wisdom of God, that Christ should
suffer and die, and we live as we please, and the reign with him, and so pass a
deliciis in delicias, from one paradise to another; that he should overcome the
Devil for those who will be his vassals; that he should foil him in his proud
temptations, for those who will not be humble; beat off his sullen temptation,
for those who will distrust and murmr; that he should make his victorious
death commeatum delinquendi, a license and charter for all generations to fling
away their weapons, and not strike a stroke: If he should have done this, we
could not have taken him for our Captain, and if we will not enter the lists,
he will not take us for his Soldiers; non novimus Christum si non credimus, we
do not know Christ, if we believe him not to be such a one as he is, a Captain
that leads us, as Moses did the children of Israel through the Wilderness full
of fiery Serpents, into Canaan; through the valley of death into life.

Nor is it expedient for us who are not born, but made Christians, (and a
Christian is not made with a thought) whose lifting up supposes some dungeon,
or prison in which we formerly were; whose rising looks back into some grave.
Toll certamen, ne virtus quidem quicquam erit, take away his combat with our
spiritual enemies, with afflictions and tentations, and Religion it self were
but a bare name, and Christianity, as Leo the tenth is said to have called it,
a fable. What were my Patience, if no misery did look toward it? what were my
Faith, if there were no doubt to assoile it? what were my Hope, if there were
no scruple to shake it? what were my Charity, if there were no misery to urge
it, no malice to oppose it? what were my Day, if I had no Night? or what were
my Resurrection, if I were never dead? Fui mortuus, I was dead, says the Lord
of life, and it is directed to us, who do but think we live, but are in our
graves, entombed in this world (which we so love) compassed about with enemies,
covered with disgraces, raked up, as it were, in those evils, which are those
locusts which come out of the smoke of the bottomless pit; and when we hear
this voice, and by the virtue and power of it look upon these, and make a way
through them, we rise with Christ, our hope is lively, and our faith is that
victory, which overcomes the world.

Nor need this Method seem grievous unto us, for these very words, Fui mortuus
I was dead, may put life and light into it, and commend it, not only as the
truest, but as a plain and easy method: For by his Death we must understand
all those fore-running miseries, all that he suffered before his death, which
were as the Train, and Ceremony, as the officers of the High priest to lead
him to it; as poverty, scorn and contempt, the burden of our sins, his Agony
and bloody sweat, which we must look upon as the principles of this Heavenly
science, by which our best master learned to succor us in our sufferings, to
lift us up out of our graves, and to raise us from the dead. There is life in
his death, and comfort in his sufferings; for we have not such an High priest,
who will not help us, but which is one, and a chief end of his suffering and
death who is touched with the feeling of our Infirmities, and is merciful and
faithful, Heb. 2.17. has not only power, (for that he may have, and not show
it) but a will and propension, a desire, and diligent care to hold up them who
are ready to fall, and to bring them back, who were even brought to the Gates
of death. Indeed mercy without power can beget but a good wish, Saint James his
complementall charity; Be ye warmed, and be ye filled, and be ye comforted,
which leaves us cold, and empty, and comfortless: and Power without mercy,
will neither strengthen a weak knee, nor heal a broken heart, may as well
strike us dead, as revive us; but Mercy and Power, when they meet and kiss
each other, will work a miracle, will uphold us when we fall, and raise us from
the dead, will give eyes to the blind, and strength to the weak, will make a
fiery furnace a Bath, a Rack a Bed, and persecution a Blessing, will call those
sorrows that are, as if they were not; such a virtue, and force, such life
there is in these three words, I was dead.

For though his compassion and mercy were coeternall with him as God, yet as
man, didicit, he learnt it. He came into the world, as into a School, and
there learnt it by his sufferings and death, Heb. 5.8. For the way to be
sensible of another misery, is first to feel it in our selves; it must be
ours, or if it be not ours, we must make it ours, before our heart will melt; I
must take my brother into my self, I must make my self as him, before I help
him; I must be that Lazar that beggs of me, and then I give; I must be that
wounded man by the way side, and then I power my oil and wine into his wounds,
and take care of him; I must feel the Hell of sin in my self, before I can
snatch my Brother out of the fire. Compassion is first learnt at home, and then
it walks abroad, and is eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame, and heales two
at once, both the miserable, and him that comforts him; for they were both
under the same disease, one as sick as the other; I was dead, and I suffered,
are the maine strength of our Salvation. For though Christ could no more forget
to be merciful, then he could leave off to be the son of God, yet before he
emptyed himself, and took upon him the form of a servant, sicut miseriam
expertus non era, ita nec miscricordiam experimento novit, says Hilary, as he
had no experience of sorrow, so had he no experimental knowledge of mercy and
compassion; his own hunger moved him to work that miracle of the loaves, for it
is said in the Text, He had compassion on the multitude; his poverty made him
an Crator for the poor, and he begs with them to the end of the world; He had
not a hole to hide his head, and his compassion melted into tears at the sight
of Jerusalem: When he became a man of sorrows, he became also a man of
compassion. And yet his experience of sorrow, in truth, added nothing to his
knowledge, but rayseth up a confidence in us to approach near unto him, who by
his miserable experience is brought so near unto us, and has reconciled us in
the Body of his flesh, Coloss. 1.21.
for he that suffered for us, has compassion on us, and suffers and is tempted
with us, even to the end of the world; on the Cross with Saint Peter, on the
Block with S. Paul, in the fire with the Martyrs, destitute, afflicted,
tormented: would you take a view of Christ looking toward us with a melting
eye? you may see him in your own souls, take him in a groan, mark him in your
sorrow, behold him walking in the clefts of a broken heart, bleeding in the
gashes of a wounded spirit; or, to make him an object more sensible, you may
see him every day begging in your streets; when he tells you, He was dead, he
tells you as much; In as much as the children were partakers of flesh and
Blood, he also himself took part of the same, and in our flesh was a hungry,
was spet upon, was whipped, was nayld to the Cross, which were as so many parts
of that discipline, which taught him to be merciful; to be merciful to them
who were tempted by hunger, because he was hungry; to be merciful to them who
were tempted by poverty, because he was poor; to be merciful to those who
tremble at disgrace, because he was whipped; to be merciful to them, who will
not, yet will suffer for him; who refuse and yet choose, tremble and yet
venture; are afraid, and yet dye for him; because as man he found it a bitter
Cup, and would have had it pass from him, who in the days of his flesh
offered up prayers, and supplications with strong crying and tears for mortal
men, for weak men, for sinners: pertinacissime durant quae discimus
experientia, (...). Ari^. An^. post. l 2. c. xix.
This experimental knowledge is so rooted and fixed in him, that it cannot be
removed now, no more then his natural knowledge; he can as soon be ignorant of
our actions as our sufferings, (...) says the Philosopher, Experience is a
collection of many particulars registered in our memory; and this experience he
had, and our Apostle tells us didicit, he learnt it, and the Prophet tells us,
he was vir sciens infirmitatum, Es. 53.
a man well read in sorrows, acquainted with grief, and carried it about with
him from his Cradle to his cross; and by his Fasting and Tentation, by his
Agony; and bloody sweat, by his precious Death and Burial he remembers us in
famine, in Tentation, in our Agony; he remembers us in the hour of death, in
our grave (for he pitties even our dust) and will remember us in the day of
judgment.

We have passed through the hardest part of this Method, and yet it is as
necessary as the end; for there is no coming to it without this; no peace
without trouble, no life without death; Not that life is the proper effect of
death; for this clear stream flows from a higher, and purer fountain, even
from the will of God, who is the fountain of life, which meeting with our
obedience (which is the conformity of our will to his) makes its way with
power through fire and water, as the Psalmist speaks, through poverty and
contumilies, through every cloud and tempest, through darkness, and death it
self, and so carries it on, to end and triumph in life: I was dead, that was
his state of humility; but I am alive, that is his state of Glory; and is in the
next place to be considered.

Vivo, I am alive; Christ has spoken it, who is truth it self, and we may take
his word for it, for if we will not believe him when he says it, neither
should we believe, if we should see him rising from the dead. And this his life
and resurrection is most conveniently placed in that, Non dabis, thou will not
suffer thy holy one to see corruption; for what stronger reason can there be
found out in matters of faith then the will and pleasure of that God, who
brings mighty things to pass? and to this end Saint Paul cites the 2. Psalm,
and S. Peter the 16. and in this the humble soul may rest, and behold the
object in its glory, and so gather strength to raise it self above the fading
vanities of this world, and so reach, and raise to immortality. What fairer
evidence then that of Scripture? what surer word then the word of Christ? He
that cannot settle himself on this, is but as S. Judes cloud, carried about
with every wind, wheeled and circled about from imagination to imagination; now
raised to a belief that it is true, and anon cast down into the midst of
darkness; now assenting, anon doubting, and at last pressed down by his own
unstablenesse into the pit of Infidelity. He that will not walk by that light
which shines upon him, whilst he seeks for more, must needs stumble and fall at
those stones of offense, which himself has laid in his own way; why should it
be thought a thing incredible, that God should raise the dead to life? If such
a thought arise in a Christian, Acts 26.8.
reason never set it up: I verily thought my self, says Saint Paul in the next
verse, but it was when he was under the Law, and he whose thoughts are
staggered here, is under a worse law, the law of his members, his lusts, by
which his thoughts and actions are held up, as by a law; is such a one that
studies to be an Atheist, is ambitious to be like the beasts that perish, and
having nothing in himself, but that which is worse than nothing, is well
content to be annihilated. For why should such a temptation take any Christian?
why should he desire clearer evidence? why should they seek for demonstration?
or that the Resurrection of Christ should be made manifest to the eye? That is
not to seek to confirm and establish, but to destory their faith; for if these
truths were as evident as it is that the sun does shine when it is day, the
apprehension of them were not an act of our faith, but of our knowledge; and
therefore Christ, says Tertullian, showed not himself openly to all the people
at his Resurrection, ut fides non mediocri praemio destinata, Tert. Apol.
non nisi difficultate constaret, that faith, by which we are destined to a
crown, might not consist without some difficulty, but commend it self by our
obedience, the perfection and beauty whereof is best seen in making its way
through difficulties: and so Hilary, Habet non tam veniam quam praemium, Hill.
l. 8. de Trin.
ignorare quod credis, not perfectly to know what thou certainly believe,
does so little stand in need of pardon, that it is that alone which draws on
the reward. For what obedience can it be for me to assent to this, that the
whole is greater then the part? that the Sun does shine? or any of those truths
which are visible to the eye? what obedience is it to assent to that which I
cannot deny? but when the object is in part hidden, in part seen; when the
truth we assent to, has more probability to establish it, then can be brought
to shake it, then our Savior himself pronounces, Blessed are they who have
not seen, and yet have believed.

Besides, it were in vain he should afford us more light who has given us
enough; for to him that will not rest in that which is enough, nothing is
enough. When he rained down Manna upon the Israelites; when he divided the red
sea, and wrought wonders amongst them, the Text says, For all this they sinned
still, and believed not his wondrous works. The Pharisees saw his miracles, yet
would have stoned him; they saw him raise Lazarus from the dead, and would have
killed them both. The people said, He has done all things well; yet these were
they that crucified the Lord of life. Did any of the Pharisees believe in him?
we might ask, Did any of his Disciples believe in him? Christ himself calls
them Fools and slow of heart to believe what the Prophets had foretold; their
Fear had sullied the evidence, that they could not see it, the Text says they
forsook him and fled. And the reason of this is plain; For though faith be an
act of the understanding, yet it depends upon the will, and men are
incredulous, not for want of those means which may raise a faith, but for want
of will to follow that light which leads unto it; do not believe because they
will not, and so bear themselves strongly upon opinion preconceived, beyond the
strength of all evidence whatsoever; when our affections and lusts are high and
stand out against it, the evidence is put by and forgot, and the object, which
calls for our eye and faith, begins to disappear and vanish, and at last is
nothing; quot voluntates, tot fides, so many wills, Hilary.
so many Creeds; for there is no man that believes more than he will. To make
this good, we may appeal to men of the slendrest observation, least
experience; we may appeal to our very eye, which cannot but see those
uncertain and uneven motions, in which men are carried on in the course of
their life. For what else is that that turns us about like the hand of a
Dial, from one point to another? from one persuasion to a contrary? How comes
it to pass that I now embrace what anon I tremble at? what is the reason that
our Belief shifts so many Scenes, and presents it self in so many several
shapes? now in the indifferency of a Laodicaean, anon in the violence of a
Zelot? now in the gaudiness of Superstition, anon in the proud and scornful
slovenry of factious Profaneness? that they make so painful a peregrination
through so many modes and forms of Religion, and at last end in Atheist? what
reason is there? there can be none but this, the prevalency and victory of our
sensitive part over our reason, and the mutability, yea, and stubbornness of
our will, which cleaves to that which it will soon forsake, but is strongly set
against the truth, which brings with it the fairest evidence, but not so
pleasing to the sense. This is it which makes so many impressions in the mind:
Self-love, and the love of the world, these frame our Creeds, these plant and
build, these root and pull down, build up a Faith, and then beat it to the
ground, and then set up another in its place. A double-minded man, says S.
James, is unstable in all his ways. Remember, 2 Timothy 2.8.
says S. Paul, that Jesus Christ of the seed of David was raised up from the
dead, according to my Gospel; that is a sure foundation for our faith to build
on, and there we have (...), fair and certain pledges of it, which are as a
Commentary upon ego vivo, I live, or as so many beams of light to make it open
and manifest to every eye; which give up so fair an evidence, that the malice
of the Jew cannot avoid it. Let them say his Disciples stole him away, whilst
their stout watchmen slept; what, stole him away? and whilst they slept? it is
a dream, and yet it is not a dream, it is a studied lie, and does so little
shake, that it confirms our faith; so transparent, that through it we may
behold more clearly the face of truth, which never shines brighter, than when a
lie is drawn before it, to veil and shadow it. He is not here, he is risen, if
an Angel had not spoken it, yet the Earthquake, the Clothes, the clothes so
diligently wrapped up, the Grave it self did speak it; and where such strange
impossibilities are brought in to color and promote a lie, they help to
confute it; id negant quod ostendunt, they deny what they affirm, and malice it
self is made an argument for the truth. For it we have a better verdict given
by Cephas, and the twelve: 1 Cor. 12.15. We have a cloud of witnesses, five
hundred brethren at once, who would not make themselves the Fathers of a lie,
to propagate that Gospel, which either makes our yea, yea, and nay, nay, or
damnes us; nor did they publish it to raise themselves in wealth and honor;
for that teaches them to contemn them, and makes poverty a beatitude, and
shows them a sword, and persecution, which they were sure to meet with, and
did afterward in the prosecution of their office, and publication of that
faith; nor could they take any delight in such a lie, which would gather so
many clouds over their heads, and would at last dissolve in that bitterness,
which would make life it self a punishment, and at last take it away; and how
could they hope that men would ever believe that, which themselves knew to be a
lie? These witnesses then (...), are many and beyond exception. We have the
blood too, the testimony of the Martyrs, who took their death on it, and when
they could not live to publish it, laid down their life, and sealed it with
their blood. And therefore we, on whom the ends of the world are come, have no
reason to complain of distance, or that we are removed so many ages from the
time wherein it was done; for now Christ risen is become a more obvious object
than before; the diversity of mediums have increased and multiplied it; we see
him in his word, we see him through the blood of Martyrs, and we see him with
the eye of faith; Christ is risen and alive, secundum scripturas, says S.
Paul, and he repeats it twice in the same chapter. Offenderunt Judaei in
Christum lapidem (it is S. Austins, and let it pass for his sake) when the Jew
stumbled at him he presented but the bigness of a stone, but our infidelity
will find no excuse, if we see him not now, when he appears as visible as a
mountain.

Vivo, Vivo, that is, vivifico, I give life.
says Christ, I am alive; there is more in this vivo than a bare rising to
life, (...), he lives, is as much as he gives life; there is virtue and power
in his Resurrection, a power to abolish Death, 2 Timothy 1.10.
and to bring life and immortality to light, a power to raise our vile bodies,
and a power to raise our viler souls; shall raise them? nay, he has done it
already conresuscitati, we are risen together with him, and we live with him;
for we cannot think that he that made such haste out of his own Grave, can be
willing to see us rotting in ours. From this vivo it is, that though we dye,
yet we shall live again, Christ's living breathes life into us, and in his
Resurrection he cast the model of ours; Idea est eorum quae fiunt exemplar
aeternum, says Seneca; and this is such a one, an eternal pattern for ours;
Plato's Idea, or common form, by which he thought all things have their
existence, is but a dream to this, this is a true and real, an efficacious,
working pattern. For as an Artificer has not lost his art, when he has
finished one piece, no more did Christ his power, when he had raised himself,
which as he is, is everlasting, and it works still to the end of the world;
perfectum est exemplar minus perfecti, that which he wrought upon himself is
most exact and perfect, a fit pattern of that which he means to work on us,
which will be like to his indeed, but not so glorious.

And now ego vivo, I live, is as loud to raise our hope, as the last trump will
be to raise our bodies; and how shall they be able to hear the sound of the
trump, who will not hear the voice of their Savior? ego vivo, Christ life
derives its virtue and influence on both; on the Body, with that power which is
requisite to raise a body now putrified, and incinerated, and well near
annihilated; and on the Soul, with such a power which is fitted to a soul,
which has both understanding and will, though drawn and carried away from
their proper operations for which they were made: we do not read of any precept
to bind us, or any counsel to persuade us to contribute any thing, or put a
hand to the resurrection of our bodies, nor can there be, for it will to be
done whether we will or no; but to awake from the pleasant sleep of sin, to be
renewed and raised in the inward man, to die to sin, and be alive to
righteousness, we have line upon line, and precept upon precept; and though
this life of Christ work in us both the will and the deed, yet a necessary and
a law lies upon us, and woe will be unto us, if we work not out our salvation.
By his power we are raised in both, but not working after the same manner;
there will be a change in both: as the flesh at the second, so the soul at this
first resurrection must be reformata and Angelificata, must be spiritualized,
refined, and angelified, or rather Christificata, if I may so speak,
Christified, drawing in no breath but his, having the same mind which was in
Christ Jesus. Whilst our bed is in the darkness, whilst corruption is our
Father, and the worm our Mother and Sister, we cannot be said to be risen; and
whilst all the alliance we have is with the world, whilst it is both Father,
and Mother, and Sister to us; whilst we mind earthly things, we are still in
our graves, nay in hell it self, Death has dominion over us; for let us call
the world what we please, our Habitation, our Delight, our Kingdom, where we
would dwell for ever, yet indeed it is but our Grave: If we receive any
influence from Christ's life, we shall rise fairly; not with a Mouth, which is a
Sepulcher, but with a Tongue, which is our Glory; not with a withered hand, but
with a hand stretched out to the needy; not with a gadding Eye, but an eye shut
up by covenant not with an itching but with an obedient ear; not with a heart
of stone, but with a heart after Gods own heart. Our life, says the Apostle,
Colos. 3.3.
is hid with Christ in God, and whilst we leave it there, by a continual
meditation of his meritorious suffering, by a serious and practical
application of his glorious Resurrection, we hide it in the bosom of Majesty,
and no dart of Satan can reach it. When we hide it in the mineralls of the
earth, in the love of the world, he is the Prince of the world, and is there to
seize on it; when we hide it in malicious and wanton thoughts, they are his
baits to catch it; when we hide it in sloth and idleness, we hide it in a
grave which he dug for us, we entomb our selves alive, and as much as in us
lies bury the Resurrection it self; but when we hide it in Christ, we hide it
in him who carries healing and life in his wings; when we do per Christum Deum
colere, worship God through Jesus Christ our Lord, and put our life in his
hands, then the life of Christ is made manifest in our mortal flesh, 2 Cor.
2.4. then we have put off the old man, and in a manner put off our mortality,
we are candidati aeternitatis, as Tertul. speaks, candidates for eternity, and
stand for a place with Abraham and Isaac, for we have the same God, and he is
not the God of the dead, but of the living.

We see now what virtue and power there is in this vivo, Vivo in aeternum. I
live for evermore.
in the life of Christ: But we must rise yet higher, even as high as eternity
it self; for as he lives, so behold he lives for evermore; a Priest for ever,
and a King for ever, Heb. 7.16.
being made not after the law of a carnal Commandment, after that law which
was given to men, that one should succeed another, but after the power of an
endless life, the Apostle calls it (...), a life that cannot be dissolved,
that cannot part from the body. And thus, as he lives for evermore, so
whatsoever issues from him is like himself, everlasting; the beams as lasting
as the light, his Word endures for ever; his Law is eternal, his Intercession
eternal, his Punishments eternal, and his Reward eternal. Not a word which
can fall to the ground, like ours who fall after it, and within a while breath
out our souls as we do our words, and speak no more: Not laws which are framed
and set to the times, and alter and change as they do, and at last end with
them; but which shall stand fast for ever, aeterae ab aeterno, eternal as he
is eternal; he has spoken this once, and he will speak no more: not an
Intercession which may be silenced with power, but imprinted in him, and
inseparable from him, and so never ceasing; an Intercession which omnipotency
it self cannot withstand; and his punishment not transitory, which time may
mitigate or take away, but an everlasting worm; not a Reward which may be
snatched out of our hands, but lasting as the Heavens, nay as Christ himself;
and they who would contract and shrink it up in the one, and so make a
temporary, perishing everlastingness, (which shall last as long as it lasts) do
stretch beyond their line, which may reach the right hand, as well as the left,
and put an end of the Reward, as they would do to the Punishment, for of the
one, as well as of the other it is said, that it shall be everlasting; all that
flows from him is like himself, yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever.

And such an High Priest it became us to have, who was to live for ever; for
what should we do with a mortal Savior? or what can a mortal Savior do for
us? what could an arm of flesh, a withering, dying arm avail us? shadow us to
day, and leave us to morrow, raise us up now, and within a while let us fall
into the dust, and at last fall down and perish with us. Man is weak and dies,
man given up the ghost, and where is he? where is (I will not say Alexander or
Caesar) but where is Moses, that led his people through the red sea? where are
his laws? where is David? S. Peter speaks it freely, that he was both dead and
buried, and that his Sepulcher was with them unto that day; but the son of
David is ascended into Heaven, is our Priest for ever, and lives for evermore.

And this title of eternity is wrought in his Girdle and Garment, may be seen
in his Head and Eyes of fire, adorns his burning feet, is engraven on his
sword, may be read in his countenance, and platted in his crown, and does well
become his power, his wisdom, his justice, his goodness; for that which is
not eternal is next to nothing; what power it that which sinks? what wisdom
is that which fails? what riches are they that erish? what mercy is that which
is as the morning dew, which soon falls, and is as soon exhaled and dried up
again? Virtue were nothing, Religion were nothing, Faith it self were nothing,
but in reference to eternity; Heaven were nothing, if it were not eternal;
Eternity is that which makes every thing something, which makes every thing
better than it is, and adds luster to light it self; I live evermore, gives
life unto all things. Eternity is a fathomlesse ocean, and it carries with it
power, and wisdom, and goodness, and an efficacious activity, a gracious and
benevolent power, a wise and provident goodness; for if he live for evermore,
then is he independent; if he be independent, then is he most powerful; and if
he be most powerful, then is he blessed; and if be blessed, then is good: He
is powerful, but good: good, but wise; and these, Goodness, and Care, and
Wisdom, and a diligent care for us meet in him, who lives for evermore, and
works on us for our eternal salvation.

And first, as he lives for evermore, so he intercedes for us for evermore, and
he can no more leave to intercede for us, than he can to be Christ; for his
Priesthood must fail before his Intercession; because this power of helping us
is everlastingly and inseparably inherent in him. St. Paul joins them together,
his sitting at the right hand of God, and his interceding of us, Romans 8.34. so
that to leave interceding were to leave the right hand of God, where he looks
down upon us, is present with us, and prepares a place for us; his Wounds are
still open, his Merits are still vocal, his Sufferings are still importunate,
his everlasting presenting of himself before his Father, is an everlasting
prayer, Jesus at the right hand of the father, more powerful than the full
vials, the incense, the prayers, the groans, the sighs, the roarings of all the
Saints that have been, or shall be to the end of the world; and if he sat not
there, if he interceded not, they were but noise, nay, they were sins; but his
intercession sanctifies them, and offers them up, and by him they are
powerful; and by this power, the sighs, the breathing, the desires of mortal,
fading men, ascend the highest heavens, and draw down eternity.

And this is a part of his Priestly office, which he began here on earth, and
continues for us, makes it complete, holds it up to the end of the world.

Again, this title of eternity is annexed to his Regality, and is a flower of
his Crown, not set in any but his; Thou art a King for ever, cannot be said to
any mortal. Did he not live for evermore, he could not threaten eternal death
nor promise everlasting life; for no mortal power can rage for ever, but
passes, as lands do from one Lord to another, lies heavy on them, and at last
sinks to the ground with them all; nor can the hand that must wither and fall
off, reach forth a never-failing reward; Infinitude cannot be the issue and
product of that which is finite, and bounded within a determined period. And
this might open a wide and effectual door unto sin, and but leave a sad and
disconsolate entrance for Virtue and Piety, which is so unsatisfying to flesh
and blood, that the perseverance in it requires no less a power, than that
which Eternity brings along with it, to draw it on. How bold and daring would
men be before the Sun and the People? what joy and delight would fill them, did
not the thought of a future and endless estate pierce sometimes through them,
and so make some vent to let it out? when the evil that hangs over them is but
a cloud, which will soon vanish, few men are so serious as to look about and
seek for shelter. Post mortem nihil est, Ipsaque mors nihil, there is nothing
after death, and death it self is nothing; sets up a chair for the Atheist to
sit at ease in, from whence he looks down upon those, who are such fools, as to
be virtuous, and smiles to see them toil and sweat in such rugged and
unpleasing ways, carried on with a fear on the one side, and a hope on the
other, of that which will never be. And indeed, how weary, and how soon weary
would men be of doing good, if there were not a lasting recompense, if they
were not half persuaded (for a full persuasion is but rare) that there were
something laid up in everlasting habitations? Honor, Repute, and Advantage,
these may bring forth a Hypocrite, these may bind on the phylacteries on a
Pharisee; but nothing can raise up a Saint, but eternity; nor can that which
fleeteth and passes away build us up in a holy faith: and then there would be
no such ship as Faith, which might fear a wreck, 2 Timothy 1.19. no such anchor
as Hope; our faith were vain, our hope were also vain, and we were left to be
tossed up and down on the waves of uncertainty, having no haven to thrust into,
but that which is as turbulent and uncertain as the sea it self, and with it
ebbs and flows, and at last will ebb into nothing.

But vivo in aeternum, I live for evermore, derives an eternity to that which
in it self is fading, makes our actions which end in the doing of them, and are
gone and past, eternal; our words, which are but wind, eternal; and our
thoughts which perish with us, eternal; for we shall meet them again, and feel
the effect of them to all eternity: It makes Hell eternal, that we may fly
from it; and Heaven eternal, that we may press toward it, and take it by
violence. Christ's living for ever, eternizeth his threatenings, and makes them
terrible; his promises, and makes them persuasive and eloquent; eternizeth our
faith and hope, eternizeth all that is praiseworthy, that they may be as a
pass, or letters commendatory to prevail and procure us admittance into his
presence, who only has immortality, and can give eternal life. This is the
virtue and operation of this vivo in aeternum, I live for evermore; for though
a time will come when he shall not govern, and a time when he shall not
intercede, yet the power of his Scepter, the virtue of his Intercession is
carried on along with the joy and happiness of the Saints, as the cause with
the effect, even to all eternity, and shall have its operation in the midst of
all our glorious ravishments, and shall tune our Halellujahs, our songs of
Thanksgiving to this our Priest and King that lives for evermore. We pass now
from the duration and continuance of his life, to his power. He has the keys
of Hell and of Death.

Habeo claves, I have the keys, is a metaphorical speech; Et metaphorae
feracissimae controversiarum, says Martin Luther, Metaphors are a soil wherein
controversies will grow up thick, and twine, and plat themselves one within the
other, whilst every man manures them, and sowes upon them what seed he please,
even that which may bring forth such fruit, which may be most agreeable to his
taste and humor. Lord what a noise have these keys made in the world? you
would think they were not keys, but bells, sounding terror to some, and
making others more bold and merry than they should be: Some have gilded them
over, others have even worn and filed them quite away, put them into so many
hands, that they have left none at all. For though they know not well what they
are, yet every man takes courage enough to handle them, and let in, and let out
whom they please; one faction turns them against another, the Lutheran against
the Calvinist, and diabolifies him; and the Calvinist against the Lutheran, and
superdiabolifies him. The Church of Rome made it a piece of wisdom to shut us
out, and all that will not bow unto her, as subordinate and dependent on that
Church; which was but idle physic, which did neither hurt nor good, but was as
a dart sent after those who we gone out of reach; a curse denounced against
those who heard it, and blessed themselves in it; indeed a point of ridiculously
affected gravity, such as that Church has many: for what prejudice could come
to us by her shutting us out, who had already put our selves out of her
Communion? unless you will think the valor of that Soldier fit for
Chronicle, who cut off the head of a man who was dead before. I have the keys,
says Christ, and it is most necessary he should keep them in his hands; for we
see how dangerous it may prove to put them into the hand of a mortal man,
subject to passions, and too often guided and commanded by them; and we know
what Tragedies the mistaking of the keys have raised in the world.

And yet he that has these keys, this power, has delegated also a power to
his Apostles, not only to preach the Gospel, but to correct those who disobey
it. I would not attribute too much to the Pastors of the Church, in this dull
and iron, or rather in this wanton age, where any thing, where nothing is
thought too much for them, where all has been preaching till all are
Preachers; yet I cannot but think they have more than to speak in public,
which, it is thought, every Christian may do. They are the Ambassadors of
Christ, set apart on purpose in Christ's stead, to minister to his Church; nay,
but to rule and govern his Church (it is S. Paul's phrase) and they carry about
with them his commission, a power delegated from him to sever the Goats from
the Sheep, even in this life, that they may become sheep (to segregate them,
Abstin^r^. Cyp. Segregare, exauctorare, virga Pastorali serire. Hier. etc.
to abstein, or withhold them, to exauctorate them, to throw them out, to
strike them with the pastoral rod, to anathematize them, etc. this was the
language of the first and purest times) which by degrees fell in its esteem by
some abuse of it, by being drawn down from that most profitable and necessary
end for which it was given, which at last brought all Religion into disgrace:
nor indeed could it be otherwise; for if upon the abuse of a thing we must
straight call for the beesome to sweep it away, what can stand long in its
place? the Temple is profaned, that must down to the ground, Liberalty is
abused, shut up your purse and your bowels together; Prayer is abused, and
turned into babbling, tack up your tongues to the roof of your mouth; nay, every
thing in the world is abused; if this argument be good, the world it self
should long since have had its end. But such a power Christ did leave unto his
Church, and the neglect of it on the one side, and the contempt of it on the
other, has brought in that lukewarmness, that indifferency amongst the
professors of Christianity, which, if God prevent not, will at last shake and
throw down the profession it self, and fill the world with Atheists, which will
learn by no Masters but such as instruct fools, nor acknowledge any keys but
those which may break their head.

But indeed we have had these keys too long in our hands, for though they
concern us, yet are they not the keys in the Text, nor had we looked upon them,
but that those of the Romishparty, wheresoever they find the keys mentioned,
take them up and hang them on their Church; But we must observe a difference
betwixt the keys of the kingdom of Heaven, which were given to Peter, and the
keys of Hell and of Death; although with them, when the keys are seen, Heaven
and Hell are all one. For the keys of David, which opens and no man shuts, and
shuts and no man opens, were not given to the Apostles, but are a regality and
prerogative of Christ, who only has power of life and death, over Hell and
the Grave; who therefore calls himself the first and the last, because although
when he first published his Gospel, he died and was buried, yet he rose again to
live for ever, so to perfect the great work of our salvation, and by his power
to bind those in everlasting chains who stood out against him, and to bring
those that bow to his Scepter out of prison into liberty, and everlasting life.
The power is his alone, and he made it his by his sufferings (He was obedient
to death, therefore God did highly exalt him) became a Lord by putting on the
form of a servant; but he has delegated a power to his Apostles, and those
that succeed them, to make us capable, sit subjects for his power to work upon,
which nevertheless will have its operation and effect; either let us out, ot
shut us up for ever under the power of Hell and of Death: were not he alive and
to live for evermore, we had been shut up in darkness and oblivion for ever;
but Christ living infuseth life into us, that the bonds of Hell and of Death
can no more hold us than they can him. There is such a place as Hell, but to
the living members of Christ there is no such place; for it is impossible it
should hold them, and you may as well place Lucifer at the right hand of God,
as a true Christian in Hell: for how can light dewll in darkness? how can
purity mix with stench? how can beauty stay with horror? If Nature could
forget her course, and suffer contradictories to be drawn together, and to be
both true, yet this is such a contradiction, which unless Christ could die
again (which is impossible) can never be reconciled. Heaven and earth may pass
away, but Christ lives for evermore, and the power and virtue of his life is as
everlasting as everlastingnesse it self.

And again, There was a pale Horse, Rev. 6.8.
and his name that sat on him was death, and he had power to kill with the
sword, with hunger, and with the beasts of the Earth; but now he does not kill
us, he does but stagger, and sling us down, to rise again and tread him under
our feet, and by the power of an everliving Savior to be the Death of death it
self. Death was a king of terrors, and the Fear of death made us slaves, Heb.
2.15.
brought us into servility, and bondage all our life long, made our pleasures
less delightful, and our virtues more tedious then they are, made us tremble,
and shrink from those Heroique undertakings for the truth of God; but now they
in whom Christ lives, and moves, and has his Being, as in his own, dare look
upon him in all his horror, expeditum morti genus, says Tertull: and are ready
to meet him, in his most dreadful march, with all his Army of Diseases, racks,
and Tortures; and as man before he sinned knew not what Death meant, and Eve
familiarly conversed with the Serpent, so do they with death, and having that
Image restored in them are secure and fear it not; for what can this Tyrant
take from them? Their life? that is hid with Christ in God: It cannot cut them
off from pleasure, for their delight is in the Lord: It cannot rob them of
their treasure, for that is laid up in heaven: It can take nothing from them,
but what themselves have already crucified, their Flesh: It cannot cut off one
hope, one thought, one purpose; for all their thoughts, purposes and hopes were
leveld not on this, but on another life. And now Christ has his keys in his
hand, Death is but a name, it is nothing, or if it be something, it is such a
thing, that troubled S. Austin to define what it is: we call it a punishment,
but indeed it is a benefit; a favor, even such a favor, that Christ who is as
Omnipotent, as he is everlasting, who can work all in all, though he abolished
the Law of Moses, the law of Ceremonies, yet would not abrogate this law, by
which we are bound over unto death, because it is soprofitable and advantageous
to us; it was threatened, it is now a promise, or the way unto it; for death it
is, that lets us in that which was promised; it was an end of all, it is now
the beginning of all; it was that, which cut off life, it is now that, through
which, as through a gate, we enter into it; we may say, it is the first point
and moment of our After-eternity, for it is so near unto it, that we can hardly
sever them; for we live, or rather labor, and fight, and strive with the
world, and with life it self (which is it self a temptation) and whilst by the
power of our everliving Christ, we hold up and make good this glorious
contention, and fight and conquer, and press forward toward the mark, either
nature fails, or is pressed down with violence, and we dye, that is our
language; but the spirit speaks after another manner, we sleep, we are
dissolved, we fall in pieces, our bodies from our souls, and we from our
miseries and Temp^tions; and this living, everliving Christ gathers us together
again, breaths life and eternity unto us, that we may live and reign with him
for evermore. And so I have viewed all the parts of the Text, being the maine
Articles of our faith, 1. Christ's death, 2. his life, 3. his eternal life; and
last of all, his power of the keys; his Dominion over hell and death; we will
but in a word fit the Ecce, the behold in the Text, to every part of it, and
set the seal to it, Amen, and so conclude.

And first, we place the Ecce the behold, on his death; he suffered and dyed,
that he might learn to have compassion on thy miseries and on thy dust, and
raise thee from both, and will thou learn nothing from his compassion? will thou not by him, and by thy own sins and miseries, which drew from him tears
of Blood, learn to pity thy self? will thou still rejoice in that iniquity
which troubled his spirit, which shed his blood, which he was willing should
gush out of his heart, so it might melt thine, and work but this in thee to
pity thy self? we talk of a first Conversion, and a second, and I know not
what Cycles and Epicycles we have found out to salve our irregular motion in
our ways to bliss; if we could once have compassion on our selves, the work
were done; and when were you converted? or how were you converted? were no such
hard questions to be answered; for I may be sure I am converted, if I be sure
that I truly pity my self; shall Christ only have compassion on thy soul?
But then again, shall; he shed his blood for his Church, that it may be one
with him and at unity in it self, and can thou not drop a tear when thou
see this his body thus rent in pieces, as it is at this day? when thou see
the world, the love of the world break in and make such havoc in the Church,
(oh it is a sad contemplation) will none but Christ weep over Jerusalem?

Secondly, let us look upon him living, and not take our eye from off him, to
fill and feed, and delight it with the vanities of this world; with that which
has neither life nor spirit; with that, which is so near to nothing; with that
which is but an Idol? Behold he lives, that which thou so dotest on, has no
life, nor can it prolong thy life a moment: who would not cease from man whose,
breath is in his nostrills? and then what madness is it to trust in that which
has no breath at all? shall Christ present himself alive to us, and for us,
and shall we lay hold of corruption and rottenness? and when heaven opens it
self to receive us, run from it into a charnell-house, and so into hell it self?

But then, in the third place, Behold he lives for evermore, and let not us
bound and imprison our thoughts within a span, and when immortality is offered,
affect no other life but that which is a vapor: Let us not raise that swarm
of thoughts, which must perish, Colos. 3.3.
but build up those works upon our everliving Savior which may follow us,
follow us through the huge and unconceivable tract of eternity. Does our
Savior live for evermore? and shall we have no spirit in us, but that which
delights to walk about the earth, and is content to vanish with it? Eternity is
a powerful motive to those who never have such pensive thoughts, as when they
remember their frailty, and are sick even of health it self, and in a manner
dead with life, when they consider it as that blessing which shall have an end.
Eternity is in our desire, though it be beyond our apprehension; what he said
of time, is truer of eternity, if you do not ask what it is, we know, but if
you ask, we are not able to answer, and resolve you, or tell you what it is;
when we call it an infinite duration, we do but give it another name, two
words for one (a short Paraphrase) but we do not define what it is. And indeed
our first conceptions of it are the fairest; for when they are doubled, and
redoubled, they are lost in themselves, and the further they extend themselves,
the more weary they are, and at greater loss in every proffer, and must end,
and rest at last in this poor, unsatisfying thought, that we cannot think what
it is. Yet there is in us a wild presage, an unhandsome acknowledgment of it,
for we fancy it in those objects, which vanish out of sight, whilst we look
upon them; we set it up in every desire, for our desires never have an end.
Every purpose of ours, every action we do is Aeternitati sacrum, and we do it
to eternity, we look upon riches as if they had no wings, and think our
habitations shall endure for ever; we look upon honor, as if it were not Air,
but some Angel confirmed, a thing bound up in eternity; we look upon beauty,
and it is our heaven, and we are fixed and dwell on it, as if it would never
shrivel, nor be gathered together as a scroule; and so in a manner make
mortality it self eternal. And therefore since our desires do so far enlarge
themselves, and our thoughts do so multiply, that they never have an end,
since we look after that which we cannot see, and reach after that, which we
cannot graspe, God has set up that for an object to look on, which is eternal
indeed, in the highest Heavens; and as he has made us in his own image, so in
Christ, who came to renew it in us, he has showed us a more excellent way unto
it, and taught us to work out eternity even in this world, in this common shop
of change; to work it out of that in which it is not, which is near to nothing,
which shall be nothing; to work it out of riches, by not trusting them; out of
honor by contemning it; out of the pleasures of this world by loathing them;
out of the flesh, by crucifying it; out of the world by overcoming it; and out
of the Devil himself by treading him under our feet. For this is to be in
Christ, and to be in Christ, is to be for evermore. Christ is the eternal
Son of God, and he was dead, and lives, and lives for evermore, that we may
dye and live for evermore, and not only attain to the Resurrection of the
dead, but to eternity.

Last of all, let us look upon the keys in his hand, and knock hard, that he
may open to us, and deliver our soul from hell, and make our grave not a
prison, but a Bed to rise from to eternal life; or if we be still shut in, we
our selves have turned the key against our selves; for Christ is ready with his
keys to open to us; and we have our keys too; our key of knowledge to discern
between Life and Death, and our key of Repentance, and when we use these,
Christ is ready to put his, even into our hands, and will derive a power unto
us mortals, unto us sinners, over hell and death.

And then in the last place, we shall be able to set on the Seal, the Amen, and
be confirmed in the certainty of his Resurrection and power; by which we may
raise those thoughts, and promote those actions, which may look beyond our
threescore years and ten, through all successive generations, to immortality,
and that glory which shall never have an end. This is to show and publish our
faith by our works, as S. James speaks, this is from the heart to believe it,
as S. Paul; for he that thus believes it from the heart, cannot but be obedient
to the Gospel, unless we can imagine there could be any man that should so hate
himself, as thus deliberately to cast himself into, and to run from happiness,
when it appears in so much glory: He cannot say Amen to life, who kills
himself, for that which leaves as soul in the grave is not faith, but fancy;
when we are told that honor comes toward us, that some golden shower is
ready to fall into our laps, that content and pleasure will ever be near, and
wait upon us, how loud and hearty is our Amen? how do we set up an
Assurance-office to our selves? and yet that which seems to make its approach
toward us, is as uncertain as uncertainty it self; and when we have it,
passes from us, and (as the ruder people say of the Devil) leaves a noisome
and unsavory scent behind it, and we look after it, and can see it no more:
but when we are told that Christ lives for evermore, and is coming, is
certainly coming with reward and punishment, vox fancibus haeret, we can scarce
say Amen, so be it. To the world, and pomp thereof we can say Amen, but to
Heaven and Hell, to eternity we cannot say Amen, or if we do, we do but say it.

For conclusion then: The best way is to draw the Ecce and the Amen, the
Behold, and our assurance together, so to study the death and life, the
eternal life and the power of our Savior, that we may be such proficients as
to be able with S. Paul (...), to meet the Resurrection, Phil. 3.11.
to look for and hasten the coming of the Lord, when his Life, and Eternity,
and Power, shall shine gloriously, to the terror of those who persecute his
Church, and to the comfort of those who suffer for Righteousness sake; when
that Head which was a forge of mischief and cruelty, that Hand which touched
the Lords Anointed, and did his Prophets harm, shall burn in hell for ever;
when that Eye which would not look on vanity, shall be filled with glory; that
Ear which hearkened to his voice, shall hear nothing but Hallebujahs, and the
music of Angels; and that Head which was ready to be laid down for this
living, everliving, powerful Lord, shall be lifted up, and crowned with glory
and honor for evermore. Which God grant, etc.

blazon or royal coat of arms of England and Wales HONI ^T QVI MAL Y PENSE

A SERMON Preached on Whitsunday.
JOHN 16.13. Howbeit, when He the spirit of truth is come, he will lead you
into all truth.


WHen the spirit of truth is come, etc. and behold he is come already, and the
Church of Christ in all ages has set apart this day for a memorial of his
coming; a memorial of that miraculous and unusual sound, that rushing wind,
those cloven tongues of fire, And there is good reason for it, that it should
be had in everlasting remembrance: For as he came then in solemn state upon the
Disciples, in a manner seen and heard, so he comes, though not so visibly, yet
effectually to us, upon whom the ends of the world are come, that we may
remember it: though not it a mighty wind, yet he rattles our hearts together;
though no house totter at his descent, yet the foundations of our souls are
shaken; no fire appears, yet our breasts are inflamed; no cloven tongues, yet
our hearts are cloven asunder; (...), every day to a Christian is a day of
Pentecost; his whole life a continued holy day, wherein the Holy Ghost descends
both as an Instructor and a Comforter, secretly and sweetly by his word
characterizing the soul, imprinting that saving knowledge, which none of the
Princes of this world had, not forcing, not drawing by violence, but sweetly
leading, and guiding us into all truth. When He the spirit of truth is come,
etc.

In which words we have (...), the Epiphany, or Apparition of the blessed
Spirit, as Nazianzen speaks, or rather the promise of his coming and
appearance; and if we well weigh it, there is great reason that the Spirit
should have his Advent, as well as Christ his, that he should say, Lo I come,
Psalm. 40. For in the volume of the book it is written of him, that the spirit
of the Lord should rest upon him, Es. 11.2. and I will pour out my spirit upon
all flesh, Joel 2.28. Christus legis, Spiritus Sanctus Evangelii complementum,
Christ's Advent for the fulfilling of the Law, and the Spirits for the
fulfilling and completing of the Gospel; Christ's Advent to redeem the Church,
and the Spirits Advent to teach the Church; Christ to shed his blood, and the
Spirit to wash and purge it in his blood; Christ to pay down the ransom for us
Captives, and the Spirit to work off our fetters; Christ to preach the
acceptable year of the Lord, and the Spirit to interpret it, for we may soon
see, that the one will little avail without the other; Christ's Birth, his
Death, and Passion, Chists glorious Resurrection, but a story in Archivis, good
news sealed up, a Gospel hid, till the Spirit come and open it, and teach us
to know him, Phil. 3.10.
and the virtue and power of his Resurrection, and make us conformable to his
death.

This is the sum of these words, and in this we shall pass by these steps or
degrees. First, carry our thoughts to the promise of the Spirits Advent, the
miracle of this day, cum venerit, when the spirit of truth comes; in a sound to
awake them, in wind to move them, in fire to enlighten and warm them, in
tongues to make them speak. Secondly, consider (...) the work and employment of
the Holy Ghost, (...), he shall lead you into all truth.

In the first we meet with 1. nomen personae, (if we may so speak) a word
pointing out to his person, the demonstrative pronoune ille, when he shall
come. 2. Nomen naturae, a name expressing his nature, he is a spirit of truth,
and then we cannot be ignorant whose spirit it is.

In the second we shall find Nomen officii, a name of office and
administration, (...) is the word, from whence comes (...) a leader or
conducter in the way, for so the Holy Ghost vouchsafed to be their leader and
conducter, that they might not err, but (...), keep on in a strait and even
course in the way.

And in this great office of the Holy Ghost, we must first take notice of the
lesson he teaches; it is Truth. Secondly, the large extent of this lesson,
(...), he leads into all truth. Thirdly, The method and manner of his
discipline, which will nearly concern us to take notice of; it is ductus, a
gentle and effectual leading; he drives us not, he draws us not by violence,
but (...) is the word here; he takes, as it were, by the hand, and guides and
leads us into all truth.

Cum venerit ille spiritus veritatis, When He the spirit of truth, etc.

And first, though we are told by some, that where the article (...) is added
to fo, there we are to understand the person of the Holy Ghost, yet we rather
lay hold on the pronoun (...) ille, when he the spirit of truth shall come, he
shall lead you; which points out to a distinct person: For if with Sabellius he
had only meant some new motion in the Disciples hearts, or some effect of the
Spirit, (...) had been enough, but (...) He, designs a certain person; and
ille he, in Christ's mouth, a distinct person from himself. Besides, we are
taught in the Schools, Actiones sunt suppositorum, actions and operations are
of persons; now in this verse Christ says that he shall lead them; and before
he shall reprove the world; and in the precedent chapter he shall testify of
me, which are proper and peculiar operations of the blessed Spirit, and bring
him in a distinct person from the Father and the Son. And therefore S.
Augustine rests upon this dark and general expression. The Holy Ghost
communicates both of the Father and the Son, is something of them both,
whatsoever we may call it; whether we call him the Consubstantiall and
Coeternall communion and friendship of the Father and the Son; or with Gerson,
and others of the Schools, Nexum Amorosum, the Essential Love, and Love-knot
of the undivided Trinity.

But we will wave these more abstruse and deeper speculations, in which, if we
speak not in the Spirits language, we may sooner lose than profit our selves,
and speak more than we should, whilst we are busy to raise our thoughts and
words up to that which is but enough: It will be safer walking below amongst
those observations, which as they are more familiar and easy, so are they more
useful, and take what oar we can find with ease, than to dig deeper in this
dark mine, where if we walk not warily, we may meet with poisonous fogs and
damps instead of treasure.

We will therefore in the next place enquire why he is called the Spirit of
Truth, for diverse attributes he has; he is called the Spirit of Adoption, Romans
8.15. the Spirit of Faith, 2 Cor. 4.13. the Spirit of Grace, of Love, of Joy,
of Zeal; for where he works, Grace is operative, our Love is without
dissimulation; our Joy is like the joy of heaven, as true, though not so great;
our Faith a working faith, and our Zeal a coal from the Altar, kindled from
his fire; not mad and raging, but according to knowledge; he makes no shadows,
but substances; no pictures but realities; no appearances but truths; a Grace
that makes us highly favored, a precious and holy Faith, full and unspeakable
Love, ready to spend it self, and zeal to consume us; of a true existence,
being from the spirit of God, who alone truly is: but here the spirit of Truth,
yet the same spirit that planteth grace and faith in our hearts, that begets
our Faith, cilates our Love, works our Joy, kindles our Zeal, and adopts us in
Regiam familiam, into the Royal Family of the firstborn in Heaven: but now
the spirit of Truth was more proper; for to tell men perplexed with doubts, that
were ever and anon (and sometimes when they should not) asking questions of
such a Teacher, was a seal to the promise, a good assurance they should be well
taught, that no difficulty should be too hard, no knowledge too high, no
mystery too dark and obscure for them, but Omnis veritas, all truth should be
brought forth and unfolded to them, and have the veil taken from it, and be
laid open and naked to their understanding.

Let us then look up upon and worship this spirit of Truth, as he thus presents
and tenders himself unto us, as he stands in opposition to two great enemies to
Truth; as 1. Dissimulation, 2. Flattery; and then, as he is true in the lessons
which he teaches, that we may pray for his Advent, long for his coming, and so
receive him when he comes.

And first, dissemble he does not, he cannot; for dissimulation is a kind of
cheat, or juggling, by which we cast a mist before men's eyes, that they cannot
see us; it brings in the Devil in Samuel's mantle, and an enemy in the smiles
and smoothness of a friend; it speaks the language of the Priest at Delphos,
plays in ambiguities, promises life, As to King (...), who a (...) slew.
when death is nearest, and bids us beware of a chariot, when it means a sword,
No, this spirit is an enemy to this, because a spirit of truth, and hates these
in volucra dissimulationis, this folding and involvednesse, these clokes and
coverts, these crafty conveyances of our own desires to their end, under the
specious show of intending good to others; and they by whom he speaks, are like
him, and speak the truth (...), 2 Cor. 3.12.
in the simplicity and godly sincerity of the spirit, not in craftiness, not
(...), handling the Word of God deceitfully, 2 Cor. 4.2. Ephesians. 4.14.
not (...), not in the slight of men, throwing a Die, and what cast you would
have them, noting their Doctrine to men and the times, that is, not to men and
the times, but to their own ends, telling them of Heaven, Wisdom 1.5.
when their thoughts are in their purse. This holy spirit of Truth flies all
such deceit, and removes himself far from the thoughts which are without
understanding, and will not acquit a dissembler of his words; there is nothing
of the Devils method, nothing of the Die, or hand, no windings nor turnings in
what he teaches, but verus vera dicit, being a spirit of truth, he speaks the
truth, and nothing but he truth, and for our behoof and advantage, that we may
believe it, and build upon it, and by his discipline raise our selves up to
that end, for which he is pleased to come and be our teacher.

And as he cannot dissemble, so in the next place, flatter us he cannot; the
inseparable mark and character of the evil spirit, qui arridet ut saeviat, who
smiles upon us, that he may rage against us, lifts us up that he may cast us
down; whose exaltations are foiles, whose favors are deceits, whose smiles and
kisses are wounds; for flattery is as a glass for a fool to look upon, and so
become more fool than before; it is the fools echo, by which he hears himself
at the rebound, and thinks the wiseman spoke unto him; and it proceeds from the
father of lies, not from the spirit of truth; who is the same yesterday, and to
day, and for ever; who reproves drunkenness, though in a Noah; adultery,
though in a David; want of faith, though in a Peter, and lays our sins in
order before us: his precepts are plain, his law is in thunder, his threatenings
earnest and vehement; he calls Adam from behind the bush, strikes Ananias dead
for his hypocrisy, and for lying to the holy Spirit deprives him of his own.
Thy excuse to him is a libell, thy pretense fouler than thy sin; thy false
worship of him is blasphemy, and thy form of godliness open impiety; and where
he enters the heart, Sin (which is the greatest error, the grossest lie)
removes it self, heaves and pants to go out, knocks at our breast, and runs
down at our eyes, and we hear it speak in sighs and groans unspeakable, and
what was our delight, becomes our torment. In a word, he is a spirit of truth,
and neither dissembles, to decieve us, nor flatters, that we may deceive our
selves; but verus vera dicit, being truth it self, tells us what we shall find
to be most true, to keep us from the dangerous bypath of error and
misprision, in which we may lose our selves, and be lost for ever.

And this appears, and is visible in those lessons and precepts which he gives,
which are so harmonious, so consonant, so agreeing with themselves, and so
consonant and agreeable to that Image after which we were made, to fit and
beautify it when it is defaced, and repair it when it is decayed, that so it
may become in some proportion: and measure like unto him that made it: for this
spirit does not set up one precept against another, nor one text against
another; does not disanul his promises in his threats, nor check his threats
with his promises; does not forbid all Fear in confidence, nor shake our
confidence, when he bids us fear; does not set up meekness to abate our
zeal, nor kindles zeal to consume our meekness; does not teach Christian
liberty, to shake off obedience to Government, nor prescribes obedience, to
infringe and weaken our Christian liberty. This spirit is a spirit of truth,
and never different from himself, never contradicts himself, but is equal in
all his ways; the same in that truth which pleases thee, and that which
pincheth thee; in that which thou consentest to, and that which thou runn^st
from; in that which will raise thy spirit, and that, which will wound thy
spirit: And the reason why men who talk so much of the spirit do fall into
gross and pernicious errors, is from hence, that they will not be like the
spirit in this, equal, and like unto themselves in all their ways; that they
lay claim to him in that Text which seems to comply with their humor, but
discharge, and leave him in that which should purge it; that upon the beck, as
it were, of some place of Scripture, which upon the first face and appearance,
looks favorably upon their present inclinations, they run violently on this
side, animated and posted on by that which was not in the Text, but in their
lusts and fancy, and never look back upon other testimonies of divine
Authority, that Army of evidences, as Tertullian speaks, which are openly pressed
out and marshalled against them, which might well put them to a halt and
deliberation; which might stay and drive back their intention, and settle them
at last in the truth, which consists in a moderation betwixt two extremes: For
we may be zealous, and not cruel; we may be devout, and not superstitious; we
may hate Idolatry, and not commit Sacrilege; we may stand fast in our
Christian liberty, and not make it a cloak of maliciousness; if we did follow
the spirit in all his ways, who in all his ways is a Spirit of truth; for he
commands zeal, and forbids Rage; he commends devotion, and forbids
superstition; he condemns Idolatry, yea, and condemns sacrilege; he preaches
liberty, and preaches obedience to superiors, and in all is he same spirit.

And this spirit did come, His Advent.
and Christ did send him; and in the next place, to this end he came, to be our
leader, to guide us in the ways of truth, to help our infirmities, to be our
conduct, to carry us on to the end; which is nomen officii, the name of his
office, and Administration, which one would think, were but a low office for
the spirit of God, and yet these are magnalia spiriuts, the wonderful things
of the spirit, and do no less proclaim his divinity then the Creation of the
world; we wonder the blind should see, the lame go, the deaf hear, the dead
be raised up, but does it not follow, pauperes Evangelizantur, Mat. 11.5.
the poor receive that Gospel? weigh it well, and in the Balance of the
fanctuary, as great a miracle as the former.

And this his Advent and coming was free and voluntary, and though he was sent
from the Father, and the son, yet sponte venit, he came of his own accord,
and he not only comes, but sends himself, say the schools, as he daily works
those changes and alterations in his creature. These words to be sent, and to
come, and the like, Dicit Mittam, ut propriam autoritatem oftendat; Tum denique
veniet, quo verbo spiritus potestas indicatur. Naz. Or. 37.
are not words of diminution or disparagement: He came in no servile manner,
but as a Lord; as a friend, from a friend as in a letter, the very mind of him
that sent it; which shows an agreement, and concord with him that sent him,
but implies no inferiority, no degree of servility or subjection. Yet some
there have been, who have stumbled at the shadow which this word has cast, or
indeed at their own, and for this made him no more then a Creature, (...), a
supernumerary God, brought in to serve, and minister, and no distinct person of
the blessed Trinity. But what a gross error, what foul ingratitude is this,
to call his goodness servility? his coming to us, submission and obedience?
and count him not a God, because by his gracious operation, he is pleased to
dwell in men, and make them his Tabernacle? why may we not as warrantably
conceive so of either person? For God (with reverence to so high a Majesty)
serves us more then we do him, who are nothing, but by his breath and power;
he serves us every day, nay, he Feeds they young Ravens that call upon him.
He knocks at our doors, he entreats, waits, suffers, commands us to serve one
another, commands his Angels to serve, and minister unto us; res rationesque
nostras curat, he keeps our Accounts numbers our tears, watches our prayers,
in our misery in the deepest dungeon he is with us. And these are no
disparagements, but Arguments of his excellency, and infinite goodness, and
fair lessons to us, not to be wanting to our selves, and our brethren, who
have God himself thus carefully waiting upon us; and to remember us, that to
serve our brethren, is to exalt and advance and raise us up to be like unto
him. When we wash our brethrens feet, when we bind up their wounds, when we sit
down in the dust with them, when we visit them in prison, and minister to them
on their bed of sickness, we may think we debase our selves, and do decrease
as it were; but it is our honor, our Crown, our conformity to him, who was the
servant of God, and our servant, and made himself like unto us, that he might
serve us in his flesh, and does so to the end of the world invisibly by his
spirit. It Is the spirits honor to be sent, to be a leader, a conduct, and
though sent he be, yet he is as free an Agent as the son, and the son as
the Father. Tertullian calls him Christi vicarium, Christ's vicar here on earth
to supply his place; but that argues no inequality, for then the son too must
be unequal to the Father; for his Angel, his Messenger he was, and went about
his fathers business. And to conclude this; in a far remote, and more
qualifyed sense we are his vicars, his deputies, his Stewards here on earth,
and it is no servility, it is our honor and glory to do his business to serve
one another in love, to be Servants, to be Angels (I had almost said) to be
holy Ghosts one to another? John 20.21.
As my Father sent me, says our Savior to his Disciples, so send I you, and
he sends us too, who are Haereditarii Christi Discipuli, Christ's Disciples by
inheritance and succession, that every one as he is endowed from above, should
serve him, by serving one another; and though our serving him cannot deserve
that name, yet is he pleased to call it helping him; that we should help him to
feed the hungry, to guide the blind, and teach the ignorant, and so be the
Spirits Vicars, as he is Christ's; that Christ may fill us more and more with
his spirit, which may guide and conduct us through the manifold errors of this
life, through darkness and confusion, into that truth which may lead us to
bliss.

The Spirits lesson.
For as he is a spirit of Truth, so in the next place, the lesson which he
teaches is Truth, even that truth, which is an Art, (Saint Austin calls it so)
and a law to direct and confine all other Arts, qua praeeunte seculi fluctus
calcamus, which goes before us in our way, and through all the surges of this
present world, brings us to the presence of God, who is truth is self; a truth,
which leads us to our Original, to the Rock, out of which we were hewn, and
brings us back to our God, who made us not for the vanities of this world, but
for himself; an Art to cast down all Babells, all towering and lofty
imaginations, which present unto us falsehoods for truths, appearances for
realities, plagues for peace; which scatter and divide our souls, power them
out upon variety of unlawful objects, which deceive us in the very nature, and
end of things. For as this spirit brought life and immortality to light, 2
Time. 1.10. (for whatsoever the prophets and great Rabbis had spoken of
immortality, was but darkness in comparison of this great light) so it also
discovered the errors, and horror of those follies which we looked upon with
love and admiration, as upon heaven it self. What a price does luxury place on
wealth and riches? what horror on nakedness and poverty? How does a jewel
glitter in my eyes, and what a slurr is there upon virtue? what Glory does the
pomp of the world present, and what a sad and sullen aspect has
righteousness? How is God thrust out, and every Idol, every vanity made a God?
but the truth here, which the spirit teaches, discovers all, pulls off the
veil, shows us the true countenance and face of things, that we may not be
deceived; shows us vanity in riches, folly in honor, death and destruction in
the pomp of this world; makes poverty a blessing, and misery happiness, and
death it self a passage to eternity; places God in his Throne, and man where
he should be, at his footstool, bowing before him, which is the readiest way
to be lifted up unto him, and to be with him for evermore. In a word, a truth
of power to unite us to our God, that brings with it the knowledge of Christ,
the wisdom of God, which presents those precepts and doctrines which lead to
happiness; a truth that goes along with us in all our ways, waits on us on
our bed of sickness, leaves us not at our death, but follows us, and will
rise again with us unto judgment, and there either acquit or condemn us,
either be our Judge or Advocate. For if we make it our friend here, it shall
then look lovely on us, and speak good things for us; but if we despise it, and
put it under our basest desires and vile affections, it will then fight against
us, and triumph over us, and tread us down into the lowest pit. Christ is not
more gracious then this truth to them that love it; but to those who will not
learn, shall be Tribulation and anguish; the Sun turned into Blood, the world
on fire, the voice of the Archangel, the Trump of God, the severe countenance
of the Judge will not be more terrible then this truth to them that have
despised it. For Christ Jesus shall judge the secrets of the heart, acquit the
just, condemn the impenitent, according to this truth which the spirit
teaches, according, says Saint Paul, to my Gospel, Romans 2.16.

The large extent of this lesson.
This is the lesson, The spirit teaches truth; let us now see the extent of
it, which is large and universal; for the spirit does not teach us by halves,
does not teach some truths and conceal others, but teaches all truth, makes
his disciples and followers free from all errors that are dangerous, and full
of saving knowledge. For saving knowledge is all indeed, that truth which
brings me to my end, is all, and there is nothing more to be known; I desired
to know nothing but Christ and him crucified, says S. Paul, 1 Cor. 2.2. here
his desire has a Non ultra; this truth is all, this joins heaven and earth
together, God and man, mortality and immortality, misery and happiness in one,
draws us near unto God, and makes us one with him. This is the Spirits lesson,
Commentum Divinitatis, the invention of the divine Spirit, as faith is called
the gift of God, not only because it is given to every believer, (and too many
are too willing to stay till it be given) but because this spirit first found
out the way to save us by so weak a means as Faith.

And as he first found it out, so he teaches it, and leaves out nothing, not a
tittle, not an Iota, which may serve to complete and perfect this Divine
Science. In the book of God are all our members written; All the members? yea,
and all the faculties of our soul; and in his Gospel, his Spirit has framed
rules and precepts to order and regulate them all in every act, in every
motion, and inclination; which if the Eye offend, pluck it out, if the Hand,
cut it off; which limit the understanding to the knowledge of God, which bind
the will to obedience, and moderate and confine our Affections, level our hope,
fix our joy, stint our sorrow, which frame our speech, compose our gesture,
fashion our Apparel, set and methodize our outward behavior. Instances in
Scripture, in every particular, are many and obvious; and what should I more
say; for the time would fail me to mention them all: In a word then, this
truth, which the spirit teaches, is fitted to the whole man, fitted to every
member of the body, to every faculty of the soul, fitted to us in every
condition, in every relation; it will reign with thee, it will serve with thee,
it will manage thy riches, it will comfort thy poverty, ascend the throne with
thee, and sit down with thee on the dunghill; it will pray with thee, it will
fast with thee, it will labor with thee, it will rest and keep a Sabbath with
thee; it will govern a Church, it will order thy Family; it will raise a
kingdom within thee, it will be thy Angel to carry thee into Abraham's bosom,
and set a crown of glory upon thy head. And is there yet any more? or what need
more than that which is necessary? There can be but one God, one Heaven, one
Religion, one way to blessedness, and there is but one Truth, and that is it
which the Spirit teaches; and this runs the whole compass of it, directs us
not only ad ultimum, sed usque ad ultimum, not only to that which is the end,
but to the means, to every step, and passage, and approach, to every help and
advantage toward it, and so unites us to this one God, gives us right to this
one Heaven, and brings us home to that one end for which we were made. And is
there yet any more?

Yes, particular cases may be so many and various, that they cannot all come
within the compass of this truth, which the spirit has plainly taught; it is
true, but then, for the most part they are cases of our own making; cases which
we need not make, cases sometimes raised by weakness, sometimes by wilfulness,
sometimes even by sin it self, which reigns in our mortal bodies, and to
such, this lesson of the Spirit is as an Ax to cut them, off. But be their
Original what it will, if this truth reach them not, or if they bear no
Analogy or affinity with that which the Spirit has taught, nor depend upon it
by any evident and necessary consequence, they are not to be reckoned in the
number of those which concern us, because we are assured that he has led us
into all truth that is necessary. Some things indeed there are, which are
indifferent in themselves, quae lex nec vetat nec jubet, which this Spirit
neither commands not forbids, but are made necessary by reason of some
circumstance of time, or place, or quality, or persons (for that which is
necessary in it self, is always necessary) and yet are in their own nature
indifferent still; veritas ad omnia occurrit, this truth (which is the spirits
lesson) reaches even these, and contains a rule certain and infallible, to
guide us in them (if we become not laws unto our selves, and fling it by) to
wit, the rules of Charity and Christian prudence, to which if we give heed, it
is impossible we should miscarry. It is the love of our selves the love of the
world, not charity, or spiritual wisdom, which make this noise abroad, which
rend the Church in pieces, and work this desolation on the earth; it is the
want of conscience, the neglect of conscience in the common and known ways of
our duty, which have raised so many needless cases of conscience, which if men
had not hearkened to their lusts, had never shown their head; had been, what
indeed they are, nothing: the acts of charity are manifest, 1 Cor. 13. She
suffers long, even injuries and errors, but does not rise up against that
which was set up to enlarge and improve her. Charity is not rash to beat down
every thing that had its first rise and beginning from Charity; is not puffed
up, swells not against a harmless, yea, and an useful constitution, though it
be of man. Does not behave it self unseemly, lays not a necessity upon us of
not doing that which lawful authority even then styles an indifferent thing,
when it commands it to be done. Charity seeks not her own, treads not the
public peace under foot, to procure her own; Charity is not provoked, checks
not at every feather, nor startles at that monster, which is a creation of our
own: Charity thinks no evil, does not see a Serpent under every leaf, nor
Idolatry in every bow of Devotion; if we were charitable, we could not but be
peaceable; if that which is the main of the Spirits lesson, did govern men's
actions, there would be abundance of peace so long as the moon endures. Multa
facienda sunt non jubente lege, sed libera charitate, says Austin, Charity is
free to do, and suffer many things which the Spirit does not expressly command,
and yet does command in general, when it commands and enjoins obedience to
Authority, which has no larger circuit to walk and show it self in, than in
things in themselves indifferent, which it may enioyn for orders sake, and the
advantage of those things which are necessary, which are already under a higher
and more binding law, than any Potentate or Monarch of the earth can make. The
acts, I say, of Charity are manifest, but those of Christian prudence are not
particularly designed, Prudentia respicit ad siagularia.
because that eye is given us to view and consider particular occurrences and
circumstances, and it depends upon those things which are without us; whereas
Charity is an act of the will, and here, if we would be our selves, or rather,
if we would not be our selves, but be free from by-respects, and unwarrantable
ends, if we would divest our selves of all hopes or fears of those things
which may either shake, or raise our estates, we cannot be to seek. For how
easy is it to a disengaged and willing mind to apply a general precept to
particular actions? especially if Charity fill our hearts, which is the bond of
perfection, and the end and complement of the Law, which indeed is our
spiritual wisdom? In a word, in these cases, when we go to consult with our
reason, we cannot err, if we leave not Charity behind us; or if we should
err, our charity would have such an influence upon our error, that it should
trouble none but our selves: for Charity bears all things, believes all
things, hops all things, endures all things.

And this is the extent of the Spirits lesson; and if in other truths more
subtle than necessary we are to seek, it matters not, for we need not seek
them; for it is no sin not to know that which I cannot know, it is no sin to be
no wiser than God has made me; or what need our curiosity rove abroad, when
that which is all, and alone concerns us, lies in so narrow a compass? In
absoluto and facili aeternitas, Hill. de Trin.
says Hilary, the way to heaven may seem rough and troublesome, but it is an
easy way, easy to find out, though not so easy at our first onset to walk in,
and yet to those that tread and trace it often, as delightful as Paradise it
self. See, God has shut up Eternity within the compass of two words, Believe
and Repent, which is a full and just commentary on the Spirits lesson, the
sum of all that he taught, lay your foundation right, and then build upon it;
because God loved you in Christ, do you love him in Christ; love him and keep
his commandments, than which no other way could have been found out to draw
you near unto God. Believe and Repent, this is all. Oh wicked abomination,
whence art thou come to cover the earth with deceit, with malice? what
defyance, what contentention, what gall and bitterness amongst Christians? and
yet this is all, Believe and Repent. The pen, the tongue, the sword, these are
the weapons of our warfare. What ink, what blood has been spilt in the cause
of Religion? how many Innocents defamed? how many Saints anathematized? how
many millions cut down with the sword? yet this is all, Believe and Repent. We
hear the noise of the whip, and the rattling of the wheels, and the prancing of
the horses; the horseman lifts up his bright spear and his glittering sword,
Nah. 3.2,3. Every part of Christendom almost is a stage of war, and the
pretense is written in their banners, (you may see it waving in the air) for
God and Religion; and this is all, Believe and Repent. Who would once think the
pillars of the earth should be thus shaken that the world should be turned into
a worse Chaos than that out of which it was made? that there should be such
wars and fightings amongst Christians, for that which is shut up and brought
unto us in these two words, Believe and Repent? for all the truth, which is
necessary, which will be sufficient to lift us to our end, and raise us to
happiness, can make no larger a circumference than this; this is the Law and
the Prophets, or rather, this is the Gospel of Christ; this is the whole will
of God; in this is knowledge, justification, redemption and holiness; this is
the Spirits lesson, and all other lessons are no lessons, not worth the
learning, further than they help and improve us in this. In a word, this is all
in all, and within this narrow compass we may walk out our span of time, and by
the conduct of the same Spirit, in the end of it attain to that perfection and
glory, which shall never have an end. And so from the lesson and extent of it,
we pass to the manner and method of the spirits Teaching; it is not Raptus, a
forcible and violent drawing, but ductus ((...) is the word) a gentle leading,
and guiding into all truth: Ducet vos, He shall lead you into all truth.



And now we know our Teacher, and the Lesson, it will be good to know the
method of this Discipline; The word is (...), he shall lead you, which implies
a capability, a preparedness, a willingness in them to be led; and the spirit
that leads us, teaches us also to follow him; not to resist him, that he may
lead us; not to grieve him by our backwardness, that he may fill us with joy;
not to quench him, that he may enlighten us; (...), 2 Timothy 1.6. to stir up his
gifts, that they dye not in us.

Now this promise was directly and primarily made to the Apostles, whose
Commission was extraordinary, even as large as the whole world, and therefore
needed the spirits guidance in a more high and eminent manner; the gifts of
Tongues, and diversities of graces, which might fit them for so great a work,
that as their care, so their power might be as universal as the world. And yet
to them it was given in measure, and where measure is, there are degrees, for
they were lead by degrees, not straight to all truth, but by steps, and
approches. Saint Peter himself was not wrapped up as his pretended successor into
the chair of truth, to determine all at once; for when pentecost was now past,
he goes to Caesarea, and there learnes more then he did at Jerusalem, sees that
in the sheet which was let down to the earth, which he heard not from the
Tongues, and of a truth now perceived what he did not before, Acts 10.34. that
God was no accepter of persons, that now the partition wall was broken down,
that Jew and Gentile were both alike, and the Church, which was formerly shut
up in Judea, was now become Catholic; a Body, which every one that would,
might be a member of.

Besides, though the Apostles were extraordinarily and miraculously inspired,
yet we cannot say, they used no means at all to bring down the blessed Spirit;
for it is plain, they did wait for his coming, they did pray for the truth, they
did labor for the truth, they did confer one with another, met together in
counsel, deliberated before they did determine; nor could they imagine they had
the spirit in a string, and could command him as they please, and make him
follow them whithersoever they were pleased to go. And then between us and the
Apostles there is a maine difference, nor can we expect an ocular and visible
descent; and therefore if we will be taught by the spirit, we must use the
means which the same spirit has prescribed in those lessons which he first
and extraordinarily taught the Apostles, and not make use of his name to
misinterpret interpret those lessons which he taught, or bring in new of our
own, and as new, so contrary to them; for what is new, must needs be contrary,
because he then taught all truth, and what is more then all, is nothing; what
is more then all truth must needs be a lie.

Nor did he lead them into all truth for themselves alone, but for all those
who should come after them, for all generations to the end of the world; he
made them Apostles, sent them to make us Christians, to make that which he
taught them, a rule of life, and to fix it on the Church as on a pillar, that
all might read it, that none should add to it, or take away from it; and for
this they are called a Foundation, Ephesians. 2.20 and we are said to be built upon
them (Jesus Christ being the head cornerstone) which we could not be, if their
testimony were so scant and defective, that there were left a kind of necessity
upon us to hew and square out what stones we please, and lay a new one of our
own to cast down theirs, and bear up whatsoever our insolent and boundless
lusts will lay upon it: And now what is become of my Text? for if this be
admitted, we cannot say the spirit led them; for what leading is that, which
leaves us so far behind at such a distance from the end, that in every age he
must come again, and take us by the hand, and draw us some other way, even
contrary to that which he first made known? and what an all is that, to which
every man may add what he please, even to the end of the world? for every man's
claim and Title to the spirit is the same, as just and warrantable in any as in
one; and when they speak contrary things, the evidence is the same, that is,
none at all, unless this be a good Argument, he has the spirit, because he
says so; which is as strong on his side, that denies it upon the same
pretense: Amongst the sons of men there are not greater fools then they, who
have nothing to say for what they say, but that they say it, and yet think this
nothing enough, and that all Israel are bound to hearken to them, as if God
himself did speak.

And this is an evil, a folly, a madness, which breaths no where but in
Christendom, never heard of in any other body or society, but that of
Christians; for though many Governors of Commonwealths did pretend to a kind
of commerce and familiarity with some God, or Goddess, when they were to make a
law; yet we do not read of any (as far as I remember) that did put up the
same pretense, that they might break it; but when the law was once promulg'd,
there was nothing thought of, but obedience, or punishment. But Christians who
have the best Religion, have most abused it, have played the wantons in that
light in which they should have walked with fear and trembling; and finding
themselves at loss, finding no satisfaction to their pride and ambition, to
their malice, and lusts, from any lesson the Spirit has yet taught, have
learnt an Art to suborne something of their own to supply that defect, and call
it a Dictate of the spirit. Nor was this evil of yesterday, or which befell
the weakest only; for the Devil has made use of it in all ages, as of the
fittest Engine to undermine that truth which the spirit first taught.
Tertullian as wise a man as the Church then had, being not able to prove the
Corporiety of the soul by scripture, flies to private Revelation in his Book
De anima non per aestimationem, sed Revelationem; what he could not uphold by
reason and judgment, Post Ioannem quoque prophetiam meruimus conscqui, etc.
Tertull. de Anim, c. ix. montanizans.
he strives to make good by Revelation; for we, says he, have our Revelations
as well as Saint John: Our sister Priscilla has plenty of them; her traunces
in the Church; she converses with Angels, and with God himself, and can
discern the hearts and inward thoughts of men. Saint Hierome mentions others,
and in the days of our forefathers Calvin many more, Calvin. contra Libert.
who applied the name of the spirit to every thing that might facilitate and
help on their design, as parish priests (it is his resemblance) would give the
name of six or seven several Saints to one image, that their offerings might
be the more. I need not go so far back for instance. Our present age harh
shown us many who have been ignorant, yet wiser then their Teachers, so
spiritual, that they despise the word of God, which is the dictate of the
spirit (for this monster has made a large stride from foreign parts, and set
his foot in our coasts) If they murder, the spirit moved their hand, and drew
their sword; if they throw down Churches, it is with the breath of the Spirit;
if they would bring in parity, the pretense is, the Spirit cannot endure that
any should be supreme, or Pope it but themselves; our humor, our madness, our
malice, our violence, our implacable bitterness, our railing and reviling must
all go for inspirations of the spirit; Simeon and Levi, Absolon and Achitophel,
Theudas and Judas, the Pharisees and Ananias, they that despise the holy Spirit
of God, these Scarabees bred in the dung of sensuality, these Impostors, these
men of Belial must be taken no longer for a generation of vipers, but for the
scholars and friends of the holy Ghost; whatsoever they do, whithersoever they
go, He is their leader, though it be to hell it felf.

May we not make a stand now, and put it to the question, whether there be any
holy Ghost, or no? and if there be, whether his office be to lead us? Indeed
these appropriations, these bold and violent ingrossings of the blessed Spirit
have, I fear, given growth to conceits well near as dangerous, that the spirit
does not spirare, breaths no grace into us, that we need not call upon him;
that the text which tells us, the holy Ghost leads, is the holy Ghost that
leads us; that the letter is the spirit, and the spirit the letter; an
adulterate piece new coined, an old Heresy brought in a new dress and tire
upon the stage again; that he is (...), a strange unheard of Deity, and (...),
an ascriptitious and supernumerary God; Nazianz Or. 37. Quis veterum vel
recentium adoravit spiritum? quis oravit? etc. sic Macedoniani, and Eunomiani,
Ibid.
I might say that it is more dangerous than this: for to confess the Spirit,
and abuse him, to draw him to as an accessory and abettor, nay as a principal,
in those actions which nature it self abhors and trembles at, is worse than out
of error to deny him. For what a Spirit, what a Dove is that which breathes
nothing but gall and wormwood? but fire and brimstone? what a Spirit is that,
which is ever pleading and purveying for the flesh? what a Spirit is that which
is made to bear witness to a lie? for as Petrarch tells us, Nihil importunius
erudito stulto, that there is not a more troublesome creature in the world,
than a learned fool; so the Church of Christ and Religion never suffered more
than by carnal men, who are thus spirit-wise; for by acknowledging the Spirit,
and making use of his name, they assume unto themselves a license to do what
they please, and work wickedness, not only with greediness, but cum
privilegie, with privilege and authority; which whilst others doubt of,
though it be not only an Error, but Blasphemy, yet parcius insaniunt, they are
not so outragiously made.

But yet we must not put the spirit from his office, because dreams, or rather
the evaporations, of men's lusts do pass for revelations; or say he is not a
leader into truth, because wicked or fanatic persons walk on in the ways of
Error, in the ways of Cain, or Corah, and yet are bold to tell the world,
that this spirit goes before them. The mad Athenian took every ship that came
into the harbor to be his, but it does not follow hence that no wise and sober
merchant knew his own. To him that is drunk things appear in a double shape
and proportion, Geminae Thehae, and gemini soles, two cities, and two suns for
one; but I cannot hence conclude that all sober men do so, nor can I deny the
Spirits conduct, because some men wander as they please, and run on in those
dangerous bypath, where he will not lead them: this were to deny an
unquestionable and fundamental truth; for an inconvenience to dig up the
foundation; because men build hay and stubble upon it, or because some men have
sore eyes, to pluck the Sun out of its sphere. It were indeed dangerous to
teach, that the spirit did teach and lead us, were there not means to try and
distinguish the Spirits instructions from the suggestions of Satan, or those
(...), those misshapen lumps and abortive births of a sick and loathsome brain,
or our private humor, which is as great a Devil. Beloved, 1. Epist. of St.
John, c. 4. v. 1, 2.
says S. Joh. believe not every spirit, that is, every inspiration, but try
the spirits, whether they be of God, for many false Prophets are gone out into
the world, that is, have taken the chair, and dictate magisterially what they
please, in the name of the Spirit, when themselves are carnal. And he gives
the rule by which we should try them in the next verse, Every spirit that
confesses Jesus is the Lord, is of God, that is, whosoever strives to advance
the Kingdom of Christ, and to set up the spirit against he flesh, to magnify
the Gospel, to promote men in the ways of innocence, and perfect obedience,
which infallibly lead to happiness, is from God; every such inspiration is
from the spirit of God; for therefore does the spirit breath upon us, that he
may make us like unto God, and so draw us to him, that where he is we may be
also. But then those inspirations which bring in God to plead for Baal, which
cry up Religion to gain the world, which tread down peace and charity, and all
that is praiseworthy under feet, to make way for men's unruly lust, to pace it
more delicately to its end; they that magnify Gods will, that they may do
their own; these men, these spirits cannot be from God: By their fruits you
shall know them. For their hypocrisy, as well and cunningly wrought as it is,
is but a poor cob-web-lawn, and we may easily see through it, even see these
spiritual men sweating and toyling for the flesh, these spirits digging in the
mineralls, and making haste to be rich: for though Gloria Patri, Glory be to
God on High, he the Prologue to the Play, (for what does an hypocrite but
play?) yet the whole drift, the business of every Scene and Act is to draw and
conclude all in this, From hence we have our gain. The Angel or the Spirit
speaks first, and is the Prologue and Mammon, and the Flesh make up the
Epilogue. Date manus, why should not every man clap his hands; surely such
Roscii, such nimble cunning actors deserve a plaudite, By their fruits you
shall know them; what spirit soever they have it is not of God; for nothing
more contrary to the flesh than this spirit, and therefore he cannot lead this
way, nor can he teach any thing that may flatter or countenance it; there is
nothing more against his nature than this; fire may descend, and the earth may
be removed out of its place; nature may change her course at the word and beck
of the God of nature; but this is one thing which God cannot do, he cannot
change himself, nor can his spirit breath any doctrine forth which savours of
the world, of the flesh, or corruption; and therefore we may, nay we must
suspect all those doctrines and actions, which are said to be the effects and
products of the blessed spirit, when we observe them drawn out and levelled to
carnal ends, and temporal respects; for sure the spirit can never beat a
bargain for the world, and the truth of God is the most unproportioned price
that can be laid out on such a purchase. When I see a man roll his eyes, compose
his countenance, order and methodize his gesture, as if he were now on his
deathbed, to take his leave of the world; when I hear him loud in Prayer, and
as loud in reviling the iniquity of the times; when I see him startle at a
misplaced word, as if it were a thunderbolt; when I hear him cry as loud for
a reformation as the Idolatrous Priests did upon Baal, I begin to think I see
an Angel in his flight and mount, going up into heaven; but then after all this
extaticall devotion, after all this zeal, and in the midst of all this noise
wherein I see him stoop like the vultur, and fly like lightning to the prey, I
cannot but say within my self, Oh Lucifer, son of the morning, how art thou
fallen from heaven? how art thou brought down to the ground, nay to hell it
self? sure I am the spirit of truth looks upward, moves upward, directs upward
to those things which are above; and if we follow him, neither our doctrine nor
our actions will ever savor of this dung.

So then, we see this inconvenience and mischief, which sometimes is occasioned
by this doctrine of the Spirits leading, is not unavoidable; it is not
necessary, though I mistake, and take the Devil for an Angel of light, that the
holy Ghost should be put to silence; though Corah and his accomplices perish in
their gainsayings, yet God forbid that all Israel should be swallowed up on the
same gulf. In the third of the first of Samuel, Samuel runs to Eli, when the
voice was Gods, but was taught at last to answer, Speak Lord, for thy servant
hears; though there be many false Prophets, yet Micaiah was a true one; and
though there be many false Teachers come into the world, yet the spirit of God
is a spirit of Truth, and ducet nos, and he shall lead us into all truth.

And that we may follow as he leads, we must observe the ways in which he
moves; for as there is (...), a way of peace, Luke 1.79. so there are (...),
the ways of truth, and in those ways the spirit will lead us. I may be in
viis iniquitatis, in the ways of wickedness, in the ways of the Gentiles,
and profane men, in viis meis, in my own ways, in those ways which my fancy
and lust has chalked out; on that pinnacle and height where my ambition has
placed me; in that mine and pit where my coverousnesse has buried me alive;
and in these I walk with my face from Jerusalem, from the truth, and in these
he leads us not. How can he learn poverty of spirit, who has no God but
Mammon, and knows no sin but poverty? How can he be brought down to obedience
and humility, who with diotrephes in S. John loves to have pre-eminence, and
thinks himself nothing, till he is taller than his fellows by the head and
shoulders? how can he hearken to the truth who studies lies? and do we now
wonder why we are not taught the truth, where the Spirit keeps open school?
there is no wonder at all; the reason why we are not taught, is because we will
not learn. Ambition soars to the highest seat, and the Spirit directs us to the
ground, to the lowest place; the love of the world does fill our barns, and the
Spirit points to the bellies of the poor, as the better and safer garners; my
private factious humor tramples under foot obedience to superiors, because I
my self would be the highest, and challenge that as my peculiar, which I deny
to others; but this spirit prescribes order. Does Montanus lead about silly
women, and prophesy? does he call his dreams revelations? Eusebius tells us,
that the Spirit which led him about was nothing else but an inseparable desire
of precedence. (...). l. 1. c. 21. Tert. coat. Valent. c. 4.
Does Valentinus number up his Aeones and as many crimes as gods? Tertullian
informs us that he hoped for a Bishopric, but fell from those hopes, and was
disappointed by one who was raised to that dignity by the prerogative of
Martyrdom, and his many sufferings for the truth. Does Arrius deny the
divinity of the Son? read Theodoret, and he will show you Alexander in the
chair before him. Theod. l. 1. c. 2.
Does Aerius deny there is any difference between a Bishop and Presbyter? the
reason was, he was denied himself, and could not be one; so that he fell from a
Bishopric as Lucifer did from Heaven, whose first wish was to be God, and
whose next was that there were no God at all. From hence these stirs and
tumults in the Church of Christ, from hence these storms and tempests, which
blow and beat in her face; from hence these distractions and uncertainties in
Christian Religion, that it is a matter of some danger but to mention it; which
made Nazianzen (in some passion as it may seem) cry out (...), etc. I would,
says he, Naz. Or. 20.
there were no precedence, no priority, no dignities in the Church, but that
men's estimation did only rise from virtue; but now the right hand and the
left, the higher and the lower place, these terms of difference have led men
not into the truth, but into that ditch where Error mudds it self. Caeca
avaritia, says Maximus, covetousness and ambition are blind, and cannot look
upon the truth, though she be as manifest as the sun at noon; and it fares with
men in the lust of their eyes, in the love of the world, as it did with the man
in Artemidorus, who dreamt he had eyes of gold, and the next day lost them, had
them both put out; for now no smell is sweet but that of lucre, no sight
delightful but of the wedge of gold; and so by a strange kind of Chemistry
they turn Religion into Gold, and even by Scripture it self heap up Riches, and
so they lose their sight and judgment, and savor not the things of God, but
are stark blind to that truth which should save them.

But now grant, that they were indeed persuaded of the truth of that which they
defend with so much noise and tumult, yet this may be but opinion and fancy,
which the love of the world will soon build up, because it helps to nourish it;
and how can we think that the spirit did lead them in those ways, in which
self love and desire of gain did drive on so furiously? for sure the spirit of
truth cannot work in that building, where such Sanballats laugh him to scorn.
Now all these are the very cords of vanity, by which we are drawn from the
truth, and must be broken asunder, before the spirit will lead us to it; for he
leads us not over the Mountains, nor through the bowels of the Earth, nor
through the numerous Atoms of our vain and uncertain and perplexed
imaginations, but as the wisdom which he teaches, so is the method of his
Discipline, pure, peaceable, Jam. 3.17.
and gentle, without partiality, without hypocrisy, and has no savor or
relish of the Earth; for he leads the pure, he leads the peaceable, he leads
the humble. In a word, he leads those who are lovers of peace and truth.

Conclus.
And now to draw toward aconclusion: will you know the ways in which the
Spirit walks, and by which he leads us? will you know the rules we must
observe, if we will be the Spirits Scholars? I will be bold to give them you
from one who was a great lover of truth, even Galen the Physician: I can but
name them, for the time will not suffer me to insist; they are but four, the
first, is (...), a love of Truth; the second, (...), a love of Industry, a
frequent meditation of the truth; the third is (...), an orderly and
methodicall proceeding in the pursuit of Truth; the last is (...),
exercitation, and our conformity to the truth in our conversation: And this
gold, though it be brought from Ophir, yet may it be useful to adorn and
beautify those who are the living temples of the holy Ghost.

And first, Love is a passion imprinted in us to this end, to urge and carry us
forward to the truth, and it is the first of all the passions, the first of all
the operations of the soul, the first mover, as it were, being a strong
propension to that we love, and which is fitted and proportioned to the mind,
seeking out the means, and working forward with all the heat of intention unto
the end; eminent among the affections, calling up my fear, my hope, my anger,
my sorrow; my fear of not finding out, yet in the midst of fear raising a hope
to attain to it; my sorrow that I find not so soon as I would; and my anger at
any thing that is averse or contrary, at any cloud or difficulty that is placed
between me and the truth. The love of Christ, says S. Paul, constrains me, 2
Cor. 5.14. (...) (a resemblance taken from women in travel) constrains,
urges me, works in me such a desire, as the pain in travel does in a woman
to be dlivered; for do we not labor and travel with a conclusion, which we
would find out? and what joy is there, when we have? like that of a woman in
travel, when a man-child is brought into the world. If you love me, keep my
commandment, John 14.15.
says Christ; if you love me not, you cannot, but if you love me you will
certainly keep them.

Will you know the reason why the ways of truth are so desolate? why so little
truth is known, when all offers it self, and is even importunate with us to
receive it? there can be no other reason given but this, that our hearts are
congealed, our spirits frozen, and we are coldly affected to the truth, nay are
averse and turn from it; this truth crosses our profit, that our pleasure;
other truths stand in our light, and obstruct our passage to that we most
desire. S. Paul speaks plainly, If the truth be hid, it is hid to them that
perish, 2 Cor. 4.3,4.
in whom the God of this world has fo blinded their mind, that the light of
this truth should not shane upon them; for if we have eyes to see her, she is a
fair object, as visible as the Sun; if we do but love the truth, the spirit of
truth is ready to take us by the hand and lead us to it; but those that
withdraw themselves does his soul hate.

Now in the next place, this love of truth brings in (...), a love of Industry,
for if we love it, it will be always in our thoughts, and we shall meditate of
it day and night; for to love seven years are but a few days, and great
burdens are but small, and labor is but pleasure, and we walk in the region of
truth, viewing it, and delighting in it, gathering what may be for our use; we
walk in it as in a Paradise. Truth is best bought when it costs us most, and
must be wooed often and seriously, and with great devotion; as Pythagoras said of
the gods, Non est salutanda in transitu, is not to be spoken with in the By and
passage, is not content with a glance and slutation, and no more; but we must
behold it with care and anxiety, we must make a kind of peregrination out of
our selves, and must run and sweat to meet it, and then this spirit leads us to
it. And this great encouragement we have, that in this our labor we never
fail of the end we labor for; which we cannot find in our other endeavors
and attempts, in which we have nothing to uphold us under those burdens which
we lay upon our own shoulders, but a deceitful hope, which carries us along to
see it self defeated, the frustration whereof is a greater penalty and vexation
than that which we undertook for its sake. How many rise up early to be rich,
and before their day shuts up are beggars? how many climb to the highest place,
and when they are near it, and ready to fit down, fall back into a prison? But
in this we never fail, the Spirit working with us, and blessing the work of
our hands, making our busy and careful thoughts as his chariot, and then
filling us with light; such is the privilege and prerogative of Industry, such
is the nature of Truth, that it will be wrought out by it; nor did ever any
rise up early, and in good earnest travel toward it, but this spirit took him
by the hand and brought him to his journeys end. If thou seek her as silver,
Prove. 2.4,5.
if thou search for her as for had treasure (which because it is hid we remove
many things, turn up much earth, and labor hard, that we may come to it) then
shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the knowledge of God; in
which work our industry and the Spirits help are as it were joined and linked
together.

You will say perhaps, that the Spirit is an omnipotent Agent, and can fall
suddenly upon us, as he did upon the Apostles this day; that he can lead us in
the way of truth, though we sit still, though our feet be chained, though we
have no feet at all; but the Proverb will answer you; (...).

If God will you may sail over the sea in a sieve; but we must remember the
Spirit leads us according to his own will and counsel, not ours; that as he is
an Omnipotent, so he is a free Agent also, and works, and dispenceth all
things according to the pleasure of his will; and certainly he will not lead
thee, if thou will not follow; he will not teach thee, if thou will not learn;
nor can we think that the truth which must make us happy is of so easy
purchase, that it will be sown in any ground, and as the Devils tares grow up
in us, Nobis dormientibus, whilst we sleep.

The third is (...), method, or an orderly proceeding in the ways of truth;
for as in all other Arts and Sciences, so in our spiritual wisdom, and in the
school of Christ, we may not hand over head huddle up matters as we please, but
must (...), keep an order and set course in our studies and proceedings: our
Savior Christ has a (...), Mat. 6.33.
seek first the kingdom of God, and in that kingdom every thing in its order;
there is something first, and something next to be observed, and every thing is
to be ranked in its proper place: the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews
tells us of principles of Doctrine which must be learned before we can be led
forward to perfection; Heb. 5.13,14.
of milk, and of strong meat; of plainer Lessons before we reach at higher
Mysteries; nor can we hope to make a good Christian, veluti ex luto statuam, as
soon as we can make a picture, or a statue out of clay. Most Christians are
perfect too soon, which is the reason that they are never perfect; they are
spiritual in the twinkling of an eye (they know not how, nor no man else) they
leap over all their alphabet, and are at their (...), their end, before they
begin; are at the top of the ladder before they have set a foot to the first
step or rown; they study heaven, but not the way to it; they study faith, but
not good works; repentance without a change or restitution; Religion without
order; they are as high as Gods closet in heaven, when they should be busy at
his footstool; study predestination, but not sanctity of life; study
assurance, but not that piety which should work it; study heaven and not grace,
and grace but not their duty; and now no marvel if they meet not with that
saving truth in this (...), in this so great disorder and confusion; no marvel
when we have broke the rules and order, and not observed the method of the
Spirit, if the Spirit lead us not, who is a Spirit that loves order, and in a
right method and orderly course leads us into the truth.

The last is (...), exercitation and practice of the truths we learn, which is
so proper and necessary for a Christian, that Christian Religion goes under
that name, and is called an exercise by Clem. (...). Strom. l. 4.
Al. Nyssen, Cyril of Ilierusalem, and others; and though they who lead a
Monastical life have laid claim to it as their own (they were called (...))
yet it may well belong to every one that is the Spirits Scholar, who is as a
Monk in the world, shut up out of it, even while he is in it, exercising
himself in those lessons which the Spirit teaches, and following as he leads,
which is to make the world it self his monastery. A good Chritian is the true
(...), Epictet. Arrian. l. 3. c. 5.
and by this daily exercise in the doctrines of the Spirit, he does (...), as
the Stoics speak, drive the truth home, and make it enter into the soul and
spirit; for as Auaxagoras said well, manus causa sapientiae, it is not the
brain, but the hand that causes knowledge, Talis quisque est qualibue
delectater; inter artisicem and artificium mira cognatio est.
and works wisdom: for true wisdom, that which the Spirit teaches,
consists not in being a good Critic, or in rightly judging of the sense of the
words, or being a good Logician in drawing out a true and perfect definition of
Faith and Charity, or discoursing aptly and methodically of the Lessons of the
Spirit; or in being a good Orator, in setting out the beauty and luster of
Religion to the very eye. No, says the son of Syrach, He that has no
experience knows little, Ecclus. 34.10.
Ex mandato mandatum cernimus, by practicing the command we gain a kind of
familiarity, a more inward and certain knowledge of it; If any man will do the
will of God, he shall know the Doctrine; Joh. 7.17.
in Divinity, and indeed in all knowledge whose end is practice, that of
Aristotle is true, Those things we learn to do we learn by doing them; we learn
devotion by prayer; charity, by giving of alms; meekness, by forgiving
injuries; humility and patience, by suffering; temperance, by every day
fighting against our lusts; as we know meat by the taste, so do we the things
of God by practice and experience, and at last discover heaven it self in
piety; and this is that which S. Paul calls knowledge according to godliness;
1 Timothy 6.3.
we taste and see how gracious the Lord is, we do as it were see with our eyes,
and with our hands handle the word of truth. In a word, we manifest the truth,
and make it visible in our actions; and the Spirit is with us, and ready in his
office to lead us further, even to the inner house; and secret closet of truth,
displayes his beams of light, as we press forward and mend our pace, every day
shining upon us with more brightness, as we every day strive to increase;
teaching us not so much by words as by actions and practice, by the practice of
those virtues which are his lessons, and our duties; we learn that we may
practice, and by practice we become as David speaks, Psalm. 119.99.
wiser then our teachers. to conclude, day unto day teaches knowledge, and
every act of piety is apt to promote and produce a second, to beget more light,
which may yet lead into more, which may at last strengthen and establish us in
the truth, and so lead us from truth to truth, to that happy estate which has
no shadow of falsehood, but like the Spirit of Truth endures for evermore.

THE FIRST SERMON.
JAMES I. Verse. ult. Pure Religion and undefiled before God and the Father is
This, to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep
himself unspotted from the World.


NOthing more talked of in the world, then Religion, nothing less understood,
nothing more neglected, there being nothing more common with men, then to be
willing to mistake their way; to withdraw themselves from that, which is indeed
Religion, because it stands in opposition to some pleasing error, which they
are not willing to shake off, and by the help of an unsanctified, complying
fancy, Multi fibi fidem ipsi potiut constitunut, quam accipiunt, dum quae
velunt sapiunt, and nolunt sapepere quae vera sunt, cum sapientiae haecveritas
sit, ea interdum sapere, quae nolis. Hilar. 8. de Trin. V. 22.
to frame one of their own, and call it by that name. That which flatters their
corrupt hearts, That which is molded and attempered to their brutish desigus,
That which smiles upon them in all their purposes, which favors them in their
unwarrantable undertakings, That which bids them Go on and prosper in the ways
which lead unto death, That with them is True Religion.

In this Chapter, and indeed in every Chapter of this Epistle, our Apostle has
made this discovery to our hands: Some there were, as he observes, that placed
it in the ear; did hear and not do: and rested in that: some did place it in a
formal devotion: did pray, but pray amiss, and therefore did not receive:
some that placed it in a shadow and appearance, Verse 25.
seemed to be very religious, but could not bridle their tongue, and were safe
they thought under this shadow: others there were, that were partial to
themselves, despisers of the poor, that had faith and no works, in the second
Chapter, and did boast of this: others, that had hell fire in their Tongue, and
carried about with them a world of iniquity, which did set the wheel, the whole
course of Nature on fire, in the third Chapter, and last of all, some he
observed warring and fighting, killing, that they might take the prey, and
divide the spoil, in the fourth Chapter; And yet all religious; Every one
seeking out death in the error of his life, and yet every one seeming to
press forward toward the mark, for the price of the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus. To these, as to men ready to dash upon the rock and shipwreck,
does our Apostle cry out as from the shore, to turn their compass, and steer
their course the right way, and seeing them, as it were, run several ways all
to meet at last in the common gulf of eternal destruction; He calls, and
calls aloud after them. To the superstitious, and the profane, To the disputer
and the scribe, to them that do but hear, and to them that do but babble, To
them that do but profess, and to them that do but believe, the word is; Be not
deceived, This is not it: but Haec est, This is pure Religion is vox a Tergo,
as the Prophet speaks, Esaias 30. a voice behind them, saying, This is the way,
walk in it: This is as a light held forth to show them where they are to walk;
as a royal Standard set up to bring them to their colors: This does
Infinitatem rei ejicere, as the Civilians speak. Take them from the Devils
latitudes and expatiations, from frequent and fruitless hearing, from loud,
but heartless prayer, from their beloved but dead faith, from undisciplined and
malicious zeal, From noise and blood, from fighting and warring, which could
not but defile them, and make them fit to receive nothing, but the spots of the
world, from the infinite mazes and bypath of Error, and brings them into the
way, where they should be, where they may move with joy and safety, looking
steadfastly toward the End.

Let us now hear the conclusion of the whole matter, whatsoever Divines have
taught, whatsoever Councels have determined or the schoolmen defined:
whatsoever God spoke in the old times, whatsoever he spoke in these last days,
That which has filled so many volumes, and brought upon us Fatigationem
Carnis, that weariness of the flesh, Ecclesia. 1 2.12.
which Solomon complains of, in reading that multitude of Books, with which the
world does now swarm with, That which we study for, which we contend for, which
we fight for, as if it were in Democritus his Well, or rather, as the Apostle
speaks, in Hell it self, quite out of our reach, or if there be any truth that
is necessary, or any other commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this
saying, even in this of Saint James, Pure Religion, and undefiled before God
and the Father is this, to visit, etc.

I way call it the picture of Religion in little; in a small compass, and yet
presenting all the lines and dimensions; the whole signature of Religion, fit
to be hung up in the Church of Christ, and to be looked upon by all, that the
people, which are and shall be born may truly serve the Lord: May it please you
therefore a while to cast your eyes upon it, and with me to view. First, The
full proportion, and several lineaments of it, as it were the essential parts
which constitute, and make it what it is, and we may distinguish them as the
Jew does the Law: by Do, and Do not; The first is Affirmative: To do Good: to
visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction. The second not to do
evil; to keep our selves unspotted from the world. And then secondly, to look
upon as it were the colors and beauty of it, and to look upon it with delight,
as it consists, First in its purity, having no mixture. Secondly, in its
undefilednesse, having no pollution. And then thirdly, the Epigraph or title of
it, the Ratification or seal, which is set to it to make it Authentic, which
is set to, not of men, or by men: but divina manu by the hand of God Himself,
which drew the first copy, and pattern: For, this is true Religion apud Deum
and patrem with God and the Father, and as he gave witness to his Son from
Heaven, This is my beloved Son, so does he also to Christiain Religion, of
which he was the Author and Finisher. Haec est, This is it, and in this I am
well pleased: Pure Religion and undefiled before God, etc.

Let us now in order view these; and these two; To do Good, and abstain from
Evil, our charity to others in the one, and our charity to our selves in the
last, in being as those Dii benefici those Tutelar Gods to the Widows and
Fatherless, and those (...) to keep all evil from our selves, I call the
effentiall parts of Religion, without which it can no more subsist, then a man
without a soul; For as the body without the spirit is dead, even so faith
without works is dead also.

Not that we exclude Faith, or Prayer, or Hearing of the Word; for without
faith religion is but an empty name, and it comes by hearing, and is increased
by devotion. Faith is a foundation upon a Foundation: for as Truth is the
foundation of faith, Amb. in Psalm. 118.
so is faith the Foundation of an Holy Conversation, in this we edify our
selves, and in this we sustain and uphold others, in this we stand, and in this
we raise up others; From faith are the issues of life, from this, as from a
fountain flow those waters of comfort, which refresh the widow, and
fatherless, and that water of separation, Number. 31.23.
which purifies us, keeps us unspotted, as white as snow.

But our Apostle mentions none of these, and I will give you some reason; at
least, a fair conjecture, why he did not. And first, not Faith, we see here
where he tells us what Pure Religion is, he does not so much as name it; for
indeed, it is the ground of the whole draught and portrayture of Religion, and
as we observe it in Pictures it is in shadow; not expressed, out yet seen:
supposed by Saint James, writing not to Insiders, but to those who had already
given up their names unto Christ. And it is like those (...) in the
Mathematics, which Tully calls Iuitia Mathematicorum, the beginnings and
principles of that science, which if we grant not, we can make no further
progress in that science. In the sixth to the Hebrews Saint Paul calls it a
principle of the Doctrine of Christ: and what necessity was there for my
Apostle to commend that unto them which they already embraced, to direct them
in that in which they were perfect, to urge that which they could not deny; not
deny? nay, of which they made their boast all the day long? No: Saint James is
for Ostende mihi, he does not once doubt of their faith, but is very carnest to
force it out, that it may evaporate, and show it self in their works of piety:
Then faith is a star, 2 Timothy 1.19.
and when it streams out light, and the beams are the works of charity: Then
faith is as a ship, when Pure Religion is the rudder to steer and guide it,
that it dash not on a rock, and shipwreck: Then faith is the soul of the soul,
when by its quickening and enlivening power we run the ways of Christ's
commandments: pure creduat, pure ergo loquantur, faith the Father: Their belief
is right, therefore let their conversation be sincere, no other conclusion can
naturally be deduced from faith, and of it self it can yield no other, and this
it will yield, if you do not in a manner destroy it, and spoil it of its power
and efficacy; for what an unnatural inconsequence is this, I believe that
Christ has taught me, to be merciful, as my heavenly Father is merciful:
That charity has the promise of the world to come, Therefore I will shut up my
bowels; this I am sure is one part of our belief, if it be not, our Creed is
most imperfect; and yet such practical conclusions does our avarice and luxury
draw. Our faith is spread about the world, but our charity is as a candle under
a bushel; the great error, and folly of this our age, which can show us
multitudes of men and women, which, as the Apstle speaks, are ever learning,
and never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth, which have con'd their
Creed by heart, but have little skill, or forgot their skill they have, in the
royal Law; who cry up faith as the Jews did the Temple of the Lord, and are
very zealous for it, yet suffer it to decay and waste, till it be dead, as my
Apostle speaks, cat out the very heart of it, by a careless and profane
conversation, as the Jews with their own hands did set fire on that Temple.
which they so much adored.

And this may be a second reason, why he mentions not faith in his character of
Religion; for having every where preached up the power and efficacy of faith,
men carnally minded did so fill their thoughts, with the contemplation of that
fundamental virtue, that they left no roomfor other virtues, not so
efficacious indeed to justify a sinner, yet as necessary as faith it self: did
commend and extol the power of faith, when it had none at all in them, nay,
(which is the most fatal miscarriage of all) did make it an occasion, Romans 6.6.
through which sin revived, which should have destroyed in them the whole
body and juncture of sin; it being common to men at last to fix and fettle
their minds upon that object which is most often presented to their minds, as
the Country peasant having heard much talk of the City of Rome, began at last
to think there was no other City but that: If we look forward to the second
Chapter of this Epistle, we shall think this more then a conjecture; for there
he seems to take away from faith its saving attribute, Numquid fides potest
salvmn sacere? Can faith save a man? What an Heretic, what a Papist would he
be, that should but put up this question in these our days? wherein the sola
justificat has left faith alone in the work of our salvation: and yet the
question may be put up, and the resolve on the negative may be true; It cannot
save him certainly that says he has faith, and has not works: And thus,
though he dispute indeed against Simon the sorcerer, and others, as we may
gather out of Irenaeus, yet in appearance he levels his discourse against Paul
the Apostle: for not by works, but by says, faith Saint Paul, not by faith,
but by works, says Saint James, and yet both are true, the one speaking to the
Jews, who were all for the Law the other to those who were all for faith, and
to them who had buried all thought of good works in the pleasing but deceitful
contemplation of faith, he speaks no other language, but do this; and exalts
charity to the higher place, that their vain boasting of faith might not be
heard; for faith, says he, has no tongue, nay, no life without her, and thus
in appearance he takes from the one, to establish the other, and sets up a
throne for charity, not without some show, and semblance of prejudice to faith.

For last of all, to give you one reason more: Faith indeed is naturally
productive of good works: For what madness is it to see the way to eternity of
bliss, and not to walk in it? Each article of our Creed points out, as with ^e
finger, to some virtue to be wrought out in the mind, and published in the
outward man. If I believe that Christ is God, it will follow, I must worship
him: If he died for sin, the consequence is plain enough, we must die to it:
If he so loved us, the Apostle concludes, we must love one another: charity is
the proper effect of faith, and upon faith, and charity we build up our hope,
if we believe the promises, and perform the condition, if we believe him that
loved us, and love him, and keep his commandments, we are in heaven already.
But yet we may observe, that the corruption of our hearts finds something in
faith it self, to abate and weaken her force, and power, and to take off her
activity, and so makes the very object of faith an encouragement to evil, and
(which is a sad speculation) the mercy of God, a kind of temptation to sin:
Mercy is a precious ointment, and mercy breaks our head; mercy blots out sin,
and mercy revives it; mercy is our hope, and mercy is made our confusion: we
should sin no more, but we sin more and more, because his mercy endures for
ever: we turn the grace of God into wantonness, and make this Queen of his
glorious attributes to wait on our lust: of a Covering, a purging, a Healing, a
saving, (I tremble to speak it) we make it a damning mercy; for had we not
abused it, had we not relied upon it too much, had we not laid upon it all our
uncleanness, our impenitency, and wilful obstinacy in sin, it would have
upheld us, and lifted us up as high as Heaven; but our bold presumption lays
hold of it, and it flings us off, and we fall from it, into the bottomless pit.

This then we may take for a sufficient reason, why our Apostle puts not faith
into his description of Pure Religion, and in the next place, as he does not
mention faith, so he passes by in silence, rather then forgets those other
excellent duties of prayer, and hearing the word.

For these two, whatsoever high esteem we put upon them; howsoever we magnify
them till they are nothing, till our selves are worse than nothing, worse than
the beasts that perish, yet are they not the end; and their end is perdition,
who make them so, and think that to ask a blessing is to have it, when they
put it from them: or to hear of God is to love him: to hear of that happiness,
which he has laid up, is to be in Paradise. The perfection of the creature,
says the Philosopher is ad naturae suae sinem pervenire, to attain to the end
for which he was made, and the end of the Christian is, to be like unto Christ,
that where he is, He may be also; that is his end, that is his perfection: Now
to draw this home, these two, to Hear and to Pray; do not make us like unto
him, but are sufficient means to renew the image of God in us, that so we may
resemble him, they are not the haven to which we are bound, but are as
prosperous and advantageous winds to carry us to it, Quod per se bonum est,
semper est bonum, that which is good in it self, and for it self, is always
good, as true piety, true Religion, but those duties which tend to it, have
their reward or punishment as they reach, or miss of that end; what is
hearing, if it beget not obedience? what are prayers if they be but the calves
of our lips? Oh, it is a sad question to be ask't, when we shall see Christians
full of malice and deceit, Have they not heard? they have heard that malice
shall destroy the wicked, that deceit is an abomination, that oppression shall
eat them up, yet will be such monsters, as if they never heard; oh, it is a sad
expostulation to the wicked, Have they not heard, and as sad a return may be
made to our prayers; we may stretch out our hands, and God may hide his eyes
from us, we may make many prayers and he not hear, we may lift up our hands,
and vocie unto Heaven, and our mind stay below wallowing in the mire of foul
pollutions, mixed and ingendering with the vanities of the world; for as we may
fast to strife and debate, so we may pray to strife and debate, as there may be
a politic Fast, so our prayer may have more in it of craft than devotion, we
may make it a trade, a craft, an occupation, and so (...) stoutly labor and
holdout, not to take the kingdom of Heaven, but to devour widows houses; make
this Key of the Gates of Heaven, a picklock to open Chests, and so debase it to
these vile offices, which is a sin, cujus non audeo dicere nomen, for which I
have no name bad enough to give it: and what is Prayer then? what are the means
if we rest in them as in the end? what are they, if we draw and force them to a
bad end? what are they if we make no use of them at all, or make this sad and
fatal use of them; if our Prayers bring down a curse; our hearing flatter us
in our disobedience, if we Hear, and Pray, and Perish? These two, and what else
of this nature have their worth and efficacy from Religion, from charity to our
selves, and others, which are as the two wings, on which our prayers ascend,
and mount to the presence of God, to bring down a blessing from thence: These
sanctify our fasts, these open the ears of the deaf, that hearing they may
hear and understand: These consecrate our Pulpets, and are the best panegyricks
on our Sermons, and make them indeed the word of God, powerful in operation,
and without these our prayers are but babbling, and the Sermons, which we hear,
but so many libels against us, or as so many knells and sad indications, that
they, that hear them, are condemned, and dead already.

For again, to visit the fatherless and widows in affliction, that is, to be
full of good works, and to renounce, and abstain from the pleasures of the
world (for those pleasures we dote on, those riches we sweat for, are those
that bespot us) is a far harder task then to say a hundred pater no sters, or
to continue our prayers, as Saint Paul did his preaching until midnight, or to
hear a Sermon every day. Bid the wanton leave the lips of the harlot: Acts 20.
bid the ambitious make himself equal to them of low degree: bid the mammonist
be rich in good works, and if he do not openly profess it, yet the conjecture
will be easy and probable, that the wanton would choose rather to fast twice in
the week with the Pharisee, than to make himself an Eunuch for the Kingdom of
Heaven: the ambitious and covetous rather say their prayers (for such can but
say them) then to stay themselves in the eager pursuit of their ends but so
long, as to give an alms: the ambitious will pray and hear, and do any thing
rather than fall lower, and the Miser chain his ears to the Pulpit, rather than
to open them to the complaint of the poor: S. Basil observed it long since
(...), etc. Great. ad Ditescentes.
and tells us that he knew many, who without any great pains might be brought,
to fast and pray, and to perform all parts of Religion, which were not
chargeable, but could not be won with the most powerful eloquence, or
strongest reason to any part of it, which did cost them (...) but one halfpenny
(...) a cheap Religion is as easy, as cheap; but Go, sell all that you have,
and give to the poor, is a better pill, which we hardly let down, and with a
sour countenance, and should we prescribe it now, to men of this Iron age,
would they not as S. Paul speaks in another case, say, that we were out of our
wits?

And therefore in the last place, These two, if they be truly in us, are never,
can never be alone, but suppose faith, which is sigillum bonorum operum, Sermon.
23.
as Chrysologus speaks, the seal to every good work to make it current and
authentic, and he that is perfect in these, cannot be to seek in the rest. He
that can govern a ship in a storm, when the Sea rages, and is unquiet, may
easily manage a cockboat in a calm: he that can empty himself to his brother,
that thinks the bellies of the poor the best granaries for his corn, and the
surest treasury for his money, that can give unto God the things that are Gods,
and return them back by the hands of his Ambassadors the poor, who beseech us
in his Name; he that is an exile at home, and has banished himself from the
world, he lives in, so uses it, as if he used it not; he that hates sin, as an
infectious plague, and in a holy pride will keep his distance from it, though
it bow toward him in the person of his dearest friend, that can detest
sacrilege, though his father were intricht by it, and passed it over to him,
as an inheritance: He that can thus keep himself unspotted of the world, will
lift up pure hands, and beat down his body and be ready to hearken what the
Lord God will say; he that sends up so many sacrifices to God, he that thus
makes himself a sacrifice, will offer up also the incense of his prayers: he
that can abstain from sin, may fast from meat, he that has broke his heart,
will open his car: In a word, he that approves himself in these two, cannot but
be active and exact in the rest.

And now having showed you, what is but shadowed in this picture and
description of Religion; let us look upon the picture it self, so look upon it,
that we may draw it out, and express it in our selves, in every limb and part
of it, that they that behold us may say, God is in us of a truth, and glorify
him at the sight of such religious men.

And first we see Charity stretching forth her hand, and casting her bread upon
the waters, the bitter waters of Affliction, going about to the widow and
fatherless, and doing good, doing all those things which Jesus began to teach,
walking in love as Christ loved us; Ciem. 2. strom. 404.
And this we may well call a part of Religion, and a fair representation of it;
for by this the image of the likeness of God is repaired in us says Bern, is
made manifest in us, and as it were visible to the eye: For in every Act of
charity he that dwells on High comes down in the likeness of men, speaks by the
tongue, gives by the hand of a mortal man, moves in him, and moves with him to
perfect this work. This makes us as God, in stead of God, one to another: for
Homint homo quid praestat? one man is not superior to another, as he is a man
(for in the Heraldry of Nature, all are of the same degree, all are equal; for
all aremen) but when charity fills his Heart, and stretches forth his Hand,
he takes the higher place, the place of God, is his Ambassador and Steward,
not of the same Essence with God, but bearing about with him, his Image, says
Clem. Al. Put you on, says S. Paul, bowels of mercy, (...) as the elect of
God, when we have put them on, we then are indeed the elect of God, endowed
with his spirit, carrying about with us the mercies of God, sent as it were
from his mercy seat, with comfort and relief to those, who are minished and
brought low by oppression, affliction and sorrow; we may flatter our selves,
and talk what we please of Election, and if we please intail it on a Faction,
but most sure it is, without charity our election is not sure, and without
bowels we can be no more Elect, then Judas the traitor was; Elect, that is by
interpretation, the sons of perdition; It is doing good alone that makes us a
Royal priesthood, and this Honor have all his Saints; the kings of the
Gentiles, says our Savior, exercise authority upon them, and they that
exercise authority over them are called (...) benefactors or gracious Lords,
are called what they should be, not what they are, for if they were gracious
and Benefactors, then were they kings indeed, anointed with the oil of mercy,
which is sent down from Heaven, being from the Heaven, Heavenly; that day, when
this distilled not from him on others, Titus the Emperor did count as lost.
Diem perdidi, so it is in Sueton: but Zonaras has it (...) I have not reigned
to day, this day I was not Gods vicegerent: we read in the book of the Kings,
that God gave Solomon a large Heart, and Pineda glosses it liberalem fecit, He
made him liberal and merciful; we read that David was a man after Gods own
heart, and Procopius upon that place gives this as the probable reason of this
denomination, that he was (...) a lover of the poor, merciful as he is
merciful, (...) Imitation gives us a kind of neernesse, and familiarity with
God; that in which we represent him, Synes. Epist. 30
makes as one with him, makes us as Christ speaks, his brother, and sister, and
mother. This is our affinity, this is our honor, this is in a manner our
Divinity on earth; For God and man, says Synesius have but this one only
thing common to them both, and that is, Heb. 13.16.
(...) to do good; To do good and to distribute, forget not, for with such
sacrifices God is pleased.

This then may well go for one part, or limb of Religion: And in the next
place, as in the visitation of the fatherless and widows all charity to our
Brother is employed, so all charity to our selves is shut up in this other in
keeping our selves unspotted of the world. And this phrase in keeping our
selves, is very significant, and that its weight; for those spots, which so
defile us, and make us such Leopards, are not so much from the world, as from
our selves, as a cheat is not only from the cunning of the Impostor, but from
the want of wisdom and experience in him that is deceived; it is Ignorance that
promotes the cheat, that draws the power and faculty into Act, makes him that
has a subtle wit, injurious, and it is an evil heart, that makes the world
contagious; for wisdom prevents a cheat, and watchfulness a spot. This world
in it self has nothing in it that can defile us; for God saw all that he made
was good, Tertul. despectaculis. c. 2.
and it was very good, but Nihil non est Dei, quod Deum offendit, there is
nothing by which we offend God, but is from God; that beauty, which kindles
lust, is his gift; that gold which has made that desolation upon the earth,
was the work of his hands; he gives us the bread we surfeit on; he fills the
cup, that intoxicates us; the world is the Lords, and all that therein is, but
yet this world bespots us not, because it is his, who cannot behold, much less
could make any unclean thing.

We must therefore search out another world: and you need not travel far, 1
ep. 2.16.
for you may stay at home, and find it in your selves; S. John has made the
discovery for you in his first Epistle, where he draws the map of it, and
divides it to our hands into three provinces or parts; the first, the lust of
the flesh, where unlawful pleasures sport themselves; secondly, the lust of
the eyes, where covetousness builds her an house; thirdly, and the pride of
life which whets a sword for the Revenger, erects a throne for the Ambitious,
raises up a triumphant Arch for the vainglorious; this is the world, says S.
John, even a world of wickedness; this inverteth the whole course of Nature,
makes the wheel of the Creation move disorderly; this world within us, makes
that world without us an enemy; makes beauty deceitful, wine a mocker, riches
a snare works that into sin, out of which, we might have made a key to open
the gates of Heaven; drops its poison under every leaf, upon every object, and
by its mixture with the world, ingenders that serpent, which spets the poison
back again upon us, and not only bespots, James 1.15.
and defiles, but stings us to death: for when Lust has conceived it brings
forth sin, and when sin is finished it defiles a man, and leave those spots
behind it, which deface him, and gives him a thousand several shapes; the
Schools call it maculam peccati the blot and stain of sin, which is of no
positive reality, but a deprivation, and defect of beauty in the soul, and
varies, as shadows do, according to the diversity of those bodies, that cast
it. We see then, that there is a world within us, as well as without us, and
when these two are in conjunction, when our lust joins it self to the things of
this world, as the prodigal is said to do to a master in a far country, then
follows pollution and deformity, and as many spots, as there be sins, which are
as many as the hairs of our head; Beauty brings in deformity, riches poverty,
plenty brings leanness into the soul; and therefore to conclude this, to keep
our hearts with diligence, and to keep our selves unspotted of the world, is a
main and principal part of our Religion, and will keep us members of Christ,
and parts of the Church, when profaneness, and coverousnesse, which is
Idolatry, shall have laid her discipline, her honor in the dust: A man of
tender bowels and a pure heart is as the Church; and the gates of hell cannot
prevail against him. By this we imitate that God we worship, we draw near unto
him, as near as flesh and mortality will permit; our escaping the spots and
pollutions of this world makes us followers of that God, who marks every spot
we have, and is not touched, sees us in our blood and pollution and is not
defiled, beholds all the wickedness in the world, and yet remains the same for
ever, even goodness and purity it self; this makes us partakers, as Saint
Peter speaks of the Divine nature, in a word, 2 Pet. 1.4.
to be in the world and tread it under our feet, to be in Sodom, and to be a
Lot, on the hills of the robbers, and do no wrong, to be in the midst of snares
and not be taken; to be in Paradise, Import.
and see the Apple pleasant to the sight, to be compast about with glorious
objects of delight and pleasures, and not to Taste or Touch or Handle, is the
nearest assimilation that Dust and Ashes, that mortal man can have to his
Creator.

I may well then call these two the Essential parts of Religion: Antigoni
Imaginem ^otegenes obliquam fecit, ut quod corpore deerat, picturae potius
deesse videretur, tantumque eam partem oslendit, quam toram poterat ostendere.
Plin. Not. Hist. l. 35. c. 11.
of which as you have taken a short several view, so be pleased to observe
also their mutual dependence and necessary connection; for if either be
wanting, you spoil the whole piece; for neither will my charity to my brother
entitle me to Religion, if I be an enemy to my self; nor my abstaining from
evil Canonize me a saint, if my goodness be not diffusive on others, and if we
draw out in our selves the picture of Religion, but with one of these, we do
but like the painter, who to flatter Antigonus, because he had but one eye,
Drew but the half face.

For first, to visit the Fatherless and widows, i. e. to be plenteous in good
works, ista sunt quasi incunabula pietatis says Gregory, Augustine.
these are the very beginings and nurcery of the love of God, and there is no
surer, and readier step to the love of God whom we have not seen, then by the
love of our Brethren whom we see; Gregor.
Tunc ad alta charitas mirabiliter surgit, cum ad ima proximorum se
misericorditer attrahit, Then our charity begins to improve itself, and rise as
high as Heaven, when it bows and descends, and falls low, to sit with a
Brother in the Dust; and if you search the Scriptures, if you look over Christ's
Sermon on the Mount, you will easily be induced to believe, that the greatest
service we can do to God, is to serve one another in love, who made us all, and
to this end; alterutra diligentia charitatis, as Tertul. calls it; This mutual
and reciprocal work of charity in upholding each other, is that which makes us
indeed the servants of Christ.

Secondly, as compassion to our Brethren is a fair preparation to purity of
life, so does purity of conversation commend our liberality, and makes it to be
had in remembrance in the sight of the Lord; Compassion in a profane, impure
person, is but a sudden forced motion, is but by fits and starts, for sure it
cannot stay, and dwell in such a sty. He that wallows in the pleasures of this
world, he that devotes himself to riot and luxury, cannot gain the title of
religious by some cup of cold water, some piece of money, which he gives; He
that gathers by oppression, and then lets fall an Alms, does but steal an Ox
to make a Sacrifice, perdere scit, Tae. 1. Hist.
donare nescit, as Piso said of Otho. He knows how to blast and spoil, but not
how to give an Alms; and commonly those winds blow not out of the Treasury of
the Lord: this bounty flows not from the clear Fountain of Divine love, but
has some other spring. Thus to visit the fatherless and widows, and to reach
out that hand unto them, which is stained with the blood of others, is not pure
and undfiled Religion, it may be Bread, it is not an Alms, that is brought by
the Hand of an Oppressor, or Pharisee.

And therefore in the next place, as they bear this fair correspondence and
mutually uphold each other, so we must not think it possible to separate them.
For some there be who come on slowly to the works of charity, because they are
not guilty of those sins, Greg. Hom. 36. in Evang.
which have shame written in their very foreheads, pigri ad exercenda bona
praecipua, quia securi, quod non commiserint mala Graviora, as Greg. are very
backward to to good, because they have not been overforward to do evil; dull
and heavy, to the performance of the best deeds, because they have not been
active in the worst; men, for the many of them, of more forecast, then
conscience, that owe their morality not to the love of God, but the world,
knowing well enough, that those vices which the world cries down, are commonly
enemies to thrift, delightful but costly; there being scarce any one of them,
which is not a stake in his way, which makes haste to be rich, and therefore
they do abstain, that they may not abstain, abstain from these disgraced
expensive vices, that their abstinence from these may be as a warrant, or
commission for them, to make their Brethren their daily sustenance, and to eat
them up as they eat Bread, to devour these Temples of the Holy Ghost with as
little regret, as they do those, which are made with hands: And this is a
common fault amongst Christians; to think the performance of one part of our
Duty to be an Apology for the neglect of the other, and that the observance of
some few precepts, will absolve us from the breach of the rest, that a sigh is
louder then an oath, and can sooner call down a pardon, then the flying Book
can bring a curse; that the diligence of the Ear will answer for the boldness
of the Hand: That a Fast will make Sacrilege a Virtue, and the keeping of the
seventh Day, acquit us of those sins which we have resolved already to corumit
in the other six.

Indeed says Basil, it is a great deal easier to do nothing at all, then to
finish and perfect a good work. Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not commit
Adultery, Thou shall not steal, Those are Negative precepts, and require but
(...) but forbeatance and sitting still; a not drawing to the Harlots lips, a
not touching the wedge of gold, a not taking up the instruments of cruelty, but
to love our Neighbor, as our selves, to fell all and give to the poor, to
visit the Fatherless and Widows in their affliction, are (...), works fit for a
Soldier, Basil in Ps. 1.
and strong man in Christ; and we must beat down many enemies, many wild
passions in our way, before we can raise our selves to this height, nor can any
man take this Honor to himself, but he that is called and fitted of God, as
were Abraham, and Isaac, and those Patriarcks and Apostles, who were full of
good works: Both then are required at our hands, and if God has joined them
both together, let no man take upon him to divorce or put them asunder.

For in the next place, these two thus linkt and united together, will keep
Religion pure and undefiled, which I told you were as the colors and beauty of
it; the Beauty of Holiness, which has its color and Grace, from whence it
has its being and strength, and if it be true, will shine in the perfection of
Beauty. Religion, if it be true, and not a name only is, as a virgin pure, and
undefiled, and makes us so, and espouses us to Christ; and as the father tells
us, Omnia virginis, virgo sunt, all that a virgin has is so a virgin, Basil l.
de virginitate.
her eyes not touched with vanity, her ears not defloured with evil
communication, her thoughts not ravished with the insiliencie of wanton
desires, her taste not violated with studied dainties, and devised meats, but in
all is like her self, a Virgin: So is this Religion, simple, and solid; Full of
it self, and receives no Heterogeneous matter, but is ever the same, and about
the same: There is nothing in our love, which sowres our Justice, nothing in
our Justice to kill our Compassion, nothing in our liberality to defile our
Chastity, nothing in our Fear to beat down our Confidence, Tertul. de coren.
mel.
nothing in our Zeal to consume our Charity. Christianus nusquam est aliud, a
true Religious man is always himself.

And as it is pure without mixture; so it is (...) and cannot subsist with
pollution and profaneness. 2 Tit. 2.5.
(...) now are our Olympicks. Now is the great trial to be made before God and
the Father: and our Religion consists in this, to fight it out, (...) legally,
a condition they were bound to, who were admitted to those games and exercises:
for before they did contend, in the proclamation was made to this purpose,
whether they were not Servants or Thieves, or otherwise of an infamous life;
and if any of these were proved against them, they were put back; The same
proclamation is made from Heaven, to those who enter our Olympicks, who enter
Religion and give up their names to Christ, that they may sight for mastery and
be crowned; our Savior tells them they must (...) sit down, and consider what
it is, in which they have engaged themselves, how full of trouble, how full of
danger, how many thorns and lets there be in their way, how many Adversaries;
not to think it is enough to name Christ; but when they name him, let them
depart from all Iniquity, and carefully provide, that the Integrity of their
life should rather commend their Religion, then that their Religion should be
suborned, and brought in to countenance the irregularity of their manners: For
we cannot but observe, that from the corruption of men's lives, have all those
corruptions and mixtures crept into Religion, which carry with them a near
likeness and resemblance to those spots, which men have received from the
world; Ambition has brought in her mixture, and covetousness hers, and
pleasures have dropped their poison, and left their very mark and characters in
the doctrines of men, which are framed and fashioned to favor and advance that
evil humor, which does first set them up. Covetousness and Ambition may set up
a Chair, or Consistory, and from thence shall provision be made to feed, and
nourish them both to a monstrous grouth: Nam ut in vita, l. 12. c. prim.
sic in causis spes improbas habent says Quintil. for those unlawful hopes,
and foul desires, which sway us in our lives, appear again, and show themselves
as full of power to pervert, and mislead us in point of Doctrine. One would
think that the world had nothing to do in the School of Christ, that Mammon
could not hold the pen of the scribe, or conclude in the Schools, or have a
voice and suffrage in a Council, that money, and honor, and pleasure, could
bring nothing to the stating of a Question, but through the corruptness of men's
minds, and manners, it has in all ages so fallen out, that these have been
the great deciders of Controversies, have started Questions, and resolved them,
have called Councels, and decreed with them; for we may be soon persuaded it
was no other spirit then this, which was sent from Rome in a Cloakbag to the
Council of Trent, we say the World; we have seen enough to raise such a
Thought: That the Church has been governed, that, That which we call Religion,
has been carried on by private Interest. From hence are those corruptions of
Truth, and mixtures in Religion; From hence those Generations of Questions,
those Catalogues of Herefies; From hence so many Religions, and none at all,
for Faction cannot be Religion, (for it cuts off the fairest part and member
she ha^, which is Charity) And thus, if Religion lose one of these colors, she
loses her beauty; If she be not pure, she cannot long be sincere and entire,
and if she be defiled, she will receive Additions; the worship of Saints to the
worship of God, the sire of Purgatory to the blood of Christ, the indulgence of
man, to the free pardon of God, Irreverence and profaneness to our hatred of
superstition, and to our zeal, oppression, and murder: In a word, if it be not
pure without mixture, and undefiled without pollution, it is not Religion.

And now I have showed you the picture of Religion in little, The Ratification.
represented it to you in these two; Doing of Good, and abstaining from Evil;
filling the hungry with good things, and purging, and emptying our selves of
all uncleanness; you have its beauty in its Graceful and Glorious Colors of
Purity and Undefiledness, Dignum Deo speciaculum, a picture to be hung up in
the Church, nay, before God himself; for thus it appears Coram Deo and Pare
before God and the Father, and has its ratification from Him. He was the first
that set it up to be looked upon: He has revealed his will by his Son, who is
the wisdom of his Father, who gave unto us the words which his Father gave
him; which give us a full, John 17.8.
and exact rule of life, a method of Obedience and Glory, the way to be like
him in this world, and to see him in the next, and there needs no other method,
no other way, no other Rule, nor a Basil, or a Benedict to enlarge it; nor is
it of so easy and quick dispatch, that it has left to men leisure for further
practice, nor so imperfect, that it should need supply from a second Hand: why
should the fancy, the unsettled, whirling fancy of a man who is ignorant as a
beast before him, take the boldness to prompt, and instruct the wisdom of the
Almighty? quod a Deo discitur totum est, all that we need learn, all that we
can learn, he alone can teach us. By this, Christian Religion has the
prerogative above all other Religions in the world; for though there be many
that are called Gods as S. Paul speaks; 1 Cor. 8.5.
though there be many that are called religions, yet unto us as there is but
one God, so there is but one Religion, which is commentum divinitatis the
invention, or rather the Revelation of the Deity, and had no author, could have
no author but God himself. Take that which seems to carry a fairer show and
comes abroad (...) like Agrippa, and Bernice with great pomp and ceremony,
with voluntary Humility, Blind obedience, with Sackcloth, and fasting, with a
pilgrims staff, with penance and satisfaction; and we know from what hands it
came; ab Hominibus and per Homines of men, and by men, who, for many of them,
drew Religion out of the soul into the outward man, betook themselves to this
bodily exercise, as to a Sanctuary, so to avoid the continual luctations and
lasting Agonies of the mind, enters Religion (that is the phrase) but carried
little Charity, and all those spots they received from the world along with
them. What voice from Heaven did Charles the fifth the Duke of Parma, and
others hear, that having lived in all state and pomp, they should count it
meritorious to be buried in the Hood of a Capuchin? or what satisfaction is
this Coram Deo and Pa^re, before God and the Father?

Again, take that which indeed is called Religion, and with that noise and
vehemence, as if there were none but that, yet is as different from it as a
picture from a man; Take all our mimick gestures, our forced and studied
deportment, the Pharisaical extermination of the Countenance, our libelling the
Times (which we help to make evil) our zeal, our revenge, our indignation
against sin in all, but our selves, all these are but puppets of our own
making, a creation of a sick and distempered fancy, and do but justify us
Coram Hominibus before men, Luke 16.15.
says our Savior, and those too no wiser then our selves, but that which
follows defaceth all our pageantry, Spectat nos ex alto Deus rerum arbiter; men
see us, who see but our face, but God also is a spectator, and He knows the
Heart. Take that zeal, which consumes not our selves, but others about us; this
fire is not from Heaven, nor was it kindled by the Father of lights; that hand
which is so ready to take a Brother by the throat, was never guided by the
Author of our Religion, who is our Father: That tongue which is full of
Bitterness and reviling, was never touched by a Cherubin, but set on fire of
Hell. These are not Religions Coram Deo and Patre before God and the Father,
but this Religion to do good, and abstain from evil ex alto origin ducit
acknowledges no author but the God of Heaven, has God and the Father to bear
witness to it, was foreshewed by the Prophets, chundered out by the Apostles
and Christ himself, who was the Author and Finisher of our Faith and Religion.

And this may serve, The Application.
first, to make us in love with this Religion, because it has such a founder
as God the Father who is wisdom it self, and can neither be deceived, nor
deceive us. Ye men and Brethren, and whosoever among you fears God, to you is
this word of salvation sent; Acts 13.26. sent to you from Heaven; from God and
the Father; in other things you are very curious, and ever desire to receive
them from the best hands: what a present is a picture of Apelles making? or a
statue of Lysippus? not the watch you wear, but you would have it from the best
Artificer; and shall our curiosity spend it self on vanities, and leave us
careless, and indifferent in the choice of that, which must make our way to
eternity of bliss, shall we make darkness our pavilion round about us, and
please our selves in error, when Heaven bows and opens it self to receive us?
and shall we worship our own imaginations, and not hearken what God and the
Father shall say? what a shame is it when God from Heaven points with his
finger to the rule; Haec est this is it; that we should frame a Religion to our
selves, that every man's fancy, and humor, or which is the height of impiety,
every man's sin should be his Lawgiver? that when there can be but one, there
should be so many Religions, Arbitrary Religions, such as we are pleased to
have, because they smile upon us, and flatter and bolster up our irregular
desires; a Hearing Religion, and a Talking Religion, and a Trading Religion, a
Religion that shall visit the Widow and Orphan, but rather to devour, then
refresh them? Behold, and look no farther, God the Father has made a Religion,
which is pure and undefiled to our hands; and therefore as Seneca counsels
Polybius; when thou would forget all other things, Cogita Caesarem, entertain
Caesar in thy thoughts; so that we may forget all other sublimary, worldly, I
may say, Hellish Religions, let us think of this Religion, whose Author and
Founder is God, whose wisdom is infinite, whose power uncontrolable, whose
authority unquestionable; for talk what we will of authority, the authority of
man is like himself, and can but bind the man, and that the frailest and
earthliest part of him, only God is Rex mentium the King of our minds, and no
authority in Heaven, or in Earth, can bind or loose a Soul but his, who first
breathed it into man; Come then let us worship and fall down before God the
Father, the maker both of us, and our Religion.

Again in the second place, if Saint James be Canonical, and Authentic, if
this be true Religion, then it will make up an answer sufficient to stop the
mouth of those of the Romish party, who are very busy to demand at our hands a
catalogue of Fundamentals, and where our Church was before the days of
Reformation, (...) as it is in the Proverb; These and such like they put up
unto us, as Archytas did his rattles into childrens hands, to keep them from
doing mischief; that being busy, and taken up with these, we may have less
leisure to pull down her Idols, or discover her shame; Do they ask what truths
are Fundamental? Faith supposed, as it is; here they are charity to our selves,
and others; nihil ultra scire, est omnia scire, to know this, is to know all we
need to know; for it is not sufficient to know that, which is sufficient to
make us happy? but, Tert. de praescript.
if nothing will satisfy them but a Catalogue of particulars, Habent Mosen and
Prophetas, they have Moses and the Prophets, they have the Apostles, and if
they find them not there, in vain shall they seek for them at our hands; they
may if they please seek them there, and then number them out, as they do their
Prayers, by Beads, and present them by Tale, but if they will yet know, what is
Fundamental in our conceit, and what not, they may (...) draw them out with
both hands; for first let them observe what points they are, in which we agree
with their Church, and (if they be in Scripture) let them set them down, if
they please, as Fundamental in our account, and on the other hand, let them
mark in what points we refuse Communion with them, and they cannot but Think
that we esteem those points for no Fundamentals. And again do they, who measure
Religion rather by the pomp and state it carries with it, then the power and
majesty of the Author, whose command alone made it Religion, ask us, where our
Religion was in the days before there was a withdrawing from the Communion
with that Church, we may answer; it was here in the Text; for haec est this is
it; and if they further question us, where it was professed, we need give no
other reply then this; it was professed, where it was professed; if it were not
protest in any place, yet was it true Religion, for the truth depends not on
the profession of it, nor is it less truth, if none receive it; but professed it
was even amongst them, in the midst of them, round about them; but wheresoever
it were, Haec erat, this was it, this was true Religion before God and the
Father, to visit the Fatherless and Widows in their Affliction, and to keep our
selves unspotted of the World.

To conclude then. Conclus. 3.
Men and Brethren, are these things so? and is this only true Religion to do
good and abstain from evil? what a busy noise then does the world make for
Religion, when it offers it self and falls so low, offers it self to the
meanest understanding, the narrowest capacity, and throws it self into the
embraces of any that will love it; Littus Hyla, Hyla, Omne sonabat, Religion is
the talk of the whole world, it is preached on the house tops, and it is cried
up in the streets, we are loud for it, and smother it in that noise, we write
for it, and leave it dead in that letter, to be found no where but in our
books; we fight for it, and it is drowned in the blood that is spilt; and Saint
James his, that is, Christ's Religion is little thought of, but trampled under
foot in the quarrel: For if this should take place amongst the sons of men, we
should have more religion and less noise; for haec est, this is it, which alone
is able to slumber this noise, to still the raging of the Sea, and the tumults
of the people: This would stay the hand of the scribe to write less, and to
more purpose; This would break the Bow, and cut the Spears, and burn the
Charriots with fire: Could this Religion, Could the Gospel of Christ prevail;
Could we deny our selves, and take up the Cross, and keep our selves unspotted
from the world, there would be then no wars, nor rumurs of wars: Let us not
deceive our selves; it is the neglect and want of this, that has been the main
cause of all these hot contentions and digladiations which have been, and as
yet are in the Church of Christ, I mean amongst those who call one another
Christians, whose mark and badge it is, to love one another, but they lie one
to another, and love the world, and in a base but fierce emulation justle one
another out of it, and so lose the thing, and retain nothing but the name,
which is less then a shadow, rejoice together at the news of a Savior, and
neglecting this Religion in the Text, are all lost, are disciples of Christ,
but such disciples as shall be punished with more stripes then they that never
heard of his name. This, this is it, that condemns the world; that makes it an
Aceldama, a field of blood, as Hell it self, full of confusion; for if men had
been careful to walk by the same rule, which was as plain and manifest, as if
it had been written with the Sunbeams, and kept themselves in a joint
obedience to this Religion, to those truths wherein they could not but agree,
and not sought out many inventions, the seed-plots, and nurseries of contention
and debate, (for from hence they spring, and here they will grow, and grow
thick, and multiply) if our Religion had been pure and undefiled, it had saved
many a poor carkas from the fire; and I may be bold to say, many a soul from
Hell; and though men's opinions in other matters had been as different as their
shape and complexion, yet their agreement in the known duties of Religion,
would have been a Fence and Bulwark strong enough, to have kept contention from
breaking in with fire and sword. But when Ambition and Covetousness and other
low and vile respects had taken possession of the hearts of men, then matter of
Religion, became matter of Faction, and the fuel of that fire, which consumed
many, but troubled all: then began men to rack the Scriptures, to make them
speak what they would have them, even that which might dilate their
phylacteries, and stretch forth the Curtains of their Habitation, and feed that
noxious humor in them which was most predominant, and like those Soldiers in
Tacitus malle victoriam, quam pacem, to desire not peace, but victory; though
most times, which side soever prevailed, it was not so much against an adverse
party, as the truth it self. This has been a great, nay, the greatest evil
under the Sun, and has brought in so many Religions into the world, that many
men are not as yet well resolved which to choose, the Devils subtilest engine to
bring in at last an opinion, that there is none at all.

By this you may see of what sovereign use my Text is, even as a precious balm,
which can so easily allay the swelling, and raging controversies, with which
the Church is so much troubled, (as some Philosophers have told us that oil
powered into the sea when it is most tempestuous does presently calm it; Mare
oleo tranquillatur. Plin Not. Phil. l. 2. c. 103.
many have wished, that there were a Judge of controversies, which might
appease these broils, with which Christendom is distracted; and some have
thought it necessary, and therefore have set one up, and built a chair with
this privilege; that he that fits in it, though he be an Heretic can never
err. Behold here is a Judge of controversies, teaching every man to judge and
give sentence of life or death in himself; if this be his Religion, he is
alive, and shall live for evermore, but if he case this behind him, and shut
charity out of doors, he is condemned already; this is our Judge of
controversies, and I think, we need no more. The Jews say, that when Elias
shall come, he shall resolve all their doubts; Lo Elias is come already, and in
these words of my Text has sufficiently resolved all controversies in
Divinity, so far forth as is necessary for our information; Thou can not now
ask what lack I yet? for here are (...) all that Jesus did teach, and if we
can interpret this Text; that is, express and manifest it in our lives and
conversation, then have we (...) confidence with God and the Father. To
conclude,

Let us therefore as many as be perfect, be thus minded, let us cleave to this,
and make it our guide and Angel in our way, and if you be otherwise minded, if
in other things less necessary you err as men, God shall reveal even the same
unto you, as far as his wisdom sees it necessary; it is that excellent counsel
of S. Paul Phil. 3.15. Let us be thus minded, and let us have this picture of
Religion drawn out by S. James ever hanging before our eyes, let us look upon
it, let us walk with it, let us go to bed with it, let us carry it about with
us whithersoever we go, I was about to say, let us fall down and worship it
(you need not fear superstition) for this is the worship of God himself; Oh let
it be as an ornament to our heads, let us hang it up in our best room, our
hearts, but so as to show it to the widow and the fatherless, Plin. Neg. l.
38.8.
let us make it, as Polycletus called his most excellent piece Canona a rule
and pattern, by which we may draw and express it, and make it visible in our
life and conversation, that men may see it, and glorify God, even the Father
which is in Heaven, that Angels may see it and applaud it; that God himself may
see it, and fix an Euge upon it, well done, for it is done before me, and
according to the pattern which I set up, and this shall keep us at peace within
our selves, this shall make our enemies at peace with us, this shall be to us
Righteousness, and peace, and glory, and peace shall be upon us, as many as
walk according to this rule and mercy and upon the Israel of God.

Which God Grant. etc.

THE SECOND SERMON.
1 SAMUEL 3.18. And Samuel told Eli every whit, and kept nothing from him. And He
said, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him Good.


THe words are the words of old Eli the Priest; and have reference to that
message which young Samuel brought him from the Lord, such a message, as did
make both the ears of every one that heard it tingle, ver. 11. Come see the
work of sin, what desolation it makes upon the Earth. Ophni, and Phinehas, the
two profane, and adulterous Sons must die: old Eli, the indulgent Father, the
High Priest must die; Thirty four thousand Israelites must fall by the sword of
the Philistines: The Arc, the glory of Israel must be taken, and be delivered
up in triumph unto Dagon; this was the word of the Lord, which he spoke by the
mouth of the child Samuel, and not a word of his did fall to the ground at the
19. verse: for what God foretells, is done already; with him that calls the
things that are not, as if they were, as the Prophet speaks, there is no
difference of times, Nothing past; Nothing to come; all is present; So that old
Eli did see this bloody Tragedy acted, before it was done; saw it done before
the signal to Battle was given; did see his Sons slain, whilst the Fleshook was
yet in their hands; himself fall, whilst he stood with Samuel; the Israelites
slain before they came into the field, the Arc taken whilst it was yet in the
Tabernacle; a fad, and killing presentment, whether we consider him as a
Father, or a High Priest; a Father looking upon his Sons falling before the
Ark, which they stood up and fought for; as a High Priest beholding the people
slain, and vanquished, and the Ark, the Glory of God, the Glory of Israel, in
the hands of Philistines.

But the word of the Lord is gone out, and will not return empty and void; for
what he says shall be done, and what he binds with an oath is irreversible,
and must come to pass, and it is not much material, whether it be accomplished
to morrow, or next day, or now instantly, and follow as an Echo to the
Prediction, nam una est scientia Futurorum, Hier. ad Pammach. adversus errores
Joann. Hierosol.
says S. Hierome, for the knowledge of things to come is one and the same: And
now it will be good to look upon these heavy Judgments, and by the terror of
them fly from the wrath to come; as the Israelites were cured by looking on the
Serpent in the Wilderness; (For even the Justice of God, when it speaks in
thunder, makes a kind of melody, when it touches, and strikes upon an
humble, submissive, yielding heart.) Behold old Eli an High Priest to teach
you, who being now within the full march, and show of the Enemy, and of those
judgments which came apace toward him like an Armed man not to be resisted, or
avoided, and hearing that from God which shook all the powers of his soul,
settles, and composes his troubled mind with his consideration, That is was
the Lord: in this silences all murmur, slumbers all impatience, buries all
disdain, looks upon the hand that strikes, bows, and kisseth it; and being now
ready to fall, raises himself up, upon this pious and Heavenly resolution
Dominus est, It is the Lord, Though the people of Israel fly, and the
Philistines triumph, though Ophni and Phinehas fall, Though himself fall
backward, and break his neck, Though the Ark be taken, yet Dominus est It is
the Lord; let him do what seems him good.

Which words are a Rhetorical Enthymeme, persuading to humility, and a
submissive acquiescience under the Hand, the mighty Hand of God, by his power,
his justice, his wisdom, which all meet and are concentred in this, Dominus
est, It is the Lord. He is omnipotent, and who has withstood his power? He is
just, and will bring no evil without good cause; He is wise, and whatsoever
evil he brings, he can draw it to a good end, and therefore Faciat quod bonum
in oculis, let him do what seems him good. Or you may observe first, a
judicious discovery, from whence all evils come. Dominus est, It is the Lord.
Secondly, a well-grounded resolution (...) to behave our selves decently, and
fittingly, as under the power, and justice, and wisdom of God, Let him do what
seems him good. The first is a Theological Axiom Dominus est, It is the
Lord, There is no evil in a City, Which he does not do. The second a conclusion
as necessary, as in any Demonstration: most necessary I am sure for weakness
to bow to Omnipotency: In a word, The Doctrine most certain, Dominus est, It is
the Lord... All these evils of punishment are from him; and the resolution,
(which is as the use and application of it) most safe Faciat quod bonum in
oculis, Let him do what seems him good.

Of these we shall speak in their order: and in the prosecution of the first
(for we shall but touch upon, and conclude with the last) that you may follow
me with more ease, we will draw the lines by which we are to pass, and confine
our selves to these four particnlars, which are most eminent, and remarkable
in the story. First, that Gods people the true professors may be delivered up
to punishment for sin. Secondly, that in these general judgments upon a
people, the good many times are involved with the evil, and fall with them.
Thirdly, that Gods people may be delivered up into the hands of Philistines and
Aliens, men worse then themselves. Fourthly, that the Ark, The glory of their
profession, may be taken away; These four, and then fix up this inscription,
Dominus est, It is the Lord, and when we have acquitted his Justice, and wisdom
in these particulars, cast an eye back upon the inscription and see what beams
of light it will cast forth for our direction. Dominus est, it is the Lord, etc.

And in the first place, of Ophni and Phineas, the Text tells us, That they
hearkened not unto the voice of their Father, because the Lord would destroy
them, which word Quia is not casual, but illative, 2 Chapter v. 25.
and implies not the cause of their sin, but of their punishment: they did
not therefore sin, because God would punish them; but they hearkened not to the
voice of their Father, therefore the Lord destroyed them, as we use to say, the
Sun is risen, because it is day; for the day is not the cause of the Suns
rising, but the Sun rising makes it day. They were sons of Belial, vessels
already fitted for wrath, as we may see, by their many fowl enormities, and
therefore were left to themselves, and their sins, and to wrath which at last
devoured them! Gods Decree, whatsoever it be, is immanent in himself, and
therefore could not because of that disobedience and wickedness, which was
extrameous and contrary to him, nor could there be any action of Gods, either
positive, or negative joined with it, which might produce such an effect, and
what need of any such Decree or Action, to make them disobedient, who refuse to
hearken to their Father, or to harden them whose sin was now great before the
Lord? But we must conclude these two within the 34000. that were slain; And
now, C 2.17.
the delivering up the people in such a number to the sword may seem to
prejudice, and call in question the Justice of God, what? His people? His own
people, culled out of the Nations of the earth, must these fall by the sword of
these Aliens, these enemies to God, that know not his Name? shall not the Judge
of all the earth do right? yes he will: for even in this, Dominus est, It is
the Lord.

For as the Lord once said to his people: Es. L. 1.
where is the bill of your mothers divorcement, whom I have put away? so here
he may ask, were is that Bill, and obligation, which I made to protect you, if
there be any brought forth, we shall find it rather like a Bill of sale, then
the conveyance of an absolute Gist: on the one side, God promises something on
his behalf, on the other, there is something required on ours; Read the
Covenant, and contract between them: they had his promise to be their God, and
they were the sons of promise; Gal. 4. but then, these promises were
conditional, and in every conditional promise, there is an obligation and
command: I will be their God, that is his promise, and they shall be my people,
that is their duty; and if these meet not, the promise is void, and of none
effect. There is not a more true and natural gloss upon this promise, than
that of Azariah, in the Chronicles, 2 Chronicles 15.2.
Hear you men of Asa, of all Judah, and Benjamin, The Lord is with you whilst
you are with him; and if you seek him, he will be found of you, but if you
forsake him, he will forsake you, both must go together, or both are lost; for
if they will be his people, then his promise is firm, being found in the
eternal essence of God, and so as constant, and immutable as Himself: but if
they break his commandment, and put it from them: Then to be their God, were
not to be their God; then to make good his promises were to vilisy, and debauch
them: This were liberalitarem ejus mutare in servitutem, Tertul.
to turn his liberality into slavery, prodigally to pour the Precious oil of
his goodness into a vessel that could not hold it, to protect and countenance
a man of Belial; because he bears the name of an Israelite. And therefore in
the 27. of Isaiah at the 11. verse, where God upbraids his people of folly, he
presently cancells the bill, and puts them out of his protection, Therefore he
that made them will not have mercy upon them, he that sramed them will show
them no favor, what though they be the people which he has purchased? yet he
will take no care of his own purchase; though they be his possession, he will
give them up, he will not do what he promised, and yet be Truth it self; for if
they do not their Duty, he did not promise; Though he made them; though he
formed them; yet he will not own them, but forsake and abhor his own work; he
will surrender them up, and deliver them to Destruction. Even here, upon the
forehead of a desolate, and rejected Israelite, we may set up this Inscription,
Dominus est, It is the Lord. And now, if we look up upon the Inscription,
Dorrinus est, It is the Lord, we may read and interpret it, without a Guide,
and learn not to Trifle with God, because he is our Lord, not to mock him with
our Hypocrisy, and force in our profession to countenance our Sin, to be worse
then Philistines because we are Israelites, to be his Enemies, because we call
our selves Gods people; to be worse, then Turks or Jews, because we are
Christians. Oh the Happy times of the Infant Church, when the Pagan could find
nothing amongst the Christians to accuse, but their Name, and then what Times
are These, when you can scarce see any thing commendable in the Christian, but
the Name? you may call it, if you please, the dotage, or blindness, of the
Church; for the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord; The Israelite, the
Israelite, The Christian, the Christian, the Protestant, the Protestant. This
is the Music, with which most use to drive away the evil Spirit, all sad and
melancholy thoughts from their hearts: but indeed, (says Basil) the Devil does
(...) does dance, and leap for joy to hear it, when he hears not withal, the
noise of our groanings, of our prayers, of our good works, nor the Harmony of a
well tuned, and well composed life to go up to Heaven along with it. Oh what
pity is it that God should place us in Paradise in a place of pleasure and
safety, and we forfeit it, that he should measure out unto us, as it were, by
the line, a goodly Heritage, and we pluck up our own hedges, and lay our selves
open to every Wild-Beast, that he should make us his people, and we force him
to be our Enemy, in a word, that our Inheritance should beggar us, our security
betray us, and our royal prerogative undo us; and further we carry not this
consideration.

2. We pass to the second particular: and in the second place, in so great a
number as 34000, I may say, in the whole Commonwealth of Israel (for a
Commonwealth may suffer in a far less Number) we cannot doubt, but some there
were that fearred the Lord, and shall there be, as the Wiseman speaks, 2
Eccle. 14. Horat. Genesis 18.23.
the same event to the righteous, and the wicked, to the clean, and him that
sacrifices not? will God Incesto addere integrum, will he destroy, says
Abraham, the righteous with the sinner? This indeed is the depth of God; and a
great part of the world have been troubled at the very sight of it; but yet, if
we behold it with that light, which Scripture holds forth, we shall find it is
not so unfordable, but we shall make some passage through it.

For, I if we could not make answer; or render any reason, yet this ought not
to prejudice, or call in question the justice of it, especially with us men,
who are of Dull, and slow understandings, and when we have wearied our selves
in searching out causes of natural things, yet after all our sweat and oil
cannot attain so far, as to know, why the grass which is under our feet is
green, rather then purple, or of any other color, and therefore far below
those Supernaturals; and most unfit to search out those causes, which God may
seem to have locked up in his own Breast; God is the lord of all the earth, Psalm.
90.4.
and as the Prophet tells us a thousand years in his sight are but as one day,
so in the case we now speak of, a thousand, a million, a world of men are with
him, but as one man, and when the Lord Chief Justice of Heaven and Earth shall
sit to do judgment upon sinners (what Caligula once wantonly wished to the
people of Rome) all the world before him have but as it were, one neck, and if
it please him, by that jus pleni Dominii, by that full power and Dominion he
has over his creature, A Platone dicitur, Deus (...) vide Plutarch. quaest
convival. l. 8. q. 2.
He may, (as he welneer did in the Deluge) strike it off at a blow. His
judgments are past finding out, and therefore not to be questioned; He is the
great Geometrician of the World, which made all things in number, weight, and
measure, and has infinitely surpast all human inventions whatsoever, and
therefore we cannot do him less honor, then Hiero King of Sicily did to
Archimede the great Mathematician; for when he saw the Engines which he made,
and the mavelous effects which they did produce, he caused it to be
proclaimed, that whatsoever Archimede did after affirm, how improbable soever
it might seem, yet should not once be called into question, but be received and
entertained as a truth; Let the course of things be carried on as it will, let
death pass over the door of the Egyptian, and smite the Israelite, let Gods
Thunder miss the house of Dagon, and shiver his own Tabernacle, yet God is
just and true, and every man a liar, that dares but ask the question; why does
He this? Look over the whole Book of Job, and you shall see how Job, and his
Friends are tossed up and down on this great deep: For it being put to the
question, why Job was thus fearfully handled, his Friends ground themselves
upon this conclusion; that all affliction is for sin, and so lay folly and
hypocrisy to his charge, and tell him roundly, that the judgment of God had
now found him out, though he had been a close irrigular, and with some art and
cunning hid himself from the eye of the World; but Job on the contrary, as
stoutly pleads and defends his innocence, his justice, his liberality, and
could not attain to the sight of the cause, for which Gods hand was so heavy on
him; why should his Friends urge him any more, Job 30.32.
or persecute him as God? they dispute in vain, for in their answers, he sees
nothing but lies. At last when the controversy could have no issue, C. 21.34.
Deus e machina God himself comes down from Heaven, and by asking one question
puts an end to the rest, Job. 38.2.
who is this, that darkneth Counsel with words without knowledge? condemns Job,
and his Friends of ignorance, and weakness, in that they made so bold and
dangerous attempt, as to seek out a cause, or call his judgment into question.

2. It may be we may save the labor that we need not move the question, or seek
any reason at all, for in these common calamities which befall a people, it may
be God does provide for the Righteous, and deliver him, though we perceive it
not. Some examples in Scripture make this very probable; the old World is not
drowned, till Noah be stripped, and in the Ark, the shower of fire falls not on
Sodom, till Lot be escaped; Daniel and his fellows, though they go away into
captivity with rebellious Judah, yet their captivity is sweetened with honors
and good respects, in the Land into which they go, and which was a kind of
leading captivity captive, they had favor, and were entreated as friends, by
their enemies, who had invaded and spoiled them. And may not God be the same
upon the like occasions? How many millions of righteous persons have been thus
delivered, whose names notwithstanding are no where recorded? some things of no
great worth are very famous in the world, when many things of better worth lie
altogether buried in obscurity caruerunt quia vale sacro, because they found
none who could or would transmit them to posterity. Vixere fortes ante
Agamemnona, no doubt, but before and since millions have made the like escapes,
though their memory lies raked up, and buried in oblivion.

But then, suppose the righteous do taste of the same cup of bitterness with
the wicked, yet it has not the same taste and relish to them both, for
calamity is not always a whip, Calamitas non est poena, militia est minus. Foe
lix.
nor does God always punish them whom he delivers over to the sword; to lose
my goods, or life is one thing, and to be punished, another, it is against the
course of Gods providence and justice, that innocence should come under the
lash; Gen 28.23.
shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? yes, he shall, and without any
breach of his justice, take away that breath of life which he breathed into our
Nostrils, though we had not sinned after the similitude of Adams transgression;
for he may do what he will with his own, and take away our goods or lives from
us, when and how he pleases, because he is Lord over them, and we have nothing
which we received not from his hands: God is not always angry, when he
strikes, nor is every blow, we feel, given by God the avenger, for he may
strike as a Father; and therefore these evils change their complexions, and
very natures with the subject upon whom they are wrought, they are, and have
the blackness of darkness in the one, but are as Angels, and messengers of
light to the other, and may lead the righteous through the valley of death into
the land of the living, when the wicked are hewn down by the sword, to be fuel
for the fire. What though they both be joined together in the same punishment,
as a Martyr, and a Thief in the same chain, August. de civitate Dei. l. 1. c. 8.
yet manet dissimilitudo passorum, in similitudine passionum; though the
penalties may seem alike, yet the difference is great betwixt the patients,
though the world perhaps cannot distinguish them; and death it self, which is a
key to open the gates of Hell to the one, may be no the other, what the Rabbles
conceive it would have been to Adam, had he not fallen, but osculum pacis a
kiss of peace, a gentle, and loving dismission into a better state, to
conclude this then, a people, a chosen people, a people chosen out of this
choice, Gods servants, and friends may be smitten, Josiah may fall in the
battle, Daniel may be lead into Captivity, John Baptist may lose his head, and
yet we may hold up our inscription Dominus est it is the Lord.

And now, let us but glance upon the inscription, and so pass to the third
particular; and the first sight of it may strike a terror into us, and make us
afraid of those sins, which bring these general judgments upon a Nation, as
Oppression, Prophanenes, Sacrilege, uncleanness (which are as visible in the
story of the Israelites, as their punishment) which you see carry a train,
which will enwrap our Posterity, our Family, our whole Country and like the
Dragons tail in the Revelation draws down the stars from Heaven, and brings
good men, even the Saints of God, within the compass, and smart of them: parce
Carthagini, si non tibi, said Tent. to Capula, if you well not be good to your
self, yet spare Carthage, spare your Country, spare the Charets of Israel and
Horsemen thereof, spare those Lots, which keep your Sodom from burning, who
when a Nation is ready to sink, and dissolve, bear up the pillars of it, know
ye not that the Saints shall judge the world says Saint Paul? who being first
acquitted by Christ, shall sit with him as his friends, and assessors, and
judge and condemn those sins, which brought them within the reach of Gods
temporal judgments, and overwhelmed them in the common Calamity and ruin of
their Country.

3. We pass now to the third particular: and if Israel must fall yet let her
not fall by the sword of a Philistine. Tell it not in Gath nor publish it in
Askelon was part of the Threnody, and Lamentation of David on the like
occasion, and he gives his reason; Lest the Daughters of the Philistines
rejoice, and the uncircumcised triumph: for besides the misery to have such an
enemy rejoice in their misery, 2 Samuel 1.20.
which will make that affliction, which is but a whip, a Scorpion; this Defeat
might seem to cast some disgrace, even upon their Religion; there being nothing
more common in the world, then to commend a false Religion by some fatal
miscariage of the professors of the true; to judge of Religion by its State and
spreading; to cry it up for Orthodox, when the Church has peace, and to
Anathematize it, as Heretical, when she is Militant, and under the Cross,
nothing more common with wavering and carnal men, then to lull themselves
asleep in most dangerous Errors, by no other Music, then the cries, and
lamentations of those who oppose them: If Ophni and Phinehas fall in the
battle, if Eli the High Priest break his neck, if the Ark be taken, then Dagon
is god; any thing is god, which is either the work of our hands, or our Fancy.
And therefore this may seem not only a rueful, but a strange spectacle, and
(as Diogenes said of Harpalus a notorious, but prosperous Thief) testimonium
adversus Deum di^ere to stand up as a witness against God himself, Tul. de
Not. Deer.
and the Government of the World: Tertul.
but the Father will tell us malus interpres Divinae providentiae humane
infirmitas, the weak and shallow considerations of men are but bad
interpretations of the providence of God, the wit of man, a poor Jacobs staff,
to take the height and depth, the true and full proportion of it. For as we
cannot judge of the Beauty of the Universe because that in regard of the
condition of our Mortality, we can be pleased but in part of it, and so cannot
at once, at one cast of our eye see the whole, in which those parts which
offend us, are at peace; no more can the Soul of man, which is confined within
a clod of Earth, judge of the course and Method of that Providence, which is
most like it self, in those events which seem most disproportionable, which is
then most strait and even, when sinners flourish, and just men are oppressed,
most equal when the honest man has not a mite, and the deceitful a Talent,
when the true Prophets are fed with the bread of affliction, and every Balaam
has his wages: when Israel falls, and the Philistin prevails, because we
cannot behold him, but in this, or that particular, but can no more follow him
in all his ways, then we can grasp the World in the palm of our hands.

And by this light we may discover, first, That true Religion cannot suffer
with the professors of it, but when they are slain with the sword, and wander
up and down destitute, afflicted, tormented, is still the same, (...), says
Basil, of the same hue and complexion, and in true esteem, more fair and
radiant, when her poor witnesses are under a cloud, in disgrace, nay, I will be
bold to say, (and whosoever rightly understands the nature of Religion, will
never gainsay it) that if it had not one professor breathing on the Earth, not
one that did dare to name, and own her (as Eliah once thought, there was but
one) yet Religion were still the same, reserved in the surest Archives we can
imagine, even in sinu Dei in the Bosom of God, the Lawgiver (Religion being
nothing else, but a Defluxion and emanation from him, a beam of his eternal
Law) so that, that which makes, and Constitutes a true Israelite, which is one
inwardly, as Saint Paul speaks, Romans 1.2.
and in the spirit, has too much of Immortality, of God in it to fall to the
ground, or expire, and be lost with the Israelite. Let not your hearts be
troubled, Religion can no more suffer, then God himself.

2. For secondly, If Religion could suffer, it suffered more by the Priests and
peoples sin, then the Philistines sword: for by them the name of God and
Religion was evil spoken of, Isa 52.5.
and that which cannot suffer, was made the object of their malice, and scorn;
as Nazianzen spoke of Julians persecution, that it was both a Comedy and
Tragedy, Invect. secunda
a Comedy full of scoffs and obtrectations, and a Tragedy full of Horror, and
yet the Comedy was the most Tragical and bloody of the two. And therefore God
Jealous of his Honor, awakes as one out of sleep, returns the scoff upon the
Philistine; and makes up the last Act of this Tragedy in his blood; first
punishes the guilty Israelite, and then the Executioner, the text says, He
smote them in the hinder parts, and put them to perpetual shame, Psalm. 78.66,
forcing them to make the similitude of their Emrods in gold, and to send them
back with the Ark as an Oblation for their sin; so that you see here Gods
Method, by which he ordinarily proceeds: first he prepares a sacrifice as we
read Zeph. 1.7. that is, appoints his people to slaughter, then bids his Guests
as it is in the same verse, sanctificat vocatos suos, as the vulgar read it,
sanctifies, that is, sets apart these Philistines, that they may be as Priests
to kill and offer them up, and when this is done, God falls upon the Priests
themselves, and makes them a sacrifice; Zeph. 2.4.
Gaza shall be forsaken, Askelon a desolation, they shall drive out Ashdod at
Noonday, and Ekron shall be rooted out: and now we may well conclude; that
God is just in all his ways, and righteous in all his judgments, and fix up
our inscription upon this particular also: when Israel is delivered up into the
hand of the Philistine; D minus est; it is the Lord.

And now, if we look well upon the inscription, we shall find it to be
like the pillar of the cloud, Exodus 14. a cloud of darkness to the Philistine,
but giving light to the Israelite. And 1. the Philistine has no reason to
boast of this, as a preferment, that he is made the instrument of God in the
execution of his judgments upon his people; for we shall find that it has
been one of the most dangerous, and fatal offices in the World, Nebuchadnezzar
was so, God called him to it, Jer. 21. Go up against the Land of Merathaim, or
of Rebels, and he did lead Israel into Captivity, but hear the word of the
Lord. How is the Hammer of the Lord cut a sunder, and broke; Jerusalem is
taken, but Shishak also shall fall, and in the 28. of that Prophecy, that cup
which was sent to Jerusalem, and the Cities of Judah, and the kings thereof,
and put into their hands to drink, at the 15. ver. is afterward put into the
hand of the king of Shishak to drink, and to be drunken, to spew, and fall;
Thus says the Lord, you shall certainly drink it, Jer. 25.27.28.
and he gives the reason, at the next verse: for lo, I begin to bring evil upon
the City, which is called by my Name, or where my Name is called upon; and
shall you go free, shall you go utterly unpunished? if you can raise such a
hope, then hear a voice from Heaven; which shall dash it to pieces; I have said
it, and I will make it good; you shall not go unpunished v. 29. I have begun
with my own house, but I am coming toward you in a Tempest of fire, to devour
yours, I have shaken my own Tabernacle, and the house of Dagon shall not,
cannot stand. For they, whom God appoints, as Executioners of justice upon his
people, are like the image, which the Tyrant saw in his dream, Daniel the 2.
partly iron, and partly clay partly strong, and partly broken. v. 42. First God
finds them apt; and fit, full of malice, and gall, (for whose hands were
fitter to fling stones at David, then his, whose mouth was full of curses? who
fitter to keep Gods people in bondage then a Pharaoh? or to lead them into
Captivity, then he, whom God did afterward drive into the fields amongst the
Beasts? who could have crucified the Lord of life, but the Jews?) and finding
them apt and fit, he permits them, gives these serpents leave to spit their
poison, gives these Hang-men leave to do their Office; This, his not hindering
them, was all the warrant, and commission they had; G^up against the Land can
be no more then this, I know you are upon your March, and I will not stand in
your way, to stay you, but you shall do me service against your wills, with
that malice which my Soul hates; (for we cannot think, that God inspired the
Tyrant, or sent a Prophet to him with the message to bid him do that, which he
threatens to punish) no: he does but permit them, he gives them leave to be his
Executioners, and in this his permission is their strength, they pursue the
Israelite, and lay on sure strokes; their malice is carried on in a Chariot of
four wheels, made up of cruelty, impatience, ambition, impudence, and drawn as
Bernard expresses it) with two wild horses, Bern. in Cant. Ser. 39.
earthly power, and secular pomp, and now they drive on furiously, and God is
as one asleep, as one that marks them not, because he will not hinder them, but
within a while he will awake; strike off their Chariot wheels, and restrain
them, say to them, as he does to the swelling Sea, Hitherto, you shall go, and
no farther, and them they are but clay, they crumble, and fall to nothing. Why
should the Philistine boast himself in his mischief? the goodness of God
endures yet daily, and is every day, Psalm. 51.2.
and in every age the same, and it is no concluding argument, that we please
God. when we are employed in the punishment of those that offend him, nor can
we thus argue, no more then we can attribute reason, and wisdom to an Ass,
because it pleased God once to make use of so contemptible a Creature, to
reprove the folly of a Prophet.

Secondly, it gives light to the Israelite, by which he may order his steps,
with more caution and wariness; For as our Savior says we may make a friend
of Mammon, and Saint Chrysostom adds even of the Devil himself, so may a true
Israelite make a friend of a Philistine, and they who survive, may learn by the
34000. who were slain, who being dead, yet speak unto them and us, to fly from
the wrath of God, who when we rebel against him, can punish us by far worse
then our selves. Oh, who would not look upon those sins, as the most horrid
spectacles in the World, for the punishment of which, God should cull out such
instruments, that are under a greater curse, fitter for the fire then those on
whom they are used? If we go on and continue in sin, Joel 2.25.
God may send out his great Army against us, his Grasshoppers, his Cankerworm,
and his Caterpillar, and eat up our Harvest; Habbac. 2.11.
He may raise up every Creature, even the timber out of the wall to speak
against us; and if we still stand out against him, he may raise up some
accursed Alien, some Philistine, some child of Perdition to wreak his
vengeance upon us; who would not be afraid of that cup of bitterness, which
must be brought to him by the hand of a Philistine? and forsake sin, if not for
the punishment, yet for the executioner? A sad sight it was to see David the
Father whipped for his Adultery, by his Son, and David the King chastised by his
Subject, who should have kissed his Feet; 2 Samuel 16.11.
(he himself says, The Lord bid him do it) to see a whole Nation carried away
Captive by a man, who did afterward degenerate into a Beast, to see so many
thousand Israclites fall at the feet of Idolaters, and servants of Dagon; but
the inscription is indeleble, what is written, is written, Dominus est, it is
the Lord.

4. But now in the last place: not only the Priests, and the people, but the
Ark it self was delivered up: the Ark of his Covenant, and the Ark of his
strength; Ps. 132. Exodus 37. 1 Samuel 4.
from whence God gave his Oracles, wherein were the Tables of the Law, and
Testimony written by the Finger of God, the Glory of God, as Phinchas his wife
calls it, even this was made a prey to these cursed Aliens, brought in Triumph
into the house of Dagon, at the sift Chapter. And here we may lay our hands
upon our mouth, once have I spoken, yea thrice, but here is a great depth,
Horror and amazement; and we may fear to proceed any further. What? defeat his
own command? deliver up his own Ordinance; what? deliver up his strength into
Captivity, and his Glory into the enemies hands? yes, even here, Dominus est
it is the Lord. God did it, because he suffered it to be done, did it, tanquam
dormiens as one asleep, withdrew himself: when he awakes, then he will lift up
his hand, and it shall fall upon the Philistine, and bruise him to pieces; then
it shall be his power and irresistible Arm, now it is but his connivence, and
permission. What the rage of the Persecutor, what the Philistine, what the
Devil does, God is said to do, and in many places of Scripture, it is called
his will: ^. quia volens permittit, because he willingly permits it, for should
he interpose his power, it could never be done, 2. Because he foretells and
threatens it, and binds it with an Oath, as he does here, which he would never
do, if he meant to hinder it. Lastly, Though he will not the thing it self, as
murder, and Sacrilege, and the Profanation of his Ark yet notwithstanding some
good will of God is accomplished by it; For even in the most horrid Execution,
some good will of God may be accomplished, he delivers up Christ to be
Crucified, but his will was to save the World, and he that was willing his Son
should suffer, yet hated the Jew, and for that very fact made their house
desolate, he found them in the gall of bitterness, and left them so, to do his
will when they brake it; the malice was their own, and God suffered them to
breath it forth, but the issue, and event was an Act of Gods will, of his
wisdom, and power; And thus he delivers up the Ark, but it was to preserve it,
as Agesilaus abrogated the Laws of L^curgus, that he might establish them, ut
semper essent aliquan^o non fuerunt, Valor. Max. l. 7. c. 2
says the Historian, they were laid aside awhile, that they might remain, and
be in force for ever; so God suffers his Ark to be lead into Captivity, that it
might conquer, first Dagon, and then the Israelite, strike off his hypocrisy,
and work, and fashion him to the will of God, of whom the Ark was but a
representation; suffered it to be removed for a time, that it might be restored
again both to its place and dignity.

For we may observe in these Israelites, what (if we could be impartial) we may
soon discover in our selves in the use of those helps, which God has
graciously afforded us: They both honored and dishonored the Ark, gave it too
high an esteem, and yet undervalued it, they called it their God, and made it
their Idol. A strange contradiction: yet so visible in the course and progress
of carnal worshippers, that he that sees them in their race, would think they
ran two contrary ways at once were very Religious, and very profane, at once
did invade Heaven with violence, and yet drive furiously to the lowest pit.

And first, we have just reason to imagine, that when the Ark was taken up upon
the Levites shoulders, and they sang let God arise (which was the set and
constant form) they spoke not by metaphor, but as if indeed they had their God
on their shoulders: for in the fourth Chapter, when Israel was smitten at the
2. ver. let us bring say they, the Ark of the Covenant, at the third: The Ark
is brought out, and now victory is certain, for when it comes amongst us, it
willsave us say they. But, as Epictetus once taught his Scholars, that they
should so behave themselves, that they might be an Ornament to the Arts, and
not the Arts unto them; so the integrity of the Jew should have been a defense
to the Ark, and not the Ark made use of, to stand up for a profane impenitent
Israelite. For what a wile, and sophisme of Satan is this, to persuade a
polluted sinful soul, that when he has scornfully rejected the substance;
(that piety which should make him strong in the Lord) at the last, in the time
of Danger, and the furious approach of the enemy, a shadow should stand forth,
and fight for him; that when he had broken the Law and Testimonies, not
regarded the Oracles, forget all the Mercies of God, and robbed him of his glory,
that then, I say, the shell, the Ark, the Shittim wood should be as the great
power of God to maintain his cause: certainly, if this be not a wile of the
Devil, I know no snare he has, that can catch us: if this be not to deceive
our selves, I shall think there is no such thing, as error in the World,

But again in the second place, and on the contrary, as they did Deificare
Arcam, as the father speaks, even deifie the Ark, attribute more unto it, then
God ever gave it, or was willing it should have; so they did also depretiare
vilify, and set it at naught: called it their strength, their glory, their
God, but employed it in baser offices then ever the Heathen did their gods, who
called upon them, to teach them, to steal and deceive: Not long since their
Priests committed rapes at the door of the Tabernacle, Pulcra laverna, Da mihi
fallere etc. Hor.
and now they expect the Ark should help those profane miscreants, who had so
polluted it. Oh, the Ark, the Ark, the glory of God, that is able to becalm,
and slumber a Tempest, to bind the hands of the Almighty, that he shall not
strike; to scatter an Army; to make kings to fly, to crown a sinful Nation with
victory, to bring back an adulterer Lanreate, a Ravisher with the spoils of a
Philistine, that shall be a buckler, a protection to defend them, who but now
defiled it; that shall be their God, which they made their Abomination: bring
forth the Ark and then what are these uncircumcised Philistines? God heard
this, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 78.59.
and was wroth, and greatly abhorred Israel, and seeing that all the cry was
for the Ark, no thought for the statutes and Testemonies, which lay shut up in
the Ark, and oblivion together; seeing the sign of his presence had quite shut
him out, of whose presence it was a sign, seeing it so much honored, so much
debased, so sanctified, and so polluted, he delivers up the people, and the Ark
together into the Philistines hands, that they might learn more from the Ark in
the Temple of Dagon, then they did, when it stood in their own Tabernacle,
learn the right use of it now, which they had so foully abused, when they
enjoyed it: in a word; strikes off their embroydery, that they might learn to
be more glorious within.

I remember, there is a constitution in the Imperial Law, st seudatarius rem
Feuae etc. if he that holds in see farm uses contrary to the will, and
intent of the Lord, redit a D^menum, it presently returns into the Lords power.
And we may observe that the great Emperor of Heaven and earth proceeds after
the same manner, with his Leige-men, and homagers the Jews: for when they fell
to Idolatry, Hos. 2.9.
and bestowed the corn and the wine, which God gave them, upon Baal, then
presently God takes to himself away the corn in the time thereof, and the ^tne
in the season thereof, and aufer am lanam and lanam, I will recover, ^aith he,
my flax and my wool, recover it as my own, thus unjustly u^urped and detained
by these Idolaters. I will cause all her mirth to cease, her Fast-dayes, her
New Mons, her Sabbaths, as if he had said, I will defeat my own purpose. I
will nullify my Ordinance, I will abolish my own Law, I will put out the light
of Israel, which to my people has been, but as a meteor, to make them wander
in the crooked ways of their own Imaginations. I will deliver the Creature
from the bond of corruption, which seems to groan, and travel in pain under
these abuses of profane men; it being a kind of servitude and Captivity to
the Creature to be dragged, and haled by the lusts, and fancies, and
disordinate affections of profane men, to be dragged to the drudgery of the
Gibeonices, which I made to be as free, as the Israelite himself, to be in
bondage and slavery under the pride, and extravagant desires, under the most
empty, and brutish fancies of corrupt men; Auferam; I will take them away, from
such unjust Usurpers. What should a Prodigal do with wealth? what should a
Robber do with strength? what should a boundless oppressor do with power? what
should Ophni and Phinehas, Adulterers, Oppressors, a sinful Nation, a people
laden with iniquity, do with the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord? I will begin,
and I will also make an end. 1 Samuel 3.12.
This glory shall depart from Israel, and the Ark shall be taken, and here,
when the Ark is taken, and the glory departed from Israel; the word, and
inscription is still the same, Dominus est: it is the Lord.

And now, to apply this last particular; shall I desire you to look up upon the
inscription, it is the Lord? Behold the Prophet Jerem, has done it to my hand.
Ite ad Stlo. Go to my palace, which was in Shiloh; where I set my Name at the
first, Jer. 7.12.
and see what I did to it for the wickedness of my people. Go unto Shiloh, and
there purge the corruption, the plague out of your hearts, wash off the paint
of your hypocrisy with the blood of these 34000. Israclites. Look upon the
Ark, but not so to be dazzled, and dote on the glory and Beauty of it, as to
lose the sight of your selves, and those sins which pollute it. Look upon the
word and Sacraments, but not to make them the non ultra of your worship, and to
rest in them, as in the end, to eat, and wash, and hear, and no more, to say
the word of God is sweet, and not to taste and digest it, to attribute virtue
and efficacy to the Sacrament, and yet be fitter to receive the Devil, then the
sop; not at once to magnify, and profane it, to call it the bread of life,
and make it poison; not to come near the Ark; not to handle these Holy things
without feeling; in a word; Not to make them first an Idol; and then nothing in
this World.

For (my brethren) it is a very dangerous thing thus to overvalue those things,
which in themselves are highly to be esteemed, and are above comparison with
any thing in this World: for when we make them more then they are, we in effect
make them less then they are, and at last nothing, of no use at all; nay we
make that a snare unto us, which was made a Help; and as every Creature within
the bounds of its own nature is useful, and profitable, so also these external
helps, the Ark of God, the word and Sacraments of the Church, are great
blessings, and highly to he Honored, whilst we use them to that end, for which
they were first Instituted, whilst we walk within that compass, and circle,
which God has drawn, according to that form which he has showed us. That Jew
deserves not the name of an Israclite, that should by word or gesture dishonor
the Ark, when we see, he was not permitted to touch it; but then, he that of a
sign of the presence of God, in the day of Battle, shall make it his God, is
so much a Jew, that he deserves to be flung out of the Synagogue. And that
Christian, that bows not to the majesty of the word, and receives it not as a
letter, and epistle from God, as Saint Augustine calls it; that esteems not of
the Sacraments, as those visible words, the signs and pledges, and conveiances
of his great love, and favor to us in Christ, has too little of the
Christian, to make him so much, as one of the visible Church; but he that is
high in his P^negyrick, and ever calling: speak Lord, for thy servant hears;
and then lies down to sleep, or if he be awake, is only active in the denying
the power of that word, he so much magnified, and called for, and thinks he
has done all duties, all offices to God, if he do but give him the ear,
(which is to trust in the Ark more then in God) He that shall make the
Sacrament first an Idol, and then a seal, to shut up Treason in silence, as the
Jesuit, or use it as an Opiate once or twice in the year, to quiet his
conscience, his viaticum, and provision rather to strengthen him in sin, then
against it; he that shall thus magnify, and thus debase it, and thus exalt,
and thus tread it under foot, is guilty of Heresy, says Erasmus, which is not
properly an Heresy, but yet such a kind of Heresy, which may make him
Anathema, though he be of the Church, and at last sever him, as a Goat from the
Sheep. And now let us Judge, not according to the appearance, but let us Judge
righteous judgment, or rather (if you please do but judge according to the
appearance. Cast an eye upon these unhappy times, which if they be not the
last, yet so much resemble those, which, as we are told, shall Usher in the
great Day, that we have great reason, to look about us, as if they were the
last; weigh I say, the controversies, the business of these times, and
concerning those Duties, and Transactions, which constitute and consummate a
Christian, you shall find as great silence in our Disputes, as in our lives
and practice. The great Heat and Contention is concerning Baptism and the
Lords Supper, and the Government and Disciplien of the Church, it is not,
whether we should deny our selves, and abstain from all fleshly lusts, but
whether we may wash or not, whether eat or not, whether Christ may be
conveyed into us in Water, or in Bread? whether he has set up a chair of
infallibility at Rome, or a Consistory at Geneva, whether he has Ordained one
Pope, or a Million? what digladiations? what Tragedies about these, and if
every particular Fancy be not pleased, the cry is, as if Religion were
breathing out its last, when as true Religion consists not principally in
these; and these may seem to have been passed over to us, rather as favors and
Honors, and Pledges of his Love, then strict and severe Commands. That we must
wash, and eat, are Commands, but which bring no Burden, or hardship with them,
the performance of them being more easy, as no whit repugnant to flesh and
blood; It is no more, but wash and be clean, Eat in remembrance of the Greatest
Benefit, that ever mankind received. All the difficulty is in the performance
of the vow, we make in the one, and the due preparation of the soul for the
other, which is the subduing of the lusts, and Affections, the Beatifying of
the inward man, which is truly, and most properly the service of Christ, which
is the Ark of our Ark, the Glory of our Glory, and the Crown of all those
outward Advantages, which our Lord and Master has been pleased to afford us;
Mic. 6.6.
we may say with the Prophet Micah, wherewith shall we come before the Lord? or
bow our selves before the High God? will he be pleased with the diligence of
our ear, with our Washing and Eating, and answer with him at the eighth verse:
He has showed thee oh man, what he does require, to do justly, and to love
mercy, and to walk Humbly with thy God. Ite ad locum meum Siolo. Go to my
palace in Silo, and there learn to disdeceive your selves by their Example,
lest, if all your Religion be shut up, with theirs, in the Ark, all in outward
Ceremony and Formality God may strike both us, and the Ark we trust to, recover
and call back those Helps and Gracious advantages from such prodigal usurpers.
For when all is for the Ark, nothing for the God it represents; when we make
the Pulpit our Ark, and chain all Religion to it; when the lips of the
Preacher, which should preserve knowledge, and be as a Ship (as Basil speaks,
to conveigh that Truth, which is more precious, then the Gold of Ophir, Orat.
(...).
brings nothing but Apes and Peacocks, loathsome and ridiculous Fancies? when
the Hearers must have a Song for a Sermon and that too many times, much out of
Tune, when both Hearer and Speaker act a part, as it were upon a stage, even
till they have their Exit, and go out of the World; when we will have no other
Laver, but that of Baptism, no bread but that in the Eucharist; when we are
such Jewish Christians, as to rely on the shell and outside, on External
formalities and performances, more empty and less significant, less effectual
then their Ceremonies; we have just cause to fear, that God may do unto us, as
he did unto Shilo; or as he threatened the same people Amos 8. Send a Famine
into the land, not a Famine of bread, but of Hearing the word (and such a
famine we may have, though our loaves do multiply, though Sermons be our daily
Bread) that he may deprive us of our Sacraments, or deliver them up to Dagon,
to be polluted by superstition, or to be trodden under foot by prophaners (which
of the two is the worst) that we may even loath, and abhor that in which we
have taken so vain, so unprofitable, so pernicious delight; and condemn our
selves, and our own foul ingratitude, and with sorrow and confusion of Face
subscribe to this Inscription, Dominus est, It is the Lord.

Concl.
And now we have settled the inscription, Dominus est, it is the Lord, upon
every particular; which may seem at first not so well placed; but as the head
of Jupiter upon the body of a Tyrant; a merciful God plucking up, and
destroying his own people, fighting for the Philistine against the Israelite,
as if a dead Israelite, were of a sweeter savor in his Nostrils, then a dead
Philistine, and the Ark were better placed in the House of Dagon, then in his
own Tabernacle: but look again, and consider it aright, and you will say, it
was rightly fixed. For the ways of God are equal, Ezekiel. 18.29.
but ours are unequal, and nothing but the inequality of our own, makes his
seem so; whilst he remains the same God in the fire, and in the Earthquake,
which he was in the still voice, the same when he slew them, and when his light
shined upon their, his Justice takes not from his Mercy, nor his mercy from the
equity of his Justice; but he is just when he binds up, and merciful, when he
wounds us; his justice, his wisdom, his mercy are over all his works. The same
God that overthrew Pharaoh in the Red sea, that slew great and mighty kings;
did deliver up his own people, good and bad; did deliver them into their
Enemies hands; did deliver up the Ark to Dagon, for his Justice, his wisdom,
and mercy endure for ever.

And now, having gone along with old Eli in his discovery, we cannot but take
up his resolution, let him do what seems him good: and we called it Elies
use, or application of his Doctrine; and let us (for conclusion) make it ours;
and learn to kiss the Son lest he be angry; nay, to kiss him, to bow before
him when he is angry, to offer him up a peace offering, our wills, of more
power then a Hecatomb, then all our numerous Fasts, and Sermons to appease his
wrath, and to bring peace, and order again into the World; that our wills being
his, being subdued by his Spirit, and delivered up into that blessed Captivity,
to be under his Beck, and Command, they may stand out against all our natural,
and carnal desires, and check and quiet them; which is the truest surrendry we
can make, and makes us of the same mind with Christ, who would not says
Hilary, Quod vult of fice did ipsum concedi sibi non vult. De Trin. l. 10.
have the granted which he would have done, did not refuse the Cup, but desired
it might pass from him: that as Saul, when he was struck to the ground, cried
out, Lord what would thou have me do? so may we, when his hand is upon us, in
our trembling and astonishment; say, Lord what would thou have us to suffer?
Fiat voluntas, Thy will be done, though it be in our destruction. By this we
testify our consent with him, this is our friendship with God, and they who
(as Abraham was) are Gods friends, have idem velle, and i^em nolle, will, and
nill the same things with him, are ready Sequi Deum, to follow God in all his
ways, when he seems to withdraw, and when he comes near us, when he shines
upon us, and when he thunders, in what he commands, and what he permits, in
what he absolutely will do, and what he makes way for, and will suffer to be
done, to follow him in all, Sen. ep. 96.
and bow before him, Non pareo Deo, sed assentior, and ex antmo illum, non quia
necesse est, sequor, says the Heathen Sencca; I do not only obey God, and do
what he would have me, but I am of his mind, and whatsoever is done in Heaven
and earth, is done as I would have it; The world is never out of frame with me,
I see nothing but order, and Harmony; no disturbance; no crossnes in the course
of things; for that wisdom which is the worker of all things, is more moving
them any m^on, Wisd. 7.
and passes, and goes through them all, reaches from one end to another
mightily, and draws every motion, and action of men to that end, in which if we
could see them, we should wonder and cry out, so, so, thus we would have it.
The stubornest knee may be made to bow, and Obedience may be constrained,
Balaam obeyed God, but it was against his will, but the true Israelite does it
with joy, and readiness, and though it be a blow, counts it as a favor; For
he that gave it, has taught him an art, Psalm. 115.3.
to make it so Goa does whatsoever he will in Heaven and in Earth, says the
Psalmist, God wills it, and does it, and when ^is done, our will must bow
before it, and we must say with old Ele, Faciat quod bonum in oculis, let him
do what he will. Take the will of God in those several ways, the Scripture,
and the light of reason has discovered it to us, and in every kind we must
subscribe, and what he does we must will, and what he will suffer, must
seem good in our eyes, and there is voluntas naturalis inclinationis and
aesiderti, that desire and inclination which naturally was in him, to work and
wish the good of his Creature, which is the proper, and natural effect of his
goodness for he Created us, for our good, and his Glory; and there is another
will, voluntas P^aec^pti, the Law and Ordinance, which he has laid upon his
Creature, which is every where in Scripture called his will; for as he
Ordained his Creature for good, so he made known unto it the means, by which
it should attain to that good for which it was at first Ordained. Now we
cannot but yield in these, for can therebe any Question made whether we vvil
set a fiat, and subscribe to our own good? It is strange that any man should
be unwilling that God should love him; unwilling to be happy, or loath that
way, which so great love has designed to bring him to this end. The number is
but few of those that do this will; but it is the voice of the whole Christian
World, that this will should be done. But there is yet further, as we may
observe, voluntas accasionata, a secondary, and Consequent will in God, not
natural, but occasioned, and to which he is in a manner constrained. The
severity of God, the miseries, and afflictions of this life; induration of
will-ful and stubborn sinners, eternal pains laid up in the World to come, are
the effects of this occasioned will. Besides this, there is voluntas
permissionis his permissive will, by which he does give way so far, as he
thinks good to the intents, and actions of evil men: He does not command them,
He does not secretly suggest them, nor does he incline the Agents to them, nor
incline the Philistines to invade that Land, which is none of theirs, but by
his infinite praescience, foreseeing all actions, and events possible,
determines (for reasons best known to himself) to give way to such actions,
which he saw would be done, if he gave way; and to these two, we cannot but
yield, unless we will deny him to be God, for if we believe him just, or wise,
we cannot but say Fiat, let him do what he will; let him be angry, and let him
carry on his anger in what ways, and by what means he please; He is our
Father, O Foelicem, cui Deus dignatur irasci, Te^tul.
and loves us, and if we will be enemies to our selves, he does but an act of
Justice, and of mercy, if he use the rod, what though he give line to wicked
men, to do that which his soul hates, to suffer that to be done which he
forbids? He permits all the evil that is done in the World, if he did not
permit it, it could not be done, and if he did not permit evil, Obedience were
but a name, for what praise is it, not to do that, which I cannot do?
whatsoever evil he suffers, his Wisdom is alvvayes present with him (for he
is Wisdom it self) and can dravv that evil which he but suffers to be done,
and make it serve to the Advancement of that good which he will do, he will
make it as the hand of justice to punish offenders, and execute his will, and
make it as his rod, or Discipline to teach sinners in the way, if we could
once subdue our wills to that will of his, which is visible in his precepts,
if we could answer love with love, and love him, and keep his Commandments,
we should have no such averseness from the other two, no such dislike, if he
do what he is forced to do, or permit that to be done, which he has condemned
already: If we do whatsoever he commands us, and be his friends, what is it to
us, though he bind the sweet influences of the Pleiades, Job. 38.31. Deuteronomy.
28.3. Job 38.38.
or loose the bonds of Orion? though he make the Heavens as brass, and the
Earth as iron? though the clods cleave fast together, and the clouds distill not
upon them? what is it to us, if he beat down his own Temples, when the tower of
Babel reaches up to Heaven? if the black darkness be in Goshen, and the
Egyptians have light; if fools sport and triumph in their folly, and the whip
be laid on the back of the innocent? what is it to us how, or where he casts
about his Hailstones, and coals of fire?

Si Fractus illabatur Orbis
Impavidos ferient ruinae. Horat. ^d.

In all these sad and dismal events, in these judgments, which fall cross
with our judgment, and (as the eye of flesh looks upon them) to the mind of
God himself, in all these perplexities, these riddles of providence, the friend
of God, is still his friend, and favors, nay, applauds whatsoever he does, or
is pleased to suffer to be done, which he would not suffer, did not his Justice
and Wisdom require it, which is able to make the most crooked paths straight,
to fill every valley and level every mountain, to work good out of evil, and so
make all those seeming extuberancies, that which to us seemed disorder, and
confusion, that which our ignorance wondered at, smooth and plain and even at
the last; Dominus est, it is the Lord, when that word is heard, let every mouth
be stopped, or let it declare his Glory amongst the Nations, and his wonders
among the people; at that word, let every knee bow both of things in Heaven,
and things in earth; let men and angels say Amen, his will be done, Dominus
est, It is the Lord, it is the antecedent, and the most natural consequent, or
conclusion, that can be drawn from it, is this of old Eli the High Priest;
Faciat quod bonum in oculis, let him do what seems him good.

To conclude then: when we are thus wrought and fashioned to his hand and will,
thus meek and yielding to his Scepter; when we follow him in all his ways, and
not question, but obey his Providence, which is the bridle of the World, and
fit for no hands but his, when with old Eli here, we join our Faciat; with his
fecit, and are willing he should do, whatsoever is done; when the Lord thunders
from Heaven, and shoots his arrows abroad; when we can look upon them sticking
in our own sides, Psa. 19.
and say; thus, thus it should be, Judicia Domini vera, the Judgments of the
Lord are true, and righteous altogether, then we have the spirit of God and we
have the will of God, and these arrows will be to us, as Jonathans were to
David, as signs, and warning to fly from some danger near at hand, that those
evils we suffer may work that patience, which may make us Cooperarios Dei (as
Tertullian spoke of Job) fellow workers with God, Tertul. De patient.
and join us with him in the conquest of those temptations, which they bring
along with them; that our patience may beget experience, how weak and frail we
are, when we are moved, and guided by our own will, and this experience; Hope
which being founded on the promises of the God of truth, can neither deceive
us, nor make us ashamed, a hope that our Ark will return, and God will restore
to us all those helps and advantages, which he shall think necessary for us in
this our warfare. He that has the will of God, has this hope, built upon his
power, and wisdom, which always accompanies his will; he that has the will of
God, has what he will; has power, and wisdom, in the strength of which we
shall be able to lift up our heads, in the midst of all the busy noise the
World shall make, be steadfast, and immovable, when the tempest is loudest, and
when our sun shall be darkened, and the stars fall from Heaven, when there shall
be Sects, and divisions, and great perplexity, when our Ark shall be taken, and
the glory depart from Israel, look upon all with an eye of Charity, or as
Erasmus speaks, with an Evangelical eye, and walk on in a constant course of
piety, and contention with those infirmities, which so easily beset us, beating
down sin in our selves, though we cannot destroy error in our brethren, and so
becomes as Nazianzen once spoke of his people of Nazianzum, like the Ark of
Noah, and by this our spiritual Wisdom, escape that deluge, and Inundation of
Contention, which has near overflovved, and swallowed up the whole Christian
World, and so walk upon these floods, and waves, Christ himself going before,
till we rest upon our Ararat, our holy Hill, that new Jerusalem, that City of
peace, where there will be no envy, no debate, no Sects, no Divisions, no
contentions, no wars, no rumor of wars, but love, and peace, and unity, and
joy, and unconceivable bliss for evermore.

THE THIRD SERMON.
COLLOSS. 26. As you have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in
him.


NOthing more familiar in Scripture, then to compare a Christian man's life to a
walk, and Christianity to a way, (...), According to the way, which they call
Heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers, says Saint Paul, Acts. 24.14.
and the resemblane fitteth very well. For, as they, who travel in the way,
meet with variety of Objects, it may be a plant or Flower (says Saint Basil)
it may be a Serpent, In Psalm. 2.
or a Lion; objects to delight them, and objects to terrify them, all to
retard, and deteine them, to stay them longer from their journeys end; so in
the course of Religion, in our way to happiness, every step is with danger, our
paths are ensnared, an our Progress entangled: if a plant, or Flower, Prove.
22.13.
the pomp and glory of the world stay us not, yet there is Leo in via, a Lion
in the way, difficulties, 2 Cor. 7.5.
which we must struggle with, and there are Fears in the way, fightings
without, and Terrors: Intur causus ambulamus, says Austin, we walk in the
midst of ruin, where every object may prove a Temptation, and every Temptation
an overthrow, nay (...) says Isidor: with our ruin about us: not only the
way, but our feet be slippery.

We need not go far for instance; for every man may find one in himself;
but we will take this (which Saint Paul has put into our hands) of the
Colossians; the occasion of my Text; and of them Saint Paul professes in this
Epistle, That they had made a fair onset in Christianity; that they were
forward in their way; he beholds them with joy, and rejoices to see them walk,
to see their order, and their steadfast Faith in Christ, in the verse before my
Text: but withal perceiving some uneven steps, and dangerous swarvings, and
declinations from the will of Christ, and those ways, which his Wisdom drew
out in the Gospel, he calls loud upon them; and at once commends, and instructs
them, arms them against those false Teachers, who by their mixtures and
additions, had made it another Gospel; commends them for their choice of their
way, and directs them how to walk. In the way they were, but there was
Philosophus in via, V^s. 8.
at the Eighth, the Philosopher in their way, with his subtilties to spoil and
rob them; and then the word is, Nen o vos depraedetur, let no man make a spoil
of you, draw you by force out of the way, by the vain deceit of Philosophical
speculations; And there was Angelus in via, an Angel in the way, with his
glorious excellencies to amaze them, v. 18. and here the word is (...), Let no
man defraud you of your reward, of that I berty, which Christ has granted you,
which makes a fair and open way to you, without the mediation of Angels. Last
of all, There was Lex in via, there was the Law in the way, with her shadows
and ceremonies to deteine them, and there word is nemo vos judicet, Let no man
judge or condemn you of a Holyday, or new Moon, or the Sabbath Day, v. 16.
Harken not to the Philosopher, but to him in whom dwells all the Fullness of
the Godhead bodily, v. 9. and that wisdom which the Holy Ghost teaches. Bow
not to an Angel; but to him, who is head of all Principality, and Power. v. 10.
And look not unto the Law, which is but a shadow; but to the Body, the Truth
and sollidity of the things themselves, which is in Christ. These three are
all, Et haec tria unum sunt, and these Three are One, I may say, these Three
Cautions and directions are but one, at least drawn up and collected in this
one, which I have read unto you; Three several lines, but meeting in this
Center, sicut accepist is, walk in Christ, as you have received him, which is
as a light from Heaven, to direct us in our way, that we be not taken by the
deceit of Philosophy; That we stoop not to the glory of Angels; That we catch
not at the shadow, when we should lay hold on the substance: In a word, This
keeps us close to Christ, and his Doctrine, which must not be mixed, or
blended, either with the Law, or Philosophy, or that voluntary Humility, and
worshipping of Angels, which is Idolatry; As ye have therefore received Christ
Jesus the Lord, so walk in him.

At the very hearing of which Exhortation, I know every man will say, That it
is good and wholesome counsel, well fitted and applied by Saint Paul to the
errors, and distempers of that Church, to which he writ, but not so proper, nor
applyable to ours; For so far are we from being ensnared with Philosophy, that
we see too many ready to renounce both their sense, and reason, to be less
then men, nay to be inferior to the beasts, neither to discourse, nor see; not
to see, what they see; nor to know what they cannot be ignorant of, that they
may be Christians, as if Christ came to put out our eyes, and abolish our
Reason. And for voluntary worship, there is no fear of that in them, who will
scarce acknowledge any Obligation and can with ease turn a Law into a Promise:
will that profane person ever stoop to an Angel, who is thus familiar with God
himself? And the Law; it goes for a Letter, a Title, and no more; for
Ceremonies, they were but shadows, but are now monsters. Christ in appearance
left us two, and but two, and some have dealt with them, as they used to do
with monsters, exposed them to scorn, and flung them out; so that this
Counsel now in respect of us, will not appear, as an Apple of Gold with
Pictures of silver, Prove. 25.31.
but may seem to be quite out of its place and Season. But yet, let us view it
once again, and we shall find, that it is a general Prescript looking forward,
and applyable to every Age of the Church, an Antidote against all Errors and
deviations, and if we take it as we should, will (...), look round upon all,
and either prevent, or purge out all error whatsoever: For though our errors be
not the same with theirs, yet they may proceed from the same ground, and be as
dangerous, or worse: peradventure, we may be in no danger of Philosophy, but
we may be of our selves, and our self-love may more ensnare us, then their
subtilties can do: we may be too stiff to bow to an Angel; but our eyes may
dazzle at the Power, and excellency of men, and we may be carried about from
Doctrine to Doctrine, from error to error with every breath of theirs, as with
a mighty wind; and though we stand out against the Glory of an Angel, yet we
may fall down and miscarry by the example of a mortal man: in a word, we may
defy all Ceremonies, and yet worship our own imaginations, which may be less
significant then they.

Let us then, as the Apostle elsewhere speaks, suffer this word of Exhortation;
let us view, and handle this Word of Life, and it will present us with these
two things.

1. A Christian man's Duty in these words, Ambulate in Christo, walk in Christ.

Secondly, The Rule by which we must regulate our motion, and be directed in
our walk, sicu^ accepistis, we must so walk in Him, as we have received him,
which two, stand in flat opposition to two maine Errors of our life. For either
we receive Christ, and not walk in him, or walk in him, but not with a Sicut,
not as we have received him; Of these in their order.

As you have received, etc.

In the handling of the first, we shall point, and level our discourse at
these two particulars. 1. Show you, That Christianity is not a lazy, idle
Profession, a sitting still, or standing, a speculation, but a walk. 2ly,
Wherein this walk or motion principally consists. And first, we find no word
so expressive, no word more commonly used in holy Writ then this, To walk with
God, Genesis 16. To walk before God, Genesis 24.40. to walk by Faith, 2 Cor. 5.7. To
walk in good Works, Ephesians. 2. and in diverse other places; For indeed, in this
one word, in this one syllable, in contained the whole matter, the end and
sum of all; All that can be brought in, to make up the perfect man in Christ
Jesus.

For first; This brings forth a Christian, like a Pilgrim, a Traveller,
forgetting what is behind, and weary of the place he stands in, counting those
few approaches he has made as nothing, ever panting and striving, gaining
ground, and pressing forward to a higher degree, to a better place; As there is
motus ad perfectionem, a motion to persection; so there is motus in
perfectione, a motion, and progress even in perfection it self; the good
Christian being ever perfect, and never perfect till he come to his journeys
end.

Secondly, It takes within its compass all those essential requisites to
action. 1. It supposes faculty to discover the way. 2ly, A power to act, and
move in it. 3ly, Will, which is nothing else, but principium actionis, as Tert.
calls, the beginning of all motion, the Imperial power, which as Queen
commands, and gives act to the understanding, senses, Affections, and those
faculties which are subject to it; And besides this, to walk, implies those
outward and adventitious helps; Knowledge in the understanding, and love in the
Will, which are as this Pilgrims staff, to guide and uphold him in his way;
his knowledge is as the day to him, to walk as in the Day, and his Love makes
his journey shorter, though it be through the wilderness of this world, to a
City not made with hands, nor seen. For faculty without knowledge, Hebr. 11.
is like Polyphemus, a body with power to move, but without eyesight to
direct, and therefore cannot choose but offend and move amiss; and faculty and
knowledge without love, and desire, are but like a Body, which wanting
nourishment, has no sense of hunger to make it call for it, and therefore
cannot but bring leanness into the soul: For be our natural faculty and
ability what it will, yet if we know not our way, we shall no more walk in it,
then the Traveller sound of body and limb can go the way aright, of which he
is utterly ignorant; Again, be our Abilities perfect, and let our knowledge be
absolute, yet if we want a mind, and have no love, if we suffer our selves to
be over-swayed by a more potent affection to something else, we shall never
do, what we know well enough, and are otherwise enabled to. Now to walk in
Christ takes in all these: Faculty, Power, Will, Knowledge, Love; Then you see
a Christian in his walk, rejoicing as a mighty man to run his race, when the
Understanding is the Counselor, and points out; This is the way, walk in it;
and the will has an eye to the hand; and direction of the understanding, bows
it self, and as a Queen draws with in those inferior faculties, the senses and
Affections, when it opens my eye to the wonders of Gods Law, and shutts it up
by covenant to the vanity of the world; when it bounds my touch and taste, with
Touch not, Taste not any forbidden thing; when it makes the senses as windows to
let in life, not death, Jer. 9.21. and as gates shut fast to the world, and the
Devil, and lifting up their Heads to let the King of Glory in, when it
composeth, and tuneth our Affections to such a Peace, and Harmony, setting our
love to piety, our anger to sin, our fear to Gods wrath, our hope to things
not seen, our sorrow to what is done amiss, and so frames in us, nunc modulos
Temperantiae, nunc carmen pietatis, as Saint Ambrose speaks, now the even
measures of Temperance, now a Psalm of piety, now the Threnody of a broken
heart, even those Songs of Sion, which the Angels in heaven, and God himself
delight in; and all these are vitually included in this one word, to walk in
Christ, and if any of these be wanting, what proffers soever we make; what
fancies soever we entertain, what empty conceptions soever we foster, yet
flesh and blood cannot raise it self on these wings of wind, nor can we be more
said to walk, then they who have been dead long ago.

For so far is the bare knowledge of the way from advancing us in our walk,
that it is a thing supposed, and no where under the command, as it is merely
speculative, and ends in it self; no more then to see, or feel, or hear, and
so essential is this motion of walking to a Christian, that in the language of
the Spirit we are never truly said to know, till we walk, and that made
imperfect knowledge, which receives those things, which concern our peace, no
otherwise then the eye does colors, or the ear sounds; never being once named
or mentioned in the Scripture, but with disgrace; If any man say, I know him,
and keep not his Commandments, he is a liar. 1 John 2.4. so that to define our
walking by Knowledge and speculation, is a kind of Heresy, which rather
deserves an Anathema, and should be drove out of the Church with more zeal and
earnestness, then many, though gross, yet silly, impertinent errors, which
p^sse abroad about the world, but under that name.

For 1. this speculative knowledge is but a naked assent, and to more, and has
nothing of the will: and the understanding is not an arbitrary faculty, but
necessarily apprehends objects in that shape and form they represent
themselves; nor is it deceived, even when it is deceived (I mean in things
which concern our walk) for the bill and accusation against us, is not, that we
do not, but that we will not understand; nolumus intelligere ne cogamur and
facere, says Aug. we wilnot know our way, for no other reason, but because we
are most unwilling to take the pains, and walk in it. And therefore in every
Christian peripatetique, there must be something of the Seraphin, and something
of the Cherubin, there must be heat, as well as light, love as well as
knowledge: for love is active, and will pace on, Hugo de Sancto vict.
where Knowledge does but stand at gaze, Amor intrat, ubi cognitio foris stat,
love is active, and will make a battery, and forcible entrance, and take the
Kingdom of heaven by violence, whilst Speculation stands without, and looks
upon it, as in a Map. What talk we of knowledge and speculation? It is but a
look, a cast of the minds eye, and no more, and does but place us, as God did
Moses once upon mount Nebo, to see that spiritual Canaan, which we shall never
enjoy; and then what comfort is it, to know what Justification is, and to want
that hand of a quick and active faith, which alone can lay hold on Christ? to
talk of Election, and never make it sure? to dispute of Paradise, and have no
title to it? to speak of nothing more, then Heaven, and be an heir of
Damnation? And then, what a fruitless mock-knowledge is that, which sets God a
walking, whilst we sleep and dream? makes the Master of the Vineyard work, and
sweat, and stands idle it self all the day long? which has a full view of what
God has done before all Time, and no power at all to move us, to do any thing
in this our day? when we are well seen in the Decrees of God, and little move
in our own Duties? when we can follow God in all his ways, and tell how he
works in us, and are afraid of that fear and trembling, with which we should
work out our Salvation? can speak largely of the Power of Gods Grace, and
resist it? of perseverance, and fall more then seven times a day? This
knowledge, I say, is but a bare assent, and so far from being enjoined us,
that, as the case now stands, ignorance were the safer choice; and rather then
thus to know him, we may say with the Apostle, Let him that is ignorant, 1 Cer.
14.38.
be ignorant still.

For in the second place: as we use it, it works in us at the most but a weak
purpose ^f mind, a faint velleity, a forced involuntary approbation, which we
would shake off, if we could, as we do a friend which speaks what we would not
hear, and calls that poison, which is as Honey to our taste: For who can see
such sights, and not in some degree be taken with them? Who can look upon the
Temple, and not ask, what Buildings are these? who can see the way to life, and
not approve it? but you know, I may purpose to rise; and yet fold my hands to
sleep? I may commend the way, and not walk in it: Nay, how often do we pray,
Give us ever of this Bread of life, and yet labor most for this bread that
perishes; which we at once revile and embrace, and speak evil of it, because
we love it, when heaven is but as a Picture, which we look upon, and wonder,
and refuse, and has no better place of reception, then that common Inn of all
wild, and loose imaginations, the fancy? Christ is the way: it is in every man's
Creed; and if this would make us walkers, what a multitude of Sectaries? what a
Herd of Epicures? what an assembly of Atheists? what a congregation of fools? I
had almost said, what a Legion of Devils might go under that name? For even
the Devils themselves have acknowledged Christ, and this way is not evil
spoken of, nay, it is magnifyed of them who had rather wallow in the mire, then
walk in it: How is Christ made not only panis quotidianus, our daily Bread,
but sermo quotidianus, the talk of every day and hour? In our misery we
implore his help; In his Name we lie down, and in his Name we rise up, In his
Name we Prophesy: if afflictions beat upon us, he is called upon to calm the
storm? If our conscience chide us, we have learnt an unhappy art and skill to
force him in to make our Peace? We love to talk of him, we many times leave
our necessary callings, and trades most unnecessarily, but to hear of him: but
all these may be rather proffers, then motions, rather pleasing and flattering
thoughts, then painful ambulations, as St. Augustine speaks of himself, in his
Confessions, Confess. l. 8. c. 5.
cogitationes similes conatibus expergisci volentium, thoughts like to the
endeavors of men half asleep, who would be awaked, and cannot, who move and
stir, and lightly lift up the head, and then fall down fast asleep: I have
been too liberal, and given them more strength, then they have, I mean, then
these Gnostiques give them, whom they neither more, nor stir, but leave them
in their prospect, fast asleep.

Or at the best, in the third place, this inclination, this approbation is but
a Dream, visus adesse mihi, etc. Christ may seem to walk with us, when he is
not in all our ways; and as in Drames we seem to perform many things, we do all
things, and we do nothing.

Nunc fora, nunc lites, laeti modo pompa Theatri, etc. Ausonii Ephemeris.

We plead we wrestle, we fight, we Triumph, we sail, we fly, we see; not what
is, but has, or should be done, and all is but a dream: so when we have made
a fancifull peregrination through all the pleasant fields, and rivers of milk,
through all the riches and glory of the Gospel, and delights which it affords;
when we have seen our Savior in his Cratch, lead him to mount Calvary, beheld
him on his Cross, brought him back with Triumph from his grave, and placed him
at the right hand of God; we may think indeed, we have walked all this while
with Christ: but when our conscience shall recover her light, which was darkened
with the pleasures and follyes of this present life, when she shall dart this
light upon us, and plainly tell us, that we have not fasted with him, that we
have not watched one hour with him, that we have not gone about with him doing
good, that we have loved those enemies, which he came to destroy, That we have
been so far from crucifying our flesh, that we have crucified him again to
fulfill the lusts thereof; That the world, and not Christ has been the Form,
which moved us in the whole course of our life; behold then it will appear,
that all was but a dream. Foolish men that we are, who has bewitched us? we
dispute, we write books, we coin distinctions, we study for the truth, we are
angry for the truth, we lose our Peace for the Truth, we fight for the truth,
we die for the truth, and when all is done, upon due examination, nothing is
done, but we have spun a Spiders webb, which the least breath of Gods
displeasure will blow a way: we have known the way, and approved it, have
subscribed, that, This is the way, but have made no more progress toward our
journeys end, then our picture; we have but dreamt of life, and are still in
the valley of the shadow of Death.

Conclus. And now, what says the Scripture? Awake thou that sleep, that
dreamest, and stand up from the dead. Let us not please our selves with
Visions, and Dreams, with the suborned flattery of our own imaginations; Let
us not think, that if we seek the way, and like it, and speak well of it, we
are in heaven already, or have that hope, that well-grounded never failing
Hope, which may entitle us to it; why should such a thought arise in our heart?
a thought, that makes us worse then fools, or madmen, and will keep us so,
courting of sin, laboring in iniquity, and wit greediness working out our
own destruction; a thought that shuts out God, and makes an open entrance for a
legion of Devils, and then welcomes, and attends them; For all the sins
which the Flesh is subject to, or the Devil can suggest, may well stay, and
find a place of rest, with such a thought. Why should we please, and loose our
selves in such a Though? See, here is water, what does let me to be baptized?
said the Eunuch to Philip, Act. 8. Here is light; what hinders, that we do
not walk in it? Behold heaven opens it self, and displayes all its beauty, and
glory? why do we run from it? Knowledge directs, but we will not follow;
Knowledge persuades; but we will not hearken; Knowledge commands; but we
rebel: we are Illuminated, we profess we know Christ, but we will not be
sanctified; For by our Works we deny him. Tit. 1.16. Our Knowledge follows, and
pursues us, we cannot shake it off; it stays with us, whether we will or no;
it goads, it provokes, it chides, it importunes, it triumphs within us, but yet
not over us, because those vanities, which we are too familiar with, will not
suffer us to yield; we cannot be ignorant of what we know, but we are too often
unwilling to do that of which we cannot be ignorant; our self-love undoes us,
and our own will drives us on the rocks, whilst the light within us points out
to the Haven, where we should be, and the knowledge within us, which did
exhort, instrust and correct, is made a witness against us, and a Judge to
condemn us to more stripes then they shall feel, who had not so much as a
glance of light, but did sit in darkness, and in the shadow of Death.

Let us them not fly, but walk, not hover aloft in the contemplation of what is
to be done, but stoop down, and do it, subdue the will to our Knowledge, the
sense to reason; let us learn to walk; and by walking, be more learned, then
before, (...): for Practice says Naz. is to Knowledge, Naz. Or. tertia.
what Knowledge is to it, a Foundation, as we build our Practice upon
Knowledge, (for we must know before we can walk) so we raise our knowledge
higher, and higher upon practice, as Heat helps motion, and is increast by
it, and the torch burns brighter, being fanned by that air which it
inlightens. Psalm. 25.14.
The secret of the Lord is revealed to them that fear him, and his Coveuant to
give them more understanding, says David. Let us then join, as St. Peter
exhorts; with Knowledge, Temperance, 2 Pet. 1.6.
and with Temperance Patience, and with Patience Godliness, and these will
make, that we shall neither be (...), idle, and not walk, for (...), walk, but
to nopurpose, unfruitful in the knowledge of Jesus Christ. For to join these
two, Knowledge and Practice, and to abound more and more, is to walk in Christ.
Thus much of the first.

2 Part.
And thus we see a Christian man's life is not as empty, aerie speculation, a
sitting still, or standing, but a walk. Let us now in the second place see,
wherein this motion, or walk principally consists: and you may think perhaps,
That I shall now point out to the Denial of our selves, show you Christ's
Cross to take up, and bid you follow him; to fight against the World, and all
that is in the world; the lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, Joh. 1.2.16.
and the pride of life; that it is, To lay hold of Christ, to love Christ, to
be Adopted, to be Regenerate, to be called, and converted (for with these
Generalities the Religion of too many is carried along, and not with the thing
it self, but the Name; and with these names and Notions they play and please
themselves, (...).
as the silly Fly does with the flame of the Taper, till they loose their wings
and feet, and are but a body, a Lump that can neither walk, nor move; They deny
themselves with an Oath, and yet are themselves still as greedy as rapacious,
as before; They take up the Cross, but it is to lay it on other men's shoulders,
they follow Christ, but as Peter did, afarr off, or rather as the Jews, to
crucify him, They fight against the world, that is, against one another, who
shall possess it (for even this we do not do, not fill our coffers, but in
the name of Christ, and Religion.) They lay hold on Christ, but it is to carry
him along with them, to promote, and further their designs. They love him,
it is plain they do, and yet no give him a cup of cold water,, when he beggs
at their door? They love him, as they do one another, til it is put to the
Trial: They are Adopted, but not of his family; Regenerated, but are liker to
the Father of lies, then him, they pretend to: They are called, and converted;
For they know the very hour, and moment of time when they heard the voice, and
said Amen to it. Lord what a noise have these Phrases, these words made in the
World; and yet it is the world still; even a world of wickedness? Sen. Centrov.
As the Orator said of Figures, possumus sine his vivere, we may live and be
saved with less noise; for all these signify but one, and the same thing; To
deny our selves, to take up the Cross, to follow Christ, to fight against the
world, to lay hold on Christ, to love him, to be Adopted, Regenerated, and
Converted, all is no more then this, to believe in Christ, and to be sincere,
upright, just, and honest men. Yet these words, and words of Holy writ, the
language of the Spirit of God, and they all full and significant, nor can I
give you a fairer Interpretation of my Text, He that denies himself, walks in
Christ: he that loves Christ, walks in him, he that is Adopted, Regenerate,
Converted, walks in Christ; but this is too general, and I see but ill use
made of these excellent expressions, which should make us better, and through
our own wilful solly, make us worse (for we may shape our selves how we list,
in our Fancy, and be quite the contrary) we will therefore interpret this walk
in Christ by that of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 7.13.
Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was called, where the word
(...) he was called, Grot. in loc.
points out, and designs (as a Learned man has observed) the time of his
Heavenly Calling; and so both callings are made compatible, and friendly linkt
together; my condition of life in this world, and my calling to a better, my
being a part of the Commonwealth, and my being a member of Christ. For Christ
came not to break Relations, or to disturb Commonwealths; not to shut up the
Tradesmans shop, or block up the Sea to the Merchant, nor to take the
Husbandman from the Plough; and I may do all these, and yet deny my self,
and take up the Cross, and fight against the world; or rather I cannot do all
these, unless I do the other, not abide in one calling, as I should, unlessed
walk worthy of the other, not be a good Merchant, unless I be a god Christian
(that we doubt not) nay, but not walk in Christ, unless we walk in our
Calling. The life, says Saint Paul, which I now live in the Flesh, Gal. 2.20.
I live by the Faith of the Son of God; That is, Those things, which I do
pertaining to the flesh, and which this natural, mortal life requires, as to
eat, drink, converse with others, and to seek my meat by the sweat of my brows
(which may seem to have no relation to a Spiritual life) I do them in the
Faith of the Son of God. For in all these things, I have always an eye to the
rule of Faith, I make that my star, my Compass to steer by, and my care is,
to make every action of my life in my temporary, conformable and consonant to
my heavenly calling. And the reason is plain; for even our natural and civil
Actions, as far as they are capable of honesty or dishonesty, pertain or
have reference to faith; for although Christ and his Religion do not
necessitate, or compel men to engage in this, or that particular Action, or
calling, yet notwithstanding it is a rule sufficient to govern and direct us in
any: to keep us in a fair correspondency, and obedience to reason and the will
of God; the Faith and Religion of Christ being practical, and having that
force, and efficacy, which may be shown and manifested in all the civil
Actions of our life. Wisd. 16.21.
As the Jewish Rabbis report of the Manna, which the Children of Israel did
eat in the Wilderness; that it had this wonderful property, that it would fit
it self to every man's taste, and look what Viand, what meat it was, that any was
delighted with, it would in taste be like unto it; so does Christianity, like
this Manna, docta quadam mobilitate, by a certain secret force, apply it self
to every Taste, to every Calling. Read the Sermon on the Mount, and those
Epistles which the holy Apostles sent to several Churches, and what is there
delivered (the Foundation first laid) then an Art of Governing our selves, and
conversing with men? Art thou called to be a Servant, 1 Cor. 7.21. Or there it
is, art thou called, being a servant. Ephesians. 6 7.
serve as in the sight of Christ? Art thou called to be a master; Remember thou
have a Master in Heaven? Art thou a Husbandman, it will hold the Plough with
thee? Art thou a Tradesman? it will buy and sell with thee? Art thou a
Scholar? it will study with thee: if thou go into the Vineyard, it will bear
the heat of the day with thee, till the Evening, and then pay thee thy wages:
if thou sell, it will oversee thy weights and measures: If we bargain, it will
remember us, that we defraud not one another, for this Counsel was given to
the Thessalonians, who were most of them men of Trade, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6.
and Merchants: When we speak, he bids us, cast away lying. And thus does
Christian Religion spread its beams through every corner of the Earth; shining
upon us at every turn, and every motion, 5. Ephesians 25.
waiting upon us in every condition of life, keeping every man within the
bounds of his Calling, and Honesty; and whilst we follow this light, walk
within these bounds, stretch not, as Saint Paul speaks, 2 Cor. 10.14. Beyond
measure.
beyond our line, we may be truly said to walk in Christ.

Use.
And therefore, to make some use of this, Let us not deceive our selves, and
think we never walk in Christ, but when we walk to Church to hear some News
of him; that when we have shut him out of our Houses, and shops, we shall be
sure to meet with him again at Church, that we never serve him, but in his own
House, we have some reason to fear, we never serve him worse; never Walk
less, then when we walk so far; And certainly, if the End be better, and
more Noble then the means to the End, then our Even and upright motion in our
several conditions, must needs have the pre-eminence: For here; in the Church
we are called; but there we work in the Vineyard: Here we take out our lesson,
there we con it; here we receive rules to guide us, there we practice them:
Here Christ is formed in us, there he is manifested, as it were, in our flesh,
in our outward Actions: In a word, here we are taught to go, there we walk in
Christ. Oh then, let us not so perversely Honor Christ, as to dishonor him, or
think, that he that passed through the contumelies of our nature, as Tert
speaks, and was made like unto his brethren, should disdain to be with us, and
walk with us in our Calling, be it never so mean; That Christ is disgraced,
when we call him into our counting-Houses, or our Shops; that we do not walk in
Christ, when we sweat in our calling. You know what Saint John Baptist said to
the Soldier, and the Publican, and certainly, Luke 3.14.
if the Publican in his Custom House, if the Soldier with his sword in his
hand, may walk in Christ, I know no calling so mean, no trade so low, as to be
excluded. It was a witless, and groundless Etymon, which he gave, who said,
they were called mechanic Arts, quia intellectus in iis quodammodo moechatur,
because the understanding in these manual trades, seems to adulterate and
pollute it self, for nothing can pollute a foul but sin, and dishonesty, and
the soul is then most pure, when passing as it were through these earthy and
carnal affairs, she orders them aright, but receives nothing that is earthy
or carnal from them, retaining still, in the midst of these employments, her
native and proper spirituality. In the third of Genesis Adam himself is set to
till the ground; at the 6. Noah is a Ship-wright, at the 24. you shall see
Rebeccah with Bracelets indeed on her arms, but with a Pitcher on her
shoulder. In the 6 of the Judges, Gideon receives his Commission to be Captain
of Israel, whilst the flayle was in his hand: And where did our Savior call
the Disciples, but as they were mending their Netts? And to take off this
imputation, himself descended to a Trade, was obedient to his Parents; Justin
Martyr says, Coll cum Tryph. Judae^.
he made (...) ploughs, and yoakes. Be our calling what it will, we then walk
truly in Christ, when we walk honestry in it: Nor only our attention, our
sighs, our groans, our often mentioning his Name, but our silence, our
honesty, our Industry, may make us Christian peripatetiques. Let us then, in
the name of Christ, and Religion, abide in our particular calling (be it
whatsoever Providence has placed us in, high or low, rich or poor) let us
(...), abide in it against all Temptations whatsoever, bear them, bear up
against them by his power; keep a good Conscience against the flatteries of the
world; and the loving and bitter menaces of Poverty; in his Name rise up early,
and lie down late, in his Name cast out those evil Spirits, those false
suggestions which might hinder us in our walk, and so press forward in a
constant and uninterrupted Motion, never shaken nor changed with the manifold
changes, and chances of this sading World, and then we shall be not only
Christ's servants, but his Companions and friends, he will call us so; and then
when Christ thus goes along with us in all our ways, when we walk on Earth,
but by this light from Heaven, we may assure our selves by thus walking, we
walk in Christ.

We pass now from the Duty, To walk in Christ, to the manner, How we must
walk in him, or the Rule by which we must regulate our motion; sicut
accepistis, we must so walk as we have received Him.

Second General part.
As you have received him, so walk in him; that is, since you have received
him, walk in him, and in this sense we may take it; "Rest not in the outward
Profession, think not, that you are only vessels to receive him, but
channells, or conduits through which he must be conveyed, even through every
vein, through every faculty of your soul, and every member of your bodies, and
so be made visible in the actions of your life.

To receive him, and not to walk in him, will but swell and enlarge the burden
of our Accounts; as to receive any good from him, and not to use it to that end
for which it was given, is the worst evil that can befall us. Many receive
him, because he comes with so much beauty, that they cannot refuse him, because
they are convinced, That he is fairer then the children of men; and most worthy
to be received; For not only out of the mouths of babes and Sucklings, but
out of the mouths of wicked men has God ordained strength, and wisdom is
justified, not only of her friends, but of her Enemies. Many receive him, as
it were in a throng, applaud Christianity, dare not refuse it, lest the
multitude of those they live with, should confute and silence them; Si nomen
Christi in tanta Gloria non esset, tot professores Christisancti Ecclesia non
haberet, Greg. Hom. 3 2. in Evang.
says Greg. If the name of Christ were not so high, and glorious in the world,
the Church would fall short in her number of Professors, whereof many make but
a proffer at christianity, for companies sake.

This the Apostle may seem either to have seen, or been afraid of, either to
have had it in his eye, or in his jealousy, and therefore strives to remove,
or to prevent it, for it is far the lesser evil, not to know his Name, then
thus to receive him, an unhappy ignorance finding some mercy even in judgment,
of which a fruitless and ungrateful knowledge is not capable.

And in this sense we may take it; but if we look forward, and consider the
many cautions the Apostle puts up against Philosopy, Traditions of men, and the
Law of Ceremonies, I see not, but that (...), Nihil peregrinum audite: Oecum.
in loc.
here may be an Adverb of similitude and likeness, and then the sense will
run thus; walk in him, in that manner you have received him, as he was
presented and delivered to you by me, or as S. Jude interprets it, verse 3.
as he was delivered (...) once for all, unto the Saints: Sicut edocti estis.
v. 7.
otherwise we receive him not, or receive something else for Christ, or
something more, or something less then Christ. And as the danger is great, if
we receive him not, so is it no less if we receive him not in his own shape,
in his full Beauty and Perfection, in which he has been pleased to present
himself unto us in his Gospel. The grand error, and mistake of the world is in
the manner of receiving him: For as in respect of his Person, we find that the
Christians in former Ages could not agree in the manner of receiving Christ
(...), Naz. Or. 26.
but some would receive him after this manner, some after another; some a
created Christ, others a half Christ, some through a conduit-pipe, others less
visible, then a Type, in an aeriall and fantastical body, a Christ and not a
Christ, a Christ divided, and a Christ contracted, (...), says Naz. and many
Christ's, indeed as good none at all: So in the practical part, in respect of
his Doctrine, we often err, and dangerously in the receiving him: we say,
Anathema to the Arrians, Manichees, and Anabaptists, and let them pass with
the censure of the Church upon them; but how we do receive him? If we will
hearken to our selves, our consciences will tell us; with his curly locks, and
spicy cheeks, with his Flaggons and his Apples, (as he is said to be described
in the Canticles) to save sinners, but not to command them, with Gospel, and
Mercy as much as he will, but not with any law; a Physician that should heal us,
without a Prescript, a King without a Scepter; a Son, that will be kissed (we
like that well) but not be angry. Some receive him without the Law, not only
taking away the rigor of it, but abolishing it quite, removing it out of our
sight, not only as a Covenant, but as a Rule of life to guide and govern us,
and then the Christian is a Libertine: some receive him with the Law of works,
and make them not only a condition required of a justified Person, but a part
and helping cause of justifying a sinner, and taking off the guilt, which is
the work of Mercy alone, and then the Christian is in part a Jew; some receive
him in the very shape the Jews expected him, with Drum and colors, and then
the Christian is a man of blood. Some receive him in the shape of Elias,
driving out all that oppose him from the Land of the Living; and then the
Christian is a consuming fire. Some receive him, not as a sacrifice for sin,
but as an Abettor, and Countenancer of those foul Enormities which nayl'd him
to his Cross; and then the Christian is a man of Belial. The ambitious receive
him, and with him Honor, and the highest place: The wanton gallant receives
him, and with him all the vanities of the world; a poor, naked Christ, with
silk and purple, and delicious fare. The Covetous receive him, and with him
Mammon, and so walk in a shadow, till he fall into the grave, which in this is
like him; That it will not be satisfied, or say, It is enough: In a word, the
Papist impropriates him, the Schismatique divides him, the Heretic trades with
him. The Ambitious scorn him: The Covetous sells him, the Oppressor whips him,
The mocker spits in his face; The Libertine crucifies him again, most receive
him, but most of all that most, are enemies to the Cross of Christ.

And therefore in these latitudes and deviations, inter tot humanos errores,
when there are so many errors and mistakes, it will be necessary, to have an
eye to the sicut, to the rule, that we neither exceed, nor come short,
Scriptura non fallit si se Homo non sallat, Aug. de urbis exerdie.
says Aust. the word received, the rule cannot deceive a man, if a man deceive
not himself first, and then suborne, and force in the rule, to make good the
cheat. It is a well of living water; if we do not stop it, as the Philistines
did Isaac's wells, and then fill it with Dust, Genesis 26.15.
with earthy glosses, consult with flesh and blood, and make that an
Interpreter one of a Thousand. It is a glass, and will show thee the color,
the full proportion of every step, and motion, if thou look steadfastly upon it,
and not go away, and forget, and then look upon others in their walk, or make
they own fancy a glass, like that which Pliny said, did hang in the Temple of
Smyrna, in which thou may see every thing but thy self. It is the Word of
God, Psalm 60.56. Figurant verba mea, ut qui ceram premendo figurat digitis, is
illam premendo, quasi dolor afficit.
who cannot lie, his Oracle, His voice from heaven to thee walking here on the
Earth, and it will direct thy steps, and make thy paths straight, if thou do
not dolorem verbo afferre, as David complains of his enemies, bring grief unto
it, wrest and wreath, and shape, and figure it by violence, fit it to thy
Action, and make light it self bear witness to a work of darkness, make that
place of Scripture plead for thee, which in plain terms has given sentence
against thee, and co^mned thee as a Malefactor; Ad omnia occurrit veritas, the
Rule will help us at all losses in our way, if we do not choose and delight to
wander, and call error it self Truth, because it gives us of that forbidden
fruit, which is pleasant to our eye and taste, or which our humor, or fancy, or
Lust have marked out, as our chiefest happiness; for these are the best, and
most Authentic Interpreters of this world. These are the Doctors in our
Israel.

How read thou? that is the rule; not how think thou? how wishest thou?
how would thou have it? and we must walk sicut accepimus, as we have
received; This is set up against all other sicuts, all other Rules whatsoever,
and bids us beware of men, beware of our selves, and try every spirit; for it
is not sicut vidimus, as we see others walk, nor sicut visum est, as it may
seem good in our own eyes (for no man more ready to put a cheat upon us, then
our selves) nor sicut visum est spiritui, as it may seem good to every spirit
(for we are too prone, to take every lying spirit, even our own (which is but
our Humor or Lust) for our Holy Ghost) what Saint John said of Antichrist, may
also be said of the spirit, we have heard that the spirit shall come, and
behold now there are many spirits, the world is full of them, so that there are
as many Rules almost as men, by which they walk several ways, but to the same
end, pressing forward to the delights, and glory of this world, nothing
doubting of their right and title to the next; thus joining together God and
the World (as Julian the Apostate did his own statues, Naz. Orat. 3. Invect
prior.
and his (...)) that they may be worshipped both together. None of these will fit
us, but sicut accepimus, as we have received from Christ, and his Apostles,
which is the only, sufficient Rule to guide us in our walk.

And first, not sicut vidimus, as we have seen others walk; no: though their
praise be in the Gospel, and they are numbered amongst the Saints of God; For as
St. Bern. calls the examples of the Saints condimentum vitae, the sauce of our
life, to season and make pleasant, what else may prove bitter to us (as Jobs
Dunghill may be a good sight for me to look upon in my low estate, and his
patience may uphold me; David's Groans and complaints, may tune my sorrow;
Saint Paul's labors, and stripes and Imprisonment, may give me an Issue (...),
1 Cor. 10.13.
a way, a Power to escape the like Temptation, by conquering it. I may wash off
all my Grief with their Tears, wipe out all disgrace with their contumelies;
and bury the fear of Death in their graves) so they may prove, if we be not
wary, venenum vitae, as poison to our life and walk: For, I know not how, we
are readier to stumble with the Saints, then to walk with them, Readier to lie
down with David in his bed of lust, then in his Couch of tears; Readier to
deny Crist with Peter upon a pretense of frailty, then to weep bitterly out of
a deep sense of our sin: In the errors and deviations of my life, I am Noah,
and Abraham, and David, and Peter,: I am all the Patriarchs, and all the
Apostles, but in that which made them Saints, I have little skill, and less
mind to follow them: It will concern us then, to have one eye upon the Saint,
and another upon the rule, that the Actions of good men may be as a prosperous
Gale to drive us forward in our course, and the rule, the Compass to steer
by; for it will neither help nor comfort me, to say, I shipwrackt with a Saint.
My Brethren, says Saint James, have not the says of Christ in respect of
Persons, Iam. 2.1.
for it is too common a thing to take our eye from the rule, and settle it upon
the Person, whom we gaze upon till we have lost our sight, and can see nothing
of man, or infirmity in him: His virtue and our esteem, shines and casts a
color, and brightness upon the Evil, which he does, upon whatsoever he says,
though it be false; or does though it be irregular; that it is either less
visible, or if it be seen, commends it self, by the person that did it, and so
steals, and wins upon us unawares, and has power with us, as a Law. Could St.
Augustine err? There have been too many in the Church, who thought he could
not, and to free him from error, have made his errors greater then they were by
large additions of their own, and fathered upon him those misshapen Births,
which (were he now alive) he would startle at, and run from, or stand up, and
use all his strength to destroy: Could Calvin or Luther do, or speak any
thing, that was not right; they that follow them, and are proud of their Names,
willing to be distinguished from all others by them, would be very Angry, and
hate you perfectly, if you should say, they could; and we cannot but be
sensible what strange effects, this admiration of their Persons has wrought
upon the Earth, what a fire it has kindled, hotter then that of the Tyrants
Furnace; Dan. 3.
for the flames have raged even to our very doors. Thus the Examples of good
men, like two-edged swords, cut both ways, both for good, and for bad; and
sin and error may be conveyed to us not only in the Cup of the Whore, but
in the Vessels of the Sanctuary; They are as the Plague, and infect
wheresoever they are, but spread more contagion from a Saint, then from a man
of Belial; in the one they are scarce seen, in the other they are seen with
horror, in the one, we hate not the sin: so much as the person, and in the
other we are favorable to the sin for the persons sake, and at last grow
familiar with it, as with our friend. Nihil perniciosius Gestis sanctorum,
Luther de Abrog. priv. Miss.
said Luther himself, There is nothing more dangerous, then the Actions of the
Saints, not strengthened by the Testimony of Scripture, and it is far safer
to count that a sin in them, which has not its warrant from Scripture, then
to fix it up for an ensample; for it is not good to follow a Saint into the
Ditch. Let us take them, not whom men (for men may Canonize themselves, and
others as they please) but whom God himself, as it were with his own hand has
registered for Saints. Sampson was a good man, and has his name in the
catalogue of believers; Numb. 25.
Phinehas a zealous man, who staid the Plague, by executing of judgment, but I
can neither make Sampson an argument to kill my self, nor Phinehas, to shed the
blood of an Adulerer. Lib. 2. de Baptismo. q 4 (...). Heb. 10.24.
Saint Basil observes, that amongst those many seeming contradictions in
Scripture, one is of a fact, or work done, to the Precept. The command is,
Thou shall not kill: Sampson killed himself, Phinehas with his spear nails
the adulterous couple to the earth, but every man has not Sampson's spirit,
nor Phinehas commission: The Fathers rule is the rule of wisdom it self: when
we read in Scripture a fact commended, which falls cross with the Precept, we
must leave the Fact, and cleave to the Precept; for examples are not rules of
life, but provocations to good works, sicut vidimus, as we have seen, is not a
right sicut: sicut Elias, like as Elias, but not to consume men with fire; like
unto Peter, but not to cut off a man's ear; and like unto Saint Paul; but
himself corrects it with another sicut, 1 Cor. 11.1.
sicut ego Christi, as I am unto Christ.

Secondly, But in the next place; if not sicut vidimus, as we have seen
others, then not sicut visumfuerit, as it shall seem good in our own eyes; for
fancy is a wanton, unruly, froward faculty, and in us, as in Beasts, for the
most part, supplies the place of reason, vulgus ex veritate pauca, Pro Rose.
Comaedo.
ex opinone multa aestimat, says Tull. the Common people (which is the
greatest part of mankind) are lead rather by Opinion, then by the truth (for
vulgus is of a larger signification then we usually take it in) because they
are more subject and enslaved to those two turbulent Tribunes of the soul, The
Irascible, and Concupiscible Appetite, and so more opinionative then then
those, who are not so much under their command: It is truly said, Affectiones
sacile faciunt opiniones, our affections will easily raise up opinions; for who
will not soon fancy that to be true, which he would have so? which may either
fill his hopes, or satisfy his lusts, or justify his anger, or answer his
love, or look friendly on that which our wild Passions drive us to: Opinion is
as a wheel, on which the greatest part of the world are turned, and wheeled
about, till they fall off several ways into several evils, and do scarce
touch at Truth in the way. Opinion builds our Church: chooses our Preacher,
forms our Discipline, frames our gesture, measures our Prayers, Methodizeth
our Sermons: Opinion does exhort, instruct, correct, Teaches, and commands; If
it say, Go, we go, and if it say, Do this, we do it; we call it our
conscience; and it is our God; and has more worshippers, then Truth. For
though Opinion have a weaker Groundwork, then Truth, yet she builds higher;
but it is but Hay and stubble, fit for the fire. Good God: what a Babel may be
erected upon a Thought? I verily thought, says Saint Paul, and what a
whirlwind was that thought? Act. 26.9.
which drove him to Damascus with Letters, and to kick against the pricks.
Shall I tell you, it was but Fancy that in David's time beat down the carved
works with Axes and Hammers: It was but a Thought that destroyed the Temple it
self, that killed the Prophets, and persecuted the Apostles, and crucified the
Lord of life Himself. And therefore it will concern us to watch our Fancy, and
to deal with it as Mothers do with their children: who when they desire that
which may hurt them, deny them that, but to still and quiet them, give them
some other thing they may delight in, take away a Knife, and give them an
Apple; so when our Fancy sports and pleases it self with vain and aerie
speculations, let us suspect and quarrel them, and by degrees present unto it
the very face of Truth, as the Stoic speaks (...), Epict.
fist and winnow our imaginations, bring them to the light, and as the devout
Schoolman speaks, resolve all our effectual notious by the Accepistis, Gers.
by the Rule, and so demolish all those Idols, which our Passions by the help
of Fancy have set up; for why should such a deceit pass unquestioned? why
should such an Imposture escape without a mark?

Thirdly, But now, if we may not walk sicut visum est, as it seems good unto
us, yet we may sicut visum est Spiritui sancto, as it seems good to the Holy
Ghost; Yes, for that is to walk according to the rule, for he speaks in the
word, and to walk after the Spirit, and to walk by this Rule, are one and the
same thing: but yet the World has learned a cursed Art, to set them at
distance, and when the Word turns from us, and will not be drawn up to our
Fancy, to carry on our pleasing, but vain imaginations, we then appeal to the
Spirit; we bring him in, either to deny his own word, or which in effect is
the same, to interpret it against his own meaning, and so (with Reverence be it
spoken) make him no better, then a Knight of the post, to witness to a lie;
This we would do, but cannot, for make what noise we will, and boast of his
Name, we are still at visum est nobis, it is but Fancy still, it is our own
spirit, not the Holy Ghost. For as there be many false Christ's, so there are
many false spirits, and we are commanded not to believe; 1 John 4.1.
but to try them, and what can we try them by, but by the Rule? and as they
will say, lo here is Christ, or there is Christ, so they will say, Lo here is
the spirit, and there is the spirit; The Pope lays claim to it, and the
Enthusiast lays claim to it, and whosoever will may lay claim to it on the same
grounds, when neither has any better Argument to prove it by, then their bare
words, no Evidence, but what is forged, in that shop of vanities, their Fancy,
idem Actio, Titioque. both are alike in this; And if the Pope could persuade
me, that ^e never opened his mouth, but the spirit spoke by him, I would then
pronounce him Infallible, and place him in the chair; and if the Enthusiast
could build me up in the same faith, and belief of him, I would be bold to
proclaim the same of him, and set him by his side, and seek the Law at his
mouth: would you know the two Grand Impostors of the World, which have been in
every age, and made that desolation, which we see on the Earth? They are these
two; A pretended zeal, and a pretense of the spirit. If I be a Zealot, what
dare I not do? and when I presume I have the Spirit, what dare I not say? what
Action so foul, which these may not authorize? what wickedness imaginable,
which these may not countenance? what evil may not these seal for good, and
what good may they not call evil? oh take heed of a false light, and too much
fire; these two have walked these many Ages about the Earth, not with the
blessed Spirit, which is a light to illuminate, and as Fire to purge us, but
with their father the Devil, transformed into Angels of light, and burning
Seraphins; but have led men upon those Precipices, into those works of
Darkness, which no night is dark enough to cover.

Conclus. 1.
I might here much enlarge my self, for it is a subject fitter for a Sermon,
then a part of one, and for a Volume, then a Sermon, but I must conclude;

And for conclusion, let us, whilst the light shines in the world, walk on,
guided by the rule, which which will bring us at last to the holy Mount: For
objects will not come to us, but have only force to move us to come to them;
Aeternall Happiness is a fair sight, and spreads its beams, and unvailes its
beauty, to win our love, and allure and draw us, and if it draw us, we must up
and be stirring, and walk on to meet it; Climachus.
what that devout Writer says of his Monk, is true of the Christian, he is
assidua naturae violentia, his whole life is a constant continued violence
against himself, against his corrupt nature, which as a weight hangs upon him,
and cloggs and fetters him, which having once shaken off, he not only walks,
but runns the ways of Gods Commandments.

Conclus. 1.
Secondly, let us walk honestly, as in the Day, walk (...), as becomes
Christians, in our several stations, and conditions of life, and not think
Christ dishonored, if we mingle him with the common Actions of our life; For
we never dishonor him more, then when we take him not in, and use him not as
our guide and rule, even in those Actions, which for the grosnesse of the
subject, and matter they work on, may seem to have no favor, or relish of
that, which we call Religion. Be not deceived; Ma^um Rempturb ^i quam comam.
^ec.
he that thus taken him in is a Priest and a King, the most honorable person in
the world. Behold the profane Gallant, who walks and talks away his l^e, who
divides himself between the comb and the glass, and had rather the
Commonwealth should fly in pieces, then one hair or his Periwig should be out
of its place, to whom we bow, and cringe to, and sail down to, as to a Golden
Calf; I tell you, the meaness Artizan that works with his hands, even he that
grindes at the Mill, is more honorable then he. Take the speculative,
Phantastique Zealot, the Christian Pharisee, that shuts himself up between the
ear and tongue, between hearing much, and speaking more, and doing contrary,
the worst Anchoret in the world, being full of Oppression, deceit and
bitterness; I may be hold to say, The vilest person, he that sits with the
dogs of your Flock, is more Honorable, more righteous then he, and of such,
as these, Saint Paul spoke often, Philip. 3.18.
and he spoke it weeping, that they did walk, but walk as Enemies to the Cross
of Christ.

Let then Every man move in his own Sphere orderly, abide in the Calling
wherein he is called, and in the last place, That we may move with the first
mover Christ, the beginner and Author of our walk, Let us take him along with
us, in all our ways; Hearken what Christ Jesus the Lord will say, That we may
walk before him with Reverence, and Godly fear, not sicut vidimus, Heb. 11.28.
as we have seen, but look upon one another as the two Cherubims, 1 King. 6.
touching and moving one another; but with the Ark of the Testimony in the midst
betwixt us, and by that either inciting, or correcting one another in our walk;
Secondly, not sicut visum suerit, not as it shall seem good in our own eyes;
(for nothing can be more deceitful, then our own thoughts) nor sicut visum
spiritui, not as every spirit may move us, which we call Holy, for it may be a
lying spirit, and lead us out of our way into those evils, which grieve that
Blessed Spirit, whose Name we have thus presumtuously taken in vain. But let us
walk, as we have received him, let us join example with the word, and it will
be no more as a meteor to mislead us, but a bright morning Starr to direct us
to Christ; correct our fancy by the rule, and it will be sanctum cogitatorium,
a Lymbeck, an holy elaboratory of such thoughts, which may fly as the Doves to
the windows of heaven; and last of all, try the Spirit by the word (for the
word is nothing else but the breathing and voice of the Spirit) and then thou
shall be baptized with the Spirit and fire; the Spirit shall enlighten thee, and
the spirit shall purge and cleanse thee, and lead the into all truth; shall
breath comfort and strength into thee, in this thy walk and pilgrimage, and
thou shall walk from strength to strength, from virtue to virtue, even till
thou come to thy journeys end, to thy Fathers house, to that Sabbath and rest,
which remains to the Children of God.

THE FOURTH SERMON.
JOHN 6.56. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me and
I in him.


THese words are our Saviors; and it was usual with this our good Master, by
those things, which were visible to the eye, to lift up his hearers minds and
thoughts, to spiritual, and Heavenly things, to draw his discourse from some
present occasion, or business in hand. He curses the fig tree, Math. 21.19.
Sterilitas nostra in Ficu Luke. 11.
which had nothing but leaves, to correct our sterility, and unfruitfulnesse:
at the table of a Pharisee, upon the sight of the clean outside of his cup, he
discovers his inward parts full of ravening, and wicknesse: At Jacobs well,
John. 4.
he powers forth to the woman of Samaria the water of life. After he had
supped with his disciples, he takes the cup and calls the wine his Blood, John.
15.
and himself the true Vine. Thus did Wisdom publish it self in every place,
upon every occasion; The well, the Table, the Highway side, every place was a
Pulpit, every occasion a Text, and every good lesson, a Sermon.

To draw down this to our present purpose; In the beginning of this Chapter, he
works a miracle, multiplyes the loaves, and the fishes, that the remainder
was more then the whole, a miracle of it self, able to have made the power of
god visible in him, and something indeed it wrought with them; for, behold at
the 24. v. they seek him, they follow him over the Sea; They ask him; Rabbi
when came thou hither? at the next verse, but our Savior knowing their
hypocricy, answers them not to what they ask, but instructs them in that they
never thought on. Verily, verily, you seek me not for the miracle, but the
loaves. v. 26. But behold, I show you yet a more excellent way: I show you
bread better then those loaves, better then Moses his manna: behold I am the
bread of life v. 48 and my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed,
v. 55. and he commends it unto them by three Virtues, or effects, 1. That it
fills and satisfies, which neither the loaves, nor Moses his manna could do:
For he that comes to me, that devoteth himself to me, shall never hunger, and
he that believes in me shall never thirst v. 35. 2. It is a living bread, v.
51. a bread that gives life, which Moses manna could not do, but was destroyed
with them, that ate it in the wilderness, v. 49. 3. That it was bread, which
had power to incorporate them, to embody them, to make them one, and give them
union, and communion with the Lord of life, in the words of my Text, He that
cateth my flesh and drinks my blood, that is, (as Christ himself, who best
knew his own meaning, interprets it) that believes in me, v. 35. that so feeds
on the mystery of my Incarnation, that can look upon my cross to which my
flesh was fastened, and there with the eye of faith behold, and wonder at those
rich treasuries of wisdom, and Patience, of Humility, of Obedience, and love,
which are the truest title, and superscription, which could be written on his
Cross: that can look upon the several passages of my blessed Aeconomy, and
receive, and digest them, and turn them into nourishment, that can look upon my
Birth, and be regenerate, and born again, upon my precepts, and make them his
daily bread, upon my Cross and be crucified to the world, upon my
Resurrection, and be raised to newness of life, He that thus eats my flesh,
and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in him.

You have the occasion, and sum of these words; (for more then an allusion to
our eating and drinking in the Sacrament, I cannot see, and that too, though
the Church of Rome would have more, is more then we can prove) I may call it
the true Character of a Christian, and who could draw it better then Christ? it
consists as you see, of two parts. 1. The Christians, or the Believers part, He
dwells in Christ. 2. Christ's part, he dwells in every man that is Regenerate.


So that in this our union with Christ, there passes a double action, one from
us to Christ, another from Christ to us; and, as in arched buildings, all the
stones do mutually uphold each other, and if you remove and take one away, the
rest will fall; so do these two interchangeably hold up and prove one another:
For if we dwell not in Christ, Christ will not dwell in us, and if he dwell not
in us, it is impossible we should dwell in him; Or we may resemble these two,
our relation to Christ, and Christ's to us, to the two Cherubins: Exodus 25.
covering the mercy seat with their wings, and their faces one to the other,
with the Covenant in the midst between them; and the Cherubins, though they
were both Cherubins, and very like, yet were two distinct Cherubins: so though
our dwelling in Christ, and Christ's dwelling in us, tend to the same and, yet
they are two, and the Covenant is in the midst between them, if we will be his
people, he will be our God; if we dwell in him, he will dwell in us. Take it
then in these two propositions or Doctrines. 1. That something, some act is
required on our parts, which is here expressed by dwelling in him. 2. Something
is done by Christ, some virtue, some efficacy proceeds from him, which is here
called dwelling in us.


In both which is seen, that mutual, interchangeable reciprocation between
Christ, and a Regenerate Soul: as he dwells in Christ; so Christ dwells in
him: and as Christ dwells in him, so he dwells in Christ; I am my beloveds,
and my beloved is mine. He that eats my flesh. etc.

We begin with the first, that some act of ours is required, which is here
expressed by dwelling in him; Now to dwell in Christ, is a phrase peculiar to
this our Evangelist, and he often uses it, both here, and in his first
Epistle, and it is full, and expressive, and operative, implying a real,
durable interest in him, a reliance and dependence on him alone, not only on
his person, (that they are bold to do, who crucify him again) but on his
offices, as he is a King to Govern us, a Priest to mediate, and intercede for
us, and a Prophet to teach us; such a dependence, which makes us truly his
Subjects, his purchase, his Disciples. We usually say, the lover dwells not in
himself, but in him he loves, dwells there, and delights in such an habitation,
nor is ever satisfied with pleasures of it, as we read Genesis 44. That Jacobs
soul was bound up with the soul of Benjamin, his life was knit with the young
man's life, his life hanged and depended on his; and by this we may discover,
what is meant by this phrase; when our souls are bound up with Christ's, when
our understandings, wills, and affections, are bound up with his will (for what
Cassian speaks of his Monk, is true of the Christian, Nescit judicare quis quis
didicit perfecto obedire -- C^ss l. 4 de instit Canob.
Nescit judicare, he has no judgment non habet suum velle, he has no will of
his own) when our understandings, wills, and affections are his, as if we were
but one flesh, and one blood, and one soul, that we will neither know, nor
serve, nor hearken to any, but Christ, that we will have no King, no Priest, no
Prophet, but him, then we dwell in him.

More particularly thus: if we dwell in him, we shall, first discover and
admire the majesty of Christ. Secondly, acknowledge his power, and love his
command. Thirdly, rely, and depend upon him alone, as our sure castle, and
protection. We shall dwell as it were within the Beauty of his rays, within
his Jurisdiction, and under the shadow of his wing.

And 1. if we dwell in him, we shall discover and admire the Majesty of Christ:
for we may observe; every thing, that is (...), that is in any emenency, sends
a kind of Majesty from it, as the Sun does its Beams, which makes a welcome,
and pleasing glide into the minds of men, and at once strikes them with
admiration, and love; sometimes it appears in the persons, sometimes in the
manners, and behavior of men; sometimes in the order and policy, of a well
governed Commonwealth: so we read, the skin of Moses face after he had talked
with God, did shine so bright, that Aaron and the people were afraid to come
near him, Exodus 34. So when holy Job went out to the gate, the young men saw
him, and hid themselves, and the Aged arose and stood up Job 29.8. and it
shows it self in a well ordered Commonwealth; Majestas est in imperin, at ^ue
in omni Pop. Romans dignitate Quint. l. 7. instit. c. 3.
it was called majestas pop. Romani, the Majesty of the people of Rome. Now if
Christ be (...) considered of thee as one in eminnecy, and Supreme, thou will
behold him, not only fair and lovely, but clothed with Majesty; I do not
mean his Majesty, in his transfiguration, when his face did shine as the Sun,
and his Disciples fell on theirs; Matthew 17. nor his Majesty, when he shall come
to judge the quick and the dead (and yet these are fit objects, for the eye of
faith to look on) but his Majesty in his cratch, his Majesty in his Humility,
his Majesty on the Cross; (for even there the thief discovered it, and it was
imputed to him for righteousness, and made the Cross it self a gate and
passage into Paradise.) but these are too remote, and for the many, we look
upon them as at distance, have so small regard of them, as if they concerned us
not, can see Majesty in a lump of flesh, in those that cannot save themselves,
sooner then in him we call our Savior; But then can thou discover Majesty in
him now? Majesty in his discipline, Wisdom in the foolishness of Preaching,
his power in weakness now in this life, when he is whipped, and spit upon, and
crucified again, when he lies covered over with disgraces and contumelies, when
his Precepts are dragged in Triumph after flesh and blood, and whatsoever it
dictates; when for one Hosanna, he has a thousand crucifige's, for one formal
Hypocritical acknowledgement, a thousand spears in his sides: when the truth is
what we will make it, the Gospel esteemed no more then a fable, and Christ
himself (if we look into men's lives) the most disesteemed thing in the World:
when thou see^st him in this cloud, in this disfiguration, in this Golgotha,
where is thy faith, what eyes have thou? does he not still appear a worm, and
no man, a man of sorrows? when thou see him thus, is there any form that
thou should desire him? Or do thou even now see his Glory, as the glory of
the only begotten Son of God? 1 John 1.14. Colos. 2.
does he now appear to thee, as the head of all principality and power? can
thou see him in that naked Lazar, that persecuted, forlorn imprisoned Saint?
does his majesty shine through the vanities of this World, and make them
loathsome, through they labor of Charity, and make it easy, through
persecution, and make it joyful? in the midst of rage, and derision, of fury
and contumely, is he still to thee, the King of glory? then thou dwell in
him, even in the beauty of holiness.

2.
Secondly: if we dwell in him, we shall be under his Command; For they who
command us, do in a manner, take us into themselves, do possess, and compass,
bound and keep us in on every side, and if we dwell in him, we shall be within
his reach and power, not have our excursions, and run from him into the streets
and highways again, into Bethaven, a house of vanity. I say, we shall be
under his command, we shall be his possession, his propriety. For man is a
little world, I may say he is a little commonwealth, Ter. de Resurrect. carn.
c. 40.
Tertullian calls him Fibulam vtriusque substantiae, the clasp or button, which
ties together his diverse substances and natures, the soul and the body, the
flesh and the spirit, and these two are contrary one to the other, says Saint
Paul, are carried diverse ways, the flesh to that which pleases it, and the
spirit to that which is proportioned to it, looking on things, neither as
delightful, nor irksome, but as they may be drawn in to contribute to the
Beauty and perfection of the soul. Gal. 5.15.
These lust, and struggle one against the other, and man is the field the
Theater where this battle is fought, and one part or other still prevails. Many
times, nay, most times (God help us) the flesh with her sophistry, prevails
with the will, to join with her against the spirit; and then sin takes the
chair, the place of Christ himself, and sets us hard and heavy tasks; sets us
to make brick, but allows us no straw, bids us please and content our selve,
but affords us no means to work it out. See how Mammon condemns one to the
mines, to dig for Metals, and treasure, for that money which will perish with
him See how lust fetters another with a look, with the glance of an eye, binds
him with a kiss, Romans 11.12.
a kiss that will at last bite like a Cockatrice: see how self love drives us
on, as Balaam did his beast, on the point of the sword? thus sin does (...),
exercise its force, and power, Lord it, and King it, reign in our mortal
bodies. Again sometimes, (and why but sometimes?) but sometimes the will
sanctified and upheld, and encouraged by the spirit of Christ, takes the
spirits part, determines for it, against the flesh, chooses any thing which the
spirit commends though it be compa^st about with terrors, and fearful
apparitions, though it be irksome, and contrary to the flesh, and then we
depose Mamman, crucify the flesh, deny our selves (...) separate our selves
from our selves, Math. 16 24
from our wilfulness and stubbornness and Animosities, and so place Christ in
his throne, reinstate our selves into his house, his family Ephesians. 3. into his
kingdom, that Christ may be all in all.

And thus it is: whilst this fighting, and contention last in us, which will be
as long as we last in our mortal bodies; something or other will lay hold on
us, will have command over us, (for there is no such aequi librium in a
Christian man's life, no time when the scales are so even, or when he hangs, (as
Solomon is pictured, between Heaven and Hell) but one side or other still
prevails, either we walk after the flesh, when that is most potent; or after
the spirit, when that carries us along in our way against the solicitations,
and allurements of the flesh; one of them is always uppermost. It will
therefore concern us to take a strict account of our selves, impartially to
consider, to which part our will inclines most, whether it be hurried away by
the flesh, or lead sweetly, and powerfully on by the spirit, to weigh it well,
which of these bears most sway in our hearts; whether we had rather be led by
the spirit, or obey the flesh in the lusts thereof; whether we had rather dwell
in the world with all its pomp and pageantry, in a M^hometical Paradise of all
sensual delights, or dwell with Christ, though it be with persecutions.
Suppose the devil should make an overture to thee, as he did once to our
Savior, of all the Kingdoms of the world, and the flesh should plead for her
self, as she will be putting in for her share) and show thee honor and power,
all that a heart of flesh would leap at, in those Kingdoms; and on the other
side, the spirit, thy conscience enlightened should check thee, and pull thee
back, and tell thee, that all this is but a false show, that death and
destruction are in these kingdoms veiled and dressed up, with Titles of honor,
in purple and state; that in this terrestrial Paradise, thou shall meet with a
fiery sword, the wrath of God, and from this imaginary, painted heaven, be
thrown into Hell it self. Here now is thy trial; here thou art put to thy
choice: if thy heart can now say, I will have none of these; if thou can say
to thy flesh, what have thou to do with me? who gave thee authority? who made
thee a Ruler over me? if thou can say to the spirit, thou art instead of God
to me: if thou can say with thy Savior, avoid Satan, I know no power in
Heaven or in earth, no dominion, but Christ's, then thou art in his house, in
his service (which is no service but the glorious liberty of the sons of God)
then thou art in him; thou may assure thy self, thy residence, thy abode,
thy dwelling is in Christ.

Thirdly, If we dwell in Christ, we shall rely and depend on him, as on our
tutelary God, and Protector, and so we may be said to dwell in him indeed, as
in a house, which is (...) says the Civilian, our fort, and Sanctuary commune
perfugium, says Tull. our common place of refuge, and what is our hope?
whither should we fly but to him? I am thine, save me, says David, because I
am thine, because I have none in Heaven but thee, and on earth desire none
besides thee: Thou art my House, my Castle, my Fortress and Defense, thou art
my Hope to the ends of the World, thou art my Christ.

And this is a principal mark of a true Christian, of a man dwelling in Christ,
that he wholly flings himself into his Protection, that he here sixeth his hope,
and does not busy himself to find any shelter, but here; for as the full
persuasion of the Almighty power of God was the first rise to Religion, the
fountain from which all worship whether true or false did flow, (for without
this persuasion there could be none at all) and we find this relying on his
power not only rewarded, but magnified in Scripture, Heb. 11.
so the acknowledgement of Gods wonderful power in Christ, by which he is able
to make good his rich and glorious promises, to subdue his, and our enemies,
and do abundantly above all that we can conceive, to work joy out of sorrow,
peace out of trouble, order out of confusion, life out of death, is the
foundation, the pillar, the life of all Christianity, and if we build not upon
this, if we abide not, if we dwell not here, we shall not find a hole to hide
our heads. For man, (such is out condition) even when he makes his nest on
high, when he thinks he can never be moved, when he exalts himself as God, is
a weak, indigent, insufficient creature, subject to every blast and breath,
subject to misery, as well as to passion, subject to his own, and subject to
other men's passions, when he is at his highest pitch, shaken with his own fear,
and pursued with other men's malice, rising, soaring up aloft, and then failing,
sinking, and ready to fall; and when he falls, looking about for help and
succor: when he is diminished and brought low by evil and sorrows, he seeks
for some refuge, some hole, some Sanctuary to fly to, as the sieman speaks of
the Conies: they are a generation not strong, and therefore have their Burrows;
to hide themselves in. Prove. 30. Now by this you may know you dwell in Christ,
if when the tempest come, you are ready to run under his wing, and think of no
house, no shelter, no protection but his. Talk what we will of Faith, if we do
not Trust, and rely on him, we do not believe in him; For what is faith, but
as our Amen to all his promises, our subscription to his Wisdom, and power, and
goodness, and here we fix our tabernacle, and will abide till the storm be
overpast; Believe in him, and not trust in him? you may say as well the Jews
did love him, when they nailed him to his Cross. Why are you fearful, Matt.
8.26.
Oh ye of little faith? said Christ to his Disciples; that faith was little
indeed, which would let in fear, when Christ the wisdom of the Father, and
mighty power of God, was in the ship: little, less then a grain of
mustardseed, which is the least of seeds, so little, that what Christ calls
here (...) little faith, he plainly calls (...) unbelief Matt. 17.20. the faith
of this World, the weak and cowardly faith of this world, which speaks of
principalities and powers, speaks swelling words, and at the sight of a cloud,
which is not so big as a man's hand, strikes in, and is not seen, but leaves us
groaning under every burden (for to such a faith, every light affliction is so)
leaves us to complaints and despair, or to those inventions, which will plunge
us in greater evils, then those we either suffer, or fear. The unbeleeving man,
he that dwells not in Christ, has either no place to fly to, or else that he
flies to, is as full of molestation and torment, as that which he did fly from;
he flies to himself, from himself, he flies to his wit, and that befools him,
he flies to his strength, and that overthrows him, he flies to his friend, and
he fails him; he asks himself counsel, and mistrusts it, asks his friend
Counsel, and is afraid of it, he flies to a reed, for a staff, to impotency,
and folly, and has not what he looked for, when he has what he looked for, is
ever seeking ease, and never at rest; and when these evils without him, stir up
a worse evil within him, a confiscience which calls his sins to remembrance,
what a perplexed distracted thing is he? what shifts, what evasions does he
catch at? her runs from room to room, from excuse to excuse, from comfort, to
comfort, he flutters and flies to and fro, as the Raven, and would rest though
it were on the outside of the Ark. This is the condition of those, who are not
in Christ, but he that dwells in him, that abides in him, knows not what
fear is, because he is in him, in whom all the treasuries of Wisdom and power
are hid, and so has ever his protection above him, knows not what danger is,
for wisdom it self conducts him, knows not what an enemy is, for power guards
him, what misery is, for he lives in the Region of happiness; he that dwells
in him, dwells in his armory, cannot fear, what man, what devil, Ephesians. 7.
what sin can do unto him, because he is in his armory, abides in him safely as
in a Sanctuary, as under his wing. I know whom I have trusted, says Saint
Paul, not the world, not my friends, 2 Timothy 1,12.
not my riches not my self, for not only the world, and riches, and friends,
are a thin shelter to keep off a storm, but I know nothing in my self, to
uphold my self, but, I know whom I have trusted, my Christ, my King my,
Governor and Counselor, who has taken me under his roof, who cannot deny
himself, but in these evil days, in that great day, will be my patron, my
defense, my protection.

And thus does the true Christian dwell and abide in Christ: 1. admiring his
majesty: 2. Loving his command, and 3. by depending wholly upon his protection:
these three fill up our first part, our first proposition, that some act is
required on our parts, here expressed by dwelling in him.

2. part
We pass now to our second; that something is also done by Christ in us, some
virtue proceeds from him, which is here called dwelling in us. There goes forth
virtue, and power from him, from his promises, and from his precepts, from his
life, and from his passion, and death, from what he did, and from what he
suffered, as there did to the woman which touched the hem of his garment, that
healed her bloody issue; a power by which he sweetly, and secretly, and
powerfully characterizeth our hearts, and writes his mind in our minds, and so
takes possession of them, and draws them into him self, in the eighth to the
Romans 11. v. the Apostle tells us he dwells in us by his spirit, and that we
are led by the spirit in the whole course of our life, in the second to the
Ephesians. the last v. we are said to be the habitation of God through the spirit,
(...), his tabernacle, his temple, which he consecrates, and sets apart to his
own use and service, there is no doubt a power comes from him, but I am almost
afraid to say it, there having been such ill use made of it; For though it
become already (for the Gospel is the power of God unto salvation) yet is it
still expected, expected indeed rather then hoped for, for when it does come,
we shut the door, and set up our will against it, and then look faintly after
it, and persuade our selves, it will come at last, once for all; There is power
in his prece^ts, for our reason subscribes, and signs them for true, there is
power in his promises, they shine in glory, Romans 1.16.
these are the power of Christ to every one that believes, and how can we be
Christians, if we believe not? but this is his ordinary power, which like the
Sun in commune profertur is shown on all at once; There yet goes a more
immediate power and virtue from him, John 3.^.
(we deny it not) which like the wind works wonderful effects, but we see not
whence it comes nor whither it goes, neither the beginning, nor the end of it,
which is in another World; For the operations of the spirit, by reason they are
of another condition, then any other thought, or working in us whatsoever, are
very difficult and obscure, as Scotus observes upon the prologue to the
sentences, for the manner not to be perceived, no not by that soul, wherein
they are wrought, profuisse deprehendas, quomodo prefuerunt non deprehendes, as
Seneca in another case, that they have wrought you shall find, but the secret,
and retired passages by which they wrought, are impossible to be brought to
demonstration.

But though we cannot discern the manner of his working, yet we may observe,
that in his actions, and operations, on the soul of man, he holds the course
even of natural agents, in this respect, that they strive to bring in their
similitude, and likeness, into those things on which they work, by a kind of
force, driving out one contrary with another, to make way for their own form;
so Abraham begat Isaac, and Isaac Jacob, and every creature according to its
own kind, as Plato said of Sacrates wise sayings, that they were (...) the
children of his mind, so resembling him, that you might see all Socrates in
them. So it is with Christ; where he dwells, he works by his spirit something
like unto himself, he alters the whole frame of the heart, 2 Cor. 10.
drives out all that is contrary to him, all imaginations, which axalt
themselves against him, never leaves purging, and fashioning us, Call. 4.
till a new creature, like himself, till Christ be fully formed in us. So it is
with every one in whom Christ dwells.

And this he does by the power of his spirit: 1. By quickening our knowledge, by
showing us the riches of his Gospel, his Beauty and Majesty, the glory and
order of his house, and that with that convincing evidence, that we are forced
to fall down, and worship, by filling our soul with the glory of it, as God
filled the tabernacle with his Exodus 40. that all the powers and saculties of
the soul are ravisnt with the sight, and come willingly, as the Psalmist
speaks, fall down willingly before him, by moving our soul, as our soul does
our body, that when he says go, we go, and when he says do this, we do it,
and so it is in every one in whom Christ dwells.

Secondly, he dwells in us, by quickening and enlivening our faith, so dwells in
our hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3.17.
that we are rooted and grounded in love; for we read of a dead faith J^m 2.20.
which moves no more in the ways of righteousness, then a dead man sealed up
in his grave, and if the Son of man should come, he would find enough of this
faith in the World; For from hence, from this, that our faith is not enlivened,
that the Gospel is not thoroughly believed, but faintly received came formidine
contrarit, with fear, or rather a hope, that the contrary is true, from hence
proceed all the errors of our lives: from hence arises that irregularity,
those contradictions, those inconsequences in the lives of men, even from
hence, that we have faith, but so as we should have the World; we have it, as
if we had it not, and so use it, as if we used it not, or which is worse, abuse
it, not believe and be saved, but believe and be damned; and we are vain men,
says Saint James, if we think otherwise, if we think that a dead faith can
work any thing; or any thing but death, but when it is quickened, and made a
working faith, when Christ dwells in our hearts by faith, then it works
wonders, Heb. 11.33. 2 Cor. 2,11.
for we read of its valor; that it subdues kingdoms, and stops the mouths
of Lions, we read of its policy; that it discovers the devils enterprises, or
devices, of its medicinal virtue, that it purifieth the heart, and we read too
furta fidei, the thefts, and pious depredations of faith, stealing virtue from
Christ, and taking Heaven by violence, and such a wonderful power it has in
that soul, in which Christ dwells, it works out our corruption and stampeth
his image upon us, it works obedience in us, which is called the obedience of
faith, that is, that obedience, Romans 1.5.
which is due to faith, and to which faith naturally tends, and would bring
us to it, if we did not dull, and dead, and hinder it.

And 1. he works in us a universal and equal obedience (for if he dwell in
us, every room is his) For there are, says Parisiensis, particulares
voluntates particular wills, or rather particular inclinations, and
dispositions to this virtue, and not to another, to be liberal, and not
temperate, sober, but not Chaste, to fast, and hear, and pray, but not to do
acts of mercy, which are virtues but in appearance, and proceed from rotten,
unsound principles, from a false spring, but not from Christ, and so make up a
spiritual Hermaphrodite, a good speaker, and a bad live, a Jew, and a
Christian, Deus in uno homine Syllas suisse credideris, Valerius Max. l. 6. c 9.
a Herod, and a John Baptist, a Zelot a Phinehas, and an Adulterer, and as the
Historian said, two Sylla's in one man, like a play-book, and a Sermon bound up
together; But these I told you, are not true virtues, but proceed many times
from the same principles, which their vices do, (for I may be a Hypocrite, and
a man of Belial for the same and) but where Christ dwells he purges the whole
house, not one, but every faculty of the soul, that is the whole man: as he
raised not a part, but all Lazarus, for if any part yet favor of rottenness
and corruption, we cannot say, that Lazarus is risen; He works I say an
universal, equal obedience, which as a Circle, consists in an equality of life,
in every respect answering to the command, and working of Christ, as a circle
does, in every part, look upon the point, or Center.

2.
Secondly, Col. 2.5.
he works in us an even, and constant obedience, the Apostle calls it (...),
the firmity and steadfastness of our faith in Christ; For as the Philosoper
well observes, that the affections do but (...) lightly move us, raise some
motion in the mind, Artic. l. 2. Ethic. c. 1.5.
trouble us, and vanish; so that one affection many times drives out another,
as Amnon did Tamar, our love ending in batred, and our sorrow in anger, and our
fear in joy; But from virtue we are said (...) to be strongly disposed to be
confirmed, and established in our actions: so the reason of that unevenness,
that instability, that inconstancy in the conversation of men, that they are
now loud in their Hosanna, and anon, a loud in their Crucifige; now in Abraham's
bosom, and anon into Dalilahs lap, now fighting, anon cursing, now very
seraphical, and anon wallowing in the mire, is from this, that they have no
other motive, no other principle, then peradventure, some private respect, or
some weak impression of some good lesson they have lately heard, some faint
radiations from the truth, and therefore can arise no higher then the Fountain,
and will soon run out with it; now, it is not so with the true Christian, in
whom Christ dwells; for he moves with the Sun, which never starts out of his
sphere, has Christ living in him, and the power of the Gospel assisting him in
every motion; and so cannot have these qualms of devotion, these waverings,
this unevenness, these Cadi-surgia as the Father calls them, Ephr. Sycus 1 John
3.9. 1 Pet. 1.5.
these risings, and fallings, these marches and Halts, these profers, and
relapses, because Christ is living in him, because the seed of God abides in
him, and he is kept by this power of Christ unto salvation.

Thirdly, he works a sincere, and real obedience in that heart in which he
dwells, and this is proper to the true Christian; For the actions of an
hypocrite are not natural, but artificial, not the actions of a living soul,
but like unto the motions of that Artificial body, which Albertus made, not
proceeding from any life in them, but forced as it were by certain wheels,
and Engines, by love of a good Name, by fear of smart, or hope to bring their
purposes about, and thus many times he walks to his end in the habit of a
Saint, when no other appearance will serve; but where Christ dwells, there is
his spirit, and where his spirit is, there is truth, and he fashioneth and
shapeth out our affections to the things themselves, makes our affections such,
as so fair an object requires; that as his promises, so our affections are
yea, and Amen, that as his reward is real, so is our love to it real, as the
Gospel and Heaven and Christ is true, so are our affections toward them hearty
and sincere; true as he is true, and faithful as he is faithful. So then (to
conclude this) Christ dwells in every true Christian, not as a contracted, or
divided Christ, as the Ancient Heretics made him, but dwells, as the Apostle
speaks, fully and plentifully in him. Secondly, he dwells in him as Christ
yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever; not as Baal, now preent with us,
and anon asleep; Lastly, he dwells in him, not as Marcion blasphemed, (...),
in a phantasme or apparition, (for so he is in every hypocrite) but true and
perfect God by the same power his father gave him, as truly dwelling in him by
his virtue and efficacy, as he now does in glory in the highest Heavens.

And now we have seen both the parts. 1. Our part to dwell in him. 2. His
gracious act to dwell in us: let us a little look aback upon this great light,
and see what matter it will further afford us for our instruction.

And 1. we must look back upon the resemblance; the two Cherubines, and see how
they keep their places, and not turn away the face, but eye each other
continually; and by them learn, not to turn away from Christ, but to look up
upon the finisher of our faith, as he looks upon us, to dwell in him as he
dwells in us, which makes up our union and communion with Christ, knits us
together in the bond of love. For as it is between Christ and his Father, so it
must be between us and him: John 14.12. John. 17.
I am in the Father, and the Father in me, and all mine is thine, and thine
mine, and I glorify him, and he glorifies me, (and that relation betwixt him,
and his Father is the ground, and foundation of that reference, that union
which is between Christ and a regenerate soul) and then see how it ecchos
between them? my beloved is mine, and I am my well beloveds, I know my sheep,
and my sheep know me, they dwell in me, and I in them. Oh auras vices, Oh happy
enterchanges; Oh blessed Reciprocation, when Christ looks upon us in love; and
we look back upon him in faith, working by love; when he shines upon us with
all his Graces, and we reflect back again upon him, not in his person (for he
needs it not,) being the fullness of him, that fills all things, but upon him
in our selves, and searching the inward man, and decking and preparing a place
for him: upon him in that poor Lazar, in those his brethren, and our brethren;
nay, upon him even in our enemies; for even in them, Matt. 5.44
he is pleading for them, and commanding us to love them; I say unto you, love
your enemies. Nay further yet, reflect upon him in his Enemies, and can Christ
be in his enemies? not indeed, so near, as to dwell in them, but so near unto
them as to call unto thee, to pray for them to pity them, John. 10,16
to restore them: for even they may be in the number of those his other sheep:
which he will bring into his ford. Oh remember the resemblance, but withal
remember the thing too, and be very careful to uphold this relation, this
blessed reciprocation between Christ and thy soul.

2.
Secondly, from this great sight; Christ dwelling in man, and man in Christ,
(...).
let us rouse up our selves, and take courage to set a price uupon our selves,
(as Pythagoras counseled) to honor and reverence our selves, to remember we
are men and so have something of God in us, are made partakers of the high
calling in Jesus Christ, and not to debase, and dishonor our selves, to become
vile in our imaginations, and place them on that, which is so far below the
exalted nature of man. And shall I persuade you to think well of your selves? I
may as well make use of Logic, and raise arguments to prevail with a hungry
man to eat, for how greedily do we suck in air? and what a perfume is the death
of fools? in what perfection of beauty would we be seen to every man? in what
shape of glory would we be fixed up in their sancy? what gods would we be taken
for? and then praise is a sweet note, and we delight to hear it? but what a
Thunderclap is a reproach? how sick are we of a reprehension? what a loss is
the loss of another man's thought? what an Anathema is it, ('it is a vulgar
phrase) to be out of his books? and yet, in the midst of all disgraces, and
calamities, when we are made the scorn of the World, when fools laugh at us,
and drunkards sing of us, nay, when wisemen condemn us amongst them all, there
is none entertain a viler thought of us, then we do of our selves; for we
think our selves good for nothing, but to be evil. We think indeed we highly
honor our selves, when we tak ethe upper seat; and place others at our
footstool, when with Herod we put on royal apparel, and make us a name; when
men bow before us, and call us their Lords; we think so, and this thought
dishonours us, degrades us from that high honor, we were created to: for is
not the life better then meat? and the body then raiment, is not the soul
better then all these? then we honor our selves, when we beat down our bodies,
when we beat down our minds, and make our selves equal to them of low degree.
then we tread the ways of honor, look toward our Original, the rock out of
which we were hewed, are Candidates of bliss, stand for a place in Heaven, to
sit with Abraham and Isaac in the kingdom of God. Synes ep. 57.
For man is a creature of high descent (...) an honorable creature, of a noble
extraction; honorable no doubt, for whom the Son of God was content to die,
only that he might dwell in him, and if Christ, who knew well the worth of a
soul, did so honor as to unite our nature in his person, and lift up himself
upon his Cross, to draw our persons after him, then will it necessarily
follow, (and ingratitude it self could not deny the consequence) that we also
ought to honor our selves, and not to fall under the vanity of the creature in
a base disesteeme of our selves, as if we were fit for nothing, but to be fuel
for hell: in a word, not to make that, a stews of unclaenness, a forge of all
mischief, a workhouse of all iniquity, which Christ did choose to make his
House to dwell in, his Temple to sit in, and his Heaven to reign in. Oh, let us
remember our high extraction, our heavenly calling, and not thus uncover our
selves, be thus vile, and base in the sight and presence of Christ.

3.
And that we may thus honor our selves, our third inference shall be for
caution; that we do not deceive our selves, and think that Christ dwells in us,
when we carry about us but slender evidence that we dwell in him: For it is an
casie matter to be deceived, and we never fall with such a slide and easiness
into any error, as into that, which is most dangerous, and fatal to the soul.
In the affairs of this life, Lord, how cautelous are we? We ask counsel, we
look about us, we use our own eyes, and we borrow other men's eyes, and if we be
over-reacht, how discontent and crest-fallen we are, as those who have been
beaten in battle, and have lost the day: but in that, which most concerns us,
we seek out many inventions, we hearken to every false Prophet; to our selves
the worst counselors that are; we study to be deceived, and count it a
punishment to be taught. And thus we see, some flattering him with their lips,
Errantis p^na est doceri, Plat.
some breathing forth blasphemy, and yet all Christians; some oppressors
grinding his face, some revengers piercing his sides, the Sacrilegious robbing
him, most treading him underfoot, and yet all Christians; some free from gross
and open, yet full of speculative, and secret sins, of envy, malice, and
rancour, and yet Christians. But not deceived: Christ may dwell in us, with our
infirmities, so they be but infirmities, but not with our wilfulness and
hypocrity; he that takes courage to venture on a sin, because it is a little
one, makes it a great one, and it is not infirmity, but presumption) Christ,
says Saint Bernard, was born indeed in a stable, but not in a stie, and will
bear with something that savours of the man, of the brutish part of the man,
but not with those foul pollutions, those wilful abominations, not with those
sins which lay waste the conscience, and devour all that better part, all that
is spirit within us; He is indeed, a House, a Sanctuary for every troubled
soul, but not (...) a common receptacle for all offenders, as Celsus bitterly
urged against Christ in Origin) not a companion for thieves and harlots, but a
Physician to heal them, not a House for every thief to lurk in, nor a Temple
for Satyrs and profane persons to dance in. If we dwell in Christ, we dwell in
a Lamb, which we cannot do with so much of the Lion and Viper, so much rage, so
much malice and venom within us.

Last of all; some there be (and that not a few) who think they dwell in
Christ, when they join themselves to such a Church, such a company, such a
Congregation, think themselves in the Habitations of peace, when they are in
the tents of Ke^ar, of bloacknesse and darkness; and this is the great error
of those of the Church of Rome, which draws with it all the rest, bears a train
like the red Dragons tail in the Revealtion, which swept down a third part of
the stars, and cast them to the earth. For does she not in a manner tell us,
that within her Territories we are safe upon what terms soever we stand with
Christ, and though we dwell in Christ, that is, perform all Christian duties,
yet if we dwell not in her, be not incorporated with her, our faith, our hope,
all our endeavors are in vain, and so instead of a Church, have set upoan
Idol, as great an Idol as they have made the Virgin Mary; For the one as well
as the other must go for a mother of mercy. And do we not with grief behold it
so in other factions, though as distant from this, as the East is from the
West? do they not meet in this, to count all goats, that are not within their
fold; to leave no way to happiness, but in their company; do not they look
upon their condition, as most deplorable, who do not cast in their lots with
them, who are not of the same collection, and discipline, of their fraternity,
which they call the Church of Christ, why should men thus flatter themselves?
it is not our joining to this particular Church, or that new fancied, and new
gathered Congregation, but our dwelling in Christ, our eating his flesh, and
drinking his blood, our feeding on, and digesting his Doctrine, and Growing
thereby, can make us Christians, and as an unnecessary separating my self from;
so an uncharitable, and supercilious uniting my self with this, or that
Congregation may endanger my estate, and title in Christ, and my dwelling in
the one, (if I take not heed) may dispossess me of the other. For, I conceive,
there is no policy, no discipline so essential to the Church, as piety, as our
obedience to Christ. Suppose I were in a wilderness? did my soul lie, as David
speaks, amongst Lions, yet might I dwell in Christ: be the government and
outward policy what it will; nay, be there but a slender appearance of any, yet
might I dwell in Christ; nay, did persecution seal up the Church doors, and
leave no power to censure inordinate livers; were there no more left then a dic
fratri, tell it to thy brother between thee and him, yet could I dwell in
Christ, else why was their faith commended, who wandered up and down in
Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, in Deserts and Mountains, in Dens, and Caves of
the earth? but then, Heb. 11.
if we dwell not in Christ; if we do not love him, and keep his Commandments,
I cannot see, what Church, what Congregation can be a Sanctuary to shelter us,
and our crying the Church, the Church, will be but as the Jews crying the
Temple, the Temple of the Lord, but as the sound of brass, or tinkling of a
Cymbal, a sad knell, and fearful sign and indication of men departed from
Christ, and cast out of doors, being dead in their sins. Oh then, let us take
heed, as the Apostle exhorts, that no root of bitterness spring up to trouble
us, and thereby to trouble, corrupt, Heb. 12.15.
and defile many; that we bless not our selves in our hearts, and say we shall
have peace, when we walk in these unpeaceable imaginations; call that Religion,
which is indeed sensuality: for when one says I am of Paul, and another I am
of Apollos, 1 Cor. 2.4.
when one says, I am of this Congregation, and another, I am of that, are yet
not carnal? and (we may observe) he does not say, when one is, or when one
thinks he is, but when he says, that he is, when he is so pleased, and
delighted in it, so rests upon it, that he must vent and preach, and publish it
to the prejudice, and censure of others, then when they thus say it, are they
not carnal? Do they not please themselves, and commit folly in their own souls;
where Pride mixeth and ingendereth with covetousness and worldly respects, and
begets malice, debate, envy, backbiting, persecution, let us then take heed of
this; of this root of bitterness, that bears gall and wormwood, and let us
watch over our selves, that we embrace not a name, for a thing, a Company, for
a Church, our humor, and fancy for Christ, and that we do not so join our
selves with others, that we lose our hold, and place in Christ.

And therefore in the last place, let us make a strickt survey, let us
impartially commune with our own hearts, and see how we have held up the
relation between Christ and us, whether we can truly say, we are his people,
and he is our God; this added to the rest makes up a number, an account,
without this our joining with such a body, such a company, nay our appearing in
his Courts, our naming him, and calling upon his name, are but ciphers and
signify nothing: it is not the Church, but the spirit of Christ, and our own
consciences, which can witness to us, that we are inhabitants of the new
Jerusalem, and dwell in Christ, we read in the 45. of Genesis that when Jacob had
news that his son Joseph lived, his heart fainted; for he believed them not;
but at the sight of the chariots, which Joseph sent to carry him, his spirit
revived; so it is here: when we shall be told, or tell our selves (for our
selves are the likeliest to bring the news) that we have been of such a Church,
of such a Congregation, and applaud our selves for such a poor, and
unsignificant information, bless our selves, that the lines are fallen unto us
in so goodly a place, when we shall have well looked upon, and examined all the
privileges, and benefits we can gain, by being parts of such a body, all this
will not assure us, nor fix our anchor deep enough, but will leave us to be
tossed up and down upon the waves of uncertainty, will leave us fainting, and
panting under doubt and unbelief; For (to recollect all in a word.) Our
admiring his Majesty, our loving his command, our relying on his protection,
and resting under the shadow of his wing: Again, our ense, and feeling of the
operation of the spirit of Christ, by the practick efficacy of our knowledge,
the actuation and quickening of our faith, and the power of it, working a
universal, constant, sincere obedience, these are the chariots, which Christ
sends to carry us out of Egypt, unto our celestial Canaan, and when we feel
these, and by a sweet and well gained experience feel the power of them in our
souls; then we draw near in full assurance; then we shall joy fully cry out
with Jacob; it is enough: then we shall know, that our Joseph is alive, and
that Christ does dwell, and live in us of a truth.

And now to conclude, Concl.
and by way of conclusion, to enforce all these, to imprint and fasten them in
your hearts, what other motive need I use then the thing it self? Christ in
man, and man in Christ: for if honor, or delight, or riches will move us, here
they are all, not as the world gives them; but as truth it self gives them, a
sight into which the Angels themselves did stoop, and desire to look into. To
be in Christ, to dwell in Christ, if a man did perfectly believe it of himself,
that he were the man, non diusuperstes maneret said Luther, he would even be
swallowed up, and die of immoderate joy. Here now is life and death set before
us, Heaven and Hell opened to our very eye: if we do not dwell in him, if we be
not united with him, we shall join our selves with something else, with flesh
and blood, with the glory and vanity of the world, which will but wait upon us
to carry us to our grave, feed us up and prepare us for the day of slaughter:
Oh who would dwell in a Land darker then darkness it self? who would be united
with death? But then, if we dwell in him, and he in us, if he call us, my
little children, and we cry Abba Father, then: what then? who can utter it? the
tongue of men and Angels cannot express it, then as he said to the Father, all
thine are mine, and mine thine, so all his is ours, and all that is ours is
his: our miseries are his, and when we suffer, we do but fill up that which was
behind of the affliction of Christ. Col. 2.24.
He is in bonds, in disgrace, in prison with us, and we bear them joyfully, for
we bear them with him, who bears all things: our miseries, nay, our sins are
his; he took them upon his shoulder, upon his account; he sweat, he groaned, he
died under them, and by dying took away their strength, nay, our good deeds are
his, and if they were not his, they were not good; for by him we offer them
unto God, by his hand, in his name, he is the Priest that prepares and
consecrates them, our prayers, our preaching, our hearing, Heb. 13.15
our alms, our fasting, if they were not his, were but as the Father calls the
Heathen man's virtues, (...), a fair name, a title of health upon a box of
poison, Nazianz.
the letter Tan written in the forehead of a reprobate.

Again, (to make up the reciprocation) as all ours are his, so all his are
ours; what shall I say, his poverty, his dishonor, his sufferings, his Cross
are ours; yes, they are ours, because they are his; if they had not been his,
they could not be ours, none being able to make satisfaction but he, none that
could transfer any thing upon man, but he that was the Son of man, and Son of
God, and his Miracles were orus; For, for us men, and for our Salvation were
they wrought: His Innocence, his purity, his Obedience are ours; For God so
deals with us, for his sake, as if we were, as if we our selves had satisfied.

Let St. Paul conclude for me, in that divine and heavenly close of his third
Chap. of the 1. Ep. to the Cor. whether Paul or Apollo, or Cephas, or the word,
or life, or death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours, and you
are Christ's, and Christ is Gods, and if we be Christ's, then be we heirs, joint
heirs with Jesus Christ, as he is heir, so have we in him, right and title,
to be heirs, and so we receive eternal happiness, not only as a gift, but as
an inheritance; in a word, we live with him, we suffer with him, we are buried
with him, we rise with him, and when he shall come again in glory, we who dwell
in him now, shall be ever with him, even dwell and reign with him for evermore.

THE FIFTH SERMON.
EZEKIEL 33.11. As I live, says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of
the wicked. Turn ye, Turn ye from your evil ways: For why will you die oh
House of Israel.


WE have here a sudden and vehement outcry; Turn ye, Turn ye, and those
events which are sudden and vehement (the Philosopher tells us) do (...), do
leave some notable mark and improssion behind them; an Earthquake shakes, and
dislocates the Earth; a Whirlwinde rends the Mountains, and breaks in pieces
the Rocks; what is sudden, at once strikes us with fear and admiration.

Certainly reverenter pensandum est, says the Father, Greg, in le^.
This call of the Prophet requires a serious, and reverend Consideration: For
if this vehement ingemination be not sharp and keen enough to enter our
Souls, and divide asunder the joints and the marrow; here is a quare
moriemini; a Reason, to set an edge on them; if his Gracious and Earnest call,
his Turn, and his Turn will not Turn us, he has placed Death in the way,
that King of Terrors, to affright us; If we be not willing to dye, we must be
willing to Turn; If we will hear Reason; we must hearken to his Voice; and
if he thus sends his Prophets after us, sends forth his voice from Heaven
after us; if he make his Justice and mercy his joint Commissioners to force us
back; If he invite us to Turn, and threaten us, if we do not Turn; either
Love, or Fear must prevail with us, to Turn with all our Hearts.

And in this is set forth the singular Mercy of our most Gracious God, parcendo
admonet, ut corrigamur poenitendo; before he strikes, he speaks: When he
bends his Bow, when his deadly arrows are on the string; yet his warning
flies, before his shaft; his word is sent out, before the judgment; the
light^ing is before his Thunder, Ecce, says Origin, antequam Vulneramur,
monemur; when we (as the Israelites here) are running on into the very Jaws of
Death; when we are sporting with our Destruction in articulo mortis, when Death
is ready to self on us, and the pit opens her mouth, to take us in; he calls
and calls again, Turn ye, Turn ye from your evil Ways, and if all this be
too little, if we still venture on, and drive forward in forbidden and
dangerous ways, he draws a Sword against us, sets before us, the horror of
Death it self; Quare moriemini? Why will you die? still it is his word, before
his blow; his Convertimini, before his moriemini, his praelusoria arma, before
his Decretoria; his blunt before his sharp; his Exhortations, before the
Sentence: non parcit ut parcat, non miseretur, ut misereatur; he is full in his
Expressions, that he may be sparing in his wrath; he speaks words clothed with
Death, That we may not die, and is so severe, as to threaten Death, that he
may make room for his Mercy, and not inflict it; Why will you die? there is
Virtue and Power in it, to quicken and rowse us up; to drive us out of our
Evil ways, that we may live for ever.

This is the sum of these words: The parts are Two. 1. An Exhortation, and
Secondly an Obtestation, or Expostulation: or a Duty; and a Reason urging, and
enforcing that Duty: The Exhortation, or Duty is plain, Turn ye, Turn ye
from your Evil ways; The Obtestation or Reason as plain, Quare moriemini?
Why will ye Dye, oh House of Israel? I call the Obtestation or Expostulation,
a Reason; and good Reason I should do so; for the Moriemini is a good Reason;
That we may not Dye, a good Reason why we should Turn; but tendered to us by
way of expostulation, is another reason, and makes the reason operative, and
full of efficacy; makes it (...), a reason invincible, unanswerable; For this
very expostulation, is an Evidence fair and plain enough, that he would not
have us die; and then it is as plain; That if we die, we have killed and
destroyed our selves against his will: Of these two then in their order; and
first of the exhortation, and Duty, in which we shall pass by these steps, or
degrees; 1. Look up upon the Author; consider, whose exhortation it is. 2ly,
The Duty itself; and in the last place, pugnacem calorem, that lively, and
forcible heat of Iteration and Ingemination, Convertimini, Convertimini, Turn
ye, Turn ye; the very life and soul of Exhortation.

Turn ye, Turn ye, says the Lord.

And first, we ask, Quis? who is he that is thus urgent, and earnest? and as
we read, it is Ezekiel the Prophet, and of Prophets, Saint Peter tells us that
they spoke (...), 2 Pet. 1.21.
as they were moved by the Spirit of God; and they received the word, non
auribus, sed animis, not by the hearing of the ear; but by inspiration, and
immediate Revelation; by a divine Character, (...). Bas in Isai. vis. 1.
and impression made in their souls; so that this Exhortation to Repentance,
will prove to be an Oracle from Heaven, to be (...), to be a Divine and
Celestial remedy, to be the prescript of Wisdom it self, and to have been
written with the finger of God.

And indeed we shall find that this duty of Turning, the true nature of
Repentance, was never taught in the School of Nature, never found in its true
effigies and Image, in all its lines and Dimensions, in the books of the
Heathen. The Aristotelians had their Expiations; the Platonicks their
purgations; The Pithagoreans their Erinnys; but not in relation to God, or his
Divine Goodness and Providence; Tert. de poenit.
Et a ratione ejus tantum absuit, quantum a rationus autore, and were as far
to seek of the true reason, and Nature of Repentance, as they were of the God
of reason himself: many useful lessons they have given us, and some imperfect
descriptions of it, but those did rise no higher then the spring from whence
they did flow, from the Treasure of Nature, and therefore could not lift them
up to the sight of that peace and rest which is eternal; They were as waters
to refresh them, and they that tasted deepest of them, had most ease, and by
living (...), according to the directions of Nature, gained that (...), that
Peace and composedness of mind, which they called their Happiness, and was
all they could attain to. Tully and Cato had not such divided, distracted
souls, as Cataline, and Cethegus; Seneca and hadnot those ictus and laniatus,
Aristot. l. 1. Eth. c. 13.
those Gashes and Rents in his heart, as Nero had; even their Dreams were more
sweet and pleasant, then those of other men; as being the resultancies, and
Eccho's of those virtuous Actions, which they drew out in themselves by no
other hand, then that of Nature; which looked not beyond that frailty, which she
might easily discover in her self, and so measured out their happiness but by
the Span, by this present life; or if she did see a glimpse and faint show, of
a future estate, she did but see, and guess at it, and knew no more. Reason it
self did Teach them thus much, that sin was unreasonable; Tert. de poenit.
Nature it self had set a mark upon it, omne malum aut timore, aut pudore
suffudit, had either struck vice pale, or died it in a blush; did either loose
their joints, or change their Countenance, and put them in mind of their
deviation from her rules, by the shame of the fact, and the fear they had to
be taken in it; which two made up that fraenum naturae, that bridle of Nature,
to give them a checque, and Turn, but not unto the Lord. For were there there
Heaven nor Hell, neither reward nor punishment, yet whilst we carry about with
us this ligh tof Reason, sin must needs have a soul face, being so unlike
unto Reason, and if we would suffer her to come in to rescue, when our loose
affections are so violent, we should not receive so many foiles as we do; a
natura sequitur ut meliora probantes, Quint. l. 6. c. 6.
peiorum poeniteat, Not to sin, to forsake sin, Nature it self teaches;
but Nature never pointed out to this board, this planck of Repentance, to bring
a shipwrackt soul to that haven of rest, which is like it self, and for which
it was made Immortal. Turn ye, turn ye, is dictum Domini, a Doctrine, which
came down from Heaven, and was brought down from thence by him, who brought
life and Immortality to light. For it was impossible, that it should ever have
fallen within the conceit of any reasonable creature, to set down and
determine, what satisfaction was to be made for an offense committed against a
God of Infinite Majesty, what fit recompense could God receive from the hand of
Dust and Ashes? what way could they find out to redeem themselves, who were
sold under sin? Ten thousand Worlds were too little to pay down for the
least of those sins, which we drink down, as an Ox does water; The Occan
would not wash off the least spot, that defiles us; all the beasts of the
Mountains will not make a sacrifice, spiritus fractus sacrificia Dei, Psalm. 51.
Naz Or. 3.
other Sacrifices have been the Inventions of men, of the Chaldeans and
Cyprians, and but occasionally, and upon a kind of Necessity, providently
enjoined by God: but a relenting, Turning Heart, Naz. Or. 15.
is his Sacrifice, nay his Sacrifices, instar omnium, worth all the Sacrifices
in the world; his own Invention, his own Injunction; his own dictum; his own
command, (...), he has but one Sacrifice, and that is the sacrifice of
purgation; a cleansed; purged, Contrite heart, a new Creature. For when the
Inventions of men were at a stand; when discourse and reason were posed, and
cold make no progress at all in the ways of Happiness, not so far as to
see our want and need of it; when the Earth was barren, and could not bring
forth this feed of Repentance; Deus eam sevit, says Tert. Lib. de poenit.
God himself sowed it in the world, made it publici juris, known to all the
world; That he would accept of a Turn of true Repentance, as the only means
to wash away the guilt of sin, and reconcile the Creature to his Maker; so
that, as Theodoret called the Redemption of mankind, the fairest, and most
eminent part of Gods Providence and Wisdom; so may we too, give Repentance a
Place, and share, as without which the former, in respect of any benefit, which
can arise to us, is frust rate and of no effect. Quod fieri posse Cicero non
putavit, and Lact. l. 6 de ver. cult. c. 24.
A thing indeed it is which may seem strange to flesh and blood, and Lactantius
tells us, that Tully thought it impossible, but a strange thing it may seem,
that the sigh of a broken heart, should slumber a Tempest, That our sorrow
should bind the hands of Majesty, that our Repentance should make God himself
repent, and our Turn, Turn him from his wrath, and a change in us, alter his
Decree; and therefore to Julian that cursed Apostate, it appeared in a worse
shape, not only as strange, but as ridiculous, and where he bitterly derides
Constantine for the profession of Christianity, he makes up his scoff with the
contempt and derision of Repentance, Julian. Caesar.
(...), and whosoever is a corrupter or defiler of Women, whosoever is a
manslayer, whosoever is an unclean Person, may be secure; it is but dipping
himself in a little water, and he is forthwith clean, yea, though he wallow
again, and again in the same mire; pollute himself with the same monstrous
sins; let him but say, he has sinned, and at the very word, the sin
vanishes; let him but Smite his breast, or strike his forehead, and he shall
presently, without more ado, become as white as snow; And it is no marvel to
hear an Apostate blaspheme (for his Apostacy it self, was blasphemy) no more,
then it is to hear a Devil Curse; both are fallen from their first estate, and
both hate that estate, from whence they are fallen, and they both howl
together for that which they might have kept, and would not: upon Repentance,
there is Dictum Domini, thus says the Lord, and this is enough to shame all
the wit; and confute all the Blasphemy of the world; As I live, says the
Lord, I will not the death of a sinner, but that he Turn: and in this consists
the Privilege and power of our Turn; this makes Repentance a Virtue, and by
this word, this Institution, and the Grace of God annexed to it, A Turn shall
free us from Death; a Tear shall shake the powers of Heaven; a repentant Sigh
shall put the Angels into Passion; and our Turning from our Sin shall Turn
God himself, even Turn him from his fierce wrath, and strike the Sword out of
his hand.

Turn ye, Turn ye, then is Dictum Domini, a voice from Heaven, a command from
God himself; And it is the voice and dictate of his Wisdom, an Attribute which
he much delights in, more then in any of the rest, says Naz. Orat. 1.
for it directs his power, for whatsoever he does, is done in wisdom, in
Order, Number, and Measure, whatsoever he does, is best: his rain falls not,
his Arrows fly not, but where they should, to the mark, which his Wisdom
has set up; It accompanies his Justice, and make his ways equal, in all the
disproportion and dissimilitude, which can show it self to an eye of flesh: It
made all his Judgments and Statutes; It breathed forth his Promises, and
Menaces, and will make them good; in Wisdom he made the Heavens; and in
Wisdom he kindled the fire of Hell; nothing can be done in this world, or the
next, which should not be done: Again, it orders his Mercy, for though he will
have Mercy on whom he will have Mercy; yet he will not let it fall, but where
he should, not into any Vessel, but that which is fit to receive it: for his
Wisdom is over all his works, as well as his Mercy; he would save us, but he
will not save us without Repentance; he could force us to a Turn, and yet I
may truly say, he could not, because he is wise; he would not have us die, and
yet he will desTroy us, if we will not Turn; he does nothing, either good or
evil to us, which is not convenient for him, and agreeable to his wisdom.
Nor can this bring us under the Imputation of too much boldness, to say; The
Lord does nothing, but what is convenient for him (for it is not boldness to
magnify his wisdom) They rather come too near, and are bold with Majesty, who
fasten upon him those Counsels, and determinations, which are repugnant, and
opposite to his wisdom, and goodness, and which his soul hates, as, That
hedid Decree to make some men miserable, to that end, that he might make his
Mercy glorious, in making them happy; that he did of purpose wound them, that
he might heal them; That he did threaten them with Death, whose names he had
written in the book of Life; That he was willing man should sin, that he
might forgive him; That he does exact that Repentance, as our Duty, which
himself will work in us, by an irresistible force; That he commands,
entreats, beseeches others to Turn and Repent, whom himself has bound, and
fettered by an absolute Decree, that they shall never Turn; That he calls them
to Repentance and Salvation, whom he has damned from al eternity, and if any,
certainly such Beasts as these, deserve to be struck through with a Dart. No,
it is not boldness, but Humility and Obedience to his will, to say, He does
nothing, but what becomes him; what his wisdom does justify, and he has
abounded toward us (...) says Saint tPaul, Ephe. 1.8.
in all Wiedome and Prudence; His wisdom finds out the means of Salvation,
and his Prudence orders, and disposes them; his wisdom shows the way to
life, and his Prudence leads us through it, to the end; I Wisdom was from
everlasting; Proverb. 8.
and as she was in initio viarum, in the beginning of Gods ways, so she was,
in initio Evangelii, in the beginning of the Gospel, which is called the
wisdom of God unto salvation; and she fitted and proportioned means to that
end; means which were most agreeable, and connaturall to it; It found out a way
to conquer Death, Heb. 2.14.
and him that has the power of Death, the Devil, with the weapons of
Righteousness; to dig up sin by the very Roots, that no work of the flesh,
might shoot forth out of the Heart any more, to destroy it in its effects; that
though it be done, yet it shall have no more force, then if it were
annihilated, then if it had never been done, and to destroy it in its causes,
that it may be never done again; Immutabile, quod factum est: Quint l. 7.
to draw together Justice and Mercy, which seemed to stand at distance, and
hinder the work, and to make them meet, and kiss each other in Christ's
Satisfaction and ours (for our Turn is our satisfaction, all that we can make)
which she has joined together, Condigna est satisfatio mald facta corrigere,
est correcta non reiterare. Ber. de Just. Dom. c. 1. Satisfactio, (...),
Antiochens, conc. can 2.
never to be severed; his Sufferings, with our Repentance; his Agony with our
sorrow, his Blood with our Tears, his Flesh nailed to the Cross, with our
lusts Crucified, his death for sin, with our Death to it; his Resurrection
with our Justification: For he bore our sins, that he might cast them away; He
shed his blood, to melt our Hearts, and he dyed that we might live, and turn
unto the Lord: and he rose again for our Justification; and to gain Authority
to the doctrine of Repentance: Our convertimini, our Turn is the best
Commentary on the consummatum est, it is Finished; for that his last Breath,
breathed it into the world; we may say, It is wrapped up in the Inscription,
Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews; for in him, even when he hung upon the
Cross, were all the Treasuries of Wisdom and Knowledge hid. 2 Coloss. 3.
In him Justice and Mercy are at Peace, for to reconcile us unto God, he
reconciled them one to another. The hand of Mercy was lifted up, ready to seal
our Pardon; we were in our Blood, and her voice was Live; we were miserable,
and she was ready to relieve us; our heart was sick, and her bowels yearn'd;
but then Justice held up the Sword, ready to latch in our sides; God loves his
Creature, whom he made; but hates the sinner, whom he could not make; and he
must, and yet is unwilling to strike: If Justice had prevailed, Mercy had been
but as the morning Dew, and soon va^sh'd before this raging heat, and if Mercy
had swallowed up Justice in victory, his hatred of sin, and fearful menaces
against it had been but bruta fulmina, and had portended nothing; Deus purgari
homines a peccato maxim cupit, ideoque agere poenitentiam jubet. Lact. l. 6.
c. 24.
had been void, and of no effect; If he had been extreme to mark what is done
amiss, men had sinned more, and more, because there could be no hope of
Pardon; and if his Mercy had sealed an absolute Pardon, men would have walked
delicately, and sported in their Evil ways, because there could be no fear
of punishment. And therefore his wisdom drew them together, and reconciled
them both, in Christ's propitiatory Sacrifice, and our Duty of Repentance; the
one freeing us from the Guilt, the other from the Dominion of sin; and so
both are satisfied, Justice lays down the sword, and Mercy shines in
perfection of Beauty. God hates sin, but he sees it condemned in the flesh of
his Son, and fought against by every member he has; sees it punished in him,
and sees it every day punished, in every repentant sinner, that Turns from his
evil ways; beholds the Sacrifice on the Cross, and beholds the Sacrifice of a
broken Heart, and for the sweet savor of the one, accepts the other, and is at
rest; his death for sin, procures our Pardon, and our death to sin sues it
out; Christ suffers for sin, we turn from it; his satisfaction at once wipes
out the guilt, and penalty, our Repentance by degrees, Tert. de anima. c. 1.
destroys sin it self; Haec est sapientia de schola caeli; This is the
method of Heaven; this is that Wisdom which is from above; Thus it takes away
the sins of the world.

And now wisdom is complete; Justice is satisfied, and Mercy triumphs; God is
glorified, man is saved, and the Angels rejoice; Tert de poenit. c. 8.
Heus tu peccator, bono animo sis, vides ubi de tuo reditu gaudeatur; says
Tert. Take comfort, sinnner, thou see what joy there is in heaven for thy
return; what music there is in a Turn, which begins on earth, but reaches
up, and fills the highest Heavens! A repentant sinner is as a glass, or rather
Gods own renewed Image, on which God delights to look; for there he beholds his
wisdom, his Justice, his mercy, and what wonders they have wrought. Behold
the shepherd of our souls; see what lies upon his shoulders; you would think a
poor Sheep that was lost; nay, but he leads sin and Death, and the Devil in
Triumph; and thou may see the very brightness of his Glory, the fairest and
most express Image of these Three his most glorious Attributes, which are not
only visible, but speak unto us, to follow this heavenly Method, His wisdom
instructs us, his Justice calls upon us, and Mercy, Eloquent mercy bespeaks us:
a whole Trinity of Attributes, are instant and urgent with us, To Turn a viis
malis, from our evil ways; And this is the Authority, I may say, the Majesty
of Repentance; for it has these Three; Gods Wisdom, and Justice, and Mercy
to seal and ratify it; to make it Authentic.

The 2. part. Turn ye, Turn ye.
We come now to the dictum it self, and it being Gods, and it being Gods, we
must well weigh and ponder it; and we shall find it comprehends the Duty of
Repentance in its full latitude. For as sin is nothing else but aversio a
Creatore, and conversio ad creaturam, and aversion, and Turning from God, and
an inordinate conversion and application of the soul to the Creature; so by our
Repentance we do refer pedem, start back, and alter our course, work and
withdraw our selves a viis malis, from evil ways, and Turn to the Lord, by
cleaving to his Laws, which are the mind of the Lord; and having our feet
enlarged, run the way of his Commandments. We see a straight line drawn out
at length, is of all lines the weakest; and the further, and further you draw
it, the weaker and weaker it is, nor can it be strengthened, but by being
redoubled, and bowed, and brought back again toward its first point. Eccles.
7.20.
The Wise man will tell us, That God at first made man upright, that is simple,
and single, and sincere; bound him, as it were to one point; but he sought out
many Inventions, mingled himself, and Ingendered with Diverse extravagant
Conceits, and so ran out, not in one, but many lines, now drawn out to that
object, now to another, still running further, and further, sometimes on the
flesh, and sometimes on the world; now on Idolatry, and anon on Oppression; and
so at a sad Distance from him, in whom he should have dwelt, and rested as in
his Center: and therefore God seeing him gone so far, seeing him weak and
feeble, wound, and Turned about by the Activity of the Devil, and sway of the
Flesh, and not willing to loose him; ordained Repentance as a remedy, as the
Instrument to bend and bow him back again, that he might recover, and gain
strength, and subsistencie in his former, and proper place; to draw him back
from those Objects, in which he was lost, and so carry him on forward to the
Rock, out of which he was hewed: whilst he is yet in viis malis, in his evil
ways, all is out of Tune, and Order; for the Devil, who does (...), Chrysostom.
Hom. de poenitent.
invert the order of things, places shame upon repentance, and boldness, and
senlessness, upon sin; but Repentance is a perfect Methodist; upon our Turn,
we see the danger we played with, and the horror of those Paths, in which we
sported, we see in our flight, a banishment, in every sin a Hell, and in our
Turn a Paradise.

Diverse words we have to express the true nature of Repentance, but none more
usual, more full and proper then this of Turning; for it includes all the
rest. It is more, then a bare knowledge of our sins, more then Grief; more
then an acknowledgement, or confession: more then a desire of change; more then
an endeavor; for if we do not Turn, a Termino, in Terminum, from one Term,
or state to another; from every sin we now embrace, to its contrary; If we do
not fly and loath the one, and rest and delight in the other; our knowledge of
sin, is but an accusation; our Grief is but a frail and vanishing
displacency, and our Tears are our recreation; Iugentibus lachrymae quietis
and recreationis loco sunt. Mos. Maimmon. Doct. perplex. l. 3. c. 4 s.
our desires but as Thoughts, and our Endeavors, proffers; but if we Turn,
and our turn be real, these Instruments, or Antecedents, These disposing and
preparing Acts must needs be so also, true and real: we talk much of the
knowledge and sense of our sin; when we cannot be ignorant of it; of grief,
when we have no feeling, of consession, and acknowledgement, when the Heart is
not broken, of a de^re to be Good, when we resolve to be evil, of our
endeavor to leave off our sins, when we seed, and nourish them, and even
hire them to stay with us, -- In udo est Maenas, et Attin.
our Repentance is languid, and faint, our knowledge without observation, our
grief without compunction; our acknowledgement without trepidation; our desire
without strength, and our endeavor without Activitie: but they are all
complete, and made perfect in our turn, and Conversion: If we turn from our
sins, then we know them, and know them in their Deformity, and all those
Circumstances, which put so much horror upon them; If we Turn, our head will
be a Fountain of Tears; Lament. 1.16.
and the Eye will cast out water; our confession will be loud and hearty; Our
desire eager, and impatient; and our Endeavors strong, and earnest and
violent. This turn is as the hinge on which all the rest move freely and
orderly; Optima poenitentia, nova vita, says Luther, the best and truest
Repentance, is a new life, a turn, carries all the rest along with it to the
end, The end of our knowledge, of our grief, of our acknowledgement, the end
of our desires and endeavors; For we know our sins, we bewail them, we
acknowledge them, we desire, and endeavor to leave them; in a word; we turn
that we may be saved.

1. The Knowledge of our sins
And first, it includes the knowledge of our sins; for he that knows not his
malady, will neither seek for our, nor admit it; Isid. Pelusiot. l. 1111. ep.
149.
he that knows not the danger of the place he stands in, will not turn his
face another way; he that dwells in it, as in a Paradise, will look upon all
other, that yield not the same delight, as upon Hell it self; he that knows not
his ways are evil, will hardly go out of them; Malum notum, res est optima,
says Luther; It Is a good thing to know evil: for the knowledge of that, which
is evil, can have no other end but this; To drive us from it, to that which is
Good: when sin appears in its ugliness, and monstrosity, when the Law, and
the wrath of God, and Death it self display their Terrors before our face; That
face is more then brass or Adamant, that will not gather blackness, and Turn
it self.

But this Prescript; To know sin (one would think) should rather be tendered
to the Heathen then Christians; Act 15 20. Quand^ hoe Factum non est? quando
reprehensum? Quando non P^missum, Cic. ^o M. Caeli^. Romans 1.31.
To them some sins were unknown, as Revenge, Ambition, Fornication, and
therefore they are enjoined to abstain from it; and yet even those which the
light of Nature had discovered to them, they did committ, though they knew,
That they who did commit them were worthy of death: But to Christians, it may
seem unnecessary, for they live in the Church, which is spoliarium vitiorum,
Ethic. 3. c. 22.
a place where sin is every day reviled, and disgraced, where it is Anatomized,
and the bowels, and entrayles, every sinew and vein of it shown. I should
say, our Church were reformed indeed, if we did commit no sins, but those we
do not know: many things we do, says the Philosopher, we may say, most
sins we commit, (...), not which reason persuades, but which the flesh
betrays us to; not to which our knowledge leads us, but our sensuallity. Stat
contraratio, Reason, when we sin, is not so foiled, or beaten down, but it
stands up against us, and opposes us to our face; It tells the Miser that
Covetousness is Idolatry, The wanton, that Lust is that fire which will consume
him; the Revenger, that he diggs his own Grave with his sword; it is indeed
commonly said, That reason is corrupt, but the Truth is, that which we call
corrupt reason, is our passion or sensuality; for that cannot be reason, which
directs us to that which is unreasonable; The sense does too often get the
better, but can never silence, or corrupt it so, as to call evil good, or good
evil; For that is the language of the Beast, of the sensual part; and for
ought I see, we may as well assign and Entitle our Good Actions to our
sensitive part, when we keep; as our bad, to our Reason, when we break the Law.
Reason never yields, and our knowledge is still the same; In Lust, it commends
Chastity, in Anger Meekness, in Pride Humility; when we surfeit on those
delights, which sin brings with it, our Reason plainly tell us, That they are
deadly Poison.

We need not then, be over-sollicitous to secure this Ingredient (the knowledge
of our sins) to bring it into the Recipe of our Repentance; for there be but
few which we know not, fewer which we may not know, if we will, if we will but
take the pains to put it to the question, either before the Act, what we are
about to do; or after, what it is, we have done; for it is a Law, a plain
Law, we are to try it by, not a dark riddle; and if we do mistake, it is easy
to determine what it was that did work, and frame, and polish the cheat: Not a
sin, which comes with open mouth to devour us, and swallow up our Peace, but
is of that Bulk and corpulency, that we cannot but see it, and though we may
peradventure here Turn away our eye, yet we cannot put it out. Our knowledge
will not forsake us, and our Conscience follows our knowledge, which may sleep,
but cannot die in us; which is an evil spirit, that all the music in the
world will not ease us of; and though we set up bulwarks against it, compass
our selves about with variety of Delights, and fence our selves in with Honor
and Power, which we make the weapons of unrighteousness; yet it will at one
time or other make its sallyes, and Eruptions, and Disturb our Peace. God has
placed it in us, as he fixed the Vrim and Thummim on the breastplate of
judgment, Exodus 28.30.
by which he might give answer unto us, what we are to do; what not to do;
what we have done well, and what amiss; as he did to the Priest, who by
viewing his Breast Plate, saw whether the people might go up, Esr. 2.63.
Nehem. 7.15. Psalm. 19.12. Levit. 4.2. Heb. 9.7.
or not go up; but when we have once defiled our Conscience, we care not much
for looking toward it, and we lose the use of it, in our slavery under sin,
as they lost the use of their Vrim and Thummim at the Captivity of Babylon.

But then, who knows how often he offends? who knows his unadvised errors? his
inconsiderate sins? (...), his ignorances, those which he entertaines, as the
Septuagint renders it, (...), unwillingly, which steal in upon him at
unawares, even whilst he is busy in subduing others; as we see one part of an
Army may be surprised, and fly, whilst the other Conquers; For the best of men,
through the frailty and mutability of their Nature, may receive many such
blows, and feel them not; and it fares with us in the course of our life, as
it does with Travelers in their way; many Objects, many sins we pass by,
and not so much as cast an eye that way; which yet in themselves are visible
enough, and may be seen, as well, as those we look upon with some Care, and
sometimes with astonishment: and yet even these secret and retired sins are
known and condemned both by our Fear and Hatred, we know such there be,
though we know not what they are, nor can call them by their Name; and our
begging Pardon for them, is our defyance of them, and declares not only our
sorrow for them, but our Anger against them; breathes Revenge, though we know
them not; and shows how roughly and disdainfully we should handle them, if we
did.

2. Grief for sin.
2. The Knowledge then of our sins is a thing presupposed in our Turn, and
so in the next place is the grief and sorrow which ordinarily does arise from
such a Convincement: for some displacency it will work, though not of strength
enough to move us, or drive us from that, which we make a Paradise, but is our
Tophet; and Turn us to embrace that condition, and estate, which at first
presents the horror of a Prison, but is a Sanctuary.

Now Grief is not sub praecepto, Quint. decl. 185.
under any command, nor indeed can it be; medicamenta mandata non accipiunt:
you may prescribe Physic, but you give it not, with a command; nor can you
say, thus it shall work: you may exhort me to look about me, and consider my
estate, but you cannot bid me grieve; when we wish men to Fear, or Hope, to be
sad, or merry; we speak improperly, and ineffectually, unless our meaning be,
they should enter into those considerations which may strike a Fear, or raise
a Hope, work a sorrow, or beget a joy; the Apostle preaches to the Jews.
Act. 2. puts his goad to their sides, Acts 2.37,38.
and the Text says, They were pricked in their Hearts, and it follows, Then
Peter said unto them, Repent; his words were sharp, and did prick them at the
heart, but they were no commands; the command is Repent and be baptized; what a
Sea of words may flow, and yet not a drop sall from our eye? what fearful
Prognostics may we see? what mournful Threnodies may we hear, and yet not be
cast down, or change the countenance? nay, what penance may we undergo, and
yet not Grieve? For Grief follows the Apprehension, and knowledge the Object,
and rises and falls with it, vary's, as that vary's: if our apprehension be
clear, our sorrow will be great; if that be pure, this will be sincere, if it
be inward, this will be Deep, but if it be superficial, this will be but in
the Face; if it be flitting, and unsettled, this will vanish at the sight of the
next object, which presents it self with less distaste; vanish like the
lightning, which is seen, and gone. Psalm 38.4.
Sin is a heavy burden (says David) it is so; when it is felt, (...), hard to
be borne; Moles, says Austin; of a great bulk, and weight, and it is not a
sigh, or a groan, a forced displacency, it is not such weak, faint Heaves of
the Sonle, that can remove such a Mountain: we see some, who mourn like a
Dove, and chatter like a Crane, when the hand of God touches them for their
sin, who speak mournfully, look mournfully, go mournfully all the day long;
who are cast down (you would think indeed) to the lowest pit, and it is easy to
mistake a Pharisee, for a Poenitentiary; we read of some who did afflict, and
Penance themselves with so much severity, That they fell in morbum
poenitentialem, as Rhenanus observes upon Tertull. into a strange distemper,
which they called the poenitentiary Disease, because it was contracted in the
days of Penance; but all this does not make up the full face of Repentance,
nor complete our Turn. For we may hang down our head like a Bullrush; we may
fast, till we have more need of a Physician, then a Divine (and yet too much
need of both) we may even seem to be afraid of our selves, to be weary of our
selves, to run out of our selves, and yet not Turn; For these may be rather
apparitions, then motions; Fasting Lamentation, and that displacency, which sin
carries naturally along with it, are glorious expressions, and probable
symptoms of a wounded Spirit, but yet many times, they are nothing else but
the Types, and shadows of Repentance; many times signa non signantia, signs
indeed, but such as signify nothing. Qui peccata deplorat, ploranda minime
committat, says Gregoory, he truly bewailes his sin, who does no longer
practice what he will be forced to bewail; he gives a perfect account of his
debts, who is resolved never to add to the Bills, he Truly Turns, who will
never look back, Haec poenitentiae vox est lachrymis orare, says Hilar. Tears
and Complaints are the voice and language of Repentance, Hill. in Ps. 11 S.
and if you see a Turn, you see a Change also in the Countenance; but many
Times, Vox est, and praeterea nihil; It is the voice of REPENTANCE, and nothing
else.

For sorrow, and Dejection of mind have not always the same beginnings, nor
do our Tears constantly flow from the same Spring and Fountain; Omnis Dolor
Fundatur in amore; says the Schools, all Grief is grounded on Love, for as my
Joy is to have, so my Grief is, to want what I love; and ours may have no
better principle, then the love of our selves, and then it comes, a Fumo
peccati, from the troublesome smoke which finne makes, or rather from the very
Gall of Bitterness; a Grief begot betwixt Conscience and Lust, betwixt the
Deformity of sin, and the pleasure of sin, betwixt the apprehension of a
real evil, and the flattery of a seeming good; when I am troubled, not that I
have sinned, but that it is not lawful to sin, much disquieted within me,
that that sin, which I am unwilling to fly from, is a Serpent, that will sting
me to death; That there is Gravel in the Bread of deceit; That, that unlawful
pleasure, which is to me as sweet as Honey, should at last bite like a
Cockatrice; That the ways, in which I walk with delight, should lead unto
Death; That, that sin, which I am unwilling to fling off, has such a Troop
of Serjants, and Executioners at her heels; and so it comes a Fumo Gehennae,
from the smoke of the bottomless Pit, from fear of punishment, which is
far from a Turn, but may prepare, mature, and ripen us for Repentance. But
then it may come from the Fear of God, wrought in us, by the apprehension of
his Justice and Mercy, and Dominion, and Power to Judge both the quick and the
dead; and this Grief is next to a Turn, the next and immediate cause of our
Conversion, when out of the admiration of his Innocence, Majesty and Goodness,
I am willing to offend my self for offending him; and offer up to him some part
of my substance, the Anguish of my soul, the Groans of Contrition, and my
tears, Anastas. Bib. pairum.
which are ex ipsa nostra essentia, sicut sanguis martyrum; from our being and
essence, and are offered up, as the blood of Martyrs.

Confession of sin.
3. And this Grief will (in the third place) open our mouths, and force us to
a Confession and acknowledgement of our sins) I mean a sad and serious
Acknowledgement, which will draw them out, Bas. in Ps. 37.
and not suffer them to be pressed down, and settle like foul and putrifyed
matter, in the bottom of the soul, as Basil expresses it; For the least
grief is vocal, the least displacencie will open our mouths; yea, where-there
is little sense, or none, we are ready to complain; and because St. Paul's
Humility brought him so low, look for an Absolution, if we can say (what we may
truly say, but not with St. Paul's Spirit) That we are the chiefest of sinners.
For nothing more easy, then to libell our selves, where the Bill takes in the
whole world; and the Best of Saints, as well as the worst of sinners: How
willing are we to confess with David, That we are conceived in sin, and
borne in Iniquity? how ready to call our selves the Children of wrath, and
workers of all unrighteousness? what delight do we take to miscall our
virtues? to find Infidelity in our Faith; wavering in our Hope; Pride in our
Humility; Ignorance in our Knowledge, coldness in our Devotion, and some
degrees of Hostility in our very love of God? what can the Devil, our great
Adversary and Accuser say more of us, then we are well pleased to say of our
selves? But this Acknowledgement is but the product of a lasy knowledge, and a
faint, and momentary disgust, and it comes (...), as the Stoics speaks, not
(...), Epict. Art. c. ^ c. 15.1.
it is but the calves of our lips, not the Sacrifice of our Hearts; we breath
it forth with noise, and words enough; we make our sins Innumerable, more
then the hairs of our head, or the Sands of the Seashore, but bring us to a
particular account, and we find nothing but Ciphers; some sins of daily
Incursion, some of sudden subreption, some minute, scarce visible sins, but
not the Figure of any sin, which we think will make up a Number: he that will
confess himself the chief of Sinners, upon the most gentle remembrance, upon
the meekest reprehension, will be ready to charge you, as a Greater; or
peradventure, Take you by the Throat.

But this is not that Confession, which ushers in Repentance, or forwards and
promotes our Turn; it is rather an Ingredient to make up the Cup of
stupefaction, which we take down with Delight, and then fall asleep, and
dream of safety; even when we are on the Brinke, and ready to fall into the
pit. David, it is true, Aug. Hom. 4.1. In his Tribus S^llabis Flamm^ sacrificii
ecram ^emino ascenctit in coelum.
said no more but peccavi, and his sin was Taken away, Tantum valent, Tres
syllabae, says St. Aust. such force there was in Three Syllables; and can
there be virtue in Syllables? no man can imagine there can; but David's Heart,
says he, was now a sacrificing, and on these three Syllables, the name of that
sacrifice was carried up before the Lord, into the highest heavens. If our
knowledge of our sins be clean, and affective; if our Grief be real, then
our confession and acknowledgement will be hearty, our Bowels will sound as a
Harp, our Inwards will boil, and not rest, our heart will tremble, and be
Turned within us, our Sighs and our Groans will send forth our words, as sad
messengers of that Desolation, Is. 16.11. Job. 30.27.
which is within; Our heart will cry out as well as our Tongue; My heart, my
heart is prepared, says David, which is then the best, and sweetest
Instrument, when it is broken.

4. Desire.
4. And these three in the fourth place, will raise up in us a desire, secondly
an endeavor to shake off these fears, and this weight which does so compass
about, and infold us: Heb. 12.1.
for who is there, that does see his sins, and weep over them, execrate them
by his Tears, Fletus humanarum necessiatum verecunda execratio. Sen. C^nt. 8.6.
and condemn them by his Confession, that shall see sin clothed with Death; The
Law, a killing letter; the Judge frowning; Death ready with his Dart, to strike
him through, who would be such a Beast, as to come so near; and Hell opening
her mouth to take him in; who will not long, and groan, and travail in pain,
and cry out to be delivered from this body of Death? Quissub tali conscientia
etc? who would live under such a Conscience, which is ever galling and gnawing
him? what Prisoner, that feels his Fetters, would not shakethem off? certainly,
he that can stand out against all these Terrors and Amazements; he that can
thwart and resist his knowledge, wipe off his Tears, and fling off his sorrow,
and baffle and confute his own acknowledgement; he that can slight his own
conscience, mock his Distaste, Trifle with the wrath of God, which he sees near
him, and play at the very gates of Hell; he that is in profundis, in this Great
Deep, and will not cry out, he that knows what he is, and will be what he is,
knows he is miserable, and desires not a change, is near to the condition of
the Damned spirits, who howl for the want of that light which they have lost,
and detest, and Blaspheme that most, which they cannot have; who because they
can never be Happy, can never desire it. But to this condition we cannot be
brought, till we are brought under the same punishment, which nevertheless is
represented to us in this life, in the sad thoughts of our Heart; in the Horror
of sin; and in a Troubled Conscience, that so we may avoid it: The Type we
see now, and to this end, that we may never see the Thing it self; and the
sight of this (if we remove not our eye, at the call and enticement of the next
approaching vanity, which may please at first, but in the end will place before
us, as foul an Object, as that, which we now look upon) will work in us a
Desire, to have that removed which is now as a Thorn in our eyes; a desire to
have Gods Hand taken off from us, and that those sins too may be taken away,
which made his Hand so heavy; a desire to be freed from the guilt, and a desire
to be freed from the Dominion of sin; a Desire that reaches at Liberty, and
at Heaven it self: Eruditi vivere, est cogitare, says Tully; Tusc. q. l. 5.
Meditation is the life of a Scholar, for if the mind leave off to move, and
work, and be in agitation; the man indeed may live, but the Philosopher is
dead; and vita Christiani sanctum Desiderium, says Hierom the life of a
Christian is nothing else, but a holy desire, drawn out and spent in Prayers,
Deprecations, Wishes, Obtestations, in Pantings and longings, held up and
continued by the heat, and vigor, and the endless unsatisfyednesse of desire,
which (if it slack or fayl, or end in an indifferency, or Luke-warmness) leaves
nothing behind it, but a lump, a mass of Corruption; for with it, the life is
gone, the Christian is departed.

5. Endeavor.
5. But in the last place; This is not enough, nor will it draw us near enough
unto a Turn; there is required, as a true witness of this our convincement,
and sorrow, of the Heartinesse of our confession, and the Truth of our desire;
a serious endavour, an eager contention with our selves, an assiduous violence
against those sins, which have brought us so low, to the dust of Death, and
the House of the Grave: and endeavor to order our steps; to walk contrary to
our selves; to make a Covenant with our eye; to purge our ear, to cut off our
hand; and to keep our Feet; to forbear every Act which carries with it, but
the appearance of evil, to cut off every occasion, which may prompt us to it,
an Endeavor to work in the Vineyard, to exercise our selves in the works of
Piety; to love the fair opportunities of doing good, and lay hold on them, to
be ambitious, and Inquisitive after all those Helps, and advantages, which may
promote this endeavor, and bring it with more ease and certainty unto the end:
And this is as the heaving and struggling of a man under a Burden; as the
striving in a Snare, as the Throws of a Woman in Travail, who longs to be
delivered; this is as our knocking at the Gates of Heaven, as our flight from
the wrath to come: Thus do we strive and fight with all those defects, which
either nature began, or custom has confirmed in us; thus do we by degrees
work that happy change; that we are not the same, but other men; Val. Max. l.
8. c. 7.
as the Historian speaks of Demosthenes (whose studiousnesse and Industry
overcame the malignity of Nature, and unloos'd his tongue) alterum Demosthenem
matter, alterum industria enixa est, The mother brought forth one Demosthenes,
and Industry another; so by this our serious and unfeigned Endeavor, eluctamur
per obstantia, we force our selves out of those obstacles and encumberances,
which detained us so long in evil ways; we make our way through the Clouds,
and darkness of this world, and are compassed about with rays of light.
Nature made us men; evil Custom made us like the Beasts, that perish, and
grace and Repentance make us Christians, and consecrates us to Eternity.

The Turn it self, Or, True Repentance.
All these are in our Turn, in our Repentance; but all these do not complete
and perfect it; For I am not Turned from my evil ways, till I walk in good; I
have not shaken off one Habit, till I have gained the contrary; I am not truly
Turned from one point, till I have recovered the other; have not forsaken
Babylon, till I dwell in Jerusalem; for, Turn ye from your evil Ways, in the
holy language is, Turn unto me with all your heart; work out one Habit,
(...). Arist. 2. Ethic. c. 1.
with another: let your Actions now, control and demolish those, which you
built up so fast; that which set them up, will pull them down, perseverance,
and assiduity in Action: The liberal Hand casts away our Alms, and our
Covetousness together: The often putting our knife to our throat, destroys our
Intemperance; The often disciplining our Flesh, crucifies our Lusts; our acts
of mercy, proscribe Cruelty; our making our selves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of
Heaven, stones the Adulterer; our walking in the light, is our Turn from
Darkness; our going about, and doing good, is our voluntary Exile, and Flight
out of the World, and the Pollutions thereof, Then we are Spiritual, when we
walk after the Spirit; and when we thus walk, we are Turned.

I know Repentance, in the Writings of Divines, is drawn out, and commended to
us under more notions, and considerations, then one; It is taken for those
preparatory Acts, which fit and qualify us for the Kingdom and Gospel of
Christ; Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand; Matthew. 3.2.
it is taken for that change, in which we are sorry for our sin, and desire
and purpose to leave it, which serves to usher in Faith and Obedience; but I
take it in its most general and largest acception, for the leaving one state
and Condition, and a constant cleaving to the contrary; for the getting our
selves of every evil Habit, and investing our selves with those which are
good; or, to speak with our Prophet; for Turning away from wickedness, Ezekiel.
18.27.
and doing that which is Lawful and right; for casting away all our
Transgressions, and making us new Hearts, and new Spirits; I am sure this one
Syllable Turn, will take in and comprehend it all: for what is all our
preparation; if when we come near to Christ, we stand back? what are the
beginnings of obedience, if we revolt? what is the bend, or Turn of our
Initiation, if we Turn aside like a deceitful Bow? what is out sorrow, if it do
but bow the head; and leave the Heart as wanton as before? what is our desire,
if it have but the strength of a Thought? what is our endeavor, if it strike and
contract it self, and is lost at the sight of the next Temptation? But our
Turn supposes all These; and takes in all the Dimensions of Repentance, the
Body, and full Compass of it, and though it be but a word, yet is as
expressive and significant, as any other in Scripture, and conteins them all.

It includes (...), our Regeneration; for if we Turn, we Turn a termino ad
terminum, Titus. 3.5.
from one Term to another; and as in Generation, and our natural Birth, there
is Non ens Tale, and ens Tale, a progress, or mutation from that which it was
not, to that, which it now is, so is it in our Turn; It was Nehushtan, a rude
piece of Brass, it is now a polisht Statue of Piety; It was a Child of Wrath;
Luke 15.32. Romans 12.2. Gal. 3.27.
it is now a Child of Blessings; It was dead, and is alive; and it takes in
(...), our Renovation or Renewing; Behold old Things are passed away, all
things are become New; The sinner that Turns, leaves his strange Apparel,
Gal. 3.27.
his Filthy Rags behind him, and upon his Turn comes forth Glorious in the
Robes of Righteousness? and it comprehends our Cleansing, Tit. 2.14.
or purification; He that turns from his evil ways, has purged out his old
Leaven, and is made a new Lump. 1 Cor 5,7.
Repentance is as Physic to the Soul, but not to be given ad pondus et
mensuram, so many grains, and so many Drammes; by measure, and proportion; non
est periculum, ne sit nimium, quod ei maximum debet, we may take too little,
there is no fear at all, that we should take too much of it; Repentance for
our sins is the business of our whole life; for inded what is Perseverance,
but an entire, and continued Repentance? a constant turning away from our evil
ways? when sin has corrupted our faculties, we purge it out by Repentance;
and when it is dead we bury it by Repentance, and it is quite lost and forgotten
in the ways of Righteousness, and being Turned, we never look back, never
cast a Thought after it, but with sorrow, and Anger, and detestation; and when
it appears before us, it appears in a fouler shape, in greater horror, then
we beheld it in, when we first fell upon our Knees for Pardon; For the more
Confirmed we are in Goodness, the more abhorrent we are of Evil; and defy it
most, when we stand at the greatest Distance; we never loath our Disease more,
then when we are purged and Healthy. There is another word; (...), which has
a good sense put upon it, which yet the word does not naturally yield, and
rather signifies a Trouble of mind, then a Turn, Matthew. 21.32.
and it is spoken of Judas himself, Matthew. 27.3.
(...) he repented himself; and what a Repentance was that, which he should
have repented of? what a Turn was that, that choked him? Had his Turn been
right, he might have dyed a Martyr, who dyed a Traitor; and a Murderer of his
Master, and himself; For this deep, Melancholy, L. 27. c. 2. De Aconito; Ea
est natura, ut hominem occidat, nisi invenerit quod in homine perimat.
and Trouble of mind, is like that poisonous Plant which Pliny speaks of,
which if it do not take away the Disease, kills the man: Judas indeed was
called the son of perdition; but it was because he destroyed himself.

But there is another word, which is more proper, and more used, (...), a
Turn, and change of the Mind? what? of the understanding. There may be such a
change, and yet no Turn, no Repentance; for how many have been brought to a
knowledge of their sins, who could never be induced to leave them? nay, but
of the will! for this sense (...), 1 Cor. 2.6.
the primitive, and those compounds of it, do bear, who has known (...),
the Mind, the Will, the Decree of the Lord? and God delivered up those that
retained him not, (...), Romans 1.28.
to a reprobate mind, id est, a will to do those things which are not
convenient; 1 Tit. 15.16.
not to knowledge of evil, but to the practice of it; and to those who are
defiled, says Saint Paul; (...), even their mind, that is their will is
corrupted, as appears by their Evil Works in the next verse: and so (...),
which does not signify a Good understanding, or a good Mind or opinion; (These
will beget but a Complement, but good words, Depart in peace, Jam. 2.16.
be ye warmed and filled) not a good wish, but a good Will, which gives those
things, which are needful for the body; in like manner, (...), which signifies
not only prescience, and foresight, but Government, Care, and direction,
which are the free Actions of the Will: we might instance in more; but (to our
present purpose) (...), primarily, and properly signifies an Act of the Will,
not as it necessarily follows the Act of the understanding, but as it ought to
follow by the command of God, although we see, it does not always follow:
Despisest thou the riches of his Goodness, Romans 2.4.
not knowing, that is, not willing to know, that it leads thee (...), to
repentance? and he speaks to those, who did judge such things, yet did the
same, verse. 3. and did know the will of God. verse. 18. So; Repent, and do the
first Works, Revel. 2.5. and in most places it is thus taken; you may call it
a Transmentation, but it is a subduing and Turning of the Will and Affections,
that the whole man may be (...), Nazianz:
not the same, but another man; before hurryed away by his passion; but now
walking by the right rule, before spreading, and diffusing himself on variety
of unlawful Objects, now recollected into himself, and looking forward on God
alone.

Why will ye die?

The maine Turn, is of the will; For we see the face of it, here in the Text,
is set upon Death it self; and therefore to be Turned away; It Is not our
Natural Concupiscence; It Is not the dullness of our understandings; It Is not
the violence of our Passion; It Is not our weakness, that we Dye, it is our
Will destroys us; If the will be Turned, the Understanding is also changed,
not to know, what it cannot be ignorant of; but to be subservient, and
Isntrumental to the Will, in drawing it nearer and nearer to that end, for
which it has determined its Act; in finding, and squaring out materials, to
the building up of this Temple of the Holy Ghost. For Heaven is Heaven, and
Hell is Hell; Virtue is Virtue, and vice is vice to the Understanding; nor can
it appear otherwise; for in these we cannot be deceived: what Reason can that
be, which teaches us to Act against Reason? Esau knew well enough, that it was
a sin to kill his Brother; but his Reason taught him to expect his Fathers
Funeral. Ahab knew it was a crying sin to take Naboths Vineyard from him by
violence; and therefore he would have paid down money for it; and his painted
Queen knew as much; but that the best way to take possession of his Vineyard,
was to dispossess him of his life; and the surest way to that, was to make him
a Blasphemer, that was the effect and product of Reason, and Discourse; which
is the best servant when the Will is Right; and the worst when she is
irregular. Reason may seek out many Inventions for Evil; and she may discover
many helps and Advantages to promote that which is good; she may draw out the
method which leads to both; find out opportunities; bring in Encouragements and
Provocations to both; but Reason never yet called Evil good, or Good evil, 2 Thessalonians. 3.2.
for then it is not Reason; the Apostle has joined both together, (...), if
they be wicked, they are unreasonable, and absurd, for they do that which
Reason abhorres, and condemns at the first presentment. So that the will you
see, is origo boni, and mali, is the prinipall cause of Good and Evil; That I
will not understand, when I cannot but understand, is from the will; that the
Judge is blind, (when he sees well enough what is just, and what is unjust) is
not from the Bribe, but the Will; That my fear shakes me, my Anger enflames
me, my Love Transports me, my sorrow casts me down, and my joy makes me mad;
That my Reason is Isntrumental, and Active against it self; That my Passions
rage, and are unruly, is from my will, which being fastened to its Object,
draws all the Powers of the Soul after it.

And therefore, if the will Turn, all these will Turn with it, Turn to their
proper offices and Functions. The Understanding will be all Light, and the
Affections will be all Peace, (for the proper Act of every Faculty, is its
Peace) when the Understanding contemplates that Truth which perfects it; it
rests upon it, and dwells there, as upon a holy Hill: But when it busies it
self in those, which hold no proportion with it (as the gathering of Wealth;
the raising of a Name; the finding out pleasures) when it is a Steward, and
Purveyor for the Sense, it is restless, and unquiet: now finds out this way;
anon another, and by and by disapproves them both, and contradicts it self in
every motion. When our Affections are levelled on that, Affectiones ordinatae
sunt virtutes. Gers.
for which they were given us; they lose their name, and we call them Virtues,
but when they fly out after every impertinent Object, they fly out in
infinitum, and are never at their end and rest; place Love on the things of
this World, and what a troublesome, Tumultuous Passion is it, tiring it self
with its own Have, and wasting and consuming it self, with its own Heat: but
place it on Piety, and there it is, as in its Heaven; and the more it spends of
it self, the more it is increased. Let your Anger kindle against an Enemy; and
it is a Fury, that Torments two at once; but derive it, and lay it on your sin,
and there it sits as a Magistrate on a Tribunal, to work your Peace. That
sorrow, which we cast away upon Temporal losses, is a Disease, which must be
cured by Time, but our sorrow for sin, is a Cure it self, is a second
Baptism; washes away the Causes of that Evil, and dies with it, and rises up
again in Comfort. That joy which is raised out of Riches, and Pleasure, is
raised as a Meteor out of dung, and is whiffed up and down, by every wind and
Breath; but if it follow the Health and Harmony, the good Constitution of the
Soul; it is as clear, and pure, and constant, as the Heavens themselves, and
may be carried about in a lasting and continued Gyre, but is still the same.
And this Turn the Affections will have, if the will Turn; then they Turn
their face another way, from Bethaven to Bethel; from Ebal, to Garazin; from
the Mount of Curses, to the Holy Hill.

We cannot Think, that in this our Turn, the Powers of the Soul are pulled to
pieces, that our Affections are plucked up by the roots; That our Love is
Annihilated, our Anger destroyed, our Zeal quenched; By my Turn, I am not
dissolved, but better built, I have new Affections, and yet the same; now dead,
and impotent to evil, but vigorous and active in Good; my steps are altered,
not my Feet, my Affections cut off; the Character is changed, but not the Book.
That sorrow, which covered my face for the loss of my Friend, is now a Thicker
and Darker cloud about it, because of my sin. That hope, which stooped so
low, as the Earth, as the mortal and fading vanities of the world, is now on
the wing, raising it self as high as Heaven: That Zeal, which drove Saint
Paul upon the very pricks, to persecute the Church, did after lead him to the
block, to be crowned with Martyrdom.

If the Will be Turned, that is captivated, and subdued to that Will of God,
which is the Rule of all our Actions, it becomes (...), a Shop, and Workhouse
of Virtuous, and Religious Actions; and the Understanding and Affections, are
(...), fellow-workers with it, ready to forward and Complete the Turn; Saint
Bernard tells us, that nothing does Burn in Hell but our will; and it is as
true, Nothing does reign in Heaven but the will: In it are the wells of
Salvation, and in it are the waters of Bitterness; in it is Tophet, and in it
is Paradise: Aug. Hom. 8.
Totum habet, qui bonam habet voluntatem, says Austin, he has run through
all the Hardship, and Exercises of Repentance, who has (not changed his
opinion, or improved his knowledge) but altered his will; for the Turn of the
will supposes the rest, but the rest do not necessitate this; when this is
wrought, all is done: that is, The Soul is enlightened, purged, renewed; has
its Regeneration, and new Creation; in a word; when the Will is turned, the
soul is saved; The Old man is a New Creature; and this New Creature changes no
more, but holds up the Turn, till he be Turned to Dust, and raised again, and
then made like unto the Angels.

THE SIXTH SERMON.
PART II.
EZEKIEL 33.11. Turn ye, Turn ye from your evil ways etc.


This Turn, is a Turn of the whole man, of his understanding, his affections;
nay, of his senses, of the eye, and the ear, from vanity of the taste, from
forbidden fruit of the touch, from that which it must not handle; a Turn of the
outward man, as well as the inward, of his deportment, and behavior, of every
motion, and of every gesture; but the principal and main Turn is of the will,
from that which is not worth a look or a thought, to that which is desirable in
it self, and does alone perfect, and in a manner glorify it in its
approximation, and union with the will of God: we may say of it, as Tertullian
does of the soul it self, it is Totum hominis, Tert de Testim. animae. c. 1.
and toto homine majus quid, it is as the whole man, and something greater then
the whole; like that (...) in Saint James, the rudder and helm, by which all
the other powers and faculties of the soul, c. 3.4.
and every member of the body are turned about, when they are driven as it
were, of fierce winds; and binds them to those objects, for which they were
especially made, and in which they may rest, as in a Haven.

This is the true turn: but this it self has been turned; the convertimini
turned about by the wind of several fancies. Take Origens conceit; That all
things shall return back into God as all things flowed from from him at the
first; and then this Turn may seem to reach home to the very devils
themselves. Take the Novatian strictness and severity, and it will not reach so
far as men. Some we see stand much upon an outward visible Turn; upon the
Ceremony and pomp of Repentance, and so have turned, and changed that name, and
called it penance; others have brought in Cervam pro Iphigenia, a beast instead
of a Virgin, the turn of an erring soul, that will err more, and more; or
rather Exanguem penitentiam an invisible turn; or a turn in a picture; a forced
sigh, a seeming displacency, Open or private confession, a very thought for
Repentance. Some again, extend Repentance ad praeterita, and make it reflect
only upon sins past, and so leave us in the very point of turning, turning
from our evil ways, but not unto God, which is an act, they say, not of
Repentance, but of spiritual wisdom; and so do tuditare negotia in Lucretius
his phrase; beat out work, where there is none, and make a business, and noise
where they need not; For what turn is that, which leaves us where we were? what
repentance is that, for which we are not the better? or can we say, the evil
man is changed, that is not good; that the angry man is changed, who is not
meek? or the proud changed, who will not make themselves equal to them of the
lowest degree? But thus the convertimini has been turned about, from the
streets to the Temple; from the Temple to the closet, from confession to a
sigh; from the eye and tongue, to the heart, from the heart to the eye and
tongue, and almost lost in the dispute. Repentance is brought forth, and
presented now in this dress, now in that, (you might think she were turned
wanton) but few entertain her in her own shape, in that Matron-like deportment,
and severity, which always attends her, or if they admit her with a whip, it is
such a one, as ploweth the back, but not touches the soul; the Doctrine of
Repentance has filled many Volumes, but the true practice of it may be
comprised in a manual.

And yet to settle the turn upon its proper hinge, that it may turn to the
rights (as we say) in this great disagreement, every party speaks some truth;
and for ought appears, may subscribe one to the other; and the turn is safe
amongst them; for that none deny. Must I confess my sins? the Protestant
affirms it! must I renounce my sins? the Papist dares not deny it; must I
leave my sins; it is true, but it is not enough to make up the turn; for I may
forbear the act, and yet cleave to the sin; I may be an Adulterer, and not
touch a woman, and remain in the stews, when I am gone out of it. Must I beat
down my body, and fast and pray, and for a time deny my self that which is
lawful, and which the Giver of every good gift has put into my hands? This is
a penance which the Protestant will allow; and must I crucify my lust, and
unruly affections? this sounds as loud, and is as much cried up at Rome as at
Geneva. Public Repentance has the advantage of Antiquity, whose practice some
have thought the best Commentary on the Scripture; and the inward Turn is so
necessary, that even they commend, and require it, who are settled on their
lees. Contrition is necessary; and new life is necessary; to Turn from our evil
ways, is necessary, and to turn to God is necessary: to abstain from evil is
necessary, and to do good is necessary: so that out of these several
characters, we may draw out the true definition of Repentance, as the Ancients
are said, out of the several writings of the Heathen Philosophers, to have made
up a complete body of the practick part of Christian Philosophy. You will say,
they make Repentance a Sacrament (an error indeed, but not so bold, and
pressing on the foundation, as many other errors of that Church are) yet
though it be not a Sacrament, let ours be visible; let our confession be so
hearty, that our absolution may be sealed in Heaven; 2 Cor. 7.11.
But then they bring in satisfaction, it is true, they do, and in another
dress, then that, in which the Ancients showed her; even satisfaction of
condignity. There is no reason we should think so, yet let our indignation, our
revenge, our zeal be such, as if we meant not only to Deprecate; but if it
were possible, to satisfy: each party may make this use of one another
conceptions, even of error it self, to the advantage of the truth; and make
that which seems an argument against him, a remedy, and so fill up the
Convertimini our Turn in every part: God forbid, we should be of the same
opinion in the one, and 'twill be our greatest happiness to join together, and
yet, in a holy emulation contend, who shall make the fairest progress in the
other. If others, Plut. in vita Arist.
as it was observed of those Governors, woe ruled in Athens before Aristides,
bring in (...) much ridioulous unnecessary stuff; (as they did build Galleries,
erect statues, hang up pictures, and the like) let us with good Aristides,
(...) bend the whole course of our policy to the raising up of virtue, and
righteousness; let us bring in such a Repentance, make such a turn, which may
bring us forward toward happiness, by our bringing forth fruits worthy
Amendment of life. Then shall the ceremonious part advance the thing it self;
and the substance cast a luster back again upon the ceremony: then shall our
verbal confession be made visible, and our turn will show, that it was more
then a voice. Then when we thus end our fast, it will be plain, that God was in
capite Jejunij, that his grace began it; then shall our sorrow for our sin be
made perfect in our love of goodness, then shall our rigteousnesse break forth
like the light, and shine upon our tears; and our tears cast a glorious
radiation, and reflect back again upon our righteousness; Then shall my piety
make my sorrow Music, and my grief shall water my piety, and make it more
abundant; my head shall be a fountain of tears, and my heart a wellspring of
life, and this will make up the Convertimini, even accomplish and consummate my
Repentance.

Thus much in general, of the turn, and the true Nature of Repentance

The Ingemina non Turn ye, Turn ye,
We shall yet press it further, and make it more visible in its properties,
which we may easily discover in this lively and forcible heat of Iteration, and
ingemination of the word; Turn ye, Turn ye; and indeed, so remarkable it is,
that we cannot let it pass, but must stay our meditations, and fix them here;
even fix them upon this vehement earnestness, and urgency, which is the very
life and soul of Exhortation.

For some great matter it must needs be; some great danger at hand, that makes
God thus call, and call again; that makes him thus reiterate his words; turn
ye, turn ye, we may say, his Wisdom, his Justice, his mercy constrained him;
and now he speaks, as it were in passion. From this it is; that Omnipotency it
self may seem to bow, and descend, to wishes, to Obtestations, to Exhortations,
to entreaties, which are far below the Majesty of God; and to call upon us,
with more earnestness of afflection, with more heat, and reality, then vile
Dust and Ashes, then man, impotent, perishing man, man that is nothing, does
upon him. What is not one turn enough? must my turn answer his call? and must I
turn and turn again? Nothing is enough to him, because he is Just, and Wise,
and Merciful, and every turn is not enough for us; we cannot turn far enough
from sin, nor near enough to him; John 17.21
we are never near enough, till we are one in him, by our obedience. The
Heathens, we know, fancied to themselves not only Deam Ageroniam a divine
power to stir them up to action, but stimulam another power to prick them
forward, and make them more active in that they took in hand, (for they could
make whatsoever they saw, or thought of, whatsoever they feared, or desired, a
God; and finding such a power, place it where they pleased) which powers
severed by them, are truly united, and one in him, who is truly one, and alone
has power. He is not only Hortus to shake off our sloth by exhortation; but
Ageronius to incite us to action, and to set us a work; to goad us and drive us
forward; ward; Turn ye, Turn ye, this Ingemination is (...), his goad, and
when we delay, or do but Turn (...), as Nazianz speaks, when our Turn is a
half, imperfect Turn, he puts it toour sides, and pricks us forward to Turn
again, he begins, he forwards, he facillitates our Turn, he urges us
forward, nor will let us shrink back, till we have made perfect our Turn. Bas.
O^m^nent in Isai.
Saint Basil calls it plainly (...), a Tautologie; for one Convertimini had
been enough, had plainly expressed, what God intended; but, as if we could
never Turn enough, as if we could never Turn far enough from our evil
ways, He calls, and calls again, turn ye, even now turn ye: Though you be
turned, you may not Turn to the right way; Though you be turned to the right
way, you are in danger still, turn ye, turn ye, you are not safe enough, when
you are safe; nor turned enough when you are turned, unless you turn again.

At the beginning of the verse, God is at vivo ego, As I live, says the Lord,
I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked; I would have you Turn: and an
Oath, says the Apostle, is for confirmation; Heb. 6.16.
and here he ends the verse with a vehement Ingemination, Turn ye, Turn ye;
and Tautologies in Scripture, says Saint Basil, are (...), the Apostles own
word, for Confirmation; Foelices nos, says Tert. happy we, for whose sake God
will swear, but unhappy we, if he swear in vain (although it cannot be in
vain) and happy we, for whose sake God, who hates Babbling, will yet multiply
words, nay, reiterate the same; but most unhappy we, if we hearken not to his
voice; if our Turn and Conversion be not as real, as the Ingemination is loud
and vehement; if there be not a Religious Tautologie, a constant, reinforced,
continued Turn in our Repentance.

To draw then the lines, by which we ae to pass; we may observe, There be two
maine letts and hindrances of our Conversion, I may call them retinacula
poenitentiae, that hang upon us, and hold us back, when we should Turn;
Despair on the one side, and Presumption on the other: Despair makes it too
late to repent; presumption makes it soon enough, though it be never so late;
presumtion makes, and breaks a Resolution every day, Despair will make no
more; Presumption makes an evening, a bedtime Repentance; she will Turn at
last; Despair Nullam, no Repentance at all, Never, Never. Now this
Ingemination is as Thunder to them both; loud in the ears of those, that
Despair, turn ye, Turn ye, It is not too late; and Terrible in the ears
of those that presume; Turn ye, Turn ye, It cannot be soon enough; and as
lightning, flashing in the face of the presumptuous sinner, showing him the
horror of his ways, and that Death is in the way; and discovering to the
drooping, or rather Dead soul, the riches of his Mercy, That though Death be in
the way; at the very door; yet Death is not unavoidable.

From this Ingemination then, we may gather, First; Gods love to repentance, to
rowse us from Despair. 2ly, The necessary and essential properties of
Repentance; It must be 1.
1. matura conversio, a speedy and sudden Turn: Turn ye, Turn ye, lest it be
too late. 2.
2ly, Syncera Conversio, a Turn, and real Turn, a Turn in good earnest: 3.
and 3ly, plena poenitentia, as the Ancients used to speak, a full Repentance,
a total Repentance; a Turn from all our evil ways; a Turn never to look
back again; and these will keep us from presumption.

Of these in their Order.

Turn ye, Turn ye, is a vehement Ingemination to rowse us from Despair: and
indeed, no greater Argument can be brought against despair; then Gods Bowels,
and Compassion, then his loud, and open proffer of Mercy. For if it were too
late to Turn, he would not thus call after us; If we could not Turn at all,
one call were too many, and then what need this noise? this Ingemination? bring
in the most despairing Christian living, and if this voice from heaven awake
him not, I must pronounce him not only dead in sin, but in Hell already.

For it is easy to observe, That the ground of all despair is not from hence;
That we cannot, but that we will not Turn, which much resembles that Despair,
which chains the damned Spirits in the place of torment; so far we are like
to them, that we despair for want of Charity, which they can never have, nor
the despairing Sinner (as he thinks) and therefore will not have: not for want
of Faith, which they have, as well as he, and tremble: we despair not, I say,
for want of Faith; For it is plain, If we did not believe, we could not
Despair, unless, peradventure, we do, with some, conceive of Faith, as that
Instrument or habit, by which we do apply, and appropriate Christ's Merits, and
Promises to our souls, which indeed is rather an Act of our Hope, then of our
Faith; Despair being nothing else, but the disability of applying Christ's
merits to our selves, which is the effect, not of Infidelity, but ungodliness.
For we believe, This is the way, and we know we have not walked in it, and so
Despair we are no where in Scripture commanded, to be assured of our
Salvation; but we are enjoined in plain Terms to make our Election sure; nor
are we any where in Scripture forbid to Despair, but if we make not good the
Condition, we are forbid to Hope, and in that commanded, to love Christ, and
keep his Commandments, that we may never despair. Miserable Dilemma, when
Imust neither Despair, nor hope; for I cannot let in Despair, till I have let
in that Monster sin, which begat it; and when that is let in, and has gained
the Dominion, there is no room for hope. Ask Judas himself, and he will tell
you, there is a God; for if there were no God, no Heaven, nor Hell, There could
be no such thing as Conscience; Ask him again; and he will tell you he is
true, or he denies him to be God; He will tell you of the riches of the
glorious Mystery of our Redemption, Coloss. 1.27.
and that in Christ Remission of sins was promised; But his many sins, and
his late sin of Betraying his Master, cast so thick a Cloud over his
Judgment, that he could not see any beam of Mercy cast toward him, and so he
concludes both against God and himself; There is mercy for Thousands, but not
for him: God calls sinners to Repentance, but not Judas, and when all the world
may Turn, he will go and hang himself. Thus may our sins go over our
heads, and over those Mercies too, which might be over our sins, and make us
very witty to argue and dispute against our selves; even dispute our selves
into Hell: A neglect of our Duty begat Despair, and Despair basely improves,
and augments our neglect; and if we judge rightly, our non posse is a nolle, we
cannot turn, because we will not turn; for if we would but turn (which we
may if we will) Despair would sink and vanish out of sight, and mercy would
shine forth through this cloud, and give light enough to fly far from that
evil, the fear of which had covered our faces, and in a manner buried us
alive: for a Despairing man is but a dead carcass, actuated not by a soul,
but a Devil. We need not seek far for Arguments; for despair is an
argument against it self: For it, there could never be any; the best that we
have heard of, is but the Logic of Fools, which is Logic without reason, I
cannot hope, because I cannot hope; It Is true, he cannot hope, in statu quo
nunc, as they speak, in the state and condition he now is; and there is reason
for that; for why should an enemy to God, hope for his favor? why should Dives
hope for a place in Abraham's bosom? and yet, he may hope for his favor,
Resolve to turn from his evil ways, which will first build up him in
righteousness, and then build up a Hope upon the ruins of Despair. Sin is
the foundation of Despair, and if we repent not, will bear it up; but upon
our Turn, Righteousness casts down the Foundation it self, and with it
Despair, and in the fall grindes it to pieces, and in the place of it Erects a
Pillar, a saving Hope, a hope, which is not ashamed to enter the Holy of
Holyes, and lay hold on the Mercy-seat, which was hidden and vayl'd before.

Quare contristaris anima mea? Psalm. 43.
Why art thou cast down, Oh my soul? why art thou troubled within me? Spera in
Domino; trust thou in the Lord, and if thou fear him, and leave thy evil ways,
thou may trust him; he will not, he cannot fail thee, thou have him
fettered, and entangled with his own promises, which are yea, and Amen, and all
the power on Earth, all the Devils in Hell, nay, his own power cannot reverse
them; For his Justice, his Wisdom, his Mercy has sealed them, Read his
character, (and he made it himself) He is merciful, righteous, and full of
compassion, and Saint Ambrose it was that observed it, that here is mercy twice
mentioned, Psalm. 116.5.
and Justice but once, and he adds for our encouragement, what? to hope, nay,
but to turn, that we may hope, In medio Justitia est, gemino septo inclusa
misericordiae, Justice is shut up in the midst, and hedge d in on every side
with Mercy; if thou turn from thy evil ways, Mercy shines upon thy Tabernacle,
and Justice is the same it was, but confined and bound up, that it cannot, that
it shall never reach thee to destroy thee: when thou sinnedst, he was Just to
punish thee; and now thou turnest from thy evil ways unto him, he is (...), a
righteous Judge still, but to receive thee, and reward thee.

They in the Primitive times, who fell away in times of persecution, and
afterward returned to the bosom of the Church, and confessed and bewailed their
Apostasy (though it were rather verbal then real, and to which they were drawn
rather by the fear of smart, then hatred to the Gospel) were said, by the Greek
Fathers, Cypr. (...) lib. de Lapsis.
(...), which Saint Cyprian interprets; Elatum prima victo: via hostem secundo
certamine superare, to recover the field, and by a second onset, to foil that
enemy, who did glory in a former conquest; and to defy the tempter after a
fall. The Novatians, who called themselves (...) the Puritans of those times,
(and they had good reason so to do) as good reason as a deformed man has to
call him self Boniface, or a wicked man write himself innocent: for they were
proud, merciless, and covetous ( Nazianzens lays it to their charge) goodly
and fit ingredients to make up that sweet composition of Purity; These
withstood their receiving into the Church, but not without the Churches
heaviest censure. Saint Jerome, for all their name, calls them by one quite
contrary, Immundissimos the impurest men of all the world; pietatis paternae
aversarios, Nazianz. or. 14.
the Enemies of Gods mercy and goodness, and Nazianzen tells them their
Religion was (...), impudence, (...) ibid.
and uncleanness, which had nothing but the name of Purity, which they made,
says he, a bait to catch and cajol the ignorant, and unwary multitude: who are
taken more with the Trumpet of a Pharisee, then with his alms, and are fed
with shows and pretenses, as they say Camelions are with air. For, as Basil,
and Nazianzen observe, this severe Doctrine of these proud and covetous men,
did drive the offending Brethren into despair, and despair did plunge them
deeper in sin; left them wallowing in the mire, in their blood and pollution;
being held down by a false opinion, that no hand could draw them out, and that
pardon was impossible; whereas a Convertimini the Doctrine of Repentance might
have raised them from the ground, drawn them out of their blood and failth:
strengthened their feeble knees, and hands hat hang down, put courage and and
life into them, to turn from that evil, which had cast them down, and stand up
to see, and meet the Salvation of the Lord.

And this is the proper and Natural effect of mercy, to give sight to the
blind, that they may see, to bind up a broken limb that it may move: and to
raise us from the dead, that we may walk, to make us good, who were evil: For
this is shines in brightness upon us every day, not only to enlighten them,
who sit in darkness, but many times the children of light themselves, who
though they sit not in darkness, yet may be under a cloud, raise up, and
settled in the brain, not from a corrupt, but a tender, and humble Heart. For we
cannot think that every man that says he despairs, is cast away, and lost; or
that our erroneous Judgment of our state, and condition, shall be the rule, by
which God will proceed against us, and Judge us at the last day; that when we
have set our hearts to serve him, and have been serious in all our ways, when
we have made good the condition, i. e. our part of the Covenant, as far as the
Covenant of Grace, and the equity and gentleness of the Gospel does exact it,
he will refuse to make good his part, because we cannot think well of our
selves, and though we have done, what is required, persuade our selves that we
are fallen so short in the performance of our duty, that we shall never reach
to the end; in a word; that he will forbear to pronounce the Euge well done,
because we are afraid, and tremble at all our works, or put us by and reject us
after all the labor of our charity, for a melancholy fit, or condemn the
soul, for the distemper of the body or some perturbation of the mind, which he
had not strength enough to withstand, though he were strong in the Lord; and in
the power of his spirit did cheerfully run the ways of his Commandments. It
were a great want of Charity thus to Judge of those, whose troublesome, and
most afflicting error was conceived and formed in the very bowels of charity.

For sometimes it proceeds from the distemper of the body, from some
indisposition of the brain, and if we have formerly and do yet strive to do him
service, he is not so hard and austere a Master, as to punish us for being
sick. Sometimes it arises from some defect in the judicative faculty, through
which, as we make more Laws to our selves, and so more sins then there are; so
we are as ready to pass sentence against our selves, not only for the breach
of those Laws, which none could bind us to, but our selves; but even of those
also, which we were so careful to keep; for as we see some men so strong, or
rather so stupid, that they think, they do nothing amiss; so there be others
(but not many) so weak, or rather so scrupulous, that they cannot persuade
themselves, that they ever did any thing well. This is an infirmity and
disease, but it is not Epidemical. The first are a great multitude, which it is
hard to number, quocunque sub axe they are in every Climate, and in every
place, but most often in the Courts of Princes, and the habitations of the
Rich, who can do evil, but will not see it, who can make the loud condemnation
of a fact, and the bold doing it, the business of one, and the same hour;
almost of one and the same moment: The other are not many, for they are a part
of that little Flock, and the good Shepherd will not drive them out of the
fold, for the weak conceit they had, that they had gone too far astray. For
error is then most dangerous and fatal, when we do that which is evil, not
when we shun and fly from it, as from the plague, and yet cannot believe, we
are removed far enough from the infection of it.

And therefore (again) it may have its Original not only from the Acrasie and
discomposedness of the outward-man, or the weakness in Judgment, or that
ignorance of their present estate (which may happen to good men, even to those,
who have made some fair proficiency in the School of Christ; and to which we
are very subject amidst that variety of circumstances, that perplexity, and
multiplicity of thoughts, which rise and sink, and return again, and strangle
one another, to bring in others in their place) but it may be brought in by our
very care and diligence, and an intensive love: For care, and diligence, and
love, are always followed with fears and jealousies: love is ever a beginning,
till all be done, and is but setting out, till she be at her journeyes end. The
liberal man is afraid of his Alms, and the Temperate mistrusts his abstinence;
the meek man is jealous of every heat: pietas etiam tuta pertimescit, piety is
afraid even of safety it self, because it is piety, and cannot be safe enough.
And if it be a fault thus to undervalue himself, it is a fault of a fair
extraction, begotten not by blood or the will of men, not by negligence, and
wilfulness, and the pollutions of the flesh, but of care and anxiety, and an
unsatisfied love, which will sometimes demur, and be at a stand, in the
greatest Certainty; so that, though the lines be fallen to him in a fair
place, and he have a Goodly Heritage, a well settled spiritual Estate, yet he
may sometimes look upon it, as Bankrupts do upon their temporal worn out
Debts and Statutes, and Mortgages, and next to nothing. Every man has not a
place and mansion in Heaven, that pretends a Title to it; nor is every man shut
out, that doubts of his evidence. This diffidence in our selves is commonly the
mark and Character of a Good man, who would be better; and though he has built
up his assurance as strong as he can, yet thinks himself not sure enough, but
seeks for further assurance, and fortify's it with his Fear, and assiduous
diligence, that it may stand fast for ever, whereas we see too many draw out
their own Assurance, and seal it up with unclean Hands, with wicked hands,
with hands full of Blood.

We have read of some in the days of our Forefathers, and have heard of
others in our own, and no doubt many there have been, of whom we never heard,
whose Conversation was such as became the Gospel of Christ, and yet have felt
that hell within themselves, which they could not discover to others, but by
ghastly looks, Outcryes, and deep Groans, and loud complaints to them who were
near them; That Hell it self could not be worse, nor had more Torments, then
they felt: And these may seem to be breathed forth, not from a broken, but a
perishing heart; to be the very Dialect of Despair; and indeed so they are,
for Despair, in the worst acception, cannot sink us lower then hell: But yet
we cannot, we may not be of their opinion, and think (what they say) that they
are cast out of Gods sight; No, God sees them, looks upon them with an Eye full
of compassion, and most times sends an Angel to them, in this their Agony, as
he did unto Christ, a message of Comfort to rowse them up; but if their
tenderness should yet raise doubts, and draw the cloud still over them; we
have reason to think (and who dares say the contrary?) that the hand of Mercy
may, even through this cloud, receive them to that Sabbath and rest, which
remains for the people of God.

I speak of men, who have been severe to themselves, and watchful in this
their Warfare; full of good works, and continued in them: and, who have many
times, when they were even at the gates of heaven, and near unto happiness,
these Terrors and affrightments, who are full of Charity, and therefore cannot
be destitute of hope, although their own sad apprehensions, and the breathings
of a Tender Conscience have made the operation of it less sensible, and their
hope be, not like Aarons rod, cut off, dried up, and utterly dead; but rather
like a tree in Winter, in which there is life and faculty, yet the absence of
the Sun, or the cold benumming it, suffers no force of life to work; but when
that draws near, and yields its warmth and Influence, it will bud and
blossom, and bring forth fruit, and leaf together.

The Case then of every man that Despaires, is not desperate; but we must
consider despair in its Causes, which produce and work it. If it be exhaled and
drawn up out of our corrupt works, and a polluted Conscience, the stream of it
is poisonous, and deleteriall, the very smoke of the bottomless pit; but if
it proceed from the distemper of the body (which seises upon one, as well as
another) or a weakness of Judgment (which befalls many, who may be weak, and
yet Pious) or an excessive solicitude, and tenderness of soul (which is not
so common) we cannot think, it can have that force and malignity, as to pull
him back, who is now thus striving to enter in at the narrow gate, or to cut
him off from salvation, who has wrought it out with Fear and trembling. At
the Day of Judgment, the Question will be, not what was our Opinion, and
conceit of our selves, but what our conversation was, and what we thought of
our Estate, but what we did to raise it? not of our fancied application of the
Promises, but whether we have performed the Condition; For then the Promises
will apply themselves; God has promised, and he will make it good: we shall
not be asked what we thought, but what we did? for how many have thought
themselves sure, who never came to the knowledge of their Error, till it was
too late? How many have called themselves Saints, who have now their portion
with Hypocrites? How many have fancied themselves into Heaven, whose wilful
disobedience carried them another way? on the other side, how many have
believed, and yet doubted? how many have been synceere in the ways of
Righteousness, and yet drooped? How many have fainted, even in their Savours
Arms, when his Mercies did compassed them in on every side? how many have been
in he greatest Agony, when they were nearest to their Exaltation? How many have
condemned themselves to hell, who now sit crowned in the highest Heavens? I
know nothing by my self, 2 Cor. 4.4.
says Saint Paul, yet am not thereby Justified; Hoc dicit, Dialogo adv.
Pelagium.
ne forte quid per ignorantiam deliquisset, says Saint Hierom, though he knew
nothing, yet something he might have done amiss, which he did not know, and
though our Conscience accuse us not of greater crimes, yet our Conscience may
tell us, we may have committed many sins, of which she could give us no
Information; and this may cast a mist about him, who walks as in the Day: In
a word; a man may doubt, and yet be saved, and a man may assure himself, and
yer perish; a man may have a groundless Hope, and a man may have a groundless
Fear; and when we see two thus contrarily Elemented, the one drooping, the
other cheerful; the one rejoicing in the Lord, whom he offends, the other
trembling before him, whom he loves, we may be ready to pity the one, and
bless the Condition of the other, cast away the Elect, and choose the
Reprobate; and therefore; we must not be too rash to Judge, but leave the
Judgment to him, who is Judge both of the quick and dead; and will neither
condemn the Innocent, for his Fear; or justify the man that goes on in his
sin, for his Assurance.

Take Comfort then thou disconsolate soul, which art stricken down into the
place of Draggons, and art in this terror, and anguish of heart; This fear to
thine is but a cloud, and it will drop down and distill in Blessings upon thy
head; This Agony will bring down an Angel; This sorrow will be turned into joy;
and this Doubt answered, this despair vanish, that Hope may take its proper
place again, the Heart of a poenitent. Thy Fear is better, then other men's
confidence, thy anxiety more Comsortable, then their security; Thy doubting
more favored, then their assurance, Timor tuus, securitas tua, thy fear of
Death will end in the firm expectation of Eternal life. Though thou art tossed
on a Tumultuous Sea, thy Mast spent, and thy Tackling torn, yet thou shall at
last strike in to shore; when these proud Saylors shall shipwreck in a Calm.
Misinterpret not this thy dejection of Spirit, thy sad and pensive Thoughts,
nor seek too suddenly to remove them: an afflicted Conscience, in the time of
health, is the most hopeful and Sovereign Physic, that is; thy fear of
Death is a certain Symptom, and infallible sign of life; there is no Horror
of the Grave to him that lies in it, Death only is terrible to the living, and
then there can be no stronger argument that thou art alive, then this; that
thou doubtest, thou art dead already.

And list up thy head too, Thou despairing, and almost Desperate sinner, whom
(not thy many sins) but thy unwillingness to leave them, has brought to the
'Dust of Death; who first blasphemest God, and then drawest the punishment
nearer to thee, then he would have it, and art thy own Hangman and
Executioner; not that Pardon is denied, but that thou will not ^ue it out: Look
about thee, and thou may see Hope coming toward thee, and many Arguments
to bring it in; An Argument from thy soul, which is not quite lost, till it be
in hell, and if thou will possess it, it shall not be lost; An argument from
thy will, which is free and mutable, and may Turn to good, as well as evil;
An argument from the very Habit of sin, which presses thee down, which though
it be strong, yet is it not stronger then the grace of god, and the activity of
thy will: It is very difficult indeed, but the Christian man's work is, to
overcome difficulties: An argument from those sholes and multitudes of
offenders, who have wrought themselves out of the power of death, and the state
of Damnation; from many, who have committed as many sins as thou, but this
one, of Despair, from those Publicans and sinners, who have entered into the
Kingdom of Heaven; An argument from thy own argument, which thou so
unskilfully turnst against thy self; for it is no argument; it is but a weak
peremptory conclusion, held up without any Premises, or Reason that can enforce
it: For Despair is but Pe^itio Principii, proves, and concludes the same, by
the same, makes our sins greater then Gods Mercies, because they are so; and
Repentance impossible, because it is so; Though the Soul be not quite lost,
till it be lost for ever; though the will be free, and Grace offers it self,
though the voice of God be, Turn, Though multitudes have Turned, and that
which has been done, may be done again: Though the Argument be no Argument,
yet despair does (...), against what reason ^oever, hold up the Conclusion.
Thou say, That God cannot forgive thee; if he cannot, then he is not
merciful, neither is he just, and so he is not God; and then what needst thou
despair? we begin in sin, proceed to Blasphemy, and so end in despair. But a
God he is, and merciful; but thy sins ae greater then his Mercies; which is
another Blasphemy, and brings in something more Infinite then God, and takes
Gods office from him, and dispences his Mercies, of which he alone is Lord, and
shuts up his rich Treasury of goodness, when he is ready, and willing to lay it
open; and so ruins us, in despite of God. But thou say, Though can not
repent, which is thy greatest error, and the main cause of thy despair (for
when the heart is thus hard, it beats off all succors, that are offered, all
those means, which may be as Oil to supple it.) Thou can not, is not true;
Thou should say, Thou will not Repent; for if thou will, thou may: for thou
can not tell, whether thou can repent or no, because thou never yet putst
it to the Trial, but being in the pit, did shut the mouth of it upon thy
self, and stop it up with a false opinion of God, and of thy self, with dark
notions, and worthless conceits of Impossibilities Behold, God calls after
thee again, and again, his Grace (as a devout Writer speaks) is most
officious to take thee out; his Mercy ready to embrace thee, if thou do not
stubbornly cast her off. Behold a multitude of penitents who have escaped the
wrath to come, and be^ken to thee, by their example, to follow after them, and
retire from these Hellish thoughts and conclusions, into the same shadow and
shelter, where they are safe from those false suggestions, and fiery darts of
the enemy; and if this will not move thee, then behold, the blood of an
immaculate Lamb streaming down to wash away thy sins, and with them thy
despair; to raise thee from thy Grave, this sepulcher of rotten bones and
baneful Imaginations, that thou may walk before him in the land of the
living; to beget Repentance, and to beget a hope; to pity us in our tentations,
who was sensible of his own; Hebr.
and to drive despair from off the face of the earth. For why should the name
of a Savior, and despair be heard of in the same coasts? if it breath within
the curtains of the Church, it is not Christ, but the Devil, and our sensuality
that brings it in. The end of his coming was to destroy it; for this he came
into the world: for this he died: Ask Christ, says Saint Basil, what he
carries on his Shoulders? it is the lost sheep: Ask the Angels, for whom they
rejoice? it is for a sinner, that repents. Ask God for what he is so earnest,
as to call and call again; It is for those who are now in their evil ways. Ask
the Shepherd, and he will tell you he left ninty and nine, to find but one lost
sheep; his desire is on us, and he had rather we would be guided by his
Shepherds-staff, then be broken by his rod of iron; if thou will return,
return; his wisdom has pointed out to it, as the fittest way; His justice
yields, and will look friendly on thee, whilst thou art in this way, and mercy
will go along with thee, and save thee at the end; If thou will, thou may
Turn; and if thou will Turn, thou shall not despair, or if a cloud overspread
thee, it shall vanish at the brightness of mercy, as a mist before the Sun.

Here then is Balm of Gilead; Turn ye, Turn ye, a loving compassionat call to
turn even those who despair of turning; The second hinderance presumption.
a Doctrine of singular comfort; but this Balm is not for every wound, nor will
it drop, and distill upon him who goes on in his sin: for mercy is as strong
drink and wine, to be given to them who are ready to perish, and to such who
have grief of heart. Prove. 31.6.
Many times it falls out by reason of our presumption, and hardness of heart,
that there is more danger in pressing some truth, then in maintaining errors;
care not for the morrow is as Music to the sluggard, and he hears it with
delight, and folds his hands to sleep; If we commend labor, the covetous has
encouragement enough to drudgon: to rise up early, and lie down late, to gain
the meat that perishes, if we but mention a worship in spirit and truth, the
sacrilegious person takes up his hammar, and down goes ceremony and order, and
the Temple it self; how many solifidians has free grace occasioned? how many
Libertines, has the indiscreet pressing of the freedom we have by Christ,
raised? the Gospel it self we see has been made the savor of death unto
death, and mercy, malevolent; At what time soever etc. has scarce with many
left any time to repent, and therefore it will concern us(...), Epist. 20. ad
Basil. Magn.
as Nazianzen speaks with Art and prudence to dispense the word of truth, or as
Saint Paul speaks (...) to cut it out as they did their sacrifices, by a
certain method, to give every one his proper food in due season; for some
dispositions are so corrupted, that they may be poisoned with Antidotes. Theod.
Therap.
Theodoret observes that God himself did not fully and plainly teach the Jews
the Doctrine of the Trinity; lest that wavering and fickle Nation might have
took it by the wrong handle, and made it an occasion of relaps into that
Idolatrous conceit, which they had learnt in Egypt, of worshipping many gods.
The Novatians error, who would not accept of penance after Baptism, so much
as once, though no Physic for a sinner, yet might have proved a good Antidote
against sin; for men (had they believed it) would (some at least) have been
more shy of sin, and more wary in ordering their steps, and shunned that sin,
as a Serpent, which would excommunicate them, and shut them for ever out of the
Church. And therefore the Orthodox Fathers (even there where they oppose that
assumed, and unwarranted severity of the Novatian) deliver the Doctrine of
Repentance with great caution and circumspection, and a seeming reluctance;
invite loquor, Ter. de penitent. Bas. t m 1. Hem. 14.
says Tertul. I am made unwilling to publish this free mercy of God (...),
says Saint Basil, I speak the truth in fear; for my desire is, that after
Baptism you should sin no more, and my fear is, you will sin more, and more
upon presumption of Repentance and mercy; He would, and he would not publish
the free mercy of God in Christ, he was bound to preach Repentance and yet he
feared. What means that profuse yet sparing tender of Gods mercy? these large
Panegyricks, and as great jealousies? why did they so much extol Repentance,
and yet male ominari presage such an evil consequence out of that, which they
had presented to all the world in so desirable a shape? But now the Father was
so taken, so delighted with the contemplation of it, discovered so much power
in it, that he thought the Devils themselves in the interim and time between
their fall and the Creation of man, might have reprented, and been Angels of
light still, and now drawing in his hand and putting it forth with fear and
trembling: before holding out Repentance, as a board, or planck to every
ship-wrackt soul, but now fearing, lest Repentance it self should become a
rock: one would think the holy Father himself were turned Novatian, and to
speak truth, that which the Novatians pretense, to deny Repentance after
Baptism, expressed these expressions from him, and was the true cause, which was
made him publish it, with so much fear, ne nobis subsidia paenitentiae
blandiantur, that men might not be betrayed by the flattery and pleasing
appearance of that, which should advantage them, and level their thoughts on
that benefit which it might bring to them, and boldly claim it as their own:
though they are willing to forget, and leave unregarded, that part of it, which
should make way, to let it in: and hearing of so precious an Antidote, presume
it will have the same virtue and operation at any time, and so after many
delays, make no use of it at all: That the Doctrine of Repentance might not
maks us stand in more need of Repentance; in a word: that, that which is a
remedy, might not by our ill handling and applying it, be turned into a
disease. Look into the world, and you will see there is great need of so much
fear, and such a caution; and that more fall by presumption, then despair: non
am morbis, quam remedio laboramus, by our own folly and the Devils craft, our
disease does not hurt us so much, as our remedy, and Repentance which was
ordained, as the best Physic to purge the soul, is turned into that poison,
that corrupts and kills it. What wandering thought? what Idle word? what
profane action is there, which is not laid upon this fair foundation. The hope
of pardon, which yet will not bear up such hay and stubble: we call sin a
disease, and so it is, a mortal one, but presumption is the greatest, the very
corruption of the blood and spirits, of the best parts of the soul, we are sick
of sin; it is true, but that we feel not: but we are sick, very sick of mercy:
sick of the Gospel, sick of Repentance, sick of Christ himself; and of this we
make our boast: and our bold relyance on this, does so infatuate us, that we
take little care to purge out the plague of our heart, which we nourish and
look upon, as upon health it self, we are sick of the Gospel, for we receive
it, and take it down, and it does not purge out, but enrage those evil humors
which discompose the soul: we receive it as Judas did the sop: we receive it,
and with it a devil.

For this bold and groundless presumption of pardon makes us like unto him;
hardens our heart first, and then our face; and carries us with the swelling
sails of impudence, and remorslesnes, to an extremity of daring, to that
height of impiety, from which we cannot so easily descend, but must fall, and
break and bruise our salves to pieces: praesumptio inverecundiae portio, says
Tert. prsumption is a part and portion, and the upholder of immodesty: and
falls, and cares not whither: ruins us, and we know not how; abuses and
dishonours that mercy, which it makes a wing to shadow it, and has been the
best purveior for sin and the kingdom of darkness. We read but of one Judas in
the Gospel, that despaired, and hanged himself, and so went to his place; but
how many thousands have gone a contrary way with less anguish and reluctance;
with fair, but false hopes, with strong, but fained assurances, and met him
there? Oh it is one of the devils subt lest stratagems, to make sin and hope of
heaven to dwell under the same roof, to teach him who is his vassal, to walk
delicately in his evil ways, and to rejoice always in the Lord, even then,
when he fights against him, to assure himself of life, in the chambers of
death. And thus every man is sure; the Schismatic is sure, and the Libertine
is sure: the Adulterer is sure, and the Murderer is sure: the Traitor is sure:
they are sure, who have no savor, no relish of Salvation. The Schismatic has
made his peace; though he have no charity; The Libertine looks for his reward,
though he do not only deny good works, but contemn them. The Adulterer
absolves himself without Penance; The Murderer knows David is entered Heaven,
and hopes to follow him, The Prosperous Traitor is in Heaven already; his
present success is a fair earnest of another inheritance that God that favors
him here, will Crown him hereafter; Every man can do what he list, and be what
he list, do what good men tremble to think of, and yet sear not at all, but
expect the Salvation of the Lord; first damn, and then Canonize himself; For
the greatest part of the Saints of this World, have been of their own Creation,
made up in the midst of the land of darkness, with noise, with Thunder, and
Earthquakes, (we may be bold to say) if Despair has killed her thousand,
presumption has slain her ten thousand.

Foolish men that we are, who has bewitched us, to lay hold on Christ, when we
thrust him from us? to make him our own, and impropriate him when we crucify,
and persecute him every day? that we had rather fancy and imagine, then make
our election sure? that will have health, and yet care not how they feed; or
what poison they let down; that make salvation an arbitrary thing, to be met
with when we please, and can as easily be Saints as we can eat, and drink, as
we can kill and slay? good God what mist and darkness is this, which makes men
possessed with sin, which is an enemy ready to devour them, to be thus quiet and
secure? could, or would we but a little awake, and consult with the light of
our faith and reason, we should soon let go our confidence, and plainly see
the danger we are in, whilst we are in our evil ways, and find fear tied fast
unto them; so says Saint Paul, but if you sin, fear. For Christian security,
and hope of life is the proper and alone issue of a good conscience, through
faith in Christ purged from dead and evil works, if we will leave our fear, we
must leave our evil works behind us. Assurance is too choice a piece, to be
beat out by the fancy, and to be made up when we please; at a higher price,
then to be purchased with a thought; it is a work, that will take up an age to
finish it, the engagement of our whole life, to be wrought out with fear and
trembling, not to be taken as a thing granted; as the (...); and so set up as a
pillar of hope, when here is no better basis, and foundation for it, then a
forced and fading thought; which is next to air, and will perish sooner, the
young man in the Gospel, had yet no knowledge of any such Assurance office; and
therefore he puts up his question to our Savior thu; Good Master, what good
thing shall I do, that I may enter into life? He saw no Hope of entering in, at
that narrow Gate, with such prodigious sins: and our Saviors answer is, Keep
the Commandments; that is, Turn from your evil ways. Be not envious,
malicious, Covetous, Cruel, False, Deceitful; Despair is the Daughter of
sin, and darkness, but confidence is the Emanation of a good Conscience; what
flesh and Blood makes up, is but a Phantasme, which appears, and disappeares;
is seen, and vanishes; so soon gone, that we scarce know, whether we saw it,
or no; there can be no firm hope raised, but upon that: which is as Mount
Sion, and stands fast for ever; which is our best guard in our way; nay,
which is our way in this our life, and when we are dead will follow us: nothing
can bear and afford it but this; unum arbustum non alit duos Erithacos; Eras.
Adag.
Sin and Assurance are Birds too quarrelsome to dwell in the same Bush, and
therefore, if you sin, Fear, or rather, Turn from your evil ways, and
then you shall have (...), Boldness, and Confidence toward God.

We must therefore sink and fall low, and mitigate our voice, and speak more
Faintly, and Remisly, when we call after the presumptuous sinner to Turn, as
if his last period were near, and it were almost too late for him to begin,
not magnify Repentance too much, lest he make it a Pass and Warrant to sin
again, and have more need of it: And we may tell him what is most true,
Repentance is a command indeed, but praeceptum ex suppositione (as Aquinas
speaks) a command not absolute, but upon a Si, a supposition: for we are not
commanded to repent, as we are, to believe; as we are to fear God, and Honor
our Parents, but upon supposition: If we sin, we have an Advocate, that will
plead for us: The command, which is absolute, is, to do his will. Repentance
is Tabula post naufragium, says Saint Hierome, Naz. O. 15.
is as a plank reached out after Shipwreck; but it is better to ride in the ship
in a calm, then to hang on the Mast in a Tempest: Repentance is a virtue, but
of that nature, that the less we stand in need of it, the more virtuous we
are, it is a purgative potion, but it is better never to be sick, then to rise
from our beds by the help of a Physician. It was commendable in him that could
say, He thanked God, he was now reconciled to his Mother; but he was more
praiseworthy, who replied; That he thanked God, That he was never reconciled
to his, for he never offended her. It is good to Repent, but it is better not
to sin: Oh, it is a great Happiness, to be restored to the Favor of God,
but it is a greater, never to lose it; it is good to appease him; but it is our
safest course, never to anger him, in a word; it is better to be ever with him,
then by Famine or Pestilence to be forced to return, better not acquire an
Evil Habit, then shake it off; better never set a step in evil ways; then to
be called out of them with so much noise; better never err, then Turn.

For conclusion; It will concern us then, not to put too much Trust and
confidence in our Helps; not to be careless of our health, upon presumption of
Remedy; not to sin, because grace has abounded; not to spend prodigally, Romans
upon hope of supply; not to oblige our selves too far, because we see a hand
of ^lercy ready to cancel the Bill. How many have these Hopes deluded? How
many have been betrayed by their helps? how many Cities had now stood, Fit, ut
ea part capiantur urbes qua sunt munitissimae. Polyb. l. 7.
had they had no other Walls but their men? for whilst we trust in these, we
neglect our selves, and so make them not only useless, but disadvantagious to
us; and we are soyled by our strength, poisoned with our Physic, lost and
betrayed in the midst of our Fort, with all our succors and Artillery about
us; we Trust in God, and offend him, look steadfastly toward the Mercy-seat,
and fall into the Bottomless Pit.

And therefore in the last place, let us not be too bold with his Mercy, Hos 3.
v. last.
but learn, To fear God and his goodness; not to make Mercy an occasion of
sin, and so consequently of Judgment, which she is so ready to remove. For
at the very name of Mercy, at the sound of this Music, we lie down and rest
in Peace; It is Mercy that saves us, and we wound our selves to death with
Mercy: And as he that looks upon the Sun with a steady eye, when he removes
his eye, has the Image of the Sun presented almost in every object; so when we
have long gazed on the Mercy-seat, our eye begins to dazzle, and Mercy seems to
shine upon us in all our Actions, and at all times, and in every place. We see
Mercy in the Law quite abolishing and destroying it, silencing the many woes
denounced against sinners. When we sin, Mercy is ready before us; That we may
do it with less regret; That no worm may gnaw us; when our Conscience chides,
Mercy is at Hand, to make our Peace. And this in the time of Health; and when
our strength fails, and sickness has laid us on our Bed; we suborne, and
corrupt it to give us a visit then, when we can scarce call for it; to stand by
us in this Evil day, when we can do no good, that we may die in Hope, who had
no Charity; and be saved by that Jesus, whom we have Crucified: And as it falls
out sometimes with men of great Learning and Judgment, who can resolve every
doubt, and answer the strongest Argument and objection, yet are many times
puzzled with a piece of Sophistry; so it is with the formal Christian; He can
stand out against all motives and Beseechings, and all the Batteries of God;
all his Calls, and Obtestations against the Terrors of Hell, and sweet
allurements of his Promises, but is shaken and foiled with a Fallacy, with the
Devils Fallacy; a Dicto secundum quid, ad Dictum simpliciter. That Mercy does
save sinners that Repent; and Therefore it saves all; and upon this Ground,
which glides away from us: upon this reason, which is no Reason, the pleasures,
which are but for a season, shall prevail with us, when heaven with its bliss
and eternity cannot move us, and the trouble which Repentance brings to the
flesh, shall affright us from good, more then the torments which are eternal
can from sin.

And therefore to conclude: Let us fear the mercy of God, so fear it, that it
may not hurt us; so fear it, that it may embrace us on every side; so fear it,
that it may save us in the Day of the Lord Jesus. Let our song be made up, as
David's was of these discords, Mercy and Judgment. Let us set and compose our
life by Judgment, that we may not presume, and Turn our fear by Mercy, Psalm.
101.1.
that we may not despair: remember we were Prisoners, and remember we were
Redeemed: Remember we were weak and impotent; and remember we were made whole;
Remember what Christ has done for us, and remember what we are to do for our
selves, and so work out our salvation with fear and trembling, and then draw
near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith to the throne of Grace; that
Gods Wisdom and Justice, and Mercy may guide us in all our ways, till they
bring us into those new Heavens, wherein dwells righteousness, where God
shall be glorified in us, and we glorified in him to all eternity.

THE SEVENTH SERMON.
PART III.
EZEKIEL 33.11. Turn ye, Turn ye from your evil ways etc.


THE word is loud; the call sudden, and vehement, and we have heard it loud in
the ears of them that Despair; Turn, Turn ye, it is not too late; and terrible
to them that presume, Turn ye, Turn ye; it is not soon enough: and it cannot
sound with terror enough; For, we see, presumption is a more general, and
spreading evil, and it lames and criples us, makes us halt in our turn, that we
Turn not soon enough; or if some judgment, or affliction Turn us about, our
Turn is but a profer, a turn in show not in reality; or if we do Turn indeed,
it is but a turn by halfs; a turn from this sin, but not from all; or a false
hope deludes us, and we are ever a turning, and never turn. Our December is our
January, our last month is our first day of the year, our thirty days hence,
nay, our last hour, is to morrow, is now, Cate cras prosiciscetur. h e. post
triginta dies. Plutarch. in vita Cat. Vtic.
(as Cato's servents used to say of him) our picture is a man; our shadows,
substances; our feigned repentance, true, our limb is a body, our partial
Repentance, a complet one, and a single Turn from one sin, universal. And
therefore the Schools will tell us, that presumption stands at greater
opposition with Hope, then with Fear. One would think indeed, the presumption
did include a Hope, and shut out Fear; and so she does, even lead us madly over
all; over the Law, and over the Gospel; over the Threatenings of God; and the
wrath of God, upon the point of the sword, upon death it self. But yet,
presumption is a deordination of Hope, rather a brutish temerity, a wilful
rashness; then Hope, and moves contrary to her. Hope lays hold on the
promises; but it is the condition that stretches forth her hand: she looks up
to Heaven, but it is this Turn, it is Repentance, that quickneth her eye. But
presumption runs hastily to the promises; but leapeth over the condition, or
treads it under her feet. Presumption is in Heaven already, without grace;
without Repentance; without a Turn, or at best it is serotina latewards, in the
evening, in the shutting up of our days, or ficta, a formal repentance, or
manca, a lame, imperfect Repentance; a false hope it is, and therefore most
contrary to Hope; and therefore no Hope at all.

Now, this sudden, and vehement call, should have more force and energie with
it, then to awake, and startle us, then to make us, for a while look about. It
was so loud, to hasten our repentance, to give it a true being, and essence,
and to complete, perfect, and settle it for ever. Our Repentance is our
Sacrifice, and it must be 1. matutinum sacrificium, our morning, early
Sacrifice. 2. Vivum, a living Sacrifice, breathing forth piety and holiness;
not a dead carcass, or the picture of Repentance; and 3. integrum a Sacrifice
without blemish, perfect in every part, and it must be, in the last place juge
sacrificium a continued sacrifice; a Repentance never to be repented of, a turn
never to turn, or look back again.

The First.

The first matutinum Sacrificium. An early Sacrifice. Sen ep. 7.
There is a time for all things under the Sun, says the wiseman, and it is a
great part of wisdom, occasionem observare properantem to watch, and observe a
fair opportunity, and not to let it slip away between our fingers, to hoyse up
our sails dum ventus operam dat, Hier. ad Celantiam. Isai. 5.7.
as he in Plautus speaks, whilst the wind sits right to fill them; and as it
is in civil actions, so is it in our turn, in our repentance, if we observe not
the wind: if we turn not with the wind, with the first opportunity; we set out
too late; when another will come toward us, is most uncertain; the next wind
cannot be so kind, and favorable. We confess, Nullus cunctationis locus est
in eo consilio, qued non potest laudari nisi peractum. Otho apud Tac. l. 11.
Hist.
advise and consultation in other things is very necessary; but full of danger
in that action, where all the danger is not to do it. Before we enter upon
action, to sit down, and cast with my self, what may follow at the very heels
of it, to look upon it, to handle and weigh it, to see whethere life or death
will be the issue of it; is the greatest part of our spiritual wisdom: but
after sin to demur, when we are running on in our evil ways to consult, what
time will be best to turn in; what opportunity we shall take to repent,
betrays our ignorance, that when time is we know it not, or our sloth, that
though we see the very nunc, the very time of turning, though opportunity even
bespeaks us to turn, yet we carelessly let it fly from us, even out of our
reach, and will not lay hold on it. Thus says Solomon, the desire of the
slothful slays him: he desires, Prove. 21.25.
but does nothing to accomplish his desire; and so he desires to be rich, and
dies poor; he thinks his ambition will make him great, his covetousness, rich;
his hope, happy; that all things will fall into his lap, sedendo, and votis, by
sitting still and wishing for them: and this keeps his hands within his bosom:
not so much his sloth, as his desire kills him. Turn ye, turn ye; the very
sound of it, might put us in fear, that now were too late; that the present
time were not soon enough; but the present is too soon with us, we will turn,
we will find a convenient time, all our turning is in desire; desire delays
our turn; and delay multiplies it self to our destruction.

We will then enforce this duty, 1. From the advantage, and benefit we may reap
from our strict observing of opportunity. 2. from the danger of delay.

And first opportunitas a portu, says Festus, Opportunity has its
denomination from the word, which signifies a haven; I may say, Festus verbo
Opportune dicitu^ ab e^, quod navigantibus maxim u^iles, optatique sint portus.
opportunity is a Haven, we see, they who are tossed up and down on the deep,
make all means, stretch their endeavors to the farthest, to thrust their
torn, and weather-beat vessel into the Haven, where they would be; quam optati
portus? how welcome is the very sight of it? littus Naufragis, the shore for
ship-wrackt persons, what can they wish for more? Behold, says the Apostle, 2
Cor. 6.2.
now is the accepted time; now is the day of Salvation: here is a Haven, and
the Tide is now: Now put in your broken vessel: now thrust in into the Haven,
opportunity is a prosperous gale, delay is a contrary wind, and will drive you
back again upon the rocks, and dash you to pieces. And indeed a strange thing
it is: that in all other things opportunity should be a Haven, but in this,
which concerns us more then any thing, a Rock. The twilight for the Adulterer:
Isaacs funeral for Esaus murder, Felix his convenient time, for a bribe: and to
opportunity they fly, tanquam ad portum, as to a Haven: the Adulterer waits for
it, Esau wished for it; Faelix sought for it; what should I say? Opportunity
works Miracles; fills the hands with good things; Raises the poor out of the
Dung; defeateth Counsels, conquers Kingdoms; is the best Physician, and does
more then Art can do; and without it Art can do nothing; is the best
Politician, and without it Wisdom can do nothing; is the best Soldier; for
without it, Power can do nothing; It is all in all, in every thing: but in our
Spiritual Polity, and Warrefare, it has not strength enough, to Turn us
about, it is not able to bow our knee, or move our Tongue, much less to rend a
heart: but such is our extremity of folly, such is the hardness of our hearts,
Ipsa opportunitas, and fit impietatis patrocinium, one opportunity raises in us
a hope of another; makes us waste our time in the ways of Evil, which should
be spent in our Return; extends our hopes, from day to day, from year to year,
from one hour to another, even till our last minute, till Time flies from us,
and opportunity with it: till our last sand, and when that is run out, there is
no more Time for us; and so no more opportunity. The voice of Opportunity is,
To day, now, if you will hear his voice, harden not your Hearts; this is his
voice: Now; it is true; but there may be more nows then this, (and it is, but,
There may be) to morrow may yield an opportunity: Thus we corrupt her language;
In my youth it is true, but I may recover it in my riper Age, my feeble Age will
have strength enough to Turn me, or I may Turn in my bed, when I am not able
to Turn my self; Now? there be more Nows, then Now; what need such haste? my
last prayer, my last Breath, my last gasp may be a Turn.

Now this our way utters our Foolishness; for what greater folly can there
be, then, when Grace and Mercy, when Heaven is offered; now to refuse it?
Plutar. in vita Pelopidae.
(...), let sin devour the opportunity, and to morrow we will Turn, is a
speech, that ill becomes a mortals mouth, whose breath is in his Nostrills,
for it may be his last. His age is but a span long; but a hand-breadth, pro
nihilo, as nothing in respect of God; the Septuagint renders it (...),
Tertullian, Nullificamina, others, Nihilitudines or, Nihilietates, which is,
Nothings, and in such a Nothing, shall I let slip that opportunity, which may
make me something, even eternal? Shall I make so many removes? so many delays
within the compass of a Span? whatsoever my span, my nothing may be, my
opportunity is not extended beyond this span, is no larger then this nothing:
And here is the Danger; whether this Span be now at an end, and measure out, I
cannot tell: My span may be but a fingers breadth; my age but a minute; That
which I fill up with so many Nows, so many opportunities, Nothing; and then if
I turn not Now, I am turned into Hell, where I can never Turn; care not then
for the morrow, let the morrow care for it self; There is no Time to Turn from
thy Evil ways, but now.

2. The Danger of Delay.
And First; It is the greattest folly in the World thus to play with danger, To
seek Death first, in the Errors of ourlife, and then when we have run out our
Course, when Death is ready to devour us, to look faintly back upon light: For
the Endeavors of a man, that has wearyed himself in sin, can be but weak and
faint, like the Appetite of a dying man, who can but think of meat, and loath
it: The later we Turn, the less able we be to Turn; the further we stray,
the less willing shall we be to look back: For sin gathers strength by
delay; devotes us unto it self; gains a dominion Over us; holds us as it were
in Chains, and will not soon suffer us, to slip out of its power: when the
will has captivated it self under sin; a wish, a sigh, a Thought is but a
vain thing, nor have they strength enough to deliver us. One Act begets
another, and that a Third; many make up a habit, and evil Habits hold us back
with some violence: What mind? what motion? what Inclination can a man that is
drowned in sensuality, have to God, who is a Spirit? A man that is buried in
the Earth (for so every Covetous man is) to God, who sits in the highest
heavens? He that delights in the breath of Fools, to the Honor of a Saint? Here
the further we go; the more we are In; That which is done once, has some
affinity to that which is done often, and that which is done always, (...). 1.
Rhet. c. 11.
says Aristotle, when an arm or Limb is broke, it may have any motion, but
that which was natural to it, and if we do not speedily proceed to cure, it
will be a more difficult (...), to set it in its right place again, that it
may perform its natural functions: now in sin, there is a deordination of
the will, there is a luxation of that faculty; hence weakness seiseth upon the
will, and if we neglect the first opportunity; if we do not rectify her
betimes, and turn her back again, and bend her to the rule, it will be more
and more infeebled every day; move more irregularly, and like a disordered
clock, point to any figure, but that which should show the Hour, and make
known the time of the day. We may read this truth in Aged men, says Saint
Basil, Orat. ad Ditescentes.
when their body is worn out with Age, and there is a general declination of
their strength and vigor; the mind has a malignant influence on the body, as
the body (in their blood, and youth) had upon the mind, and being made wanton,
and bold with the Custom of sin, heightens, and enflames their frozen, and
decayed parts, to the pursuit of pleasures past; though they can never overtake
them, nor see them but in Essigie in their Image or Picture, which they draw
themselves. They now call to mind the sins of their youth with delight; and
act them over again, when they cannot Act them; as youthful, as when they
first committed them. They have milk (they think) in their Breasts, and marrow
in their bones; they periwigg their Age with wanton behavior: Their Age is
Threescore and Ten; when their speech and will is but Twenty: They boast of
what they cannot Act, and would be more sinful, if they could; and are so,
because they would. It is a sad contemplation, how we startled at sin in our
youth, and how we ventured by degrees, and engaged our selves: how fearful we
were at first; how indifferent afterward; how familiar within a while; and
then how we were settled, and hardened in it at the last; what a Devil sin
was, and what a Saint it is become? What a Serpent it was, and how now we play
with it? we usually say, (...). Arist. Ibid.
Custom is a second Nature; and indeed it follows, and imitates natural
motion; It is weak in the beginning, stronger in the Progress, but most
strong and violent toward the end: Transit in violentiam voluntas antiqua;
That which we will often, we will with eagerness, and violence. Our first
onset in sin, is with fear and Reluctation; we then venture further, and
proceed with less regret; we move forwards with delight; Delight continues the
motion, and makes it customary; and Custom at last drives and binds us to it,
as to our Center; vitia insolentiora renascuntur, says Seneca: Sin grows more
insolent by degrees, first flatters, then commands, after enslaves, and then
betrays us: First gains consent, afterward works delight, at last (...), a
shamelesness in sin; Jere. 6.15.
Were they ashamed? They were not ashamed: nay, (...), Nihil magis in natura
sua laudare se dicebat, quam, ut ip sius verbo utar, (...) Suet. Caligula.
a senselessness and stupidity in sin; and Caligula's (...), a stubbornness;
and perverseness of disposition, which will not let us Turn from sin. For by
neglecting a timely remedy, vitia, mores fiunt, Our evil ways become our
manners, and common deportment, and we look upon them, as upon that which
becomes us, upon an unlawful Act, as upon that, which we ought to do: Nay,
peccatum lex, sin, which is the Transgression of the Law, is made a Law it
self. Saint Austin in his Confessions calls it so, Lex peccati est violentia
consuetudinis. That Law of sin, which carries us with that violence to sin,
is nothing else, but the force of long Custom and Continuance in sin. For
sin by Custom gains a Kingdom in our souls, and having taken her seat and
Throne there, Lex alia in membris meis repugnavit legi menti^ (...), and Rom^
Lex n. peccati est violentia consuetudinis, qua trahitur and tenetur etiam
invitus animus, eo merito, quo in eam volens illabitur. Aug. l. 8. Confess c. 5.
promulges Laws: If she say Go, we go; and if she say, Do this, we do it:
Surge, inquit, Avaritia, she commands the Miser to rise up early, and lie down
late, and eat the bread of sorrow; she sets the Adulterer on fire, makes him
vile, and base in his own eyes; whilst he counts it his greatest honor and
preferrment, to be a slave to his Strumpet. She draws the Revengers sword; she
feeds the intemperate with poison; And she commands, not as a Tyrant, but
having gained Dominion over us, she finds us willing subjects; she Holds us
Captive, and we call our Captivity our liberty: Her poison is as the poison of
the Aspick; she bites us, and we smile, and Die, and Feel it not.

2. The danger of delay in respect of God.
Secondly: It is dangerous in respect of God himself, whose call we regard not,
whose counsels we reject, whose patience we dally with: whose Judgments we
slight: to whom we wantonly turn the back, when he calls after us, to seek his
sace, and so tread that mercy under foot, which should save us: and will not
turn yet, upon a bold and strange presumption, that though we grieve his
spirit; though we resist, and blaspheme his spirit: yet after all these Scorns,
and contempts: after all these injuries, and contumelies, he will yet look
after us, and sue unto us, and offer himself, and meet and receive us, at any
time, we shall point out, as most convenient to turn in.

It is most true: God has declared himself, and as it were became his own
Herald, and proclaimed it to all the world, Exodus 34.6,7.
the Lord, Merciful, and Gracious, and abundant in Goodness, and Truth,
keeping Mercy for Thousands: for he is (...) most lovingly affected to man, the
chief, and Prince of his creatures: he longs after him, he wooes him, he waits
on him: His Glory and man's Salvation meet and kiss each other: for it is his
Glory to crown him: Nor does he at any time turn from us himself, till we dote
on the world, and sensuality, and divorce him from us, till we have made our
Heaven below; chosen other gods, which we make our selves, and think him not
worth the turning to. He is always a God at hand, never goes from us, till we
sorce him away by violence. How many murmurings and rebellions? how many
contradictions of sinners, has he stood out, and yet looked toward them? how
has he been pressed, as a Cart under sheaves, Amos 2.13.
and yet looked toward them? how has he been shaken off and defied, and yet
looked toward them? he receives David after his Adustery, and murder, after
that complication of sins, the least of which, was of force enough, to cast him
out of Gods presence for ever; he receives Peter after his denial, and would
have received Judas, after his Treason; he received Manasses, when he could not
live long, and he received the Thief on the Cross, when he could live no
longer. All this is true; His Mercy is infinite, and his Mercy is everlasting,
and is the same, yesterday, and to day, and for ever; Ter. de pudicit. c. 10.
But as Tertullian says well, non potest non irasci contumeliis misericordiae
suae, God must needs wax angry at the contumelies and reproaches, which by our
dalliance, and delay we fling upon his mercy, which is so ready to cover our
sins. For how can he suffer this Queen of his Attributes to be thus
prostituted by our lusts, to see men bring sin into the world under the
shadow of that Mercy, which should take it away; to see men advance the
Kingdom of Darkness, and to fight under the devils banner with this
inscription and motto lifted up, the Lord is merciful? what hope of that
Soldier, that flings away his buckler? or that condemned person, that tears
his pardon? or that sick man that loves his disease? and counts his Physic
poison? and the Prophet here in my Text, where he calls upon us with that
earnestness, Turn ye, turn ye, gives us a fair intimation, that if we thus
delay, and delay, and never begin, a time may come, when we shall not be able
to turn. It may seem indeed, a harsh, and hard saying, a Doctrine not suitable
with the lenity and gentleness of the Gospel (which breaths nothing but mercy)
to conclude; that such a time may come, that any part of time, that the last
moment of our time may not make, a now to turn in: that whilst we breath, our
condition should be as desperate, as if we were dead; that whilst we are men,
our estate should be as irrevocable, as that of the damned spirits, with this
difference only, that we are not yet in the place of torment, which
nevertheless is prepared for us, and will as certainly receive us, as it does
now the Devil, and his Angels. It is harsh indeed, but may be very profitable,
and advantageous for us so to think; that such a time may be, which may be our
last; for grace, though not our last for life, that we may live, and yet be
dead eternally; a time, Heb. 10.26.
when there will remain no more sacrifice for sin. I cannot say, we should make
it an article of our Creed, and yet I know no danger in believing it; and it
may prove fatal to us to disbeleeve it, or look upon it, as such an error,
which deserves to be placed in the Catalogue of Heresies. And therefore though
you subscribe not, yet there is no reason, you should Anathematize it; because
we may find some parts of Scripture, which look this way, and so far seem to
enforce it, that we have rather reason to fear, that there may be some truth in
it; since our wilful delays are but as the degrees to it, as the ready way to
that gulf, out of which it will be impossible to lift up our selves; at least
impossible in the Lawiers sense; impossible, as those things which may be, but
seldom come to pass; It is a part of wisdom to fear the worst, nor can we be
too scrupulous in the business of our Salvation.

In the 15. of Genesis, and the 16. v. God tells Abraham, that he will judge
the Amorites; but he will stay to the fourth generation, till their iniquity be
full, and when it is full, then he will strike. At 23. of Matt. Our Savior
thus bespeaks the Pharisees. v. 23. Fill you up the measure of your
forefathers, which is not a command, but a prediction, that they should fill up
the measure of their sin, and then be ripe for punishment. For when men have
run out the full length of their line, then it is Gods time to draw it in, and
give them a check; to pull them on their backs, there to be buried in ruin for
ever. When our Savior beheld Jerusalem, the Text tells us, he wept over it,
wept over it, as at its funeral, as if he now saw the enemy cast a trench round
about it, as if he saw it, Luke 29.43.
lie level with the ground. Will you hear this Epicedium, or his Funeral
speech, which he uttered with great passion, and tears running down his cheeks?
Oh that thou had known the things that belong to thy peace, in hac die tua,
even in this thy day; A day, then they had, but when this day was shut in, then
follows, nunc autem but now, they are hid from thine eyes, which ushers in that
blackness of darkness for ever. Oh that thou had, then was liberty of
choice, but Now, thou art bound and fettered under a sad impossibility for
ever. And that we may be thus bound hand and foot, before we be cast into utter
darkness, Saint Paul does more then intimate, when he tells us of the
Gentiles. Romans 1. That as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge;
to retain him as a merciful God, retain his love and favor, by the true
worship of him, he also gave them over, (...), to a reprobate mind; he left
them in that gall of bitterness, in which they delighted, tradidit repletos, non
replendos, Isid. Pelus l. 4. ep. 102
says the father, he gave them over not be filled, but being filled already
with all iniquity, he delivered them over to a reprobate mind: they retained
not God in any part of their time, and now that is run out, is at an end; and
that time will be no more; they would be evil, and now they cannot be good. The
Jewish Doctors had a proverb, that God did but in this his proceeding farinam
jam molitam molere, but do that, which was done already, to his hands, grind
that corn that was ground already, and leave them, who would be left to
themselves, and their own hellish wickedness, which was their ruin. For that
of Basil is most true, Bas. Hom. 22. c. 11.
(...) Judgment follows mercy at the heels, to take revenge upon those, who
wantonly abuse her; strikes them dead, who would not live, and seals them up to
damnation, who were condemned already. You may now Turn, and he will receive
you; that is the dialect of mercy, but you shall not, if you thus put it off
from time to time, that is the voice of an angry and despised God; Oh that thou
had known in this thy day; see Mercy gave her a day, and shined brightly in
it, by which light she might have seen the things that concerned her peace?
nunc autem, but now, now it is past: are as the black lines of reprobation,
drawn out by the hand of Justice: It was thy day, but now it is shut up, and
now nox est perpetuo una dormienda, thy Sun is set for ever: all is night,
eternal night; the light is hid from thine eyes, and thou shall never see it
more.

You will say, this was spoken to a People, to a Nation; it is true: but may it
not also be so with every particular person? may it not be so, with one
Pharisee? with one viper, as well as with a generation? was it not so with
Judas, as well as with Jerusalem? I have read that a Body or a Society, that a
Commonwealth may fall under a censure, and be subject unto penalty: yet bodies
do not offend, but in their parts; it is not Rome that commits the fault, but
Sempronius or Titius, who are parts of that Commonwealth. Not the Amorites
alone: Not the sect of the Pharisees; not Jerusalem alone, but every man may
have Diem suam his allotted time, in which he may turn from his evil ways; and
this day may be a Feast Day, or a day of trouble, it may beget an eternal day,
or it may end in the shadow of death, and everlasting darkness. Oh that men
were wise, but so wise as the creatures which have no reason; so wise, as to
know their seasons, to discover hanc diem suam, this their day, wherein they
may yet turn: that we could but behold that Decretory hour, or but place it in
our thoughts, or make it our fear, that such a one there may be, in which Mercy
shall forsake us, and Justice cut off our hopes for ever: Certainly we should
not make so many Days in our year, we should not resolve to day, for to
morrow, and to morrow for the next, and so drive it forward, till the last
sand, till we can resolve no more. For he that thinks so lightly of eternity,
to think it may be wrought out in a moment, and yet will not allow it so much;
but when he please, has just cause to fear, that his day is past already.

Now though there may be such a day, such a moment; yet this day, this moment,
like the day of judgment, is not known to any, and it may seem on purpose to
be removed out of our sight, that we may be jealous of every moment of our
life, and when the devil tempts, the World flatters, the flesh rebels, set up
this thought against them, that this may be our last moment, and if we yield
now, we shall be slaves for ever. For as the long suffering of God is
Salvation, the second of Pet. 3.15. so is every day, every hour of our life,
such a day, and such an hour, which carries along with it eternity, Sen. de
benef. 2.5.
either of pain, or Bliss. That thou may therefore turn now, think that a
time may come, when thou shall not be able to turn, tarde velle nolentis est,
not to be willing to turn to thy God now, is to deny him, delay is no better
then defiance. And why should thou hope to be willing hereafter, whoart not
willing now; and art not willing now, upon this false, deceitful hope, that
thou shall be willing hereafter? Wilful and present folly is no good presage of
after-wisdom, and it is more probable that a froward will, will be more froward
and perverse, then that after it hat joined with the vanities of this world,
and cleaved fast unto them, it should bow, and bend it self, to that Law, which
makes it death to touch them. He that leaps into the pit, upon hope, that he
shall get out, has leapt into his Grave, at least deserves to be covered over
with darkness, and to buried there for ever.

Fear then, lest the measure of thy Iniquity be almost full; and persuade thy
self, thy next sin may fill it; Think, this is thy Day, thy hour, Thy moment,
and though peradventure it may not be; yet think it may be thy last; It is no
error, though it be an error; For if it be not thy last, yet in Justice God
might make it so: for why should Heaven be offered more then once? and if it be
an Error, It is an happy Error, and will redeem us from all those Errors,
which delay brings in, and multiplies: even those Errors, which make us worse
then the Beasts that perish: A happy error; I may say an Angel, that lays hold
on us, and snaches us out of the fire, out of the common ruin, and hastens us
to our God: A happy Error, which frees us from all other errors of our life.
And yet, though it may be an error (for it is no more, Then it may be) it is a
truth; for only Now is true; there may be many more Nows, it is true; a now to
morrow, and a now hereafter, and a now on our deathbed, but these are but
may-bees, and these potentiall Truths concern us not (for that which may be,
may not be: that which concerns us, is an Everlasting Truth, To day, if you
will hear his voice, harden not your hearts, if you harden them to day, and
stand upon May-bees, then they may be stand for ever.

And therefore, if you expect I should point out to a certain time; The time
is now, Turn ye, Turn ye, even now; now the Prophet speaks; now the words
sound in your ears; Now, if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts.
For why was it spoken, but that we should hear it? It is an earnest call after
us, and if we obey not, it is an Argument against us, That we deserve to hear
it no more. We are willing that what we speak, should stand; not a word, not a
syllable, not one tittle must fall to the ground. If we speak to our servant,
and say Go, he must go; and if we say, do this, he must do it nunc, Now,
dicto citius, as soon as it is spoke. A deliberative pausing Obedience,
Obedience in the Future Tense, to say, he will do it, when he pleases, strips
him of his Livery, and Thrusts him out of doors. And shall man, who is Dust
and Ashes, feek a convenient time to Turn from his Evil ways? shall our now
be when we please? shall one morrow Thrust on another, and that a Third? shall
we demurr and delay, till we are ready to be thrust into our graves, or which
will follow, into Hell? if the Lord says, Turn ye, Turn ye, there can be no
other time, no other now, but now. All other nows and opportunities, as our
days, are in his hands, and he may close, and shut them up, if he please, and
not open them to give thee another, Domini, non servi negotium agitur, the
business is the Lords, and not the servants, and yet the business is ours too;
but the Time is in his Hands, and not in ours.

Now then Turn ye, now the word sounds, and Eccho's in your ears. Again,
now; now thou have any good Thought, any Thought, that has any relish of
Salvation: For that thought, if it be not the voice, Deus ad homines, imoquod
proprius est in homines venit. Sen. Ep. 73. Job 33.16.
is the whisper of the Lord, but it speaks as plain, as his Thunder. If it be a
good thought, it is from him who is the fountain of all good, and he speaks to
thee, by it, as he did to the Prophets by Visions and Dreams. In a Dream, in
a Vision of the Night, I may say, In a Thought, he opens the ears of men,
and seals their Instruction. And why should he speak once and twice, and we
perceive it not? why should the Devil, who seeeks to devour us, prevail with us
more, then our God, that would save us? why should an evil thought arise in
our hearts, and swell, and grow, and be powerful to roll the Eye, to lift up
the head? to stretch out the Hand? to make our feet, like Hinds feet in the
ways of Death? and a holy Thought, a good intention, which is, as it were, the
breath of the Lord, be stopped, and checked, and slighted, and at last be
chased away into the land of Oblivion? why should a good thought arise, and
vanish, and leave no impression behind it? and an evil thought increase and
multiply, shake the powers of the Soul, command the will, and every faculty of
the mind; every part of the body, and at last bring forth a Cain and Esau, a
Herod, a Pharisee, a profane Person, an Adulterer, a Murderer? why should we so
soon divest our selves of the one, and morari, stay, and dwell, and fool it in
the other? sport our selves, as in a place of pleasure, a Seraglio, a Paradise?
For, let us but give the same friendly Entertainment to the Good, as we do to
the bad; let us but as joyfully embrace the one, as we do the other; let us be
as speculative men in the ways of God, as we are in our own, and then we shall
make Have, and not delay to Turn unto him. We talk much of the Grace of God,
and we do but talk of it: It is in all mouths; in some it is but a sound; in
others it is scarce sense, in most it is but a loud, but faint acknowledgement
of its power, when it has no power at all to move us; an acknowledgement of
what God can do, when we are resolved he shall work nothing in us; we commend
it, and resist it; pray for it, and refuse it. Behold the Grace of God has
appeared to all men: appeared in the Doctrine of the Gospel; and appears in
those good Thoughts, which are the proper Issue of t hat doctrine, and are
begot by this word of Truth; and when the heart sends them forth, she sends
them as Messengers of Grace, to invite us, and draw us out of our evil ways:
and if the Devil can raise such a Babel upon an evil Thought; why may not God
raise up a Temple unto himself upon a Good?

I appeal to your selves, and shall desire you to ask your selves the question.
How often have you enjoyed such Gracious ravishing thoughts? How often have you
felt the good motions of the Spirit? How often have you heard a voice behind you,
say, Do this? how many checques? how many inward Rebukes have you had in your
Evil ways? how often have these thoughts followed, and pursued you in the ways
of Evil, and made them less pleasing? what a dampe have they cast upon your
delight? what a Thorn have they been in your flesh, even when it was wanton?
How often are you so composed, and by assed by these Heavenly Insinuations, that
heart and hand are ready to join together, as partners in the Turn? How often
would you, and yet will not Turn? How often are you the Preachers, and tell your
selves, Vanity of Vanity, all is Vanity, and that there is no true rest, but in
God? I speak to those, who have any feeling and presage of a future Estate; any
Taste of the Powers of the world to come (for too many we see have not; I speak
this to our shame) Now is the Time; Now is the Now.

-- nunc, nunc properandus and acri,
Fingendus sine fine rota --
Now thou must turn the wheel about, and frame and fashion thy self into a
vessel of Honor, consecrate unto the Lord; makeup a Child of God, the new
Creature: Now nourish, and make much of these good Motions, good inclinations,
wrought in us either by the Word of God; or the rod of God; They are fallen
upon us, and entered into us, but how long they will stay, how long we shall
enjoy them we cannot tell; a smile from the World; a Dart from Satan, if we
take not heed, if we be not tender of them, may chase them away. This is the
time, this is the Now; for at another time, being fallen from this Heaven, our
Cogitations may be from the earth, earthly, such gross, and durty thoughts,
which will not melt, but harden in the Sun. Our Faculties may be corrupt; our
Understandings dull and heavy, our wills froward and perverse; that we shall
neither will that which is Good, or so will it, that we shall not have strength
to bring forth, not be able to draw it into Act; If we approve, or look toward
it, we shall soon start back, as from an Enemy, as from that which suits not
with our present disposition, but is distasteful to it; tanquam fas non sit, as
if it were some unlawful thing, as we read of the Sybarite, who was grown so
extremely dainty, that he would fall into a cold sweat, and faint at another
man's labor. Now, therefore, Now let us close with it, whilst it appears in
Beauty, whilst it is amiable in our eyes, whilst our will begins to bend, and
our heart inclines to it; for if we let this so fair an opportunity to pass,
within a while Vanity it self will appear in Glory, and that Holiness (which
should make us like unto God) will be taken for a monster; There will be Honey
on the Harlots lips, and gall on Chastity; a Lordship shall be more desirable,
then Paradise; and three lives in that, then eternity in Heaven; now God is
God, and if we do not Now fall down and worship him; the next Now, Baal will
be God, The world will be our God, and the True God, which but now we
acknowledged, will not be in all our ways. The first now, the first
opportunity is the best; the next is most uncertain, the next, may be Never.

But now, Turn now: Sole puro: in Times of Peace.
if we will stand to distinguish times by the events, as by their several
faces; the diverse complexions they receive, either from Peace or Trouble,
either from Prosperity, or Adversity; Then certainly, the best Time to Turn to
him, is when he turns his face to us, Cum candidi fulgent soles, when he shines
brightly upon our Tabernacles; when God speaks to us, not out of the Whir
wind, but in a still voice: when Plenty crowns the Commonwealth, and Peace
shadows it; when God appears to us, not as Jupiter to Semele, in Thunder, but
as to Danae, in a shower of Gold; whilst he stands as it were at the Door, and
entreats entrance, and not stay till he knock with the hammer, till he break
in upon us with his sword; because to Turn to him now in this Brightness,
will rather be an Act of our love, then our fear, and so make our Repentance a
Free Will Offering, a Sacrifice of a Sweet smelling Savor unto God; and make
it evident, that we understand the Voice of his calling; the language of his
Benefits; the miracle, which he works, which is to cure our inward blindness
with this Clay, with these outward Things, that we may see, to Turn from our
evil ways, unto the Lord. This is truly to praise the Lord for all his
Benefits; this is truly to Honor him; to bear our selves with that Fear, and
Reverence, that we leave off to offend this God of Blessings. Negat
beneficium, qui non Honorat, he denies, he despises a Blessing, that does not
thus Honor it: Ingratitude is contumelious to God; is the bane of merit, the
defacer of goodness: The Sepulcher, the Hell of all Blessings; for by it they
are turned into a Curse; Ingratitude loathes the light, loathes the Land of
Canaan, and looks for Milk and honey in Egypt. And this is it which the
Prophets every where complain of, that the People did enjoy the light of Gods
Countenance, but by it walked on in their evil ways, and made no other use of
it, then this; That they did per tantorum honorum detrimenta Deum contemnere,
as Hierome speaks, lose the Favor of God, in their contempt, and were made
worse by that which should have Turned them from being Evil; that being his
pleasant plant, they brought forth nothing but wild Grapes.

And to apply this to our selves; Dare we now look back to the former times?
what face can turn that way, and not gather blackness? God gave us light, and
we shut our eyes against it. God made us the envy, and we were ambitious to
make our selves, the scorn of all Nations; he gave us milk and honey, and we
turned it into Gall and Bitterness: God gave us Plenty, and Peace; and the one
we loathed, as the Jews did their Manna; the other we abused: our Peace brought
forth a War, as Nicippus sheep, in Aelian did yean a Lion. God spoke to us by
Peace, and we were in Trouble, till we were in Trouble, till we were in a
Posture of War: God spoke to us by Plenty, and we answered him by luxury: God
spoke to us by love, and we answered him by Oppression: He made our faces to
shine, and we grinded the poor; He spoke to us in a still voice, and we defied
the Holy One of Israel. Every benefit of his cried, Give me my price, and lo,
in stead of Turning from our evil ways, delighting in them; in stead of
leaving them, defending them; In stead of calling upon his Name, calling it
down to countenance all the Imaginations of our Heart, which have been evil
continually; This was the Goodly price that he, and all his Blessings were
prized at; and then, when this light was thus abused; our Sun did set, our day
was shut in: That Now, That Then had its end; The next call was in Thunder, and
he gave us Hail for rain, and fla^ fire in our Land.

But such a then, such an opportunity we had, and we may say with shame, and
sorrow enough, that we have lost it; but since we have let slip this time of
peace, this acceptable time, yet at least, let us turn now in the storm, that
he may make a calm; turn to him in our trouble, that he may bring us out of our
distress; turn now, when our Sun is darkened, and our Moon turned into blood,
when the knowledge of his Law, of true Piety begins to wax dim, and the true
face, and beauty of Religion to wither. When the stars are fallen from Heaven,
the teachers of truth, from the Profession of truth, and set that up for truth,
which sets them up in high places: when the powers of Heaven are shaken, when
the pillars of the Church sink, and break asunder into so many Sects and
divisions, which is as music to Rome, but makes all walk as mourners about the
streets of Jerusalem; when Religion, which should be the bond of love, is made
the title and pretense of war, the somentor of that malice, and bitterness,
which desiles it, and puts it to shame, and treads it under foot; Now when the
Sea and the waves thereof roar, when we hear the noise and tumult of the
people, which is as the raging of the Sea, but ebbing and flowing with more
uncertainty, and from a cause less known; Now in this draught and resemblance
of the end of the World: when he thus speaks to us in the whirl-winde, when he
thus knocks with his hammer, when he calls thus loud unto us, turn ye, turn ye,
now let us bow down our heads, and in all humility answer him; Ecce accedimus,
Behold we come unto thee; For thou art our Lord and God. For, as our Savior
speaks of offenses: so may we of these Judgments and Terrors, which he sends
to fright us to him: Necesse est ut veniant, It must needs be that they come
not only necessitate consequentiae by a necessity of consequence, supposing the
condition of our nature, and the changes, and chances of a sinful world; or
rather supposing the corruption of men's manners, which can produce nothing but
tumult and sedition, but plagues and famine, and war, (for what other fruit can
grow upon such evil trees?) but necessitate finis, in respect of the end, for
which they are sent; for which God, in whose power both men, and their actions
are, does not only, not hinder them by his mighty hand, but permits them, and
by a kind of providence sends them upon us, partly for our trial, but
especially for our amendment; that finding Gall, and wormwood upon every
pleasure, and vanity of the world; finding no rest for our feet in these
tumultuous waves, we may flee to the Ark, and turn to him, with our whole
heart. And certainly, if they work not this effect, they will a far worse; if
they do not set a period to our sin, they are then but the beginnings of
sorrow, (...) says Naz. but a prologue to that long and lasting Tragedy, the
sad Types, and sorerunners of everlasting torments in the bottomless pit. As
yet, they may be but an argument of Gods love; the blows of a Father (...), as
Basil calls them, Basil in 10. Esai. Tert. de patient. 11.
blows to turn us out of our evil ways; Oh soelicem servum cujus emendationi
instat Dominus, cui dignatur irasci, says Tert. Oh happy servant, whom God
takes such care to amend, whom he thus diggs about, and waters with his
discipline of Affliction, whom he thus purges, that he may bring forth fruits
meet for repentance; whom he loves so well, as to be angry with him, to whom he
gives this great Honor and respect, as to chastise him; quem admonendi
dissimulatione non decipit, Ibid.
whom he thus plainly tells of his sin and danger, and writes and imprints
it, as it were, in his very Flesh; whom he does not in his Anger Dissemble
with, and Deceive; that is, whom he lets not alone, that he may ruin himself,
seems to favor, that he may destroy him; not Touches, that he may grind him
to pieces: Nam quanta est poena, nulla poena? not to be punished at all, is the
greatest punishment of all; and nothing is more deplorable, then the happiness
of a wicked man; for when God is silent, and will speak no more, then he has
his Axe in his hand, to cut us Down, that we shall bear no more fruit.

And such a Now, such a Time there may come; when God has called again and
again, when he has spoken to us, and spoken within us; when he has spoken
to us from his Mercyseat, and spoken in Thunder, that he will speak no more;
and this no doubt has befallen many Thousands, whom God in Justice delivered
to these chains of Darkness, to be reserved to Judgment; whom he would not
frown upon, whom he would not look upon on, whom he would not Trouble, whose
eyes he would not open; to see the danger they were in; but as they colluded,
and Trifled with him, so he laughed at their folly and madness, and left them
to themselves to run on with pleasure, with Hope, with confidence untoucht,
unrebuked, unregarded to their Destruction. All that are lost, are not in Hell,
for they that are now there, were lost before, vivi, videntesque, even whilst
they walked in the land of the Living; lost, when they were called upon, and
would not hear; Lost in the midst of Prophets and Apostles; Lost in the
Church; Lost in the Mercies of God, which they rejected; Lost in the Judgments
of God, which they slighted; Lost before they were utterly lost; Lost when they
left God; and when God left them; Judas had his Name, before he hanged himself,
and before he went to his place, was the son of Perdition. It may seem strange
indeed, but it is True, and there is no reason it should seem strange; for why
should it seem strange, That God should leave us once, who have left him so
often; That when he can do no more to his Vineyard, he should pluck up the
hedge, and lay it open to bring forth nothing but Briars and Thorns: That when
we have Abused his Mercy, he should be angry? That when we Defy him, he should
fling us off; that when we will be evil, he should let us alone. It is our
own folly, that makes it a Paxadox; our Ignorance of our selves, and our God;
Our High, and vile esteem we have of his Mercy; Our false glossing, and
misinterpreting his Judgments? these have made it a Heresy, have Anathematized,
and exploded it; and now, any Now, any Time is soon enough with them, who will
sin, but would not be punished; who put God from them, but would not be left
to themselves; who would repent, and yet sin; would be saved, but not Now.
These are the Soloecismes of Delay, the contradictions and Absurdities of
wilful sinrs; and all such who would Turn, yet will go on in their sin. It
were easy to fill our mouth with Arguments; but Delay in our on-sets and
progress to Eternity, is of so foul and monstrous an aspect, that there need
no Tongue of Men or Angels to set forth the horror of it: every Eye that sees
it, must needs turn it self away; every thought that receives it, must
distaste, and condemn it; even the Heart, that is deceived with it, cannot but
tremble at it. Amongst so many that have perished; amongst so many, that may
perish by it, it never yer found one Patron, any one man, that had a good word
for it, or did dare to say, It were not a sin to trust to it: Even when we
Delay, we condemn our selves, and yet still Hope, and still Delay; we
condemn it in others, and of those who have been long evil, we are too ready
to say, They will never be good. He that hearkens to the call, and Turns at
the first sound of it, condemns it, for he flings it off, as if Death were in
it; He that expects an hour, when the Hour is Now, condemns it, condemns
it by his very expectation, condemns it by his fear? for he that does but hope
for such an hour, cannot but entertain some fear that it might never come; and
so conclude against himself, that, that opportunity which has a being, and
subsistence, is far better, and to be preferred before that which love of
vanity, and his hope has made up; which is Nothing, but in expectation: thus
we delay and check, and comfort our selves, Bern. in Cant. Ser. 75.
and yet delay, and destroy our selves, and look for Salvation in medio
Gehennae says Bern. in the midst of Hell, which is wrought already, and must
be wrought out by us in medio terrae in the midst of the earth.

For Conclusion then; Turn ye, Turn ye, That is, Turn ye Now: There is but
one Now; There may be many more: but most True it is; Hom. 41.
There is but One. Tene quod certum, Dimitte, quod incertum, says Austin: let
us lay hold on that which is certainly ours, let us not send our Thoughts, and
hopes afarr off, to that which has no better foundation to rest on, then
uncertainty it self; let us not hope to raise Eternity upon a Thought of that
which may be, or rather of that, which may not be; For we may as well consult
and determine what we will do when we are dead, as what we will do in this
kind, Hereaster; and if it be never wrought out of its contingency; if it never
come to pass, the difference is not great; For that which may be, Arestot. de
interp. c. 9.
and that which never shall be, may be the same. That which may be, and may not
be, has no Entity at all, and so cannot be the object of our Knowledge, nor
bear either an Affirmation, or Negation; and will thou settle a Resolution on
such a Contingency? Resolve to do that at such a Time, which thou can not
tell, whether it will ever come or no? Resolve upon that, of which thou can
neither affirm, nor deny, that it shall ever be? will thou hazard the favor
of God, thy soul, and Salvation upon the hope of that, which is not, and may be
nothing? This were to let go Juno and embrace a cloud; to set thy happiness on
the cast of a die, to call the things that are not, as if they were (but in
vain) in brief, to set up an Idol, a false hope, a gilded nothing, and fall
down, and worship it, and forsake that present opportunity, which is the voice
of God, and bespeaks us to make no more delays, but to turn Now.

The word now sounds, and let us hearken now: we have been told by him, and we
have been told by them, who had it from Christ, as Christ had it from his
Father, that now is the acceptable time, now is the day of Salvation, and we
were never yet told of any other day. For did ever yet any Prophet or Apostle
exhort you to turn to morrow? At what time soever, is not when you please; but
though you have not yet lest your evil ways, yet now you may turn. At what
time soever, is now. Divinity, or the Doctrine of the Gospel is practical, and
considers not contingencies, but necessaries; In it there is nothing presented
to us in the futurtense, but Salvation; which is a thing of another world: the
means are all derived to us in the present, To day if you will hear his voice;
Deny your selves, take up your Cross; mortify your fleshly lusts to day,
believe now, love him now, hope in him now; that which is to come, or may be,
in respect of our duty, is not considerable in that science, but left in his
hands, who is the Ancient of days; who is eternal, who may indulge as many
opportunities, as in wisdom, be shall think fit, Dan 7 9
but his command is Now, who may receive us at any time, but binds us to the
present.

We have been told, nay, we can tell our selves; that now is better then to
morrow; that we have but one day, and moment; which we can call ours, and after
that, Time may be ^o more: we have heard, that delay is a Tyrant, a Pharaoh,
and lays more work upon us, doubles, and trebles, nay, infinitely multiplies
our Task, and yet allows, us no straw, withdraws the means; the helps and
advantages we had to turn, or else makes us weak and impotent, less able to
use them: delivers us over to more difficulties, more pangs, and troubles, and
more tormenting Agonies, then we should have felt, if we had cast her off, and
begun betimes. And shall we yet delay? we have heard, that it is a sin to
delay, and makes sin yet more sinful; that it is the devils first heave, to
throw us into that Gulf, out of which we shall have neither power, nor will to
come; that it is a leading sin, the forerunner to the sin against the Holy
Ghost; which shall never be forgiven; and shall we yet delay? we have been
taught, that it is a high presumption to leave Christ working out his part of
the covenant in his blood, which was once shed for us, Non expectat Deus
frigescentes Senectu is annos, nec emortuam jam per consuetudinem vitio rum
consuetudinem, vult longi praelij militem. Hilar. in Psalm. 118. Beth.
and intercedes for us, for ever, and wilfully to neglect our part, and drive
it off, from time to time; from the cheerfulness, and vigor of youth, to the
dullness and laziness of old age, to withered hands, and trembling joints, to
weak memories, heavy hearts, and dull understandings; to the unactive
amazednes; the would but cannot of a bedrid-sinner; then to strive against sin,
when we are to struggle with our disease, then to do it, when we can do
nothing, and so, when we cannot finish and perfect our Repentance, fill, and
make it up in a Though, or Sigh, a faint and sick acknowledgement, which are
rather sad Remonstrances against our former neglect and delay, then Infallible
Testimonies, or Demonstrative Declarations of a wounded, and Broken Heart. This
we have been told, and shall we yet delay? in brief: we have been taught, That
Delay, if we cut it not off betimes, will at last cut us out of the Covenant of
Grace; That it will make the Gospel, as killing as the Law; The Promises, which
are yea, and Amen, Nothing to us; that it will make a Gracious God, a consuming
fire, and Jesus a Destroyer: That a dying man can no more Turn to God, then
the Dead praise him; That after we have thus scared our Consciences, drawn out
our life in a continued disobedience, the Gospel is sealed up, and concerns us
not at the hour of Death, who would not lay hold of one hour of our life, to
Turn in; and therefore cannot go the same ordinary way to heaven with the
Apostles, Agens poenitentiam, and reconciliatus cum sanus est, and post a been
viveus securus hinc exit. Agens poenitentiam ad ultimum recenciliatus, si
securus hinc exit, ego non sum securus, Aug. Hom. 41.
and Martyrs, and the souls of just men made perfect, with those who have put
off the old man, and put on the new, with those who have escaped the pollutions
of the world, and were never again entangled in them: but are left to that
Mercy which was never promised, and which they have little reason to hope for,
who have so much abused it, to their own perdition. All that can be said, is
scarce worth their Hearing; Non dico, salvabuntur; non dico, Damnabuntur, we
cannot say, they shall be saved: we cannot say, they shall be Damned: They may
be safe, but of this we cannot be sure; because we have no Revelation for it,
but rathere for the contrary, only God is not bound to Rules and Laws, as man
is; no, not to his own; but keeps to himself his Supreme right and power
entire, and may do what he will with his own, and may take that for a Turn,
which he has not declared to be so; and do that which he has threatened he
will not do: but it is ill depending upon what God may do; for (for ought that
is revealed) he will never do it, never do it to him, who presumes he will,
because he may; and so puts off his Turn, his Repentance to the last, leaves
the ordinary way, and trusts to what God may do, out of Course; never do it
to a man of Belial, who runs on in his sins, yet looks for such a Chariot,
to carry him into Heaven. We have no such Doctrine, nor the Church of Christ;
Her voice is, Turn ye now, at Last, will be too late; This is the Doctrine of
the Gospel; but yet the Judgment is the Lords. And all this we have heard, and
we cannot gainsay, or confute it: and shall we yet delay?

Certainly if we know these Terrors of the Lord, and not Turn now; we shall
hardly ever Turn. If we hear, and believe this, and do not repent, we are
worse then Infidells; our Faith shall help the Devil to accuse us, and it
shall be easier for Sodom and Gomorrha, then for us; If we hear this, and
still fold our hands to sleep, still Delay; if this noise will not stir and
move us, if this do not startle us in our evil ways, we have good reason to
fear, we shall never awake, till the last Trump; till that day, till the last
Day, which is a Day of Judgment, as this our day, is of Repentance.

We say we believe it; that now heaven is offered, and now we must strive to
enter in; we say, we pray for it, we hope for it; we long for it; if we do,
Then Now is the Time; Festina fides, Alacris Devotio, spes impigra, Amb. Epist.
c. 10. Ep. 82.
says Saint Ambrose, Faith is on the wing, and carries us along, with the
speed of a Thought, through all difficulties, through all distasts, and
affrightments, and will not let us stay one moment in the house of vanity, in
any slippery place, where we may fall, and perish: Devotion is full of Heat,
and Activity; and Hope that is deferred is an Affliction. If we are lead by the
Spirit of God, Devotio est actualis voluntas prompte faciendi quae ad Dei
cultum spectant. Aquin. 22. q. 82. Art. 1.
we are lead apace; drawn suddenly out of those ways, which lead unto death;
we are called upon to escape for our lives, and not to look behind us, and (as
it was said of Cyprian) we are at our journeys end, as soon as we fet out. God
speaks, and we hear; he begins good thoughts in us, and we nourish them to
that strength, that they break forth into Action; he poures forth his Grace,
Praepropera velocitate pietatis paene ante coepit persectus esse, quam
disceret. Pontius Draconus de Cypriani vita.
and we receive it; he makes his benefits his lure, and we come to his hand; he
thunders from heaven, and we fall down before him. In brief, Repentance is as
our Passover; and by it we sacrifice our heart, and we do it in the
Bitterness of our Soul, and we do it in have; and so pass from Death, to
Life, from darkness, to Light, from our evil ways, to the Obedince of Faith:
and God passes over us; sees the blood our wounded Spirits, our Tears, our
Contrition, and will not now destroy us; but feeing us so soon, so far
removed from our Evil ways, will favor us, and shine upon us; and in the
light of his Countenance we shall walk on from strength to strength, through
all the hardship, and Troubles of a continued Race, to that Rest and Peace,
which is Everlasting. Thus much of the first property of Repentance; it must be
matura Conversio, a speedy, and a present Turn.

Festina, and haerentis in Salo naviculae funem magis praecide, quam solve.

Hier. Paulino.
THE EIGHTH SERMON.
PART IIII.
EZEKIEL 33.11. Turn ye, Turn ye from your evil ways. For why, etc.


TO stand out with God, and contend with him all our life long; to try the
utmost of his patience, and then in our Evening, in the shutting up of our
Days, to bow before him, is not to Turn: nor have we any reason to conceive
any Hope; that a faint Confession, or sigh should deliver him up to Eternity of
Bliss, whom the swinge of his lusts, and a multiplied continued disobedience
have carried along without checque, or control to his chamber and Bed, and the
very mouth of the Grave; who have delighted themselves in evil, till they can
do no good: Delay, if it ben ot fatal to all, (for we dare not give Laws to
Gods Mercy) yet we have just reason to fear; it is so to those that trust to
it, and run on in their Evil ways, till the hand of justice is ready to cut
their Thread of life, and to set a period to that, and their sins together,
Turn ye, Turn ye, that is, now: that it be not too late.

The second property, or the Sincerity of our Turn.
This ingemination has more heat in it, not only to hasten our motion and
turn, but to make it true, and real, and sincere; For when God bids us turn, he
considers us not, as upon a stage, but in his Church, where every thing must be
done, not acted, where all is real; not in shadow, and representation: where we
must be Holy, as he is Holy, perfect, as he is perfect, true as he is true:
where we must behave our selves, as in the House of God, which is not pergula
pidoris a Painters shop, where all is in show, nothing in truth; where not the
Garments but the heart must be rent; that as Christ our head was crucified
indeed, not in show, or in phantasme (as Marcion would have it) so we might
present him a wounded soul, a bleeding Repentance, a flesth crucified, and so
join, as it were, with Christ in a real and sincere putting away, and
abolishing of sin. God is truth it self: True and faithful in his promises; if
he speak he does it, if he command it shall stand fast, and therefore hates a
feined, forced, wavering, imaginary Repentance, to come in a vizor, or disguise
before him, is an abomination; nor will he give true joy for feigned sorrow,
Heaven for a shadow; nor everlasting happiness for a counterfeit, momentary
turn, Eternity for that which is not, for that which is nothing: For Repentance
if it be not sincere, is nothing. The holy Father will tell us (...), Nazianz.
or 19
that which is feigned is not lasting; that which is forced fails, and ends,
with that artificial spring that turns it about; as we see the wheels of a
clock move not, when the Plummet is on the ground, because the beginning of
that motion is ab extra, not from its internal Form, but from some outward
violence, or Art without, simplex recti cura, multiplex pravi, there is but one
true principle of a real turn, Septem men. dacijseget mendacium unum, ut verum
videatur. Luth. jde Jndulgent.
(the fear of God) there may be very many of a false one: as Martin Luther
said, that one lie had need of seven more, to draw but an apparency of truth
over it, that it may pass under that name; so that which is not sincere, is
brought in with a troop of attendants like it self, and must be set off with
great diligence, and art; when that which is true commends it self, and needs
no other hand to paint, or polish it. What art and labor is required to smooth
a wrinckled brow? what ceremony? what noise? what trumpets? what extermination
of the countenance? what sad looks? what Tragical deportment must usher in an
Hypocrite? what a penance does he undergo, that will be a Pharisee? how many
counterfeit sighs, and forced groans? how many Fasts? how many Sermons must be
the prologue to a false turn? to a Nominal turn? for we may call it turning
from our evil ways; when we do but turn and look about us, to secure our
selves in them; or to make way to worse: Ahab and Jezebel did so: Absolon did
so: the Jows did so; Isa. 58.4.
Fast to smite with the fist of wickedness, and to make their voice to be
heard on high. A false turn? wickedness it self may work it; crast and cruelty
may blow the trumpet in Sion, and sanctify afast. A feigned repentance?
Opression, policy, the love of the world, sin it self may beget it, and so
advance and promote it self, and be yet more sinsul, and commonly a false turn
makes the fairest show, Plin. Panegyr.
appears in greater glory to a carnal eye, then a true; ingeniosior ad
excogitandum simulatio veritate, for hypocrisy is far more witty, seeks out
more inventions, and many times is more diligent, and laborious, then the
truth; because truth has but one work, to be what it is, and takes no care for
outward pomp and ostentation; nor comes forth at any time to be seen, unless
it be to propagate it self in others.

Now by this, we may judge of our turn, whether it be right and natural or no:
For as we may make many a false turn, so there may be many false springs, or
principles to set us a mourning: sometimes fear may do it; sometimes hope,
sometimes policy, and in all the love of our selves, more then of God; and then
commonly our Tragedy concludes in the first scene; nay in the very prologue;
our Repentance is at an end in the very first turn, Nemo potest personam diu
far. Ficta cito in na^urant suam recidunt. Sen. 1. de Clem. c. 1.
in the very first show; Ahabs Repentance, a flash, at the Prophets thunder;
Pharaohs Repentance drove on with an East Wind, and compast about with locusts;
an inconstant, false, and desultory repentance. I cannot better compare it,
then to those motions by waterworks: whilst the water runs, the devise turns
round, and we have some History of the Bible presented to our eyes, but when
the water is run out, all is at an end, and we see that no more, which took our
eyes with such variety of action, and so it is many times in our turn, (which
is no better then a Pageant) whilst the waters of affliction beat upon us, we
are in motion, and we may present diverse actions and signs of true Repentance:
Our eyes may gush out with tears; we hang down our head, and beat our breast;
our tongue, our glory may awake, and our hands may be stretched out to the
poor; we may cry peccavi with David; we may put on sackcloth with Ahab; we may
go forth with Peter; but when these waters of bitterness are abated or cease,
then our motion fails, and our turn is at an end: our tears are dried up, and
our tongue silent, and our hands withered, and it plainly appears, that our
Turn was but artificial, Hier. l. 2 cp. 10
our motion counterfeit: and our Repentance, but a kind of puppit-play:
malorum vestigia quasi in Salo posita, fluctuant, and prolabuntur, says Jerome.
The wicked walk in this world, as on the waves of the sea; they make a profer
to go and walk, but they soon sink and fall down, their motion is wavering and
inconstant, and he gives the reason: Fundamenta fidei solida non habent they
have no sure grounding, nor does the love of goodness, but some thing else
thus startle and disquiet them in evil; Saul's whining at Samuels reproof: Ahabs
mourning and humbling himself at Elijahs Prophecy; Felix trembling at Paul's
preaching were not voluntary and natural motions, but beat out by the hammer.
The loss of a kingdom: the destruction of a Family; the fear of judgment may
drive any Saul to his prayers; cloth any Ahab with sackcloth, and bring motum
trepicationis a fit of trembling upon any Felix, loose the joints of any
Heathen. For as it is observed, that the very Heathen retained some seeds of
truth, and although they had no full and perfect sight of it, but saw it at a
distance, falsum tamen ab absurdo refutarunt, yet condemned error and
falsehood by that absurdity which was visible enough, and written as it were in
its very forehead: so in the most rotten and corrupt hearts there are divinae
Veritatis semina, some seeds of saving knowledge, but choked and stifled with
the love of vanity, and the cares of this world; and though they do not hate
sin, yet the horror of sin, or that smart which it brings along with it, makes
them sometimes turn away, and make a seeming flight from that sin which they
cannot hate. What therefore the Philosopher speaks of friendship is here very
appliable: that friendship is most lasting, which has the best and furest
ground, which is built and raised upon virtue: Arist. Eth. 8. c. 8.
(...), the friendship of wicked men is as unconstant, and unstable as
themselves: for they want that goodness, which is the confirmation and bond of
love. If it rise from pleasure, that is a thinner vapor then a man's life, and
it appears a less time and then vanishes away: and the friend goes with it:
if you lay it on riches, they have wings, and that love, which was tied to them
flies away with them. Nothing can give it a sure, and firm being, but that
piety, which is as lasting as the Heavens: profit and pleasure, and by-respects
are but threads of towe, and when these are broken, then they, who had but one
mind and soul, are two again: And so also it is with us in our converse and
walking with our God; whose friends we are, if we keep his sayings, if the love
of his name be, as it were the form and principle, that moves and carries us
toward him, if we turn in his Name: but if we do it upon those false grounds,
upon such motives, which will rather change our countenance, and gesture, then
our minds, and make us seem good for a while, Mali non apparent, ut plus liceat
malignari. Bern. in Cant. 6.6.
to be worse for ever after: if we vomit up our sin to ease our stomach, and
then lick it up again; if we turn, that the flying book of curses overtake us
not; we then give him but a single turn, nay, the shadow of a turn, for a
double call; our Conversion is not Sincere, and True: there must be (...),
something to strengthen it, that which will make us like him, will knit and
unite us to him; our Repentance must be fully sormea in our hearts, before it
speak in sorrow, or be powered forth in Tears, or hang down the head at a Fast,
before it take the poenitentiall Habit; our Turn must be begun and continued
by Faith and Obedience; and then we shall not only be Baptized in the Tears
of our Repentance, but withal receive our Confirmation.

And let us thus Turn: For first, False Repentance is a sin greater then
that I Turn from; because to make a show of Hatred to that I most love, is to
love it still, and make my guilt greater by an Additionall lie, to seem to be
sorry for that, I delight in: to forsake that, I cleave to; to renounce that,
which I embrace: to Turn from that, which I follow after, which makes our
Condition, in some respects, worse than that of the Atheist, For we do not
only deny God, but deny him with a mock, which is a greater sin, then not to
Think of him. If we Profess we Turn, and yet run on; we sin in professing
that which we do not, and we sin in not doing that which we profess: If we
profess we do it, why then do we it not? and if we do it not, why do we
profess it? A show of what I should be, accuses me, for not being what I show,
as we see the Ape appears more deformed, and ridiculous, because it is like a
man, and a Strumpet is never more despicable, then in a Matrons stole; as
Nazianzen speaks of Women, that paint themselves, Naz. or. 19. A Gel. Noct.
Attic. l 1.2. Aristippus in purp ura sub magna gravitatis specie ne potatur.
Tert. Apol. 46. Athenaei Deipnos. l. 13. c. 1. Aristoph, Eupolis.
(...), their Beauty shows them more deformed, because it is Counterfeit. They
very heathen could say, Odi homines Philosopha sententia, ignava opera. I hate
those men, who are Stoics in word, and Epicures in Deed, whose virtue is
nothing else but a bare sentence in Philosophy, with some advantage from the
Gown and Beard. Sopbocles, who had no more chastity, then what he was to thank
his Old Age for, yet could lash, and with great bitterness reproach Euripides,
and pass this censure upon him; That he was (...), that he was very bitter
against women in his Tragedies, but more kind then was fitting, in his
Chamber. The Comedians, to make Socrates ridiculous to the People, bring him
upon the Stage, measuring the leaps of Fleas, and disputing, and putting it to
the Question, what part it was they made a noise at; but never thought he had
sufficiently exposed him to laughter, till he brought him in discoursing of
Virtue, and in his very Lecture of Morality, stealing a piece of Plate: For he
knew nothing could be more absurd, then for a Philosopher to play the Thief;
and then too when he was prescribing the rules of Honesty. Now, if the very
Pagans, by the light of Nature could condemn Hypocrisy by their very scorn,
and deride and hate it; no sentence can be severe enough against it, in a
Christian: because the Abuse of Goodness is far the greater, by how much the
goodness, which is abused, is more Excellent, and levelled to a better End;
and therefore a formal Penitent is the grossest Hypocrite in the world.

Besides this in the Second place; God, who, is Truth it self, stands in
extreme opposition to all that is feigned, and counterfeit; An Alms with a
Trumpet: a Fast with a sour face; devotion, that devoures Widows Houses, do
more provoke him to wrath, then those vices, which these outward Formalities
seem to cry down: Nothing is more distasteful to him, then a mixed, compounded
Christian, made up of a bended knee, and a stiff neek; of an attentive care,
and a Hollow heart; of a pale Countenance, and a rebellious Spirit: of Fasting
and Oppression; of Hearing and Deceit: of Cringes, and bowings, and flatteries,
and real disobedience; Absolon's vow, Jehu's sacrifices, Simon Magus his
Repentance; Ahab's Fast, Non amat salsum eutor veritans: Adulteriam est apud
illum omne quod Fingitur. Tert de Ep. c. 23.
his soul does hate, or any Devil that puts on Samuel's Mantle: and he so far
detests the mere outward performance of a Religious Duty, that when he
thunders from heaven, when he breathes out his menaces and Threatenings on the
greatest sinners, The burden is: they shall have their portion with Hypocrites.
In the 20. Chapter of Exedas, at the 25. verse we read. Non ascendet super
Altar securis: Thou shall not build an Altar of Hewn stone, nor shall thou
lift up a Tool upon it: why not lift a Tool upon it? They used the Hatchet
says Nazianzen, to build the Ark, to srame the staves of Chittim wood; they
wrought in Gold, and silver, and Brass, with Iron Instruments, They put a
Knife to the Throat of the Sacrifice; yet here, to life up a Tool upon any
stone of the Altar, is to pollute it; and why not pollute the Arc, as well as
the Altar? the Father gives the Reason: The stones of the Altar were by the
Providence of God, and a kind of miracle found fitted already for that work,
Eaz. Orat. 19.
(...), because, says he, whatsoever is consecrate to God, must not borrow
from the help of Art; must not be Artificial, but Natural. If we build an
Altar unto God, to sacrifice our selves on, the stones must be naturally
fitted, not he wen out by Art: not a forced Groan, a forced acknowledgement,
artificial Tears, but such as Nature sends forth, when our grief is True.

To avoid this Danger then, let us ask our selves the Question, whether we have
gone further in our Turn then an Ahab, or an Herod, or a Simon Magus, and even
by their feigned Turn, learn to make up ours in Truth. For did Ahab mourn, and
put on Sackcloth? did Herod hear John Baptist, and hear him gladly? did Simon
Magus desire Peter to prya for him, even then, when he was in the Gall of
bitterness? what anxiety? what contritiion must perfect my conversion? si
tanti vitrum, quanti margarita? if glass cast such a brightness, what must
the luster of a diamond be? Aristot. Metaph. 2.
And thus may we make use, even of hypocrifie it self, to establish our selves
in the truth; make Ahab and Herod arguments and motives to make our Repentance
sure: For as the Philosopher well tells us, that we are not only beholding to
those, who accurately handled the points and conclusions in Philosophy, but to
those also, and even to Poets (...), who did light upon them by chance; and but
glaunce upon them by allusion; so may we receive instruction, even from these
Hypocrites, who did repent, tanquam aliud agentes so slightly, as if they had
some other matter in hand. We must fast and put on sackcloth with Ahab; we must
hear the word with Herod, we must beg the prayers of the Church with Simon
Magus, but finding we are yet short of a true turn, we must press forward, and
exactly make up this divine science; that our turn may be real, and in good
earnest; that it may be finished after his form, who calls so loud after us,
that it may be brought about, and approved to him, in all sincerity and truth.

Thus much of the second property of Repentance.

The third property of our Turn; It must be total and Universal,
The third is: it must be poenitentia plena a total and Universal conversion, a
turn from all our evil ways. For if it be not total, and Universal, it is not
true. A great error there is in our lives, and the greatest part of mankind
are taken, pleased, and lost in it: to argue and conclude a part ad totum, to
take the part for the whole, and from the slight forbearance of some one
unlawful act; from the superficial performance of some particular duty to
infer, and vainly arrogate to themselves, a hatred to all, and an universal
obedience: as if what Tiberius the Emperor was wont to say, of his
Half-eaten-meats, were true of our divided, our parcel, and curtailed
Repentance, Suet. Tiber. Cas. cap. 34.
Omnia eadem habere, quae totum, every part of it, every motion and inclination
to newness of life, had as much in it, as the whole body and compass of our
Obedience, and there were that mutual agreement, and sympathy of duties in a
Christian, as Physicians say there are of the parts of a living Creature: the
same sapor and taste in a disposition to Goodness, as in a Habit of goodness;
The same Heat and Heartiness in a Thought, as in a constant, and earnest
perseverance; in a velleity as much activity, as in a will; as much in a
Pharisees pale countenance, as in Saint Paul's severe discipline, Hippocrat de
locis in Homine
and mortification; and as Hippocrates speaks (...), in the least performance
all the parts of our obedience, in a mere approbation, a desire; in a desire, a
will; in a leaving one evil way, a turning rom all, and cutting off but one
limb or part, the utter destruction of the whole body of sin.

And therefore, as if God did look down from Heaven, and from thence behold the
children of men; and then saw how we turned, oen from luxury to covertousnesse;
another from superstition to profaneness; a third from Idols, to sacrilege; as
if he beheld us turning from one sin to another; or from some great sin; not
another, from our scandalous, and not from our more Domestic, Retired, and
speculative sins; he sends forth his voice, and that a mighty voice, turn ye,
turn ye, not from one by-path to another, not from one sin, and not another,
but turn ye, turn ye, that you need turn no more, turn ye from all your evil
ways: Curt. l. 6. c. 3.
In corporibus aequis nihil nociturum medici relinquunt, Physicians purge out
all noxious humors, from sick and crazy bodies; and so does our great
physician of souls, sanctify and cleanse them, that he may present them to
himself, not having spot or wrinckle, Ephesians. 5.26,27.
or any such thing; that they may be Hely and without Blemish.

For to turn from one sin to another, from prodigality to sorditude and love of
the world, from extreme to extreme is to flee from a Lion to meet a Bear:
(...): extremities are equalities: Amos 5.19.
though they are extremes and distant, yet in this they agree, that they are
extremes, and though our evil ways be never so far asunder, yet in this they
meet; that they are evil. Superstition dotes; profaneness is mad, covetousness
gathers all; prodigality scatters all; rash anger destroys the innocent;
soolish compassion spares the guilty. We need not ask, which is worst, when
both are evil; for sin and destruction lie at the door of the one, as well as
of the other. To despise prophesying, and to hear a Sermon, as I would a song:
not to hear, and to do nothng else, but hear; to worship the walls, and to beat
down a Church; to be superstituious, and to be profane are extremes, which we
must equally turn from, down with superstition on the one side; and down with
profaneness on the other; down with it, even to the ground: Because some are
bad, let not us be worse; and make their sin a motive, and inducement to us to
run upon a greater, because some talk of merits, be afraid of good works;
because they vow chastity, pollute our selves: because they vow poverty, make
have to be rich: because they vow obedience, speak evil of Dignities. It is
good to shun one rock, but there is as great danger if we dash upon another.
Superstition has devoured many, but profaneness is a gulf, which has
swallowed up more, Phod. cod. 77
(...), says Photius in his censure of Theodorus Antiochenus, for that which is
opposite to that which is worst, is not good; for one evil stands in opposition
to another, and both at their several distance, are contrary to that which is
good; nor can I hope to expitate one sin with another; to make amends for my
Oppression, with my wasteful expenses; to satisfy for bowing to an Idol, by
robbing a Church, for contemning a Priest, by hearing a Sermon, for standing in
the way of sinners, by running into a conventicle; for I am still in the seat
of the scornful; this were first to make our selves worthy of death, and then
to run to Rome, or Geneva for sanctuary: first to be villains, and men of
Belial, and at last turn Papists or Schismatics; in both we are what we should
not be, nor are our sins lost in a faction: this were nothing else, but to
think to remove one disease with another, and to cure the cramp with a Fever.
Turn ye, turn ye, whither should we turn but to God? In hoc motu convertit se
anime adunitatem et identitatem, in this motion of turning, Gerson.
the soul strives forward through the vanities of the world, through all
extremes, through all that is evil (though the branches of it look contrary
ways) to unity and Identity, to that good which is ever like it self, the same
in every part of it, and is never contrary to it self; strives forward to be
one with God, as God is one in us; and as he is (...) one and the same God in
all his commands; not forbidding one sin, and permitting another; as his ways
are equal, so must our turn be equal, not from the right hand to the left, not
from superstition, to profaneness; not from despising of prophecy, to
Sermonhypocrisy, not from uncleanness to faction, not from Riot to Rebellion;
but a turn from all Extremes, from all evil; a collection and levelling the
soul, which before looked diverse ways, and turning her face upon the way of
truth, upon God alone.

If we turn as we should, if we will answer this earnest, and vehement call, we
must turn from all our evil ways: we use to say, that there is as great a
miracle wrought in our conversion, as in the Creation of the world, but this is
not true, in every respect; for man, though he be a sinner, yet is something,
has an understanding, will, affections to be wrought upon; yet as it is one
condition required in a true miracle, that it be perfect; so that there be not
only a change, but such a change, which is absolute, and exact, that it may
seem to be, as it were, a new Creation; that water which is changed into wine,
may be no more water, but wine; tht the blind man do truly see, the lame man
truly walk, and the dead man truly live, so is it in our turn and conversion,
there is a total and perfect change: the Adulterer is made an Eunuch for the
kingdom of Heaven; the intemperate comes forth with a knife at his throat; the
revenger kisseth the hand that strikes him; when we Turn, sin vanishes, the
Old man is dead, and in its place, there stands up a new Creature.

In the 15. to Galatians, Saint Paul speaking of the works of the flesh (which
are nothing but sins) and having given us a catalogue, reckoned up many of
them, by which we might know the rest, at last concludes. Of which I tell you
before, as I have told you often, that they who do such things shall not
inherit the kingdom of God: where the Apostles meaning is not, that they who do
all these, or most of these, or many of these, or more then one of these, but
they, who die possessed of any one of these shall have no place in the kingdom of
God, and of Christ: for what profit is there to turn from one sin, and not all,
when one sin is enough to make us breakers of the whole Law, and so liable to
eternal death? It is a conclusion in the Schools; that whosoever is in the
state of any one mortal sin, and turns not from it, whatsoever he does, do he
pray, or give alms, bow the knee before God, or open his hand to his brother;
be it what it will in it self, never so fair and commendable, it is forth with
blasted, and defaced, and is so far from deserving commendations, that it has
no other wages due to it, but death. I cannot say, this is true (for so far as
it is agreeable with reason, so far it must needs be pleasing to the God of
reason; so far as it answers the rule, so far is it accepted of him, that made
it) nor can we think, that Regulus, Fabricius, Cato, and the rest, who do
convitium facere Christianis, upbraid and shame many of us Christians, were
damned for their justice, their integrity, their honesty; (Hell is no
receptacle for men so qualified, were there nothing else to prepare and fit
them for that place) but yet most true it is, that if we be endued and
beautified with many virtues, yet the habit of one sin is enough to deface
them, to draw that night and darkness about them, that they shall not be seen;
to put them to silence, that they shall have no power to speak, or plead for
us, in the day of trial: though they be not sins, not bright, and shining sins,
(for I cannot see how darkness it self should shine) yet they shall become
utterly unprofitable, they may, peradventure lessen the number of the stripes,
but yet the unrepentant sinner shall be beaten. For what ease can a myriad of
virtues do him, who is under Arrest? nay, what performance can acquit him, who
is condemned already? Reason it self stands up against it, and forbids it: for
what obedience is that, which answers but in part? which follows one precept,
and runs away from another? and then what imperfect monsters should the
kingdom of Heaven receive? a liberal man, but not chaste; a Temperate man, but
not honest? a Zealous man, but not Charitable, a great Faster, and a great
Impostor, a Beadsman, and a These; an Apostle, a great Preacher, and a
Traitor? such a Monsterous misshapen Christian cannot stand before him; who is a
pure, uncompounded Essence, the same in every Thing, and Every Where; One and
the same, even Unity it self.

For again; every man is not equally inclined to every sin: This man loves
that, which another loathes, and he who made the Devil fly at the first
Encounter, may entertain him at a second: he that resisted him in lust, may
yield to him in Anger: He who will none of his delicates, may fail at his
Terrors, and he that feared not the roaring of the Lion, may be ensnared by the
flattery of the Serpent. For the force of Temptations is many times quickened,
or Dulled according to the Natural Constitutions, and several complexions of
men, and other outward Circumstances, by which they may work more coldly, or
more vehemently upon the will, and Affections. A man of a dull and Torpid
disposition is seldom Ambitious; a man of a quick and active Spirit, seldom
Idle; the Choleric man not obnoxious to those evils, which melancholy does
hatch; nor the Melancholic to those, which Choler is apt to produce: As hard a
matter it may be for some men to commit some one sin, as it is for others to
avoid it; as hard a matter for the Fool in the Gospel to have scattered his
Goods, as it was for the other Fool the Prodigal to have kept them; as hard a
matter for some to let loose their Anger, as it is for others to curb and
bridle it: some by their very temper and Constitution, with ease withstand
lust, but must struggle and take pains to keep down their Anger: Some can
stand upright in Poverty, but are overthrown by wealth: some can resist this
Temptation by slighting it; but must beat and macerate themselves, must use a
kind of violence before they can overcome another, which is more suitable, and
more flatters their Constitution: And this we may find by those darts, which we
cast at one another, those uncharitable Censures we pass: For how do the
Covetous condemn and pity the Prodigal? and how does the Prodigal loath and
scorn the Covetous? How does the Lukewarm Christian abominate the
Schismaticque, and the Schismaticque call every man so, if he be not as mad as
himself? How does this man bless himself, and wonder, that any should fall into
such or such a sin; when he that commits it, wonders as much, that he should
fall into the Contrary? For the Enemy applies himself to every Humor, and
Temper, and having found where every man lies open to invasion, there strives
to make his Battery, where every man is most assaultable, and there enters with
such forces, which we are ready to obey: with a sword, which the Revenger will
snatch at; with Riches, which the Covetous will dig for; with a dish of
dainties, which the Glutton will greedily devour, and what bait soever we taste
of, we are in his Snare; he has his several Darts, and if any one pierce the
heart, he is a Conqueror: For he knows the wages of any one sin unrepented,
is death. We are indeed, too ready to flatter, and comfort our selves in that
sin, which best complies with our Humor, ever more to favor and Pardon our
selves in some sin or other, and to make our obedience to one precept an
Advocate to plead for us, and hold us up in the breach of another; I am not as
other men are, there are more Pharisees then one that have spoke it. Some sin
or other there is, either of Profit, or pleasure, or the like, to which by
Complexion we are inclined, which we too often dispense with, as willing it
should stay with us (as Austin confesses of himself, that when he prayed
against Lust, he was not very willing to be heard, or that God should too soon
divorce him from his beloved sin) At the same time we would be Good, and yet
evil; we would partake of life, and yet join with that, which tends unto
death: we would be converts, and yet wantons; we would Turn from one sin, and
yet cleave fast to another. Oh let me Hugg my Mammon, says the Miser, and I Will
defy lust: let me take my fill of love, says the wanton, and I Will spurn at
Wealth: Let me wash my feet in the blood of my enemies, says the Revenger, and
all other pleasure I shall look upon, and loath: I will fast and pray, says
the Ambitious, so they may be wings to carry me to the highest place, where I
had rather be, then in heaven it self. Every man may be induced to abstain
from those sins, which either hinder not, or promote that, to which he is
carried by the swindge of this natural Temper, and disposition: And as every
Nation (in the times of Darkness) had its several God, which they worshipped,
and neglected others; so every man almost has his beloved sin, which he
cleaves to, and rather then he will Turn from it, will fling off all respect,
and familiarity to the rest; will abstain from evil in this kind, so he may
take in the other, which is pleasant to him; will be for God, so he may be for
Baal too; will not Touch, so he may Taste, will not look on this forbidden Tree,
so he may pluck and Taste of the other: And this is to sport and please our
selves in that evil way, which leads to Death; For what though I escape the
Lion, if the Bear tear me in pieces? what is it to lean our hand, and rest
upon the forbearance of some sins, if a Serpent bite us? what is it to Turn
from many sins, and yet be too familiar with that, which will destroy us?
Saul, we know, spared many of the Amalekites, when Gods command was, to put
all to the sword, and the event was; he spared one too many, for one of them
was his Executioner; God bids us destroy the whole Body of finne, to leave no
sin reigning in our mortal Bodies, and if we favor and spare but one, that
one, if we Turn not from it, will be strong enough to Turn us to Destruction.

For again; It is Obedience only, that commends us to God, and that, as
exact, and perfect, as the equity of the Gospel requires, and so every degree
of sin is rebellion: God requires totam voluntatem, the whole will for
indeed) where it is not whole, it is not at all, it is not a will, and integram
poenitentiam, a solid, entire, universal Conversion. True Obedience, says
Luther, non transit in genus deliberativum, does not demurr and deliberate, I
may add, non transit in genus judiciale, does not take upon it self to
determine, which Commandment is to be kept, and which may be omitted; what in
it is to be done, and what is to be left undone. For as our Faith is imperfect;
if it be not equal to that Truth which is revealed; so is our obedience
imperfect, when it is not equal to the command, and both are unavailable,
because in the one we stick at some part of the Truth revealed, and in the
other come short of the command; and so in the one distrust God, in the other
oppose him: what is a sigh, if my murmuring drown it? what is my Devotion, if
my Impatience chill it? what is my Liberality, if my uncleanness defile it?
what are my Prayers, if my partial obedience turn them into sin? what is a
morsel of bread to one poor man, when my oppression has eaten up a Thousand?
what is my Faith, if my malice make me worse then an Infidel? The voice of
Scripture, the Language of Obedience is; to keep all the Commandments; the
language of Repentance, to depart from all Iniquity. For all the Virtues in the
world cannot wash off the guilt of one unrepented sin; Shall I give my
firstborn for my Transgression, says the Prophet, the fruit of my body, for
the sin of my soul? shall I bring the merits of one Saint? the
supererogations of another? and add to these the Treasure of the Church? shall
I bring my Alms, my Devotion, my Tears; all these will vanish at the guilt of
one sin, and melt before it, as the wax before the Sun: for every sin is,
as Seneca speaks of Alexanders, in killing Calisthenes, Crimen aeternum, Sen.
de Benef.
an everpentance can redeem; For, as often as it shall be said, that Alexander
slew so many thousand persians, it will be replied, he did so, but withal, he
slew Calisthenes. He slew Darius, it is true, and Calisthenes too: He wan all,
as far as the very Ocean; it is true, but he killed Calisthenes; and as often we
shall fill our minds, and flatter our selves with the forbearance of these, or
those sins, our Conscience will check and take us up, and tell us; but we
have continued in this, or that beloved sin, and none of all our performances
shall make so much to our comfort, as one unrepented sin shall to our
Reproach.

And now because in common esteem, one is no number, and we scarce count him
guilty of sin, who has but one fault; Let us well weigh the danger of any one
sin; be it Fornication, Theft or Covetousness, or the like, be it whatsoever
is called sin; and though, perhaps, we may dread it the less, because it is
but one, yet we sahll find good reason to Turn from it, because it is sin.

And first: Every particular sin is of a monstrous aspect, being committed
not only against the Law written; but against the Law of Nature, which did
then Characterise the soul, when the soul did first inform the Body: for
though we call those horrid sins unnatural, which Saint Paul speaks against
in the 1. to the romans, yet in true estimation, every sin is so, being
against our very Reason, which is (...), Naz. or. 34.
the very first Law, written in our hearts, says Naz. for sin is an
unreasonable Thing, nor can it desend it self by discourse, or argument. If
Heaven were to be bought with sin, it were no Purchase, for by every evil
work, I forfeit not only my Christianity, but my manhood; I am robbed of my
chiefest Jewel, and I my self am the Thief. Who would buy eternity with sin?
who would buy Immortallity upon such loathed Terms: If Christ should have
promised Heaven upon condition of a wicked life, who would have believed there
had been either Christ or Heaven? And therefore it is laid as an imputation
upon man, Solum hoc animal Naturae fines transgreditur, no Creature breaks the
bounds and limits which Nature has set, but Man; and there is much of Truth in
it; man, when he sins, is more unbounded, and irregular then a Beast. For a
Beast follows the conduct of his natural Appetite, but man leaves his Reason
behind, which should be more powerful, and is as natural to him as his sense.
Man, says the prophet David, that understands not, is like to the Beasts that
perish; and Man that is like to a Beast, is worse then he: No Fox to Herod, no
Goat to the Wanton; no Tiger to the Murderer; no Wolf to the Oppressor; no
Horse-leech to the Covetous; for Beasts follow that (...), that instinct of
Nature, by which they are carried to the Object; but man makes Reason, which
should come in to rescue him from sin, an Instrument of Evil; so that his
Reason, which was made as a help; as his God on Earth, serves only to make him
more unreasonable. Consider then, though it be but one sin, yet so far it
makes thee like unto a Beast, nay worse then any; though it be one, yet it has
a monstrous aspect; and then Turn from it.

Secondly: though it be but one; yet it is very fruitful, and may beget
another, nay, multiply it self into a numerous issue, into as many sins, as
there be hairs of thy head: for as it is truly said, omne verum, omni vero
consonat, there is a kind of agreement, and harmony in truths; and the devout
School-man tells us, that the whole Scripture is but one copulative
proposition, because the precepts therein contained are many, and yet one, many
in regard of the diversity of those works, that perfect them, but yet one, in
respect of that root of charity, which begins them; so peccatum multiplex, and
unum, there is a kind of dependencie between sins, and a growth in
wickedness, one drawing, and deriving poison from another (...) as Epiphanius
speaks of heresies, Epiphan. Here Is. Bastlid.
as the Asp does from the Viper, which being set in opposition to any
particular virtue, creeps on, and multiplies, and gathers strength to the
endangering of all. And sin may propagate it self; first, as an efficient
cause, Removens prohibens, weaking the power of grace, dimming the light of the
Gospel, setting us at a greater distance from the brightness of it, making us
more venturous, taking off our blush of modestty, which should restrain us, one
evil act may dispose us to commit the like, and that may bring on a thousand.
Secondly, as a material cause; one sin may prepare matter for another; thy
covertousnesse beget debate; debate enrage thee more; and that not end but in
murder. Last of all, as the final cause, thou may commit theft for
fornication, and fornication for theft, that thou may continue a Tyrant, be
more a Tyrant; that thou may uphold thy oppression, oppress more, that thou
may walk on in safety, walk on in the blood of the innocent, that thou
may be what thou art, be worse then thou art, be worse and worse, till thou
art no more. Ambition leads Absolon to conspiracy, conspiracy to open
Rebellion, Rebellion to his Fathers Concubines; at last to the Oak, where he
hung with three darts in his side. For sin, says Basil, like unto a stone,
that is cast into the water, multiplies it self by infinite Gyres, and Circles;
The sins of our youth hasten us to the sins of our age; an the sins of our age
look back upon the follies of our youth; pride feathers my ambition, and
ambition swells my pride, gluttony is a pander to my lust, and my lust a
steward to my gluttony: Sins seldom end, where they begin, but run on, till
they be infinite, and innumerable. And now this unhappy fruitfulness of sin may
be a strong motive to make me run away from every sin, and fear one evil
spirit, as that which may bring in a Legion. Could I think, that when I tell a
lie, I am in a disposition to betray a kingdom; could I imagine that when I
slander my Neighbor, I am in an aptitude to blaspheme God, could I see luxury
in gluttony, and incest in luxury; strife in covetousness; and in strife
murder; in idleness theft, and in theft sacrilege; I should then Turn from
every evil way, and at the sight of any one sin, with fear and trembling, cry
out; behold a troop comes.

But in the Third place, if neither the monstrosity of sin, nor the
fruitfulness of sin moves us, yet the guilt it brings along with it, and the
obligation to punishment may deter us: For sin must needs then be terrible,
when she comes with a whip in her hand: indeed she is never without one, if we
could see it; and all those heavy judgments which have fallen upon us, and
pressed us wellneer to nothing, we may impute to what we please, to the madness
of the people, to the craft and covetousness of some, and the improvidence of
others, but it was sin that called them down, and for ought we know, Josh. 7.2.
Sam. the last c.
but one. For one sin as of Achan, all Israel may be punished; for one sin, as
of David, threescore and ten thousand may fall by the plague: For Jonahs
disobedience, a Tempest may be raised upon all the Mariners in the ship: and
what stronger wind can there blow then this, to drive us every one out of
every evil way? how should this consideration leave a sting behind it, and
affect hand startle us? It may be my sacrilege, may the Church-robber, It may
be my luxury, may the wanton, It may be my bold irreverence in the House of
God; may the profane man say: whatsoever sin it is, it may be mine, which has
wrought this desolation on the earth; and then what an Achan, what a Jonah,
what a Murderer am I? I will confess with Achan; build an altar with David,
throw this Jonah overboard, cast this sin out of my soul, that God may turn
from his fierce wrath, and shine once again both upon my Tabernacle, and upon
the Nation.

But in the last place; if his anger be not hot enough in his temporal
punishments; it will hereafter boil and reake in a Cauldron of unquenchable
fire; he will punish thee eternally for any one sin habituated in thee, which
thou have not turned from by Repentance. Saint Basil makes the punishment not
only infinite in duration, but in degrees, and increase, and was of opinion,
that the pains of the damned are every moment intended, and augmented,
according, as even one sin may spread it self from man to man, from one
generation to another, even to the worlds end, by its venomous contagion and
ensample. Think we as meanly, and slightly, as we will, (swallow it without
fear, live in it without sense, yet thus it may (for ought we can say to the
contrary) multiply and increase both it self, and our punishment, and this of
Saint Basil may be true. My love of the world may kindle my anger, my anger may
end in murder, my murder may beget a Cain, and Cain a Lamech, and from Cain, by
a kind of propagation of sin, may proceed a blody race throughout all
generations; and I shall be punished for Cain; and punished for Lameoh; and as
many as the contagion of my sin shall reach, and I shall be punished for my own
sins; and I shall be pinished for my other men's sins (as Father Latimer
speaks), and my punishment shall be every moment infinitely, and infinitely
multiplied, and increased; a heavy and sad consideration it is, and very
answerable, and proportionable to this loud and vehement ingemination
Convertimini, Convertimini, Turn ye, Turn ye, able to turn us, and so to turn
us, that we may turn from every evil way.

The fourth property of our Turn, it must be final, carried on to the end.
Our turn then must be true, and sincere; and it must be universal; we must
turn with all our Heart; and turn from all our sins; there is yet one property
more, one thing more required, that it be final, that we hold it on unto the
end, for without this the other three are lost; the speediness, the sincerity,
the universality of our Repentance are of no force, which though it were true
(...), in respect of its essential parts, and in respect of its latitude and
extent, yet is it not true in respect of its duration, unless we Turn once for
all, and never fall back upon those paths, out of which horror, grief, and
disdain did drive us; it may work our peace, and reconcile us for a time; but
if we fail, and fall back, even our turn, our former Repentance forsakes us,
and mercy it self withdraws, and leaves us under that wrath, which we were fled
from. And therefore in our turn, this must go along with us, and continue the
motion; the consideration of the great hazard we run, when we turn from our
evil ways, and then turn back again.

For first, as a pardon does nullify former sins, so it makes our sins,
which we commit afterward more grievous, and fatal; and as it is observed;
that it is the part of a wise friend etiam leves suspiciones fugere, to shun
the least suspicion of offense, Hier. ad pau. match. and marcel.
ne quod fortuito fecit, consulto facere videretur, lest what might formerly be
imputed to chance or infirmity, may now seem to proceed from wilfulness; so
when we turn, and God is pleased so far to condescend, as to take us to his
favor, and of enemies, not only make us his servants, but call us his
friends; it will then especially concern us, to abstain from all appearance of
evil, to suspect every object, as the devils lurking place, in which he lies in
wait, to betray us; lest we may seem to have begged pardon of our sins, not out
of hatred, but out of love unto them, and to have left our sins for a time, to
commit them afresh. We are bound now, not only in a bond of common duty, but of
gratitude: for his free favor is Numella, as a clog, or yoke, to chain and
fetter, and restrain us from sin, that we commit not that every day, for which
we must beg pardon every day.

A reason of this we may draw from the very love of God: for the anger of God,
in a manner, is the effect, and product of his love: He is Angry if we sin;
because he loved us: he is displeased when we yield to Temptations; because he
loved us, and his Anger is the hotter, because his love was excessive. As the
Husband which most affectionately loves the Wife of his youth, and would have
her be as the loving Hind, and pleasant Roe, Prove. 5.19.
but to himself alone, will not allow so much love from her, as may be
conveyed in a look, or the glance of an eye; is jealous of her very looks, of
her deportment, of her garments, and will have her to behave her self with that
Modesty and strangeness, ut quisquis videat, metuat accedere, that no man may
be so bold, as to come so near, as to ask the question, or make mention of
love; and all, because he most affectionately loves her: So much, nay, far
greater is the love of God to our souls, which he has married unto himself,
in whom he desires to dwell, and take delight, and so dearly he loves them,
that he will not divide with the World and the Flesh; but is straight in
Passion, if we cast but a favorable ook, or look friendly upon that sin, by
which we first offended him; if we come but near to that which has the show of
a Rival, or Adversary: but if we let our Desires loose, and fall from him, and
Embrace the next Temptation, which wooes us, then he counts us guilty of
spiritual whoredom, and Adultery; His jealousy is cruel as the Grave, and
this Jealousy, which is an effect of his love, shall smoke against us. First,
it was Love and Jealousy, lest we might tender cur service to strange gods,
cast our Affections upon false Riches, and deceitful pleasures; and now we
have left Life for Death, preferred that which first wounded us, before him
that cured us; it is Anger and Indignation, that he should lose us, whom he so
loved; that we should fling him off, who so loved us; That he should create,
and then lose us, and afterward purchase, and redeem us, and make us his
again, and we should have no understanding, but run back again from him into
Captivity.

For in the Second place; as our sins are greater after reconcilement, so if
they do not cancel the former Pardon, (as some are unwilling to grant) yet
they call those sins to remembrance, which God cast behind his back. For as
good Works are destroyed by sin, and revive again by Repentance, so do our
evils, which are covered by Repentance, revive again by sin. Not only my
Alms are devoured by oppression, my Chastity defloured by my uncleanness; my
Fasting lost in my luxury; but my former sins, which were scattered as mist
before the Sun, return again, and are a thick cloud between me, and the bright
and shining mercy of God. Not that there is any mutability in God; no: God does
not repent of his gifts, but we may of our Repentance, and after pardon, sin
again, and so bring a new guilt upon our souls; and not only that, but
vengeance upon our Heads, for the contempt tempt of his Mercy, and slighting of
his former pardon. For nothing can provoke God to Anger more, then the abuse of
his goodness and Mercy, nor does his wrath burn more violently, then when it is
first quenched, and allaid with the Tears of a sinner, and afterward kindled
again by his sin. Then he that was well pleased to be reconciled, will
question and condemn us, and yet make good his Promise; he that forgot our
sins, will Impute our sins; and yet be Truth it self. For remission of
sins is a continued Act, and is, and remains, whist the condition which is
required, remains, but when we fail in that, the door of Mercy, which before
was wide open unto us, is shut against us; for should he Justify, and forgive
him, who breaks his Obligation, and returns to the same place, where he stood
out against God, and fought against him? shall he be reconciled to him, who
will be again his Enemy? if the righteous relapse, his righteousness shall not
be mentioned, Ez. 18.21.24.
nor shall the wickedness of the wicked be mentioned, if he repent: for the
change is not in God, but in our selves: aliter and aliter judicat de homine
aliter et aliter disposito, he speaks in Mercy to the Penitent, but in anger to
the relapsed sinner: The Rule of Gods Actions is constant, and like himself;
and in this particular, this is the Rule, this his Decree: To forgive the
Penitent, and punish the relapsed Sinner: So he forgives the sinner when he
repents, and punishes him when he falls away. And why should it be put to the
Question, whether God revoke his first Pardon? Quid prodest esse, quod esse non
prodest? as Tertull. speaks; if we think he did it not, or cannot do it; yet
what profit is it, that, that should remain, which does not profit? nay, which
does aggravate our sin? or what Pardon is that, which may remain firm, when
he to whom it was given, for his revolt, may be Turned into Hell? when the
Servant falls down, he is moved with Compassion, Matthew. 18.
and loses him, and forgives him the debt; But when he takes his fellow
servant by the Throat, he delivers him to the Tormenters, till he should pay
the utmost farthing; because God is ever like unto himself, constant to his
Rule; and he forgives, and punishes for this reason, because he is so, and
cannot change. For as we beg our Pardon upon promise, so does he grant it upon
supposition of perseverance; for he does not pardon us our sin, that we
should sin again; and if we break our Promise, we cut selves have made a
Nullity of the Pardon, or made it of as little Virtue and Power, as if it had
never been. For as the Schools tell us, that the Sacraments are Protestationes
fidei, the Protestations of our Faith; so is our Prayer for Pardon, a
Protestation and promise of Repentance, which is nothing else, but a continued
obedience: we pray to God, To cast our Sins behind his back, with this
Resolution, to extirpate them; and upon this Condition, God seals our Pardon,
which we must make a motive, not to sin and fall back, but to a new life, and
Constant obedience; If we Turn, and Turn back again, he may Turn his face
from us for Ever.

Again, in the Third Place; we have reason to arm our selves against
Temptation, after Pardon; because by our relapse, we do not only add sin to
sin, but we are made more inclinable to it, and anon more familiar with it, and
so more averse and backward to the Acts of Piety: Tert. l. 1. ad uxorem. c. 8.
for as Tertullian observes, viduitas operosior virginitate, that it is a
matter of more difficulty to remain a Widow, then to keep our Virgin; not to
taste of pleasure, then when we have tasted to forbear: so it is easier to
abstain from sin a first, then when we are once engaged; when we have tasted
of that Pleasure which commends it: And then, when we have loathed it, for some
bitterness it had; for some misery, some Disease it brought along with it; and
when that is for got, look toward it again, and see nothing but those smiles
and allurements, which first deceived us; we like and love it more, then we did
before it gave us any such distaste; and at last can walk along with it, though
wrath be over our heads, and Death ready to devour us, and what we did before
with some reluctance, we do now wiht greediness, we did but lap before, with
some fear and suspicion, at last we take it down, as the Ox does water.

And what an uneven, distracted course of life is this: to sin, and upon some
distaste, to repent, and when that is off, since again? and upon some pang that
we feel, Repent again? and after some ease, meet and join with that, which has
so pleased, which has so troubled us? The Stoic has well observed, homines
vitam suam amant simul, and oderunt; some men at once both hate, and love
themselves: now they send a divorce to sin, anon they kiss and embrace it;
now they banish it, anon recall it: Now they are on the wing for Heaven, anon
cleaving to the Dust; now in their Zenith, and by and by in their Nadir; Saint
Ephreem the Syrian, expresses it by the word (...), calls it a falling rise,
or a rising fall, a course of life consisting of Turning, and Returning; in
rising and relapsing; in sinning and repenting, because men find it more for
their ease, deprecari crimen, quam vacare crimine, to beg Pardon for sin
committed, then to forbear committing it after, and so sin and Repent, and
sin again, and as solemnly, by their sin renounce their Repentance, as they
do by their Repentance recant their sin: We deal with our beloved sin, as
Maecenas did with his Wife, Sen. ep. 114.
quae cum unam habuit, millies duxit, says Seneca, who had but one, yet
married her, and divorced her from him; and then married her again, a Thousand
times: First we look upon the painted face, and Countenance of sin, and are
taken as it were with her Eye and Beauty; and we draw near, and embrace it;
but anon the worm gnaweth us, our conscience is loud and troublesome, and then
we would put it from us, when it flatters, we are even sick with love; and when
it turns its worst face toward us, we are weary of it, and have an
inclination, a velleity, a weak and feeble desire to shake it off: our soul
loves it, and loatheth it, we would not, and we will sin; and all upon
presumption of that mercy, which first gave us ease; upon hope of forgiveness,
quis enim timebit prodigere, quod habebit postea recuperare? Tertul. de
pudicitia. c. 9.
for who will be tender and sparing of that, which he hopes to recover, though
lost never so often? or be careful of preserving that, which he thinks cannot be
irrecoverably lost? so that Repentance, which should be the death of sin, is
made the security of the Sinner: and that which should reconcile us to God, is
made a reproach to his mercy, and contumelious to his goodness; in brief, that
which should make us his friends, makes us his enemies: we turn and return, we
fall and rise, and rise and fall; till at last we fall, never to rise again:
And this is an ill sign, a sign our Repentance was not true, and serious, but
(as in an intermitting fever) the disease was still the same, only the fit was
over: Gravedinosos quosdam, quosdam tor ninosor (...) mus, non quia semper, sed
quia saepesunt. Tul. Tusc. q. l. 4 Galen: de fanitat. Tuenda.
or as in an Epilepsie, or the falling sickness, it is still the same, is still
in the body, though it do not cast it on the ground, and such a Repentance is
not a Repentance, but to be repented of, by turning once for all, never to turn
again: or if it be true, we may say of it, what Galen said of his art, to those
that abuse it, who carry it not, and continue it to the end, perinde est, ac si
omnino non esset, it is as if it were not at all, nay, it is fatal and
deleterial: It was Repentance, it is now an accusation, a witness against us,
that we would be contra experimenta pertinaces, and even against our own
experience taste that cup again, which we found bitter to us, and run into that
snare, out of which we had escaped, and turn back into those evil ways, where
we saw death ready to seize upon us: and so run the hazard of being lost for
ever.

And these four are the necessary requisities, Concl.
and properties of Repentance; it must be early and sudden; upon the first all:
For why should any thing in this world stop and stay us one moment in our
journey to a better? is not a span of time little enough to pay down for
Eternity? it must be true and sincere; for can we hope to bind the God of
Truth unto us with a lie? or can a false Turn bring us to that happiness which
is real? it must be perfect, and exact in every part; for why should we give
him less then we should; who will give us more then we can desire? or how can
that, which is but in part, make us shine in perfection of Glory? Last of all;
it must be constant and permanent; for the crown of life is promised unto him
alone, who is faithful unto death; Turn ye, Turn ye, now, suddenly; in reality,
and not in appearance, Turn ye from all your evil ways; Turn never to look
back again, and this is (...), as the Septuagint render it, to turn for ever,
and so to press forward in the ways of righteousness, till we are brought to
that place of rest, where there is no evil to Turn from; but all shall turn to
our Salvation.

Thu much of the exhortation; Turn ye, Turn ye; the next is the Reason or
Expostulation. For why will you die, O House of Israel.

THE NINTH SERMON.
PART V.
EZEKIEL 33.11. Turn ye, Turn ye from your evil ways. For why will you die,
Oh House of Israel.


WHY will you die? is an Obtestation, or Expostulation; I called it a reason,
and good reason I should do so: for the moriemini is a good reason: that we may
not die, a good reason to make us turn, but tendered to us by way of
expostulation, is another reason, and puts life and efficacy into it, makes it
a reason invincible, unanswerable. The Israelite, though now in his evil ways,
dares not say, He will die, and therefore must lay his hand upon his mouth, and
Turn.

For God, who is truly (...) free from all passion, being to deal with man
subject to passion, seems to put it on; exprimit in (...) we have here a large
field to walk over; but we must bound our discourse within the compass of those
observations, which first offer themselves, and without any force, or violence,
may naturally be deduced from these words; and we shall first take notice of
the course, and method God takes to turn us, he draws a sword against us, he
threatens death, and so awakes our fear, that our fear might carry us out of
evil our ways. Secondly, that God is not willing we should die; Thirdly, that
he is not any way defective in the administration of the means of life. Last of
all, that if we die, the fault is only in our selves, and our own will ruins
us. Why will ye die O house of Israel?

We begin with the first, the course that God takes to turn us; he asks us why
will ye die? in which we shall pass by these steps, or degrees; First, show
you what fear is: Secondly, how useful it may be in our conversion. Thirdly,
show it not only useful; but good and lawful, and enjoined both to those, who
are yet to turn, and those who are converted already: The fear of death; the
fear of Gods wrath may be a motive to turn me from sin, and it may be a motive
to strengthen, and uphold me in the ways of righteousness. God commends it to
us, and timor iste timendus non est, and we need not be afraid of this Fear.

Quare moriemini?

Why will ye Die?

And death is the King of terrors; to command our fear, that seeing death in
our evil ways ready to destroy us, Job. 18.16.
we might look about and consider in what ways we were, and for fear of death
turn from sin, which leads unto it; for thus God does Amorem timore pellere,
subdue one passion with another, drive out love with fear, the love of the
world, with the fear of death; present himself unto us in diverse manners
according to the different operations of our affections; sometimes with his
rich promises, to make us Hope, and sometimes with fearful menaces to strike us
with fear, sometimes in glory to encourage us, and sometimes in a tempest,
Clem. Alexand. (...).
and whirle-winde to affright us (...), various, and manifold in the
dispensation of his goodness, that if hope drive us not to the promises, yet
fear might carry us from death, and death from sin, and so at last beget a
Hope; and delight, and ravish us with the glory of that, which before we could
not look upon.

Now what fear is, we may guess by Hope, for they are both hewed, as it were,
out of the same Rock; and Expectation is the common matter, out of which they
are framed; as Hope is nothing else but an Expectation of that, which is good,
so Fear, says the Philosopher has its beginning (...), Arist. Rhet. 2. c. 6.
from the Imagination of some approaching Evil; where there is Hope, there is
Fear, and where there is Fear, there is Hope; For he that does but fear some
evil may befall him, retains some Hope, that he may escape it; and he that
hopes for that which is desirable, stands in some fear, that he may not reach
and possess it; so that you see, Hope and Fear, though they seem to look at
distance one upon the other, yet are always in Conjunction; and are levelled
on the same Object, till they lose their Names, and the one end in Confidence,
the other in Despair.

Now of all the Passions of the Mind, Fear may seem to be the most
improfitable; for the Wiseman will tell us, it is nothing else but the
Betraying of those succors which reason offers; Wisd 17.11. Curt.
and the Historian speaking of the Persians, who in their flight flung away
their weapons of Defense, shuts up all with this Epiphonema, adeo pavor ipsa
auxilia formidat, such is the nature of Fear, that it disarmes us, and makes
us not only run from Danger, but from those Helps and Succors, which might
prevent and keep it off: It matures and ripens mischief, anticipates Evil, and
multiplies it; and by a vain kind of Providence, gives those things a being
which are not -- spe jam praecipit hostem, says the Poet, It presents our
Enemy before us, when he is not near, and latcheth the Sword in our Bowels,
before the Blow is given. And indeed, such many times are the effects of Fear:
but as Alexander sometimes spoke of that fierce and stately Steed Bucephalus,
qualem isti equum perdunt, Curt. l. 1.
dum per imperitiam, and mollitiem uti nesciunt? What a brave Horse is spoiled
for want of manning? so may we of Fear; a most useful Passion is lost,
because we do not manage and order it as we should: for we suffer it to
distract and amaze, when it should poyse and byas us; we make it our Enemy,
when it might be our Friend, to guard and protect us; and by a Prophetical
presage, or mistrust, keep off those Evils which are in the approach ready to
assault us; for prudentia quaedam Divinatio est, our Prudencie, Vit. Pompon
Attici.
which always carries with it Fear, is a kind of Divination. Our Passions are
as a wind, and as they may thrust us upon the Rocks, so they may drive, and
carry us on to the Heaven where we would be. All is in the right placing of
them, passiones aestimantur objectis, our passions are as the objects are they
look on; and by them they are measured, and either fall or rise in their
esteem; to fear an Enemy, is cowardice; to Fear labor, is slothfulness, to
fear the face of man, is something near to baseness and servility; to be
afraid of a command, because it is difficult, is disobedience; but Pone Deum,
says Saint Austin, place God as the Object; and to Fear him, not only when
he shines in Mercy, but when he is girded with Majesty, to fear him not only
as a Father, but a Lord; nay, to fear him, when he comes with a Tempest before
him, is either a virtue, or else leads unto it.

Now to show you how Fear works, and how useful it may be to forward our
Turn: we may observe first, that it works upon our memory, revives those
Characters of sin, which long Custom had sullied and defaced, and makes that
Deformity visible, which the delight we took in sin had vayl'd and hid from our
sight: when the Patriarchs had sold their Brother Joseph into Egypt, for Ten
years space, and above, whilst they dreaded nothing, they never seemed to have
any sense of their fact, but looked upon it as a lawful, or warrantable sale,
or made as light on it, as if it had been so. Joseph was sold, and they thought
themselves well rid of a Dreamer: But when they were now come down into Egypt,
Genes. 42.
and were cast into Prison, and into a fear withal, that they should be there
chained us as Captives, and slaves, then, and not till then it appeared like an
ill Bargain; then they could give it is right name, and call it a sin
against their Brother: we are doubtless guilty of our Brothers Death, say they
one to another, verse. 21. Said I not (says Reuben) that you should not offend
against the Lad? at the next verse. Thus whilst our Sun shines clear, without
cloud or Tempest, all Conscience of sin is asleep, and we forget what we have
done, even as soon as we have done it, and it is to us, as if it never had
been, or appears in such a shape, we can delight in; but when the weather
changes, and the Tempest is loud, when the pale Countenance of death is turned
toward us; if then our Countenance changes, because our mind does so; we have
other thoughts, and other eyes, and by the very sight of Death, are led to the
sense of sin; Now, our sin, which was buried in Oblivion, is raised again,
and appears in its own shape, with that terror and Deformity, that we begin to
hate, and at last, are willing to destroy it. Death has a Terrible look, but
the sight of Death may make us live, as the Brazen Serpent did Heal those, who
were bitten in the Wilderness, only by being looked upon.

For,

Secondly, Having a sense and feeling of our sin, we begin to advise with our
selves, and ask Counsel of our Reason, which before we had left behind us,
and our Thoughts, which were let loose, and sent abroad after every vanity,
that came near us, are collected, and turned inward upon themselves, to
revolve and see what an ill flight they made, and what poison they gathered,
where they sought for Manna; how they were worse then lost, in such deceitful
Objects; (...), Aristot. Rhet. 2. c. 6.
for Fear brings us, says the Philosopher, to consultation. Call the Steward
to account, and he is presently at his Quid faciam? what shall I do? Luke 16.3.
when a King goes to war, and war is a bloody, and fearful Trade, the text
tells us, (...), Luke 14.31.
he fitteth down first, and takes Counsel. Fear is the mother of a device,
and Consultation dies with fear; when we presume, Counsel is but a reproach,
and is taken as an Injury; and when we despair, it is too late.

There be three things, says Saint Basil, which perfect and consummate every
Consultation, and brings it to the end for which it was held: First, we
consult; Secondly, we settle and establish our Consultations; and last of all,
we gain a Constancy and perseverance in those Actions, which our Consultations
have engaged, and encouraged us in; and all these three we owe to Fear: Did we
not Fear, we should not Consult: did not Fear urge and drive us on, we should
not determine; and when this breath departs, our Counsels fall, and all our
Thoughts perish. Present Christ unto us in all his beauty, with his Spicy
cheeks, and Curled locks, with honey under his Tongue, as he is described in the
Canticles; present him as a Jesus, and we grow too familiar with him. Present
him on the Mount at his Sermon; and perhaps, we will give him the hearing.
Present him as a Rock, and we see a hole to run into, sooner then a Foundation
to lay that on, which is like him, and we run on with ease in our evil ways,
having such a friend, such an indulgent Savior always in our Eye; but present
him descending with a shout, and with the Trump of God, and then we begin to
remember, that for all these Evil ways, we shall be brought into Judgment:
Our Counsels shift, as the wind blows; and upon better motion, and riper
consideration, we are ready to alter our Decrees: For these three follow close
upon each other, pallemus, horrescimus, Circumspicimus, Plin. Epist.
says Pliny; first Fear strikes us pale, then puts into a fit of Trembling,
at last, wheels us about, to fee and consider the danger we are in, this
consideration follows us, nor can we shake it off, longiorisque timoris causa
Timor est; this wind increases as it goes, drives us to consultation, carries
us on to determine, and by a continued force binds and fastens us to our
Counsels. And therefore Aquinas tells us, that our Turn proceeds from the
fear of punishment, tanquam a primo motu, as from that which first sets it a
moving; for though true Repentance be the gift of God, yet fear works that
Disposition in us, by which we Turn, when God does Turn us; The Fear of
punishment restraines us from sin; in the restraint a hope of Pardon shows it
self, upon this hope we build up and strengthen our Resolution, and at last see
the horror of sin, not in the punishment, but in the sin, hate our folly more
then the whip, and our evil ways more then Death it self, which we call a
Filial fear, which has more of love then fear, and yet does not shut out
this Fear quite (for a good son may fear the Anger of a good Father) and
thus God is pleased to condescend to our weakness, and accept this, as our
reasonable service, at our hands, though our chiefest motive to serve him at
first, were nothing else but a flash from the Quare moriemini? nothing else but
a fear of Death.

For in the last place; Bas. in Psalm. 32.
this is a principal effect of the fear of punishment, (...), says Basil, as
it brings us to Consultation, so is it a fair Introduction to Piety it self.
Fear takes us by the hand, and is a Schoolmaster unto us, and when Fear has
well disciplined and Catechized us, then love takes us in hand, and perfects
our Conversion, so that we may seem to go from Fear to Love, as from a School
to an Universitie. In the 28. of Genesis, at the Twelfth verse, Jacob sees a
Ladder set upon the Earth, and the Top of it reaching up to heaven, and we may
observe, that Jacob makes Fear the first step of the ladder, for when he
awakes, as in an ecstasy he cries out, Quam terribilis iste locus? how
dreadful is this place? verse 17. so that fear is as it were the first rung
and step of the Ladder, and God on the top, and Angels Ascending and
Descending; Love, and Zeal, and many Graces between. Think what we please,
disgrace it if we will, and fasten to it the badge of slavery and servility, it
is a blessed thing thus to fear, the first step to happiness, and one step
helps us up to another, and so by degrees we are brought ad culme Sionis, to
the top of the Ladder, to the Top of perfection, to God Himself, whose Majesty
first wounds us with fear, and then gently binds us up, and makes us to love
him; who leads us through this darkness, through this dread and terror, into so
great light, makes us Tremble first, that we may at last be as mount Sion, and
stand fast, and firm for ever.

We now pass, and rise one step higher, to take a view of this fear of
punishment, not only as useful, but lawful, and commanded not under the Law
alone, but under the Gospel, as a motive to Turn us from sin, and as a
motive to strengthen and uphold us in the ways of Righteousness, not only as
a restraint from sionne; but as a preservative of Holiness, and as a help and
furtherance unto us in our progress in the ways of perfection.

And here it may seem a thing most unbefitting a Christian, who should be led
rather then drawn, Plat. l. de Rep.
and not a Christian alone, but any moral man; and therefore Plato calls it
(...) an illiberal and base disposition to be banished the School of morality;
and our great master in Philosophy makes punishment one of the three things
that belong to slaves, as the whip does, says Solomon, to the fools back; for
to be forced into goodness, to be frighted into health, argues a disposition,
which little sets by Health or goodness it self.

But behold a greater then Plato and Aristotle, our best master, the Prince of
Peace, and love himself strives to awake, and stir up this kind of fear in
us, tells us of Hell, and everlasting Darkness, of a Flaming Fire, of weeping
and gnashing of Teeth; presents his Father, the Father of Mercies, with a
Thunderbolt in his hand, with Power to kill both body and soul, shows us our
sin in a Deaths Head, and in the fire of Hell, as if the way to avoid sin,
were to fear Death and Hell, ad if we could once be brought to fear to die,
we should not die at all. Many glorious things are spoken even of this fear;
The Philosopher calls it (...), Basan Ps. 31. Tert. de poenit. c. 6.
the bridle of our Nature; Saint Basil, (...), the bridle of our lusts;
Tertullian, Instrumentum poenitentiae, an Instrument to work out Repentance;
Pachomius places it, supra december millia paedagogorum, makes it the best
Schoolmaster of ten Thousand. Harken to the Trumpet of the Gospel, be attentive
to the Apostles voice, what found more frequent, then that of Terror, able to
shake and divide a soul from its sin? Had Marcion seen our Savior with a
whip in his hand: Had he heard him cursing the Fig Tree, and by that example
punishing our sterility, had he weighed the many woes he pronounced against
sinners, perhaps he would not have fallen into that impious conceit of two
Gods; for though the dispensation have not the same aspect under the Law, as
under the Gospel; yet God is the same God still, 2 Cor. 5.11.
as terrible to sinners that will not Turn, as when he thundered from Mount
Sinai; and if we will not know and understand these Terrors of the Lord, if we
make not this use of them, to drive us unto Christ, and to root and build us up
in him, the Gospel it self will be to us, as the Law was to the Jews, a killing
Letter.

For again, as Humane Laws, so Christ's precepts have their force and life from
reward and punishment; and to this end, we find not only scripta supplicia,
those woes, and menaces, which are written in the Gospel, but God has
imprinted a fear of punishment in the very hearts of men.

Esse aliquos manes, and subterranea regna. Juvenal.

That there remained punishments after life for sin, was acknowledged by the
very Heathen, and we may easily be persuaded, that had not this natural
domestic fear come in between, the World had been far more wicked then it is,
we see many are very inclinable to deny that there is either Heaven or Hell,
and would believe it, because they would have it so, many would be Atheists if
they could; but a secret whisper haunts and pursues them. This may be so, there
is an appointed time to die, and after that judgment may come; There can be no
danger in obedience, there may be in sin, and this, though it do not make
them good, yet it restraines them from being worse; quibus incentivum
impunitas, timor taedium, freedom from punishment makes sin pleasant and
delightsome, and so makes it more sinful; but the fear of punishment makes it
irksome, brings those reluctancies nd gnawings; those rebukes of Conscience,
(for without it, there could be none at all) till the whip is held up, there is
honey on the Harlots lips, and we would taste them often, but that they bite
like a Cockatrice: 1 Pet. 5.6.
non timemus peccare, timemus ardere, it is no sin, we so much startle at, but
Hell fire is too hot for us. And therefore Saint Peter, when he would work
repentance, and Humility in us, places us under Gods hand, Humble your selves
under the mighty hand of God, which expresses his power, his commanding
Attribute; his Omniscience finds us out, his Wisdom accuses us, his Justice
condemns us, potentia punit, but it is his hand, his power, that punishes us.
Psalm. 78.34.
Take away his hand, and who fears his Justice? or regards his wisdom? or
tarrieth for the twilight to shun his alseeing eye? but cum occidat, when we
are told, that he can kill, and destroy us, then, if ever, we return, and seek
God Early.

Again, as the fear of death may be as Physic to purge and cleanse our souls
from the contagion of sin, so it may be an Antidote and preservative against
it; it may raise me when I am fallen, and it may supply me with strength, that
I fall not again. It is a hand to lift me up and it is an hand to lead me when
I am risen inter vada and freta through all the dangers that attend me in my
way; as it is an introduction to piety, Tract. 1. in Psalm c. 8.
so is it (...), says Gr. Nyssen, a watch, a guard upon me to keep me, that no
temptation, no scandal, no stone of offense, make me turn back again into my
evil ways. For we must not think that when we are Turned from our evil ways,
we have left fear behind us; no, she may go along with us in the ways of
Righteousness, and whisper us in the ear, that God is the Lord most worthy to
be feared; she is our Companion, and she leaves us not, nor can we shake her
off, till we are brought to our Journeys end. Our love, such as it is, may well
consist with Fear, Chrysostom. l. 1. de compunct. c. 4. (...).
with the Fear of Judgment. Look upon the blessed Saints, David, a man after
Gods own heart, yet he had, says Chrysostom. the memory of Gods Judgments
written in his very heart; his thoughts were busied with it, his Meditations
fixed here, and it forced from him a Domine ne in furore, Correct me not O Lord,
in thy angeer, nor chastise me in thy wrath. Hezekiah, one of the best of the
Kings of Judah, yet walked in the bitterness of his soul, did mourn like a
Dove, Isa. 38.14.
and chatter like a Crane. Saint Paul builds up a Tribunal, and calls all men
to behold it; Romans 14.10.
We shall all stand before the Judgment seat of Christ; Saint Hierom had the
last Trump always sounding in his ears, and declaring to Posterity the
strictness of his life, his Tears, his fasting, his solitariness, confesses
of himself, Hier. 1. Tom. ep. 141.
Ille ego, qui ob Gehennae metum tali me carcere damnaveram Scorpiorum tantum
socius and ferarum -- I that condemned my self to so straight a prison, as to
have no better companions then Scorpions and wild Beasts, for fear of Hell and
Judgment did all this, and was not ashamed to acknowledge, that not so much
the love unto it, nor the Author of it, as the dread of Hell, and punishment
confined and kept him constant in the practice of it. And what should I say
more? for the time would fail me to tell you of other Saints of God, who
through fear wrought Righteousness, obtained Promises, out of weakness were
made strong: Behold love in its highest elevation, in its very Zenith; behold
it, when it was stronger then Death; look upon the Glorious Army of Martyrs,
they had trial of cruel mockings and scouragings, yea moreover, of Bonds, and
Imprisonment, they were stoned, and slain with the sword; And greater love
then this has no man, says our Savior, then this, that a man lay down his
life for his friend; and yet Saint Ambrose, upon the 118. Psalm will tell us,
that this great love was upheld and kept in life. by this gale of wind, by
Fear. That the fear of one Death was swallowed up in the fear of another;
the fear of a temporal, ion the fear of an Eternal. The bloody Pagans, to
weaken their faith, Pont. Diac. vit. Cypr.
urged the fear of present Death, Consule tibi; Noli animam tuam perdere,
favor your self, cast not away your life, Reverence your age, and these they
thought suggestions strong enough to shake their Constancy and Resolution; but
the consideration of the wrath of God, and eternal separation from him did
strengthen and establish them: what is my breath to Eternity? what is the fire
of Persecution, to the fury of Gods wrath? what is the rack to hell? and sic
animas posuerunt, and with these Thoughts, they laid down their lives, and were
crowned with Martyrdom.

We cannot now think, that these Martyrs sinned in setting before their eyes
the horror of Death, and fear of Hell; or think their love the less, because
they had some fear, or that their love was lost in that, which was ordained
and commanded as a means to preserve it. Their love, we see, was strong and
intensive, and held out against that, which laid them in the dust; but lest it
should faint, and abate, they borrowed some heat, even from the fire of Hell;
and made use of those Curses, which God has denounced against all those, who
persevere not to the end. The best of men are but men, but flesh and blood
subject to infirmities, so that in this our spiritual warrfare, and Navigation,
we should shipwreck often, did we not lay hold of the Anchor of Fear, as well
as of that of Hope; Each Temptation might shake us, each vanity amaze us, each
suggestion drive us upon the Rocks; but Anchora cordis, pondus timoris, says
Gregory, the weight of fear, as an Anchor poyses us, Greg. l 6. Mer. c. 27.
Ecclus. 9.13.
and when the storm is high, settles and fastens us to our resolutions. We
walk in the midst of snares, says the Wise man, and if we swerve never so
little, one snare or other takes us; for there be many: a snare in our lusts, a
snare in the object, a snare in our Religion, and a snare in our very love, and
if fear come not in to cool and allay it, to guide and moderate it, our love
may grow too warm, too saucy and familiar, and end in a bold presumption. And
therefore Saint Paul, in that his parable of the Natural, and wild Olive,
advising the new engrafted Gentile not to wax bold against the root, Romans 11.20.
makes fear a remedy, be not high minded, says he, trust not to your love of
him, nor be over-bold with Gods love to you, because he has grafted you in;
but fear; and he gives his reason, for if God spared not the natural
branches, much less will he spare you, verse 21. Fear then of being cut off,
If Saint Paul's reason be good, is the best means to repress in us all proud
conceits, and highness of mind, which may wither the most fruitful, and
flourishing branch, and make it fit for nothing, but the Fire.

Thus is Fear necessary, and prescribed to all sorts of men, to them that are
fallen, that they may rise, and to them that are risen, that they may not fall
again; for them that are weak, that they may be strong; and to those that are
strong, that their strength deceive them not. And yet an opinion is taken up in
the world; That Fear was only for mount Sinai; that it vanished with that
smoke, and was never heard of more, when that Trumpet was laid by: we will not
have this word spoken to us any more: There is no blackness, nor Darkness,
nor tempest in the Gospel, but all is to be done out of pure love; That we
being delivered from our enemies, may serve him without fear. Nor is this
conceit of yesterday, but the devil has made use of it in all Ages, as of an
Engine to undermine, and blow up the Truth it self, and so supplant the Gospel,
which is the wisdom of God unto salvation; that so he might (...), as Gr.
Nyssen speaks, sport with us, in our evil ways, lead us on in our dance and
wantonness of sin, and so carry us along with music and melody to our
Destruction.

Tertullian in his book de Praescriptionibus adversus haeret. mentions a sort
of Heretics, c. 43.
who denied that God was not to be feared at all, unde illis libera omnia, and
soluta, whence they took a liberty to sin, and let loose the reins to all
impiety. Saint Hierom relates the very same of the Marcionites, and Gnostics,
and it is probable Tertullian meant them; In 4. Hos.
for say they, Iis, qui fidem habent nihil Timendum. If we have Faith, we may
bid Fear adieu, how many, and how foul soever our sins be: God regards what
we believe, not what we do; and if our faith be true, the obliquity of our
Actions cannot hurt us. After these ex eodem semine, J. Gers. T. 1.
from the same root sprung up the Begardi, and Begardae, and others, who from
their opinion, that no sin could endanger the state of those, who were
predestined, and Justified, took their name, and were called
praedestinatiani, the Praedestinarians. After these; the Libertines breathed
forth their Blasphemy, with the like Impudence, whom Calvin wrote against, who
made sin to be nothing else but fancy and opinion; Regeneration, a deposition
and putting off all Conscience, Calvin. contra Errores Anabaptist arum.
a casting off all fear and scruple, and a returning into Paradise, where it
was a sin to Judge between good and Evil: who if they saw a man appalled with
the checks of Conscience, would cry out; Oh Adam adhuc aliquid cernis? Oh Adam,
do thou yet see, and discern any thing? The old man is not yet crucified in
thee; If they saw any trembling, or speaking sadly of the Judgments of God,
would reprove, and pass this censure upon them; That they had yet a Taste and
relish of the Apple; That that morsel would choke them. If they saw any man
displeased with himself, and cast down because of his sins, they called it,
The abiding of sin in them, and a Captivity under the sense, and motions of
the flesh. With them, Sin, The old man, The flesh, were nothing but in
opinion; and not to think of sin, to put off this Opinion, was to put on the
New man: and amongst us, There have been some men, so bold, or rather so
frantic, as to profess it; and too many so live, as it were true; for there
be more Libertines, than those, that go under that name.

Thus has the Devil in all ages strove, and made it is Masterpiece to pluck up
Fear by the very roots, that no seed of it might remain; to remove Custodem
inocentiae, as Cyprian calls it, Epist. ad Domasum.
this keeper and preserver of Innocence, and all other Virtues, and like a
subtle Captain, first sets upon the Watch, that he may with the more ease
enter the Soul of man, and so rob and spoil him of all those riches, and
endowments, which are the only price of bliss and Eternity: And in these
latter days, he has used the same Art, has set up Faith, and Love, against
Fear; the Gospel against Christ; and the Spirit against himself; That so Faith
might die; and love wax cold; That the good tidings might make us forget our
Duty, and the Spirit of Adoption, by which we cry Abba Father, blot out the
memory of that lesson, which has declared his Power, and Taught us, that he is
a Lord.

Indeed, a weak Error it is, and it is an open and casy observatition, That
they who please and hugg themselves in it, are very weak, even Children in
understanding. Gerson, the devour Schoolman tells us, Mulieres omnes propter
infirmitaetem consilii m^jores nostri in Tutorum potestate esse voluerunt.
Cicero pro Mutaena.
it is most commonly in Women, quarum aviditas pertinacior in assectu,
fragilior in cognitione. Whose affections commonly outrunne their
understanding, who affect more then they know, and are then most enflamed, when
they have least light, and it is in men too, and too many, who are as fond of
their groundless Fancies, and ill-built Opinions, as the weakness of that sex,
could possibly make them, are as weak as the weakest of women, and have more
need of the bitt and Bridle, then the Beasts that perish; what greater
weakness can there be then to follow a blind guide, and deliver our selves up
to our Fancy, and affective Notions, and make them Masters of our Reason, and
the only Interpreters of that word, which should be a lamp to our feet, and a
light to our paths? For if we check not our Fancy and Affections, they will
run madding after shadows and apparitions, They will show us nothing but Peace
in the Gospel, nothing but Love in Christianity; Nothing but Joy in the Holy
Ghost. They will set our Love and Joy on Wheels, and then we are straight
carried up to Heaven in these siery Chariots. One is Elioas, Another John
Baptist; Another Christ himself. If the Virgin Mary have an Exultat, they have
a Iubilee. If Saint Paul be in the Spirit, They are above it, and right Reason
too; and the Spirit is theirs, if he put on that shape, which best likes them.
If he be a Spirit of Counsel; we are his Secretaries of his Closet; and can
tell what he did before all Times, and Number over his Decrees at our Fingers
ends: If a Spirit of strength, we bid defiance to Principalities and Powers. If
a Spirit of Wisdom, we are filled with him, the wisemen, the sages of the
World, though no man could ever say so, but our selves; If a Spirit of Joy, we
are in an Ecstasy; if of Love, we are on fire: But if he be Spiritus Timoris, a
Spirit of Fear, there we leave him, and are at Ods with him; we seem to know
him not; and we cannot Fear at all, because we are bold to think that we have
the Spirit.

It Is true; whilst we stand thus affected, a Spirit we have; but it is a Spirit
of illusion, which troubles and distorts our Intellectualls, and makes us look
upon the Gospel, ex adverso situ, on the wrong side, on that which may seem to
flatter our infirmities, but not on that which may cure them; and as Tully told
his friend, That he did not know, Totum Caesarem, all of Caesar; so we know not
totum Christum, all of Christ: we know, and consider him as a Savior, but not
as a LORD, we know him in the Riches of his Promises; but not in the Terror of
his Judgments; know him in that life, he purchased for Repentant sinners, but
not in that death he threatens to Unbeleevers.

For to let pass the Law of works, Heb. 12.20.
we dare not come so near as to touch at that; for we cannot endure that which
was commanded; Let us well weigh and consider the Gospel it self, which is the
Law of Faith; was not that established and confirmed with promises of Eternal
life, and upon penalty of Eternal Death? In the Gospel we are told of weeping
and gnashing of Teeth, of a condition, worse them to the a Millstone hanged
about our necks, and to be thrown into the bottom of the Sea, and by no other,
then by the Prince of Peace, then by Christ himself, who would never have put
this fear in us, if he had known, that our Love had had strength enough to
bring us to him. And therefore in the Tenth of St. Matthews Gospel, at 28.
verse, he teaches us how we shall fear, Recta methodo, he teaches us to be
perfect methodists in Fear, and that we misplace not our Fear upon any Earthly
Power, he sets up a Ne Timete, Fear not them that can kill the Body, and when
they have done that, have done all, and can do no more; and having taken away
one fear, he establishes another, But fear him who can both cast Body and
Soul into Hell fire; and that we might not forget it (for such troublesome
guests lodge not long in our memory) he drives it home, with an Etiam Dico,
Yea, I say unto you, fear him. Now Him denotes a Person, and no more, and then
our fear may be Reverence, and no more; It may be Love, it may be Fancy, it
may be nothing; but qui potest is equivalent to quia potest, and is the reason
why we must fear him; even because he can punish. And this, I hope may free us
from the Imputation of sin, if our Love be blended with some Fear, and if in
our Obedience we have an eye to the hand that may strike us, as well as to that
which may fill us with good things; and if Christ, who is the Wisdom of the
Father, think it fit to make the Terror of Death an argument to move us, we
cannot have Folly laid to our charge, if we be moved with the Argument: Fac,
Fac, says Saint Austin, vel timore poenae, si non Potes adhuc amore justitiae.
Do it man, Do it, if thou can not, yet for Love, of Justice, yet for fear
of punishment.

I know that of Saint Austin is true, Brevis differentia legis and Evangelii
Amor and Timor; Love is proper to the Gospel, and Fear to the Law; but it is
Fear of Temporal punishment, not of Eternal, for that may sound to both, but
is loudest in the Gospel: The Law had a whip to fright us, and the Gospel has
a Worm to Gnaw us. I know that the Beauty of Christ in that great Work of Love,
the work of our Redemption, should transport us beyond our selves, and make us
as the Spouse in the Canticles is said to be, even sick with love; but we must
consider, not what is due to Christ, but what we are able to pay him, and what
he is willing to Accept; not what so great a Benefit might challenge at our
hands, but what our Frailty can lay down; for we are not in Heaven already,
but passing toward it with Fear, and trembling; And he that brings forth a
Christian in these colors of Love, without any mixture of Fear, does but (as
it was said of the Historian) votum accomodare non historiam, present us rather
with a wish, then an History, and Character out the Christian, as Xenophon did
Cyrus, Non qualis est, sed qualis esse deberet, not what he is, but what he
should be. I confess, thus to fear Christ, thus to be urged and chased to
Happiness, is an Argument of Imperfection: but we are Men, not Angels: We are
not in heaven already, we are not yet perfect, and therefore have need of this
kind of remedy, as much need certainly, as our first Parents had in Paradise,
who before they took the forbidden fruit, might have seen Death written and
engraved on the Tree, and had they observed it as they ought to have done, had
not forfeited the Garden for one Apple: had this Fear walked along with them
before the cool of the Day, before the rushing wind, they had not heard it,
nor hid themselves from God: in a word, had they Feared, they had not fell; for
they fell with this Thought, that they should not fall, that they should not
die at all: Imperfection, though it be to Fear, yet it is such an Imperfection,
that leads to perfection; Imperfection though it be to Fear, yet, I am sure,
it is a greater Imperfection to sin, and not to fear. It might be wished
perhapps, that we were tied and knit unto our God, quibusdam internis
commerciis, as the devout School-man speaks, with those inward ligaments of
Love, and Joy, and Admiration; that we had a kind of familiar acquaintance and
intercourse with him; That as our Alms and Prayers, and fasting came up before
him, to show him what we do on earth; so there were no imper fection in us, but
that God might approach so nigh unto us with the fullness of Joy, to tell us,
what he is preparing for us; that neither the Fear of Hell, nor the Hope of
Heaven and our Salvation, but the Love of God and Goodness, were the only
cause of our cleaving to him; That we might love God, because he is God, and
hate sin, because it is sin, and for no other reason; that we might with
Saint Paul, wish the increase of Gods Glory, though with that heavy condition
of our own Reprobation: But this is such an Heroic spirit, to which every man
cannot rise, though he may at last rise as high as Heaven; this is such a
condition, which we can hardly hope for, whilst we are in the flesh: we are in
the body, not out of the body; we struggle with doubts, and difficulties;
Ignorance and Infirmity are our Companions in our way, and in this our state of
Imperfection, contenti simus hoc Catone, Dictum Augusti cum hortaretur ferenda
esse praesentia qualiacunque sunt. Suet. Octav. August. c. 87.
we must be content to use such means, and Helps, as the Lawgiver himself
will allow of; and not cast off fear, upon a Fancy that our Love is perfect
(for this savours more of an Imaginary, Metaphysicall subtility, of a kind of
extaticall affectation of Piety, then the plain and solid knowledge of
Christian Religion) but continue our Obedience, and carry on our perseverance
with the Remembrance of our last end, with this consideration; That as under
the Law, there was a curse pronounced to them that fulfill it not; so under the
Gospel, there is a flaming fire to take vengeance of them that obey it not. 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.

It was a good censure of Tully, which he gave of Cato, in one of his Epistles.
Thou can not, says he to his friend, love and Honor Cato more then I do;
but yet this I observe in him, optimo animo utens, and summa fide nocet
interdum Reip. he does endammage the Commonwealth, but with an Honest mind,
and great Fidelity; l. 2. ad Attic. ep. 1.
for he gives sentence, as if he lived in (...), Platonis, non in faece Romuli,
in Plato's Commonwealth, and not in the dreggs, and Rascaltry of Romulus; And
we may pass the same censure on these seraphical Perfectionists, who will have
all done out of pure Love, nothing out of Fear; They remember not, that they
are in fraece Adami, the offspring of an Arch-Rebell, that their father was an
Amorite, and their mother an Hittite, (and that the want of this Fear threw
them from that state of Integrity, in which they were created; and by that out
of Paradise) and so with great ostentation of love, hinder the Progress of
Piety, and setting up to themselves an Idaea of Perfection, take off our Fear,
which should be as the hand to wind up the Plummet, which should continue the
motion of our Obedience; the best we can say of them, is, summa fide, and pio
animo nocent Ecclesiae; If their mind be pious, and answer the great show they
make, then with a Pious mind they wrong and trouble the Church of Christ.

For suppose I were a Paul, and did love Christ as Cato did Virtue, because I
could no otherwise: Nunquam recte fecit ut faces videretur, sed quia aliter
facere non poterat. Vell. ratere. l. 2. Hist.
suppose I did fear sin more then Hell, and had rather be damned, then
commit it; suppose that every thought, word, and work were Amoris foetus, the
issues of my Love; yet I must not upon a special favor build a general
Doctrine, and because love is best, make Fear unlawful, make it sin to
fear that punishment, the Fear of which might keep me from sin; for this
were in Saint Paul's phrase (...), to put a stumbling block in our Brothers way;
with my love, to overthrow his fear; that so at last both Fear and Love may
fall to the ground: for is there any that will fear sin for punishment, if it
be a sin to Fear? What Is the language of the world now? we hear of nothing,
but filial fear; and it were a good hearing, if they would understand
themselves (for this does not exclude the other, but is upheld by it:) we are
as sure of happiness, as we are of Death, but are more persuaded of the Truth
of the one, then of the other; more sure to go to heaven, then to die, and yet
Death is the gate, which must let us in; we are already partakers of an
Angelical Estate; we prolong our life in our own Thoughts, to a kind of
Eternity, and yet can fear nothing; we challenge a kind of familiarity with
God, and yet are willing to stay yet a while longer from him: we sport with his
Thunder, and play with his Hayl-stones and Coals of fire: we entertain him as
the Roman Gentleman did the Emperor Augustus, Macrobius in Saturnal.
coena parca and quasi quotidiana, with course and Ordinary fare, as Saul in
the 15. of the first of Sam. with the vile, and refuse, not with the fatlings,
and best of the sheep and Oxen; Did we dread his Majesty, or think he were
Jupiter vindex, a God of Revenge, with a Thunderbolt in his hand, we should
not be thus bold with him, but fear, that in wrath, and Indignation he should
reply, as Augustus did, Non putaram me tibi fuisse tam familiarem; I did not
think I had made my self so familiar with my Creature.

I know the Schools distinguish between a servile, and Initial, and a Filial
fear; there is a Fear, by which we fear not the fault, but the punishment,
and a fear which fears the punishment, and fault withal; and a Fear, which
fears no punishment at all; I know Aquinas puts a difference between servile
fear, and the servility of fear, as if he would take the soul from Socrates,
and yet leave him a man: Senec ep.
These are niceties more subtle then solid, in quibus ludit animus, magis quam
proficit, which may occasion discourse, but not instruct our understanding:
(...), As near as we can, let us take things as they are in themselves, and not
as they are beat out, and fashioned by the work, and business of our wits; and
then it will be plain; that though we be sons, yet we may fear, fear that
Evil which the Father presents before us, to fright us from it; that we may
make the fear of Death an Argument to Turn us, and a strong motive to
confirm us in the course of our Obedience; that it is no servility to perform
some part of Christ's service upon those terms, which he himself allows, and
has prescribed to us. Leet us call it by what name we please (for indeed we
have miscalled it, and brought it in as slavish and servile, and so branded the
command of Christ himself) yet we shall find it a blessed Instrument to
safeguard and improve our Piety; we shall find, that the best way to escape the
Judgments of God, is, to draw them near, even to our Eyes; For Hell is a part
of our Creed, as well as Heaven; his threatenings are as loud as his promises;
and could we once fear Hell as we should, we should not fear it. For I ask,
may we serve God, sub intuitu mercedis, with respect unto the reward? it is
agreed upon on all sides, that we may (for Moses had respect unto the
recompense of the reward, and Christ himself did look upon the Joy that was set
before him: Heb. 11.26. Heb. 12.2.
) why then not sub intuitu vindictae, upopn the fear of punishment? will God
accept that service which is begun, and wrought out by the virtue and influence
of the reward? and will he cast off that servant, which had an eye upon his
hand, and observed him as a Lord? why then has God propounded both these, both
reward and punishment, and bid us work on in his Vineyard, with an eye on them
both, if we may not as well fear him, when he threatens, as run to meet him,
when he comes toward us, and his reward with him? let us then have recourse to
his Mercy-seat, but let us tremble also, and fall down before his Tribunal,
and behold his Glory and Majesty in both.

But it may be said, and some have thought it their duty to say it, that this
belongs to the wicked, to the Goats to fear, but when Christ speaks to his
Disciples, to his Flock, the language is, Nolite timere, fear not little
flock, Luke. 12.32.
for it is your Fathers will to give you a Kingdom; It Is true, it is your
Fathers will to give it you, and you have no reason to fear, or mistrust him;
but this does not exclude the fear of the wrath of God, nor the use of those
means, which the Father himself has put into our hands; not that Fear, which
may be one help and Advance toward that violence, which must take it: For our
Savior does not argue thus; It is your Fathers will to give you a Kingdom;
Therefore persevere not for any fear of punishment; but the Fear, which Christ
forbids, is the Fear of distrustfulness, when we fear as Peter did upon the
Waters, when he was ready to sink, and had therefore a check, and Rebuke from
our Savior, why fear thou, oh thou of little Faith? so that fear not little
Flock, is nothing else but a disswasion from infidelity. A Soldier, that puts
no Confidence in himself, yet may in his Captain, if he be a Hannibal, or a
Caesar, (for an Army of Hearts may conquer (said Iphicrates) if a Lion be the
leader) so though we may something doubt, and mistrust, because we may see much
wanting to the perefection of our Actions, yet we must raise our diffidence
with this persuasion, that the promise is most certain, and that the power of
Heaven and Hell cannot infringe or null it. We may mistrust our selves; for of
our selves we are Nothing; but not the Promises of CHRIST, for they are yea,
and Amen.

But they are ready to reply, that the Apostle St. Paul is yet more plain,
Romans 8.15. where he tells us, That we have not received the spirit of Bondage,
to fear again, but the Spirit of Adoption, by which we cry Abba Father. And it
is most true, that we have not received that Spirit; for we are not under the
Law, but under Grace, we are not Jews, but Christians; nor do we fear again,
as the Jews feared, whose eye was upon the basket, and the sword, who were
curbed, and restrained by the fear of present punishment; and whose greatest
motives to Obedience, were drawn from Temporal respects, and Interests; who
did fear the Plague, Captivity, the Philistim, the Catterpillar, ad
Palmerworme, and so did many times forbear, that which their lusts, 2 Cor.
4.18.
and irregular Appetites were ready to join with; we have not received such a
spirit, for the Gospel directs our look not to those things which are seen,
but to those things which are not seen, and shows us yet a more excellent way;
But we have received the Spirit of Adoption, we are received into that Family
where little care is taken for the meat, that perishes, where the world is
made an Enemy, where we must leave the morrow to care for it self, and work out
our Salvation with fear and trembling, where we must not fear what man, but
what God can do unto us, observe his hand, as that hand which can raise us up
as high as Heaven, and throw us down to the lowest Pit; love him as a Father,
and fear to offend him; love, and kiss the Son, lest he be angry; serve him
without fear of any evil that can befall us here in our way; of any Enemy
that can hurt us, and yet fear him as our Lord and King; for in this his grant
of liberty, he did not let us loose against himself, nor put off his Majesty,
that we should be so bold with him, as not to serve, but to disobey him without
fear; nor does this cut off our Filiation, our relation to him: for a good
son may fear the wrath of God, and yet cry Abba, Father.

But then again, we are told in Saint John, In caritate non est timor; that
there is no fear in love, 1 John 4.18.
but perfect love casts out all fear, and when he says All fear, he
excepteth none; no, not the fear of punishment. l. de fuga in persecutione.
I know Tertullian Interpreting this Text, makes this fear to be nothing else,
but that lazy Fear, which is begot by a vain and unnecessary contemplation of
Difficulties; the fear of a man, that will not set forward in his journey, for
fear of some Lion, some perilous Beast, some horrible hardship in the way;
and this is true, but not ad textum, nor does it reach Saint John's meaning;
which may be gathered out of the third Chapter and 16. verse, where he makes it
the duty of Christians, to lay down their lives for the Brethren, as Christ
laid down his life for them; and this we shall be ready to do, if our love be
perfect, cast off all fear, and lay down our lives for them; For true love
will suffer all things, and is stronger, then Death; but love does not cast out
the fear of Gods wrath, for this does no whit impair our love to him, but is
rather the means to improve it, when we do our duty, we have no reason to
fear his Anger, but yet we must always fear him, that we may go on and
persevere unto the end; he will not punish us for our Obedience, and so we need
not fear him, but if we break it off, he will punish us, and this thought may
strengthen, and establish us in it: Let us therefore Fear, lest a promise
being left us of entering into his rest, any of us should come short of it, Heb.
4.1. But we may draw an answer out of the words themselves, as they lie in the
Text; for it is true indeed, Charity casts out all fear, but not simul and
semel, not at once, but by degrees: As that waxes, our fear waines, as that
gathers strength, our fear is infeebled; and perfecta for as mittit, when our
Love is perfect, it casts it out quite. If our Sanctification were as total,
as it is universal; were our obedience like that of the Angels, and could never
fail, we should not then need the sight of Heaven to allure us, or Gods Thunder
to affright us, but it being only in part, though in every part, the best of
Christians in this state of imperfection, may look up upon the Moriemini, make
use of a Deaths-head, and make Gods Promises, and Threatenings as subordinate
means to concur with the principal; as the Butteresses to help to support
the building, that it do not swerve, whilst the foundation of love and Faith
keep it, that it do not sink. For a strange thing it may seem; that when with
great zeal we cry down that perfection of degrees, and admit of none but that
of parts, we should be so refined, and sublimate, as not to admit of the least
tincture and admission of Fear.

Now in the next place, as Fear may consist with love, so it may with Faith,
and with Hope it self, which seems to stand in oppositition with it. For first,
Faith apprehends all the Attributes of God, and eyes his threatenings, as well
as his Promises, and God has established and fenced in his Precepts with them
both; if he had not proposed them both as objects for our Faith, why does he
yet complain? why does he yet threaten? And if we will observe it, we shall
find some Impressions of Fear, not only in the Decalogue, but in our Creed.
Iudicare vivos and mortuos, to judge both the quick and the dead, are words
which sound with terror, and yet an Article of our Belief; And we must not
think it concerns us to believe it, and no more: Agenda, and credenda are not
at such a distance, but that we may learn our Practiques in our Creed. His
Omnipotence both comforts, and affrights me; his Mercy keeps me from despair,
and his Justice from presumption; but then his coming to judge both the quick
and the dead, is my solicitude, my anxiety, my fear. Nor must we Imagine,
that, because the Faith, which gives assent to these Truths, may be merely
Historical, this Article concerns the justified Person no more, then a bare
Relation, or a history: for the Fear of Judgment is so far from destroying
Faith in the justified person, that it may prove a sovereign means to
preserve it, (...), Bas. in Ps. 32.
as Basil speaks, to order and compose our Faith, which is ready enough to take
an unkind heat, if fear did not cool, and Temper it. In Prosperity, David is
at his non movebor, Ps. 30.6.
I shall never be moved; Before the storm came, Peter was so bold, as to dare
and challenge all the Temptations, that could assault him, Etsi omnes, non ego,
although all men deny thee, yet not I, and was puzzled, Matthew. 26.
and fell back at two or three words from a silly Maid: To keep us from such
distempers, it will be good to set Gods judgments always before our eyes.

And as Faith, so Hope, which is as the blood of the soul, to keep it in life
and cheerfulness, may be overheated; our Expectation may prove unsavory, if
it be not seasoned with some grains of this salt; and Hope, like strong wine,
may intoxicate and stupify our sense, if, as with water, we do not mix and
temper it with this Fear: Psalm. 115.11.
And therefore the Prophet David makes a rare composure of them both, Timentes
Confidite, ye that Fear the Lord, trust in the Lord; as if, where there were no
fear, there were no confidence, and without fear, there were a strange Ataxie
and disorder in the soul, and our hope would breath out it self, and be no more
Hope, but presumption. Navigamus, says Saint Hierom, spei velo; we hoyse up
the sails of Hope: now if the sails be too full, there may be as much danger
in the sail, as in a Rock, and not only a Temptation, but our hope may wrack
us: Then our Hope Sails on in an even Course, when fear, as a contrary wind,
shortens and stays her; then inter sinus and scopulos, Psalm. 115.11. Tert. de
Idol. c. ult.
she passes by every Rock, and by every reach, tuta, si cauta: secura, si
sollicita, safe if wary, and secure, if sollicitous.

To recollect all, and conclude; Thus may Fear temper our Love that it be not
too bold; our faith, that it be not too forward, and our hope, that it be not
too confident; make our Love Reverent, our Faith discreet, and our hope
cautelous, that so we may go on in a strait and even course, with all the
Riches and substance of our Faith from Virtue to Virtue, from one degree of
perfection to another. I made Fear but a Buttresse, Tert. de cult. Foem. c. 2.
Tertullian calls it Fundamentum, the Foundation of these three Theological
Virtues, Faith, Hope and Charity; and when is the Foundation most necessary?
not when the Timber is squaring, and the walls rising, but when it is Arched
and vaulted, and compact by its several contignations, and made into an house:
Then, not the Rain, and the wind, and the floods, but if the Foundation be not
sure, mole sua ruit, its own weight will shake and disjoynt, and throw it
down: Then, when we are shaped, and framed, and built up to be Temples of the
holy Ghost, then, Si non in timore Domini tenueris te instanter, if thou keep
not thy self diligently in the Fear of the Lord, in the Fear of his
displeasure, his wrath, and in the fear of the last account, this house, this
Temple will soon be overthrown. For as the Temple in the first of Ezra the
Scribe, Ecclus. 27.3.
was said to be built in great joy, and great mourning, that they could not
discern the shout of joy, for the noise of weeping: So our spiritual building
is raised, Inter Apocr. cap. 5. ver. 64, 65.
and supported with great hope, and great fear, and it may be sometimes we
shall not discern which is greatest, our fear, or our hope: but when we are
strong, then are we weak; when we are rich, then are we poor; when we hope,
then we fear; and our weakness upholds our strength, our poverty preserves our
wealth, and our Fear tempers our hope, that our strength overthrow us not;
that our riches beggar us not; that our hope overwhelme us not; quanto magis
crescimus, tanto magis timemus, the more we increase in Virtue, the more we
Fear. Thus manente Timore, stat aedificium, whilst this Butteresse, this
Foundation of Fear lasts, the house stands: Thus we work out our Salvation
with Fear and Trembling.

To conclude then, I speak not this to dead in any soul any of those Comforts,
which faith, or Love, or Hope have begotten in them, or to choke and stifle any
fruit or effect of the Spirit of love: No; I pray with S. Paul, that your love
may abound (...), Phil. 1.9.
yet more and more, but as it follows there, (...), in Knowledge and in all
Judgment; that you may discern things that differ one from another, a Phansy
from a Reality; a flash of Love, from the pure flame of love; a notion of
Faith, from a true Faith; and hope from presumption. For how many sin? how few
think of punishment? how many offend God, and yet call themselves his (...)?
how many are wilful in their disobedience, and yet per^ ^ory in their hope?
how many run on in their evil ways, (...) leave sear behind them, which
never overtakes them, but is furthest off, when they are nearest to their
journeys end, and within a step of the Tribunal? For that which made them
sinful, makes them senseless, and they easily subborn false comforts; the
^knes of the flesh, which they never resisted, and the Mercy of God, which they
ever abused, to chase away all fear; and so they depart (we say) in peace, but
are lost for ever. Curtius de Alexand.
For as the Historian observes of men in place, and Authority, Cum se fortunae
permittunt etiam naturam dediscunt, when they rely wholly upon their greatness
and Authority, they lose their very Nature, and turn Savage, and quite forget
that they are men; in like manner it befalls these spiritualized men, who build
up to themselves a pillar of assurance, and lean and rest themselves upon it,
they lose their nature, and reason, and forget to fear, or be disconsolate,
and become like those whom the Philosopher calls (...), because their boast
was, they did not fear a Thunderbolt.

Fear not them that can kill the body, says our Savior; whom do they fear
else? who has believed our report? or to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed?
That arm which breaks the Cedars of Libanus in pieces: That Arm, which
only does wondrous works, is ever lifted up, and we sport, and walk delicately
under it, when we tremble, and Couch under that, which is as ready to wither,
as to strike. Behold Dust and Ashes invested with Power: Behold man, who is of
as near kin to the worm and Corruption, as our selves, and see how he aws us,
and bounds us, and keeps us in on every side; If he say, Do this, we do it,
Subscribe to that as a Truth, which we know to be false, make our yea, nay, and
our nay, yea; renounce our understandings, and enslave our wills, change our
Religion, as we do our clothes, and fit them to the Times and Fashion; pull
down resolutions, cancel Oaths; be votaries to day, and break to morrow;
surrender up our souls and bodies; Deliver up our Conscience, in the midst of
all its Cryings and Gain-sayings, and lay it down at the foot of a fading,
transitory Power, which breathes it self forth as the wind, whilst it seeks to
destroy, which threatens, strikes, and then is no more. When this Lion roares,
every man is afraid, is transelemented, unnaturalized, unmanned, is made wax to
receive any impression from a mighty, but mortal hand; and shall not the God
of heaven and earth, who can dash all this Power to nothing, deserve our fear?
shall we be so familiar with him, as to contemn him? so love him, as to hate
him? shall a shadow, a vapor, awe us; and shall we stand out against
Omnipotency and Eternity it self? shall sense, brutish sense prevail with us
more, then our Reason or Faith? and shall we cross the method of God, make it
our Wisdom to fear man, and count it a sin to fear God? who is only to be
feared? this were to be wiser, then Wisdom it self, which is the greatest
folly in the World.

I have brought you therefore to this (...), to this School of fear, set up
the Moriemini, showed you a Deaths-Head to discipline and Catechize you, that
you may not die, but live, and Turn from your evil ways, and Turn unto him,
who has the keys of hell and of Death, who as he is a Savior, so is he also
a Judge, and has made Fear one Ingredient in his Physic, not only to purge
us, but to keep us in a healthful Temper, and Constitution.

And to this, Promptuor. Moral.
if not the danger of our souls, yet the noise of those who love us not, may
awake us. Stapleton, a Learned man, but a malicious Fugitive, lays it as a
charge against the Preachers of the Reformed Churches, that they are copious
and large in setting forth the Mercies of God, but they pass over Graviora
Evangelit, the harsher; but most necessary passages of the Gospel, suspenso
pede, lightly, and as it were on their Tiptoes, and go softly, as if they were
afraid to awake their hearers: That we are mere solifidians, and rely upon a
reed, a hollow and an empty faith. Bellarmine is loud, that we do per
contemplationem volare, hover as it were on the wings of Contemplation, and
hope to go to heaven in a Dream. Pamelius in his notes upon Tertullian, is
bold upon it, That the Primitive Church did Anathematize us in the Marcionists,
and Gnostiques, and if they were Heretics, then we are so. And what shall we
now say? Recrimination is rather an objection, then an Answer, and it will be
against all rules of Logic, to conclude our selves Good, because they are
worse; or that we have no Errors, because they have so many, and that none can
Err but he, that says he cannot, and for which we call him Antichrist; This
bandying of Censures and Curses has been held up too long with some loss and
injury to Religion, on both sides; Our best way certainly to confute them, is
by our practice; so to live, that all men say, The Fear of God is in us of a
Truth, to weave Love and Fear into one Piece, to serve the Lord in fear, and
rejoice in Trembling, Hilar. in Fs. 2.
ut sit timor exultans, and exultatio tremens; that there may be Trembling in
our Joy, and Joy in our Fear: not to Divorce Jesus from the LORD, nor the Lord
from Jesus; not to Fear the Lord the less for Jesus, nor love Jesus the less
for the Lord, but to join them both together, and place Christ in the midst;
and then there will be a pax vobis, peace unto us; his Ointment shall drop upon
our Love, that it be not too bold, and distill upon our Fear, that it faint
not, and end in despair; that our Love may not consume our Fear, nor our Fear
chill our love: but we shall so Love him, that we do not Despair, so Fear him,
that we do not presume, That we may Fear him as a Lord, and love him as Jesus;
and then when he shall come in Glory to Judge both the quick and the dead, we
shall find him a Lord, but not to affright us; and a Jesus to save us; our Love
shall be made perfect; All doubting taken from our Faith; nay, Faith it self
shall be done away, and the fear of Death shall be swallowed up in Victory,
and we who have made such use of Death in its representation, shall never dye,
but live for evermore.

And this we have learnt from the Moriemini: Why will you Die?

THE TENTH SERMON.
PART VI.
EZEKIEL 33.11. -- why will you die, Oh House of Israel?


WE have lead you through the Chambers of Death; through the school of
Discipline; The School of fear. For why will ye Die? Look upon Death, and
fear it; and you shall not Dye at all.

Thus far are we gone.

We come now, ad domum Israelis, to the House of Israel: Why will ye die oh
house of Israel? For to name Israel, is an Argument: Take them as Israel, or
take them as the House of Israel: Take the House for a Building, or take it for
a family, and it may seem strange, and full of Admiration, that Israel, which
should prevail with God, should embrace Death; That the House of Israel
compact in it self, should ruin it self: In Edom it is no strange sight to see
men run on in their evil ways; In Mesheck, or the Tents of Kedar, there might
be at least some color for a Reply; but to Israel, it is Gravis expostulatio,
a heavy, and full Expostulation. Let the Amorites and Hittites; let the
Edomites, let Gods enemies perish; but let not Israel the People of God Dye.
Why should they die? The Devil may be an Edomite; but God forbid he should be
an Israelite.

The Quare moriemini? why will ye Die? we see, is levelled to the mark, is
here in its right and proper place, and being directed to Israel, is a sharp
and vehement exprobration. Oh Israel, why will ye die? I would not have you
die: I have made you gentem selectam, a chosen people, that you may not Die: I
have set before you Life and Death; Life, that you may choose it, and Death,
that you may run from it; and why will you die? My sword is drawn to affright,
and not to kill you; and I hold it up, That I may not strike: I have placed
death in the way, that you may stop and retreat, and not go on: I have set my
Angel, my Prophet, with a sword drawn in his Hand, That at least you may be as
wise, as the Beast was under Baalam, and sink, and fall down under your Burden.
I have imprinted the very Image of Death in every sin; will ye yet go on?
will ye love sin, that has such a foul face, such a terrible countenance,
that is thus clothed, and apparrell'd with Death? Quis furor oh Cives? what a
madness is this, oh ye Israelites? As Herod once upbraiding Cassius for his
seditious behavior in the East, (...); wrote no more but this, Herod to
Cassius. Thou art mad; Philostrat. in vit. Herodis.
so God may seem to send to his People. God, by his Prophet, to the Israelites,
you are mad. Therefore do my people run on in their evil ways, Isa. 5.13.
because they have no understanding. For now look upon Death; and that
affrights us: Look upon God, and he exhorts us: Reflect upon our selves, and we
are an Israel, a Church of God. There is no cause of dying, but not Turning: no
cause of destruction, but Impenitency: If we will not die; we shall not die;
and if we will Turn, we cannot die at all; for that if we die, God passes
sentence upon us, and condemns us, but kills us not; but perditio tua ex te
Israel, our destruction comes from our selves: It is not God, it is not death
it self, that kills us, but we die, because we will.

Now by this Touch, and short descant on the words so much Truth is conveyed
unto us, as may acquit and discharge God as no way accessory to our death: and
to make our Passage clear and plain, we will proceed by these steps or degrees;
draw out these three Conclusions. 1. That God is not willing we should die. 2.
That he is so far from willing our death, that he has plenteously afforded
sufficient means of life and salvation, which will bring in the Third and
last; That if we die, our death is voluntary; That no other reason can be given
of our death, but our own will. And the due consideration of these three, may
serve to awake our shame, Naz. Or. 20.
as death did our fear, which is (...) (as Nazianzen speaks) another Help and
furtherance to work out our Salvation.

Why will ye die, oh House of Israel?

And first, That God is not willing we should die, is plain enough; First,
from the Obtestation, or Expostulation it self: Secondly, from the Nature of
God, who thus expostulates. For 1. why will ye die? is the voice of a friend,
not of an enemy; He that asks me, why I will die? by his very Question assures
me, he intends not to destroy me: God is not as man, that he should lie; what
he works, he works in the clear and open day: His fire is kindled to inflame
us; his water flows to purge and cleanse us; his oil is powered forth to supple
us; his commands are not snares, nor his Precepts Accusations: He stamps not
the Devill's face upon his Coin; He wills not, what he made not, and he made
not Death, says the Wiseman. He wishes, he desires we should live; he is
angry, Wisd. 1.12.
and sorry if we die. He looks down upon us, calls after us; he exhorts, and
rebukes, and even weeps over us, as our Savior did over Jerusalem, and if we
die, we cannot think that he that is life it self, should kill us. If we must
die, why does he yet complain? why does he expostulate? for if the Decree be
come forth, if we be lost already, why does he yet call after us? how can a
desire, or command breath in those coasts, which the power of an absolute will
has laid waste already? if he has decreed we should die, he cannot desire we
should live, but rather the Contrary, that his Decree be not void, and of no
effect; otherwise to pass sentence, an irrevocable sentence of Death; and then
bid us live, is to look for liberty and freedom, in Necessity, for a
sufficient effect, from an unsufficient cause; to command, and desire that,
which himself had made impossible; to ask a Dead man, why he does not live, and
to speak to a carcass, and bid it walk. Indeed by some this, why will you die?
is made but sancta simulatio, but a kind of holy dissimulation, so that God
with them, sets up man as a mark, and then sticks his deadly arrows in his
sides, and after asks him, why he will die? And why may he not, says one,
with the same liberty Damn a soul, as a Hunter kills a Dear? (a bloody
instance) as if an immortal soul, which Christ set at a greater rate, then the
World it self, nay, then his own most precious Blood, were in his sight of no
more value, then a Beast, and God were a mighty Nimrod, and did destroy men's
souls for delight and pleasure. Thus though they dare not call God the Author
of sin (for who is so sinful, that could hear and not Anathematize it?) yet
others, and those no children in understanding, think it a Conclusion, that
will naturally, and necessarily follow upon such bloody premises; and they are
more encouraged by those ill-boding words, which have dropped from their quills;
For say some; vocat, ut induret; He calls them to no other end, but that he may
harden them; he hardens them, that he may destroy them; He exhorts them to
turn, that they may not Turn^; He asks them, why they will die; that they may
run on in their evil ways, even upon Death it self: when they break his
command, they fulfill his will; and it is his pleasure they should sin; it is
his pleasure, they should die; and when he calls upon them not to sin, when
he asks them, why they will die, he does but Dissemble, for they are dead
already; Horribili decreto, by that horrible, antecedaneous Decree of
Reprobation.

And now tell me; If we admit of this, What Is become of the expostulation? what
use is there of the obtestation? why does he yet ask, why will ye Die? I called
it (...), a reason unanswerable; but if this Fancy, this Interpretation take
place, it is no reason at all, why will ye die? the Answer is ready (and what
other answer can a poor praecondemned soul make?) Domine Deus tu nosti, Lord
God thou know: Thou condemnest us before thou made us; Thou did Destroy
us, before we were; and if we die, Even so, Good Lord, For it is thy good
pleasure; Fato volvimur, it is our Destiny; or rather, Est deus in nobis, not a
stoicall fate, but thy right hand, and thy strong irresistible Arm has
destroyed us, and so the expostulation is answered, and the Quare mortemini is
nothing else, but mortui estis, why will ye die? that is the Text; the Gloss
is, you are dead already.

But in the Second place, That this expostulation is true and Hearty, may be
seen in the very Nature of God, who is Truth it self; who has but one
property, and Quality, says Trismegistus, and that is Goodness; and therefore
cannot bid us live, when he intends to kill us: For consider God before man had
fallen from him by sin and disobedience, and we shall see nothing but the works
of his Goodness, and Love. The heavens were the works of his Fingers; Basil.
Hem. in Famem and sicci^.
he created Angels, and men, he spoke the word, and all was done, (...)? says
Basil: what necessity was there, that he should thus break forth into Action?
who compelled him? who persuaded him? who was his Counselor? He was
All-sufficient, and stood in need of nothing, l. 4. c. 28.
non quasi Indigens plasmavit Adam, says Irenaeus, it was not out of any
indigencie, or Defect in himself, that he made Adam after his Image. He was all
to himself before he made any thing, nor could millions of Worlds have added to
him. What was it to him, that there were Angels made, or Seraphin, or Cherubin?
he gained not (...), Athena. Legatio pro Christianis.
said Aristotle, for there could be no Accession, nothing to heighten his
perfection. Did he make the world (...), as Athenagor as calls it, as an
Instrument to make him Music? Did he cloth the Lilies, and dress up Nature in
various colors to delight himself? or could he not reign without man? says
Mirandula? God has a most free, and powerful and immutable will, and
therefore it was not necessary for him to work, or to begin to work, but when
he would; for he might both will, and not will the Creation of all Things,
without any change of his will, but it pleased him out of his goodness, thus to
break forth into Action: will you know the cause, says the Sceptique, why he
made world? Sext. Emperic. adv. Mathemat. page 327.
(...); He was good; Nihil ineptius, says one, quam cogitare Deum nihil
agentem; There is nothing more vain then to conceive that God could be idle,
or doing of nothing; and were it not for his Goodness, we could hardly
conceive him ad extra agentem; working any thing out of himself, who was (...),
All-sufficient, 1 Timothy 1.11.
and Blessed for evermore, infinitely happy, though he had never created the
Heaven, and the Earth, though there had neither been Angel or man to worship
him; but he did all these things because he was good. Bonitas says Tertul.
otium sui non patitur, hinc censetur, Tert. adv. Marcion. l. 2.
si agatur, Goodness is an Active, and restless quality, and it is not, when
it is Idle; it cannot contain it self in it self, and by his Goodness he made
man, made him for his Glory, and so to be partaker of his happiness; placed him
here on earth, to raise him up to Heaven, made him a living soul, ut in vita
hac compararet vitam, that in this short and Transitory life, he might fit
himself for an Abiding City, and in this moment work out Aeternity. Thus of
Himself, God is good, nor can any evil proceed from him; if he frown, we
first move him: if he be angry, we have provoked him; if he come in a Tempest,
we have raised it; if he be a consuming fire, we have kindled it; we force him
to be, what he would not be; we make him Thunder, who is all Light. Tert.
advers. Marc. l. 2. c. 11.
Bonitas ingenita, severitas Accidens; Alteram sibi, alteram rei Deus
praestitit, says the Father, his goodness is Natural, his severity (in
respect of its Act) Accidental; for God may be severe, and yet not punish; for
he strikes not till we provoke him; his Justice, and severity are the same, as
everlasting as himself, though he never speak in his wrath, nor draw his sword;
If there were no Hell, yet were he just, and if there were no Abraham's Bosom,
yet were he Good; if there were neither Angel nor men, he were still the Lord,
blessed for evermore; in a word, he had been just though he had never been
Angry; he had been merciful, though man had not been miscrable, he had been
the same God, just, and good, and merciful, though sin had not entered in by
Adam, nor Death by sin. God is active in Good, and not in Evil, he cannot
do what he does detest and hate, he cannot Decree, Ordain, or further that,
which is most contrary to him; he does not kill me before all time, and then in
time, ask me why I will die? He does not Condemn me first, and then make a
Law, that I may break it. He does not blow out my Candle, and then punish me
for being in the dark. That the conviction of a sinner should be the only end
of his Exhortations, and Expostulations cannot consist with that Goodness,
which God is, who when he comes to punish, Isai. 28.21.
sacit opus non suum, says the Prophet, does not his own work, does a
strange work, a strange Act, an Act that is forced from him, a work which he
would not do.

And as he does not will our Death, so does he not desire to manifest his Glory
in it; which (as our Death) proceeds from his secondary, and occasioned will;
For God, says Aquinas, seeks not the manifestation of his Glory, Aquin. 2.2 q.
132. art. 1.
for his own, but for our sakes; His glory as his Wisdom, and Justice, and
Power, is with him always, as eternal as himself; no Quire of Angels can
improve, no raging Devil can diminish his Glory, which in the midst of all the
Hallelujahs of Seraphin, and Cherubin, in the midst of all the Blasphemies of
men and Devils, is still the same; and his first will is to see it in his
Image, in the conformity of our wills to his, where it strives in the
perfection of Beauty, rather then when it is decayed and defaced, rather then
in a Damned Spirit; rather in that Saint he would have made, then in that
Reprobate, and cursed soul, which he was forced to throw into the lowest pit,
and so to receive his Glory, is, that which he would not have, which he was
willing to begin on Earth, and then have made it perfect and complete in the
highest Heavens. Tert. ibid.
Exinde admortem sed ante ad vitam; The sentence of Death was pronounced
against man, almost as soon as he was man; but he was first created to life; we
are punished for being evil, but we were first commanded to be good; his first
will is, That we glorify him in our Bodies, and in our souls; but if we
frustrate his loving expectation here, then he rowseth himself up as a mighty
man, and will be avenged of us, and work his Glory, out of that which
dishonored him, and write it with our blood. In the multitude of the People,
Prove. 14.28.
is the Glory of a King, says the wisest of Kings, and more Glory, if they be
obedient to his laws, then if they rebel, and rise up against him; That
Commonwealth is more glorious, where every man fills his place, then where the
Prisons are filled with Thieves, and Traitors, and men of Belial; and though
the Justice, and wisdom of the King may be seen in these, yet it is more
resplendent in those, on whom the Law has more Power, then the sword. In
Heaven is the glory of God best seen, and his delight is in it; to see it in
the Church of the Firstborn, and in the souls of just men made perfect, it
is now indeed his will, which primarily was not his will, to see it in the
Devil and his Angels. For God is best pleased to see his Creature man, to
answer to that patte^e, which he has set up, to be what he should be, and what
he intended: And, as every Artificer glories in his work, when he sees it
finished according to the rule, and that Idea, which he had drawn in his
mind; and as we use to look upon the work of our hands, or wits, with that
favor and complacency we do upon our Children, when they are like us; so does
God upon man, when he appears in that shape and form of Obedience, which he
prescribed; for then the Glory of God is carried along in the continued
stream, and course of all our Actions, breaks forth, and is seen in every
work of our Hands, is the Echo of every word we speak, the result of every
Thought, that begat that word; and it is Music in his ears, which he had
rather hear, then the weeping and howling of the Damned, which he will now
hear, though the time was, when he used all fitting means to prevent it, even
the same means, by which he raised those, who now glorify him in the Highest
Heaven.

God then, is no way willing we should die; not by his Natural will which is
his prime, and antecedent will; for Death cannot issue from the Fountain of
Life, and by this will was the Creature made in the beginning, and by this
preserved ever since; by this are administered all the means to bring it to
that perfection and happiness for which it was first made; for the goodness of
God it was, which first gave a being to man, and then adopted him in spe^
reg^i, designed him for immortality, and gave him a Law, by the fulfilling of
which, he might have a Taste of that Joy and Happiness, which he from all
Eternity possessed. And therefore secondly, not voluntate praecepti, not by his
will expressed in his command, in his precepts, and Laws; For under Christ, this
will of his is the only destroyer of Death, and being kept and observed,
swallows it up in victory; for how can Death touch him, who is made like unto
the living Lord? or how should Hell receive him, whose conversation is in
heaven? Ezekiel. 16.^1.13.21.
If we do them, we shall even live in them, says the Prophet, and he repeats
it often, as if Life were as inseparable from them, as it is from the living
God himself, by which, as he is life in himself, so to man, whom he had made,
he brought life and immortality to light. And these his Precepts are defluxions
from him, the proper issue of his natural and primitive desire, of that
general Love of goodwill which he did bear to his Creature, and the only way
to draw on that love of Friendship, that nearer Relation by which we are one
with him, and he with us, by which he calls us his Children, and we cry Abba,
Father; his first will ordained us for good, his second will was published, and
set up as a light, to bring us to that good, for which we were made and created.

But we are told, there is in God, voluntas permissionis, a permissive will, or
a will of permission; and indeed some have made great use of this wo^d
permission; and have made it of the same necessitating power and efficacy, with
that, by which God made the Heavens and the Earth, for we find it in Terminis,
in their writings, posita peccati permissione, necesse est ut peccatum eveniat,
that upon the permission of sin, it must necessarily follow, that sin must
be committed; They call it permission, but before they wind up their
Discourses, the word, I know not by what Logic, or Grammar has more
significations put upon it, then God or nature ever gave it. Tert. in vit. Agr.
Romani ubi solitudinem faciunt, pacem appellant, say the Ancient Britons in
Tacitus, The Romans, where by Fire and Sword they lay the Land waste, and
Turn all to a Wilderness, call it Peace, so here the word is permission, but
currente rota, whilst they are hot, and busy in their work, at last it is,
Excitation, stirring up, Inclining, hardening, permittere is no less then
Impellere, permission is Compulsion, and by their Chemistry, they are able to
extract all this out of this one word and more, as, That God will have that
done, which he forbids us to do; God does not will, what he tells us, he does
will; That some are cast asleep from all eternity, that they may be Hardened,
and all this with them is but permission. And to make this Good, we are told
That God has on purpose created some men with an intent to permit them to fall
into sin? and this at first sight is a fair Proposition, that carries Truth
written in the very forehead, but indeed it is deceitful upon the weights, one
thing is said, and another meant. God has created some, and why some, and not
all? for no doubt the condition of Creation is the same in all. And why with a
purpose to permit them to fall into sin? did he not also create them with a
purpose, that they should walk in his Commandments? Certainly both, and rather
the last then the former; for God indeed permits sin, but withal forbids it;
but he permits, nay he commands us to do his will. Permission looks upon
both, both upon sin, and upon Obedience; on the one side it meets with a
check, on the other with a Command, That we may not do what is but permitted,
and Forbidden, and that we may yield ready Obedience to that which is not
permitted only, but commanded. It was a Custom amongst the Ancients (...), to
number and cast up their Accounts with their fingers, Naz. Or. 3.
as we do by Figures and Counters, whence Orontes the Persian was wont to say,
Eundem digitum nunc December millia, nunc unum ostendere, that the same finger
with some alteration and change, did now signify Ten thousand, and in another
posture and motion but one; The same use some men have made of this word
permission, which they did of their fingers. In its true sense, and natural
place, it can signify no more then this, A purpose of God, not to Intercede by
his Omnipotency, and hinder the committing of those sins, which if he
permitted not, could not once have a being: but men have learnt so to place it,
that it shall stand for Ten Thousand; for Inclination, and excitation, and
induration, and all these Fearful expressions, which leave men chained and
Fettered with an Inevitable necessity of sinning, and so make that, which in
God is but merely permission, infallibly effective, and so damn men with
gentler Language, and in a soster phrase; he permits them; That he does, that
he must do; but their meaning is, His absolute will is, that they should die;
and let them shift as they please, and wind and Turn themselves to slip out of
reach; after all Defalcations and substractions they can make, it will arise
near to this Sum, which I am almost afraid to give you, That God is willing
we should die. For to this purpose, they bring in also Gods Providence; To this
purpose? I should have said, To none at all; For though God rule the world,
(...), by this Law of Providence, as Nazianz. calls it, though he disposes and
orders all things, and all actions of men, yet he lays not any Law of
Necessity upon all things. Aquin. pri^. part. q. 22.
Some effects he has fitted with necessary causes, that they may infallibly
fall out, says Aquinas, and to other effects, which in their own nature are
contingent, he has applied Contingent Causes, so that, that shall fall out
Necessarily, which his Providence has so disposed of, and that Contingently,
which he has left in a Contingency; and both these in the nature of things
necessary and Contingent are within the verge and rule of his Providence, and
he alters them not, but extra ordinem, when he would do some extraordinary
work, when he would work a Miracle. The Sun knows his seasons, and the
Moon its going down, and this in a constant and unchangeable course, but yet he
commanded the Sun to stand still in Gibeon, Josh. 10.12.
and the Moon in the valley of Ajalon. But then, I think, all Events are not as
necessary, as the change of the Moon, or the setting of the Sun, for all have
not so necessary causes: unless you will say, to walk or stand, to be rich or
poor, to fall in battle, or to conquer, are as necessary effects as
Darkness, when the Sun sets, or Light, when it rises in our Horison: And this
indeed may bring in a new kind of Predestination, to walk or stand, to Riches,
and Poverty, to Victory and Captivity, as well as to Everlasting life, and
everlasting perdition.

But, posito, sed non concesso, Let us suppose it, though we grant it not, That
the Providence of God has laid a Necessity upon such Events as these, yet it
does not certainly upon those Actions which concern our everlasting welfare,
which either raise us up to heaven, or cast us down to destruction. It were
not much material (at least a good Christian might think so) whether we sit or
walk, whether he predetermine that we be rich or poor, that we Conquer or be
overcome: what is it to me, though the Sun stand still, if my feet be at
Liberty, to run the ways of Gods Commandments? what is it to me, if the
Moon should start out of his Sphere, if I lose not the sight of that
brightness, which should direct me in my way to bliss? what were it to me, if
I were necessitated to Beggary, so I be not a predestinate Bankrupt in the City
of the Lord? Let him do what he will in Heaven and in earth; Let the Sun go
back; let the Stars lose their light, let the Wheel of Nature move in a
contrary way, Let the pillars of the world be shaken; Let him do what he will;
It concerns us not further then that we say, Amen, so be it; for we must give
him leave, who made the world, to govern it: If all other Events and Actions
were necessary, we might well sit down, and lay our hands upon our mouth; But
here it is est de tota possessione, we speak not of Riches and Poverty, or fair
weather and tempests, but of Everlasting life, and everlasting Damnation; and
to entitle God either directly or indirectly, to the sins and death of wicked
men, so to lay the Scene, that it shall appear, though masked and veiled with
limitations and distinctions, and though they be not positive, yet leave such
Premises, out of which this conclusion may easily be drawn, is a high reproach
to Gods Infinite Goodness, a Blasphemy, however men wipe their mouths after
it, of the greatest magnitude (not to speak the worst) it is to stand up, and
contradict him to his face, and when he swears, he would not have us die, to
proclaim it to all the world, that there be Thousands whom he has killed
already, and destroyed before they were, and so Decreed to do that from all
Eternity, which in Time, he swore he would not do.

I speak not this to rake the Ashes of any of those who are dead, who either
maintained or favored this Opinion, nor to stir the Choler of any man living,
who may love this Child for the Fathers sake; but for the honor of God, and his
everlasting goodness, which I conceive to be strangely violated by this
Doctrine of Efficacious permission, or by that shift and evasion of a positive
efficiency joined (as it is said) inseparably with this permission of sin,
which is so far from coloring it over, or giving any loveliness to it, that
it renders it more horrid and deformed, and is the louder blasphemy of the two,
which clothes, as it were, a Devil, with Light, which yet breaks through it,
and rages as much, as if he had been in his own shape. Permission is a fair
word, and bodes no harm, but yet it breathes forth that poisonous exhalation,
which kills us; for but to be permitted to sin, is to be a child appointed to
death; The Ancients, especially the Athenians, did account some words ominous,
and therefore they never used to speak them; (...), they called (...), and
(...); The Prison they called the House, The Hangman, Helladius apud Photium.
the Common Officer, and the like, and the Romans would not once mention
Death, or say, their friend was dead, but Humanitus illi Accidit, we may render
it in the Scripture Phrase; He is gone the way of all flesh; what their fancy
lead them to; Religion should persuade us, to think, that some words there be,
which we should be afraid to mention, when we speak of God: Excitacion to
sin, Inclination, Induration, Reprobation, as they are used, are (...),
ill-boading words, but yet we must not, with the Heathen only change the
language, and mean the same thing, and call it Permission, when our whole
Discourse drives this way, to bring it forward, and set it up for a flat and
Absolute Compulsion: for this is but to plough the wind, to make a way, which
^oses of it self, as soon as it is made; this is not to Teach men, but to
amaze them. Sermo per deflexus, and anfractus veritarem po^rus qu^il, quam
ostendit, says Hilary; when men broach these contradictions to known and
common Principles, when they make these Meanders, these windings and turnings,
in their Discourses, they make it also apparent, that they are still in their
search, and have not yet found out the Truth. Let us therefore, Fontem a Capite
f^dere, as near as we can, lay open the ground of this mistake and Error, and
we shall find it to be an error, as great as this, and has the same taste and
relish with the fountain from whence it flowed.

For they who make Gods will, which is but permissive, Effective, at the very
mention of Gods will, Think of that absolute will of his, which cannot be
resisted, by which he made the Heavens, and the earth, and so acknowledge no
will of God but that which is absolute and effective, as if that will of his,
by which he would have us do something, were the same with that, by which he
will do something himself, and so in effect, make not only the Conversion,
but the Induration of a sinner the work of his Omnipotency. But were not men
blind to all objects, but those they delight to look on, they might easily
discern a great difference; and that Gods will is broken every Day. His
Natural Desire, which is his will to save mankind, is that fulfilled? if it
were, there could be no Hell at all. His command, that is, his will, what
moment is there, wherein that is not resisted? we are those Devils which
kindle that fire, which he made not for us; we are those sons of Anak, those
Gyant-like fighters against Heaven, which break his Commands with as great
ease, as Samson dip his Threads of Towe. We are like those Leviathans, which
break the bounds which he has set us, that esteem Iron as straw, with whom his
Threatenings, which he darts at us, are accounted as stubble, and can we, who so
often break his will, say, That his will is always fulfilled?

For again, we must not imagine, That all things that are done in the world,
are the work of his hand, or the effect of that Power by which he brings
mighty things to pass, nor can we so much forget God and his Goodness, as to
imagine, that upon every Action of man, he has set a Dixit, and factum est, he
spoke the word, and it was done, he commanded, and it became Necessary; for
some Actions there be, which God does neither absolutely will, nor powerfully
resist, but in his Wisdom permits to be done, which otherwise could not be
done, but by his permission; nor does this will of permission fall cross with
any other will of his; not with his absolute will, for he absolutely permits
them; not with his primary and Natural will; for though by his Natural will,
he would bring men to happiness, though he forbid sin, though he detest it,
as that which is most contrary to his very nature, and which makes men Devils
and Enemies to him; yet he may Justly permit it; and the reason is plain. For
man is not as God, qui sibi sufficit ad beatitudinem, who is all-sufficient and
Happiness it self, and therefore was placed in an Estate, where he might work
out his own Happiness, but still with a Possibility of being miserable. And
herein was the Goodness and Wisdom of God made visible; and as from his
goodness it is, that he loved his Creature, so in his goodness and Wisdom
he placed before him Good and evil, that he might lay hold on Happiness, and
be good willingly, and not of Necessity. For it is Impossible for any Finite
Creature who has not his completenes, his perfection in himself, to purchase
heaven, but upon such terms, as that he might have lost it, nor to lose it,
but upon such Terms, as that he might have took it by violence. For every Law,
as it supposes a possibility of being kept, so does it also a possibility of
being broken, which cannot be without permission of sin, Lex justo non est
posita, if Goodness had been as Essential to man, as his Nature and soul by
which he is; if God had interceded by his Omnipotency, and by an irresistible
force, kept sin from entering into the world; The Jews had not heard the
noise of the Trumpet under the Law, nor the Disciples the Sermon on the Mount
under the Gospel; there had been no use of the Comfortable breath of his
Promises, nor the Terror of his Threatenings; for who would make a Law against
that, which he knows will never come to pass? a Law against sin, supposes a
permission to sin, and a possibility of sinning. Lastly, it stands in no show
of opposition to his occasioned and consequent will; for we must suppose sin,
before we can take up the least conceit of of any will in God to punish. Omnis
poena, si justa est, peccati poena est, says Austin, in his Retractations; all
punishment that is just, is the punishment of sin, and therefore God, who of
his Natural Goodness would not have man commit sin, out of his Justice
wills man's Destruction, and will not repent: Sic totus Deus bonus est, dum pro
bono omnia est, Tert. l. 2. adv. Marcion.
says Tertullian, Thus God is entirely good, whilst all he is, whether
Merciful, or severe, is for Good: minus est tantummodo prodesse, quia non
aliud quid possit, quam prodesse, his reward might seem too loose, and not
carry with it that Intinite value and weight, if he could not reach out his
hand to punish, as well as to reward, and some distrust it might work in the
creature, That he could not do the one, if he could not do both: So ^en,
sin is permitted, though God hate sin; that which brings us to the gates of
Death, is permitted, though God has tendered ^s will with an Oath, That he
will not have us die; Though he forbids sin, though he punish it, yet he
permitts it, I have said too little; Nay, he could nor forbid, and punish it,
if he did not permit it. Yet permission is permission, and no more, nor is it
such a Trojan Horse, nor can it swell to that bulk and Greatness, as to hide
and contain within it those Monsters of Fate and Necessity; of Excaecation,
and excitation, of inclination, and induration, which devour a soul, and
cannot be resisted; which bind us over unto Death, when the noise is loud about
us, why will ye die? For this permissive Will of God, or his will of permission
is not operative, nor efficacious; neither is it a remitting, or slackning of
the will of God, upon which sin, as some pretend, must necessarily follow;
nor is it Terminated in the thing permitted, but in the permission it self
alone; for to permit sin is one Thing, and to be willing that sin should be
committed is another; for it is written in the leaves of Aeternity, That God
will not have sin committed, as being most abhorrent, and Contrary to his
Nature, and will, and yet this permission of sin is a positive Act of his
will; for he will permit sin, though he has clothed it with Death, to make
us afraid of it, and upon pain of Eternal Damnation, forbids us to sin,
though it were his will to permit it. These two; To be willing to permit
sin, and to be willing that sin should be committed, are as different in
sense, as in sound, unless we will say, That he who permits me to be wounded,
when I would not look to my self, and hold up my buckler, ^id cast that Dart at
me, which sticks in my sides: we have been told indeed, Qui volens permittit
peccata, certe vult voluntate permissiva ab alijs fieri, That he that is
willing to permit sin, by that permissive will, is willing also to have that
sin committed; but it is so unsavory, so thin and empty a Speech, that the
least cast of the Eye pierces through it, a rotten stick whitled by unskilful
hands, to make a Pillar to uphold that Fabric of the Fancy, The absolute
Decree of Reprobation. Take away this supporter, That God will have that to be
done, which he permits, that is, That he will have that to be done, which he
forbids, and down falls this Babel of Confusion to the ground.

And now what is God's will? Haec est voluntus Dei, sanctificatio vestra; This
is his will, even your sanctification; Saint Luke calls it, (...), the Counsel
of God, and so does Saint Matthew, 1 Thessalonians 4.3. Luke 7.30.
his counsel his wish, his desire, his will, his natural, sincere, and
constant will, and it savours of much vanity and weakness, to talk and dispute
of his Decree, which in respect of particulars, must needs be to us most
uncertain, when we certainly know his will, when he cries to day if you will
hear his voice; when his Precepts, his Laws are promulg'd, hodie, To Day, to
enquire what he did before all Eternity; we may rest on the Goodness of God,
who would not have created us, Isa. 43.7.
if he had not loved us; (I have made thee, I have formed thee, I have Created
thee, says God, for my Glory) on the Mercy of God, with which it could not
consist, to precondemne so many to Misery before they were; upon the Justice of
God, which cannot punish without desert, which could not be in the Creature,
before he was; and on the Wisdom of God, which does nothing, much less does
make man for naught, stamp his Image upon him, to deface it, nor uses to make
and unmake, to build, and pull down, to plant, and to dig up; and to the
grace of God, which has appeared unto all men, that they may know him to be
the True God, and him, whom he has sent Christ Jesus.

But now we are told, that some places of Scripture there are, which seem to
give God a greater hand in sin, then a bare, and feeble, and uneffective
permission; for in the 6. of Esaias. 9, 10. verse. God bids the Prophet, Go, tell
the People, Crassum reddito cor populi hujus, Make the heart of this people
fatt, and their ears Heavy, lest they see with their Eyes, and hear with
their Ears, and be converted. Now to make their heart fatt, and their ears
heavy, and to shut up their eyes, is more then a bare permission, is in a
manner to destine, and appoint them to Death; most true; if it can be proved
out of this place, that God did either. But it is one thing to Prophesy a Thing
shall be done, and another to do it; Hector in Homer foretells Achilles Death,
and Herod the fall of Mezentius in Virgil, and our Savior the Destruction of
Jerusalem; but neither was Hectors Prophesy the cause of Achilles Death, nor
Herod's of Mezentius, nor our Savior of the Destruction of Jerusalem; vade and
dic, Go, and tell them; makes it a plame prediction, what manner of men they
would be, to whom Christ was to speak, stubborn and refractory, and such as
would harden their faces against the Truth. If you will not take this
Interpretation, our! Savior is an Interpreter one of a Thousand, nay, one for
all the world, and tells the multitude, that in them was fulfilled the Prophesy
of Esaias, which says, By hearing you shall hear, and not understand, Matthew.
13.14. for this Peoples heart is waxen fat, and their eyes have they closed,
that they might not see. And here, if their eyes were shut, it were fit one
would Think, they should be opened; True (says Chrysostom) if they had been
borne blind, or if this had been the immediate Act of God; but because they
wilfully shut their eyes, he does not say simply, they do not see, but seeing
they do not see to show what was the cause of their blindness, even a perverse
and froward heart: they saw his Miracles; they said he did them by Beelzebub.
He tells them that he is come to show them the will of God; they are peremptory
and resolute, that he is not of God, and bring corrupt Judges against their own
sight, and understanding, they were justly punished with the loss of both: For
it is just, that he should be blind, that puts out his own eyes. Yet was not
this incrassation or blinding through any malevolent influence from God, but
this action is therefore attributed to God, because whatsoever light he had
afforded them, whatsoever means he had offered them, whatsoever he did for
them, was through their own fault and stubbornness of no more use to them, then
colors to a blind man, or as the Wiseman speaks a mess of Pottage on a
Dead-mans Grave.

We might here Sylvam ingentem commovere, meet with many other places of
Scripture like to this, but we will touch but one more, and it is that, which
is so common in men's mouths, and at the first hearing conveighs to our
understanding a show and appearance of some positive act in God, which is more
then a bare permission; For God tells Moses in plain terms Indurabo cor
Pharaonis, I will harden Pharaohs heart. Exodus 7.3. And here I will not say
with Garson, aliud est litera, aliud est literalis sensus, that the letter is
one thing, and the litteral sense another, Hill de Trin. l. 8.
but rather with Hilary, Optimus est lector, qui dictorum in telligentiam ex
dictis potius expectet, quam imponat, and retulerit magis quam attulerit, he is
the best reader of Scripture, who does rather wait and expect what sense the
words will bear, then on the sudden rashly fasten what sense he please, and
carry away the meaning, not bring one; nor cry this must be the sense of the
Scripture, which his presumption formerly had set down; Sure I am none of the
Fathers, which I have seen, make this induration, and hardening of Pharaohs
heart a positive act of God; not Saint Augustine himself, who was more likely
to look this way then any of the rest, although he interprets this place of
Scripture in diverse places; Augustine: Feria 4 post 3. Dominic: in Quadrages.
Pharaoh non potentiae, sed patientia Dei indurabatur, id. Ser. 88.
I will but mention one, and it is in one of his Lent Sermons Quoties auditur
cor Pharaonis Dominum obdurasse etc. As often as it is read in the Church that
God did harden Pharaohs heart, some scruple presently arises not only in the
minds of the ignorant Laity, but of the Learned Clergy, and for these very
words the Manichees most Sacrilegiously condemned the old Testament, and
Marcion rather then he would yield that good and evil proceeded from the same
God, did run upon a grosser impiety, and made another, two principles, one of
good, and another of evil; But we may lay this, says he, as a sure ground and
an infallible Axiom, Deus non deserit nisi prius deserentem, God never
forsakes any man, till he first forsake God. When we continue in sin, when the
multitude of our sins beget despair, and despair obduration, when we add sin
to sin, and to make up the weight that sinks us; when we are the worse for Gods
mercy, and the worse for his Judgments, when his mercy hardens us, and his
light blindes us, God then may be said to harden our hearts, as a Father by way
of upbrayding may tell his prodigal and Thristlesse son, ego talem te feci, it is
my love and goodness has occasioned this, I have made thee so by sparing
thee, when I might have struck thee Dead; I have nourished this thy pertinacy,
although all the Fathers love and indulgency was grounded upon a just hope and
expectation of some change and alteration in his son. Look upon every
circumstance in the story of Pharaoh, and we cannot find one, which was not as
a Hammer to malleat and soften his stony heart, nor do we read of any, upon
whom God did bestow so much pains: His ten plagues were as ten Commandments
to let the people go, and had he relented at the first, says Chrysostom, he
had never felt a second; so that it will plainly appear, that the induration
and hardening Pharaohs heart, was not the cause, but the effect of his malice
and rebellion, Magnam mansuetudinem contemptae gratiae major sequi solet ira
vindictae, for the contempt of Gods mercy (and there is mercy even in his
Judgments) does always make way for that induration, which calls down the
wrath of God to revenge it. We do not read that God decreed to harden Pharaohs
heart, but when Pharaoh was unwilling to bow, when he was deaf to Gods Thunder,
and despised his Judgments, and scorned his Miracles, God determined to leave
him to himself, to set him up as an ensample of his wrath, to work his Glory
out of him, to leave him to himself and his own lusts, which he foresaw would
lead him to ruin and destruction.

But if we will tie our selves to the letter, we may find these several
expressions in several Texts, 1. Pharaoh hardened his heart; 2. Pharaohs heart
was hardened; 3. God hardened Pharaohs heart; and now let us Judge whether it be
safer to interpret Gods induration by Pharaohs, or Pharaohs by Gods; for if God
did actually and immediately harden Pharaohs heart, then Pharaoh was a mere
patient, nor was it in his power to let the people go, and so God sent Moses to
bid him do that, which he could not, and which he could not, because God had
hardened him; but if Pharaoh did actually harden his own heart (as it is plain
enough he did) then Gods Induration can be no more then a just permission, and
suffering him to be hardened, which in his wisdom and the course he ordinarily
takes, he would not, and therefore could not hinder; sufficit unus Huic operi,
one is enough for this work of induration, and we need not take in God; for to
keep to the letter in the former hakes a main principle of truth; that God is
in no degree Author of sin; but to keep to the letter in the latter cleeres all
doubts, prevents all objections, and opens a wide and effectual door to let as
in to a clear sight of the meaning of the former; For that man does harden his
own heart, is undeniably true; But that God does harden the heart is denied by
most, is spoken darkly and doubtfully by some, nor is it possible that any
Christian should speak it plainly or present it in this hideous and monstrous
shape, but must be forced to stick and dress it up with some far fetched, and
impertinent limitation, or distinction.

For lastly, I cannot see, how God can positively be said to do that, which is
done already to his hand; For induration is the proper, and natural effect of
sin; and to bring in God alone is to leave nothing for the devil or man to do,
but to make Satan of a Serpent, a very fly indeed, and the soul of man nothing
else but a forge and shop to work those sins in, which may burn and consume it
everlastingly. God and nature speak the same thing many times, Aristot l. 7.
Eth. c. 1.
though the phrase be different; that wihch the Philosopher calls (...), a
ferity and brutishness of nature, that in Scripture is called hardness of
heart; for every man is shaped and formed and configured says Basil to the
actions of his life, whither they be good or evil, one sin draws on another,
and a second, a third, and at last we are carried (...) of our own accord, and
as it were by the force of a natural inclination, till we are brought to that
extremity of sin, which the Philosopher calls Ferity, a shaking of all that is
man about us, and the holy Ghost (...), a reprobate mind: And such a mind had
Pharaoh, 1 Romans 2.8.
who was more and more enraged by every sin which he had committed, as the Wolf
is most fierce and cruel, when he has drawn and tasted blood. For it is
impossible that any should accustom themselves to sin, and not fall into this
(...), this hardesse of heart, and indisposition to all goodness; and
therefore we cannot conceive that God has any hand in our death, if we die,
and that dereliction, Incrassation, excaecation; hardness of heart are not
from God further, then that he has placed things in that order, that when we
accustom our selves to sin, and contemn his grace, blindness and hardness of
heart will necessarily follow, but have no relation to any will of his, but
that of permission; and then this expostulation is real and serious, Quare
moriemini?

Why will ye die? --

And now to conclude, I have not been so particular as the point in Hand may
seem to require, nor could I be in this measure of Time, but only in General,
stood up in defense of the Goodness and Justice of God; for shall not the Judge
of all the Earth do right? shall he necessitate men to be evil, and then bind
them by a Law to be good? shall he exhort, beseech them to live, when they are
dead already? shall his Absolute Dominion be set up so high, from thence to
ruin his Justice? This indeed, some have made their Helena, but it is an ugly
and ill-favored one; for this they fight unto Death, even for the Book of
life, till they have blotted out their names with the Blood of their Brethren:
This is Dressed out unto them as savoury meat set for their palate, who had
rather be carried up to heaven in Elias fiery Chariot, then to pace it thither
with Trouble and pain. That GOD has absolutely Decreed the salvation of some
particular men, and passed sentence of Death upon others, is as Music to some
ears, like David's Harp, to refresh them, and drive away the Evil Spirit. Et
qui amant, sibi somnia fingunt, men's desires do easily raise a belief, and
when they are told of such a Decree, they dream themselves to Heaven; for, if
we observe it, they still choose the better part, and place themselves with the
sheep at the right Hand, and when the Controverly of the Inheritance of Heaven
is on foot, to whom it belongs, they do as the Romans did, who, when two
Cities contending about a piece of Ground, made them their Judge to determine
whose it was, fairly gave sentence on their own behalf, and took it to
themselves: because they read of Election, elect themselves, which is more
indeed, then any man can deny, and more I am sure, then themselves can prove;
And now, Oh Death, where is thy sting? The sting of Death is sin, but it cannot
reach them, and the strength of sin is the Law, but it cannot bind them; for
sin it self shall Turn to the good of these Elect and Chosen Vessels; and we
have some reason to suspect, that in the strength of this Doctrine, and a
groundless conceit that they are these particular men, they walk on all the
days of their life in fraud, and malice, in Hypocrisy and disobedience, in all
that uncleannes and pollution of sin, which is enough to wipe out any name
out of the Book of Life; Hoc saxum defendit Manlius, Sen. Controv.
hic excidit; For this they rowse up all their Forces, this is their rock,
their fundamental Doctrine, their very Capitol, and from this we may fear
many thousands of souls have been Tumbled down into the pit of Destruction: at
this rock many such Elect Vessels have been cast away.

Again, others miscarry as fatally on the other hand; for when we speak of an
absolute Decree upon particulars, unto the vulgar sort, who have not Cor in
Cord, as Austin speaks, who have their Judgment not in their Heart, but in
their sense, they soon conceive a fatal necessity (and one there is, that
called it so, Fatum Christianum, the Christian man's Destiny) they think
themselves in chains and shackles, that they cannot Turn, when they cannot be
predestinate not to Turn, but to die, because they will not Turn. I will give
you a remarkable instance, and out of Mr. Calvin; Quintinus, Cont. Libertin:
And yet his own followers use the ^am words, bring the same Lexis, and Apply
them as the Libertines did. vide Piscat. Aphorismos.
the Father of the Libertines (as Calvin himself calls him) as he rides in
company, by the way lights upon a man slain, and lying in his goare, and one
asking who did this bloody deed? he readily replies, I am he that did it, if
thou desire to know it; and art thou such a Villain, says the party again,
to do such an Act? I did it not my self, says he, but it was God that did it.
And being asked again, whether we may impute to God those heinous sins which
in Justice he will and does so severely punish? So it is said he, Thou did
it, and I did it, and God did it; for what thou or I do, God does; and what God
does, that thou and I do; for we are in him, and he in us, he works in us, he
works all in all. Quintanus is long since dead, but his error dyed not with
him, Fataliter consti^utam est quando, and quant^pere unusquisque nostrum
pietatem colere, vel non colere (...). Piscator. ad ^uplicat. Vorstij. p. 2^8.
for it is the policy of our common Enemy, to remove our Eye as far as he can
from the Command, and he cannot set it at a greater distance, then by fixing it
on Eternity, that so whilst we think upon the Decree, we may quite forget the
Command, and never fly from Death, because for ought we know, we are killed
already, never do our Duty, because God does whatsoever he will in Heaven and
in Earth; never strive to be better then we are, because God is all in All.

Let us then walk on in a middle way, and neither flatter, nor afflict our
selves with the thought of what God may do, or what he has done from all
Eternity; let us not busy our selves in the fruitless study of the Book of
Life, which no man in Heaven or in Earth is able to open and look into, but
only the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Revel. 5.3,5. in that Book, says Saint
Basil, Comment. in 10. c. Isai.
no names are written, but of them that Repent: Let us not seek what God
Decrees, which we cannot find out; but hearken to what he Commands, which is
nigh us, even in our mouths. The Book of Life is shut and sealed up: but he
has opened many other Books to us, and bids us sit down and read them: The
Book of his Works, of which the Creatures are the leaves, and the Characters
the Goodness and Power, and Glory of God: and the Book of his Words, the Book
of the Generation of JESUS CHRIST, to be known and read of all men; and if
these Words be written in thy Heart, thy name is also written in the Book of
Life; And the Book of thy Conscience, for the information of which, all the
Books in the world were made, and if thou read, and study this with care and
diligence, and an impartial eye, and then find there no Bill, or Indictment
against thee, then thou may have confidence toward God, that he never past
any Decree or Sentence of Death against thee, and that thou art ordained to
Life. This is the true method of a Christian man's studies, not to look too
steadfastly backward upon Aeternity; but to look down upon our selves, and
ponder and direct our paths, and then look forward to eternity of Bliss.

For Conclusion; we read of the Philosopher Thales, that lifting up his eyes to
observe the Course of the Stars, he fell into the water, which gave the
occasion to a Damsel called Thressa, of an ingenious and bitter scoff: That
he who was so busy to see what was done in Heaven, could not observe what was
even before his feet; and it is as true of them, who are so bold and forward in
the Contemplation of Gods Eternal Decree, many times they fall dangerously
into those Errors which swallow them up; they are too bold with God, and so
negligent of themselves, Talk more what he does, or has done, or may do,
then do what they should; are so much in Heaven, and to so little purpose, that
they lose it; But the Apostles method is sure, to use diligence to make our
Election sure, and so read the Decree in our Obedience, and sincere
conversation, and if we can persuade our selves, that our Names are written in
the Book of Life, yet so to behave our selves, so to work on with Fear and
Trembling, as if it were yet to be done; as it was told the Philosopher, that
he might have seen the figure of the Stars in the water, but could not see
the water in the stars. All the knowledge we can gain of the Decree, is from
our selves; it is written in heaven, and the Characters we read it by on Earth:
are Faith and Repentance: if we believe, and repent, then God speaks to us from
heaven, and tells us, we shall not die; If we be dead to sin, and alive to
Righteousness, we are enrolled, and our names are written in the book of Life;
here, here alone is the Decree legible, and if our eye fail not in the one, it
cannot be deceived in the other; If we love Christ, and keep his Commandments,
we are in the number of Elect, and were chosen from all Eternity.

Be not then cast down, and dejected in thy self with what God has done, or
may do by his absolute Power, for thou may build upon it; He never saved an
Impenitent, nor will ever cast away a Repentant sinner. Behold, he calls to
thee now by his Prophet; Quare morieris? Why will thou die? did thou ever
hear from him, or from any Prophet, a morieris, that thou shall die, or a
Mortuus es, that thou art dead already? Thou have his Prayers, his entreaties,
and besseechings, Expandit manus, he spreads forth his hands all the day long;
Thou have his wishes; Oh that thou were wise, so wise as to look upon the
moriemini, to consider thy last end: Thou have his Covenant, Deuteronomy. 23.29.
which he swear to our forefathers Abraham, and his seed for ever: His
Comminations, his obtesTations, his expostulations thou may read, but did
thou ever read the book of life? Look on the moriemini, look on the deaths head
in the Text, look not into the book of life; thou have other care that lies
upon thee, thou have other business to do; thou have an understanding to
adorn, a will to watch over, affections to bridle, the flesh to crucify,
temptations to struggle with, the devil to encounter: Think then of thy duty,
not of the decree, and the sincere performance of the duty will seal the
decree, and seal thee up to the day of redemption. It is a good rule, which
Martin Luther gives us, Dimitte Scripturam ubi obscura est, tene ubi certa,
where the text is dark and obscure, suspend thy judgment, and where it is
plain and easy, express and manifest it in thy conversation, which is the best
descant on a plain song. Thou read, there are vessels made to dishonor;
whether God made them so, as some will have it, or they made themselves so, as
Basil and Chrysostom interpret it, it concerns not thee; That which concerns
thee is plain, thou may run and readit, that thou must possess thy vessel
in honor, and build up thy self in this holy faith: the Quare moriemini? is
plain, it is plain that God is not willing thou should die, but has showed
thee a plain passage unto life; has not indeed supplied thee with means to
interpret riddles, and untie knots, and explain and resolve hard texts of
Scripture; but he has supplied thee with means of life, brought thee to the
gates of paradise, to the ways of life, and the wells of salvation. The lines
are fallen to thee in a fair place. Behold, he has placed thee in Domo
Israelis, in the house of Israel, in domo salutis in the house of salvation.

Which is next to be considered.

THE ELEVENTH SERMON.
PART VII.
EZEKIEL 33.11. For why will you die, Oh House of Israel?


GOD is not willing we should die; for he is goodness it self, and no evil can
proceed from him, Or. quod Deus nonsit Author mali.
no not the evil of punishment; for it is his strange work, and rather ours,
then his (says Basil) for if our sins did not call and cry out for it he would
not do it, as delighting rather to see his glory in that Image which is like
him, then in that which is defaced, and toru and mangled, and now burning in
hell; Ipse te subdidisti poenae, that's the style of the imperial Law; his wrath
could not kindle, nor Hell burn, till we did blow the coals, we bring our
selves under punishment, and then he strikes, and we die, and are lost for
ever. It was his goodness that made us, and it was his goodness which made a
Law, and made it possible to be kept, and in the same stream of goodness were
conveyed unto us sufficient and abundant means, by the right use of which we
might be carried on in an even and constant course of obedience to that Law,
and so have a clearer knowledge of him, a nearer union with him, a taste of the
powers of the world to come, a share and part in that fullness of joy, which is
at his right hand for evermore. And why then will you die Oh House of Israel?

And indeed, why should Israel? why should any of the House of Israel die? For
take it in the letter for the Jews; Take it in the application, for us
Christians; take it for the Synagogue, which is the Type, Romans 9.6
or take it for the Church, which is Israel indeed, as the Apostle calls it,
and a strange thing it is, and as full of shame as wonder that any one should
die in domo Israelis in the house of Israle, or perish in the Church; Si
honoratior est persona major est peccantis invidia, Salvian. l. 1. de Gub. M.
the malice of sin is proportioned to the person that commits it; not so
strange a thing to die in the streets of Askelon, as in the house of Israel,
nor for a Turk or Infidel to be lost as a Christian. For though the condition
of the person cannot change the species of the sin (for sin is the same in
whomsoever it is) yet it has not so foul an aspect in one as in another, cries
not so loud in the dark, as in the light, and is most fatal, and destructive
where is most means to avoid it; is most mortal there where there is most light
to discover its deformity. A wicked Israelite is worse then an Edomite, and a
bad Christian worse then a Turk or a Jew. In domo Israelis, to be in the house,
to be a member of the Church is a great privilege, but if we honor not this
privilege so far, as to make our deportment answerable, even our privilege,
it self being abused and forfeited, will change its countenance, and accuse,
and condemn us. We find it as a positive truth laid down in the Schools, and
if it were not in our Books, common reason would have showed it us in a
character legible enough; Gravius peccat fidelis, Aquin. 2.2. q. 10 art. 3.
quam Infidelis propter Sacramenta fidei quibus Contumeliam facit, of all
Idolaters an Israelite is the worst, and no swine to the unclean Christian, no
villain to him, if he be one; for here sin makes the deeper tincture, and
impression, leaves a stain, not only on his person, but his profession; Flings
contumely on the very Sacraments of his faith, and casts a blemish on his house
and family; whereas in an Infidel it has not so deadly an effect, but is
veiled and shadowed by ignorance, and borrows some excuse from Infidelity it
self.

For first, to speak a word of the house of Israel in the letter, and so to
pass from the Synagogue to the Church. the Jews were Domestica Dei gens as
Tertullian calls them, Tert. Apolt c. 18.
the Domestic, and peculiar people of God, like Gideons fleece, full of the
dew of Divine Benediction, when all the world was dry besides: to them were the
Oracles given, those Oracles which did foretell the Messiah, Romans 2.3.
and by which they might more easily know him, then the Gentiles; Romans 9.4.
to them pertained the adoption, for they were called the Children of God:
Deuteronomy. 14.1. They had the Covenant written in Tables of stone, and the giving of
the Law, and constitutions, which might link, and unite them together into a
body and society, and the service of God, they had their sacrifices, but
especially the Paschal Lamb; and that their memory might not let slip his
statutes, and Ordinances, he does even Catechize their eyes, and makes the
least Ceremony a busy remembrancer. Behold a Tabernacle erected, Aaron and his
sons appointed, the Sacrifices slain, the Altars smoking, all so many Ocular
Sermons. They may behold Aaron and his sons ascending the Temple, laying all
their sins upon the head of a sacred Goat, and so carrying them out of the
City; they might behold him entering the vail with Reverence: His garments,
Hier. ad Fabiol. de vestit. sacerd.
his motion, his Gesture, all were vocal, quicquid agebat, quiequid loquebatur,
doctrina erat populi, says Saint Jerome, his Actions were Didacticall as well
as his Doctrine, and the priest himself was a Sermon, and these were as so many
antidotes against death. The 23. and 26. v. of this Chapter, the Prophet
reproves them for their capital, and mortal sins, Adultery, murder, and
Idolatry, and God had sufficiently instructed, and fortified them against
these. He forbad lust, not only in the Decalogue, but in the S^arrow Levit.
11. murder in the Vulture and Raven, Novatian. de cib. Judacicis
and those Birds of prey, ut Israelitae murdareatur pecora culpatasunt, to
sanctify and cleanse his people he blames the Beasts, as unclean (which they
could not be of themselves, because he made them) and lays a Blemish upon his
other Creatures, to keep them underfiled, and for to keep our Idolatry, he
busied them in those many ceremonies, 1a. 1ae.
which he ordained for that end, ne vacaret Idololatriae servire says Aquin.
that they might not have the least leisure to be Idolaters: So that (to draw up
all) they might learn from the Law, they might learn from the Priest, they
might learn from the Sacrifice, they might learn from each Ceremony; they might
learn from men, and they might learn from beasts, to Turn from their evil ways,
Isal. 5.4.
and God might well cry out Quid facerem quod non fecerim? what could I have
done, that I have not done? and speak to them in his grief, and wrath, and
indignation. Quare etc. why will ye die Oh House.

O house of Israel?

But to pass from the Synagogue to the Church, which excells merito fidei, et
majoris scientiae, in respect of a clearer faith, and larger knowledge; to come
to the time of Reformation, Heb. 9.10.
in which all things which pertain to the full happiness of Gods people, was
to be raised to their last height and perfection, to look into the Law of
liberty, which lets usnot loose in our own evil ways, but makes us most free
by restraining and tying us up, and withholding us from those sins, which the
Law of Moses did not punish; and here Why will ye die? if it were before an
obtestation, it is now, a bitter Sarcasme, as bitter as death it self. It is
here improved and drove home a minori ad majus, by the Apostle himself, for if
that which should be abolisht was glorious, 2 Cor. 3 11.
much more shall that which remains, whose fruit is everlasling, be glorious.
And again, If they escaped not who resused him, who spoke on earth, from mount
Sinai, by his Angel; Acts. 7.38.
how shall not we escape, if we turn away from him who spoke from Heaven by his
Son? For the Church is a house, but far more glorious, built upon the
Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the head
corner stone, in whom all the building coupled together grows into a Temple
of the Lord. Colos. 2.20.21.
the whole world besides are but rubbage, as bones scattered at the graves
mouth. The Church is compact, knit, and united into a house, and in this house
is the Armory of God, ubi mill clipei, and armatura fortium, where are a
thousand Bucklers, and all the weapons of the mighty to keep off death, the
helmet of Salvation, the sword of the Spirit, and the shield of Faith to quench
all the Fiery Darts of Satan; as they be delivered into our hands, Ephesians. 6.

And as it is a House, Ephesians. 3.5
so is it a Family of Christ, of whom all the Family of heaven and earth is
named; who is M (...) the great Master of the Household. For as the Pythagorean,
fitting and shaping out a Family by his Lute, required 1. (...) the integrity
of all the parts, as it were the set number of the strings; 2. (...) an apt
composing and joining them together, as it were the Tuning of the instrument;
and lastly (...) a skilful touch, which makes the harmony: So in the Church, if
we take it in its latitude, there be Saints, Angels, and Archangels, if we
contract it to the Militant (as we usually take it) there be some Apostles,
some Pastors, some Prophets, some Teachers: Ephesians. 4. there be some to be Taught,
and some to teach; some to be governed, and some to rule, which makes up the
integrity of the parts, and then these are (...), says the Apostle, coupled
and and knit together by every joint, by the bond of charity, which is the
coupling and uniting virtue, as Prosper calls it, by the unity of faith, by
their agreement in holiness, having one faith, one Baptism, one Lord, and at
last every string being touched in its right place, begets a harmony, which is
delightful both to heaven and earth.

For when I name the Church, I do not mean the stones and building (some
indeed would bring it down to this, to stand for nothing, but the walls) but I
suppose a subordination of parts (which was never yet questioned in the Church,
but by those, who would make it as invisible, as their Charity) Not the foot to
see, and the eye to walk, and the Tongue to hear, and the Ear to speak, not
all Apostles, not all Prophets, not all Teachers, but as the Apostle says it
shall be at the Resurrection, Every man in his own Order. Naz. Or. 25.
For (...) -- Order is our security and safeguard; in a rout, every man is a
Child of Death, every throat open to the Knife, but when an Army is drawn out
by Art and skill, all hands are active for the Victory: Inequality indeed of
persons is the ground of disunion and discord, but Order draws and works
advantage out of Inequality it self; when every man keeps his station, the
common Soldier has his Interest in the victory, as well as the Commander, and
when we walk orderly, every man in his own place, we walk hand in Hand to
Heaven and Happiness together.

For further yet; In the Church of God, there is not only a union, an Order,
but as it is in our Creed, a Communion of parts; The glorious Angels, as
ministering Spirits, are sent to guard us, and no doubt, do many and great
services for us, though we perceive it not; The blessed Saints departed, though
we may not pray for them, yet may pray for us, though we hear it not, and
though the Church be scattered in its Members, through all the parts of the
world, yet their hearts meet in the same God. Every man prays for himself, and
every man prays for every man. Quodest Omnium, esi singulorum, that which is
all men's, is every man's, and that which is every man's, belongs unto the whole.

For though we cannot speak in those high Terms of the Church, as the Church
of Rome does of her self, yet we cannot but bless God, and count it a great
favor, and privilege, that we are filii Ecclesiae, as the Father speaks,
Children of the Church, think of our selves, as in a place of safety and
advantage, where we may find protection against Death it self. We cannot speak
loud with the Cardinal, si Catholicus quisquam labitur in peccatum; and,
Bellarm praefar. ad Controv.
If a Catholic fall into a sin, suppose it Theft, or Adultery, yet in that
Church, he walks not in Darkness, but may see many helps to salvation, by
which he may soon quit himself out of the snare of the Devil, maternus ei non
deest assectus, she is still a Mother, even to such Children; her shops of
spiritual comfort lie open; there you may buy Wine and Milk, Indulgences and
Absolution, but not without money, or money-worth; be you as sick as you will,
and as often as you will, There is Physic, there are Cordialls to refresh, and
restore you: I dare not promise so much in the House of Israel, in the Church
of Christ, for I had rather make the Church a School of Virtue, then a
Sanctuary for Offenders, and wanton sinners. We dare not give it that strength,
to carry up our Prayers to the Saints in heaven, or to conveigh their Merits to
us on Earth: we cannot work and temper it to that heat, to draw up the blood
of Martyrs, or the works of supererogating Christians (who have been such
profitable servants, that they did more in the service of God, then they
should) into a common Treasury, and then shower them down in Pardons, and
Indulgences; but yet, though we cannot find this power the re (which is a
Power to do nothing) yet we may find strength enough in the Church to keep us
from the Moriemini, to save us from Death: Though I cannot suffer for my
Brother, yet I may bear for him, Gal. 6.2.
even portare onus fratris, bear my brothers burden; Though I cannot merit for
him, yet I may work for him; though I cannot die for him, I may pray for him.
Though there be no good in my Death, nor profit in my Dust, yet there may be in
my memory of my good Counsel, my Advice, my Example, which are verae sanctorum
reliquiae, Consult. Cass. c. de Relig. 5.
says Cassander, the best and truest relics of the Saints; and though my
Death cannot satisfy for him, yet it may Catechize him, and teach him how to
die; nay, teach him how to overcome Death, that he shall not die for ever: and
by this Communion it is, that we work Miracles; that in Turning the Covetous,
turning his bowels in him, we recover a dry Hand, and a narrow Heart; in
teaching the Ignorant, we give sight to the blind; in settling the inconstant,
wavering mind, we cure the palsy; for we can well allow of such Miracles as
these in the Church, but not of Lies.

For as there is an Invisible union of the Saints with God, so is there of
Christians amongst themselves, which union, though the Eye of flesh cannot
behold it, yet it must appear, and shine, and be resplendent in those duties
and offices which do attend this union, which are as so many Hands, by which
we lift up one another to happiness; As the Head infuseth life and vigor into
the whole body, so must the members also annoint each other with this Oil of
Gladness. Each member must be Active and Industrious to express that Virtue,
without which it cannot be one. Let no man seek his own, but every man
another Wealth, says the Apostle; not seek his own? 1 Cor. 10.24.
what more natural to man? or who is nearer to him, then he himself? but yet
he must not seek his own, but as it may bring advantage, and promote the Good
of others; not press forward to the mark, but with his hand stretched forth, to
carry on others along with him, not go to Heaven, but saving some with fear,
and pulling others out of the fire, Ep. Iud. 23.
and gathering up as many, as his Wisdom and care, and zeal toward God and
man can take up with him in the way. And this is necessary, even in humane
Societies, and those Politic Bodies, which men build up to themselves, for
their Peace and security, Turpis est pars, quae toti suo non Convenit, that is
a most unnecessary superfluous part or Member, for which the whole is not the
better; ut in sermon literae, says Austin, as letters in a word or Sentence,
so men are Elementa Civitatis, the principles and parts which make up the
Syntaxis of a Republique, and he that endeavors not the advancement of the
whole, is a Letter too much; fit to be expunged and blotted out; but in the
Church, whose maker and Builder is God, it is required in the highest degree,
especially in those transactions which may enlarge the Circuit and glory of it:
here every man must be his own, and under Christ, his Brothers Savior; for as
between these two Cities, so between the happiness of the one, and the
happiness of the other, there is no Comparison. As therefore every Bishop in
the former Ages, called himself Episcopum Catholicae Ecclesiae, a Bishop of the
Catholic Church, although he had Jurisdiction but over one Diocese, so the
care and Piety of every particular Christian, in respect of its diffusive
Operation, is as Catholic as the Church, every soul he meets with, is under
his charge, and he is the care of every soul; in saving a soul from Death,
every man is a Priest and a Bishop, although he may neither invade the Pulpit,
or ascend the Chair: I may be eyes unto him, Numb. 10.31.
as it was said of Hobab: I may take him from his Error, and put him into the
way of truth; if he fear, I may scatter it; If he grieve, I may wipe off his
Tears; If he presume, I may teach him to fear, and if he despair, I may lift
him up to a lively Hope, that neither fear nor grief, neither Presumption, nor
despair swallow him up: thus may I raise a dead man from the grave, a sinner
from his sin, and by that example many may rise with him, who are as dead as
he, and so by his friendly communication transfuse our selves into others, and
receive others into our selves, and so run hand in hand from the Chambers of
Death.

And thus far we dare extend the Communion of Saints, place it in a House, a
Family, a society of men called and gathered together by Christ; raise it to
the participation of the Privileges and Charters granted by Christ; calling us
to the same faith, leading us by the same rule, filling us with the same Grace,
endowing us with several Gifts, that we may guard and secure each other; and
so settle it in thoe Offices and Duties, which Christianity makes common, and
God has registered in his Church, which is the Pillar of Truth; where all men's
Joys and Sorrows, and Fears, and Hopes should be one and the same; And then
to die surrounded with all these Helps, and Advantages, of God above, ready to
Help us; of men like unto our selves, pressed out as auxiliaries to succor and
relieve us, of Precepts to guide us, of Promises to encourage us, of Heaven
even opening it self to recerve us, then to die, is to die as fools die, to
suffer their hands to be bound, and their feet put in fetters, and to open
their Breast to the sword: for to die alone, is not so grievous, not so
imputable, as to die in such Company, to die, where it is no more but to will
it, and I might live for ever. Oh how were it to be wished, that we well
understood this one Article of our Faith, the Communion of Saints, that we knew
to be Vessels to receive the water of Life, and Conduits to conveigh it, that
we would remember that by every sin, we bring trouble to a Million of
Saints, and by our Obedience make as many Angels merry; That when we spend our
portion amongst Harlots, we do not only beggar our selves, but rob and spoil
our Brethren; when we yield our selves to the enemy, we betray an Army; that we
knew what 'twere to give Counsel, and what 'twere to receive it, what it were
to shine upon others, and to walk by their light, that we knew the Power, the
Necessity of a Precept, the riches and Glory of a Promise; that we would
consider our selves, as men amongst men invited to happiness, invited to the
same Royal FeasT; if this were rightly considered, we should then ask our
selves the question! why should we die? why should we die! not in the
wilderness amongst beasts, upon our Turf or stone, where there is none to
help; but in domo Israelis, in a House, and in the House of Israel, where
Health and safety appears in every room, and corner? why should we fall, like
Samson, with the house upon us, and so endanger, and bruise others with our
fall? If I be a string, why should I jarre, and spoil the Harmony? If I be a
part, why should I be made a Schism from the body? if I be under Command, why
should I beat my fellow servants? If a member, why should I walk disorderly in
the Family? why should I? why should any Die in Domo Israelis? in the House of
Israel?

And now to reassume the Text; Why will ye die oh House of Israel? What a
fearful exprobation is it? what can it work in us, but shame and confusion of
Face? Why will you die? you that have Christ for your Physician, the Angels for
your Ministers, the Saints for your Example, the Church a common shop of
precious Balm, and Antidotes, who are in Domo Israelis, in the House of
Israel, where you may learn from the Priest, learn from the Oracles of God,
learn from one another, learn from Death it self, not to die? In this House, in
this Order, in this Union, in this Communion, in the midst of all these
Auxiliarie Troops to fall and miscarry; to have the Light, Quale est de
Ecclesia Dei in Ecclesiam Diaboli tender^? de coelo in coenum? Tert. de spect.
c. 25. Aug de Civit. Dei l. 14. c. 15.
but not to see it, the bread of Life, but not to Taste it, to die with our
Antidotes about us, to go per portam coeli in Gehennam, through the House of
Israel into Tophet, through the Church of Christ into Hell, may well put God to
ask Questions, and expostulate, and can argue no less then a stubborn and
relentlesse heart, and not only a Defect, but a distaste and hatred of that
Piety, quae una est sapientia in hac Domo, which is the only Wisdom, and
most useful in the House of Israel, which is our best strength against our
Enemy, Death.

And here to apply this to our selves; let us compare the state of the House of
Israel, with the state of the people of this Nation, and Jerusalem with this
City, and we may say, what could he have done more for us, which he has not
done? onley his Blessings and privileges will rise and swell, and exceed on
our side, and so make our Ingratitude, and Guilt the greater. They had their
Priests and Levites, we have our Pastors and Ministers. They had their Temple
and Synagogues, we our Parochial Churches. They had their Sacraments,
Circumcision and the Paschall Lamb, we Baptism and the Lords Supper. They had
Moses preached in their Synagogues, every Sabbath Day, so have we; (I speak like
a Fool) we have more, the Gospel Interpreted, or abused every Sabbath Day,
nay, every day of the week, I had almost said, every hour of the day; we are
Baptized with a Sermon, and we are married with a Sermon, and we are buried
with a Sermon. When we take our journey, a Sermon is our farewell, and when we
return, it is our welcome home. If we Feast, a Sermon is the Grace before it,
if we sail, a Sermon must weigh Anchor; and if we fight, a Sermon is the
Alarm to Battle; If we rejoice, we call to the Preacher to Pipe to us, that
we may dance (for many times we choose our Preachers, as we do our Musicians by
the Ear and fancy, not by judgment; and it must needs be a rare choice, which
a Woman and ignorance makes) and such an one is to us as a lovely song of one
that has a very pleasant voice, Ezekiel. 33.1. and if we be in Grief, he must
turn the key and change his note, and mourn to us, that we may lament. A
Sermon is the grand Sallet, to usher in every dish; like Sosia or Davus in the
Comedy, scarce any Scene, or part of our life without it: It is Prologus
Galeatus, a Prologue that will fit either Comedy or Tragedy, every purpose,
every Action, every business of our Life. In a word; what had they, which we
have not in measure pressed down? They had the Favor, and Countenance of God,
They had the blessings of the Basket, so had we, if we could have pinned it,
and kept them in, and not played the wantons in this light, and so let them fly
away from us, that we can but look after them, and sadly say, we had them; They
had Temporal blessings, we have Graces and spiritual endowments, more light,
and richer Promises; more and more Gracious Privileges then they; Their
Administration was with Glory, but burs is more glorious. Glorious things are
spoken of this City, glorious things are seen amongst us, able to deceive a
Prophet, nay, if it were possible, the very Elect: For he that shall see our
outward formality, the earnestness, the demureness, the talkativeness of our
looks and behavior, when we flock and press to Sermons; he that shall hear our
noise and zeal for Religion, our anger and detestation against Idolatry, even
where it is not; he that shall scarcely hear a word from us, which sounds not
as the word of God, he that should see us such Saints abroad, would little
mistrust we should come so short of the honesty of the Pagans in our shops and
dealings; He that shall see such a promising form of godliness cannot
presently discover the malice, the fraud, the uncleanness, the cruelty that
lies wrapped up in it, like a Devil in light; He that shall see this, in the
City, cannot but say of it, as the Prophet Samuel did of Eliab; Surely the
Lords anointed is here. This is the faithful City; This is the City of the
Lord. But God sees not, as man seeeth, nor looks on the outward appearance
but the Heart, and may account us dead for all these glories, this Pageantry,
for all this noise, which to him is but noise, as the sound of their Trumpet,
who will not fight his battles, but fall off, and run to the Enemy, but as a
song of Sion in a strange Land, even in the midst of Babylon. We read in our
Books that it was a custom amongst the Romans, when the Emperor was dead in
honor of him to frame his image of wax, and to perform to it all Ceremonies of
state, as if the image were the living Emperor; The Senate and Ladies
attended; the Physicians resorted to him to feel his pulse, and Doctorally
resolved that he grew worse and worse, and could not escape; A guard watched
him, Nobles saluted him, his Dinner and Supper at accustomed hours was served
in with water, with sewing, and carving and taking away; His Nobles and
Gentlemen waited as if he had been alive, there was no Ceremony forgot which
state might require; Thus has been done to a dead carcass, and if we take not
heed, our case may be the same; All our outward shows of Churches, of Sermons,
of Sacraments, our noise and ostentation, which should be arguments of life and
Antidotes against death, may be no more, then as funeral rites performed to a
carcass, to a Christian, to a City whose iniquities are loathsome, of an ill
smelling savor to God; the great company of preachers (whereof every one
chooses one according to his lusts) may stand about it, and do their duty, but
as to an image of wax, or a dead carcass; the bread of life may be served in,
and divided to it by art and skill, as every man fancies, it may be fitted and
prepared for every palate when they have no taste, nor relish of it, and receive
no more nourishment, then they that have been dead long ago. Be not deceived,
benefits and burdens (thou have laden me daily with thy benefits, says David)
and burdens which, if we bare not well, and as we should do, will grind us to
pieces: All prerogatives are with conditions, and if the condition be not kept,
they turn to scorpions, they either heal or kill us, they either lift us up to
Bliss, or throw us down to destruction: there is Heaven in a privilege, and
there is Hell in a privilege, and we make it either to us: We may starve,
whilst we hang on the breasts of the Church, we may be poisoned with Antidotes,
those mouths that taught us, may be opened to accuse us, the many Sermons we
heard, may be so many Bills against us; the Sacraments may condemn us, the
blood of Christ cry loud against us, and our profession, our holy profession
put us to shame. Have thou been so long with me, and know thou not me
Philip? says our Savior. John 14.9. Had thou so good a Master, and art yet
to learn? have thou been so long with me, and deniest thou me Peter? have thou
been so long with me, and yet betrayest me Judas? has Christ wrought so many
works amongs us, and do we go about to kill and crucify him? has he planted
Religion, true Religion amongst us, and do we go about to digg it up by the
roots? has the Gospel sounded so long in our Ears, and begot nothing but
words? words that are deceitful upon the Balance? words which are lies? so
many Sermons, and so many Atheists? so much Preaching and so much defrauding?
so many breathings and Demonstrations of love, and so much malice in the house
of Israel? so many Courts of Justice, and so much oppression? so many Churches,
and so few Temples of the Holy Ghost? what? profess Religion, and shame it?
cry it up, and smother it in the noise? and for a member of Christ, make thy
self the head of a Faction? what? press on to make thy self better, and make
thy self worse? Go up to the Temple to pray, and profane it? what? go to
Church, and there learn to pull it down? why, Oh Why will ye thus die O house
of Israel?

Oh then, let us look about us with a thousand eyes, Let us be wise and
consider what we are, and where we are; That we are a house, and so ought,
every man to fill, and make good his place, and murually support each other;
that we are a Family, and must be active in those offices, which are proper to
us, and so with united forces keep death from entering in; That we are the
Israel of God, his chosen people, chosen therefore, that we may not cast away
our selves; That we are his Church, which is the pillar, 1 Timothy 3.15.
and ground of truth, a pillar to lean on, that we fall not, and holding out,
and urging the truth, which is able to save us, that we may not die. We have
his word to quicken us, his Sacraments to strengthen and confirm us; his Grace
to prevent, and follow us; we have many helps, and Huge advantages, and if we
look up upon them, and lay hold of them; If we harken to his word, not resist
his grace, if we neither Idolize, not profane his Sacraments, but receive them
with Reverence, as they were instituted in Love; If we hear the Church, if we
hear one another, if we confirm one another, if we watch over our selves and
one another, Death shall have, can nave no more Dominion over us; we shall not,
we cannot die at all; but as many as thus walk in the common light of the house
of Israel; Peace shall be upon them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God.

The introduction to the last part.
And now we must draw toward a conclusion, and we must conclude and shut up
all in nobis ipsis in our selves; for if we die, it is quia volumus, because we
will die; For Look above us, and there is God, the living God, the God of life,
saying to us, Live: Look before us, and there is death breathing terror, to
drive us from it, showing us his Dart, that we may hold up our buckler: Look
about us, there are armories of weapons, treasuries of wisdom, shops of
Physic, Balm and Ointments; helps and advantages, pillars and supporters to
uphold us, that we may stand, and not fall into the pit, which opens its mouth,
but will shut it again, if we fly from it; which is not, cannot be, is
nothing; if we do not digg it our selves. The Church exhorts, instructs,
corrects; God calls, invites, expostulates, death it self threatens us, that we
may not come near; Thus are we compast about auxiliorum nube, with a Cloud of
helps and Advantages, the Church is loud, death is terrible, Gods Nolo is loud,
I will not the death of a sinner, and confirmd with an Oath, As he lives, he
would not have us die, and it is plain enough, in his Lightning and in his
Thunder, in his expostulations, and wishes, in his anger, in his grief, in his
spreading out his hands, in his administration of all means sufficient to
protect and guard us from it, and excludes all stoicall fate, all necessity of
sinning or dying; there is nothing above us, nothing before us, nothing about
us, which can necessitate, or bind us over to death, so that if we die, it is
in our volo, in our will; we die for no other reason, but that which is not
reason, quia volumus, because we will die.

We have now brought you to the very Cell, and Den of death, where this monster
was framed, and fashioned, where 'twas first conceived, brought forth, and
nursed up: I have discovered to you the Original, and beginnings of sin, whose
natural issue is death, and shut it up in one word, the will; that which has
so troubled, and amuzed men in all the ages of the Church, to find out; That
which some have sought in Heaven, in the bosom of God, as if his Providence had
a hand in it, and others have raked Hell, and made the devil the Author of it,
who is but a perswader, a soliciter to promote it; that which others have tied
to the chain of Destiny, whose links are filed by the fancy alone, and made up
of air, and so not strong enough to bind men, much less the Gods themselves
(as it is said) what many have busied themselves in a painful and unnecessary
search to find out, opening the windows of Heaven to find it there, running
to and fro about the universe to find it there, and searching Hell it self to
discover it, we may discover in our own Breasts, in our own heart, the will the
womb that conceives this Monster, this Viper, which eats through it, and
Destroys the Mother in the Birth; For that which is the beginning of Action,
is the beginning of sin, and that which is the beginning of sin, is the
cause of Death. In homine quicquid est, sibi proficit, Hilar. in Ps. 118.
says Hilary, there is nothing in man, Nothing in the world, which he may not
make use of to avoid and prevent Death, and In homine quic-quid est, sibi
nocet, there is nothing in man, nothing in the world, which he may not make an
occasion and Instrument of sin; That which hurts him, may help him; That
which Circumspection and Diligence may make an Antidote, neglect and
Carelessness may Turn into Poison: (...) says Basil, as goodness, so sin is
the work of our will, not of Necessity, If they were wrought in us against our
will, there could be neither Good, nor Evil. I call Heaven and Earth to
witness, says GOD, by his Servant Moses; I have set before you Life and
Death, Blessing, and cursing; Deuteronomy. 30.19.
and what is it to set it before them, but to put it to themselves, to put it
into their own Hands, to put it to their choice? Choose then which you will; The
Devil may tempt, the Law occasion sin; Romans 7.11.
the Flesh may be weak; Temptations may show themselves; but not any of these,
not all of these can bring in a necessity of Dying: For the Qeustion or
Expostulation does not run thus, Why are you under a Law? why are you weak? or
why are you Dead? for Reasons may be given for all these, and the Justice and
Wisdom of God will stand up to defend them; but the Question is, Why Will ye
die? for which there can be no other Reason given, but our Will.

And here we must make a stand, and take our rise from this one word, this one
syllable, our Will, for upon no larger foundation then this, we either build
our selves up into a Temple of the Lord, or into that Tower of Babel and
Confusion, which God will Destroy.

We see here, all is laid upon the Will: But such is our Folly and madness; so
full of Contradictions is a wilful sinner, that though he call Death unto him
both with words, and works; though he be found guilty, and sentence of Death
past upon him, yet he cannot be wrought into such a persuasion, Tert. Apol. c.
1.
That he was ever willing to Die; nolumus nostrum, quia malum Agnoscimus, we
will not call sin ours, because we know it Evil; and so are bold to
exonerate and unload our selves upon God himself. It Is true, there is light,
but we are blind, and cannot see it; There is Comfort sounds every where, but
we are deaf and cannot hear it, There is supply at hand, but we are bound and
fettered, and can make no use of it; There is Balm in Gilead, but we are lame,
and have no hand to apply it. We complain of our natural weakness; of our want
of Grace and Assistance; when we might know the Danger we are in; we plead
Ignorance, when we willingly yield our Members servants to sin, we have
learnt to say, we did not do it, plena voluntate, with a full Consent and
will, and what God has clothed with Death, we cloth with the fair Gloss of
a good Intention, and meaning; we complain of our Bodies, and of our Souls, as
if the Wisdom of God had failed in our Creation; we would be made after
another fashion, that we might be good, and yet when we might be good, we will
be evil; And these Webbs a sick and unsanctify'd Fancy will soon spin out;
These are Receipts, and Antidotes of our own Tempering, devised and made use of
against the Gnawings of Conscience: These we study, and are ready and expert
in, and when Conscience begins to open, and chide, these are at hand to quiet
it, and to put it to silence; we carry them about for ease, and comfort, but
to as little purpose, as the women in Chrysostoms time, bound the coins of
Alexander the Great, or some part of Saint John's Gospel to ease them of the
Headache; for by these Receipts, and spells we more envenom our souls, and draw
nearer to Death, by Thinking to fly from it, and are ten-fold more the Servants
of Satan, because we are willing to do him service, but not willing to wear
his Livery; and thus excusando exprobramus, our Apologies defame us, our false
Comforts destroy us, and we condemn our selves with an Excuse.

To draw then the lines, by which we are to pass; we will take off the
Moriemini, the cause of our Death from these. First, from our Natural
weakness. Secondly, from the Deficiency of Grace; for neither can our Natural
weakness Betray, nor can there be such a want of Grace, as to enfeeble, nor
has Satan so much Power, as to force the will, and so there will be no
Necessity of Dying, either in respect of our Natural weakness, or in regard of
Gods strengthening hand, and withholding his Grace: and then in the second
place, that neither Ignorance of our duty, nor regret, or reluctancie of
Conscience, nor any pretense, or good Intention can make sin less sinful, or
our Death less voluntary; and so bring Death to their Doors, who have sought
it out, who have called it to them, who are Confederate with it, and are worthy
to be partakers thereof. And Why Will you Die, O House of Israel?



Why will ye die? we may perhaps answer, we are Dead already.

-- Haeret lateri lethalis Arundo.
The poisoned, and Deadly Dart is in our sides: Adam sinned, and we die: Omnes
eramus in illo uno, cum ille unus nos omnes perdidit, we were all in the loins
of that one man Adam, when that one man slew us all. And this we are too ready
to confess, that we are Borne in sin; nay, we fall so low, as to damn our
selves before we were born, which some may do in Humility, but most are well
content it should be so, well pleased in their Pedigree; well pleased to be
brought into the world in that filth and uncleanness, which God does hate; and
make the unhappiness of their Birth an Advocate to plead for those pollutions,
for those wilful and Beloved sins, which they fall into in the remaining
part of their life, as being the proper and natural Issues of that weakness,
and Impotency, with which we were sent into the world; which is not True in
every part; for that weakness, whatsoever it is, can draw no such necessity
upon us, Licentiam usurpare praetexto necessitatis. Tert. de cul. Faem.
nor can be wrought into an Apology for sin, or an excuse for dying: for to
include, and wrap up all our Actual sin in the folds of Original weakeness,
is nothing else but to cancel our own Debts, and Obligations, and to put all
upon our first Parents score, and so make Adam guilty of the sins of the
whole world. Our natural and Original weakness, I will not now call into
question, since it has had such Grandees in our Church, men of great Learning
and Piety, for its Nursing Fathers, and that for many Centuries of years; but
yet I cannot see why it should be made a Cloak to cover our other
Transgressions, or why we should miscarry so often, with an Eye cast back upon
our first fall, which is made ours, but in another man; nor any reason, though
it be a plant watered by the best Hands, why men should be so delighted in it,
why they should lie down, and repose themselves under its shadow; why they
should be so willing to be weak, and so unwilling to hear the contrary; why
men should take so much pains to make the way to happiness narrower, and the
way to death broader then it is. In a word; why we should thus magnify a
Temptation, and disparage our selves, why we should make each Importunate
object, as powerful and Irresistible as God himself, and our selves as Idols,
even nothing in this world. Magna pars humanarum querelarum non injusta modo
materia, Petrarch. 1.3. R. S. c. 1.
sed stulta est, the world is full of complaints, and excuses, but the
complaints which the world puts forth, are for the most, most unjust, and void
of that reason, which should present and commend them. For when our souls are
pressed down and overcharged with sin, when we feel the Gripes and Gnawings of
our Conscience, we commonly lay hold on these remedies, which are worse then
the discase, and suborne an unseasonable, and ill applied conceit of our own
natural weakness, (which was more dangerous then the temptation) as an excuse
and comfort of our overthrow, we fall and plead we were weak, and fall more
then seven times a day, and hold up the same plea still, till we fall into that
place where we shall be muzled, and speechless, not able to say a word, where
our complaints will end in curses, in weeping and wailing, Hierenym: Amando.
and gnashing of teeth. Omnes nostris vitijs favemus, and quod propria facimus
voluntate ad naturae referimus necessitatem, we are all tender and favorable
to our own sins, and because they pleased us, when we committed them, we are
unwilling to revile them now; but wipe off as much of their filth as we can,
because we resolve to commit them again; and those transgressions, which our
lusts conceived, and brought forth by the Midwifry of our will, we remove as
far as we can, and lay them at the Door of Necessity, and are ready to complain
of God and Nature it self.

Now this Complaint against nature, when we have sinned is most unjust; For God
and nature has imprinted in our Souls those common principles of goodness,
as, that good is to be embraced, and evil to be abandond; That we must do to
others, as we would be done to, those practick notions, those anticipations, as
the Stoics call them of the mind, Natura nos ad optimam mentem genuit: Quint.
l. 12. Inst. c.
and preparations against sin and death, which if we did not wilfully stifle
and choke, might lift up our souls far above those depressions of self love and
covetousness, and those evils, which destroy us, quae ratio semel in universum
vincit, which reason, with the help of Grace overcomes at once; For reason does
not only arm, and prepare us against these inrodes, and incursions, against
these (as we think) so violent assaults, but when we are beat to the ground,
checks and upbraides us for our fall. Indeed, to look down upon our selves, and
then lift up our eyes to him, from whom comes our salvation, is both the duty
and security of the sons of Adam; and when we watch over our selves, and keep
our hearts with diligence, when we strive with our inclination, and weakness,
as well as we do with the temptation, then if we fall, God remembers whereof we
are made, considers our condition, that we are but men; and though we fail, his
mercy endures for ever; but to think of our weakness, and then to fall, and
because we came infirm, and diseased into the world, to kill our selves; to
seek out death in the error of our life, to dally and play with danger; to be
willing to join with the temptation at the first show and approach, as if we
were made for no other end, and then to complain of weakness, is to charge God
and nature foolishly, and not only to impute our sins to Adam, but to God
himself; and thus we bankrupt our selves, and complain we were born poor, we
criple our selves, and then complain we are lame, we deliver up our selves, and
fall willingly under the temptation, and then pretend it was a son of Anack, too
strong for such Grasshoppers as we, we delight in sin, we trade in sin, we were
brought up in it, and we continue in it, and make it our companion, our friend,
with which we most familiarly converse, and then comfort our selves, and cast
all the fault on our temper and constitution, and the corruption of our nature,
and we attribute our full growth in sin, to that seed of sin which we should
have choked, which had never shot up into the blade, and born such evil fruit,
but that we manured and watered it, and were more then willing, that it should
grow and multiply. And this though it be a great sin, as being the mother of
all those misshapen births, those Monsters, which walk about the world, we
dress and deck up, and give it a fair and glorious name, and call it Humility,
which is, says Hilary, the hardest and greatest work of our faith, to which it
is so unlike, that it is the greatest enemy it has, and every day weakens, and
disenables it, that it does not work by charity, but leaves us Captives to the
world, and sin, which but for this conceit, it would easily vanquish, and tread
down under our feet. We may call it Humility, but it is Pride; a stubborn,
Humilitas maximum Fidei opus Hill. in Ps. 130.
and insolent standing out with God that made us, upon this foul, and unjust
pretense, that he made us so, humilitas sophistica, says Pet. Blasensis, the
humility of Hypocrites, which at once bows, and pusheth out the horn, in which
we disgrace and condemn our selves, that we may do what we please, and speak
evil of our selves, that we may be worse; Oh wretched men that we are, we groan
it out, and there is music in the sound, which we hear, and delight in, and
carry along in our mind, and so become wretched indeed, even those miserable
sinners, which will ever be so. And shall we call this Humility? Ep. ad Colos.
2.18.
if it be, it is as the Apostle speaks, a voluntary humility, (but in a worse
sense) he is the humblest man, that does his duty; for that Humility which is
commended to us in Scripture, lets us up to heaven, this, which is is so
Epidemical, sinks us into the lowest pit; that Humility bows us down with
sorrow; this binds our hands with sloth; that looks upon our imperfections
past, this makes way for more to come; that ventures and condemns it self,
condemns it self and ventures further; this runs out of the field, and dare not
look upon the enemy; nec mirum, si vincantur, qui jam victi sunt, and it is no
marvail, they should fall, and perish, whom their own so low and groundless
opinion has already overthrown.

For first, though I deny not a derived weakness, and from Adam, though I
leave it not after Baptism as subsistent by it self, or bound to the Center of
the earth with the Manichee, nor washed to nothing in the Font with others, yet
it is easy to deceive our selves, and to think it more contagious then it is,
more operative, more destructive then it would be, if we would shake off this
conceit, and rowse our selves, and stand up against it, and ignavia nostr
fortis est, and it may be, it is our sloth, and Cowardice, that makes it
strong; for certainly, there must be more force then this has, to make us so
wicked as many times we are, and there be more promoters of the kingdom of
Darkness in us, then that which we brought with us into the world. Lord, what
a noise has Original sin made amongst the sons of Adam? and what ill use has
been made of it? When this Lion roares, all the Beasts of the Forest tremble,
and yet are beasts still; we hear of it, and are astonished, and become worse
and worse, and yet there are but few, that exactly know what it is: when we are
Infants, we do not know that we are so, no more then the Tree does, that it
grows, much less can we discover what poison we brought with us into the
world, which, as it is the nature of some kind of poison, though it have no
visible operation for the present, may some years after break forth from the
head to the foot, in swellings, and sores full of corruption, and not be fully
purged out to our lives end. Again, in the opening and dawning of our reason,
we have scarce so much light, as to see our selves by, and we understand little
more then the rod, which we soon forget, and boldly venture upon the same
fault, for which we felt it, and should count it a virtue and our bounden duty
to do it, but for the smart it brings with it, which yet can work in us little
conscience of guilt. And then in our riper age, our blood runs in our veins
with more heat, and we are active, and strong to act over them with some sense
and feeling, which we learnt but imperfectly in our nonage, which our Nurse
pratled into us, which servants read to us with a licentious tongue, and wanton
behavior; and many times we repeat and express those rudiments and principles
of thrift, which those who are set over us do commonly first teach, and we show
our selves as perfect in them, as those old Gray Headed Atheists, that taught
them. These we take up betimes; Wantonness, Revenge, love of the world, and
being used unto them, they are no burdens, and if at any time they wring us, we
have learnt so much at Church, as to cast them off upon Adam, to ease our
selves with the remembrance of our natural weakness, though we know not what it
is, nor have learnt it half so perfectly, as we have done those other lessons,
which have no evil in them, as we think, but that which is of ancient
extraction, derived from the first evil, that was ever seen under the Sun. But
then in our old age, which is a complication, and collection of all sins, as
well as diseases, how should a dim eye discover it in the midst of so many evil
habits wreathed and platted one within another, covetousness wrought in with
luxury, and with luxury, cruelty, each thwarting, and yet friendly complying
the one with the other? can we now say that these sins were thus multiplied,
and raised to such a height by the power and continued force of that fatal
Legacy, which our first Parents left us? or was this the best crown wherewith
our mothers crowned us in the day of our conception? can we labor and toil?
can we affect and study sin? can we make it our business? our ambition to walk
in our evil ways, and say, that we were put in them from the beginning, and
forced forward by the violent hand, that first put us in? Indeed, the old man,
the old sinner is glad to hear of another Old man, although he never intend to
Crucify him, nor well understands what it is: no more then the vulgar do
Antichrist, which in their fancy is a Beast, and has horns; The multitude of
years (though Age be talkative,) yet many times know no more of this primitive,
and so much famed evil, then they who were but of yesterday. For even they who
have been brought up in Nob, in the City and University of Priests, have not
all agreed in their discovery of this evil, but have presented it in so many
shapes, that it will be hard to choose, and say this is the right, this, this it
is: I am sure their opinions and more, then the sins can be, which Original sin
does necessarily bring into act. The Ana-Baptists in the days of our
forefathers called it Somnium Augustini, Saint Austins dream; See Melanct. l.
c. de perc.
some make it a sin, and some a punishment only, some make it both; some have
made it to be nothing but the want and deprivation of Original righteousness,
or an habitual aversion, and obliquity of the will; others have made it the
image of the devil; There be, that conceived the whole essence of man to be
corrupted; there be that make it an Accident, and there have been that have
made it a substance, and there have not been wanting those, who have made it
nothing; All agree in this; that there is something in us which we must strive
to subdue, and keep under, some call it our natural inclination, which may be
the matter of virtue as well as of vice; others Original sin, which to yield
to, is to die, but to curb, and restrain, to fight against and to conquer, is
the great work and Business of a Christian.

I speak not this to take away our Original weakness, but to take it away
from Being an excuse; For in the Second place, our Natural weakness is so
far from excusing our sin, or making it less voluntary, That we are bound
by our very profession, to Crucify this Old Adam in us, to mortify our Earthly
Members and lusts, non exerere quod Nati sumus, not to be, what indeed we are,
to be in the Body, but out of the Body, to Tame the wantonness of the Flesh:
for did we not for this give up our names unto Christ? were we not Baptized in
this Faith? It is my Melancholy, says the Envious, It is my Choler; says the
Revenger; It is my Blood, says the wanton; it is my Appetite, says the
Glutton; and so every man runs on in his own ways, because the wind that
drives him, comes from no other Treasury, but himself, no other corner, but his
corrupt heart; fructu peccatorum utuntur, ipsa subducunt, they are content to
reap the fruit and pleasure of sin, but withdraw the sin it self, and remove
it out of the way: But this is not the right use of our natural weakness, which
may be left in us, but (as all agree) to Humble, not disarme us, to show we are
men, weak and impotent in our selves, not to make us proud and Rebellious
against our God, but to set us upon our Guard, and make us bestirre our selves,
and call up all our Forces, and send our Prayers, as Ambassadors to Heaven for
help and succor, against this Inmate, and Domestic Enemy. The Envious should
purge his Melancholy, and rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep with them
that weep: The Choleric should bridle his Anger, and make it set before the
Sun; The wanton quench that fire in his Blood, and make himself an Eunuch for
the Kingdom of Heaven; Julian. Antiochens.
the Glutton, (...), wage war with his Appetite, and set a knife to his
Throat; If this care were General, if we understood Christianity aright, and
did strive and struggle with our selves (the best Contention in the world) If
we did do an Act of Justice upon our selves, perform that Judicatory part of
the Gospel, labor to bind this Old Man in Chains, and Crucify the flesh, with
the Lusts and Affections, we should not complain, or rather speak so
contentedly of Adams fall, not bemoane our selves, and yet be pleased well
enough in it; nor take that Doctrine with the left hand, which is offered to us
with the right, or, as he spoke in the Historian, sinistra Dextram amputare,
Cut off our right Hand with our left, and by a sinister, and unnecessary
Conceit of our own weakness, rob and deprive our selves of that strength, which
might have defended us from sin and Death, which now is voluntary, because we
cannot derive it from any other Fountain, then our own Wills.

For last of all; Be the Blemishes in the understanding and will, which we are
said to receive by Adams fall, what they may be either by certain knowledge, or
conjecture, yet we shall not die, unless we will; And if such we were all; yet
now we are washed, now we are sanctified, now we are Justified in the Name of
the Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 6.11.
and the Leper, who is cleansed, complains no more of his disease, but returns
to give Thanks; The blind man, who is cured, does not run into the Ditch, and
impute it to his former Blindness, but rejoices that he can now see the Light,
and walks by the light he sees; and we cannnot without foul Ingratitude Deny,
but what we lost in Adam, we recovered again in Christ, and that improved and
exalted many degrees; For not as the offense, so is also the gift, says the
Apostle; For as by the offense of one, many were made sinners, that is, Romans
5.15.
were under the wrath of God, and so considered, as if they had themselves
committed that sin, so by the Obedience of One, many shall be made righteous,
made so, not only by Imputation, That we would have, and nothing else; have
sin removed, and be sinners still) but made so, that is, supplied with all
Helps, and with all strength that is necessary, and sufficient to forward, and
perfect those Duties of Piety, which are required at the hands of a Justified
person: for do we not magnify the Gospel from the abundance of light, and Grace
which it affords? Do we not count the last Adam stronger then the First? Is not
he able to cast down all the strong holds, all the Towering Imaginations which
flesh and blood, though Tainted in the womb, can set up against him; and
therefore, if we be truly (what we profess our selves) Christians, this
weakness cannot hurt us, and if it Hurt us, it is because we are not Christians.

To conclude: If in Adam we were all lost, In Christ we are come home, and
brought near to heaven, and post Jesum Christum, when we have given up our
Names unto Christ, and profess our selves members of that Mystical body,
whereof he is the head, all our Complaints of weakness, and disabilitie to
move in our several places, is vain and unprofitable, and Injurious to the
Gospel of Christ, which is the Power of God unto Salvation; and a gross and
angerous error it is, when we run on, and please our selves in our Evil ways,
to complain of our Hereditary Infirmities, and the weakness and imperfection
of nature; For God may yet breath his Complaints and Expostulations against
every son of Adam that will not Turn; Though you are weak; Though you have
received a bruise by the fall of your first Parents, yet in me is your
strength, and then, Why will you die oh House of Israel?

We must now remove those other pretenses of Flesh and Blood; But in our next
and last Part.

THE TWELFTH SERMON.
PART VIII.
EZEKIEL 33.11. Turn ye, Turn ye from your evil ways: For why will you
die, Oh House of Israel?


We are told, and can tell our selves, that Sin is a burden; and he that lies
under a Burden, seeks Ease; nor does he always ask Counsel of his reason to
choose that, which is made and fitted to remove it; but through the importunate
irksomness of his pain, he lays hold of that which is next, and that's the
best: though it leave him under the same load, and pressure, and all his Art
and continuance has gained no more then this, That he thinks it lighter then
it was; when it is the same, but with a large addition of weight. And thus we
sin, but cannot persuade our selves we were willing to sin: we run upon our
death, and yet it is that which both our eye and our will abhors: we die; for,
1. we were born weak, 2. We want means to avoid it, 3. We want light to see our
ways; 4. We walk on in them, but we walk in pain, and though we make no stop,
yet we have many a check; we would not, and yet we will go on, we condemn our
selves for what we do, and do it; and last of all we seek death, but we mean
life, we do those things, whose end is death, but to a good end, and so make
our way to heaven through hell it self, intend well, and do those things which
can have no other wages but death. These are pillows which we sew under our own
elbows; Original weakness; want of grace; ignorance of our ways: the
reluctance of our Conscience, which we call Involuntarines; and if these be not
soft and easy enough to sleep on, we bring in a good meaning, a good intention
to stuff and fill them up; and on these we sleep securely, as Sampson did in
the lap of Dalilah, till our strength go from us, and we grow weak indeed; fit
for nothing, but to grind in his prison, to do him service, who put out our
eyes; able to die and perish, but not able to live; strong to do evil, but
faint and feeble, and lost to that which is good.

The second pretense.
For as we have sought for ease from the beginning of the world, so have we
also from the beginning of the Gospel, as Saint Mark has it; Mark. 1.1.
as we have brought in the first Adam infecting and poisoning us; so we would
find some deficiency in the second, as if that Grace which he plenteously
spreads in our hearts, had not virtue enough to expel and purge it out, as we
pretend want of strength, so we pretend want of help and succor; the want of
that Grace which we might have, which we have, but will not use; and have
nothing more common in the world, even in their mouths, who know not what it
is. What mention we the many? what talk we of those, who like those narrow
mouthed vessels receive but little, because it is powered out too fast, and many
times have as little feeling of what they receive, as those earthen vessels, to
which we compared them. Grace, it is in every man's mouth, the sound of it has
gone through the earth, and they hear it, and Echo it back again to one
another; they talk and discourse of it, and yet all are not saved by that Grace
they talk of: Ebrius ad phialam, Augustine
mendicus ad januam; the drunkard speaks of it in his cups, and by the Grace of
God he will drink no more, and yet drinks drunk 'till there be no appearance in
him either of Grace or Nature, either of the Christian or the man; the Beggar
he makes it his Topic, and hopes it will melt him he beggs of, into
compassion, which had not power to unfold his hands to work, that he may need
no relief: it sounds in every ear, and every ear is delighted with it, and it
is to them as the sound of a consecrated Bell is to the superstitious, and they
conceive it has power to drive the devil out of their coast, whilst they not
fall, but run into those temptations, which they might have overcome by that
Grace they talked of. What speak we of these? even they who have a great name
for learning, and are of the first rank and file, have not brought it forth to
the Sun, and people in that simplicity and nakedness, that upon the first
sight they may say, This is it; Sometimes it is an infused habit; sometimes is is
a motion or Operation; sometimes they know not how to distinguish it from faith
and Charity; it is one and the same, and yet it is manifold: it excites, and
stirs us up; it works in us, and it works with us; it prevents, and follows us,
and thus they handle Grace as the Philosophers do the Soul, they tell us what
wonders it works, but not its essence; they tell us what it does, but not
plainly what it is.

But let us take it in its most plain and vulgar sense, for that special, and
supernatural Assistance, which promotes, and upholdes us in that course, and
those Actions, which carry us on to a supernatural end, but not shut out that
Grace of God, by Christ Jesus by which we are justified, which in Scripture is
called (...) the Grace and favor of God, and in most places is opposed to the
works of the Law; nor those (...), those gifts and graces, as quickness of
wit, depth of understanding and the like; not in his mercies, by which we are
so often entreated, nor his promises, which do even woo, and allure us, nor
any beams of the glory of that gospel, which are all agents and instruments in
working us out a Crown, in bringing us to that end, for which we were made, and
designed; and he that shall look back upon these, cannot conceive that God will
shorten his hand, and be desicient, and wanting to us in that help and
assistance, which is fit and necessary for us in this our race, that he will
speak to us by his Son, speak to us by his Blood; speak to us by his mercies;
speak to us from heaven, and then leave us as the Ostrich does her young ones
in the sand, open to injuries, and temptations, naked and without help to
defend us against that violence, which may tread us to death? this certainly
cannot consist with his Justice and his goodness, who having given us Christ,
will with him give us all things; for how should it be otherwise? says Saint
Paul; who gives to all men liberally, Romans 8.32. Jam. 1.5.
and upbraideth not, says Saint James; and to pretend a want of Grace, and
assistance from God, what is it but to cast all our imperfections upon him, as
well as upon Adam? as if we sinned, and were defective in our duty, not through
our own negligence, and corrupt and perverse wills, but because God refused to
give us strength to do it, gave us a Law, and lest us in fetters, bid us go,
and meet him in our Obedience, when we were as lame as Mephibosbeth, and had no
servant to help us; as if the heavens were as brass, and denied their
Influence, and god did on purpose hide himself, and withdraw his grace, that we
might fall from him and perish. And therefore Hilarie passes this heavy
censure upon it, impiae est voluntatis, it is the sign of a wicked Heart, and
one quite destitute of those graces and riches, which are the proper
Inheritance of believing Christians, to pretend they therefore want them,
because they were not given them of God.

A dangerous error it is; and, we have reason to fear, has sunk many a soul
to that supine carelessnes, to that deadness, from whence they could never
rise again; for this is one of the wiles of our enemy, not only to make use of
the flying and fading vanities of this world; but of the best Graces of God, to
file and has hammer them, and make them snares; and has wrought temptations
out of that, which should strengthen us against them: Faith is suborned to keep
out Charity; the spirit of truth is named to lead us into error, and the power
of Gods Grace has lost its authority and Energie in our unsavorie and
fruitless Panegyricks: we hear the sound and name of it, we bless and applaud
it, but the power of it is lost, not visible in any motion in any Action, in
any progress we make in those ways in which along grace will assist us;
floats on the Tongue, but never moves either heart, or hand. For do we not lie
still in our graves, expecting till this Trump will sound? do we not cripple
our selves in hope of a miracle? Non est honae and solidae fidei omnia ad
volumatem Dei refer, ut non intelligamus aliquid esse in Nobis ipsis. Tertul.
Exhort. ad Castitatem.
do we not settle upon our lees, and say, God can draw us out? wallow in our
blood, because he can wash us as white as snow? do we not love our sickness,
because we have so skilful a Physician? and since God can do what he will, do
what we please? This is a great evil under the Sun, and one principal cause of
all that evil that is upon the earth; and makes us stand still, and look on,
and delight in it, and leave it to God alone, and his power to remove it, as if
it concerned us not at all, and it were too daring an attempt for us mortals,
the sons of Adam, to purge and cleanse that Augaean stable, which we our selves
have filled with dung; as if Gods wisdom and Justice did not move at all, and
his mercy and power were alone busy in the work of our salvation; busy to
save the adulterer; for though he be the member of an Harlot, yet when God
will, he shall be made a member of Christ; to save the seditious: For though he
now breath nothing but Hailstones and coals of fire; yet a time will come,
where he shall be made peaceable, whether he will or no; to save them who
resolve to go on in their sin, for he can check them when he please, and bring
them back to Obedience and holiness; in a word, to save them, whose Damnation
sleeps not. I may say with the Father, utinam mentirer, would to God in this
I were a lier; but we have too much probability to induce us to believe it, as
a truth; that they who are so ready to publish the free and irresistible power
of Gods Grace, and call it his Honor; dishonor him more by the Neglect of
their duty, which is quite lost, and forgot in an unseasonable acknowledgement
of what God can, and a lazy expectation of what he will work in them, and so
make God Omnipotent, to do what his Wisdom sorbids, and themselves weak and
impotent to do, what by the same wisdom he commands: and then (when they
commune with their heart, and find not there those longings and pantings after
piety, that true desire and endeavor to mortify their earthly members, which
God requires, when in this Dialogue, between one, and himself, their hearts
cannot tell them they have watched one hour with Christ) flatter and comfort
themselves, that this emptiness, and nakedness, shall never be imputed to
them by God, who if he had pleased, might have wrought all in them in a moment,
by that force, which flesh and blood could never withstand; And thus they sin,
and pray, and pray and sin, and their impiety and devotion like the Sun and the
Moon have their interchangeable courses, it is now night with them, and anon
it is day; and then night again, and it is not easy to discern which is their
day, or which is their night, for there is darkness over them both; They hear
and commend virtue and piety, and since they cannot but think, that virtue is
more then a breath, and that it is not enough to commend it, they pray, and are
frequent in it, pray continually, but do nothing; pray, but do not watch, pray,
but not strive against a temptation, but leave that to a mightier hand to do
for them, and without them, whilst they pray and sin; call upon God for help,
when they fight against him; as if it were Gods will to have it so; for if he
would have had it otherwise, he would have heard their prayers, and wrought it
in them; and therefore will be content with his Talent though hid in a napkin,
which, if he had pleased, might have been made ten, and with his seed again,
which if he had spoke the word, had brought forth fruit a hundred fold. Hence
it comes to pass, that though they be very evil, yet they are very secure,
this being the triumph over their Faith, not to conquer the world, but to leave
that work for the Lord of Hosts Himself, and in all humility to stay till he do
it; for they can do nothing of themselves, and they have done what they can,
which is nothing, and now they are heartlesse, feeble, and (if I may so speak)
this do-nothing devotion, which may be as hot on the tongue of a Pharisee, and
tied to his Phylactery, must be made a sign of their election before all
times, who in time do those things, of which we have been told often, that they
that do them shall not inherit the kingdom of Heaven.

I do not derogate from the power of Gods grace (they that do, are not worthy
to feel it, but shall feel that power, which shall crush them to pieces) they
rather derogate from its power, who bring it in to raise that obedience, which
coming with that tempest and violence, it must needs destroy, and take away
quite; for what obedience is there, where nothing is done? where he that is
under command does nothing? vis ergo ista, non gratia, says Arnobius, this
were not grace, or royal favor, but a strange kind of emulation to gain the
upper hand. We cannot magnify the Grace of God enough, which does even expect,
and wait upon us, John 1. ep. 2 c. 27. v.
woo, and serve us; it is that unction, that precious ointment Saint John
speaks of, but we must not pour it forth upon the hairy scalp of wilful
offenders, who loath the means, despise prophecy, quench the spirit, and so
hinder it in its operation, of men, who are as stubborn against Grace, as they
are loud in its commendations, as active to resist, as to extol it; For this is
to cast it away and nullify it, this is to make it nothing by making it
greater, nay, to turn it into wantonness.

But it may be said, that when we are fallen from God we are not able to rise
again of our selves; we willingly grant it; that we have therefore need of new
strength, and new power to be given us, which may raise us up, we deny it not;
and then Thirdly, that not only the power, but the very act of our recovery is
from God, ingratitude it self cannot deny it; and then, that man can no more
withstand the power of that grace, which God is ready to supply us with, then
an infant can his birth, or the dead their Resurrection; that we are turned
whether we will or no, is a conclusion, which these premises will not yield.
This flint will yield no such fire, though you strike never so often; we are,
indeed, sometimes said to sleep, and sometimes to be Dead in sin; but it is ill
building conclusions upon no better Basis then a figure, or because we are said
to be dead in sin, infer a necessity of rising when we are called; nor is our
obedience to Gods inward call of the same nature, with the obedience of the
Creature to the voice and command of the Creator (for the Creature has neither
reason nor will as man has) nor does his power work after the same manner in
the one as in the other. How many Fiats of God have been frustrate in this
kind? how often he has he smote our stony, and rocky hearts, and no water
flowed out? how often has he said Fiat lux let there be light, when we
remained in darkness? for we are free agents, and he made us so, when he made
us men, and our actions when his power is mighty in us, are not necessary but
voluntary; not does his power work according to the working of our Fancy, nor
lies within the level of our carnal Imaginations, to do what they appoint, but
is accompanied, and directed by that wisdom, which he is, and he does nothing,
can do nothing, but what is agreeable to it. As it was said of Caesar in Lucan,
though in another sense, Velle putant, quodcunque potest.


We think that God can do whatsoever he can; but we must know, that as he is
powerful, and can do all things, so he is wise, and sweetly disposes all
things, as he will, and he will not save us against our will, for to
necessitate us to goodness, were not to try our obedience, but to force it,
and quod necessitas praestat, depretiat ipsa. Necessity takes of the price and
value of that it works, and makes it of no worth at all; And then God does not
voluntarily take his grace from any, but if the power of it defend us not from
sin and death, it is because we abuse and neglect it, and will not work with
it, which is ready to work with us; For Grace is not blind, as Fortune, nec
cultores praeterit, nec haeret contemptoribus, she will neither pass by them,
who will receive her, nor dwell with those persons which contemn her, nor save
those who will destroy themselves.

To conclude this; He is most unworthy to receive Grace, who in the least
degree detracts from the power of it; and he is as unworthy who magnifies, and
rejects it, and makes his lise an argument against his Doctrine, says he
cannot be resisted, and resists it every day; he that denies the power of it,
is a scarce a Christian, and he is the worst of Christians who will not gird up
his loins, and work out his salvation, but loiters and stands idle all the day
long, shadows and pleases himself under the expectation of what he will do,
and so Turns it into wantonness. Let us not abuse the Grace of God, and then
we cannot magnify it enough; but he that will not set his hand to work, upon a
fancy, that he wants Grace; he that will not hearken after Grace though she
knock and knock again, (as Fortune was said to have done at Galbas gate) till
she be weary, has already despised the Grace of God, and cannot plead the want
of that for any excuse, which he might have had, but put it off, nay, which he
had, but so used it, as if it had been no grace at all. They that have grace
offered and repel it, they that have Antidotes against death and will not use
them, can never answer the expostlation, Why will ye die?

The third pretense.
And certainly, he that is so liberal of his grace, has given us knowledge
enough to see the danger of those ways which lead to death; and therefore in
the next place, ignorance of our ways does not minuere voluntarium, does not
make our sin less wilful, but rather aggrandize it; For first, we may know,
if we will know every duty that tends to life, and every sin that brings
forth death; we may know the Devils enterprises says saint Paul, 2 Cor. 2.11.
and the ignorance of this finds no excuse, when we have power and faculty,
light and understanding; when the Gospel shines brightly upon us, to dispel
those mists, which may be placed between the truth and us, Sub silentiae
fa^ultate nes^ire, repudiatae magis quam non com pertae veritatis est reatus
Hill. in Psalm. 1.8.
then if we walk in darkness, and in the shadow of death, we shall be found
guilty, and not so much of not finding out the truth, as of refusing it, as
Hilary speaks of a strange contempt in not attaining that, which is so easily
achieved, and which is so necessary for our preservation. I know every man
has not the same quickness of apprehension, nor can every man make a Divine,
and it were to be wished, every man would know it (...), it is not for him that
thresheth out the corn, to resolve controversies, or State-questions, but Saint
Peter requires that every man should be able to give an answer, 1 Pet. 3.15.
a reason of his faith, and if he can do that, he that knows the will of God is
well armed and prepared against death, and may cope with him, and destroy him
if he will. And this is no perplexed, nor intricate study, but fitted and
proportioned to the meanest capacity: he that cannot be a Seraphical Divine,
may be a Christian; he that cannot be a Rabbi, may be an honest man; and if men
were as diligent in the pursuit of the truth, as they are in managing their own
temporal affairs; if men would try as many conclusions for knowledge, as they
do for wealth, and were as ambitious to be good, as they are to be rich and
great; if they were as much afraid of Gods wrath, as they are of poverty, and
the frown of a mortal, this pretense of want of knowledge would be soon
removed, and quite taken out of the way. For now the Grace of God has appeared
unto all men, and commanded all men every where to repent, and turn from their
evil ways. What Apology can the oppressor have, when wisdom it self has
sounded in his ears, and told him, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self?
for even flesh and blood would soon conclude, that no man will oppress
himself. What can the Revenger plead after that thunder, vengeance is mine?
what can the covetous pretend when he hears, Go sell all and give to the poor?
what can the seditious say, when he is plainly told; he that resists shall
receive damnation? can any man miss his way, where there is much light to
direct him? when he brought a great part of his Lesson along with him into the
world, which he may run and read, and understand: How can he there err
dangerously, where the Truth is fastened to a pillar? where there is such a
Mercury to show him his way?

And therefore in the second place; if we be ignorant, it is because we will be
ignorant, and if we could open a window into the breasts of men, we should soon
perceive a hot contention between their knowledge and their lusts, struggling
together like the twins in Rebeccahs womb, till at last their lust supplants
their knowledge and gains the pre-eminence, nolunt intellgere, ne cogantur and
facere, says Austin, they will not understand their duty, lest that may draw
upon them an obligation to do it, nor will see their error, because they have
no mind to forsake it; for their knowledge points toward life, but not to be
attained to, but by sweat and blood, which their lust loathes, and trembles at;
and therefore this knowledge is too wonderful for them, nay, it is as the gall of
bitterness unto them; and as Neros mother would not suffer him to study
Philosophy, quia impetaruro contraria, Suet. Nero. c. 25.
because it prescribes many moral virtues as Sincerity, Modesty, and Frugality,
which sort not well with the crown, and must needs fall cross with those
actions, in which Policy and Necessity many times engage the Monarchs of the
Earth; so do these look upon the truth, as a thing contrary to them, as
checking their pride, bridling their malice, bounding their ambition, chiding
their injustice, threatening their Tyranny, and so study to unlearn, suppress,
and silence it, and will not hear it speak to them any more, but set up a lie,
first the child, then the Parasite of their lusts, and enthrone it in its
place to reign over them, and guide them in all their ways. I remember Bernard
in one of his Sermons upon the Canticles, tells us, that he observed many cast
down and very sad and dejected upon the knowledge of the truth, not so much for
this, that it did show them the danger they were in, and withal an open and
effectual door to escape, but that it choked the passages, and stopped up the
way to their old Asylum and Sanctuary of ignorance. For truth is not only a
light, but a fire to scorch and burn us, not only a direction, but a Satyr,
and teaches us to deny ungodly lusts, and if we obey not, it censures and
condemns us. This ignorance then cannot excuse our sin, or make our death less
voluntary, because our lust has taken the place of knowledge, and dictates for
it, and we grope at noonday, and will not see those sins, which though they be
works of darkness, yet are as visible as the light it self. Rebellion is not
therefore no sin, because it comes gravely toward us in the habit of zeal and
religion. Profaneness is not excusable, because Fanatic persons count
Reverence, Superstition. Deceit is not warrantable, because I hold it as a
positive truth; that the wicked have title to the things of this world, and my
Fantastic lusts have drawn out another conclusion, where there was no medium,
no premises to be found, that I am a righteous person, and then follows a
conclusion as wild as that, that I may rob, and spoil him. But these are but
bella Tectoriola, but artificial Daubings, and the weakest eye may see through
them, and discover a monster; and as Tully in one of his Books de Finibus tells
us, that those Philosophers who would not plainly say, that pleasure was their
summum bonum, or chiefest Happiness, but vacuity of sorrow and trouble, did
vicinitate versari, bordered and came near to that, which they first called it;
so the world has found out diverse names to color and commend their soulest
sins, but bring them to the trial, and they must needs mean one and the same
thing, and that zeal and Rebellion Devotion and Prophainess, taking from the
wicked, and downright Cosenage are at no greater distance, then these two, a
Fiend and a Devil, but that the Devil is then worst, when he takes the name of
an Angel of light. The truth is plain enough, but the Prince of this world has
so blinded them, that they will not see it; For their lusts which laid their
Conscience asleep, has taken the chair, and prescribes for it, and drives
them on to do that which was never done nor seen. Judge. 19.30. to tread all
Laws of God and man under feet, and make their strength the Law of
unrighteousness; I know not whether we may call this ignorance or no; It is too
good a name for it, and nothing but our Charity can make it so, or grace it so
much, if it be ignorance, it is a proud, puffing, majestic, insolent
ignorance; the Jewish Rabbis might well say, Error Doctrinae reputatur pro
superbia, Maimonid: more Henoch. p. 3. 41.
this ignorance is nothing but pride or the issue of it, even of that pride,
which threw Lucifer down from Heaven, and raises men here upon earth to fling
them down after him.

But in the last place, to conclude this: if this ignorance be not affected, or
rather forced, and made a pillow to sleep on, yet if it proceed only from that
(...) that non-attention, that supine negligence to keep it out, yet in matters
which concern life and death, we are as much bound to know the means how, as to
strive to attain the one, and escape the other; for what I ought to do, I ought
to know. Pet Aerod. de Reb. Judicat: de Fide and Relig. c. 5. Idem.
The Jews have a saying, Delinquit propheta, qui a propheta decipitur, it is a
great fault in a Prophet to be deceived, though by another Prophet: The
Civilians, imperitia medicorum dolo comparatur, Ignorance in a Physician is a
kind of cheat, and a bloody cheat; Plin. N. Hist.
for the ignorant Physician negotiatur animas hominum, says old Cato in Pliny,
does Trade, and deceive men out of their lives, when they most trust in them.
For if the man be Ignorant, if he will administer Physic, he will kill; if the
man be ignorant, if he will Preach, he will also Prophecy lies: If he be a
Magistrate, if he will Govern, he will also shake the pillars of the
Commonwealth. If he be a Christian, if he be ignorant; then as he will
profess; so also will he run into the snares of the Devil: and this his
ignorance is no plea against that Law, which he was bound to know, Sen. Contr.
l. 5. c. 5.
as well as to keep it. Ex toto noluisse debet, qui Imprudentia defenditur, he
that will plead Ignorance or error for an excuse, must have his whole will
strongly set up against it, and then the great difficulty or impossibility of
avoiding it may be his Advocate and speak for him: but if he make room for it,
when he might exclude it, if he Embrace that which may let it in, or make no
use of the light that detects it; if he will, or reject not, or be indifferent,
if he distaste the truth for some cross aspect it has on his designs, and
love a lie, because it smiles upon them, and promotes them, then this ignorance
is a sin, and the last the greatest, and therefore cannot make up an excuse for
another sin, for those sins which it brings in, in Triumph; but is so much the
more Malignant, in that we had light, but did turn our face away and would not
see it, or did hate and despise it, and blow it out: For he that will not know
the ways of life or calls his evil ways by that name, may well be asked the
question, why he will die?

Ignorance then is not always an excuse; for some are negligent, and
indifferent, will not take the pains to lift themselves up to the truth by
those steps and degrees, which are set for them, and are the way unto it, and
so walk as in the night which themselves have made, because they would not look
upon the Sun. Others study and affect it, and when the truth will not go along
with them to the end of their designs, persuade themselves into those errors
which are more proportioned to it, and will friendly wait upon them, and be
serviceable to fill and answer that expectation, which their lust had raised,
and call them by that name. They will not know, what they cannot but know, nor
see death, though he stand before them in their way, and so are lead on with
pomp and state, with these false persuasions, with these miserable Comforters
to their grave.

The fourth pretense.
But in the next place: when we find some check of Conscience, some regret,
some gain-sayings in our mind, that we are unwilling to go on in these evil
ways, and yet take courage and proceed, we are ready to please our selves with
this thought, and are soon of the Opinion, that what we are doing, or have done
already, if it be evil, yet is done against our will; and if destruction
overtake us, it seises on them, that did so much hate and abhor it, that we
shook and trembled, when it did but show it self to us in a thought. And this I
take to be an error as full of danger, as it is void of reason, of no use at
all, but to make us favor our selves, and engage and adventure further in
those ways which lead unto death.

I deny not, but as there is great difference in sins, so there may be a
difference also in committing them; that the righteous person does not drink
down sin with that delight and greediness which the wicked do, that they do
not sport themselves in the ways of death, nor fall into them with that
easiness, with that precipitancy, that they do not count it as a purchase to
satisfy their lusts, and that most times the event is different; for the one
falls down at the feet of God for mercy; the other hardens his heart, and
face, and will not bow: but yet, I cannot number it amongst the marks and
characters of a righteous man, or (as some love to speak, and may so speak, if
they well understood what they said) of one of the elect, when he falls into
any mortal grievous sin, as Adultery, Murder, and the like, that he does not
fall plena voluntate, with a full consent, and will but more faintly, and
remissly, as it were with more Gravity, then other men; that he did actually
fall, but was not willing to fall, that is, that he did will indeed the sin which
he did commit, but yet did commit it against his will. Nor can I think our
consent is not full, when we chide and rebuke the tentation, and yet suffer it
to win ground, and gain more and more Advantage against us, when we have some
grudgings, some petty murmurs in our selves; and in our heart defame those
sins, which we show openly in our Actions: for when we have done that which is
evil, we cannot say, we would not have done it; when we have made room for sin
to enter, we cannot say, that we would have excluded it.

For, 1. I cannot see how these two should meet so friendly, a double Will,
nay, a contrary will in respect of one, and the same Act, especially when sin
is not in fieri but in facto esse, when the temptation has prevailed, and the
will determined its act. Indeed, whilst the Act was suspended, and our mind
wavering, and in doubt where to fasten, or which part to embrace, whether to
take the wedge of Gold, or to withdraw; whether to smite my brother, or to
sheath up my sword, and anger together; whether to taste, or not to taste the
forbidden Fruit; when it was in labor as it were, and did strive and struggle
between these two; the delightfulness, and unlawfulness of the Object,
between the temptation, and the Law, whilst the flesh lusts against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, there may be such an indifferency, a
kind of willing, and nilling, a profer, and distaste, an approach and a pawse,
an inclination to the object, anda fear to come near: But when the sense has
prevailed with the will to determine for it against the reason, when lust has
conceived, and brought forth, then there is no room for this indifferency,
because the will has determined its act, and concluded for the sense against
the reason, for the Flesh against the spirit. For we must not mistake the
fluctuations and pawses, and contentions of the mind, and look upon them, as
the Acts of the will, which has but one simple, and indivisible act, which it
cannot divide between two contraries, so as to look steadfastly on the one, and
yet reflect also with a look of liking upon the other, our Savior has fitted
us with an instance, you cannot serve God and Mammon: if we know then what the
will is, we shall know also, that it is impossible to divide it, and shall be
ashamed of that Apology, to say, we sin semiplena voluntate, with an
imperfect, with an half will, we know not how. There may be indeed a kind of
velleity and inclination to that which is good, when the will has embraced
that which is evil; there may be a probo meliora, a liking of the better, when
I have chosen the worser part; which is not a willing, but an approbation, an
allowing, that which is just, which arises from that light of our mind and
Law of our understanding from that natural Judgment, by which we discern that
which is evil, from that which is good, and is an Act of our reason, and not of
our will; and thus I may will a thing, and yet dislike it, I may embrace, and
condemn it, I may commend Chastity, and be a wanton, Hospitality and be a
Nabal, Clemency and be a Nero, Christianity, and be worse then a Jew; I may
subscribe to the Law, that it is just, and break it; I may take the cup of
Fornication, and drink deep of it for some pleasant taste it has, when I know
it will be my poison.

And therefore: in the second place; this renitency, and resistancie of
Conscience is so far from Apologizing for us, as for such as sin not with a
full consent, that most times it does add weight to it, and much aggravate our
sin, and does plainly demonstrate a most violent, and eager consent of the
will, which would not be restrained, but passed as it were this Rampire, and
Bulwark, which was raised against it, to the forbidden object; which neither
the Law, nor the voice, and check of Conscience (which to us in the place of
God) could stop or restrain, and that we play the wantons and dally with sin,
as the wanton does with his strumpet, that we do opponere ostium, non claudere,
put the door gently to, Senec. N Q. l. 4.2.
but not shut and lock it out, which is welcome to us when it knocks, but more
welcome when it breaks in upon us; and so frown and admit, chide and embrace,
bid it farwell, when we are ready, and long to join with it, make a show of
running from it, when we open our selves to receive and lodge it in our heart.
For again, if the pravity and obliquity of an act is to be measured, and judged
by the vehement and earnest consent of the will, then the sin which is
committed with so much reluctance, will prove yet more sinful, and of a higher
nature, then those we fall into, when we heard no voice behind us to call us
back; For here the will of the sinner is stubborn, and perverse, and makes have
to the forbidden object against all opposition whatsoever, against the voice of
the Law, which is now loud against him, against the motions of the spirit,
which he strives to repel, against the clamors of Conscience, which he hears
and will not hear, even against all the Artillery of Heaven: it does not yield
to the tentation, when no voice is heard: but of the tempter, nothing
discovered, but the beauty and allurement of the object, nor upon strategeme,
or surprisals, but it yields against the thunder of the Law, and dictate of
Conscience; admits sin, not in its Beauty and glory, when it is dressed up with
advantage, and comes toward us smiling to flatter and woo us, but it joins
with it, when it is clothed with death, when it is revealed by conscience, and
hung round about with all the curses of the Law; Swallows down sin, not when it
is as sweet as honey, but when it has a mixture and full taste of the
bitterness of Gall, and so though our sin be against our conscience, yet it is
not against our will, and therefore is the more voluntary.

Besides in the last place; this is a thing, which almost befalls every man,
that is not delivered over to a reprobate sense, whose eye of reason is not
quite put out, who is not unmanned, and has any feeling or sense of that which
is evil, and that which is good; nay, it was in Cain, it was in Judas, it is in
every despairing sinner or else he could not despair. These pauses, and
deliberations, these doubtings and disputes, and divided thoughts are common to
the righteous, and to wicked persons.

-- Duplici in diversum scindimur Hamo
Hunccine, an hunc sequemur? --
Most men are more or less thus divided in themselves, and as Plautus
observes, it is the humor of some men, when they are at a feast, to dislike
the dishes, but no whit the more abstain, Culpant, sed comedunt tamen, they
find fault with their meat, and did eat it up: so it is with us, we too often
disrelish sin and swallow it down; we cannot but condemn sin, and we are as
ready to commit it, and with him in the Comedy Ask, Quid igitur Faciam? When
shall we now do? when we are knocking at the harlots door, and are ready to
break forth into Action. And therefore this Conceit that a regenerate man does
not sin with a full consent, in that his conscience calls after him to retire
in the very adventure, is very dangerous, and may be mortal to the heart, that
fosters it; for when this conceit has filled and pleased us, we shall be ready
with Pilate to wash our hands, when they are full of blood, and cry out we are
Innocent, when we have released Barrabas, let loose our Sense, Appetite, and
Affections to run riot, and delivered Jesus the just one to be scourged and
crucified; delivered up our reason to be a slave; and ministerial to all those
evils which the flesh or devil can suggest, and delivered up our affections to
be torn and scattered as so many straws upon a wrought sea, and never at rest,
in a word contemnere peccata, quia minora putamus, to slight and pass by our
sins in silence, because we will not behold them in their just shape, and
proportion, in that horror that Terror, and deformity which might fright us
from it. And this conceit is a greater Tentation then that which has first
taken us, for it brings on, and ushers in the Tentation, Takes from it all its
displacency, that it may enter with ease, and when it has prevailed, shuts out
Repentance, which should make way for that mercy and forgiveness, which alone
must make our Peace. Every man favors himself, and is very open to entertain
any Doctrine which may cherish and uphold this humor, and make him less
wicked, or more righteous, then he is; and though at first we find no reason,
which commends it to us, and craves admittance for it, yet because it speaks so
friendly to our Infirmities, and helps to raise up that, which we desire to see
in its height, we take it upon Trust, and believe it to be true indeed; and
stand up, and contend for it, as a part of that Faith, which was once delivered
to the Saitns, and having this mark of the Righteous, That we sin, but check
our selves in it, we take our selves to be so, righteous persons, though we be
so ill qualified, that an Impartial eye beholds it, and finds so much
probability, as points to it, as to the mark of the Beast. It is with many of
us, as it was with the slave in Tacitus, Annal. 2.
who being like Agrippa in outward favor, and the linaments of his body, did
also take upon him to counterfeit his Person, and being askd by Caesar, How he
came to be Agrippa, stoutly answered, As thou came to be Caesar: Nemo non
benignus sui Judex, there are but few, or none at all, that are not too
favorable Judges in their own cause, and though they be slaves, and servants
unto sin, yet will be ready to put on the person of a Prince, of a Saint, of
a chosen vessel, and by the help of Imagination, and the frequency of those
pleasing, and deceitful thoughts at last verily believe himself to be so; And
if reluctancie and regret, and the turning away of the Face of the soul, the
Conscience, at the evil we do, be a mark of a Regenerate man, then certainly
a very Pagan, a Notorious sinner may find this mark about him, and though he
commit sin with greediness, yet lay him down, and rest, and sleep upon this
conclusion; That hating sin as he does, and committing that sin, which he
thinks he hates, his name may be written in Heaven, and that he is also one of
the Elect.

But then, to conclude this, A strange thing it may seem, That we should first
wound our Conscience, and then force her to power in this Balm, first, not
hear her speak, and then bring her in to make this plea; That we did not Hear
her; first to slight and offend her, and then make her our Advocate; I spoke
unto you, and you heard not; it is your happiness; Had I not spoken, your
sin had been greater then it is, and thus we do it with less danger (That's
our thought) because we first told our selves, That we should not do it. But
call our sin what we please, a sin of Infirmity, or a sin with a
halfe-will, with a Half Consent, with a will, and no will, non mutatur
vocabulis vis rerum, Quintil l. 9. Inst. c. 1.
words, and names have no power to change and alter the nature of our sin, or
to abate any degree of its poison and malignity, and pretend what we will,
(...) the sentence and Judgment is the Lords, and in his sight, even those
sins which we do with reluctance, and some contention with our selves, and
voluntary, and without Repentance bind us over to Death Even of them who sin,
though they check and condemn themselves before the Act, say they would not,
and yet do it, this Question may be asked, Why will ye die?

The fifth and last Common pretense.
We come now to the last pretense, which is commonly taken up by men, who are
willing to be evil, but not willing to go under that name; and we shall but
touch it; for it will soon fall to pieces with a Touch. And this pretense is
made up of a bad will, and a good Intention, or meaning; which is indeed of a
Good will and a bad; the one being levelled on the end, the other on the means
that lead unto it, and the one is set up to commend and Authorize the other;
for, as some think, if the end be fair, it casts a beauty and luster upon the
way that leads to it; though it be as foul as sin can make it; and then,
when our Will is evil, it is not evil, because it looks further then that
evil, to something that is so good, that by its virtue it will transform, and
change the nature of it, and make it like unto it self. And, if we look into
the world, we shall find that nothing has deceived men more, nothing has
wrought more mischief on the Earth, then a groundless thought, that that must
needs please God, which is done to a good end, with a good mind, and an Ardent
Affection and zeal, That of the two Tables, we may break the one, to secure and
preserve the other, that we may serve God, when we break his will, and honor
him, when we deface his Image; that that sin, which may Damn a soul (and the
least may do that) is not considerable, if we carry it along but in our hopes,
to that End, which we have set out with the fair title of Good, though it may
sometimes be a greater sin, then that which we would make use of, to raise it
up. But we must suppose it good; but yet we cannot think it can have such a
strange, and more then Omnipotent virtue to change every thing, even that,
which is most contrary to it, into its self, or to make Things not to be what
they are, or at the same time to be both good and Evil. This is but a
Sophisme, but a cheat put upon us by the Devil; for there be two things to
make up a good Intention, or else it is not good; First it must be levelled to
a right and warrantable end, and then carried to it in a due and orderly
course, by those means which are fitted and proportioned to that end; and sure
sin is so unlike to that which is good, that it were easier to dissolve the
Earth, and then set it upon its pillars again, then to draw them to such a
subordination, as to serve to advance one another; what a strange sight would
it be, to see such a fig grow on such a Thistle, to see one evil Spirit
drive out another, which commonly brings in seven worse then himself; to see
Religion brought into the World upon the Devils shoulders? Besides, every
thing that is good, whether it be a natural Good, or a Civil good, or a
Divine good, has its proper and peculiar means ordained and fitted to it,
either to procure or preserve it; If I desire Health, Temperance and a good
diet are the means; If I would have food and raymeant? Industry is the means;
If I would keep my friend; Fidelity is the means; If I would have a
well-ordered Family; Discipline is the means; if I would establish a
Commonwealth; Prove. 20.28.
Justice is the means; That, That alone will uphold it, says Solomon, who was
the wisest of Kings, and knew the fittest means for that end; but who ever
heard of any use that sin was ever of? what end can that be proportioned to?
if there be any, it is not worth the nameing; the end of it is Damnation. Run to
and fro the Earth, look about in every corner of the universe, search all the
Records from Adam to this moment, you shall never find any other: For our
Health, it destroys it, strikes us in the very Gates of life, Cutts us off in
the midst of our days, and Tumbles our Gray Hairs with sorrow into the Grave;
For this many are weak and sick amongst us, 1 Cor. 2.10.
and many are asleep. For our food, it makes it gravel in our mouths, and
strips us of our raiment, and drives us amongst Swine. For Friendship: It may
tie a knot, but it will fly in pieces of it self; for the friendship of evil
men is as false and deceitful as themselves. For our Families: It raises a
Tempest even in these Basins, Fluctus in Simpulo. Proverb. Tull. 3. de leg.
these little bodies, these petty resemblances of a Republic. It sets Father
against Son, and son against Father, makes a servant a Traitor, and raises
enemies within doors, and draws out a Battalio in a Cottage. For
Commonwealths: the least sin may sooner overthrow them, then the greatest
set them up, and of all their Glories, they cannot show any one of them, that
was brought in by either: It may raise them for a time perhaps, to some height,
butthen it gets up above them, lies heavy upon them, and presses them down,
breaks them to pieces, and Buries them in their Rubbish; this it does, and
shall that which can do nothing, but work desolation, be a fit prop for
Religion to lean on, when she seems to sink, or to bring her back, when the
voice is, that she is gone out of our Coasts? Can evil be fit for any Thing,
but that which is like it?

But we are told Tale critopus tuum, qualis Intentio; Bernard. de modo been
vivendi. c. 15.
that our work does follow the Nature, and quality of our Intention; True, if
the Intention be Evil; If I build a Church to set up Idols; If I build a
college to perpetuate my name; If I be very holy on the sudden, and pay my vow
to usury, a Crown; if I do a good act in it self, for some evil end, for then
the intention alters, and changes the Nature of it, and makes it like unto it
self; and the reason is plain, because any one bad Circumstance is enough to
make an Action evil, but bonum ex causa intergra the concurrence of all is
required to denominate it good, Greg. Past. Cur Part. c. 4.
multa non illcitavitiat animus, the mind and intention does bring in a guilt
upon those Actions which are otherwise lawful, but cannot make that just, which
is forbidden; cannot answer for the breach of a Law: Briefly a good intention
and a good action may be joined together, and be one, nor can they be good but
in this conjunction; but to join a good intention to a bad action is with
Mezentius in the Poet, to tie a living Body to a Carcass, it may color indeed,
and hide a bad Action, but it cannot consecrate it; it may disguise a man of
Belial, but it cannot make him a Saint; it may be as a Ticket, or a pass to
carry a wicked man to the end which he sets up, and there leave him more
secure, (it may be) but without doubt, more wicked then before: For Murder now
has no voice; Faction is Devotion, Sacrilege is zeal, all is well, because we
mean well; we fix up a good intention in our fancy, and that is our pole star,
and having that in our eye, we may steer our course, as we please, and buldge,
but swell our sails, and bear forward boldly, till at last we are carried upon
that rock, which sinks us for ever; and therefore to conclude this; a good
intention cannot pull out the sting from death, nor the guilt from sin, but if
we sin, though it be with an honest mind, we sin voluntarily; in brief, though
we know it not to be a sin; though from the Tribunal of conscience we check our
selves before we commit it; though we do evil but intend good, though we see it
not, though we approve it not, though we intend it not as evil, yet evil it is,
and a voluntary evil, and without repentance has no better wages then death,
and this expostulation may be put up to us Quare moriemini? Why will ye die?
for we cannot say, but they are willing to die, who make such have to the pit
of ruin, and in their swift and eager pursuit of death, do but cast back a
faint look toward the land of the living.

We must now draw toward a conclusion, and we must conclude and shut up all,
even death it self in the will of man, we cannot lay it upon any natural
weakness; nor upon the want of grace and Asistance: we cannot plead ignorance;
nor the distaste, and reluctance of our mind, nor can a good intention name
that will good, which is fixed on evil, nor the means which we use commend and
secure that end, which is the work of sin, and has death waiting upon it: if
we die we can find no other answer to this question, Why will ye die? but that
which is not worth the putting up; it is quiavolumus, because we will die. Take
all the weakness, or corruption of our nature; look upon that inexhaustible
sountain of Grace, but as we think, dried up: take the darkness of our
understanding, the cloud is from the will; Nolumus intelligere: we will not
understand; take all those sad symptoms, and prognostics of death, a wandering
unruly fancy; it is the will whiffs it about, turbulent passions; the tempest is
from the will, etiam quod invitus facere videor, si facio, voluntate facio,
even that which I do with some reluctance, if I do it, I do it willingly: all
provocations, and incitements imaginable being supposed: no love, no fear, no
anger; not the devil himself can determine the will, or force us into action,
and if we die, it is quia volumus because we will die; If death be the
conclusion, that which infers it, is the will of man, which brought sin and
death into the world.

And this may seem strange, that any should be willing to die. Ask the
prophanest person living, that has sold himself to wickedness; and so is even
bound over to death, and he will tell you, he is willing to be saved; heaven is
his wish, and eternal happiness his desire; as for death, the Remembrance of it
is bitter unto him: death? if you do but name it, he trembles; The Glutton is
greedy after meat, but loathes a disease; the wanton seeks out pleasures, but
not those evils they carry with them under their wing; the Revenger would wash
his feet in the blood of his enemy, but not be drowned in it; the Thief would
steal, but would not grind in the prison; but the Philosopher will tell us
(...), Aristot. Ath. 2.1
the beginning of all these is in the will; and he that will be intemperate,
will surfeit; he that will be wanton will be weak; he that takes the sword will
perish by the sword; he that will spoil, will be spoiled, and he that will sin
will die, Clem. Alex. strom. 2.
every man's death is a voluntary act, not (...) out of any natural appetite to
perish, but (...) by his own choice, who did choose it, though not in se, not in
itself, which is so terrible, but in causis, as the Schools speak, in its
causes, in those sins in which it is bound up, and from which it cannot be
fevered, for sin carries it in its womb, and if we sin we are condemned, and
dead already; we may see it smile upon us in some alluring pleasure, we may see
it glitter in a piece of Gold, or woo us in the rays of Beauty, but every
smile, every resplendency, every raie is a dart, and strikes us through. Why
will ye die? why? the holy Ghost is high, and full in the expressing it; Amamus
mortem; we love death; Prove. 8. and the last. v. and love, says the Father, is
vehemens voluntas, a vehement, and an Active will; it is said to have wings,
and to fly to its object, but it needs them not, for it is ever with it; the
covetous is kneaded in with the world; they are but one lump: It is his God,
one in him, and he in it. The wanton calls his strumpet his soul; and when she
departs from him, he is dead; the ambitious feeds on honor, as it is said
Camelions do on air; a disgrace kill him; amamus mortem, we love death, which
implies a kind of union, and connaturality and complacency in death. Again,
exultamus rebus pessimis Prove. 2.14. we rejoice and delight in evil; Ecstasim
patimur, so some render it, we are transported beyond our selves, we talk of
it, we dream of it, we sweat for it, we fight for it, we travel for it, we
triumph in it, we have a kind of trance, and transformation, we have a Jubilee
in sin, and we are carried delicately, and with triumph to our death; Nay,
further yet, 1 Kings 22.4.
we are said to make a covenant with Death, Isai. 29.15. we join with it, and
help it, to destroy our selves; as Iehoshaphat said to Ahab, I am as thou art,
and my people; as thy people, we have the same friends, and the same enemies,
we love that, that upholds its dominion, and we fight against that, that would
destroy it, we strengthen and harden our selves against the light of Nature,
and the light of grace, against Gods, whispers, and against his loud calls,
against his exhortations, and obtestations, and expostulations, which are
strength enough to discern death, and pull him from his pale horse; and all
these will make it a volumus at least, not a velleity as to good; but an
absolute vehement will: after we have weighed the circumstances, pondered the
danger, considered and consulted, we give sentence on deaths side, and though
we are unwilling to think so, yet we are willing to die; to love death, to
rejoice in death, to make a Covenant with death will make the volumus full; to
the question, why will ye die? no other answer can be given, but, we will; For
if we should ask further; yea, but why will ye? here we are at a stand, horror
and amazement, and confusion shuts up our mouth in silence, as in the 22 of
Matthew. when the Guest was questioned, quomodo huc? how he came thither? the
Text says (...), capistratus est, he was muzled, he was silent, he could not
speak a word.

For conclusion then: Let us as the Wiseman counsels, keep our heart, Prove.
4.23.
our will, with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of life, and out of
it are the issues of death; let us take it from death, and consine and bind it
to its proper object, bind it with those bonds which were made to bind Kings
and Nobles, the most stout and stubborn, and imperious heart, bind it with the
fear of death, with the fear of that God which here does ask the question, and
not seek to ease our selves, by an indiscreet and ill applied consideration of
our natural weakness; For how many make themselves wicked, because they were
made weak? how many never make any assay to go, upon this thought, that they
were born lame? Original weakness is an Article of our Creed, and it is our
Apology, but it is the Apology of the worst; of the covetous, of the
ambitious, of the wanton, when it is the lust of the eyes, that buries the
covetous in the earth, the lusts of the flesh, that sets the wanton on fire,
the pride of life, that makes the Ambitious climb so high, prima haec elementa,
these are the first Elements; these are their Alphabet; they learn from their
Parents, they learn from their friends, they learn from servants to raise a
bank, to enoble their name, to delight themselves in the things of this world;
these they are taught, and they have their method drawn to their hands; by
these evil words, which are the proper Language and Dialect of the world, their
manners are corrupted, and for this our father Adam is brought to the bar, when
it is Mammon, Venus, and the world that have bruised us more, then his fall
could do.

And secondly, pretend not the want of Grace; for a Christian cannot commit a
greater soloecisme, then to pretend the want of that, which has been so often
offered, which he might have had if he would; or to conceive, that God should
be unwilling he should do his will, unwilling he should repent and turn unto
him. This is a charge, as well as a pretense, even a charge against God, for
bidding us rise up and walk when we were lame, and not affording us a staff, or
working a miracle. Grace is of that nature, that we may want it, though it be
not denied, we may want it, when we have it; and indeed we want Grace as the
covetous man wants money, we want it because we will not use it, and so we are
starved to death with bread in our hands; for if we will not eat our daily
bread, we must die.

And in the next place, let us not shut up our selves in our own darkness, nor
plead ignorance of that, which we were bound to know; which we do know, and
will not: which is written with the Sunbeams, which we cannot say we see not,
when we may run and read it. For what mountainous evils do men run upon? what
gross, what visible, what palpable sins do they foster, quae se sua
corpulentia produnt, sins which betray themselves to be so, by their bulk and
corpulency? Sacrilege is no sin; and I cannot see how it now should, for there
is scarce any thing left for its gripe. Lying is no sin; it is our Language,
and we speak as many lies almost as words, perjury is no sin, for how many be
there, that reverence an oath? jura perjura; it is an Axiom in our morality,
Iusjurandum rei servandae, non perdendae conditum est. Plaut. Rud. Act 5 sc. 3.
mantile, quo quotidianae noxae extergentur: Laber.
and policy, and secures our estates, and intailes them on our posterity.
Deceit is no sin, for it is our trade; nay, Adultery is no sin, you would think
with the Heathen, with those who never heard of the name of Christ, nay, but
with those who call upon it every day, and call themselves the knowing men, the
Gnostics of this age; and whilst men love darkness more then light, with some
men, there will scarce be any sins upon that account as sins, till the day of
Judgment.

Next, bring not in thy conscience to plead for that sin which did (...), beat
and wound thy conscience; for the offie of thy conscience is before the fact,
to inform thee, and after the fact, if it be evil to accuse thee, and what
comfort can there be in this thought that thou did not sollow her
information, that she called it a sin, and thou did it? that she pointed out
to it as to a rock, and thou would needs choose it for thy Heaven? no,
commonly this is the plea of those whose hearts are hard, and yet will tell
you, they have a tender conscience; and so they have: Tender in respect of a
ceremony or thing indifferent; here they are struck in a manner dead, quite
besides themselves, as if it were a Basilisk; here they are true and constant
to their conscience, which may err, but not tender in respect of an eternal
Law, where it cannot mistake, here they too often leave their conscience, and
then excuse themselves, that they did so: in the one, they are as bold as a
Lion, in the other, they call it the frailty of a Saint; this they do with
regret, and some reluctance, that is by interpretation, against their will.

Last of all; do not think thy action is not evil, because thy intention was
good; for it is as easy to fix a good intention upon an evil action, as it is
to set a fair and promising title on a box of poison; hay and stubble may be
laid upon a good foundation, but it will neither head well, or bed well, as
they say, in the work of the Lord, we must look as well to what we build as the
Basis we raise, and set it on, or else it will not stand and abide, we see what
a fire good intentions have kindled on the earth, and we are told that many of
them burn in Hell. I may intend to beat down Idolatry, and bury Religion in the
ruins of that which I beat down; I may intend the establishing of a
Conmmon-wealth, and shake the foundation of it; I may intend the Reformation of
a Church, and fill it with Locusts and Caterpillars innumerable: I may intend
the Glory of God, and do that, for which his Name shall be evil spoken of; and
it will prove but a poor plea, when we blasphemed him, to say we did it for his
Glory.

Let us then lay aside these Apologies, for they are not Apologies, but
Accusations, and detain us longer in our evil ways, then the false beauty, and
deceitful promises of a temptation could, which we should not yield to so
often, did not these betray us, nor be fools so long, if we had not something
to say for our selves.

And since we cannot answer the expostulation with these, since these will be
no plea in the Court of heaven, before the tribunal of Christ, let us change
our plea, and let us answer the last part of the Text, with the first, the
moriemini, with the convertimini, answer him, that we will Turn, and then he
will never ask any more, Why will ye die? but change his Language, and assure
us, we shall not die at all. And our answer is penned to our hands by the
Prophet Jerem. Ecce accedimus, Behold we come, we turn unto thee, for in our
God is the Salvation of Israel; and our Savior has registered his, in his
Gospel, and left it as an invitation to turn, Come unto me all ye that be weary
of your evil ways, and are heavy laden, feel the burden you did sweat under,
whilst you were in them; and I will ease you; that is, I will deliver you from
this body of sin, fill you with my Grace, enlighten your understandings,
sprinckle your Hearts from an evil Conscience, direct your eye, level your
intentions, lead you in the ways of life, and so fit and prepare you for my
kingdom in Heaven; To which he bring us etc.

THE THIRTEENTH SERMON.
GAL. 4.39. But as then, he that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that
was born after the Spirit, even so is it now.


IN which words the Apostle does present to our eye the true face of the Church
in an Allegory of Sarah and Hagar, of Ismacl, and Isaac, of mount Sinat and
mount Sion, which things are an Allegory; verse 24. (...), for it speaks one
thing, and means another, and carries wrapped up ^n it, a more excellent sense,
then the words at first hearing do promise.

Take the full scheme, and delineation in brief. 1. Here is Sarah and Hagar,
that is, Servitude and Freedom. 2. Here are two Cities; Jerusalem, that now is,
the Synagogue of the Jews, and that Jerusalem which is above; the vision of
peace, and mother of all the faithful; for by the New Covenant we are made
children unto God. 3. Here is the Law promulged, and thundered out on mount
Sinai; and the Gospel, the Covenant of Grace, which God published, not from the
mount, but from Heaven it self, by the voice of his Son. In all you see a fair
correspondence, and agreement, between the Type, and the thing, but so that
Jerusalem our mother is still the Highest; the Gospel glorious with the liberty
it brought, and the Law putting on a yoke, breathing nothing but servitude, and
fear; Isaac an heir, and Ismael thrust out, the Christian more honorable, then
the Jew.

The curtain is now drawn, and we may enter in, even within the vail, and take
that sense, which the Apostle himself has drawn out so plainly to us. And
indeed, it is a good, and pleasing sight to see our privilege and priority in
any figure, to find out our inheritance in such an Heir; our liberty and
freedom though in a woman, who would not lay claim to so much peace, and so
much liberty? who would not challenge kindred of Isaac, and a Burgesseship in
Jerusalem? it is true, every Christian may; But that we mistake not, and think
all is peace, and liberty, that we boast not against the branches that are cut
off, he brings in a corrective, to check and keep down all swelling, and
lifting up our selves; the adversative particle sed, but; But as then, so now:
we are indeed of Sarah, the freewoman, we are children of the promise, we are
from Jerusalem, which is from above; sed, but: if we will inherit with Isaac,
we must be persecuted with Isaac, if we will be of the Covenant of grace, we
must take up the Cross; if we look for a City, whose maker, and founder is
God; we must walk to it in our blood; in other things we rise above the Type,
but here we fall, and our condition is the same; But as then, he that was born
after the flesh, persecuted him, who was born after the spirit, even so it is
now.

The vail is drawn, and you may behold presented to your view, and
consideration a double parallel. 1. Of the times, But as then, so now. 2. Of
the occurrences; the acts, and monuments of these times, divided between two,
the Agent, and the patient, those that are born after the flesh persecuting,
and those that are born after the spirit suffering persecution. The them was
not long, it began and ended in a scoff: for Sarah saw Ismael mocking of Isaac
Genesis 21.9. and yet this scoff began those 400. years of persecution foretold
by God, Genesis 15.13. and is drawn down by our Apostle, to the times of grace.
But the now is of larger extent, and reaches even to the end of the World,
from the Angels Antheme, to the last Trump, when Christ shall resign all power
into his Fathers hand. But because we cannot well take a full view of them
both, and the Church of Christ is one, and the same from the first just man
Abel, to the last man, that shall stand upon the earth, though different in
outward Administration: as Tertul. speaks upon another occasion, Tertul. de
pallio
nunquam ipsa semper alia, etsi semper ipsa, quando alia, because receiving
degrees of perfection, yet always one, and the same, when in some respects it
appeared not the same; we will therefore draw both times together, both the
then and the now: the time under the Law, and the time under the Gospel, within
the compass of this one position, and Doctrine, That, though the privilege
and prerogative, (I may say) Royalties of the Church be many yet was she never
exempted from persecution, but rather had intailed it on her, as an
inheritance. And when we shall have made this good, 1. from the consideration
of the quality of the persons, here upon the stage; the one persecuting, the
other Suffering; the one born after the flesh, the other after the spirit. 2.
From the nature, and constitution of the Church, which in this World is ever
Militant, 3. From the providence and Wisdom of God, who put this enmity between
these two seeds, between those that are born after the flesh, and those who are
born after the spirit; When we have passed over these, we will in the last
place draw it down to our selves, look back upon persecution brandishing it is
terrors upon them both, and so learn to take up, and manage the weapons of our
warfare, and prepare our selves against the day of trial; But as then he, that
was born after the flesh persecuted etc.

1. The persons. That no privilege of the Church can exempt her from
persecution, we may read in the persons themselves; the one born after the
flesh, the other born after the spirit; the reason is hid, but visible enough,
in their very Attributes. For as the flesh lusts against the spirit, and
these two are contrary, Gal. 5.17.
i.e. are carried by the sway of their very natures to contrary things; so the
children of the one, and of the other are contrary. Of the first, our Apostle
will tell us, that they killed the Lord Jesus, and killed their own prophets,
and persecuted the Christians; and the reason follows, 1 These. 2.15.
which indeed is against all reason, but was the best motive they had; for as
they hated God, so were they contrary to all men, looking with an evil eye upon
the graces of God in others, and whatsoever savored of the spirit, like
Hannibal in the story, can part with any thing, but war and contention; can be
without their native Country, but not without an Enemy, and the reason is
plain; for that which is born of the flesh, is flesh, that is, Has all the
qualities, and malignity of flesh, is full of the works of the flesh, which are
the very principles of contention, and persecution, From whence are wars, and
tumults, says Saint James, Jam. 4.1.
are they not from those lusts, which fight in their members? From envy, and
malice, from Covetousness, and ambition, which are the works of the flesh, and
are raised from the flesh, as one creature is from another of the same kind,
or rather as a Serpent is out of carryon, or a scarabee out of dung; which if
they cannot find occasion of doing evil, will work and force it out of good it
self; so Cain the first disciple of the dvil, as Saint Bas. calls him, (...)
Eas. de ^ invidia. 1 John 3.12.
slew his brother for no other reason but this, because his works were evil and
his brothers good; for he was, says the Text, of the wicked one, (for to be
born of the flesh, and to be born of the devil, are one and the same thing.)
From the father of envy, though not (as the Rabbis fancy) born of the very
filth, and seed which the Serpent conveyed into Eve. If there were no evil
men, there could be no persecution; for I cannot see how 'its possible for good
men to persecute one another. It is more probable, that Satan should rise up
against Satan, and one devil cast out another. Evil men may rage against evil
men, a covetous man may rob and spoil a covetous man, and a proud man may swell
against a proud man, and an ambitious man lay hold on him, that is climbing,
and pull him back into the dust, for that which made them brethren in evil, may
make them enemies; Herod and Pilat may fall out, and then be reconciled, and
join their forces, as one man, against Christ, and then fall asunder, and be at
distance again. The wicked may gather together, and with one Heart, and with
one Soul pursue the innocent, and hold out their swords together, and join
their forces to rob and spoil them, and then, when they are to divide the
spoil, turn the points of their sword at one another breasts; for they cannot
make way to the end of their hopes, but by striking down them, that seem to
stand in their way, cannot be rich, but by making others poor, cannot be at
liberty, but by binding others, cannot soar to their desires height, but by
laying others on the ground; cannot live at ease, unless they see others in
their grave; which are the several kinds of persecution, as it were, the
strings of that Scorpion. For that which is born of the flesh, is flesh. Take
covetousness, and ambition the proper and natural issues of the flesh, and as
the Apostle joins it every where, with uncleanness, so may we with hatred and
persecution; for these make that desolation upon the earth, the only
Incendiaries in a Church, or Commonwealth, and the great troublers of the
peace of Israel. These destroy the walls, and break down the towers of a City,
these rend the Veil, nay, dig up the very foundation of the Temple, (the
spirit is named, but from the flesh is the persecution.) For what did the
Husbandmen set upon the Lord of the Vineyard Matt. 21. but to gain the
inheritance? what set the whole City of Ephesus in an uprore, but Demetrius his
Rhetoric, the brutish, but strong persuasions of the flesh; from this craft
have we this gain? Acts 19. Look back upon every age of the Church: was there
ever rent, or Schism which these made not? was there ever Heresy, which these
coined not? was there ever fire, which they kindled not? was there ever
torment, which these invented not? was there ever evil in the City, which these
have not done? And though the truth, and Religion were held up, and showed
openly, for a pretense, yet these envenomed the heart, and strengthened the hand
of all the enemies of the Church, those whet the sword, and made the furnace of
Persecution, seven times hotter then it would have been, the flesh is the
treasury, from whence these winds blow that rage, and beat down all before
them. And thus it is with every one that is born of the flesh, he is ever in
labor with mischief, is ever teeming and traveling with persecution, and
wants nothing but occasion, as a Midwife to bring it forth.

And now as we have beheld one person in this Tragedy, and the chiefest actor;
so let us look upon the other, the patient born after the spirit; and behold a
Lamb (for the spirit who came down like a dove begets no tigers or Lions)
Behold a man, a worm and no man, virumperpissicium, as Seneca calls Socrates,
Sen. ep. 104.
a man of sufferance deaf, or if not, yet dumb to all reproaches; and when
injuries are loudest, as silent as the Grave, kissing the hand that strikes him
(...), as Naz. candidatum crucis, as Tertul. on that is so sitted and prepared
for the cross, that he looks upon is, spiritualized in matter
as upon a preferment: poor Lamb, he cannot bite and devour; he cannot scatter
the Counsels of the crafty, he cannot bind the hands of the mighty; ignorant
and foolish, as David speaks, as a beast in this world, a man in nothing but in
Christ Jesus; being elemented and made up of love, and peace, and
long-suffering, gentleness, meekness, Gal. 5.22.
the rinciples of the spirit, having no security, no policy, no eloquence, no
strength, but that which lies in his innocence and truth, which he carries
about as a cure, but is looked upon as a persecution, by those who will not be
healed. Why have thou set me up as a mark? says Job, Job 7. why? every one
that is born of the spirit is set up as a mark. Saint Paul calls it a
spectacle, 1 Cor. 4.6.
as a man appointed to die, or as Tertul. renders that place, elegit veluti
Bestiarios, culled out, and set apart to fight with beasts, a mark for envy to
shoot out her eye at, for malice to strike, and spit at; for every Shimei to
fling a stone at, and a curse together, every Ziba to cozen, every Judas to
betray; a mark for all the Devils Artillery, for all the fiery darts, that
malice and subtlety can draw out of Hell: for he must appear (says Seneca out
of Plato) as a fool, that he may be wise; as weak, that he may be strong; as
base and vile, that he may be more honorable; and if you ask a reason of his,
Jerem. 15.10.
we can give no other but this: because he is born of the spirit, for he is no
sooner thus born, but he comes forth a contentious man, that striveth with the
whole earth, nor can the spirit breath, and work in him, but he shakes every
corner of the earth, every thing that is from the earth earthy. It strives to
pull the wanton from the harlots lips, to level the ambitious, with those who
are of low degree, it beats the Covetous from his Mammon, it wrests the sword
out of the hand of the revenger; it strikes out the teeth of the oppressor, it
marks the Schismatic and avoids him, it Anathematizeth the Heritick; It is
that Angel which stands in our way, when we are running greedily for a reward;
it is that Prophet, that forewarns us; that hand on the wall, that writes
against us; the Cock that calls us to repentance; that Trump, that summons us
to Judgment, well said Martin Luther, Nihil scandalosius veritate, there is
not a more scandalous, a more offensive thing in the world, then that spirit of
truth which begets and constitutes a Christian; which much resembles the
Lodestone quae trahit simul and avertit, which is at once both attractive and
averse; at one part draws the Iron, at the other loathes it, as the truth knits
al good men, all that are born of the spirit in a bond of peace but withdraws
it self, will not join with the evil, with those who are born after the flesh,
and so makes them enemies; and therefore, I may add to Luther, Nihil
periculosius veritate, there is not a more dangerous thing in the world (in
respect of the world) then the truth; for as the truth (as it was said of Noah)
Heb. 11. Condemns the world, that is, convinces it of infidelity, and so
leaves it open to the sentence of condemnation, so does the world also condemn
the truth: 1. By reproaching it, and bringing up an evil report of it, as an
unnecessary, thriftlesse, troublesome, seditious thing Ecquis Chrislus cum sua
fabula? said the Heathen, what ado here is with Christ and his Legend? and so
says every Athiest in his heart, every one that is born after the flesh. 2. By
selling it; as the wanton does for a smile; the covetous for bread; for that
which is not bread, the ambitious for a breath, a sound, a thought; the
Superstitious for a Picture, for an Idol, which is nothing: and then 3. By
violence against the friends and lovers of truth, that they may drive it out of
the world, by commanding and charging them to speak no more in that name, by
persecuting them, Genesis 22.6.
as Ismael did Isaac with a scoff, (for this is all we read, vidit ludentem,
Sarah saw Ismael mocking him) and this scoff, this derision, whatsoever it was,
Saint Paul calls a persecution, this is the Devils Method to make a scoff, the
prologue to a Tragedy, to usher in persecution with a jeer, first put the
Christians in the skins of beasts, and then bait them to death with dogs, first
disgrace them, and then ad Leones, away with them to the Lions, first call the
orthodox Bishops traditores, and then beat them down at the very Altar, first
make them vile, and then nothing; the Psalmist fully expresses it, Psalm. 55.20.
swords are in their lips, for every word these scoffers speak, eats flesh; it
is a mock now, it will be a blow, it will be a wound, it begins in a Libel, it
ends in rise, kill and eat, the first letter the Alpha is a mock, the last, the
(...), is desolation. Thus the son of the freewoman, he that is born after the
spirit, is ever the Patient, and the son of the Bondwoman, he that is born
after the flesh, lays on sure strokes, unus venture, sed non unus animus, says
Aust. as the two Twins strove in the womb of Rebeckah, so these two, the Good
and the Evil strive in the World, the one by silence, the other by noise, the
one by being what he is, the other by being Angry, that he is so; the one by
his life, the other by his Sword. Ecclus. 2.1.
Art thou borne of the Spirit, a true member of Christ? then prepare thy self
for temptation, as the son of Syrach speaks; for when thou have put on These
Graces, That make thee one, thou have with them put on also a Crown of
Thorns; if thou be an Isaac, thou shall find an Imsael.

3. From the Nature of the true Church.

Thus then by looking on the persons in the Text, you may plainly see the face,
and condition of the Church, and that no privilege she has, can exempt her
from persecution, which will yet more plainly appear from the very Nature, and
constitution of the Church, which is best seen in her Blood, when she is
militant, which is more full and expressive, then any other representation, any
other Title she has. For do we say she is visible? the best, and truest parts
of her are not so; we see the Professor, but not the Saint; all we can
challenge, is but a charitable guess and conjecture; for the Lord only
knows who are his. 1 Timothy 2.19.
Do we call her Catholic and Universal? Christi nomen and regnum ubique
porrigitur, omnibus Christus aequalis, omnibus rex, omnibus Judex, Omnibus Deus
and Dominus est. Tert. adv. Judaeos. c. 7.
she is so, when her Number is but small; she was so when Christ built her as a
House upon a rock, open to all, and ready to receive them, though not many
rich, not many Noble entered: shall we give her that high and proud title of
Infallible? Although she be so in those Doctrines, without which she cannot be
a Church, yet in many Things, we err all: But when we draw her in her own
blood, when we call her Militant, we bring her in wrestling, not only against
flesh and blood, against men, but against Principalities, and all those Powers
of Darkness; then we show her as she is. To say, she is the Body of Christ
filled with him, who fills all things, is to set her up as a mark for the
World, and the Devil to shoot at; and this, To set her up as a mark, is to
build her up into a Church: so that, Though persecution comes forth in several
shapes, with more or less Terror, yet to say the Church is ever free from all,
is as full of Absurdity, as to say; A man may live without a soul.

But now, take it with all its Horror, accompanied with whips and Scorpions,
with fire and sword; yet is it so far from the destroying the true Church,
That it rather establishes, enlarges and Adorns her. For the Church of Christ,
and the Kingdoms of the Earth, are not of the same making, and Constitution,
have not the same soul and Spirit to animate them: These may seem to be built
upon Air, they are so soon thrown down; This is raised upon a Holy Hill; These
have a weak and frail hand to set them up, and as weak a hand may cast them
down; This is the work of Omnipotency, which fences it about, and secures it
from Death and Hell: These depend upon the Opinions, upon the affections, upon
the lusts of men, which change oftener then the wind; upon the breath of that
Monster, the Multitude, which is any thing, and which is nothing, which is, it
knows not what, and never agrees with it self, is never one, but in a Tempest,
in Tumult and Sedition; This is founded upon the eternal Decree, and will of
GOD, and upon Immutability it self, and shall stand fast for ever: These when
they are in their height and glory, are under uncertainty and chance, The
Church under the wing and shadow of that Providence, which can neither err,
nor miscarry, but works mightily, and irrisistibly to its end. His evertendis
una dies, Hora, momentum sufficit, These are long a raising, and are blown
down in a moment, but this is as everlasting as his love, that built it; in a
word, these are worn out by Time; This is but melted and purged in it, and
shall then be most Glorious, when Time shail be no more.

I know well; Persecution appears to us as a Fury sent from Hell, and every
Hair, every Threat is a Snake, that Hisseth at us; but it is our sensuality,
and Cowardice that whips us; yet, the common consent of all men has given her
a fairer shape, and they that run from her, do prefer the suffering part,
and as our Savior said, It is more blessed to Give, then to Receive, so is it
vox Populi, The voice of the People (though they practice it not) It is better
to suffer, then to Oppress; even they who have the sword in their Hand, and
breath nothing but Terror and Death, will rage yet more, if you say, They
persecute you; and either magnify their Cruelty with the name of Justice, or
else seek to persuade the world, that they, and they alone suffer Persecution.
Every man flies persecution, and every man is willing to own it. The Arrians
complained of the cruelty of the Orthodox, and the Orthodox of the fury of the
Arrians; vos dicitis pati persecutionem, says Austin to the Manichees, August.
ep. 48. et 68.
"you say, you suffer, but our Houses are laid waste by you; you say you
suffer, but your Armed men put out our eyes; you say, you suffer, but we fall
by the sword, what you do to us, you will not impute to your selves; but what
you do to your selves, you impute to us. Thus it was then; And how do we look
back upon the Marian days, as if the Bottomless Pit did never smoke but then?
and are not they of the Romish party, as loud in their Complaints, as if the
Devil were never let loose till now? we bring forth our Martyrs with a Faggot
on their shoulder, and they theirs with a Tiburne Tippet, (as Father Latimer
calls it) and both glory in Persecution.

We see then, every party claims a Title to it, and counts it an Honor to be
placed in the Number of those that suffer; and indeed, Floridi Martyrs
dicuntur a Cypriano. ep. 20, 21.
Persecution is the Honor, the prosperity, the flourishing Condition of the
Church; for it brings her out of the Shadow into the Sun, makes her indeed
Vifible, puts her to her whole Armor, to her whole strength, to the whole
substance of her Faith, That she may suffer and Conquer, which indeed is to be
a Church. Nazianzen, I remember, calls it the Mystery of Persecution,
Sacramentum sanguinis, the Sacrament and Mystery of blood, a visible sign of
Invisible Grace, where one thing is seen, and another Thing done, where the
Christian suffers, and Rejoices; is east down and promoted; falls by the
sword, to rise to Eternity; where Glory lies hid in Disgrace; Advantage in
loss; Increase in Diminution; and life in Death; Ecclesia in attonito, a
Church shining in the midst of all the blackness, and darkness, and Terrors of
the world.

For again, As when Commonwealths are in their best estate, and flourish,
every man fits under his own Vine and Figtree, every one walks in his own
Calling. The Scholar studies, the Merchant Trafficks, the Tradesman sells; The
Husbandman Tills and Ploughs the Ground; so the time of persecution to the True
Church, to that Body, which is made up of those, who are borne after the
spirit, is a Day of Salvation, 1 Timothy 6.22.
a Day to work in her Calling (for hereunto you were called, says the Apostle)
where she sits under the shadow of Gods wings, where she studies patience, and
Christian Resolution, where she ploughs up the Fallow ground, and sowes the
seeds of Righteousness, where she Trafficks for the rich Pearl, and buys it
with her blood, where every Member Acts in its proper place, by the virtue, and
to the Honor of the Head.

But this you may say, is True, if we take the Church as Invisible, made up of
sheep only, as a Collection of Saints; To speak truly, Charity builds up no
other Church; for all she beholds, are either so, or in a possibility of having
that Honor, though the Eye of Faith can see but a small number to make up that
Body; But take the Church under what Notion you please, yet it will be easy to
observe, that Persecution may enlarge her Territories, Increase her number, and
make her more visible, then she was, when the weather was fair, and no cloud
or Darkness hung over her; that when her branches were lopt off, she spread the
more, That when her members were dispersed, there were more gathered to her,
when they were drove about the world, they carried that sweet smelling favor
about them, which drew in multitudes to follow them, That in their flight they
begat many Children unto Christ, insomuch, Crudelitas vestra illecebra est
Sectae. Tert. Ap. c. L.
says Saint Hierom, That una vox totius mundi Christus, Christ was become the
Language of the whole world. Plures efficimur, quoties metimur, when Christians
are drove about the world, and when they are drove out of the World, they
multiply, so that we may conclude; That so far are all the Graces, and beauty
of the Church, from raising any Privilege, to exempt her from persecution,
that they are rather Occasions and Provocations to raise one, and make
Persecution it self a Privilege.

For in the last place. As it was then, so is it now; And he does not say, It
may be so, or It is by Chance, but Ita est, so it is by the Providence of God,
Providentia ratio ordinis rerum ad Fiem. Aquin.
which consists, and is seen in the well Ordering, and bringing of every Motion
and Action of man to a right End, which commonly runs in a contrary Course to
that, which Flesh and blood, Humane Infirmity would find out. Eternity, and
mortality, Majesty, and Dust and Ashes, wisdom and Ignorance steer not the
same course, nor are they bound to the same point: My ways are not your ways,
Is. 55.8.
nor my thoughts yours, says God by his Prophet, to a foolish Nation, who in
extremity of folly would be wiser then God; Mine are not as yours, not such
uncertain, such vain, such contradictory and deceitful Thoughts, but as
far removed from yours, as Heaven is from the Earth. And as he has made the
Heaven, (...), as Basil. as a veil of his Divine Majesty, so in all his
proceedings and Operations upon man, Deus tum maxim magnus, cum homini
pusiltus, tum maxim optimus, cum homini non bonus. Tert. l. 2. adv. Marcion,
c. 2.
he is Deus sub velo, a God under a veil, Hidden, but yet seen, In a dark
Character, but read; not touched, but felt; Merciful, when he seems angry;
Just, when in outward appearance he favors Oppression, then shadowing us under
his wing, when we think he Thunders against us, The same yesterday in the
calm, and to day in the storm; then raising his Church as high as Heaven,
when we tremble, and imagine he has opened the Gates of Hell to devour her;
whilst we stand at distance, and gaze and wonder at his Counsels and
dispositions, and understand them not. Were flesh and blood to build a Church,
we should draw our lines out in a pleasant place; It should not be as a House
subject to the winds and weather, but some house of pleasure, a Seraglio, a
Royal Palace; It should not be in Egypt, or Babylon, but in the Fortunate
Islands, or in Paradise; Our Lily should be set far enough from the Thorns;
For we would go to Heaven without any Ifs or Ands, without any buts or
difficulties; we would be eased, but not weary; we would be saved, but not
believe, or believe, but not suffer, we would hear God, but not in the
Whirlwind; Enter into his Kingdom, but not with Tribulation; That is, would
have God neither provident, nor Just, nor Wise, that is (which is a sad
Interpretation) would have no God at all.

But Gods method is best, and is drawn out by his manifold Wisdom, Ephesians.
3.10. nor could it possibly be otherwise; Honorem operis fructus excusat.
For that is Method and Order with him, which we take to be confusion, and that
which we call persecution, is his Art, his way of making of Saints, de perverso
auxiliatur, raising us by those evils, Tertul. Scorpiac. c. 5.
we labor under, and as in his manifold Wisdom, he redeemed mankind; so the
manner and method of working out our Salvation, is from the same Wisdom and
Providence, which as it set an Oportet upon Christ to suffer for us, so it set
an Oportet upon the Church, to have a Fellowship in his Sufferings; Act. 14.22.
We must through many Afflictions be consecrated, be made perfect, and so enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven. Nor Indeed, Take us, as we are, polluted and
unclean, could we enter any other way, not enter into the New Heavens, but
purged and refined and transformed by these into a new Creature, Cured by
diseases, healed by Bruises, raised by our Fall, and made more spiritual by
the contradiction of those who are borne after the flesh, more Isaacs, then
before for the many Ismaels: so that it is not only agreeable to the wisdom
of God, but convenient to the weakness of man: God could not save us, we could
not be saved any other way; Oportet, we must go this way; Nay, Datum est,
Philip. 1.29.
it is a Gift, It is given not only to believe, but to suffer, a Gift for
which heaven it self is Given; and it is a Beatitude, Blessed Poverty, Matthew. 5.
blessed mourning, blessed persecution; blessedness set upon these as a Crown,
or as rich Embroyderie upon Sackcloth, or some courser stuff.

And thus you see, the Church is not, cannot be exempt from Persecution, if
either we consider the Quality of the Persons themselves, or the Nature and
constitution of the Church, or the Providence and Wisdom, and Mercy of God; As
it was then, So is it now, In Abraham's Family, Ismael mocks and persecutes
Isaac; In the World, the Synagogue persecutes the Church, and in the Church one
Christian persecutes another; It was so it is so, and it will be so to the end
of the World: Let us now look back upon this dreadful, blessed sight, and see
what Advantage we can work, what light we can strike out of this cloud of
blood, to direct and strengthen us in this our Warfare, That we may be
Faithful unto Death, and so receive the Crown of Life.

And first, knowing these Terrors, as the Apostle speaks, seeing Persecution
entaild as it were upon the Church, seeing a kind of Providence and Necessity,
that it should be so; Let us not (...), as Saint Peter speaks, Think it
Strange, or be amazed at the fiery Trial, not be dismayed when we see that
befall the Church, which befalls the Kingdoms and Commonwealths in the world,
when we see the face of the Church gather blackness, and not to shine in that
Beauty, in which formerly we beheld her. For what strange-thing is it, that
Ismael should mock Isaac? that a serpent should bite? or a Lion roar? that the
world should be the world? or the Church the Church? For the Church, so far as
she is visible, in respect of its visibility and outward form is as subject to
change, as any other thing that is seen, as those things which we use to say,
are but the balls of fortune to play with; for those things of the Church,
which are seen are but temporal, those which are eternal are not seen; 2 Cor.
4. last v
the fashion of the world passes away says Saint Paul, and so does the
fashion of the Church, and when the scene is changed, it comes forth with
another face, and speaks like a servant, that spoke like a Queen; in brief, it
is turned about on the wheel of change, subject to the same storms, to the same
injuries, to the same craft and violence, which the Philosopher says, make
that alteration in States, changes them not into those which may bear some
faint resemblance of them, but into that which is most unlike and contrary to
them, sets up that in their place, leaving them lost, and laboring under the
expectation of another change. Thus it is, and ever was, and ever shall be with
the Church in respect of outward profession, which is the face of the Church,
nor has the seed of the woman so bruised the Serpents head, but that he still
bites at the heel. Behold the Children of Israel in the wilderness, sometimes
in straits; and anon in larger ways; sometimes sighting Exodus 17. sometimes
resting as at mount Sinai; sometimes going forward, and sometimes turning
backward, sometimes on the mountains, and sometimes in the valleys, sometimes
in places of sweetness, as Mithkah, and sometimes in places of bitterness, as
Marah. Behold them in a more settled condition, when their Church had Kings for
her Nursing-fathers, how did Idolatry follow Religion at the heel and supplant
it? and of all their kings how few of them were not Idolaters? how many
professors were there, when Eliah the great Prophet could see but one? and how
can that have always the same countenance, which is under the power and wills
of mortal men, which change so often, sometimes in the same man, but are never
long the same in many, amongst whom one is so unlike the other, that he will
not suffer that to stand long, which a former hand has set up, but will model
the Church as he please, and of those who look upon it with an eye of distaste,
will leave so few, and under such a cloud, that they shall be scarce visible.
Not to speak of former times of those seven Golden candlesticks which are now
removed out of their place, nor of those many alterations in after ages, but to
come home to our selves, our reformed Religion cannot boast of many more years,
then make up the age of a man. That six years light of the Gospel in the days
of Edward the Saint, was soon overspread and darkened with a cloud of blood in
Queen Mary's reign, since when we willing to believe (for we made our boast of
it) that it shined out in beauty to these present times, which have thought fit
to reform the Reformation it self; and now for the glory of it, for its order
and Discipline, which is the face of it (...)? where is it to be seen? we may
say of it, as Job does of the frailty of man; It dies, it wastes, it gives
up the ghost, and where is it? talk what we will of perpetuity, of visibility,
of outward profession Quod cuiquam accidere potest, cuivis potest, what we have
seen done to one Church, may certainly be done to another, may be done to all;
what was done in Asia, may be done in Europ, and if the candlestick be removed
out of one, it may be removed out of any place, nor is that Church, which calls
her self the mother and Queen of the rest, secure from violence, but may be
driven from her seat, and pomp, though she be bold to tell the world, that the
Gatesof Hell shall not prevail against her. Religion ('it is true) is as mount
Sion which cannot be moved, but stands sast for ever; no sword, no power can
divide me from it, nor force it out of my embraces; this has its protection
its salaogardium, from Omnipotency; but the outward profession of it, the form
and manner in which we profess it; in a word, that face of the Church, which
is visible is as subject to change, as all those things are which are under the
Moon. All I shall say is Nolite mirari, wonder not at it, for whatsoever
changes and alterations there be in the outward profession of Religion;
Religion and the Church of Christ is still the same, the same in her nakedness
and poverty, which she had in her cloth of wrought Gold, and all her
Embroyderie. Marvel not then, for this admiration is the child of ignorance,
an exhalation from the flesh, and has more in it of Ismael, then of Isaac.

The third Inference.

And that we may not think it strange; let us in the next place have a right
judgment in all things, and not set up the Church in our fancy, and shape her
out by the state and pomp of this world, but be transformed by the renewing of
our minds. Romans 12.2.
For by looking to steadfastly on the world we carry the image of it about with
us whithersoever we go, and make it the Idea, and platform of a Church; a
Mornarchy is the best form of Government says the Philosopher, and therefore
say they at Rome, the fittest for the Church. Judges are set up to determine
controversies in the Commonwealth, and by this pattern they erect a Tribunal
for a Judge in matters of faith. Temporal felicity and peace is the desire of
the whole earth, hence they have made it a note and mark of the Church of
Christ; like the wanton Painter in Pliny, who drew the picture of a Goddess in
the shape and likeness of his Paramour, and thought that was best and fittest,
which he best likt. From hence it is, from our too much familiarity with the
world, from our daily parlies with vanity, from our wanton Hospitality, and
free reception of it into our thoughts, and the delight we take in such a
guest, we are deceived, and lose all the strength of our judgment, not able to
distinguish between Heaven and earth, or discern that one differs from the
other in glory; and being thus blinded, having this vail drawn before our face,
we are very apt to take the Church and the world to be alike, miscere Deum and
saeculum, to mingle God and the world together, and place our selves betwixt
them, and so make vanity it self our companion in our way to happiness. From
hence it is, that when we see the sword and persecution to rage against the
professors of the Gospel, we think, that not only the Glory is departed, but
the light of Israel is quite put out, that when a kingdom is shaken, and
wasted, the gates of Hell has prevailed against the Church: as groundless a
conceit well near, as if we should take the description of Heaven in the
Revelation to be true in the letter, and think that it is a City of pure Gold,
that the foundations of the walls are adorned with precious stones, that every
gate is pearl, and the streets shine like Glass.

And therefore in the third place let us cast down these imaginations, these
bubbles of wind and air, The third.
blown up by the flesh, the worser part, which does soonest bring on a
persecution, and soonest fear it; and let us in the place of these build up a
royal fort, build our selves up in our holy faith, and so fit and prepare our
selves against the fiery trial: For as amongst the Heathen, those Ceremonies
were called Mysteries which were precedaneous, and went before the Mysteries,
Clem. Alex l. 1. strom.
(...), and he may be said to fight, who does but flourish, and arms, and fits
himself for the battle: so the blessed spirit every where calls upon those who
are born of him to watch, and pray, and stand upon their guard, Ephe. 6.11.
to put on the whole armor of God, that when the devil assaults them in a
storm of persecution, they may be able to stand, in time of peace, to prepare
for war, to look upon the sword before hand, to behold the glittering of it,
all its terror; and take it up and handle it, and then by the wisdom, which
the spirit teaches, dispute it out of its force and terror, saying within
themselves, This can but kill the body which is every day in killing it self,
living, and dying, building up it self, which is next to ruin, but if I faint
and fall under it, I lose my soul which God breathed into me, and then made as
immortal as himself, and whilst I fly from the edge of the sword, my
backsliding carries me into the pit of destruction. Thus by a familiar
conversing with it, before the blow, In pace, labor, and incommodis bellum
pati discunt; in armis deambulando, campum decurrendo. fossam metrendo, etc.
Tert. ad Marry res. c. 3.
by opposing our Hopes of Happiness, to the smart and Death it may bring, by
setting up Life, against Death, and Eternity against a moment, we may abate its
force and violence, and so conquer before we fight. This is our military
Discipline, this is our Spiritual exercise, our Martyrdom, before Martyrdom,
This binds the sacrifice with cords to the Horns of the Altar, and makes it
ready to be offered up; This prepares us for War, that we may have peace;
peace, before we fight, whilst we rest on the Authority, In militaris
disciplinae sinu and rutela, serenus beatae pacis status acquiescit. Val. Max.
l. 7. c. 3.
and command of our Emperor, and in his strength (for we may do all Things in
Christ, that strengthens us) and then peace, everlasting Peace, the reward and
Crown of victory. Every day to a Christian Soldier, is Dies Praeliaris, a day
of Battle, in which he makes some assault or other, and gains advantage on
the adversary; for however the day may be fair, and no cloud appear, yet the
sentence is gone out, All that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer
Persecution: 2 Timothy 3.12.
What shall all be torn on the rack; and bruised on the wheel? shall all be
sacrificed? shall all be Martyrs? yes, all shall be Martyrs, though many of
them lose not a drop of blood. Habet and pax suos Martyrs, for there is a
kind of Martyrdom in Peace, for he that thus prepares and fitts himself, he
that by an assiduous mortifying of himself (which indeed is in some degree to
Deify himself) builds up in himself this firm resolution to leave all, to
suffer all for the name of Christ and the Gospel; he suffers, before he
suffers, he suffers, though he never suffers, there wanting nothing to complete
it, but an Ismael, but the Tyrant, and the Executioner: he cannot but be
willing to leave the world, who is gone out of it already.

Be ye therefore ready, for in an Hour, when you think not, Matt. 24.44.
the Son of man, the Captain of your Salvation may come, and put you into the
lists: though the trumpet sound not to battle, yet, Bellum status est nomen,
qui potest etiam esse, cum operationes ejus non exerit. Grot. de Jure belli,
and pacis.
is it not peace. And if you ask me, how you shall make ready, and address
your selves? what preparation is required? I may say, it is no more then this;
To love the Truth, which you profess, to make it your guide, your Counselor,
your Oracle, whilst the light shines upon your head, when that says Go, to
Go, and when it says, Do this to do it; (...), 1 Timothy 4.7. (...). Basil. de
Humil.
to exercise your souls unto Godliness, and so incorporate, as it were, and
make it Consubstantiall with them, leave and imprint them there in an Indeleble
Character. For if you thus display, and manifest it in every Action of your
life, if you thus fasten it to your soul, and make it a part of it, in time of
peace, you will not then part with it at a blast, at the mock of an Ismael, or
the breath of a Tyrant, which is but in his Nostrills, you will not forsake it
in time of Temptation. Love, if it be true, oh, it is mighty in operation,
stronger then Death it self, and will meet and cope with him, though he comes
toward us on his pale Horse, Mieremb. de art volunt.
with all his pomp and Terror; Love, says a devout Writer is a Philosopher,
and can discover the Nature, and qualities, the malignity, and weakness of
those Evils, which are set up to shake our Constancy, and strike us from that
rock, on which we are founded: who is a God like unto our God? says David,
what can be like to that we love; what can be equal to it? if our Hearts be
set on the Truth; to it the whole world is not worth a thought, Nullum
spectaculum sine concussione spiritus Tert. de Spect. c. 15.
nor can that shop of vanities show forth any thing, that can shake a soul, or
make the passions Turbulent, and unruly, that can draw a Tear or force a
smile, that can deject it with sorrow, or make it mad with joy, that can raise
an Anger, or strike a fear, or set a desire on the wing; every object is dull
and dead, and has nothing of Temptation in it for to love the truth, is all in
all, and it bespeaks the world, as Saint Paul did the Grave, where is thy
victory? nor heigh, Romans 8.35,36,37,38,39.
nor depth can separate us from that we love. And love is a Sophister, able to
answer every Argument, wave every subtilty, and defeat the Deviills (...), his
wiles and crafty enterprises: nay, Love is a Magician, and can conjure down
all the terrors, and noise of Persecution, which are those evil Spirits,
which amaze and cow us. Love can rowse and quicken our drooping and fainting
spirits, and strengthen the most feeble knees, and the hands that hang down;
If we love the Truth, if Truth be the Antecedent, the consequent is most
Natural and Necessary, and it cannot but follow, that therefore we will, when
there is reason, lay down our lives for it.

For, again, what is said of Faith, is true of Love, it purifies the
Conscience, and when that is clean and pure, the soul is in perfect Health,
cheerful and active, full of courage, either to do or suffer, ready for that
disgrace, which brings honor, for that smart which begets joy for that wound,
which shall heal, for that Death, which is a Gate opened to Eternity, ready to
go out and join with that Peace, which a good Conscience, which is her
Angelus custos, her Angel to keep her in all her ways, has sealed and assured
unto her. A good conscience is an everlasting, never-failing foundation the,
foundation of that bliss which the noble army of martyrs now enjoy. But then,
the clamors and checks of a polluted one, will not give us leisure enough to
build up an holy resolution: for when we have detained the Truth of God in
unrighteousness, 1 Romans 81.
as the Apostle speaks, kept it down as a Prisoner, and not suffered it to
work in us any Thing like unto it self, when in the whole course of our life,
we have kept her Captive under our sensual Lusts, and affections, have not
hearkened to her voice, when she bids us do this, but done, the contrary, when
in our ruff and jollity we have thus slighted, and baffled her; it is not
probable, that in Time of Danger, and Astonishment, she should have so much
power over us, as to win us, and to prevail with us to suffer for her sake,
but we shall willingly, nay, hastily throw her off; and renounce her, when to
part with her is to escape the evil that we most fear, and avoid the blow,
that is coming toward us; for we shall soon let go that which we hold, but
for fashion sake, which we fight against, when we defend it, and tread under
foot, even then, when we exalt it: which has no more credit with us, then
what our Parents, our Education, the voice of the People, and the multitude of
professors have even forced upon us? If the Truth have no more Power over us,
if we have no more love for the Truth, but this, which has nothing but the
name of Love, but is indeed the contrary; if we bless it with our Tongue, and
fight against it with our Lusts, at once embrace and stifle it, then those
sensual Lusts, which in time of Peace did deteine, and keep it under, will be
the same, and show themselves again in Time of Persecution, and be as forcible
to deter us from those Evils, which are so, but in show and appearance, as
they were before to plunge us in those of sin, which were true and real; If we
love not the truth, we are Ismaels, and not Isaacs.

Every unclean Beast is not fit to make a Sacrifice, nor the hairy scalp of
him that goes on in his sins fit for the Crown of Martyrdom; for how shall
he, who draws out his life in Open Hostility to Christ, and trifles with him,
and contemnes him all his Days, suffer or die for him before Repentance, and
Reconciliation, which is indeed in the very Act of Hostility? shall we seek
for Heaven in Hell? or shall we seek for witnesses to the Truth amongst a
Generation of Vipers? Can he who all his life long has cast Christ's words
behind him, seal to them with his blood, that they are true? Can the
Conscience, so beaten, so wasted, so overwhelmed with the Habits of sin, upon
the sudden take in, and entertain a Fear of so little a sin, as the denial
of one Truth is, in respect of all? Can Ismael, in the twinkling of an Eye, be
made an Isaac? I will not say, It is Impossible, but it carries but little show
of probability; and if it be ever done, it is not to be brought in censum
ordinariorum, nor falls out in the Ordinary course that is set, and is to be
looked upon as a Miracle, which is not wrought every day, but at certain times,
and upon some important occasion, and to some especial end; for it is very rare
and unusual, that conscience should be quiet and silent so long, and then on
the sudden, be as the mighty voice of God; That it should lie hid so long, and
then come forth, and work a miracle; drive us to the confession of some one
truth, which had no power to hold us from polluting our selves with so many
sins. Keep faith, 1 Timothy 1.19.
says Saint Paul, and a good conscience, which some having put away concerning
faith have made shipwreck; for so near an alliance there is between faith and
a good conscience, that we must either keep them both, or lose them both, faith
being (as Saint Paul intimates), as the ship, and an undefiled conscience as
the rudder, if you strike off the rudder, or let it go, the Ship will soon dash
upon the rocks, and faith will be lost in the waves and floods of this present
world.

If then thou will stand up against Israel, be sure to be an Isaac, a child of
promise, and an heir to the faith of Abraham, if thou will be secure from the
flesh, be renewed in the spirit, if thou will be fit to take up the cross,
first crucify thy self, thy lusts, and affections, if thou will be prepared
against persecution, first raise one in thy own breast, smother every idle
thought, silence every loud desire, check and correct thy wanton sancy, beat
down every thing, that stands in opposition to the truth; Be thus dead unto thy
self; and then neither death nor life, neither fear of death, nor hope of life
shall be ever able to separate thee from the love of God which is in Christ
Jesus. This is all the preparation that is required, which every one, that is
born after the spirit does make, and there needs no more; for he that is thus
fitted to follow Christ in the regeneration, against the Ismaelites of this
world, is well qualified, and will not be afraid to meet him in the clouds and
in the air, when he shall come in terror, to judge both the quick and the dead.

Conclus.
And now to conclude: what says the Scripture? Cast out the bondwoman, and
her son, for the son of the bondwoman shall not inherit with the son of the
freewoman. It Is true, Ismael was cast out into the wilderness of Beersheba,
Genesis 21.14.
and the Jew is cast out, ejectus says Tert. coeli et soli extorris, cast out
of Jerusalem, scattered and dispersed over the face of the earth, and made a
proverb of obstinate impiety, Tertul adv. Judaeos. c. 13. Apolog. 21.
so that when we call a man a Jew, putamus sufficere convitium, we think we
have railed loud enough. But now, how shall the Church cast out those of her
own bowels, of her house and family? (for such enemies she may have, which hang
upon her breasts; called by the same word, sealed with the same Sacraments, and
challenging a part in the same common salvation.) To cast out is an act of
violence, and the true Church evermore has the suffering part; but yet she may
cast them out, and that with violence; but then, it is with the same violence
we take the kingdom of Heaven, a violence upon our selves. 1. By laying our
selves prostrate, by the vehemence of our devotion, by our frequent prayers,
that God would either melt their hearts, or shorten their hands, either bring
them into the right way, or strike off their chariot wheels; fot this kind of
spirit, these malignant spirits cannot be cast out, but by prayer and fasting,
which is energeticall, and prevalent (...), says Eusebius. a most invincible and
irresistible Thing, placing us under the wing of God, far above all
principalities and powers, above all the flatteries and terrors of the world,
there with Steven pleading for Saul the persecutor, till he become Paul the
Apostle, which is in effect to cast out the persecution it self.

Secondly, by our patience and long suffering: For patience works more
miracles then power; it gives us those goods, which our enemies take from us,
it makes dishonor glorious, it dulleth the edge of the sword, it cools the
flames of fire, it wearieth cruelty, shames the Devil, and like a wise Captain
turns the Ordnance, upon the face of the enemy. Romans 5.3.
Patience is the proper effect of faith (for if we believe him who has told us
our condition, what will we not suffer for his sake?) and it is omnipotent,
Philip. 4.13.
by the virtue of which Saint Paul professes, he could do and suffer all
things. It may seem strange indeed, that a mortal, frail man should be
omnipotent, and do all things, yet it is most evidently true; so true that we
cannot deny it, unless we deny the faith; for if the eye of our faith were
as clear, as the reward is Glorious, it would neither dazzle at the smile and
beauty of a flattering, nor at the terror of a black temptation; but pleasure
would be vanity, and persecution a crown. So that you see, to sit still and do
nothing, to possess our souls with patience, and to suffer all things; is to
cast them out.

3. By our innocence of life, and sincerity of conversation; and thus we shall
not only cast them out, but persecute them, as righteous Lot did the men of
Sodom; this is to keep our selves to mount Sion, to that Jerusalem, which is
above, to defend our priority, our primogeniture, our Inheritance, this is to
be born after the spirit. Hom. 8.10.
There is says Austa Just. persecutio, there is a just and praiseworthy
persecution; for Isaac to be Heir, was a persecution to Ismael; for the Church
to be built upon the foundation of the Apostles, Christ being the head corner
stone, was a persecution to the Jews: for no sooner had Paul mentioned his
sending to the Gentiles, but they fling off their clothes, and fling dust in
the air, and cry, Acts 22.23. Judaeorum Synagogae fontes persecutionum.
Tertul. Scorp. c. 10.
Away with such a fellow from the Earth, and nothing more odious to a Jew, to
this Day, then a Christian. The holy and strict conversation of the just, is a
persecution to the wicked; castigat, qui dissentit, he that walks not by our
Rule, Wisd. 2.12.
but draws out his Religion by another, is as a Thorn in our eyes, and a whip
in our sides, and does not instruct, but control and punish us: Do they not
speak it in plain words, Contrarius est, he is contrary to our Doings, it
grieves, and vexes us to look upon him; He will not dig with us in the Mine
for Wealth, he will not wallow with us in Pleasure, nor climb with us to
Honor, he will not cast in his Lot with us to help to advance our purposes to
their End. And let us thus persecute them with our Silence, with our Patience,
with our Innocence, even persecute those Ismaelites, no other way but this, by
being Isaacs.

The fourth and last.

Lastly, Psalm. 55.22.
we may cast them out by Casting our Burden on the Lord, by putting our cause
into his Hands, who best can plead it, by citing our Persecuters before his
Tribunal, who is the Righteous Judge. If we thus cast it upon him, we need no
other Umpire, no other Revenger: If it be a loss, he can restore it, if an
injury, he can return it; if grief, he can heal it; if disgrace, he can wipe
it off, and will certainly do it, if we so cast it upon him, as to trust in
him alone; the full persuasion of Gods Power being that, which awaketh him as
one out of sleep, puts him to cloth himself with his Majesty, sets his power a
working, to bring mighty Things to pass, and make himself Glorious by the
delivery of his People.

Conclus.
To shut up all and Conclude: Thus if we cast our burden upon him, thus if we
look up to the Hills from whence comes our Salvation, Luke 21.28.
we shall also (...), Look up, and lift up our Heads, behave our selves, as if
all Things did go, as we would have them, look up and lift up our Heads, as
herbs peep out of the Earth, when the Sun comes near them, and Birds sing
when the Spring is near, so look up, as if our Redemption, our Spring were
near.

Thus if we Importune Him by our Prayers, wait on Him by our Patience, walk
before him, when the Tempest is loudest, in the syncerity and uprightness of
our Hearts, and put our Cause into his Hands, if there be any Ismael, to
persecute us, any Enemies to trouble us; he will cast them out, either so melt
and transform them, that they shall not trouble us, or if they do, they shall
rather advantage them, then Hurt us, rather improve our Devotion, then cool,
and abate it, rather increase our Patience, then weaken it, raise our
Syncerity, rather then sink it, rather settle and confirm our Confidence, then
shake it, in a word, shall so cast them out, as to teach us to do it, that we
may so use them, as we are Taught to use the unrighteous Mammon, to cast them
out by making them Friends, even such Friends, as may receive us into
Everlasting Habitations, which God Grant for His Son JESUS CHRIST'S sake, etc.

THE FOURTEENTH SERMON.
MATTHEW. 24.42. Watch therefore; For you know not what hour your Lord does come.


I. PART.
WHich words, are the words of our Blessed Savior, and a part of that Answer,
which he returned to that Question, which was put up by his Disciples, ver. 3.
Tell us, When shall these things be, and what shall be the sign of thy
coming, and of the end of the world? Where, we may observe, that he does not
satisfy their Curiosity, which was measuring of Time, even to the last point,
and moment of it, when it shall be no more, but resolves them in that, which
was fit for them to know, and passes by in silence, and untoucht, the other as
a thing laid up, and reserved in the Bosom of his Father. The Time he tells
them not, but foretells those Fearful signs, which should be the Fore runners
of the Destruction of Jerusalem, and the ends of the world; which two are so
interweaved in the Prediction, that Interpreters scarce know how to distinguish
them.

We need not take any pains to disentangle, or put them asunder: At the 30. v.
he presents himself in the Clouds with Power and Glory, the Angels sound the
Trumper at the next; the two men in the Field and the two women grinding at the
Mill in the Verses immediately going before my Text, the one taken, the other
lest, are a fair Evidence, and seem to point out to the end of the world;
which will be a time of discrimination, of separating the Goats from the sheep.
And then these words will concern us as much as the Apostles; In which he who
is our Lord and King to Rule and Govern us, He that was and that is, Revel. 1.4.
and (...), He that is to come, tells us of his coming opens his will, and
manifests his Power, and (as he has given us Laws) tells us, he will come to
require them at our bands; He that is the Wisdom of his Father, he that
neither slumbers nor sleeps, calls upon us, makes this stir and noise about
us, and the Alarm is (...), Be watchful. Call it what we please, an
Admonition, or an Exhortation, it has the necessitating and compulsive force
of a Law, and Christ is his own Herald, and proclaims it, as it were, by the
sound of the Trumpet for this vigilate ergo, watch, Therefore is tuba ante
Tuham, is as a Trumpet before the last, and thus it sounds. To you it is
commanded, to fling your selves off from the bed of security, to set a Court of
Guard upon your selves, to rowze up your selves, to stand as it were on a
Watchtower, looking for, and expecting the coming of the Lord. I may call it
a Law, but it is not as the Laws of men, which are many times the result of
men's wills; which are guided and determined by their Lusts and Affections: and
so Ambition makes Laws, and Covetousness makes Laws, and private Interest
makes Laws, with this false Inscription, Bono publico, For the Public Good;
but it is prefac'd, and ushered in, with Reason, which concerns, not so much
the Head, as the Members, not the Lord, as his Servants, not the King, as his
Subjects, for us men, and for our salvation, For him that is in the Field, and
him that is in the House; For him that sits on the Throne, and the woman
that Grindes at the Mill: for the whole Church, is the warning given, This Law
promulg'd and every word is a Reason. 1. That he is our Lord, that is to come.
2ly. That he will come. 3ly. That the time of his coming is uncertain: A Lord
to seal and ratify his Laws with our blood, which we would not subscribe too,
nor make good by our Obedience; and a Lord, gone as it were into a far
Country, and leaving us to Traffic, till he come, but after a while to come,
and reckon with us; and last of all: at an uncertain time, at an Hour we know
not, That every hour may be unto us, as the hour of his coming; for he that
prefixes no Hour: may come the next: every one of these is a Reason strong
enough to enforce this Conclusion, Vigilate ergo: Watch therefore. A Lord he
is, and shall we not fear him? To come, and shall we not expect him? To come at
an hour, we know not, and shall we not watch? these are the premises; and the
conclusion is Logically, and formally deduced, primae necessitatis the most
necessary conclusion, that a servant, or subject can draw: so that in these
words, we have these things considerable. First, the person coming: Dominus
vester, your Lord; Secondly, his Advent, veniet: he will come. Thirdly, the
uncertainty of that hour; we know not when it will be; out of which will
naturally follow this conclusion, which may startle and awake us out of sleep;
vigilate ergo: watch therefore.

Watch therefore, for you know not the Hour etc.

We will follow that method which we have laid down, and begin with the
premises; and first, it will concern us to look upon the person, for as the
person is, such is our expectation, and could we take the Idea of him in our
hearts, and behold him in the full compass, and extent of his power, we should
unfold our arms and look about us, veternum excutere, shake off our sloth and
drowsinesse, and prepare for his coming; for it is Christ our Lord. Ask of me,
and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance Psalm. 2. says God to
Christ, and Christ says, John 10.30.
I and the Father are one, we believe that he shall Judge the world; and we
read that the Father has committed this Judgment to the Son; John. 5.22.
take him as God, or take him as man, he is our Lord; Cum Dominus dicitur, unus
agnoscitur, for there is but one faith, and but one Lord; so that Christ may
well say, you call me Lord and Master, 1. Cor. 6.20. Colos. 2.15.
and so I am; a Lord as in many other respects, so jure Redemptionis by the
redemption, having bought us with a price, and so jure belli by way of
Conquest, by treading our enemies under our feet, and taking us out of slavery,
and bondage.

And that we may not think, that Christ laid down his power with his life; or
that he is gone from us, never to come again; we will a little consider the
nature of his Dominion, and behold him there, from whence he must come to judge
the quick and the dead, and the Prophet David has pointed out to him sitting
at the right hand of God, where we should ever behold him, Psalm. 110.1.
and fix our thoughts, our eye of faith upon him, in this our watch. The Lord
said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, Psalm. 110.
till I make thy enemies thy footstool; which speech is Metaphorical, and we
cannot draw it to any other sense, then that on which the intent of the speaker
did level it, which reached no further then this, to show that his own kingdom
was nothing in comparison of Christ's, which was of another, Non exparabolis
materias comment mur, sed exmaterijs parabolas interpretamur. Tert. de puducir.
c. 8.
and higher nature; as Tertul. spoke of parables; we do not draw conclusions,
and Doctrines out of Metaphors, but we expound the Metaphor, by the Doctrine
which is taught, and the scope of the teacher, nor must we admit of any
interpretation, which notwithstanding the Metaphor might yield, which is not
consonant, and agreeable to the Doctrine, and analogy of faith, (...) says
the Philosopher, we can neither bring a Metaphor into a definition, nor can we
build an argument upon it; we may say of Metaphors, as Christ spoke of the
voice from heaven, they are used in Scripture for our sakes (...), Arist. 5.
Top. c 2.
for likeness, and proportions sake, and serve to present Intellectual objects
to the eye, and make that light, which we have of things familiar to us, a help
and medium, by which we may more clearly see those which are removed, and stand
at greater distance. For he cannot be said to sit there, at the right hand of
God, from the position, and site of his body; we cannot entertain so gross an
Imagination; and Saint Stephen tells us, Acts. 7.
he saw him standing at the right hand of God; but it may declare his victory,
his triumph and rest, as it were from his labor, secundum consuetudinem
nostram illi consessus offertur, qui victor adveniens Honoris gratia
promeretur, ut sedeat, it is borrowed says Saint Ambrose, from our customary
speech, by which we offer him a place, and seat for honors sake, who has done
some notable and meritorious service, and so Christ having spoiled the
adversary by his death, having lead captivity captive, and put the Prince of
Darkness in chains at his return with these spoils, hears from his Father,
Sede ad dextram, sit now down at my right hand. Nor does his right hand point
out to any fixed or determined place, where he sits; For Christ himself tells
the high Priest, That they shall see the Son of man sitting at the right hand
of God, Mar^ 14.12.
and coming in the clouds of heaven, which if it be literally understood, we
must needs conceive him coming and sitting at the same time. All agree it is a
Metaphor, and some interpret it of that supremacy he has above the Creature,
for so he is described sitting at the right hand of God in Heavenly places,
Ephesians. 1.20,21.
far above all principalities and powers, and every name that is named not
only in this world, but in the World to come. Some have conceived, that by
this honor of sitting at the right hand of God, not only an equality with God
is employed, but something more; Equal to the Father as touching his Godhead.
Ath. Cr.
not that the Son has any thing more then the Father, for they are equal in
all things, but because in respect of the exercise, and execution of his royal
office, he has as it were this dignity to sit in his royal seat, as Lord and
Governor of his Church, for the Father is said, as I told you, to commit all
judgment to the Son; Tertul de pudicit c. 9.
But we may say with Tertul. malo in scripturis forte minus sapere, quam
contra, we had rather understand less in Scripture, then amiss, rather be
wary then venture too far, and wade till we sink; and that will prove the best
interpretation of Scripture, which we draw out of Scripture it self; and then
Saint Paul has interpreted it to our hands; for where as the Prophet David
Tells us, the Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, the Apostle
speaks more expressly; Oportet eum regnare, 1 Cor. 15.
he must reign, till he has put down all his enemies under his feet; Heb. 8.1.
and in the Epistle to the Hebrews, we have such an high Priest that sits at
the right hand of the throne of the majesty in the Heavens; that is, we have
such an high Priest, which is also a Lord, and king of Majesty, and power to
command, and govern us, who has absolute authority over things in Heaven, and
things in earth, over all the souls, and bodies of men, and may prescribe them
Laws; reward the obedient and punish offenders either in this world, or the
next, or in both; for though he were a Lord and King even in his cratch, and on
his cross; yet now his Dominion, and kingly power was most manifest, and he
commands his Disciples to publish the Gospel of peace, and those precepts of
Christian conversation to all the World, and speaks not as a Prophet but as a
Prince, in his own name; enjoins Repentance, and amendment of life, to all the
Nations of the earth, which were now all under his Dominion. Thus says Christ
himself, it is written, and thus it behoved him to suffer and to rise again,
that Repentance and remission of sin, Luke 24.47.
might be preached (...) in his name, among all Nations: and his Dominion is
not subordinate, but absolute; he commands not as the Centurion in the Gospel,
who had diverse under him, yet himself was under authority; but as Solomon's
King, he is Rex Alkum a King, against whom there is no rising up.

And now that it may appear, that he is not for ever, thus to sit at the right
hand of God, but there sits to rule, and govern us, to behold, and observe us
in every motion, and in every thought and will, nay, must come again, either
with a reward for those who bow to his Scepter, or vengeance to be poured forth
upon their heads, who contemn his laws, and think neither of him, nor the right
hand of God, and will not have him reign over them, though they call him their
king; Let us a little further consider the Nature and quality of his Dominon,
that our fear, and reverence, our care and caution may draw him yet a little
nearer to us, and we may conceive of him, as not only sitting at the right
hand of God, but so live as if he were now coming in the clouds. Tell the
daughter of Sion, behold thy king coming to thee, meek, on a colt, Math. 2.51.
the foal of an Ass, this was his first coming in great humility, and this and
his retinue, that his Kingdom was not of this world. Philip. 2.8,9.
He humbled himself, says Saint Paul, wherefore God has highly exalted him,
and given him a name, which is above every name; given him power, dignity, and
honor, and made him our Lord and King. For his Prophetical office which he
exercised in the land of Judea, was in a manner and act, and effect of his
kingly Office, by which he sits as Lord in the Throne of Majesty, for by it he
declared his Fathers will, and promulged his Laws throughout the world: as a
king and Lord he makes his Laws, and as a Prophet he published them; a Prophet,
and a Priest, and a Lord for ever: For he teaches his Church, he mediates and
intercedes for his Church, and Governs his Church to the end of the world. Take
then the Laws by which he Governs us; the virtue, and power, the compass and
duration of his Dominon, and we shall find it to be of a higher, and more
excellent Nature, then that which the eye of flesh so dazles at; that he is,
The Lord of lords, and King of kings.

And first, the difference between his Dominion, and the Kingdoms of the world
is seen not only in the Authors, but the Laws themselves; for the Laws of men
are enacted many times nec quid, nec quare, and no reason can be given why they
are enacted, good reason there is why there should be Laws made against them,
and they abolished; some written in blood, too rigid and cruel, some in water
ready to vanish, many of them but the results and dictates of men's lusts, and
wild affections, made not to safeguard any State, but their own. But his are
pure and undefiled, exact, and perfect, such as tend to perfection, to the good
of his Subjects, and will make them like unto this Lord, heirs together with
him of eternity of bliss, and as the reward is eternal, so are they
unchangeable, the same to day, and to the end of the world, not like the Laws
of the Heathen, which were raised with one breath, and pulled down by another,
which were fixed by one hand, and torn down by a second Licurgi leges
emendatae, says Tert. Lycurgus his Laws were so imperfect, so ill fitting the
Commonwealth, that they were brought under the hammer and the file, to be beat
out and fashioned in another form more proportionable to that body for which
they were made, Tert. Apol. c. 4.
were corrected by the Lacedaemonians, which undervaluing of his wisdom did so
unman him, that he would be a man no longer, but starved himself to death,
Vetus et squallens sylva legum edictorum securibus Truncata, the whole wood of
the old Laws now sullied and weakened with age were cut down by the edicts and
rescripts of after Emperors at the very root as with an axe; all of them are in
the body of time, and worn out with it, either fail of themselves, or else are
cast aside; humane Laws being but as shadows cast from men in power, and when
they fall to the ground, lost with them, no more to be seen, nec uno statu
consistunt, sed ut coeli facies et maris, ita rerum, et fortunae tempestatibus
variantur, Gel. Noct. At. l. 20.
nor do they remain in one state, but alter as the face of the Heavens and the
Sea, now smile, anon frown, now a calm, and by and by a tempest; now the strong
man says, do this, anon a stronger then he comes, and I forfeit my head if I
do it; they are too often written with the point of the sword, and then the
character follows the hand that bears it. Thus it is with the Laws of men, but
the Laws of this our Lord and Lawgiver can no more change, then he that made
them; no bribe can buy out their power, no dispensations wound them, no power
can disanul them, Dispensationes vulnera legum.
but they are the same, and of the same countenance, they moult not a feather,
they alter not in one circumstance, but direct the Obedient, and stare the
offender in the face, and by the power of this Lord kindle a Hell in him in
this life, and will appear at the great day, to accuse him; for we either stand
or fall in judgment according to these Laws; in a word, humane Laws are made
for certain Climates, and fitted to the complexion and temper of certain
Commonwealths, but these for the whole world: Rome, and Britanny, and
Jerusalem, all places are bound alike, and as his Dominion, so his Laws reach
from one end of the earth to another, and these which he published at the first,
are not only Laws, but promises and pledges of his second coming, for he made
them not for naught, but has left them with us, till he come again in Glory to
judge both the quick and the dead, according to his Gospel.

Besides the Laws of men are too narrow, and cannot reach the whole Body of
sin, cannot comprehend all, not the inward man, Leges non omnia comprehendunt,
non omnia vetant, nec absolvunt. Sen. 3. de Benef. c. 6.
the thoughts, and surmises of the heart, no not every visible act, they forbid
not all, they absolve not all; some irregularities there be, which these Laws
look not upon, nor have they any other punishment, then the common hatred of
men who can pass no other sentence upon them, then this; that they dislike
them, and we are forced to leave them to the censure and anger of the highest,
says Seneca; Quoties licet non opertet; Every thing that is lawful for me to
do, is not fit to be done, and his integrity is but lame, that walks on at
pleasure, and knows no bounds, but those which the Laws of men have set up, and
never questions any thing he does, till he meets with a check, is honest no
further then this, that he fears not a Prison, nor the Gibbet; is honest,
because he deserves not to be hanged. How many are there who are called
Christians, who yet have not made good their title to that honor, which we
give to a just man? How many count themselves just men, yet do those things,
which themselves, if they would be themselves, would condenm as most unjust,
and do so, when others do them? and how many have carried so much honesty with
them into hell? the Law, of men cannot reach home to carry us to that height of
innocence, to which on other Law but that within us, might lift us up; but the
Laws of this Lord, like his power and providence, reach and comprehend all,
the very looks, and profers, and thoughts of the mind, which no man sees,
which we see not our selves, which though they break not the peace, nor shake
any pillar of a commonwealth (for a thought troubles no heart, but that which
conceives it) yet it stands in opposition to that policy which this our Lord
has drawn out, and to that end, for which he is our Lord, and is louder in his
ears, then an evil word in ours, and therefore he looks not only on our
outward guilt but the conscience it self; and pierces to the dividing asunder
of the soul and the spirit, regulates the very thoughts and intents of the
heart, which he looks upon, not as fading and vanishing characters in the soul,
but as killing letters imprinted and engraven there, as S. Basil speaks, as
full and complete actions wrought out in the inward man (Saint Bernard calls
them passivas actiones passive actions) which he will Judge secundum
evangelium, Bas de virg. Bern. 159.
according to these Laws which he has published in his Gospel.

Secondly, that he is a Lord appears by the virtue, and power of his dominion;
for whereas all the power on earth (which so often dazles us) can but afflict
the body, this wounds the soul, rips up the very heart, and bowels, and when
those Lords, (which we so tremble at, till we fall from him) can but kill the
body; This Lord can cast both soul and body into Hell; nay, can make us a Hell
unto our selves, make us punish and torment our selves, and being greater then
our conscience can multiply those strokes. Humane laws have been brought into
disgrace, because they had not power enough to attend and hold them up, and
even the common people, who fear them most, have by their own observation
gathered the boldness to call them cobwebs; for they see, he that has a full
purse, or a good sword will soon break through them, or find a beesom to sweep
them away. What speak you of the Laws? I can have them, and bind them up in
sudariolo, says Damianus, in the corner of my Handkerchief, nay, many times
for want of power victae leges the Laws must submit as in conquest, and though
they have a tongue to speak, yet they have not a hand to strike. And as it is
in punishment, so it is sometimes in point of reward; men may raise their mer
it and deserts so high, that the Exchecquer it self shall not find a reward to
equal them. We have a story in our own Chronicles, of a Nobleman, who did such
service for his friend, then but a private man, that he made him first a
Conqueror, then a king: the Historian gives this note, that kings love not to
be too much beholding to their Subjects, nor to have greater service done, then
they are able to reward, and so (how truly I know not) makes the setting on of
the Crown on his friends head one cause of the losing of his own. But it is not
so with this our Lord, who being now in his throne of Majesty, cannot be
outdared by any sin, be it never so great, never so common, and can break the
hairy scalp of the most Gyant-like offender, and shiver in pieces the tallest
Cedar in Libanus. Who shall be able to stand up in his sight? In his presence
the boldest sinner shall tremble and fall down, and see the Horror of that
profitable, Honorable sin, in which he Triumphed, and called it Godliness;
The Hypocrite, whose every word, whose every motion, whose every look was a
lie, shall be unmaskt, and the man of Power, who boasted in malice, and made
his will a Law, and hung his Sword on his will, to make way to that, at which
it was levelled, shall be beat down into the lowest pit, to Howl with those,
who measured out Justice by their Sword, and thought every thing theirs, which
that could give them; Before him Every sin shall be a sin, and the wages
thereof shall be Death.

Again, he has rewards, and his Treasury is full of them; Not only a Cup of
cold water, but the pouring forth my blood as water for the Truths sake, shall
have its full and overflowing Recompense, nor shall there ever any be able to
say, what profit is it that we have kept his Laws? No, says Saint Paul, Non
sunt condignae, Mal. 2.14. Romans 8.8.
put our passions to our Actions, our Sufferings to our Alms, our Martyrdom
to our Prayers, they are not worthy the naming in comparison of that weight of
Glory, which our Lord now sitting at the right Hand of God, has prepared for
them that fear him: Nec quisquam a regno ejus subtrahitur, nor can any go out
of his reach, or stand before him, when he is angry: He that sits on the
Throne, and he that grindes at the Mill, to him are both alike.

3.
And now in the third place; That every knee may bow, and every Tongue confess
him to be the Lord; Let us a little take notice of the large compass, and
Circuit of his Dominion, and the Psalmist will tell us, That he shall have
Dominion from the Sea, to the Sea, and from the River, unto the ends of the
world. Adam, the first man, and he that shall stand last upon the Earth; Every
man is his subject. For he has set him, says Saint Paul, at his right hand,
in heavenly places, and has put all things under his Feet, and gave him to be
Head over all Things to his Church, and what a thin shadow? what a Nothing is
all the overspreading power of this world to this? All other Dominion has its
bounds and limits, which it cannot pass, but by violence and the sword, nor is
it expedient for the world to have one King, nor for the Church to have one
Universal Bishop, or, as they speak, one visible Head. For as a ship may be
made up to that bulk, that it cannot be managed; so the number of men, and
distance of place may be so great, that it cannot subsist under one Government.
Thus it falls out in the world, but it is not so in the Kingdom of this our
Lord; No place so distant or remote, to which this Power cannot reach, Lybiam
remotis Gadibus Jungit, all places are to him alike, and he sees them all at
once. It is called the Catholic Church, and in our Creed we profess we
believe Sanctam Catholicam Ecclesiam, the holy Catholic CHURCH; That is,
That, that Church, which was shut up within the narrow confines of Judea, now
under the Gospel is as large as the world it self; The Invitation is, to all,
and all may come; They may come, who are yet without, and they might have come,
who are bound hand and foot, and cannot come; The Gate was once open to them,
but now it is shut. Persa, Gothus, Judus Philosophantur, says Saint Hierom, the
Persian and the Goth and the Indian, and Egyptian are subjects under this Lord;
Barbarism it self bows before him, and has changed her Harsh notes, into the
sweet melody of the Cross; There was dew only upon the Fleece; the people of
the Jews; but now that fleece is dry, and there is dew upon all the earth. The
Gospel says our Savior, must be Preached to all Nations, and when the Holy
Ghost descended to seal and confirm the Laws of this Lord, Act. 2,6.
there were present at this great sealing, or Confirmation, some (says the
Text) of all Nations under Heaven, that did hear (...), the wonderful things
of God, every one in his own language, so that the Gospel might seem to have
been Preached throughout the world, before the Apostles did stir a foot from
Jerusalem. But here we may observe, that Christ, who has jus ad omnem terram,
has not, in strictness of speech; jus in omni Terra, The right and propriety
is his for ever, but he does not take possession of it all at once, but
successively, and by parts: It is as easy for him to illuminate all the world
at once, as the least nook and corner of it, but this Son of Righteousness
spreads his beams gloriously, Joh. 11.1.
but is not seen of all, because of the Interposition of men's sins, who
exclude themselves from the Beams thereof; This true light came into the
world, but the world received him not; but yet what our sensuality will not
suffer him to do at once, he does by degrees, and passes on, and gains
ground, That so successively he may be seen, and known of all the world.

But suppose men shook off their Allegiance (as too many, the greatest part of
the world, the greatest part of Christendom do) suppose there were none found
that will bow before him (which will never be) suppose they Crucify him again?
yet is he still our King, and our Lord, the King and Lord of all the world:
such an universal falling a way, and forsaking him, would not take away from
him his Dominion, nor remove him from the right hand of God, and strip him of
his Power; If all the world were Infidells, yet he were a Lord still, and his
Power as large and irresistible as ever. For his Royalty depends not on the
Duty, and fidelity of his subjects; if it did, his Dominion would be indeed but
of a very narrow Compass, the sheep not so many as the Goats, his flock but
little: Indeed he could have no right at all, if it could be taken from him;
Neither deceit, nor violence can take away a right, no man can lose his right
till he forfeit it; which was impossible for this supreme Lord to do; All the
Contradictions of all the men in the world cannot weaken his Title, or contract
his Power; If all should forsake him, if all should send this Message to him,
Nolumus hunc regnare, Luke 19.14.
we will not have thee Reign over us; yet in all this scorn and contempt, in
this open Rebellion and Contradiction of sinners he is still the Lord, and as
he favors those subjects, who come in willingly, whom he guides with his
staff; so he has a rod of Iron to bruise his Enemies, and this Lord shall
command, and at his command, his servants, and Executioners shall take those
his Enemies, who would not have him reign over them, and slay them before his
face; He will not use his Power, to force and dragg them by violence to his
service, but if they refuse his help, abuse the means which he offers them, and
turn his grace into wantonness, then will he show himself a King, and his anger
will be more terrible then the roaring of a Lion; They shall feel him to be a
Lord, when 'twill be too late to call him so; when they shall weep and curse,
and gnash with their teeth, and Howl under that Power, which might have saved
them, for the same Power opens the gates of heaven, and of Hell: In his hand is
a Cup, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 75.8.
and in his hand is a reward, and when he comes to Judge, he brings them both
along with him: the same Power brings Life and Death, as Fabius did Peace or
War to the Carthagenians in the lap of his Garment, and which he will, he
powers out upon us, and in both is still our Lord; when faith fails, and
Charity waxes cold, and the world is set on wickedness, when there be more
Antichrists then Christians, he is our Lord, yesterday and to day, and the same
for ever. Heb. 13.8.


4
And in the last place; as the Dominion of our Lord is the largest that ever
was; so is most lasting, and shall never be destroyed, and shall break to
pieces, and destroy all the Kingdoms of the Earth, but it self shall stand
fast for ever; no violence shall shake it; Dan. 2.44.
no craft shall undermine it, no Time wast it; but Christ shall remain our
Lord for ever. The Apostle indeed speaks of an end, of delivering up his
Kingdom, and of Subjection. It Is true, there shall be an end; 1 Cor. 15.24.
but it is, when he has delivered up his Kingdom; and he shall deliver up
his Kingdom, but not till he has put down all Authority; Finis hic defectio
non est, nec Traditio Amissio, nec subjectio infirmitas, says Hilary, This end
is no failing; This delivery no loss, this Subjection is no weakness nor
Infirmity Regnum Regnans tradet; He shall deliver up his Power, and yet be
still a Lord. Take Nazianzens Interpretation and then this subjection is
nothing else, but the fulfilling of his Fathers will; Orat. 36.
(...) says he in his 36. Oration, which he made against the Arrians: Take
others, and by Christ, is meant, his Church, which in Computation, is but one
Person with Christ, and when His Church is perfected, then does he deliver up
his Power and Dominion. But let us but observe the manner of the ending of this
Kingdom, and the Failing, and Period of others, and we shall gain light
enough to guide us in the midst of all these doubts and difficulties: For other
Kingdoms are undermined by craft, and shaken by the madness of the People, who
shun the whip, and are beaten with Scorpions, cast off one yoke, and put on a
heavier (as the young men in Livy complained) either Kingdoms are changed and
altered, as it pleases those, who are victorious, whose right hand is their
God; but the Power of this Lord is then, and only in this sense said to have
an end; when, indeed, it is in its (...), and perfection, when there will be no
enemy stirring to subdue, no use of Laws; when the Subjects are now made
perfect, when this Lord shall make his subjects Kings, and Crown them with
Glory and Honor for ever. Here Is no weakness, no Infirmity, no abjuration, no
resignation of the Crown, and Power, but all things are at an end, his enemies
in Chains, and his subjects free; free from the fear of Hell, or Temptations
of the Devil, the World, or the flesh, and though there be an end, yet he
reigns still, though he be subject, yet he is as high as ever he was; Though
he has delivered up his Kingdom, yet he has not lost it, but remains a
Lord, and King for Evermore.

And now you have seen this Lord, that is to come, you have seen him sitting at
the right hand of God; His right and Power of Government, his Laws just and
Holy, and wise; the virtue and Power, the largeness, and the duration of his
Government, a sight fit for those to look on, who love, and look for the
coming of this Lord, for they that long to meet him in the Clouds, cannot but
delight to behold him at the right Hand of God? Look upon him then sitting in
Majesty, and Power, and think you now saw him moving toward you, and were now
descending with a shout; for his very sitting there should be to us as his
coming; it being but the (...), the preparation to that great Day. Look upon
him, and think not, that he there sits Idle, but beholds the Children of men,
those that wait for him and those that Think not of him, and he will come down
with a shout, not fall as a Timber-logge, for every Frogg, every wanton sinner
to leap upon, and croake about, but come as a Lord, with a Reward in one hand,
and a Vengeance in the other; Oh it is far better to fall down, and worship
him now, then not to know him to be a Lord, till that time, that in his wrath
he shall manifest his Power, and fall upon us, and break us in pieces. Look
then upon this Lord, and look upon his Laws, and write them in your hearts;;
for the Philosopher will tell us, that the strength and perfection of Law,
consists, not only (...), in the wise, and discreet framing of them, but
(...), in the right, and due performance of them; for obedience is the best
seal and Ratification of a Law. He is Lord from all eternity, and cannot be
divested of his royal office, yet he counts his kingdom most complete, when we
are subject, and obedient unto him, when he has taken possession of our
hearts, where he may walk (not as he did in Paradise terrible to Adam, who had
forfeited his allegiance) but as in a garden of pleasures, to delight himself
with the sons of men. Behold he commands, threatens, beseeches, calls upon us
again, and again; and the beseechings of Lords are commands, preces armatae
armed prayers, backed with power; and therefore next consider the virtue and
power of his dominion, and bow before him, do what he commands with fear and
trembling; let this power walk along with thee in all thy ways, when thou art
giving an alms, let it strike the trumpet out of thy hand, when thou fastest,
let it be in capite jejunii, let it begin, and end it, when thou art struggling
with a tentation: let it drive thee on, that thou faint not, and fall back, and
do the work of the Lord negligently; Jer. 48.10.
when thou art adding virtue to virtue, let it be before they eyes, that thou
may double thy diligence, and make it up complete in every circumstance: and
when thou think of evil, let it join with that thought, that thou may
hate the very appearance of it, and chase it away? why should dust and ashes
more awe thee, then Omnipotency? why should thy eye be stronger then thy faith?
not only the frown, but the look of thy Superior composeth, and models thee,
puts thee into any fashion, or form; thou will go, or run, or sit down, thou will venture thy body, (would that were all) nay, thou will venture thy soul,
do any thing, be any thing what his beck does but intimate; but thy faith is
fearlesse; as bold, as blind, and will venture on, on the point of the sword,
fears what man; not what this Lord can do to him; fears him more that sits on
the bench, than him that sits at the right hand of God; If we did believe as we
profess, we could not but more lay it to our hearts, even lay it so, as to
break them; for who can stand up when he is angry? and let us next view the
largeness and compass of his Dominion, which takes in all that will come, and
reaches those, who refuse to come, and is not contracted in its compass, if
none should come; and why should thou turn a Savior into a destroyer? why
should thou die in thy Physicians arms, with thy cordials about thee? why
should thou behold him as a Lord, 'till he be angry? he caleth all, inviteth
all that come, why should Publicans and sinners enter, and thy disobedience
shut thee out? Lastly, consider the duration of his Dominion, which shall not
end, but with the world, nor end then, when it does end, for the virtue of it
shall reach to all eternity; and then think, that under this Lord thou must
either be eternally happy, or eternally miserable, and let not a flattering,
but a fading world, thy rebellious and traitorous flesh, let not the father of
lies, a gilded temptation, an apparition, a vain shadow thrust thee on his left
hand: for both at his right and left, there is power, which works to all
eternity.

The second, his Advent or coming. Venit, he will come.
And now we have walked about this Sion, and told the towers thereof, showed you
Christ's territories and Dominion; the nature, of his laws, the virtue and
power, the largeness and compass, the duration of his kingdom, we must in the
next place consider his Advent, his coming, consider him as now coming; for we
cannot imagine (as was said before) that he sat there idle like Epicurus his
God, nec sibi facessens negotium nec alteri, not regarding what is done below,
but like true Prometheus, governing, and disposing the state of times and
actions of men, M. Sen. Contr.
Divinum numen, etiam qua non apparet, rebus humanis intervenit; his power
insinuates it self, and even works there, where it does not appear. Though he
be in heaven, yet he can work at this distance, for he fills the heaven and the
earth (...) he beholds all things, he hears all things, he speaks to thee,
and he speaks in thee, he hears thee when thou speak; and he hears thee when
thou speak not; in his book are all things written, nay, he keeps a book in
the very closet of thy heart, the only book which shall go along with thee,
and when he comes, it shall fly open, every chapte, revery letter, every
character of sin shall be as plain to thy eye, as to his, and though we here
seal up this book, he can read it when it is shut. He sits there tanquam
venturus, as one coming. Indeed to us (who like those Philosophers in Tully,
seeing nothing with our mind, refer all to our sense, and scarce believe any
thing but that, for which we have an ocular demonstration; the eye of whose
faith is so dull, and heavy, that it cannot clearly discern that eye of our
Lord which is ten thousand times brighter then the sun) he is most times as
lost; like Epicuus his God doing nothing, like Baal either in his journey, or
sleeping, and as at his first coming he was had in no reputation, so now he is
at the right hand of God, he is in a manner forgot. We do not insult over him
in plain terms, as those did in Theodoret (...)? what does the Carpenters son
now do? but we are as slow of heart to believe what we are taught, and what we
say we believe; as those disciples which went to Emaus. We are told that he did
rise again from the Dead, and ascended, and sits at the right hand of God,
and will come again, but it is a long time since these things were done, and he
is long a coming. To the Athiest, to the profane person, to the Lukewarm
Christian, to the Hypocrite, he is in a manner lost, they have sealed up his
grave, and he will come no more. And this is one argument, that he will come;
even this, that we so little regard it; for can a Lord that breathes nothing
but love, bear with such contempt? can he whom the voice of God, and man, whom
Scripture, and Miracles, and reason have placed on the Tribunal, and made judge
of all the world, be kept back by these vain Imaginations, which are nothing
else, but the steame, and exhalations from our sensual, and Brutish part?
shall not he judge all the earth, because we are guilty, and deserve to be
condemned? no, veniet, veniet his etiamsi nolis veniet, he will come, August.
he will certainly come whether thou will or no; nor is delay in coming an
Argument, that he will not come. For the Lord is not slack concerning his
promise, and Coming, as some count slackness, some scoffers, who walk after
their own lusts, and ask where is the promise of his coming; For sensuality is
the Mother, and nurse of unbeleefe; and the sense flies the Knowledge of that,
which is terrible to it; and so we are as Saint Peter tells us, 2 Pet. 3.3,4.
willingly ignorant of that which we are Taught, and will not consider, that
the world is made of corruptible parts, and therefore must at last be
dissolved, and, verse. 12.
that as the old world perished by water, so this shall by fire. For what
guilty Person does not study to drive the thought of a Judge coming, out of his
mind? He that has his delight, his heaven in this world, is not willing to
hear of another to come, venit, the Lord comes, is not in his Creed; Sed nulla
est mora ejus, quod certo eveniet, but the deferring, or delay of that which
will certainly come, should not come into our Consideration; for come he will,
though he come not yet, and when he is come, all the time past and before, in
which we grew wanton, and presumptuous, and beat our fellow servants, is not in
true esteem, so much as a moment, or the twinkling of an eye. It Is not
slackness, it is not delay: That is our false Gloss, who when we break the Law,
are as willing to misinterpret the Lawgiver; The Hypocrite thinks him as very a
dissembler, as himself, and is well persuaded, that though he threaten, yet he
means it not, though he has denounced judgment against those that sin,
and repent not, yet he will not be so good, or rather as bad as his word; The
sacrilegious person looks upon him as an enemy to Churches, and he it is,
that puts the hammer into his hand, to beat down his own Temple. Tertul. de
Anima.
The profane person would excaecare providentiam Dei, would put out the eye of
his Providence, and the moral Atheist pull him from his Throne, and thrust him
out of the world: Every man frames such a God, as will fit him, and
proportions him to his lusts, we draw him out, as the Painter did the Goddess,
in the likeness of those vanities, which we most dote on, and so we entitle
him to our fraud and Oppression, Petrarch.
invenimus quomodo etiam Avarum facerem, we have found an Art to bring him in
as an Abbettor, a Promoter of our Covetousness, and Ambition, and so, as much
as in us lies, make him as Ambitious, Psalm. 50.21.
and Coveto us as our selves, Thou thoughtest verily, that I was like unto
thee, says God to the Hypocrite; behold Christ sits at the right hand of God,
in full power, and Majesty, ready to descend, but he comes not yet, and hence
the scorner concludes he will never come. This is a false Gloss, and a false
conclusion, the result and Inference of flesh and blood; for it is not
slackness; that is the dictate of our lusts; but if Truth interpret it, 2 Pet.
3.15.
it is long suffering, and his long suffering should end, and be eased in our
repentance; Saint Peter tells us; It is Repentance; It is, what it should be;
if it be not Repentance, we have drove it from it self; and see; now it is
nothing, but wrath, and Indignation: his long suffering, is either our
Repentance, or our Condemnation.

And this is the true reason, Why he comes not yet. Isid. l. V.
why he is not yet come; but as it were, a coming; For Time is nothing unto
him, nor is it any thing in it self; nec intelligitur nisi per actus humanos
nor can we conceive; or understand it, but by those Actions, which we do now
and again, and which we cannot do at once, A Thousand years in his sight, are
but as yesterday, but not so long, not so long as a Thought; he delays not, but
he bears with us in this our Time, we look upon the Day of Judgment, as upon
a Day to come, but to him it is present; That he is not come to us; is for our
sakes. For the Church of Christ, till the consummation of all things, is in
Fluxu, in Corpore Temporum (as Tert. speaks) is wrapped up in the Body of Time,
comes not simul and semel, at once, but successively gains the addition of
parts: St. Paul calls it a body, and though it be not such a Body as the Stoics
fancied quod more Fluminum in assidua diminutione, and adjectione est, which
like Rivers, receives every day increase, and every day diminution, and is not
the same to Day, which it was yesterday, yet is it corpus aggregatum, a
collected Body, which is not made up at once in every part, but receives its
parts successively: She is Terrible, as an Army with Banners, as it is said of
the Spouse in the Canticles, and in an Army you know, the Van may lodge there
to night, where the Rere comes not till the Morning: So it is with the
Church, it has always its parts, yet has always parts to be added; so we
read, Acts 2. and the last verse, That the Lord added daily, that is,
successively, such as should be saved; Quantum iniquitatis grassatur tantum
abest regnum Dei, quod secum affert plenam re ^itudinem, says the Father,
Christ is come, and yet is still a coming; whilst there are Heresies, and
Schisms in the Church, whilst the one undermineth the Bulwarks without, and
the other raises a Mutiny within, whilst the Devil rages, and men sin,
there be yet some to be gathered to his Sheepfold, and though in respect of
his Power, he be already come, yet for his Elects sake, he will not execute it
yet. And this is the very reason, which Justine Martyr gives of the proroguing,
and delay of his coming and why the Consummation, and end of all things is not
yet, (...), for mankinds sake, (...), for the seed of Christians, which is yet
to be propagated; for by his eternal Wisdom, he fore-sees, That many there
be, who will believe, and turn to him by Repentance; and some that be not,
even many, who are yet unborn; in his second Apology for the Christians; For
the promise is made to you, and to your children says Saint Peter, and natis
natorum and qui nascentur ab illis, and to all that are afar off, Acts 2.39.
even as many as the Lord God shall call; for how many thousands are not yet,
who shall be Saints? for their sakes it is; that the Lord does not consume the
world with fire; that he does not come to judge the world; that wicked men are
permitted to revell on the earth and the devil to rage; that he suffers that
which he abhors, suffers injustice to move its arms at large, and spread it
self like a green bay tree, and leaves innocence bound in chains; that he
suffers men to break his commands, to question his providence, to doubt of his
being, and essence, that we see this disorder and confusion; the world in a
manner dissolved, before its end; but when that number is full, a number which
we know not, or if we did, cannot know, when he will fill it up; when that is
complete, then time shall be no more; then, Lo he comes, and will purge the
world of Heresy and Schism, will appear in that Majesty; that the Athiests
shall confess he is God, and see all those crooked ways, in which his
providence seemed to walk, made even and strait; then the Epicure shall see,
that it was not below him to sit in heaven, and look upon the children of men;
no dishonur to his Majesty, to manage and guide all those things which are
done under the Moon; that he may ride upon the Cherubin, and yet number every
hair of our head, and observe the Sparrow, that falls from the house top; then
we shall see him; and we shall see all things put under his feet, even Heresy,
and Schism, profaneness and Atheism, sin and death, Hell, and the Devil
himself. This he has in effect done already by the virtue, and power of his
Cross, and therefore may be said to be come; But because we resist and hinder
that, will not suffer him to make his conquest full, and when we cannot reach
him at the right hand of God, pursue and fight against him in his members, he
will come again, and then comes the end, another consummatum est, all shall be
finished, his victory, and triumph complete, and he shall lift up the heads of
his despised servants, and tread down all his enemies under his feet (...) in
the most proper sense, Coloss. 2.15.
Triumph, and make a show of them openly.

And this is a fit object for a Christian to look upon. Of this more --

THE FIFTEENTH SERMON.
MATTHEW. 24.42. Dominus venturus, The Lord will come.

Nescitis qua hora, You know not what hour.


PART. II.
WE have already beheld the person, our Lord; and we have placed him on his
Tribunal, as a judge, (for the Father has committed the judgment to the Son)
you have seen his Dominion in his Laws, which were fitted and proportioned to
it: as his Scepter is a Scepter of Righteousness, so his Laws are just; no
man, no Devil can question them; we approve them as soon as we hear them, and
we approve them when we break them; for that check which our conscience gives
us, is an approbation. You have seen the virtue and power of his dominion; for
what is regal right, without regal power? what is a Lord, without a sword? or
what is a sword if he cannot manage it? what is a wiseman, if a wiser then he?
what is a strong man, if a stronger then he comes upon him? but our Lord, Es.
9.6.
as he is called wonderful, Counselor, so is he the Mighty God: who can stand
before him when he is angry? We have showed you the large compass, and circuit
of his Dominion, no place so distant, or remote, to which it does not reach; It
is over them that love him, and over them that crucify him: It is over them
that honor him, Luke 1.33
and over them that put him to open shame; and last of all, the durability, or
rather the eternity of it, for of his Dominion there shall be no end, says the
Angel to Mary, and take the words going before, he shall reign over the house
of Jacob, and the sense will be plain; for as long as there is a house of
Jacob, a people and Church on earth, so long shall he reign; as his Priesthood,
so his Dominion is (...) and shall never pass away.

We must now fix our eyes upon him, as ready to descend, in puncto reversus,
settled in his place, but upon his return, Dominus venturus, the Lord will
come, it is a word of the future tense, as all predictions are of things to
come, and it is verbum operativum, a word full of eshcacie, and virtue. First,
to awake and stir up our faith. Secondly, to raise our hope; and Thirdly to
inflame our charity. It is an object for our faith to look on, for our hope to
reach at, and for our Charity to embrace.

And first it offers it self to our faith; for ideo Deus alscessit, ut fides
nostra corroboretur, therefore does our Savior stay, and not bow the heavens,
and come down, that our faith which may reach him there, may be built up here
upon earth, and he is therefore absent, and in a manner lies hid, that this eye
might find him out; For faith is a kind of prospective or optic Instrument,
by which we see things afar off, as if they were near at hand; things that are
not yet, as if they were, turns venturus est, into the present tense, behold
Christ not only sitting at the right hand of God, but as now already
descending with a shout: With this eye of faith, I see new Heavens, and a new
earth, a new face of every thing, I see what a nothing, that is, which mortals
sweat, and fight for; what a nothing the world is; for I see it on fire; I see
righteousness, peace, and order, constancy, duration, even whilst I walk in
this shop of vanities, this World of wickedness, this Chaos, and confusion;
this seat of change; I see honesty pitied, scorned, baffled, honesty lifted up
on high, far above reproach or injury; I see injustice powerful, all
conquering, Triumphant injustice trembling before this Lord, arraigned,
condemned, flung down into the lowest pit, there to be whipped with many stripes:
I see now the wisdom of men made foolishness, and the foolishness of God
wiser then men; I see that restored, which I saw lost; I see the eye that was
bored out, in its prace again, I see the plowed back, with no furrow on it; I
see Herod in prison, and John Baptist with his head on; I see my goods
restored, before I lose them, and I am in heaven, before the blow is given, in
bliss when every eye does pity me, and what is now left for the boasting
Tyrant to do? what can he take from me, that is worth a thought? what can he
strip me of, but that which I have laid down, and left already behind me? will
he have my goods? the treasury where they are kept, is out of his reach; will
he take from me my good name? It Is written in the book of life; or will he take
my life? my life? he cannot; For it is hid with Christ in God. This is sancta
impudentia Fidei, the holy boldness, and confidence of faith to break through
flesh and blood, all difficulties whatsoever, to draw down Heaven to earth, and
if the object be invisible, to make it visible, if it be at distance to make it
present, if the Lord say, he will come, to faith he is come already. This
operation faith will have, if it be not dulled, and deaded by our sensuality:
for what faith is that, which is not accompanied with these high apprehensions,
and resolutions equal to them? what faith is that which leaves us weary of the
truth, and ashamed of our profession? what faith is that, which we are so ready
at every frown to renounce? shall I call that faith which cannot strike the
Timbrel out of our hands, nor the strumpet out of our arms? That shows Christ
coming to the Covetous, yet leaves him digging in the earth; to the ambitious,
and cannot stop him in his mount? to the hypocrite, and cannot strike off his
mask, to the Politician and cannot make him wise unto Salvation? that cannot
make us displease our selves, that cannot make us love our selves, not awe an
eye, not bind a hand, not silence a word, not stifle a thought, but leaves us
with as little power, and activity as they who have been dead long ago,
although the venturus est, the Doctrine of Christ's second Advent sound as loud
as the Trump shall do at the last day? faith shall we call this, or a weak, and
faint persuasion, or a dream? or an Echo from an hollow heart, which when all
the World proclaims it venturus est, he will come, resounds it back again into
the world? a faith which can speak, but not walk, or work, a faith which may
dwell in the heart of an Hypocrite, a murderer, a Devil? for all this he may
believe or at least profess, and yet be that liar, that Antichrist, which
denies Jesus to be the Lord, or that he ever came in the flesh, or will come
again to judge both the quick and the dead.

Secondly, As it casts an Aspect upon our Faith, so it does upon hope, which
(...), the blood of our Faith, says Clemens Alexand. Paedag. 1. Tertul.
advers. Gnostic. c. 6.
without which, it will grow faint, and pale, and languish; oportet habere
aliquem spei cumulum, says Tertul. and therefore this addition of Hope to
Faith, is necessary, for if we had all Faith, and had not hope, this Faith
would profit us nothing, and faith without Hope may be in Hell, as well as on
the earth; Believe, who does not? or at least say so? but how many expect his
coming? how many are saved? Heb. 10.
the Apostle speaks of a fearful looking for of Judgment; indeed they who
hope not for it, who do but talk of it, and are unwilling to believe
themselves, may be said to look for it, because they ought to do it; and his
coming is as certain, as if they did; Truly and properly they cannot be said to
expect it; for how should that he in their expectation, which is not so much as
in their thought? Hope will not raise it self upon every Faith, nor is that
Faith (which the most of the world most depend on) a fit Basis for hope to
build upon; even he that despaires, believes; or else he could not despair; for
who will droop for fear of that veniet, of that judgment, which he is so
willing to persuade himself, will never come? Foolish men that we are, who has
bewitched us? that we should glory in Faith an Hope, and make them the subjects
of our Songs, and rejoicing, when our Faith is but such a one, as is Dead, and
our hope at last will make us ashamed? when our Faith is the same, which is in
hell, and our Hope will leave us with the Devil, and his Angels? a Faith worse
then Infidelity, and a hope more dangerous then despair; a Faith, when we do
not believe, and a Hope, when there is great reason we should despair, and
which will serve only to add to the number of our stripes; yet this is the
Faith, this is the hope of the Hypocrite, of the Formal Christian, These are
thy gods oh Israel.

3.
And therefore in the last place, that we may join these two together, Faith
and Hope, we must draw in that excellent gift of Charity, which is Copulatrix
virtus, says Cyprian, the uniting, coupling Virtue, not only of men, but of
these two Theological Virtues, which will not meet together, but in Love, or
if they do, with so little truth, and reality, that they will rather
disadvantage, then help us; for where Virtue is not, the name is but an
Accusation: I told you before, that hope does Suppose Faith. For we cannot hope
for that, which we do not believe, yet Faith (such as it may be) may show it
self, and speak proud words, when Charity is Thrust out of Doors, and many
there be, who have subscribed to the venturus est, that the Lord will come, who
have little reason to hope for his coming: How many believe, he will come, and
bring his reward with him, and yet strike off their own Chariot wheels, and
drive but heavily toward it? how many believe there is a Judge to come, and
wish there were none? Faith; Saving Faith, Hope, Hope that will not make
ashamed, cannot dwell in the heart till Charity has taken up a room; but when
she is diffusa in cordibus, shed, and spread abroad in our Hearts, then they
are in Conjunction, and meet together, and kiss each other, Faith is a
Foundation, and on it our love raises it self as high as heaven in all the
several branches and parts of it: Because I believe, I love, and when my love
is real and perfect, my hope springs up, and blooms, and flourishes: my Faith
sees the object, my Love imbraceth it, and the means unto it, and my Hope lays
hold of it, and even takes possession of it. And therefore this venturus est,
This coming of the Lord is a Threat, and not a promise, if they meet not: If
Faith work not by Love; and both together raise not a Hope, venturus est, he
will come, is a Thunderbolt; And thus, as it looks upon Faith and Hope, so it
calls for our Charity; For whether we will or no, whether we believe or no,
whether we hope or no, veniet, he will certainly come, but when we love him,
then we love also his appearance, and his coming, and our Love is a
subscription to his Promise, 2 Timothy 4.8.
by which we truly Testify our consent, and sympathize with him, and say Amen,
to his Promise, That he will come, we echo it back again unto him, Even so,
come Lord Jesus: For that of Faith may be in a manner forced, That of Hope may
be groundless, but this of Love is a free, and voluntary subscription. Though I
I know he will come, yet I shall be unwilling he should come upon me, as an
Enemy, that he should come to me when I sit in the Chair of the Scornful, or
lie in the bed of Lust, or am wallowing in the mire, or weltring in my own
blood, or washing my feet in the blood of my Brethren; for can any condemned
person hope for the day of Execution? But when I love him, and bow before him,
when I have improved his Talent, and brought my self to that Temper, and
Constitution, that I am of the same mind with this Lord, and partaker of his
divine Nature, then Faith opens, and displayeth her self, and Hope towreth up
as high, as the right Hand of God, and would bring him down, never at rest,
never at an end, but panting after him, till he do come, crying out with the
souls under the Altar, How long Lord? How long? How long? is the very
breathing and language of Hope; Then Substantia mea apud te, Psalm. 62.5.
as the vulgar reads that of the Psalmist, my expectation, my substance, my
being is with the Lord, and I do not only subscribe to the veniet, to his
coming, because he has Decreed, and resolved upon it, but because I can make
an hearty Acknowledgement, that the will of the Lord is just and good, and I
assent not of Necessity, but of a willing mind, and I am not only willing, but
long for it, and, as he Testifies these Things, and confirms this Article of
his coming, with this last word, etiam venio, surely I come; so shall I be able
truly to Answer, Even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

The End of his Coming.
And now venturus est, the Lord will come, and you may see the Necessity of his
coming in the End of his coming, for qualis Dominus, talis adventus, as his
Dominion is, such is his Coming, his Kingdom spiritual, and his coming to
punish sin, and reward Obedience, to make us either Prisoners in Darkness, or
Kings, and Priests to reign with him, and offer up spiritual Sacrifices for
evermore. He comes not to answer the Disciples question, to restore the Kingdom
to Israel; for his Kingdom is not such a one, as they dreamt of, nor to place
the Mother of Zebedees Children, the one at his right Hand, and the other at
his left; nor to bring the Lawyer to his Table to eat bread with him in his
Kingdom; These carnal conceits might suite well with the Synagogue, which
looked upon nothing, but the Basket: and yet to bring in this Error, the Jews,
as they killed the Prophets, so must they also abolish their Prophecies, which
speak plainly of a King of no shape or beauty: Esai. 53.2. Zech. 9.9. Isa, 9.6.
of his first coming in lowliness and poverty; of a Prince of Peace, and not
of war, of the Increase of whose Government there shall be no end. Nor does he
come to lead the Chiliast, the Dreamer of a Thousand years of Temporal
Happiness on Earth, into a Mahometicall Paradise of all Corporal Contentments,
That after the Resurrection, the Elect (and even a Reprobate may think, or
callhim self so) may reign with Christ a thousand years in all state and Pomp,
and in the Affluence of all those Pleasures which this Lord has taught them to
renounce. A conceit, which ill becomes Christians, who must look for a better,
and more enduring substance, who are strangers and Pilgrims, Heb. 10.34. Heb.
11.13.
and not Kings on earth, whose Conversation is in heaven, and whose whole life
must be a going out of the World; why should we be commanded, and that upon
pain of eternal separation from this our Lord, to weane our selves from the
World, and every thing in the World, if the same Lord Think these flatteries of
our worser part, these pleasures, which we must loath, a fit and
proportionable reward, for the labor of our Faith and Charity, which is done
in the Inward man? can he forbid us to touch and Taste these Things, and then
glut us with them, because we did not Touch them? and can it now change its
Nature, and be made a Recompense of those Virtues, which were as the wings on
which we did fly away, and so kept our selves untoucht, unspotted of this
Evil. But they urge Scripture for it, and so they soon may, for it is soon
misunderstood, and soon misapplyed: It is written they say, in the 20. of the
Revel. at the 6. v. that the Saints shall reign with Christ a thousand years;
shall reign with Christ, is evidence fair enough to raise those spirits which
are too high, or rather too low already (...), no sooner is the word read, but
the crown is on. To let pass the diverse interpretations of that place, some
making the number to be definite, some to be indefinite; some beginning the
thousand years with the persecution of Christ, and ending it in Antichrist;
others beginning it with the reign of Constantine, when Christianity did most
flourish, and ending it at the first rising of the Ottoman Empire: some
beginning it at the year 73. and drawing it on to conclude in the year 1073.
when Hildebrand began to Tyrannize in the Church; To let pass these, (since no
man is able to reconcile them) we can not but wonder, that so gross an error
should spread so far in the first and best times of the Church, as to find
entertainment with so many, but less wonder that it is revived and fostered by
so many in ours, who have less learning, but more art to misinterpret, and
wrest the Scriptures ^o their own Damnation. For what can they find in this
text to make them kings? no more then many of them, can find in themselves, to
make them Saints? And here is no mention of all the Saints, but of Martyrs
alone, who were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, v. 4. But we may say of
this book of the Revelation, as Aristotle spoke of his books of Physic, that
it is (...), that it is published, and not published; published, but not for every
man to fasten what sense he please upon it, though we cannot deny, but some few
of latter times (and so few, as but enough to make up a number) have by their
multiplicity of reading, and subtle diligence of observation, and by a dextrous
comparing those particulars, which are registered in story, with those things
which are but darkly revealed; or plainly revealed to Saint John, but not so
plain to us,) have raised us such probabilities, that we may look up them with
favor, and satisfaction 'till we see some fairer evidence appear, some more
happy conjectures brought forth, which may impair, and lessen hat credit which
as yet (for ought that has been seen) they well deserve. But this is not every
man's work.

(...). Every man's eye is not so quick, and piercing to see at such distance;
and we see, since so many men, have taken the courage, and been bold to play
the interpreters of their dark Prophesies, they have shaped out what fancies
they please; and instead of unfolding Revelations, have presented us with
nothing but dreams, as so many diverse moralls to one fable, and fo for two
witnesses we have a cloud; for one Beast, almost as many as be in the Forest,
and for one Antichrist, every man that displeases us. But let men interpret
the thousand years how they please; Our Savior calls it an error, an error
that strikes at the very heart of Christianity, which promises no riches nor
power, nor pleasure, but that which is proportioned to those virtues and
spiritual duties, of which it consists. For in the Resurrection neither do they
marry Wives, nor are married, we may add neither are there high nor love,
neither rich nor poor, but all are one in Christ Jesus; and his words are plain
enough, Quaedam sic digna revinci, ne gravitate adorentur. Tert. adv. Valentin.
John 18. my Kingdom is not of this World. I should scarce have vouchsafed to
mention an error so gross, and which carries absurdity in the very face of
it, but that we have seen this monster dressed up and brought abroad, and
magnified in this latter age, and in our own times, which, as they abound with
iniquity, so they do with errors, which to study to confute, were to honor them
too much, who make their ^ual appetite a key to open Revelations, and to please
and satisfy that, are well content here to build their Tabernacle, and stay on
earth a thousand years amongst those pleasing objects, which our Religion bids
us to contemn, and to be so long absent from that joy and peace, which is past
understanding. Their Heaven is, as their virtues are full of dross and earth,
and but a poor and imperfect resemblance of that which is so indeed; and their
conceit as carnal as themselves, which Christianity and even common reason
abhors; For look upon them, and you shall behold them full of debate, envy,
malice, covetousness, ambition, minding earthly things, and so fancy a reward
like unto themselves (...), like embraces like, as mire is more pleasing to
swine, then the waters of Jordan: and it is no wonder, to hear them so loud and
earnest for riches and pleasure, and a temporal Kingdom, who have so weak a
title to, and so little hope of any other.

But God forbid, that our Lord should come, and flesh and blood prescribe the
manner, for then in how many several shapes must he appear in? he must come to
the covetous and fill his cofers, to the wanton and build him a Seraglio, to
the ambitious and crown him; no his advent shall be like himself, he shall come
in power, and majesty, in a form answerable to his Laws and Government, and as
al things were gatherd together in him, Ephesians. 1.10,22.
which are in Heaven, and which are in earth, and God has put all things under
his feet, so he shall come unto all, to Angels, to the Creature, to men. And 1.
he may well be said to come unto the Angels; For he is the head of all
Principality and Power, colos. 2.10.
and as at his first coming, he confirmed them in their happy estate of
obedience (which we believe as probable, though we have no plain evidence of
Scripture for it) so at his second, he shall more fully show that to them, that
which they desired to look into, 1 Pet. 1.17.
(as Saint Peter speaks) give them a clearer vision of God, and increase the
joy of the good, as he shall the torments of evil Angels. For if they sang for
joy at his Birth, what Hosannas and Hallelujahs will they sound forth, when
they attend him with a shout? if they were so taken with his humility, how will
they be ravished with his Glory, and if there by joy in Heaven for one sinner
that repents, how will that joy be exalted when those repentant sinners shall
be made like unto the Angels? when they shall be of the same Quire, and sing
the same song, glory and honor to him that sits upon the Throne, and to
this Lord, for Evermore?

Secondly, he comes unto the Creatures to redeem them from bondage; for the
desire of the Creature is for this day of his coming; Romans 8.19,22
for even the whole Creation groaneth with us also, but when he comes they
shall be reformed into a better estate; 2 Pet. 3.13.
there shall be new Heavens and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness.
Now the Creature is subjecta vanitati, subject to vanity; not only to change,
and mutability, but to be instrumental to evil purposes, to rush into the
battle with us, to run upon the Angels sword, to be our drudges and our
Parasites, to be the hire of a whore, and the price of blood. They groan as it
were and travail in pain under these abuses, and therefore desire to be
deliverd, not out of any rational desire, but a natural inclination, which is
in every thing to preserve it self, in its best condition. To these Dominus
veniet, the Lord will come, and his coming is called the consummation of all
things, that which makes all things perfect, and restores every thing to its
proper, and natural condition. The creature shall have its rest; the earth
shall be no more wounded with our plowshares, nor the bowels of it dug up
with the mattock, there shall be no forbidden fruit to be tasted, no pleasant
waters to be stolen; no Manna to surfeit on, no Crowns to fight for, no wedge of
gold to be a prey, no beauty to be a snare, Dominus veniet, the Lord will come,
and deliver his Creature from this bondage, perfect and consummate all, and at
once set an end both to the world, and vanity.

Lastly, Dominus venit, the Lord will come to men both good, and evil, he shall
come in his glory, Math. 25.31,32.
and he shall gather all Nations and separate the one from another, as a
Shepherd divides his sheep from his goats, and by this make good his Justice,
and manifest his providence in the end; for his Justice is that, which when the
world is out of order, establishes the pillars thereof, for sin is an injury
to the whole Creation, and inverts that order, which the Wisdom of God had
first set up in the World. My Adultery defiles my body, my oppression grindeth
the poor, my malice vexes my brother, my craft removes the Landmark, my
particular sins have their particular objects, but they all strike at the
universe, disturb and violate that order which wisdom it self first established;
and therefore the Lord comes to bring every thing back to its proper place, to
make all the ways of his Providence consonant, and agreeable to themselves; to
Crown the Repentant Sinner that recovered his place, and bind and setter the
stubborn and obstinate offender, who could not be wrought upon by promises, or
by Threats to move in his own sphere, Dominus veniet, the Lord will come to
show, what light he can strike out of Darkness, what Harmony he can work out of
the greatest disorder, what beauty he can raise out of the deformed body of
sin: for sin is a foul deformity in Nature, and therefore he comes in
judgment to order, and place it there, where it may be forced to serve for the
Grace, and Beauty of the whole, where the punishment of sin may wipe out the
disorder of sin, where every thing is placed as it should be, and every man
sent (...), Act. 1.25. Gers.
to his proper place; nec pulchrius in coelo Angelus. quant in Gehenna
Diabolus; Heaven is a fit and proper place for an Angel of light, for the
Children of God; and Hell is as fit and proper for the Devil, and his Angels.
Now the ways of men are croo^ed and Intricate, and their Actions carried on
with that contrariety, and contradiction, that to quit and help himself out of
them and take himself off from that Amazement, Duos Ponticus deos tanquam duas
Symplegadas naufragii sui adsert, quem negare non potuit, i.e. creatorem. i. e.
nostrum: and quem procare non pote^it. i.e suum. Tert c. 1. adv. Marcion.
Marcion ran dangerously upon the greatest Blasphemy, and brought in two
Principles, one of Good, and another of Evil; that is, two Gods, but when he
shall come, and lay Judgment to the line, all things will be even and equal;
and the Heretic shall see, that there is but one: now all is jarring, discord
and confusion, when he comes, he makes an everlasting Harmony; he will draw
every thing to its right and proper end, restore Order and beauty to his work,
fill up those breaches, which sin has made, and manifest his wisdom and
Providence, which here are looked upon, as hidden mysteries; in a word, to make
his Glory shine out of Darkness, as he did light, when the earth was without
form; That the Lord may be all in all.

Here in this world, all lies as in a night, in darkness, in a Chaos or
confusion, and we see neither what our selves, nor others are: we see, indeed,
as we are seen, see others as they see us, with no other Eyes, but those, which
the Prince of this world has blinded: Our Judgment is not the Result of our
Reason, but is raised from by, and vile respects: If it be a friend, we are
friends to his vice, and study Apologies for it: If it be an enemy, we are
Angry with his virtue, and abuse our wits, to disgrace it; If he be in Power;
our eyes dazzle, and we see a God come down to us, in the shape of a man, and
worship this Meteor, though exhaled, and raised from the dung, with as great
Reverence, and Ceremony, as the Persians did the Sun: what he speaks, is an
Oracle, and what he does is an Example, and the Coward, the Mammonist, or the
Beast gives sentence, in stead of the man, which is lost, and buried in these.
If he be small, and of no repute in the world, he is condemned already, though
he have reason enough to see the Folly of his Judges, and with pity can null
the Censure which they pass. If he be of our Faction, we call him, as the
Manichees did the chiefest of their Sect, one of the Elect; but if his Charity
will not suffer him to be of any, we cast him out, and count him a Reprobate.
The whole world is a Theater, or rather a Court of corrupt Judges, which judge
themselves and one another, but never judge righteous Judgment: for as we
Judge of others, so we do of our selves: Judicio favor officit, our self-love
puts out the eye of our Reason, or rather diverts it from that which is good,
and imployes it in finding out many Inventions to set up Evil in its place, as
the Prophet Esaias speaks, we feed on Ashes, a deceived Heart has Turned us
aside, Isa. 44.20.
that we cannot deliver our soul, and say, is there not a lie in our Right
Hand. Thus he that sows but sparingly, is Liberal, He that loves the world, is
not Covetous; He, whose eyes are full of the Adultress, is chaste: He that sets
up an Image, and falls down before it, is not an Idolater: he that drinks down
blood, as an Ox does water, is not a Murderer; He that does the works of his
Father the Devil, is a Saint. Multa injuste fieri possunt, quae nemo possit
reprehendere Cic. de Finibus. 93.
Many things we see in the world, most unjustly done, which we call
righteousness, because no man can commence a suit against us, or call us into
question, and we doubt not of Heaven; if we fall not from our cause, or be
cast, as they speak, in Westminster Hall: If Omri'^ statutes be kept, we soon
persuade our selves, that the power of this Lord will not reach us; and if our
names hold fair amongst men, we are too ready to tell our selves, That they
are written also in the Book of Life. This is the Judgment of the world; Thus
we judge others; and thus we judge our selves, so biased with the Flesh, that
for the most, we pass wide of the Truth. Others are not to us, nor are we to
our selves, what we are, but the work of our own hands, made up in the world,
and with the help of the world; for the wisdom of this world is our Spirit and
Genius, that rayses every Thought, dictates all our words, begets all our
Actions, and by it, as by our God, we live, and move, and have our being. And
now, since judgment is thus corrupted in the world, even Justice requires it,
Et veniet Dominus, qui male judicata rejudicabit, the Lord will come, and give
judgment against all these crooked and perverse Judgments, and shall lay
Righteousness to the Plummet, Is. 28.17.
and with his oreath sweep away the refuge of lies; and shall judge, and pass
another manner of sentence upon us, and others, then we do in this world. Then
shall we be told, which we would never believe, though we have had some
Grudgings, and whisperings, some half Informations within us, which the love of
this world did soon silence and suppress; Then shall he speak to us in his
displeasure, Aliud est judicium Christi, aliud anguli Susurrorum. Hier.
and though we have talked of him all the day long tell us we forgot him; If we
set up a golden Image, he shall call us Idolaters, though we intended it not;
and when we build up the Sepulchers of the Prophets, and flatter our selves,
and accuse our Forefathers; tell us we are as great murderers, as they; and
thus find us guilty of that which we protest against, and haters of that, which
we think we love, and lovers of that, which we think we detest, and take us
from behind the bush, from every lurking hole, from all shelter of excuse, take
us from our Rock, our Rock of Air, on which we were built, and dash our
presumptuous Assurance to Nothing. Nor can a sigh, or a groan, or a loud
profession, a Fast, or long Prayers corrupt this Lord, or alter his sentence,
but he shall judge, as he knows, who knows more of us, then we are willing to
take notice of, and is greater the our Conscience (which we shrink, and dilate
at pleasure, and fit to every purpose) and knows all things, and shall judge
us, not by our Pretense, our Intent, or forced Imagination, but secundum
Evangelium, according to his Gospel: veniet, he shall come when all is thus out
of Order, to set all at Right, and strait again; And this is the end of his
coming.

The Third Particular.
Non nostis Horam, You know not the Hour.

And now being well assured that he will come, we are yet to seek, and are
ready with the Disciples to Ask, When will these things be? and what hour will
he come? veniet, come he will! Et hocsatis est, aut nescio quid satis sit, as
P. Varus spoke upon another occasion, this is enough, or we cannot see what is
enough.

But nothing is enough to those, who have no mind, nor Heart to make use of
that, which is enough, to them enough is too much, for they look upon it, as if
'twere nothing: and therefore Christ does not feed, and nourish this thriftless
and unprofitable Humor, but bridles, and checks it, puts in his veto, his
prohibition, not to search after more, then is Enough. Non nostis Horam, you
know not the hour, is all the Answer, which he (who best knows what it is fit
for us to know) will afford our Curiosity. For what is that we do not desire
to know? Sen. devit. Beat. c. 32.
Curiosum nobis Natura dedit ingenium, says the Philosopher, Nature it self
may seem to have imprinted this itch of Curiosity in our very minds and wits,
made them inquisitive, given them (...), an eye, which never sleeps, never
rests upon one Object, but passes by that, and gazeth after another; That he
will come, is not enough for our busy, but idle curiosity to know: we seek
further yet, to know that (which cannot be known) the Time and very hour of his
coming. The mind of man is (...), Enormi, and otiosae curiositati, tan^a^
decrit dis ere, quantum ^buerit inqui^ere. Terr de Anima c. ult.
restless, in perpetual motion; It walks through the Earth, sometimes looks
upon that which delights it; sometimes that, which grieves it, stays, and
dwells too long upon both, and misinterprets them, to her own Impoverishing and
disadvantage, perru^pit Coeli munimenta, says Seneca, it breaks through the
very Gates of Heaven, and there busily pryes after the Nature of Angels, and of
God himself, but see it not; Enters the Holy of Holies, and there is venturing
into the Closet of his secrets; and there is lost, lost in the search of those
Things, of Times, and Seasons, which are past finding out, and are therefore
set at such a distance that we may not send so much as a Thought after them;
which if they could be known, yet could not advantage us. It was a good
Commendation, which Tacitus gives of Agricola, retinuit, quod est difficulimum,
in sapientia modum, In vita Agricolae.
He did (what is difficult for man to do) bound and moderate himself in the
pursuit of knowledge, and desired to know no more, then that which might be of
use, and profitable to him, which wisdom of his, had it gained so much credit,
as to prevail with the sons of men, which would be thought the Children of
Wisdom, they had then laid out the precious. Treasure of their Time, on that
alone, which did concern them, and not prodigally misspent it on that, which is
impertinent, in seeking that which did fly from them, when they were most
intentive, and Eager in their search; If this Moderation had been observed;
There be Thousand questions, which had never been raise d; Thousand O^inions
which had never been broacht; Thousands of errors, which had never showed their
heads, to disturb the Peace of the Church, to obstruct and hinder us, in those
ways of Obedience, which alone (without this impertinent turning our eye, and
looking aside) will carry us in a strait and even course unto our end. Why
should I pride my self, in the Finding out a new conclusion, when it is my
greatest, and my only glory to be a New Creature? why should I take such
pains to reconcile Opinions which are Contrary? my businese is to still the
Contradictions of my mind; those Counsels and desires, which every day thwart,
and oppose one another: what profit is it to refute other men's errors, whilst
I approve, and love, and Hugg my own? What purchase were it to find out the
very Antichrist, and to be able to say, This is the man? All that is required
of me, is to be a Christian: what if I were assured the Pope was the Beast I
sought for? he appeared in as foul a shape to me, before that Title was
written in his forehead; for I consider more what he is, then what he is
called, and thousands are now with Christ in heaven, who yet never knew this
his great Adversary on earth; and why should I desire to know the time, when
Christ will come, when no other command lies upon me, but his, to watch, and
prepare my self for his coming? when all that I can know, or concerns me is
drawn up within the compass of this one word watch, which should be as the
center, and all other truths drawn from it, as so many lines to bear up the
circumference of constant and a continued watch.

Christ tells us he will come, Hoc satis est dixisse Deo, and this is enough
for him to tell us, and for us to know he tells us that we cannot know it, that
the Angels cannot know it, that the Son of man himself knows it not, that it
cannot be known, that it is not fit to be known, and yet we would know it; some
there have been, who pretended they knew it by the secret Revelation of the
spirit, though it were a lying spirit, or a wanton fancy that spoke within
them; (For men are never more quick of belief, then when they tell themselves a
lie) and yet the Apostle exhorts the Thessalonians that they would not be
shaken in mind, 2 These. 2.2.
nor troubled neither by spirit, nor word, nor by letter as from him, as that
the day of Christ is at hand: others call in tradition; others find out a
Mystery in the number of 7. and so have taken the full age of the world, which
is to end say they after 6. hundred years; and this they find, not only in
the six months the Ark floated on the waters, and its rest on the mountains of
Ararat in the seventh; in Moses coming out of the cloud, and the walls of
Jericho falling down the seventh day, but in the seven vials, and the seven
Trumpets in the Revelation, such time and leisure hear men found perscrutari,
and interrogare latebras numerorum, to Divine by numbers; by their art and
skill to digg the air, and find precious metal there, where men of common
apprehensions can find no such treasure inter irrita exercere ingenia, to
catch at Attomes and shadows, and spend their time to no purpose; For curiosity
is a hard task-master, sets us to make brick, but allows us no straw, sets us
to tread the water and to walk upon the wind; put us to work, but in the dark,
and we work, as the spirits are said to do in Minerals; they seem to digg, and
cleanse, and sever Metals, but when men come, they find nothing is done. It is
a good rule in husbandry (and such rules old Cato called oracles) imbecillior
esse debet ager, Columel.
quam Agricola, the Farm must not be too great for the Husbandman, but what he
may be well able to manure and dress, and the reason is good, quia si fundus
praevaleat colliditur Dominus, because if he prevail not, if he cannot manage
it, he must needs be at great loss; and it is so in the speculations and works
of the mind, those inquiries are most fruitful, and yield a more plentiful
increase, which we are able to bring unto the end, which is, truly to resolve
our selves, thus it is, as a little plot of ground well tilled, will yield a
fairer crop, and harvest, then many Acres which we cannot husband; for the
understanding does not more foully miscarry, when it it is deceived with false
appearances, and sophismes; then when it looks upon, and would apprehend
unnecessary and unprofitable objects; and such as are set out of sight; res
frugi est sapientia, spiritual wisdom, is a frugal and thirsty thing, sparing
of her time; which she does not wantonly waste, to purchase all knowledge
whatsoever, but that which may adorn, and beautify the mind which was made to
receive virtue, and wisdom and God himself: to know that which profits not, is
next to ignorance; but to be ambitious of impertinent speculations, carries
with it the reproach of folly: Basil. Hem. 29 ad v^calumn. S. Trin.
what is it then (...) as Basil speaks, to seek with such diligence for that,
which is past finding out?

And 1. the knowledge of the hour of his coming, is most impertinent, and
concerns us not, non est nosirum nosse tempora, It is not for us to know the
times; as our days, so the times are in his hands, and he disposes, and
dispenses them as it pleases him, fits a time to every thing, which all the
wisdom of the world cannot do. Thou would know when he would take the yoke
from off thy neck; it is not for thee to know: that which concerns thee, is to
possess thy soul with patience, which will make thy yoke easy. Thou would
know when he will break the teeth of the ungodly, and wrest the sword out of
the hand of them that delight in blood; it is not for thee to know: thy task is
to learn to suffer and rejoice, and to make a blessing of Persecution. Thou
would know when the world shall be dissolved; why should thou desire to
know it? thy labor must be to dissolve the body of sin, and set an end, and
period to thy transgressions. Thou would know what hour this Lord will come;
It is not for thee to know, but to work in this thy hour, and be ready, and
prepared for hsi coming: (...) the present, the present time that is thine, and
thou must fill it up with thy obedience; that which is to come of what aspect
so ever it be, thou must only look upon, and consider as an help, and
advantage to thee in thy work. Dominus venturus the Lord will come speaks no
more to me then this, to labor and sweat in his vineyard 'till he come. All
the days of my appointed time, will I wait, says Job. Job. 14.14.
There is a time, and an appointed time, and appointed by a God of eternity,
and I do not study to calculate, or find out the last minute of it; but
expectabo, I will wait, which is but a syllable, but of a large and spreading
signification, and takes in the whole duty of man: For what is the life of a
Christian but the expectation, the waiting for the coming of the Lord? David
indeed desires to know his end and the measure of his days, Psalm. 39.4.
but he does not mean, so to calculate them, as Arithmeticians do, and to know
a certain and determined number of them, not so to number them, as to tell them
at his fingers ends, and say; This will be the last: but himself interprets
himself, and has well explained his own meaning in the last words, Let me know
the measure of my days, that I may know how sraile I am, know, not exactly how
many, but how few they be; let me so measure them, that I may know and consider
they are but few, that in this little time I may strive forward and make a way
to eternity. This was the Arithmetic which he desired to have skill in. For it
may seem a Paradox, but there is much truth in it; Few men are so fully
resolved of their mortality, as to know, Their days are few; we can say indeed
that we are but shadows, but the dreams of shadows, but bubbles, but vapors,
that we began to die before we were born, and in the womb did move and strive
forward toward the gates of death, and we think it no dispargement, because we
speak to men of the same mould, who will say the same of themselves, and lay to
heart as little as we; for should we pass over Methusalems age a thousand
times, yet when we were drawing even toward our end, we should be ready to
conceive a possibility of a longer race, and hope like the Sun to run the same
compass again, and though we die every day, yet we are not so fully confirmed
in this, that we shall ever die: Ep. 26.
Egregia res est condiscere mortem, says Sen. The best art is the knowledge of
our frailty, and he must needs live well, who has well learnt to die, and
egregia res est condiscere adventum Domini, it is a most useful thing to have
learned, and well digested the coming of the Lord; for we cannot take out this
as we should, but we must be also perfect in those lessons which may make us
fit to meet him, when he come: For the hour of his coming, that is locked up in
the treasuries of his wisdom, and he has left us no key to open it, that we
might not so much as hope to find it, and so mispend our thoughts in that
which they cannot lay hold on, which should be fastened on the other, to
advance and promote our duty: (...), fix that well, which is present, here
layout all thy store, all the powers of thy soul, whilst it is time, whilst
it is day, whilst it is thy day, make ready for his coming.

2.
For secondly, though it be in the future tense veniet he will come, though it
lie hid, as it were in the womb of time, and we know not when it will be
brought to birth, yet at this distance it looks upon us, and has force enough
in it self, to work that fear and caution in us, which the knowledge of the
very hour peradventure might not do; we say we believe it, and that is enough;
and some have given faith the pre-eminence above knowledge, and count the
evidence we have by faith clearer and more convincing, then that we have by
demonstration. But if it were not, yet even that, which is but probable in
other things does prevail with us, and is as it were principium motus, the
spring, and beginner of all motion to wards it; Lord, what Rhetoric? what
commanding eloquence is there in that, which is but probable? nay, many times
in that which is most improbable, if it carry any show of probability with it?
nay, if it do not, our ardent affections supply all deficiencies in the object,
and hurry us along to do that, which when the heat is over, we could easily
see, could not be done? how does love carry us, as it were on the wing, to lay
hold of that, which we must needs know, is out of our reach, it is but
probable, that industry will make us rich; how do we toil and sweat? It is
probable that flattery will lift us up on high, and to make our selves little,
will make us great; Lord how do we strive to mishape, and disguise, and
contract our selves? what dwarfs? what minims will we appear? how do we call
contumeli's favors, and feed on injuries, only because we are old that
Potentates will make them Lords, that make themselves their slaves? probability
is the hand, that turns every wheel, the intelligence which moves every sphere,
and every man in it. Hearken to the busy noise of all the world; Behold the
hollow eye, the pale, and careful countenance, the speaking and negotiating
eye, and the active hand; see men digging sweating, traveling, shouldring, and
treading one another under foot, and if you would know what works all this?
Behold it is nothing, but that which hangs in Futurition, that which is but
probable, and uncertain! And if probability have such power, and force in other
things, why should it not in this, especially the evidence being so fair, and
clear, that it is impossible to find out, or set up any better against it,
which might raise any doubting in us, and make us disbeleeve it, to a true
Believer Dominus veniet, the Lord will come, is enough, nor need he seek any
further, a further inquiry, to be assured of the time, is but inquieta
inertia, a troublesome sloth and busy negligence, like Ixions wheel, to turn us
about, where we shall never fasten and rest, but be circled about in a giddie,
and uneffective motion.

3.
Thirdly, the knowledge of the very hour can be of no use at all to forward and
carry on that, which we are now to do; non prodest scire, sed metuere futura,
says Tull. to know that which is to come, is of no use, but to fear it; for if
I know it and not fear it, I do but look upon it as to come, and that does but
leave us settled in our lees, leaves the covetous in the mine, the revenger in
his wrath, the wanton in the strumpets arms; if we confess he will come, and
are not startled, what a poor squib would that be, if we should be told, he
would come, and come at such an hour: But then what a long hour should we make
it? how should we extend and thrust it back to all eternity? yet a little
sleep, a little stumber; Pro. 6.10
for poverty is in arms, and coming, but not yet come; yet let me grind the
poor, says the oppressor; yet let me crown my self with roses, says the
luxurious; yet a little more dalliance says the wanton; yet let me boast in
mischief, says the man of power; for whilst we consider things in the future,
fit ut illud futurum semper sit futurum, imo fortassis nunquam futurum, says
the Father, that which is to come will be always to come, nay, peradventure we
shall think at last, that it will never come; All futures are contingents with
us, and at last are nothing. The time flies away and will not stay its course,
neither for the delaier, nor the uncautelous, and therefore our Lord who knows
what is sufficient and best for us would not let us know any more, quod a
Christo discitur totum est, that which he has taught us is all, that we can
learn, if it would add but one cubit to our stature, and growth in grace, he
would have left it behind, written in the fairest character, but it is hid from
our eyes, for our advantage, that by the doubtful and pendulous expectation of
the hour, our faith might be put to the trial, whether it be a languishing dead
faith, or fides armata, a faith in arms, Tert. de Anima c. 33.
and upon its watch, ut semper diem observemus, dum semper ignoramus, that
whilst we know not, when 'twill be, it may present it self unto us every
moment, to affront, and awe us in every motion, and be as our task-master to
over-see us, and bind us to our duty that we may fulfill our work, and work
out our salvation with fear and trembling, that our whole life may be as the
vigils, and Eve, and the hour of his coming, the first hour of an everlasting
Holy Day.

Lastly, there is no reason why it should be known, neither in respect of the
good, nor of the evil; for the good, satis est illis credere, it is enough for
them that they believe; they walk by faith, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.7.
and in their way behold the promises, and comminations of the he Lord, and in
them as in a glass behold heaven, and hell, the horror of the one, and the
glory of the other; and this sight of the object, which they have by the eye of
faith, is as powerful to work in them obedience, as if Heaven it self should
fly open, and discover all unto them: to the true believer Christus venturus,
Christ to come, and Christ now coming in the clouds, are in effect, but one
object; for Faith sees plainly the one, in the other, the last hour, in the
first, the World at an end, in the prediction.

But to Evil, and wicked men, to men, who harden themselves in sin, Jud. Ep. v.
10.
no evidence is clear enough, and light it self is darkness: what they
naturally know, and what they can preach unto themselves, in that thy corrupt
themselves, and give their senses leave to lead them to all uncleanness,
whilst reason which should command, is put behind, and never hearkened to; are
as bruit Beasts in spite of all they have of man within them; and if they
believe his coming, and will not turn back and bow, and obey their Reason, they
would remain the same beasts or worse, though they knew the very hour of his
coming. After all those judgments Pharaoh was still the same, after the rivers
turned into blood, after frogs and lice, after the plague on man and beast,
after every plague which came thick, as line upon line, precept upon precept,
after all these, the effect and conclusion was, Exodus 10.27.
Pharaoh hardened his heart, was Pharaoh still, the same Tyrant till he was
drowned in the Red Sea: Balaam though the Ass forbad his folly, and the Angel
forbad it, though the sword was drawn against him, and brandisht in his very
face, that he bowed on the ground, and fell flat on his face, yet he rose
again, and took courage to betray the Israelites, to that sin, with the
Midianitish women, which brought a curse upon them, and death upon himself, for
he was slain for it with the sword. Exodus 31.8. what evidence can prevail with,
what terror can move a wicked man, hardened in his sin? who knows well enough,
and can draw the picture of Christ coming, and look upon it, and study to
forget it, and then put on an ignorance of his own knowledge; and though he
know, he will, yet persuade himself, he will not come, and he that can thus
stand out against his own knowledge in the one, may be as daring and resolute
in the other, and venture on, though Hell it self should open her mouth against
him, and breath vengeance in his face; for howsoever we pretend ignorance, yet
the most of the sins which we commit, we commit against our knowledge. Tell the
foolish man, that the lips of the Harlot will bit like a Cockatrice, he knows
it well enough, and yet will kiss them; tell the intemperate, that wine is a
mocker, he will taste, though he know he shall be deceived: the cruel oppressor
will say, and sigh it out, that the Lord is his God; and yet eat up his people,
as he eats bread; who knows not that we must do to others, as we would have
others do to us, and yet how many are there (I may ask the question) that make
it good in practice? who knows not what his duty is, and that the wages of sin
is death? and yet how many seek it out, and are willing to to travail with it,
though they die in the birth? cannot the thought of judgment move us, and will
the knowledge of a certain hour awake us? will the hardened sinner cleave to
his sin, though he know the Lord is coming, and will he let it go and fling it
from him, if the set determined hour were upon record? No: 2 Timothy 3.13.
they wax worse, and worse says the Apostle, earth is a fairer place to them,
then Heaven it self, nor will they part with one vanity, nor bid the devil
avoid, though they knew the very hour, (I might say) though they now saw him
coming in the clouds; For wilt not thou believe God, when he comes as near
thee, as in wisdom he can, and his pure Essence, and Infinite Majesty will
suffer? and art thou assured thou shall believe him, if he would please to come
so near, as thy sick Fancy would draw him? Indeed this is but aegri somnium,
the dream of a sick, and ill affected mind, that complains of want of Light,
when it shines in thy face, for that Information which we so long for, we
cannot have, or if we could, it would work no more Miracles, then that does,
which we already have, but leave us the same Lethargiques, which we were; in a
word; if his doctrine will not move us, the Knowledge (which he will not
Teach) will have little force, and though it were written in Capital Letters,
at such a time, and such a day, and in such an Hour, the Lord will come, we
should sleep on as securely as before, and never awake from this Death in sin
till the last Trump.

To look once more upon the Non nostis horam, Conclus.
and so conclude: and we may learn even from our Ignorance of the Hour, thus
much; That as his coming is uncertain, so it will be sudden, as we cannot know
when he will come, so he will come, when we do not think on it; Tert. Apol. c.
33.
cum Totius mundi motu, cum horrore orbis, cum planctu omnium, si non
Christianorum, says Tert. with the shaking of the whole world, with the Horror
and amazement of the Universe, every man howling, and lamenting, but those few,
that little flock, which did wait for his coming. It is presented to us in
three resemblances. 1. Of Travel coming upon a Woman with Child. 1 Thessalonians.
5.2,3. Luke 21.35.
2. Of a Thief in the night; and 3ly, Of a snare. Now the Woman talks, and is
cheerful; now she lays her hands to the spindle, and her hands hold the
distaffe, and now she groans, Now the Mammonist locks his God up in his chest,
lays him down to sleep, and dreams of nothing else: and now the Thief breaks
in and spoils him. Now our feet are at liberty, and we walk at large; walk on
pleasantly, as in fair places; Now the bitterness of Death is past, and now
the snare takes us. Now we fancy new delights, send our Thoughts afarr off,
dream of Lordships and Kingdoms. Now we enlarge our Imaginations as Hell,
Anticipate our Honors, and wealth, and gather riches in our mind, before we
grasp them in our Hand; Now we are full, now we are Rich, now we reign as
Kings; now we beat our fellow servants, and beat them in his name; and in this
type and representation of Hell: entitle our selves to eternity of bliss, are
cursed, and call our selves Saints, and now, even now he comes.

Now; sudden surprisalls do commonly startle, and amaze us, but after a while,
after some pause and deliberation, we recover our selves, and take heart to
slight that, which drove us from our selves, and left us as in a Dream, or
rather dead: But this brings either that Horror, or that joy, which shall enter
into our very bones, settle, and incorporate it self with us, and dwell in us
for evermore. Other assaults, that are made upon us unawares, make some mark,
and impression in us, but such as may soon be wiped out: we look upon them, and
being not well acquainted with their shapes, they disturb our Fancy; but either
at the sight of the next object we lose them, or our Reason chaseth them away,
the Tempest rises, Aul. Gell. N^ct. Art. l. 19. c. 1.
and the Philosopher is pale, but his Reason will soon call bis blood again
into his cheeks: he cannot prevent these sudden and violent motions, but (...),
he does not consent, he does not approve these unlookt for apparitions and
Fantasies; he does not change his Counsel, but is constant to himself: sudden
joy, and sudden fear with him are as short, as sudden. But this coming of our
Lord, as it is sudden, so it brings omnimodam Desolationem, an universal
Horror, and amazement, seises upon all the Powers and Faculties of the Soul,
chains them up, and confines them to loathsome and Terrible Objects, from
which no change of Objects can divert, no wisdom redeem them. No serenity
after this Darkness, no joy after this trembling, no refreshing after this
consternation; for no coming again, after this coming, for it is the last.

And now, to conclude: veniet Fratres, veniet, Aug. Ser. 140. de Temp.
sed vide quomodo te inveniet, says Aust. He shall come, He shall come, my
brethren: his coming is uncertain, and his coming is sudden; it will concern us
to take heed how he finds us, when he comes. Oh, let him not find us digging
of Pitts, spreading of netts to catch our Brethren, spinning the Spiders web,
wearying and washing our selves in vanity; let him not find us in strange
apparel, in spotted Garments, in Garments stained with blood; Let not this
Lord find thee in Rebellion against him; This Savior find thee a Destroyer;
This Christ, who should anoint thee, find thee bespotted of the world; Let not
an humble Lord find thee swelling, a meek Lord find thee raging, a merciful
Lord find thee cruel; let not an innocent lord find thee boasting in mischief;
let not the Son of man, Find thee a Beast; But to day, if you will hear his
voice, harden not your hearts; This is your Day, and this day you may work out
Eternity; this is your hour to look into your selves, o be jealous of your
selves, vereri omnia opera, to be afraid of every word, work and Thought, every
enterprise you take in hand: for whatsoever you are saying, whatsoever you are
doing whatsoever you are imagining; whilst you Act, whilst you speak, before
you speak, whilst you think, and that thought is a Promise, or prophecy of
Riches and Delights, and Honors, which are in the approach, and ready to meet
you, or a seal and Confirmation of those glories which are already with you;
whilst you think, as the Prophet David speaks, That your Houses shall continue
for ever, even then he may come upon you, and then this Inward Thought, all
your thoughts perish, or return again upon you like Furies, to last and torment
you for ever. And therefore, to conclude; since the Premises are plain, the
Evidence fair; since he is a Lord, and will come to Judge us: Since he will
certainly come; since the Time of his coming is uncertain, and since it is
sudden; He is no Christian, he is no man, but has prostituted that which makes
him so, his Reason to his sense, and Brutish part, who cannot draw this
Conclusion to himself; That he must therefore watch, which is in the next place
to be considered.

THE SIXTEENTH SERMON.
MATTHEW. 24.42. Watch therefore, etc.


The last PART.
We have seen Christ our lord at the Right Hand of God; considered him, First,
as our Lord. Secondly, as coming. Thirdly, as keeping from our eye and
knowledge, the Time of his coming; and now, what Inference can we make? He is a
Lord, and shall we not fear him? To come, and shall we not expect him? To come
at an hour we know not, and shall we not Watch? This every one of them
naturally, and necessarily affords, and no other conclusion can be drawn from
them; but when we consult with flesh, and blood, we force false conclusions,
even from the truth it self, and to please and flatter our sensual part,
conclude against Nature, to destroy our selves. Sensuality is the greatest
Sophister, that is; works Darkness out of Light, poison out of Physic, sin
out of Truth: See what Paralogismes she makes; God is merciful, therefore
presume; he is patient, Therefore provoke him. He delayeth his coming; we may
now beat our Fellow Servants, and eat and drink with the Drunken; It is
uncertain when he will come, therefore he will never come; This is the
reasoning of Flesh and blood; This is the Devils Logic; and therefore, that we
be not deceived, nor deceive our selves with these Fallacies, behold, here
Wisdom it self has shown us a more excellent way, and drawn the Conclusion to
our hands; Vigilate ergo: He is a Lord, and to come, and at an Hour you know
not of; Watch therefore.

And this word (...), vigilate, is verbum vigilans, as Aug. speaks, a waking
busy, stirring word, and implies, as the Scholiast tells us, (...), all manner
of care and Circumspection; and what are all the Exhortations in Scripture, but
a Commentary, and Exposition of this Duty? There we find it rendered by
awaking, working, running, striving, Fasting, Praying; we shall find it to be
Repentance, Faith, Spiritual Wisdom, that golden chain, wherein all virtues
and Graces, that Vniversitas Donorum, as Tert. speaks, that Academy, that world
of Spiritual Gifts meet, and are united; when we awake, we watch to look
about, and see what danger is near; when we work, we watch, till our work be
brought to perfection; That no Trumpet scatter our Alms; no Hypocrisy corrupt
our Fast, no unrepented sin deny our prayers, no wandering Thought defile our
Chastity, no false fire kindle our zeal; no Lukewarmnes dead our Devotion, when
we strive, we watch that lust which is most predominant; and Faith, if it be
not Dead, has a restless Eye, an eye that never sleeps, which makes us even
here on Earth like unto the Angels; for so Anastasius defining an Angel, calls
him a reasonable Creature, but (...), such a one as ver sleeps. Cord vigila,
Fide vigila, spe vigila, charitate vigila, says St. August. an active Faith, a
waking Heart, a lively hope, a spreading Charity, assiduity, and perseverance
in the work of this Lord, these make up the vigilate, the watching here; These
are the seals; Faith, Hope and Charity, set them on, and the Watch is sure.

But this is to General; To give you yet a more particular acaccount, we must
consider. 1. That God has made man a Judge, and Lord of all his Actions, and
given him that freedom, and Power, which is Libripens emancipatia Deo Boni,
Tert. l. 2. cont. Marcion.
which does hold as it were the balance, and weigh, and poyse both good and
evil, and may touch or strike which Scale it please, that either Good shall
outweigh Evil, or Evil good (for man is not evil by Necessity, or Chance,
but by his will alone) See, I have set before thee, this Day, Life and Good,
Death and Evil, Therefore choose Life. Deuteronomy. 30.19. Secondly, he has placed an
apparency of some good, on that which is evil, by which he may be wooed and
enticed to it; and an apparency of smart, and evil on that which is Good,
Difficulty, Calamity, persecution, by which he may be frighted from it. But
then thirdly, he has given him an understanding, by which he may discover the
horror of Evil, though colored over, and dressed with the best advantage to
Deceive; and behold the Beauty, and Glory of that, which is good, though it be
discolored and defaced with the blackness: and Darkness of this world: He
has given him a Spirit, Prove. 20.27.
which the Wise man calls the Candle of the Lord searching the inward parts of
the belly; his Reason, that should sway and govern all the parts of the body
and faculties of the Soul; by which he may see, to eschew evil, and choose
that which is good, adhere to the Good, though it distaste the sense, and fly
from evil, though it flatter it: By this we discover he Enemy, and by this we
conquer him; By this we see danger, and by this we avoid it: By this we see
Beauty in Ashes, and vanity in Glory: And, as other Creatures are so made, and
framed, that without any guide or Leader, without any agitation or business of
the mind, they turn from that which is Hurtful, and choose that which is
Agreeable with their Nature, as the Cocles, which, says Pliny, carent omni
alto sensu, quam C^bi andpericuli, C. 9. N. 1 Q. c. 30.
have no sense at all, but of their food, and of Danger, and naturally seek the
one, and fly the other: So this Light, this Power is set up in man, which by
discourse, and comparing one thing with another, the beginning with the end;
and shows, with Realities, and fair Promises, with bitter effects, may show
him a way to escape the one, and pursue life through rough and rugged ways,
even through the valley of Death it self. And this is it, which we call
vigilance or watchfulness; Attend tibi ipsi, says Moses, Deuteronomy. 4.9. Tom. 1.
Take heed to thy self, and Basil wrote a whole Oration, or Sermon on that
Text, and considers man, as if he were nothing else but mind and soul, and the
Flesh were the Garment, which clothed and coverd it; and that it was compast
about, with Beauty, and Health, Sickness and deformity Friends and Enemies,
Riches and Poverty; from which the mind is to guard, and defend it self; that
neither the Gloty nor Terror of outward Objects have any power or influence on
the mind, to make a way through the flesh to deface, and ruin it, and put out
its light, (...), Take heed to thy self prae omni custodia serva cor tuum; Keep
thy heart with Diligence, ab omni cautione, so it is rendered by Mercer, out of
the Hebrew, from every thing that is to be avoided, ab omni vinculo so others,
from every tie, or bond, which may shackle, or hinder thee in the performance
of that Duty, to which thou art obliged, whether it be a chain of Gold, or of
Iron, of pleasure, or pain; whether it be a fair, and well promising; or a
black Temptation; keep it with diligence, and keep it from these Encumbrances:
and the reason is given; For out of it are the Issues of Life, processiones
vitarum, the Issues, and Proceedings of many lives: for so many Conquests, as
we gain over Temptations, so many lively motions we feel animated, and full
of God, which increase our Crown of joy: All is comprehended in that of our
Savior, Math. 26.41.
Watch, and pray, lest you enter into Tentation: If you watch not, your heart
will lie open, and Tentations will Enter, and as many Deaths will issue forth:
Evil Thoughts, Fornications, Murders, Adulteries, Blasphemy, as so many
Locusts out of the Bottomless Pit

To watch then, Philip. 2.
is to fix our mind on that, which concerns our Peace. To work out our
Salvation with fear and trembling, to perfect holiness in the Fear of God, 2
Cor. 7.1. Heb. 12.28. 2 ep. John 8.
to serve him with Reverence and Godly Fear, That we lose not those things
which we have wrought, so that by the Apostle, our Caution, and watchfulness is
made up of Reverence and Fear; and these two are like the two Pillars in the
Porch of the Temple of Solomon, Jachin and Boaz. 1. of Kings and the second, to
establish and strengthen our Watch; For this certainly must needs be a
Sovereign Antidote against sin, and a forcible motive, to make us look about
our selves, when we shall Think that our Lord is present every where, and
sees, and knows all Things, when we consider him, as a witness, who shall be
our Judge; That all we do, we do, as Hilary speaks, in Divinitatis sinu, in
his very presence, and Bosom, when we deceive our selves, and, when we deceive
our brethren, when we sell our Lord to our Fears, or our Hopes, when we betray
him in our craft, crucify him in our Revenge, defile, and spit upon him in our
uncleanness, we are even then in his Presence; if we did firmly believe it, we
would not suffer our eyes to sleep, nor our eyelids to slumber; For how
careful are we, how anxious, how sollicitous in our behavior? how scrupulous
of every word, and look and gesture? what Critics are we in our deportment, if
we stand before them whom we call our betters, indeed our fellow Dust and
Ashes? and shall we make our face, as Adamant in the presence of our Lord? shall
we stand Idle, and sport, and play the wantons before him? shall we beat down
his Altars? blaspheme his Name? beat our Fellowservants before his face? shall
we call him to be witness to a Lie? make him an Advocate for the greatest sin,
suborne his Providence to own our impiety; his Wisdom to favor our Craft;
his permission to consecrate, and ratify our sin? can we do, what a Christian
eye cannot look upon, which reason, and Religion condemns? and even Pagans
tremble at? can we do it, and do it before his Face, whose Eye is pure, Tertul.
de Testim. animae. c. 2. Vnde haec tibi anima non Christiana?
and Ten thousand times brighter then the Sun? Deus videt, and Deus judicat,
God will see, and God will Judge, is taken out of the Common Treasury of
Nature, and the Heathens themselves have found it there, who speak it as their
Language: And, if his awful Eye will not open ours, our Lethargy is mortal:
we are Infidells if we believe it not; and if we do believe it, yet dare do
those things, which afflict his eye, we are worse then Infidels.

Let us then look upon him: think him present, and stand upon our guard, let us
stand in awe and not sin; let one fear call upon another; the fear of this
Lord, the fear of cautelousnesse, and circumspection, which is as our angel
keeper, to keep us in all our ways, in the smooth and even ways of peace, and
in the rough and rugged ways of adversity: to lead us against our enemies,
which are more then the hairs of our head, as many, as there are temptations
in the world, and help us to defeat them, is our best buckler to keep off the
darts of Satan, and as a Canopie to keep our virtues from soil; to keep our
liberality cheerful, our chastity fresh and green, our devotion fervent, our
Religion pure, and undefiled, to waste the body of sin, and perfect and secure
our obedience, in a word, to do that which the Heathens thought their Goddess
Pellonia did, to drive, and chase all evil out of our coasts. For let us well
weigh and consider it; let us look upon our Enemies, the world with all its
pageantry, the flesh with all its lusts, the Devil with all his snares, and
wiles, and enterprises, let us look upon him coming toward us, either as an
Angel of light to deceive us, or as a Lion to devour us, and then let us
consider out Lord and Captain, Heb. 3.1.
the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, opening the gates of Heaven
unto us, man festing his glory, streaming forth his light, ready with his
strength, free in his assistance, pouring forth his Grace, now triumphing over
these our enemies, leaving us only the chase, and pursuit of them, and to fill
up (...) some small matter, that is behind, Coloss. 1.25.
which is nothing in respect of that which he both did, and suffered; let us
lay this to heart, and view it well; all our dangers and all our advantages,
and we shall find, that it is not the strength, nor multitude of our
adversaries, nor yet our own weakness and infirmity (which we so willingly
acknowledge) it is not the craft of Satan (for we have wisdom it self on our
side) it is not his strength, or power (for he has none) but our want of
watchfulness, and circumspection, that gives us the blow, and strikes us on
the ground. For want of this, our first Parents fell in Paradise; Ep. ad Olymp.
and had certainly fallen (says Saint Chrysostom) had there been no Serpent, no
Tempter at all; for he that watches not, tempts the Tempter Himself, who would
not assault us so often, did we not invite him, would not fling a dart toward
us, did he see us in our Armor, did he see us with our buckler, and upon our
watch. By this Adam sell, and by this Adams posterity after the fall recovered
their state, escaped the corruption, which is in the world, and fled from the
wrath to come, so necessary is it for a Christian, that had we no other defense
but this, yet we could not be overcome, Fortis saepe victus est, cautus
rarissime the strong man has often ruined with his own strength, but he that
stands upon his guard, though the adversary lay hard at him, yet is never
overthrown: we may look back with comfort upon the eternal purpose, and decree
of God, I mean to save penitent believers; but we must give diligence to make
our calling, 2 Pet. 1.10.
our election sure; we cannot but magnify the Grace of God, which brings
salvation: but we must work it out with fear and trembling; Philip. 2.12.
we cannot deny the power of the Gospel; but it is watchfulness, that makes it
the savor of life unto life; 2 Cor. 2.16. 2 Timothy 4.8.
we look for a crown that is laid up, but it is watchfulness that must put it
on.

And now having as it were, set the watch, we must next give you the particular
orders to be observed in our watch, and we must frame and fashion them, not
only by the majesty of the Lord, which is to come, but the power, and force,
and manner of working of those temptations, which we are to cope with all, and
watch against that; when they compass us about, we may find a way and escape
them, solus Christianus novit Satanam, says Tert. it is the character of a
Christian alone, and it is peculiar to him, Veget. l. v.
to know the Devil, and his enterprises, and difficile vincitur, qui potest de
suis and adversarij copiis judicare, says Vegetius, it is a very hard matter
to overcome him, who truly knows his own strength, and the strength of his
adversary.

And first, we must know our selves; how we are framed and fashioned, how the
hand of God has built us up, and we shall see, that he has ever laid us open
to tentations, and set us up, as Job speaks, as a mark, for the enemy to shoot
at; that man is (...) one creature, Naz or. 38.
but made up of two different natures, the flesh, and the spirit; and put into
this world, which is a shope of tentations, hung sull with vanities, which
offer themselves, and that with some importunity to the eye, and ear, and every
sense he has: into which when God first put him, he made him upright, Eccles.
7.29.
but with all mutable; the root of which mutability, was his will; by which he
might incline to either side, either bargain, or pass by, Legem dedit Deus
(...) Naz or. 38.
either embrace temptations, or resist them. In hoc est lex constituta, non
excludens, sed probans libertatem, says Tertul. To this end a Law was enacted,
not taking away, but proving and trying the liberty which we have, either
freely to obey, or freely to transgress, for else why should he enact a Law?
For the will of man looks equally on both; and he being thus built up, did owe
to his maker absolute, and constant obedience, and obedient he could not be, if
he had not been thus built up. To this end, his understanding and will were to
be exercised with arguments, and with occasions which might discover the
resolution, and the choice, and election of man. Now these arguments, and
occasions are that, which we call temptations; which though they naturally
light upon the outward man, yet do they formally aim at the inward, and are
nothing, do nothing, till they seize upon the will, which may either join with
the sensitive part, against the reason, which makes us to every good work
reprobate; or else join with our reason against our sensual appetite, which
works in us, a conformity to the will of God; for he wills nothing to be done
which right reason will not have us do. The will is that alone, which draws,
and turns these temptations, either to a good end, by watchfulness and care;
or by supine negligence, turns them to a bad; turns them from that end, for
which they were permitted, and ordained, and so makes Satan's darts more fiery,
his enterprises more subtle; his occasions more powerful, and his persuasions
more persuasive, then indeed they are: so that what God ordained for our trial,
and crown, by our security and neglect, is made a means to bring on our
downfall, and condemnation.

We must therefore in the midst of temptations, as in a School, learn to know
our selves; and in the next place, to know our enemies, and now they ^ork, and
mine against us, examine those temptations, which make toward us, lest we judge
of them by their outside, look upon them, and so be taken with a look: lest (as
the Romans observed of the barbarous Nations, that being ignorant of the art of
engining, when they were besieged, and shut up, they would stand still, and
look upon the Enemy working on in the mine, not understanding, quo illa
pertinerent, quaeex longinquo instruebantur, what it meant, or wherefore those
things were prepared, which they saw a far off, and at distance, till the Enemy
came so near, as to blow them up, and destroy them) so we also behold
temptations with a careless and regardlesse eye, and not knowing what they
mean, suffer them to work on, to steal nearer, and nearer upon us, till they
enter into our souls, and dwell there, and so take full possession of us.

And first, we may lay it as a ground; That nothing properly provokes it self,
as the fire does not provoke it self to burn nor the Sun to shine; for the next
and necessary causes of things, are rather efficients, then provocations, which
are always external either to the person, or principal, or part, which is the
principal and special agent; and so the will of man does consummate, and finish
sin, but provokes it not, but is enticed to that evil, or frighted from that
which is good, by some outward object, which first presents it self unto the
sense, which carries it to the fancy, which conveighs it to the understanding,
whence arises that fight, and contention between the inferior part of the
soul, and the superior, between the sensual appetite and the reason, not to be
decided, or determined but by the will, and when the will like Moses holds up
its hands, as it were, and is steady and strong, the reason prevails, and
when it lets them down, the sense. The senses then are, (as Hierom calls them)
fenestra animae, the windows of the soul, through which tentations enter to
flatter and woo the fancy and affections, to join with the principal
faculties of the soul, to beget that sin, which begets death, and if you
will observe how they work by the senses upon the soul, you will soon find
that they do it not, by force and battery, but by allurement, and speaking it
fair, or else by frowns and terrors; that there is no such force in their
arguments which spiritual wisdom, and vigilance may not assoile; that there is
no such beauty on them, which may not be loathed, no such horror, which we may
not slight and contemn.

And first, they work us occasions of sin: and all the power, that occasion
has, is but to show it self, and if it kill, it is as the Basilisk, by the
eye, by looking toward us, or indeed, rather by our looking toward it.
Occasion is a creature of our own making; we give it being, or it were not: and
it is in our power as the Apostle speaks (...) to cut it off. 2 Cor. 11.12.
When we see the golden wedg, we know it is but a clod of earth: we see beauty
and can call it the color, and symmetry of flesh and blood, of dust and ashes;
and unless we make it so; it is no more; indeed, we commonly say, occasio
facit furem, that occasion makes a thief; but (the truth is) it is the thief
that makes the occasion; for the object being let in by the senses, calls out
the soul, which frames and fashioneth it, and brings it to what form it
please; makes beauty a net, (...). Bas. in ps. 1.
and riches a snare; and therefore Bonum est non tangere, it is not safe to see
or touch; for there is danger in a very touch, in a cast of the eye, and upon a
look or touch, the Soul may fly out to meet it, and be entangled unawares,
utinam nec videre possimus, quod facere nobis nefas est, we may sometimes make
it our wish, Hieron.
not to see that, which we may not do, not to touch that which may be made an
occasion of sin, not to look upon wine, when it is red, nor the strange
woman, when she smiles.

For in the second place; they are not only made occasions of sins, but are
dressed up, and trimmed by the father of lies (who takes up a chamber in our
Fancy,) in that shape and form, in those fair appearances, which may deceive
us: there is a kind of Rhetoric, and eloquence in them, but not that of the
Orators of Greece, which was solid, and rational, but that of the later
Sophisters, which consisted in elegancies, and figures, and Rhetorical colors,
that which Plato calls (...) flattery, and popular eloquence: for as they who
deliver up themselves to fortune, and tread the ways to honor, and the
highest place, do commonly begin there with smiles, where they mean to shake a
whip; and cringe, and bow, and flatter the common people, whom they intend to
enslave, stroke and clap them, and so get up and ride the Beast to their
journeyes end: so do these tentations insinuate, and win upon the weaker part
of man, whilst the stronger is left to watch: work upon that part first, which
is easier to be seduced, then the reason or will, which must needs deny them
admittance, if they came, and presented themselves in their own shape, and were
not first let in by the senses and Fancy, and there colored over, and
beautified, and in this dress sent up unto them. Indeed the senses are merely
passive, receive the object, and no more, the eye does see, and the ear hear,
and the hands feel, and their work and office is transacted; and thus, if I be
watchful, I may see vanity, and detest it: I may hear blasphemy and abhor it, I
may touch, and not be defiled: but as the Prophet Jeremy speaks, Death comes in
at the windows, Jer. 9.21.
and so by degrees enters into the palace of our mind, and as the Civilians
tell us, possessio acquiritur, etiamsi in angulo tantum ingrediamur, we take
possession of a house though we come but into a corner of it, so through our
negligence, and unwariness, many times, nay, most times, it falls out that
when the temptation has gained an entrance at the eye, or ear, it presses
forward to the more retired and more active faculties, and at last gains
dominion over the whole man: for from the senses it is transmitted to the
Fancy, which has a Creating faculty, to make what she pleases, of what she
list, to put new forms and shapes upon objects; to make gods of clay, to make
that delightful, which in it self is grievous, that desirable which is
loathsome; that fair and beautiful, which is full of horror; To-set up a Golden
calf, and say it as a good, and habentur phantasmata pro cognitis, these shows
and apparitions are taken for substances, August. lib. music. c. 11.
these airy phantasmes, for well-grounded conclusions, and the mind of man
does so apply it self unto them, ut dum in his est cogitatio, ea intellectu
cerni arbitramur, that what is but in the fancy, and wrapped up in a thought,
is supposed to be seen by the eye of the understanding, in the same shape: what
we think is so, and with us (in these our distempers) opinion and knowledge are
one and the same thing: and this inflames, and mads the affections, that they
forget their objects, and look and run wild another way: our hatred is placed
on that which we should love, and our love on that, which we should detest, we
fear that which we should embrace, and we hope for that, which we should
fear, we are angry with a Friend, and well pleased with an enemy: Now
profaneness sounds better, Hilar. in Psalm. 118.
then a Hymn, or Psalm of Thanksgiving; a Fable is more welcome, then the
Oracles of God, et blandior auri species, quam hominis, aut coeli, aut lucis,
and a piece of Gold is a more glorious sight, then man, the Image of his Maker,
or the Heaven, wherein he dwells, or the Light it self; so true is that of the
Orator, Quintil l. 10. c. 3.
aliud agere mentem cogunt oculi, by this means, the eye diverts the mind of
man from its proper work, that it cannot attend and busy it self to discern
betwixt Good and evil, and so watch, and stand upon its Guard.

I called Tentations not only Occasions, but Arguments, but such Arguments,
which as I told you, conclude not and beget not knowledge, but opinion, and
prevail not with wise men, but with fools, who commonly for want of
Circumspection, entertain, and swallow down uncertain things for those which
are certain, and that which is doubtful, for that which is true. They who have
wisdom for their guide, judge of things, Arist. Sophist. Elench. c. 12.
(...), according as they are in themselves, according to the Truth; attempt
nothing, do nothing upon Opinion, or a bare appearance, but before they make
Choice, do weigh and examine the Object: but uncautelous, and unadvised men do
but see, and presently embrace that, which was most deformed in it self, and
had nothing to commend it self to them, but the fucus and paint, which
themselves laid on. Good God, how friendly and familiar are we with that, which
pleases the eye and fancy, Magna ista, quia parvi sumus, credinus. Sen. Praef.
ad N.Q.
before the reason has looked upon it? Take all the sins which we commit,
what better ground or Foundation have they, on which they rise to that visible
height, then False opinion? Our Ambition soars, and mounts aloft with this
thought, as with a wing; That Honor will make us, as Gods: Our Covetousness
diggs and sweats with this assurance; That Riches are the best Friend. Our
revenge is furious and bloody, because we think, That to suffer is Cowardice,
we run after evils, and study for a Curse, for some glimpse, or show it has
of some great blessing; And we dote on the earth, which is fading, and whose
fashion passes away for some resemblance we think it has to Heaven and
Eternity, Et inambus phant asmatibus tanquam pictis epulis reficimur, Aug de
vera Religi. c. 51.
and these vain imaginations, These Dreams of Happiness, are but as a painted
Banquet; for as Junckets in a Picture may delight the eye, but not fill the
stomach, so do these sudden, and weak conceptions tickle and please the fancy,
perhaps, but bring leanness into the soul, and leave it empty and poor: And no
marvail. For when the sense is thus pleased, when the fancy has sported and
played with that which delighted the sense; the Affections grow unruly, and
reason is swallowed up in Victory, so that God seems to be the enemy, and the
Devil a Friend, bringing good news unto us, and speaking pleasing Things to
us, such as are Music to our ears, whereas God seems to come in Thunder, with
Terror, and command, to drive us to our watch: providing a knife for our
throat, shutting up the eye, cutting off the right hand, muzling up the mouth,
that it speak no Guile, writing sad Characters upon that, which our sense, and
Fancy had painted, and dressed up; as Touch not, Taste not, Handle not.

Now that Temptations work thus by the sense, and Enter, and make their passage
into the inward man, is evident not only in those grosser sins, which turn
the very soul it self into flesh, nam wist a anima libidine, fit Caro, says
the Father, for when the soul is polluted with lust, it loses its
spirituality, and is transubstantiated as it were into Flesh) but it is seen in
those which are more retired, and inward to the Soul; not only in the Practice
of our Life, but the Errors of our Doctrine; and on this ground Saint Paul puts
Heresies into his black Catalogue, Gal. 5.20.
and numbers them amongst the works of the Flesh. For if we look upon those who
are the Authors, and Fomentors of Error, we shall find that they wilfully shut
their eyes, and ears against the Truth, which offers it self, and bespeaks
them with Arguments, and reasons undeniable, and decline to falsehood, by
leaning rather to that which is convenient, then that which is true, harkening
more to earthly and sensual motives, then to the voice of God which told them,
This is the way. Honor, and Riches, and love of this world make up that body of
Divinity, which must be a Directory for others to walk by, the eye reads the
Text, and the eye lets in the Interpretation; for the love that I delight in,
is urgent with me, and persuades me to understand it so, as it may favor and
Countenance that Love.

Thus do Tentations both to sin, and error creep in at these doors, and
inlets of the senses, and like Thieves steal in by night, colored over with
the pleasures, and clouded with the pomp of the world, and so find easy
admittance, and steal away the Truth, and Love of God out of our hearts,
whilst we sleep.

And if a fair Temptation do not make entrance with a smile, a bitter and
grievous Temptation may force a passage with its Horror. For thus according to
their diverse and several aspects, they work both upon the Irascible, and
Concupiscible Power; If an Enemy be loud against us, we have a Tempest within
us; if Jacob has the blessing, Esau hates him; At the sight of Beauty, if I
take not heed, my Love begins to kindle at the next look, it Flames; The
approach of danger strikes me with fear; nay, a shadow, and representation
will do it; I may take a Promontory for a Navy, and a field of Thistles, for a
body of Pikes; not only that which is true, but that which is Feigned; That
which is but color, which is but round, which is but a superficies, but an
apparition, but a shadow, being carelessly let in, and entertained, may raise
this Tumult and Sedition in the Soul: a fair promising Temptation comes upon
parley, and treaty, and conditions, insinuates and winnes upon us with its
smiles and flatteries, but a fearful, and boy sterous Temptation, plays upon
us with all its Artillery, with smart, and shame, and poverty, and
Imprisonment, and Death, makes forward with a kind of force and violence, T^ll.
Offi. 1.
Et tumultuantes de gradu dcijcit, and overthrows us with some noise. And as
the senses conveigh the Tentations, so do the Affections, if we watch them not,
and suppress them, make sensible alterations in the heart, and make themselves
visible to the very Eye, Ardent, intenduntur, humectant, connivent hinc illae
misericordrae Lacrymae. Plin. Not. H. l. 11. c. 37.
profecto says Pliny, in oculis animus inhabitat, the mind dwells in the eye,
there it is visible to be seen; in its joy it leapeth there, in its grief it
languisheth, in its fear it droopeth there, in its Anger it threatens there,
in its Hope it looks out cheerfully, and in its Despair, it sinks in again,
and leaves the living man with no more motion, then a Carcass. The heart of
man changes his countenance, says the Wise man; If we stand not upon our
Guard, the state, and peace of our mind will soon be over-thrown, Respexit
oculis (says St. Amb.) et sensum mentis evertit os libavit, and crimen
retulit, the man did but look back, and his mind was shaken, he did but open
his ear, and lost a good intention, he did but lightly Touch, and shadow the
Object, and took in a sin, he did but Touch, and was on fire.

You see now the force and strength of the Enemy, you see him in his mine, and
you see him in his March, with his flatteries and Menacies, with his glories,
and Terrors, with his occasions and Arguments, and if to these you oppose your
Prudency and watchfulness, your Fortitude, and Christian Resolution, you put
him to flight, or Tread him under your foot.

1.
For first, A. Gel. Noct. At. L. 19. c. 2.
Temptations may enter the senses without sin, for to behold the Object, to
Touch or Taste (which are called belluini sensus, our more Brutish senses) is
not to commit sin, Tertul de Coron. Mil. c. 5.
because God himself has thus ordered, and framed the senses by their several
instruments and Organs, auditum in auribus fodit, visum in ceulis accendit,
gustum in ore conclusit, says the Father, he has kindled up light in the
eyes, he has dug the hollow of the Ear, for hearing, and has shut up the
Taste in the mouth, or palate, and has given man his senses very fit for the
trial, and reward of virtue; for as he made the eye to see, so he made every
thing in the world to be seen, Frustra ii essent si non viderentur, says
Amor. they were to no End, if they were not to be seen, and seen they may be to
our Comfort, and to our peril, and as Temptations may enter in at the Eye or
Ear, or any of the other senses, so we may make them the matter of virtue, as
well as the occasion: in a word, make a Covenant with our eye, bridle our Taste,
bind our Touch, purge our ears, and so sanctify, and Consecrate every sense
unto the Lord, which is indeed to watch.

2.
Secondly, They may enter the Thoughts, and be received into the imagination,
and yet, if we set our Watch, not overcome us; for as yet they are but, as it
were, in their march, bringing up their forces, but have made no battery, or
breach into the soul; For as God has, Blood and uncleanness, all the foul
Actions which are done in the world, written in his Book; and yet every leaf
thereof is fair, and clean, as purity it self; so may the mind of man mingle
it self with the most polluted Objects that are, and yet be a Virgin still,
chaste and untoucht; I may entertain all the Heresies that are, in my thoughts,
and yet be Orthodox, I may think of evil, and with that thought destroy it:
It Is not the sight of the object, nor the knowledge of evil, it is not the
remembrance of evil; It Is not the Contemplation of Evil, that can make me
Evil; for, if I watch over my self, and it, I may think of it, and loath it, I
may remember, and abhor it; For how could a Prophet denounce Judgment
against sin, if he did not think of it? How could I abhor, and avoid s^?
how could I repent of it, if it were not in my Thought.

3.
This we cannot doubt of: But then Thirdly, The sense and Fancy may receive the
object with some delight, and natural complacency, and yet without sin; if
we stand upon our Guard, suffer it to win no more ground, but then oppose it
most, when it most pleads for admittance: For thus far it will advance; and
as the rational, and intellectual delight is, from some Conclusion gained and
drawn out of the principles of Discourse, which is the work of reason; so there
is a sensible complacency, which is nothing else but adulatio corporis, the
pleasing of the sense, by the application of that, which is most agreeable to
it; as a better red, Arnob. l. 7. adv. Gent.
and white to the eye; of a more pleasant voice to the ear; That which is
sweet, the Taste judges so, that which is fair, the eye receives so: for this
is natural to it, and inseparable from it; and so it is to the Fancy, to
entertain objects in that shape, and form they represent themselves; But then,
we must stay, and question them here, at their first approach, and arrival in
these their rays and Glory; and God has made man a keeper of his heart, as of
a Castle; which he betrays not, 'till he has delivered it up into the Enemies
hands. Clavis hujus castri cogitatio est, The Key of this Castle is his
Thought; Bern.
This opens his Heart, and may shut it; This gives way and Room for the
Tentation to enter, which is not done, till he think, as the enemy would have
him; 'til he busy, and roll about his thought, which is as the turning of a
key to open a door, and passage unto him; I may think it is a fair sight, and
my will may turn from it; I may think it Music, and my will may be deaf; I may
think it pleasant to the taste, and my will may distaste, and loath it when
reason has discovered death in the apple; but when we draw near to it, and in
a manner invite it to enter; when we delight in that beauty, which attempts our
chastity, that pleasure which assaults our continence, and stay, and dwell, and
solace our selves with these unlawful objects; then it is more then a thought,
it is more then a natural complacency; it is a sin, for not only the sense is
pleased, but the will; for we would not have set it up so high in our fancy, we
would not have Deified it there, if we had not been willing to fall down, and
worship it; And now though it be but a thought, it is a work of the flesh,
wrought and finished in the mind, and wants nothing but opportunity to bring it
into Act; Tertul de resurrect. carn's. c. 15.
nec enim cogitatus licet solos, licet non ad effectum per carnem deduc^os a
collegio carnis auferimus, says Tertullian, so far is it, that the soul should
be alone in the Actions of our life; that we cannot take these thoughts which
are alone, and not yet brought into act, from the society, and fellowship of
the flesh, which works in the soul, as the soul does by it; For in the flesh,
and with the flesh, and by the flesh, that is done by the soul, which is done
in the heart and inward man.

Fourthly: Our natural inclination or appetite to join with those objects which
occasion siune, if it proceed, and work not beyond the limits which God has
set up, is not irregular, or sinful: Nullus in homine naturalis appetitus qui
non potest virtuose impleri. Helcet. in l. Sap ser. 42.
for there is no natural appetite, no natural inclination of man, which in the
effect may not be drawn up, to end in some virtuous action: no fuel, no sparkle
in our nature which may not be improved, and fixed at last, as a star in the
firmament of the soul; and therefore is good and tends to good, as well as to
evil: my inclination to anger my be drawn up unto a godly zeal, or end in
meekness; my inclination to meats; in sobriety and temperance, my inclination
to carnality, may either be restrained in a virgins life, or made honorable in
a married; my affections, and desires were imprinted in me by Nature, and
therefore by the hand of God himself, and are not in themselves vicious, but
may be good, and profitable; and advantageous to me, in the race I have to run:
what though my inclination, and desire look toward pleasure? my anger prompt,
and urge me to revenge? my fear drive me from that danger; by undergoing which,
I might secure my self from a greater? it is their nature, and they are left in
me to this end; for God has also set up a power within me, my reason (...) a
natural judicatory, by which I discern that which is good, from that which is
evil, by which I may be familiar with the Laws of God, well skild in spiritual
wisdom; and by that becalmall Tumults in the soul, moderate, and regulate my
affections, and if they be too urgent, subdue and crucify them, set them their
bounds which they shall not pass, which are righteousness and the Laws of
God; that I prefer not my grief or pleasure, or any other inclination, or
affection before the will of God, which has placed them in me, not to destroy
me, but to be serviceable to him, and conducible to that end, for which he left
them in me: I may make my anger a Magistrate to punish my sin, my fear a
Sentinel to warn me of danger, my sorrow a penitentiary to water my couch with
my tears; my hope a pillar to lean upon, and how can that be sin, without which
I cannot be virtuous? For if I could not be angry, I could not be meek: If I
had no desire, I could not be chaste; if I were void of fear, I could not watch,
if I could not rebel, I could not obey; if I could not be evil, I could not be
good; if I had no inclination to vice, I could not be virtuous: for this is the
work of reason, and virtue, to subdue, and regulate this inclination, to draw
it unto good, which might have been mislead, and carried unto evil, and our
watchfulness consists in this, in making that useful, which may be hurtful, in
making that a friend which might have been an enemy, in taking the danger out
of an inclination, the sting out of a temptation, and with it the victory. What
can we resemble God more then in the destruction of sin? and this we may do by
the help of our passions; my joy sings Psalms to him, my fear observes him,
and trembles before him; my anger revengeth his quarrel; when my indignation is
against my self; my sorrow pays him the tribute of tears; my love hastes with
a steady eye to that which is good, when that is present, it is transformed
into joy, when to come, it is quickened into hope, when it is past, it is poured
forth into desire; all natural inclinations may be brought to work for our
good, and the glory of God that gave them.

For we must learn to distinguish between our natural desire and our will, or
else we shall bring him in guilty of sin; who took away the sins of the
World, who though he came to do the will of his Father, and was willing to do
it, yet in his Agony, desired that that cup might be taken from him, without
drinking of which, it could not be done; and this desire does not derogate from
his obedience, but commend it; that he brought down this natural desire under
the will of his Father, and would drink that cup, Maxima chsequii gloria est in
eo, quod aequi minus velit. I'lin. Paneg.
which his humane nature trembled at; not my will but thine be done. Herein is
obedience, if a man does the will of God even against his will, that is his
natural desire. When my breasts are full of milk, and my blood dances in my
veins, and my natural inclination is strong within me, when beauty, not only
tempts, but sollicits, and opportunity and the twilight favor me; when my
natural desire is eager, and vehement, when I thus would, and might, and will
not; then am I chaste, an Eunuch for the kingdom of Heaven: when my choler would
draw my sword, and my reason locks it in my Scabbard; then am I meek: when I am
brought to the trial of my faith, and my fear would carry me away from that
persecution which rages against me, for the truths sake, and I cleave to the
truth, and chase this fear away, which would carry away me, or awe, and
overmatch it by the readiness, and strength of the spirit, and resolve against
those terrors, which would shake me from my rock, (for I may fear, and yet
suffer) then am I a Soldier of Christ: when I am fastened to the stake, and am
made a spectacle to thousands, to some a spectacle of pity, to others of
reproach, when I see the light; the joy of the whole earth; the Heavens above
me; and the land of the living, where I was wont to walk; when I see all the
ceremony, and pomp of persecution and death; when the executioner is ready to
put fire to my funeral pile; when my flesh trembles, and nature shrinks from
that which will abolish it, when in this fit of trepidation, a conditional
pardon is offered, and I would, yet will not receive it, because even the
saving letters, that are in it, are killing; when the outward man would not be
thus sacrificed: and yet I offer him up, then the crown is ready for me, and
the flame of fire, in which I shall be reduced almost to nothing, is my
Chariot, to carry my soul up to receive it. I cannot say, that this strife and
contention is in all; for the grace of Gods spirit, may so settle and quiet it,
that it shall scarce be sensible; but where it is sensible, it is no sign that
the tentation has prevailed, but rather a strong argument, that we are not as
yet lead, and shut up in it, but forcing a way, and passage out of it, that
though the strong man thus come against us, yet there is something in us
stronger then he, something opposite, and contrary to the tentation, which will
not suffer it to come so near, as to shake our constancy, or drive us from our
resolution; it may lay hard at us, to make us leave our hold: and to repress,
and keep it back, to strengthen and lift up our selves, that we do not fall, is
the effect of our watchfulness, and Christian fortitude, by which we are more
then Conquerors.

To conclude this; though the sense, and fancy receive the object, which is a
tentation, though our natural temper incline to it, and raise in us a kind of
desire to it (which is but a resultancy from the flesh) yet if we stand upon
our guard, and watch, we shall be so far from sinning, that we shall raise that
obedience upon it, which makes a way to happiness; and the soul shall be
sospes, et fidei calore fervens inter tentamenta Diaboli, Hieron. Apronio
as Saint Jer. speaks, safe and sound, vigorous and lively in the midst of all
these tentations, shall be undefiled of that object, which is fair, and
unshaken of that, which is terrible to the sense. Put on then the whole armor
of God, stand upon your guard, set up the spirit against the flesh, the reason
against your sense; watch one eye with another, your carnal eye, with a
spiritual eye, your carnal ear, with a spiritual ear, check your fancy, bound
your inclination, if the flesh be weak, let the spirit be ready, if one raise
a liking or desire, let the other work the miracle, and cast it out; and this
is to work light out of darkness, good out of that, which might have bin evil,
life out of that, which might have been death; this is indeed to watch.

And to this end that we may thus watch; let us out of that which has been
said, gather such rules, and directions which may settle and confirm us in our
watch, and carry on our care, and solicitude unto the end, that we may watch,
and so not enter into temptation. And first we must study the temptations
themselves, so study them as to wipe off their paint, to strike off their
illecebrae and beauty, to behold them in their proper, and native colors, and
representations; optimus Imperator, Veger.
qui habet cognitas res hostium, he is the best Commander, the best Watchman
who knows his enemy, and can see through his disguise and vizor, through his
counterfeit terrors, and lying boasts, and knows what he is: For indeed
nothing can make tentations of any force, but the opinion we have of them; it
is not poverty that afflicts me, but the opinion that poverty is evil; it is not
the evil it self, but my own thoughts which deserve this ill at my hands: I am
afraid of it, because I think it horrid, and whilst I think, I make it so. It
is not the blow of the tongue that can hurt me, for it is but a word, it is not a
Thunderbolt, and if it were, yet the Stoic will tell us inhonestius est
dejectione animi perire, quam fulmine, Senc. Na. Question.
It is not so great an evil, nor so dishonorable, to be struck with a
Thunderbolt, as to be killed with fear; far worse that my fancy should wound
me, then the tongue of an enemy. For what secret force can there be in a
calumniating tongue, to pierce through our very hearts, and shake and disturb
our minds? we can hear it thunder, and not be cast down, but so improvident,
and cruel we are to our selves that a breath from malice, or envy will lay us
on the ground, Non ex eo quod est fallimur, sed ex eo quod non est, we are not
deceived with the realities, but with the disguises, and appearances of things,
which those shapes which we have given them, we first make them idols, and then
fall down and worship them: we carelessly take in the object, and let our fancy
loose to work and hammer, and polish it, as Poets do make gods of men, and Seas
of little Rivers; and in this fair outside, in which we have dressed them, they
do deceive us, if we would look nearer into them, if we would desire them,
involutas evolvere, unsold, and lay them open, take them out of that
gaudinesse, in which they are wrapped, they could not have this operation, nor
thus work upon us, sapiens est, cui res sapiunt, ut sunt, he is a prudent man,
to whom things savor, and relish as they are, and our vigilance, and spiritual
wisdom consists in this, in distinguishing one thing from another, in
abstracting that evil that may be, from that good that appears, in discovering
a sophisme from a demonstration, in being able to sever the color and
appearance of a thing, from the thing it self; glory from riches, misery from
poverty, for truly these are not in them, but are to be looked for and feared in
something else: Did we contemplate only that, which is properly theirs, which
is only theirs, and not that which they have not, but ex dono by our gift, we
should not so often stoop, and submit to these vile offices, nor forsake our
reason to join with our sense: we should then look through the flatteries of
the world, and behold the inward horror they conceal, we should look through
the terrors of the world, and consider that inward sweetness, and light which
many times breaks through them, like lightning through a dark and sullen cloud:
we should not thus honor them with our fear, nor would our hearts so often
fail at the very sight of them: we should not forfeit our souls to save our
estates, wound our Conscience to secure our purse, be perjured rather then
imprisoned, and so run into Hell from the face and frown of a Tyrant: but as
Gregory observes, Hom. 39. in. Isa.
Anima rebus praesentibus dedita abscondit sibi mala sequentia, when the Soul
mixes with the world and cleaves to these temporary things, when it is buried,
as it were, in the flesh, and carnal pleasures, it draws the veil before its
face, and obscures and hides from it self those evils which are sure to follow,
which could she truly discern, she would watch, and take courage against that
temptation, which she now, not only yields to, but embraces.

And that we may thoroughly discern them, which is the office of our Christian
vigilance, it will be necessary for us to compare them: for the Orator will
tell us, Facilius latent, M. Seneca. Cont. 164.
quae non comparantur, Those things which we look upon with a single eye, but
once; do commonly lie hid, and we see them, as if we saw them not; but when we
look them over again, and compare them with something better then they, then
we see them nearer, and have a more direct, and fuller view of them, we see
they are nothing, or nothing what they seemed, as when the Sun is up, the
lesser lights are obscured, and the glory of the stars is not seen. Beauty is
delightful, but what is it to the splendour of Virtue? who would look upon a
face, that could see her naked? what is Honor, that is blasted with a breath,
with a Frown, to immortal Glory? what is the Merchants Pearl, to the
Kingdom of Heaven? what are pleasures, which are but for a season, to those
which are for evermore? what is a span of time, a moment to Eternity? And
certainly, were these outward things, which do but please, and tempt, and
withdraw us from better, the only reward of goodness, these Aerie, fugitive,
envenomed Glories, all that we should find at the end of our Race, no wise man
would stoop to reach them up; if these were the end of our Hopes, we were of
all men most miserable; if this were all the Heaven that were promised, we
should not believe there was either a God, or Heaven: Compare them if you
please; worldly Glories, with spiritual blessings; the one come toward us
smiling, and make us mirth and melody, but they soon turn their back, and leave
us sad and disconsolate, in the very shadow of Death; The other present
themselves at first, with great distaste to flesh and blood, because we look
upon them through a sad and dark medium, through disgrace and affliction, and
Death it self, but if we look often, and converse familiarly with them, we
shall see them in Beauty and Riches, and Heaven, and God himself; and is it not
a great deal better for a while to watch, and strive, and fight it out, and
afterward rejoice, and triumph as Conquerors, then by the impatience of one
hour, to be slaves for ever? Quid enim est malum, nisi impatientia boni?
Tertul de patientia.
for what is evil; what is our yielding to Temptations, the slacking of our
watch, but our want of patience toward that which is good? Thus if we compare
them, we shall soon discover their deformity, and on holy desires, and strong
resolutions, as with the wings of a Dove, fly swiftly away, that we may be at
rest; Thus if we know them, they can hardly hurt us; for what Pliny spoke of
Monsters and Prodigies, is true, either of fair, or black Tentations,
Ostenterum vires in eorum potestate sunt, quibus portenduntur; as of the one,
Prout quaeque accepta sunt, ita valent. Plin. Not. hist. l. 28.3.
so of the other, their power is no greater, then they would have it, to whom
it is showed, and presented, and are of force so far, as they are received,
have no power to hurt us, but from our selves; and therefore we must deal with
them, as they did with those prodigies, neglect, and slight them, that they may
not hurt us, beat down, Crucify the flesh, with the affections and lusts,
disgrace, and vilify every imagination that exalts it self against God; Hate
them with a perfect hatted: For not to yield, is to overcome, to study, and
learn, and know temptations, and find out, where their great strength lies,
and cut it off; to consider them as they are, and not in appearance, but
reality; to contemn and put them by, is that which makes way to victory, and
prepares us for the coming of the Lord.

3.
But Thirdly: Nihil in bello oportet contomni.
let us not so neglect and slight them, as to let them come up too near us (for
so to neglect an Enemy, is to strengthen him) but let us stand at the Doors,
and repress, and put them back at the first sight, either of their false
glory, or their borrowed Terror; let us turn away our eyes, that they behold
not vanity; periculosum est crebro videre, Nemo diu ^u tus periculo proximus.
Cyp. ep. 61.
per quae aliquando captus sis, a dangerous thing it is, nay, a folly it is to
behold those objects, and look upon them often, which may be a snare unto us,
to dally with the point of that sword, which may enter our Bowels, to sport
with that serpent, which may sting us to death. What should they do long in
the eye? why should they stay so long in the Fancy, till she gild and beautify
them? and set them up as an Idol to worship? no let us watch, and rowse up our
selves, and beat down every Altar, as soon as it is erected there; nay, stay
the Fancy in its work, repress them here in causis, in their beginnings, Take
these Babylonish brats, and dash them against the stones; for he that does not
meet, and withstand an evil in the approach, has fairly invited it, to come
forward, qui morbo non occurrit, sibi manus infert, he that does not use speedy
means to keep back a disease, is as he that kills himself. A A thought begets
Delight, delight begets consent, consent is seen in Action, Action begets
Custom, Custom necessity, necessity Death; it was but an object, but an
apparition, but a Thought at first, and now it is Death; and he that was willing
a Thought should lead in the Front, was willing also that Death should come in
the rear. It is not safe thus to Dally with a Temptation, to resolve not to
act it, and yet to act in the mind, which will soon make the Basis, and
groundwork of a resolution to be afraid of the Action, and yet commit the
sin, to nourish that sin in my bosom, which I am ashamed to be seen with
abroad, which will yet at last break forth before the Sun, and the people, to
harbor that in my closet, which within a while will be on the House top. That
of Bernard is most true, though it be in ryme, non nocet sensus, ubi non est
consensus, the sense hurts not where there is no consent: It is no sin for
the eye to see, or the care to hear, or for the Fancy to set up objects within
her in that shape in which they appear, but it is a hard matter, as Saint
Hierome speaks, integritate mentis abutivoluptatibus, to abuse those pleasures,
which daily present themselves, to a good end; to have them as Aristippus had
his Lais) and not to have them, to live in pleasure, without that delight,
which makes Tentation a sin: we may say of Temptations, as he did of Fortune,
ana est ad illam securitas, non toties illam experirt, The best security we
have against Fortunes fickle inconstancy is, not to make trial of her too
often, not to want her; so of Tentations: It is not good to look too often upon
them when they flatter, not to see too often, not to hear too often, not to
open our eyes or our ears to vanity; For as they who busy themselves in
worldly affairs, when all things succeed prosperously, do begin at last to
doat on Riches, and love them for themselves, which they sought for at first,
but for their necessity; so what we look upon at first, as a common object, by
degrees insinuates, and is made familiar to us, and winnes our affection to it,
delights and overcomes us, and what did at first stand at door, and beg an
entrance, at last enters in, and takes full possession of us, and commands in
chief.

Last of all, let us Consider the Apostle and High Priest of our profession,
CHRIST JESUS, even this Lord who is to come, who has open^d the Treasuries of
Heaven, brough^ own Life and Immortality, displayed his rich, and precious
promises of Heaven, and Everlasting Happiness, all which he will make ours, if
we make good but this one word, but this one syllable, Watch: This is the price
of Heaven; This he dyed for, that we should be a peculiar People unto him, Even
his Watchmen: That as he, for the joy which was set before him, endured the
Cross, despised shame, suffered the Contradictions of sinners, and yet was
yesterday and to Day, Heb. 12.
and the same for ever. So we by his Power, and the efficacy of his Spirit, by
the virtue of his Precepts, and the Glory of his Promises, may establish our
selves, watch over our selves, secure our selves, in the midst of snares, and
so be in the World as out of the world, walk in the midst of Temptations and be
untoucht, walk in the midst of all these Fiery Trials, as the Three Children
did in the Furnace, and have no hurt; Hear the Music of the world, but not
hearken to it, behold its allurements, and not be moved, be one and the same in
all the Changes and variety of Temptations, the same when they flatter, and the
same when they Threaten, which is truly (...), to be like unto our Lord.

And because the watch man watches in vain, unless the Lord keeps the
house; we must call upon this Lord, to watch with us, and to watch over us, who
is not gratiae angustus, as Saint Ambrose speaks, no niggard of his Grace, but
as he has given us a command to watch, so he has given us another, to depend
upon him, Greg Hom. 36.
for assistance, et scimus quia petentes libenter exaudit, quando hoc petitur
largiri quod jubet, and we know it is impossible he should deny us our
requests, when we desire him to grant us that, which he desires we should have;
his help and assistance to do that which he commands; do we desire it? he
wishes it; do we beg it of him? he beseeches us to accept it; we beg his
assistance against the lusts of the flesh; 1 These. 4.3.
he commands us to crucify them; against the pollutions of the world; his will
is our sanctification, against the Devil; if we will, he will tread him under
our feet; he commands us, who is Xistarcus the master of the race; and (...),
the over-seer, and Captain of the watch, by whose power and wisdom, we may keep
back all our enemies. If the Devil suggests evil thoughts, he inspires good; if
the enemy lay hard at us that we may fall his mercy is ready to hold us up; if
we be subtle; our Lord is wisdom it self; in all our trials, in all time of our
tribulation, in all time of our wealth, in the hour of death, and in the day of
judgment, he is our Lord, and his Grace is sufficient for us. If we fail, and
miscarry, it is because we will not join him with us; because we begghis
assistance, and will not have it, call upon him for help, and weary him with
our refusals; be seech him to do that, which we will not suffer him to do,
bespeak him to watch over us, Is. 21.11. If you will enquire, enquire.
and fll fast asleep! If you will repent, repent, says the watchman; Iaf you
would watch, why do ye not? How many years have you worn out in this spiritual
exercise? nay, Vide Castalionis perutilem Tract. de quinque impedimentis bonae
mentis. Job 8.9.
to fall lower, have we devoted two or three months? nay, lower yet, how many
weeks have we spent? a week is not long; but how many days? our days on earth
are but a shadow, but how many hours? and hours we say, have wings, and fly
away; (I am ashamed to ask again) How many minutes has it cost us? our life is
but a span; how much of this span? how little of this little? what a nothing of
this nothing has this great business took up? Job 14.14. Psalm. 119.164 Psalm
55.17. Acts 24.25. Ephe. 6.14.
O that we could say with Job: all the days of my appointed time, or with
David, seven times a day, or were it his morning, his noon, his evening; but I
fear, all is shut up in Foelix his convenient season, that is, when the world,
and our flesh; when our lust and the devil will give us leave, and then, what
faint, feeble breathing? what thin and empty conceptions? nay, what noysom
exhalations? what contradictions? what sins are our prayers.

Let us then call upon him to be present with us, and to assist us in our
watch; but, let us gird up our loins when we call upon him; let us watch and
pray; pray, and watch, let us endeavor, when we pray, and he will help our
endeavors, let us intend what we desire, and he will grant it: let us mean
what we speak, and he will hear us: for he never shuts his ears against his own
words, and his own words are, Ask and you shall have; ask the blessings of the
right hand, or the left, and he will give you them, or that which is better for
you: but if you ask his Grace, his assistance; you are heard, before you speak,
for he is all Grace, all Goodness, all Rays, all beauty, and will fill you
with himself; for his delight is to be in the sons of men, and to make them
like him. Trouble not your selves then with what he will do, or not do, but be
busy in your watch, watch and pray in this your hour; that you may know him,
and be known of him; that at your last day, and hour, you may know, and find
him, what now you believe him to be, your Righteousness, your Lord, your
Savior; haec est hora vestra, this is your hour; this span of time, this
moment is that, on which depends your Eterniy; if in this your hour you watch,
and be ready to go out, and meet him, he will receive you with joy, even
receive you to his table; there to rest, and sit down, and delight your selves
with Abraham, and Isaac, and all the Prophets, and all the Apostles, all the
Martyrs, all your fellow watchmen, and with them to sing praises to this Lord
for evermore.

THE SEVENTEENTH SERMON.
GAL. 1.10. The last part of the Verse. For do I now persuade men or Gods? or
do I seek to please men? For if I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant
of Christ.


WHich words admit a double sense, but not contrary; for the one is virtually
included in the other; as first, If I should yet do as I did, when I was a Jew,
seek to please men, and to gain repute, and honor, and wealth, fit my Doctrine
to their corrupt disposition, I should never have entered into Christ's service,
which sets me up as it were, in opposition to the world, and the counsels of
the world, and so lays me open to scorn, and hatred, to misery, and poverty.

Or more plainly this; If being an Apostle of Christ, I should yet please men;
attemper my Doctrine to their taste and relish, whatsoever I call my self, yet
certainly, I shall in no degree approve my self, to be the servant of Christ.

And in this sense, if you view the form and manner of the words, they are at
the first found, but a mere supposition of S. Paul's; but if we hear them again,
and well observe and consider them, we shall find them to bea satyr, and bitter
reprehension of those false Apostles, who did mingle and confound Christ and
the Law; and all those who shall leave the truth behind them, to meet and
comply with the humors of men; I say, a plain and flat redargution, but
clothed in the Garment and ^abit of a Hyothetical proposition, Nobis non licet
esse sic disertis. It is not for us Latins to be thus elegant; the Latin Poer
speaks it of himself, but indeed lasheth that too much liberty, which the
Greeks assumed to themselves; and si adhuc placerem, if I yet pleased men, is
as a finger pointing out to the false Doctors, who were pleasers of men.

Again, as it is an artisicial reprehension, so if you shall please to look
upon it intentively, you shall find it to be a rale and precept. For as some
commentators on Aristotle have observed, that his rule many times is contained,
and lies hid in the example and instance which he brings; as when he gives you
the instance of a magnificent man, you shall there easily discover the face and
beauty, and full proportion of magnificence, so what Saint Paul, speaking of
himself, lays down as a supposition, is indeed a rule and precept. And this
which has been observed of Aristotle, is the constant method of the holy
Ghost, that which is brought for instance, is a precept, when Josuah speaks of
himself, Josh. 24.15.
I, and my household will serve the Lord, he draws the character of a good
Master of a Family. When Job says; Job. 29.24.
I put on righteousness, and it clothed me, he fitteth a robe for a good
Magistrate; when David says, I watered my Couch with my tears, he has
presented us with the most lively picture of a Penitentiary; my meat is to do
the work of him that sent me, are the words of our Savior in Saint John's
Gospel, John 4.34.
and as they lie, seem to be but a bare Narration, but they are a command, and
speak in effect thus much unto us, that as to him it was, so to us it must be
even meat and drink to do the will of our Father which is in Heaven. And here,
si adhuc placerem, if yet I pleased men, I were not the servant of Christ,
Saint Paul speaks it of himself, but it is a command given to all those, who
have given up their name unto Christ, and every man may make this deduction to
himself, that to please men and serve Christ are (...), are incompatible, and
cannot stand together; that the best way to keep Christ's livery on our backs,
is not so much to be slaves unto men, as to please them.

And then, these three things are wrapped up in this supposition. First, our
Apostles purgation of himself; that he is none. Secondly, a sharp reprehension
of Men-pleasers. Thirdly, a flat command against it.

Or thus: here is something implied, and something plain and positive; that which
is implied is, that most men are willing to be pleased; that which is plain and
positive, is, that there be others, that will be too ready to please them. And
then the parts will be three. 1. We shall discover the humor, the desire of
being pleased, and the danger of it. 2. A humor, which is ready to meet, and
answer this; an art, and readiness of pleasing others, of knowing their taste
and palate, and dishing out their instructions with such sawces which shall
delight them; in making their addresses to them in that shape, and posture,
which they most love to look upon, and are ready to welcome and reward; and
cast off all the Huge distance, and inconsistency which is between these two,
the pleasing of men, and the being a servant of Christ, and of these we shall
speak plainly in their order.

si adhuc placerem; if I yet pleased men etc.

And first we need not doubt, that most men desire to be pleased, and it may
seem a needless labor to go about to prove it, for do but whisper, do but
breath against their humor, and you have made a demonstration, that it is so.
Saint Paul indeed makes it his wonder at the 6. v. miror quod tam cito, I
wonder that you are so soon removed; and we might well wonder at his wonder,
but that his miror carries with it more of reproof then admiration; for the
consideration of this humor, this desire to be pleased takes off our
admiration, and when we have discovered this, we cease to wonder, into a barren
soil, from the Gospel of Christ, which brings salvation, but withal trouble
to the flesh, to another Gospel, which is no Gospel, but excludes both; in a
word, to see men begin in the spirit, and end in the flesh Omnis rei
displicentis etiam opinio reprobatur, says Tert. The very thought of that,
which displeases us, displeases us almost as much as the thing it self; for
indeed it is nothing but thought that troubles us, and it is not the matter or
substance of truth, but opinion, and our private humor which makes truth such
a bitter pill, that we cannot take it down. It was the usual speech of
Alexander the great to his Master Aristotle, Doce me facilia; leave, I pray
you, your knotty and intricate discourses, and teach me those things which are
easy, which the understanding may not labor under; but such as it may receive
with delight: and it is so with us in the study of that art of arts, which
alone can make us both wise and happy, we love not duros Sermones, those hard
and harsh lessons which discipline the flesh, and bring it into subjection, and
demolish those strong holds, which it has set up, and in which it trusts; a
Parasite is more welcome to us, then a Prophet: he is our Apostle, who will
bring those familiar and beloved arguments to persuade us to that, to which we
have persuaded our selves already, and further our motion to that, to which we
are flying; we find almost the parallel in the 30. of Esai. 10. v. of those,
who say to the Seers, see not; loquimini placentia, Prophecy not unto us right
things, but Prophecy deceits, men who had rather be cosen'd with a pleasing
lie, then saved with a frowning and threatening truth, rather be wounded to
death with a kiss, then be rowsed with noise, rather die in a pleasant dream,
then be awaked to see the pit opening her mouth, and even speaking to them to
fly, and save themselves from destruction.

I am appeal to your eye, and tender you that, which your observation must
needs have taken up before, both at home in your selves, and abroad in others;
for he that does but open his eyes, and look into the world; will soon conceive
it as a common stage, where every man treads his measures for approbation, and
applause; where every man acts his part, walks as a Parasite to himself; and
all men one to another: that is, do the same, which the Israelites did after
the molten Calf, Exob. 32.27.
slay every man his brother, and every man his Neighbor, and every man his
Companion, every man being a ready executioner in this kind, and every man
ready, and willing to die. We will therefore in the next place, search this
evil humor, this desire of being pleased, and we shall be the willinger to be
purged of it, if either we consider the causes from which it proceeds, or the
bitter effects, which it produces.

And First: It has no better Original, then Defect, then a wilful, and
negligent failing in those Duties, to which Nature and Religion has obliged
us; a leanness and emptiness of the soul, which not willing to fill it self
with Righteousness, fills it self with Air, with false counsels, and false
attestations, with miserable comforts: In time of necessity, when we have
nothing to eat, we fall too with the Prodigal, and fill our Belly with husks.
The wicked fly when none pursues. Prove. 28.1. fly from themselves to others,
and from others to themselves; chide themselves, and flatter themselves, are
troubled and soon at rest, fly to the Rule, which condemns them, to absolve
them, and suborne one Text, to infringe and overthrow another, as he that has
no good Title, is bold on a false one. Cito nobis placemus; It is a thing soon
done, and it requires no labor nor study to be pleased: we desire it as sick
men do Health, as Prisoners do Liberty, as men on the rack do Ease; for a
troubled spirit is an ill disease; not to have our will is the worst
Imprisonment, his choice, is to put himself upon the rack. Romans 14. the last
verse.
We may see it in our civil affairs, and matters of lesser allay: when any
thing lies upon us as a burden, how willing are we to cast it off? How do we
strive to pluck the sting out of every serpent, that may bite us? how do we
study to work out the venom out of the worst of evils? when we are poor, we
dream of Riches, and make up that, which is not, with that which may be: when
we have no House to hide our heads, we build a Palace in the Air: when we are
sick, This thought turns our bed, That we may recover; and if the Physician
cannot heal us, yet his very name is to us as a promise of Health: we are
unwilling to suffer, but we are willing, nay, desirous to be eased, as Basil
tells us of young men, that when they are alone, or in some solitary place
(...), they feign unto themselves strange Chimeras, suppose themselves Lords
of Countries, and favorites of Kings, and which is yet more, though they know
all this to be but fancy, and a Lie, yet please themselves in it, as if it were
true indeed. Arist Rhetor. 2. c. 14.
We all are like Aristotle's young man (...), full of Hope, and when there is no
Door of hope left, we make one. And so it falls out in the managing of our
spiritual estate, we do as the Apostle exhorts (though not to this end) cast
away every Thing, that presses down, but so cast it away, as to leave it
heavier then before, prefer a momentary ease, which we beg, or borrow, or
force from Things without us, before that Peace, which nothing can bring in,
but that grief, and serious Repentance, which we put off with hands and words,
as as a Thin irksome, and unpleasing; For could we be sick, we might be well;
did not we love our disease, we might shake it off; but we are sick, and will
be so; there is something wanting, and a supply is our shame, being an Argument
of that defect, which we are unwilling to acknowledge, a Physician does but
upbraid us, and selves in our Disease, as in health it self, and had rather
languish and Dye, then be told we are sick.

And this (in the Second place) proceeds even from the force and power of
Conscience within us, which, if we will not hearken to it as a Friend, will
Turn Fury, and pursue and lash us, and if we will not obey her Dictates, will
make her feel her whip. This is our Judge, and our Executioner; It whips the
sluggard, stones the Adulterer, Hangs and quarters the Traitor, blows upon the
misers store, and makes the lips of the Harlot bite like a Cockatrice; whither
shall they go from her spirit, and power? whither shall they fly from her
presence? the Philosopher will tell us, (...), they fly from themselves,
Aristot. l. 9. Eth. c. 4.
yet carry themselves about with them whithersoever they go. Now every thing
that is oppressed, does naturally desire ease, and so do they, and finding it
a laborious thing to quiet the Conscience, which cannot be done but by yielding
and bowing our backs to her whip, and running from our selves, from those
sins, which pleased our sense, but enraged our Conscience; we seek out many
inventions, and advance our sins against her, till they prevail, and even put
her to silence. For in evil men, the worst part does the office of the better,
corrupts the Records, mitigates the sentence, pronounces life in Death: The
sensual part is their Conscience, their God, it bids them do this, and they
do it, and when it is done, is a ready Advocate to plead for it, and defend
it; It conceives and brings forth the Monster, and then gives it what name it
please: It was a crying sin; It has now lost its voice; It was uncleanness,
it is now frailty; It was treason, it is now the love of our Country; It was
perjury, It is now prudence; Riches commend Covetousness, bonor Treason,
pleasure wantonness: That which begets sin, nurseth it up, till it grow up to
strength to oppose it self to Conscience, and degrade, and put her from her
Office, and bring in a Thousand sorry excuses to take her place; in the midst
of which she cannot be heard; not heard against Riches, whose Sophistry is
preferred before her Demonstrations; not heard against Beauty, which bewitches
us, and makes us fools; not heard against Honor, which lifts us up so high,
that we cannot hear her; not heard against Power, which is the greatest
parasite in the world, and calls in a world of Parasites to bow before us, and
bless us in the Name of the Lord; and thus we are first pleased to sin and
then are easily pleased in it; we are in danger, and will not know it, and
when the God of Israel is angry, hear what the God of Ekron will say: In a
word; we raise a storm in our selves, and whistle it down; we wound our
selves, and skinn it over, we are too soon troubled, and too soon eased, and
might recover, were not our remedy more fatal then our Disease.

Thus you see this humor of being pleased is very predominant in most men; and
in the Third place, as it proceeds from the power and force of Conscience,
which will speak if she may be Heard, and does speak, even when she is not
heard, so it does from the luster and Glory of Piety and holiness, which
spreads her Beams, and darts her Light in the very face of them, who have
proscribed her, sent her a Bill of divorce, and put her away, (...), for
goodness is equally venerable to all men, and not only Good men speak well of
her, but her enemies praise her in the gates; who is so evil, that he is
willing to go under that Name? How angry will a Strumpet be, if you call her
so? Call a Pharisee a Hypocrite, and he will thrust you out of the Synagogue.
Though I bow down before an Image, yet I am not an Idolater; though I break
the bonds of Peace, yet I am not factious. Though I never have enough, yet I am
not covetous; I am not evil, though I do those Things, for which we justly
call men so. Our rule here is quite contrary to that known and received Axiom
of the world, Malo me divitem esse, quam haberi; In the managing of our worldly
affairs, we had rather be rich, then be accounted so, but in the course of our
Religion, we are rich enough, we are good enough, if we have but the name that
we are so; we are good enough, if none dare call us evil.

And thus it is both in the Errors of our understanding, and of our will: In
the one we think it better to pretend to knowledge, and rest our selves in
that, then to be taught to alter our mind, malumus didicisse, quam discere,
That we know something already, is our glory, Quintil. l. 3. Instit. 1.
but to submit our selves to Instruction, is an Argument of Imperfection; and
therefore we account it a punishment to be Taught; And this is the reason, why
so few have retracted their Errors, but rather stoutly defended them, even a
loathness to seem to have erred, which mightily reigns in most men but
especially in all pretenders unto knowledge; Nature it self having annexed a
shame unto these two above all other Things, which Naturally befall us, Lust
and Ignorance; for as the Italian Proverb is, A Learned Fool will be a fool
ever.

And so it is in the other; In the practick errors of our life, we would not
know our selves, nor have others know that we have done any thing amiss; qui
apponit scientiam, apponit dolorem, Eccles. 1. last verse.
he that increases Knowledge, increases sorrow: for when the knowledge of the
Truth incites us to follow after it, and the force of Custom draws us back, we
are as it were, at war, and divided in our selves, our motion is unquiet, as
the bounding of a heady Steed, with the bit in his mouth; we are in our own
way, and impatient of a Check; and we hate those Counselors which are willing
to be eyes to us, and lead us out of Danger. Tell a heretic, he is so: He will
Anathematize you. Tell a Schismatic he is so; he will fly from you, as from
the Plague. Tell a persecuter, he is so, and he will rage more, and make it
good upon your self, deny it, and yet make it too manifest, That he is so. For
the will of man loves the channel, which it has chosen, and would run on
smoothly, and evenly without Interruption, but when it meets with any stop, or
bank, it begins to rage and foame, and cast up mire and dirt in their faces,
who do attempt to stop its course, volumus errare, we will err, and he is an
Enemy, that tell us the truth, volumus peccare, we will sin, but he that
tells the Sinner, Thou art the man, shall not be received as a Prophet, but be
defied, as an Adversary: Sin is of a Monstrous appearance, who can stand
before it? and therefore we either cloud and hide it with an excuse, or dress
it up in the mantle of Virtue, in the Habit, and Beauty of Holiness, as Pompey,
to commend the Theater, which he built, called it a Temple.

And these are the causes which beget and nurse up this evil Humor in us;
This desire to be pleased; this unwillingnesse to be Troubled, though it be to
be plucked out of the fire. 1. A defect in our selves, cannot fill up with
righteousness, we do with the shadow of it; Secondly, The Power of Conscience,
which when we cannot quiet, we slumber, and cast into a deep sleep; and lastly:
the Glory and Beauty of Goodness, which forces from us, though not a
Complacency, yet an approbation, and makes them lay claim unto her, who have
violently Thrust her out of doors. He that loves to err, loves not to be told
so; He that is not righteous, will Justify himself, and the worst of men desire
to bear up their Head and Esteem with the best.

Let us now see the danger of this Humor, and the bitter effects it does
produce.
And first, This desire to be pleased places us out of all hope of succor,
leaves us like an Army besieged, when the Enemy has cut off all relief. It is
a curse it self, and carries a train of curses with it; it makes us blind to
our selves, and not fit to make use of other men's eyes; it makes our rain,
powder and dust, Deuteronomy. 28. corrupts all that Counsel and instruction, which as
moisture should make us fruitful, it makes us like to the Idols of the Heathen,
to have eyes and see not, to have ears, and not to hear; living dead men, such
as those to whom the Pythagoreans set up a Sepulchral Pillar; such as Plato
says do (...) sleep in Hell; men made up of contradictions; in health, and
therefore desperately sick; strong and therefore weak, and never more fools, then
when they are most wise; plus quam oportet sapiunt, and plus quam dici potest
desipiunt, says Bernard; they are wiser then they should be, and more deceived
then we can express. Look on the Galatians, in this Epistle, and you shall see
how this humor did bewitch them, and what fools it made them, They had
received the spirit by the hearing of faith, but this spirit did shake and
trouble them, frowned upon that, which they too much inclined to, and therefore
they turn the ear from Saint Paul, and opend it to let in the poison of Aspes,
which the lips of those false Apostles carried under them, and for no other
reason, but because they did (...) C. 6. v. 12. make a fair show in the flesh,
make them put on the form and shape of a Jew, to avoid the fury of the Roman,
who did then tolerate the Jew, but not the Christian, and how many have we now
adays, who do Galatizari, as Tertullians phrase is, who are as foolish as the
Galatians? and make this humor the only rule, by which they frame and measure
out their Religion? who make it as their Mistress, and love it most then when it
is exploded? who will hear to teacher, but that Pharisee, who has made them
his Proselytes? Every man is pleased in his Religion, and that is his Religion,
which pleases him; that he will rely upon, and Anathema to Saint Paul, or any
Angel, that shall preach any other Gospel but that. Our two Tables are not
written with the finger of God, our Religion is not framed in the Mount, but
here below, in the Region of Phantasmes by flesh and blood, which must not be
despleased, but swells against every thing, that does not touch it gently and
flater it, and so makes us like to the beasts that perish, who have no
principle of motion, but their sense; nay, worse then they, for they have no
reason, but we have reason indeed, Seneca.
sed quae suo malo est, atque in perversum solers, but which is made
instrumental against it self, taught to promote that, which it condemns, to
forward that which it forbids, and serves only to make us more unreasonable.

For again, in the second place, this humor, this desire to be pleased does
not make up our defects, but makes them greater; does not make vice a virtue,
but sin more sinful, for he is a villain indeed, that will be a villain, and
yet be thought a Saint; such a one as God will spue out of his mouth. And what
is it to acknowledge no defect, and to be worse and worse? to feign a Paradise
and be in Hell? to have a name that we live, and to be dead? and what content
is that, which is more mortal, then our selves, and will soon end, and end in
weeping and lamentation? Better, far better, were it, that a sword did pass
through our heart; that the hidden things of darkness were brought to light, 1
Cor. 4.5.
and the counsels of our heart made manifest to us, then that it should be dead
as a stone, senseless of its plague; better we were tormented into health, then
t hat we should thus play and smile, and laugh our selves into our graves look
to upon those sons of Anack, those Giantlike sinners against their God, who
have bound up the Law, and sealed up the testimony, which is against them; who
will do what they please, and hear what they please, and nothing else, who deal
with the Scripture as Caligula boasted he would with the Civil Law of the
Romans, Sueton Calig. c. 34.
take care ne quid praeter eos loquitur, that it shall not speak at all, or not
any thing against them; look upon them; I forget my self, for I fear we look
upon them so long, till our eyes dazzle at the sight, and we begin to think,
that is not truth, which these men will not hear; but yet look upon them, not
with an eye of flesh, but that of faith, an Evangelical eye, and it will rather
drop then dazzle; pity then admire them. Oh infaelices, quibus licet peccare,
Oh most unhappy men of the World, who have line and liberty to destroy
themselves, whom God permits to be evil (as in wisdom he may) and then in
justice permits to defend it, whose Chariot wheels he strikes not off, 'till
they are in the Red Sea, whom he suffers, when they would not hearken to his
voice, to be smothered to death with their own power, and the breath and
applause of fools; Oh it is the heaviest judgment in the world not to feel,
and fear a judgment till it come. It may be said perhaps, what in all ages
has been said, and not without mur mur and complaining, Behold these are the
wicked, Psalm. 73.6,7.
yet they prosper in their ways; their pride compasses them about as with a
chain, their violence covers them as with a garment, they feel no pangs, no
throws, have no luctations, no struglings within them: they call themselves the
children of the most High; and what evil can be to him that feels is not? what
is Hell to him that is not sensible? but these are but the Ebullitions, the
breathings of flesh and blood, that sees no more of man, then his face and
garment; for what see thou? a painted Sepulcher, but thou do not see the
rotten bones within; thou see Triumphs and Trophies without, but within are
horror, and setench: thou see the tree of life painted on the gates, open
them, and there is fire and Brimstone, Hell and Damnation; thou hear the
tongue speak proud things, but thou see not the worm, which gnaws within; all
this Music is but a Dirge sung at their Funeral, their joy but an Abortive,
and an untimely Birth begat by pleasure, by power and wealth, a shadow cast
from outward contentments, and when these depart, this joy perishes.

For in the third pleace; This humor, this desire to be pleased, does not take
the whip from Conscience, but enrageth her, lays her asleep to awake with more
terror. For conscience may be seared indeed, but cannot be abolisht, may
sleep, but cannot die, but is as immortal as the soul it self. Conscience
follows our knowledge, and it is mpossible to be ignorant of that, which I
cannot but know; it is not conscience, but our lusts that make the Music; for in
the common and known duties of our lives, conscience does not, cannot mislead
us; whose conscience ever told him, that Murder, or treason were virtuous? but
our lust having conceived and brought forth sin, licks and shapes it to the
best advantage; he that is taken in Adultery, will not say that Adultery is no
sin; but that flesh was weak, and beauty importunate, says Hilary; he that
revenges will look more on the foulness of the injury, then the irregularity,
and exorbitancy of his wrath; he that troubles the peace of Israel will make
necessity his plea, or say, he troubles none but those that trouble Israel, and
thus conscience may be suppressed, but not totally, and for a time, but not for
ever: it may be slumbered by diversion of the mind from trouble some thoughts,
by immersing it in pleasures and delights, by the lullabies of Parasites and
false Prophets, and so be in a manner held down by the weight of the flesh; But
still it is not dead, but sleeps; and then when these are removed, when
pleasure shall turn her back, and worse side, when the false Prophets are dumb,
when the flesh has a thorn in it, will awake as a Giant out of wine, and be
more Active and Clamorous then before, call in thy power, thy honor, subborn
the the pleasures of the world to make thy peace; seek out some cunning Artist,
who can teach what a Philosopher once professed (...) an Art of indolency, a way
to be free from pain and grief; when thy conscience urges one place of
Scripture, do thou answer it with another; when the letter kills, do thou put
life into it with a gloss, and when it puts thee to trouble, do thou strive to
put it to silence, yet conscience will be conscience still, and keep her sting,
and bite and wound thee deeper yet; For to seek remedy against the gnawings of
the conscience, from these outward formalities and flatteries, is to strive to
take away grief with that, which is the cause of it, to destroy it with that
which begets it, to diminish it with that which increases it, and to cure a
wound with poison; what though we have some pause and ease? we can have no
Holy Day, but what we make our selves, and that will make our other days more
black and dismal; for that ease which I forced and gave my self, does but
multiply my pain and leave it to return upon me again with violence and
advantage: nay, our conscience does not stay so long, but many times lays hold
on us in a triumph, in all our state and glory, and in our clearest day will
break through all those Bulwarks which we have set up against her, and sieze
upon us, when we shall say, we shall never be moved, will shake us, when we say
Tush God does not see, will strike through our loins, and when we plead,
conscience will tell us we lie. When we breath nothing but spirit, will
pronounce us most carnal Hypocrites; will be as the finger on the wall, when we
are quaffing in the vessels of the Sanctuary, you will say, but who sees it?
why, the king, the Sacrilegious kind saw it, who was guilty. For who can feel
the sting of another man's conscience? and it is no good argument to say, we do
not see it, and therefore it is not done: for what close offender will publish
the sorrow of his heart? who will tell you what stripes he feels, who is
resolved to cleave fast to that, for which he is beaten? He whose ways tend to
death, when he makes most have, and even feels himself falling in, yet will not
tell you he is going into Hell. And this is the sad condition of all those, who
will, who must be pleased, who will hear nothing that is contrary to them,
that is, nothing that may help them; who are devils to themselves, and help the
Tempter to overthrow them, who never acknowledge a disease til it be incurable,
never see themselves but in Hell, never feel any pain, till it be eternal.

The second Part.
We proceed now to lay forth the other evil humor of pleasing men, which is
more visible and eminent in the Text. And indeed, to desire to be pleased, and
to be ready to please (...) says Isidor Pelusiot, to flatter, and to be
flattered bear that near relation the one to the other, that we never meet them
asunder. It is the Devils net, in which he catches two at once, if there be an
itching ear, you cannot miss, but you shall find a flatering tongue: if the
king of Sicily delight in Geometry, the whole Court shall swarm with
Mathematicians, if Nero be lascivious, his palace shall be turned into a stew
or Brothel-house, Curt. l. 8.
or worse; Non deerit Alexandro talia concupiscenti pernitiosa adulatio, says
Curtius. Alexander that loved to be flattered had Parasites enough. If the
Donatists be factious, there will be a Primianus and a Maximinianus to lead
them, accedit dignum patella operculum, as Saint Hierom applies this proverb to
this very purpose; these dishes that will receive nothing but juncats, shall
find covers to fit them. And if we look into the world, and see how men every
day change with the fashion of the world, alter their notes and turn them to
the times, what Echo's they are, when power speaks; if we turn over those
multitude of Pamphlets, which for the most part are nothing else but the
monuments of men's flattery and base condescendency (for what error yet has
shown so foul a face, as not to find a patron?) If we consider what
mountebanks we have in Divinity, as well as in Physic, who seek not men, but
theirs, and not to cure their souls, but their own poverty, we shall find
reason enough to be jealous, that there has been a kind of conspiracy made to
meet and satisfy this so inordinate and pernicious desire, and to betray the
of truth of Christ to this soul and loathsome humor.

We must enquire then, what it is to please men, and from whence it proceeds,
that men, who naturally love to be (...), to to be eminent above their
Brethren, can work themselves to this Baseness, as to fall down and lick the
dust of their feet, and help them to destroy themselves, to the Ruin of Both;
for both he that makes the Music, and he that hears it, fall together into
the same Hell, to howl forever.

And first, we must not Imagine, That Saint Paul does bring in here a Cynicall
Morosity, or a Nabal-like Churlishness, That none may speak to us, and we
speak nothing but swords, Psalm. 59.6.
That we should make a noise like a Dog, and so go round about the City;
That we should be as Thorns in ou Brethrens sides, ever pricking and gauling
them, That we should, as Appius in Livy, accusatoriam vitam ducere, breath
nothing but railing accusations, nothing but what may strike them with fear,
or cast them down with sorrow, or raise their anger, and Indignation. No, Saint
Paul was now no such rigid and morose Disciplinarian, for now he is an Apostle,
and not a Persecuter, Mane lupus rapax Benjamin ad vesperam dividit escam,
Hieron ad Heliodorum, Epitaph. Nepotiani.
Ananiae ovi submittens caput, He was as Benjamin, of whose tribe he was, a
Ravening Wolf, but now he bows down his head to Ananias, who was a sheep, and
of the flock of Christ, and breaths nothing but meekness. There is not a more
pleasing, more Tractable, more pliable Creature in the world, then a Christian;
If his Brother persecutes him, he is his Beadsman, and prays for him; if he
injure him; he is his Priest, and absolves him; if he err, he is his Angel, to
keep him in all his ways, and bring him back; if he mourn, he puts on
Sackcloath, and if he Rejoice, He is one at the Feast; He appears not to him in
any shape that may disquiet or trouble him, but as Esau did to Jacob, Genesis
33.10. That he may see his face, as if he saw the face of God himself. Read the
10. Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, the last verse, Even I,
says Saint Paul, please all men in all things, not seeking my own profit, out
the profit of many, That they may be saved. (...) I please them, the same word
which is in the Text, and in the Ninth Chapter of the same Epistle, at the 22
Verse, I am made all things to all men, (...); I am made, I even frame and
Fashion, and force my self to it, Though I am free, I make my self a servant,
at the 19. Verse. I undergo all the Humility, the Drudgery, the hardship of a
servant; To the Jew I become a Jew, that I might gain the Jew, and you have an
example of it, Acts 21. verse 23, 24, 25. To those that are under the Law, as
under the Law; to the Gentiles, who were not bound to Mases Law, as a Centile,
to them that were without Law, as without Law, as we find Acts 17.22. a
Christian Proteus, that wrought himself into any shape, which might bring
advantage to them who beheld him; was a Jew to the Jew, to make him a
Christian; to them that were without Law, as without Law, to confirm them in
the Truth of the Gospel, to them that were weak, as weak, to make them strong;
as all Things to all men, not to fill his purse, but to gain their souls, to
cut off Circumcision by permitting Circumcision; to converse with the Gentile,
and passing by to throw down their Altar, by the Inscription; and by the
unknown, bring them to the knowledge of the living God; by being without the
Law, bring the Gentile to the grace of the Gospel, and thus Cedendo vincere, by
seeming to yield to overcome. And this is not the pleasing of a parasite, but
of an Apostle, and careful Father, even that Discretion and Wisdom, which
Quintilian commends in a Schoolmaster, whose Duty it is, non statim onerare
infirmit atem discentium, Quint. l. 1. Inst. c. 3.
sed temperare vires, not presently to over burden the weak capacity of
Noviers, but to Temper and moderate his own strength, and consider not what he
can teach, but what they can learn; with Jacob, to lead his Flock on softly,
lest they Die.

Besides, The Act it self was not unlawful because the Synagogue was indeed
Dead, but not yet buried, but to be buried with Honor, and it was Judaeis
factus tanquam, it was only amongst the Jews; for what himself did amongst the
Jews at Jerusalem, he reproves Saint Peter for doing it amongst the Gentiles at
Antioch. Gal. 2.11,14. Nihil Paulo indignum, quod efficit Deo credere, says
Hilary, That which brings a Jew or Gentile to Christ, may well become Saint
Paul an Apostle of Christ, when we so please men, that we please God also, we
cannot please them enough. But when the Case is otherwise, when the Truth and
Honor of God were in hazard, then Saint Paul is in a manner Saul again, and
breaths forth threatenings and slaughter, He strikes Elymas the Sorcerer Blind;
Delivers up the Incestnous Corinthian to Satan, 1 Cor. 4.21.
and when they were puffed up, was ready with his Goad to let out the wind;
comes toward them in that Imperious strain; What will ye? shall I come unto
you with a rod? which I am sure are not pleasing words, sed quae cum ictu
quodam andiuntur, but such as are Heard with a kind of smart, and leave an
impression behind them; for quam exerta acies macherae spiritualis? as
Tertullian speaks; hownaked and keen is the edge of his Reprehension, In
faciem impingit, he strikes them on the face, in os caedit, he beats them on
the mouth, jam, vero and singulari stylo figit, and sometimes points them out
as a mark, and darts his Reprehension, and strikes it in them; what then would
he do, if he lived now, and saw what we see?

Thus you see, Both these are true; we may please men, and we may not please
them; Ex Deo magia quam in con tumeliam Dei hominibus placendum. Hill. in Psalm.
52.
we must please them, and we must not please men, if we will be the servants of
Christ. For if you please, you may conceive that Relation betwixt God and Man;
which is betwixt our Reason and our sense. Now sin may seem to be nothing
else, but the Flattery of our Sense, because when I break the Law, my will
stoops down to please my sense, and betray my reason; but yet when I please my
sense, I do not always sin: for I may please my sense, and be Temperate; I
may please my eye, and make a Covenant with it; I may please my Taste, and yet
set a knife to my Throat; I may please my sense, and it may be my Health and
Virtue as well as my sin; so in like manner, to please men against God is the
basest slattery, and Saint Paul flings his Dart at it, but to please men in
reference to God, is our Duty, and takes in the greatest part of Christianity;
for thus to please men may be my Allegiance, my Reverence, my meekness, my
Longanimity, my charitable care of my Brother, I may please my superior and
obey him; I may please my obliged Brother, and forgive him; I may please the
poor Lazar, and relieve him; I may please an erring Brother, and convert him,
and in thus doing, I do that, which is pleasing both to God and man.

What then is that, which here St. Paul condemns? Look into the Text, and you
shall see Christ and men, as it were two opposite Terms; If the man be in
Error, I must not please him in his Error; for Christ is Truth; If the man be
in sin, I must not please him, for Christ is Righteousness; And in this case
we must deal with men, as Saint Austin did with his Auditory, when he observed
them negligent in their Duties; we must tell them that, which they are most
unwilling to hear; Quod non vult is facere, Bonum est, says he, That which
you will not do; That which you are afraid of, and run from; That, which with
all my Breath and Labor I cannot procure you to love, That is it which we call
to do good. That which you deride; That which you Turn away the care from
with scorn; That, which you loath as poison, That which you persecute us for;
Quod non vultis audire, verum est: That which you distaste, when you hear, as
gall and Wormwood; That, which you will not Hear, That which you call strange
Doctrine; That is Truth. As Petrarch told his friend; Si prodessevis, scribe,
quod Doleam; Petrarch. l 7. de Re. F c. ult.
If you will profit and Improve me in the ways of Goodness, let your Pen drop
Gall, write something to me, which may trouble and grieve me to read; so when
men stand in opposition to Christ, when men will neither hear his voice, nor
follow him in his ways, but delight themselves in their own, and rest and
please themselves in Error, as in Truth, to awake them out of this pleasant
Dream, we must trouble them, we must thunder to them, we must disquiet and
displease them; for who would give an Opiate Pill to these Lethargiques? To
please men then, is to tell a sick man, that he is well; a weak man, that he is
strong, an erring man, That he is Orthodox; in stead of purging out the noxious
Humor, to nourish and increase it, to smooth and strew the ways of Error with
Roses, that men may walk with case and Delight, and even Dance to their
Destruction; to find out their palate, and to fittit, to envenom that more
which they affect, as Agrippina gave Claudius the Emperor Poison in a Mushrome:
what a seditious Flatterer is in a Commonwealth, that a false Apostle is in
the Church; For as the seditious Flatterer observes and learnes the Temper and
Constitution of the place he lives in, and so frames his speech and Behavior,
that he may seem to settle and establish that, which he studies to overthrow,
to be a Patriot of the Public good, when he is but a Promoter of his private
ends, to be a servant to the Commonwealth, when he is a Traitor; so do all
Seducers and false Teachers; They are as loud for the Truth as the best
Champions she has, but either substract from it, or add to it, or pervert
and corrupt it, that so the Truth it self may help to usher in a lie: when the
Truth it self does not please us, any lie will please us, but then it must
carry with it something of the Truth.

For Instance: To acknowledge Christ, but with the Law, is a dangerous mixture
(It was the Error of the Galatiams here) To magnisy Faith, and shut out Good
Works, is a Dash; That we can do nothing without Grace, is a Truth, but when
we will do nothing to impute it to the want of Grace, is a bold and unjust
addition; To worship God in Spirit and Truth; our Savior commands it, but from
hence to conclude against outward worship, is an injurious Defalcation of a
great part of our Duty. The Truth is corrupted, says Nyssen. (...) Orat. 1.
Cont. Ennom.
To stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, The Apostle
commands it, but to stand so, as to rise up in the Face of the Magistrate, is a
Gloss of Flesh and Blood, and corrupts the Text: Letevery soul be subject to
the higher Powers, That Is the text, but to be subject no longer then the Power
is managed to our will, is a chain to bind Kings with, or a Hammer to bear all
Power down, that we may tread it under our Feet; and when we cannot relish the
text, these mixtures and Additions and Substractions will please us. These hang
as Jewels in our Ears; these please and kill us; beget nothing but a dead
Faith, a graceless life; not Liberty, but Licentiousness, not Devotion, but
Hypocrisy, not Religion, but Rebellion, not Saints, but Hypocrites, Libertines,
and Traitors.

And these we must avoid the rather, because they go hand in hand, as it were
with the truth, and carry it along with them in their Company, Tert. de
Proscript.
as Lewd persons do sometimes a Grave and Sober man, to countenance them in
their sportiveness, and Debauchery. De nostro sunt, sed non nostrae, says
Tertul. They invade that Inheritance which Christ has left his Church; some
furniture, some color, something they borrow from the truth, something they
have of ours, but Ours they are not: And therefore as St. Ambrose advises
Gratian the Emperor, of all Errors in Doctrine, we must beware of those, which
come nearest, and border as it were upon the truth, and so draw it in to help
to defeat it self; Because an open and manifest Error carries in its very
forehead an Argument against it self, and cannot gain admittance, but with a
veil, whereas these Glorious but painted Falsehoods find an easy entrance, and
beg entertainment in the Name of truth it self; This is the Cryptick method,
and subtle Artifice of men-pleasers, that is Mendeceivers, to grant something,
that they may win the more, and that too, in the end, which they grant; not
rudely at first to demolish the truth, but to let it stand, that they may the
more securely raise up, and fix that Error with which it cannot stand long;
Saint Paul saw it well enough, though the Galatians did not; If you be
circumcised, Christ profits you nothing, That is, is to you, as if there were
no Christ at all. For if the false Apostles had flatly denied Christ, the
Galatians would have been as ready, as Saint Paul, to have Cut them off,
because they had received the Gospel; but joining and presenting the Law with
Christ, they did deceive, and please them well, who began in the Spirit, and
did acknowledge him, but would not renounce the Law, propter metum Judaeorunt,
for fear of their Brethren the Jews.

Now these men-pleasers, these Crows, which devour not dead, Dictum Diogenis.
(...), Athen: Deipnos. l. 6. c. 17.
but living men, are from an Evil Egg, and Beginning, are bred and hatched in
the dung, in the love of this world, and are so proud and fond of their
Original, that it is their labor, their Religion, and main design of their
life, to bring the Truth, Religion, and Christ himself in subjection under it,
and to this end are very fruitful to bring forth those misshapen issues, which
savor of the earth and corruption, and have only the name of Christ fastened
to them, as a badge, to commend them, and bring them to that end, for which
they had a being; which is to gain the world, in the Name; but in despite of
Christ.

And these are they, who as Saint Peter speaks, make merchandise of men's souls.
2. Pet. 2.3. nummularii sacerdotes, as Cyprian calls them, Doctors of the Mint,
who love the Image of Caesar more then of God, and had rather see the one in a
piece of Gold, then the other renewed and stamped in a mortal man; and this
Image they carry along with them whither soever they go, and it is as their
Holy Ghost to inspire them; for most of the Doctrines they Teach, savor of
that mint, and the same stamp is on them both; The same face of Mammon which is
in their Heart, is visible also in their Doctrine. H s 4.^.
Thus Hosea complained of the false Prophets in his Time, peccata populi mci
come derunt, They cat up the sin of the People, that is, by pleasing them,
they have consented to their sin, and from hence reaped gain (for flatterry
is a livelihood) or they did not seriously reprehend the sins of the People,
that they might reeive more sacrifices on which they might feed; some render
it, Levabant animum suum ad peccata populi: they lifted up their soul,
anhelabant, they even panted after their sin, desired that they might sin,
that they might make advantage, and so made them evil, to make themselves
Rich. For from hence, from hence, from that for which we cannot find a name,
nor have a Thought bad enough, from a desire to be rich, breaks forth that mark
of a slave, our desire to please; Saint Paul has made a window into their
breasts, that we may see them with the same hand coining their Dectrine and
Money; Romans 16.18.
They that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus, but their own Belly, and by good
words, and f^re Speeches, deceive the Hearts of the simple. Serpents they are
to Deceive, and the Curse of the serpent is upon them, upon their belly they
go, and they eat Dust all the days of their life. For a wonderful Thing it
is to see, how the love of the world will Transform men into any shape,
sometimes to fawn like a Dog, sometimes to rage like a Lion, and then to lurk
like a Fox; how, like the Charity of the Gospel, it makes them to bear all
Things, believe all Things, endure all T hings; Contumelias in quaestn habere,
et injuriis pasci, to count Contumelies gain, and to feed, and feed sweetly on
Injuries, to speak what they do not think, to like what they condemn, to
mortify themselves, to eye, and cringe, and bow, and fall to the ground, which
is a kind of Mortification, more then they will do for Christ, who brings
Poverty, disgrace, and contempt, and has no reward, but that which is laid up
for the future. This brought Plato the great Philosopher a shipboard to sail
to Dionysius his Court, Naz. Or. 3.
and there laid him down at his feet, this made him (...), etc. as Nazianz.
speaks, prefer a Halfe-peny before his goods; This was the evil Spirit in the
mouth of those lying prophers, which did prevail with Ahab to go up, and fall
at Ramoth Gilead. This makes men speak, not with men's Persons, but with their
Fartunes, not with thye sinner, but with the rich and Noble man; and this
Spirit is abroad still, and persuades some into their Graves, and some into
Hell, rayses every storm, and every Tempest; and makes that desolation which
we see upon the Earth. Val. Max. l. 4. c. 3.
We read that Aristippus found Diogenes washing his Herbs and Roots, his daily
food, and in a kind of pity or scorn, told him, That if he would flatter
Dionysius, he need not eat these; nor tie himself to such course fare; but
Diogenes replies like a Philosopher, and returns his saying upon him, Si tu
ista esse velles, Dionysio non adulareris, If thou could content thy self,
and feed on these, thou would never be so base, as to flatter Dionysius.

And certainly, if we could with the Lyrick, be content with Nature for our
purveyour, and look for no supply but from her Hand, Having Food and Raiment,
as Saint Paul speaks, could we be there with content; did we not enlarge our
desires as Hell, and send our hopes afarr off, did we not love the world, and
the things of this world, we should not thus debase, and annihilate our selves,
as being men our selves, to make our selves the shadows of others, in their
morning to rise with them, at their noone and highest, to come up and close
with them, and then at their night, fall out, and leave them in the dark; we
should not mould and fit our best part, to their worst, our Reason to their
lust, nor make our fancy the Elaboratory to work out such Essaies, which may
please and destroy them; we should not foment the Anger of the Revenger to
consume him; nor help the Covetous to bury himself alive, nor the Ambitious to
break his Neck; nor the Schismatic, to rend the Seamlesse coat of Christ, nor
the seditious, to swim to Hell in a River of Blood; but we should bind the
Revengers Hands, break the Misers I dols, bring down the Ambitious to the Dust
make up those rents which Faction has made, and confine the Seditious to his
own sphere and Place; for who would favor or uphold such Monsters as these,
but for pay and salary? In a word, If every man did hate the World, every man
would love his Brother; If every man did keep himself unspotted of the World,
every man would be his Brothers Keeper; when the world pleases us, we are as
willing to please the world, and we make it our stage, and Act our parts; we
call our selves Friends, and are but Parasites; we call our selves Prophets,
and are but Wizards and Juglers, we call our selves Apostles, and are
Seducers, we call our selves Brethren, though it be in Evil, and like
Democritus his Twinns, we live and dye together, we flatter, and are
flattered, we are blind, and leaders of the Blind, and fall together with them
into the Ditch, and bring our Burden after us, we please men to please our
selves, lull them into a pleasant Dream, and our Damnation sleeps not.

You see now what it is to please men, and from whence it proceeds, from whence
it springs, even from that bitter root, the root of all evil, the Love of the
World.

Let us now Behold that huge Distance and Inconsistency, which is between these
two, The pleasing of men, and the service of Christ.

Jf I yet please men, I am not the servant of Christ.

I am thy Servant, Hill. in Loc.
says David, Psalm. 119. Grant me understanding, to know what it is to be thy
Servant. Latet sub familiaribus verbis maxima Fidei and conscientiae professio,
says Hilary, By this familiar word of Servant, we bind our Faith and
Conscience to the will and command, to the beck of him we serve. The servant of
Christ? It is a title too great, too high an Honor for mortal man; too high
for an Emperor, for an Apostle, for an Angel, for a Seraphim; but since he is
pleased to give it, we are bound to make it Good, That every Action and motion,
every thought of ours may be to him; That whether we live, we may live unto
him, whether we die, we may die unto him, That whatsoever we do, we may be
the Lords.

And first; we cannot do both, not serve men, and Christ, no more then you can
draw the same straight line to two points, to touch them both; you cannot,
says Christ, serve God and Mammon. One Master may have many servants, but one
servant cannot have many Masters; Imperium dividi potest, Amor non potest,
Power and command may stretch, and spread, and divide it self to many, but Love
and Observance cannot be carried, and levelled but on one, nor can the mind,
says Quintilian, seriously Intend many things at once, Quocunque respexerit,
desinit intueri quod propositum fuerat, to whatsoever it turns it self, it
turns from that which it first looked upon, and loses one Engagement in
another, because it cannot fit and apply it self to both. How then can one and
the same man bestow himself upon Christ, and upon the world? For it is not with
the will and Affections, as it is with the Intellectual faculty. The
understanding may easily sever one Thing from another, and understand them
both, nay, it has power to abstract, and separate Things really the same, and
consider them in this Difference; but it is the property of the will and
Affections, in unum ferri, and se in unitatem colligere, to collect and unite,
and make it self one with the Object, nor can our Desires be carried to two
contrary Objects at one and the same Time: we may apprehend Christ as
righteous and Holy, and the World and Riches of it, as vanity it self, but we
cannot at once serve Christ as Just, and Holy, and love the World and the
vanities thereof; Our Savior tells us, we shall love the one, and hate the
other, lean to the one, and despise the other; If it be a love to the one, it
will be at best, but a liking of the other; If it a will to the one, it will be
but a velleity to the other; If it be a look on the one, it will be but a
glance on the other; And this liking this velleity, This glance are no better
then disservice, then hatred, and Contempt: For these proceed from the
understanding, but my love from my will, which is fixed, not where I approve,
but where I choose. It Is easy to say, and we say it too often, for the Devil
is ready to suggest it; It Is true: we set our Affections upon things below,
but yet so, That we do not omit the Duties of Divine worship; we are willing
to please men, but we doubt not, but we may please Christ also; we are indeed
Time-servers, but we are frequent Hearers of his Word: we pour Oil into our
Brothers ears, but we drop sometimes a Penny into the Treasury; Thus we please
others, and we please our selves, we betray others, and are our own Parasites,
but Christ is ready to seal up our lips with an (...), Matthew. 6.24.
No man can serve two Masters. So that you see what a weak Foundation that Hope
has, which is thus built up upon a Divided love and service, it is built in
the Air, nay, it has not so sure a Basis, it is built upon nothing; It is
raised upon Impossibility.

Secondly: The Servant must have his eye upon his Master, and as he sees him
do, must do likewise: Now Christ is called Gods Servant, Isai. 62.10. and he
broke through Poverty, Disgrace, and the Terrors of Death it self, that he
might do his Fathers will; Omitted no tittle or lota of it, but he that would
not break a bruised reed, shook the Cedars of Libanus, pronounced as many woes
to the Pharisees, as they had sins, calls Herod Fox, plucks off every visor,
plowes up every Conscience, and thus shook the Powers of Hell, and Destroyed
the Kingdom of Satan; for he came not to do his own, but his Fathers will.
Look upon his Acts of mercy; even them he did not to please men; non habent
divina adulationem, Hill. de Trin. l. 2.
says Hilary, His divine works, his works of Love and Compassion had Nothing
of Flattery in them: He did them not as seeking his own Glory; for he had a
Quire of Angels to chant his praise; he did them not to flatter men; for he
needed not that which is ours; for the world was his, and all that therein is.
Power cannot flatter, and Mercy is so intent on its work, that it thinks of
nothing else; to work wonders, to please men, were the greatest wonder of all;
And thus should we look upon him, and Teach our brethren, as he wrought
miracles; not for praise, which may make us worse; not for Riches, which may
make us poorer then we were; but beseech them in Christ's stead, and in the
Person of Christ, and speak like him in whose mouth there was neither flattery
nor guile; speak the Truth, though it displease, speak the Truth, though the
Heathen Rage, and the People imagine a vain Thing; speak the Truth, though,
for ought we know, it may be the last word we speak; speak the Truth, though
it nail us to the Cross; where we shall most resemble him with this Title,
The servant of Christ, as his was, The King of the Jews. He that takes Nothing
but his Name, serves the world, he that flatters, when he bids him rebuke, and
pleases others when they displease Christ, is not his servant, but his enemy,
but one of those many Antichrists; or if his Servant, such a servant, as Peter
was, when he denied him, as Judas, when he betrayed him; and he will take it
for more disservice to betray him in his Members, then in his Person, and is
troubled more at the sight of those wounds which are made in his Mystical
Body, then he was at those which were made in his flesh; for he willingly
suffered the pains of Death, that they might not die; Himself was lead to
Death, as a sleep to the flaughter, and opened not his mouth, but when he saw
havoc made of his Church; he cried out, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?
and in this, every false Teacher is worse then Peter, when he was at the worst,
every flatterer is worse then Judas; every Seducer is worse then the Jews,
when they nayl'd him to the Cross.

For lastly, Servus pro nullo est.
A servant is nothing, is no person in Law, has no power of his own, servitus
morti aequiparatur, say the Civilians, a servant is as a Dead man, and cannot
Act nor move of himself, but is Actuated as it were, by the Power and command
of his Lord and Master, and never goes, but when he says go, never Does, but
what he bids him do, and does not interpret, but execute his Will. Non oportet
villicum plus sapere, quam Dominum, says Columella; It is a most unfit, and
disadvantageous thing for the Farmer or Husbandman to be wiser then his Lord;
For when the Lord commands one thing, and the servant thinks it fitter to do
another, the crop and harvest will be but Thin; and it is so in our spiritual
Husbandry; It savours of too much boldness and presumption, for the servant to
be wiser then his Master, and there will be but small increase, when the Master
calls for the whip, and the servant brings the merry Harp and the Lute, when he
calls for a Talent to reckon but a mite, and when he writes a Hundred, to take
the Bill, and set down Fifty. It is the greatest folly in the World to be thus
wise, when wisdom it self prescribes; when he condemns the love of the
World, to put in Immoderate, and yet keep no moderation in our Love; when he
forbids us to be Angry, to lay hold of that without a cause; and yet suffer,
every breath to raise a Tempest in us: when he says, swear not all, to
persuade men to swear, and swear again, though it be against a former Oath;
when he bids us pray for our Enemies, to be so bold, as to curse our Friends
and our Brethren. It is a great and dangerous folly, thus to trifle with our
Master, and delude his Precepts; and what do we with these Distinctions, and
limitations, and mittigations, but shake Christ's Livery off from our backs? and
Thrust our selves out of his service? and then Tell me whose servants are we?
Quot nascuntur Domini? For this one Master, whose service we have cast off,
how many Masters and Tyrants do we serve? servants to the Flesh, to fulfill
the lusts thereof; servants to Covetousness, which sets us with the Gibeonites
to be hewers of wood, and diggers of water, condemns us to the Mines, and
Brick-kiln; servants to Ambition, which will carry thee from step to step, from
degree to degree, till thou break thy neck; servants to pleasure, which like
the Egyptian Thieves, will Embrace and strangle thee; and Servants to other
men; would that were all; nay, but to other men's wills and Lusts, which change
as the wind, now embracing, anon loathing, now ready to join with that, which
in the twinkling of an eye they fly from; et quot rascuntur Domini? How many
Masters must thou serve in one man? servants to their Lusts, which are as
unsatiable as the Grave; servants unto Error, which is blind; and to sin,
which is Darkness it self, even mancipia Satanae, the bondslaves of Satan, with
Canaans curse upon us, Genesis 9. A servant of servants shall he be. Non sum
servus Christi, I am not the servant of Christ, is Anathema Maran-atha, the
bitterest Curse that is.

For Conclusion then, Let them who are set apart to lead others in the ways of
Truth and Righteousness, take heed they lead them not in the ways of Cain, and
take from them their spiritual, as he did from his Brother his Temporal life.
Let them who subscribe themselves Your servants in Christ; (In every Epistle
thus they write) be careful to make it good, That their Epistle prove not a
Complement, and their subscription, a lie. Let them who do (...), fit their
conversation and Doctrine to the Times, and so make them worse; who force the
word of God, (...), to speak in favor of Philip, or any great Potentate,
Athen. Deipn. l. 12. (...). Scire uti Forc.
as he was; let them who make it (...), a buskin to be pulled on, and fit any
design, any enterprise, let them remember what they are called, and they call
themselves the servants of Christ, of that Christ, who will one day call them
to an Account, and require the blood of those, who are under their charge, at
their Hands; who shall call upon them as Augustus Caesar did upon Quinctilius
Varus; Quinctili Vare, read legiones. Give an account of your stewardship,
where are the Legions; those souls which I committed to your hands? The souls
of them you betrayed to the world; and left them Mammonists; the souls of them
you betrayed to Pride, and made them Factious; The souls of them you betrayed
to discontent, and made them seditious? the souls of them you betrayed to
cruelty, and made them Murderers? Their blood will be upon you, and verily it
shall be required of this Generation.

And let them who are Taught, remember, They are hought with a price, and are
the servants of Christ, and cleave fast to him, and not to be drove from him
with every wind of Doctrine, not to Judge of the Doctrine by the person, but to
judge of the person by his Doctrine; for in Christianity says Saint Hierom,
Non multum differt decipere, and decipi, there is no great difference between
these two, To take a cheat, or to offer one; for both are deceived, and both
perish; The one comes with a veil, the other is willing to draw it over his
face, The one puts out his eyes, and the other is willing to be blind, and both
rejoice at the work, both cry, so so, Thus we would have it. When we see so
many, so diffident in all things, but that which should fit them for
happiness, taking nothing upon Trust, but the Doctrines of men: when we shall
see them have men's persons in Admiration, and their eyes dazzle at every
Mushrome in Divinity, that grows up in a Night; when we shall see them Debauch
their reason, and deliver up their understandings and wills to a Face, to a
voice, to the Gesture, and Behavior, and sleight of men, when every empty
cloud that comes toward them shall be taken for heaven, and he that speaks not
so much reason as Balaams Ass, shall be received for a Prophet; when men are
so inclined, so ready, so ambitious to be deceived, we need not wonder to see
so many Blind Bartimeus's in our streets, that Grope at noonday, and stumble
at every straw, That blindness is happened to Israel, That Truth is become a
Monster, and error a Saint, we need not wonder that the Pharisees have more
Disciples then Christ. Men and Brethren, what should I say? why should you
desire to be pleased? if we thus please you, we damn you: why should we study
to please you? if we study to please you, we damn our selves. It Is not your
Favor, your Applause which we affect, we know well enough, out of what
Treasury those winds come, and how uncertainly they blow; one applause of
Conscience is worth all the Triumphs in the World. Bring then the Balance of
the Sanctuary, The Touchstone of the Scripture; If our Doctrine be not minus
Habens, be not light, but full weight; If it be not Refuse Silver, but current
Coin, and bear no other Image, but of the King of Kings, even for the Truths
sake, for our common Masters sake, whose servants we are, lay aside all malice,
and guile, and Hypocrisy, and receive it, That you may grow thereby; but if
nothing yet be Truth, which does not please you, then what shall we say? but
even tell you another Truth, vero verius, most true it is, you will not hear
the Truth.

And therefore in the last place; Heb. 10 14. Ephesians. 4.
Let us all, both Teachers and Hearers, purge out this evil Humor of
pleasing, and being pleased, and let us, as the Apostle exhorts, Consider one
another, to provoke unto love, and Good works; Let us speak Truth, every one to
his Neighbor; For we are members one of another. This is the true and surest
Method of pleasing one another; for Flattery, like the Be, carries Honey in
its mouth, but has a sting in its Tail; but Truth is sharp and bitter at
first, but at last more pleasant then Manna; He that would seal up thy lips
for the Truth, which thou speakst, will at last kiss those lips, and Bless
God in the Day of his Visitation. And this if we do, we shall please one
another (...), to Edification, and not unto ruin; And thus all shall be
pleased, the Physician, that he has his Intent, and the Patient in his Health,
The strong shall be pleased in the weak, and the weak in the strong, The wise
in the Ignorant, and the Ignorant in the wise, and Christ shall be well pleased
to see Brethren thus walk together in Unity, strengthening and inciting one
another in the ways of Righteousness, and when we have thus walked hand in
hand together to our journeys End, shall admit us into his presence, where
there is fullness of joy and pleasures for evermore.

blazon or royal coat of arms of England and Wales HONI ^T QVI MAL Y PENSE

THE EIGHTEENTH SERMON. BEING A PREPARATION TO THE HOLY COMMUNION.
1 COR. 11.25. This do ye, as often as you drink it, in remembrance of me.


THat which is made to degenerate from its first institution, is so much the
worse, by how much the better it would have been, if it had been levelled and
carried on to that end for which it was ordained: the truth of which is plain
and visible, as in many others, so in this great business of the
Administration of the Lords Supper, which in its right and proper use might
have been as physic to purge, and as manna to feed the soul to eternal life;
but being either raised higher, or brought lower than it self, either made more
than it is, or less than it is; either made miraculous or nothing, has become
fatal and destructive, and has left most men guilty of the Body and Blood of
the Lord. For some we see, have quite changed and perverted the Ordinance of
Christ, scarce left any shadow or sign of its first institution; have made of a
Supper for the living a Sacrifice for the dead, turned the Minister into a
sacrificing Priest, Bread and Wine into very Flesh and Blood, and Bones; the
remembrance of Christ's Death into the adoration of the outward Elements; have
written books, filled many volumes in setting out the miraculous virtue it
has, of which we may say as Pliny did of the writings of those magical
Physicians, that they have been published non sine contemptu and irrisu generis
humani, not without a kind of contempt, and in derision of all the world, as if
there breathed not in it any, but such who were either so brutish as not to
know, or such fools as to believe whatsoever fell from the pen of such idle
dreamers. Others have fell short, have been more coldly affected, and have lost
themselves in a strange indifferency, as not fully resolved whether it be an
institution that binds or no; and look upon it rather as an invention of man,
than the word and command of Christ. Others run far enough from Superstition,
as they think, and are great enemies to Popery, and yet unawares carry a Pope
with them in their belly, lean too much to the opus operatum, to the bare
outward action, think what they will not say, that if they come to the Feast,
it is not much material what garment they come in, that the outward elements
are of virtue to sanctify the Profaner himself; that though they have been
haters of God, yet they may come to his Table; though they have crucified
Christ, yet here they may taste and see how gracious he is. These extremes have
men run upon, whilst they did neglect the plain and easy rule by which they
were to walk; the one upon the rock of Superstition, the other, as it falls out
most commonly, not only from the error which they were afraid of, but from
the truth it self, which should be set up in its place; we see at the first
institution almost, and when this blessed Table was as it were first spread,
that many abuses crept in to poison the feast, some by factiousnesse, others by
partiality, and some by drunkenness, v. 21. profaned it, did come and sit
down, and eat and drink, but to their punishment and damnation, says S. Paul:
and therefore having laid open their gross errors and prophanations, having
set their irregularities in order before them, he prescribes the remedy, and
calls them back to the first institution, and the example of Christ himself, v.
23, 24. First he shows the manner of Christ's institution, He took the bread,
and gave thanks, brake it, and gave it them: Secondly, The mystery signified
thereby: The breaking of the Bread, and pouring out of the Wine, representing
the brusing of his Body, and shedding of his Blood for the remission of sins;
and last of all, the end of this institution, and of this celebration of the
Lords Supper, in the words of my Text; This do, as often as you do it, in
remembrance of me.

Which words I read to you as S. Paul's, but indeed they are Christ's, delivered
by him, and received from Christ, as he tells us, v. 23. In which you may
behold his love streaming forth, as his blood did on the Cross; for not
content once to dye for us, he will appear unto us as a crucified Savior to
the end of the world, and calls upon us to look upon him and remember him, whom
our sins have pierced; presents himself unto us in these outward elements of
Bread and Wine, and in the breaking of the one, and pouring out of the other is
evidently set forth before our eyes, and even crucified amongst us, as S. Paul
speaks, Gal. 3.1. thus condescending and applying himself to our infirmities,
that he may heal us of our sins, and make and keep us a peculiar people to
himself.

And since the words are his, we must in the first place, look up and hearken
to him who breaths forth this love; secondly, consider what task his love has
set us, what we are to do; thirdly, ex praescripto agere, since it is an
injunction, whose every accent is love, do it after that form which he has
set down, after the manner which he has prescribed: So the parts are four;
First, the Author of the Institution: Secondly, the duty enjoined, to do this:
Thirdly, to do it often: Lastly, the end of the Institution, or the manner how
we must do it; we must do it in remembrance of him, i.e. of all those benefits,
and graces, and promises which flowed with his blood from his very heart, which
was sick with love; and with these we shall exercise your Christian devotion at
this time.

And first, we must look upon the Author of the Institution; for in every
action we do, it is good to know by what authority we do it; and this is the
very order of nature, says S. Austin, Aug. l. 1. de Morib. Eccl. c. 2.
ut rationem praecedat autoritas, that Authority should go before and have the
pre-eminence of Reason, that where Reason is weak, Authority may come in as a
supply to strengthen and settle it. For what can Reason see in Bread and Wine
to quicken or raise a soul? what is Bread to a wounded spirit, or Wine to a
sick soul? 1 Cor. 8.8.
For neither if we eat are we the better, the more accepted, nor if we eat not,
are we the worse, says S. Paul: It Is true, the outward elements are
indifferent in themselves, but authority changes, and even transelements them,
gives them virtue and efficacy, a commanding power, even the force of a Law. He
that put virtue into the clay and spittle to cure a bodily eye, may do the same
to bread and wine to heal our spiritual blindness; he that made them a staff to
our body, may make them also a prop to our souls, when they droop and sink; and
then if he say, this do ye, though our reason should be at a stand, and boggle
at it, as at a thing which holds no proportion with a soul, yet we must do it,
because he says it. It may be said, Is not his word sufficient, which is able
to save our souls? is it not enough for me to beat down my body, to pour forth
my prayers, to crucify my flesh? No: nothing is sufficient but what the
authority of Christ has made so; nescit judicare, quisquis didicit perfect
obedire is true in matters of this nature; we have no judgment of our own, our
wisdom is to obey, and let him alone to judge what is fit, who alone has
power to command. Authority must not be disputed with, nor can it hear why
should I do this? for such a question denies it to be authority; if it were
possible that God, to try our obedience, should bid us sow the rocks, or water
a dry stick, or teach a language which we do not know (as the Jesuits do their
Novices) a necessity would lie upon us, and woe unto us, if we did it not; how
much rather then should we obey, when he commands for our advantage; gives us a
law, that he may give us more grace, binds us to that which will raise us
nearer to him; when he spreads his table, prepares his viands, bids us eat and
drink, and then says grace; bids a blessing himself unto it, that we may grow
up in his Favor, and be placed amongst those great examples of eternal
happiness?

Look not then on the Minister howsoever qualified, for a brass seal makes the
same impression which a ring of Gold does, and it is not material whether the
seal be of baser or purer metal, so the image and character be authentic,
says Nazianz. Look not on the outward elements, for of themselves they have no
power at all, no more than the water of Jordan had to cure a Leper, but their
power and virtue is from above; the force and virtue of a Sacrament lies in the
institution, all the power it has is from the Author. Before it was but Bread,
but common Bread, now it is Manna, the bread of strength, the bread of Angels;
and this truth thou may build upon, nor does the Church of Rome deny it; and
though they have added five Sacraments, and may add as many more as they
please, Quicquid arant homines, navigant, aedificant, any thing we do may be
made a Sacrament (when the fancy is working she may spin out what she please)
yet they cannot deny that every Sacrament must have immediate institution from
Christ himself, from his own mouth, or else it is of no validity, and therefore
are forced to pretend it, though they cannot prove it, in those which
themselves have added for their own advantage. Think then when thou hear
these words, Take, eat, this is my body which was broken, thou hear thy
Savior himself speaking from heaven; think not of the Minister, or the
meannesse of the Elements, but think of him who took thee out of thy blood, and
sanctified thee with his, and by the same power is able to sanctify these
outward Elements, by the virtue of whose institution, The cup of blessing,
which we bless, which he blessed first, shall be to every one that comes
worthily, the Communion of the Blood, and the Bread which we break, which he
first brake, the Communion of the Body of Christ, 1 Cor. 10.16. And thus much
of the Author.

Let us now consider what he enjoins us to do; and the command is to do this,
that is, to do as he did, though to another end, to take Bread, and to give
Thanks, and eat it, and so of the Cup, to take and drink it; and if this be
done with an eye to the Author, and a lively faith in him, this is all (for
this table was spread not for the dead, but for the living) this, I say, is
all: but some have stretched this word beyond its proper and natural
signification; others, and that a multitude, do rest under the shadow of the
word, content themselves in the outward action, do do it and no more, which
indeed is not to do it. For though this word to do be not of so large a
signification as the Church of Rome has drawn it out in, that they might build
an Altar, and offer up Christ again, which they say is to remember him, yet is
it not so scant and narrow as ignorance and profaneness make it; verba non
sono, sed sensu sapiunt, says Hilary, Hilar. advers. Constable. Aug.
we must not tie our selves to the sound, but lay hold on the sense of the
words; and this word to do, though it be less than the little cloud in the
book of the Kings, nothing near so big as a man's hand, yet if it be
interpreted, it will spread and be as large as heaven it self, and contains
within its sphere and compass all those stars, those graces and virtues
which will entitle us to bliss, by fitting and qualifying of us to do it; for
indeed, non fit quod non fit legitime, that is not done which is not done as it
should be; those duties in Scripture which are shut up in a word, are of a
large and diffusive interpretation; when God bids us hear, he bids us obey;
when he bids us believe, he bids us love; when he awakes our understanding, he
commands our hand; when he bids us do this, he bids us perfect our work; for
hearing is not hearing without obedience; faith is dead, if it work not by
charity; and knowledge is but a dream, without practice; and we do not that,
which we do not as we should. To do this then is not barely to take the Bread
and eat it; this Judas himself might do, this he does, that does it to his own
damnation; and therefore though it be not now common Bread, and common Wine,
but consecrated and set apart for this holy use, yet we must be careful that we
attribute no more unto them, than Christ the author does; we must not suffer
our eyes to dazzle at the outward Elements, nor must we rest in the outward
action; for this were in a manner to transubstantiate the elements, and bring
the body and blood of Christ into them, which nothing can do but faith and
repentance; this were to make the very action of receiving it, opus
privilegiatum, as Gerson speaks, to give it a greater prerogative than was ever
granted out of the court of heaven. This were to rest in the means as in the
end, and at once to magnify and profane it; This were to take it as our first
parents did the Apple, That our eyes may be opened, and then to see nothing but
our own shame; this were to eat, and to be damned.

But this we shall not need to insist upon, for it is sufficient to point out
to it, as to a thing to be done, and that we may do it besides the Authority,
and command, and love of the Author, we have all those Motives and inducements
which use to stir us up and incite us unto action, even then when our hands are
folded, and we are unwilling to move. As, 1. the fitness and applyablenesse of
it to our present condition, 2. the profit and advantage it may bring, 3. the
pleasure and delight it carries along with it, 4. the necessity of it, which
are as so many allurements and invitations, as so many winds to drive us on,
and make us fly to it as the Doves to their windows.

And 1. it fitteth and complyeth, as it were, with our present condition,
blanditur nostrae infirmitati, and even flatters, and comforts, and rowzeth up
our weakness and infirmity; as our Savior speaks upon another occasion, This
voice, this institution came for our sake: we walk by faith, 2 Cor. 5.7.
says the Apostle, and hoc est nostrae insirmitatis, says the Father, and
this is a sign and an Argument of humane Infirmity, that we walk by faith;
that God can come no nearer to us, nor we to him; that we see him only with
that eye, which when it is clearest, sees him but as in a glass, darkly. And
therefore as God sent Adam into the world, and gave him adjutorium simile sibi,
a help convenient and meet for him, Genesis 2. so does he place us in his Church,
and affords us many helps meet for us, and attempered to our frailty and humaue
Infirmity: He speaks to our Ear, and he speaks to our eye, he speaks in
Thunder, and he speaks in a still voice; he passes his promise, and seals, and
confirms it; he preaches to us by his word, and he preaches to us by these
Ocular sermons, by visible Elements, by water to purge us, and by Bread and
Wine to strengthen us in his grace, and omits nothing that is meet and
convenient for us. When God told the people of Israel, that he would no longer
go before them himself, he withal tells them, he would send his Angel, which
should sead them; and when we are not capable of a nearer approach, he sends
his Angels, his words, his Apostles, his Sacraments, which like those
ministering spirits minister for them who are heirs of Salvation; and not
content with the general declaration of his mind, he adds unto it certain
seals and external signs, that we may even see, and handle, and taste the
word of life; and as it was said by Laban and Jacob, when they made a Covenant,
Genesis 31.48.
this stone shall be witness between us: so God does say to thy soul by these
outward Elements, This Covenant have I made with thee, and this that thou
see, shall witness between thee and me. Do thou look upon it, and bring a
bleeding renewed heart with thee, and then Do this, and I will look upon it as
upon the Rainbow, and remember my Covenant, which was made in the blood of my
Son: I thus frame and apply my self to thee in things familiar to thy sight,
that thou may draw nearer and nearer to that light, which now thy mortal
eye, thy frailty and infirmity cannot attain to. And shall we not meet and
embrace that help which is so fitted and proportioned to us?

Secondly, profit is a lure, and calls all men after it, and if you ask with
the Apostle, (...); what profit is there? we may answer with him; much every
manner of way: For what is profit but the improvement of our estate, the
bettering of our condition? as in the increase of Jacobs Cattle, the doubling
of Jobs sheep, as when David's sheep-hook was changed into a Scepter, here was
improvement and advantage: And this we find in our spiritual addresses, in our
reverent access to this Table, a great improvement, in some thirty, in some
sixty, in some an hundred fold; a will intended, a love exalted, our hope
increased, our faith quickened, more earnestly looking on God, more
compassionately on our Brethren; more light in our understanding, more heat in
our affections, more constancy in our Patience; every vicious inclination
weakened, every virtue rooted and established; what is but brass it refines into
Gold, raises the man, the Earthy man to the participation of a Divine nature.
And shall we not be covetous of that which is so profitable and advantageous?

Thirdly, Pleasure is attractiue, is eloquent, and pleads for admittance; who
will not do that, which brings so much delight and pleasure when it is done?
and here in this action of worthy receiving it is, not that short, transitory
Meteor, the flattery and titillation of the outward man, but that new heaven,
which reason and Religion create in the mind, the joy of harvest as the Prophet
speaks, for here we reap in joy, what we sowed in tears; the joy and triumph
of a Conqueror, for here we tread down our enemy under our feet; the joy of a
prisoner set at liberty, for this is our Jubilee. And such a joy the blood of
Christ, if it be tasted and well digested, must necessarily bring forth, a
pure, refined, spiritual, heavenly joy; 1 Pet. 1.7.
precious blood says Saint Peter, and not to be shed for a trifle, for that
joy which is no better then madness: and the blood of an Immaculate Lamb, and
not to be poured forth for a stained, wavering, fugitive joy, for a joy as full
of pollution, as the world and the flesh, from whence it sprung; bring but a
true taste with thee, a soul purged from those vicious humors which vitiate
and corrupt it, and here is not only Bread and Wine, but living bread, bread
that puts gladness into the heart, more then Corn and Wine can, Psalm 4.
Here is Christ, here is joy, here is heaven it self. And shall we not do that,
which fills the heart with so much joy in the doing it? shall we not take and
eat that, which is so pleasant to the taste?

Last of all, it is not only convenient, pleasant, and profitable, but it is
necessary to do it: for if this Sacrament could have been well spared, that
men might have well kept the law of the inward man without it; our Lord who
came to beat down all the Rites and Ceremonies of the law would not have raised
up this; but he knew it necessary, and therefore left it upon record, as
binding as a law, and for ought we find, nay (without all doubt) did never
recall or dispense with it. Do this is plain, and do it often is plain enough,
but do it not, or do it seldom is never read; but he calls, and commands us to
his table, to feed on the body and blood of Christ, and in the strength of it
to walk before him and be perfect; that when our souls be run to decay, when
good habits are weakened, and the graces of God discolored and darkened in us,
when our knees are enfeebled, and our hands hang down; when our faculties begin
to shrink, and be parched, as with the drought of summer, we may come to this
fountain and fill our cisternes, and recover our former strength and beauty.
Our fault it is and a great one, to be ever enquiring what binds, and what is
necessary, and if necessity drive us not, like dull beasts we will not mend our
pace, and are more led by Omri's statutes, by humane laws, then Christ's
institution; when, if we rightly weigh it, whatsoever is convenient for us,
whatsoever may be advantageous to us in the service of our Lord, should be as
powerful with us, as if it came under the imperial form of a Law; and what
is convenient, and fitted to us in such a case, is also necessary for us in the
same condition; necessary I say, if a more violent necessity come not to cross
and hinder it: for when nothing is wanting, but a will; then a necessity lies
upon us, and woe unto us, if we do it not. So now you have them all four; and
to conclude this, if these will not quicken and move us to come, we are dead in
sin, and have lost our taste: Will convenience move us? (we talk much of it)
here it is a duty fitted and proportioned to our present condition: Will profit
move us? and whom does not profit add a wing to? lo here it is in this duty,
the due performance of which repayes all our cost and pain with interest. Will
pleasure move us? and whom does not pleasure transport? here is joy, here is
paradise, here is pleasure, and there is none but it. Last of all, will
necessity move us? it is said that will drive us, and if the rest be but gentle
gales, this is as a whirlewind; behold here is necessity, a duty as necessary
as our own wants, and the authority of our High Priest and King can make it,
who has not only commanded us to do it, but to do it often, which now offers
it self to our consideration.

As often as you do it, implies a doing it often; (...) includes a (...), and
does not leave it at large to our will and pleasure, as an arbitrary thing, to
be taken up when our discretion shall appoint the time. I will not be so bold
as to prescribe how often, nor is it necessary to be determined; every man's
want and necessity in this should be a law unto him, and as often as he finds his
soul to droop and faint, here he is to refresh it; as often as he feels the
inward man to decay, here to repair it; as often as he sees the temple of the
holy Ghost to gather dust and filth, here to sweep and purge it; when his faith
begins to fail, here to confirm and strengthen it: If we come like rude and
unmannerly guests, once is too often; but if we purge and cleanse our hearts,
if our stomachs be clean, if we come prepared for the feast, often we may come,
but we cannot come too often. Sic vive, says Saint Ambrose, ut quotidie
mereare accipere; Si quotidianus est cibus, cur post annum sumis? Amb. l. 6. de
Sacram. c. 4. Cypr. ep. 54. and 69.
so pass every day of thy life, that thou may be fit to do it every day: I
will not urge nor bind you to the practice of the first Christians, who
received every day, because in time of persecution, as children appointed to
dye, they looked upon every day as their last; although Saint Cyprian will tell
us they did it also in times of peace, and Saint Austin calls it Quotidianum
ministerium Dominici corporis, Augustine. ep. 180.
a daily office and ministry. The truth is, the Sacrament is fit for every
day, but we are not every day fit for it, and in this different variety of
circumstances of time, and the dispositions and qualifications of men, every
man must be his own judge and lawgiver, and yet the royal law binds him to be
fit every day. A great shame it is, that any man should be dragged to a feast;
for what a strange law would that seem, which should bind a hungry man to eat,
or a sick man to take physic, or a dying man to taste of the water of life?
look upon the Primitive Christians (whose practice has bin accounted the best
interpreter of Scripture) and if thou can not with them do it every day, yet
let every fair opportunity set thy day. Christ's dead yet all quickening carkase
is the same still, and we should be Eagles, as well as they, to fly to it. The
Blood of Christ is the same, his death as full of virtue and efficacy; he is
still a fountain of life to them who will taste him, nor was his most precious
blood shed for the first Christians, and in tract and continuance of time dried
up at last. At this fountain we may draw as well, and as often as they, if our
pitcher be as fit; and if we loved the cup of blessings, we should not fear how
often it came into our hands. But to speak truth, we have degenerated from that
devotion, that love, that zeal, which inflamed their breasts, and retain
nothing but the memory of their exceeding piety, which we look upon rather as a
pious error, then a just and regular devotion; and because we are unfit, and
therefore unwilling to do it, persuade our selves, that superstition had an
early birth, and did follow religion at the heels, to supplant it; that by this
their busy, and too frequent remembrance of Christ, they did rather flatter
then worship him, or at best, that they did that, which with more Christian
prudence they might have left undone; For if it were devotion then, it could
not be lost in the body and flux of time, which could have no such influence
upon it, as to change it so, that it should become a sin in the last age, which
was thought a duty in the first; since devotion is like Christ himself,
yesterday and to day, and the same for ever. Devotion is still the same, but we
are not the same, but have been bold with her name, and in that name have
conjured up those evil spirits which blast the world, and breathe nothing but
profaneness; have started questions, raised scruples, made new cases of
conscience, which they, walking in the simplicity and integrity of their hearts
never heard nor thought of, and so did do it and do it often with less art and
noise, but with more piety, and with a zeal of a purer flame, and a heat more
innocent; their devotion was to do it often, ours is to talk and magnify it,
and to do it when we please. The duty it self of celebration how often has it
been neglected, and set at derision in this latter age? what tragedyes raised
about a name? what comedies? what scoffs and jests upon the holy action? what
gross and impious partiality in admitting men unto it? how have we
distinguished and made a strange difference of one from another, and counted
none fit, but of such a part, or such a faction? when were we not too far
engaged in the world, and did not the world too far engage and bind us to such
a side or faction, we could not but see, that the very being of a side or
faction, the dividing our selves from our brethren, for things no whit
essential to Christianity, has force enough, not only to drive us from this
table, but to shut us out of heaven. For what should such uncharitable men do
at a feast of love? what should such carnal men (the Apostle calls them so)
feed on this spiritual food? I will not stand to confute these groundless and
ridiculous, but dangerous and destructive fancies (for these men have more need
of our tears and prayers, then our confutation) I had rather remove those
hindrances and retardances, those pretenses, and excuses, which men not well
exercised in piety, use to frame and lay in their own way, and so fearing a
fall and bruise at that, which no hand could set up against them but their own,
make not their approches so often as they should to this holy table. For when we
are to do a thing, one thing or other intervenes, and startles and troubles us,
that we omit and do it not.

And the first and great pretense is; our own weakness and unworthiness,
which is the issue of our own will, begot in us by the sense of some habit of
sin, which we have discovered reigning still in our mortal bodies; at the
sight of which we start back, even from that which might help us, and cannot
compose and qualify our selves for the celebration; Before the action they are
afraid, even afraid of the feast, afraid of life; at the table, they have a sad
and cast down countenance drawn out more by a disquieted troubled mind, then
that reverentiall joy which it shows forth in the outward man, when it is at
rest, and we go away from it, with the same burden we brought to it, which we
would and would not lay down; are weary, but seek not ease, but from those
aversions which make it heavier then it was, and then we feel it again, and so
are ever preparing and never prepared to come to this feast. For our
preparation is our mortifying of our sinful lusts, which is not done, whilst
any one sin has this power and dominion in us: For how can he come to this
fountain of life, who is unwilling to live? how can he partake of Christ's
blood, who yet loves that sin, for the washing away of which Christ shed it? so
that he sins if he come, and he sins if he come not; a miserable dilemma
that sin drives him upon, that like the servant in the comedy, si faxit
perit, si non faxit vapulat, if he do it, he eats his own damnation, and shall
nevertheless be punished if he do it not.

For not only acts, but omissions are evil; It is a sin to kill my father,
and it is a sin not to help him: it is a sin to oppress, and it is a sin not
to give an alms: It is a sin to resist a superior, and it is a sin not to
honor him. It is a sin to contemn the sacrament, and it is a sin not to receive
it; and the one leads to the other, neglect or indifferency to open
profaneness; the sins of omission to sins of commission; he that does not
what he should, has made a bridge for his lusts, which will soon carry him
over to do what he should not. He that will not help his parents, will be drawn
on by the least temptation to dishonor them; he that will not feed the poor,
will be soon induced to grind their face; he that will not honor the king, when
opportunity favors him, will pull him from his throne; he that neglects the
sacrament, or is indifferent, within a while may be ready to take it away, as a
thing of no use at all; sin consists as well in the negation, or
nonperformance of that we are bound to, as in the doing of some act; which is
contrary to it, in which commonly it ends at last: nor is it then only, when
the will is directly carried to the omission it self, when I will not do it,
because I will not do it, which is high contempt; but when the will settles and
rests upon that by which I am hindered from doing that which I am bound to do,
and which I would willingly, and might easily do, but for this obstacle, which
I my self set up against my self; but for that sin which is the issue of my
lust, and which I had rather cleave to, then to the command of Christ; so that
now I do not abstain from the Lords table upon necessity, but voluntarily, nor
can I say, I would receive, when I thus say within my self, I will yet sin; for
he that will not prepare himself, will not sit down at his table: but we may
hear sometimes large expressions of sorrow from those who are so backward in
this duty, and troubled they are, that they are such, but not fit for a
Physician; that they are hungry, but have no stomach to that which should feed
and nourish them; that they love the feast, but are not yet prepared to eat. I
am sorry, is soon said, even by them, who yet take pleasure, reap profit and
advantage from that sin which they bewail; who condemn it by these mournful
and sad declarations of their mind, and yet give it the highest place in their
heart: I am sorry, is too often a lie, but if it be not a lie, it is, and will
be accepted as our preparation: for godly sorrow brings forth repentance not to
be repented of, and every prenitent is a fit communicant: He that has mingled
his tears with his Saviors blood, is a welcome guest at this table.

What then is to be done in this case, when the conscience of some habit of sin
keeps us from coming? for certainly a great sin it must needs be, to make one
sin an apology for another, to excuse a sin of omission, by a sin of
commission, and when I will not do that whsch I should, to put in that plea,
that I have done what I should not.

This knot then like the Gordian knot must be cut asunder with the sword, with
the sword of the spirit; This habit of sin must be shaken off, and we must
use a violence upon our selves, strive and labor with earnestness, and by
practsing that which is contrary to it, to be less and less fettered and
entangled every day: For to remain in it cannot be infirmity or weakness (for
that name we give even to malice it self) but obstinacy, and a pleasing and
wilful perseverance in sin. Why will thou not come? or rather, why will thou
still sin? for what were thou made a Christian? for what did the grace of God
appear? for what did his most precious blood gush out of his sides, but to
purge and cleanse thee from thy sin? why do thou love thy disease? why
do thou favor thy flesh and corruption? why do thou envenom and fester
thy sore? why art thou such a Judas, first to betray thy Savior, and then hang
thy self? why do thou still stand out and wilt not be cured? why do thou
prefer thy sin before the sacrament, thy husks, before the Bread of Life? why
art thou sick, and wilt be sick, dying, and resolvest to dye? thou will not
come because thou have sinned; break of thy sin and come: if thou condemnest
thy self, why do thou not forsake thy self? do thou acknowledge what thou
art, and yet continue what thou art? thou who wilt strike that man to the
ground who stands in thy way to honor or wealth, have not heart enough to
destroy that sin, which thou say does obstruct thy passage, and keep thee
from this feast, from the table of the Lord, which was spread on purpose, that
thou should first demolish and remove thy sin, and then come and eat:

This then is but a hindrance, a block of offense of our own hewing, an evil
spirit which we invited to us, and we must cast it out. Tell me, can thou
believe? why, then thou may come; if this faith be strong enough to cast down
those imaginations, which set themselves up against Christ, to work in thee
holy cesires, and holy resolutions: and art thou now in an agony in this
blessed contention with thy self? art thou serious in the resistance of this
thy enemy? and do thou gain some conquest over him every day? then thou may
come, though thou art not yet made perfect.

For we must remember (that the weaker Christian lie not down under his burden,
not able to move toward the cup of Blessings, when it is reached forth unto
him) we must remember, I say, that Faith and true sanctifying Grace have a wide
latitude, that they are not so quick and active in one man as in another, and
yet may save both. There be, who by continual watching over themselves, by
continual struggling with themselves, by a vehement and incessant pressing
forward, are well near come unto the mark, that have so confirmed themselves in
the profession and exercise of Christian Religion, that they run their race
with joy, and are scarce sensible of a tentation; who have made holiness so
familiar to them, that no wile or enterprise of Satan can divorce them. In a
word, who by that seed which is in them, keep themselves that he wicked one
touches them not, as S. John speaks. These have no Oxen, nor Farms; 1 John
3.7. and 5.18.
These are not married to the world, and therefore they will come.

Again, there be some who are but as it were Incipients in the school of
Christ, and in their way, but laboring and panting forward, and are as it were
in fieri, in the making, framing and composing themselves by that royal law
which the Church of Christ holds forth unto them; who though they have for some
time sucked the breasts of the Church, and received the sincere milk of the
Word, yet are not yet grown thereby into perfect men in Christ Jesus, have not
yet that strength to destroy the whole body of sin, but fall sometimes into
this sin, sometimes into that; but those they fall into are not so many, nor so
manifest, not so offensive and hurtful to others, not of that number or bulk,
as to shut them out of the Church, or to exclude them from the communion of
Saints. These have not yet attained, but they follow after; and though they
have an eye toward the world, yet they come to Christ's Table with a firm
resolution to pluck it out; and though their right hand offends them, yet they
will cut it off, and with all their strength, and with all their soul shake off
the yoke of sin, and take Christ's upon them, and even now are they hot and
intentive on that work. These men, I say, may, nay ought to come, and here
quicken their Faith, improve their Charity, strengthen and fix their
Resolutions; and they who are so severe and over-rigid as to drive them from
it, do shut themselves out, though not from the table, yet from the feast, and
are more unfit then they, because they want that charity which is required of a
guest, even that charity which will not bruise the broken reed, nor quench the
smoking flax. It was a pious wish of Moses Numb. 11. would God all the Lords
people were Prophets; and it were as much piety to wish, and with his spirit,
would all Christians were perfect, that every one were as Saint Paul, and knew
nothing by himself. But we are in via, and as travellours on the way, one man
makes more have then another, walks with more ease and delight, slips not,
falls not so often; another walks after, though not with the same speed and
cheerfulness, because he meets with rubs and difficulties, which he every day
contends with, and both at last by the guidance of the same spirit, and by the
power of a compassionate Savior, come to their journeys end; and he that goes
before, and he that comes more faintly and slowly after, meet at last and sit
down together in the same heaven. And now, in such variety of tempers, such
diversity of temptations, amongst so many errors which some men quit themselves
of with less, some with more trouble, we may applaud those who are near the
top of perfection, but we must not despise those who are in their ascent, and
laboring and striving forward after them; not quench the spirit in any man,
though it burn not so brightly in some as it does in others who are more fully
enlightened; not shut them out as unclean beasts, because they discover
something of the frailty of man; even such as these ('it is plain) Saint Paul
admitted in this chapter, and he pleads for them Galat. vi.i. as for those who
are to be restored with the spirit of meekness, and we cannot shut them out
from his table or presence, whom Christ is so willing to meet, when being weary
and heavy laden they come unto him.

Nor does this admitting weaker Christians open a door to let in wilful
offenders, nor a gap to let in the goats to feed in the same green pastures
with the sheep. These Beasts, if they come too near, will be thrust through
with a dart: But then all sins are not of the same malignity, and we must put
a difference between Judas's fall and Peter's. All sins do not strike us out
of the covenant, and therefore do not drive us from Christ's table, where we are
to renew and confirm it: there be some sins which are devoratoria salutis,
and swallow up all hope of salvation, whilst they remain in us; there be
peccata fortia, Amos 5.12. boisterous and mighty sins, which do urge the
Justice of God, and even weary and conquer his clemency; there be others which
weaker Christians through frailty fall into even in the state of grace, and
which God will not be extreme to punish, though in Justice he might, but
remains a Father still of those who seriously endeavor, yet sometimes times
fail for his covenant sake which he made in his Son Jesus Christ, and of
these sins Saint John speaks 1 John 2.2. If we sin, we have an advocate
with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is a propitiation four our
sins. In a word, if all that sin were excluded, the feast were at an end;
and if some that sin were not excluded, the table were no more a table, but
an Altar for Thieves and murderers to fly to.

Fear then of infirmity is no excuse, but we should shake it off with our
sin; it is an evil spirit of our own raising, and we must conjure it down:
But there is another pretense, and it is drawn from a high conceit of the
Sacrament, and an apprehension of an excessive and angelical kind of
perfection, which some conceive is necessary to the due celebration of it; and
so they are going toward it, but make no speed; are in action, but do nothing;
are coming but never come, This may seem to be great humility, but as Bernard
speaks, Ista Humilitas tollit humilitatem, this humility puts true humility
from its office; for it is she alone that takes us by the hand, and leads us to
this supper; Dicendo se indignum fecit se dignum, says the same Father of the
Centurion in the Gospel; if we can truly say we are unworthy, we make our
selves worthy, and thus we set forward toward it. But groundless
scrupulosity, which many times is rather the issue of pride, then the daughter
of humility, sees the way, and then sits down in it, and then makes every
pibble a mountain, puzzles and perplexes us, sets us a framing and fashioning
dangers to our selves, and inconveniences, and summing them up, like the man in
Lucian, who sat on the Sea shore numbering each wave as it came toward him,
till at last the waves driving one another, beat on and wrought themselves over
his head, and drowned him. In a word, it weakens and disenables us in the
performance of our duty, and with it we are so good, that, as the Italian
proverb is, we are good for nothing.

This is but a scruple iudeed, and it weighs no more, and the least breath is
strong enough to blow it away. For upon the same inducement we must seal up
our lips and never pray, we must stay at home and not go to Church; for (...);
what mortal is fir for these things? how can dust and ashes speak to the
majesty of heaven? what ear is purged enough to hear his word? whose feet are
clean enough to tread his courts? And why do we pretend weakness or
unworthiness? are we too weak, are we too unworthy to do his will? or can
Christ command us that, which our unworthiness will make a sin for us to do?
when the trumpet has sounded, when the law is promulged, this fear must
vanish: when our Savior has once spoken it, take, eat, this is my Body, shall
we neglect to do it, and make this our plea, that we are not worthy to do it?
when he would cleanse and purge us, shall we cry we are unworthy? unfit to do
his will, but not unfit to break it? unfit to be redeemed, but not unfit to
perish? unfit to empty our selves of our pollution, but not unfit to settle on
our lees? Oh it is ill thus to apologize, and dispute, and fret our selves to
destruction, to lie sick and bedridden in sin, and say we are unfit and unworthy
to be healed: And what Reverence is that to Christ, which crucifies him again,
and tramples his blood under our feet? for not to receive it, not to be purged
and bettered by it, I am sure, is in the highest degree to dishonor it.

I shall insist the longer upon this, for I see too many withdraw and put from
them this favor and grace of God, and call it reverence, and might well blush
at this their apology, if they did rightly consider what reverence is. Now
reverence is nothing else but a kind of Justice paying back that which is due
to a benefit, for some good it has, or may bring unto us, and is either our
overball or our real gratitude. Thou shall reverence my Sanctuary, Levit.
19.30. for here we offer up our selves to God, and God descends in blessings
upon us. The word of the Lord is reverend, for it is the power of God unto
salvation; therefore I esteemed all thy precepts, says David Psalm. 119.128.
and holy and reverend is his name, for whatsoever good we do, we do in his
name. And yet see, If we take not heed, if we keep not our feet, we may bow in
his temple, and offer up the sacrifice of fools; we may greedily harken what
God will say, and yet despise his word; we may call upon his Name, do wonders
in his Name, and yet blaspheme it; as the Jews bowed before Christ when they
mocked him, and spet upon him, and smote him on the head. No: reverence is the
payment, of a debt, and what is due to the Sanctuary? even that we should lift
up holy hands; what do we owe unto his word? even obedience; and what reverence
is due to the Sacrament? in Scripture we read of none in terminis, for there
need no command to bind us to honor it; for who will not reverence that love
which is breathed forth from Majesty? who does not reverence the meanest gift
that comes from the hands of a King? but what reverence is that that refuses
it? or is he reverent, who, when he is invited to a royal feast, will not
come? what reverence is that that leaves Christ's body, as it were, hanging on
the Cross, and his blood poured out on the ground, and will not stoop to take
it up? If we look upon it well we shall find that excuse has not a more ugly
face in any defect, which it is brought in no countenance, then in this. For
tell me, why should we not be afraid to hear the word? why have we such
itching ears? why do we throng and press into his courts? is there not as
great a preparation due unto that? is it so easy a matter to fling off all our
unruly affections? are we so soon made fit to speak unto God, that he may
hear; or to hear, when he does speak; or may we as soon do it, as pull off
our shoes from our feet, and make good the thing it self, as we can the
representation? indeed we make it our apology, but it is foul ingratitute, and
we cannot call it by a worse name, for it takes in all, our negligence, our
luke-warmnesse, our imprudency, our carnality, our love of those evils which
first trouble us, and then make us loath our peace, first make us sick, and
then afraid of the physician. This excuse, I I am sure, is not put up by those
whom Christ bids depart into everlasting fire; for they do not say, we were
unworthy to feed, or cloth, or visit thee, but we never saw thee hungry, or
naked, or in prison: they did not think that Christ had been shut in prison
with John the Baptist, or that he had begged in Lazarus. If heaven should open
it self to receive thee, would thou stay below with sin and misery, and
cry, thou art unworthy to strive to enter it? behold here in the Sacrament,
Paradise is, as it were, again laid open to thee, and no cherubin stands
against thee, and shall this weak pretense of a wilful sinner be as a flaming
sword to keep thee from the tree of life? say then to these pretenses, as thou
should to Satan, who is the forget of them, avoid, get you behind me: for
this is a command laid upon all Christians, and snpposes all able to receive
it, and no man is infirm, or weak, or unworthy, but he that makes himself so;
for his commandments are not grievous, says Saint John, and amongst them all,
there is not one less grievous then this. For is it not easier to do this,
then to deny our selves, to take up the Cross, to love our enemies, to lay
down our lives for the brethren? and yet under this heavy obligation we lie.
Whether we make it good or no, I know not, but whether it be done or not, no
man, I think, did ever put up this pretense, that he was unworthy to do it; and
shall we even offer our selves to the hardest task, to the weightier matters of
the Gospel, and startle and fly back and be afraid of the Sacrament? are we fit
to receive his commands, which exact our goods, and our life, and shall there
be a time when we shall be unfit to receive the pledges of his love? are we
worthy to be Christians, and not worthy to be communicants?

I do not here forbid preparation, for it is that I urge and press, but
unworthiness is the worst excuse, because we are bound to cast it off; and we
cannot more dishonor the Sacrament, then by not receiving it. For from what
root but from that of bitterness does this evil weed, does this banefull
pretense spring us? Let us take an Inventory of all those things which occasion
it, and we shall find them all to be such fruit of which we may well be
ashamed; the best of them is our calling and necessary employments in the
world; and is the world which passes away of such value with us, that we will
not leave it behind us, for a while to meet with Christ at his table? is our
daily bread sweeter to us then the bread of Life? is mammon a greater God then
God himself? but then the rest are of that nature that we should be afraid to
think of them; luke-warmnesse in religion, love of our sins, unwillingnesse
to part with them, or to be saved too soon, these are the rotten bones which
lie under this painted Sepulcher and glorious pretense of great reverence to
the Sacrament: Our farm, our ox, our wife, our vanity, our sin is preferred
before Christ, and then we say we reverence him.

But now, take this pretense of reverence with the best interpretation you can
give it; suppose they that pretend it are not men devoted to the world, and
vanity, but such as do try and examine themselves every day, and keep a
careful watch over their hearts, (and yet it is scarce probable such men
should pretend unworthiness; for these tares of excuses commonly grow upon the
rocks, and barrenness, and not upon good ground) but suppose this high
reverence they have of the Sacrament, may keep them off, and make them afraid
to come near; yet as Saint Paul speaks in another case, 1 Cor. 4.7. This is
utterly a fault in them, if not (...) yet it is (...) it is not so bad as
profaneness, but a fault it is, and neglect too large for this excuse to
palliate and cover.

For 1. By this their abstaining they do either pity or condemn those that are
more forward, as those that venture too far upon that formidable mystery, which
they look upon at distance, and tremble, and dare not come near; as those that
do not well consider what they do, and therefore are bold to do it; as men whom
not conscience but presumption brings to the Altar. They will say perhaps, they
pass no such censure on their brethren, they condemn them not; but yet they
may, and speak not a word, condemn them by their actions, as Noah did condemn
the world by his faith; for when in our behavior we turn our back upon them,
there is something of a sharp reprehension flies from us, like an arrow from a
Parthians bow, after those who walk another way. And this utterly is a fault by
my not eating to condemn them that eat: This is contristari fratres, this is to
grieve our brethren, to make them think that mors in olla, that death is in the
pot, danger in eating the Bread of life: this is to walk uncharitably, and for
ought we know, to destroy him with our not eating, for whom Christ dyed.

Or 2ly; Their refraining to come may keep others at the same distance, and it
is not easy to determine utrum pejor us, an pejori exemplo agatur, (as Cato
speaks to another purpose in Livy) whether is more dangerous, their absence to
themselves, or the example to others; For if Moses turn his back, who will not
be afraid to come near to the mount? If men of more reserved conversation, who
keep themselves unspotted of the world, tremble and dare not come nigh, how may
many weak Christians, who hope here to receive their additionall strength, be
struck with terror, and so refuse to come? and think of these mysteries as the
Germans in Tacitus did of those offices which they performed to their Goddess
Hertha, the earth? The Goddess was washed, and they who ministered unto her
were swallowed up in the same lake; Arcanus hinc terror, sanctaque Tacitus.
ignorantia, says the Historian, quid sit illud quod tantum perituri vident,
Hence a secret terror, and holy ignorance possessed them, who wondered what that
divine power should be, which none could see, but they who were to perish in
the sight; for minister to it, was to dye.

I know we cannot give too much reverence unto it, we cannot give enough; but
that servant does but little honor his master, who will bow, and cringe, and
kiss his hand, and keep at distance, and yet sleep in his service. Obedience
and reverence are twins, they are borne, and grow up, and dye together: I am
not truly reverent till my obedience speaks and publishes it, and if I obey
not, my reverence is but a name, and it profits nothing; as Saint Paul spoke
in another case, If be a breaker of the law, my Circumcision is made
uncircumcision: If I do not come as Christ commands, I may call it reverence,
but he will count it a great dishonor to his love.

We complain much of the superstition of the Romish party, we are angry with
their Altars, their vestments, their bowings, and cringes, and count it a kind
of Theatricall Idolatry, and I think, without breach of Charity we may; for as
they make it, it is one of the greatest Idols in the world; but we must take
heed how we cry down superstition in others, whilst we suffer it to lie at our
own doors; how we condemn it as a monster, as it walks abroad, when we hug and
cherish it in our own breasts. Superst^tio error insanus est, amandos timet,
quos colit violat. Quid enim interest utrum Deos neges, an infames? Sen. ep.
123.
For what is superstition but a groundless fear? what is it but a fear where
no fear is, or if there be, a fear which we are bound to abolish? A fear to
do our duty is something worse then superstition, and if we do not make the
Sacrament an Idol, yet by this kind of lazy reverence, we make it nothing in
this world, and as much as in us lies frustrate the grace of God, which in
these outward elements is presented in a manner to the eye.

I have dwelt the longer on this subject, because I see this duty so much
neglected; some not fit to come, others not so much unfit, as unwilling; some
so spiritual, or rather so carnal and profane, that they contemn it; some so
careless, that they seldom think ont, but suffer their soul to run to ruin,
not to be raiss'd and repaired till it be taken from them; some pleading their
own infirmity, others the high dignity of these mysteries; the best of which
pretenses is a sin, which one would think we but a hard and uneasy pillow
for a sick conscience to rest on. Not come, because I care not? not come,
because I will not? not come because I dare not? not come? That utterly is a
fault, and neglect does aggrandize it; contempt does make it yet greater; and
infirmity, and conceit of our unworthiness is another fault, and our high
esteem of the Ceremony cannot wipe it out, but it shows it self even through
this reverence, and shows us guilty of the Body and blood of Christ, though we
eat not this Bread, nor drink this cup; we pretend indeed we cannot, but the
truth is, we will not come. Let us not then bring in our unworthiness as an
excuse, for such an Apology is our doom which we pass against our selves,
which removes, and sets us a far off from any relief of that mercy which
should seal our pardon, because we say we need it not: we ought not to do,
what we ought to do, and we are unworthy to do our duty, is brought in as an
excuse, but it is our condemnation. Let us then do it, and let us do it
often, and in the last place let us do it to that end for which he did first
institute, and ordain it. Let us do it in remembrance of him.

And now we may imagine that this is a thing soon done, a matter of quick
dispatch; for as the Jews had Moses, so have we Christ read in our Churches
every Sabbath day; he is the story, the discourse of the times, and we name him
almost as often as we speak, and too often name him, but not with that
reverence which we should; but thus to remember him may be a greater injury
then forgetfulness, and better we never knew him, then thus to remember him.
And therefore we must remember, that this remembrance consists not in a bare
calling back into our mind every passage of his glorious Economy, by bringing
him from his cratch to his cross, and from his cross to his grave; for words
of knowledge in scripture evermore imply the affections; when Joseph desired
Pharaohs Butler to remember him, his meaning was he should procure his liberty:
when Nehemiah prays to God to remember him in his last Chap. v. 22. he
interprets himself, and pardon me according to the multitude of thy mercies:
when the Thief on the Cross bespeaks Christ to remember him when he came into
his kingdom, he then begged a kingdom. Indeed such a benefit deserves to be
had in everlasting remembrance; for what is a jewel of a rich price in the
hands of a fool, who has no heart to receive and keep it? what were all the
glory of the Stars, of the Sun and the Moon, which he has ordained, if there
were no eye to behold them? How can seed be quickened, if the womb of the earth
receive it not? or what a pearl is the Gospel, if the heart be not the Cabinet?
what is Christ, if he be not remembered?

We must then, and upon this occasion especially, open the register of our
soul, and enroll Christ there in deep and living characters; For the memory is
a preserver of that which she receives: but then it is not enough for us to
behold these glorious Phantasmes, and carry them about with us as precious
Antidotes, unless we bring them ab intestino memoriae ad os cogitationis, as
Saint Aust. speaks, from the inward part of the memory to the mouth and stomach
of the cogitative faculty, which is our spiritual rumination, August. cont.
Faust. Manich. l. 6. c. 7.
our chewing of the cud; unless we do Colloqui cum fide, hold a Colloquie
within us, and Catechize our faith, and enquire whether we remember Christ as
we should; whether our faith be as strong, our hop eas steadfast, our charity as
fervent, as so great love requires; whether it be such a faith, and such as
hope, and so intensive a charity, as Christ and his love thus diffused abroad
might beget; whether Christ be hung up in this gallery of our soul, only as a
picture, or whether he be a Living Christ, and dwells in us of a truth: For
the memory as it is the womb to form and fashion Christ, so it may yield good
blood to nourish him, and in this sense, Plato solus in tanta gentium sylva, in
tanto sapientum prato, dearum and oblitus and recordatus est. Tertull. de anim.
c. 24.
that of Plato may be true, (...), we learn and are instructed by those
notions, which were formerly imprinted in our Memory; we do conceive and are in
travel, as Saint Paul speaks, with Christ; till he be fully formed in us; we
work him out in Cogitatoria, in the Elaboratory of our hearts. When we have him
in our thoughts, and his precepts always before our eyes, as in a book which
checkes us at every turn, and by a frequent Contemplation of them draw our
souls out of those encumbrances which many times involve and fetter them; when
we recollect our mind into it self, and fasten it to this rock, where it may
rest as upon a holy hill, from whence it may look down and behold every object
in its proper shape; look upon an injury as a benefit, persecution as a
blessing, and see life in the face and countenance of death, then and not till
then we may be said to remember him. For can he remember a meek Christ, who
will be angry without a cause? can he remember a poor Christ, that makes
Mammon his God? can he remember the Prince of Peace, who is wholly bent to war?
can he remember Christ, who is as ready to betray him as Judas, and nail him
to the Cross as Pilat? Better he were quite raced out of our memory, then that
we should thus set him there as a mark to be shot at; then to be thus set up,
to be scorned, and reviled, and spit upon, and Crucified again; better never to
have known him, then to know, and put him to shame. And therefore, if we will
remember him, we must contemplate him in his own sphere, in that site and
aspect which he looks upon us; deliberare, and causas expendere, well weigh and
consider upon what terms and conditions we did first receive him, and
entertain him in our thoughts and memories, and this will drive Christianity
home, make it enter into the soul and spirit, fasten and rivet Christ into us,
and make him a part of us; that his promises and precepts, and the virtue of
his death and passion may be in our memory as vessels are in a well-ordered
family, whence upon every occasion we may readily take them out for our use,
find a defense against every temptation, a buckler for evey dart, that so the
love of Christ may swallow up all reluctance in us, in victory. This gives us a
true taste and relish of the sweetness of those blessings and benefits which
we receive in the Sacrament. For the sweetness of honey, says Basil, is not
known so well by the Philosophers discourse, as by the taste (which is a better
and surer judge then the most subtle Naturalists) no more are the benefits of
Christ and his Gospel, though uttered by the Tongue of men and Angels, in the
words which conveigh them, as in a heart melted and transformed into the Love
of Christ; then in the mind of man, when it is the same mind which is in Christ
Jesus: there he is remembered indeed, there he is placed not as in the High
Priests Hall, to be mocked, and derided, and blasphemed, but as in his throne,
in his heaven, where he dispenses his light, his joy, his glory, such glory as
no Eloquence is equal to, no language can express, not Saint Paul himself,
who was caught up into Paradise and tasted the sweetness of it, and then tells
us no more then this, that they were (...) the words were unspeakable words,
words which it was not possible for a man to utter; which was in effect, 2 Cor.
12.4.
to tell us he did feel it, but could not tell us what it was: and thus to
taste him is to remember him.

And first, It takes in our faith, I do not mean a dead and unactive faith,
for that leaves us dead and buried in a land of Oblivion, never looking upon
Christ, or his benefits, nor gathering any strength or virtue from him, and no
more considering this our High Priest, then if he had never offered himself,
never satisfied, never been but a faith that works by love, a faith that
follows Christ; through every Period, and stage, and passage of his blessed
economy; a faith that is a disciple, and follows him whithersoever he goes;
looks upon him in time of prosperity, and cloths him in the days of
affliction, forgets them, remembering him; in injuries, and forgives them; in
death it self, and makes him our Resurrection, makes us one with him, that we
cannot think, or speak, or move, that we cannot live, nor dye without him.

Now the time of receiving the Sacrament, of the receiving these pledges of his
love, and these pignora fidei, these pledges of our faith, is the time of
actuating, of quickening and increasing our faith, that it may be more
apprehensive, more operative, more lively, that it may even spring in our
hearts at the mention of Christ, at this representation of his body and blood,
as the babe did in Elizabeth's womb at the Virgin Mary's salutation. For our
Faith, as it may have its increasings and improvements, so it may have its
decreasings and failings; may be weakened by the daily incursions which the
world and the devil make upon it, by presenting objects of Terror to daunt and
enfeeble it, objects of delight to slumber and charm it. It may be weakened by
the daily avocations and common actions of our life, that we may not cleave so
close unto Christ, not eye him with that intention, not love him with that
fervor, not obey him with that cheerfulness which we should, but be in a
disposition ready to fall off, and let go our hold of him. And therefore as we
must at all times stir it up, and actuate it, so especially in our approaches
to the Lords table, for in this does our preparation to it, in this does the
benefit and power of the Sacrament principally consist: for here does our
Savior, as it were, again present himself to us, opens him wounds, shows us
his hand, and his side, speaks to us as he did to Thomas, reach hither your
fingers and behold my hands; and reach hither your hands and thrust them into
my sides; take, eat, this is my body, and be not faithless but believing; here
shake off that chilness, that restivenesse, that acedie, that weariness, that
faintness of your faith; here warm, and actuate, and quicken it, that it may
be a working, fighting, conquering faith. For thus to do it is to do this in
remembrance of him.

Secondly, It takes in repentance, by which we do most truly remember Christ;
remember his birth, and are born again, for repentance is our new birth;
remember his Circumcision, and circumcise our hearts, for repentance is (...),
the great circumcision, says Epiphanius; go about with him doing good, for
repentance is our obedience; remember him on his Cross, for repentance sets
up a Cross in imitation of his, and lifts us up upon it, stretches and
dilates all the powers of our soul, peirceth our hearts, and so crucifies the
flesh, and the affections and lusts thereof. Our repentance, if it be true, is
an imitation of Christ's suffering, a revenge upon our selves for what the Jews
did to him; the proper issue and effect to his love; for what Christ works in
us, he first works upon us, makes us see, and feel, and handle his love, that
we may be active in those duties of love, which by his command and ensample we
owe to him, and in him to our brethren: He dyed to be a propitiation for our
sins, that is, that he might make sin to cease, for so the word (...)
implies; gives us strength by repentance quite to extinguish and abolish sin.
Thus if we repent, thus if we do, we do it in remembrance of him. And this we
are to do, but then especially when we prepare our selves, and make our
addresses to Christ's Table; for though repentance be the fruit of a due
examination of our selves, yet we may and must examine our repentance it self,
and the time to do it is now, now thou art to renew thy Covenant, and so must
also renew thy repentance. In the Feast of the Atonement the Lord tells his
people, Lev. 23.27. you shall keep it, and he that does not afflict his soul,
shall be cut off, This is a day for it, and in this day thou must do it. This
is the season to ransack thy soul, to see how many grains of hypocrisy were
left behind in thy former repentance, what hollowness was in thy groans, what
coldness in thy devotion; to see what advantage Satan has since taken, what
ground he has won in thy soul; and then in remembrance of Christ's love set
afresh to the work of mortification, wound thy heart deeper, lay on surer
blows, empty thy self of thy self, of all that rust and rubbish which thy
self-love left behind, and then stir up those graces in thee which through
inadvertency and carelessnesse lie raked up as in the ashes; in a word, refine
every virtue, quicken every grace, intend thy will, exalt thy faith, draw
nearer to Christ, and so renew thy Covenant, and sit down at his Table and thus
if thou do it, thou do it in remembrance of him.

I might here take in the whole train, the whole Circle and Crown of Christian
graces and virtues, and draw them together and shut them within the compass of
this one word remembrance, for it will comprehend them all; knowledge,
obedience, love, sincerity, thankfulness, from whence the Sacrament has its
name, (...), my last payment, and peace offering; for he that truly believes
and repents, as he is sick of sin, so is he sick of love, of that love, which
in the Sacrament is sealed, and confirmed to us; is full of saving knowledge,
is ever bowing to Christ's scepter, is sincere and like himself in all his
ways, will meditate of it day and night, will drive it ab animo in habitum, as
Tertull. speaks, from the mind to the motions and actions of his body, from the
conscience into the outward man, till it appear in liberal hands, in
righteous lips, and in attentive ears; will breath forth nothing but devotion,
but prayers and Hallelujahs, glory, honor, and praise for this his love; and
so become as the picture, and image, and face of Christ, reflecting all his
favors and graces back upon him; as a Pillar engraven with Gods
lovingkindnesses, a Memorial of Gods goodness thankfully set up for ever; and
thus to do it is to do it in remembrance of him.

And to conclude; thus if we do it, if we thus remember him, he will also
remember us, remember us, and set us as seals upon his heart, and signets on
his right hand, remember us as his peculiar treasure; and as our remembrance of
him takes up all the duty of a Christian, so does his remembrance of us
comprehend all the benefits of a Savior; our love of him, and his love to us
are (...), will be as matter and fuel to nourish and uphold this remembrance
between us for ever; Nazian or. 17.
we shall remember him in humility and obedience, and he shall remember us in
love and power; we shall remember him on earth, and he shall remember us in
heaven, and prepare a place for us; he shall remember our affliction, and
uphold us; he shall remember our prayers, and make them effectual; our alms;
and make them a pleasing sacrifice; he shall remember our failings, and settle
and establish us; our tears, and turn them into joy; he shall remember all
that we do or suffer, all but our sins, those he has buried in his grave for
ever. And now we are drawing near to his table with fear and reverence he
will remember us, and draw nearer to us in these outward elements, then
superstition can feign him; beyond the fiction of transubstantiation, and
abundantly satisfy us with the fatness of his house; feed us, though not with
his flesh, yet with himself; and move in us, that we may grow up in him. In a
word, He will remember us in heaven more truly then we can remember him on
earth, and distill his grace and blessings on us, be ever with us, and fill our
hearts with rejoicing, which will be a fair pledge of that solid, pure, and
everlasting joy in the Highest Heavens. And Lord remember us thus, now thou art
in thy kingdom.

blazon or royal coat of arms of England and Wales HONI ^T QVI MAL Y PENSE

THE NINETEENTH SERMON.
1 THESE. 4.11. And that you study to be quiet, and to do your own business,
and to work with your own hands, as we have commanded you.


THe sum of religion and Christianity is to do the will of God; and this is
the will of God, even our Sanctification, at the 3. v. of this chapter. This is
the whole duty of man, and we may say of it, as the Father does of the Lords
prayer, quantum substringitur verbis, Tertull. de orat.
tantum diffunditur sensibus, though it be contracted, and comprised in a word,
yet it poures forth it self in a Sea of matter and sense. For this holiness
unto which God has called us, is but one virtue, but of a large extent and
compass; (...), but one virtue, but is divided into many, and stands as Queen
in the midst of the circle and crown of all the graces, and claims an interest
in them all; has patience to wait on her, compassion to reach out her hand,
longanimity to sustain, and this (...), this placability of mind and
contentation in our own portion and lot, to uphold her, and keep her in an
equal poyse and temper, ever like unto her self; that we may be holy in our
faith, and holy in our conversation with men, without which though our faith
could remove mountains, yet we were not holy. Tot ramos porrigit, tot venas
diffundit, so rich is the substance of holiness, so many branches does she
reach forth, so many veins does she spread into; and indeed, all those virtues
which commend us to God, are as the branches and veins, and Holiness, the
blood and juice to make them live. I do not intend to compare them one with
the other, because all are necessary, and the neglect of any one does frustrate
all the rest; and the Wiseman has forbid us to ask, Why this is better then
that, for every one of them in his due time and place is necessary. It has
been the great mistake and fault of those who profess Christianity, to shrink
up its veins, and lop off its branches, contenting themselves with a partial
holiness: some have placed it in a sigh or sad look, and called it repentance;
others in the tongue, and hand, and called it zeal; others in the heart, in a
good intention, and called it piety; others have made it verbum adbreviatum, a
short word indeed, and called it faith: few have been solicitous and careful
to preserve it in integritate tota and solida, solid and entire, but vaunt and
boast themselves as great proficients in Holiness, and yet never study to be
quiet; have little peace with others, yet are at peace with themselves; are
very religious, and very profane; are very religious and very turbulent, have
the tongues of Angels, but no hand at all to do their own business, and to
work in their calling. And therefore we may observe, that the Apostle, in every
Epistle almost, takes pains to give a full and exact enumeration of every duty
of our lives, that the man of God may be perfect to every good work; teaches
us not only those domesticke and immanent virtues (if I may so call them)
which are advantageous to our selves alone, as faith, and hope, and the like,
which justify that person only in whom they dwell; but emanant, public, and
omiliticall virtues of common conversation, which are for the edification and
good of others, as patience, meekness, liberality, and love of quietness and
peace: my faith saves none but my self; my hope cannot raise my brother from
despair; yet my faith is holy, Jude 20.
says Saint Jude, and my hope is a branch and vein of holiness, and issues
from it. But my patience, my meekness, my bounty, my love and study of
quietness and peace, sibi parciores, foris totae sunt, Ambros.
exercise their act and empty themselves on others; these link and unite men
together in the bond of love in which they are one, and move together as one,
build up one another faith, cherish one another hope, pardon one another
injuries, bear one another burden, and so in this bond, in this mutual and
reciprocal discharge of all the duties and offices of holiness, are carried
together to the same place of rest. So that to holiness of life more is
required then to believe, or hope, or pour forth our souls, or rather, our
words before God; it is true this is the will of God, but we must go farther,
even to perfection, and love the brethren, and study to be quiet; for this also
is the will of God, and our Sanctification. What is a sigh, if my murmuring
drown it? what is my devotion, if my impatience disturb it? what is my faith,
if my malice make me worse then an infidel? what are my prayers, if the spirit
of unquietness scatter them? will we indeed please God, and walk as we ought?
we must then, as S. Peter exhorts, add to our faith virtue, to our virtue
knowledge, to knowledge patience, to patience brotherly kindness, and to
brotherly kindness, love, 2 Pet. 1.5.6. v.
or as Saint Paul here commands, not only abstain from fornication, from those
vices which the worst of men are ready to fling a stone at, but those gallant
and heroic vices, which show themselves openly before the Sun and the people,
who look favorably and friendly on them, and cry them up for zeal and
religion, even from all animosity and turbulent behavior; we must (...) we
must study to be quiet, and be ambitious of it. Thus our Apostle bespeaks the
Thessalonians, we beseech you brethren, that you increase more and more, and in
the words of my text; that you study to be quiet, and do your own business,
and work with your own hands, as we have commanded you.

In which words, first a duty is proposed, study to be quiet. 2ly. the means
promoting this duty are prescribed, or causae producentes, and conservantes,
the causes which bring it forward and hold it up, laid down; the first, (...),
to do our own business; the 2. to work with our own hands; the first shuts out
(...), all pragmaticall curiosity, and stretching beyond our line, and that
compass wherein God has bound and circumscribed us; the 2. (...), all
unactivenesse and supine negligence in our own place and station. And the 3.
and last makes it a necessary study, and brings it under a command; sicut
praecepimus vobis, you must do it as I have commanded you.

Or because to be quiet is here proposed as matter of study, we will consider,
1. the object, or thing it self in which our study must be seen; and it is
(...), a quiet and peaceable behavior. 2. the act, which requires the
intention of our mind, thoughtfulness, and a diligent luctation and contention
with our selves, we must make it our study, (...), be ambitious of it. Thirdly,
the method we must use; we must meddle with our own business, and work with
our hands. And last of all, the warrant of this method, I have commanded it;
and of these we shall speak in their order.

Ut operam detis, that you study to be quiet etc.

And first, to be quiet is nothing else but to be peaceable, to keep our selves
in an even and constant temper, to settle and compose our affections, that they
carry us not in a violent and unwarranted motion, against those with whom we
live, though they speak what we are unwilling to hear, and do what we would not
behold; though their thoughts be not as our thoughts, nor their ways as our
ways, though they be contrary to us; That there be (as S. Paul speaks) no
schism in the body, 1 Cor. 11.25.
but that the members may have the same care one of another; That we do not
start out of the Orb wherein we are fixed, and then set it on fire, because we
think it moves disorderly; but that we look on all with a charitable and
Evangelicall eye; not pale because others are rich; not sick for our neighbors
vineyard; not sullen because others are cheerful; not angry because others are
weak; not clouded with envy and malice, because others in some respects
outshine us; but as S. Paul speaks, leading a quiet and peaceable life in all
Godliness and Honesty; 1 Timothy 2.2.
(for the Gospel of Christ has left us no other eye but that of charity to
look abroad with) that this peace of Christ may rule in our hearts, 3 Coloss.
15.
to the which also we are called in one body; may rule in our hearts, (...),
sit as judge there, for so the word signifies, being in its native propriety
spoken of the Judge in the Olympic games: Let peace rule in your hearts, let
it have this office, let it be the only judge to set an end to all
Controversies, (...), to stand in the midst between two contrary sides, and
draw them together, and make them one; to be a Mediator between the offense
that is given, and the smart that is felt; to command our patience against the
injury; to awake the one to conquer and annihilate the other, and so bury it in
oblivion for ever.

And that we may better understand it, we must sever it from that which is like
it; for likeness is the mother of error, from whence it is, that there be so
many lovers of peace, and so little of it in the world; that when ambition and
covertousnesse harrass the earth, when there be wars and rumors of wars,
when the kings of the earth rise up, when the people are as mad as the Sea when
it rages, when the world is on fire, yet there is not one that will be
convinced, or persuade himself, that he ever raised one spark to kindle it. It
was a just and grave complaint of Saint Hierom, non reddimus unicuique rei suum
vocabulum, we are guilty of a dangerous misnomer, and do not give every thing
its proper name; and think we study quietness when we are most bent to war,
and ready to beat up the drum. Alii Dominationem pacem appellant, some call
tyranny peace, and nothing else, and think there is no peace, unless every man
understand and obey their beck; unless all hands subscribe to their
unwarrantable demands; quiet they are and peaceable men, when like a tempest
they drive down all before them; to him that tyrannizeth in the commonwealth,
he is rebel that is not a parasite; and to him that Lords it in the Church, he
that bows not to every decree of his, as if God himself had made it, is an
heretic, a schismatic, an Anathema; then this peace, and not till then, when
every look, and word, when every lie of theirs is a law. Others call even
disobedience it self peace, and are never quiet, but with their quod volumus
sanctum est; but when they are let loose to do what they please, are filii
pacis the the children of peace, when they digg her bowels out, as the
Donatists in Saint Aust. who were the greatest peace-breakers in the world, yet
had nothing so much in their mouths as the sweet name of peace; and how is she
wounded by those who stand up in her defense? we call that peace which has
nothing of it but the name, and that too but of our own giving; and esteem our
selves as quiet and peaceable men, when we are rather asleep then settled,
rather senseless and dead then delighting our selves in those actions, which
are proper to us in that motion which tends to rest; rather still and silent
then quiet, bound up as it were with a frost, till the next thaw, the next
fair weather, and opportunity as fair, and then we spread abroad, and run out
beyond our limit and bounds, nor can we be contained or kept in them. Again,
others there be, such as Tacitus speaks of, who are sola socordia innocents,
who are very quiet and still, and do little hurt, by reason of a dull and heavy
disposition, and therefore says Tully, do removere se a publicis negotiis,
step aside and remove themselves out of the public ways; withdraw themselves
out of the company and almost out of the number of men, who do no harm because
they will do nothing, whose greatest happiness is nihil agere, nihil esse,
Honestum pacis nomen segni otio imposuit. Tacit. de Turpiliano Annali. 14.
to do nothing and to be nothing; whose souls are as heavy and unactive, as
those lumps of flesh, their bodies, and so raise no thoughts but such which lie
level with their present condition, and reach not so high as to take in the
public interest; who know not what to think, and so care not how unevenly or
disorderly the course of things is carried along, so it be not long of them,
being as much afraid of action, as others are weary and sick of rest; as
unwilling to put forth a hand to support a shaking and falling commonwealth, as
others are active and nimble to pull it down. Nay some there are of so tender
and soft disposition, ut non possint in caput alterius ne testimonium dicere
(as the orator observes in Senecas controversies) that they cannot be brought
to bear witness to that truth which may endanger the life of any man; so
heartlesse, that they cannot speak the truth, having so much of the woman, and
the coward, that they know not how, but count it as a punishment to be just and
honest men.

May we not take these now for quiet and peaceable men? no: these are not
quiet, for they never studied it; and the orator will tell us mores natura non
constant, there is more required to the composing of our manners, and the
raising and fixing this virtue in our mind, then that which the hand and
impression of nature left in us; (...), says Nazianzen, Nazianz. orat. 31.
for those imbred dispositions, those natural virtues do not reach home. Who
thanks the sire for its heat, or the water for its moisture, the snow for being
cold, or the sun that it does shine? and may we not truly say of these low and
tender dispositions, whom no disorder can affect, no violence move, that they
are Lambs, that is, have as much quietness as nature instil'd and put into
them?

Again, as there is (...), a natural quietness, so there may be also (...), a
constrained quietness, wrought in us by necessity; the quietness of Esau,
which would last but till his fathers funeral; the quietness of a Philistim
under the yoke and harrow, I might say the quietness of Goliath when his head
was off. And indeed, this forced quietness is like that of a dead man, of whom
we may say, quiescit he is at rest and quiet, because he cannot move. Absalom
and Achitophel, Theudas and Judas, Catiline and Cethegus, and all those
turbulent boutefeaus which history has delivered to the hatred and detestation
of posterity, were as quiet before opportunity and hope set their spirits a
working, as now they are in their urnes or graves. Much quietness the world
has yielded in this kind, and many men who have been quiet against their will,
who have stood still, because they were bound hand and foot, or as little able
to break forth into action as those that are, whilst authority was too strong
for them and held them in, they were as silent as the night; but when the
reins were slacked, and the bit out of their mouths, as raging as the Sea, and
as loud as the noise of many waters, (as Virgil describes his horse, stare loco
nescit --) they could not be quiet, they could not stand still, and keep their
place; or (as Job characters out his) they swallowed up the ground for rage and
fierceness, they mocked at fear, and turned not back from the sword; like
those wild horses which set the world on fire, and threw Phaeton out of the
chair; when they were weak and low, upon their knees, tendering supplications,
but when their strength increased, reaching forth their demands on the point of
their sword.

These Pageants the world shows every day, but this is not to be quiet in Saint
Paul's sense; for nemo pius qui pietatem cavet, no man is good or quiet, who
cannot or dare not for some danger that is near him and hangs over his head,
be otherwise; (...), says Basil, we commend those men, and call them good and
quiet men, who are so by choice and election, and not by necessity. For as he
is not a Jew who is one outwardly, so is not he a peaceable man who is so
outwardly, and for a time, nor is that quietness which is outward in the
flesh; but he is quiet who is so inwardly, and quietness is that of the heart,
in the spirit, whose praise is not of men but of God; for if the love of peace
be in the heart, the lips will be sealed, and the hands bound up for ever.

So that, to be quiet consists in sweet composure of mind, in a calm and
contented conversation, in a mind ever equal, and like unto it self; and he is
a quiet and peaceable man, who is not moved when all things else are; stands
upon his own basis, when all about him is out of frame; when the world passes
by him, and inverts its scene, and changes its fashion every day, now shining
and anon lowering; now flattering, anon striking; now gliding by us in a smooth
and delightful stream, and anon raising up its billows against us; in every
change is still the same, the same when the sword hangs over him, and peace
shadows him; the same when riches increase, and poverty comes toward him as an
armed man; the same when religion flourishes, and the commonwealth has
nothing praeter obsessum Jovem, and Camillos exules, but God dishonored, and
good men oppressed; the same when the world runs cross to his desires, as when
he can say, So, So, thus would I have it; (...) in rebus novis nihil novum, to
whom nothing comes as new and unexpected; who stands as a rock, and keeps his
own place, and station; not swelling at an error, not angry with contempt, not
secure in peace, not afraid of persecution, not shaken with fear, not giddied
with suspicion, not bowed down with covetousness, nor lifted above himself
with pride; who walks and is carried on in every motion by the same rule in
cujus decretis nulla litura, whose decrees and resolutions admit no blot, who
does not blot out this days quietness with to morrowes turbulency (as
Aristides spoke of Pericles) who is not unquiet or troubled for any rub, or
interposition, Aristides in Photii. Bibl.
for any affront in his way, but keeps himself in an even and constant course,
as constant in his actions as his knowledge; as if you should ask him a
question of numbers, he will give you the same answer to day which he did
yesterday, or to morrow which he did to day, and many years before; who by his
patience possesses his soul, and will not yield or surrender it up to any
temptation or provocation whatsoever, there to be swallowed up and lost; whom
another man's evil does not make evil, another man's riches do not make pale,
another man's honor does not degrade from himself, whom another man's noise does
not disquiet, another man's riot does not discompose, another man's fury does not
distract, another man's schism does not divide from the Church: in a word, who
changes not color with the world, nor is altered with that confused variety,
and contradiction of so many humors of so many men, and applies himself to
every one of them as a Physician to supple and cure, and not to enrage them,
this man is quiet, has gained this (...) this quietness of mind, this man
cannot but be at peace with himself, and all the world.

And to this, Christianity, and the religion which we profess does bind us;
this is a plant which our heavenly Father alone does plant in our hearts; in
which when it is planted, it will shoot forth and grow up, and raise it self
far above the love of the world, above covetousness, and envy, and malice, and
fraud, which first disquiet and rack that breast in which they are, and then
breath forth that venom which blasts the world, and troubles and provokes those
which are near us; sometimes gnashing the teeth, which eats and consumes us;
sometimes breathing forth hailestones and coals of fire which fly back in our
faces and destroy us; sometimes laying of snares in which our selves are
caught, for envy is the rottenness of the bones, says Solomon, and anger
kills the foolish; and the Bread of deceit though it be sweet at first, yet
it shall fill the mouth with gravel: nemo non in seipsum prius peccat, says
Austine, no man disturbs the peace of another, but he breaks his own first; no
man repines at his brothers good, but he makes it his own evil, and his vice is
his executioner; no man breaths forth malice, but it echoes back upon him; no
man goes beyond his brother, but has outstript himself, and the Psalmist tells
us that evil shall bunt the violent man to destruction. But when this plant,
this peace is deeply rooted in us, it spreads its branches abroad over all,
over all cross events, over all injuries, over all errors and miscarriages,
over envy, malice, deceit, and violence, and shadows them, that they are not
seen, or not seen in that horror which may shake it; spreads it self over the
poor, and relieves them; over the malicious, and melts him; over the injurious
man, and forgives him; over the violent man, and overcomes him by standing the
shock; keeps it self to its root, is fixed and fastened there: and when this
wind blows, when this rain falls, when all these beat upon it, when the
tempest is loudest, is ever the same, is peace still. And this is the work of
the Gospel, the sum of all, the end of all that it teaches, to work this
quietness and peace in us that we may raise it up in others, that this peace
may beget and propagate it self in those who are enemies to it, that the kid
may feed with the wolf, and the Lamb with the Leopard, so long as the moon
endures; that there may be no deceit, no envy, no violence, no invasion, no
going out, no complaining in our streets. This is the Evangelicall virtue, this
is peculiar and proper to the Gospel and Christian religion, proper in the
highest and strictest degree of propriety, every good Christian is a peaceable
man, and every peaceable man is a good Christian. Look into your prisons, says
Tertullian, to persecuting heathens, Tert. Apol.
and you shall find no Christians there, and if you do, it is not for murder,
or theft, or cozenage, or breach of the peace; the cause for which they are
bound and confined there, is only this, that they are Christians. This is that
height of Perfection, which the vanity of Philosophy, and the weakness and
unprofitablenesse of the law could not reach; nor could the Jews bring any
thing ex horreis suis out of his granary, his store or basket, or the
philosopher e narthecio suo, out of his box of ointments, out of his book of
prescripts, which could supple a soul to this (...), this tranquillity and
quietness, which might purge and sublime, and lift it up above the world, and
all the flattery and terror that is in it; humane reason was too weak to
discover the benefit, the pleasure, the glory of it; nor was it seen in its
full beauty, till that light came into the world, which did improve, and exalt,
and perfect our reason; the Philosophers cried down anger, yet gave way to
revenge; laid an imputation upon the one, yet gave line and liberty to the
other; both Tully and Aristotle approve it, as an act of Justice. The language
of the law was, an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth. It was said to them
of old, you shall love your neighbor, Math. 6.
and hate your enemy; but the return of the Gospel is a blessing for a curse,
love for hatred, a prayer for persecution; whatsoever the Law required, that
does the Gospel require, and much more; an humility more bending, a patience
more constant, a meekness more suffering, a quietness more settled, because
those heavenly promises (which the Philosopher never heard of) were more, and
more clearly proposed in the Gospel then under the Law; for is not eternity of
bliss a stronger motive, then the basket, or glory, or temporal enjoyments?
is not heaven more attractive then the earth? under the Law this peace and
quietness was but a promise, a blessing in expectation, and in the Schools of
Philosophers it was but a fancy, the peace and quietness they had was raised
out of weak and failing principles, de industria consultae aequanimitatis, non
de Fiducia compertae veritatis, says Tertullian, Tertull. de Animax. 1.
out of an industrious affected endurance of every evil, that it might not be
worse, out of a politic resolution to defeat the evil of its smart, but not
out of conscience, or assurance of that truth, which brought light, and
immortality to settle the mind, to collect and gather it within it self, in the
midst of all those provocations and allurements, which might show themselves to
divide and distract it, but remain it self untoucht, unmoved, looking forward
through all these vanishing shadows and apparitions, which either smile or
threaten, to that glory which cannot be done away. This Christianity only can
effect; this was the business of the prince of peace, who came into the world,
but not with drum and colors, but with a rattle rather; not with noise,
Tertull. cont. Judaeus.
but like rain into the mowen grass; not destroying his enemies, but making
them his friends; not as a Caesar, or Alexander, but as an Angel, and
Ambassador of peace; not denouncing war, but proclaiming a Jubilee; and with
no sword, but that of the spirit, who made good that prophecy of the Prophet
Micah, that swords should be turned into plow-shares, and spears into pruning
hooks; Micah. 4.3.
that all the bitterness and malice of the heart should be turned into the
love and study of modesty and peace; that every man should sit under his own
vine and under his own figtree, and gather his own fruit, and not reach out his
hand into another man's vineyard, not offer violence, nor fear it, nor disturb
his brothers peace, nor be jealous of his own; not trouble others, nor be
afraid himself; that the earth might be a temporal paradise, a type and
representation of that which is eternal. For this he came into the world, and
brought power enough with him to perform it, and put this power into our
hands, that we may make it good; and when he has drawn out the method of it,
when he has taught us the art to do it, when there is nothing wanting but our
will, the prophesy is fullfilled, for it was never yet foretold by any Prophet,
that they should be quiet, who made it their delight, their study, the
business of their whole life to trouble themselves and others. What could he
in wisdom have done more then he has done? he has dug up dissension at
the very root, male velle, male dicere, male cogitare ex aequo vetamur, says
Tertullian, to wish evil, to speak evil, to think evil are alike forbidden
in the Gospel, which restrains the will, binds the hand, bridles the tongue,
fetters the very thoughts, commands us to love an enemy, to surrender our coat
to him, who has stripped us of our cloak, to return a blessing for a reproach,
and to anoint his head with oil, who has struck us to the ground; which
punishes not the ends only, but the beginnings of dissension; which brings
every part to its own place, the flesh under the spirit; the will under the law
of charity, which is the peace of the soul, the obedience of faith under the
eternal law, which is our peace with God; which draws with it the servant
under the master, the child under the parent, the subject under the magistrate;
which is the peace of an house, of a commonwealth, the peace of the world,
which makes every part dwell together in unity, begets a parity in disparity,
raises equality out of inequality, which keeps every wheel in its due motion,
every man in his right place, is that intelligence which moves the lesser
sphere of a family, and the greater orb of a commonwealth composedly and
orderly, which is its peace, for peace and quiet is the order and harmony of
things; the Father calls it a Harp, and it is never well set or tuned but by an
Evangelicall hand, which slacketh and lets down the string of our self-love,
to an hatred of our selves, and windeth up the string of our love to our
brother in an equal proportion to the love of our selves; we must hate our
life in this world, John 12.15. and we must love our brother as our selves,
Matthew. 22.39. nay it lets it lower yet, even to our enemies, and the sound of
it must reach unto them, and talk what we will of peace, if it be not tuned and
touched by charity, if it take not its rise and spring from this peace here,
from the peace of the Gospel, it will be but a dreadful sound, as Job
speaks, 15.21. either in the soul, or in a family, or in the Church, or in
the Commonwealth.

This is the nature, the power, the virtue of the Christian Law; this it does
even when it is not done, for if the Gospel might take place, it would most
certainly be done; that there is so much heat, so much distraction, so much
bitterness amongst Christians, that one kingdom rises against another, and
almost every kingdom is divided in it self, that the Church is moulder'd out
into schisms, and parcelled out into conventicles, that every man almost is
become a Church unto himself by a wilful separation from the whole, that
Christians, whose mark and badge is was, by which they were known and
distinguished from all the world, that they did love one another, that they
would dye for one another, should hate one another, revile one another,
proscribe one another, Anathematize one another, and kill one another, and do
that bloody office sooner then a Turk or Jew; that Christendom should thus be
made a stage of war, and a field of blood, is not from the Gospel or Christian
religion; no, these winds blow not out of this Treasury, but rather out of the
pit of hell, from the swellings of pride, which Christianity beats down; from
the love of the world, which Christianity conquers; from desire of supremacy,
which Christ anity stifles; from envy, whose evil eye Religion puts out; from
an hollow, deceitful heart, which Christianity breaks; from those evils which
are the only enemies, which the Prince of peace, the author and finisher of
the Gospel came to fight against and destroy. Look back upon the first
Christians, who had rather suffer the greatest wrong then do the least; who
when for their multitude they might have trod their enemies under their feet,
yet yielded themselves to their fury and rage; who did so out-number them, that
only to have withdrawn themselves, had been to have left their persecutors in
banishment, to wonder and lament their own paucity and solitude, and yet bowed
down their necks to their yoke, and delivered up their lives to their cruelty,
and more willing to rest in their graves, then be unquiet; and in them this
prophesy was fulfilled, their swords were indeed turned into mattocks, and
their spears into pruning hooks, for all the weapons they had were their
Innocence and Patience. And thus it was for well-neere four hundred years
together; but look forward and then see blackness and darkness, noise and
tempests, even in the habitations of peace, Christians reviling and libelling
one another, as in the Council of Nice; Christians killing and treading one
another under foot, as in the Council of Ephesus; Christians killing one
another, as in the quarrel or schism of Damasus and Ursicinus; and then let
your eye pass on through all the ages of the Church, and if it can for
dropping, look upon this last, and you will see that which will be as a thorn
in your eye, and hear that which will make your ears tingle; see blood and
war, tragedies, and massacres, tumult, and confusion, Christians defranding,
cursing, tormenting robbing one another; you should see -- but the time would
fail me to tell you, what you should see; but you would think that
Christendom were a wilderness, not a place where the Leopard did lie down
with the kid, or the wolf feed with the Lamb, but where the kid was turned into
a Leopard, and the Lamb into the wolf; you will think that either this
prophecy was false, or that Christ the Prince of peace was not yet come in the
flesh. But as our Savior said to his Disciples, when they were affrighted, and
supposed him to be a Spirit, why are you troubled? Luke 24.37.38.
for if you be troubled you mistake Christ's, and think him to be what he is
not; For for all these dismal and horrid events, so contrary, so
unproportioned to the promise of God, Christ is come in the flesh, and the
prophecy is fulfilled; for all Christians are peaceable men; and whosoever is
obedient to the Gospel, does feel and can demonstrate this power in himself:
what though we see violence and strife in the Church? yet the Church is the
house of peace; what though Appius be unchaste? we cannot libell the Decemvirat;
what though Judas be a Son of perdition? 'twas the traitor, not the Apostle
which betrayed Christ: If there be controversies, Religion does not raise them;
if there be schisms, Religion does not make them; if there be war, Religion
does not beat up the drum; if there be busybodies, Religion does not employ
them; if there be incendiaries, Religion did not enrage them; if there be a
fire in the Church, the Christian did not kindle it, but the Ambitious man, the
mammonist, the Beast that calls himself by that name; for Religion cannot do
that which she forbids, cannot do that on earth, which damnes to hell; cannot
forward that design, which is against her; cannot set up that which will pull
her down; in brief, Religion, Christian Religion cannot but settle us and make
us quiet and peaceable; cannot but be it self; for that which unsettles us, and
makes us grievous to our selves and others, is not Christian Religion. For
Religion is the greatest preserver of peace, that ever was, or that Wisdom it
self could find out, and has laid a fouler blemish on discord and dissension,
then Philosophy ever did when she was most rigid and severe; she commands us to
pray for peace, 1 Timothy 2.2. she enjoins us to follow peace with all men, Heb.
12.14. she enjoynes us to lose our right for our peace, Mat. 5. motus aliena
naturae pace nostra cohibere, as Hilary speaks, to place a peaceable
disposition as a bank or bulwark against the violence of another rage, by
doing nothing to conquer him who is in arms; to charm the hissing Adder, with
silence; it levels the hills, and raises the valleys, and casts an aspect upon
all conditions of men, all qualities, all affections whatsoever, that they may
be settled, compact, and at unity with themselves and others. This was Christ's
first gifts, when he was born, and it was conveyed unto us in an Hallelujah;
Luke 2. peace on earth, and this (...), as Basil calls it, his last gift, when
he was to dye, John 14.27. Peace I leave with you, and so conclude, this is it
which Saint Paul here commends to us as a lesson to be learnt of us, the word
is (...), we must labor and study to be quiet.

There is nothing in the world which deserves true commendation but must be
wrought out with study and difficulty; nor is the love of peace and quietness,
obvia and illaborata virtus, an obvious and easy virtue, which will grow up of
it self. Indeed, good inclinations and dispositions may seem to grow up in
some men, as the grass and the flowers of the field, and to be as naturally in
them as the evil; for man that is born to action brought with him into the
world those practick principles, which may direct him in his course; there is
says Basil, (...), one part of piety which we never learnt, but brought with
us, as an impression made in us by the hand of Nature it self. And these
natural and inbred dispositions do not always grow up as we do in stature,
but show themselves, and soon disappeare, like the embryon or child in the
womb, they live and dye, and never see the sun; they bud and blossom in us,
and bear this glory with them for a while, but when they should ripen and be
that fruit which we hope to see and look on with delight, either through our
neglect, or the malignant aspect of ill example, they are nipt, and withered,
and lost, and there grow up worse in their place, so unlike to their first
show, and those hopes which we conceived, that we upbraid the end with the
beginning, the harvest with the spring, and wonder how that which in its
putting forth was a flower, should in its growth and culmination become a
thistle; how that which was a Lamb in the morning, should be a fox or Lion
before its evening; how these good dispositions, like a fair temple which is
in raising, should sink and fall and be buried in the rubbish. But these
dispositions and good inclinations we look upon as upon promises, which may be
kept or broke; nor can we commend them farther then by our hopes, which are
sometimes answered, but too often deluded, nor can we call them virtues, because
they are not voluntary. That which is truly praiseworthy, and must fit us for
Eternity, will not shoot forth of it self, Deorum virtus natura excellit,
hominum autem industria. Cicer. Top.
nor grow and flourish in its full beauty, till the soul and mind of Man be
well cultivated, be dressed, manured and watered; is a work of time, and must be
wrought out in us, by us, even against our selves, against the reluctancies of
the flesh, against all solicitations, and provocations which will beround us,
and compass us in on every side; for else we shall not be long quiet, but
uncertain and desultorious, leap out of one humor into another, like those
whom we must study and deprehend, and so meet and apply our selves unto them in
every mode and disposition, or else they will vent and break forth, and trouble
us, whom we cannot make our friends, unless we make our selves their
parasites. We are not what we should be, till we labor and study to be so;
when we shake off our mist, and shine, then our light is glorious; when we are
flesh, and make our selves spiritual, then we are active; when we quit our
selves of that leaden weight of our corrupt nature, as Nazianzen calls it,
(...). Naz. or 31.
and are carried up by our reason above all that may disquiet us, or work us
out of our selves to the molestation of others, then we are quiet; then we are
a fit spectacle for God, for Angels, and men to look upon and delight in; we
read indeed of infused habits, and the Schools have furnished us with many
such conclusions; but have not given us those premises which may enforce them;
which they could not do, because neither reason nor revelation will afford
them: but if they be infused, as they are infused into us, so they are not
infused without us, they are poured not like water into a Cisterne, but into
living vessels fitted and prepared for them; for if they were infused without
us, I cannot see how they should be lost; if wisdom were thus infused into us,
we could never err; if righteousness were thus infused, the will would ever
look upon that wisdom, and never swerve, nor decline from it; if Sanctity were
thus settled on the Affections, they could never rebel. The understanding
could never err, for this wisdom would ever enlighten it; the will could not
be irregular, for this righteousness would ever bridle it; the affections
could not distract us, for they would ever be under command; for as they were
given without us, so bringing with them an irresistible and uncontroublable
force, they would work without us, and we might sit still upon our bottomes,
and fill our selves with vanity, in expectation of such an infusion, of such a
dew which would fall into us whether we will or no; and so virtue would be an
Ancile, as a buckler sent down from heaven which we never set a hand to, and we
shall be worse and worse upon this account, that we shall better, and look upon
grace as Caligula did upon the moon, Suet. Caligula.
when she was full and bright, and wonder she does not fall down out of her
orb, and hasten to our embraces, and so we may be deceived, as he was, and it
may never come. No, it is most true, grace is sufficient for us, and it is as
true, grace is not sufficient for us, unless we cherish it; quietness is the
gift of God, but it is a conditional gift, which exacts something from him who
must receive it: if we will be quiet, we must study to be so, that is,
earnestly and unfeignedly desire it, and the earnest desire of any practical
virtue, is the study of it; when the heart is prepared, the will made
conformable, then are we perfect Scholars in this art of conversation.

And to this end we must, first, make it our meditation day and night, and fill
our minds with it, and this is like the conning of a part which we are to act,
and will make us ready to perform it with a grace and decorum, and so receive
a plaudite, (...). Arist. Rhet. 3. x.
an Euge from him who is our peace. For Meditation is (...), is a kind of
augmentation and enlargement of the object we look upon, and by our continual
survey of the beauty of it, by fixing our thoughts upon it, and by renewing
that heat and fervor in us, by thinking of it, and an assiduous reviving and
strengthening those thoughts, we make it more visible, more clear, more
applyable then before; make that, which written, is but a dead letter; or
spoken, but a sound; as the voice of God himself, of force and energie to
quicken and enliven us. It is like to those Prospectives which this later Age
has found out, by which we discover Stars which were never seen, and in the
brightest of them find spots which were never discerned; We see the glory of
tranquillity, and the good it brings to our selves and others; what a heaven
there is in love and peace, and what a hell and confusion in Anger, and debate;
We find out the plague of our hearts, the Leprosy of our souls, which before
appeared as a spot, as nothing, and this help we have by Meditation. For
though it be most seen, as the Pilots skill is, cum stridunt funes, and gemunt
gubernacula, in a rough and well-wrought Sea, in times of trouble and
distraction; yet our study and desire of it wants no opportunity of time or
place, and inter medios rerum actus invenit aliquid vacui, in the midst of our
business and employments finds leisure, and makes its closet in the very
streets. Every day, every hour of our life we may contemplate it, and prepare
our selves to be at peace with all men. That when the tempest does arise, which
may disquiet us and throw us from our station, we may be ready and able, if not
to be calm and slumber it, yet to becalme our selves, and stand as quiet and
upright as if no wind did blow. As the young man in Xenophon did (...) exercise
his limbs and fingers at home, and framed them to that gesture, and elegancy of
motion, which might win the favor and commendations of those who beheld him
abroad; so may we enter into our closet and be still; tell our selves what a
blessing it is to be our selves, what a divine thing it is not to be moved; how
like to God we are, when we see distasteful objects and are not changed; how
meritorious and heroic a thing it is, to save our selves in the midst of a
froward generation; thus prepare and fix our hearts, think that God may lay us
as he did Job in the dunghill, and resolve to be patient; that I may live
amongst perverse and froward men, and be ready to addulce and sweeten them;
amongst those whose teeth are arrows, and hold up our buckler; that the
heathen may rage, and tumultuously assemble, and comfort our selves, that God
shall have them in derision; that we may live in the midst of the enemies of
peace, and provide to keep it; suppose that such a Lion as Nero, or some worse
beast should rore amongst us, commune with our selves, and be still, and fly to
no other Sanctuary then our tears and our prayers.

And therefore in the next place, we must not only meditate and contemplate
it, but upon all occasions put it in practice; for meditation may be but the
motion and circulation of the fancy; the business, or rather the idleness of
such men who send their thoughts abroad, as boys throw smooth stones upon the
surface of the water, which are lost in the making; which look and gaze on
virtue, and then fly aloft in the contemplation of it, but like those birds of
prey which first tower in the Air, and then stoop at carrion. We must
therefore second our meditation, and ratify, and make it good by practice,
faciendo discere, con it more perfectly by being not moved at the incursion of
any evil; learn to pass by a petty injury, that we be not cast down with a
greater; not to be envious against evil doers, that we may be less troubled at
what they do; not to repine at the prosperity of evil men, that we may not be
too far exalted with our own, by accustoming our selves to the suffering of
this or that evil, proceed and grow up to that composedness, that we may
endure all; to learn with a foil, that we may fight with a sword, as
Demosthenes used to repeat his Orations on the beach, that having stood the
roaring of the Sea, he might be the less troubled at the noise and insolency
of the people in the Pleading-place.

And this study is no easy study, for dedocendi prius quam docendi, we must
unlearne many things, before we can be taught this; we must abandon our former
principles, out of which we drew so many dangerous conclusions, before we can
make any progress in this divine science; we must pull down our former
desires, before we can raise up new. In a word, we must empty our selves before
we can be quiet.

And first we must cast out self-love, I mean, we must not love our selves so
irregularly, so ridiculously, so perniciously, so mortally as we do; for there
is no adamant, no millstone more unyielding to the stroke of the hammer, then
the heart of man when once it is possessed with the love of it self: then every
thing that flies, crosses us, troubles us; every apparition is a monster; every
man is our enemy, every look is a threat, every word is a sword, every whisper
is thunder; he that thus loves himself cannot long be quiet with any man. Our
blessed Apostle where he tells us that in those perilous times which were to
come, 2 Timothy 3.
there should be (...), lovers of themselves, that is, blind to themselves,
ignorant of themselves; he brings in a train after them, an Iliad of many
evils that should follow, whilst self-love led in the Front. First lovers of
themselves, and then Covetous, Boasters, proud, disobedient to Parents,
Traitors, Heady minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God; and such
men can never be quiet.

2ly. We must root out that root of all evil, Covetousness, which will never
suffer us to be quiet; is ever busy abroad seeking to add house to house, and
land to land, to draw all unto it self; nam and avaritia amat unitatem, says
Aust. For even covetousness is a lover of unity; and commands, and drives us
from place to place, even through the world, till it collect all into one, and
make it its own: and to this end we must confine our desires, and begin not to
stand in need of Fortune; for if we let them run out, they will be ever
running, and never at an end, and throw down whatsoever is against them; for
what our desires are let out, and upon the wing, we speak to every man which
stands between us and the object they fly to, as Joab did to Asahel, 2 Samuel 2.
Turn thee aside or we will smite thee to the Ground. This fills the hills with
Robbers, the Sea with pirates, the Commonwealth with thieves, and cheats, and
oppressors; this raises sedition, tumults, wars. Aurato Capitolio bella
gessimus, Sen: Controv.
says the Orator, whilst Rome was poor, peace was within her walls, but when
the Capitol was gilded, rich and glorious, then war brake in. The Gods and
Religion might be the pretense, but Covetousness and Ambition beat up the
drum.

And therefore we must in the next place pull back our Ambitition, which is a
busy, troublesome, and vexatious evil; carrying us over our brothers necks to
that pitch, from whence we commonly fall and break our own, never quiet till
then.

And then we shall the more easily bind our malice which is ever lurking and
prying for the prey; and bridle our anger, which will never suffer us to be at
quiet in our selves or with others, but will drive us from our selves, and put
us in the posture and motion of madmen, make us run out of our own house to
burn our neighbors, and afflict our selves to trouble others. And last of
all, empty our selves of all suspicion and evil surmizing, of all discontent,
which never want fuel to foment them; which feed on shadows, on whispers, on
lies, empty reports, and draw conclusious out of any, out of no premises at
all; which call small benefits injuries, and every frown a persecution; which
level us in our best estate, impoverish us in riches, raise a tempest in a
calm, and strike us on the ground, when no evil breaths in our coasts;
which have a miraculous power to turn a rod into a serpent, a creating power
to work not good out of evil, but evil out of nothing; are quick and
apprehensive, strike at every guat, and make it a Camel to choke us; in brief,
which are that worm which gnawes us continually, which kindle a hell on earth,
torment us in pleasure, bruise us on profit, bind us in liberty, lay us on our
bed, fright us with visions and dreams, and fearful apparitions, which turns
a seraglio into a prison, a talent into a mite, and a mite into nothing; and
whatsoever comes near into a punishment, which is worse then nothing. These
are the evil spirits which torment and tear us, and strike us to the ground,
and make us wallow and foam, and when we have dispossessed our selves of these,
we shall sit quietly, and in our right minds; or if we move, we shall move in
our own sphere and compass, which is a motion in our place, and such a motion
is rest.

This is our spiritual exercise, and this we must study; this is the labor
and work of our faith, and we must practice it every day; and when we have
practiced it, practice it again, repeat our lesson over and over, and be
jealous of our selves, that we are not yet perfect; as Petrach counsels
students, Sic philosophari ut philosophiam amemus, so study to be quiet, that
we may love it, love it as that, which will purchase us the love of the God of
Peace.

And if we take the proper signification of the word here, (...), our love must
be of that nature, that we must love it as that which will crown us with glory,
we must be ambitious of it. And how do ambitious men stretch, and rack their
wits? how do they study to attain first one degree of honor, then another, and
then the top of all, and then study again to be higher then the highest? for
ambition though it do begin with the end, yet it is always a beginning, and
this is proper to it, that it never looks back, or considers how high it has
soared; it begins at one kingdom, and then begins at another, and though it
make way ad cubile solis, to the end of the world, yet it does but begin there.
Thus should we be ambitious of quietness of a settled mind and a peaceable
behavior, which no man's height can sink, no man's greatness can diminish, no
man's anger can move, nomans malice can shake, no man's violence can disorder; as
others are of honor, which they must win with fire and sword, Naz. or. 18.
and so make up Nazianzens number, who tells us there be three things which
cannot be overcome or disquieted, God, and an Angel, and a good Christian; for
God is not troubled when he is angry; though for our sakes he tells us he is,
even pressed as a Cart under sheaves, and it is our sin not wrath that whets the
sword of the destroying angel; and shall we not be ambitious to make up the
third? to be like unto our heavenly Father, to be like unto the Angels in this?
to be quiet, and keep the same temper and evennesse in the midst of so many
humors as men; to be the same, when others run several ways, and all to
trouble us; to be humble, when one scorns us; to be meek, when another rages;
to be silent, when this man does rail; not to be transported with what others
do, but to stay at home with our selves, and be still; when the world is out of
order, not to pull it to pieces in seeking to settle it; not to enrage a fire
by attempting to quench it; to establish this order, this peace, this heaven
within our selves, and as much as in us lies, keep it with all men. This is
truly Religion, not to hear, and talk, and fill the world with noise and
confusion; not to exercise our selves in things too high for us, but to fight
against our lusts, and trouble none but our selves; though this aged world is
grown over-wise, and has found out a way to divorce Religion from honesty and
peace. This is truly Christianity, the command and practice of Christ, who
would not be an Arbitrator between two brethren; For who, says Christ, has
made me a Judge or Divider over you? my business is to give you general
precepts, which you must draw down to particular cases, and not to put my hand
to help to manage the affairs and business of particular men, who came down
into the world as rain into a fleece of wool, to beget us with his Word, that
we his children might move and walk in the world as he came down into it, that
is, without noise.

Lastly, this is truly honorable, a mark which the ambition of a Christian
should fly to; for it is an honor to cease from strife, Sedere, Quiescere, so
it is rendered, to sit still and be quiet; possess your selves, Prove. 20.3.
says S. Paul, in sanctification and honor, in sanctity, which is your
honor, by which you honor and adorn the Temple of the holy Ghost. We count it
indeed an honor to make our tongues our own, and speak what we list; to make
our hands our own, and do what we please; to pursue our enemies and take them,
and beat them as small as the dust before the wind; we count it an honor to
stand in the valley, and to touch the mountains till they smoke; to reach at
that which is above us, and pull it down; to divide that which is united, to
shake that which is established, to violate that which should not be touched, and
are ever moving and heaving upward to be more than we should be, to be what we
should not be; vile, and ignoble, and dead in our own place, and never
honorable (we think) till we have left it behind us, to gain us a name, though
it be by firing a temple, or setting the world it self in Combustion.

Thus honors are dispensed amongst the children of men, amongst the Sons of
Belial; honorable Schismatics descended from Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, who
made Israel to sin; honorable Revengers of the tribe of Simeon and Levi, those
brethren in evil; honorable hypocrites, Pharisees and the Sons of Pharisees,
a generation of vipers; honorable murderers, of their Father the devil, who
was so from the beginning. Ambitious, humorous, covetous, discontent, forlorn
and desperate persons.

Quosque suae rapiunt sceleratae in praelia causae. These are the Grandees, the
honorable persons of this world; but in the Court, and Heraldry of heaven, we
find no such titles of honor. No, Write these men desolate, who shall not
prosper, though they do prosper; write them down Haters of God, Despightfull,
Boasters, Inventers of evil things, Fools without understanding; but the man,
who is quiet, and peaceable, he is the honorable man, though he lie on a
Dunghill, though he sits amongst the dogs of the flocks; like unto the Angels,
nay like unto God, and holding resemblance with him, transformed from glory to
glory; the same though the fashion of the world change every day; not stealing
into honor, as those great thieves of the world, Alexander, and Hanibal, and
Marius, and Sylla, errore hominum, by the error and mistake of men, who call
fools Politicians, and Madmen valiant; but Judicio Dei, by the Judgment and
sentence of God, himself made proprietary of it, being his Soldier, who has
fought against none but himself; being his Priest, who has sacrificed himself,
all his lusts, and desires, and animosities; being his King too, who has awed,
and commanded, and governed himself in peace, and has subdued every thing that
might disquiet either himself or others; and so made a Royal Priesthood unto
the Lord. Thus, thus shall it be done to the man, whom the King of kings will
honor. This honor have all his Saints in this life, and in the next,
Everlasting Glory.

You see then, brethren, your calling; you are called to holiness, and you are
called to peace and quietness; you see the study you are employed in by the
blessed Apostle, as a hard, so an honorable study; and in the ways of honor,
who would not move? we must therefore make one step further, and learn the
method which is prescribed, or the means to keep us at peace with our selves
and others; we must (...), we must do our own business, and labor with our
hands, as he has commanded. But of this in the next.

blazon or royal coat of arms of England and Wales HONI ^T QVI MAL Y PENSE

THE TWENTIETH SERMON.
PART II.
1 THESE. 4.11. -- And to do your own business, and to work with your own
hands, as I have commanded you.


OUr progress in our studies and endeavors is commonly answerable to our
method, and the rules we observe; which if they be proper and connaturall to
the end which we have set up, omnia breviora fiunt, our labor and pains are
the less, and our profit and improvement more. For every man would be quiet in
his own place, and pretends he is so, when he is busy and tumultuous abroad;
the Covetous man is in his place, when he joins House to House, and lays
Field to Field, till there be no place; the ambitious is in his place, when he
flies out of it, never at rest, till he reach that height, where he cannot
rest; the revenger is in his place, when he is digging in the bowels of his
brother; the parasice, the Calumniator, the talebearer, the libeller, the
seditious, all desire peace, and quietness, when they move as a tempest, drive
down all before them, and are at last lost themselves in the ruin which they
make; the flatterer is poisoned with his own oil; the calumniator is wounded
with his own lie, and it returns back upon him into his own bowels; the
Talebearer is consumed in the fire which he kindles; The wit which the
Libeller scatters, flies back upon him, and many times is writ in his forehead;
The Seditious are often struck down with the noise which they make; divide the
Commonwealth, and are distracted themselves: And though their craft, or
violence, their hypocrisy, and perjury bring them home to that which their
over-daring Hope first looked upon, yet there they find no rest, but move
uneasily in the midst of those cares and fears which came not near them when
their thoughts were at home; for they have never more business to do, then
when they do not their own; and have not their end, when they have their end,
because they went not that way, nor trod those paths, those plain and easy
paths which did lead unto it.

Now, there cannot be a truer Method in our study and endeavor to be quiet,
then this which our Apostle has here laid down: which in the 1 Cor. 7.20. he
calls (...), (...), to abide patiently, Grot.
to abide in our calling, to abide there as in our own proper place, and
sphere; as in our Castle, as in our Sanctuary, where we are safe, safe from
those incursions and affronts, which will meet together, and multiply about us,
to shake and disturb us when we are out of it. The surest way to be Quiet, is
to abide in our calling, in that state and condition, in which the Hand of
Providence has placed us, and not to be drawn out of it by the splendor, or
glory, the benefit, and fairer appearance and show of another man's: Not to
swell, 2 Cor. 12.20. For when we swell, we swell over, and out of our place,
and so nearer and nearer to danger; to that Opposition, which will beat against
us, to drive us back, and shrink us into our own Measure and Compass; and
either in ordinem redigere, as the phrase is, either drive us back to our own
place, or leave us none to move in. Again, not to stretch beyond our line, 2
Cor. 10.14. for God in confining us unto our calling has given us, as it were,
our measure, has drawn out a line which we must not pass; peccare est tanquam
lineas transilire, says Tully; Tull. Par. 16.
every action of ours has its limit and Boundaries, and if we pass them we
sin; if we stretch beyond these, and if we break through our bounds, Tert.
Scorp.
and are busie-bodyes in other men's matters, 1 Pet. 4.15. (...), Alieni
Speculatores, as Tertullian renders it, we take off our eye and care from our
own, and send them abroad as spies, and observers of that which concerns us
not; we hold our visitations, exercise our jurisdiction there, where we have no
power. Our eye wanders, our ear is itching, our Tongue is walking through the
Earth, our hand is reaching at every forbidden tree, our feet are in every man's
house, our heart is the forge where we fashion out every man's business but our
own; a Praetorium, or place of State, where we appoint out every man's
Commission, set other men tasks, and neglect our own; and as it is in the
Proverb, aedilitatem gerimus sine populi suffragio, invest our selves with a
power which was never given us, and usurp authority, which we were never voted
to; and are neither quiet our selves, nor suffer others to be so. A. Gellius.
Lib. 11. Noct. ^tic. c. 16. Senec. de Tranq. c. 12.
The Greeks call it (...) which Gellius cnfesses he cannot render, no not
obscurely, in many words; Sineca inquietam inertiam, an unquiet and troublesome
sloth, by which we run up and down, and never abide at one stay, but like men
which run in haste to quench a fire, shoulder every one we meet, and tumble
down our selves and others in the way, and so fall together: Curiosus nemo est,
quin sit malevolus, says he in Plautus; Plaut. Stich. Act. 1. Sc. 3.
Curiosity is the breath of malice, and is mischievous; and mischief provokes
wrath; and injustice and mischief on the one side, and impatience and wrath on
the other, meet and strive, and struggle together; and in the contention either
one or both are lost. And therefore Plato tells us, to meddle with our own
matters, (...), and not to busy our selves in other men's, (...) etc. Plat. c.
4. de Repub.
is that which we call justice, for by this, we leave to every man that which
is his untoucht, and preserve to our selves that which is ours; that is, we are
just to others, and just to our selves; we do not trouble and disadvantage
other men in their station, and defend our own. But when we fly out and pass
beyond our bounds, we are not what we should be, but carry about with us a
world of iniquity; our thoughts are let loose full of desire, and are doubled
upon us full of anxiety, and when we gain most, we are the greatest losers: we
are injurious, false, deceitful; we are oppressors, thieves, murderers,
usurpers; we are all that in our selves which we condemn in others; for this is
the seminary of all those evils, which are sent forth so many emissaries to
break the peace of Church and Commonwealth.

And therefore not only Religion, but reason, not only Christianity, but
nature it self has cops'd and bound us in from flying out, and has designed
to every man his proper business, that he may not stray nor wander abroad.

And first, Christianity is the greatest peacemaker, Romans 12.
and keeps every man to his own office; if Ministry, to wait on his Ministry;
if teaching, to teach; if trading, to follow his Trade; if government, to rule
with diligence; if service, to be obedient with singleness of heart, Exodus 16.
Ephesians. 6. Every man has his gift, and every man has his measure and
proportion; and, as it was in the gathering of Manna, he that has much, has
nothing over, and he that has little, has no lack; every man's place is the
best: Naz or 3.
for there is no place either in Church or Commonwealth which is not
Honorable; and a great honor it is to serve God in any place: One Star
differs from another Star in Glory; but in its proper sphere, every Stare
shines, but out of it, is either a Mass, or lump, or nothing. It is true,
indeed, in Christ Jesus there is neither high nor low, neither rich nor poor;
no difference between the Noble and the Peasant, between him that grindeth at
the Mill, and him that sits on the Throne; because his spiritual graces are
communicated non homini, sed humano generi, not to this man; or that, to this
calling or that, but to as many as will receive them, to all the world and
every man that is Christ's servant, is a Peer, a Priest, and a King; and when he
shall come to judge both the quick and the dead, he will not pardon this man
because he was a king, nor condemn that man because he was a beggar; for
neither was Dives put in hell, because he was rich, nor Lazarus carried into
Abraham's bosom, because he was poor; neither was Nero lost, because he was an
Emperor, nor Paul saved, because he was a Tent-maker; but yet for all this, he
has made up his Church, and formed Commonwealths, not of Angels, but of men,
who live in the world, and so under order and government; and has assigned
every man his place and calling, which if every man would keep and make good,
every man would be quiet and in peace; the Church would be as heaven it self,
all glory and all harmony; and the Commonwealth would be a body compact within
it self, and never fly in pieces, but last for ever, and flourish in it self,
being subject to no injury, but that of Time, or a greater and over-powerfull,
foreign force; for that of a designed Period, and a fatality hanging over
every body Politic, which at last sinks it down, and buries it in that ruin,
upon which another is raised, is generally believed in the world, but upon no
convincing evidence, having neither reason nor Revelation to raise it up to the
credit of a Positive truth; for, That such a thing has been done, is no good
Argument, that it shall ever be so; and though God has foretold the period and
end of this or that monarchy, yet the prophecy does not reach unto all; and he
himself has given us those rules and precepts, has raised such a fence, and
hedge about every commonwealth, which if we did not pluck it up our selves,
might secure, and carry them along in the course of things even to their end,
that is, to the end of the world; but this we talk of, as we do of many other
things, and talk so long, till we believe it, and rest on our guess and
conjecture, as on a demonstration: but the truth is, we are our own fate and
destiny, we draw out our thread, and cut it; we start out of our places, and
divide our selves from one another, and then indeed, and not till then, Fate
and Necessity lie heavy upon a kingdom, and it cannot stand.

Christianity binds us to our own business, and till we break loose, till some
one or other steps out of his place from it, there is peace; we are safe in our
lesser vessels, and the ship of the commonwealth rides on with that smoothness
and evennesse which it has from the consistencie of its parts in their own
place; for though all are one in Christ Jesus, yet we cannot but see, that
there is a main difference between the inward qualification of his members, and
the outward administration and government of his Church. In the kingdoms of
the world, and so in the Church visible, every man is not fit for every place;
some must teach, and some govern; some must learn and obey; some must put
their hand to the plough; some to this trade, and some to that; only (...), as
Aristotle speaks, those who are of more then ordinary wit and ability, (...).
Aristot. l. 6 Polit. c. 5.
must bear office in Church or Commonwealth. One is noble, another is
ignoble; one is learned, another is ignorant; one is for the spade, and another
for the sword; one for the flaile, and sheephook, another for the scepter: and
such a disproportion is necessary amongst men; for nihil aequalitate ipsa
inaequalius, Plin. Epist.
there is no greater inequality in the world, then in a body politic, where
all the parts are equal; for that equality, which commends and upholds a
Commonwealth, arises from the difference of its parts moving in their
several measures and proportions, as music does from discords; when every
part answers in its place, and raises it self no higher then that will bear;
when the magistrate speaks by nothing but the Laws, and the subject answers by
nothing but his obedience; when the greater shadow the less, and the less
help to fortify the great; when every part does its part, and every member its
office, then there is an equality and an harmony, and we call it peace. For if
we move, and move cheerfully in our own sphere and calling, we shall not start
forth to discompose or disorder the motion of others in theirs; if we fill our
own place, we shall not leap over into another; our desires will dwell at
home; our covetousness and ambition dye; our malice cease; our suspicion end;
out discontent vanish, or else be soon changed and spiritualized; our desires
will be levelled on happiness, we shall covet the best things, we shall be
ambitious of heaven; we shall malice nothing, but malice, and destroy it;
suspect nothing but our suspicion; and be discontent with nothing, but that we
are so; and so in this be like unto God himself, and have our Center in our
selves, or rather make peace our Center, that every motion may be drawn from
it, that in the compass and Circumference of our behavior with others, all
our Actions, as so many lines, may be drawn out, and meet, and be united in
peace.

And this is not only enjoined by Religion and the Gospel, but it is the
Method of nature it self, which has so ordered it, that every thing in its own
place is at quiet and rest, and no where else; The earth moves not; water is
not ponderous in its proper place; the fire burns not in its sphere, but out
of it it has voracitatem toto mundo avidissimam, says Pliny, it spreads it
self most violently, and devours every thing it meets with, nay poison it self
is not hurtful to those tempers that breed it; Senec. ep. 81.
Illud venenum, quod serpents in alienam perniciem proferunt, sine sua
continent, says Seneca; The venom of the Scorpion does not kill the Scorpion,
and that poison which serpents cast out with danger and hurt to others, they
keep without any to themselves. And as it is in nature, so is it in the society
of men: Our diligence in our own business is sovereign, and connaturall to our
estates and conditions, but most times poisonous abroad, and dangerous and
fatal to our selves and others. When Uzzah put forth his hand to hold up the
Ark of God, and keep it from falling, though his intention were good, yet God
struck him for his error and rashness in moving out of his place, and struck
him dead, 2 Samuel 6.7.
because he did not (...), do his own business; when Uzziah invades the
Priests office, the 2. Chr. 26. and would burn Incense, and Azariah the Prophet
told him, ad te non pertinet, it pertains not to thee, it is not thy
business; even while the censer was yet in his hand, his sin was writ in his
forehead, he was struck with a leprosy, and cut off from the city of the Lord,
v. 21. When Peter was busy to enquire concerning John, What shall this man
do? Our Savior was ready with a sharp reply, quid ad te? what is that to
thee? thy business is to follow me. When Christians out of a wanton and
irregular zeal did throw down Images, and were slain by the Heathen in the
very fact, the Church censured them as disturbers of the peace, rather then
Martyrs; and though they suffered death in the defiance of Idolatry, yet
allowed them no place in the Dypticks, or in the Catalogue of those who laid
down their life for the truth. Corah rises out of his place, and the earth
swallows him up. Sheba is up and blows a Trumpet, and his head flies over the
wall. Absalom would up into the Tribunal, which was none of his place, and was
hanged in the Oak, which was fitter for him; and if any have risen out of their
place, as we use to say, on the right side, and been fortunate villains, their
purchase was not great; honey mingled with gall, Honor drugg'd with the hatred
and curses of men, with fears and cares, with gnawings within, and Terrors
without: all the content and pleasure they had by their great leap out of
their place, was but as Music to one stretched out on the Rack, or as that
little light, which is let in through the crack or flaw of a wall into him that
lies fettered in a loathsome dungeon, and at last their wages, which was death,
eternal death, and howling for ever. Nay, when we are out of our place, and
busy in that which concerns us not, though what we do may be in it self
lawful, and most expedient to be done, yet we make that act a sin in us, which
is another man's duty, and so shipwreck at that point, to which another was
bound; perish in the doing of that, for which he shall perish, for not doing
it: The best excuse that we can take up, is that we did honesta mente peccare,
that we did that which is evil, as we say, for the best; that we did sin and
offend God with a good intention and pious mind; which Gloss may be fitted to
the greatest sin, and is the fairest Chariot the Devil has, to carry us to
hell. If we would be particular, the instances in this kind would be but too
many: For such Agents the Enemy of the Truth has always had in all the Ages
of the Church, who have unseasonably disturbed the public peace, and their
own, whose business it was (and sure it could be none of their own) to teach
Pastors to Govern, and Divines how to Preach; every day to make a new coat for
the Church; to hammer and shape out a new form and discipline, as if nothing
could be done well, because they stood not by and had a hand in the doing it;
and so make her not so fair, but certainly, as changeable as the moon. One
sect dislikes this, and another that, and a third quarrels at them both; and
every one of them, if their own fancy had been set up and established by another
hand, would have kicked it down. For this humor is restless and endless, and
for want of matter, will at last feed on him that nourishes it: as it was in
that experiment of the Egyptians in Epiphanius, who filled a bag with serpents,
and when afterward they opened it, found that the greatest had eat up the
rest, and half of it self: we may well say of them, as Gregory the great does,
illos alienorum actuum sagax cogitatio devastat, they so busy their thoughts
upon other men's actions, that they have none left for their own: which being
sent abroad into the world, leave a devastation, a wilderness at home; which
fly to every mark which is set up, but that which their calling and Religion
directs them to aim at; whose whole life and employment is to do other men's
business, and sleep in their own. It is not safe neither for Church nor
commonwealth, that such busybodies should walk in matters so far above their
sphere and compass; nor is it fit that Phaeton should sit too long in the
chair; for if these turbulent, domineering spirits prevail, if the mercy and
providence of God prevent it not, the whole course of nature will be set on
fire, or else dislocated and perverted; and the foot shall stand where the hand
does, the ear shall speak, and the tongue hear, and the foot see; all shall
be Prophets, all Teachers, I might say, all shall be kings, and I might add,
all will be atheists.

If then we will study peace, or desire to be quiet in our place, let RELIGION
guide us, which has drawn out to our hands the most exact method, and most
proportioned to that end; or let us follow the method of nature it self; and in
the course of nature thus we see it. The heavens are stretched forth as a canopy
to compass the Air; the Air moves about the earth; the earth keeps its
Center, and is immovable; the Sun knows his season, and the Moon her going
down; the Stars start not from their spheres: Heavy bodies ascend not, nor
do the light go downwards; but all the parts of the Universe are tied and
linkt together by that law of providence and order, that they may subsist. And
so it is both in Church and Commonwealth; we are not in Termino, we cannot be
quiet and rest, but in our own place and function: what should a Star do in
the earth, or a strone in the firmament? what should an inferior step into a
superiors seat, and set himself above those who are over him in the Lord?
which I am sure is to be out of his place, where he cannot move but disorderly.
If men would but fill their own, they would have but little leisure to step
into another man's place, or to be so much fools as to set their foot within
their neighbors doors. Thucidides.
For the Historian has observed it, that those men who neglect their private
affairs, are ever very busy in examining public proceedings; well skilled in
every man's duty but their own. Who fitter to change the face of a
Commonwealth, Julius Caesar before the civil war said it of himself, Quam
multis indigeo ut nihil habeam?
then he that was so far indebted, that he dared not to show his own? who
wanted so much, that he might be worth nothing? who more ready to shake and
dissolve a state, then he that has wasted his own with riotous living? who
will sooner be a traitor then a bankrupt?

I might here urge and press this duty, which confines every man to his own
business; 1 a decoro, from the grace, and beseemingnesse of it; for what
garment can fit us better then our own? what business more natural to us then
our own? what motion more graceful then in our own? our own place best becomes
us, and we are riculous and monstrous in any other: Apelles with an aule in his
hand, or the cobbler with his pencill; Midas with asses ears, or an ass in
purple; Nero with his fiddle, or a fiddler with a crown; Commodus in his
artifex, quae stationis imperatoriae non erant, etc. Ael. Lampridius.
Comodus making of glasses, a good dancer, and a swordplaier, or a glasseman,
and a dauncer giving laws; a tradesman in the pulpit, or a divine with the
meteyard in his hand; the Lord in his servants frock, and the servant on his
footcloth, are objects of that nature, that they command our finger and our
smile; and the first and easiest censure we pass on them, is our laughter, and
it were happy for commonwealths, if they deserved no worse. But they are not
only ridiculous, but ominous and prodigious, and appear like comets,
threatening and ushering in some plague, or war, some strange alteration in
Church or Commonwealth; whereas our own place (be it what it will) does not
only conserve, but become and adorn us; and our regular motion in it, is a
fair prophecy of peace to our selves and all that are about us; and though it
be the lowest, we may be honorable in it, as Themistocles once said, being
chosen into a mean office, that he would so manage it, as to make it of as
great repute in Athens as the highest.

2ly. ab utili, from the advantage it brings; quod enim decet fere prodest,
says Quintilian; for that which becomes us, Quint. instit. l. x. 1.
commonly does also further and promote us; we usually say, our plough goes
forward, and when the plough goes and is ours, when we sow our own seed, in our
own ground, we have laid the foundation of a fair hope, and we seldom miss
of a rich and plenteous harvest. When we venture out of our place, we venture
as at a Lottery, where we draw many blanks, before we have one prize; and when
that is drawn, it does not countervaile the fourtieth part of our venture; but
the trumpet sounds as at a triumph, and we leave behind us more then we carried
with us, and go away with the loss: So it is when we move in another man's
place, we move upon hopes, which most times deceive us; when we do our own
business, we find no difficulty but in the business it self, and no enemy,
but negligence; but when we break our limits, and leap into other men's
affairs, we meet with greater opposition; we meet with the Law, which is
against us, and very often too strong for us; we meet with those who will be as
violent to defend their station, as we are to trouble it; and if we chance to
break through all these, yet when we have cast up our accounts, and reckon up
the trouble we have undergone, the illegality and injustice of our proceedings,
the detestation of all good men, and the vengeance which hangs over us, with
that benefit which we have reapt, we may put our advantage in our eyes, as they
say, and drop it out.

Lastly, a necessario, from the necessity of doing it; and I do not mean a
legal, and Causative necessity, as the Civilians speak, a precise necessity,
which the law and honesty lays upon us; but a necessity in respect of the end,
which is to be quiet, which we cannot attain to but by our motion in our own
place; for other paths are strange paths and heterogeneous to it; and the
further we go in them, the further we are off, and meet with nothing but that
which is Diametrically opposed to it; injustice, hatred, the curse both of God
and man, goods which are of no value, whilst they are in our hands, and never
estimable but in his, whose they truly are; which all are ill materials to
make a pillow to rest on. In a word, in this our irregular motion we look
toward the rising Sun, and travel toward the West; we run from the shade into
a tempest; we seek for ease and rest, and have thrust our selves into the
Region of noise, and thunder, and darkness. Ask those boisterous and
contentious spirits which delight in war; ask the Tyrants of the earth, those
public, and priviledg'd thieves; ask those who do wade to their unwarranted
desires through the fortunes and blood of others, and see how they are filled
with horror and anxiety; how the riches, which they so greedily desired, have
eaten them up; Behold them afraid of their fortunes, of their friends, of
themselves, even fainting and panting on the Pinnacle of State, ready to be
blown down with every puff of wind; as busy to secure their estate, as they
were to raise it, and yet forced to that unhappy prudence which must needs
endanger it. Behold one slain by his friends, another by his sons, a third
by his servants, and some by their very soldiers, who helped to raise them to
this formidable height. Look over all the Tragedies which have been written,
scarce any but of these; -- Sine caede and sanguine pauci.


Few of them have brought their gray hairs unbloudy to their grave; and if
this be to be quiet, we may in time be induced to believe, that rest and peace
may be found even in hell it self.

This then is not the way; and if we will reach home to the end, we must choose
that path which leads unto it: This is not the Apostles method; no, says Saint
Paul, we have many members in one body, and all members have not the same
office; having therefore different callings, and different gifts, and different
places to move in, let every man wait upon and move in his own, for there he
may be quiet, and no where else: let the Lawyer plead, and the Divine preach;
let the husbandman plough the earth, and the Merchant the Sea; let the
Tradesman follow his trade; let the Magistrate govern, and let all the people
say Amen; let all men make good their place, and every man do his own
business, and so rejoice together in the public order and peace: And as
Cuiacius that famous Lawyer in France, Papyrius Massonius in Elog. illust.
Viror. in vita Cuiacii.
when he was asked his opinion in points of Divinity, was wont to give no other
answer but this, Nihil hoc ad Edictum Praetoris, this which you ask me has to
relation to the Edict of the Praetor; so when any temptation shall take us, and
invite and flatter us Ire in opus alienum, to put our hands to another man's
work, let us drive it back and vanquish it with this considerate resolution,
that it is not amongst the (...), that it is none of our business, no more
pertaining to our calling, then Divinity does to the Edict of the Praetor. And
then as we confine our selves to our own calling, so let us be active and
constant in our motion in it; and as it follows in the Apostles method, let us
shake off sloth, and work with our hands; which is next to be considered.

For indeed, idleness is the mother and nurse of this pragmaticall curiosity;
Plaut. Mostell.
Haec mihi verecundiam, and virtutis modum deturbavit, says he in Plautus,
this takes off our blush, and makes us bold adventurers to engage our selves in
other men's actions; for when the mind of man is at loose, not taken up and
busied in the adorning of it self, then Dinah-like it must gadd abroad to see
the daughters of the Country, and mingle it self with those contemplations
which are, as it were, of another Tribe and Nation, mere strangers unto her.
It is the character of the strange woman, Prove. 7. That she is garrula and
vaga, that she is loud, and ever straggling ( vagum scortum as Horace calls her)
and her feet abide not in her house; Polit. 7. c. 3.
for (...), says Aristotle in his Politics.) He that will be Idle, will be
evil; and he that will do nothing, will do that which he should not; and the
reason is given by the Stoic, mobilis and inquieta men's homini data est, the
mind of man is full of activity, ever in motion, and restless, now carried to
this object, and anon to that; it walks through the world, and out of the
world, and is not at rest, when the body sleeps; and if it do not follow that
which is good, it will soon fasten to that which is evil; for it is not as a
wedg of lead, but of the nature of an Angel, which is (...), which cannot
sleep; as Aristotle spoke of children, (...), it cannot rest, and be quiet; and
therefore the same Philosopher much commends (...) Archytas his rattle, as a
profitable invention; for being put into the hands of children, Aristot. l. 8.
Polit. c. 6.
it keeps them from breaking vessels of use; and so this restless humor is
made less hurtful, by diversion. And such a course, God and nature may seem
to have taken with us, not to dull this activity in us, but to limit and
confine it; and as he has distributed to every man a gift, so he has allotted
to every man a Calling answerable to that gift, that every man being bound to
one, may have the less scope and liberty to rove and make an incursion upon
another man's calling. This is a Primordiall Law, of as great antiquity as the
first man Adam, That we must work with our hands; For God will not every day
work miracles for us, and send us, as he did the Israelites, (...), as Basil
speaks, food without the labor of plowing and sowing. Every Dew will not bring
us Manna, nor every rock yield us water; No, In sudore vultus tui, In the sweat
of thy brows thou shall eat thy bread, was a Command as well as a Curse; and
God has so ordained it, that by fulfilling the Command, we may turn the Curse
into a Blessing. We are not now in Paradise, but as our first Father, after he
had forfeited it, mundo dati quasi metallo, as Tertull. l. de pallio.
speaks, condemned to the world as to the mines, to labor and dig, and so find
that treasure we seek for. As heaven, so the earth is the Lords, and he has
given them both to the Sons of men; the food of our souls, and the food of
our bodies are his gift, and he gives them, when he reveals and prescribes the
means how we shall procure them; for the one he has given us faculty and
will, for the other strength and appetite; neither will the heavens how
themselves down to take us in, nor the things of this world fall into our
bosom, when we sit still, and lay no more out for them then a wish. Ps. 81.10.
Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it, and the opening of our mouth is our
Prayer, our Endeavor, our working with our hands, and then his blessings fall
down, and fill it. Labor and industry is a thing so pleasing to God, tht he
has even bound a blessing to it, which never leaves it, but is carried along
with it, wheresoever it is, even in the mere natural, and heathen man; be the
man what he will, it is almost impossible that diligence should not thrive, for
a blessing goes along with it, as the light does with the Sun, which may be
shadowed or eclip'sd by the cloudinesse of the times, or by some cross
accident, but can never be quite put out: In a word, labor is the price of his
gifts, and when we pay it down, by a kind of commutative justice, he brings
them in, and puts them into our hands.

Ut operemini manibus, that you work with your hands; which words take in all
manual trades, and handycrafts, which are for use and necessity; all lawful
trades; for even thieves, and robbers, and Juglers, Tertull. de Idololat. c. 5.
and cheaters, and forgers of writings do work, not with their feet, says
Tertullian, but with their hands; and he brings in his exception against
Painters, and Statuaries, and Engravers, but no further then he does against
Schoolmasters, and Merchants, who bring in frankincense; in that respect only,
as they sacrifice their sweat and their labor, and are subservient and
ministerial, either to lust or Idolatry; Diligentia tua numen illorum est.
Idem. c. 6. de Idololat.
for the diligence, says he, of the Statuary is the divinity of the Idol; and
we may say, those many unnecessary Arts and trades which are now held up with
credit and repute in the world, because it will still be world, were at first
the Daughters, and are now become the nurses of our luxury and lust; luxury
begat them, and they send our luxury in triumph through the Streets: were
Tertullian, whose zeal waxt so hot even against a purpleseller, to pass now
through our great city with power and authority, Tot sunt artium venae, quot
hominum concuprscentiae. Tertull. de Idol. c. 8. 1 Timothy 6.8.
how many shops would be shut up? or rather how many would there be left open?
for it is not easy to number those Arts and Crafts, which had they never been
professed, we might have had Food and Raiment, with which we Christians, above
all the generations of men, should be content.

But it is not for me to determine which are necessary, and which are not, but
to leave it to the magistrate; there be Arts and trades enough besides these,
vide Plutarch. vit. Lycurgi.
to exercise our wit, our strength, our hands, and such as Lycurgus might have
admitted into his Commonwealth, whose prudence and care it was to shut out all
that was unnecessary; the first that required the labor of the hands was
tillage and husbandry, for, Antiquis temporibus nemo Rusticari nescivit, faith
Ischomachus in Columel. Columel. l. 11. c. 1.
In the first age no man was ignorant of this Art, and the learned have
observed, that the original of humane Laws, which were the preservers of
peace, the boundaries to keep every man in his own place, was from tillage, and
the first division of grounds; whence Ceres, who is first said to have devised
and taught the sowing of Corn as she is called Frugifera, the goddess of
plenty, so is she termed (...) the maker of Laws; and in honor of her the
Athenians celebrated those feasts which they called (...).

-- Mactant lectas de more bidentes
Legiferae Cereri. -- Virgil

They did sacrifice to Ceres the Lawmakers. These men never heard of the curse
in Paradise, yet by the very light of nature, they saw the necessity of labor;
the necessity did I say? nay the dignity and honor of it; for man was made and
built up to this end, says Aristotle, ad intelligendum and agendum, to
understand and to work; and what more unworthy a man, who is made an active
creature, then to bury himself alive in sloth and idleness? to be like Saint
Paul's wanton widow, dead whilst he lives? to be a more unprofitable lump then
the earth, to live and show so little sign of life? whereas the ground
receives rain, and sends back its leaf and grass; what can be more
unbeseeming, then to have feet, and not to go; to to have hands, and not to use
them? and therefore that of the Apostle, Let not him that labors not, eat,
is not only true, because Saint Paul spoke it, but Saint Paul spoke it because
it is true; a Dictate not only of the spirit, but of nature it self. Man is
borne unto labor, says Job; it is natural to him, as natural, as for the
sparks to fly upwards; and if we rightly weigh it, it is as great a prodigy,
as monstrous a sight, to see an idle person, that can do nothing but feed and
cloth himself, and breath, as to see a stone fly, or fire descend to the
Center of the earth; I may add, as to see the Sun stand still: For as the
Sun, so Man naturally should rejoice to run his course.

Shall I now awake the sluggard (if any Thunder will awake him) and tell him he
is a thief that he drinks not water out of his own cisterne? That he eats
stolen bread: If I should, I have Saint Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 3.12.
and Reason to justify me, who tells him plainly, that he that works not at
all, walks inordinately, and eats not his own bread, as if it were not his own,
if his own hands brought it not in; and Ephesians. 4.26. Let him that stole, steal
no more, but rather let him labor and work with his hands: If he will not
steal, let him labor; if he do not labor, he does but steal, even that
which in common esteem is his own. For we must not think, that they only are
thieves, who do vitam vivere vecticulariam, who dig down walls by night, or
lie in wait upon the hills of the robbers; Fur est, qui rem contrectat alienum,
Festus in verb vecticularia v. ta.
he is a thief, which makes use of that which is not his; and then we may
arraigne the ilde, slothful person at this bar, as guilty of this crime; for
he rosteth that, which he never took in hunting; he uses the creature, Prove.
12.27.
to which he has no right; He has interdicted, and shut himself out from the
benefit of fire and water, and all humane commerce; he has out-lawed and
banished himself from the world: He has robbed himself; for though he have
plenty of all things, yet idleness will blow upon it and blast it; He robs the
Commonwealth, for Interest reipub. ut quis re sua been utatur, private
diligence is a public good, and the careful managing of every man's estate,
is advantageous to the whole. And last of all, he robs his own soul of the
service and Ministry of his body, which was made a servant to it; he robs his
soul of his soul, of all the power and activity it has, which serves for no
use but to carry him to a feast, and from thence to his bed, where he lies the
picture and representation of himself, of what he was when he was awake, and
will be yet more like himself, when he is in his grave; For here he is but a
walking, talking, breathing shadow, nay dead, compassed about with stench and
rottenness, whilst many evil spirits hover over his grave, many temptations
are ready to seize on him, and we may say of him, as Seneca did of his friend
Vatia, hic situs est, In this world he does not live, but is buried. Senec. ep.
55.


I might here bring to this bar those cloistered Monks and Friars, who leave
the world as men do virtue and learning, not because they loath and detest it,
but because the way unto them is hard and rugged; leave the world to enter into
a paradise, where all things grow up of themselves, and of many of them that of
Martin Luther (who was himself once a Monk) is true, Monachos ignavia fecit,
Idleness has made more Monks, then Religion; who leave not the world for
Christ, but shadow themselves under their Coule and his name, that they may the
more quietly enjoy it.

But to pass by these as none of our Horizon; A sort of Christians there are,
and they think themselves of the best sort (we may call them Monks at large) as
idle as they, but not cloistered up, who though they labor for the things of
this world, because they love them well, yet look not upon their labor as any
acceptable service to God, but break it off many times most unnecessarily, and
leave their duty behind them, to go up with the Pharisee, into the Temple, not
to pray, but to hear a Sermon, and then return back to their shop, and commend
and confute it; Hear and do not, but do the contrary. They call it devotion,
but it is the Itch and wantonness of the Ear which wastes their devotion, and
sometimes their estates; this they delight in, and this is their Religion,
nothing but words and noise; to this they sacrifice their time which is due to
their calling, and then too often redeem it with fraud and couzenage, which has
so often been presented to them as the gall of bitterness, even in the dish
which they love. The word of God? can we hear it too often? Yes; if we do not
practice it, or if we practice the contrary; if we can go from the mount, and
break the law, whilst yet the thunder is in our Ear. I may ask with the
Apostle, Is all the body hearing? does all Religion dwell in the ear? Nay, I
will add further, does all Religion consist in prayer? (For what? I must answer
these men, as Saint Austin did the Monks in his time) are we not bound alike to
all the precepts of God? or may we lay out all our time in the performance of
one duty, and leave none for the rest? shall the ear rob the tongue, and the
tongue the hand? August. de Oper. Monach.
shall one duty swallow up another? Si ab his avocandi non sumus, nec
manducandum est; If we may not sometimes break off our devotion, we must break
another precept, which binds us, to work with our hands; and yet we need not so
break it off, Sudans m^ssor psalmis se avocat, and curva atrundens vites falce
vinitor aliquod Davidicum canit. Hieron. Marcell.
but that we may carry it along with us, even carry the savor of it, which may
mingle it self with the actions of our calling, and so perfume them, and make
them pleasing and acceptable to God. Arator stivam tenens Hallelujah cantat,
says Saint Hierom; the husbandman may pray, and praise the Lord, and sing an
Hallelujah at the plough tail, and so may the smith with the hammer in his
hand: and certainly, if we would entertain them, Religion and Devotion would
wait upon us even in our shops, and be the best attendants we have, would make
us honest, and make us rich. Palladius in his Lausiaca tells us of a certain
virgin, who said seven hundred prayers in a day. Take the gloss in the margent
(for it much took me when I first read it) December orationes constitutae publicis
rebus occupato non minoris pretii sunt, quam tercentum nihil agentis. Ten
prayers, says the gloss, made by a man employed in public affairs, or in
his own private calling, are of as high an esteem, and of force availeable, as
three hundred conceived or uttered by him who does nothing but pray. I may be
bold to add; he that hears but one Sermon, and meditates thereon, and repeats
and acts it over in his life, laboring painfully and honestly in his calling,
is more pleasing and acceptable to God, then he that neglects his calling; and
if it were possible, in one week, heard an hundred. And if you will not take my
word, I doubt not, but you will give some respect to S. Augustines reason.
Citius exauditur una obedient is oration, quom december millia contemptoris; one
prayer of an obedient man, who walks in his calling according to the rule,
shall be sooner heard of God, then ten thousand from him, who makes his
diligence to keep one commandment a privilege and warrant to break the rest;
for what folly is it, ut, quod bonum est frequentius audiatur, id^o facere
nolle quod auditur? under pretense of having time to hear, to take no time at
all to practice that truth which is heard?

But here the devout sluggard may perhaps find something in scripture, which
may serve him as a pillow to sleep on: for as the covetous person can cull out
certain thrifty Texts to countenance his covetousness, as that, He that
provides not for his family is worse then an Infidel; and, let not him that
labors not eat; so has the idle and negligent person his, as Take no-care
for the morrow; Take no care for your life; Labor not for the meat that
perishes. Thus, as Tertullian speaks, Tert. l. de. J^junio.
they can draw the Scripture either way, ut haec restringere fraenos, illa
laxare videatur, either to give a check, or to let loose the reins to
idleness and sloth. But the Scripture is truth in every part, and one part
cannot contradict another; for we may work with our hands, and yet care no more
for the morrow, then if it were no part of time, then if it were nothing; and
for ought we know, it is so, for who can say, he has a morrow? and we may
easily reconcile them by the two persons, The covetous, and the careless; for
both Texts do not so apparently fit both: Let then the careless and negligent
person have this goad set in his side, that if he provide not for his family,
He is worse then an Infidel; this Text is infallibly true for him: and then
hold back the covetous beast with this bit and bridle, that he must not care
for the morrow; and this Text will fit him, qui ipsa quiet fatigatur, as
Hilary speaks, who is weary of nothing more then rest, and is in labor, if he
labor not and drudg in the world; and thus may the careless learn to labor,
and the covetous forget to care; the sluggard may awake from his Lethargy, and
the covetous not rise so early, nor make such haste to be rich; the one Text is
as a whip on the back of the slothful, and the other as a chain to bind the
desires of the covetous; to the one, labor not; to the other, labor cannot be
spoken with accent sharp enough. Our Savior could not be too expressive
against covetousness, because it is a vice which bears up and carries a fair
name and credit in the world; men speak well of it, and call it wisdom, and
providence. Again, Saint Paul could not speak loud enough to the idle person,
because idleness is (...), a flattering and pleasing evil, and which we do
not easily shake off, especially when it has got a mask on, and comes forth
with the varnish and color of piety, and can shrowed and shelter it self under
the beauty of holiness.

We must not pass by the idle and boisterous gallant, but give him a salute,
because he looks fot it; for we see too many, who have no calling, no
profession, qui volitant velut umbrae, who flutter up and down like shades, and
apparitions; like ghosts, which leave no impression behind them, or such a one,
which is as dishonorable as the hole in a slaves Ear, or the mark in the
forehead of an Impostor: They plough not, they trade not, they preach not, they
plead not, they neither sow nor reap, yet Solomon in all his Royalty was not
clothed like one of these; nor yet so wise, as they are in their own conceits:
Salve Getulice, why should we not bow the knee, and do them reverence? Nay
rather we may be bold to tell them, that they are Carcinomata reipub. the
Cankers and impostumes of their Country; that they are pinned to the
Commonwealth, as their Feathers are to their Caps, for show, but for no use at
all; like those Parasiticall plants (as the Herbalists call them) which spring
out of other plants, and have their juice, and nourishment, and vegetable life
foom their roots, or as warts upon a man's hand, which grow up with it, and
trouble and deface it; or indeed as Idols, which though dressed up, and painted,
and gilt, yet are nothing in this world.

I know they may reply, that they are born rich, and what they possess is
theirs by inheritance; this may be true, but yet they were not born fools, nor
were luxury and idleness entailed upon them at the same time; they were born
men, and not as the beasts of the field, to eat and drink, and straggle up and
down, and then fall to the ground; were they born to great possessions? It is
then most unnatural to draw this conclusion from hence, that they may do what
they list; It will follow rather, that they are more bound to be active in
doing of good, that they are more obliged to God which puts that bread into
their mouths, which he makes others stoop for to the ground. I will not put the
sheephook into their hands, and yet the Patriarchs were shepherds; I will not
bind them to a trade, yet Kings and Emperors have bound themselves to one, and
made it their recreation; I will not reach to them the Axe or the Chizell, and
yet Joseph of the house of David, and according to the latter, Christ himself
was one; I will not pull their hands to the plough, for then I should take them
from Complement, and the Gentleman were lost: but I cannot think that God gave
them plenty, to make them idle; that he did so much for them, that they should
do nothing, or which is worse, learn to defy him; give them strength, to
make it the law of unrighteousness; wit, to descant on his providence, to
derogate from his miracles, to baffle religion, to laugh at judgment, and to
mock at Hell; we cannot think he made them rich, to make them Atheists (for
nothing else can be raised upon idleness; not those mountains of piety and
charity, but big and swelling imaginations, which exalt themselves against
God.) There be other trades besides those that are Manual; vivendi arts, the
Art of good life, the art of composing our Affections, the Art of ordering our
private affairs, and of being subservient to the public, qua non sub
manunascuntur, which cannot be learnt in the midst of Riot and wantonness;
which will cost us more pains, then they take, who work with their hands; for
should the plough-man turn student, he would look back upon his former days,
as so many Festivalls, and on his labor as not so great, compared with that
toil and contention of mind which will stretch and rack him in the days of
his gown. To conclude this; non otiose vivit, qui qualitercunque utiliter
vivit, says Aquinas, he lives not idly who imploys himself in doing good,
whether as a Divine, or Lawyer, or Tradesman, or Gentleman, or Lord, or King.
He does many times more then labor with his hands who does stretch his
endeavors to the furthese, to be profitable to himself and others, to act his
part upon the common stage, to make good his place in the Commonwealth; who
binds himself to those acts which are proper to him, and therefore do most
become him. Facito aliquid operis ut te semper Diabolus inveniat occupatum,
says Saint Hierom; be always doing some work or other, Aezyptiorum monasteria
hunc morem tenent, ut nullum absque operis labor suscipiant, non tam propter
victus necessitatem, quam animae salutem. Hieron. Rustico.
that the devil may find thee full and and employed, so busy in thy calling,
that he shall not spy any place where he may fasten his dart: if he thus find
thee, he has lost his craft and his strength, and will neither be a serpent to
deceive, nor a lion to devour thee. This is S. Paul's counsel, and part of his
method, and he sets his seal to it, and does not only counsel, but command
it, study to be quiet, do your own business, work with your hands, sicut
praecepimus, as I have commanded you.

Which we may look upon (and we can but look upon it) as a command, and as
Saint Paul's command. And first, it comes under the command, which makes it
necessary to be observed, and leaves it not to us to do when and how we please;
as necessary for us to do, as to believe in Christ. For howsoever we may count
them as petty duties, and of a lower form yet our blessed Savior puts an high
esteem upon them, and upon the least title and Iota of them, and Math. 5.19.
tells us plainly, that if any shall break one of these least commandments,
which regulate our conversation with men, he shall be called the least of the
kingdom of heaven, that is, shall be of no esteem at all, that is, shall be
shut out of that kingdom. For a strange thing it may seem, that faith, and
hearing, and prayer, and fasting, and many times but the formality of them,
should make up the maine Battalia in our spiritual warfare, as those three
hundred did in Gideons Army; and those Omiliticall virtues, silence,
peaceablenesse, honesty, meekness, doing our own business, industry in our
calling, like those who lapped not, should be left behind, as not fit for
service. It Is true, the Church is founded upon a rock, upon faith in Christ,
but then faith implies practice, even the practice of those virtues which
concern us as members of the Commonwealth as well as of the Church; for the
Commonwealth is not in the Church, but the Church in the Commonwealth; for
every Commonwealth is not Christian. And as Saint Paul tells us, that he that
knows not how to rule his own house, is not fit to take care of the Church; no
more can he who at pleasure breaks these ties and ligaments, with which nature
and Religion have linkt him in a body politic, and that many times under
pretense of Religion, boast or comfort himself in his relation to Christ. He
that is not a good member of the Commonwealth, is not a true member of the
Church; he that is not a good servant, or a good master; a good governor, or a
good subject; he that is not a just dealer, an honest tradesman, a faithful
labourer; he that loves not his neighbor as himself, he that is not quiet, and
peaceable, and industrious (deceive himself as he please) can have nothing but
the name of a Christian. For what! will hearing only, or praying, or fasting,
lie upon this foundation? was Jesus Christ laid as the foundation only to bear
up speculative and fancifull men, only to bear up Pharisees and hypocrites?
will not discretion, and seasonable silence, and honesty and diligence in our
calling concur to that superstructure which must rise up as high as heaven?
will our eye, or tongue, or ear, or knee, or fancy bow and incline God, and
will he not once look down upon our order, upon our peaceable, and honest
conversation with men? Is Religion turned anchoret, and shut up within our
selves, there only to listen after words and sounds, and breathe them out
again? and must not she come forth to order our steps amongst men? may she not
be seen in a settled mind, and eye; in a laboring hand, as well as in an open
ear, and a busy tongue, which speaks loud and often of Gods kingdom, when we do
those things which will shut us out? Let us not deceive our selves; to be
quiet, to meddle in our own business, to labor with our hands, are
subpraecepto, are under the command, and binding, and are tendered to us, and
prescribed as a law. Indeed nature and Reason, one would think, should bind us,
and guide our motion in that sphere, or place, wherein we are fixed; for why
should not every man be what he is made to be? and although I do not think that
every command in the Gospel, is juris naturalis, and so made known to us by the
light of nature (for nature certainly could not teach us to dye for our
brethren, which yet the Gospel does) yet there is nothing commanded there,
which carries not with it a natural dignity and beseemingnesse, to which, with
a little instruction, Vide Grot. l. r. de Jur. Bell. and pac. c. 12. Sect. 6.
and upon serious consideration, we shall willingly subscribe. And these
duties, which we now speak of, may seem clearly to issue from those dictates
of nature, that we should do to others, as we would be done to; that all things
should be done decently and to edification. That nothing should be done against
conscience; which had been of force for the ordering of men's actions of this
nature, though the Scripture had never expressed them, and were of force before
the Gospel was written, and did bind us, not only because they were written,
but because they were just. For why should he who would not be spoiled himself,
rob another? why should he who makes his house his castle, be so ready to
invade, and break into his neighbors? why should he who is even sick of a
cheat, be so ready to put one upon anorher? why should be that would be quiet
at home, be so troublesome abroad? why should not Ahab be as willing to part
with his crown, as to take Naboths vineyard? But Christ, the best master and
lawgiver that ever was, came not to destroy, but to perfect nature; not to
blot out those common notions which we brought into the world with us, but to
make them more legible, to improve them, and so make them his Law; and if we
look upon them as not belonging to us, we our selves cannot belong to the
covenant of grace; for even these duties are weaved in, and made a part of the
covenant; and if we break the one, we break the other; and not only if we
believe not, but if we live not peaceably; if we stretch beyond our line; if we
labor not in our calling, we shall not enter into his rest. For these also are
his Laws, and these does our blessed Apostle teach and command.

And, to conclude; such a power has Christ left in his Church, conferred it
first on his Apostles, and those who were to succeed and supply their place,
who were to speak after them in the person and in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, we will not dispute now what power it is; it is sufficient to say, it
is not an Earthly, but a Heavenly Power, derived from Christ himself, the
Fountain and original of all power whatsoever. As Christ's kingdom is not of
this world, so is not this power of that nature, as to stand in need of an Army
of Soldiers to defend and hold it up, but is like to the object and matter it
works upon, spiritual; a power to command, to remember every man of his duty
in the Church or Commonwealth; for the Church and Commonwealth are two
distinct, but not contrary things, and both powers were ordained to uphold and
defend each other; the civil power to exalt Religion, and Religion to guard
and fence the civil power, and both should concur in this, that we may lead a
quiet and peaceable life in all Godliness and honesty. Our commission is from
heaven, and we need no other power then his, that sealed it, and the virtue and
Divinity of it shall then be made manifest, when all earthly power shall cease,
and even Kings and they who did what they list, shall tremble before it. We
see, that power which is exercised here on earth, though the glory of it dazzle
an eye of flesh, yet sits heavy upon them who wear it; we see it tortures
them, that delight in it; eats up them that feed on it; eats up it self, and
driving all before it at last falls it self to the ground, and falls as a
millstone upon him that has it, and bruiseth him to pieces. It is not such a
power, but I may be bold to say, though it be looked upon, and laughed at, and
despised by the men of this world, yet is it a greater power than that, which
sometimes sets it up on high, and sometimes makes it nothing, and has its end,
when it has not its end; for to publish our masters will, to command in his
name is all; and though the command prove to some the savor of death unto
death, yet the power is still the same, and does never fail; and if men were,
what they profess themselves, Christians; if they had any taste of the powers
of the world to come, they would more tremble at this, then at the other; be
more afraid of a just reproof, then a whip; of an excommunication, then a
sword; of the wrath of God, which is yet scarce visible, then of that which
comes in fire and tempest to devour us; for his favor, or his wrath ever
accompanies this power, which draws his love nearer to them that obey it, and
poures forth his vengeance on them that resist it.

To conclude then; look upon the command, and honor the Apostle that brings it;
for the commands sake; for his sake, whose power, and command it is. A power
there is proper and peculiar to them, who are called to it; and if the name of
power may move envy (for we see men fret at that which was ordained for their
good, and so wast and exhale all their Religion till it be nothing) if the name
of power bear so harsh a sound, we will give you leave to think it is not much
material, whether you call it so or no; whether we speak in the imperative
mood, hoc fac, do this upon your peril; or only positively point as with the
finger, this is to be done: we will be any thing, do any thing, be as low as
you please, so we may raise you above the vanities of the world, above that
wantonness, which storms at that, which was ordained for no other end, but to
lift you out of ruin, into the highest heavens. Our power, and the command of
Christ differ not so much, but the one includes and upholds the other; and if
you did but once love the command, you would never boggle at the name of power,
but bless and honor him that brings it.

Oh that men were wise! but so wise, as not to be wiser then God, as not to
choose and fall in love with their own ways as more certain, and direct unto
the end, then Gods; as not to prefer their own mazes and Labyrinths, and
uncertain gyrations drawn out by lust and fancy, before those even and unerring
paths found out by an infinite wisdom, and discovered to us by a mercy as
infinite; oh that we could once work out and conquer the hardship of a command,
and then see the beauty of it, and to what glory it leads us; we should then
receive an Apostle in the name of an Apostle, and look upon the command, though
brought in an earthen vessel, as upon heaven it self; oh that we were once
spiritual; then those precepts which concern our conversation on earth, would
be laid hold on and embraced, as from the Heaven Heavenly; then should we be as
quiet as the Heavens, which are ever moving, and ever at rest, because ever in
their own place; then should we be as the Angels of Heaven, who envy not one
another, malice not one another, trouble not one another, but every Angel knows
his office, and moves in his own order; and our assiduous labor in our calling
would be a resemblance of the readynesse of those blessed spirits, who at the
beck of Majesty have wings, and haste to their duty; who are ever moving, and
then in their highest exaltation, when they are in their ministry. In aword;
then should we every one sit under his own vine, and figtree, and no evil eye
should look toward him, no malice blast him, no injury assault him, no bold
intrusion unsettle him; but we should all rejoice together, the poor with the
rich, the weak with the strong, the low with the high, all bless one another,
help one another, guard one another, and so in the name of the prince of peace
walk peaceably together, every one moving in his own place, till we reach that
peace, which yet we do not understand, but shall then fully enjoy to all
Eternity.

The One and Twentieth SERMON.
PART I.
MICAH v. 6. Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the
high God? Shall I come before him with burnt-offerings? etc. --

MICAH v. 8. He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord
require of thee, but to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy
God?


THere be many who say, Who will show us any good? says the Pophet David, Ps.
4.6. For Good is that which men naturally desire; and here the Prophet Micah
has fitted an Answer to this Question, He has showed thee, O man, what is
good. And in the discovery of this Good, he uses the same method which the
Philosopher does in the description of his Moral Happiness; First shows us
what it is not, and then what it is: And as the Philosopher shuts out Honor,
and Riches, and Pleasure, as being so little necessary, that we may be happy
without them; so does the Prophet, in the verses going before my Text, in a
manner, reject and cast by burnt offerings, and all the Ceremonial, and
Typical part of Moses law, all that outward, busy, expensive and sacrificing
Religion, as no whit essential to that good, which he here fixes up, as upon.
a pillar for all eyes to look upon; as being of no great alliance or nearness,
nor fit to Incorporate it self with that piety, which must commend us to God:
and as a true Prophet, he does not only discover to the Jews the common error
of their lives, but shows them yet a more excellent way, Non satis est
reprehendisse peccntem si non doceas recti viam. Columel. de Re Rust. l. 11. c.
1.
first asking the question, will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams?
whether sacrifice be that part of Religion with which we may appear and bow
before our God, and be accepted? and then in his answer, in the words of my
Text, quite excluding it, as not absolutely necessary, and essential to that
which is indeed Religion.

And here the question, will the Lord he pleased with sacrifice? adds Emphasis
and Energy, and makes the Denial more strong, and the Conclusion in the Text
more positive and binding then if it had been in plain terms, and formally
denied; then this Good had been showed naked and alone, and not brought in with
the spoils of that Hypocrisy, which supplants and overthrowes it, and usurps
both its place, and name; shall I come before him with burnt offerings? is in
effect, I must not do it; That which is good, that which is Religion has so
little relation to it, that it can subsist without it; and most times has been
swallowed up, and lost in it. It was in the world before any command came forth
for Sacrifice; and it is now most glorious, when every Altar is thrown down,
and has the sweetest favor, now there is no other smoke. The Question puts it
out of all question, That this good is best without it. What will the Lord do
to the Husbandmen, that killed the heir? Math. 21.41. Our Savior puts it up
by way of question; and you know how terrible the answer is; what will he do?
what will he not do? 1 Cor. 11.
He will miserably destroy those Husbandmen. Is it comely that a woman pray
uncovered? Judge in your selves: you cannot say it is comely. As the Athenians
used to ask the guilty person who was arraigned before them, and by sufficient
evidence convict of the crime; Are you not worthy of death? That they might
first give sentence against themselves, and acknowledge the sentence to be
just, which was to pass upon them: so does the Prophet here ask the
sacrificing Jews, who so doted on outward Ceremony, that they scarce cast an
eye, or look toward that, which was truly the service of God, as if there were
no more required at their hands, then that which was to be done at the Altar:
shall you bring burnt offerings? shall you offer up your firstborn, the fruit
of your body for the sin of the Soul? your selves shall be witness against
your selves, and out of your own mouth shall you be condemned. O ye Hypocrites!
you cannot be so ignorant as to think, nor so bold as to profess, that this is
the true service of God. I remember Gregory Nazianzen calls man (...) (and we
may call this good in the Text so) a spiritual heavenly statue; and as the
statuary by his art and with his Chezell does work off all that is unnecessary
and superfluous, and having finished and made it complete in every part, fixes
it, as the lively representation of some God or Goddess, or Heroic person
whose memory he would perpetuate in the minds of those, who are to look upon
it; so does the Prophet Micah here, being to delineate and express the true
servant of God in his full and perfect proportion, first out of the Lump and
Mass, which made up the body of the Jews Religion, strikes off that which was
least necessary, and most abused; all that formality, and outward ceremony in
which they most pleased themselves; Burnt offerings and calves of an year old,
these he lays aside, as that which may be best spared, as that which God did
not require for it self, or for any good there was naturally in it, and then
draws him out in every part, in those parts, which do indeed make him up in
that perfection, in which he may shine, as a great example of eternal
happiness. Wherewith shall thou come before the Lord? and bow thy self before
the high God? not with burnt offerings; those he puts by, as no essential
materials, as the scurfe, and least considerable part of Religion; but with
thy heart, and with thy will and affections; with a Just, and merciful, and
Broken heart; with these thou shall walk with him, or before him, even with
Justice, and Mercy, and Humility, with those graces, which will make thee like
unto him, and transform thee into the Image of God, and set thee up as a fair
statue, and representation of thy maker; He has showed thee O man, what is
good, etc.

Or if you please, you may conceive of true piety and that which is good, as of
a tree of life planted in the midst of Paradise, in the midst of the Church,
spreading as it were its Branches, whereof these 3. in the Text are the
fairest: 1. Justice and uprightness of conversation; a straight and even
Branch bearing no fruit, but its own; 2. Mercy, and Liberality, yielding much
fruit to those weary and faint souls, who gather it, and are refresht under
the shadow of it: and 3. Humility, a Branch well laden, full, and hanging down
the head.

More plainly, and for our better proceeding, thus. He takes away the one,
that he may establish the other: He takes away Ceremony and Sacrifice, that he
may set up true piety, and that which is Religion indeed, which here is first
termed That which is good in it self and for it self; which sacrifices and all
other Ceremonious parts of Gods worship were not. 2ly. Manifested and pointed
out to as with a finger; Indicavit tibi, God by his Prophet has showed it.
3ly. Published and promulged as a law: What does the Lord require of thee? and
lastly, charactered, and drawn out in its principal parts: 1. Justice and
Honesty: 2ly. Mercy and Liberality. 3ly. Humility, and sincerity of mind, which
is the Beauty and Glory of the rest, and commends tem; makes our Justice and
Mercy shine in the full beauty of Holiness, when we are this, and do this, as
with, or Before the Lord. He has showed thee O man what is good, etc.

These be the particulars: we begin with the first, That Piety and True
Religion is here Termed Good, in it self and for it self, in opposition to the
sacrifices and Ceremonies of the Law.

And first, the Sacrifices, and Ceremonious part of Gods worshp were good, but
ex instituto, because God for some reason was pleased to institute and ordain
them, otherwise in themselves they were neither good nor evil. They were,
before they were enjoined; and men offered them up, (...) Respons. ad orthod.
in operib. Justini martyris. ad Interrog 83.
not in reference to any command, but out of a voluntary zeal and affection to
the honor of God, which they expressed and showed forth in this especial act,
in devoting that unto him, which was with them of highest esteem, as more due
to the Giver of all things then to them for whose use they were given. God did
not command, but did accept them for the zeal and affection of them who offered
them up; and he tells them so himself, I speak not to your Fathers, nor
commanded them in the day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt,
concerning Burnt-offerings or sacrifice: But this thing I commanded them,
saying, Obey my voice. Jerem. 7.22,23.

Secondly, when they were commanded, they were commanded not for any real
goodness there was naturally in them, (for what are Blood and smoke to the God
of spirits?) but brought in for that good effect which the wisdom of God could
work out of them, which had nothing of Good in them, nor which might commend
them, but the end for which they were ordained. And therefore he commanded
them, not as desirable in themselves, but by way of condescension, submitting
himself, as it were, to the present infirmity and condition of the Jews, who
were so strongly affected to this kind of worship; Populum pronum Idololatriae,
ejusmodi officiis religioni suae voluit astringere, says Tertullian; God put
this command, Tertull^d v. Marcion. l. 2.
as it were a bridle into their mouths, who were too prone to run out beyond
their limits; and that they might not offer unto Idols, he confines and ties
them up, to do it to him alone.

And so they were good, but ex comparatione, but by being compared with
something that was worse: If they will sacrifice, it is better they sacrifice
to God then to Devils; better do this then worse; better do that, which had it
not been commanded, had been neither good nor evil, then that which is
absolutely evil; better do that which God can bear with, then that which he
hates; better they should be under the restraint and managing of an Indulgent
hand, then that they should run into those abominations which a Father cannot
pardon, and which will make a loving and tender God, a consuming fire. Thus
they are Good being compared with something that is worse, and being put into
the scales together, are valuable, because they outweigh them: Et quale est
Bonum, quod mali comparatio commendat? says Tertullian; what good is that,
which were not so, if the evil which it shuts out, and with which it is
compared, did not commend it.

3. That which is good in it self and its own nature, is always so; piety and
true Religion is older then the world, for it is a part and beam of that
wisdom which was with God from Everlasting, and it shines forth from one end
of the world to the other; has the same splendour and brightness, when the
fashion of the world changes every day; and binds alike all the men in the
world, and ends not but with it, and in its effects continues, when that shall
be dissolved, even to all eternity: as it was breathed from God, and flows from
his eternal law, so it is always the same, and remains the same, till it end
in glory. For this there is no consummatum est, there is no end. The veil of
the temple is rent in twain, the temple it self is buried in ruin, and not a
stone left upon a stone; every Altar is thrown down, the sacrifices and
Ceremonies abolisht, but quicquid condidit virtus, coelum est, That which is
truly good is as lasting as the heavens: heaven and earth may pass away, but
not one tittle of this good shall fall to the ground.

4. These Ceremonies were confined to time and place; you observe days and
months, says the Apostle, Gal. 4. yea and you obseve places too: you say,
That Jerusalem is the place, says the woman of Samaria to our Savior, John 4.
but that which is truly good, and in it self, is of that nature, that time and
place have no power or influence on it, either to shrink it up and contract it,
or to bound or circumscribe it, or to put a period to it, and cut it off. It is
never out of season, never out of its place. Every day is the good man's
holiday, and his sacrifice may be offered up at any time: It stays not for the
new moon, or Sabbath day, but is res omnium horarum, may show and display it
self at any day, in every hour of that day, and every minute of that hour.
Ever yay, every hour, every minute is the good man's Sabbath and rest. And as
it is not tied to time, no more is it to place: All the ends of the world shall
remember the Lord, says the Psalmist; and this good in the Text may be set up
in any part of it. The Church is the place, and the Market is the place, and
the Prison may be the place; piet as in plate is sibi secretum facit, Religion
may build it self an oratory, a chapel in the midst of the streets, nay in a
stews, in Sodom it self, (for there Lot was;) and it is the greatest
commendation to be good amongst the worst.

Last of all: This Ceremonious part of Religion was many times omitted, many
times dispensed with; but this good which is here shown, admits no
dispensation: Circumcision was dispensed with; sacrifice was dispensed with;
the Sabbath was dispencsed with; but the true service of God was ever in force:
who ever was dispensed with in a moral and positive law? who ever had this
indulgence granted him to defraud or oppress his brother, to be cruel and
unmercifull to him, or to walk contrary to his God? who ever was unjust on
earth by a grant and prerogative from heaven? Aliud sunt imagines, aliud
definitiones; Imagines prophetant, definitiones gubernant, Tertull. de
manogamia. c. 6.
says Tertullian. OUr lives are not regulated by Ceremonies, which pass away
as a shadow, but by that law of God, which is indispensable: God himself has
dispensed with the one, but never with the other. When Sacrifices were omitted,
and the Sabbath for some reasons was not observed, God complained not; we find
that in a manner he does disclaim Sacrifice, as in this place, and in the 1. of
Isaiah, and in the 50. Psalm. but where does he hold a controversy with his
people for omitting it? What Ceremony was there almost, which was not at some
time, and upon some just occasion neglected? How many Easters? How many
Jubilees do we read of? But that Good, which is the Rule of Life, is
indispensable; No occasion must withdraw us, no place can bind us, no time
hinder us, no necessity force us from it, ecause it requires o more then our
will, which is the same in every place, and at every time, and is imputed to us
as the Deed it self, when we cannot do it, when we have no tthat power which
will-reach so far as to bring it into act. That which is good in it self (...),
is so to every man, Greg. Naz. or. de. mort.
and at all times, and in every place; is like to him who is the ountain and
Author of it, is so yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever.

This Good then in the Text, may subsist in its full beauty and perfection,
though no Altar smoke; but a Hecatomb, all the Beasts in the Forest offered
up, Ten thousand rivers of oil, will not make up a just and merciful man. For
it was observed even by some of the Jews themselves, That the greatest
Sacrificers were most commonly the greatest Sinners, who conversing so much
with shadows, and lost in the admiration of them, had no thought left empty
enough to entertain the more substantial and harder parts of the Law, were so
busy on the one, that they cast no look on the other; but in the strength of
their Sacrifice, and a high conceit of this their formal worship, walked
carelessly, and delicately over them, even to that which they forbad; So that to
say, He is a true Israelite, becausehe is frequent at the Altar, is no better
an Argument, then that which the Stoic so much derides, He has a long Cloak
and Beard, Therefore he is a great Philosopher: Arrian. Epictet. l. 4. c. 8.
For neither is Sacrifice the (...), the matter and business of the Israelite
to which his profession binds him, but justice and mercy; nor a grave outside
of a Philosopher, but Reason, and the End, (...), as the Stoic calls it of the
Israelite, is to do justice, and love mercy, as the Philosophers is in all his
actions to make Reason his Rule. Cast but your eye back upon some former
passages in this Prophecy, and you shall find that these Sacrificers were
Idolaters, Chap. 1. That they were Oppressors, Chap. 2. That in the night they
did study iniquity, and in the morning practice it: That they did covet Fields,
and take them by violence; oppress a man and his house, even a man and his
heritage, ver. 1, 2. That they were cruel, and bloudy-minded; That they did
eat the flesh of the people, and flay their skins from off them, Chap. 3. ver.
5. That they were unjust, and ignorant, and ungrateful in this Chapter, all
which they did bear with ease, when they led their Sacrifice to the Altar, and
there laid them to vanish aay with that smoke. It is a wonderful thing to
observe, how soon and easily we are persuaded to think well of our selves in
our worst condition; how a form of Religion will secure us to tread it under
our feet; how the doing that which is not good in it self, will lift us up and
make us active and cheerful in doing that which is absolutely evil; how the
nearer we come unto hell, the less we fear it; bring a sacrifice, set fire to
your incense, bow the knee, call upon that God, whom you blaspheme, and there
will then be no more conscience of sin. And therefore in this so great abuse,
God is forced to give a check to his own command, and precisely to except
against that Ceremony, that part of worship which himself for some reasons had
enjoined: when their hands were full of blood, then Satur est, then is he also
full, troubled and wearied with their burnt offerings, Es. 1.14. then he asks
the Question by his Prophet; will I be pleased with thousands of Ram? that
is, I will not. Tacitus 1. Nist
Incense is an abomination; he that kills a bullock is as if he slew a man;
he that sacrifices a sheep as if he cut off a dogs neck. Es. 66. and that of
the Historian proves true, plura peccant dum demerentur, quam dum offendunt,
Their devotion is turned into sin; their Ceremonious diligence does violate
the majesty of God; They provoke him to wrath with their peace-offrings, and
never offend him more, then when they worship him.

We may then learn thus much from the Prophets Question, That the Ceremonious
part of Gods worship, though enjoined by God, and performed most exactly by
men, yet if it be not driven to that end, for which it was commanded, is so far
from finding acceptance with God, that it is odious and hateful in his sight.
For some Duties there are which are Relativi juris, which are commanded for
some farther end, as Sacrifice, and Prayer, and Hearing, and Fasting, which if
they end in themselves, are but smoke, but words, but noise, but shows; I may
say, but sins. Others there are, that have their (...), (as Aristotle speaks of
sapience) their end in themselves, as denying our selves, Crucifying the old
man, Justice and Mercifullnesse, and Humility; These are done for themselves,
for they have no other end, unless it be glory. The first always have
reference to the lasT, and if they come alone, or with no better a retinue then
those sins and irregularities which they countenance, then God removes them,
as he did the high places; cuts them down as he did the groves; looks upon them
with the like detestation as he does upon Idols; 2 King. 18.4.
as he did upon the brazen serpent, when the people did burn Incense to it,
which, though it was lifted up in the wilderness by his command, yet by his
command it was pulled down and broken to pieces by Hezekiah, and made
Nehushtan, a lump of brass.

For 1. these outward performances of some part, and the easiest part of the
law, were not done out of any love to the law or the Lawgiver. For love is of
a quick and operative nature, and cannot rest in shows and formalities, but
will draw them home to the end for which they were ordained: Love presents the
gift, and the heart also, and (before he comes to the Altar) makes the
worshipper himself a sacrifice. Love does not stay at the porch, but enters the
Holy of Holyes; does not stay in the beginnings, but hastes to the end; does
not contract the duty, but extends it to the utmost; does not draw pictures,
but men; does not sacrifice the beast only, but offers and consumes us, binds
us wholly to the work, forces, and constrains us; never lets us rest, till we
have fulfilled the will of him that commands; Improves sacrifice to obedience;
hearing, to practice; fasting, to humility and repentance; Love may begin, but
never ends in ceremony. And this is the reason why Religion has so many
professors, and so few friends; so many salutes, and so many contempts flung
upon her; why she is so much spoke of, as the bird of Jupiter, that eagle which
must carry us to heaven, but has no more regard, then the sparrow on the house
top or the owl in the desert; why it is so much talked of and so little
practiced; for men do not love it, but because it carries a kind of majesty and
beauty along with it, and strikes every eye that beholds it; because men speak
well of her in the gates, and we cannot but speak well of her, whilst we are
men; therefore we are willing to give her a salute in the midst of all those
horrid and hellish offices which are set up against her; we give her a bow and
let her pass by, as if her shadow could cure us; or we lay hold on the skirts
of her garment, touch and kiss them; are loud and busy in the performance of
the easiest part of it; bind the sacrifice with cords to the horns of the
Altar, but not our lusts and irregular desires, but let them fly to every
object, every vanity; which is to sacrifice a beast to God, and our selves to
the devil.

2. These formal worshippers do not only not love the command, but they do it
for the love of something else: They love oppression, and blood, and injustice
better then sacrifice; and all this heat and busy industry at the Altar
proceeds not from that love which should be kindled and diffused in the heart,
but as the unruly tongue, is set on fire by hell;; has no other original, then
an ungrounded, and unwarranted love of those profitable and honorable evils,
which we have set up as our mark, but cannot so fairly reach to, if we stand
in open defiance to all Religion. And therefore when that will not join with
us, but looks a contrary way to that to which we are pressing forward with so
much eagerness, we content our selves with some part of it, with the weakest,
with the poorest and beggerlyest part of it, and make use of it to go along
with us, and countenance and secure us, in the doing of that which is opposite
to it, and with which it cannot subsist; and so well and feelingly we act our
parts, that we take our selves to be great favorites, and in high grace with
him whose laws we break; and so procure some rest and ease from those
continual clamors, which our guiltiness would otherwise raise within us, and
walk on with delight and boasting, and through this seeming, feigned paradise
post on securely to the gates of death. In what triumphant measures does a
Pharisee go from the Altar? what a harmless thing is a cheat after a Sermon?
what a sweet morsel is a widows house after Long Prayers? what a piece of
Justice is oppression after a fast? After so much Ceremony, the blood of Abel
himself, of the justest man alive, has no voice.

For in the 3. place; These outward performances, this formality in Religion,
have the same spring and motive with our greatest and foulest sins. The same
cause produces them, the same considerations promote them, and they are
carried to their end on the same wings of our carnal desires. Do you not
wonder that I should say, The formality and outward presentiments of our
devotion may have the same beginnings with our sins, may have their birth
from the same womb; That they draw the same breasts, and like twins, are born,
and nursed, and grow up together? does a fountain send forth at the same place
sweet water, and bitter? No; It cannot, but both these are salt and brinish;
our sacrifice as ill smelling as our oppression, our fast as displeasing as our
sacrilege: and our hearing and Prayers cry as loud for vengenace as our
oppression. We sacrifice, that we may oppress; We fasT, that we may spoil our
God; Ezekiel. 16.44.
and we pray, that we may devour our brethren: Like Mother, Like Daughter,
says the Prophet Ezekiel; They have the same evil beginning, and they are both
evil: Ambition was the cause of Absoloms Rebellion, and Ambition sent him to
Hebron to pay his vow, 2 Samuel 15. Covetousness made Ahab and Jezebel
murderers, and Covetousness proclaimed their fast, 1 King. 21. Lust made
Shechem, the son of Hamor, a Ravisher, and lust made him a Proselyte and
Circumcised him, Genesis 34. Covetousness made the Pharisee a Ravening wolf, and
Covetousness clothed him in a lambs skin. Covetousness made his Corban, and
Covetousness did disfigure his face, and placed him praying in the Synagogues,
and the corner of the streets: Ex his causam accipiunt, quibus probantur, says
Tertullian; They have both the same cause; for the same motives arise and show
them both; The same reason makes the same man both devout and wicked; both
abstemious, and greedy; both meek and bloody; a seeming Saint, and a raging
Devil; a Lamb to the eye, and a Roaring lion: Scit enim Diabolus alios
continentia, alios libidine, occidere, says the same Father, The devil has an
art to destroy us with the appearance of virtue, as soon as with the poison of
sin.

For in the fourth place; This formality in Religion stands in no opposition
with him, or his designs, but rather advances his kingdom, and enlarges his
dominion. For how many Sacrificers, how many attentive hearers, how many
Beadsmen, how many Professors are his vassalls? how many call upon God, Abba,
Father, who are his children? how many openly renounce him, and yet love his
wiles? Ex malitia ingenium habet. Tertull. de Idololat.
delight in his craft which is his malice? how many never think themselves at
liberty, but when they are in his snare? and does not a fair pretense make the
fact fouler? does not sacrifice raise the voice of our oppression, that it
cries louder? does not a form of Godliness make sin yet more finfull? when we
talk of heaven, and love the world, are we not then most earthly, most
sensual, most divelish? is the devil ever more devil, then when he is
transformed into an Angel of light? And therefore the devil himself is a great
promoter of this art of pargetting and painting, and makes use of that, which
we call Religion, to make men more wicked; loves this foul and monstrous
mixture of a Sacrificer and an Oppressor; of a Christian, and a Deceiver; of a
Faster and a Blood-thirsty man: And as he was most enraged, and impatient, a^
Tertullian tells us, to see the works of God brought into subjection under man,
who was made according to his image; so is it his pride and glory to see man
and Religion it self brought under these transitory things, and even made
fervants and slaves unto them: O! to this hater of God and man, it is a kind of
heaven in hell it self, and in the midst of all his torment, to see this man,
whom God created and redeemed, to do him the greatest service in Christ's
livery; to see him promote his Interest in the name of Christ and Religion; to
see him under his power and dominion most, when he waits most diligently and
officiously at the Altar of God. The Pharisee was his beloved disciple, when he
was on his knees with a dissigured face: These Jews here were his disciples,
who did run to the Altar, but not from their evil ways; who offered up the
blood of beasts to God, and of the innocent to him; he that fasts and
oppresses, is his disciple, for he gives God his body, and the Devil his soul:
He that prays much, and cozens more, is his disciples; for he does but flatter
God, and serves the enemy, speaks to a God of truth with his lips, but hearkens
to the Father of lies and deceit. I may say the devil is the great Alchymist of
the world to transelement the worst things, to make them more passible, to add
a kind of esteem and glory to them. We do not meet with Counterfeit Iron or
Copper, but gold and precious stones, these we sophisticate, and when we cannot
dig them out of the mine, or take them from the rock, we strive to work them by
art out of Iron, or Copper, or glass, and call them gold and diamonds. Thus
does the Devil raise and sublime the greatest impiety, and gild it over with a
sacrifice, with a fast, with devotion, that it may appear in glory, and
deceive, if it were possible, the very elect: we see too many deceived with it,
who having no Religion themselves, are yet ready to bow down to its Image
wheresoever they see it, and so fix their eye and devotion upon it, that they
see not the thief, the oppressor, the Atheist, who carries it along with him,
to destroy that of which it is the Image; but take it for that which it
represents, as little children and fools take pictures and puppets for men. Is
he unclean? who sees that, when he is at the Altar? does he defraud his
brother? who would say so, that should see him on his knees? has he false
weights and balances? It is impossible, for you may see him every day in the
temple: are his feet swift to shed blood? It cannot be, for he fasteth often,
behold how he hangs down his head like a bulrush. The vein of gold is deep in
the earth, and we cannot reach it but with sweat and industry: true piety and
that which is good is a more rare and precious thing then gold, and the veins
of it ly deep; its original is from heaven in Christ, at a huge distance from
our carnal desires and lusts, and so requires great anxiety, strong
contention, and mighty strivings to reconcile it to our wills. This pearl is
as it were in a far country, and we must sell all to purchase it; the whole man
must lose, and deny it self to search and find it out; we must lay down all
that we have, our understandings, our wills and affections at his feet that
sells it: And therefore that we may not trouble, nor excruciate our selves too
much, that we may not ascend into heaven, or go down into hell for it, that we
may not undergo so much labor, and endure so much torment in attaining it, e
take a shorter way, and work and fashion something like unto it, which is most
contrary to it, and transelement impiety it self, and shadow it over with
devotion, and publish it to others, and say within our selves, this is it. For
what Seneca said of Philosophy is true of Religion, Adeo res sacra est, ut
siquid illi simile sit, etiam mendacium placeat, It is so sacred and venerable
a thing, that we are pleased with its resemblance, and that shall soon have
its name that has but its likeness; that shall be the true pearl, which is
but counterfeit; and by this means all Religion is confined to the Altar, and
that shall consecrate that which is not good, and make it appear so. That
piety which came from the bosom of the Father, and was conveyed to us by the
wisdom of the Son, must be shut up in outward worship, in formality, and
Ceremony, and show, and that which quite destroys it, and tramples it under
our feet; must go under that name, and make us great on earth, though it make
us the least in the kingdom of heaven, so that we shall have no place there,
but be tumbled down into the lowest pit. As the Prophet Isaiah speaks in his
first chapter; Argentum nostrum versum est in scoriam, our silver is become
dross, our wine is mixed with water, nay our best silver, our most refined
actions are dross; our wine is gall and bitterness, or as he speaks in
another place c. 30. all our Righteousness (and he means such formal,
counterfeit righteousness,) is as a menstruous cloth.

Again in the last place: This formality, and insincerity is most opposite to
God, who is a God of truth, (...), unissimus, a most single and uncompounded
essence, with whom there is no variableness, nor shadow of changing, says
Saint James; no mixture nor composition of diverse or contrary things: His
justice does not thwart his mercy, nor his mercy disarme his justice; his
providence does not bind his power, nor his power check his providence; what he
is he always is, like unto himself in all his ways. Tertullian gives him
these two proprieties, Tert. de Bapt. c. 2.
simplicitatem and potestatem, simplicity or uncompoundednesse, and power: He
is (...), the singleness of all that are of a pure and single heart; Dionrs.
de Divin. Nomin.
and hence the strictest Christians in the first times were called (...), says
the Father, viri singulares, men that were one in themselves, and of a single
heart; who did strive and press forward as far as mortality and their frail
condition would suffer them, (...) to the divine unity, to be one in
themselves, as God is ever most one, and unity it self. For God who gave us our
soul, looks that we should restore it to him, one and entire; not contemplating
heaven, and wallowing in the mire; not feeding on Ceremony, and loathing of
purity; not busy at the Altar, and more busy in the world. The Civilians will
tell us, dicitur res non reddita, quae deterior redditur, That cannot be said
to be restored, which is returned worse then it was, when it was first put into
our hands: and what can accrue to a soul by sacrifice, by Ceremony, by any
outward formality, if it receive no deeper impressions then these can make? if
we return it back to him with nothing but words, and noise and shows, in the
posture of a bragging coward with his scarfs and ribbons, and big words, and
glorious lies? with no better hatchments then these, we return it far worse
then we received it, worse then it was when it was as a smooth unwritten table,
when it was such a soul, qualem habent qui solam habent, such a one which they
have, Tertull. de Testim. anim.
who have it only as other creatures have, to keep them alive and in being,
and no more; and better we had breathed it out when it was first breathed in,
then that we should thus keep and retain it, and then return it with no better
furniture, no better endowed and filled, then with shadows and lies. That which
adornes, and betters a soul, and makes it fit to be returned, must be as
spiritual as it self; Self-denial, Sincerity, and Honesty, love of mercy,
humility; these are the riches and glories of a soul, which must make it fit to
be presented back again into the hands of its Creator. For these, for the
advancement of these, were all outward Ceremony and Formality ordained, and
without these sacrifice is an abomination, and the Brownists calumny or rather
blasphemy will be a truth, our preaching will be but Preachments; our time of
preaching but disputing to an houre-glasse; our Pulpits prescript places; our
solemn fasts but stage plays, wherein one acts sin, another Judgment, a
third Repentance, and a fourth the Gospel; and the blessed Sacrament will be
but as a two-peny-feasT. Or, which is worse, our outward formality and busy
diligence in those duties which require the least, will but serve Contenebrare
incesta, as the Father speaks, Tertull. Apol.
to cast a mist and darkness upon our impurities, which may hide them from our
own eyes, whom it most concerns to see them, and for a while from others, who
see the best of us (which indeed is the worst of us, because it makes us worse
and worse) whilst the evil they shadow and hide, is in our very bowels, and
spreads it self, and works on insensibly, but most strongly and certainly to
our ruin; and then it appears more ugly and deformed to his pure and
all-seeing eye, who never hates an oppressor more then when he sees him at the
Altat, and is most offended with that fraudulent man, who is called Christian.
We read in the Historian, when Nero had but set his foot into the temple of
Vesta, he fell into a fit of trembling, facinorum recordatione, says Tacitus,
being shaken with the remembrance of his monstrous crimes; for what should he
do in the temple of Vesta, who had defiled his own mother? And how shall we
dare to enter Gods courts, unless we leave our sins behind us? how dare we
speak to a God of truth, who defraud so many? why should we fast from meat, who
make our brethren our meat, and eat them up? at that great day of separation of
true and false worshippers, when he shall bespeake those on his right hand,
Come ye llessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you; The form
or reason is not, for you have sacrificed often, you have fasted often, you
have heard much, you were frequent in the temple; and yet these are holy
duties, but they are ordinata ad aliud, they were ordained for those that
follow, and therefore are not mentioned, but in them employed: For I was hungry,
and you gave me meat; I was thirsty, and you gave me drink; I was naked, and
you clothed me; sick and in prison, and you visited me. Then outward worship
has its glory and reward, when it draws the inward along with it; then the
sacrifice has a sweet smelling savor, when a just and merciful man offers it
up; when I sacrifice and obey, hear and do, pray and endeavor, contemplate
and practice, fast and repent: and thus we are made one, fit to be looked upon
by him who is Oneness it self, not divided betwixt sacrifice and oppression; a
form of godliness, and an habitual course in sin; a dissembling with God,
and fighting against him; betwixt an Hosanna and a Crucifige, a professing
Christ, and Crucifing him. In this unnity and conjunction every duty and
virtue, as the stars in the firmament, have their several glory, and they make
the Israelite, the Christian, a child of light: but if we divide them, or set
up some few for all; the easiest and those which are most attempered to the
sense, for those which fight against it; and bring in them for the maine, which
by themselves are nothing; if all must be sacrifice, if all must be Ceremony
and outward formality; if this be the conclusion and sum of the whole matter,
If this be the body of our worship and Religion; then instead of a blessing and
an Euge, we shall meet with a frown and a check; and God will question us for
appearing before him in strange apparel, which he never put upon us; question
us for doing his command, and tell us he never gave any such command, because
he gave it not to this end: will he be pleased with burnt offerings? with
Ceremony, and formality? he asks the question with some indignation, and
therefore it is plain he will not, but loathes the sacrifice, as he does the
oppressor, and unclean person that brings it.

We see then (that we may yet draw it nearer to us) that there was good reason
why God should thus disclaim his own ordinance, because he made it for their
sakes, and to an end quite contrary to that, to which the Jew carried it; we
see the Prophet might well set so low an esteem upon so many thousand rams,
because Idolaters, and oppressors, and cruel blood-thirsty men offered them.
We see Sacrifice and all out ward Ceremony and formality are but as the garment
or shadow of Religion, which is turned into a disguise, when she wears it not;
and is nothing, is a delusion, when it does not follow her. For oppression and
sacrilege may put on the same garment; and the greatest evil that is, may cast
Wuch a shadow. He that hates God may sacrifice to him; he that blasphemes him,
may praise him; The hand that strips the poor may put fire to the incense, and
the feet that are so swift to shed blood, may carry us into the Temple. When
all is Ceremony, all is vain, nay lighter then vanity; for in this we do not
worship God, but mock him; give him the skin, when he looks for the heart; we
give him shadows for substances, and shows for realities, and leaves for fruit;
and we mortify our lusts and affections, as Tragedians die upon the Stage, and
are the same sinners we were, as wicked as ever. Our Religion puts forth no
thing but blossoms, or if it knit, and make some show or hope of fruit, it is
but as we see it in some Trees, it shoots forth at length, and into a larger
proportion and bigness, then if it had had its natural concoction, and ripened
kindly, and then it has no taste or relish, but withers, and rots, and falls
off. And thus when we too much dote on Ceremomy, we neglect the maine work, and
when we neglect the work, we fly to Ceremony and formality, and lay hold on the
Altar; we deal with our God, Clem. Alexande. 3. strom.
as Aristotle of Cyrene did with Lais, who promised to bring her back again
into her country, if she would help him against his Adversaries whom he was to
contend with; and when that was done, to make good his oath, drew her picture
as like her as art could make it, and carried that; and we fight against the
devil, as Darius did against Alexander, with pomp, and gayetry, and gilded
armor, as his prey, rather then his enemies; and thus we walk in a vain shadow,
and trouble our selves in vain, and in this Region of shows and shadows dream
of happiness, and are miserable; of heaven, and fall a contrary way, as Julius
Caesar dreamed that he soared up, Suet. Vit. C. Caesar.
and was carried above the clouds, and took Jupiter by the right hand, and the
next day was slain in the Senate House.

I will not accuse the foregoing Ages of the Church, because as they were loud
for the Ceremonious part of Gods worship, so were they as sincere in it, and
did worship him in spirit and truth, and were equally zealous in them both; and
though they raised the first to a great height, yet never suffered it so to
overtop the other, as to put out its light; but were, what their outward
expressions spoke them, as full of Piety as Ceremony; and yet we see that high
esteem which they had of the Sacraments of the Church, led some of them upon
those errors, which they could not well quit themselves of, but by falling into
worse. It is on all hands agreed, that they are not absolutely necessary, not
so necessary as the mortifying and denying of our selves, not so necessary as
Actual holiness. It is not absolutely necessary to be baptized; for many have
not passed that Jordan, yet have been saved; but it is necessary to have the
Laver of Regeneration, and to cleanse our selves from sin. It is not absolutely
necessary to eat the Bread, and drink the Wine in the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper; for some cross accident may intervene, and put me by; but it is
necessary to feed on the Bread of Life, as necessary as my meat, to do Gods
will. True Piety is absolutely necessary, because none can hinder me from that,
but my self; but it is not always in every man's power to bring himself to
the Font, or approach the Lords Table; All that can be said, is, That when they
may be had, they are absolutely necessary; but they are therefore not
absolutely necessary, because they cannot always be had; and when they
stretched beyond this, they stretched beyond their line, and lost themselves in
an ungrounded, and unwarranted admiration of these Ordinances, which (whilst we
look upon them in their proper Orb and Compass) can never have honor and
esteem enough. They put the Communion into the mouths of Infants, who had but
now their Being; and into the mouths of the Dead, who had indeed a BEing, but
not such a Being as to be fit Communicants; and Saint Austin thought Baptism
of Infants so absolutely necessary, that Not to be baptized, was to be Damned,
and therefore was forced also to create a new Hell that was never before heard
of, and to find out mitem damnationem, a more mild and easy damnation, more
fit, as he thought, for the tenderness and innocence of Infants.

Now this was but an error in speculation, the error of devout and pious men,
who in honor to the Author of the Sacraments, made them more binding and
necessAry then they were; and we may learn thus much by this overgreat esteem
the first and best Christians, and the most learned amongst them, had of them;
that there is more certainly due, then has been given in these latter times,
by men who have learnt to despise all Learning, and whose great devotion it is
to quarrel and cry down all Devotion: who can find no way to gain the
reputation of Wisdom, but by the fierce and loud impugning of that which has
been practiced and commended to succeeding Ages by the wisest in their
Generation; by men who first cry down the Determinations of the Church, and
then in a scornful and profane pride and animosity deny there is any such
Collection, or Body, as a Church at all.

But our Errors in Practice are more dangerous, more spreading, more
universal. For what is our esteem of the Sacraments? more a great deal then
theirs, and yet Less, because it is such which we should not give them, even
such, which they, whom they are so bold to Censure, would have Anathematized.
We Think, or Act as if we did, that the Water of Baptism does cleanse us,
though we make our selves more Leopards, fuller of spots then before: That the
Bread in the Eucharist will nourish us up to eternal life, though we feed on
husks in all the remainder of our days. We baptize our children, and promise
and voew for them, and then instill those thriving and worldly principles into
them, which null and cancel the vow we made at the Font: hither we bring them
to renounce the world, and at home teach them to love it. And for the Lords
Supper, what is commonly our preparation? A Sermon, a few hours of meditation,
a seeming farewell to our common affairs, a faint heaving at the heart that
will not be lifted up, a sad and demure countenance at the time; and the next
day, nay before the next day this mist is shaken off, and we are ready to give
Mammon a salute, and a cheerful countenance, the world our service, to drudge
and toil as that shall lead us, to rail as loud, to revenge as maliciously,
to wanton it as sportfully, to cheat as kindly as ever we did long before, when
we never so much as thought of a Sacrament. And shall we now place all
Religion, nay any Religion in this? or call that good, that absolutely good and
necessary, for which we are the worse, absolutely the worse every day? Well may
God ask the question, Will he be pleased with this? Well may he by one Prophet
ask, who has required it? and by another instruct us, and show us yet a more
excellent way.

It was not the error of the Jew alone to forget true and inward sanctity, and
to trust upon outward worship and formality; but sad experience has taught us,
that the same error which misled the Jew under his weak and beggarly Elements,
has in the fullness of time found admittance and harbor in the breasts of
Christians uneer that perfect Law of Liberty, in which the grace of God has
appeared unto all men. I am unwilling to make the parallel; it carries with it
some probability that some of them had that gross conceit of God, that he fed
on the flesh of bulls, and drunk the blood of goats; for God himself stands up
and denies it in the fiftieth Psalm, will I eat the flesh of bulls, and drink
the blood of goats? If I be hungry, I will not tell thee: if there were not
such conceit, why does God thus expostulate? And is there no symptom, no
indication of this disease in us? do we not believe that God delights in these
pageants and formalities? That he better likes the devotion of the ear, then of
the heart? do we not measure out our devotion rather by the many Sermons which
we have heard, then the many alms we have given? or which is better, the many
evil thoughts which we have stifled, the many unruly desires we have suppressed,
the many passions we have subdued, the many temptations which we have
conquered? Has not this been our Arithmetic, to cast uup our accounts, not by
the many good deeds we have done, which may stand for figures or numbers; but
by the many reproaches we have given to the times, the many bitter Censures we
have past upon men better then our selves; the many Sermons we have heard,
which many times (God knows) are no better then Ciphers, and by themselves
signify no more? Do we not please our selves with these thoughts, and lift our
selves up into the third heaven? Do we not think, that God is well pleased with
these thoughts? Do we not believe they are sacrifices of a sweet smelling
favor unto him? And what is this less, then to think that God will eat the
flesh of bulls, and drink the blood of goats? nay may it not seem far worse,
to think that God is fed and delighted with our formalities, which are but
lies, and that he is in love with our hypocrisy? I may be bold to say, as
gross an error and as opposite to the wisdom of God, as the other. It is
truly said, multa non illicita vitiat animus, That the mind and intention of
man may draw an obliquity on those actions which in themselves are lawful; nay
multa mandata vitiat, It may make that unlawful, which is commanded. O! it is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God; but how fearful is
it to have his hand fall upon us, when we stan dat his Altar? to see him frown
and hear him thunder, when we worship him; in anger to question us, when we are
doing our duty? What a dart would it be to pierce our souls through and
through, if God should now send a Prophet to us, to tell us, That our
frequenting the Church, and coming to his Table, are distasteful to him; That
our fasts are not such as he has chosen, and that he hates them as much as he
does our oppression and cruelty, to which they may be as the prologue; that he
will have none of the one, because he will have none of the other? and yet if
we terminate Religion in these outward formalities, or make them wait upon our
lusts, to bring them with more smoothness, with more state and pomp, and
applause to their end, to that which they look so earnestly upon; if we thus
appear before him, he that shall tell us as much of our hearing, and fasting,
and frequenting the Church, shall be as a true Prophet as Micah the Morasthite
was.

And now to conclude; If you ask me, wherewith shall you come before the Lord,
and bow your selves before the most High? Look further into the Text, and
there you have a full and complete directory; Do Justly, Love Mercy, and walk
humbly with your God; with these you may approach his Courts, and appear at
his Altar. In aram dei Justitia imponitur, says Lactantius, Justice, and
mercy, and sincerity are the best and fittest sacrifices for the Altar of God,
Lactan^. de vere cultu. l 6. c. 24.
which is the heart of man; an Altar, that must not be polluted with blood: Hoc
qui exhibet, toties sacrificat, quoties bonum aliquid aut pium facit, The man
that is just and merciful does sacrifice, as often as he does any just and
merciful act. Come then and appear before him, and offer up these; nor need
you fear that ridiculous and ungodly imputation, which presents you to the
world under the name of mere moral men: Bear it as your Crown of Rejoicing;
It is stigma Jesus Christi, a mark of Christ Jesus; and none will lay it upon
you as a defect, but they who are not patient of any loss but of their
honesty: who have learnt an art to join together in one the Saint and the
deceiver; who can draw down heave to them with a thought, and yet supplant, and
overreath their brother as cunningly as the devil does them. Bonus vir Caius
Seius, Tertull. Apolog.
Caius Seius is a good man; his only fault is that he is a Christian, would
the heathen say; He is a good moral man, but he is not of the Elect, that is,
one of our Faction, says one Christian of another. I much wonder, how long a
good moral man has been such a monster. What is the decalogue, but an
abridgement of morality? what is Christ's Sermon on the mount, but an
improvement of that? and shall civil and honest conversation be the mark of a
reprobate? Shall nature bring forth a Regulus, a Cato, a Fabricius, Just and
Honest men, and shall Grace and the Gospel of Christ bring forth nothing but
zanies, but plaiers and actors of Religion, but Pharisees and hypocrites? or
was the new creature, the Christian, raised up to thrust the moral man out of
the world? Must all be election and regeneration? Must all Religion be carried
along in phrases and words, and noise; and must Justice and Mercy be exposed as
monsters, and flung out into a land of oblivion? Or how can they be elect and
regenerate, who are not just and merciful? No: the moral man that keeps the
commandments is not far from the kingdom of God; and he that is a Christian,
and builds up his morality, Justice and Mercy, upon his faith in Christ; he
that keeps a good conscience, and does to others what he would that others
should do unto him, shall enter in and have a mansion there, when these
speculative and Seraphick Hypocrites, who decree for God, and preordain there a
place for themselves, shall be shut out of doors.

Come then and appear before him with these, with Innocence, and Integrity,
and Mercifulness Wash your hands in Innocence, and compass his Altar. For
Christ has made us Priests unto his Father, Rev. 1.6. there is our Ordination:
To offer up spiritual sacrifice, 1 Pet. 2.5. there is our duty and
performance: By Jesus Christ, there is our seal to make good and sure our
acceptance. Chrysostom, besides that great Sacrifice of the Cross, has found
out many more; Chrysostom. in. Ps. 5^.
Martyrdom, Prayer, Justice, Alms, Praise, Compunction and Humility; and he
brings into the preaching of the World, which all make (...), Basil. ep. 87.
says Basil, a most magnificent and precious sacrifice. We need not cull out
any more then these in the Text; for in offering up these, we shall find the
true nature and reason of a Sacrifice observed. For to make any thing a true
Sacrifice, there must be a plain and expressed change of the thing that is
offered. It was a Bull or a Ram, but it is set apart and consecrate to God; and
it is a Sacrifice, and must be slain. And this is remarkable in all these, in
which though no Death befall us, (as in the Beast offered in Sacrifice) but
that Death (which is our Life) our death to sin; yet a change there is, which
being made to the honor of Gods Majesty, is very pleasing and acceptable in
his sight. When we do justly, we have slain the Beast, the worst part of us,
our love of the world, our filthy lusts, our covetousness and ambition, which
are the life and soul of fraud, and violence, and oppression, by which they
live, and move, and have their being. When we offer up our Goods, there is a
change; For how strong is our affection to them? how do we adore them as Gods?
are they not in common esteem as our life and blood? and do we not as
willingly part with our breath as with our wealth? Now he that does good and
distribute, he that scatters his wealth, poures forth his very blood; binds the
sacrifice with cords to the horns of the Altar, lets out all worldly desires
with his wealth, and has slain that sacrifice, says Saint Paul, with which
God is well pleased.

And last of all, Humility wastes and consumes us to nothing; makes us an
Holocaust, a whole burnt-offering, Nothing in our selves, nothing in respect of
God; and in htis our Exinanition, exalts all the graces of God in us, fills us
with life and glory, with high apprehensions, with lively anticipations of that
which is not seen, but laid up for us in the Treasuries of heaven. These are
the Good man's sacrifice, and they naturally flow from this Good which is here
showed in the Text, and are the parts of it. These were from the beginning and
shall never be abolisht; and if we offer up these, we shall never be
questioned, nor asked, will God be pleased with these? for he is pleased only
with these, and for these, with whatsoever we offer; and he will love us for
them, and accept us in him, who to sanctify and present these, offered himself
an offering, a sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor; even Jesus Christ the
righteous, who is a Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedeck.

Thus have we taken a view of this Good which is shown in the Text, as it
stands in opposition with the Sacrifices of the Law, and outward formality; and
now the vail is drawn, we shall present it in its full beauty and perfection in
our next.

blazon or royal coat of arms of England and Wales HONI ^T QVI MAL Y PENSE

The Two and Twentieth SERMON.
PART II.
MICAH 6.8. He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord
require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with
thy God?


WE have showed you, That Piety is termed Good in it self, in opposition to
Sacrifice, and the ceremonies of the law, which were but ex instituto, for some
reasons instituted and ordained, but in themselves were neither Good nor Evil.
We might now take a view of this Good, as it stands in opposition to the things
of this world, which either our Luxury, or Pride, or Covetousness have raised
in their esteem, and above their worth, and called Good, as the heathens
consecrated their affections, their diseases, their very vices, and placed them
in the number of their Gods. For Good is that which all desire, which all bow
and stoop to, but yet it has as several shapes, as there be opinions and
constitutions of men; and all the mistake is in our choice, that we set up
something to look upon, which is not worth a glance of our eye: That we call
Evil, Good; and that Good, which is neither evil, nor good, but may make us so;
Good if we use it well, and Evil, if we abuse it. ( Non est bonum, quo uti male
possis, and that cannot be truly and in it self good, Sense. ep. 20.
which we may use to an evil end, says Seneca) that we propose to our selves
objects which are attended with danger, and very often with horror, and give to
them this glorious title; paint out of our selves some deformed strumpet, and
call her a Goddess, and kiss the lips of that which will bite like a
Cockatrice. Good we desire, and when our desires have run to that which we set
up for good, we meet with nothing but evil, which shows not it self till it be
felt; we hoyse up our sails and make toward it, and are swallowed up in that
Sea as Austin calls it, of the good things of this world, which we thought
mighty carry us to the end of our hope; we take it for bread, and in our mouth
it is gravel; we took it for pleasure, and when we tasted it, it was gall; we
hunt after riches, as Good, and they beggar us; climb to honor, and that
breaks our neck; and though we swallow down these good things, as the Ox does
water, yet we are never full. Saint Hilary in his comments on the first Psalm
having observed, that some there were who drew down all their interpretations
of that book respectively to spiritual things and God himself, because they
thought it some disparagement to that book, that terrene and secular matter
should so often interline it self; yet passes on them no heavier censure then
this, haec little opinio argui non potest, etc. We need not be so severe as to
condemn this opinion of theirs, because it proceeds from a mind piously and
Religiously affected; and it is a thing which deserves rather commendation then
blame, by a favorable endeavor to strive to apply all things to him by whom
all things were made. For these things are not Good, but only go under this
deputative and borrowed title: The world has cried them up, but the scripture
has no such name for them; it is Good to praise the Lord, nay it is Good to be
afflicted, this we read; but where do we read, It is good to be rich; It is
good to be honorable; It is good to go in purple, and fare deliciously every
day? we find many curses and woes sent after them, but we never find them
graced with the title of good. Thou have received thy good things, faith
Abraham to Dives; Luke 16.27.
Good things but, Thine, such as thy lusts esteemed so; thy good things, and
such good things, which have helped to hurry thee to this place of torment. Good
they are not, for they are so far from making a man good, that they make him
him not rich: Look upon Dives at his feast, and Lazarus at his gates, and which
was the rich man? If I should say Lazarus, it were no Paradox, for Dives had
nothing of a rich man but his name.

Good then they are no tin themselves, nor can they be, but by being
subservient to this Good in the Text; and therefore we must make another
defalcation of these Temporal goods, as we did of those Sacrifices which were
but temporary: Down must Sacrifice and down must Mammon; down must his temple
and his groves, and no picture, no representation must be left of them in our
minds; but let us look upon Sacrifice and Formality, as shadows, and the things
of this world as less then shadows, and then upon the ruins of hypocrisy,
and covetousness, and ambition, to build up a temple to true piety and
religion, and that which is called Good here in the Text, which God by his
Prophet has laid open before our eyes: For he has sheed thee, O man, not
Sacrifice, not the glory of the world, that is the devils show, Math. 4. but he
has showed thee what is good.

And now having drawn the veil, we may enter the Sanctum Sanctorum, the holy
of holies, and behold piety, and that which is good; that good, which is so in
it self, real and eternal, quod nec invitus accipis, nec invitus amittis,
which thou neither receivest nor losest but when thou will, as thou may thy
possessions, Agustin. Ser. 12. in Matthew.
thy honors, nay thy body and life it self, which all may be taken from thee
against thy will; that good, which is a defluxion and emanation from God
himself, derived and flowing from that wisdom which dwelt with him from all
eternity; that good, which will make us good here, and raise us up to be
eternal with him in the highest heavens; that good, which will give us an
heavenly understanding, a divine will, angelical affections, and in a manner
incorporate us with God himself.

And if you please to look upon it in its perfection of beauty; you may
consider it, 1. as fitted and proportioned to our very nature. 2ly. as fitted
to all sorts and conditions of men. 3ly. as lovely and amiable in the eyes of
all. 4ly. as filling and satisfing us. 5ly. as giving a relish, and sweet
taste to the worst of evils which may befall us, whilst with love and
admiration we look upon it; and making those things of the world, which are not
good in themselves, useful, and good, and advantageous to us. This is the
object which is here set up, and it is a fair one, and man is called to be the
spectator, he has showed thee, O man! and if he look pon it with astedfast and
single eye, with affection and love, it will make him dignum Deo spectaculum,
an object fit for the angels and God himself to look upon; for, 1. it is fitted
to him. 2ly. it is opened and made manifest, placed before his eye: Jndicavit
tibi, he has showed thee it. Last of all, it is required of him; for what else
does he require? 1. It is proper for him. 2ly. is is displayed and laid open
before him. 3ly. It is a Law to bind him. He has showed thee O man, what is
Good; and what does the Lord require?

And first, we cannot doubt but God built up man for this end alone, for this
Good; to communicate his goodness, to make him partaker of a divine nature, to
make him a kind of God upon the earth, to imprint his image upon him, by which
according to his measure and capacity he might express and represent God. 1.
by the knowledge not only of natural and transitory, but those things which
pertain to everlasting life, as it is Coloss. 3.10. being renewed in knowledge,
after the image of him that created him. 2ly. in the rectitude and Sanctity of
his will: Ephs. 4.24. putting on that new man, which after God is created in
righteousness and holiness. And 3ly. in the free and ready obedience of the
outward parts, and inward faculties, to the beck and command of God; which
being divine, a breathing from God himself, cannot but look forward, and look
upward upon its original; and so teach us to be just, as God is righteous in
all his ways; to be merciful, as he is merciful; and to walk humbly before
him, who has thus built us up out of the dust, but to eternity. I say, God
has imprinted this image on man, and what communion can God have with evil?
what relation has an immortal essence to that which passes away, changes
every day, and at last is not? 1 Cor. 7.31. Take man for the miracle of the
world, as Trismegistus calls him, that other, that lesser world, the tie and
bond of all the other parts, which were made for his sake, and what
conversation should he have, but in heaven? what should he look upon, but that
which is Good? Or take him as made after Gods image, as having that property
which no other creature has, to understand, to will, to Reason and determine,
by which he was made capable of good, and made to be partaker of it; and we
cannot think he had an understanding given him only to forge deceit, and
contrive plots; to find out a twilight, an opportunity to do mischief; to
invent new delights, to make an art of pleasure; and draw out a method and Law
of wickedness; That, that which was given him as his counselor in relation to
this good, should be his purveior in the works of the flesh, and no better then
a pander to his lust: Illud mirum, mal^s esse tam multos; nam ut aqua piscibus,
circumfusus nobis spiritus volucribus convenit: It a certe facilius esse
oportebat secundum naturam, quam contra eam vivere. Quint. l. 12. Instit. orat.
c. 11.
we cannot think that he had a will given him, to embrace shadows and
apparitions, which play with our fancy and deceive us; to wait upon the flesh
which fights against the spirit, and this image within us: we cannot think he
had reason given to distinguish him from the other creatures, to make him worse
then they; This cannot be the thought of a man, whilst he remains so; a man
who is formed, and fitted, and fashioned only for that which is good; which
consideration made Quintilian himself, a heathen, to pronounce, that it was as
natural for man to be good, as for the birds to fly, or fishes to swim;
because man was made for the one^ as the birds and fishes were for the other.

Secondly, there is no proportion at all between any corporeal and sensual
thing, and the soul of man, which is a spirit, and immortal, and so resembles
that God which breathed it into us. For as Lactantius said, God is not hungry,
that you need set him meat, nor thirsty, that you should pour out drink unto
him; he is not in the dark, that you need light up candles; And what is beauty,
what is the wedg of gold to the soul? The one is from the earth earthy, the
other is from the Lord of heaven. The world is the Lords, and the world is the
souls, and all that therein is; and to behold the creature, and in the world,
as in a book, to study and find out the Creator; to contemplate his majesty,
his goodness, his wisdom; and to discover that happiness which is prepared
for it; to behold the heavens, the works of Gods hand, and purchase a place
there; to converse with Seraphim and Cherubim; This is the proper act of the
soul for which it was made; this, this alone was proportioned to it. And herein
consists the excellency, and very essence of Religion, and the Good which is
here showed us; in exalting the soul, in drawing it back from mixing with the
creature, and in bringing it into subjection under God, the first and only
good; in uniting it to its proper object; in making that which was the breath
of God, breath nothing but God; the soul being as the matter, and this Good
here, that is piety and religion, the form; the soul being (...) (for so Plato
calls matter) the receptacle of this Good, as the matter is of the form, and
never right, and of a persect being, till it receive it; this good being as the
seed, and the soul the ground, Math. 13. the matrix, and the womb; and there is
a kind of sympathy, between this good, this immortal seed, and the heart and
mind of man, as there is between seed, and the womb of the earth: for the soul
no sooner sees it unclouded, unvailed, not disguised and made terrible by the
intervention of things not truly good, but upon a full manifestation, she is
taken, as the bridegroom in the Canticles, with its eye, and beauty. Heaven is
a fair sight, even in their eyes who tend to destruction; so that there is a
kind of neernesse and alliance between this good, and those notions and
principles which God imprinted in us at the first. And therefore even nature it
self had a glimpse, a weak, imperfect sight of this good, and saw a further
mark to aim at, then this world in this span of time could set up, Tertull. 2.
de Finib.
whence Tully calls man a mortal God: and Seneca tells us, That, by that which
is best in man we go before other creatures, Sen. ep. 76. In homine quid
optimum^ratio: hac antecedit animalia, deos sequitur.
but follow to join with that which is truly good, by which we may be carried
along to the fountain of good, even God himself.

For again; as this good here, that is, piety and religion, bear a sympathy
and correspondence with the mind of man, so has the soul of man (...) a
formative quality, a power to shape and fashion it, and by the sweet influence,
and kindly aspect of Gods quickening grace, to bring forth something of the
same nature, some heavenly creature; the new man, which is made up in holiness
and righteousness, in Justice, and mercy, and humility, which are the good in
the text; the beauty of which may beget and raise up that violence in us, which
may break open the gates of heaven; beget a congregation of Saints, of just and
honest men, a numerous posterity to Abraham of hospital and merciful men; and
an army of martyrs, which shall in all humility lay down their lives for his
sake that gave them, and forsake all, to join and adhere to this Good.

And now in the second place, as it is fitted and proportioned to the soul of
man, so is it to every soul of man, to all sorts and conditions of men; it is
fitted to the Jew; and to the Gentile; to the bond, and to the free, to the
rich, and to the poor; to the scribe, and to the Idiot; to the young, and to
the aged; no man so much a Jew, no man such a bored slave, no man such a Lazar,
none so dull and slow of understanding, no such Barzillai, which may not
receive it. Freedom and slavery, circumcision and uncircumcision, riches and
poverty, quickness and slownesse of understanding in respect of this Good, of
Piety and Religion, are all alike. Religion is no peculiar, but the most
common, the most communicative thing that is. (...), etc. The Law, the
Prophets, Naz. Orat. 26.
the Oracles, Grace, Faith, Hope, and Charity, these, says Nazianzen, (...)
etc. Ib.
are common to all, as common as the Sun; are the goods and possessions
(...), not of the mightiest, or the wisest, but of those who are willing to
receive them. Nor were there any thing more unjust then our Faith and Religion,
(says he) if it were entailed only on some few; if God, whose Property, whose
Nature it is to do Good, should dispense that Good most sparingly, which does
most please him; if he should shut it up, as he does Gold and other Metals, in
the bowels of the earth and seal a patent but to some few, to find and dig it
out; if it should be left, as the things of this world are, in the uncertain
and inequal hand of Chance; or looking alike on all, should withdraw, and hide
it self from the most, or be unatchievable, not to be attained to by some, when
it is bound up as it were in the bosom of others. No; the most excellent
things are most common, and offered and presented to all: nothing is so common
as this good, and when other things fly from us, and as we follow after them,
remove themselves farther off, and mock our endeavors, this is always near
us, shines upon us, invites and solicits us to take it for our guide, which
will lead us in a certain and unerring course, through the false shows and
deceitfulness of this world, through blackness and darkness, to the end for
which we were made. This Good is every man's good, that will; as Aquinas is said
to have replied to his sister, when she asked him, how she might be saved; si
velis, if you are willing you may: every covetous person is not rich; every
ambitious man has not the highest place; every student is not a great clerk;
but piety opens the gate to every man that knocks, and he that will, enters in
and takes possession of her; Fastidiosior est scientia quam virtus; paucorum
est ut literati sint, omnium ut boni: That which is best, is most accessable;
and when other things, Petrarch. l. 7. Re. Fam. op 17.
knowledge, and wealth, and honor, are coy, and keep a distance, and when we
have them, are desultorious, and ready in the midst of all our joy and pride to
leave us, and leave us nothing but a heavy heart, and dropping eye to look
after them; this good is ever before us, and never removes it self, till we
chase it away; is ever with us, if we will; and if we will, as the father in
the Gospel tells the elder Son, we may be ever with it, and all that it has
is ours. In a word, It is most kind, most beneficial, when most profess it;
It is not lapt up in the ephod, as belonging to the priest alone, for it was
not showed to him alone, nor was it required of him alone; every branch and
part of it concerns you who are to be taught, as much as them that are set
over you in the Lord, to teach you; the people are bound to be as holy as the
priest, and they are both to pass the same narrow way; nor are the gates of
heaveu so made that they will fly open to the people, but must be beat upon
with violence by the priest; that he must bow, and stoop, and lie down in the
dust, and mortify himself, and then be scarcely saved, as Saint Peter speaks,
and they may walk on in the lust of their hearts, and do what they please, and
then enter Heaven with all their sins, with Hell it self about them. This is a
dangerous error, and we have reason to fear has sent many the other way, even
to the place of torment, where it will bring no ease at all to them to see
those whom they foolishly thought this Good did only concern, beaten with
more stripes then they. All are men, and this Good is shown to all, and
required of all; and tribulation and anguish will be upon every soul that
regards it not, upon the Priest first, and also upon the people.

Thirdly, as it is fitted to all men, so is it lovely and amiable in the eyes
of all; and this is the glory and triumph of goodness and piety, that it
strikes a reverence in those who neglect it; finds a place in his breast, whose
hand is ready to suppress it; is magnified by those who revile it, and tunc
vincit cum laeditur, tunc intelligitur cum arguitur, then conquers when it
cannot prevail, is then understood, when it is opposed, and then gains honor,
when it cannot win assent. O! what a victory and triumph had Christ's innocence
over the heart and tongue of Pilate, even then when he gave sentence of death
against him. Be it as you require, this his ambition and fears forced from
him; but I find no fault in the man, this was the victory of Christ's innocence,
which made his judge his advocate, who at once pleads for him and condemns
him. How glorious were the blessed martyrs in their thoughts who dragged them
to execution? How do the wicked saint them in their heart, whom they gnash at
with their teeth? How do their passions rage against them, when their reason
acquits them? How do good men beat down and dismay their enemies in their very
fall? and how do their enemies secretly wish, that being such, they would not
be such, but cast in their lots with them, and be as wicked as they? Ecclus
49.1.
The remembrance of Josiah, says the wiseman, is like a perfume, as sweet as
hone^ in all men's mouths; for as the one takes the sense, so do the other
surprizethe reason, and is as proper and natural to the understanding, as
honey, and music are to the sense; and this is taken from the common stock of
nature, and we never lose it, but with our selves; nor can we lay it by, till
we are unmanned, and like Nebuchadnezzar, drove into the field, and turned into
beasts: For who was ever so intemperate, as to condemn temperance for a vice?
who was ever such a traitor, as to write a Panegyric on rebellion? who was
ever such a devil, as not to wish himself a Saint? we deny not, but that the
conntinuance in sin, advantage and prosperity in sin, the pleasures of
sin, the longsuffering of God (which may be looked upon as an applause from
heaven) the cringes and Idolatry of Parasites, the profit of sin, the honor
of sin, may swell and puff up a man of Belial, and build him up into a most
unholy faith, that Thus, Thus should it be; That there is no virtue but a
thriving vice; no holiness but powerful, and glorious hypocrisy; that vice
bowed to is virtue, and virtue whipped and disgraced is vice; but then many a sad
intervall he has, many a twindge and gnawing at his heart, that he dare not
look upon his sin, but in this dress and state; and maugre all these, many a
bitter remembrance, which disquiets and buffets him, that in this height and
glory he shakes and wavers, and is unstedfast in this his faith, that he cannot
give a full and constant assent to that which he is so willing to believe;
cannot be persuaded of what he is persuaded, not believe what he does believe;
but is sick, and well; is resolved, and trembles; condemns and absolves
himself every day; and cannot live in peace in that sin, in which
nevertheless he may be resolved to dye. To conclude this; even they who weary
themselves in the ways of wickedness, know there is no rest but in this Good;
and those fools, who count piety as madness, when they make a truce with
their passions, and consult with reason, are so wise, as to see and admire, and
acknowledge the beauty of this Good.

Fourthly; and as this Good in the text is lovely and amiable, so is it filling
and satisfying; so fitted to the soul, that it fills it, when nothing else can;
for that which fills a thing, must be proportioned to it. The heart of man is a
little member, it will not, says Saint Bernard, give a kite its breakfast, and
yet it is too large a receptacle, of too great a compass for the whole world
to fill; in hoc toto nihil singulis satis est, there is nothing in the whole
Universe which is taken for enough by any one particular man; nothing in which
the appetite of a single man can rest, only this Good here in the text, can
fit it, because it is fitted to it; Honor is but air, and is lost in the
grasping; Riches are but earth, and sink from us in the digging; Pleasures are
but shadows, and slip through our embraces; but this Good is a solid,
permanent, lasting thing, changes the soul into it self, fills it in every
part, and brings delight where it fills. I have seen an end of all perfection,
Nieremb. de art. vol.
but thy law is exceeding large, says David, Ps. 119.96. So large as to fill
the soul as with marrow and fatness. We are told by those who have written of
the Indians, that there are certain birds there which seem to call passengers
to them, making a kind of articulate noise, Lo here it is, and when passengers
deceived with this note draw near to that place from whence the sound came,
the birds fly away, and at some distance renew their note; and still as the
passengers approach, fly away, and then take up the same note, till they have
quite led them out of their way. Penes historicos fides esto, Let the truth of
this be what it will; what these birds are said to do, that which we so much
dote on, and follow after, the things of the world (which are the Good which is
most sought after) do truly act. Some song they sing, some pleasure they
present to draw us near unto them; for that which is pleasant, and fair to
the sense, has not only a voice, but is eloquent to persuade, and it seems to
bespeak us, Lo here it is, here is happiness; and when we send out our
desires to overtake it, they miss and come short, and are frustrate: our
covetousness follows it, but it flies away; still we pursue it, and that still
withdraws, and so we lose our way, wander and err, open to the rage of every
beast of every temptation that assaults us, and at last fall into the pit of
destruction. And here is the difference between that which is truly good, and
that which but colors for it, and appears so: In the one our appetite
pleases us, but experience is distasteful; it is honey in the desire, but gall
in the taste; In the other, in that which is truly good, our appetite many
times is dull and queazy, but when we have tasted, and chewed upon it, ^ is
sweeter then the honey or the honey comb: It may be gall in the appetite, but
in the taste it is manna; If you put them into the scales to weigh them, there
is no comparison; you may as well measure time with eternity, or weigh one sand
of the shore with the whole ocean; for he that feeds on lies must needs be
empty, when it is truth alone that fills us.

Last of all; As this good fills and satisfies us, so it gives a sweet relish
and taste even to misery it self, and those evils, which we so fear, as if
there were none but those; it makes those things which are not good in
themselves useful and advantageous to us; and as Saint Basil observes, Bas. de
Gratiarum action. T. 1. p. 357.
is not changed or lost in the multitude and throng of those evils which
compass us about on every side, but changes and turns them, and makes them
the helpers of our joy, makes loss gain, enriches poverty, ennobles disgrace,
shines upon afflictions that we may rejoice in them, crowns persecution with
blessedness, and is that alone which makes Saints and canonizeth Martyrs. It
is the delight of man, and it is the delight of Angels, the delight and glory
of God himself. In respect of Religion it is not material, whether we be rich,
or poor, naked or clothed, at the mill, or on the throne, Censum non requirit,
nudo homine contenta est, religion and piety require nothing but a man, for
'twere strange we should think this Good was showed, this Religion ordained to
put us to charges. Indeed he that imbraceth it, and keeps this treasure in his
heart can never be poor, nor weak, nor naked, nor dishonorable; for in what
weakness is not he strong? in what solitude has not he troops to guard him?
or when is he poor, who possesses all things? when is he alone who has piety
for his companion, and the Angels for his ministers? when is he dishonorable,
who is clothed with this robe of righteousness? He that has nothing in this
world, if he has not this art of enjoying nothing, Perdidit infoelix totum
nil, has utterly lost the benefit of that nothing. This may seem a Paradox,
and so does every thing to the flesh, to the sensitive part, which does
confine, and regulate it, which indeed is to honor and spiritualize it; but
reason and religion discover more gross absurdities and soloecismes in the
motitions and applications of the sense, which wastes it self in its
inclinations and longings, and is lost in its paradise in that flattering
object, to which it was carried with such violence; and so we are made poor in
the midst of our heaps, base and dishonorable in our zenith, when we are at
the highest; are sick, and tremble as Belshazzar did at a feast, are quickly
weary of those delights we longed for; we have least, when we have most, and
have nothing, when we have all; when with this Good here in the text, (when in
appearance we have nothing) we have more then this world can give, and are then
richest, when we are thrown out of it; and are then at the end of our hopes,
when to the eye of flesh we are lost for ever.

Again, as it sweetens our misery, so it improves our wealth; makes that
useful to us, which might otherwise ruin us; makes that as a chain and
ornament about our necks, which the devil uses to make his snare: Parisiensis
calls it Honestissimum furem, the honestest thief in the world, which by taking
from us, makes us richer. In a word, it makes the unrighteous mammon a friend,
non enim auri vitium est avaritia, for covetousness is not the fault of the
gold, nor gluttony of meats, nor drunkenness of wine, but of men; nec
deficitur ad mala, sed male, says Aust. we fail not in things evil in their
own nature, but our great defect is, that even against the order of nature, we
abuse those things to evil, which are naturally good. All the riches in the
world cannot raise a cloud, says Basil, but yet we see the widows two mites
did purchase heaven. All the dainties, all the glory which we see, cannot bring
us back again into Paradise, and yet a cup of cold water shall find its reward.
And this is the end why they are given, to wit, to be subservient to this Good;
to be the matter, whereon it may show its art and skill, and extract Manna out
of meat, and the water of life out of drink, and eternity out of that which
passes away as a shadow, and returns no more; for sensible things, says
Basil, are as types and representations of spiritual, and point out to them,
as the sacrifices under the law, did to Christ, and shall have their
consummatum est, and be abolisht as they were; and therefore we may so far make
use of them (and it is the best use we can put them to) to make us in love with
this true Good, which may lead us to bliss; and so think of them, as if there
no gold at Ophir, no pearl but sanctity, no riches but godliness, no purchase
but eternity. And this is the Good in the text, 1. fitted and proportioned to
the nature of our soul, 2ly. fitted to all sorts and conditions of men, 3ly.
lovely and amiable in the eyes of all, 4ly. filling and satisfying all; And
last of all, giving a sweet relish to the worst of evils, which we use most to
fear; and making that which is not good in it self, good, and profitable, and
advantageous to us; view it well and consider it, and you cannot but say, it is
wroth the showing, wroth the sight, and worth the purchase, though we lay down
all that we are worth.

And now to proceed; that you may fall in love with it, and embrace it, It is
first, laid open and naked, and manifested unto you; Iadicavit tibi, He has
showed the.
2ly. published by open proclamation, as a law, which has (...), a forcing and
necessitating power, that if the cords of love will not draw you, the bonds and
force of a law may confine you to it. 1. he shows it, he has showed thee, O
man what is good; 2ly. he requires it, he wills, he commands it; for what does
God require but this? He has showed thee O man what is good, and what does the
Lord require?

And first: That which is truly good is open and manifest unto all; God
exposes and lays open, puts it to sale, and bids us come and buy: It is a
treasure, and he has unlockt it; it is a pearl, Math. 13. and he has opened
the casket; It is his light, and he hides it not under a bushel; It is a rule
by which we are to walk, and being it concerns our conduct in our way, it is
easy, and obvious, and open to the weakest understanding; sua front
proponitur, says Tertullian, it is presented to us without any mask or veil.
For indeed it is the property of a rule to be so, perspicuous; otherwise it is
not a rule, but an Oracle, or rather a snare to catch us; for how shall we be
able to embrace it, if we cannot see it? how shall we be able to do our duty,
if we know not what it is? if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall
prepare himself to battle? says Saint Paul; If this good be clouded with
darkness, and perplexities, who shall gird up his loins to make his approches
and addresses to it? it is true indeed; to draw near, to lay hold and join
with it (having no better retinue commonly, then contempt and reproach, then
misery and affliction, then persecution and death, being compassed about with
these terrors,) is a matter of difficulty, in regard of our weakness and
frailty, which loves not to look upon beauty in such a dress; and that
domestic war which is within us, and that fight and contention which is
between the flesh and the spirit; and in this respect it is a narrow way, and
we must use a kind of violence upon our selves to work through it to our end;
but yet it is showed and manifested, and the knowledge of the way is not shut
up and barricadoed, but to those who are not willing to find it, but run a
contrary way by some false light, which they had rather look upon and follow,
then that which leads them upon the pricks, upon labor, and sorrow, and
difficulty. Whatsoever concerns a man, is easy to be seen, for it is as open
as the day, in other passages, and dispensations of himself, in other effects
of his power and wisdom: God is a God afar off, but in this which concerns
us, he is near at hand, he is with us, about us, and within us; In other
things, which will no whit advantage us to see, he makes darkness his pavilion
round about him, but in this he displayes his beams. His way is in the
whirlwind, Nahum 1.3. and his footsteps are not known, Ps. 77.19. why he lifts
up one on high, and lays another in the dust; why he now shines upon my
tabernacle, and anon beats upon it with his tempest; why he places a man of
Belial in the throne, and sets the poor innocent man to grind at the mill; why
he passes by a brothel-house, and with his thunder beats down his own temple;
why he keeps not a constant course in his works, but to day passes by us in
a still voice, and to morrow in an earthquake; as it is far removed out of our
ken and sight, so to know it would not promote or forward us in our motion to
happiness; we are the wiser, that we do not know them; for there is no greater
folly in the world then for a mortal, finite creature, to discover such a mad
ambition, as to desire to know as much, and be as wise as his creator. This was
my infirmity, says David, I was even sick, when I did think of it; and he
checketh himself for it, Psalm. 77.11. Behold the world is my stage, and here I
must move by that light which he has afforded me, and not be put out of my
part to a full shame, by a bold and unseasonable contemplation of Gods
proceedings; not run out of my own ways by gazing too boldly on his. My
business is to embrace this good, and that will be my Angel to keep me in all
my ways, that I dash not my foot against a stone, against those perplexed and
cross events, which are those stones which we so hardly digest. I cannot know
why he lifts up one, and pulls down another; but if I cleave to this, This
will lift up my head, even when I am down. It is not fit I should know why the
wicked prosper; but by this light I see a serpent in their Paradise, which will
deceive and sting them to death: why they prosper I cannot find out, but he
that seems to hide himself, comes so near me, as to tell me, Their prosperity
shall slay them. Prove. 1.32. That their greatest happiness is their greatest
curse, and if there be an hell on earth, it is better then their heaven. It is
not convenient for me to know things to come; quem mihi, quem tibi sinem Dii
dederint, what will be my end, and what will be theirs, to know the number of
their days how long they shall rage, and I suffer; these are like the secrets
of great Princes, and they may undo us, and therefore they are locked up from
us in the prescience and bosom of God, and he keeps the key himself, and will
not show them: But cast thy burden upin him, do thy duty, exercise ^hy self in
that which he has shown, and then thon may lie down, and rest upon this,
that their damnation sleeps not, that their rage shall not hurt thee, and
that thy patience shall crown thee. In a word, If it be evil and thou forseest
it, it may cast thee down too low; and if it be good, it may lift thee up too
high, and thy exaltation may be more dangerous then thy fall; but Eschew Evil,
and follow that which is good, and this will be a certain Prophecy and presage
of a good end (be it what it will) whether it come to meet thee in the midst of
rays, or of a tempest.

These things God will not show thee, because thy eye is too weak to receive
them; nor in the next place will he answer thy curiosity and determine every
question which thou art too ready to to put up; nor redeem thee from those
doubts and perplexities, which not knowledge but thy ignorance has led thee
into, and so left thee in that maze and labyrinth, out of which thou can not
get; for it savours more of ignorance then knowledge, to venture in our search
without light, to conclude without premises, and to affect the knowledge of
that which we must needs know was yet never discovered, and therefore can never
be known. That Good which is good for us, he brings out of the treasury of his
wisdom, and lays it before us, and bids us come and see how gracious he is;
but that which is curiosae disquisitionis, as Tertullian speaks, of a more
subtle nature, he keeps from our eyes: for religion may stand fast as mount
Sion, though it have not those deeper speculations to support it, which many
times supplant and undermine it, and rob it of that precious time, and those
earnest endeavors, which were due, and consecrated to it alone. What a
fruitless dispute might that seem to be between Saint Hierome and Saint
Austin, concerning the original of the soul? when after long debate, and some
heat, and frequent intercourse of letters, Saint Austin himself confesses in
his Retractions, de origin animae nec tunc sciebam, nec adhuc scio, concerning
the souls original, I knew nothing then, and know as little now: what a
needless controversy arose between the Eastern and the Western Bishops,
concerning the time of the keeping of the Feast of Easter? when whenever they
kept it, they gave some occasion to standers by, of fear, that they kept it
both with the leaven of malice and uncharitableness; and what a weakness is
it to put that to the question, which before inquiry made, we may easily know
we shall never find? Many such questions have been in agitation, many such
inquiries made, and some others of another nature, which do not deserve the
name of questions, because they cannot be resolved, or are resolved with so
little profit; as concerning the state of the dead, which they could not, or
would not discover, who were raised from it; of the nature of hell fire, when
it should be the study of our whole life to be those new creatures who shall
never know it; of the condition of infants, that dye in the womb; of Gods
decrees, and the order of them; of his omnipotency, omniscience, omnipresence,
which we as boldly speak of, as we do of the virtues in Aristotle's morals, as
if we did see him as he sees us, and did know him as we are known. Many more
there are, and to these, many cases of conscience, which do rather perplex and
rack the conscience then guide and settle it; and too many, which, as the
Apostle speaks of fornication and uncleanness, are not fit to be named
amongst us. Poteramus has horas non perdere, The time which has been spent in
the discussion of these, might (to speak no more) have been bestowed with more
advantage to the Church and common cause; for I do not see how they come within
the compass of this Good, or have added one hair to its perfection. Quo plus
est dogmatum, hoc uberior est haeresium materia: Nunquam fuit sincerior,
callio^que Christiana files, quam cum illo uno, eoque brevissimo Symbolo
contentus est orbis. Erasm. Guliel. Varamo Archiep. Cant. prefat. ^d ep. Hieron.
For what need this loss of oil and labor, this stir and noise? why should
this curiosity spread so, as to be as universal as the Church it self? when
all that God will show, or concerns us to see, is drawn up within this narrow
compass of this one word, that which is Good. Would you view it in its
particulars? I need not send you to those many Creeds framed at sundry times,
and in diverse manners; for Erasmus will tell us, That religion was never more
sincere and incorrupt, then when they used but one Creed, and that a short one:
Saint Paul calls the proportion of faith, Romans 12.6. that proportion, which we
must not come short of, nor exceed; a form of sound words, 2 Timothy 1.13. which
has no corrupt doctrine mixed with it, and the truth, which is after
Godliness, 1 Iit. 1. which is therefore shown, that we may be just, and
merciful, and humble: who knows not what it is to believe in Christ? to deny
ungodliness, and worldly lusts? what oppressor knows not what Justice is, and
who more ready to demand it? what tyrant is not ready to beg mercy at his need?
who is so puffed up, as to be quite ignorant, what humility is? who understands
not our Saviors Sermon on the mount? Where this Good in the text is spread and
dilated into its several parts? And to know these, is to know all that should
be known; and did we practice what is easy to know, we should not thus trouble
our selves and others to know what to practice; and as the ancients use to say,
the way to knowledge is easy to them who are desirous to be Good, nor was this
light ever hid from those, who did delight to walk by it; the law is a light
says David, and to say it is not visible when it is held forth, is to deny it
to be a light; for he therefore shows it, that it may be seen.

He has showed thee O man, etc.

Thus then God has shown us, 1. all those things which concern us, 2ly. all
that we can apprehend, all those truths of which we are capable; and these two
are always in conjunction, and have a mutual aspect one on the other; what
concerns us, that we can apprehend, and what we can apprehend concerns us;
the mind is large enough for that which will better it, and that which will
better it, is obvious to the mind, as Saint Paul speaks, Phil. 4.8. whatsoever
things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just,
whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be
any virtue, any praise, these are within the compass of this Good here in the
text, and are set up and pointed to by the finger of God, for all that are men
to look upon.

But now it may be asked; if the object be so fair and visible, how comes it to
pass it is hid from so many eyes, that there be so few that see it, or see it
so as to fall in love with it, and embrace it? for as the Prophet asks, who
has believed our report? so may we, who has delighted in this sight? I must
therefore call your thoughts to look upon the spectator, as well as the object,
the man as well as the Good. If it be good it was showed to the man, and if he
be a man he can see it. He has showed thee O man what is good: and this word
man runs through every vein of the text, he was built up to be a spectator
of this great sight; the man it is, to whom the law is given, and if he be a
man, he cannot but behold it; for when he sees it not, he does exuere hominem,
he puts off the man quite, devests himself of reason, and becomes like to the
beasts that perish. Many hindrances there may be, to keep it from our eyes,
that we do not rightly judge of this Good, in which the man is lost and
swallowed up in victory: Isidore of Pelusium has given us three: the 1. is
(...), the narrowness of the understanding and judgment; the 2. is (...),
sloth and neglect in the pursuit of it; the 3. (...), the improbity of men's
manners, and a wicked and profane conversation.

And first, the narrowness and defect in the understanding is an evil incident
but to a few; for how can the understanding be too narrow to receive that Good
which was fitted and proportioned to it? if it will receive Evil, it will
receive Good; for there can be no reason given, why it should be as the needles
eye to piety and holiness, and a wide open door, of capacity enough to let in
a legion of devils. No; this befalls none but those who know it not indeed, and
yet shall never be questioned for their ignorance, as natural fools and
madmen, Non est dementia quae est in hominis potestate. Quint. declam. 348.
which bring that disease with them into the world, which they can neither
avoid nor cure, and of which the cause cannot be found out, says the Orator;
and these men come not under the common account, nor are to be set down in the
roll and catalogue of men; Pet. Faber. adel. 124.
Furiosus pro absente, says the law, wheresoever they are, they are as absent,
and whatsoever they do, they do as if they did it not: They are not what they
are, and they do not what they do; and why they are so, and what shall be their
end, is casus reservatus, is locked up, and reserved in the bosom of God alone;
and he that shall ask how it comes to pass that they are thus and thus may
well claim kindred of them both. To these it is not showed, who are as far
removed from being men, as they are from the use of reason: August. l. 1. de
doct. Christ.
and how should he see a star in the firmament, says Saint Austin, who cannot
see so far as to my finger, which points up to it? how should they see this
good, who are so distitute of reason, which is the only eye, with which we can
behold it?

The 2. is (...), sloth and neglect, that we do not search it out, not fix our
eyes upon it, but walk on toward our journeyes end, sport our selves in the
way, and only salute it in the by, and then (as travelers do many objects and
occurences they meet with) behold it, pass by and forget it, or as Saint James
speaks, look on it as on a glass, not as women with curiosity and diligence,
but as men perfunctorily and slightly, and never once think more of what we
have seen: we first slight, and at last loath it; for a negative contempt is
the immediate way, and next step to a positive: venit ignavia, Plaut. Mostell.
and ea mihi tempestas fuit, says he in the Comedy; sloth comes upon us, binds
our faculties, and that is the tempest which spoils us of our crop, of that
fruit, which we might have gathered from this tree of life. For though this
Good be most fully and perspicuously set forth in Scripture, shown in all its
beams and glory, yet this gives no encouragement to neglect those means which
God has reached forth unto us, to guide and direct us in our search; There is
light enough, and it is plain, is no argument, that we should shut our eyes.
For as we do not with the Church of Rome pretend extreme difficulty, and with
this pretense quite strike the Scripture out of the hands of the Laity, and
busy their zeal with other matters, bind them, as a horse is bound to the
mill, and lead them on in the motion of a blind obedience; so do we require the
greatest diligence both in reading Scripture, and also in asking counsel of the
gray hairs, and multitude of years, of the learned, of those whom God has
placed over them in the Church; and if the great Physician Hippocrates thought
it necessary in his art for those who had taken any cure in hand, (...),
Hippocrat in praecep. N^z. cp. 120.
to ask advice of all, even of Idiots, and those who knew but little in that
art; much rather ought we (...), ask counsel of God by prayer, and to be ready
to be instructed by any who is a man; for though the lesson be plain, yet we
see it so falls out, that negligence does not pass a line, when industry and
meditation have run over the whole book; that diligence has a full sight of
this Good, when sloth and neglect have but heard of its name. Saint Hierom
speaks of some in his time, qui solam rusticitatem pro Sanctitate habebant, who
accounted rusticity and ignorance the only true holiness, and called
themselves the scholars and disciples of the Disciples of Christ, who we are
told, were simple and unlearned fishermen; Idcirco Sancti, quod nihil scirent,
as if ignorance were the best argument to demonstrate their piety, and they
were therefore holy, because they knew not what it was to be so. I will not
say, such we have in these our days; no, they are not such as profess
ignorance, but who are as ignorant as they could be who did profess it. Like
the lilies of the field, they labor not, they study not, and yet Solomon with
all his wisdom was not so wise as one of these: Some crummes fall from their
masters table, some passage they catch and lay hold on from some Prophet, which
they call theirs, and this so fills them, that they must vent, that it runs
over, and defiles and corrupts that which they will not understand; for bring
them to a trial, and you shall find them as well skilled in Scripture, as he
was in Virgil, who having studied it long, at last asked whether Aeneas was a
man or a woman. Faith is their daily bread, their common language; religion
they speak of, as often almost as they do speak; piety dwells with them, purity
is their proper passion, or essence rather; but then this Good in the text,
Justice, and Mercy, and honesty in conversation (if we may judge of the tree by
his fruits) is not, as the Psalmist speaks, in all their thoughts, for it is
scarce in any of their ways; and we have that reason, which we would not have,
to fear, that they do but talk of it. Now to cast a careless look upon this
good is not to see it; to talk of it, is not to understand it; to name it, is
not to embrace it; for all these may be in a man who has the price in his
hand, but has no heart to buy it: and as the Philosopher said of those who
were punished after death in their carcasses, Relicto cadavere abijt reus, the
body was left behind, but the guilty person, the Parricide was departed and
gone: So here is a lump of flesh, but the man is gone, nay dead and buried,
covered over with outward formalities, with words and fancy: This is not the
man in the text, and then no marvel if he cannot see this great sight.

The 3. is (...), Improbity of manners, a mind immerst and drowned in all the
filth and pollution of the world, evil affected, Acts 14.2. Corrupt, Arislotle
Eth. 6.5. M^gnis sceleribus in^a naturae intereunt. Sen. Cont.
2 Timothy 3.8. for wickedness is (...), says the Philosopher, and does corrupt
the very principles of nature, and make that Candle, as Solomon calls it, which
God has lighted up in our hearts, burn but dimly; and as we read, when the
earth was without form and void, darkness was upon the face of the deep; so
when the perturbations of our mind interpose themselves, as the earth, there is
straight a darkness over the soul. An Evil eye cannot behold that which is
good; An eye full of Adulteries, cannot discover the beauty of chastity; A
lustful eye cannot see justice; a Lofty eye can neither look upon mercy, nor
humility. The love of honor makes the judgment follow it to that pitch and
height, which it has set and marked out: The love of money will gloss that
blessing, which our Savior has annexed to poverty of spirit. My factious humor
will strike at the very life and heart of religion, in the name of religion and
God himself, and destroy Christianity for the love of Christ. Resist not the
power; In one age it is glossed, bound in with limitations and exceptions, or
rather let loose to run along with men of turbulent spirits against it self; in
another, when the wind is turned, it is a plain text, and needs no interpreter.
Bid the angry gallant bow to his enemy; he will count you a fool: Bid the
covetous sell all that he has; he will think you none of the wisest, and pity
or scorn you: Bid the wanton forsake that strumpet, which he calls his
mistress; and he will send you a challenge, and for attempting to help him out
of that deep ditch, Prove. 23.27.
will send you to your grave. We may talk what we please of Marcion, and Manes,
of heretics and the devil, as interpolators and corrupters of Scripture; but
it is the wickedness of men's hearts, that have cut and mangled it, and made it
what we please, made it join and comply with that which it forbids, and
severely threatens. Now to conclude this; in the midst of so many passions and
perturbations, in the throng of so many vices, and ill humors, in this Chaos
and confusion, where is the man? There is a body left behind, inutile pondus,
an unweildly and unprofitable outside of a man, the garment, the picture, or
rather the shadow of a man, and we may say of him, as Jacob did when he saw
Joseph's coat, It is my sons cout, but evil beasts have devoured him, Genesis
37.33. Here is the shape, the garment, the outside of a man, but the man
without doubt is rent in pieces, distracted, and torn asunder by the
perturbations of his mind, corrupted, annihilated, unmanned by his vices, and
there is nothing left but his coat, his body, his carcass, and the name of a
man. This is not the man, and then no marvel if he do not see this great
sight: In his day, whilst he was a man, his reason not clouded, his
understanding not darkened, in this his day, it was showed to him, and it was
fair and radiant, but now all is night about him, and it is hid from his eye;
for if it be hid, it is hid to them that perish, to them that will perish, 2
Cor. 4.3. He has showed thee O man: The Good invites the man, and the man
cannot but look upon that which is Good. Draw then thy soul out of prison; take
the man out of his grave, draw him out of these clouds of sloth, of passion, of
Prejudice, and this good here, Piety and Religion, will be as the sun, when
it shines in its strength.

For conclusion then; let us cleave fast to this good, and uphold it in its
native and proper purity against all external rites, Conclusion.
and empty formalities, and in the next place, against all the pomp of the
world, against that which we call good, when it makes us evil. I am almost
ashamed to name this, or make the comparison; For what is wealth to
righteousness? what is policy to religion? what is earth to heaven? but I know
not how men have been so vain as to attempt to draw them together, and to shut
up the world in this good, or rather this good in the world; to call down God
from heaven, not only to partake of our flesh, but our infirmities, and
sins, and draw down that which is truly good, and make it an assistant and
auxiliary to that which is truly evil. For how do men's countenance, nay how
does their religion alter, as they see or hear how the world does go? Now they
are of this faction, and then of that, and anon of a third: Now Protestants,
anon Brownists, anon Papists, anon -- but I cannot number the many religions,
and the no-religions; but wheresoever they fasten, they see it, and say it is
Good; so that as it was observed of the Romans, that before the corruption and
decay of manners they would not entertain a servant or officer but of a perfect
and goodly shape; but afterward, when luxury and riot had prevailed, and was
in credit with them, they diligently sought out, and counted it a kind of
elegancy and state to take into their retinue dwarfs, and monsters, and men of
a prodigious appearance, ludibria naturae, those errors and mockeries of
nature: So has it also fallen out with Religion, at the first ^ise and
dawning of it, men did lay hold on that faith alone which was once delivered to
the saints, and went about doing good; but when this light had passed more
degrees, men began to play the wantons in it, and to seek out diverse
inventions; and this Good, the doctrine of faith was made to give way to those
sick and loathsome humors, which did pollute and defile it; and instead of
following that which was showed, they set up something of their own to follow
and countenance them in whatsoever they should undertake, and then did look
upon it alone, and please, and delight themselves in it, although it was as
different from the true pattern which was first showed as a monster is from a
man of perfect shape; as Quintilian speaks of some professors of his art, illa,
quaecunque deflexa tanquam exquisitiora mirabantur, and that was cried up with
admiration, which had nothing in it mavelous or to be wondered at, but its
deformity. We have a proverb, that It is ill going in procession, where the
devil says mass; but most certain it is, there be too many, who never move
nor walk but where he is the leader. If the Prince of the air, if the God of
this world go before, we follow, nay we fly after. If any child or slave of his
hold out his scepter, we bow and kiss it. The world, the world is the mint,
where most men's religion is coined; and if you well mark the stamp and
superscription, you may see the Prince of the air on one side, and the world
on the other; the devil on the side like an Angel of light, and the world on
the other with its pomp and glories: And then when we have brought our desires
home to their ends, when we have raised our state and name, how good, how
religious are we? when the purse is full, the conscience is quiet; when we are
laden with earthly blessings, we take them as a fair pledge of eternal: we
say to our selves as Michah did, Judges 17.13. Now I know that the Lord will do
me good, because I have a Priest, said he; because we have great possessions,
say we, as great Idolaters as Micah, for what are our shekels of silver, but as
his graven and molten image? and thus we walk on securely all the days of our
life, not as the children of this world, but as the children of light, and out
of our great abundance sometimes drop a penny; we wast away, and sicken, and
make our will, and seal it, and doubt not, but the spirit will do his office
and seal our redemtion: at last the rich man dies, and is buried, and some
hireling will tell you, The Angels have carried his soul into heaven: A strange
conceit, and if true, would be of force to pluck Lazarus out of Abraham's
bosom, and to bring back Dives through the gulf, and place him in his room.

But if this be not true, may it never be true: only let us not deceive our
selves, but search and try our hearts, and root out all such vain, such
groundless, such pernicious imaginations, which may be raised up in time of
prosperity, and multiply like flies in the Sun: Let us not seek our peace in
those false, fictitious, spurious, deceitful Goods, but in the true, and full,
and filling Good, the Good here in the Text; and because God has fitted and
proportioned it to us, let us fit and apply our selves unto it; and since he
has built us up after his own Image, let us adorn and beautify it with
Justice, and Mercy, and Humility, and not blur and deface it with the craft of
a Fox, the lust of a Goat, and the rage of a Lion; for what should the mark of
the Beast do upon the Image of God? Again, being fitted to us and to all sorts
and conditions of men, Let young men and maids, old men and children, Scribes
and Idiots, Noble and ignoble, Priest and people, cleave and adhere to it, and
so praise and magnify the Name of the Lord; sic laudant Angeli, for so the
Angels and Archangels praise him. And thirdly, being lovely and amiable, let
us make it our choice, and espouse our wills to it, love and embrace it; not
kiss and wound it, approve and condemn it, worship it in our hearts, and
persecute it in our brethren: And since it is a filling and satisfying good,
here let us let down our pitchers, and draw waters out of this well of
salvation, even those waters which will sweeten our miseries, and give a
pleasant taste to bitterness it self.

To conclude, behold here is the object, that which is Good; fair and
beautiful to the eye; Jer. 5.1.
Run to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and see of you can find a
MAN, and he is the spectator, and cannot but see it. But what went you out into
the wilderness to see? says our Savior; why the eye is never satisfied, and
all would go out to see; some would see soft raiment, and that you may see on
every back; some gaze upon beauty, and that's a burning-glasse to set the soul
on fire. Others love to see the redness of the wine; look not on it, says
Solomon, It is a mocker. Some would behold a show of pomp and glory, and we
see, though justice can never fail, but has the best, even when she is
worsted, yet injustice has had more triumphs then she. When Julius Caesar
triumphed over his country, and Pompey rid in with the spoils of Asia, the
ceremony, the pomp, the glory was the same. But the eye with which we behold
these spectacles is not fit for this object; we have another eye, a spiritual
eye, we call it the eye of our reason, and we call it the eye of our faith,
which many times is but as an eye of glass for show, but no use at all, and
serves to hide a deformity, but not to see with; but if it be a quick and
living eye, then here is a fit object for it, worth the looking on, in which we
may see all other things in a fairer dress, in a celestial form, in the
Beauty of Holiness, being made useful and subservient to it, like that
Speculum Trinitatis, that feigned Glass, in which (they tell us) he that
looks, sees all things. If we see it not, then are we blind, 2 Pet. 1.9. or if
not (...), purblind, not seeing afar off those things which are laid up in
heaven, for those who look upon this Good, and love it: and then I am unwilling
to say what we are, but certainly we are but infidels. And indeed there is
something of infidelity, in all our aversions and turning away from this good:
for what is the reason, that covetous men make riches an Idol, and sacrifice to
their own net, but want of faith, and their distrust in God? for when God does
not answer their desires, they run with Saul to the devil at Endor, T^rtull.
adv. Judaens. c. 1. p^ae^sset eis bubalum capul, etc.
or with the Israelites in a pet choose to themselves Bubulum caput, as
Tertullian expresses it, a calves head to be their leader. I say, there is a
degree of infidelity in all these aversions from this good; all that can be
said is but what many say within themselves after they have consulted with
flesh and blood, that this good is not shown so clearly, nor made so plain, as
it is said to be, which is indeed to remove their own prop and pillar, to
demolish their own Idol, and to drive faith quite out of the world: believe
they do in God, yet will not trust him; and they are persuaded of the truth of
things not seen, yet will leave the pursuit of them, to follow vanity, because
they are not seen. He has showed thee, O man, what is good, and will thou not
believe him? fath is the substance of things not seen, and though they be not
seen, yet they are evident, the Means evident, and the End as evident as the
Means; In our sad and sober thoughts, when we talk like speculative men, as
evident as what is open to the eye. But such an evidence we have, which a
covetous man would soon, lay hold on for a title to a fair inheritance; and
the ambitious for an assignment of some great place: for if such a record had
been transmitted to posterity, if the Scripture which conveighs this Good, had
entailed some rich Manor or Lordship upon them, it should have then found an
easy belief, and been Gospel, a sure word of prophecy, unquestionable,
undoubtable, like the decrees of the Medes and Persians, which must stand fast
for ever and cannot be altered; for too many there be who had rather have their
names in a good leaf, then in the book of life; and this is the reason why we
are so ignorant of that which is good indeed, and so great clerks in that which
is calted good, but by the worst; why we are so dull and indocile in
apprehending that wisdom, which is from above, and so wise and witty to our
own damnation; why we do but darkly see this Good which is so plainly showed
unto us.

What shall we say then? nay, what says the Scripture? Awake thou that
sleep in sloth and idleness; thou that sleep in a tempest, in the midst
of thy unruly and turbulent passions; arise from the grave and sepulcher
wherein thy sloth has entombed thee; arise from the dead, from that nasty
charnel-house of rotten bones, where so many vicious habits have shut thee up;
break up thy monument, cast aside every weight, and every sin, that presses
down, and rise up, and be but a man, improve thy reason to thy best advantage,
and this Good shall shine upon thee with all its beams and brightness, and
Christ shall give thee light, if not to see things to come, to satisfy thy
curiosity, yet to see things to come, which shall fill thy soul as with marrow
and fatness; if not to know the uncertain, yet certain ways of Gods
providence, yet to know the certain and infallible way to bliss; if not to
know things too high for thee, yet to know that which shall exalt thee to
heavenly places in Christ Jesus. He has shown thee, O man, what is Good: do
thou see it? do thou believe it? thou shall see greater things then these:
thou shall see what thou do believe; enjoy what thou do but hope for;
thou shall see God, who has showed thee this Good, that thou might see him;
thou shall then have a more exact knowledge of his ways and providence, a
fuller taste of his love and goodness, a clearer sight of his beauty and
majesty, and with all his Angels, and all his Saints behold his glory for
evermore.

Thus much of this Good as it is an object to be looked on; we shall in the next
place consider it as a Law. Quid requirit? what does the Lord require?

blazon or royal coat of arms of England and Wales HONI ^T QVI MAL Y PENSE

The Three and Twentieth SERMON.
PART III.
MICAH 6.8. He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord
require of thee, but to do justly, etc.


HE has showed thee, O man, what is good; what it is thou were made for, even
that which is fitted and proportioned to thy soul; that which is lovely and
amiable, and so a fit object to look on; that which will fill and satisfy the
soul, and turn the greatest evil the world can lay as a stone of offense in our
way, into good, and raise it self upon it, to its highest pitch of glory; and
this he has made plain and manifest, drawn out in so visible a character, that
thou may run and read it. And thus far we have already brought you.

We must yet lead you further, even to the foot of mount Sinai; what does the
Lord require of thee? which is as the publication of it, and making it a law:
For with the thunder, and the lightning, and the sound of the Trumpet, and the
voice of words, this voice was heard, I am the Lord. Thus says the Lord; It is
the Prophets Warrant or Commission; I the Lord have spoken it, is a seal to the
Law. By this every word shall stand, by this every Law is of force. It is a
word of power, and command, and authority; for he that can do what he will,
may also require what he will, in heaven or in earth. So then, If he be the
Lord, he may require it; and in this one word, in this Monosyllable, all power
in heaven and in earth is contained. For in calling him Lord he assigns unto
him an absolute will, which must be the rule of our will, and of all the
actions which are the effects and works of our will, and issue from it, as from
their first principle and mover. And this his will is attended, 1. with Power,
2. with Wisdom, 3. with Love. 1. By his power he made us; 2. he protects and
preserves us; and from this issues his legislative power: 3. as by his Wisdom
he made us, so by the same wisdom he gives us such a Law, which shall sweetly
and certainly lead us to that End for which he made us; And last of all, his
Love it is to the work of his own hands, thus to lead us: And all these are
shut up in this one word Lord. And let us view and consider these, and so look
upon them, as to draw down their influence and virtue into our souls, which may
work that obedience in us, which this Lord requires, and will reward.

And 1. Quid requirit Dominus? what does the Lord require?
It is the Lord requires it; and I need not trouble you with a recital of
those places of Scripture, where God is called the Lord. For if the Scripture
be as the Heaven, this is a Star of the greatest magnitude, and spreads its
beams of Majesty and power in the eyes of all men; and to require is the very
form of a Law: I will, I require, if power speak, It is a law. It will be more
apposite and agreeable to our purpose, that we may the more willingly embrace
and entertain this Good, which is published as a law, to look upon this word
Lord, as it expresses the Majesty and greatness of God; for he is therefore
said to be the Lord, because he is omnipotent, and can do all things, that he
will. He is (...), says Nazianzen, a vast and boundless Ocean of essence, and
he is (...), a boundless and infinite sea of power. Take the highest pitch of
Dominion and Lordship that our imagination can reach, yet it falls short of
his, who is Lord of Lords, to whom all earthly Majesty must veil, and at whose
feet all Princes lay down their Crowns and Scepters. And therefore Dionysius
Longinus falling upon the story of the Creation, makes that expression of
Moses, Dionys. Long. de sublimi genere orat. Sect. 7.
(...), Let there be light, and there wus light; Let there be earth, and there
was earth; the highest and most sublime that the art or thought of man could
reach, (...), for thus the Majesty of God is best set forth; He no sooner
speaks, but it is done. Nor can it be otherwise; for as he is a Lord, and has
an absolute and uncontrollable will, so this will is attended by his infinite
power, which is inseparable from it; And you may find them both joined
together, Acts 4.28. All things are done, (...), whatsoever his hand and his
counsel determined to do; for because he can do all things, therefore he brings
to pass whatsoever he will; and his hand and power has here the first place,
because all counsel falls to the ground, if power be not as a pillar and
supporter to uphold it. What is the strength of a strong man, if there be a
stronger then he, to bind and disarm him? what is it to conceive something in
the womb of the mind, to shape and form and fashion it, to bring it even to the
door of life, if there be no strength to bring it forth? what is my will if it
be defeated? Libera volunt as in nullum habe imperium, praeterquam in se.
Hlerocles apud Phor. Bibliot: 394.
Thus it falls out with dust and ashes, with man, whose will is free, when his
hands are bound; who may propose miracles but can do nothing; who may will the
dissolution of the world, when he has not power to kill a fly, or the least
gnat that lights upon him. But Gods power is infinite, nor can any thing in
heaven or earth limit it, but his will, which does regulate and restrain it,
which otherwise must needs have a larger flow. If he cut off, or shut up, or
gather together, who can hinder him? Job 11.10. The voice of the Lord, that is,
his power (for his word is power) is full of Majesty, it breaks the Cedars of
Lebanon, and makes them skip like a calf. It has set a tabernacle for the
Sun, he bids it run its race, and commands it to stand still; he does
whatsoever he will in heaven or in earth. I need not here enlarge my self;
Every work to his is a miracle, every miracle is eloquent to declare his power:
Every thing that has breath speaks it, and that which has neither breath
nor life speaks it; that which has voice speaks it, and that which is dumb
speaks it: Day unto day utters speech, and night unto night shows knowledge.
There is no speech, nor language, Apul. de mu^lo
where their voice is not heard, Psalm. 19.23. The power of this Lord is the
proper language of the whole world: Non, ut ait ille, silere melius est, sed
vel parum dicere; It is not good to be silent, nay we cannot be silent, but yet
it is not good to speak too much of the power of this Lord, because we cannot
speak enough, nor can any finite understanding comprehend it.

Now by this power, 1. God created man, and breathed into him a living soul;
made him as it were wax fit to receive the impressions of a deity; made him a
subject capable of a Law. I am fearfully and wonderfully made, says David,
Psalm. 139. marvellously made, excellently made, set apart, selected, culled
out, as it is Psalm. 4.4. from all the other creatures of the earth, to walk
with God and be perfect. My members were curiously wrought, drawn as with a
needle (for so the word there signifies) embroidered with all variety, as with
diverse colors, every part being made isntrumental either to the keeping, or
breaking of the Divine Law. I am as it were built and set up on purpose, to
hearken what that power which thus set me up, will require of me. In a word, It
is he that made us, not we our selves; and made us to this end, to his glory,
to be united to himself, to bow under his power, to be conformed to his will,
and so to gain a title to that happiness, and which is ready to meet them that
run unto it, by doing what he requires at their hands.

2ly. By this power as he creates, so he continues him and protects him; does
not leave him as an artificer does his work, to the injuries of time, to last
or perish, as the strength of the materials is, of which it consists; but as
by his power he made him, so by the same power he upholds and preserves him,
that in this life he may move and press forward to a better; he moves in him,
and moves with him, that in this span of time he may make a way to eternity. He
gives to all, Acts 17.25. (...), life and breath, but in a more eminent manner
to man, to whom he has communicated part of his power, and given him dominion
over himself, and other creatures: He is not far from every one of us, v. 27.
he is near us, with us, within us; He has made the small and the great, and
cares for all alike, Wisd. 6.7. Sceleratis sol exoritur, says Seneca, his Sun
rises upon the evil, and the good, says our Savior. Math. 5.45. His power
moves in the hand that smites his brother, and in the hand, that lifts him out
of the dust; moves in the Tyrant, which walks in his palace, and with that
poor man who grinds at the mill: By it Uzzahs hand was stretched out to uphold
the Ark, and by it he was smitten and dyed: D^us Salus est and perseverantion
earum quas effecerit rerum. Apul. ibid.
It moves in the eye that is open to vanity, and in the eye that is shut up by
covenant. All the creatures, all men, all motions and actions of men are in
manutentia Divina; My times are in thy hand, says David, Psalm. 31.15. and in
this sense, the Schools tell us, that the creation of man and his conservation
are but one continued act, that we may say of every creature, so long as it is,
so long God creates it; because creation respects the being of the creature, as
made out of nothing, and conservation the being of the same creature, as
continually quickened and upheld, that it fall not back again into that nothing
out of which it was made: for his power is the Being of the creature, and the
withdrawing of it, is its annihilation: The heavens and the earth are by the
word of God, are established by his power, and when he will no longer uphold
them, all shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with heat: It is no
more but the withdrawing of his power, and the world is at an end.

Now in the next place; from this Ocean of his power naturally issues forth his
power of giving Laws, of requiring what he please, from his creature: for as
there is but one omnipotent God, so there is but one Lawgiver, who is able to
save and to destroy: James 4.12. for the one is the ground and foundation of
the other: If he made us, and not we our selves; if he preserve us, and nor we
our selves; then not we our selves, but he is to give us Laws. It is here Do
ut des, and, facio ut facias; he gives us our being and continuance, that we
should give him our obedience and subjection; he does this for us, that we may
do something for him, even whatsoever he shall require. The Stoics say well
(...) All duties are measured out by relations: Epict. Enchir. c. 28.
The care of the Father calls for the Honor of the Son; the oversight of the
master commands the obedience of the servant; and the Father and the Master are
to the Son and Servant as Moses is said to be to Pharaoh, Exodus 4.16. instead
of God. Domestici magistratus, says Seneca, Sen. de Benes. 3.11.
Domestic Lords or Magistrates: He is my father, if he speak the word, it is
done; He is my Master and Lord; if he say Go, I go. The reason of this is
plain; for Beneficia Compedes, All benefits are as fetters, are obligations,
and he that does me good, obliges me, places himself as it were in authority
over me, and gives me Laws, looks upon me as his Creature, which must do
whatsoever he requires in a just and equal proportion to what he has done.
Accepi beneficium, and protinus perdidi libertatem, I receive a good turn, and
forthwith lose my liberty; my hand is filled and bound at once, bound to his
service that fills it. If he say, do this, I do it, I plead for him, I commend
him, I excuse him, I run for him, I die for him, because he is my friend: If my
friend bid me, I will set fire on the Capitol, says Blosius in Tully. Not
only a Father, Tull. de Amicitia.
a Master, a Lord, but a Friend, every one that obliges me is a kind of
Lawgiver, bounds and keeps me in on every side, tenders me his Edicts and
Laws, by doing something for me, gains a power over me. In the Civill-Law it
is styled Patris Majestas, the Majesty of a Father, and there is the Majesty of
a Master, Nique id magis facimus quam nos monet pietas. Plant. Stich. Act. 1.
sc. 1.
and the Majesty of a Friend or Benefactor: for* nostrum officium nos facere
aequum est, There is a kind of Equity and Justice, that he that buys me with a
price, should claim some interest in me. These are those cords of men to tie us
to them; and if we break them asunder, and cast these bands from us, if we will
not answer the diligent love of a Friend, by doing something which may be
required at our hands, we are guilty of a foul Ingratitude, which is a kind of
Civil or Moral Rebellion. And therefore God takes up this as an argument
against the Rebellious Jews, and draws it from that Relation which was founded
on his Power, and that love which he had showed to them, Mal. 1.6. A Son
honors his Father, and a Servant his Master: If then I be a Father, where is
my Honor? If I be a Master, where is my Fear? says the Lord of Hosts; who am
not only your Lord by right of Creation, but your Father for my daily care and
preservation of you, and those many benefits I have laden you withal. And You
are my friends, if you do what I command you, says Christ, Joh. 15.14. If you
do it not, you are not my friends, but you have broke that relation, which
might have been eternal. So that we see, one power follows another, as in a
chain; The power and right of Dominion, the power by which we were made and are
preserved; the power of giving Laws, the power that made us capable of a Law:
He that did these great things for us, may require what he please. First, God
creates Man, and then gives him a Law, puts him to the trial of his Obedience;
for by the same Act of Power, by Creating, as he acquired to himself the full
right of Dominion, so he brought also upon Man the Necessity of Subjection.
Lord, what will thou have me to do? says Saint Paul, when he was struck to
the ground, Acts 9. verbum breve, Rern. de converse. Paul. Ser. 7.
sed vivum, sed efficax, says Bernard, a short speech, but full, and lively,
and operative, even an acknowledgment of that power of God, which is mighty in
operation; by which power he has authority to command and require what he will.

Gods Will then thus attended with his Power, must be the rule of all our
actions, and is the matrix from which all Laws must issue. But in the next
place; As his Absolute Will is attended with Power uncontrollable, so is it
also with Wisdom unquestionable: For as he is the only Powerful, so he is
the only wise God, Romans 16.27.1 Tim. 1.17. and from the inexhaust fountain of
his Wisdom flow those Rivers of Laws, which make glad the City of God; which
are made, as all things in the world are, in Number, Weight, and Measure;
Numbered, Weighed, Measured, fitted out unto us, That we may live and move
thereby, even move upwards toward the House of our Lord, where there are many
mansions prepared for us. So that all the Laws of men which look toward
Innocence, and Perfection, Tertull. Apol. c. 45.
are borrowed, says Tertullian, from the Divine Law; and all Lawgivers are
called by Galen, and called themselves the Disciples of God; Minos of Jupiter,
Numa of Egeria, Solon of Minerva, Lycurgus of Apollo, Trismegistus of Mercury;
none ever having been thought fit to make a Law, but God, whose Power has no
bounds but his Will; Nalla lex satis commoda omnibus est, etc. Live. Dec. 4. l. 4
and whose Wisdom reaches over all Tempers and Constitutions, all Casualities
and Contingences, all Circumstances of Time or Place, all Cross intercurrent
Accidents, which the narrowness of man's understanding, which human frailty
cannot foresee, Nalla t^nta esse (...) prude^iam jorum, ut ad omne ignus
acquitiae accurrat -- Qaint. doct. 350.
nor prevent. Lex erit omne quod ratione consistit, says Tertullian, That
which binds a reasonable creature, must it self be reasonable; and whatsoever
is reasonable, is a Law; and reason is a beam of the Divine Light, by which
all Laws, which deserve the name of Laws, were drawn.

The Power of God, yea and his Wisdom rules over all, and his Laws are like
himself, Just and holy, pure and undefiled, unchangeable, Qui dat rationem, dat
legem. Tert. de Coron. mil. c. 4.
immutable, and everlasting; fitted to the first Age of the world, and fitted
to the last; fitted to the wisest, and fitted to the simplest; fitted to times
of peace, and fitted to times of tumult; established, and mighty against all
occurrences, all alterations, all mutations whatsoever. There is no time
wherein a man may not be just and honest, wherein he may not be merciful and
compassionate, wherein he may not be humble and sincere. A Tyrant may strip me
of my possessions, but he cannot take from me my honesty; he may leave me
nothing to give, but he cannot sequester my compassion; he may lay me in my
Grave, but my Humility will raise me up as high as Heaven. The great Prince of
the Air, and all his Legions of Devils or men cannot pull us back, or stop us
in the course of our obedience to the Will and Law of God; but we may continue
it and carry it along through honor and dishonor, through good report and
evil report, through all the terrors and affrightments which Men or Devils can
place in our way. What he requires, he required, (and it may be done)
yesterday, and to day, and to the endof the world.

And as his Wisdom is seen in giving Laws, so it is in fitting the Means to
the End; in giving them that virtue and force to draw us to a nearer vision and
sight of God, whose wisdom reaches from one end to another mightily, and does
sweetly order all things, Wisd. 8.1. For which way can frail Man come to see
his God, but by being like him? what can draw him near to his pure Essence,
but simplicity and purity of spirit? what can carry us to the God of love, but
Charity? what can lead him into the Courts of Righteousness, but Justice? what
can move a God of tender mercies, but Compassion? For certainly God will never
look down from his Mercy-seat, on them that have no Bowels. In a word, What
can make us wise, but that which is good? Those virtues, Temperance, Justice,
and Liberality, which are called the Labors of wisdom, Wisd. 8.8. what can
bring us into Heaven, but this full Taste of the powers of the world to come?
so that there is some Truth in that of Gerson, Gloria est gratia consummata,
Glory is nothing else but Grace made perfect and consummate; For though we
cannot thus draw Grace and Glory together, as to make them one and the same
thing, but must put a difference between the Means and the End; yet Wisdom it
self has written it down in an indelible character, and in the leaves of
eternity, That there is no other key but this Good in the Text, to open the
Gates of the Kingdom of Heaven; and he that brings this along with him, shall
certainly enter. Heaven and Glory is a thing of another world, but yet it
begins here in this, and Grace is made perfect in Glory.

And therefore, in the last place; his Absolute will is not only attended with
Power, and Wisdom, but with Love; and these are the Glories of his Will; He
can do what he will, and he will do it by the most proper and fittest means;
and whatsoever he requires, is the Dictate of his Love. When he sent his Son,
the best Master, and wisest Lawgiver that ever was, on whose shoulders the
Government was laid, he was ushered in with a Sic dilexit, so God loved the
world; John ^.
and his love seems to have the preeminence, and to do more then his power,
which can but annihilate us; but his love, if we embrace it will change our
souls, and Angelifie them; and change our bodies and spiritualize them; and
endow us with the will, and so with the power of God; make us differ as much
from our selves, as if we were not Annihilated, which his power can do; but
which is more, made something else, something better, something nearer to God,
which is that mighty Thing which his Love brings to pass. We may imagine, that
a Law is a mere indication of power, that it proceeds from Rigor, and Severity;
that there is nothing commanded, nothing required, but there is Smoke, and
Thunder, and Lightning; but indeed every Law of God is the Natural and proper
effect and Issue of his Love; from his power, it is true; but his power managed
and shown in Wisdom and Love; For he made us to this End, and to this End he
requires something of us; not out of any Indigency, as if he wanted our Company
and Service, (for he was as Happy before the Creation, as after) but to have
some object for his Love and Goodness to work upon; to have an Exceptory, and
vessel for the dew of Heaven to fall into; as the Jews were wont to say,
Propter Messiam mundum fuisse conditum, That the world and all mankind were
made for the Messiah, whose business was to preach the Law which his Father
said unto him, Psalm. 2.7.
and to declare his will.

And in this Consists the perfection and Beauty of Man; for the perfection of
Every Thing is its drawing near to its first principle and Original; and the
nearer and liker a thing is to the first cause that produced it, the more
perfect it is as the Heat is most perfect, which is most intense, and has most
of the Fire in it. And Man the more he partakes of that which is Truly Good, of
the Divine Nature, of which his soul is as it were a sparkle, the more perfect
he is, because this was the only End for which God made him; This was the End
of all his Laws, that he might find just Cause to do him Good; That man might
draw near to him here by Obedience, and Conformity to his will, and in the
world to come reign with him for ever in Glory. And as it is the perfection, so
is it the Beauty of a man: for, as there is the Beauty of the Lord, Psalm. 27.4.
so is there the beauty of the subject: The Beauty of the Lord is to have will,
and power, and Jurisdiction, to have power and wisdom to command, and to
command in love: So is it the beauty of a man to bow, and submit, and conform
to the will of the Lord, (for what a deformed spectacle is a Man without God in
this world?) which has power, and wisdom, and love to beautify it. Beauty is
nothing else but a result from perfection; the beauty of the Body proceeding
from the symmetrie and due proportion of parts, and the beauty of the Soul
from the consonancy of the will and affections to the will and law of God. Oh
how beautiful are those feet which walk in the ways of life? how beautiful
and glorious shall he be, who walks in love as God loved him; who rests on his
power, and walks by his wisdom, and places himself under the shadow of his
love? And thus much the substance of these words afford us, What does the Lord
require?

Let us now cast an eye upon them in the Form and Habit in which they are
presented, and consider the manner of proposing them; and the Prophet proposes
it by way of Interrogation: And as he asked the question, wherewith shall I
come before the Lord? so does he here ask, what does the Lord require? For he
does not bespeak them in positive Terms, as the Prophet Jeremiah does 6.16.
Ask for the Old paths, where is the Good way, and walk therein, or as the
Prophet Esai. c. 30. This is the way, walk in it; but shapes and forms his
speech to the Temper and disposition of the people, who sought out many ways,
but missed of the right. For so we find Interrogations to be fitted, and
sharpened like darts, and then sent toward them who could not be awaked with
less noise, nor lesser smart: and we find them of diverse shapes and Fashions.
Sometimes they come as complaints, why do the Heathen rage? Ps. 2.1. Sometimes
as upbraidings, How came thou in hither? Math. 22. Sometimes as Admonitions;
why should I now kill thee? 2 Samuel 2. Sometimes as Reproofs, why tempt ye me,
you Hypocrites? and whithersoever they fly, they are Feathered and pointed with
reason; for there is no reason why that should be done, of which Christ asks a
reason, why it is done? And here it has diverse aspects, it looks (...),
forward and backward; it looks back upon the Jew busy at his Sacrifice, and it
looks forward to the Beauty of Holiness, and it is levelled at the very Heart
of those Errors, which led them from the City of God into the wilderness, from
that which is Truly Good, to that which is so but in appearance, which did show
well, and speak well, but such words, which were clothed with death; For it
checks them in their old course, and then shows them a more excellent way. The
Jew (as we have told you formerly) pleased himself in that piere of service,
which was most attempered to the sense, and might be passed over. and performed
with less vexation of the Spirit, and labor of the mind; for what an easy
matter was it to approach the Courts of God, to appear before the Altar? what
great trouble was it to bind the Sacrifice with cords to the Horns of it? Nay
this was their delight, this they doted on, and this they thought none could
cry down, but a false Prophet. Did they not thus speak and murmur within
themselves, If this be not, what is then Religion? If to appear in his Courts,
to offer Sacrifice, be not to serve God, how should we bow before him and
serve him? as many say in their hearts now adays; If to go to Church, to be
zealous in a Faction, to cry down Superstition, be not true Religion, what
Religion can there be? Who can speak against it but an uncircumcised Philistim,
or he that has drunk deep of the Cup of the Whore? He that preaches any other
Law, or any other Gospel, let him be Anathema. And therefore the Prophet to
silence this, asks another question; Do you ask, if this be not, what is true
Religion? I ask also, What does the Lord require? Not this in which you please
your selves, But something else; But, to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk
humbly with your God.

And this But, as it is an Exclusive, and shuts out all other services
whatsoever, which look not this way, or are not conducible to uphold, support,
and promote it; so it does color, as it were, and place a kind of
amiablenesse, a philtrum upon it, which may invite and win us to embrace it.
For, commonly, those duties which require the luctation of the mind, the
strivings and victories of the Spirit, are more formidable, and so more
avoided, then those which employ only the outward man, the Eye, the Tongue,
the Ear, and the Hand: Here every man is ready and officious, and thrusts
himself into the service; every man almost, rejoices to run his race, and
there is a kind of emulation and contention, who shall be the forwardest; but
those commands which set us at variance within our selves, which busy the
Spirit against the Flesh; which sound the Allarm, and call us into the lists to
fight the good fight of Faith against our selves, against our Imaginations,
even those which lie unto us, and tell us All is well: These are that Medusa's
head, which turns us into stones; and we who were so active and diligent in
other duties less necessary, when these call upon us to move, are lame, and
impotent; we who before had the feet of Hinds, can move no more then he did who
lay so long by the pool side. In the second book of the Kings, John 5.
Chap. 5. the Prophet Elisha bids Naaman the Leper, Go wash in Jordan seven
times, and thou shall be clean, but Naaman was worth, and thought that may be
done with the stroke or touch of a Prophets hand; at the ver. 11. Are not
Abanah and Pharpar, rivers of Damascus, better then all the rivers of Israel?
But the Servants were wiser then the Master, and truly told him, that what the
Prophet enjoined was no great thing, for it was But this, Wash and be clean. So
it was with the Jew, and so it is with us; That which will cure and heal us, we
most distaste; Tertull. Scorp. c. v.
Nauseat ad Antidotum qui hiat ad venenum, the stomach turns at the Antidote,
that is greedy of Poison. What? bid us be Just, and Merciful, and Humble? Will
not Sacrifice suffice? Are not our Sabbath-dayes Exercise, our Psalms and
Hymns, of force enough to shake the powers of Heaven, and draw down Blessings
upon us? Why may he not speak the word and heal us? Why may he not save us by
miracle? To be just and honest, will shrink the Curtains of our Tabernacles; to
be merciful and liberal, will empty our Chests; to be humble, will lay us in
the dust: These are harsh and rugged, hard and unpleasing commands, and beyond
our power, impossible 20 be done: Nay rather these are the ebullitions and
murmurs of the flesh, the imaginations of corrupt hearts; and therefore the
Prophet Micah sets up his But against them, to throw them down and demolish
them; Quare formidatis compedes sapientiae? Why are you asraid of the fetters
of Wisdom? they are golden fetters, and we are never free, but when we wear
them. Why do you startle at his Law? It is a Law that gives life. Why do you
murmur and boggle at that which he requires? Behold he requires nothing But
that which is first, possible secondly, easy; thirdly, pleasant and full of
delight. He requires BUT to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with
thy God.

And first; The Prophet here does not bid us do any great thing; He does not
bid us work miracles, and remove mountains, dol that which is beyond our
strength; Do that, which you cannot do; do justly, for you cannot do so; be
merciful, for you cannot be so; walk humbly before me, though it be impossible
you should: God never yet spoke so by any Prophet; for this were to make Gods
commands such as Saint Austin tells us those of the Maniches were, not only
Nugatoria, light and vain, but Pugnatoria, August. de Morib. Manich.
opposite and destructive to themselves; For nothing more destructive and
contrary to a Law, then to place it under an impossibility of being kept: For
the keeping of a Law is the virtue, and force, and End of a Law, the End for
which it is enacted. It Is true, God has now concluded all under sin, and the
reason is given, For all have sinned, Romans 3.23. but the Apostle there delivers
it as an instance and matter of Fact, not as a Conclusion drawn out of
Necessary principles; be does not say All must sin, but All have sinned: for,
both the Gentiles might have kept the Law of Nature, and were punished because
they did not, as it is plain in the first chapter; and the Jews might have kept
that Law which was given to them, as far as God required it; for so we see many
of them did, and God himself bore witness from heaven, and has registered the
names of those in his book, who did walk before him with a perfect heart, as of
Aza, 2 Chronicles. 15. of David, that he kept Gods Laws, 1 King. 11. of Josias,
that he turned not aside neither to the right hand nor to the left; These
though they fell into many sins, which yet notwithstanding they might have
avoided, (for why might they not by the same assistance fly one sin as well
as another?) yet they kept the Law, though not so exactly as God required, yet
so far, as that God was pleased to accept it as a full payment. In that hot
Contention betwixt the Orthodox and the Pelagians, when the Pelagians, to build
up perfection in this life, brought in the Examples of the Saints of God, who
either had not broke the Law of God in the whole course of their life, or if
they did, did return by Repentance, and afterward in a constant obedience did
persevere unto the end; they found opposition on all Hands, not one being
found, who would give this Honor to the best of Saints; but where they urge
that this perfection is not impossible, where they speak not de esse, but de
posse, and conclude not that it is, but that it may be so; Si negaverimus esse
posse, and homines libero arbitrio, qui hoc volea^o appetit, and D^i vi^tuti,
qui hoc adiuvando essicit, derogabimus. August. de peccat. meritis. and Remis.
l. 2. c. 6.
not that any man has done what God requires, but that he may; Saint Austin
himself joins hands with them, Non est eis continuo incauta temeritate
resistendum, etc. we must not be so rash as unwarily to oppose them who say,
Man may do what God requires; for if we deny a possibility, we at once derogate
from man's will, which may incline to it, and the power, and mercy of God, who
by the assistance of his Grace may bring it to pass; so that the great
difference between them may seem to be but this; The one thought it possible
by the power of Nature, the other by the assistance of Grace, which is mighty
in its operation, and may raise us to this height, if we hinder it not; for
every stream may rise as high as its spring. Cum Dei adjutorio in nostra
potestate consistit, says Saint Austin often; August. Hom. 2.6.12.16.27, etc.
It is in our power to do what he requires, with the help of Grace: God
requires nothing above our strength; and certainly we can do what by him we are
enabled to do. When Julian the Pelagian, a young man of a ready and pleasant
wit, urged Saint Austin with his own Confession, and that he did but dissemble,
when with so much art and Eloquence, with such vehemence of spirit he persuaded
men to the love of chastity, if they could not, August. l. v. cont. Iul. Pelag.
c. uit.
though they would, preserve and keep themselves undefiled, Saint Augustine
makes this reply, Respondeo, me fateri, sed non sicut vos; I confess they may
preserve their virgin, (but not as you would have it) by their own power, but
by the Help of Gods Grace, which must make them willing, and with his Help they
may. And what need there then any further Altercation? why should men contend
about that in which they cannot but agree? why should they set themselves at
such a distance, when they both look the same way? for there are but few, and I
am persuaded none, that do so far Pelagianize, as to deny the Grace of God; And
then, when God bids us, do this, he that shall put up the question, Whether it
be possible to be done? has no more of Reason, or Revelation to plead for him,
then the Pelagian had; for with him, the Law cannot be kept neither without the
Help of Grace, nor with it; and so it must lose its name; nor is it a Law; for
what Law is that which cannot be kept? I know it was a Decree of a Council at
Carthage, That every man ought to pray to God to forgive him his Trespasses:
That he ought to speak it, not as out of Humility, but Truly; and I think there
are scarce any, that will not willingly subscribe to it, and this Decree may be
as unchangeable as those of the Medes and Persians: But yet I do not see any
Necessity of fixing this doctrine, of the Impossibility of Doing what God
requires, on the Gates of the Temple, or proclaiming it as by the sound of the
Trumpet, in the midst of the Great Congregation. For this Petition is put up in
especial Relation to sins past, for Ne peccemus, is in order before si
peccemus, 1 John 2.1. we are first commanded not to sin, and then follows the
supposition, if we sin: so that these two, sin not, and if you sin, make
up this Conclusion, we may, or we may not sin, rather then this, It is
impossible to keep to Laws. So then, This petition may be said, Humiliter,
humbly, and veraciter, truly, in respect of sins past; but it is neither
Truth nor Humility to make God a Liar; to call upon us to do that, which he
requires, when he knows we cannot do it; to make him a Tyrant, in cripling us
first, and then sending us about his business; In giving us flesh which the
spirit cannot Conquer; in letting loose that Lion upon us, which we cannot
resist; in leaving us naked to those Temptations which we cannot subdue. No;
verax and Fidelis Deus, God is faithful and true, and will not suffer us to be
tempted above our strength; 1 Cor. 10.13.
will not let in an Enemy upon us, which with his assistance (which is ready,
if we refuse it not) we cannot overcome: And he is Gracious and merciful; if
in the midst of so many Enemies, we chance to slip, and fall with Jonathan in
these high places, to reach out his hand, and lift us up again; but with this
Proviso, that we look better to our steps hereafter. For he knows of whom he
requires it, even of men, and he considers us as men, and remembers whereof we
are made: He does not require we should be as Just and Merciful as he is; God
may give us his strength, but he cannot give us his Arm; to be as Just as he;
This is more impossible then that which is most impossible, it is impossible to
think it; nor does he look that our Obedience should be as exact as that of the
Angels, quorum immortalitas sine ullo malorum metu and periculo constat, whose
Happiness is removed from all danger, or Fear of change, says Lactantius;
but he requires an Obedience answerable to our Condition, which may consist
both with sin and Error, into which man, as man may sometimes either through
inadvertency, or frailty fall into, and yet do what he requires: But then, If
this Doctrine were true, That we were Fettered and shackled with an
impossibility of doing what he requires, as indeed it has neither Reason nor
Scripture to countenance it, yet sure it cannot without danger be so rudely,
and with such zeal and earnestness published, as sometimes it is; nor can it
savor of that spiritual wisdom, which is the Salt which every Teacher should
have in himself, to urge and press it to the multitude, who are too ready to
make an Idol of that serpent which is lifted up to cure them. For how many
weak hands, and feeb e knees, and cowardly Hearts has this made? How willing
are we to hear of weakness, and impossibilities, because we would not keep
the Law? How often do we lie down with this Thought, and do nothing, or rather
run away with it even against the Law it self, and break it? what polluted,
blind, impotent, cripled wretches are we ready to call our selves? which were
indeed a Glorious confession, were it made out of hatred to sin; but most
commonly they are sent forth not from a broken, but a hollow heart; and comfort
us rather then accuse us; are rather flatteries then aggravations; the oil of
sinners, to break their heads, to infatuate them; not to supple their limbs,
but benum them; and they beget no other Resolution in us, but this, Not to gird
up our loins, because we are weak; to sin more and more, because we cannot
but sin; not to do what God requires, because we have already concluded
within our selves, that it is impossible. To conclude this; The question is not
whether we can exactly keep a Law, so as not to fail sometimes as men; for I
know no reason why this question should be put up; but whether we can keep it
so far forth as God requires, and in his goodness will accept; whether we can
be Just, and Merciful, and Humble men? and if this be impossible, then will
follow as sad an impossibility of being saved; For the not doing what he
requires, is that alone which shuts the Gates of Heaven against us, and cuts of
all hope of eternal happiness: and this were to unpeople Heaven; this were a
dragons tail to draw down all the stars, and cast them into hell. But the
Saints are sealed, and have this seal, that they did what God required, and it
is a thing so far from being impossible, that the Prophet makes but a But of
it; It is not impossible, it is but to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk
humbly with our God.

For secondly, It is so far from being impossible, that it is but an easy
duty. My yoke is easy, says our Savior, Mat. 11. and my burden light: For
it is fitted to our necks and shoulders, and is so far from taking from our
nature, or pressing it with violence, that it exalts and perfects it. All is in
putting it about our necks, and then this yoke is an ornament of Grace, as
Solomon's chain about them; and when this burden is laid on, then it is not a
burden, but our form to quicken us, and our Angel to guide us with delight in
all our ways. And this the beloved disciple sucked from his masters bosom, 1
John 5.3. This is the love of God, that we keep his commandments, and his
commandments are not grievous; for here is love and hope to sweeten them, and
make them easy and pleasant. Nor does he speak this as an orator, to take them
by craft, by telling them that that which he exhorted them to, was neither
impossible, nor difficult, and so give force to his exhortation, and make a way
for it to enter, and work a full persuasion in them to be obedient to those
commands; but as a Logician, he backs and establishes his affirmation with an
undeniable reason in the next verse, For whatsoever is bern of God overcomes
the world, and so his commandments are not grievous to those who have the true
knowledge of God: He that is born of God must needs have strength enough to
pass through all hindrances whatsoever, to tread down all Principalities, and
Powers, to demolish all imaginations, which set up and oppose themselves, and
so make these commands more grievous, then they are in their own nature; and
this he strengthens with another reason in the next verse, For he that is born
of God, has the help and advantage of faith, and full persuasion of the power
of Jesus Christ, which is that victory which overcomes the world; so that
whosoever says the commandments are grievous, with the same breath
excommunicates himself from the Church of Christ, and makes himself an
Hypocrite, and pofesses he is that which he is not, a Christian, when Christ's
words are irksome and tedious unto him; That he is born of God, when he has
neither the language nor the motion of a child of God; does not what God
requires, but does the works of another father, the devil. When men therefore
pretend they cannot do what God requires, they should change their language,
for the truth is, Salvian.
they will not for if they would, there were more for them then against them:
Totum durum est quicquid imperatur invitis, to an unwilling mind every command
carries with it the fearful show of difficulty. Mvult execrari legom quam
emendari mentew; praecepta odisse quam vitia.
A wicked man, mavult emendare Deos; quam seipsum, says Seneca, had rather
condemn the Law, then reform his life; rather hate the precept then his sin:
Continence is a hard lesson, but to the wanton; Liberality to a Miser;
Temperance to a Glutton; Obedience to a factious and rebellious spirit: All
these things are hard to him that loves not Christ: but where there is will,
there is strength enough, and love is stronger then death. What was sweeter
then Manna? what sooner gathered? yet the children of Israel murmured. What
more bitter then Hunger and Imprisonment? Isid. Palus. 2. cp. 67.
yet Saint Paul rejoiced in them, nay (...), wickedness in its own nature is a
troublesome, vexatious thing. Vitia magno coluntur, says Seneca, scarce any
sin we commit, but costs us dear: what more painful then Anger? what more
perplexed and tormenting then Revenge? what more entangled then Lust? what can
more disquiet us then Ambition? what more fearful then Cruelty? what sooner
disturbed then pride? nay further yet; how does one sin incroche and
trespass upon another? I fling off my Pleasure and Honor to make way to my
Revenge; I deny my Lust, to further my Ambition; and rob my Covetousness to
satisfy my Lust; and forbear one sin to commit another; and so do but
versuram facere, borrow of one sin to lay it out on another, binding and
loosing my self as my corruption leads me, but never at ease. Tell me, which is
easier, says the Father, to search for wealth in the bowels of the earth, nay
in the bowels of the poor by oppression, then to sit down content with thy
own? night and day to study the world, or to embrace Frugality? to oppress
every man or to relieve the oppressed? to be busy in the Market, or to be
quiet at home? to take other men's goods, or to give my own? to be full of
business for others, or to have no business but for my soul? to be solicitous
for that which cannot be done, or to have no other care, but to do what God
requires? To do this will cost us no sweat nor labor; we need not go a
Pilgrimage, or take any long journey, it will not cost us money, nor enage us
to our friends; we need not sail for it, nor plough for it, nor fight for it,
(...), etc. says Chrysostom, if thou be willing, Chrysostom. orat. de ira.
obedience has its work and consummation, if thou will, Arist. l. 4 Eth. c. 3.
thou art Just, Merciful, and Humble. As Aristotle spoke of his Magnanimous
man, (...), so to a resolved Christian nothing is great, Liber and rectus
animus omtia subjiciens sin, se nuili. Sen. cp. ult.
nothing is difficult. It Is not to dig in the Mineralls, or labor in chains,
it is not to cleave wood, or draw water with the Gibeonites, but thy lines are
fallen unto thee in a fair place, it is but to do Justly, love Mercy, etc.

Lastly, it is not only easy, but sweet and pleasant to do what God requires;
For Obedience is the only spring from whence these waters of comfort flow; it
is an everlasting foundation on which alone joy and peace will settle and rest.
For what place can thou find? what other foundation on which thou may build
up a true and lasting joy? will thou look on all the works which thy hands have
wrought? will thou prove thy heart with mirth, and gather together all that is
desirable, and say here it will lie? All that joy will soon be exhausted, and
will draw it self dry: That pleasure is but like that beast of the Apothecary,
to whom Julian the Pelagian likens Saint Austin, Non sum similis p^arm
^copolae, ut^d it is, qui promit tebat Bestiam quae seipsam com sset. August.
Cont. Iul. Pelag. l. 3. c. 21.
which he promised his patient of great virtue; which before the morning was
come, had eaten up himself. But the doing what God requires, our conformity to
his will is the only basis upon which such a superstructure will rise, and
tower up as high as heaven, for it has the will and power of God to uphold and
perpetuate it, against all those storms and tempests which are sent out of the
devils treasury to blast or imbitter it. Do you take this for a speculation and
no more? Indeed it is the sin and the punishment of the men of this world to
take those truths which most concern them, for speculations, for the
groundless conceptions of thoughtfull men, for school subtilties, rather then
realities: Mammon and the world have the preeminence in all things, and
spiritual ravishments and heaven it self are but ingens fabula, and magnum
mendacium, as a tedious ly, or a long tale that is told. And there is no reason
of this, but their disobedience; for would they put it to the trial, deny
themselves and cleave to the Lord, and do what he desires, there would then be
no need of any Artist, or Theologue to demonstrate it, or fill their mouth with
arguments to convince them of the truth of that which would so fill their
souls. Of all the Saints and Martyrs of God that did put it to the trial, did
we ever read that any did complain that they had lost their labor? but upon a
certain knowledge and sense of this truth, betook themselves cheerfully to the
hardship of mortification, renounced the world, and laid down their lives;
poured out their blood for that truth, which paid them back again with
interest, even with fullness of joy. Let us then hearken what this Lord will
say, and answer him in every duty which he requires, and he will answer us
again, and appear in glory, and make the terrors and flatteries of the world,
the object not of our fear and amazement, but contempt; and the displeasing
and worser side of our obedience, our Crown and Glory, the most delightful
thing in the world; for (to conclude this) why are we afraid? why should we
tremble at the commands of God? why should their sound be so terrible in our
ears? The Lord requires nothing of us, but that which first is possible, to
rouse us up to attempt it; secondly, which is easy, to comfort and nourish our
hopes; and thirdly, which is pleasant and delightful to do, to woe and invite,
and even flatter us to obedience, and to draw us after him with the cords of
men. And what does he require, but to do justly, and love mercy? etc.

We have now taken a view of the substance of these words, The Application and
Conclusion.
and we have looked upon them in the form and manner in which they lie; what
does the Lord require? let us now draw them nearer to us; for to this end they
are sharpened into an interrogation, that as darts they might pierce through our
souls, and so open our eyes to see, and our ears to hearken to the wonders of
his Law.

And first; this word Lord is a word of force and efficacy, and strikes a
reverence in us, and remembers us of our duty and allegiance; for if he be the
Lord, then has he an absolute will, a will which must be a rule to regulate
our wills by his Jubeo and his vete, by his commands and prohibitions; by
removing our wills from unlawful objects, and confining them to that which may
improve and perfect them; from that which is pleasing but hurtful, to his Laws
and commands, which are first distasteful, and then fill them with joy
unspeakable. And this is the true mark and character of a servant of God, to be
then willing, when in a manner he is unwilling; to be strong when the flesh is
weak; to have no will of his own, nor any other spring of spiritual motion,
but the will of his Lord. And therefore as he is the Lord over all, so are his
Laws over all Laws; as to him every knee must bow, so to his Laws all the Laws
of men must yield and give place, which are no further Laws, or can lay any tie
or obligation, but as they are drawn from his, and wait upon them, and are
subservient to them; common reason will tell us, and to that the Apostles Peter
and John appeal, when the rulers of the Jews commanded them to speak no more in
the name of Christ, Act. 4.18,19.
whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more then to God,
judge you; for we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard, and
we cannot but be obedient, for the Lord requires it. When Creon the Tyrant in
Euripides asked Antigone, how she dared to bury her brother Polynices, when he
had enacted a Law to the contrary, her answer was (...), etc. that this was not
Jupiters Law, and that she buried her brother, in obedience to a Law more
ancient then that of the Tyrants, even to the Law of nature, (...), for this
Law was not of yesterday, but eternal, and I ought not for fear of any man to
break the Law of God and nature. And what better answer can a Christian make to
all unlawful commands, either of those we love, or of those we fear? (...),
etc. God has not enacted these, I see more of the claw of the devil, then
finger of God in these; these are Novellae institutionis, but of yesterday; the
breathings, and dictates, it may be, of Lust and Covetousness, of Pride and
Ambition, and I must not consider what man, what this man, this Lord or this
Potentate, but what the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings requires at my hands;
when his Laws are published, all others must be silent, or as little hearkened
to, as if they were; as when the Sun appears the stars are not seen, nor seen
at any time, but with that light which they borrow from it.

For again, as he is Lord Paramount, and has an absolute will, so his will is
attended with Power, with that Power, which made thee; and he did not make thee
a man, that thou should make thy self a beast of burden, to couch under
every load which the hand of a Pharisee will be ready to lay upon thee; He did
not make thee capable of a Law, that thou should keep the Laws of the flesh,
or of men; he did not publish his will, that upon this or that pretense thou
should resist it; that the fear of a frown, and the love of the world
should be stronger, and prevail with thee more then his will. For if thou will
not do what he requires, he will not do what thou expectest, but leave thee to
thy choice, to those new Lords and Masters under the same wrath and curse to
walk delicately along with them to that vengeance, which will fall upon the
heads of those who will not hearken to this Lord.

For thirdly, by the same power he preserves and protects thee, which all power
that is over us does not; for then the thief may be said to protect him he
robs; the strong; man may be said to protect him he binds; the oppressor him
whom he has eaten up; and Cain to have protected Abel, when he knocked out his
brains: But the Power of God is a saving and preserving power, and under the
shadow of his wing we shall be safe; and to this end he spreads his wing over
us, he guides and holds us up, that we may walk before him in all obedience, in
the land of the living; who bowing to his will against our lust, anon against
our Ambition, against all those machinations and temptations, which press upon
us to break his will, even whilst we are under his wing. What should a wanton,
what should an oppressor, a man of Belial do under his wing? And yet we see
many times they play and revell it in the shadow, when they that do his will
are beaten with the tempest, and yet are safer there then they are in their
Paradise; are the miracles of his Providence to be manifested at last to all
the world. It Is true, The wicked are in some sort under his wing, for he
upholds, and continues them, prolongs their days; and if an eye of flesh may
judge, they are the greatest favorites of this Lord; and if the world were
heaven, they were the only Saints: But the spiritual man judges all things,
and to his eye they are but a sad and ruefull spectacle, as condemned men led
with music to execution; for he preserves and protects them no otherwise then
he does serpents, and vipers, and beasts of prey; he upholds them no otherwise
then he does the earth, and the devils, and hell it self, which he preserves
for them, as he reserves them for it, as Saint Jude speaks in his Epistle, v.
5. and then as Abraham said to the rich man, Son, Remember, thou in thy life
time receivedst thy good things; so shall this Lord to these, to a Cain, to a
Nimrod, an Ahab, an Pharisee, a Hypocrite; Remember you were under my wing,
under my protection, and remember what you did there, how you beat your
fellow servants, how you stripped one, dispossessed another, killed a third;
how even then when you were under my wing, when I upheld and preserved you, you
said in your hearts, there was no God. This is a fearful and hideous change,
like the fall of Lucifer, only he fell from heaven indeed, these from an
Imaginary one, a heaven built up with a thought; but both fall into the same
place. O then since he made us, since in him we live, and move, and have our
being, let us live unto this Lord, let our motion be regular; and let us be
what he would have us be; let it be our wisdom to follow him in those ways
which his infinite wisdom has drawn out for us; let our love be the echo of
his love; this wisdom is from above, and this love is kindled from the coal of
a cherubin, is a fire from heaven kindled in our hearts, and it will lick up
all fluid and unbounded desires in us. Let us remember, that he has endowed us
with faculty and ability to do what he requires; that he has committed and
entrusted this unto us for this end, that he does now, as it were, Manu sua
tenere debitores, that he has us in his power, obliged and bound fast unto him
by this his gift, as by an instrument or bond; (...) is the Apostles word, Romans
3.3. and it is the very word which the Civilians use, he has committed an
entrusted his commandments, and requires something of us; and as he that
entrusts his money does not lost the propriety of it, no more does God of that
substance, of our intellectual and practique faculties, which he has put into
our hands; he has not passed them over to us, as a free and absolute gift, but
left them only negotiari dum venerit, to traffic with and improve till he
come. For in receiving the Law, and will and faculty to observe it, Arist. Eth.
5.
we make a kind of contract with God (...), says Arist. for the Law it self is
a kind of contract or covenant, because he that comes under a Law has bound
himself to keep it. Let us remember then, that we come under many obligations;
I cannot name the several ways we stand obliged to this Lord; we may
comprehend all in that axiom of the Civilians, Tot obligationes presumuntur
quot sunt scripturae, we have as many engagements and obligations, as there be
instruments and writings betwixt us; and there are as many, as there be
precepts and commands, which are the best helps to promote us to perfection.
Let us then provide against the day of trial; for not to keep covenant with
him, but when he comes to make inquisition whether we have done what he
required, to present him with nothing but shows, but good intentions, but
drowsy endeavors, and feeble wishes; when he comes to ask for his talent to
show him a napkin, is a plain forfeiture of our obligation, and brings us under
a worse and heavier, binds us over to punishment. Let us then ever fix our eye
upon onr obligation; let us consider that he made us, that he upheld and
protected us, and so had power to oblige us and bind us to him by a Law; let us
admire his wisdom, and embrace his love; let this double chain, the strong
Iron chain of his infinite power and universal dominion; the glorious and
golden thain of his superabundant love, bind and tie us unto him; and when all
other creatures are ready to bow at Gods beck, and follow constantly in that
way which nature has allotted them, and do seldom or never turn aside; when
the Sun knows his setting, and the Moon her seasons, let not us forget our
station and place, but answer this Lord in every command, as the Roman
Centurions did their Emperors, Factum est, Imperator, quod jussisti; Behold
thou art our Lord, and we have done what thou requirest.

And in the last place; let us not set up these mountains in our way of
difficulty, or irksomeness or impossibility, and then faint and lie down, and
settle our selves upon our lees, and wallow in our own blood upon a groundless
fear that there is no passing out; for why should we pretend and plead
difficulty and impossibility, when we our selves are an argument against our
selves, and our own practice every day confutes us? For how do we every day
make a surrendry of our wills to those who have will indeed, and proclaim their
will, but have neither might, nor wisdom, nor love to attend it? Ibo, licet
invita faciam omnia, says the woman in the Comedy; Plaut. Mil. Glor. Act. 4.
sc. 8.
I will go although Igo against my will. To rise up early and lie down late are
nothing pleasing to us, yet for that which a wiseman contemns, for a little
pelf, we will do it. To wait attendance, to bow, and crings, and make great
men Gods, to give him a leg, whom we wish on the gallows, to engage our selves
for the hardest task, to be diminished and brought low, to sweat, and fight,
and dye, cannot be delightful to flesh and blood, yet for honor we will do
it. But then how do we debauch our understandings and wits, and bury them in
other men's wills as in a Sepnlchre, there to rot and stink amidst those corrupt
and loathsome imaginations, which are as wings to carry them to their
unwarrantable ends? how ready are we to conclude that to be true, which we know
to be false, that to be lawful, which our conscience condemns? It was a sin,
It is now a duty; It was as abomination, it is now a sign of Election; It was
oppression, Power has set a mark upon the innocent, and it is justice; It was
an Idol, it is now our God; It was a devil, a black and ugly fiend, it is now an
Angel of light. Thus we can ad omnem occursum majoris cujusque personae
decrescere, as Tertullian speaks, shrink our selves in, and are in a manner
annihilated at the appearance of any greater person; and when these Sons of
Anak show themselves, we are but grasshoppers, we are fools, or slaves, or
worse, any thing, or nothing, even what they will have us. We are led captive
according to the will of others, and according to the will of our greatest
enemy, and become the devils enchanters, to make that appear which is not,
that seem white, which is black, and that good, which is evil; and the devils
musicians, setting and tuning our notes, our words and looks and actions to his
will and pleasure; nay, the devils fiddles to be wound up or let down to any
pin or note, to which the hand of greatness or power will set us; we are as so
many looking-glasses which reflect and present the actions of men in power back
upon themselves, laughing when they laugh, and weeping when they weep, striking
as they strike, planting as they plant, and plucking up as they pluck up; doing
in all as they do; when they are weary and faint and falling to the ground
along with them; and all this to gain our peace, or as the Apostle tells the
Galatians, cap. 6.12. lest we should suffer persecution for the Cross of
Christ. I urge this by way of instance, and exprobration, to show that the
denial of our own will is not a thing of such difficulty as it is thought, that
we may do that for Gods cause, which we do for our own; that we may do that for
him, that we do for our lust, unless we shall so far dishonor God and our
selves as to make that most inglorious and false confession, that we can do
nothing but that which is evil, and have strength to do nothing, but that which
will ruin us; and so conclude against heaven and our own souls, that we are
good for nothing but damnation. I have much wondered, that men should be so
willing to publish their weakness and disability in this, and in other things
to hide and masque it as they do their sin; that they should be ready to
brand him with the name of Heretic, that shall tell them, they may be Just and
Honest men, if they will; that God will assist them, if they put him not from
them; and yet be as forward to be Parasites to that Parasite, and reward him
that shall commend their prudence, and dextrous activity in the affairs of
this world, as if they were made for this world, and no other, and made able to
raise a bank here, but not to lay up for themselves any treasure in heaven. Why
should it be thought a thing incredible, that God should raise the dead? says
Saint Paul, Act. 26. why should any man think it impossible to do the will of
God? It is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, then for a
rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven: True, whilst he trusts in his
riches. And it is impossible for an unclean person to enter there; true, till he
make himself an eunuch for that kingdom: but is it impossible for a rich man
be made poor in spirit? is it impossible for a wanton to make a covenant with
his eyes? Our Savior has fully determined that, That with men it is
impossible, but with God all things are possible, Matthew. 19.26. possible for
him in the barrennest ground to plant and gather sruit; out of any crooked
piece of wood to make a Mercury, a statue for himself: and this comnipotency of
God is referred not only to the giving a being to all things, but in fitting
those helps and furtherances of Piety, which may enable and promote us in the
performance of our duty, as Saint Paul speaks Phil. 4.13. I can do all things
through Christ that strengthens me; who if we call upon him with that sincere
fervor and humility, which our weakness and his Majesty requires, is ready at
hand; ready by his power and assistance, to preserve the rich safe from the
contagion of wealth, and the snare of the devil; and to purge the unclean
person, and to keep him from the foolish woman, and the door of her house.
Why, why should thou lay so unjust an imputation upon so just and merciful
a Lord? God is not as man, that he should lie; God is not as man, that he
should bid us do what we cannot do. Such indeed is our miserable condition
under the sons of men, under those who are built up of the same mould and
earth which we are. Many times our superiors grow wanton; and as they can be
angry for no other reason, but because they will be angry, so they will
command, to show their power; tell us we are Idle, when we are impotent; give
us such commands, as the devils was to the men of Delos, to double his Altar,
to double a cube or square, which has troubled the wits of all ages to find
out; and shall we fancy such a God unto our selves? This were at once to divest
him of his Majesty and goodness, Prodigiosum oraculum hoc suit, liberatum iri
Delios malis praesentibus, si aram Deli duplicasseat. Plut. de urb. Theb. and
Socratis Doemon.
and take him from his throne; first to slander and blaspheme him, and then
break his Law, and comfort our selves in our rebellion.

Nay rather, let God betrue, and all men be liars; for he requires of us no
more, then we can do: And, to conclude, when we cannot do it, he requires but
the will, and as it is a great sin nolle cum possis, not to be willing when
thou can do it, so is it a great virtue velle cum non possis, to be willing
when thou can not do it: And thus I may be poor when I am rich; I may be
liberal when I do not give; and I may be humble in a triumph; Praestat
op^ribus volunt as. Hilar. in Ps. 128. Saepe honorata virtus est, ubi eam
impellit exitus. Sen. Contro. c. 4.7.
I may do what I do not, for with God to will is to do, because when our hands
are bound, that is left free, nor has man or devil any power over it.
Persecution may seal up the Church doors, yet I may love the place where his
honor dwells; power may seal up my lips, yet I may say with David, my heart,
my heart is prepared, and my prayers are loud, when they are not heard, and I
am heard though I cannot speak: I may pray with the tongue, and I may pray with
the spirit, and I may pant forth those prayers which I must not say; I may do
what God requires, when I have neither mouth, nor tongue, nor hand; For what
does he require? that which a man has, and not that which he has not; that
which thou can do, and that which thou may do with ease, and that which
thou may do with delight: Here are these three; first, it is possible,
secondly easy, thirdly delightful; and these are as those wings, Ezekiel. 1.9.
joined one to another, and carrying us straight forward toward the mark; these
are as the wheels v. 16. and on these our Obedience may move on in an even and
constant course, till we are brought to our journeys end, even to that place of
rest, which is prepared for all those who are ready to hearken and do what the
Lord requires. We pass now to the particulars, etc.

blazon or royal coat of arms of England and Wales HONI ^T QVI MAL Y PENSE

The Four and Twentieth SERMON.
PART IIII.
MICAH 7.8. He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord
require of thee, but to do justly, etc.


WE have seen what this Good is, for it is shown unto us and we have beheld it
in the commanding form, and power of a Law; for God requires it, who, as he
made the whole world for man, so he made man for himself, and bound him to that
which might make him free; to walk at liberty in those paths which lead unto
that happiness, which is with him for evermore. We compared it to the tree of
life, and the heart of man is the Paradise, the soil wherein it must grow; and
it is so a celestial Paradise, a Paradise of the purest and sincerest
delights, when this Good is planted and well rooted in it. We have taken a
survey of it in its generality, as it were in the bulk, and body, and substance
of it; we descend now to particulars; to gather some fruit from the parts and
branches of it, which are three; first, Justice or Honesty; secondly, the Love
of Mercy; thirdly, an Humble and reverent deportment, and walking with our God.

And the first is Justice or Honesty, which is a smooth, and straight, and even
branch, and we reap the fruit thereof in peace: To do justly is but one, but it
spreads it self, and in its full latitude takes in all the duties of our life;
For we are no sooner men, but we are debtors, under obligations to God, to men,
and our selves: The Apostle in the 1 to the Thessalonians 2.10. comprehends all
in three words, you are witnesses how holily, andjustly, and unblameably we
behaved our selves amongst you; first, (...), how Holily in relation to God,
for we are bound to him as Sons, to Honor him; as subjects, to obey him; as
servants, to do his will; in brief, to be Holy as he is Holy: secondly, (...),
how justly in respect of men; For we are not left at large, but as there is a
relation of man to God, so there is of one man to another: All men are bound to
every man, and every man is bound to all; there is an instrument and obligation
drawn between them, a kind of counterbond to secure one from the other, and it
is written and sealed up in every heart, and by the hand of God himself, To do
to others, as we would have others to do to us, if men would be but men, would
be, what it was made for, the security of the whole world: thirdly, (...), how
unblameably in respect of himself, and his personal conversation; for (though
we sacrse believe it, or consider it as little as if it were not true) we our
selves are bound unto our selves, and in all the assaults we make either
against God or our neighbor, the first injury we do is to our selves; we are
bound to our bodies, not to make them the instruments and weapons of
unrighteousness; and we are bound to our souls, not to pawn or sell them to
our lusts; we are bound to our flesh, as a magistrate is in his office, to beat
it down and subdue it, and so rule and govern it; and we are bound to our
reason, not to enslave it, or place it under the vanities of this world; and if
we break these obligations, we are the first that rise up against our selves;
the first man that condemns a finner is the sinner himself, se judice nemo
nocens absolvitur; In himself he bears about with him a court, a seat of
Justice, from which no appeal lies; his Reason is his Judge, his Conscience is
his accuser, and he himself is his own prisoner, and he crucifies and hangs
himself up every day, though no foreign authority arrest him. And these three
are linkt together as in a chain; For when we make good our obligations to God
and our selves, we never fail in that which is due unto men; and he that fails
in doing justly to men, has ipso facto forfeited his obligation to God and
himself; for to do justly is a duty which he owes to God and himself as well as
to others: he that is not just, is not holy, and he that is not holy is an
enemy to God and himself; for God made him to this end, and God requires it at
his hands; so that an unjust man at once breaks this threefold cord, and is
injurious to God, to men, and himself: If we miss in one, we are lost in all,
and are in a manner out-lawed from men, banished from our selves, and so without
God in this world.

We have a large field here to walk in, but we must limit and confine our
selves, and pass by the justice of the public Magistrate, whose proper work
it is (...), stand in the midst between two opposite sides, till he draw them
together, and make them one; to keep an equality, even in inequality; to use
his power, rescindendo peccatori, in cutting off the wicked from the earth, and
taking the prey out of his mouth, or else communi dividundo, in dividing to
every man his own possessions, in giving Mephibosheth his own Lands; for this
is neither meant here in the text, nor can it concern this Auditory. Read the
10, 11, 12. v. of this chapter, and you will see what Justice it is the Prophet
here speaks of. 10. Are there yet treasures of wickedness in the house of the
wicked, and the scant measure, that is abominable? 11. Shall I count them pure
with the wicked balances, and with the bag of deceitful weights? 12. For the
rich men thereof are full of violence, and the inhabitants thereof have spoken
lies, and their tongue is deceitful in their mouth. Is there yet the house of
the wicked built by oppression, and cemented with blood, and will he not
restore what he has unjustly gained, after so many warnings and threats? Adhuc
ignis in domo Impii? so the vulgar: Is there yet a fire in the house of the
wicked? not a Treasure, but a Fire, which will consume all? so that Facere
judicium, to do justly in this place, is not only the duty of the magistrate
(and yet public Justice is both a serpent and a rod, not only to bite and
sting the guilty person, but a rod or measure, to measure out to every man his
own measure) but to do justly is to give every man his own, not to lay hold on,
or alienate or deceitfully withdraw, or violently force from any man that of
which he is a lawful possessor for quicqutd jure possidetur, injuria aufertur,
that which I possess by right, cannot be taken from me but by injury. And this
is it which we call common honesty, or private Justice, and it binds my hand
from oppression and robbery; it seals up my lips from guile and slander; it
checks and fetters my fancy from weaving those Nets of Deceit which may catch
my Brother and entangle him; it limits my Hands, my Wit, my Tongue, not to do,
not to imagine, not to speak that which may endamage him; not to touch, not to
undermine his estate; not to touch, not to wound his reputation; for Slander is
a great injustice, a kind of Murder, jugulans non membra, sed nomina, says
Optatus to the Donatists, not cutting off a limb or member, but mangling and
defacing a good and fair name, and even treading it in the dirt. Private
Justice is of a far larger extent then that which is Public, and speaks and
acts from the Tribunal: For Public Justice steers by no other Compass but
the Laws of Men; but this by the Laws of Nature, and Charity, which forbid many
things which the Laws of Men mention not; and restrain us there, where Humane
Authority leaves us in nostro mancipio, to dispose of our selves as we please;
Nec enim, quicquid honestum est, legibus praecipitur, for this Justice and
Honesty binds us to that which no Law exacts; for Lawgivers are not Diviners
or Prophets, and they see little more then what is passed by them already, or
now before their eyes, or which Probability has brought so near, that they
even see it, as a thing, which, if not prevented, will certainly come to pass.
They have not the knowledge of all that is possible, nor of all things that are
under the differences of times past, present, and to come; nor can they fathom
the depth, and deceitfulness of their own hearts, much lest of the hearts of
other men, which are fruitful in evil, and every day find out new inventions,
and multiply them every day: For as Saint Austin spoke of the Lawyers of his
time, Angust deved. Dan. Imm. 19.
Nulla Causa sine causa, There was not a Cause brought to them, which they
could not so handle, as that it should multiply in their hands, and beget as
many as they pleased; so there is no fraudulent act, Usu ^atum est (...) apu
(...), etc. Thras. Paet. apod Ta^t. Annal. 15.
which is not a step to another, and that to a third, and that is now a
teeming, ready to bring forth more; Depunge ubi sistam; Injustice has the same
subsistence and measures with our Covetousness and Lust, and that (...), knows
neither bounds nor end; So that those Laws by which Humane Societies are
managed and upheld, are rather occasioned by that which is past, then that
which is to come; and they that make them take their aim by their eye, and some
sensible inconvenience, which is either visible in it self, or in that which
may cause it, but cannot provide against that which is removed so far, as that
neither the eye, nor thoaght, neither wisdom, nor suspicion can reach it, but
is to them as if it would never be; in that darkness and obscurity, which it
was before they were born. And therefore the rule of those duties which we owe
one to anothyer, is of a larger extent then that of the Law, S^n. 2. ale Ira.
c. 27.
Angusta est innocentia ad legem probum esse, says the Philosopher, that
honesty is but of a narrow compass which measures it self out by that rule,
and reaches no further then to that point which the Laws of men have set up,
and makes that its Non ultra. Fost. verb. Pictas.
Piety constrains us to do many things, where the Law leaves us free; what Law
did force that pious Daughter to suckle her old Father in prison, and nourish
him with the milk from her own breasts? Sp^ritanus.
or Antonine the Emperor to lead his aged Father-in-law, and ease and support
him with his hand? Again Humanity binds us, where the Law is silent; for where
was it enacted, Hun^nit^tis es^quae. lam nes^ velle.
that we should not open the letters no not of our enemies? yet Julius Caesar
burnt those which he found in their tents, whom he had conquered; and the
Athenians and Pompey did the like. Liberality has no Law, and yet it is a
debt. Beati divites, quiet caeteris prodesse possunt and achent. Alcint. de
verb. Sigaifificat. Fides and juramentum aequiparam 7, thoc serva i^h^t, Ua and
illa. Menoch. cap. 367.
No law enjoynes me to keep my promise and make good my faith, and yet my
promise binds me as firmly, and should be as sacred as an oath. All these are
extra publicas tabulas, and are not to be found in our statutebooks; and he
that confines his studies and endeavors to these; he that has no other
compass to steer by in the course of his life, then that which he there finds
written, cannot take this honor to himself, this Honorable title of a Just and
Honest man. For how many inventions and wiles have men found out to act
iniquity, as by a Law? to drive the proprietary out of his possessions, before
the Sun and the people, and then wipe their mouths, and proclaim it as Just to
all the world? How many Eat no other Bread but that which is kneaded by craft
and oppression, and sometimes with blood, and yet count it as Manna, sent down
from Heaven? How short is the hand of the Law to reach these? Nay how does the
Law it self many times enable them to invade the Territories of others, and to
riot it at pleasure? How is it made their music, by which they dance in other
men's blood? Justice, Consensere jura p^ceatis, etc. Cypl. ad Donat.
or common Honesty, is but one word, but of a larger compass then Ambition and
Covetousness are willing to walk in. In a word; I tmay not be just and Honest,
and yet there may be no Law to punish it, Cicer. 2. de Fimb. 93. Lex
Stagaritarum (...). Ae^ian. var. H^st. l. 3. c. 46. Clem. Alex. 2. strom. 398.
Dolus quidam in contractu est non indicare crronem. Hermias a pud Damas in
Plut. Bibl.
or no man that dare reprehend it, says ^ully. Take not up that which thou
laidst not down; count that which thou find in the way, but as a pledge to
be returned upon demand, said the Stagarites. If thou sell a thing, declare the
fault of it; If thou underbuy a thing, upon the discovery, pay the full price.
These no Humane Law, but Justice and Honesty, and the Law of nature requires.
To collect and draw out a catologue of all those irregularities in Behavior
which will not consist with Justice and Honesty, as it is a thing not necessary
to be done, so is it impossible to do it: for as day unto day teaches the
knowledge of that which is good, so day unto day, and hour unto hour teaches
the knowledge of that which is evil, and it is not easy to open those
Mysteries of iniquity. The mind of man, when it is corrupted, is restless in
finding out new, and untroden paths which may lead to its desired end, and is
wheeled about from one falsehood to another, begets a second lie to defend the
first, and draws in cheat upon cheat, that it may have at least the shadow of
Justice and Honesty to veil and obscure it; and so long he is an Honest man
that is not a detected knave, as he is counted a good Lawyer, who can find out
something in fraudem legis, some hansome color or fetch to delude the Law. He
that has the sentence on his side, is Just, and he that is fallen from his
cause, is fallen from the truth; and so honesty is bound up in the verdict of
the Jury, and twelve perjured men may make an oppressor honest, when they
please.

We will not therefore go in Hue and Cry after every thief, nor follow the
deceitful person in those rounds, in those windings and turnings which he
makes; and I can truly say, non multum incola fuit anima mea, I have been but a
stranger and sojourner in these tents of Mesech, and have not so much conversed
in these ways of thrift, and arts of living, as to read a lecture upon them,
and discover the Method and course of them. It may so fall out, and does too
often, that they who are the best artists in these, are the worst of men; For
the wisdom of this world is not like that in Aristotle, which rests in it
self, and never seeks an other end, but in this the theory and the practice go
hand in hand, and advance one another: nor do we make use of it only to
preserve and defend our selves, but we let it out to disquiet and diminish
others; and they that tread these hidden and indirect ways, though they hide
themselves from others, yet seldom do they so far deceive themselves, as not
to know they walk deceitfully: for they check, and comfort themselves at once;
they know they do not justly, and yet this thought sets them forward in their
course, even this poor and unworthy thought, that It is good to be rich; and so
the light which they see is somewhat offensive, but the love of gain is both a
provocative, and a cordial.

We will therefore bring Justice to the line, and Righteousness to the
plummet, and have recourse to the Law and the Prophets; not stand gazing upon
the practice of the world, and actions of men, but look upon the rule, by which
a diligent eye may easily discover all particular swervings and deviations,
though they be as many as the Atoms before the Sun: For as Seneca well,
Difficile est animam suam effugere, It is a hard matter for a man to fly from
himself, or to divest himself of those principles with which he was born, or so
to fling them from him, as that they shall never return to restrain and curb
him, or at least to molest him when his flesh and lusts are wanton, and unruly,
and violent to break their bounds. And now, what does the Lord require But to
do justly? That is, but to do that, which first, the Law of nature requires;
secondly, that which he at sundry times by holy men, and his Prophets has
taught, and in the last days has urged and improved by his Son Christ Jesus,
the Prince of Peace and righteousness. So that Justice does raise it self upon
these two pillars, Nature and Religion, which are like the two pillars in the
porch of the Temple, 1 Kings 7.20. Jachin and Boaz, and do strengthen and
establish Justice, as that does the pillars of the earth, or as the legs of the
bridegroom in the Canticles 5.15. which were as pillars of marble set upon
sockets of pure gold: for the wisdom and strength of Christ and Christianity
consists in the adorning and improving of Nature, and settling a true and
perfect Religion, and the sockets, the bases are of pure gold, Basis aurea
timor plenus disciplinae, says Ambrose, the golden Basis which upholds all, is
a well disciplined fear, by which we walk with circumspection, and carefully
observe the Law of nature, and the Law of Christ; and by the Law of nature, and
the brighter and clearer light of Scripture, so steer our course, that we dash
not against thosedangerous rocks of deceit and violence, of oppression and
wrong, that we may not spem nostram alienis miseriis inaugurare, not increase
our selves by diminishing others; not rise by another man's ruin; not be
enriched by another man's loss; not begin and inaugurate, and crown our hopes
and desires with other men's miseries; nor bath our selves with delight in the
tears of the widow and the fatherless; but rather suffer wrong then do it,
rather lose out coat, then take away our brothers; vitamque impendere vero,
rather lose that we have, and life it self, then our honesty; and so by being
Men, and by being Christians, full fill all right eousnesse.

And first, Nature it self has hewn and squared all Mankind as it were out of
the same Quarry and Rock; has built them up out of the same Materials, into a
Body and Society, into a City compact within it self: For the whole world is
but as one City, and all the men therein, in respect of mutual offices of
love, are but of one Corporation. Respicite zur. Es. 5.1. Look unto the rock
out of which you were hewn, and the hole of the pit where you were dug:
Look unto the common seed-plot, out of which you were all extracted, and there
you shall discover that near Relation and Fraternity, that makes every man a
Neighbor, a Brother to Every man: how they are not only together Children of
Corruption, and kin to the worm and Rottenness, but the same workmanship of an
immortal hand and an illimited power; the Brethren of one Bather who has
built them up in his image, and according to his likeness, which though it may
be more resplendent, more improved in one then in another, yet it is that
impression which is made and stamped on all. From the same rock are hewed out
the weak and feeble man, and Ish the man of strength, who has milk in his
breasts, and marrow in his bones; From the same hand is that face we turn away
from, and that face we so much gaze on; the scribe and the Idiot, the narrow
understanding that receives little, and the active and piercing wit, which runs
to and fro the earth; that plain simple man that has no ends, and the subtle
Politician, who multiplies his every day, and can compass them all. Of the
same extraction are the purple Gallant, and the Russet Pilgrim; and he that
made them casts an equal eye on them all, and binds every hand from violence,
and every heart from forging deceit; makes every man a guard and protection to
every man; gives every man a guard and conduct for himself and others; and to
every man the word is given, touch not another, and do him no harm. Thus has
he fenced us in and taken care, that the strong man bind not the weak; that the
scribe overreach not the Idiot; that the Politician supplant not the innocent;
that the experienced man defraud not the ignorant; but that every man's
strength, and wit, and experience, and wisdom should be advantageous, and not
hurtful to others; that so the weak man may be strong with another man's
strength; and the ignorant man wise with another experience; and the Idiot be
secured by the wisdom of the Scribe. For who has made all these? have not I
the Lord? and then if he made them, and linkt them together in one common tie
of nature, quis discernet? as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 4.7. who shall divide
and separate them? who shall divide the rich and the poor, that he should set
him at his footstool and despise him? The strong from the weak, that he should
beat him to the ground? The wise from the ignorant, that he should bassie and
deceive him? Indeed sme distance, some difference, some precedence of one
before the other may show it self to an eye of flesh; but yet even an eye of
flesh may see how to reunite and gather them together as on and the same in
their Original: Respicite zur, Look unto the rock, the vein out of which you
were taken, and then what Moses spoke to the Israelites when they strove
together, may be spoken to all the men in the world, Sirs, you are brethren,
why do you defraud, or use violence? why do you wrong one to another? Acts 7.26

But in the next place; Besides this our common extraction, the God of Nature,
who has built us out of the same materials, has also imprinted those
Principles, those Notions, those Inclinations in the heart of every man, which
may be as so many Buttresses and supporters to uphold this frame, and to make
us dwell together in all simplicity and innocence of coversation; not in envy
and malice, in fraud and deceit, but with courtesy and affability, helping and
supporting one another, which is that justice which God requires at our hands:
Nulla anima sine crimine, quia nulla sine Boni semine, says Tertullian, No
soul can plead Not guilty here, because no soul is destitute of this seed of
Goodness. And thus we see in Romans 1. where Saint Paul makes up that catalogue
of foul irregularities, he drags the unrighteous, the covetous, the malicious,
the deceitful, the inventors of evil things, the Covenant-breakers, to no
other Tribunal then that of Nature, and condemns them by no other Law then that
which we brought with us into the world. Quaedam jura non scripta, sed omnibus
scriptis certiora, says the Orator. This Law is not written, Since. Contr.
S^loms Lges lign^is aribus incisae Gell. l. 2. c. 12.
and therefore is written to all; and being connaturall to us, is more sure and
infallible then those which are written in wood, or engraven in Brass or
Marble. And one would think that it were as superfluous and needless to make
any other Law to bind us to Justice and upright dealing one toward another, as
to command children to love their parents, or parents to be indulgent to their
children: For why should that be urged with that vehemence, to which men's
natural bend and inclination carries them, and would certainly continue them,
and hold them up in an even course of justice and honesty, did not Education,
and their familiar converse and dalliance with the world, corrupt and blind
them? To this Law of Nature S. James seems to call us back, chap. 3.9. where he
makes it as a strange thing to be wondered at, That the same tongue that
blesses God, should yet curse men, who are made after the similitude of God.
As if he should have said, Curse him not, deceive him not; for if thou curse
him, if thou deceive him, thou cursest and deceivest God, after whose
similitude he is made. My brethren, these things ought not be, and are as much
against nature, as for the same fountain to send forth sweet and bitter water,
or for a fig tree to bear olives, or a vine figs, at the 12. ver. Saint Paul
in the 4. to the Ephesians, shuts up the Liars mouth with the same argument,
ver. 25. Wherefore cast off lying, and speak truth every one to his neighbor:
and the Reason follows, For you are members one of another. Thou art a part of
him, and he is a part of thee, being both hewn out of the same Rock, formed and
shaped of the same mould, and by lying to thy Brother, thou putt est a cheat
upon thy self, and as far as in thee lies, upon that GOD that made you both,
and gave you Tongues, not to lie, but to instruct; and Wits, not to deceive,
but counsel and help one another. And therefore in the 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. he deters
them from fraud and violence, by no other argument then this, That God is the
avenger of such things, as if the Lie had been told, and the Cheat put upon
him. And when Man's justice to man fails, there Gods vengeance is ready to
make a supply: For, says Clemens, Vidisti fratrem tuum? vidisti Deum tuum:
When thou look upon thy Brother, Clem. Alex. Strom. 2.
thou see God himself, as near as Mortality can discover him; for he is the
fairest Copy thou can see him by, fairer then the Heaven of Heavens, and
those ministers of light; fairer then the fairest Star, then the Sun in the
Firmament, when he rejoices to run his race. Hence Saint John concludes
positively and peremptorily, 1 Epist. 4.20. If a man say he loves God, and
hates his brother, (and he that deceives him, he that oppresses him, hates
him; or else despises him, which is worse) he is a liar: and his reason is
irrefragable, For he that loves not his brother whom he has seen, in whom he
sees himself, in whom he sees his God, and so has love conveyed into his heart
by his very eye, many visible motives to win him to this duty, how can be love
God whom he has not seen? whom no man has seen or can see, but, as the
Apostle speaks, though a glass darkly, in his words, and in his works, of
which Man is the brightest Mirror, and gives the fairest and clearest
representation of him. So that now we may see all Mankind tied and united
together in this Love-knot of Nature; knit together as Men, that they should
not fly asunder, and then return again one upon another, not as Men, but as
Snakes and Vipers; look back, but with an evil eye; approach near, but in a
cloud or tempest; not look, but envy; not speak, but lie; not touch, but
strike; not converse with, but defraud and oppress one another; which is
against that Law with which we were born, and which we carry about with us
whithersoever we go, and whatsoever we do.

(...). How gracious and helpful a creature is one man to another, if he
continue so, a man, and receive no new impression from the flesh, from
self-love, and those transitory vanities below? if he be not by assed and
wheeled from this Natural motion, by the world, and so fit to be drove into
the field with Nebuchadnezzar, being turned Fox, or Lion, or Tiger, or Panther,
or worse then any of those Beasts, because he is a Man? (for so many forms he
may receive, having once degenerated from his own) and then it is not: Look upon
Men as of the same mould and frame, as Brethren by nature; as auxiliaries and
supplies, as keepers and guardians; but Cavete ab hominibus, Beware of men; a
warning and caution given by our Savior himself, Mat. 10.17. and a strange
caution it is from him who so loved men that he dyed for them. Beware of men,
beware of them thus transformed, thus Brutify'd. That smiling friend may be a
tempter; He that calls himself a Saint, may be a Seducer; his oily tongue may
wound thee; his embrace crush thee to pieces; that demure countenance may
shadow a legion of Devils. Look not upon his phylacteries, the Man's a
Pharisee; and this Angel keeper may be thy Murderer. And thus it is when the
course of nature is turned backward, and Man degenerates from himself, and
makes his Reason, which should be an instrument and promoter of Justice, a
servant to sin, and a weapon of unrighteousness. This the love of the world,
and the wisdom of the flesh can do; Victrix etiam de Natura triumphat, When
it prevails, it moves and troubles the Wheel, as S. James calls it, the whole
course of our Nativity, and triumphs over Nature it self.

Now to draw this yet nearer to our purpose; Speak what we will of Profit and
Commodity, the Heathen Orator by the very light of Nature has told us, That
they who divide Profit from Justice and Honesty, and call that profit and
advantage, which is unlawfully gotten or detained, Subvertunt homines and ea
quae sua^ Fundamenta N^turae, citm utilitatem ab Hon shat sejungunt. Tall. de
off. l. 3.
with the same hand lift at the very foundation of nature, and strive to put
out that light which they cannot utterly extinguish; Ista duo facimus ex uno,
says Seneca, though we make Profit and Honesty two things, yet they are but
one and the same; and therefore to rise upon another man's ruins, to enrich our
selves by fraud and deceit, is as much against nature, says Tully, as poverty
which pincheth it, or grief which afflicts it, or death which dissolves it; for
poverty may strip the body, Ibid.
grief may trouble it, and death may strike it to the ground, but yet they have
a soul, but injustice is its destruction, and leaves a dead soul in a living
body. For as we have already shown, man is naturally. (...) a sociable
creature, but violence and deceit quite destroy all Society; and Lully gives
the same reason in his Offices, which Saint Paul does against Schism in his
Epistles, 1 Cor. 12. If one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; and
therefore the intent and purpose of all must be, says the Orator, ut eadem sit
utilitas uniuscujusque and singulorum, that the benefit of one and every man
may be the same, so that what deceit has purloyned, of stolen away, or
violence snatched from others, is not Profit, because it is not honest; Res
surtiva, quousque redierit in Comini potestatem, perpetuo vitiosa est.
and the Civilians will tell us, that, that which is unjustly detained is not
valuable, is of no worth till it return to the hands of the lawful proprietary.

Again, in the second place; Justice and Honesty are more agreeable to the
nature of men then Profit or4 Pleasure; For these reason it self has taught us
to contemn, and he most enjoys himself who desires not pleasure, and he is the
richest man who can be poor, and we are never more men, then when we lest
regard them; but if we forfeit our integrity, and pervert the course of
Justice, we have left our selves nothing but the name of men. Si, quod absit,
spes foelicitatis nulla, says Saint Austin, If we had no eye to eternity, nor
hope of future happiness; Tull. Off. 3.
Si omnes Deos hominesque celare possimus, says Tully, if we could make
darkness a pavilion round about us, and lie skreend and hid from the eyes of
God and man, yet a necessity would lie upon us to be what we are made, to
observe the lessons and dictates of nature, says one; Nihil injuste faciendum,
says the other, nothingmust be done unjustly, though God had no eye to see it,
nor hand to punish it; and this doctrine is current both at Athens and
Jerusalem, both in the Philosophers School and in the Church of God.

To give you yet another reason, but yet of near alliance to the first;
whatsoever we do, or resolve upon, must habere suas causas, as Arnobius speaks,
must be commended by that cause which produces it; now what cause can move us
to desire that which is not ours? what cause can the oppressor show that he
grinds the face of the poor? the thief, that he divides the spoil? The
deceitful tradesman, that he has false weights, Pondus and pondus, a weight
and a weight, a weight to buy with, and a weight sell with? If you ask them,
what cause? they will eitherlye and deny it, or put their hand upon their
mouth, and be ashamed to answer; here their wit will fail them, which was so
quick and active to bring that about, for which they had no reason: it may be,
the cause was, an unnecessary fear of poverty, as if it were a greater sin
then cosenage; It may be the love of their children, and saepe ad avaritiam cor
parentis illicit. Foecunditas prolis, Gregan 1 Job c. 4.
says Gregory, many children are as many temptations, and we are soon overcome
and yield, willing to be evil, that they may be, rich, and calling it the duty
of a Parent, when we feed, and cloth them with our sin; or indeed it is the
love of the world, and a desire to hold up our heads with the best, which are
no causes, but defects and sins, the blemishes and deformities of a soul
transformed after the image of this world. These are but sophismes, and
delusions, and of no causality. For it is better I were poor then fraudulent;
better that my children should be naked then my soul; better want then be
unjust; better be in the lowest place, then to swim in blood to the highest;
better be drove out of the world then shut out of heaven. It is no sin to be
poor, no sin to be in dishonor, no sin to be on a dunghill, or in a prison;
it is no sin to be a slave: but it is a sin, and a great sin, to rise out
of my place, or either flatter, or shoulder my neighbor out of his, and to
take his room; It is no sin to be miserable in the highest degree, but it is a
sin to be unjust or dishonest in the least. Iniquity and injustice have
nothing of reason to countenance them, and therefore must run and shelter
themselves in that thicket of excuses, must pretend want, and poverty, and
necessity; and so the object of my concupiscence must Authorize my
concupiscence, and the wedg of gold warrant my theft, and to gain something is
my strongest argument to gain it unjustly. Ibid.
And therefore Tully says well, If any man will bring in and urge these for
causes, argue not against him, nor vouchsafe him so much as a reply; omnino
enim hominem ex homine tollit, for he has most unnaturally divided man from
himself, and left nothing but the beast. Nature it self, our first
School-mistris, loathes and detests it, nor will it suffer us by any means to
add to our own, by any defalkation from that which is another; and such is the
equity of this position, that the Civil Law always appeals unto it, videtur
dolum malum facere qui ex aliena jactura lucrum querit, He is guilty of
cosenage and fraud, who seeks advantage by another man's loss; where by Dolus
malus is understood whatsoever is repugnant to the Law of nature or equity. For
with the beams of this Law, as with the beams of the Sun, were all Humane
Laws written, which whip idleness, which pin the Papers of Ignominy (the best
hatchments of a knave) in the hat of the common barretter, which break the
teeth of the oppressor, and turn the bread of the deceitful into Gall; upon
this Basis, this principle of nature, whatsoever you would that men should do
unto you, even so do unto them, hang all the Law and the Prophets. For the rule
of behavior which our Savior set up, is taken out of the Treasury of nature,
and for this is the Law and the Prophets, Matthew. 7.2. that is, upon this Law of
nature depend the Law and the Prophets, or by the due and strict observing of
this, the Law is fulfilled, as Saint Paul speaks, Romans 13.8. or this is the
sum of all which the Law and the Prophets have taught, to wit, concerning
Justice and Honesty, and those mutual offices, All. Lamprid.
and duties of men to men; a rule so equitable, so visible even to the eye of a
natural man, that Severus a heathen Emperor made his motto, and some have
engraven it in their rings, visne hoc fieri in agro tuo quod alteri facis?
would thou have done that in another man's field which thou would not have
done in thy own? would any impostor be caught by craft? would any spoiler be
spoiled? would any cheat be cozened? would any oppressor have his face ground?
would any calumniator be slandred? and why should any man claim the privilege
of his humanity, if he be not willing to grant it to all? why should this
secure me from injuries, and leave my brother as a mark for deceit to go about,
and Malice, and Covetousness, and Power to shoot at? why should not this Law
of nature be an Amulet to secure all mankind from the venom of Fraud and
Injustice? This Law of nature brought forth a Regulus, a Cato, a Fabricius, and
those Worthies, which showed to posterity the possibility of keeping this Law
so far as to be Just, and do as yet teach and upbraid us Christians.

By this Law, and by no other then this, were the Aediles or Clarks of the
Market in Rome, directed to lay it down as a Law, that whosoever sold any
Commodity, was to disclose to the buyer, what fault, what defect, what
imperfection it had: If he sold an House in which the Plague had been, he was
to proclaim it by the common crier, Pestilentem Domum Vendo, I sell an
infectious house; If he sold a Horse, he was to make known the diseases; if a
piece of cloth, the falsehood of it; for if he did not this, there lay an action
against him, Actio redibhitoria, by which he was constrained to take back his
wares again, or make good the damage to the buyer: By this they flung all
false and deceitful wares into the River. This has been done in Gath and
Askelon; what a strange sight would this be in Jerusalem? This has been done
amongst Heathen, Solebant Aediles malas merces in flumen jactare Plin. Not.
Hist. p. 638.
aliens from the Grace of god, and is it not pity it should appear as
ridiculous amongst us Christians, who make our boast of it all the day long?
for should we put it in practice, what objects of scorn and laughter should we
be made to the man of this world, who would call us fools, or set us down for
none of the wisest, or (which is the easiest censure) place us in the number of
those, Hier. ad Eustoch. Amittit merito proprium qut alienum app. tit. Vide
aus. epiced. in patrem and ver. ^nterp. in Sar. Juvenal.
who may be wise perhaps, but will not be wise for themselves? But Saint Hierom
goes further and adds, aliena adpetentes publicae leges puniunt, The public
Laws did punish even those who did but seek after or desire another man's
possessions; perhaps alluding to that custom of the Ancients, who straightly
forbad that any man should add to, or diminish that which he possessed. Lastly,
this was it that made them sacrifice Deo Lermino, Q^ Term number ex rassa, ipse
and Raves (...) Fest. in verbo. Te^minus.
to the God of bounds; and as god laid a curse upon him that removed the
Landmark, Deuteronomy. 19.14. so did Numa by the light of nature, even upon him who,
though by chance, had plowed it up, such is the tie of nature so, great an
obligation does it carry with it; for whatsoever is done against nature, all
men, says Tertullian, esteem as monstrous, but Christians Sacrilegious against
God, who is the lord, and Author of nature, and further we press not this
consideration.

For in the second place; Justice and Honesty have yet a fairer pillar, more
polished and beautiful, more radiant and manifest to the eye, for besides the
Law of Nature, or Humane Laws, which are but the extracts and resultances from
it, Habemus legem, we have a Law written, the Law of God, who is a God of
truth, and pure eyes, and cannot behold deceit and violence, and the Law of
that great Lawgiver, the Prince of righteousness, in whose mouth there was
sound no guile. Angust. de Relig. c. 6.
And this makes our obligation to do justly the stronger. Lex prohibens omnia
delicta congeminat, says Austin, the superaddition of a Law to the Law written
in our hearts, aggravates and multiplies a sin, because after the open
promulgation of a Law, we do not only that which is unlawful in it self, but
also that which is by supreme authority forbiden. Now when we speak of a Law,
we do not mean the Law of Moses (although that commands to make our Hin right
and our Ephah right. Leges 12. Tabul. ne Agrum defraudante; ae frugein a^atro
qua si^am n^ctu surtim depescuqto, I'u e^s si secanto, Cor. ri eos su^peniunto.
Impaberts arbi^to Pra^oris verber. nio; Ac noxae^ aliodem dee raunio. Plin.
Not. Hist. l. 28. c. 3.
Levit. 19.36. That, that should be restored, which was either violently or
deceitfully taken away. Levit. 6.4. That, that which goes astray, or is lost,
should be restored. Deuteronomy. 22.1. That the hired servant be not oppressed. Deuteronomy.
24.13,14,15. That he that kills a Beast shall restore it. Levit. 24.21. That
he that smites a man, so that he keeps his bed, shall pay for the loss of
his time, and cause him to be thoroughly healed. Levit. 21.18,19. That if a man
feed his beast in another man's field, he shall make restitution out of his own
sield. Exodus 22.5. That in buying and selling they should not oppress one
another. Levit. 25.14.) but legem Evangelicam, the Law which was preached and
promulged by Righteousness it self, the best master Christ Jesus, and by this
Christians are obliged above all the men in the world, because they are
Disciples of a better testament. For Christ came not to destroy the Law of
Nature, but to establish and improve it; and though it propose some duties to
which peradventure by clear evidence we are not obliged by the Law of Nature,
yet they who have most improved and perfected their reason, even by the light
of reason will subscribe to them that they are just and good, and as they
concern our conversation with men, most fit to be done, and most worthy of
observation. Innocentiam perfect notrant Christiani perfecto magistro
revelatam, says Tertullian, Tertull. Apol.
That innocence of life which beats down all violence, checks and confutes all
Sophistry and deceit in dealing, is most exactly learnt by Christians from the
best and perfectest master that ever was, who that we may not kill, has taught
us not to be angry; that we may shut out uncleanness, has shut up our eyes;
that we may not do evil, has prohibited us to speak or think it; and is so far
from permitting his disciples to do any injury, that he has expressly and
straightly commanded them with patience to bear any that is offered: quis illic
sicarius? quis manticularius? quis sacrilegus? what Christian says he, is a
murderer, or a thief, or a sacrilegious person? or will he steal thy coat, who
by his profession is bound to give thee his, and his cloak also? It was a
common saying amongst them, Bonus vir Caius Seius, Caius Seius was a just Good
man certainly, and there was but one fault in him, and that was, that he was a
Christian. When the soldiers asked John the Baptist, what shall we do? he
returned an answer which did not disarme them, but bound their hands from
violence and wrong, Do no violence, Accuse no man falsely, and be content with
your wages. The Publicans were odious even to a proverb, yet he vouchsafes
them an answer; Exact no more then is appointed you, Luke 3.13. will you hear
our Savior from the mount? and there you cannot but observe, that most of
those precepts delivered there tend to Honesty and Sincerity of conversation
with men, Blessed are the merciful. Blessed are the peacemakers. Be not
angry. Let your yea be yea, and your nay be nay; which short precept leaves no
room for fraud and deceit, for that which is called Dolus malus, when our yea
is nay, and our nay yea; one thing is said and another meant; one thing is
pretended, and another done. The Apostles are frequent in urging this duty; for
Christianity was so far from disanulling those precepts of morality and mutual
conversation, which the Philosophers by the light of nature delivered and
transmitted to posterity, that the ancient Christians as learned Grotius
observes, Grot. Prolegom. ad l. de Jure bell. and pacis.
though they were not devoted to any one Sect of them, yet observing that as
there was no Sect which had found out all truth, so also there was not one of
them which had not discovered-some, did take the pains to collect and gather
into a body, what was here and there diffused and scattred in their several
writings, and did think this a fair commentary on the Practick part of the
Gospel, and a sufficient expression of that discipline, which Christians by
their very title and profession were bound to observe: you may read them in the
Philosophers, but they are the precepts of Christ.

And this is the true face of Christianity: For no other foundation can any man
lay, then that which is laid; Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 3.11. See Sermon. 20.
Now every foundation should bear something; not wood, and hay, and stubble,
but gold, and silver, and precious stones; Fraud, and Violence, and Injustice,
cannot lie upon that foundation which is laid in Truth, in Mercy, in Justice,
nor upon that Savior who knew no guile; who had this Elogium from his very
enemies, That he had done all things well, and that there was no fault to be
found in him. No, upon this foundation you must lay such materials which are
like unto it, Innocence, and Truth, and Righteousness; which that they may
grow up and flourish amongst the sons of men, he watered them with his Blood,
which was shed for the Oppressor, that he might be merciful; for the
Dissembler, that he might speak truth; for the Deceitful person, that he might
be just in all his ways, and righteous in all his dealings; for the violent
person, that he might do no more wrong; and if it have not this effect, it is
his blood still, but not to save us, but to be upon us to our condemnation. For
it is strange, that Christ's blood should produce nothing but a speculative, a
fancied and an usurped faith, a faith which should keep those evils in life,
which he dyed to take away; a faith, which should suffer those sins and
irregularities, to grow and grow bold, and pass in triumph, which he came to
root out of the earth, and to banish out of the world. Faith is the substance,
the expectation of a future and better condition; but we do not use to expect a
thing, and have no eye upon the means of attaining it. Can we expect to fly
without wings, or go a journey without feet? no more can we hope ever to enter
those heavens, wherein dwells righteousness, if we have no other conduct but
faith, faith so poorly and miserably attended, with fraud, deceit, injustice,
and violence. For who shall dwell in the holy hill? He that walks uprightly,
and works righteousness, and speaks the truth in his heart: He that does
no evil to his neighbor, that swears to his own hurt, and changes not.
Psalm. 15. It Is strange then that there should be so many oppressors in the
world, and so many Saints; that so many should forfeit their honesty, and yet
count their election sure; that they who are like enough to do as the Jews did,
Crucify Christ, if he were on the earth, should yet hope to be saved by his
blood: For if you should ask me, what the true property of a Christian were
(faith always supposed, which is the ground and foundation of all) I could not
find any virtue which does more fairly decipher, or more fully express him,
then sincerity and uprightness of conversation, which says Chymachus, Scal
P^rad. gra^. 1.
is virtus sine varietate, a virtue which is ever like unto it self, and makes
us so; which does not look diverse ways at once, both toward Samaria and
Jerusalem; does not profess a benefit when it studies ruin; cloth hatred
with a smile, and a purpose to deceive, with fair language and large promises,
nor make up words of butter, which at last prove to be very swords: but it is
like the Topaz, si polis obscuras, if you polish it, you obscure and darken it,
but if you leave it as nature presents it, it casts the brighter luster. And if
you ask me the emblem of a Christian, our Savior has already given one, the
Dove, whose Feathers are silver white, not speckled, as a bird of diverse
colors, but whose eyes are single, and direct, not leering as a fox, nor
looking diverse ways, animal simplex, non fell amarum, non morstb us saevum,
says Cyprian, an innocent and harmless bird, no bird of prey, without gall,
not cruel to fight, having no talons to lay hold on the prey; so far from
doing wrong that he knows not how to do it. For, as Quintilian observes, Quint.
l. 1. Instit. c. 14. de Grammat. off.
Inter virtutes Grammatici est nescire quaedam, That it is to be summed up
amongst the virtues of a Grammarian to be ignorant of some particular nice
impertinences: so is it a part of a Christians integrity and simplicity not to
be acquainted with the wiles and devises and stratagems of the world; to be a
non proficient in the Devils Politics; to hear the language of the children
of this world as a strange tongue, and understand it not; not to know what
cannot make him better, and may make him worse; not to know that which we may
wish buried in oblivion and darkness, never to be seen or known of any; for
what glory can it be, to be well seen in these arts of Legerdemain? what praise
is it to be that (which I cannot hear from others with patience) an unjust,
deceitful, and dishonest man? for (to conclude this) it is far worse to do
unjustly, then to be reproch'd for doing so; far worse to be dishonest, then to
be called by that name; far worse to be a thief, or a Traitor, then to be
hanged for it: for between the evil of action and the evil of passion there is
no comparison; the evil of passion may have a good end, it may be medicinal,
and cure the sinner, if not set an end to his wickedness, but the evil of
action has no end but damnation, no wages but death, and that too has no end,
for it will be eternal.

Thus have we seen Justice or Honesty in its full shape and beauty, fastened
upon its proper pillars, the Law of Nature, and the Law of the God of nature:
let us now see by way of Application, with what eye and favor the world of men
and the world of Christians have looked upon it; whether they have not relied
more on those pillars of smoke and air, their private fancy, and private
interest, then these pillars of marble which God himself has set up, which are
firm and strong, and might bear them up; to build upon them that Justice,
which would raise them up above the dying and killing glories of this world, to
that which is everlasting in the highest heavens; and so conclude.

And first, the complaint is old that Justice and Honesty has since left the
earth, or rather is drove out of it; to speak truth, when her Territories were
largest, when she stretched the curtains of her habitation to the furthest, she
did but anguste habitare, she took up but little roo me, and her retinue was
but small; she never yet could tithe the children of men, and it had been well
if she had taken in one of an hundred. It were even a labor to show the diverse
arts and inventions of men, which they made use of to work out their way to
honor, Ad haec simplicem h^ct^nus vivendi ration^m excogit ^tis m^nsuris, and
po^deribus immutavit, pristinamque sincerita^m and generositat^m ignaram talium
artium, in novam quandam versutiam d^pravavit. Joseph. Antiq. ludaic. l. 1. c.
3. Sen. de Benef. l. 7. c. 10.
and the riches of this world. Cain is blamed by Josephus for first finding out
Weights and Measures, which was a tacit and silent accusation that that age
was corrupt, in which so much caution was necessary. Quid foenus and
kalendarium? says Seneca, what are interest, and the calendar, and your
count-books, but names extra naturam posita, found out quite besides and beyond
the intention of nature? what are your bills and obligations, and indentures,
but as so many Libels wherein you profess to the world, that you dare not
trust one another, and that you believe men cannot be honest unless they be
bound? plus annulis quam animis creditis, your seal-rings are a better
assurance then your Faiths. And how do too many sell themselves, but not for
bread? how in all sorts and conditions of men have some used their power,
others their wit pro lege publica, instead of a public Law; and have entitled
themselves the just possessors of that estate into which they have wrought
themselves with hands of oppression, robbery, and deceit? It has been an old
reproach which has been laid upon Commonwealths, that they did set common
honesty to sale. The Athenians had (...), a tribute out of the stews; and we
are told that Christians have so, it Rome may yet be thought to be in
Christendom. Look into the Civil Law Codice de Spect. Scen. and Lenonibus, of
theatricall shows, stage plays, and bawdes, and you shall find, that even from
hence, from these loathsome and nasty dunghills of corruption, Emperors, and
Commonwealths have sucked gain: Mathematicians, Juglers, Fortunetellers,
Thieves, and which the Father could not tell whether he should grieve or blush
at, Inter hos Christiani vectigales, Tert. Apo^o^. (...). Prove. Art 2. Rhet.
F^st. Verb. uxor. Tacitus.
amongst this rabble Christians also were brought in as Tributary. This was
exacted from poor men, from statues, from dead-men, from very Urine, and to the
Emperor it was a sweet smelling savor. In one age they did Uxorium pendere,
pay a sum of money for not being married; in another etiam Matrimonia
obnoxia, they who were married were liable to this exaction; quocunque modo
rem, Gain was welcome at what gate or postern soever it came in: so soon did
they forget they were men, so little did they regard the Law of nature.

And it were to be wished that this evil had stayed here, that this art of
unjust and unlawful acquisition had been only known in the tents of Kedar;
but by degrees it stole in and found entertainment in the Church of God, and
Christians forgetting their profession, quae nil nisi justum suadet, which
should be known by justice and equity, and the contempt of the world, began to
think stolen waters sweet, and to feed greedily on the bread of deceit and
violence. For as the Pharisees did teach their children to say to their Father
and Mother, Corban, which is not a curse, as some have imagined; for the
Pharisees were too wise to be so openly wicked, as to teach men to curse their
parents; (to have done this had been to forfeit their Phylacteries) but it was
their craft and policy, an art to fill their treasury; and therefore they
taught children who were offended with their parents to consecrate their wealth
to the Treasury, that so they might defeat that other Law which bound them to
supply their parents in want and distress; so even within the pale of the
Church, there were found men whose Phylacteries were as broad as theirs, who by
holy fraud did take into their hands the possessions of the earth, and at last
laid claim unto the whole world, and that upon the score of Religion; taught
men to redeem their ill-spent time with a piece of silver; for what were else
the prayers for the dead, as they were used in the Church of Rome, but the
price of men's souls? For the very thought of the power and efficacy of them
drove men to a more supine and negligent conversation, to weary themselves in
the ways of wickedness, having such a pillow to sleep on; for what need they
be diligent to make their election sure whilst they live, who are fully
persuaded that this may be done by proxy for them when they are dead? This is
truly the Pharisees Corban, to teach men to rob their parents, to endanger
their souls by religion, that so their treasuries may be full, and so to make
that monumentum sceleris, a lasting monument of their craft and policy, which
should have been specimen pietatis, an example and expression of piety; this
was to cheat them into charity and liberality (which should be free and
voluntary) with false hopes. It was the saying of Martin Luther, Papatus est
robusta venatio Romani episcopi, that Popery was nothing else but a close
senting and following of gain, and hunting after the riches and Pomp of the
world; for if men will not give or yield up their estates, either Policy shall
betray, or Power like a whirlwind snatch them away. When Peter's keys are too
weak, Julius the second flings them into the River ^iber, with this Christian
resolution, to try what Paul's sword could do.

We may say with the wise man, that this is an evil disease under the sun, a
disease which did not only envenome that politic estate, which is nothing
else but a disease, but did spread some part of its poison and Malignity
amongst those who may seem to have been sent down from heaven to purge it out.
We cannot but magnify the name of God for this blessed reformation of the
Church, and bless their memories which were the Instruments; but yet some
there be, who have thought it a just complaint, that at least some of those who
did bear a name with the best, did not so much seek Gods honor, as their own,
and the improvement of their estate, and enlargment of their Territories, more
then the advancement of piety, and so to recover her, drew more blood from her
then was necessary.

Excessit medicina modum, nimiumque sequuta est
Qua morbi duxere, manus --
Lucan. I will here pass no censure upon it, and yet one would think Jupiters
cloak would sit best on his own shoulders; but yet we may have leave to look
back and bewail it, and at least wish that the hand which was so active to
cure it had not made so deep an incision as to leave no blood: That there had
been some other way found out to restore her to her health and soundness, then
that which at first made her poor, and at last nothing. But this is but our
wish, and not our censure, and we may spend our affection there, where we may
not venture our judgment; The tree which grew up and was strong, whose leaves
were fair, and fruit much, whose height seemed to reach to heaven, and the
sight thereof to the end of all the earth; whose boughs spread even to the envy
of her who sits as a Queen amongst the nations, is now hewn down, and scarce a
stump of the roots left in the earth: so that we may wish for that which we can
never hope; and yet we might have observed some of those who cried down with
it, down with it to the ground, even those who first laid the axe to the root
of the tree, sad and heavy and angry as Haman was when he waited on Mordecai,
now clad with that honor which his ambition had prophesied and decreed to
himself, much troubled that they gathered so little fruit from the branches,
when the tree was fallen.

But to proceed; This contagion has spread it self well-neere over the face of
all Christendom, where most men count that lawful purchase, which they can
lay hold on: much like Vibius in Tacitus, l. 4. Hist.
pecunia and ingenio inter claros magis quam bonos; more famous for their
worldly providence and wealth then their honesty. What should I speak of
thieves that are dragged to the Bar? (...). G^ll. l. 11. N^ct. Attic. c. 18.
the Greek proverb tells us there be thieves that keep holiday; and old Cato in
Gellius, that those who steal from private men, are fed with the bread of
affliction, held in misery and Irons; but Fures publici in auro and purpura,
but your public thieves do glitter in purple and gold, and none dare say,
Black is their eye, (as the word is) for fear of losing their own. There have
been Laws made against those who dig down walls by night, who sell adulterate
and mixed corn, who suppress and hoord their corn to sell it dearer, whom Basil
calls the Hucksters and Factors of the common calamity; Lex Metell^ extat
Fullo^nbus dicta, ad^o omnia m jor^lus curae f. e^c. Plin. N.Q. 35.13.
Laws against Impostors and cheaters, and the authority of the Magistrate has
influence upon men of what calling or quality soever. In the Commonwealth of
Rome, there was a Law to regulate Fullers, and in ours a Parliamentary Statute,
that Cord-wainers should look to their sowing threads, and that their wax
should be well tempered; but what Law can restrain them who can deal with the
Law as Alexander did with the Gordian knot, cut it asunder with their sword;
Cic^r. Bru^. sive de claris. Orat.
I mean can defeat and baffle the Law by their power and wealth? or those, who
as Tully spoke of a certain Orator, are Lubrici and incomprehensibles, so
slippery, that the Law cannot lay hold on them; so cunning, that they can
deceive the eyes of the Sun, and Justice it self, and rob the poor even at
nooneday; who can make up the ruins of their estate which the dye or strumpet
has wasted, with the tears of the widow and fatherless, and then think with
that Emperor, Nunquam se prosperiori al^a usos, that they never threw a more
fortunate cast in their life? yet such we have in the world, and they call
themselves Christians.

We must draw toward a conclusion: Thus have we shaken both the pillars of
Justice, Nature and Grace, and put behind our backs the lessons of the one, and
precepts of the other, that we may run with less regret and control to that
forbidden tree which we delight to look on. Nature is swallowed up in victory
by the love of the world; buried and raked up in the lust of the eyes, the lust
of the flesh, and the Pride of life; and then on this foundation of innocence
we build in blood; on this ground of Justice we set up oppression: nay which is
yet worse, Nature is swallowed up in victory by Grace it self, the Decalogue is
lost in our Creed, and Honesty in Faith; for a strange conceit is now crept
into the world, that how regardlesse soever we be of those seeds of Goodness,
how forgetful soever of that which nature dictates to us, yet if we can hear
of honesty, talk of honesty, and cast some of our Gall and Bitterness upon
that Injustice which is to us as sweet as honey, we may be good Christians
enough, and the only religious men in the world. And as the ancients in time
of Superstition, did appropriate Religion to that kind of life which did least
express it, and men were then said Ingredi Religionem, to enter into Religion,
when they went into a Monastery, and put on a Monks coule; so there are a
generation of men amongst us, who talk of nothing more then Religion, as if it
must needs live and dye with them, and yet do only take her mantle and vizor,
and in it walk on the whole course of their life; here beating their fellow
servants, here defaming one, and defrauding another, and defaming him, that
they may defraud him; they sharply inveigh against and lash the iniquities of
the time, they are severe Justiciaries, and chastise all but themselves,
Ausonii Cupido Crucisixus.
as the wanton women in Ausonius did crucify Cupid on the wall, sibi ignoscunt,
and plectunt Deum, they know well enough how to pardon themselves for fraud,
for lying, for false weights and measures, for covetousness and malice, and
the whole body of their Religion is made up in this, to fling disgrace upon the
name of dishonesty, and so punish it but in a picture.

For conclusion then; to avoid these rocks at which so many have been cast away
and lost, Let us first look up upon this light of nature, and walk honestly as
in the day, and not after those blind guides, the love of our selves, and the
glory of the world, which will lead us on pleasantly for a while, and at last
slip from us and leave us in the dark, there to lament, and curse the folly of
our ways. For Riches and Honor and Pleasure are not natural unto us, but
adventitious and accidental, and that which is natural should be prevalent
against all that is accidental, Accidentali praeval^t natural. c. 3. ff. de
Tutelis.
say the Civilians. This Relation by Nature should be strong against all
foreign Circumstances whatsoever. And therefore it is but a busy folly, a
studious kind of iniquity, to come and frame distinctions which may wipe out
this relation, and so leave us at loose with line enough to run out unto a
liberty and privilege of encroching on others by fraud or violence; As the
Persians in Xenophon taught their children, that they might lie or not lie with
a distinction, lie loudly to their enemies, so they remember to speak truth to
their friends; deceive a stranger, and not an acquaintance; and I fear we have
too many such Persisians in this our Island, and if they do not utter and
dictate it, yet their hearts speak it, and their hands speak it, and their
practice proclaims it to the whole world. He is a stranger, he is an enemy, of
another Religion, of another Faction, I may make what advantage I can upon him,
undermine and blow him up; and thus the man, the image of God, the brother is
quite lost. And what is the issue of this Diabolical coynage? even the same
which Xenophon there observed to be of the Persian education. Their children,
says he, soon forgot the distinction, and grew up at last to be so bold as to
lie to their best friends. And so it is with them who find it an easier thing
to call themselves Religious then to make themselves honest; who first begin
with these proviso's and distinctions to practice injustice, and with so much
gravity and demureness to deceive their brethren, and to be dishonest by a
rule, at last they fall down to an universal and promiscuous iniquity:
Friends, brother, they of the same family, they of the same Sect and faction,
all are the same with them; when they look for advantage, no respect of
persons; when they look for Balaams wages, every man then is a stranger, an
enemy, or as strangely, used as if he were; and this is to put out the light of
nature, and so to go a whoring after our own inventions, which once kindled by
the love of this world, are those false lights which lead us into that
darkness which Saint John speaks of. He that thus handles his brother, 1 John
2.19.
walks in darkness, and knows not whither he goes, because darkness has
blinded his eyes, that he cannot see a man in a man, nor a brother in a
brother; a man in the same shape, and built up of the same materials; a man of
the same passions with himself.

And therefore by this light of Nature, let us check and condemn our selves,
when any gall of bitterness rises in our hearts; and allay, or rather root it
out with this consideration, That it is most inhumane and unnatural, that we
cannot nourish it in our breast, and not fall from the honor of our Creation,
and leave off to be men. How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, and cut
down to the ground? Es. 14.12. and how art thou fallen, O man, whosoever thou
art that do unjustly, that take from another that which is his, either by
violence or deceit? How art thou fallen from heaven? (for on earth there is no
other heaven, but that which Justice and Charity make;) How art thou fallen to
hell it self, nay to be an hell, a place for these foul spirits malice and
fraud to reign and riot in, and to torment others and thy self? How art thou
fallen from conversing with Angels, to wallow in blood; from the glory of thy
Creation to burning fire, and blackness and darkness and tempest? O what a
shame is it, That a man thus created, thus Elemented and composed, should
delight in fraud, in violence and oppression; should feed on that bread not
which his father who made him, did put into his hands, but which craft did
purloine, or violence snatch from the hands of others who were not so wise or
so strong as himself? That this creature of love, made by love, and made to be
Sociable, should be as hot as a fiery furnace sending forth nothing but sulphur
and stench? That this honorable Creature should be a beast, nay a devil to
ensnare, to accuse, to deceive and destroy his brethren?

This is a sad aggravation; but if the light of Nature be too dim and cannot
lead us out of the world, and those winding and crooked paths, which the love
of it makes in it every day, let us in the last place, look up upon that
clearer light, that light which did spring from on high and has visited us;
why should not our friends be more powerful with us then our enemies? why
should not Grace be stronger then a temptation? why should not the rich and
glorious promises of the Gospel be more eloquent and persuasive, then the
solicitations of the flesh, which is every moment drawing nearer to the dust;
or of the world, which changes every day, and shall at last be burnt with
fire? why should they not have the power to purge and cleanse us from all
unrighteousness? why should we choose rather to be raised and enriched here for
a span of time, by craft and power, then to be crowned by Justice and Integrity
for ever? For this is the end for which this great light has shined, to
lighten every man that is in the world, that they may walk in the paths of
righteousness. It is a light that leads unto bliss, but it will not go before
an oppressor, a thief, an Impostor, a Tyrant, to lead them to it, because they
delight not in it, and do but talk on it; Math. 6.23.
The light that is in them is darker then darkness it self, their judgment is
corrupt, their will is averse and looks another way from the Region of light.
Without faith it is impossible to please God; It is true, but without Justice
and Honesty faith is but a name; for can we imagine that Religion should turn
Thief, and Devotion a Cutpurse?

To conclude then; That you may do justly, and walk honestly as in the day,
consider injustice, oppression, and deceit in their true shape and proportion,
and not dawbed over with untempered mortar; not disguised with the pleasures
and riches of the world; not veiled and dressed up with pretenses and Names,
which make them lovely, and make them worse; consider well, and weigh the
danger of them, and from what they proceed. For first, If we would find out the
fountain from whence they flow, we shall find it is nothing else but a strange
distrust in God, and a violent love of the world; a distrust in that God who is
so far from leaving man destitute of that which is convenient for him, that he
feeds the young Ravens that call upon him. For if the windows of heaven do not
open at our call, if riches increase not to fill our vast desires, we murmr
and repine, and even chide the Providence of God, and by foul and indirect
means pursue that which would not fall into our mouths. As aul, in the book of
Kings, Acheronta movemus, when God will not answer, we ask counsel of the devil.

Secondly, we may think perhaps that they are the effects of Power and Wisdom,
the works of men who bear a brain with the best; that they are the glorious
victories of our wit, and Trophies of our Power; but indeed they are the
infallible Arguments of weakness and impotency, and as the devils marks upon
us. Non est vera magnitudo pesse nocere, It is not true power nor true
greatness to be able to injure our brethren; It is not true wisdom to be
cunning artists in evil, and to do that in the dark which may be done with more
certainty and Honor in the light; and to raise up that with a lie, which will
rise higher, and stand longer with the truth. That power more emulates the
power of God, by which we can do good, That comes nearer by which we will; nor
can we attribute wisdom to the fraudulent, but that which we may give to a
Jugler or a Pick-purse, or indeed to the Devil himself. And commonly these
scarabees are bred in the dung of Laziness and Luxury, and their crafty
insinuating, their subtle sliding into other men's estate had its rise and
beginning from an indisposition and inability to manage their own. He that can
bring no demonstration, must play the Sophister; and if the body will not do,
then he that will be rich, says Nevisanus the Lawyer, must venture his soul.

Lastly, weigh the danger of it; for though the bread of deceit have a pleasant
taste, and goes down glibly, yet passing to thee through so foul a chanel as
fraud or oppression, it will fill thee with the gall of Asps. The robbery of
the wicked shall destroy them, says Solomon, Prove. 21.7. shall fall upon them
like that talent of lead, and fall upon the mouth of their Ephah, and lie heavy
upon it. Serrabit eos, as it is rendered by others, shall tear their
conscience, as with a saw; exossabit, as others, shall consume them to the very
bones, and break them as upon a wheel; or as others, Rapina eorum
diversabitur, That which is got unjustly shall not stay long with them. It may
give them a salutation, a complement, peregrinabitur, like a traveller on the
way, it may lodge with them for a night, but dwell longer as with a friend it
will not, but take the wing and fly away from these unjust usurpers, never at
rest but in those hands which are washed in innocence, and in that mouth which
knows no guile; will dwell with none but those that do justly. To conclude;
Tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man who does that which is evil and
unjust; to the oppressor and deceiver, to the man that boasts himself in his
power, and to the man that blesses himself in his craft; to the proud
Hypocrite, and the demure Politician; but to those that do justly, that are as
God is, just in all their ways, and righteous in all their dealings, that walk
holily before God, and Justly with men, shall be Glory, and Honor, and peace,
and immortality, and eternal life.

Thus much of Justice and Honesty: the next is, the Love of Mercy, but, etc.

blazon or royal coat of arms of England and Wales HONI ^T QVI MAL Y PENSE

The Five and Twentieth SERMON.
PART V.
MICAH 6.8. He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord
require of thee, but to do justly, to love mercy, etc.


WE have laid hold of one branch of this tree of life, and beheld what fruit it
bare; we must now see what we can gather from the second, Mercy or Liberality,
which grows upon the same stock, and is watered with the same dew from heaven,
and brings forth fruit meet for repentance, and answerable to our Heavenly
calling; whether you take it in actu elicito, or in actu imperato, whether you
take it in the habit, or in the Act, which is misericordia eliquata, that which
runs from it in the melting as it were: the love of mercy includes both, both a
sweet and heavenly disposition, a rich treasury of goodness, full and ready
to empty it self, and those several acts which are drawn out of it, or rather
which it commands. And here though miracles be ceased, yet by the blessing of a
God of mercy, it retains a miraculous power; it heales the sick, binds up the
wounded raises the poor out of the dust, and in a manner raises the dead to
life again, upholds the drooping and the fainting spirit which is ready to
fail; intercedes, and fights against the cruelty of persecutors; fills up the
breaches which they make, raises up that which they ruin; clothes the naked,
whom they have stripped; builds up what they have pulled down; and is as a
quickening power, a resurrection to those whom the hand of wickedness and
injustice has laid low, and even buried in the dust. A branch it is which
shadows and refreshes all those who are diminished, and brought low by
oppression, evil and sorrow.

And these too, Justice and Mercy, are neighboring branches, so enwrapped, and
entwined one within the other, that you cannot sever them. For where there is
no Justice there can be no mercy; and where there is no Mercy, there Justice is
but Gall and wormwood: and therefore in the Scripture they go hand in hand,
unto the upright man there arises light in darkness, he is gracious, and full
of compassion, and righteous. Psalm. 112.4. There is an eye of Justice, a single
and upright eye, as well as an eye of mercy: There is an eye that looks right
on, Proverb. 4.25. and there is a bountiful eye, Prove. 22.9. and if you shut
but one of them, you are in darkness; he that has an evil eye to strip his
brother, can never see to clothe him; he whose feet are swift to shed blood,
will be but a cripple when he is called to the house of mourning; and if his
bowels be shut up, his hand will be soon stretched out to beat his
fellow servants. Ps. 147.1.
It becomes the just to be thankful. In their mouth praise is comely, it is a
song, it is music, and it becomes the Just to be merciful and liberal; out
of their heart mercy flows kindly, streams forth like the River out of Eden,
to water the dry places of the earth; there you shall find gold, and good gold,
Bdellium, and the Oynx stone; all that is precious in the sight of God and man.
But the heart of an unjust man is as a rock on which you may strike and strike
again, but no water will flow out, but instead thereof gall and wormwood,
blood and fire, and the vapor of smoke. Joel 2.30. Prove. 12.10.
The tender mercies, the bowels of the wicked are cruel, their kisses are
wounds, their favors reproaches, their Indulgences Anathema's; their bread is
full of gravel, and their water tainted with blood. If their craft or power
take all, and their seeming mercy, their hypocrisy put back a part, that part
is nothing, or but trouble and vexation of spirit. Thus do these two branches
grow and flourish, and bring forth fruit, and thus do they wither and dye
together.

And here we have a fair and a full vintage, for indeed mercy is as the vine,
which yields wine to cheer the hearts of men; has nothing of the Bramble,
nothing of the fire, nothing that can devour; it yields much fruit, but we
cannot stand to gather all. I might spread before you the rich mantle of mercy,
and display each particular beauty and glory of it; but it will suffice to set
it up as the object of our Love: for as Misery is the object of our Mercy, so
is Mercy the object of our Love; And we may observe, it is not here to do
mercifully, as before to do justly (and yet if we love not Justice, we cannot
do it) but in express terms the Lord requires that we love mercy, that is,
that we put it on, wear it as a robe of Glory, delight in it, make it (as God
does make it his) our chiefest attribute to exalt, and superexaltate; to make
it triumph over Justice it self. For Justice and Honesty gives every man his
own but Mercy opens those Treasuries which Justice might lock up; and takes
from us that which is legally ours; makes others gatherers with us, partakers
of our basket, and brings them under our own vine and fig tree; Et haec est
victoria, this is the victory and triumph of Mercy.

Let us then draw the lines by which we are to pass, and we shall first, show
you Mercy in the fruit it yields; secondly, in its root: First, in its proper
act or motion, casting bread upon the waters, and raising the poor out of the
dust: Secondly, in the form which produces this act, or the principle of this
motion, which is the habit, the affection, the love of mercy; for so we are
commanded, not only to show forth our mercy, but to love it; for what does the
Lord require, but to love mercy? etc.

We begin with the first; and the proper act of mercy is to flow, to spend it
self, and yet not be spent, to relieve our brethren in misery, and in all the
degrees that lead to it, necessities, impotencies, distresses, dangers,
defects; This is it which the Lord requires. And howsoever flesh and blood may
be ready to persuade us that we are left at large to our own wills, and may do
what we will with our own, yet if we consult with the Oracle of God, we shall
find that these reciprocal offices of mercy which pass between man and man,
are a debt; That we are bound as much to do good to others, as not to injure
them; to supply their wants, as not to rob them; to reach forth a hand to help
them, as not to smite them with the fist of wickedness; and though my hundred
measures of wheat be my own, and I may demand them, yet there is a voice from
heaven, and from the mercy-seat, which bids me take the bill and sit down
quickly and write fifty. Do we shut up our bowels and our hands together?
Behold, Habemus legem, we have a Law, and the first and greatest Law, the Law
of Charity, to open them. It Is true, what we gain by the sweat of our brows,
what Honesty and Industry, or the Law has sealed unto us, is ours ex ass,
wholly and entirely ours, nor can any Hand but that of Violence divide it from
us: but yet Habemus legem, we have a Law, another Law, which does not take from
us the propriety of our Goods, but yet binds us to dispense and distribute
them: In the same Court-roll of Heaven we are made both Proprietaries, and
Stewards. The Law of God as well as of Man is Evidence for us, that our
possessions are ours; but it is Evidence against us, if we use them not to that
end for which God made them ours. They are ours, to have and to hold, nor can
any Law of man divorce them from us, or question us: For what Action can be
drawn against want of mercy? who was ever yet impleaded for not giving an Alms
at his door? what bar can you bring the Miser to? who ever was arraigned for
doing no good? but yet in the Law of God, and in the Gospel of Christ, which is
a Law of Grace, we find an action drawn de non vestiendis nudis, for not
clothing the Naked, not feeding the Hungry, not visiting the Sick; I, says
Nazianzen, could peradventure be willing, That Mercy and Bounty were not
Necessary, but arbitrary; not under a Law, but presented by way of Counsel and
advice (for the flesh is weak, and would go to Heaven with as little cost and
trouble as may be) but then the mention of the Left hand and the right; of the
Goats; of the torments they shall be thrown into, not who have invaded other
men's goods, but who have not given theirs; not who have beat down, but who have
not supported these Temples of the Holy Ghost; this is that which strikes a
terror through me, and makes me think and resolve, That I am as much bound to
do acts of mercy, as I am not to do an injury; as much bound to feed the poor
man, as I am not to oppress and murder him: To show mercy to others, is not an
Evangelicall Counsel, it is a Law. And therefore as Homer tells us, when he
speaks of rivers or birds, That men did not call them by their proper names,
for the Gods had other names for them, Chalcidem homines, Cymindim Dii vocant;

(and he speaks of a certain bird) so when we call that ours, which our net
has taken in, our wit and industry has brought in unto us, we speak after the
manner of men, we speak the language of the world, in the Dialect of Mammon:
but when we call them ours, and make them ours for the use and benefit of
others, we do a Christo discere disciplinam, as Tertullian speaks; we speak in
the language of our Savior, in that phrase and sense which God and the Holy
Saints do ever take them. Did I say, It was the language of men? It is the
language of the two daughters of the Horse-leach, of Covetousness and
Ambition, Prove. 36.14,16. Sanguis Daemonis pabulum. Tertull. Apol. c. 22.
Give, Give, always taking in, never emptying themselves: It is the Dialect of
that generation, whose Teeth are swords, and their Jaw-teeth as knives to
devour the poor of the earth: It is the voice of Luxury and riot, which must
be fed as devils are, with the blood of others; who like that Behemoth can
drink up rivers of blood; It is the language of the Devil himself, who is no
helper but a destroyer. The language of Nature is more mild and gentle; Tull.
l. 1. Oss.
misericordia nihil est naturae hominis accommodatius, says Tully; There is
nothing more suitable with the nature of man, then mercy, and a desire to do
good to others; for when thou see a man thou beholdest thy self as in a
glass; in him thou beholdest thy self, now cheerful and anon drooping; now
standing and anon sinking; now in purple and anon naked; now full and anon
hungry; thou see thy self in the weakness, in the mutability, in the
mortality of thy condition, and his present necessities are but a lesson, an
argument, which plainly demonstrate, and to thy very eye, what thou or any
other man may be; and withal a silent and powerful appeal to thy mercy, a
secret beseeching thee, I might say, a Legal requiring thee, to do unto him as
thou would be done to in the like case, which thou art as liable to as he; to
be of the same mind, which thou will be certainly, when with this Lazar thou
lie at the gates of another.

But if this light of Nature be not bright enough, Errat olim is^a ^ntenti^:
v^mo (...) nas^i^ur, moriturus sihi. Tert. de pall. c. 5.
yet by the light of Scripture, by the light of the Gospel we may easily
discern the truth of this parallel. For the Servant of God, the true Christian
is born again, not for himself alone, but for all those who are parts of the
same building, and members of the same body; If one member suffer, all the
members suffer with it, Romans 12.20. And this makes not only all the riches,
but withal, all the miseries, all the necessities, all the afflictions of our
brethren Ours. And what a Celestial Harmony does mercy make, which puts those
who are at liberty, in bonds with the prisoners; which makes the rich lie down
with the poor, the strong sympathize with the weak? what a Harmony is that
which rises out of such discords? when the joyful heart weeps with them that
weep, and the sorrowful Spirit rejoices with them that rejoice; when all men
are of the same mind one with another, the rich naked with the poor, and the
poor abounding with the rich; the whole Church imprisoned in one man, and
every man comforting his bondage with the peace and prosperity of the whole?
This is an Harmony indeed; but, I fear, I may say, it is like the Harmony of
the spheres, which was never heard, or at least we have more reason then we
would, to believe, that there is scarce any such music in our days. But thus
it should be, and this music Mercy does make.

I know the ways of God are past finding out, and the reasons of his
judgments, says Basil, are (...), are as Jewels fit to be hid and reserved in
the Treasuries of God alone, and are understood only by that Wisdom which
sends them abroad: yet if you ask why one is born a servant, and another free;
why one grinds at the mill, and another sits on the throne; why one lies at the
gates, whilst another feasts in his Palace? I may with confidence give you
this for one: This God does, to exercise the patience and humility of the one,
and to stir up and awake the mercy of the other. The rich and poor meet
together, the Lord is the maker of them both, says Solomon, Prove. 22.2. not
that his immediate hand made them rich and poor; poured down with his left
hand riches into the bosom of the one, and withdrew it from the other, and so
left him naked; For this is not manifest; For God forbid that we should have
such a conceit of God, that he should fill the usurers bags, or enlarge the
territories of the wicked; nor can we say, that every poor man was
predestined to beggary: nor make it good, that he has thus discerned and
distinguished them, (for we know Luxury and Idleness clothes many with rags,
and Industry gathers much, and Craft and Power more) but he was the maker of
them both; They were both the work of his hands, and from his hands they were
the same, though now the fashion of the world has brought in a disparity
between them; and God (says the Father) did make both poor and rich, ut in
pauperibus divitum misericordiam probaret, that he might make the want of the
poor as a touchstone to try the mercy of the rich. For no doubt he could send
the Ravens to feed them; he could send Angels to feed them; he could let down
all manner of flesh in a sheet, as he did to Peter: his providence is never at
a stand, but can find out ways which we cannot think of; but Christ has so
ordered it, That though we cannot have him, yet the poor and miserable we
shall always have with us, ut locupletem aliena inopia ditaret, that what all
the world cannot, another poverty may do, that is, enrich and blesse^s; and tu
neminem praetereas, ne is quem praeteris Christus sit, and let thy mercy, says
Austin, pass by none, lest it pass by Christ himself. This he put into the
Covenant which he made with us, when he was on the earth, and sealed it with
his blood; and now he looks that we should make it good, and to that end
presents and offers himself unto us in these, and even bows before us, to the
end of the world. And certainly it is strange, that we should thus stand out
with him, and deny him that which is his by Covenant; that we should lock up
all from him, who opened his heart, and let out his blood for us; but so it is;
the vice we delight in, makes that virtue which is contrary to it a punishment;
and when we love the world, to give an Alms is as irksome and grievous to us
as to pay a forfeiture; Liberality is a penalty, and therefore we use all
means (but pay down nothing but excuses) to take it off; mercy is no thriving
virtue, but seems to come upon us as a Thief and a Robber, to strip and spoil
us, and to make us like unto them whom she binds us to relieve, and therefore
we shut her up in a narrow heart, and an earthy mind; and if there be any in
us, it is as a fountain sealed up, which sends not forth a drop; or a garden
enclosed, where no man can come to fill his hand. This hard opinion the world
has of mercy, as of the most useless, the most unprofitable and
disadvantageous thing in the world; as the nurse of prodigality and the mother
of beggary; as that which lets out our blood and life to feed and strengthen
others: we will therefore in the next place, as Tertullians phrase is, in hunc
ictum considerare, have an eye on this blow, and we shall avoid it with ease;
for indeed it is rather a proffer then a blow, and it will soon appear, that it
is mercy alone that makes our wealth ours; that it is never more ours then when
we part with it; that Alienation is our best Assurance, and continues it to us
for ever.

For first: It is but an error to imagine, that God opens his hand and fills
our basket, and gives us the good things of the world for our selves alone, and
our own use; that he opens the windows of Heaven, and drops down his blessings
into us, there to settle, and putrify, and corrupt; for this is, says Basil,
as if a man who made haste to the Theater, should think all others excluded,
because he came first: this is (...), to appropriate to thy self those things
which are common to all; to lock up that in thy chest which should fill the
bellies of the poor. The goods of the Church in former ages were called (...),
and (...), the wealth of God and the poor, (...), the things of God. Tert.
Apol. c. 39.
Tertullian calls them deposita pietatis, the pledges of mercy deposited in our
hands; and if I should call the wealth of Christians so, I should not err,
Bern. l. 4. de consid.
for all are bound to count them so, Patrimonium Crucifixi, the Patrimony of
their crucified Savior, given them not only to feed and clothe themselves,
but to supply the necessity of others, who have a right, (which indeed they
cannot challenge) have something in our Granaries and wardrobes, to which we
only keep the key, with a charge from Heaven to open them, when Nakedness and
misery come but so near as to knock at our eyes. For God who gave them, is
(...), the great auditor, who will take a strict account, if we do (...), use
them as our own (as the Ancients use to speak) or spend that in wantonness
which should strengthen the weak knees, and hands that hang down: we are ready
to say, says the Father, (...) whom do I wrong in keeping of my own? and must
I be cruel to my self, that I may be merciful to others? must I put my knife
to my throat, that a stranger may be fed? and we are easily persuaded that we
are good Christians, if we be not Foxes to deceive, or Lions to devour them.
The greatest part of our Piety is Negative (and would we did but make that
good) not to oppress, not to defraud, not to take away, with us is to be
Merciful; as Thieves, says Salvian out of Tully, qui putant se vitam dare
quibus non eripiunt who will say they give him his life, whom they do not kill:
and yet if Mercy open not my bowels, and my hand too, I may wrong my brother
when I do him no harm; I may defraud and spoil him when I take nothing from
him. I wrong no man, is a poor Apology: why man? thou wrongest the King of
Kings, A^ vol^n atem (...) uti (...). Bern de ^teriori. dom. c. 25.
when thou suffer his subjects to perish; and this Negative Mercy is no
better then theft. The bread which thou layest up is not thine, but the bread
of the hungry; The garment which thou have locked up in thy chest, is the
garment of the Naked; The gold which thou hidest in the earth is the Revenue of
the poor and needy; as he said of his writings, omne tuum, and nihil tuum, All
is thine, and nothing is thine.

For in the second place: That is the best use we can put them to, the true use
which God that gave them has taught us, to use them that they may stead us in
our greatest necessity; to open our hand, that it may be filled; to water, that
we may be watered again, says Solomon, Proverb. 11.25. to make them our
friends, says a wiser then Solomon. To make that which is a Parasite to
deceive us, a snare to entrap us, an enemy to fight against us, a friend to
help and succor us; so to use it, that it may return multiplied into our
hands. For what is properly gain? is not this, for a mite to receive a talent;
for one seed, one work of Mercy, to receive an hundred fold? Negotiatio est
aliqua amittere ut plura lucreris, says the Father, It is a kind of traffic
and merchandise to lay out something that you may gain more; Tertull. ad ^nt.
c. 2.
to venture a knife or bugle, to bring back a Diamond; to treasure up by
spending, to increase our stock by diminishing it, and by losing all to
purchase more. Who was ever, says Julian the Apostate, the poorer for what he
gave? and of himself he tells us, that whatsoever he laid out to supply the
wants of others, was returned back again by the Gods (as the Apostate had now
learnt to speak) into his hands with usury: For when his liberality had
well-neere exhausted his own estate, his grand-mothers happily and opportunely
fell into his hands. What that cursed Apostate falsely attributes to his false
Gods, that the God of Gods does most exactly perform, and has set up his
Assurance-office, to pay us back in our own coin, or if not, in that which
cannot be valued, being of an inestimable price. I make no doubt but Gods Mercy
is ready to shine upon ours, for he loves it, and loves to look on it. I doubt
not but he rewards our Mercy with the blessings of this life; for a cup of cold
water, which the hand of mercy fills, and poures out, gives many times riches
and honor though we perceive it not, but attribute it to something else; to
our wisdom and industry rather then to that Providence which always waits
upon mercy, blessing it in the work, and blessing it when the work is done: but
what are these to that reward which is laid up for those who do seminare in
benedictionibus, who sow plentifully? what are riches that have wings, to
immortality? what is a Palace to heaven? we visit the sick, and the spirit of
comfort visits us; we serve our brethren, and the Angels minister unto us; we
cover the naked with our cloth, and God clothes us with joy; we convert a
sinner, and sline as stars; we part with a few shekels of silver, and the hand
of Mercy works and turns them into a crown; we sow Temporal, Transitory
things, and the Harvest is eternity: whilst we make them ours, they are weak
and impotent, but when we part with them, they work miracles, and remove
mountains, all that is between us and blessedness; all the riches in the world
will not add one cubit to our stature, but if we thus tread them under our
feet, they will lift us up as High as Heaven: Nulla sunt potiora quam de
misericordia compendia, The best gains are those we purchase with our loss;
and the best way to find our bread, is to cast it upon the waters.

Will you see the practice of the Primitive Christians? I do the rather
mention it, because, methinks, I see the face of Christendom much changed and
altered, and Christians (whose Plea is Mercy, whose Glory is Mercy, who but for
Mercy were of all men most miserable; who have no other business in the world,
then to save and help themselves and others) using all means to dry up the
Fountain of Mercy, shaping to themselves vi tutem duram and ferream, bringing
forth Mercy in a coat of a Maile, and like Goliath with an Helmet of Brass,
standing as Sentinel, as a Guard about our wealth, with this loud prohibition
to all that stand in need, Touch not, Taste not, Handle not. Let us therefore
look back and see what they were in former times, and we shall find them so
unlike to those of succeeding generations, that they will rather be brought
under censure, then set up as a pattern for imitation; for we are as far
removed from their Piety, as we are from the Times wherein they lived. They, I
am sure, thought Mercy a virtue, and the chief virtue of the Gospel; a virtue
in which they thought it impossible to exceed; and made it their daily bread to
feed others; Melior est racematio, etc. their Grapes were much better then our
Vintage. Justin Martyr in his Apology for the Christians, tells us, That that
which they possessed they did (...), bring it into a common Treasury:
Tertullian calls it Arcam communem, a common chest: Tert. Apol.
Nor was this Benovolence exacted as a Tribute from those who desired to be
joined with them in communion, (as the Heathen did calumniate) but every man
did sponte confer, says Tertullian, (...), Tert. Apol. c. 42.
says Justin Martyr, voluntarily, and what he would. And that which was
gathered was committed to the hands or trust of the Bishop, and after (when he
was taken up with other matters more proper for his calling) to the Deacons,
which by them was laid out for the clothing of the naked, the maintenance of
the poo^e, of Orphans, and old men; to redeem Captives, to succor men who had
been shipwrackt by Sea, and those who were in prison for their profession, and
the Gospel of Christ: Plus nostra misericordia insumit vicatim, qu m vestra
superstitio Templatim, says Tertullian: Our Mercy lays out more in the
streets on the poor, then your Superstition does on your Gods in your Temples;
our Religion has a more open hand then your Idolatry; and to this end they had
matriculas egenorum, certain Catalogues of the names of their poor Brethren,
personarum miserabilium, persons, as they termed them, miserable. How many of
them were there, who as Aristotle speaks, did (...), did greatly exceed in
their liberality, Aristot. l. 10. Eth.
and did seem to be more merciful then the Lord requires? Nazianzen tells us
of his Mother Nonna, Naz. Orat. 10.
that she was possessed (...), with an immoderate and unmeasurable desire of
bestowing her goods; That she was willing not only to sell all that she had,
but even her very children, for the use and relief of the poor. Gorgonia her
daughter sucked this pious and melting disposition, though not from her breasts,
yet from her good example; who stripped her self of all, committed her body to
the earth, and left no other Legacy to her children but her great example, and
the imitation of her virtues, which she thought was enough to enrich them,
though they had nothing else. Saint Hierom tells us of his Paula, that though
she were Eminent in many virtues, yet her Liberality did exceed, and like a
swelling river, could not be kept within the banks; hac habebat voti ut mendica
moreretur, she wished for that which most men do fear as much as death it self,
and her great ambition it was that she might dye a beggar. We might instance in
more; and these examples have shined in the Church as stars of the fairest
magnitude; but after-ages have thought them but comets, looked upon them, and
feared them; and though they know not well how to condemn this exceeding piety,
yet they soon persuade themselves, and conclude, that they are not bound to
follow it, and so are bound up as in a frost, in the coldness and hardness of
their hearts, because some did seem to overflow and pass their limit. These
indeed are strange examples, Easil. orat in samem and siccitat.
but yet Saint Basil delivers a doctrine as strange (for he would not give it
as his counsel, if it had not truth to commend and confirm it) Licet vnus tibi
tantum panis sit, And if thou have but one loaf left in thy house, says he,
yet if a poor man stand at thy doors, and ask for Bread, bring it forth and
give it him, with thy hands lifted up to Heaven; whilst thou do that which
God requires, and for thy own supply reliest on the Providence of Thy Father
which is in Heaven; do it in his Name, and in his Name thou shall be fed
assuredly; thou have parted with thy one loaf here, but his power, to whom
thou gave it, can and will multiply it; for they that thus give, are as wells
which are soon drawn dry, but fill the faster, and the more they are exhausted
the fuller they are. I know not whether it may be safe to deliver such a
doctrine in these days, and therefore we will not insist upon it; and these
examples which I have held up to you, may be Transcendent, that we may not bind
every man to reach them. These pious women may seem perhaps to have stretched
beyond the line, and exceeded the bounds of moderation; but yet we cannot but
think, that this was truly to go out of the world, whilst they were in it; and
we may observe, That this excess is incident to great and Heroic spirits, who
(as it is said of Homer and Sophocles, sometimes swelling above that proper and
ruled sublimity of speech, wherein they did excel) do generose labi, do err
and fall more nobly, and with greater commendation, then others who spin an
even but course thread; and are so far from rising too high, that they are
flat, and always lie upon the ground. I know that all our actions are to be
squared by the rule, and that it may savor of great folly to be wiser then
that wisdom that taught us; but yet I cannot think that a God of Mercy, that
loves it in himself, and in his creature, will look in anger upon those who
through too much Fervor and Ambition of doing all, do more then is required,
but favor and reward them rather; when he will severely punish that negligence
that binds our hands in our bosom, that we do nothing. Melius ultra quam citra
stat misericordia, Thee is less danger, (in the works of Mercy) to exceed then
to fall short; I may say, less danger in superstition then in profaneness;
less danger in giving all then in giving nothing; and I can see no reason
there should be bounds set to our Mercy, for this is the way to shut it up
quite, and then we can set the bounds where we please; our non ultra will be a
penny, a mite, a cup of cold water, and at last nothing. I will not censure the
devotion of these women, and I need not take any pains to frame an Apology
for them; He that shall be so bold as to pass sentence against them, will
betray in himself so much love of the world as will deserve a heavier doom; and
although I may not press it as a duty on every man, yet thus much we may gain
by it, as to conclude, That if these women attained to this so high perfection,
as to be willing to strip themselves of all, and give it to the poor, It is
not so hard a matter as we make it, to part with our superfluities; as easy
for Mercy to open our hands now as then; and if this excess of theirs were as
a rock which we should avoid (as indeed it is not) yet what need they to fear
it who are so unwilling to set out, or to follow them but so far as to the
mean, and those Tropicks which we our selves set up, and do acknowledge in our
course? Julian. Epist. 49 and Fragment ep. edit. Petav.
Julian the Apostate in one of his Epistles, observing how glorious and
renowned the Christians were grown for this virtue, thought it a great piece of
his art and cunning to lay this imputation and slurr upon it, That their acts
of Mercy were done rather out of policy then devotion, and were rather a cheat
then charity; that by their liberality they did countenance and commend their
Religion, which had nothing else to speak for it; and with this show of
bounty, with the Ceruse and paint of communicating to the necessities of
others, did cover the horror (as he there impiously speaks) of their
profession; and thus did entice and draw others to their faction, as men do
children with a cake, whom they mean afterward to destroy. If the Apostate
were now alive, he would not be put to the Labor of his Brain, nor forced to
ask counsel of his wits to find out such a malicious lie; for our Mercy, for
the most part, is in the heart (I mistake) I would it were there, for then upon
occasion it would evaporate and show it self: no, It floats on the Tongue, and
the countenance of it is wan and pale, without paint or dress: Our Alms are
verba sine penu and pecunia, words without works: what need this ceremonious,
expensive Mercy? It is enough if our charity speak, and we show our love to
Mercy even then when we have shut it up in the inward man, and do but think of
it.

But let us not deceive our selves; This duty is written in lasting characters
to all posterity. Poverty and contempt of the world will be beatitudes to the
worlds end. Mercy and compassion are everlasting duties; to part with our coat
to our brother, is as necessary now as when Christ first taught it. Why should
we paraphrase mercy, and coin distinctions, and draw out our limitations, as
it were to copse her up and confine her, that she shall not move our tongue or
hand, but when our lusts will give her leave? Be ye merciful as your Heavenly
Father is merciful; why that is impossible, and therefore because we cannot
reach so far, we will not stir a foot. Lend looking for nothing again; That
cannot bind us, in the letter; and so, though we may be persuaded to lend, yet
our covetousness shall have line enough to reach the debtor, and take him by
the throat, and make him lay down what he owes, with the advantage. Go sell all
thou have; that was spoken to the young man, and so concerns us not; It Is
true, to sell all and give it to the poor, was a particular precept to the
young man in the Gospel, and with this command, Christ made a window into his
breast, and discovered the rottenness of his heart. But yet this precept is
not so particular to the young man, but that it may and does concern those who
are fallen into the same snare of the devil, and are ready to be strangled
(...) with the same golden halter, and in this respect it may concern more then
a many. For should our Savior come with his fan in his hand, he would find too
much of this chafe, discover too many who are ready to subscribe to the
Decalogue, to those commands which they are too ready to break, but have no
hand at all to fling one mite into the treasury; too many so like this young
man in this, that they may well receive this strict command, Go sell all that
you have and give it to the poor. For the love of the world is a foul humor,
and no other pill can purge it out; nor can this Augaean Stable, the heart of a
covetous man be purged without a Hercules, otherwise then by a strong and
violent evacuation: No better remedy against the love of the world then thus
exhaeredare se seculo, then to abandon the world and disinherit our selves of
all right and title to it, as the Philosopher tells us. To make a crooked staff
straight, the best way is to bow it violently the other way; and if this
physic will not purge and cure him, no power, no miracle, no mercy can save
him.

I am very willing so far to be as a John Baptist, as a forerunner to Mercy, as
to fill up every valley, and to bring every mountain and hill low, to make
smooth every rough passage, and so prepare a way, and make the paths of Mercy
straight, and in doing this I prepare a way for Christ himself; for Christ and
Mercy never go asunder. I would not see her circumscribed and drawn within that
compass which the flesh will make narrow enough with glosses, distinctions and
limitations: If it be Mercy, it cannot be thus shut up, but will break through
and thine every where, and in its full strength; and scatter every mist,
disperse every cloud, and is most seen in darkness; If it be a man, and
miserable, the makes haste to help him; she asks no questions, makes no pause,
nor deliberation, stands not upon circumstances of time or place, or measure of
what, or where, or when, or how much; she does not examine nor catechize his
person, Ubicunque est homo, ibi beneficio locus est. Sen. l. 4. de benef. c. 24.
and then raise scruples (for a scrupulous mercy is but a conniving cruelty; it
does not hurt, but it does not help) she sees him cast down, and she imploys
the understanding to find out ways and means, she opens the ear to harken to
complaints, she makes the tongue as the pen of a ready writer, and speaks to
his heart, and stretches forth the hand to lift him up; her haste is her
wisdom; her loss, her improvement; her motion, her light; her actuating is
the next object; her life, is misery; her method poseth the wisemen of this
world; her art is simplicity; her soloecismes, Rules, her strange works are the
laughter of fools, and the music of Angels; In a word, she ends not but in
her seife; for if it end, (where the object is seen) it is not mercy; and thus
she leads us on, and grows up with us to that strength, that we are able to Dye
for the brethren, and then, and not till then the merciful man and his mercy
end together; and yet they do not end, for they shall be had in everlasting
remembrance.

And we shall not think so strange of this Operation and Magistery of mercy, If
in the next place we consider what spring, Op^rari est l^rgiri ^le masynam.
Tertull. de Idolo^at. c. 23. Cyptian. l^b. inscripsit, de opere and elemosynis.
what principle it is, which begins and continues its motion, and sets it a
working; and Saint Paul places it in the inward man, in the very bowels of
him; put on therefore bowels of mercy, Coloss. 3.12. bowels which may sound
as an harp, Is. 16.11. to raise and refresh every drooping soul. For there is a
melting as well as a flowing, which is nothing else but compassion or a
fellow-feeling; and as every Natural act and motion has its principle from
whence it proceeds, so have our spiritual duties their form, as it were, to
give them life and motion; and when this is wanting, we fail and sink in our
performance, are but Idols; have eyes, but see not; have mouths, but speak not;
have hands, but cannot reach them forth.

Now compassion is the spring and principle of Mercy, when it exercises its
act, when it teaches the ignorant, or feeds the poor. This wrought the
miracle of the loaves, Matthew. 15. for Christ tells his Disciples, I have
compassion on the multitude, and he multiplies them. This forced his tears
from him, and drew them down his cheeks: For when he came near, he beheld the
City, and wept over it. Luke 19.41. In a word, this nailed him to the Cross.
Nor can we take it ill, or be troubled to hear of a compassionate and weeping
Christ, unless we be troubled also that he was a man; for never did the hand
reach forth relief, nor the tongue speak comfort, till compassion had melted
the heart; never was there any true and natural motion without a spring; nor
was there any reason it should be expunged and left our, for we read it again
John 10. and Jesus wept. It is no wisdom so to honor Christ, as to take from
his humanity. This wisdom comes not e-porticu Solomonis, from the porch of the
Temple, but from the Gallery and Schools of the Stoics who took away all
passion, and with it the very Nature of man. It was extreme folly with them to
be compassionate; and as they took them away quite, so the Peripateticks left
them, but with a curb, to be stopped and moderated; and here they both run
diverse ways, and both mist of the right. Lactant. l. 6. de ver. cult. c. 14,
15, 16, 17.
For as Lactantius well observes, neither are the Affections quite to be
extirpated and rooted out, as the Stoics hold; nor yet always to be checked
and bounded, as the Peripateticks would have it, but to be levelled and
directed on the right object: If you set your compass, and steer to the right
point, you cannot fill your sails too much: If Jerusalem, Jerusalem, now
shaking, tottering, and falling, be in your eyes, you cannot weep too much; If
a multitude now ready to famish, you cannot be too compassionate; If your
affections be set right, your anger cannot be too loud, for no indignation can
be raised up equal to your sin: your love cannot be too intensive, for you
cannot love virtue enough (the love of a friend, the love of a woman comes
short, and will never reach it;) your sorrow cannot be too excessive; for how
can they be cast down too much, who are fallen from God? He that goes out of
his way, though his pace be gentle, yet must needs walk with danger, every step
is an error; but he that keeps on in the right way, cannot possibly make too
much speed. No; compassion is so far from being imputed as a defect, that it is
that by which we come nearest to Christ himself; (...), It is a divine thing,
says Isidor, to be compassionate; an imitation of him who is a Father of
Mercies, and whose compassions never fail. Lament. 3.22. And therefore God
forbid, says Saint Austin, That, though we pray against them, and would use
our strength, and wit, and utmost power to keep them off, we should take off
our eye, as loath to see, or shut our ears, as unwilling to hear the
complaints, and grievings, and miseries of our brethren; It is indeed a sad
spectacle, but a blessed occasion to call up our compassion, and to draw out
our Mercy into act; to kindle the fire within us that it may break forth into a
pure flame, to warm and comfort them: And what is a Christian man's life? what
is the business of his life, but to watch, and observe, and lay hold of
occasions? to look upon that fire which may melt him; that misery of others
which may make an impression, and leave its image in his heart? which will
bring in that heavenly community, cum quamvis alii ferendo patiantur, alii
cognoscendo compatiantur, communis tamen sit tribulatio; when mercy possesses
the heart of all men with the smart of that affiction which but one man lies
under, making every man a partaker, though not in the loss, yet in the sorrow.

For this compassion is bound up as it were in the very nature and constitution
of the Church; and it is as impossible to be a part of the Church without it,
as it is to be a man without the use of reason; nay we so far come short of
being men as we are defective in humanity. All Christians are the parts of the
Church, and all must sustain one another, and this is the just and full
Interpretation of that of our Savior, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self, and then thou will pity him as thy self; Toll invidiam, and tuum est
quod habet, Take away envy, and all that he has is thine; and take away
hardness of heart, and all that thou have is his. Take away malice, and all
his virtues are thine; and take away pride, and thy Glories are his. Art thou a
part of the Church? thou have a part in every port, and every part has a
portion in thee. We are (...), compacted together by that which every joint
supplies, Ephesians. 4.16. a similitude and resemblance taken from the curtains in
the Temple, says learned Grotius, Exodus 26. whereof every one has its
measure; but yet they are all coupled together one to another, v. 3. and by
their loops which lay hold one of another, v. 5. and like those curtains, not
to be drawn but together, not to rejoice, not to weep, not to suffer but
together. The word Church is but as a second notion, and it is made a term of
art, and every man almost, says Luther, abuses it, draws it forth after his
own image, takes it commonly in that sense which may favor him so far, as to
leave in him a persuasion that he is a true part of it; and thus many enter the
Church, and are shut out of heaven. We are told of a visible Church, and the
Church in some sense is visible; but that the greatest part of this Church has
wanted bowels; that some parts of it have been without sense or feeling,
besmered and defiled with the blood of their brethren, is as visible as the
Church. We have heard of an infallible Church, we have heard it, and believe it
not; for how can she be infallible who is so ready to design all those to death
and hell who deny it? If it be a Church, it is a Church with horns to push at
the nations, or an army with banners and swords; we have long talked of a
Reformed Church, and we make it our crown and rejoicing, but it would concern
us to look about us and take heed, That we do not reform so as to purge out
all compassion also; for cercainly to put off all bowels, is not (as some
zelots have easily persuaded themselves) to put on the new man. Talk not of a
visible, Infallible, or a Reformed Church; God send us a Compassionate Church;
a title, which will more fit and become her, then those names which do not
beautify and adorn, but accuse and condemn her when she has no heart. What
visible Church is that which is seen in blood? what infallible Church is that
whose very bowels are cruel? what reformed Church is that which has purged
out all compassion? visible, and yet not seen; infallible, and deceived;
reformed, and yet in its filth; Monstrum; Horrendum, Inform, This is a
misshapen monster, not a Church. The True Church is made up of bowels; every
part of it is tender and relenting, not only when it self is touched, but when
the others are moved; as you see in a well-set instrument, if you touch but one
string, the others will tremble and shake. And this sense, this fellow-feeling,
is the fountain from whence this silver stream of Mercy flows, the spring and
first mover of those outward acts, which are seen in that bread of ours which
floats upon the waters, in the face and on the backs of the poor; for not then
when we see our brethren in affliction, when we look upon them, and pass by
them, but when we see them, and have compassion on them, we shall bind up their
wounds, and pour in wine and oil, and take care for them: For till the heart
be melted there will nothing flow. We see alms given every day, and we call
them acts of piety; but whether the hand of Mercy reach them forth or no we
know not; our motions, all of them are not from a right spring; vain glory may
be liberal; Intemperance may be liberal; Pride may be a benefactor; Ambition
must not be a Niggard; Covetousness it self sometimes yields, and drops a
penny; and importunity is a wind which will set that wheel a going, which had
otherwise stood still. We may read large catalogues of munificent men, but many
names which we read there may be but the names of men, and not of the
Merciful: compassion is the inward and true principle, begetting in us the
love of Mercy, which compleats, and perfects, and crowns every act; gives it
its true form and denomination; gives a sweet smell, and fragrant savor to
Maryes ointment, for she that poured it forth loved much, Luke 7.47. I may say
compassion is the love of the Mercy, and plus est diligere quam facere, says
Hilary, It is a great deal more to love a good work then to do it; to love
virtue, then to bring it into act; to love mercy, then to show it; it does
supply many times the place of the outward act, but without it the act is
nothing, or something worse. It has a privilege to bring that upon account
which was never done; to be entitled to that which we do not, which we cannot
do; to make the weak man strong, and the poor man liberal, and the ignorant
man a counselor; For he that loves mercy would, and therefore does more then
he can do; as David may be said to build the Temple, though he laid not a stone
of it, for God tells him, he did well, That he had it in his heart; and thus
our love may build a Temple, though we fall and dye before a stone be laid.

Now this love of mercy is not so soon wrought in the heart as we may imagine;
as every glimmering of light does not make it day; It is a work of labor and
travel, and of curious observance and watchfulness over our selves; It will
cost us many a combat and luctation with the world and the flesh; many a
falling out with our selves; many a love must be dug up by the roots, before
we can plant this in our hearts; for it will not grow up with luxury and
wantonness; with pride, or self-love; you never see these together in the same
soil: The Apostle tells us we must put it on; and ^ the garments which adorn
the soul are not so soon put on as those which clothe the body; we do not put
on mercy as we do our mantle, for when we do, every puff of wind, every
distaste blows it away; but mercy must be so put on, that it may even cleave to
the soul, and be a part of it; That every thought may be a melting thought,
every word as oil, and every work a blessing. Then we love mercy, when we
fling off all other respects, and whatsoever may either shrink up or straiten
our bowels, or seal up our lips, or wither our hands; when we look upon the
world but as our stage, where we must act our parts, and display the glories of
mercy; where we must waste our selves, drop our tears, run in to succor those
who are roughly handled in it, and thus tread it under our feet, and then take
our Exit and go out. When we can forget our honor, and remember the poor;
forsake all rather then our brethren, and desire not to be rich but in good
works; when we have so incorporated out brethren into our selves, that we stand
and fall, are happy and miserable together; when we consider them as ingrafted
into the same Christ, and in him to be preferred before the whole world, and to
be looked upon as those for whom we must dye, Then we love mercy, then we are
merciful as our heavenly Father is merciful.

Thus if we be qualified, we shall become the Temples and habitations of Mercy;
and as our bodies shall after their resurrection, so our souls shall here have
novas dotes, shall be endowed with activity, cheerfulness, and purity. And
first, our mercy will be in a manner Natural unto us: secondly, it will be
Constant: thirdly, it will be Sincere: fourthly, it will be Delightful to us.
It will be Natural, not forced; it will be Constant, not flitting; It will be
Sincere, not feigned; and it will be Delightful, that we shall long to bring
it into act.

And first; we then love it, when it is in a manner made natural to us; for we
never fully see the beauty of it, till we are made New Creatures, and have new
eyes; then as the new creature cannot sin, as Saint John speaks, that is, can
do nothing that is contrary and destructive to that form which constitutes a
new creature, no more can a merciful man do any thing which will not savor
of mercy; and does as naturally exercise himself in it, as the Sun does send
forth its beams, or the Heavens their influence. For the Spirit of God has
made his Heart a Fountain of Mercy, as he made the Sun a Fountain of Light; and
if he break not forth into action, it is from defect of means, or occasion, or
some cross accident which comes over him, which do but cloud and eclipse his
mercy, as the interposition of a gross body does the Sun, but not put out its
light; at the very sight of Misery, Mercy is awake, up, and either doing of
suffering. Who is weak, 2 Cor. 11.29.
and I am not weak? says Saint Paul; who is offended, and I burn not? If I
but see him weak, I faint; and if I see him vexed, I am on fire. Nature is
active and will work to its end; heavy bodies will descend, and light bodies
will mount upwards; and Mercy will give, and lend, and forgive; it cannot be
idle, Inquies opere suo pascitur, Livi. pres.
it is restless, and is made more restless by its work, which is indeed its
pleasure; It is then most truly Mercy, when it shows it self. If occasion
presents it self, it soon lays hold of it; If the object appear, it is
carried to it with the speed of a Thought, and reaches it as soon; If there
be no object, it creates one; if there be no occasion, it studyes one: Is there
yet any left of the house of Saul, that I may show kindness to for Jonathans
sake? And, Is there no Lazar to feed, no Widow to visit, no Wounds to bind up,
no weak brother to be restored, none that be in darkness and error to be
brought into the light? These are the Quaeres, the true dialect, this is the
Ambition of Mercy: It longs more for an occasion to vent it self, then the
Adulterer does for the twilight; lays hold of the least as of a great one;
thinks nothing too high, nothing too low, which it can reach; is still in
motion, because it moves not like those Artificial bodies by art or outward
force, but by a principle of life, the spirit of love; and so moves, not as a
clock, which will stand still when the plummet is on the ground, but its motion
is Natural, as that of the spheres, which are wheeled about without cessation,
and return by those points by which they past; and indeed, may be said rather
to rest then to move, because they move continually, and in the same place.
Misery is the point, the object of mercy, and at that it touches
everlastingly: mercy and misery still go together and eye each other; the eye
of misery looks up upon mercy, and the eye of mercy looks down upon misery;
they are the two cherubins, that have ever their faces one toward another, and
they are both full and ready to drop and run down; the eye of misery is ever
open, and mercy hides not her eye, Prove. 28.27. By this you may judge of your
acts of liberality, and look upon them as those sacrifices with which God is
pleased, when you find something within you that enlarges you, that opens your
mouth and hand, that you cannot but speak and do; when you find a heat within
you that thaws and melts you, that you pour out your selves on your brethren;
then your works of mercy are of a sweet smelling savor, when love sets them on
fire.

For secondly, being made Natural unto us, it will be also constant, it will
be fixed in the firmament of the soul, and shine and derive its influence
uncessantly, and equally, doing good unto all men, while it has time, that is
at all times. When the heart dissents from it self (for love only unites and
makes it one,) when it is divisum cor, a divided heart, divided between God and
the world; when it has inconstant motions, and changeable counsels, when it
joins with the object, and leaps from the object; willing to day and lothing
to morrow; this day cleaving to it, and even sick for love, (as Ammon was with
Tamar) and the next thrusting it out of doors; choosing without judgment, and
then altering upon experience; In such a heart mercy cannot dwell; and from
hence it is that we see men every day so unlike themselves, now giving, anon
oppressing; now reaching out an Alms, and by and by threatening with the sword;
now giving their brother the right hand of fellowship, and within a while with
that hand plucking him by the throat; now pitying him that lies in the dust,
and anon crying out, So, So, Thus we would have it: For indeed their pity and
their rage, their mercy and their cruelty have the same original, are raised
upon the same ground, the love of themselves, and not of mercy; and thus they
do some acts of mercy, magno impetu, sed semel, with much earnestness and
zeal, but not often, like some birds whose notes or rather noise we hear one
part of the year, and then they leave us, vanish out of sight and hearing, and
as some say, sleep out the other. For even in the worst of men there be some
seeds of goodness, which they receive as they are men, from whence arise those
(...), those sudden but short and transitory inclinations, which are choked up,
but not so dead in them, but that sometimes they show themselves and shoot out,
but as grass does upon the housetops, Ps. 129.6
which withers before it grows up. There is no Tyrant but may do one act of
mercy; no oppressor but may give a cup of cold water. In pessimis est aliquid
optimi, there may be something of that which is good, even in the worst. Then
mercy is in its full glory, when it acts upon a certain and well grounded
determination; when we decree, as the Stoics speak, and resolve so to do, when
we have fixed this decree, and made it unalterable; when we are rooted and
grounded in mercy, as Saint Paul speaks, Ephesians. 3.17. Rooted as a tree deeply in
it, and built as a house upon it, where the corner and chief stone is the love
of mercy. Then we are as trees to shadow others, and as an house to shelter
them; otherwise our mercy will be but as a gourd, as Jonahs gourd, and will
grow and come up and perish in a night.

Thirdly, If we love mercy, it will be sincere and real; for sincerity is the
proper issue and child of love, and makes the wounds of a friend better then
the kisses of an enemy; makes a dish of herbs a more sumptuous Feast then a
stalled ox; makes a mite, a good wish, a good word an Alms. What Is the mercy
of the parasite? he feeds by it. What Is the mercy of the Ambitious? a stirrup
to get up by. What Is the mercy of the Covetous? a piece of art, a warrantable
cheat. What was that seeming mercy of Peter? It was an offense, for which
Christ called him an enemy. What Is the mercy of those, who through
Covetousness, with feigned words make a prey of men's souls? 2 Pet. 2.3. I
will not tell you, because I cannot give it a name bad enough. There may be
mercy in a supply, but that supply may be a snare. There may be mercy in
counsel, but that counsel may betray me. There is mercy in comfort, but we
know, there be miserable comforters. True mercy must be like our faith, (...),
1 Timothy 1.5. unfeigned, and then it runs must pure and clear without taint or
trouble, when love opens the fountain, or rather is the fountain from whence it
flows; when the love of Christ has begot in us the love of our brethren, and
we show mercy to them, not for those arguments which we make our selves, or
those persuasions which may be the oratory of the flesh and the world; but for
Christ's sake, and for the love of mercy, whose rational and demonstrative
eloquence we should most obey: otherwise it will begin fairly, and end in
blood; It will drop tears, and then hailstones; it will be a but preface of
clemency, a mild prologue to lead in a tragedy; an echo out of a sepulcher of
rotten bones, and as music at the gates of hell: It will be mercy, but not
like unto Christ, in whom there was found no guile, but like unto Marcions
Christ, all in appearance; mercy with a trumpet in one hand, and a sword in the
other; mercy which shall lessen your burden, to lay on more; shall speak of
ease, and then add to the misery of the oppressed. For that which is not
sincere is not lasting. It may begin to shine, but it will end in a storm: A
true face is ever the same, but a vizor will soon fall off. In a word, if it be
not sincere, it is not mercy, and sincere it will not, it cannot be, if we love
it not.

Last of all; If we love mercy we shall take delight in it, for joy is but a
resultancie from love; that which we love is also the joy of our heart. Behold
my servant whom I have chosen, says God of Christ, Es. 42.1. and then it
follows, In whom my soul delights. I have loved thee, says God, of Israel,
and his love thus bespeaks them, as a bridegroom rejoices over his bride, so
shall thy God rejoice over thee, Is. 62.5. The bridegroom is sick of love in
the book of Canticles, his heart is ravished, and then the floodgates are laid
open, and the stream is joy. How fair is my love? how much better is thy love
then wine, and the smell of thy ointments then all spices? David's heart was
knit unto Jonathan, and then, very pleasant have thou been unto me, 2 Samuel
1.26. Abraham loved hospitality, and therefore he is said to sit in his tent
door, in the heat of the day, to invite men in, as if every stranger had been
an Angel. If love be as the sun, Joy and delight are the Beams which stream
forth from it; If Love be as the Voice, Joy is the Echo, for Joy is but Love in
the reflection; If Love fill the heart, it will heave, and work it self out,
and break forth in joy. By our joy we may see the figure, and shape, and
constitution of our souls; for Love is operative, working and raising up
something in the soul, and with it that delight which is born with it, and
always waits upon it. If it be dark and scarce observable, our Joy interprets
it; Joy is open and talkative; In the wanton it is a frolic; in the Revenger it
is a Boast; in the Drunkard it is a Ballad; in the Rich it is Pride; in the
Ambitious it is a Triumph; but in the Merciful it is Heaven. What a well-drawn
picture is to an Apelles, what a fair character is to a Scribe, what a heap of
gold is to the Miser, that and much more are the works of Mercy to them that
love it; only here the joy is of a purer flame, and burns brighter; that is
gross and earthy, this is Seraphicall. When you reach forth your hand to give
a penny, tell me, what do you feel in your heart? when you give good counsel,
do you not hear a pleasing echo return back upon you? when you have lifted up
the poor out of the dust, do you not feel an elevation and ascension in your
mind? when you clothe the naked, are not you even then super vestiti, clothed
upon with joy? Believe it, you cannot give that relief to the miserable, which
Mercy works in the soul, nor can he that receives be so much affected as he
that gives; For when he gives, he gives indeed his money, but has bestowed the
greatest Alms upon himself; the poor man rejoices, as a hungry man that is
fed, as a naked man that is clothed, as one that sits in darkness does at the
breaking in of light; but the merciful man has triumphs and Jubilees within
him. In a word, to love Mercy is to be in Heaven, every man according as he
purposes in his heart, let him give not grudgingly, or of necessity, for God
loves a cheerful giver; such a mercy is Gods Almoner here on earth, and he
loves and blesses it, follows it with his providence, and his infinite Mercy
shall crown it. That gift which the Love of Mercy offers up, is only fit to
be laid up in the Treasury of the Almighty.

And now I have set before you Mercy in its full beauty, in all its glory;
Conclusion.
you have seen her spreading her rays: I might show you her building of
Hospitalls, visiting the sick, giving eyes to the blind, raising of Temples,
pitying the stones, breathing forth Oracles, making the ignorant wise, the
sorrowful merry, leading the wandering man into his way; I might have showed
you her sealing of Pardons (but we could not show you all) these are the
miracles of Mercy, and they are wrought by the power of Christ in us, and by
us, but by his power; the fairest spectacle in the world. Let us then look upon
it, and love it: what is mercy when you need it? is it not as the opening of
the heavens unto you? and shall it then bea punishment and hell unto you, when
your afflicted brethren call for it? Is it so glorious abroad, and shall it be
of so foul an aspect, as not to be thought worthy of entertainment at home?
shall it be a Jewel in every Cabinet but your own hearts? Behold, and lift up
your eyes, and you shall see objects enough for your Mercy to shine on; If ever
one depth called upon another, the depth of calamity for the depth of our
compassion; if ever our bowels should move and sound, now, now is the time. I
remember, that Chrysologus observes, that God did on purpose lay Lazarus at the
rich man's Gate, quasi pietatis conflatorium, as a forge to melt his stony
heart. Lazarus had as many mouths to speak, and move him to compassion, as he
had ulcers and wounds; and how many such forges has God set before us? how
many mouths to beseech us? how many wounds wide open which speak loud for our
pity? how many fires to melt us? shall I show you an ulcerous Lazar? They are
obvious to our eye, we shall have them always with us, says our Savior, and
we have them almost in every place: Shall I show you men Stripped and wounded,
and left half dead? that may be seen in our lives, as well as in the high ways
between Jericho and Jerusalem. Shall I show you the tears drilling down the
cheeks of the orphans and widows? shall I call you to hear the cry of the
hire kept back by fraud or violence? for that cries to you for compassion, as
oppression does to God for vengeance; and it is a kind of oppression to deny it
them. Have you no compassion all ye that pass by, and every day behold such
sad spectacles as these? shall I show you Christ put again to open shame,
whipped, and scorned, and crucified, and that which cannot be done to him in his
person, laid upon his Church? shall I show you him now upon the cross, and
have you no regard all you that pass by? shall I show you the Church miserably
torn in pieces? shall I show you Religion? I would I could show you such a
sight, for scarce so much as her form is left; what can I show, or what can
move us, when neither our own misery, nor the common misery, nor sin, nor
death, nor hell it self will move us? If we were either good Men, or good
Citizens, or good Christians, our hearts would melt and gush forth at our eyes
in Rivers of water; If we were truly affected with peace, we should be troubled
at war; If we did love the City, we should mourn over it; if we did delight in
the prosperity of Israel, her affliction would wound us; if Religion were our
care, her decay would be our sorrow; for that which we love and delight in must
needs leave a mournful heart behind it, when it withdraws it self. But private
interest makes us regardlesse of the common, and we do not pity Religion
because we do not pity our own souls, but drink deep of the pleasures of this
world; enlarge our Territories, fill our barnes, make haste to be rich, when
our soul is ready to be taken from us, and nothing but a rotten mouldring wall,
a body of flesh which will soon fall to the ground, between us and hell.

I may well take off your eye from these sad and woeful spectacles; it had been
enough but to have shown you Mercy, for she is a cloud of witnesses, a cloud of
Arguments for her self; and if we would but look upon her as we should, there
need no other Orator. I beseech you look into your Lease, look into your
Covenant, that Conveyance by which bliss and immortality are made over to you,
and you shall find that you hold all by this; you hold it from the King of
Kings, and your quit-rent, your acknowledgement for his great Mercy, is your
Mercy to others; pay it down, or you have made a forfeiture of all; if you be
Merciless, all that labor (as it is called) of charity is lost; your loud
profession, your forced gravity, your burning zeal, your faith also is vain,
and you are yet in your sins. For what are all these without Mercy but words
and names? and there is no name by which we can be saved, but the name of Jesus
Christ; and all these, Devotion, Confession, Abstinence, Zeal, Severity of
life, are as it were the letters of his name, and I am sure Mercy is one, and
of a fair character; and if we expunge and blot it out, it is not his name.
Why boast we of our zeal? without mercy it is a consuming fire. It Is true, he
that is not zealous does not love; but if my love be counterfeit, what a false
fire is my zeal? and one mark of true zeal is (...), Naz. or. 14.
if it be kept within its bounds, and mercy is the best watch we can set over
it to confine and keep it in. The Church of Christ is not placed under the
Torrid Zone, that these cooler and more temperate virtues may not dwell there:
if you will have your zeal burn kindly, Ignis zeli ardere debet oleo
misericordiae. Aqu^. de Eruditione princip. l. 1. c. 15, 16.
it must not be set on fire by any earthy matter, but from Heaven, where is the
Mercy-seat, and which is the seat of Mercy; if you will be burning lamps, you
must pour in oleum misericordiae, the oil of mercy, as Bernard speaks; if this
oil fail, you will rather be Beacons then Lamps, to put all round about you in
Arms, as we have seen in Germany and other places. Men and Brethren, I may
speak to you of the Patriarch David, who is dead and buried; and though we have
not his Sepulcher, yet we have the memory of his mercifulness remaining with us
to this day; and I ask, Had not he zeal? Yes, and so hot and intensive, that it
did consume him, Psalm. 119.139. and yet but three verses before, Rivers of
water ran down his eyes; and this heat, and this moisture had one and the same
cause, because they kept not thy law, in the one; because they forgot thy word,
in the other; which is the very same. We much mistake if we do not think there
may be a weeping as well as a burning zeal: And indeed zeal is never more
amiable, never moves with more Decorum, nay with more advantage both to our
selves and others, then when Mercy sends it running down the cheeks. We cannot
better conclude then with that useful advice of GBernard, Bern. 46. S. in Cant.
Zelus absque misericordia minus utilis, plerumque etiam perniciosus, etc. Zeal
without mercy is always unprofitable, and most commonly dangerous; and
therefore we must pour in this oil of mercy, quae zelum supprimat, spiritum
temperet, which may moderate our zeal, and becalm and temper ourspirit, which
may otherwise hurry us away to the trouble of others, and ruin of our selves;
which it cannot do, if Mercy be our Assessor.

To conclude. Let us therefore cast off every weight, let us empty our selves,
fling out all worldly lusts out of our hearts, and make room for mercy; Let us
receive it, naturalize it, consubstantiate it, as the Greek Fathers speak, with
our selves, that we may think nothing, breathe nothing, do nothing but mercy;
That mercy may be as an Intelligence to keep us in a constant and perpetual
motion of doing good; That it may be true and sincere, and sweeter to us then
the honey or honeycomb, and so be our Heaven upon Earth whilst we are here,
that peace may be upon us, and mercy, even upon all those who love mercy, who
are indeed the true Israel of God.

The last branch is our humble walking with God, and that we shall lay hold on
in our next.

blazon or royal coat of arms of England and Wales HONI ^T QVI MAL Y PENSE

The Six and Twentieth SERMON.
PART VI.
MICAH 6.8. He has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does the Lord
require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with
thy God?


WE have already gathered fruit from two of the Branches of this Tree of Life,
This Good which God by his Prophet has showed us in the Text; we have seen
Justice run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream as the
Prophet speaks: we have seen Mercy dropping as the dew on the tender herbs, and
rain upon the grass. We have beheld Justice filling the hand, and Mercy
opening it; Justice fitting and preparing the hand to give, and Mercy
stretching it forth to clothe the naked, and fill the hungry with good things;
Justice gathering, and Mercy scattering; Justice bringing in the seed, and
Mercy sowing it; in a word, Justice making it ours, and Mercy alienating it,
and making it his, whosoever he be that wants it.

We must now lay hold on the third, which shadows both the rest from those
blasts which may wither them; Those storms and temptations which may shake and
bruise them: from Covetousness, Ambition, Pride, Self-love, Self-deceit,
Hypocrisy, which turn Justice into gall and worme-wood, and eat out the very
bowels of Mercy. For our reverent and humble deportment with God is the mother
of all good counsel, the guard and defense of all holy duties and the mistress
of innocence: By this the Just and Merciful man lives, and moves, and has his
being; his whole life is an humble deportment with God; every motion of his is
humility; I may say, his very essence is humility; for he gathers not, he
scatters not, but as in his eye and sight. When he fills his garners, and when
he empties them, he does it as under that all-seeing eye, which sees not only
what he does, but what he thinks. In this the Christian moves, and walks with
or before his God not opening his eyes, but to see the wonders of his Laws; not
opening his mouth, but in Hallelujahs; not opening his ears, but to his voice;
not opening his hand, but in his name; not giving his Alms, but as in the
presence of his Father, which sees in secret, and so doing what he requires,
with fear and trembling. This spreads and diffuseth it self through every
vein and branch, through every part and duty of his life. When he sits in
judgment, humility gives the sentence; when he trafficks, humility makes the
bargain; when he casts his bread upon the waters, his hand is guided by
humility; when he bows and falls down before his God, humility conceives the
prayer; when he fasts, humility is in Capite Iejunii, and begins the fast; when
he exhorts, humility breaths it forth; when he instructs, humility dictates;
when he corrects, humility makes the rod: whatsoever he does, he does as
before, or under, or with the Lord: humility is (...), all in all. In a word;
Singularum virtutum proprii actus, say the Schools; virtues both moral and
Theological, like the celestial Orbs, have their peculiar motion proceeding
from their distinct Habits and Forms; but humility is the intelligence which
keeps and perpetuates that motion, as those orbs are said to have their motion
held up and regulated by some assistent form without.

And now, being here required to walk humbly with our God, It will not be
impertinent to give you the picture of humility in little, to show you (...),
summarily and in brief what it is, and so we may better see in what this our
walking humbly consists. And indeed we look upon humility as we do upon a
picture, mirantur omnes divinam formam, sed ut simulachrum fabre politum
mirantur omnes, as Apuleius speaks of his Psyche. Every man does much admire it
as a beautiful piece, but it is as men admire a well-wrought statue, or
picture; every man likes it, but (which was the lot of his Psyche) no man loves
it, no man wooes it, no man desires to take her to his wife.

Yet it will not be amiss to give you a short view of her. And the Orator will
tell us, Virtutis laus omnis in action consistit, Every virtue is commended by
its proper act and operation, and is then actually, when it works; Temperance
does bind the appetite; liberality open the hand; modesty compose the
countenance; valor guard the heart, and work out its contrary out of the mind;
and Humility every thing that rises up; every swelling and tumor of the
soul, which are called by the Apostle (...), 2 Cor. 12.20. puffings up, for
riches, or learning, or beauty, or strength, or eloquence, or virtue, or any
thing which we admire our selves for; elations and lifting up of the mind above
it self, the stretching of it beyond its measure, 2 Cor. 10.14. setting it up
against the Law, against our brethren, against God himself; making us to
complain of the Law, as unjust; to start at the shadow of an injury; to do
evil, and not to see it; to commit sin, and excuse it; making our tongues our
own, our hands our own, our understandings our own, our wills our own; leaving
us independents, under no Law but our own: The Prophet David calls it the
highness or haughtiness of the heart, Ps. 131. Solomon, the haughtiness of
the spirit, Prove. 16.18. which is visible in our sin, and visible in our
Aplogies for sin; lifting up the eyes, and lifting up the nose (for so the
phrase signifies) Ps. 10.4. lifting up the head, making our necks brass, as if
we had devoured a spit, as Epictetus expresses it; I am and I alone, Graeci
(...) appellant. Arrian. Epict.
is soon writ in any man's heart; and it is the office and work of humility to
wipe it out, to wipe out all imaginations which rise and swell against the Law,
our neighbor, and so against God himself. For the mind of man is very subject
to these fits of swelling; humility? our very nature rises at the mention of
it. Habet men's nostra sublime quiddam, and impatiens superioris, says the
Orator; men's minds naturally are lifted up, and cannot endure to be overlookt.
Humility? It Is well we can hear her named with patience; it is something more,
that we can commend her: but, quale monstrum? quale sacrilegium? says the
Father; O monstrous sacriledg! we commend humility, and that we do so, swells
us; we shut her out of doors, when we entertain her; when we deck her with
praises, we sacrilegiously spoil her, and even lose her in our Panegyricks and
commendations. We see (for it is but too visible) what light materials we are
made of, what tinder we are, that the least spark will set us on fire, to blaze
and be offensive to every eye. We censure pride in others, and are proud we do
so; we humble our brethren, and exalt our selves. It is the art and malice of
the world, when men excel either in virtue or learning, to say, they are
proud, and they think weith that breath to level every hill that rises so
high, and calls so many eyes to look upon it: But suppose they were; alas, a
very fool will be so, and he that has not one good part to gain the opinion of
men, will do that office for himself, and wonder the world should so mistake
him. Does learning, or virtue, do our good parts puff us up, and set us in our
Altitudes? No great matter, the wagging of a feather, the gingling of a spur, a
little ceruse and paint, any thing, nothing will do it. Nay, to descend yet
lower, That which is worse then nothing will do it; wickedness will do it: He
boasts of his hearts desire, says David, Ps. 10.3. he blesses himself in
evil; he rejoices in evil, says Solomon, Prove. 2.14. he pleases and
flattereth himself in mischif: And what are these benedictions, these
boastings, these triumphs in evil, but as the breathings, the sparkles, the
proclamations of pride? The wicked is so proud, he cares not for God, he is
not in all his ways. When Adam by pride was risen so high as to fall from his
obedience, God looks upon him in this his exaltation, or rather in this ruin,
and beholds him not as his creature, but as a prodigy, and seems to put on
admiration; Ecce! Adam factus tanquam unus e nobis; See, the man is become like
unto us, and he speaks it by an Irony. A God he is, but of his own making;
whilst he was what I made him, he was a man, but Innocent, Just, immortal, of
singular endowments, and he was so truly and really; but now having swelled,
and reached beyond his bounds, a God he is, but per mycterismum, a God that may
be pitied, that may be derided, a mortal, dying God, a God that will run into
a thicket to hide himself: His greatness is but figurative, but his misery is
real; being turned out of Paradise, has nothing left but his fancy to Deifie
him. This is our case, and our Teeth are on edge with the same sour grapes: we
are proud, and sin, and are proud in our sins: we lift up our selves
against the Law, and when we have broke it, we lift up our selves against
repentance: when we are weak, then we are strong; when we are poor and
miserable, then we are rich; when we are naked, then we clothe our selves with
pride as with a garment; and as in Adam, so in us, our greatness is but a
tale, a pleasing lie, our sins and imperfections true and real; our Heaven but
a thought, and our hell, burning: a strange soloecisme; a look as high as
heaven, and the soul as low as the lowest pit. It was an usual speech with
Martin Luther, That every man was born with a Pope in his belly; and we know
what the Pope has long challenged and appropriated to himself, Infallibility
and Supremacy, which like the two sides of an Arch mutually uphold each other:
for do we question his Immunity from Error? it is a bold error in us; for he
is supreme Judge of Controversies. And the Conjecture is easy which way the
question will be stated. Can we not be persuaded and yield to his supremacy?
then his Parasites will tell you that he is Infallible; by this we may well
guess what Luther meant; for so it is in us, Pride makes us incorrigible, and
the thought that we are so increases our pride: we are too high to stand, and
too wise to be wary; too learned to be taught, and too good to be reproved: we
now stand upon our supremacy, see, how the worm swells into an Angel: The
heart forgets it is flesh, and becomes a stone; and you cannot set Christ's
Impresse, Humility, upon a stone. Learn of me, for I am humble; The ear is
deaf, and the heart stubborn; the mind (...), says Saint Paul; (...), says
Theodoret, a reprobate, reverberating mind, a heart of marble, which violently
beats back the blow that should soften it.

Now the office of humility is to abate this swelling; Its proper work is to
hammer this rock, and break it to pieces, Jer. 23.29. to drive it into it self,
to pull it down at the sight of this Lord, to place it under it self, under the
Law, under God; to bind it as it were with cords, and let out this corrupt
blood, and this noxious humor, and so sacrifice it to that God that framed it.
In a word, depressing it in it self, that it be not too wise, too full; That it
may behold it self of more value then the whole world, and then shut it self
up, that it wander not abroad after those vanities which will soon fill it with
air, and swell it. This is the method, and this is the work of humility; It
pulls out our eyes, that we may see; spoils us of our wealth, that we may be
rich; takes us out the rays, that we may have light; takes us from our selves,
that we may possess our selves; bids us depart from God, that we may enjoy
him. This is Janitrix scholae Christi, faith Bernard; for when we bow, and lie
prostrate, we are let in. This is as Saint John Baptist to prepare the way, to
make every mountain low, and the rough places plain; to depresse a lofty head,
and sink a haughty eye, and beat down a swelling heart. In a word, this is the
best Leveller in the world, and there need none but this.

We see then in what humility consists; in placing us where we should be, at
the footstool of God, admiring his majesty, and abhorring themselves,
distrusting our selves, and relying on his wisdom, bowing to him when he helps
us, and bowing to him when he strikes us; denying ourselves, surrendering our
selves, being nothing in our selves, and all things in him. Which will more
plainly appear in the extent of this duty, which reaches the whole man, both
body and soul. It was the speech of Saint Austin, Domine duo creasti, alterum
propete, alterum prope nihil, Lord thou have made two things in the world, one
near unto thy self, divine and celestial, the soul; the other vile and
sordid, next to nothing, the body. These are the parts which constitute and
make us men, the subject of sin, and therefore of humility. Let not sin
reign in your mortal bodies, Romans 6.12. but let humility depose, and pluck it
from its throne: Ind delinquit homo unde constat, says Tertullian, from thence
sin is, from whence we are; (...), says Nazianzen, with our selves we fight
against our selves; we carry about with us those forces which beset us; we are
that Army which is in battle array against us; -- videas concurrere Bellum
Atque virum --
Our enemies are domestic, at home within us; and a tumult must be laid where
first 'twas raised. Between them both, says the same Father, Naz. orat. 8.
there is a kind of warlike opposition, and they do (...), as it were pitch
their Tents one against the other; when the body prevails, the soul is lost;
and when the body is at the lowest, (...), then is the soul is high as heaven;
and when the soul is sick, even bedrid with sin, then the body is most
active, as a wild Ass, or wanton Heifer. In both there is matter for humility
to work on; (...). Hesyc.
In both there are excrescences and extuberations to be lopt off and abated;
the body must he used as an enemy, ((...), says Saint Paul, I buffet it, I
beat it black and blew, I handle it as a Rebel, or professed enemy; and it must
be used as a servant; (...), I hold it in subjection, like a captive, like a
slave after conquest.) And the soul to be checked, contracted, and depressed in
it self, ne in multa diffluat, that it spread not, nor diffuse it self on
variety of objects: It must not be dimidiata humilitas, an humility by halves,
but Holocaustum, a whole burnt-offering, both body and soul wasting and
consuming all their dross in this Holy Conflagration. I know not how, good
duties are either shrunk up in the conveyance, not drove home by the Masters of
the Assembly, or else taken into pieces in the performance. Does God proclaim
a Fast? See, the head hangs down, the look is changed; you may read a Famine in
the countenance, and yet the Fast not kept: Walk humbly with him? So we will;
he shall have our knee, our look; he shall see us prostrate on the ground, say
some, who are as proud on the ground as when they stood up. He shall have the
heart, no knee of ours, say others, as proud as they. If we can conceive an
Humiliation, and draw forth its picture but in our fancy; nay if we can but
say, It is good to be humbled, it is enough, though it be a lie, and we speak
not what we think. We are most humble when we least express it, so full of
contradictions is Hypocrisy, (and what a huge (...) and gulf is there between
Hypocrisy and Humility?) so reaching at Impossibilities, which may draw Pride
and Humility together to be one and the same, which yet are at greater distance
one from the other, then the Earth is from the Heaven. And thus we divide
Humility, nay thus we divide our selves from our selves, our souls from our
bodies; either our Humility is so spiritual that we cannot see it, neither
dropping at the eyes, nor changing the countenance, nor bowing the knees; nor
hear it in complaints, and groans, and roarings, which were wont to be the
language of humility; or so corporeal, that we see it all. God has his part,
and but a part, and so has none; and then the conjecture is easy, who has it
all.

But our selves include both; neither is my Body my self, nor my Soul my self,
but I am one made up of both, the knot that ties them both together; and my
Humility lasts no longer then whilst I am one of both. Whilst then we are so,
let us give him both, and first the Soul. For there is no vice so dangerous,
or to which we are more subject, then spiritual pride. Other vices proceed
from some defect in us, or some sinful imbecility of nature, but this many
times arises out of our good parts; Others fly from the presence of God, this
dares him to his face, and makes even Ruin it self the Foundation of its
Tabernacle. Intestinum malum periculosius, The more near the evil cleaves to
the soul, the more dangerous it is; the more inward, the more fatal. I may
wean my self from the world, and fling off vanity; I may take off my soul from
sensible objects; I may deny my appetite, I may shut up my eye, I may bind my
hands; I may study pleasure so long, till I truly understand it, and know it is
but madness; and the world, till I contemn it; but Pride ultima exuitur, is
the last garment which we put off; when we are naked, we can keep her on; and
when we can be nothing we can be proud. And therefore some have conceived
humility to be placed in the soul as a Canopy covering and shadowing both the
faculties, binding and moderating the understanding, and subduing the will; and
whilst they sit under humility, they sit in state; the understanding is
crowned with rays and light, and the will commands just things, as from its
Throne; never imploys the eye or hand in any office for which the one should be
plucked out, and the other cut off, but are both in their highest exaltation,
being both now under the will of God. Our understanding many times walks in
things too high for it, yet thinks she is above them; and our will inclines
(and that too often) to things forbidden, because they are so; cannot endure the
check and restraint of a command, which it breaks under that name; the two
greatest evils under the Sun, we are too wise, and we are too wilful. Now
the pride of our will is quickly seen, and therefore the more curable; It
shows it self in the wild irregular motions of the outward man; If lifts up
the hand, it moves the tongue, it rowles the eye, it paints it self upon the
very countenance, either in smiles or frowns, either in cheerfulness or
terror; It is visible in each motion, and there be Laws to check and curb it,
that it may not be so troublesome and destructive as otherwise it would be; but
quae latent nocent, The serpent at the heel, an overweening conceit of our
own knowledge, of our own perfections, how invisible does it enter us? how
deceitfully does it flatter us? how subtly ensnare us? Been sapimus in causa
nostra, we are wise in our own cause; we have dig'd deep and found the truth,
which others do but talk of; we cannot be deceived, and the thought that we
cannot be deceived, does deceive us most. Now we are rich, now we are learned,
now we are wise, now we reign as kings, and carry all before us; we control
the weak with our power; the ignorant with our knowledge; the poor with our
wealth; the simple with our wisdom; and confute our selves with our own
arguments, and are poor, because we are so rich; are deceived, because we are
so wise; can do little, because we can do so much; and manifest our folly unto
all men, because we are so wise. For whither will this high conceit of our
selves lift us? even above our selves, besides our selves, against our selves:
for wheresoever we stand, we stand a contradiction to our selves and others,
and are as far from what we would set up, as they are, who would set up
something else which is nothing like it. We conceive the world is shaken and
out of order, and we put forth our hand to bear up the pillars of it. We form
Commonwealths, we square out one by another, and know the dimensions of
neither. We model Churches, draw out their Government, that is, make a coat
for the moon: we make a Church, and clothe it with our fancy; fit it with a
government, as with a garment, which will never be put on; or if it be, The
next power may pluck it off, and leave it naked, leave it nothing, or put on
some other which may be worn with more honor and safety to that power, which
put it on. This is visible and open to the eye, and that eye is but weak and
dull which does not see and observe it; why should then our pride and
self-conceit thus walk as in shadow, as in a dream? why should we thus
disquiet our selves in vain, and busy our selves, and trouble others, to
build up that to which we can contribute no more, then a poor, feeble wish,
which has not power enough to raise it to that desired height in which we
would have it seen, but will leave it where it was first set up (an useless
unregarded thing) in our brain and imagination? Christ and his Apostles did not
leave the Church naked, but fitted her with a garment, which she wore for many
ages; in which there were scarce any that did stand up and say, It did not
become her; and if we do not now like the fashion, but sit down and invent
another, we do but teach and prompt others to do the like; and so we shall have
many more, and none at all, be ever choosing, ever changing, even to the end of
the world. This is it which has divided Christians, which have but one name,
and given them so many, that it will cost us labor and study but to number
them: This rends the Church with Schism; for men that will not be confined,
are ever asking how they should be governed; and they are busiest to question
the present form of discipline, who would have none: and if you observe the
behavior of the Schismatic, you may behold him walk, as if he had the Urim
and Thummim on his breast, the breast plate of judgment ever with him, for by
a thought (which is but a look of the mind) he discovers, and determines all
things; so dangerous is this spiritual pride both to our selves and others.
Nor is the high conceit of our own perfections and holiness less dangerous,
but most fatal to our selves; For that he aven which we draw out in our fancy,
has no more light and joy in it, then the region of darkness; only what is
wanting in reality, we supply with thought; but to no more purpose then that
soldier, who having no other pillow to lay his head on but his headpiece,
that he might make it more easy, filled it with chafe. We think our selves to
be something, as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 6. and we are nothing, and are
deceived; pride is but a thought, and pride is folly; now we are (...), more
regular then the rule, more exact then the Law, Nazian.
more bright then light, above the command; not to believe us is infidelity;
not to obey us is a kind of rebellion; not to admire us is profaneness; not to
join with us is schism; not to subscribe to what we say, is heresy. We are,
and we alone; we are as he that lies on the top of the mast, and we sleep, and
dream out the tempest; we may be Adulterers, Murderers, Traitors, and the
Favorites of God; we may be men after Gods own heart, and yet do what his soul
hates: All our sins are venial, though never so great; our sins do not
hurt, but rather advantage us; the greatest evil that is in us will turn to our
good; for our faith is steadfast, our hope lively, and our Election sure; and to
this height our imagination has raised us, and from this we fall, and are lost
for ever.

And therefore it will concern us to captivate both, both our understanding and
our will; not (...), not to be over-wise, not to be wise in our own conceits,
Romans 12.16. not to be such Gnostics, not to seem to know what we do not; nay
sometimes not to seem to know what we do know; and this will defend us from
Error, and our Brethren from offense: and then to subdue our will to our
reason and the rule, to subject our will against our natural desire and
inclination to the will of God; ad nutum ejus nutu citius obedire, to obey
every beck of his as soon as the beck is given, in the twinkling of an eye,
without deliberation or demur. In a word, not to do what thou would, but to
obey in what thou would not, and which the flesh shrinks from, which is the
crown and perfection of Obedience, put on by the hand of Humility.

And this is the Humility of the Soul: But is this enough? No, Psalm. 40.
Tertull. de Pallio.
Corpus apta sti mihi, A body have thou prepared me. God sees thy Body as well
as thy Soul, and will have the knee, the tongue, the eye, the countenance,
Auditur Philosophus dum videtur; the Philosopher, and so the Christian, is
heard when he is seen. Thou art to walk with him, or before him. Come, says
David, Let us worship and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker. Then
you may best take Humilitie's picture, when the Body is on the ground; you may
mark her how she bows it down, watch her in a tear, take hold of her in a
look, follow her in all her postures, till she faint, and droop, and lie down
in dust and ashes. Oh beloved, the time was when men did so walk, as if God had
been visible and before them; The time was when Humility was thought a virtue;
when Humility came forth in this dress, multo deformata pulvere, with ashes
sprinkled on her head, her garments rent, like a Penitentiary: You might have
beheld her kissing the chains of imprisoned Martyrs, washing the feet of
Lazars, wallowing at the Temple doors, begging the prayers of the Saints; you
might have seen her rent, and torn, stripped and naked, the hair neglected, the
eye hollow, the body withered, the feet bare, and the knees of horn, as
Nazianzen describes it in his 12. Oration. Then we humility not sunk into the
soul, but written and engraven in the body in Capital letters, that you might
have run and read it. But, I know not how the Face of Christendom is much
altered, and humility grown stately, has bracelets on her Arms, and rich
Diamonds on her Head: we have fed her daintily, and set her upon her feet. Walk
humbly; that we can without hat or knee, with a merry and lofty countenance,
with a face set by our Ambition, and even speaking our Pride and Scorn; and we
appear in the service of God, as in a thing below us and which we Honor with
our Presence: Humility with an Humble look, a bowed knee, a Bare Head, a
Composed Countenance? away with it, It is Idolatry and Superstition. But let us
not deceive our selves; God hates the visor of humility, but not her face; If
she borrow from art and the pencill, she is deformed, but appearing in her own
likeness, in that dress; which God himself has put her in, she is lovely,
and shines upon those duties in which we are employed, and makes them so
delightful to behold. It Is true, the thought may knock at heaven, when the
body is on the ground; and when that is shut up between two walls, may measure
out a Kingdom; and the whole world may be too narrow for an Anchoret: but it
is as true, That humility never seized on the mind, but it draws the body after
it; If I lose my friend, my look will tell you he is gone. If a robber spoil
all that I have, there is a kind of devastation of the countenance, but a
wounded spirit who can bear? If thy soul be truly humble, thy bones will
consume, and thy marrow waste, as David speaks, Thy eye wax old, and thou will
forget to eat thy bread; thou will go heavily all the day long. Think what we
will, pretend what we can, flatter our selves as we please, I shall as soon
believe him chaste, whose eyes are full of Adulteries, or who will sell a
copyhold to buy Aretines pictures; I shall as soon think him modest, whose
mouth is an open sepulcher; him charitable, who will sooner eat up twenty poor
men, then feed one, as that man devote and humble in his heart, who is so bold
and irreverent in his outward gesture.

I cannot but look upon it as upon an impossibility, to draw these two
together, a neglectfull deportment, and humility; for I cannot imagine, nor can
any man give me a reason, why every. Passion, nay, why every vice should show
it self in the outward man, tota corpulentia, as the Father speaks, in its full
proportion and dimensions; That Anger should shake the lips, and set the teeth,
and dye the face sometimes with white sometimes with red; that sorrow should
make men put on sackcloth, rend their garments, beat their heads against the
walls, as Augustus did for the defeat and loss of Varus; that even
dissimulation it self should betray it self by the winking of the eye, Prove.
10.10. That every vice and virtue should one way or other open it self, and
even speak to the eye, only Devotion and Humility should sink in, and withdraw
it self, lurk and lie hid in the inward man, as if it were ashamed to show its
head; that we should be afraid, to kneel, afraid, to be reverent; that it
should be a sin to kneel, a sin to be humble; that to come and fall down, or
bow, though it be in the house of God, is to worship Dagon. Reason and Religion
help us, and destroy every Altar, and break down every image, and burn it with
fire, and chase and banish all superstition from the face of the earth. And let
all the people say Amen. But, God forbid, that reverence, and those motions and
expressions of humility which are the works and language of the heart, should
be swept out together with the rubbish; that the wind which drives out
superstition, should leave an open way for Profaneness and Atheism to enter
in. And let all the people say Amen to that too. For if we do not present our
bodies as well as our souls a living sacrifice, glorifying God in every motion
of it, as as we do in every conception of our mind, Romans 12.1. Our service
cannot be a reasonable service of him, and the same tempest may drive down
before it religion and reason both. S. Paul has joined them both together as
in the purchase, so also in the obligation, 1 Cor. 6.20. Ye are bought with a
price, This is the Antecedent; and then it follows necessarily, therefore
glorify God in your bodies and your spirits, which are Gods.

But this may seem too general; yet if we know what humility is, we shall the
better see how to walk humbly with our God; but we will draw it nearer, and be
more particular. And indeed, to walk humbly with our God, and to walk before
him, Genesis 17.1. to walk in his statutes, Psalm. 119.1. to walk in the light of
the Lord, Is. 2.5. to walk as in his sight, differ not in signification, nor
present unto our understandings diverse things. For all speak but this, to
walk as in his presence, to walk as if he were a near spectator, as if he were
visible before us, not to shroud and mantle our selves, not to run into the
thicket, as if there he could not see us; but so to behave our selves, as if he
were a stander by, an eyewitness of all our Actions; to curb our fancy, keep
our tongue, be afraid of every Action, upon this certain persuasion, That God
is at hand. For as God is Emanuel, God with us, when he blesses us and does us
good, so do we walk with God when we bless him, and do our duties. As I was
with Moses, so will I be with thee, says God to Joshuah, Joshuah. 5. Then God
is with us when he strengthens our hands, when he shadows us under his wing,
when he pours forth his graces upon us; and then we walk with him when we
bow before him, use all the faculties of our souls, and move every member of
our bodies as his, and as in his sight; when we devote our selves to him alone;
when our eye looks upon him as the eye of the handmaid on the eye of her
mistress, and by a strict and sincere obedience we follow him in all those
ways which he has appointed for us.

This I take to be the meaning of the words; we shall draw all within the
compass of these considerations; first, That God has an all-seeing eye, That
he sees all ad Nudum, as the Schools speak, naked as they are, surveys our
Actions, hears our words, and searches the very inwards of the heart:
secondly, That truly to believe this is the best preservative of the other two;
the best means to establish Justice, and uphold Mercy in us; to keep us in an
even and unerring course of obedience: for will any man offend his God in his
very eye? And in the third place, we shall discover and point out those who do
not thus walk with God, but walk in the haughtiness, and deceitfulness of
their hearts, as if God had neither eye to see, nor ear to hear, nor hand to
punish them, that we may mark and avoid them; and this shall serve for use and
application. What does God require?

-- to walk humbly with thy God.

And first, That we may walk humbly with our God, this must be laid as a
foundation to build upon, as the primum movens, as the which first sets us a
walking, and puts us into this careful and humble posture, That God is present
every where, and sees and knows all things. And here we must not make too
curious and bold a disquisition concerning the manner how God is present every
where, and how he sees all things; It is enough for us to believe he does so,
and not to seek to know that which he never told us, and which indeed he cannot
tell us, because we cannot apprehend it: for how can we receive that knowledge,
of which we are not capable? we read, That he fills the earth and the heaven,
Jer. 23.24. That heaven is his Throne, and the earth his footstool, Is. 66.1.
That he is higher then heaven, and deeper then hell, and longer then the earth,
and broader then the sea, Job 11.7,8,9. That he is not far from every one of
us, That in him we live, and move, and have our being. Acts 17.27,28. That his
understanding is infinite, Psalm. 147.5. That there is no creature which is not
manifest in his sight; that all things are naked to him, (...), open as the
entrails of a beast cut down in the back, for sacrifice, Heb. 4.13. That he
looks down from heaven on the children of men. Psalm. 142. That his eyes are
open upon all their ways; That neither they, nor their Imquity are hid from
his face; and hoc satis est dixisse Deo -- and this is enough for God to tell
us, and this is enough for us to know. I dare be bold to say, says Saint
Augustine, Forsitan nec ipse Johannes dicit de Deo, ut est, Saint John was as
an eagle, and flew aloft, to a higher pitch then the rest, but could not soar
so high as to bring us down a full relation, and tell us what God is. This is a
message which no man can bring, nor no man can hear. He was a man inspired
from God himself; if he had not been inspired, he could have said but little,
and being a man, he could say no more. They that walk in valleys and in low
places, see not much more ground then they tread; they that are in deep wells,
see only that part of the world which is over their heads; but he that is on
the top of some exceeding high mountain, sees all the level, even the whole
country which is about him: So it stands betwixt us mortals and our
incomprehensible God; we that live in this world, are confined as it were into
a valley or pit, we see no more then the bounds which are set us will give us
leave; and that which our scant, and narrow wisdom, and providence foresees,
when the eye thereof is cleerest, is full of uncertainty, as depending upon
causes which may not work, or if they do, by the intervening of some cross
accident, may fail. But God, who is that supreme and sublime light, and by
reason of his wonderful nature so high exalted, as from some exceeding high
mountain sees all men at once, all Actions, all Casualties present and to come,
and with one cast of his eye measures them all. This we are told, and it is
enough for us that God has told us so much; that he is in heaven, and yet not
confined to that place; that he is every where, though we do not know how; that
he sees all things, knows all things; that he is Just, and wise, and
Omnipotent: and here we may walk with safety, for the ground is firm under us;
upon this we may build up our selves in our Holy Faith; upon this we may build
up our Love, which always eyes him; our honor to him, which ever bows before
him; our patience, which bears every burden, as if we saw him laying it on;
our fear, to which every place is as mount Sinai, where it trembles before
him; our hope, which lays hold on him, as if he were present in all the
hardship we undergo; our obedience, which always works as in his eye; to
venture further, is to venture as Peter did upon the Sea, where we are sure to
sink; nor will Christ reach out his hand to help us, but we shall be swallowed
up in that depth which has no bottom, and be lost in that which is past
finding out; for this is the just punishment of our bold, and too forward
curiosity; It works on busily, and presses forward with great earnestness to
see it self defeated; loses that which it might grasp, and finds nothing.

It is enough for us to see the back parts of God, that is, as much as he is
pleased to show us; and the want of this moderation has occasioned many gross
errors in the Church of Christ (for what can curiosity bring forth but
monsters?) The Anomaei thought God as comprehensible as themselves (and indeed,
upon a slender stock of knowledge we grow wanton, and talk of God as we do of
one another) and no marvel, that they who know not themselves should be so
ignorant of God, as to think to comprehend him. Against these Saint Chrysostom
wrote. The Manichees confined him to a place, and these Saint Austin confutes.
Others took upon them to qualify and reform this speech, God is in every
place, by changing the preposition In into Cum, God is with every place. Others
conclude that the essence of God is most properly in heaven; others have shut
him up there, and excluded his presence from this lower world. The heaven, they
will tell you, is his Throne, but then is not the earth also his footstool;
why may he not then be in earth, as well as in heaven? For the Argument is the
very same; nor must we conceive of God as we do of great Potentates, whom we do
not entertain in a Cottage, but in a Palace; nor can his Majesty gather soil by
intermingling it self with the things of the earth (a most carnal conceit) for
the very Poet will tell us, Tangere and tangi nisi corpus nulla potest res.
That nothing but a body can be touched, much less defiled. We cannot think the
Angel impaired his beauty by being in prison with Peter, or in the den with
Daniel, unless we will say he was scorch't in the furnace, when the three men
did not so much as smell of the fire. The heavens themselves are unclean in his
sight, says Job, c. 15. yet he remains, says the Father, pure (...), in a
most wonderful exuberance, beyond all Hyperbole; No pitch can defile him, no
sin pollute him; No deformity on earth can sully his beauty. Our cursed
oaths do even blast his name, yet his name is the same, the Holy of Holyes;
his eyes beheld us weltring in our blood, yet they are ten thousand times
brighter then the sun; and therefore he is truly called Actus primus, an act
or essence, as free from contagion, as composition. We take perfection from,
him he receives no imperfection from us; he sits in heaven, yet his Majesty is
not increased; he walks on the earth, yet his Majesty is not diminished; he
rides on the wings of the wind, yet his Majesty and glory is still the same. He
is in darkness, makes darkness a Pavillion round about him, yet is light it
self; he is in our corrupt hearts, yet is purity it self. Nusquam est, and
ubique est, he is no where, because no place can contain him; he is every
where, because no body, no place, no substance whatsoever can exclude him. And
as he is present with us, and about our paths, so he sees and knows every
motion and action of ours. Our inclinations, our thoughts, when they are risen,
whilst they were arising, before there was either object or opportunity to
raise them, or any temptation to draw them up. He sees our habits, our vices
and virtues, before we ventured on that action which did lead the way and begin
them; I know him, says God of Abraham, Genesis 18.19. and that he will do Justice
and Judgment. He knows our dispositions. And found some good thing in
Jeroboams child, 1 Kings 14.13. He sees all our actions long before they are
done; our thoughts, before they are conceived; our deliberations, before we ask
counsel; and our counsels, before they are fixed. Of what large extent were many
of the prophesies? how many years? how many cross actions? how many
contingencies? what numberless swarms of thoughts inconsistent, and not
understood, and yet concurrent and introductory to that which was foretold,
came between the prophecy and the fullfilling of it? yet God saw through all
these, and saw all these, and how they were working to that end, of which he
was pleased to give the prophets a sight. The prophet Daniel foretells the
succession of the Monarchies, the division of Alexanders kingdoms, the ruin
of the Jews, and that so plainly, that Prophyry, a great enemy to the
Christians, to disgrace and put it off, said, That it was a discourse much like
Lycophrons Cassandra, written after the things were done, and so published to
caiol and deceive the people, who are soon pleased, and so, soon taken with a
cheat. Male norunt Deum, qui non putant illum posse quod non putant, Tert. de
Resurr. Carn. c. 38.
says Tertullian, They have but little knowledge of God, who do not think that
he can do, yea and does know and see what they cannot think. For he that made
the eye, shall not he see? He that teaches man knowledge, shall not he know?
Psalm. 94.9,10. He that fashioneth the heart, shall not he consider all our
works? Psalm. 33.15. He sees us when we fall down before him, he sees us when we
harden our faces; and he sees us in our tears, and he sees us in our blood,
and yet he remains yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever. For as it is
an argument of his infinite perfection to understand all things, so is it of
his Judiciary and infinite power to see, and know, and observe those motions,
those offers, those inclinations which are against his Law, and by which we are
said to fight against him. I may know Adultery, and yet be chaste; I may see
malice and debate in the City, and yet be peaceable; I may hear blasphemy, and
yet tremble at Gods name: For sin does not pollute as it is in the
understanding, but in the will; not as it is known, but as it is embraced; and
not by any physical, but a moral contagion, which first infects the will
alone. If the bare knowledge of evil could pollute, then he that makes himself
an Eunuch for the kingdom of heaven, may be an Adulterer, and the Judge that
sits to condemn the sin, may be a Parricide.

God then may be present every where, and this is the poorest exception that
can be made against it. I have waved, you see, that more subtle and intricate
disputes, (and there be too many, for men are never weary of doing nothing)
that which has been spoken is as plain as necessary, and no man can take it as
a thing out of his sphere and reach. Let us pass to that which we proposed in
the second place, and for which we proposed this of the Omnipresence and
Omniscience of God. For the consideration of this is the best preservative of
Mercy, and Pillar to uphold Justice; Septum Legis, a fence, a hedge set about
the Law, that no unclean beast be so bold to break in, and come so near as to
touch it. The Prophet David makes this use of it, Psalm. 139.7. Quo ibo a
spiritu? whither shall I go from thy spirit, or whither shall I fly from thy
presence? If I go into heaven, thou art there; If I make my bed in hell, behold
thou art there; If I take the wings of the morning, and fly to the uttermost
parts of the Sea, even there shall thou find me out. Now nothing can be more
forcible to make us walk reverently and humbly with our God, then a firm
persuasion that God walks with us that he sees and observes us, that whatever
we do or think lies open to the view and survey of that all-seeing eye. For
secrecy is the nurse of sin; that is done often which is done without
witness, and done with more delight, in a kind of pride and triumph, where
there is the least fear of discovery. They that are drunk are drunk in the
night, and the twilight is the Adulterers season: (...), said Pindarus. Clem.
Paedag. 3.
Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Revelling, are (...), says Nazianzen, are the
thefts of the night, by which we would steal and convey our sin from the Sun
and the people. Naz. or. 40.
And Clemens observes it of the Gnostics, That they profess themselves to be
the Sons of God, Clem. Strom. 3.
but as the Sons of God did not love the light, but polluted themselves, and
took their pleasure, not as Kings, but (...), as slaves in secret, for fear of
the whip. Look upon the Politicians of the world, and see how they work under
ground, as it were in vaults and caves; how they look one way and work another;
what a stream of light ushers in a work of darkness; what a goodly preface we
have to a flying book of curses; what a fair frontispiece to a Beth-aven, a
house of vanity; and then when their lust, which conceived with so much art and
concealment, has brought forth that sin with which they were so long in
labor, they will not own it under that name, but father it upon something else
which was scarce thought on till then, and is more different from it in kind,
then a man is from a Lion. So they hide it that it may be done, and when it is
done they hide it; a child of darkness it was in the conception, and now it is
brought forth, it is a child of darkness. For the most part, we bid defiance
to sin in public, and meet and join with it in the dark; though we venture
not in the day, but stand out, yet if it will give us a visit in the twilight,
we are willing to yield: Apuleius.
Quod nemo novit pene non fit, what no man knows is as if it were not done at
all; and such is our folly and madness, to think to make our selves as
invisible as God, and that he sees not us because we see not him, as Tully
spoke of some Philosophers, quia animo videre non poterant, omnia ad oculos
referebant, when they saw so little with their intellectual eye, they referred
all to their sense, and would believe nothing but what they had an ocular
demonstration for. See Ser. 14.
And we because the eye of our faith is dull and heavy, and near put out, and
do not discern that eye which is ten thousand times brighter then the Sun,
think there is no other eye but that of flesh, which if we can lie hid from, we
are Securi adversus Deos hominesque, we are secure and safe not only from men
but from God himself; so different and contrary is our behavior when we break,
to that which we put on when we keep the Law. When we have given an Alms, we
take a trumpet; when we fast, our countenance must proclaim it, and though we
lie on the ground, yet are we on the housetop; when we have fought it out, and
withstood and conquered a temptation, Hieron.
Difficile est Deo tantum judice contentum esse, we can hardly be brought to
make God our judge, and leave it between him and our selves, but use some art
that multitudes may behold us. But when we are willing a temptation should
prevail, nay when we tempt the temptation it self, and call it to us, we play
least in sight; all is hushed in silence, and we are well content that God alone
should be our judge.

What then will make us walk humbly, but this persuasion that we walk with God,
and that he sees us? For if any thing will do it, it must either be the Laws of
men, or that Law within our selves; but we shall see, that either these will
not reach home, or that this twofold cord will be easily broken.

For first, the Laws of men, though framed with the greatest wisdom, and
diligence, and providence which can possess the largest hearts, yet have not
strength enough to level our ways, or make our paths straight: nor do they
comprehend all those sins which must needs offend that eye which can behold no
evil; they condemn nothing but that which is seen and evident, nor do they
censure our wills, but our deeds; they punish offenses, and take away deceit,
injustice, and cruelty, quatenus tenere manu res possunt, so far forth as they
are within their hand and reach, says Tully: Off. 3.
But the Law of God reaches the inward man, curbs and bounds the
extravagancies of our thoughts, which are as opposite to that order and policy
which God has set up amongst men, to bring them to happiness, as the foulest
Disorders, Murders, Adulteries, Rebellion, can be to the peace of a Temporal
Kingdom.

Again, though the Laws of men carry some terror with them, yet as Aeneas
Sylvius speaks of the low esteem they of Vienna had of Excommunications, Tantum
terrent quantum infamant, aut damno temporali sunt, Their terror is no more,
then the smart, and loss, and infamy they bring; and though they be surda res,
deaf and inexorable, yet a Bribe will not only blind the eyes, but change the
countenance and voice of him that should keep them; and this leaves them weak
and invalid to prevent or remove those irregularities which they threaten, but
in vain, being in those hands which are open for a bribe, and then bind them
up. Tertullian has well observed, That the providence and authority of men in
this do pariate and are alike; such as their wisdom is to demonstrate that
which is good, such is their power to exact it; Tam illa falli facilis, quam
ista contemni, Tertull. Apol. c. 45.
their wisdom as subject to error, as their power to a baffle; the one may be
deluded, and the other restrained; and both Omri and his statutes may be trod
under foot. When we walk under the Laws of men, we walk as under a cloud,
which every wind may carry about, and at last scatter and disperse; but when we
walk under the Laws of God, we walk as under heaven, the Throne of God, which
shall stand fast for ever; when we walk with men, we walk as with them whom we
can sometimes delude, sometimes muzzle and bind; but when we walk with God, we
walk with him who is every where, and sees every event; whose eye is ever open,
whose hand is ever stretched out, and whose voice breaks the Cedars of
Libanus.

But now, secondly: as the Laws of men do not so awe and regulate us but that
we break out too often beyond those bounds which Reason and Religion has set up;
no more does the Law within us, the Law of our understanding, as Damascen calls
the conscience, command or confine us in our walk; sometimes we gloss it,
sometimes we slight it, sometimes we silence it, and some there be that seal
it up, and sear it, as Saint Paul speaks, as with a hot Iron. If it speak to
us we are deaf; if it renew its clamours, we are more averse; and if it check
us we do (...), says Saint Paul, beat and wound it more and more: multi famam,
pauci conscientiam verentur, says Pliny, the loudest noise our conscience can
make is not heard, but the censure of men, which is not, most times worth our
thought, is a thunderclap; we hear it, and we tremble; we are led like fools
with melody to the stocks; what others say is our motion, and turns us about
to any point, but when we speak to our selves we hear it, but believe it not,
fling it by and forget it. The voice of conscience is, defraud not your
brother; nay, but we will overreach him: the voice of conscience is, Love thy
neighbor as thy self; nay, but we will oppress him; the voice of conscience
is, Love Mercy; nay, but we will love our selves: what we speak to our selves,
our selves soon make heretical. How Ambitious are we to be accounted Just, and
how unwilling to be so? How loud are we against sin in the presence of others,
and then make our selves as invisible as we can that we may commit it? what a
sin is uncleanness in the Temple, and what a blessing is it in the closet?
with what gravity and severity will a corrupt Judge threaten iniquity? What? a
pilferer? Let him be whipped. What? a murderer? He shall dye the death: he whips
the thief, and hangs the murderer, and indeed whips and hangs himself by a
Proxy. So that we see, neither the power of the Laws, nor the respect and
obedience we owe to our selves, are of any great force to prevail with us to
order our steps aright, walk with men, or as before men. That may have some
force, but it reaches no further then the outward man. Walk with our selves?
give ear to our selves? This might do much more; but we see the practice of it
is very rare and unusual; That there is little hope that it will complete and
perfect our walk, and make us Just and Merciful men, which is here required.
It will be easy then to infer, that our safest conduct will be to walk with
God, and to secure both the Laws of men, and that Law within us; that they may
have their full power and effect in us, we must first raise and build up in our
selves this firm persuasion, that whatsoever we do, or think, is open to the
eye of that God who is above us, and yet with us; That that discovery which he
makes is infinitely and incomparably more clear and certain then that which we
make by our senses; that we do not see our friend so plain as he sees our
hearts; that thou see not the birds fly in the air so distinctly as he sees
thy thoughts fly about the world, to those several objects which we have set
up for our delight; that he sees, and observes that irregularity and deformity
in our actions, which is hid from our eyes when our intention is serious, and
our search most accurate. Yet nevertheless, though being as we are in the
flesh, and so led by sense, were this belief rooted and confirmed in us, That
he did but see us, as man sees us or were this as evident to our faith, as that
is to our sense, we should be more watchful over our selves, more wary of the
devils snares and baits then we commonly are; magna necessitas indicta
pietatis, etc. says Hilary, Hill. in. Psalm. 178.
for there is a necessity laid upon us of fear and reverence, and
circumspection, when we know and believe, That he now stands by as a witness
who will come again and be our Judge. What a Paradise would the world be? what
a heaven would there be upon earth, if this were generally and steadfastly
believed? Glorious things are spoken of faith, we call it a full assent; we
call it (...), a full and certain persuasion, It is the evidence of things not
seen; I ask, is ours so? would to God it were; nay would for many of us, we did
but believe that he is present with us, and sees what we do or think, as firmly
as we do a story out of our own Chronicles; nay, as many times we do believe a
lie; would our faith were but as a grain of mustard seed; even such a faith, if
it did not remove mountains, yet would chide down many a swelling thought,
would silence many a proud word, would restrain us from those actions which now
we glory in, but would run from as from serpents, as from the devil himself, if
we could fully persuade our selves that a God of wisdom and Power were so near.

And now in the last place; Let us cast a look upon those who for want of this
persuasion, do walk on in the haughtiness of their hearts, and neither bow
to the Laws of God or men, nor hearken to the Law within them; which
notwithstanding could not be in them, were not this bright Eye and powerful
Hand over them. And this may serve for Use and Application.

Many walk, says Saint Paul to the Philippians, of whom I have told you often,
and now tell you weeping, that they are enemies to God. And first, the
presumptuous sinner walks not with God, who has first hardened his heart, and
then his face as Adamant; whose very countenance does witness against him; who
declares his sins as Sodom and hides them not; and they who first contemn
themselves, and then scornfully reject what common Reason and Nature suggest to
them; and then at last, trusting either to their wit or wealth, conceive a
proud disdain of all that are about them, and not a negative, but a positive
contempt of God himself; first lose their reason in their lusts, and then their
modesty, which is the only good thing that can find a place in evil: who do
that upon the open stage, which they did at first but behind the curtain; who
first make shipwreck of a good conscience, and then with the swelling salies of
Impudence, hasten to that point and haven which their boundless lusts have
made choice of, as we should do to eternal happiness, per calcatum patrem,
as Saint Jerome speaks, over Father and Mother, over all Relations, and
Religion it self; forsake all these, not for Christ's sake and the Gospel, but
for Mammon and the world. What foul pollutions, that grinding and cruel
oppressions, what open profaneness have there been in the world? and we may
ask wit the Prophet Jeremiah, cap. 8.12. Confusi sunt? Were they ashamed when
they committed abomination? Nay, they were not ashamed, neither could they have
any shame, (...), Ephesians. 4.18. for the hardness and blindness of their heart.
For in sin and by sin they at last grow familiar in sin; clothe themselves with
it as with a robe of Honor; bring it forth into open view, like Agrippa and
Bernice in the Acts, (...), with great state and pomp; They set it up, as
Nebuchadnezzar did his Image of Gold, threescore Cubits high, to be seen of
all; boast of their Atheism, and look down upon them with a contemptuous pity,
as shallow, weak men, who go about to persuade such men as they, of quick and
searching wits, that there is a God who both sees and hears them; and take it
very ill, if we do but wish them well. Thus it is in every bold presumptuous
sinner even as it was with the Devil, Depuduit, no sooner do they cast
themselves down from Heaven, but they cast away all shame, and their modesty
flies from them in the very fall, and their Motto is, Tush, God does not see;
And this sure is not to walk with God, but to walk and strut as Nebuchadnezzar
did in his Palace, This is the Palace which I have built: Thus, thus have I
done, and who dares fling a stone at it? To walk as Goliath did, in a coat of
Brass, and defy the Host of Israel, and God himself. Golias in front, etc.
says Austin; Golias was smote in the forehead, and so are they. The disease
indeed is in the heart, but it has made an impression, and left a mark in the
forehead. He that has forgot to blush, does not well remember that there is a
God who looks upon him.

Secondy, the dissembling sinner, the Hypocrite walks not with God: for he is
but a Player of Religion, and being but a Slave, comes forth a King, and then
treads his measures, puts it to the trial whether God has an eye, whether he
will take dross for silver, a superficies for a substance, a Fast for
Repentance, a picture for the new creature. Archidamus said well of an old man,
that had died and discolored his hair, It Is not likely he should speak truth,
qui mendacium in capite circumfert, who carries about with him a lie on his
head; nor can he walk as with his God, whose very speech and gesture, whose
very look is a lie. Where there are false lights there the ware is not
warrantable; where there are privy doors, there the Priests will practice
collusion, and eat up the Idols meat. If you see a labyrinth, it is either to
conceal a strumpet or a Minotaure. That is true of the hypocrite which the
Rabbis conceived of their Priests; He is like an Angel, visible or invisible
as he please. Now this is not to walk with God, but to walk with our lusts,
with our malice and Covetousness; to look upon them as we should do upon our
God, to be careful that they are pleased and satisfied; to reverence them, to
follow their behests and commands; to provide that these horse-leaches be fed,
our lust fed with pleasure, and our covetousness with gold; for these are the
Hypocrites gods. As for the true God, they leave him behind them, and walk with
nothing but his Name.

Thirdly: The Apologizing sinner walks not with God, but runs himself into
the thicket of excuses, Covers his transgressions as Adam, and hides his
iniquity in his bosom, Job 31.33. Covers himself over with these leaves, which
have no heat, no solidity in them, but will wither and dye when the Sun shows
it self, and be scattered before the wind, and leave him naked and miserable.
He has learnt an art, (and he may quickly learn that of his sin, which
needs and teaches it) pavimentare peccata, (it is Saint Austins phrase) to
smooth or plaster and parget over his deformities; he excuses the breach of one
commandment with his zeal to another; the breach of his charity, by his love to
his faith: He excuses sacrilege, by his hatred to Idolatry; his malice, by his
zeal; he pleads ignorance where there is light enough, and weakness when he
might be strong; and infirmity, where he presumes; and willingness, when he
had no will; and will not consider that the devil speaks by all these, as he
did to our first parents by the serpent; For this is no sin at all, and you
shall not dye at all, are all one. He speaks, says Saint Austin by the
mathematician, That he sins not, but his star. He speaks by the Manichee,
That he sins not, but the Prince of Darkness. I may add, he speaks by the
Anabaptist, It Is not he sins, but the Ass his body; By the Libertine, That
God sins in him; and by the many, that the devil only is in fault. If we look
upon it well, and send our eye abroad into the world, we may peradventure be
tempted to think, that the world and all that therein is, were only made to
yield matter out of which to forge and fashion an excuse; for what is there
almost in the world which we do not lay hold on for that end? Adam the first
man, is the first excuse, and we drew it out of his loins: Original sin,
and after that the Law, the flesh, the will, the understanding, sin,
obedience, the devils, and God himself are forced in to speak for us; and what
was made the matter of virtue and obedience, is by us made the matter of
excuse; we may be bold to say, This is not to walk with God, as if he had an
all-seeing eye, but to flutter up and down, as the Raven did upon the waters,
from excuse to excuse, but far from God and the Arc; so to walk as if we were
quite out of his reach and sight.

Last of all; The speculative sinner does not walk with God, I mean, the man
that breaks not out into action, but yet perfects his work in his mind; where
the sinner does that which he never does, joins with that object which he
shall never touch; commits adultery, and yet may be an Eunuch; plots revenge,
and yet never strikes a stroke; grasps the wealth which he will not labor for;
marryes that beauty which he saw but once, and shall never see again; and there
acts over those sins which he shall never bring into act; delights in that
which he shall never enjoy, and robs and slayes, and rides in triumph on a
thought; and so leaves his God, who gave him this power and faculty to another
end, and not to wallow in this mire, nor to be enslaved to the drudgery of so
vile an employment; and yet too many are willing to persuade themselves, that
God neither sees it nor regards it; that a thought is such Gozamour, of so thin
an appearance, that it escapes the eye, and so they set up a whole family of
them in the mind, and dally and delight themselves with them as with their
children. And yet this is the ground of all evil, and evil it self; wrought in
the soul, which works by its faculties, as the body does by its members, the
eye and the hand; and thus it may beat down Temples, murder men, lay Kingdoms
level with the ground, and it grows and multiplies, reflects upon it self
with joy and content, and omnia habet peccatoris praeter manus, and has all
that makes a sinner but hands; and though men see not our thoughts, (for this
is a royal prerogative) yet they are visible to his eye who is a spirit; and
they that look upon them as bare and naked thoughts, and not as complete works
finished in the soul, know not themselves, nor the Nature of God, and therefore
cannot be said to walk with him.

To conclude then: These walk not with God, and let us mark and avoid them. The
presumptuous daring sinner walks not with him, but hides himself in this
Atheistical conceit, that because man cannot punish, God does not see. The
hypocrite comes forth in a disguise, and acts his part, and because men applaud
him, thinks God is of their mind; as the Pantomime in Seneca, who observing the
people well pleased with his dancing, did every day go up into the Capitol, and
dance before Jupiter, and was persuaded that he was also delighted in him. The
Apologizer runs into the holes and burrowes of excuses, and there he is safe;
for who shall see him? The speculative sinner hides himself and all his
thoughts in a thought, is this thought, that thoughts are so near to nothing
that they are invisible; that sin is not sinful, till it speak with the
tongue, or act with the hand. But the eye of God is brighter then the Sun, and
his eyelids will try the children of men, Psalm. 11. as the goldsmiths tries
his gold in the fire, and will find out the dross, which we do not see. And if
we will not walk with him, but walk contrary unto him, Levit. 26.22. He will
also walk contrary unto us; He will see us, and not see us; know us, and not
know us. Hilar. l. 9. de Trin.
Habemus nescientem Deum quod tamen non nescit, says Hilary; God will seem not
to know that which he does know, and his ignorance is not ignorance but a
mystery. For to them who walk not with him humbly, the word will be at the last
day, I know you not, and God will keep state, and not know and acknowledge
them. This pure God will not know the unclean, this God of truth will not know
the dissembler, this strong and mighty God will bring down the imperious
offender; this Light will examine thoughts, and excuses will fly before it as
the mist before the Sun. But then, The Lord knows the ways of the Righteous,
says the Psalmist; and those that do justly, and love mercy, and walk as under
his all-seeing eye with humility and reverence, he will lead by the hand, and
go along with them, and uphold and strengthen them in their walk, and shadow
them under his wing; and when their walk is ended, know them as he did Moses,
above all men, and seeing his own marks upon them, beholding in them though a
weak, yet the image of his Justice and his Mercy upon them, he will spare them
as a Father spares his Son that serveh him; he will know them, and love them,
know them and receive them with an Euge, well done good and faithful servants,
you have embraced the Good which I showed you, done the thing which I required
of you; you have dealt Justly with your brethren, and I will be Just in my
promises; you have showed Mercy, and Mercy shall crown you; you have walked
humbly with me, I will now lift up your heads, and you shall inherit the
Kingdom which was prepared for you from the foundation of the world.

FINIS.
blazon or royal coat of arms of England and Wales HONI ^T QVI MAL Y PENSE

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE FUNERAL OF THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sir GEORGE
VVHITMORE, Knight, Sometime Lord Mayor of the City of LONDON: Who departed
this life December. 12. 1654. At his house at Bawmes in MIDDLESEX.
PSALM. 119.19. I am a stranger in the earth, hide not thy commandments from me.


THis Psalm is a Psalm of David (so Saint Augustine, and Hilary, and others)
or gathered by him, or out of him, and it is nothing else but a Collection of
Prayers and Praises, a body of devout ejaculations, which the Greek Fathers
call (...), lively sparkles breathed forth from a heart on fire, and even sick
with love; and they fly so thick, that observation can hardly take the order of
them. The method of devotion follows and keeps time with the motion of the
heart, which is as various and different, as those impressions which joy or
grief, fear or hope make in it; which either contract and bind it up and then
it struggles and labors within it self, and conceives sighs and groans which
cannot be expressed or breaks forth into complaints and strong supplications;
Take away the rebuke that I fear, v. 39. Let thy tender mercies come unto me
that I may live, v. 77. and the like; or else dilate and open it, and then it
leaps out of it self, and breaths it self forth with exultation and triumph, in
songs of praise and Hallelujahs, O Lord, thou art my portion, v. 57. O how I
love thy Law! v. 79. The Law of thy mouth is better unto me then thousands of
gold and silver.

In this which I have read unto you, and chosen as the fittest subject for this
present occasion; The heart having looked abroad, having looked out of it self,
and reflected back into it self, draws out in it self the picture of a
stranger or a Pilgrim, and having well looked upon it with the serious eye of
contemplation (which is the heart of the heart, and the soul of the soul)
having surveyed the place of its habitation, how frail and ruinous it is, as a
tent subject to the winds, and beat upon by every storm, and at last to be
removed; it goes out of it self, and seeks for shelter under the shadow of Gods
wing, sends forth strong desires for supply and support; in hoc inquilinatus
sui tempore, as Tertullian speaks, in this time of its sojourning and
Pilgrimage; and for that supply which is most answerable to the condition of a
stranger upon earth, and which may best conduct him to the place for which he
was born and bound. He asks not for riches; they have wings and will fly
away, and leave him in his walk, or if they stay with him they will but mock
and delude him, and lead him out of his way; not for honor, that is but a
breath, but air, and may breath upon him at one stage, and at the next leave
him, but never forward him in his way; not for delightful vanities; these are
but ill companions and will lead him out of his way: the best supply for a
stranger here upon earth is from heaven; from the place not where he sojournes,
but to which he is going; the best convoy, the will and commandments of God;
the word of God, the best lantern to his feet; for whilst these are in his eye
and heart, he shall pass by slippery places, and not fall; he shall pass
through fire and water, he shall walk upon the Lion and the Aspe, he shall meet
with flattering objects, and loath them with terrorus, and contemn them; use
the world as if he used it not; in poverty, and yet not poor; in affliction,
but not distressed; in many a storm, and pass through, and rejoice in it; living
in the world, and yet dead in the world, and so make his way through the valley
and shadow of death to his journeyes end, to that rest which remains for the
people of God, who are but Strangers and Pilgrims upon earth. This is the best
supply, and for this the Prophet puts up his petition in the words of my text,
I am a stranger upon earth, hide not thy commandments from me.

They are the words of the Kingly Prophet, and in the thirty ninth Psalm he
has the very same; Hold not thy peace at my tears, for I am a stranger with
thee, and a sojourner as all my Fathers were; and in them he presents unto us
his state and condition, and in his own, of all mankind. Menander fecit Andriam
and Perinthiam, one man is the map of all mankind, and he that knows one knows
them all. David was, and then all men are but accolae, inquilini, and howsoever
their Pomp and Glory may dazzle the eyes of men, yet if we will define them
aright, and set them out as they are, they are but strangers and Pilgrims upon
earth.

So that we have here first, a doctrine; declaring what we are; we are but
strangers upon earth, that is our condition; he that is least in it is so, and
he that has most and is Lord of it, is no more; secondly, the use or
inference; hide not thy commandments from me. For he that has one eye upon his
frailty and defects, will have another upon a supply; he that knows himself a
stranger will desire a guide.

Or you have our character, we are Accolae, strangers; and our (...) or
viaticum, our provision in our way, the commandments of God.

Or if you please you may consider first the person, I, King David; secondly,
his quality and condition, a King and yet a stranger on the earth; and these
two draw together into one the two most different states of the world, a
powerful Prince and a poor Pilgrim, him that sits on the Throne, and him that
grinds at the mill, the crowned head, and that head which has not a hole to
hide it self. And thirdly, the reason why the Holy Ghost, to teach us our
condition, does make choice of a King; out of which we shall raise this
doctrine, which is but a Paraphrase of the text, first, that man by nature is
but a stranger to the world; secondly, that he is to make himself so. And that
you may, I must hold out to you your viaticum, your provision, the commandments
of God, and show you of what use they have been to you in this your
peregrination and pilgrimage. I am a stranger in the earth, etc.

And first we must look on the person that speaks, and we may peradventure
wonder that he speaks it; that he who was as a God upon the earth, and one of
those whom God himself calls so, should yet speak in the low and humble
language of a Lazar, and count himself a stranger. We may well think the
character does but ill befit him: It may seem rather to be the speech of some
one of the Rechabites, who by their Father Jonadab were forbad to build houses,
to sow seed, to plant vineyards, or to have any, but all their lives to live in
Tents, Jer. 35.6,7. Or of some of the Essenes, a Sect amongst the Jews, who
left the City, and betook themselves to Fields and Mountains, Plin. Not. Hist.
l. 6.17.
( Gens aeterna, in qua tamen nemo nascitur, said Pliny of them; a lasting
Nation, in which notwithstanding none were born, for they begat Sectaries and
not Children) or of some of them of whom the Apostle speaks, Heb. 11. that
wandered in deserts and mountains, in dens and caves of the earth: or of some
Asceticall Monk, devoted and shut up in some cloister; or of some Anchoret,
shut up between two walls. This speech had well befitted one of these; and had
Demosthenes or Tully been to draw the character of a stranger upon earth, they
would have brought him out of the streets or highwayes, out of some Cell or
Prison, with all the marks about him; but their imagination would have passed
by the Palaces of Princes, as yielding nothing of him; For a King is but a
nickname, but a soloecisme, if he be not at home in every place. But the holy
Ghost regards not this Rhetoric, observes not this art, which indeed is made
up but by the eye; his method is e chola Coeli, drawn out by that wisdom which
formed and fashioned us, and knows whereof and what we are made; and that which
flesh and blood counts a soloecisme, with him is the most exact propriety of
language; what with us is looked upon as that which is against the rules of art,
with him is most regular. I may say, truth is the spirits art, and those words
which convey it are the best Elegancies; and thus to commend this lesson to us,
he makes choice of a person to an eye of flesh most unlikely, as Elias in the
book of Kings takes water to kindle the fire upon the Lords Altar. A King on
the earth and a stranger on the earth non been convenient, and will hardly be
coupled together in the same proposition. For how can they be strangers on
earth, who are the only Lords and proprietaries of it? Kings are Domini rerum
temporumque, are Lords of the times, and of all affairs, and they carry all
before them; this shall be the manner of the King, says Samuel 1.7. He shall
take your sons and your daughters, and make them his servants. He shall take
your fields and your vineyards, and turn them to his own use. A King; the very
name strikes a terror in us, and puts out of the best eye we have, our reason,
that we cannot discern between the King and the Man, nor the man and the
stranger; that we judge of him by what he is: Si libet, licet, His will is his
Law, and what he does is just, or he will make it so, for who dares say what
do thou? And yet this King, this God, is but a stranger, take him in his
zenith: take all his broad-blown glories, his swelling titles, his
over-spreading power, and all are drawn together and shrunk up in this one word
(...), Accola; whatsoever he is, whatsoever he appears, he is but a stranger.
Behold here the Kingly Prophet makes it his profession, lays by the title of a
King as guilty of a Misnomer, and calls himself a Pilgrim; and as in the
darkness of Popery he that vowed a Pilgrimage either to our Lady, or some
Saint, to Rome or to Jerusalem, did present himself before the Altar, and then
receive his Scrip and Staff. So am I here this day occasioned by this Pilgrim,
this honored Knight, to exhort you to vow a Pilgrimage, not to this or that
Saint, but to the King of Saints, and this you may do and stay at home; In your
house and private closets this Pilgrimage is best vowed, for the way to heaven
is as near out of Brittany as Jerusalem; and here you have a King to lead you,
and his example to accompany you. For the words which I now read, do as it
were bring him to the Church, where he presents himself before the Altar, lays
down his Crown and Scepter, and takes as it were his scrip and his staff, and
vows himself a Pilgrim. I am a stranger in the earth, hide not, etc.



And now to give you some reason why the holy Ghost makes choice of a King to
teach this lesson: First, in this he sets over us the best and wisest
Masters, Peripatetici dicunt generari prudentiam (...). A Gell. Noct. At. l.
13. c. 8.
because the Scholars and Disciples of Experience, Quam usus genuit, and matter
peperit memoria, Begot by use and conversation in the world, and brought forth
by memory. For those Conclusions which we gain by evidence of Reason, may be as
sure, but not so operative and impressive as those which are drawn out by
frequent and sensible observation. Those we behold as we do our face in a
glass (as Saint James speaks) and then go away and forget them; and commonly
they beget a knowledge which ends in it self, and so becomes more fatal then
Ignorance. But those Lessons which Experience brings us, do leave a mark and
impression behind them, and even characterize the soul, and so fill it that it
must vent and evaporate, discourse to it self, and discourse to others what it
has seen and felt; and it flows naturally and forcibly from the very depth of
Apprehension. He makes the fairest and the livelyest show of a stranger, who
shows him in purple and on the throne. He will soonest persuade you that you
are mortal, who first shows you Death in his own face. He writes most
effectually, who does (...), dip his pen in his mind, and then draw out those
conclusions which long and sad experience has taught him: For who fitter to
declame against Riot, then he that has fed with Swine? who can be a better
Orator against Intemperance, then he that has found the delusion of Wine, and
the rage of Drink? who can disgrace beauty more then he that has felt it bite
like a Cockatrice? when Dives was in hell, how ready was he to be a Preacher of
righteousness to his brethren? Experience does make men both willing and able
Instructers. And certainly to cast a slur on vanity, to decry the glory of the
world, to teach the uncertainty of riches, and the folly of Ambition, to
demonstrate that there is no solid or lasting Joy to be founded on any thing
under the moon, they can best do who have had experience, and are examples of
both fortunes, who have wallowed in wealth, and been mocked by it; who have lain
in pleasure, and been stung; who have caught at any evil that might carry them
to that height they aimed at, and then been thrown down by the same evil that
brought them up; who by long experience know what riches and Pleasures are;
what wings the one have, and what horror the other leave behind them when they
turn their back; who having had all their vain wishes made good, are brought at
last to unwish and execrate them all, and forced to make this their last, that
they had never had what they so much desired. Never was the world more severely
censured then by those who have made most trial of it. No theme more usually
handled by all sorts, then that of the contempt of the world, nusquam tamen
humanum genus tam incredulum, tam surdum est, and yet who hears what himself
says? or who believes his own report? the greatest part of men that speak
against it, do it not out of hatred, but out of love to the world; for who more
desirous to pluck the purple robe off from the rich man's back, then he that
longs to wear it himself? how greedily do men surfeit on that meat which their
injustice has plucked out of the mouths of others? His invisa saenoratio
quibus succurrere videtur. Columel.
It is with the world as with money let out upon use, men hate and revile it,
yet are willing and use all means to bring it into their hands, though upon
the hard and so much loathed condition of interest. The Philosophers have
largely written of this subject, but most of that they wrote they wrote upon
conjecture and guess, and scarce believed themselves in what they wrote; they
have writ best who have been disciplined by their own folly, and have been
taught not by the best, but yet by the surest mistrisse, experience; who have
been so roughly handled in the ways which they chose and delighted in, that at
last they were even forced to that proficiencie, that they did indeed believe
themselves. Solomon, who was a King, and wrote a bitter Satyr against the
world, did first taste the gall of every vanity, and then he wrote more fully,
more profitably, then ever yet any Philosopher did in his cell; for having run
over the whole work of the creation of the world, having watched the course of
things, and every motion of his own heart; having been turned round as it were
on the wheel of vicissitude and change, at last settles and rests upon this
conclusion, which was drawn forth out of the full treasury of his experience:
First he thought in his heart of what he had seen; and then he said in his
heart, and fixed it up in lasting characters to be read in the world to the end
of it, That, all that was in it was vanity. And therefore when a King thus
pronounces of himself that he is but a stranger, it must needs carry a far
greater weight and argument of truth, then if a private unexperienced man had
spoken it. David had experience of peace and war, of riches and poverty, of
pleasures and woe; He had been a private and public person; a shepherd, a
painful calling; a soldier, a bloody trade; a courtier, an honorable
slavery, which joins together in one the Lord and the Parasite; the Gentleman
and the Drudg; and he was a King, a glorious name, filled up with fears and
cares; all these he had passed through, and found least rest when he was at the
highest, less content in the Throne then in the sheepfolds; all this he had
observed and laid up in his memory, and this his confession is an Epitome and
brief of all; and in effect he tells us, that whatsoever he had seen in this
his passage, whatsoever he had enjoyed, yet he found nothing so certain as
this, that he had found nothing certain, nothing that he could abide with, or
would abide with him, but was still as a passenger, and stranger on the earth.

Now (to give you a second reason, why the spirit of God makes choice of a King
to preach this lesson) as he chooses the best and most experienced masters, so
does he condescend, and indulge to our infirmity, and appoints the fittest for
us, and those of whom we will soonest learn; whose first question commonly is,
who is the Preacher? who deliver up our judgments to our affections, and
converse rather with men's fortunes then their persons, and make use of no other
rule in our censure of what is done or said, then the man himself that did or
spoke it: if honor, or power, or wealth have made the man great in our eyes,
then whatsoever he speaks is an Oracle, though it be the doctrine of devils,
and have the same Father which all other lies have. Truth does seldom go down
with us, unless it be presented in the cup in which we love to divine and
prophecy. There was a poor wise man found, says Solomon, that delivered the
City by his wisdom, Eccles. 9.15. but none remembered or considered this poor
wise man. For poverty is a cloud, and casts a darkness over that which is
begot of light, sullies every perfection that is in us, hides it from an eye of
flesh, which cannot see wisdom and poverty together in one man; whereas folly
it self shall go for wisdom, and carry away that applause which is due to it,
if it dwell in the heart, or issue from the mouth of a purple and gallant fool;
ut sumus sic judicamus, as we are so we judge; and it is not our reason which
concludes, but our sense and affection. If we love beauty, every painted wanton
is as the Queen of Sheba, and may ask Solomon a question; If riches, Dives with
us will be a better Evangelist then Saint Luke; If our eyes dazzle at Majesty,
Herod's royal apparel will be a more eloquent orator then he that speaks, and
the people shall give a shout and cry, the voice of God and not of man. Do but
ask your selves the question, does not affection to the person beget admiration
in you, and admiration commend whatsoever he says, and gild over error and
sin it self, and make them current? do not your hopes or fears or love make
up every opinion in you, and build you up in your most unholy faith? Is not the
Coward, or the Dotard, or the Worldling in your Creed and profession? do you
not measure out one another as you do a tree by the bulk and trunk, and count
him best who is most worth? Is not this the compass by which you steer? the
bond of your peace? Is not this the cement of all your friendship? does not
this outward respect serene or cloud your countenance, and as the wind, the
state of things change, make you to day the dearest friends, and to morrow the
deadliest enemies? can you think ill of them you gain by? or speak ill of them
you fear? or can he be evil who is powerful? or dare you be more wise then he
that has thirty legions? We may say this is a great evil under the sun, but
it is the property of the blessed spirit to work good out of evil, to teach us
to remember what we are, by those who so soon make us forget what we are; to
make use of riches which we dote on, of power, which we tremble at, of that
glory which we have in Admiration, to instruct us to the knowledge of our
condition, and to put us in mind of our mortality and frailty by Kings, whom we
count as Gods. Behold a King from his Throne proclaims it to his subjects and
all the world, That his power is but as a shadow cast from a mortal; his
glory, but his garment which he cannot wear long; and his riches, but the
embroidery, which will be as soon worn out. And when we have gazed and fallen
down and worshipped, and are thus lost in our own thoughts, if we could take away
the filme from our eye, which the world has drawn over it, and see every thing
in its nature and substance as it is, we should behold in all these rays of
glory, and power, and wealth, nothing but David the stranger. So that we see
Kings, who are our nursing Fathers, are become our Schoolmasters to teach us.
For we see the ignorant and foolish men perish, and they dye as fools dye, not
remembered nor thought on, as if nothing fell to the ground, but their folly.
The beggar dies, but what is that to the rich, who cannot see him carried by
the Angels into Abraham's bosom? the righteous also perish, and no man lays it
to heart. I but Kings of the earth fall, and cannot fall but with observation,
but they fall as a star, are soon mist in their orb, and soon forgot. But then
living Kings make their Throne a Pulpit, and preach from thence and publish to
the world their own frail and fading condition, measure out their life by a
span, and prophecy the end of it, call their life a Pilgrimage; and shall we
not hearken what the Lord God does say by such royal Prophets? shall their
power make us beasts of burden to carry it whithersoever their beck shall
direct us, and shall not their doctrine and example persuade us that we are
men, traveling men, hasting to another country? behold then here David a
Prophet and a King, made and set up an ensample to us; and if David be a
stranger upon the earth, we can draw no other conclusion then this, then
certainly much more we. If David and all his Fathers, If pious Kings and bloody
Tyrants, If good and bad found no settled estate, no abiding place here, why
should we be so foolish and ignorant, as to turmoile, or sport and delight our
selves under the expectation of it? If Kings be pulled down from their Thrones,
and fall to the dust, we have reason to cast up our accounts, and reckon upon
it that we are gliding and passing, nay posting and flying as so many shadows,
and that our removal is at hand. For these things happened to them for
ensamples, and they are written for our admonition. They prophesied to us, and
they spoke to us, I may say, they died to us, and to all that shall follow
them, to the last man that shall stand upon the earth. When Adam had lived nine
hundred and thirty years, he dyed, lead the way to his posterity, not that
they should live so long, but that they should surely dye, to every son of
his, till the coming of the second and last Adam; Abraham a stranger, and Moses
a stranger, and David a stranger, that we might look back upon them, and see
our condition. And when Patriarchs and Prophets, when Kings preach, not only
living but dying, not only dying but dead, we shall not only dye, but dye in
our sins if we take not out the lesson; and learn to speak in their dialect
and language, Accolae sumus and peregrini, we are strangers and Pilgrims on
the earth. And so we pass from the person, I King David, and come to take a
nearer view of his condition, and quality; I am a stranger on the earth.



We pass now from the King to the stranger and Pilgrim, and yet we cannot
pass from the one to the other, for they are ever together; for there is so
near a conjunction between them, that though the one appear in glory, the
other in dishonor; the one sits on a Throne, the other lies in the dust; yet
they can never be put asunder, nor separated the one from the other; for he
that is a King is but a Pilgrim, and he that is a stranger was born and
designed unto a Kingdom, and a greater Kingdom then David's was. Thou have
made us unto our God Kings and Priests, and we shall reign upon the earth.
This is the song of Pilgrims, and they sing it to the Lamb, in the fifth of
the Revelation, v. 10. The Kingdom of heaven is taken by violence, and the
violent take it by force, Mat. 11.12. And these violent men are such as are
Pilgrims and strangers; to that place they travel, endure many a storm, many a
fall and bruise in their way; so that the immediate way to be a King, is first
to be a stranger in the earth.

Now that Man is naturally a stranger on the earth, we have the Word of God
written, and the Word of God within us; we have both the holy Scripture, and
right Reason to instruct us; both these are as the voice of God, and by these
he speaks unto us, and calls us by our name when he calls us strangers.

And first in the Old Testament, the life of Man is every where almost termed a
pilgrimage; so Jacob in the 47. of Genesis, when Pharaoh asked him, How long he
has lived? in his answer does as it were correct his language; The days,
says he, not of my life, but of my pilgrimage are an hundred and thirty years.
So that in the language of Jacob Life and Pilgrimage are all one. The same is
the language of the New Testament: Whilst we are in the flesh, Peregrinamur a
Domino, says Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 5.6. we are absent, we are travelers, we are
wanderers from God; but we are returning to him, on our way, pressing forward
to our home. And though we make haste out of the world, yet as S. Bernard
observes, some savor, some taste, something that is from the earth earthy, we
shall carry about with us till we come to our journeys end. Not only they are
strangers, who with the Prodigal take their journey into a far country, and
cleave to every vanity there; but they who are shaking them off every day, yet
look more then they should, and like more then they should, and are not yet
made perfect; Not only they are strangers from God who are Aliens from the
house of Israel, but they who with the Patriarchs in the 11. to the Heb.
confess themselves strangers in the land which is allotted them, and look for
a City whose Foundation and Builder is God. It is the observation of S. Hierome
in his Epistle to Dardanus, That the Saints in Scripture were no where called
Inhabitatores terrae, the inhabitants of the earth. There is a woe, says he
denounced, against sinners, in the eighth of the Revelation, and under that
name; vae habitatoribus terrae, woe to the Inhabitants of the earth. And Saint
Austin almost speaks the same, where he puts this difference and distinction
between them; that the righteous can only be said esse in Tabernaculo carnis,
to be in this tabernacle of the flesh, to be there, as the Angels are said by
the schoolmen to be in uno loco, quod non sint in alio, to be in one place,
because they are not in another, but to be circumscribed no where; and they are
only said to be on the earth, because they are not yet in heaven, but
nevertheless have their conversation there; but the wicked do habitare in
Tabernaculo carnis, do dwell on earth, and have their residence in it, and may
pass into a worse, but never into a better place; and these though they will
not be strangers to it, yet are strangers on the earth, and pass away from
that to which their soul was knit, on which they fixed their hope, and glutted
their desires, and raised their joy, which was their heaven; they pass away
and fall from it, and shall see it no more.

This then is the voice and language of Scripture; and in the second place,
this even common reason may teach us, which is the voice of God, and is our God
upon earth, and should be in his stead and place to command and regulate us
here, and if we were not first lost in our selves, if we were not strangers to
our selves, we should not seek for a place of rest in that world, whose fashion
every day changes, and which must at last with its work be burnt with fire.
For do we not see by this common light, that the mind of man is a thing of
infinite capacity, and utterly insatiable, and here on earth never receives
full content? content is that which all men have desired, but never yet any did
attain; but still as one desire is satisfied, another rises; and when we have
all that we desired, we will have more; now we would have but this, and when we
have it, it is nothing, for our measures are enlarged by being filled. Are you
learned enough? nay, but there be yet more conclusions to be tried. Are you
ever wise enough? If but once you be deceived, you will complain that a
thousand things which might have been observed have past your sight. But are
you ever rich enough? The fool in the Gospel was not, till his soul was fetched
away, nor Dives, till he was in hell. Nay, are you not most miserably poor when
you are most abundantly rich? do you not want most, when you have most? or was
ever your heart so much set on riches as when they did increase? or has the
Ambitious any highest place, any vertical point? one world was not enough for
Alexander; and had there been as many as those Atoms of which Democritus made
it up, he would have wished after more. Our appetite comes by eating, and our
desires are made keen and earnest by enjoying, majora cupere ex his discimus,
the obtaining of something does but prompt us to desire more. And now to draw
this to our present purpose; If the things of this world be not able to
satisfy us, if never man yet found full content, if nothing on earth can allay
this infinite hunger of the soul, which certainly was not imprinted in us in
vain; If we cannot find it here, though we should double and treble Methusalems
age; If we cannot find it in the world, though we should live to the end of it,
we cannot think that the earth should be our country, but that the things which
we so highly esteem more then our life, more then our soul, are unnatural and
strangers to us, and we unto them, and we must turn our selves about, and look
toward something else which may meet and fill our desires, which here find
nothing to stay, but every thing to enlarge them. Here are delights that
vanish, and then show their foulest side; here are riches that makes us poor,
and honor that makes us slaves; here are nothing but phantasmes and
apparitions, which will never fill us, but feed the very hunger of our souls,
and increase it; there in our country, at our journeys end, there is fullness
of joy, which alone can satisfy this (...) and infinite appetite: and
therefore the earth is but our stage to walk through, heaven is our proper
place and country, and to this we are bound; here we are but strangers, si
velimus accolae, si nolimus acccolae, if we will we may be strangers, and if we
will not, but love to dwell and stay here, yet we shall be strangers whether we
will or no.

And as we are, so our abode here is that of strangers in another country, as
of those who are ever in their way, and moving forwards, never standing still,
but striving to go out of it; and his whole motion and progress is a leaving
it behind him. When Adam was Lord of all the world, he was but a stranger in
it; for God made him naked in Paradise, and withal gave him no sense of his
nakedness, and the reason is given by Saint Basil, that man might not be
distracted and called (...), from meditation upon God; that the care of his
flesh might not steal away his mind from him that made him; so that Adam was
made a stranger, when he was made the sole Emperor of the world. But when he
was fallen, God clothes him with skins, ut illum veluti morte quadam indueret,
says Proclus in Epiphanius, that he might clothe him as it were with death it
self, which was represented unto him in the skins of dead beasts; that he might
always carry about with him the remembrance of it, the most suitable garment
that a stranger or Pilgrim can wear. A stranger comes not to stay long in a
place, he is here (as we say) to day and gone to morrow, so is man; he flies
as a post, or rather as a shadow, and continues not, Job 14. At an end as
soon as a tale that is told, and not so long remembered. There may be many
errors in his way, but there is none in his end; and which way soever he
travels, wheresoever he pitcheth his tent, his journeyes end is the grave.
Tertull. (...) Anima. c. 50.
Hoc stipulata est Dei vox, hoc spopondit omne quod nascitur, says Tertullian;
this is the stipulation and bargain, which God has made with every soul, and
by being born we made a promise, and obliged our selves to dye. We are bound in
a sure obligation, and received our souls upon condition to resign them pure
and unspotted of the world. Would you know when we pay this debt? we begin with
our first breath, and are paying it till we breathe out our last; hoc quod
loquor inde est, whilst I speak, and you hear, we are paying part of the
sum, and whether this be our last payment we cannot tell. I am dying whilst
I am a speaking; every breath I fetch to preserve life, is a part taken from my
life: I am in a manner entombed already, and every place I breathe in is a
grave; for in every place I moulder and consume away, Suit. vit. Claud. Caes.
in every place I draw nearer and nearer to putrefaction. We may say as those
mariners who were to fight and dye did, as they say'ld by Claudius the
Emperor, Morituri te salutant, O Emperor dying men salute thee; and so we
pass by and salute one another, not so much as living but as dying men; and
whilst I say good morrow, I am nearer to my end, and he to whom I wished it, is
nearer to his; one dying man blesses, and one dying man persecutes another,
that is, one Pilgrim robs another. In what relation soever we stand, either as
Kings or subjects, of masters or servants, of Fathers or children, we are all
Morituri, but dying men, all but strangers and pilgrims. Comfort thou thy self
then thou oppressed innocent; 'Twas a dying man that put the yoke about thy
neck; and why do thou boast in mischief, thou man of power? In the midst of
all thy triumphs and glories thou art but a dying man: He that kisseth thy lips
is but a dying man; and he that strikes thee on the face is but a dying man.
The whole world is but a Colonie, every age new planted with dying men, with
pilgrims and strangers.

This you will say is a common theme and argument, and indeed so it is; for
what more common then death? and yet as common as it is, I know no lesson so
much forgotten as this: for who almost considers how he came into the world, or
how he shall go out of it? Ask the Wanton, the Mammonist, the Ambitious of
their minute, and they will call it Eternity, Sol iste, dies nos decipit, etc.
The present, the present time, that deceives us, and we draw that out to a
lasting perpetuity, which is past whilst we think on it; such a bewitching power
has the love of the world, to make our minute eternity, and eternity nothing;
and the day of our death as hard and difficult to our faith as our
resurrection. For though day unto day utters knowledge, though the preacher
open his mouth, and the grave open hers, and we every day see so many pilgrims
falling in, though they who have been dead long ago, and they who now dye,
speak unto us; yet we can hardly be induced to believe that we are strangers,
but embrace the world, and rivet our selves into it as if we should never part,
and we deny that which we cannot deny, resolve on that which we cannot think,
will not be persuaded of that which we do believe, or believe not that which we
confess, but place immortality upon our mortal, and so live as if we should
never dye. And can we who thus every day enlarge our thoughts and hopes, and
let them out at length beyond our threescore years and ten, measuring out
Lordships, building of Palaces, anticipating pleasures and honors, creating
that which will never have a being, and yet delighting in it as if we now had
it in possession; can we who love the world as that friend from which we would
never part, but lose all others for it; can we who would have this to be the
world without end, and have scarce one thought left to reach at that which is
so, and to come; can we who love, and admire, and pride our selves in nothing
more, in nothing else, say or think we are pilgrims, and sojourners, and
strangers in the earth?

It Is true, strangers we are (for all are so) and passing forward apace to our
journeyes end, but not to that end for which we were made; and therefore that
we may reach and attain to it, we must make our selves so, put off the old man,
which loves to dwell here, take off our hopes and desires from it, look upon
all its glories as dung, look upon the world as a strange place, and upon our
selves as strangers in it; and look upon the place to which we are going, and
fling off every weight, and shake off every vanity; every thing that is of the
earth, earthy, make haste and delay not, but leave it behind us, even while we
are in it; for a Christian man's life is nothing else but a going out of it.

And to this end (in the last place) you must take along with you your
viaticum, Hide not thy commandments from me.
your provision, The Commandments of God: (Hide not thy commandments from me,
says David; and he spoke as a stranger, and as in a strange place, as in a
place of danger, as in a dark place, where he could not walk with safety, if
this light did not shine upon him.) For here we meet with variety of objects;
here are serpents to flatter us, and serpents to bite us; here are pleasures
and terrors, all to deceive and detain us. Here we meet with that arch-enemy
to all strangers and pilgrims in several shapes, now as a roaring Lion, and
sometimes as an Angel of light; and though we try it not out at Fists with him
(as those foolish Monks boasted they had often tried this kind of hardiment)
though we meet him not as a Hyppocentaure, Hieron. de vita Pauli Eremitae, and
Malchi and Hilarionis.
as the story tells us Paul the Hermit did; as a Satyr, or shee-wolf, as
Hilarion did, to whom were presented many fearful things, the roaring of
lions, the noise of an Army, and chariots of fire coming upon him, wolves and
foxes, and sword-plaiers, and I cannot tell what. Though we do not feel him as
a Satyr, yet we feel him as voluptuous; though we do not see him as a wolf,
yet we apprehend him thirsting after blood; though we meet him not in the shape
of a fox, yet non ignoramus versutias, we are not ignorant of his wiles and
enterprises; though we do not see him in the tempest, we may in our fear; and
though his hand be invisible, yet we may feel him in our impatience, and
falling from the truth; we cannot say in our affliction, this is his blow, but
we may hear him roar in our murmuring: or we may see him in that mungrell
Christian made up of ignorance and fury, of a man and a beast, which is more
monstrous then any centaure: we may see him in that hypocrite, that deceitful
man, who is a fox, and the worst of the cub; we may meet him in that oppressor
who is a wolf; in that Tyrant and persecutor who is a roaring lion.

And in some of these shapes we meet him every day in this our Pilgrimage; and
here in the world we can find nothing to secure us against the world; adversity
may swallow up pleasure in victory, but not the love of it; impotency and
inhability may bridle and stay my Anger, but not quench it; Providence may
defend me from evil, but not from fear of it; nor can the world yield us any
weapon against it self: and therefore God has opened his Armory of heaven, and
given us his commandments to be our light, our provision, our defense in our
way; to be as our Pilgrims staff, our Scrip, our letters commendatory, to be
our Angels to keep us in all our ways, and there is no safe walking for a
stranger without them. And as when the children of Israel were in the
wilderness, he rained down Manna upon them, and led them as it were by the
hand, till he brought them to the land of promise, so he deals with them, with
all that call upon his name whilst they are in via, in this their
peregrination, ever and anon beset with temptations which may detain and hinder
them; he raines down abundance of his grace, which like that Manna will serve
the appetite of him that takes it, and is like to that which every man wants,
applies it self to every taste, to all the callings and conditions, to all the
necessities of a stranger. Thus we walk by faith, 2 Cor. 7. Festina fides, and
faith is on the wing, and leaves the world behind us, is the substance and
evidence of things not seen, and looks not on those things which are seen, and
please a carnal eye; or if it do, looks upon them as Joshua did upon Ai, and
first turns the back, and then all its strength against them, makes us fly
from them that we may overcome them. For this is the victory which overcomes
the world, even our faith. And Festina spes, hope too is in her flight, and
follows our forerunner Jesus, to enter with him that which is within the
veil, Heb. 6.19. even the holy of holies, heaven it self; spe jam sumus in
coelo, we are already there by hope, and to him that has seen the beauty of
holiness, the world is but a loathsome spectacle; to him that truly trusts
in God, it is lighter then vanity, and he passes from it. And then our love of
God is our going forth, our peregrination; it is a perishing, a death of the
soul to the world, and if it be truly fixed, no pleasure, no terror, nothing in
the world can concern us, but they are to us as those things which the
travellour in his way sees, and leaves every day; and we think no more of the
glory of them then they who have been dead long ago. For we are dead, says the
Apostle, Coloss. 3.3. and our life is hid, hid from the world with Christ in
God: our temperance tastes not, our chastity touches not, our poverty in
spirit handles not those things which lie in our way, but passes by them as
impertinencies, as dangers, as those things which may pollute a soul more then
a dead body could under the Law. The stranger, the pilgrim passes by all, his
meekness makes injuries, and his patience afflictions, light; and his
Christian fortitude casts down every strong hold, every imagination, which
may hinder him in his course. Every act of piety is a kind of sequestration,
and drives us, if not from the right, yet from the use of the world. Every
virtue is to us as the Angel was to Lot, and bids arise, and go out of it;
takes us by the hands, and bids us haste and escape for our life, and not to
look behind us. And with this provision, as it were with the two Tables in our
hand, we come nearer and nearer to the end of our faith, the end of our hope,
and the end of our love. For he that looks upon the commandments and keeps them
has the will of God, and he that has his will, has all that wisdom can find
out, or power bring to pass, has Gods providence and almightinesse his
companions, his guides, his protection in his way, and the world, the pomp and
vanity of it can no more prevail against him then it can against God himself;
but where God is there shall this stranger be also, when passing through all
these he shall come to his journeys end.

For first, (that we may make some use of this, and so conclude) this our
conformity to the will of God in keeping his commandments, will make us observe
a Decorum, and being strangers in the earth to behave our selves as strangers
in it, for necessities sake give a perfunctory and slight salute, not look upon
it as a friend, not to trust it, not to trust in uncertain riches, but in the
living God, as Saint Paul exhorts, 1 Timothy 17. but to suspect and be jealous
of every thing in it, Theophr. (...).
as we use to be of every man we meet in a strange place; and as plain
countrymen, who are ignorant of coins, suspect and try every piece they see,
and though it be current, yet fear it may be counterfeit. So to say within our
selves, this beauty which smiles may bite as a cockatrice; this wine which
looks red may be a mocker; these riches may be my last receipt; this strength
may ruin me; this wit may befool me; that which makes me great in my own eyes,
that for which I flatter and worship my self, and tread all others with scorn
under my feet, may make me the least in the Kingdom of heaven, nay quite shut
me out; this beauty may bring deformity into my soul; this wine may be as the
Manichees called Fell principis tenebrarum, the gall of the Prince of darkness,
and these riches may beggar me, and my Perfections undo me. Far better is it
for a stranger to be cautelous and wary, then too venturous and foolhardy;
better for him to fear where no fear is, then to be ready to meet and embrace
every toy and trifle that smiles and kills. Now, by this we arm our selves
against all casualties and misfortunes, which is more then all the conveyances
and devises of the Law, more then the providence of the wisest can do. For what
can fall out by chance to him who is ever under the wing of the almighty? or
what can be lose who has denied all unto himself, and himself too in every
aspect and relation to the world? This is our provision, and this is our
security; and he that will be secure must learn to be a stranger; he that will
lose nothing must learn to have nothing; and then as our obedience to Gods will
does keep us in a decorum, so it teaches us by looking on the world with an
eye of jealousy to make it our friend, a friend of Mammon, and a friend of a
temptation; for so we make that which was dangerous beneficial unto us, and
rise up as high as heaven upon that which might have been our ruin, by looking
upon it with the suspicious and jealous eye of a stranger.

Secondly, It supplies us with arms, and strengthens us against all
afflictions, which may beat upon us, all miseries which befall us, all
contumelies which may affront us in our way; for what are all these poor
sprinklings, these weak breathings of wind and air to us, when we remember we
are but strangers in the world? The world knows us not, because it knows not
God, as Saint John tells us, 1 Ep. 3.1. peregrini deorsum, cives sursum,
strangers here below, but Citizens above. What can they who are so unlike to
the world, who contemn the world, expect less? here there will be Shimeis to
revile us, Zedekiahs to smite us on the cheek, oppressors to grind us, and
Tyrants to rob and spoil us when they please; and if we will have them our
friends, we must make our selves like them, and go to hell along with them; but
the commandments of God are an Antidote against all these. For these evils
cannot trouble us if we make use of the right remedy, which is no where to be
found but in Christ, in whom all the treasuries of wisdom are hid. But one
error of our lives it is, and a great one, to mistake the remedy of evils, nec
tam morbis laboramus quam remediis, nor does our disease and malady so much
molest us, as the remedies themselves. The poor man thinks there is no other
remedy for poverty, but riches; the revenger cannot purge his gall and
bitterness, but with the blood of his enemy; the sick is quieted with nothing
but with health: but indeed these are not remedies answerable to the nature and
operation of these several diseases, for the poor man may become rich, and be
poorer then before; the revenger may draw blood, and be more enraged then
before; the sick man may be restored to health, and be worse then before; the
will of God is the truest, and most sovereign physic, and his will is that we
estrange our selves from the world; that our hearts be fixed on him, and on
those pleasures which are at his right hand for evermore. And then there will
be no such things as Poverty, or Injuries, or Sickness, or at least they will
not appear so to us, which is all one; nay, which is more, for now they are
not what they are unto us, nor do we see that horror in them, which they that
dwell in the world do, but as Saint Paul speaks, when we are poor then we are
rich, when we are weak then we are strong, when we are in disgrace then we are
honorable, when we are persecuted then we are happy, when we are sick then we
are best in health, and even see our journeys end. Nihil imperitius
impatientia, Impatience which ever accompanies the neglect of Gods commands, is
the most ignorant, unskilful, inexperienced, the most ungodly thing in the
world. For these complaints in poverty, this impatience of injuries, this
murmuring in our sickness, are ill signs that we love the pleasures of the
world more then the will of God; that we see more glory in a piece of earth,
then virtue; that we are more afraid of a disgrace then of sin; that we bow
with more devotion and affection to the world then to God, and so cannot make
this glorious confession with our Kingly Prophet, that we are Accolae and
peregrini, strangers and pilgrims upon the earth.

Thirdly, our conformity to the will of God is a precious Antidote against the
fear of death; the fear of death? why we were delivered from that, when
Christ took part with us of flesh and blood, Heb. 2.14. and through death
destroyed him who had the power of death, the devil, why should any mortal now
fear to dye? It is most true, Christ dyed, and by his death shook the powers
of the grave; Consummatum est, all is finished, and he is returned victoriously
with the spoils of his enemies, and of this last enemy death. But for all this
his triumph, death may be still the King of terrors, and as dreadful as
before. All is finished on his part, but a covenant consists of two, and
something is required on ours. He does not turn Conditions into Promises, as
some have been willing to persuade themselves, and others; It must be done, is
not, thou shall do it; If thou will believe, is not, thou shall believe. But
every promise, every act of grace of his implies a condition. He delivers those
that are willing to be delivered, who do not feed death, and supply this enemy
with such weapons as make him terrible. All the terror death has is from our
selves, our sin, our disobedience to the commands of God, that is his sting. And
our part of the covenant is, by the power and virtue of Christ's death every day
to be plucking it from him, and at last to take it quite away. We, we our
selves must rise up against this King of terrors, and in the Name and Power of
Christ take the Scepter out of his hand, and spoil him of his strength and
terror. And this we may do by parts and degrees, now cut from him this sin,
now that; now this desire, and anon another, and so dye daily, as Saint Paul
speaks, dye to profit, dye to pleasure, dye to Honor, be as dead to every
temptation which may beget sin in us, and a sting in him; and so leave him
nothing to take from us, not a desire, not a hope, not a thought, nothing that
can make us fear death. Then we shall look upon it not as a divorcement from
those delights which we have cast off already, or a passage into a worse
condition from that we loved too well, to that we never feared enough; but we
shall consider it as a sleep, as it is to all wearied pilgrims, as a message
sent from Heaven to tell us our walk is at an end, and now we are to lay down
our staff and scrip, and rest in that Jerusalem which is above, for which we
vowed this pilgrimage: Et quis non ad meliora festinat? Tert. de patientia.
What stranger will be afraid to return to his Fathers house, or lose that
life, quam sibi jam supervacuam fecit, which by dying daily to the world he
has already made superfluous and unnecessary? To conclude this: He that truly
fears God can fear nothing else, nor is Death terrible to any but to those who
would build their tabernacle here, who love to feed with swine on husks,
because they have not tasted of the powers of the world to come, who wish
immortality to this mortal, before they put it on; who are willing to converse
and trade with vanity for ever, who desire not with David to be spared a
little, but would never go hence.

Last of all, It will moderate our sorrow for those our friends who are dead,
or rather fallen asleep, or rather at their journeys end. For why should any
man who knows the condition of a stranger, how many dangers, how many cares,
how many storms and tempests he was obnoxious to, hang down the head and
complain that he had now passed through them all, and was set down at his
journeys end? why should he who looks for a City to come, be troubled that his
fellow pilgrim came thither, and entered before him? It might be a matter of
holy Emulation perhaps, but why it should afflict us with grief I cannot see,
unless it be because we have not made it our meat and drink to keep Gods
commandments, which might give us a taste of a better estate to come, unless
it be because we have not well learnt to act the part of a stranger. Miserable
men that we are, that we will be; that know not our own quality and condition
that are strangers, and yet unwilling to draw near our selves, or to see others
come to their home, but think them lost where they are made perfect. We stand
by the bed of our sick and dying friend as if he were now removed to a place of
torment and not of rest, and to be either nothing or more miserable then he was
in a region of misery; we send out shreeks and outcries to keep time with his
gasps, to call him back, if it were possible, from heaven, and to keep him
still under the yoke and harrow; when as the fainting of his spirits, the
failing of his eyes, the trembling of his joints, are but as the motion of
bodies to their center, most violent when they are nearest to their end. And
then we close up his eyes, and with them our hopes, as if with his last gasp he
had breathed out his soul into air; when indeed there is no more then this,
one pilgrim is gone before his fellows, one gone, and left others in their way
in trouble, and more troubled that he is gone to rest. Migrantem migrantes
praemisimus, says Saint Hierom, we are passing forward apace, and have sent
one before us to his journeys end, his everlasting sabbath. With this
contemplation does religion comfort and uphold us in our way, and keeps us in
that temper which the Philosopher commends as best, in which we do sentire
desiderium and opprimere, she gives nature leave to draw tears, but then she
brings in faith and hope to wipe them off; Sen. ad Marciam.
she suffers us to mourn for our friends, but not as men without hope. Nature
will vent, and love is (...), says the Orator, ever querulous and full of
complaints when the object is removed out of sight; and God remembers whereof
we are made, is not angry with our love, and will suffer us to be men, but then
we must silence one love with another, our natural affection with the love of
God; at least divide our language thus, Alas my Father, Alas my Husband, Alas
my Friend; but then he was a stranger, and now at his journeys end; and here we
must raise our note; and speak it more heartily, Blessed are such strangers,
blessed are they that dye in the Lord, even so says the spirit, that they rest
from their labors.

For conclusion; let us fear God, and keep his commandments, this is the whole
duty of a stranger, to observe those Laws, which came from that place to which
he is going, let these his Laws be in our heart, and our heart will be an
elaboratory, a limbeck, to work the water of life out of the vanities and very
dregs of world, through which we are to pass. It shall be as a rock firm and
solid against every wave and temptation that shall beat against it, and a shop
of precious receipts, and proper remedies against every evil; It shall be
spoliarium mortis, a place where death shall be stripped and spoiled of its
sting, and of its terror. In a word; It shall be the Temple of God, an house
of feasting and joy, where sorrow may look in at the window, at the sensitive
part, but be soon chased away: It shall be even ashamed of its Tabernacle of
flesh, and pant and beat to get out, that it may be clothed upon, and mortality
be swallowed up of life. In brief, it will make us strangers, and keep us
strangers, even such strangers, which shall be made like unto the Angels, and
whom when they come to their journeys end, the Angels shall meet, and welcome,
and receive into their Fathers house, where they shall rest, and rejoice for
evermore.

I have done with my Text, and now must turn your eyes and thoughts upon this
pilgrim here, this Honored and worthy Knight, who has now passed through the
busy noise and tumults of this world to his long home and rest. In which
passage of his (as I have received it from men of place and worth, and
unquestioned integrity) he has so exactly performed the part and office of a
stranger and pilgrim, that he is followed with the applause of them that knew
him; and as in his death he is become an argument to prove the doctrine which I
have taught, so in his life he made himself a great ensample for them to look
upon who are now traveling and laboring in the same way.

Look upon him then in every capacity and relation, either as a part of the
Commonwealth, or a member of the City, or a Father of a Family, and you shall
discover the image and fair representation of a stranger in every one of these
relations; for no man can take this honor to himself to be a good
Common-wealths-man, a good master of a family but he who is as David was, a
stranger. All the ataxie and disorder, all the noise we hear, and mischiefs we
see in the world, are from men who love it too well, and would live and dwell
and delight themselves in it for ever.

For the first; I may truly say as Lampridius did of Alexander Severus, he was
vir bonus and Reipublicae necessarius, he was a good man and of necessary use
in a Commonwealth, and laid all the strength he had to uphold it, and
preferred the peace and welfare of it to his own, as well knowing that a
private house might sink and fall to the ground, and yet the Commonwealth
stand and flourish; but that the ruin of the whole must necessarily draw with
it the other parts, and at last bury them in the same grave. And here he found
as rough a passage as Aufidienus Rufus in Tacitus did in that commotion and
rebellion of Percennius, Tacit. l. 1. Annal.
who was pulled out of his chariot, loaded first with scoffs and reproaches, and
then with a fardell of stuff, and made to march foremost of all the company,
and then asked in scorn, whether he bore his burden willingly? or whether so
long a journey was not tedious and irksome to him? so was this worthy Knight
taken from his wife whom he entirely loved, and from his children those pledges
of his love, conveyed to ship, and by ship to prison in a remote City, where he
found some friends, and then brought back from thence to a prison nearer home,
where (if the providence of God had not gone along with him, and shadowed him)
he had met the plague; so that in some measure that befell him which Saint Paul
speaks of himself, He was in journeying often, in perils of waters, in perils
of his own Countrymen, in perils in the City, in perils on the Sea, in
perils amongst false brethren.

But it may be said, what praise is it to suffer all this, if he suffer as an
evil doer, and for conscience toward God? I come not hither to dispute that,
but am willing to refer it to the great trial which shall open every eye to
behold that truth, which now being dazzled with fears and hopes, and even
blinded with the love of the world, it cannot see. But if it were an error,
and not knowledge but mistake drove him upon these pricks, yet sure it was an
error of a fair descent, begot in him by looking steadfastly on the truth, by
having a steady eye on the oath of God, Eccles. 8.2. and if here he fell, he
fell like a Christian, who did exercise himself to keep a good conscience; for
he that follows not his conscience when it errs, will be as far from harkening
to it when it speaks the truth; for even error it self shows the face of truth
to him that erres, or else he could not err at all. And yet (I need not fear
to say it) It is an error of such a nature, that it may rather deserve
applause then censure, even from those who call it by that name; for we do not
use to fall willingly into so dangerous, vexatious, and costly errors;
errors, which will strip us, which will put a yoke upon us; errors which will
put us in prison; no, to fly from these we too often fly from the truth it self,
when it is as open as the day, and commands or faith though not our tongue, and
forces our assent, when we renounce it. Private interest, love of our selves,
fear of restraint, hope of advancement, these are the mothers commonly of this
monster which we call error when we do not err, and in these it is engendered
and bred, as serpents are in carrion or dung. He that erres and loses by it,
erres most excusably, and shows plainly that he would not err, for who would
do that which will undo him?

Again, take him in the City, in which he bore the highest honor, and filled
the greatest place, and was rather an ornament to it then that unto him; for he
sat in it as a stranger and a pilgrim, as a man going out of the world, nor
did so much consider his power as his duty, which looked forward, and had
respect on that which cannot be found in this, but is the riches and glory of
another world; and therefore this world was never in his thoughts, never came
in to sour Justice, to turn judgment into wormwood by corrupting it, or into
vinegar by delaying it; no cries of orphans, no tears of the widow, no loud
complaints of the oppressed to disquiet him in his passage, which use to follow
the oppressor even to the gates of hell, and there deliver him up to those
howlings which are everlasting. How often has he been presented to me, and that
by prudent and judicious men, as the honor and glory of the City? And thus he
went on his way full of temptations and troubles, and full of honors, even of
those honors which he refused, for you may remember how he bore this great
office, and you may remember how he refused it, and gained as much honor in
the hearts of men by the last as by the first; as much honor by withdrawing
himself and staying below, as he did formerly in sitting in the highest place
with the sword in his hand. For the state and face of things may be such, as
may warrant Demosthenes wish and choice, and make it more commendable in
exilium ire quam tribunal, to go into banishment then to ascend the tribunal;
for he best deserves honor, who can in wisdom withdraw himself; he can best
manage power, who knows when to lay it down.

Bring him now from the public stage of honor to his private house, and there
you might have seen him walking, as David speaks, in the midst of his house in
innocence and with a perfect heart, as an Angel or intelligence moving in his
own sphere, and carrying on every thing in it with that order and Decorum which
is the glory of a stranger; whose moving in it is but a going out of it to
render an account of every act and motion; you might have beheld him looking
with a settled and immovable eye of love on his wife, walking hand in hand
with her for forty four years, and walking with her as his fellow-traveller,
with that love which might bring both at last to the same place of rest. You
might behold him looking on his children with an eye of care as well as of
affection, initiating them into the same fellowship of pilgrims; and on his
servants, not as on slaves, Quid Servus? Amicus humilis.
but as his humble and inferior friends, as Seneca calls them, and as his
fellow-pilgrims too; and thus he was Domesticus Magistratus, a Domestic
Magistrate, a lover and example of that truth which Socrates taught, that they
who are good Fathers of their family will make the best and wisest Magistrates;
they who can manage their own cock-boat may be fit at last to sit at the stern
of the commonwealth; for a private family is a type and representation of it,
nay, says Eusebius, (in the life of Constantine) of the Church it self.

I confess I knew but in his evening, when he was near his journeys end, and
then too but at some distance; but even then I could discover in him that
sweetness of disposition, that courteous affabibility, which Saint Paul
commends as virtues, but have lost that name with Hypocrites, with proud and
supercilious men, who make it a great part of their Religion to pardon none but
themselves, and then think that they have put off the old man when they have
put off all humanity. In these Omilitick virtues I could discern a fair
proficiency in this reverend Knight, and what my knowledge could not reach was
abundantly supplied and brought unto me by the joint testimony of those who
knew him, and by a testimony which commends him to heaven, and God himself, the
mouths of the poor which he so often filled. Thus did he walk on as a
stranger, comforting and supporting his fellow-Pilgrims, and reaching forth his
charity to them as a staff. Thus he expressed himself living, and thus he has
expressed himself in his last Will, which is voluntas ultra mortem, the Will, the
Mandate, the Language of a Dead man; Speculum morum, says Pliny, the Glass,
wherein you may see the Charity, that is, the Face, the Image of a Pilgrim, by
which he has bequeathed a Legacy of Comfort and Supply (a plain
acknowledgement that he was but a stranger on the earth) to every Prison, and
to many Parishes within this City, and remembers them who are in bonds, as one
who himself was in the body, and sometimes a prisoner as they. I know, in this
world it is a hard thing Justum esse sine infamia, to be good and not to hear
ill; expedit enim malis neminem esse bonum, for evil men make it their work to
deface every fair image of virtue, and then think well of themselves when they
have made all as evil as themselves; but it was this our honored brothers
happiness to find no accuser but himself, I may truly say, I never yet heard
any; but report has given him an honorable pass: the voice of the poor was,
He was full of good works; the voice of the City, he was a good Magistrate; the
voice of his equals, he was a true friend; the voice of all that I have heard,
he was a just man; and then our charity will soon conclude he was a good
Christian, for he lived and died a son of the Church, of the reformed, and
according to the way which some call Heresy, some Superstition, so worshipped
he the God of his Fathers.

And now he is gone to his long home, and the mourners go about the streets: He
is gone to the grave in a full age, when that was well near expired which is
but Labor and sorrow, (...), as Cyril speaks, grown in wisdom and grace, which
is a fairer testimony of age then the gray hairs or fourscore years; his body
must return to the dust, and his soul is returned to God that gave it; and
being dead he yet speaks, speaks by his Charity to the Poor, speaks by
his fair example to his Brethren of the City, to honor and reverence their
Conscience more then their Purse, -- vitamque impendere vero,
and to be ready to resign all, even life it self for the truth; he speaks to
his friends, and he speaks to his relict, his virtuous and reverend Lady, once
partner of his cares and joys, his fellow-travellour, and to his children, who
are now on their way, and following a pace after him, weep not for me, why
should you weep? I have laid by my Staff, my Scrip, my provision, and am at my
journeys end at rest; I have left you in a valley, in a busy tumultuous world,
but the same hand, the same provision, the same obedience to Gods commands will
guide you also, and promote you to the same place, where we shall rest and
rejoice together for evermore. There let us leave him in his eternal rest with
Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, with all the Patriarchs, and prophets, and
Apostles, all his fellow-Pilgrims and strangers, in the Kingdom of Heaven.

FINIS.
By the forced absence of the Author from the Press, besides many points
mistaken, these Errata have escaped, which the Reader is desired to amend as he
finds them.
Page 4. l. 12. r. Transacted. p. 12. l. 23. r. riddle. p. 25. l. 7.5. These
will bring in. p. 26. l. 39. r. not because he cannot, but because he will not.
p. 27. l. 13. r. bought, mortal. page 33. marg. Eulalia. p. 39. l. 10. not. p.
65. l. 14. cast himself into hell. p. 83. ult. this noise when.

Page 10. l. 5. for that has. p. 13. l. 14. (...). ibid. l. 19. (...). p. 14.
l. r. (...). ibid. marg. Tit. for Tim. ibid. l. 7. in them. p. 16. c. 6.
entered. p. 17. l. 21. Sublunary. p. 23. l. 39. be the cause. p. 24. l. 25.
founded on. p. 35. l. 40. beautifying. p. 45. l. 3. (...). p. 54. l. 30. for
and, are. p. 58. l. 27. for (...). p. 63. l. 19. affectuall. p. 75. l. 9.
about. p. 78. marg. for Deus, Duos. p. 89. l. 30. breath of fools. p. 89. l.
32. abfuerunt. p. 99. l. 8. of the object. p. 100. l. 27. for innocence,
justice. p. 104. l. 27. start back. ibid. l. 30. intention. ibid. l. 33. shunk.
p. 108. l. 40. (...). p. 118. l. 27. victo: via for victoria. p. 121. l. 4.
worn out with. p. 122. l. 7. steame. p. 125. l. 32. maintaining some errors.
p. 126. l. 35. that which was. p. 136. l. 31. (...). ibid. l. 42. measured out.
p. 137. l. 25. Add, that which is done often with that which is done always.
p. 161. l. 9. (...). p. 192. l. 18. aegris. p. 168. l. 33. r. (...). p. 178. l.
13. add, many times makes us speak what otherwise we would not. p. 207. l. 15.
r. (...). p. 208. l. 25. r. shines. p. 228. l. 29. r. (...). p. 230. l. 16. r.
the memory. p. 241. l. 5. r. lifts us. p. 242. l. 37. r. over that. p. 244. l.
5. r. non exercere. p. 240. l. 25. r. not his mercies. p. 250. l. 13. r. to
file and hammer them. p. 251. l. 39. r. of their faith. ibid. l. 43. r. and now
this heartlesse. p. 252. l. 25. r. but then. p. 253. l. 6. r. God will do. p.
260. l. 9. r. reviled. p. 264. l. 1. r. usurp. p. 266. l. 18. r. disarme death.
p. 283. l. 23. r. Salviguardium. ibid. l. 34. Dele The third inference. p. 300.
l. 33. r. Petrus Damiani. p. 304. l. 44. r. (...). p. 306. l. 15. r. (...). p.
307. l. 41. r. faceremus. p. 325. l. 30. r. (...). p. 331. l. 24. r. wasting
ourselves. p. 337. l. 46. r. For want of this. p. 338. marg. for (...). 343. l.
9. r. the love of that. p. 344. l. 3. r. sound. p. 345. l. 3. r. as the
occasion of sin. p. 350. l. 10. r. define them. p. 351. l. 30. r. see in
them. p. 353. l. 37. r. (...). p. 354. l. 14. r. if he be. p. 359. l. 20. r.
and last of all. p. 362. l. r. r. make us feel. p. 363. l. 3. r. (...). p. 364.
l. 14. add, which when we cannot fill up etc. ibid. l. 41. r. (...). p. 368.
l. 34. r. tune. p. 370. l. 41. r. sticks it in them. p. 373. marg. r. (...). p.
374. l. ult. r. Cynick. p. 403. l. 3. r. is this faith. p. 427. l. 37. r.
kicking. p. 447. l. 13. r. ^. p. 478. l. 3. r. (...). p. 521. l. 11. r. now
bowing. p. 537. l. 3. r. they leave a soul. p. 574. l. 33. r. seen in our
cities. p. 619. l. 22. r. to be removed.


