The impudent and daring Protestation, and appeal to God, of George Bishop,
concerning the business of the Lord Craven, whereof (as he confesses) he had
the whole management.
I Do declare in the presence of the Lord, before whom I fear, who searches
the heart, and tries the reins, and brings every work to judgment, that I
am clear and innocent therein; nor have I used, nor do I know of any indirect
proceeding in that whole business of Craven and Faulconer.

George Bishop.

THE Lord Cravens Case Stated; AND The IMPOSTOR Dethroned: By way of REPLY to
Captain George Bishop, A Grand Quaker in Bristoll.

Wherein is briefly hinted, the rottenness of the Quakers conversion, and
perfection, in general, exemplified in this busy BISHOP; in special instanced

In his Practices against the Estate of the LORD CRAVEN, Life of Mr. LOVE.

By occasion whereof, this Truth is asserted, viz. If we may judge of the
Conscience, Honesty, and Perfection of Quakers in general, by this man in
particular, A man may be as vile a person, as any under heaven, and yet a
perfect QVAKER.

Come down, and sit in the dust, O Virgir, Daughter of Babylon, sit on the
ground; there is no Throne, O Daughter of the Chaldeans, Isa. 47. v. 1. Thy
nakedness shall be uncovered, yea, thy shame shall be s^en, v. By Ralph
Farmer, a Servant of Jesus Christ, who was crucified at Jerusalem, above
sixteen hundred years ag^, and whose Blood the Quakers trample under foot, as a
common thing.

London, Printed by R. I. for Edward Thomas, at the Adam and Eve in Little
Britain. 1660.

To the Right Honorable, William Lord Craven, Baron of Hampsteed, Marshall in
the County of BERKS.
IT IS usual (my Lord you know) in publishing books, to prefix the name of some
worthy and considerable personage; and I now apply my self to your Honor, upon
several accounts.

First, Tua res agitur, much of the matter ensuing concerns your self.

Secondly, I never heard, but that you were a lover of your Country, always
with much respect and honor, treating and entertaining your Countrymen that
came over into the Low Countries; (the place of your residence, for many years
together) and he that loves my Country, I love him, and him I honor. As for
your Adversary (the man I here deal with) his tongue is no slander, for who
will believe a common liar? which whether I have made him appear to be or no,
judicet mundus.

Thirdly, I understand the present Parliament has taken cognizance of your
cause, and intend to consider it next Session, and I am come (in the mean time)
to bring you good news; your Adversary quakes, which if it be a symptom of
true Conversion, there is hopes that confession, (an ingenuous confession of
the whole design) and an endeavor of satisfaction (if it can be) will follow;
but fearing it may prove but a false birth, I have put manum obstetricalem, in
intima, searched his bowels for a real discovery, that the world may no longer
be deceived with a windy conception. Truly, may Lord, your case is hard; but
what shall we say? it is the fortune of the wars; and there you know (as i^ a
common scuffle) many an honest man, that stands by, and means no harm, gets a
knock, as well as those who begun the quarrel; and this your Adversary himself
(who confesses to have had the mannagement of the whole business against you)
seems to me clearly to acknowledge, as the ground of your Sequesiration: For,
in answer to an objection made on your Honors behalf, by your friends, in the
Narrative, by them published, he (your Adversary) doubting of the weight and
validity of the testimonies produced against you, says, (in the fourth
particular answer, page 22. of his book) that the time when your estate was
sequestered, was, when the Commonwealth was deeply imbroiled in wars.

And then goes on, and says, (in the next page) that in such times and cases,
they have many considerations, as the reason of their actions, which those who
are without doors, (that is, your Honor, and your friends, who were not of the
Parliament) neither know, nor apprehend, nor are to take upon them so to do: So
that here (you see) is Club-law, you must be sequestered, because the
Commonwealth was imbroil'd in wars; and your Honor (being out of doors) must
neither know, nor apprehend ('it is too far above your reach) the reason why; nor
are you to take upon you ('it is presumption) so to do: For he tells you (page
2.) that true Englishmen, have used to have Parliaments, and their Acts, as
being the judgment of the whole Representative of the Nation, in more
veneration and esteem, than to be put into the balance, with the
contradictory assertions, of any private biased spirits.

And truly (my Lord) upon this ground, we may well question, whether you be a
true Englishman, or no, who being swayed by your own private interest, and
biased with a desire after your own estate again, should dare now to move any
thing against the actions of that Parliament, which (as he tells you in the
same page, answ. 6.) upon the proofs by him alleged, and (because they were
not full enough) for reasons best known to themselves, in time of general
imbroilments, ordered your estate to be confiscate. So that still (my Lord)
you must take the fortune of the wars; and though your Honor, and all out of
doors, know no reason for it, yet they did it (says he) for reasons best
known unto themselves.

But will your Honor give me leave (as a true Englishman) to say something
for that Parliament, and indeed for all Parliaments, and Courts of Judicature;
you well know, that the manner of their proceedings, in administration of
Justice, is much according to that Aeconomico-Political process of nature in
man himself, wherein the apprehensive, deliberative, and conclusive faculties,
(which in a word we call common sense) which is the great Judicatory in man,
does determine all things, (with a common and equal respect) as they are
represented. Now the outward senses, are the Spies and Intelligencers of the
Soul, who bring in several objects (according to their respective natures and
faculties) to be judged of, and determined by the understanding. And hence we
say, nihil in intellectu, quod non sit, prius in sensu.

Now if these senses (either by any defect or vice in the organ, faculty, or
medium, (which we might follow with an exact and elegant Analogy) but I will
avoid prolixity) If I say the senses, either by deficiency, or redundancy,
under, or over-doing, make a false report unto the Court (the common sense)
false judgment must proceed accordingly, and yet the Court blameless: But some
men tell us of inferior faculties (even in the soul it self) which do corrupt
the superior, and so obstruct Justice, and pervert judgment: If this be so,
it is within doors, and I who am without, am not (I am told) to take upon me
to enquire into. All the hope is, the smoke of Cun-powder, (being by Gods
goodness) dissipated, the noise of Drums and Trumpets, and clattering of Armor
ceased, and those imbroilments, which hurried your estate into sequestration,
abated, and the confessions (and so the guilt) of your adversaries discovered;
the great Judicatory of the Nation, will be the better able to discern and
judge of your case, with serene judgment, and imperturb'd affections; and
accordingly resolve upon, and execute such signal justice, as shall deliver the
land from the guilt of oppression, if any such there be in this particular,
which is, and shall be the prayer of him, who is,

My Lord, The Commonwealths, and your Honors servant, so far as your Honor is
the servant of the Commonwealth. RA. FARMER.

To the Christian and understanding Reader.
Reader,
I Think it requisite (by way of Preface) to give an account, why I sit not
down in a retired and desirable silence; I met with one who tells me, that, As
he that impaireth the good name and fame of another, is cruel to that other;
so he who neglects his own, is cruel to himself: And that it concerns
Ministers of the Gospel in a special manner, to preserve their reputation,
because the contempt of their persons redounds to the prejudice of their work
and calling. How I have been reproached and charged by my quaking Adversary, in
his railing and reviling Pamphlet, is obvious to all who read it; and how
falsely, appears in the discourse ensuing; as for his foul language, I leave it
to the men and women of their generation; but as for the imputation of forgery,
and underhand practices, my soul so much abhors them, that I should think it
my sin to sit still in silence under them, but rather conceive it my duty, to
return them whence they came, there being so just and real a lodging for them,
of which (Reader) I constitute thee a Judge between us As for those vulgar
bubbles, that take wind, and rise with every light and foolish story, which
they receive from the men and women only of their own persuasion, and judge of
things and persons by the rule of their affections, I dismiss them to Anticyra,
for a purge of Hellebor, taking up the resolution of the Apostle (in cases
where I appeal not to them) with me it is a very small thing to be judged by
them, 1 Cor. 4.3.
or by man's judgment; for what more false, uncertain, and inconstant, than the
popular air, who cry Hosanna to day, and Crucify to morrow? No (Reader) I Will
dwell at home; and so long as I maintain peace between God, and my own
conscience, I Will rest there. But some may say (for we live in a querulous age,
wherein every one (even women) will be quarrelling) why did you at all appear
in public? I answer, to maintain the peace of my own conscience; for I say
with David, 1 Samuel 17.29. was there not a cause? Shall the uncircumcised
Philistines, defy the Hosts and Armies of the living God? And shall David
(though a stripling) stand still and bear it? No, Judge. 5.23.
Curse ye Meroz, says the Angel of the Lord, curse ye bitterly the
inhabitants thereof, because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help
of the Lord, against the mighty.

I writ not this, as blaming all who have not appeared with me in the like
manner: But this I judge, that if (in such a case as this is) the Lord suggest
it to any man, (especially a Watchman) and make his spirit willing, and he
withdraw upon selfish considerations, he cannot maintain that peace true
Christians look for: For my part, in plain English, I am not (I cannot be) an
Universalist.

There is an opinion (or at least a practice) taken up by some of universal
respect, and compliance with all persons, of whatever opinion or persuasion,
which is not less prejudicial to truth, than the Doctrine of the universal and
equal love of God to all, is prejudicial to grace. I know they are both
plausible things, winning and taking, as much suiting to, and complying with
every man's interest and affections; but how agreeing with Gods mind, with some
men, sub judice lis est, but is with me determined. And for the former, I have
taken some notice of the insinuations and subtilties of it, in our last
generation; for what more usual Plea (with those who lay in wait to deceive.)
than love, and sweetness, and meekness, and gentleness, and mutual forbearance,
indeed in difference in matters of Religion; as if it were a virtue to
Scepticks, ever doubting, querying, and questioning, never resolving, that
either this or that, were the undoubted mind of God, and the true Religion:
And how skilfully did the Prince of Darkness play his Game in his black
Regiments, by branding all those with the scandal and reproach of passion, and
bitterness of spirit, who would not answer his ends in a lukewarm neutrality?
Or at least, in such a sweetness of spirit, (as they call it) as should give
equal encouragement. But whether the Word of Christ warrant such a deportment,
would easily be concluded, if men would not consult their ease and worldly
advantages; and I propose it to be considered, whether one, or both of these,
be not the temper of this kind of people? Let which side will be uppermost,
they will loose nothing. I could not but smile (but yet with a kind of
indignation) when I took notice of a Letter, heretofore written from London, to
one in this City, in the behalf of blaspheming Nayler, when the punishment,
adjudged by the Parliament, to be inflicted upon him in this City, was to be
executed, the Author of that Letter takes an occasion, from information of some
of his fellow Saints, (of the new model) that there were some here of bitter
spirits, forsooth, and fearing rigorous execution, writes for a mitigation,
giving high expressions of what super-excellencies he found in that adorable
creature, when as this Epistoler himself, is a Saint of so mild and sweet a
temper in Religion, that he will never be branded for a Puritan; for Sabbath
days were his fittest seasons to look over his accounts, or to go to his house
in the Country. Truly Reader, I must tell you, we are fallen into those times,
wherein most peoples Religion (I mean the wise ones) lies in making faces, and
courting the rising interest, at least waiting an opportunity so to do: In the
mean while, the question grows high, and Romes interest (by the subtilties of
the Jesuits working amongst us) is very much promoted, and that by our own
hands, men pretending (which is strange) to the Protestant persuasion; for now
the question is not (as among the Separatists) whether our Parishes are true
Churches, but whether we have had any true Churches at all in England, till
these late years, that they were brought in by the Sword in the late Army, or
those who accompanied them; and it is very like (if the Lord prevent not)
Magisterially, and Dictator-like (almost in Cathedra) to be resolved, That we
neither have, nor had true Churches, or Ministers among us, and that we must
renounce our Ordination, take it up from the people, and so make all new, after
a mode, which yet our eyes, nor the eyes of our Forefathers have ever seen, or
their ears ever heard of. To effect this, have those Emissaries of the Roman
Faction, no doubt, stirred up, and set on foot these obstreporous Quakers,
(though the generality of them suspect no such matter) to cry down our
Churches, Ministers, and Ordinances, to whom they have now drawn in, heads and
pens more subtle and able, who, aliud agentes (as it were) do that for them,
which they themselves (in their own persons openly) were not able to effect or
accomplish, who does not with fear and sadness (that does consider) foresee
that lamentable result, that is like to follow upon the contests raised, and
increasing between our brethren of the Presbyterian and Independent persuasion,
and which by the heat and opposition of persons of ability, (on both sides) are
like to grow more high than ever: But if my poor low voice might be heard
between them, and Oh, that the Lord would persuade them to hear, I should say
as Abraham to Lot, Let there be no strife between you, for you are Brethren;
and I should beseech them in Joseph's language to his Brethren, Fall not out by
the way: But if I cannot be heard, I make this protestation, disclaimer, and
prayer, Lord, let not my foul come into the secrets, and let me never partake
of the delicacies of those men, who make Schismatical separation, destroying
those Churches and Ministry, wherein, and by whom (blessed be God) thousands
have been converted and saved; and who are willing to reform, and conform,
according to what is revealed in the Scripture; sure I am, and experience (the
Mistress even of fools) has made it good unto the world, that Discipline and
Government in the Church, has (ever since the reformation from Popery) kept
the Reformed Churches free from Heresy and Blasphemy getting head among them;
and if there were danger of an inrode, and an incursion, by the abuse of
Government, he shall come little short of an Idiot, (and wise men will easily
acknowledge it) that does not perceive, that no Government at all, every one
being left to his own fancy) will much more do it. It Is a strange piece of
madness, not to put a difference between enforcing men to Religion, and
tolerating all Religions, to the hazzarding of the true: Or if (putting a
difference) Matchivilianisme shall so far prevail with any, as that, so they
can secure their own interests, they care not for the concernments of Jesus
Christ, and his Gospel. As for my own former undertakings (by the help of the
Press) I have but endeavored to discover these upstart enemies, and
adversaries to the truth, who privily brought in damnable Heresies, even
denying the Lord that bought them. By occasion whereof, I have raised up this
homebred Adversary, my own Countryman, by hinting only at whose impostures in
this kind, the impostume is broken, and much filth and quitture has been
vomited forth from it, in most unchristian railings, lyings, and reproachings,
who yet withal, pretends to higher measures of Saintship, and perfection, than
ordinary, which considering (and well knowing the man, and his practices) I
concluded this with my self, that if we might judge of the conscience,
honesty, and perfection of the Quakers in general, by this man in particular,
we may well assert this, viz. A man may be as vile a person as any under
heaven, and yet a perfect Quaker, which (after a brief discourse of the
conversion and perfection of Quakers in general) I have endeavored to
demonstrate, from the practices and doings of him in special; and this in his
dealings in the matters of the Lord Craven, and Mr. Love; the ones Estate, and
the others Life.

The materials I have built my discourse with, (in the matter of the Lord
Craven) are two printed pieces, the one entitled, A true and perfect
Narrative, of the several proceedings, in the case concerning the Lord Craven,
wherein are set forth the whole proceedings, together with the Indictment,
Trial, and Conviction of Faulconer, of Perjury, in that information, upon which
the Lord Cravens Estate was sequestered, which piece was printed and published
by the friends of the Lord Craven; the other is a piece, entitled, The Lord
Cravens Case, etc. with a short examination of that former Narrative; and this
latter, was written by Bishop himself, in excuse, and defense of himself and
Faulconer, of which book, he printed so few, and so disposed of them, as that
I could not get one, either here, or at London, until (by providence) I was
directed to send to himself to borrow it. And this I did, because in his
Pamphlet against me, he quotes it, and refers to it, for clearing (as he
thought) of his innocence; which if he had refused to lend me, I intended to
acquaint the world, that he had quoted his book to clear himself, which could
not be come by, which (it may be) he feared, and therefore sent it me; or
otherwise, by the disposing of Divine Providence (the time being come for the
discovery of his deep hypocrisy) he was overruled so to send it. For his own
Confessions (therein contained) and Faulconers Confession upon his deathbed,
of that perjury, (which Bishop would in his book free him from) being
conferred, and compared, the whole practice, and whence it arose, and how it
was carried on, is manifestly discovered; as in the discourse following, to
which I have added a little of his dealings against Mr. Love, to let him, and
the world see, whether he be not also a blood-sucker. Could I have gotten his
other book, called, A Short Plea, etc. which he also published against Mr.
Love, I doubt not but thence I should have made a further discovery of him; but
he dealt as subtly in this, as in the former, printed so few, as that they
cannot be gotten. But I suppose what I have done is sufficient; the
improvement I make of the whole, is this, to let the world see, how deeply and
closely wickedness may lie lurking in our natures, and what a desperate evil
Hypocrisy is, that a man may continue in such wickedness unrepented of, and
yet think himself a Saint, and to have attained to perfection: If by what I
have herein done, I may be instrumental to bring him to repentance, or his
case may be as a Pillar of Salt, to season and caution others, I shall be
abundantly satisfied in my labor, and shall (when I know it) give God the
glory: In the mean time, I rest,

Reader, Thine, and the Churches Servant; RA. FARMER.

THE IMPOSTOR DETHRONED; OR, The Quakers Throne of Truth Detected to be Satan's
Seat of LIES.
It Is the great Criterion and distinguishing Character of the Generation of
Quakers among us, that they pretend to greater measures and higher stature in
Christ and Christianity then others, to have attained even to perfection; such
perfection, as to be without sin in their persons. This to be so, is manifest
by their reproaching and vilifying the Ministers of the Gospel, and their
Doctrine in this point; though we teach and press perfection as the white to be
aimed at, and as that which every true Christian must, and does endeavor
after, not as though he had already attained, either were already perfect, but
following after, if that he might apprehend that, for which also he is
apprehended of Christ Jesus; Phil. 3.11, 12, 13, 14.
and which he shall attain unto, when he has attained unto the Resurrection of
the Dead. And although we say and teach, that there is a measure of perfection,
even in this life attainable (and that personal too) consisting in sincerity,
integrity, and uprightness of heart, walking in all good conscience both
toward God and men: And that we must and do daily cleanse our selves from all
filthiness of the flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1.
perfecting holiness in the fear of God. Although (I say) we preach and press,
and (by grace received) practice this, yet this will not content them: No less
then such a manner and such a measure of Christ within them, as shall put them
out of need of Christ without them, will serve their turn: If this be not so,
they have no cause to charge us as they do, for we do (with all seriousness
possible) profess and urge a necessity of Christ within us, renewing,
transforming, and changing us from our dead and perishing estate in nature, and
conforming, and making us more and more like unto himself by grace, and the
mighty and powerful operations of his Spirit within us. When we sin (which we
would not do) giving the grace of repentance (and the exercise of it) unto us:
Romans 7.
By his mediation and intercession in heaven, procuring pardon and peace for
us, and as our Head and King, by degrees, subduing our sins and iniquities
(which are our greatest enemies) under us. This is our Doctrine; this we
profess, preach, and practice. And for the truth of this (that we do so, even
all of us unanimously, and with one mouth) I appeal to the whole world to bear
us witness. But this (I say) our present Adversaries disapprove of; their
perfection is of another nature, a high form of perfection, absolute and
entire, wanting nothing. And we are (with them) false teachers, because we say,
we cannot here attain it. To argue this a little, because it is (cardo and caput
controversiae) the great and main thing they seem to drive at, and to profess;
witness their morose and severe carriage and conversation; their demure looks
their abstinences in meats and drinks, the pulling off their Points, Laces, and
Ribons from their clothes, their separating and withdrawing from the society
and familiarity of all others, as unclean and polluted. And last of all,
witness their living without, and despising all former Ordinances and
Administrations since Christ and his Apostles, as if too low and mean, and not
suiting with their perfection. We shall therefore a little examine this matter,
and try their Title, and doubt not but (upon trial) we shall find them as
those in the Revelations, whom the Angel of the Church of Ephesus tried, Rev.
2.2.
who said they were Apostles, and were not, and so were discovered to be liars:
Perfection then is twofold, Doctrinal, and Practical; Doctrinal perfection, is
such a height and measure of knowledge, as beyond which a man cannot go: To be
perfect in knowledge. Practical Perfection is such a measure of holiness, as
not to sin at all, at any time, in any thing, but to be perfect in the measure
of every grace, and in the practice of every duty. I suppose this is so plain a
distribution of humane perfection absolute, as is very clear and obvious. And
if our Adversaries mean less then this, they fall in with our Doctrine, and
then they quarrel and charge us wrongfully. Now if I shall show from
Prophetical and Apostolical Doctrine (and consequently from the Doctrine of
Christ) that perfection in either kind, (Doctrinal or Practical) is not in
this last sense in this life attainable, then the Quakers are found to be out
of the Doctrine of Christ, and are hypocrites and liars; and it will not need
many words to prove either. And first for Doctrinal Perfection, that we cannot
here attain that full measure of knowledge allotted us, that one place of the
Apostle is a sufficient testimony, 1 Cor. 13.9, 10. We know in part, and we
Prophecy in part, but when that which is perfect is come, then that which is
in part shall be done away. And ver. 12. For now we see through a glass darkly,
but then face to face; Now I know in part, but then I shall know, even as I am
known. If any shall be either so simple or perverse, as to question whether the
Apostle speak this of our imperfect state in this life, in point of knowledge.
I shall not think him worthy of an answer; the clearness of the truth will
sufficiently argue such a man's imperfection; And as for Practical perfection,
that we cannot here attain such a measure of holiness, as not to sin at all, at
any time, in any thing, but that we may be absolutely perfect in the measure of
every grace, and in the practice of every duty. I shall not need heap
testimonies, a few places will sufficiently evidence this truth, without any
further argumentation, 1 Kings 8.46. There is no man that sins not. Prove.
20.9. Who can say I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? Eccles.
7.20. There is not a just man upon earth, that does good and sins not. These
are the testimonies of Solomon. More might be produced from the Old Testament,
take only two from the New. The first from St. John, 1. John 1.8. If we (I
John, and the Saints to whom he wrote) If we say that we have no sin, we
deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. The next from St. James, Ja.
3.2. In many things (not in a few only) we offend all. So that here we attain
not a finless perfection, we shall not here be, I say, fully like Christ in
holiness or knowledge, this is reserved for hereafter; and this the same St.
John attesteth, 1 Jo. 3 2. Beloved, now are we the sons of God, and it does not
yet appear what we shall be; but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be
like him, for we shall see him as he is, when we shall see him (as St. Paul
says before, face to face.) then our imperfect measures shall be made perfect.
That which there follows in John (and other places produced for perfection)
intend it, and press it ( viz. absolute perfection) as our duty and the matter
of our endeavor.

Thus from Canonical truth I have showed you the imperfection of our perfection
here: And what ground our Adversaries have, to plead their exemption from the
same condition, I cannot discern. Suppose we should grant them to be led by the
immediate and infallible teachings of the un-erring Spirit, let them then tell
us, who are the liars, Solomon, and Paul, and James, and John, or they? Or was
that true which they affirmed of themselves and all men, that they are sinners?
And is this, which these men affirm to the contrary, true also? Or was it truth
then, and is not so still? Does new light make the old a lie? Romans 3.4.
Or does the Spirit speak contraries? No, let God be true, and every man a
liar; and that I am sure is a sinner. And for our parts, 2 Cor. 11.30. and 12.
from 5, to the 10.
if we boast, we will (with the Apostle) boast and glory of and in our
infirmities, not that we are sinners, (that is our burden) But that God for
Christ's sake is righteous and just to forgive us our sins, 1 John 1.9
when we confess them, and that Christ by his grace, will cleanse us from our
sins, and all iniquity; That so his strength might be perfected, and
manifested, and magnified in our infirmity. With this further. That if we were
so perfect, as to be free from sinning on earth, we should not need Christ's
intercession in heaven; nor should we need to pray daily (as Christ taught his
Disciples) father forgive us, And therefore we say, Heb. 7.25
Blessed be God for Jesus Christ in heaven: who ever lives to make
intercession for us. And who, when we sin, 1 Jo 2.1, 2
is there our advocate, and the propitiation for our sins; and thereby able
to save us ((...)) to the uttermost, to perfection: till all be perfected, and
if the Quakers will not for themselves join with us in this Christian
confession, let them speak out, and say so: And we know what to say to them,
and if they will join, let them cease to condemn us, for the acknowledgement of
our imperfection.

And thus have we argued human imperfection, by an argument ad rem. And now
we shall prove it by arguments ad hominem; Even the Quakers themselves. And
discover the imperfection and unsoundness of their pretended perfection, and
consequently their Hypocrisy. And first from the manner of their conversion,
and then from the matter or quality of the persons converted. And thirdly from
their conversion it self. And this, first a little from the conversion of the
Quakers in general: And then of my quaking adversary in particular.

And first of the manner of the Quakers conversion in general, and that which I
shall here observe is from the suddenness of their conversion, and I may add
the violence of their conversion. And first from the suddenness of it, it may
render it justly suspected, for suppose a drunkard, or a sottish Buffoon, a
fellow that makes himself a Fool (an ape) to make profane persons merry (for
some such among us have turned Quakers) suppose I say, such a one, shall all of
a sudden leave his drunkenness, or leave his apish conversation, and (with out
any more ado) become a Quaker, shall we call this conversion? Its a saying of
that great Lecturer of nature Hipocrates, that omnes repentinae mutationes,
sunt periculosae: All sudden changes or alterations are dangerous: They
forebode no good, but evil. These sudden leaps, are from violent motions.
Nature in its regular course is more lent and moderate, making its progress
from one degree unto another; And although sometimes there are found such
violent motions in nature, yet they are very rare, but always doubtful, this
is true in religion and grace also.

These sudden Converts are (if not miracula) mira gratiae, wonders. As we say
of late conversion, from the instance of the Thief upon the Cross; One was so
converted, that none might despair, and but one; that none might presume. So of
this sudden Conversion, they are Rare. A Paul or so, That (as he himself
says, 1 Timothy 1.16.) Christ might in him show forth all long-suffering, for a
pattern, to encourage others to come into God, notwithstanding they were
Persecutors, and grievous sinners. But I say, These patterns are rare, As one
Job was made a pattern of Patience. Such dispensations being not ordinary; For
as we say, Nemo repent fit pessimus, none come to the height of wickedness
at once, so Nemo repent fit optimus: A man comes not to his stature of
goodness on a sudden.

There are several ages in Christ: There are little children, young men, and
Fathers, 1 John 2.12, 13. And there is a growth in Grace, 2 Pet. 3.18. as well
as in Nature.

In order to the appearances of grace, in true conversion, there is a previous
and precedaneous act of godly sorrow, which works repentance and true
humiliation; whereby the soul (being cast down under the sense of its former
evil ways and ungodly conversation) is made humble, meek, and lowly; judging
and condemning it self as the vilest of all others: Or at least as vile as any.
And thence (by the power of the spirit fetching strength from Christ, by faith)
comes up by degrees, to some stature and growth in him, till he come up to his
appointed measure. But these persons (as we have observed them) do per saltum,
skip from the lowest degree of baseness; to high measures of perfection, in a
moment, all of a sudden. But some may say, how can you tell whether they have
not been so humbled, or truly repented? The sin and evil conversation was open,
but the repentance may be secret. We see a change, an alteration.

Ans. I Will ask then this question (and let it be seriously considered) May not
Satan be contented that a person leave a base, a wicked conversation; that a
man cease to be a drunkard, (or the like) that he may become an Heretic, a
Blasphemer? Is it not his advantage? Does not the devil gain Proselites by such
Converts as these are? Oh says a poor simple honest-hearted Christian, who
judges by appearance, and suspects no evil, What a change is here wrought in
this man? Surely this must needs be by some immediate and extraordinary power
of Gods Spirit, it is good therefore to be of his Religion, whereas the man
has but shifted spirits. One or two are gone out, to make way for more and
worse. Is not this the meaning of that Parable, where an unclean spirit (it may
be a whorish one, Mat. 12.43, 44, 45.
or a drunken one) being gone out of a man, comes again and finds his old
habitation (as there) swept and garnished, swept from his former filthy lusts,
and garnished with specious shows and pretenses of piety (indeed an hypocrite)
empty of true grace, and finding it thus, concludes, there is a fit dwelling for
my purpose, and then goes and takes seven devils more, worse then himself,
devils of pride, censoriousness, faction, railing, lying, heresy, blasphemy,
and all these enter and take possession, and so the man's worse then ever, his
latter end is worse then his beginning: So that you cannot call this man's
change, a conversion, though there be an alteration. But yet to show the
uncertainty, and (for the most part) hypocrisy of these sudden changes, and to
make an estimate in that which may appear. Suppose a person has got an estate
by cheating, cozening, bribery, forgery, perjury, extortion, oppression, or the
like, and this person becomes a Quaker, and so a witness of the truth, even of
that Christ's appearing the second time, and without sin unto salvation, as my
friend George has it in the Title Page of his railing Pamphlet; and you must
suppose this appearing of Christ the second time without sin, to be so in him,
or else he cannot be a witness, which he says himself to be. Now I say,
suppose such a person become a Quaker, and so an eminent Saint, of the highest
form of the Quakers model, and has not made restitution, nor given
satisfaction for that estate so wickedly, impiously, and villanously gotten,
can any one in the world say, this man has repented that he is converted, or a
true Christian? Will any one dare to say other of such a one (if he profess to
be godly) then that he is a most wretched hypocrite and dissembler? and such
persons we find among them; and therefore the very suddenness of their
Conversions, with so little evidence of truth, does justly render it suspected,
especially if you consider the violence of the motion in which they are
hurried. We have another saying, that nullum violentum est perpetuum, what is
violent, is not lasting. And surely, if we observe their violent unusual and
uncivil actings, following (or rather going along) with their sudden
Conversions, we may easily conclude the unsoundness of them. For as for the
Spirit of Christ (which they so highly pretend to) it was not of their temper:
He did not (as was Prophesied of him) strive, Mat. 12.19, 20.
nor cry, neither did any man hear his voice in the streets: He did not quench
the smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed; He did no sin, neither was there
guile found in his mouth; when he was reviled, 1 Pet. 2.22, 23
he reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed
himself to him that judges righteously. And how contrary this peoples
demeanor is, and how unlike this pattern, it is easy to discern: Never were
there such bold, open, and unparalled Railers and Revilers in the world, as
these are, as if they were the Masters of Scolding, and Billingsgate
Professors; and which is remarkable, their rage and malice is thus violently
belched out, most against the Ministers of the Gospel, by which we discern
whose Scholars they are, and whose work they do: The malice of Satan has been
always most against Christ's Ministers; and therefore has his practice been,
by his instruments, to slander and cast dirt in their faces, that by
calumniating their persons, he might hinder the acceptance of their Doctrine;
and this with singular confidence and boldness and (no doubt) by this means
they gain with some people: They have learnt that Machivilian Maxim,
Calumniare audacter, aliquid haerebit; Lie, calumniate, slander, and do it
boldly, and with confidence, and some of it will stick, it will take with some
or other; according to the Hebrew Proverb, If all enter not, half will. And
indeed it will not be believed (but by observing persons) how much bold,
confident, and peremptory asserting and holding out an Opinion, or Relation
(though false in it self) will take, and prevail with such simple and
unexercised people, who cannot judge, and put a difference between words and
matter: And it is strange to see, how in matters of debate and controversy,
they will determine of his side that is most daring, and carries on his cause
with most words and confidence: Nay, most certain it is, that the very Title
Page of a Pamphlet, boldly stuffed and languag'd, shall be a sufficient
confutation and satisfaction to many, against that person or side they fancy
not; so that sense, or nonsense, truth or falsehood, their Adversaries (say
they) is answered and confuted, though possibly they read neither one nor
the other; or if they do, they do not understand them; and so from the bold
revilings of their leaders, take up a prejudice against both our Doctrine and
persons: But as for the latter, we can be contented to be reproached for
Christ's sake, and the Gospel; and we can with comfort read and think upon these
w^^ds, Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, Mat. 5.11,
12.
and shall say all manner of evil of you falsely for me sake, rejoice and be
exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven, for so persecuted they the
Prophets which were before you. And in the steps of these their railing
Forefathers do this people tread, much unlike our Lord and Master Christ
Jesus: True it is, we find him angry, and much displeased sometimes, but
'twas with two sorts of persons, those who profaned the public place of
worship, and those hypocrites, who under specious pretenses of more holiness
and higher perfection than others, devoured Widows houses, and made void Gods
Commandments, teaching, that Children were free from honoring their Parents,
upon their Corban, some religious pretenses, and that now they were free from
doing any more for their Father or Mother, contrary to that Commandment, Thou
shall honor thy Father, and thy Mother. And Solomon ranks them that do not
bless their Mother, Pro. 30.11, 12, 13.
with them that curse their Father: And who are they? Proud self-conceited
hypocrites. I Will give you all together, There is a generation that curses
their Father, and does not bless their Mother; There is a generation that are
pure in their own eyes, and yet is not washed from their filthiness; There is a
generation, oh how lofty are their eyes, and their eyelids are lifted up. And
surely these things have never been exemplified in any age more, than in this
present generation of Quakers, wherein, under pretext of more holiness, piety,
mortification, self-denial, voluntary humility, abstinences, and the like, they
put forth so much pride, scorn, rancour, censoriousness, self-exalting,
other-men condemning practices, that never was the like known (or heard of) by
any people under heaven. With such as these ( Profaners of the public places
of worship, and dissembling hypocrites that despised all others) I find our
Lord dealing very roundly, whipping the one out of the Temple, and denouncing
direful and dreadful woes and judgments against the other: But as for all
other sorts of sinners, I find him manifesting much tenderness toward them,
being meek and gentle, benign and gracious, eating and drinking with Publicans
and sinners; which reads me this lesson, that Profaners of Gods Worship, and
hypocrites, are to be dealt with more severely and sharply than others. And the
same course does the Apostle Paul direct his Scholar Titus (a Minister) to take
with unruly and vain talkers, and deceivers, who subvert whole houses, teaching
things that they ought not, for filthy lucres sake, Titus 1.13. Rebuke them
sharply, that they may be sound in the faith: And therefore if these people be
found to be hypocrites, and we deal plainly with them; if they call our plain
dealing railing, we will follow our Master in bearing his reproach, for doing
the same work that he did, and his Apostles enjoined us and leave it to him to
judge between us.

And for mine own part, if any man shall be displeased with me, for telling
people of their sins, and neglect of their duties (as desiring their amendment)
keeping my self within the bounds of truth and soberness (of which those who
are guilty of base cowardice, flattery, or unworthy compliance; nor those who
kick, because their sores are touched on, shall be my Judges) I shall not
account my self to have discharged my Ministry faithfully, if some be not
angry. Sore eyes cannot endure the light, and a toothless Minister will best
please a careless and a secure people; and if they will have such Teachers, the
best way (which they have pretty well learned) is to get such that must live
upon their alms, that they and theirs may starve, if they will not flatter
them; and which (I am confident) is not the least of Satan's design at this time
upon this Nation. I write not this in reference to my own condition, for I
bless God, I am otherwise honestly provided for; and the shutting of peoples
Purses, shall not stop my mouth from speaking what my Lord and Master commands
me: And as the Apostle (in another case) so I in this, could wish, that all
other Ministers in the Nation were as I am, for then I should hope we should
have a better people, I mean for the general; and as for those reproaches which
some would cast upon me, I can, and do rejoice in this, that it is not for any
false Doctrine, or scandalous conversation, or for any thing of personal or
private concernment, but for home, and plain, and faithful applications, from
zealous and hearty opposition against faction, heresy, and blasphemy, and
against unworthy and unchristian practices in some people, especially
hypocrites, who will not easily be rouzed: And if any shall hence apprehend
themselves justified in the like reprehensions toward me, I prevent them with
this proposal; when they shall find me devouring Widows houses, or ruining
the estate of any man; when they shall see me (with the hypocritical or quaking
Pharisee, wearing broader or narrower Philacteries than others; that is, making
greater or higher shows and outsides of Religion (one way or other) on
purpose to be taken notice of, and to be seen of men, and pointed at; when they
shall find me (as their fellows) compassing Sea and Land to make Proselites;
when they hear of me running up and down from Country to Country, from one
Parish to another, disturbing, revileing, railing at, and persecuting those who
are in their lawful and settled stations (following and pursuing their lawful
callings) when they find me (and they can prove it) preaching false doctrine
and heresy, when I do any of these things, let them call me hypocrite, and
deal sharply with me, I will not call it persecution. And since I am thus
fallen upon this particular, give me leave to write a word or two unto it.

The Quakers charge us (and according to their guize and guile) make loud
outcries on us for Persecution: But I appeal to all the world, who are the
Persecutors; Do not they disturb, revile, and persecute? Are not we in our
rightful possessions and employments? And did, or do we go or run after them,
to hinder or disquiet them? Do we desire any thing of them, more than that we
and our people might meet and serve God peaceably, according to our rule? And
may we not require it of our Magistrates? And is it not their duty, to secure
and protect us and themselves from tumults, frights, and fears? Must they
revile and reproach us, and our doctrine, and render us vile at their
pleasures? Must all they say be good and warrantable? And must our just
defenses of our selves, calling, and worship, be persecuting and railing,
because they say so? Was there ever such a breed of peremptory Controllers of
words, Laws, and actions, as these are? Must all the world bow down and kiss
their feet and worship James Naylor, upon their bare and un-grounded
affirmations? And if at any time, any of them do suffer imprisonment, or the
like, what is it for? Is it for Religion, or conscience sake? Who meddles with
them upon that account? Is not their suffering for riotous disturbances in our
Public Worship? And if they say their conscience or light leads them to it,
and therefore they must be suffered, and not punished, which if we do punish,
it is Persecution. I ask, What if their light lead them to take away our estates
as well as our good name, must they (because they pretend conscience) be let
alone and suffered? Or if they suffer, is it Persecution? I leave it to all
sober men in the world to judge, and who are not willing to be led blinde-fold:
Nor is this a groundless or a blind suggestion, that such a thing as this may
be; for did not the Anabaptists in Germany heretofore do the same, upon the
like pretenses? Did they not rob, and take away the estates of all that were
not of their Faction, because forsooth they were the wicked and ungodly? And
was not this the levelling principle of that thing, which my opponent George in
his imaginary Throne of truth, page 104. calls a Parliament, and highly
magnifies? Whose speech was that to the Officers of the Army at White Hall,
concerning that Parliament (if we must so call it) That they did fly at liberty
and property, insomuch, that if one man had twelve Cowes, they held, that
another that wanted Cowes ought to take a share of his neighbor: And (as he
most consideringly said) Who could have said any thing was his own, if they had
gone on? And blessed be God for their dissolution. And thus much of the Quakers
perfection, from their Conversion, in respect of the manner, sudden and
violent, Mark 9.18.20.
more like a possession, then a conversion.

And now a word or two of the matter (the stuff) these Quakers are made of;
and truly (all things considered, their sudden rise, growth, and perfection,
together with the matter whereof they are generated) I know not to what more
fitly to liken them, than Mushroms, or Toad-stools, one of natures hasty
productions, sprung up and perfected in a night or two; a kind of excressence,
of a light and thin substance, like a Sponge, white and fair to look to,
generated for the most part out of rottenness and putrefaction; most of them
of a dangerous and pernicious quality at the best good for nothing. Hence (by
translation) they use to call an unprofitable and empty fellow, a Fungus, which
is a Mushrom. He that will be informed of them, let them read Gerhards Herbal,
where among other evil qualities of them, you shall find some of them (for
there are of several kinds) made use of to kill and smother Bees, to drive
them out of their Hives, and bereave the poor Bees of their meat, houses, and
lives: And in some places they serve, says he, to carry fire from place to
place, and which being opened, send forth a thin powder like to smoke, This of
the Puck foists, which is one kind of Mushrom.
which is very noisome and hurtful to the eyes, causing a kind of blindness,
which is called Pur-blinde, or Sand-blinde; and they grow, says he (some of
them) where old rusty iron lies, or rotten clouts, or near to Serpents Dens, or
roots of trees that bring forth venomous fruit. In sum, they are a slimy
excrementitious matter, suddenly arising out of the earth, having no root, and
so of no continuance, tending as suddenly to putrefaction and rottenness,
whence they had their original. And how this does quadrare, and almost run upon
all four, and fully suit to hypocritical productions, is easy to discern: For
a little to apply, and but a little, for an ordinary capacity may carry it on;
Is it not strange? and is it not that which makes the wonder now a-daies, that
sots, drunkards, whores, whoremongers, covetous persons and oppressors, persons
stupid and ignorant, of no brains or knowledge in morality, less in Religion,
silly clownes, and simple women, whose capacities reach not beyond their
breeding and employment, persons fanatical, vertiginous, factious, of unstable
and unsettled spirits, and indeed almost all sorts of vile persons, that these
should be the matter of which the Quakers are gendred? Does not the world
wonder at this, as it did after the beast which arose out of the Sea? Rev. 13.
But alas friends cease your wondering, Is it such a strange thing to see old
rusty iron, dirty clouts, and rotten trees bring forth dainty Mushroms? Is not
this the mode of the ungrounded, unrooted Professor? Know you not? or have you
not heard of the Parable of the Sower? There are a sort of Professors which
quickly (suddenly) take, but not having depth of earth (not well rooted) they
dry away and wither? And it is observable what Matthew has, Matthew. 13. Mark 4.
Luke 8.
ver. 5. concerning them; and Mark also, ver. 5. That forthwith (immediately,
(...), all of a sudden) it sprung up, And why? Because they had no depth of
earth; slight and ungrounded Professors start up suddenly; and for the same
reason they suddenly wither, as in the following verses: Ill weeds (we say)
grow apace; not so good herbs, and fruit-bearing plants; they bring forth with
patience, they must have time to perfect them. And here let me not be mistaken,
I do not any way judge or limit the Almighty in his operations upon souls to be
converted, either for the matter (the persons to be converted) or the manner
(the suddenness of it) for he is a most free, and a most powerful Agent, and in
my soul I bless and do adore him. But let it be considered, his workings are
not ordinarily so sudden, violent, and so general, especially with such as have
been grossly ignorant and scandalous; he does not usually bring souls from the
lowest condition of darkness, ignorance, and stupidity (both natural and
spiritual) and of profane and ungodly conversation, to the heights of light,
knowledge, and holiness (even to perfection) at an instant, in a moment, within
a few days, or weeks, or months, as these pretend to be. These sudden,
violent, and hasty progressions are not usually well grounded, or perpetual;
for indeed they have no bottom, no stable foundation, and argues, that though
there be a change, it is not true conversion, every turning, every change is not
conversion. The Scripture tells us of some who turn aside after Satan, 1 Timothy
1.15. 2 Timothy 4.4.
and that some shall turn awa^ their ears from the truth, and shall be turned
unto fables which is the third thing considerable in the Quakers conversion,
and will evidence their imperfection; for perfection stands in these two
things, to be perfectly fully informed and established in truth of doctrine and
faith, and t^ be absolutely, fully completed in holiness, and if a person
come short in either, he is not absolutely, completely perfect. And now if a
man turn from profaneness to heresi^ from an ungodly conversation, in point of
practice, to a^ un-christian or antichristian persuasion, in point of
doctrine, he cannot be said to be truly converted, much less absolutely
perfect; The greatest Heretics have been sober and serious persons.
and I do sadly, seriously (and with respect to the welfare of peoples souls)
propose it to b^ weighed by honest, yet simple hearts (and so easy to b^
seduced.) And let them tell me, Is there not as great danger? and does it not
bring upon the soul as certain perdition and damnation, to be under the devils
dominion b^ heresy and false doctrine, as by a wicked conversation? (...) not,
What matter is it, whither a man be a Christian (...) no, or what Religion he
be of, so he be otherwise an hone^ man, and of a good conversation? Does not
the Word te^ us of damnable heresies, which bring swift destruction and that
the damnation of such as embrace them, 2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3. 1 Timothy 4.1, 2.
slumber not? And of some that depart from the faith ( i.e. true doctrine) and
give heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines (...) devils, vented by such as
speak lies in hypocrisy; and tha^ some are thereby in the devils snare, 2 Timothy
2.25, 26.
and led captive by h^^ at his will.

Much more might be, and has been elsewhere spoken and written to this purpose,
not to be denied: If then the Quakers do turn from one ungodly way to another,
(...) certainly destructive and deadly, we cannot account ther^ perfect: Nor
will their own sayings, boasting, pretendings avail them, for he is not just
who acquits himself, b^^ he whom God acquitteth.

And now as for the Antichristian doctrines of the Quakers, they have been
sufficiently discovered, and whether they acknowledge their heresies, or no,
makes not to the matter, for Satan's captives are blinded by him, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4.
2 These 2.10, 11, 12.
and the Lord in judgment gives some men over to the efficacy of error, to
believe lies, to their condemnation. And let it here again be minded (to evince
the unsoundnesse of the Quakers conversion, aad thence their imperfection) the
effect or end of Gospel conversion is, to change and alter men both in mind
and manners, and to bring them to that Gospel temper prophesied of and
promised, Isa. 11.6.7, 8. The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard
shall lie down with the Kid, and the Calf, and the young Lion, and the Fatling
together, and a little child shall lead them, etc. So tame and gentle shall
they be, walking lowly and meekly, under the sense of former vileness, with
humble acknowledgements of their own unworthiness, of such grace they have
received, not boasting, exalting, or (Pharisee like) lifting up themselves
above others, with a stand further off, I am more holy then thou: Whereas the
Quakers change is of a quite contrary temper, whatever they were before: How
meek, how mild, how gentle soever, they now become fierce, and heady, and
raging, running up and down like mad dogs and tigers, barking, biting,
snarling, raving, and railing at all others; nay, even women and maidens, (the
ornament of whose sex is a meek and quiet spirit) changing their natural
temper, 1 Pet. 3.4.
become (not spiritual, but) unnatural, uncivil, and immodest, lifting up their
voices in the very streets and public Congregations: So that had that conceit
of those Philosophers, of Transmigration of the souls of men and women into
beasts been true, we might have thence fancied another, and that is, that the
souls of beasts had transmigrated, and shifted themselves into the bodies of
women and maidens, and informed them, it being otherwise almost impossible
(sure not imaginable) that that more modest and milder sex should so far forget
themselves, but not to seek after such uncertain light (indeed false) for the
ground of this miscarriage. The true light of Scripture tells us, Romans 1.25, 26.
that those who change the truth of God into a lie, the Lord in justice gives
them up to vile affections, and passions, so that even women change the order
of nature into that which is contrary to nature, as this people do: So that
from the manner of the Quakers conversion, the matter, and the end and term, we
may well conclude, their change is not true conversion, but unsound and rotten,
and then they are not perfect. Thus of the Quakers in general.

And now to deal with my quaking friend in particular: And first, as for the
person of the man, I profess I do not hate him; and should the Lord be pleased
to humble him, to give him a sight of his sins, and the grace of true
repentance, that so he might betruly converted I shall (notwithstanding all his
unworthy dealings with me) gladly receive him into my bosom; but for the
present, and as yet he appears to be, I look upon him with a heart full of
trembling, and beg of God, that he would never leave me (or any good man) to
fall into the like condition. For truly, as I look upon Francis Spira, as a
dreadful instance of a poor despairing creature, so I look upon George Bishop,
as a fearful example of a poor wretch, whose heart is judicially hardened, and
his conscience seared, and both, for sinning against the light of the Gospel
revealed to them; for the Lord has several ways to deal with Gospel-despisers
and contemners, who receive not the truth with a love of it. When I read my
opponents Pamphlet (oculo currente) as we say, and with a superficial eye,
Throne of Truth, page 100.
I met with his Protestation, concerning the matter of the Lord Craven, (with
the iniquity whereof I knew he had been highly charged) I made a stand, and
seriously observed it; and I do confess I was somewhat astonished at that bold
and daring Appeal, which he therein makes unto the all-discerning eye of the
Almighty, of his innocence and integrity, which made me (considering the
notoriousnesse of the fact, and of his being charged with it) to read again,
and to consider whether there might not be some equivocation in the language
and expression, which not appearing to me, I then began to think, that possibly
he might not be guilty, this being an age, wherein many things are charged upon
many men very slightly and ungroundedly, and sometimes very falsely: But when I
more closely, and with a more observant eye, read again his writings, and took
notice of his practices and devices, his juglings, wrestlings, prevarications,
and pervertings of my plain sense and meaning; his putting of blindes and
fallacies upon his Reader, (which artifice possibly he learned of his Master
the Jesuit, whom he served till he was discovered.) And when I observed his
railing and reviling language, with his malicious and revengeful tendencies, I
then saw, that as he had dealt with a shameless forehead in this matter, so he
had done in that also; and that he was a person of a profligate spirit, and
that there was some mental reservation in his protestation; or that (which I
most incline to believe) he is a man of a most supernaturally, and
God-forsaken-harden'd heart, and seared conscience. And I affirm, that if we
may judge, and take an estimate of the Conscience, honesty, and perfection of
the Quakers in general, by this man in particular, we may safely say, that one
may be as vile a person as any under heaven, and yet be a perfect Quaker. For
certainly, he that shall dare to make such an appeal to the all-seeing eye of
God, of his innocence, and shall be guilty, will dare to do any thing. But the
Proverb is verified; She that will dare to play the Whore, will dare to deny
it; Custom is a second nature: So that, in what a man is accustomed unto, it
is a hard matter for him to do otherwise: Can the Ethiopian change his skin,
Jer. 13.23.
or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do
evil: Frequent and reiterated acts beget a habit, and hard and much working,
does not more harden the hand, than often sinning hardens the heart: So that as
S. Peter says, 2 Pet. 2. from 10. to the end.
they cannot cease from sin; who (as S. Paul describes them, Ephesians. 4.18, 19.)
through the darkness of their minds, and the blindness of their hearts, being
past feeling, give themselves over to work all manner of wickedness, even with
greediness: And with Ahab, 1 Kin. 21.20.
who by wicked practices got away Naboth's vineyard, sell themselves to work
evil, even in the sight of the Lord. And when they have perpetrated their
leudness (with the Whore in the Proverbs) eat and wipe their mouths, Pro.
30.20.
and say, I have done no wickedness: Nay, so prevalent is Satan with such
persons, that they will pretend to God, Religion, and the public interest, to
promote their evil practices. So did Ahab but the devil is never a worse devil,
than when a Saint, Dissimulata Sanctitas, est duplex iniquitas, Dissembled
(counterfeited) Sanctity, is double iniquity, none so dangerously tempting and
taking; 2 Cor. 11.14. 1 These. 2 9.
and therefore does Satan himself transform himself sometimes into an Angel of
light, coming with greater power than ordinary, and more specious shows of
holiness; he comes as an immediate messenger, an Angel from heaven, with great
light, when it is but a new Gospel, (if it be a Gospel) and the old devil, who
upon pretense of teaching our first Parents in another way than God had
declared, made their children blind ever after, till restored and recovered of
their sight, by a new Creation, and till then, no marvel if they go on in
their wickedness with resolution as (too much to be feared) this man has
done, in many particulars.

For to come to his dealings and practices, and to begin (and to consider) what
he begins with, how vainly (and like the bragging soldier in the Comedy) how
Thrasonically, and with long-winded expressions, does he lift up the hands of
that blaspheming wretch, James Naylor? And how daringly does he ask the
question? What law has he broken? Or what offense against man has he
committed? Whom the Parliament has censured (and in part punished) as a
horrible blasphemer: It Is free to this man (Geo. Bishop) to arraign and censure
the actions of the Parliament; but, is James the Champion of the Lord of Hosts,
before whom none of the Priests could stand, as George says? And was his light
so clear (so infallible, so sure?) How comes it to pass that this glorious son
of the morning, is like Lucifer so cast down, and darkened, by that woman and
her company, Martha Simons.
with all their filthiness and deceit, as he phrases it, page 5. beg. What
Spirit was that: and what darkness was that which he speaks of, page 4. that
clouded him? When began it? And is it not still upon him? And how came it to
pass, that being delivered, he became dark again? (page ead.) These things
would be known, that so we might say, when James is in the dark, or when he is
in the light, that so we might not be mistaken in him; for we must not be
altogether led by George Bishop, lest we agree not with those, who
(notwithstanding his, and his fellow Foxes disclaimes) did, and do still own
James Naylor. But to let this pass, (for he is not worth inquiring after) by
the wisdom of God that fore-sees all things (says he, page 5.) it was so
ordered, that there was found (among the papers that were about James Naylor)
one paper wherein that spirit (good or bad) the woman and her company, Martha
Simons. This was the Letter sent from Fox and Bishop to Naylor; mentioned both
in my Narrative, and Geo. answer. In which Letter they disclaim, and judge
James Naylor, and his crew, as deceivers.
and their practices were expressly discerned and judged. But now mark
(horrendum facinus) the false and mischievous spirit of the Priest, that
published that Narrative, and his foul and dishonest dealing, and how
unfaithful he is in his relation: The Priest out of devilish wickedness
(Georges words) forges such a word, as had it been truly so, might have rendered
George Fox a blasphemer under his own hand; and this is such a fact, that words
need not further to express it, which in its very face is so manifestly wicked
and abominable, a wickedness not found in the roll of those evils, which the
Apostle mentions, should make the last days perilous; and it is manifest, this
act is wilful.

All this, and more, page 7, 8. of his Pamphlet, and part of the 9. To all this
outcry, by way of answer, one would have expected, that one so eminently
perfect in charity as George is (for if he have not charity, he is nothing,
he is not what he pretends) would have judged the best, which is one main
property of charity, it would have taught him, as v. 5. not to be ready to
think evil of another, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2.
and not to have triumphed and rejoiced in my sin, and made so many words of
it; and to aggravate it so highly; Charity would have suggested this, or the
like, Possibly through his (the Priest) and his Scribes neglect, or mistake, or
the hand of the Clerk (from whom he received the Copy of that Letter) being
obscurely written, there being not much difference between these two words (own
and am) as they may be written, might mislead both, or either of them. Or, it
may be a mistake of the Printer, and the Priests oversight in correcting. Or
(if none of this could have pleaded my excuse, to clear me from so great a
crime as foul forgery) he might have (in reason) considered me from his own
condition, before he became so singularly illuminated. For I ask, was he never
(in the time of his darkness and ignorance) guilty indeed of forgery? (of which
hereafter) Or was it not, because he had been so often criminous in such
practices, that he so easily, so readily, and so confidently charges others. I
leave it to his light within him: But (to satisfy every honest person) the
truth is, It is just so (as I have set it down) in the Copy of the Letter,
which I received from the hands of the Clerk, who took the examination, and
that as plainly written, as any words in the world, which Master Dorney will
acknowledge, and which the Copy it self will justify, which I have to show to
all that desire it. As for the Letter it self, it was sent up to London to the
Parliament, and there continues. And (as Mr. Dorney said upon sight of the
Copy) it might be so as I have expressed it (for ought he knew) in the original,
which whether it be or no, in this case is not material, I am clear, I did not
forge it; and yet upon this base does he build the great weight of his
discourse, charging and re-charging (like a doughty Captain) again and again,
in several places of his Pamphlet, making this his great Achilles. And so much
in discharge of that great calumny which he makes so much use of. And I wish
him to consider, whether he did not willingly take it up, as a matter to
reproach me, when as (probably) he might be informed, I followed my Copy.
For sure I am, I have been diverse times asked (before the publication of his
scurrilous Pamphlet) how it was in my president, or copy: To which I gave
satisfaction, if he did it wilfully, the Lord humble him, and forgive him.

And whereas he saves (page 9.) that what I have published in my Narrative (p.
10, 11.) of the examination of Martha Simons, is enough to prove me, my
design, and title, and book, to be a lie. Surely he presumes highly upon the
blindness, ignorance, or negligence of his Reader; for it clearly demonstrates,
that Fox, and his Crew, were against Naylor, and his; and so that they were not
all guided by one spirit, or at best, by that spirit which is the spirit of
division, which was part of the design and title of my book, and so not a lie.
But that which sticks much in the Captains teeth, and puts him to picking (from
page 11. of his Pamphlet, to 24.) is the Quakers confusion with which I charge
them. And truly, I believe, had he been left at large, to choose his own
testimonies, and to have suborned and produced his own witnesses, he would
perhaps have packed his matter handsomer, and more to his own purpose; but
being confined to my relation, how miserably is he be-dabled and confounded, in
seeking confusion where it was not, in my book.

The sum of all that matter is this, for I could not bring you into every
stinking corner of his discourse, but help you to view it, and him at a
distance, lest the noysomness of it should offend you. I did (in my Narrative)
by way of dilemma (which what kind of argument that is Scholars know) propose
two things, by way of supposition, but positively affirming neither: But if
either were true, (as one of them must, the matters propounded being apparent)
I had my end upon them. The matter thus, There was opposition and witness
bearing (that is plain, and confessed, not only by words of mouth and writing, but
also by blows and sore beating) between Fox; and his followers, and Naylor,
and his. Now, say I here is opposition manifested and declared, Party against
Party, in appearance. I considered the Quakers, ( Fox and Naylor, an^ all of
them one and another) as pretending to be le^ by one and the same unerring
spirit; and that, as they said they were all one; but here was division, and
dagger drawing (as it were) one against another; I looked upon them in general
as deceivers, their fruits discovering (...) This opposition (if true) I
concluded could not cons^^^ with unity and oneness, to which they pretended I
ha^^ no way to determine the matter, but thus: This opposition of theirs (say
I) was either real, i.e. Fox and h^^ Crew were realy and indeed displeased,
and did judg^ Naylor and his, or they were not indeed displeased and offended,
and this oppesition and quarrel might be but from the teeth outward, and to
blind the world; one of the^^ two must of necessity be granted; if the former,
sc. that (...) was a real quarrel, then their brags of Unity was a lie, (...)
cheat, and they deceivers, and impostors that way. If th^^ latter, sc. If their
opposition were but feigned, they we^^ cheats and liars that way, in pretending
opposition whe^^ it was not real.

Now that either might be true, I gave diverse ground or reasons, not
determining for either, but absolutely concluding one, which was sufficient to
my purpose, which was, to discover their impostures and deceivings: An^ yet
hereupon so simple, or so -- is this fellow, as to cr^ out, Is not the matter
granted, and the Priest grants it when as it is easy to discern, I do but
argue exhypothes^^ and by way of supposition. Thus, if so, then they are
divided (notwithstanding their professions of unity) (...) thus (as it may be)
then (notwithstanding their outward oppositions) they are secretly agreed, and
they at one, either way, Impostors. And this discovers his delusions in those
fourteen pages: And yet we see how simply he pleases himself at the end of his
thirteenth page, and the beginning of the fourteenth, vapouring and bragging
with high language, as if my discourse in that matter were nothing but
confusion and contradiction. I am no^ willing to put my self to so much pains
to write it out. And here I might end with his 24. page for the matter: But
there are some things I must take notice of, to discover his blindes and
juglings with his Reader, and his most miserable begging a thing in question;
nay, utterly denied him. In the fourteenth page, (and so on, to part of the
twentieth) he seems to me to deal with his Reader as a cunning Thief, who
over-taking a simple-hearted, and unwary Traveller, and not well acquainted
with the way, falls in with him, and entertaines him with a long discourse, and
(unawares to the man) draws him out of the way, to rob him: So does he make a
large story of Moses leading Israel out of Egypt, and of his transactions with
Corah and his company; and of Aarons business with Nadab and Abihu, and other
such like matters, and of the opposition between Paul and Peter, and of Paul
and Barnabas, etc. and asks, Whether, because of these oppositions and contests
between the good and bad party, (the one being in the right, and the other in
the wrong) Whether therefore the Quakers, because of their oppositions, be a
pack of cozening Impostors, and lying Mountebanks: And he saves, if my argument
be good, or of force to prove the Quakers confusion, and that the one true
infallible spirit by which they are led, is a Babel, bauble, cheat, an
Impostor, etc. because of Foxes and Naylors opposition: Then he says, Moses
and the Israelites, who kept faithful with God, and the Law, etc. must be so
too. And upon this score, calls me high blasphemer, and arrogant Priest, etc.
Before I make answer, I must observe the wretched, perverse, and prevaricating
spirit of this man, and how unworthily, and indeed dishonestly he wrests and
changes my expressions at his pleasure: For where (in all, or any part of my
book) did I say, that the one true infallible spirit, by which the Quakers are
led, is a Babel, bauble, cheat, an Impostor (as he would make me to say page
15. of his Pamphlet) All that I said was, that their pretenses to be led by
that Spirit, was a Babel, etc. And I deny that they are led by the one true
infallible Spirit: And now I say further, the Spirit by which the Quakers are
led, is a Babel, etc. And now to the matter in question: And seriously (Reader)
I Will tell thee truth, when I observed his reasoning (if I may give it so good a
name) I could not choose (though alone) but smile, and was affected, I cannot
well say, whether more with the simplicity of the man in his own understanding
(in respect of his darkness) or with something else, whereby he would impose
upon the ignorance of some silly Reader, in all, and every one of those
instances produced by him, which is to this end, sc. to evince this truth, (for
I Will do him all the right in the World) That good men may disagree, and not be
Impostors, as did Moses and Aaron, Paul and Peter, etc. wherein he might have
spared himself, and Reader, a great deal of labor. For I readily grant, That
because some sin, therefore all sin, is no good argument: But what is this to
the Quakers? Does this clear them from being Impostors? We say, whether they
agree, or not agree, they are both wrong, both deceivers: May not Knaves fall
together by the ears? Does their falling out, make either side honest? Suppose
the Quakers and the Ranters (who pretended to as high a principle, even the
same) should fall out, would that justify either? No no, my friend George (or
who ever helped him) is out; they shall not get that by begging, which they will
never prove; nor will we ever grant them, that either ( Fox or Naylor) are in
the right, or to be believed: True it is, had either ( Fox or Naylor) been in
the Truth, as Moset was, and Paul was, and those other Worthies (whom he
instances) these allegations had been to purpose; but Fox and Naylor both,
being Deceivers, all this matter of Georges, is besides the cushion.

And I cannot but note one thing, how bold this man is with all the Quakers
that are not of his persuasion, as if he had monopoliz'd the Spirit of Truth
and Infallibility, he brings in Naylor and his Party, as Aaron, and the
Calf-makers, and Fox and his Party, as Moses; the one sinning, the other
reproving; for if this be not his meaning, he produces that, and his other
instances, to no purpose: So that he would have Naylor the Calf, and his
Party, ^ose that worship him. Are all the Quakers of England ^f his mind? If
not (as sure it is they are not) where ^s still their unity? And they may well
question George, ^s arrogating and assuming unto himself (and Foxes followers)
the spirit of stability and setledness: In derogation of Naylor and his
Adherents, as he does in page 20. whom they deny, as being under the spirit of
darkness, page 21.

And whereas he (sillily) seems to triumph over us Priests (as he calls us)
because we do not hypocritically and lyingly (as they do) pretend to be led
infallibly, by the Spirits discovery of new doctrines to us, as were the
Apostles: Let him know, that we are led and guided by the Spirit, into the
knowledge and belief of those truths which were so revealed, by belief whereof,
we attain salvation, (and as many as by our preaching embrace and follow the
same truths with us) without more or further revelations. And we affirm, and
prove, that so preaching, our people ought to hear us, and we are to be
believed.

But does not the Reader perceive the blind, that George would put upon him?
Does he not discern the end of that long discourse, whereby he would draw him
out of the way to cozen him, that he might not look after the matter that was
of great concernment, and incumbent upon George (as the Quakers great Advocate)
to have undertaken and discharged? But of that ne gry quidem (as we say) not a
word: That which an understanding Reader would reasonably have looked for, was,
that George would have done them this service to have showed how this can stand
with truth, That the Quakers are all at an agreement, and led by one Spirit of
truth; When as Fox, (one great Apostle, (who also has many followers) shall
charge Naylor (another great Apostle, who also has many followers) that he
and his Disciples are joined against the truth, As in that former Letter.
and that he trained up a company against it, and that their iniquity does
increase, and that accompanied with wilfulness and stubboruness. this to be
one in the truth, when one considerable Pat are joined against the truth? etc.
And another thus be witness against them, and yet they stubbornly persist.
George now could have unfolded this riddle, he shot have been the Quakers
Oedipus, or their great Apollo, resolve all their doubts, and help them at a
dead lift, (...) not being able to do it, he decoyes his Reader out of (...)
way, and tells him a long story, of nothing to the purpose: And yet a little
further, it would be known, (...) the information of all Quakers in general
(for I see I (...) be their friend) What is, or was James Naylor's (...) and
wickedness, that such high testimony is born again it, as that the matter must
come to blows: Wherefore do these infallible ones thus judge him, and his
company (who are not a few) and spirit? It is not (it seeme^ for his and their
blasphemous practices, for which the Parliament did censure him, for this
testimony was born against him, and the sin witnessed against, was long before
James riding in pomp. No, this Fox and his Crew can a^ low of, and so become
participes criminis, guilty of (...) same crime, witness Foxe's, and others
papers published in print, for extenuation and vindication of Naylor; witness
the Petitions of those eminently godly and conscientious persons, who
interceded for him with the Parliament and witness Bishop himself, page 3. who
asks, What L^^ has it been made appear to the Nation that Naylor has broken?
And then highly aggravates his suffering as unparrallelled: So that in this,
the Priest will grant they are agreed. But still we are to seek what was James
his sin Was it; because that woman (Martha Simons) struck him dumb, and made
him silent; so that he has not sine spoken in public? Why, Is not this now
in fashion among them generally? Their silent meetings, wherein like Pig and
Swine they come together, and grunt, and snuffle, and so depart.

We read in the Gospel, sometimes of a mad and raving devil, that no man
could tame, Mark 2.3, 4. And Matthew says he was so fierce, Mat. 8.28.
that no man might pass by that way. And sometimes we read of a dumb, a silent
devil, so called, because he made those he possessed dumb and silent, so that
they were not then free to speak. And it seems the Quakers must witness these
various dispensations, as a part of their perfection. This then is not James
Naylors sin, George Fox, or Bishop, shall do well (in charity) to acquaint the
World of Quakers with it, that they may avoid it, lest they come into the same
condemnation, and to greater consusion, and he be more puzzled, we shall
expect it, when George gets up into his Throne again; and if it be that
Bastard that James Naylor was charged with, let them deal plainly with the
World, for there is (since the publication of my Narrative) some further
discoveries of it, more fully; as in a book entitled, The Grand Impostor
examined, printed for H. Brom, at the Hand in Pauls-Church-yard. As also
another entitled, An exact History of the Life of James Naylor, with his
parents, birth, education, etc. printed by Edward Thomas in Green-Arbour, both
published by one John Deacon, wherein there is also mention made of a Maid,
seduced to be a Quaker, and got with child, by one Duesbury, another Quaker,
which was confessed by her self who also affirmed, that Naylor did solicit her
to lie with him; and possibly this may be it, for George does not deny it,
neither in Text, nor Margin, nor does he say, it is a lie, as he does page 6.
in the behalf of Howgil, whose mouth Martha Simons affirmed she had stopped:
It was a lie (says he) for his mouth was never stopped by her, but always
open to declare against her, and their deceit (that is, James Naylor, and his
company.) They were Deceivers then, and the Matter of their deceit would be
known.

But I must not stay here, for my friend George has, page 24. something
further to say to me: And I must acknowledge, when I took a survey of his
strength, and following forces (for what is past, was (it seems) but his
forlorn.) And having a desire to gather up as much as I could together, (to
ease my self and my Reader of impertinencies, and tautologies) I was confounded
with his disorder. True, in his page 25. he begins with my Title page, but in
the very next page, he leaps to page 30. 31. And in the next, to 44. of my
book; and then in his page 28. to the 30 of mine, and 39. and then presently to
the 30. again, and some seven lines after, back again to my 17. then to my 45.
and within two pages after, to my Epistle to the Reader, and instantly to page
48 of my book, and shortly after to my title page again, and so runs (Fox-like)
skipping up and down, that it would tire any man in the World to follow him,
speaking to the same things in several places, as if he did it on purpose to
make work for one that had nothing else to do, but to be so idle as to follow
him. And truly, if his skill in Martial affairs were no better, to order and
muster his forces, he is fitter to be a Captain to lead Apes and Monkies,
than reasonable creatures. And I am half jealous, that this was done by him
upon design, to take up so much of my time and leisure to follow him in his
Serpentine motion, that I might glut my reader with these litigations, that so
he might have less stomach to what I have to say to George in particular. And
therefore, as to my Narrative and relation, for the truth of it, I say thus
much in the general, That when he has said, and I have said, we must leave
it to the judgment of those who live here in this City, to conclude of the
truth of either: And I have said only thus much further, I desire it may be
observed, that in my Epistle to the Reader, I did profess I had not inserted
all the letters, nor all the examinations and page 4. I expressly said, I should
give in so many, and so much of their letters and papers, as was pertinent to
their discovery, and no more, as being unwilling to make my book swell too much
in bulk and price; so that if I have not inserted all that might have been, and
George would have: I am not, (I cannot) therein be found a lier, because I have
not gone against my promise; for I did not propose, nor intend an exact and
full relation of all things concerning it, as I have expressed my self.
Sufficient it is to me, that there is nothing therein contained, but what is
truth, which was that I promised, and have performed. And as to the order of
time (wherein things were acted) when I came to a close in that particular, I
told my Reader, page 59. that I had not been exact, to observe the order or
circumstance of time in every particular; for (as I th^^e say) I intended not
an exact Diary, but had been careful to give in the substance in truth, and
reality, which (as in Gods sight) I was careful to observe and do: if any thing
therefore be short or mis-timed it does not follow that I am a liar and
deceiver, etc. as he (most uncharitably and unchristianly) charges me with;
to all which I say, the Lord rebuke him, and give him repentance for it; and
these two things being observed, will serve to answer much of his cavils and
reproachings of me: But yet I must not pass over all so lightly, but I shall
make answer to some things, which I conceive of concernment, in special,
leaving the rest as not worth the troubling my self, or the Reader with; and in
this I shall study brevity, and in them observe, how short this man comes of
that Christian perfection which he pretends to.

And passing by his railing, and sending me to the lake, to be tormented with
the devil and his Angels (who he says is my father and portion) I shall make
a stand a little at his charge against me in his page 27. concerning the Oath
of Laurence Raymond: And herein I shall discover the wretched nature and
practice of this Quaker and his fellow, I having heard that this Laurence
Raymond had heard that blasphemous and unchristian expression spoken by
Audlands Wife, That whosoever did think to be saved by that Jesus Christ that
died at Jerusalem, should be deceived; and being assured from his own mouth of
the truth of the relation, I did some time after (that these Wretches might be
discovered) desire the Magistrates to send for this young man, and to take his
testimony upon oath, for greater satisfaction, as occasion should require,
which accordingly (at their own leisure) they did, I not being present, or
speaking any further with the young man in it. Now this testimony, my friend
George would invalidate, because in my Narrative, the place (where the words
were affirmed and expressed by the young man in his deposition to be spoken)
were left out, which to be done upon design (as he affirmed) I utterly deny,
not can, or could there be any design in it, for any thing that did appear to
me, for I doubted not, nor had heard any thing, that might occasion me to
doubt of the truth of his oath, either in the substance (which was that I only
looked at) or the circumstance, which was not by me much considered, which
possibly made me less wary, and observant of the omission in that, as of
another passage, and non-momentanous sentence, in Foxes letter to Naylor; of
which George took notice, but it would not afford him ground to cavil upon, as
this it seems does. And for the Readers satisfaction here, I desire him to
know, that the discoursive and declarative part of my Narrative, was wholly
written to him (who coppied them out again for the Press) with mine own hand:
But as for those letters, examinations, and other things, which I had in loose
papers, I only marked the place in my discourse, where they were to be
inserted, leaving it to him to inscribe and write them; and in hasty
examination, I might (as it seems I did) pass over, and not take notice of an
omission, especially in a matter of circumstance, which my thoughts were not,
as I said, so much upon; as here the main thing intended to be declared was,
that such words were spoken by this Quaker: And as for the truth of the oath in
every particular, which this Caviller would enervate by this nicity, I did
(upon the publication of his Pamphlet, and observation of this passage) repair
to the young man (Laurence Reymond) and there I discovered a notorious piece of
juggling, and wretched practice of these Quakers; for showing to him what George
had written, and asking him what he could say unto it, in that he had charged
him as a liar, and forsworn. He made me this answer, that Hollister had got
him over into his shop, and had been tampering with him, to entrap him, or draw
him from his testimony, affirming it was false, using many words to that
purpose, till the young man was weary, and left him; but then asserted and
maintained the truth of what is contained in his oath, in every particular, as
he does still, insomuch that Hollister, seeing he could not prevail before
he left him, threatened him, that the plagues of God would, or should over-take
him, as they had done (as he affirmed.)

Cowlishaw, for taking a false oath, (as he called it) against the Quakers
formerly, and this the young man's Master (Mr. Stephens) told me, the youth
informed him of, so soon as he came from Hollisters. Now my Reader must know,
that Mr. Cowlishaw (since his oath taken as aforesaid) is failed in his trade;
and I wish it may not be the case of many an honest man besides him. And it is
strange it should not, in such times as these are of dead trade in general. But
mark the bold, daring, and uncharitable presumption of these wretched Quakers,
who step up into the Judgment Scat of the Almighty, and assign the particular
causes of his dispensation; as if those upon whom the Tower of Siloa fell, were
greater sinners than others, because of that hand of providence; or as if his
oath were false, because of this accident. No, he still owns the truth of his
deposition also. And diverse others there are in this City, who can attest much
to the substance of it: But see the malicious spirit of these wretches; and yet
further, seeing they could not draw off this young man from the truth of what
he had deposed, nor yet any advantage (by tampering with him) against me
(which was the thing intended; for Hollister then told him, he had a hand in a
book to that purpose:) Now not being able to compass their ends upon him,
Bishop by Hollisters instigation (I believe) (for I suppose the young man is
almost as much a stranger to Bishop, as to my self, who never spoke with him
but twice, and that upon this occasion) Bishop, I say, falls to reproach this
young man, and to stain his reputation, as one of evil course, and bad
conversation, from which he would needs have us believe, Quakerisme had
restrained him and to which (since he left quaking) he affirms he again
returned, page 28. of his Pamphlet; How far (...) young man's Father is
concerned in this (a person of quality, Colonel Raymond a Justice of Peace in
the Cou^^ of Gloucester) I shall not inquire. But for his comfo^^ his Sons
Right, and the discovery of the spiteful, malicious, revengeful, and lying
spirit of these deluded, and (...) luding wretches; I do affirm, that both from
his M^ster and Neighbors (persons I am sure of better cre^^ than Hollister or
Bishop) I received a most ample and (...) Testimony of the youths most sober,
piously conformable and good conversation; By which we may see, wh^^ spirit
these Quakers are of, and how ready they are (...) reproach all that are not
with them; A Generation of V^^pers, and Adders, that when they cannot reach the
hea^^ will be biting at the heels of those who come near them and must vent
their venom one way or other, so th^^ (notwithstanding his cavillings) the
young man's Testimony stands good against him, that these blasphemo^^ words were
spoken, as is alleged; Nor must his deny a^^ (no nor of many more) pass for
current, or bear weigh^ against a positive affirmation, so solemnly confirmed:
N^^ is blaspheming language of the Quakers so strange or ra^^ as he would
make; for it is but the same, which was spoken by one Simon Dring, another of
them, as I have declared, which allegation Bishop would also enervate, annull,
because I do not name him to whom the words were spoken; and from thence, says
it is of my own invention page 77. I was not, I confess, over-forward to
mention the names of persons, by whom things were related (...) me, because
all are not willing to have their names (...) publicly mentioned.

But now (for satisfaction) I let him know, it is on that is not ashamed to
appear in the face of Captain Bishop and it is Mr. Timothy Parker, whom, I
suppose, he wi^^ not deny to be a person of credit, and who is ready to attest
the truth of what I have set down concerning it. And for a further discovery of
the impostures, prevarications, ^eceits, and juglings of this generation, I Will
give one instance more, from a person, of whose faithfulness, I am assured, who
himself upon London rode, meeting with one with whom he had been formerly well
acquainted, and ^^owing him to be turned Quaker, amongst other discourse, said
unto him, (by way of dislike of his present ^udgment and opinions of
Quakerisme) you did look and ^ope for righteousness or justification by Jesus
Christ; the Quaker answered, so I do still; yea, (but replied the other) Do you
look to be justified, and to have your sins ^ardoned for that blood which
Christ shed upon the Cross? whereunto the Quaker replied, What can that blood
be worth, which was shed so long ago. This (for substance) will be made good,
both parties I know very well; and his Quaker not one of the dull, simple, or
sottish sort of them (who know not the worst of their own opinions) ^ut one of
an ingenuous education, and of abilities more ^han ordinary, in comparison of
the generality of them, one acquainted with the mysteries of their own
iniquity, and blasphemous Doctrine. And this not much unlike another (but a
She Quaker, yet not of the simplest rank) who being conferred with by one who
had heard much of their opinions, and asking her by whom she hoped to be
saved, she answered, by Jesus Christ: By what Jesus Christ, said he? By that
Jesus Christ that died at Jerusalem, said she: What (replied he) by that
Jesus Christ that died at Jerusalem, and that is now in heaven? Yea, said she:
Whereat he something wondering, and yet suspecting some equivocation, (or
mental reservation) Where, said he, is that heaven? In me, said she, and so
discovered the juggle.

Now who (but one who knows them thoroughly) but would have been satisfied with
her first answers? And who would have thought it needful, to have carried on
the question any further? And so in the former, any honest, simple, well
meaning heart (that is not acquainted with their collusions) would have been
satisfied with the first answer: But you see how hard a matter it is for ever^
one to discover them, and how loath they are, that wha^^ they hold should be
fully known, lest it should (as (...) deserves) render them abhorred, by all
honest Christians. And hence also you see, how little they are to be believed
in what they say, having reserved meanings (...) themselves, and speaking
contrary to the sense of tho^^ expressions which are commonly used amongst
Christians And now, as the rest of his niblings at my Narrative, an^
observations thereupon, I shall leave the truth to be determined by the
examinations themselves, which he cannot impeach; nor will his affirmations,
negations, (...) wrestings, any way impair. And for matter of fact, (...) the
rise, growth, and settling of these people among us, appeal to those who were
ear and eyewitnesses of the^ things.

And for his atheological cavillings, and Scripture wresting, and misapplyings,
I refer to those who are judicio^^ in such matters, to conclude between us,
only there ar^^ some few things, wherein I must observe unto my Reader, the
malicious and revengeful temper of this man in (...) dealing with me. I
confess, neither the person of (...) Opponent, or the things are (in
themselves) worthy (...) the thoughts of any serious man; and I should
therefore have past it over, but that I mind my engagement an^ promise, which
is, to let the world see (in the instance (...) my adversary) that the
conversion and perfection of Quaker, (if to be estimated by this man's) is very
unsound, imperfect, and rotten, notwithstanding all the^ outward shows, and
specious pretenses; any man (eve^ with half an eye, as the saying is) may
easily discer^^ (by the matter and manner of his language) that his design, all
along, and throughout his whole Pamphlet, (...) to render me (all the ways
he can) obnoxious to danger, and the displeasure of others that are above me^^
wherein (besides his malice) his impotence is discerue^ in that being not able
to revenge himself upon me, h^^ would bring me within the reach of others,
who might do it for him. And see how he goes out of the ways of truth and
honesty to do it; (so revengeful is he) yea, out of the way of his own
profession (so impetuously is he hurried in his rage and passion; for but
mind his Courtship, giving flattering titles, and having respect to persons
(as they call our due tenders of reverence and honor to our Superiors) in
page 27. Justice Fell, a discreet grave man, one of the Judges of the Nation,
and Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster: Well, what of all this? Why says
George to me, Art thou assured he will put up all this? Oh, says he, the
instance is so foul and odious, and so filled with scoffs and jeers, that thy
wickedness therein is hard to be expressed.

Thus he there. Oh lamentable! Is it not pity that any man (much more a
Minister of the Gospel, and if you will, a Priest) should commit so great a
crime? Surely it can be no less than betraying Mr. Love to death, or ruining
some great man's estate, by base practices, perjury, bribery, or some such
thing? No, but it is as bad: Why, what is it? Oh hearken, and wonder! In page
31. of my Narrative, I produced Judge Fells wife (as one bearing witness in the
behalf of James Naylor) and (here is my sin which has raised all this outcry)
I said, such discerning folks cannot easily be mistaken. Ah poor impotent
creature, how has rage, and malice, and hatred, and envy besotted him? Is not
this man guilty of having men's persons in admiration for advantage, that he
might have advantage against me? Or does he mock the Judge, in giving him
these titles, so much contrary to their quaking principle? The Lord help him to
see the baseness of his Spirit. But yet, why does he add an, etc. to the
criminous words quoted by himself? Why, surely, to let the world see, that his
malice out-bid and out-brib'd his conscience; for being convinced in himself
that the words quoted, would not bear so high a charge against me, as of a
crime so great, the wickedness whereof can hardly be expressed, he would have
it understood, that the danger lay in the word, etc. which if it do, it is none
of mine. And let any one in the world read my book, and say, whether they can
find any thing else in that whole matter, to be charged as an offense upon
me: And is this such an offense, so heinous, so grievous? to say ironically,
that such discerning folk as Judge Fells wife, cannot easily be mistaken:
What Is this to the Judge? May not a wise man, a good man, have a simple, a
perverse, or a quaking wife, which is not in his power to remedy, further than
to restrain her from their assemblies; he cannot change her judgment: As for
the Judge himself, I meddle not, I do not know him, I have not heard (to my
remembrance) other than well of him: Well, the Lord forgive my adversary, and
humble, and alter him: Sure I am, this is far from that simplicity, charity,
goodness, that was, and is in Christ Jesus. Hence ex ungue leonem, by this paw
of the Lion (or rather hoof of some more silly creature) judge of the man; or
if you will, you may take him both ways: A Lion, or a Bear, for his rage and
fierceness, and a more sottish beast, for his filliness. I have discovered the
venom of his teeth, in this the more fully, to save my self and thee (Reader)
some labor, in being as brief as possibly I may, in the following particulars;
and the next is, his endeavor to traduce me, with traducing the Magistrates
of our City. And whereas I plead their excuse, in that, by their lenity at
first, (over and above what other places in the Nation exercised toward these
croaking frogs) they gave them too much encouragement to nestle amongst us,
imputing this (as just cause I had) to their too much fearfulness, and having
been formerly over-topt, and overborn, by an over-swaying power, by the
usurpation of inferior Officers, exercised upon them; and looking upon this as
a part of their weakness and infirmities, which (because of the common frailty
incident to all men, even the best) I did (as being in the body, and sensible
of the same frailties) Christianly and soberly alleviate, (not justify) how
does he most Pharisaically and proudly fall, both upon me, and them in it?
And because I say (and say now) that the best Magistrates have their spots,
defects, and failings, he concludes them to be no Magistrates of God, but men
of sin, evil doers, and the born of the devil, page 34. But because this (nor
any thing in my Narrative) would afford matter to incense them; he runs
abroad, licking up the vomit of every malicious and venomous Spider, to belch
it out against me; and this lyingly too, (more suo) for he says, that I
endeavored in the Pulpit to render them vile and odious; one while likening
them to Jupiters log; and to George on horseback, and reproaching them with the
abilities of Tom Pain; which he puts in great letters, as if I had mentioned
his name in the Pulpit. But what a bold and daring wretch is this, to judge of
my intentions and endeavors, as if they were to render the Magistrates vile
and odious? When being called to preach unto them, upon a public occasion, for
administration of Justice: The Lord knows my heart, my endeavor was to render
them honorable and precious, by pressing them to discharge their duty; and to
that purpose, I told them, that Magistrates should not be as Jupiters log,
which by lying still, and doing nothing, made the frogs bold with it, and to
leap upon, and make sport with; and that they should not be as the picture of
George on horseback, with his arm and sword always lifted up, but never
smiting; telling them further, that if the bare name, ornaments, and
accoutrements of a Magistrate were sufficient, then that poor creature (that
was then walking up and down in their presence) might make a Magistrate; but I
utterly deny, that I likened or compared them with, or to either, or named him.
And of this, all those who heard me with their right ear, must bear me
witness. But what will not a malicious person do to revenge himself, though he
do it never so impotently? But indeed (George) did I deal so plainly with them,
even the Magistrates, and that to their faces, and being their Chaplin too, and
having many large dinners and feastings from them, besides my sallery of ten
pounds a year for that service, And when I have fair words and advisings from
them? (all this in his pages 37. 38.) Why sure (friend) it seems the
Magistrates were so honest, that they did not choose a Chaplin to flatter them,
they had diverse years experience of me, and my temper: And further, it is clear
from hence, I am no respecter of persons, which I am sure amongst you is
accounted a virtue, and a high piece of your perfection, though in a perverted
sense: And is it now a sin (a vice in me?) I see nothing will please him, who
is resolved to quarrel: And you see (friend) that their large dinners do not
so fill my belly, but that I can speak plainly; if I reflected upon some who
were guilty of doing nothing, (which is a great sin in a Magistrate) does that
condemn (does it not honor) those who are active? I might mention your
railings at, and despisings of all Magistrates, it is too gross and palpable;
and that he might be still, sibi constans, like himself, in his mischievous
practices. In like manner does he charge me with abusing Major General
Skippon, whereas whoever reads, shall find, I make no other than an honorable
mention of him, as a discreet and sober person, who did not usurp authority
over the civil Magistrates, but held (as I say) a good correspondence with
them. And is this to abuse him? What a hard thing is it for a man habituated to
an evil course, Although he had before charged the same things, page 41.
(lying, railing, or the like) to leave it? So also toward the end of his
Pamphlet, page 103. and so onwards, he falls to the same malicious work again,
charging me of abusing that reverend Parliament, concerning which I have
spoken already, of which, and such like, I desire never to speak more only
this, We may well guess what a pure convention it was, when such pitiful
fellows, as his fellow Hollister should be a principal member thereof.

And wherein (as George phrases it) page 45. he tasted as much (yea more) of
the power and glory of this world (oh lamentable world!) than any in this City,
which he says, he might still have had, could he bow down and worship; bow
down to whom, to him whose nose George would have held to the grinde-stone? He
and his fellow Hollister will not then, it seems, bow down, nor worship, not so
much as civilly; a stiff-necked and stubborn generation: Thus we may see, what
it is, to lift up the head of a dunghill brood, how highly they will swell, and
how hardly they will be reduced again: And truly I cannot here (upon this
occasion) but think, how Nebuchadnezzar-like, Dennis Hollister did strut it,
and pride himself in his ayery Kingdom; and how he did scorn and despise all
the opposite party in that Assembly: Read his words, in a Pamphlet published by
him against that Congregation (or Church) in this City, whereof he was once
(till turned Quaker) the Leader; the title of which Pamphlet is this, And well
may he call them so, which I shall elsewhere discover.
The Skirts of the Whore discovered, and the mingled people in the midst of
her. In a Letter sent by Dennis Hollister to the Independent baptized people,
who call themselves a Church of Christ in Bristol, but are found to be a
Synagogue of Satan; together with another letter written by him to Thomas
Evens, a Teacher among them, who before several witnesses has often denied
himself to be a Minister of the Gospel. This, and more is Dennis his title.

Now suppose him in his heights, and hear his language, page 13. 14. For my own
part, I must deal plainly, Such as were so high, as that they were above all
Ordinances.
and tell you, the beholding and observing the unrighteous actings, and
deceitful hypocritical dealings of many of the eminent members, and other high
pretenders to Religion, whilst I sat with them in Parliament, and other chief
places of Council and trust in the Nation (brave words) was one of the first
things that put me upon consideration what the root of that profession (of
Anabaptisme, I suppose he means) should be, from whence such sour grapes,
and fruits of bitterness proceeded; and so on, telling them their own
sufficiently. And then he lets them know, that he has known what it is to be
accounted something among those called Churches, and what the preferment of
Pharoahs Court is, (we know whom he means) and the great things of England;
and that he had a nature prone enough (which we all well know) to embrace the
same, but that his peevishness was as great as his pride, which made him side
with that faction, which acted by those levelling principles I formerly
mentioned, which gave just occasion to his Highness to ding many of them down
to the dunghill, from whence those vapors were exhaled, which yet he in his
pride, (such is his stomach) calls a suffering affliction with the people of
God, rather than to enjoy the pleasures and treasures of England, which belike
then were in their hands; and if he could have bowed down, he supposed he
might have still enjoyed (and George thinks so too) ever for ever: For then (no
doubt) the fifth Monarchy would have been erected; but it seems they were not
then infallibly inspired; for then they carried their Bibles to their
Parliament, there to seek out the pattern, but there it seems it was not to be
found exactly; and therefore now (throwing away their Bibles, and) being more
immediately guided by the Spirit (of blood, The Levellers standard being now
discovered.
and of rebellion) they betake themselves to their weapons, to build and raise
their Kingdom, which possibly may be the reason why so many Bricklayers and
Carpenters (and such like persons) turn Quakers, in hope of employment, it may
be of preferment; and why not, as well as Mascinello, a poor Fisher-boy in
Naples, or John of Leyden, a Tailor in Germany, who made themselves Regents, by
the assistance of the rude rabble, the one upon civil, the other upon religious
pretenses? But (to meddle no more with this Parliament) in the next place
(malice making him very industrious) he renders me obnoxious to the
Protector, and his Council, which needs no long answer. For whereas I had said
nothing against them, he would make me criminous by way of inference and
insinuation, and the like, concerning Major General Desborow, (to whom, for
advantage, he will afford a title of honor) whom he says I intimated to
have been easily and mischievously instrumental to wicked, ungodly, and
unchristian practices; it is wonder he did not directly charge me: But let any
man read what I have therein written, and say, wherein have I abused him. And
thus much I say, (as to that) as I hope the Major General, and others in power,
did not by their lenity intend to countenance such practices before: So now
(seeing what their lenity may produce) they will not be so easy to be
entreated for the future, which was that (and all) I aimed at; and the like
envious dealing has he in the matter of Colonel Scroop, and there he charges
me with flattering him: So that let me speak how I will, I must (it seems)
be concluded an offender. But (he alleges) I had spoken against him, why,
what of this? Because I deal plainly with a man when I find he does ill, may
I not therefore commend him when he does well? Is not this an argument of
ingenuity? I hope he will pardon me this offense. And truly, had I not
apprehended him really to have disclaimed these Quakers, (as I then believed
he did) I should not have made that honorable mention of him.

And I confess, had he been still here in power over us, I might well have
been thought, in so doing, to have flattered him; but it is well known, when
he was here, I did it not, and less reason to do it now, in that he is absent.

But I must here observe what George says concerning him, which very much
tends to the justifying of my Narrative, concerning the rise, growth, and
settling of the Quakers among us, by the over-topping, and over-bearing of our
Magistrates, and making them Ciphers, by a foreign power, so that they could
not reform things, though they had a will to it; for page 106. George, says
he (Col. Scroop) was so far from denying the Quakers, to speak publicly, that
he said to Dennis Hollister, by name, that if the Magistrates did put them in
prison one day, he would put them out the next, which no doubt Dennis
acquainted them with, for their encouragement, which very likely made them so
bold and daring, and to outface (as they did) the Magistrates, and not to care
for their commands to depart the City: How will revenge and malice blind a man
to tell all, which he had better forborne? As for the remainder (ejusdem
farinae) which follows, it is a further discovery of the same spirit which I
shall pass over, intending (as the Lord shall give time and opportunity) to
give a full and distinct answer to the particular of Thomas Evens; for as for
Morgan Lloyd, whose doctrine he says I had reproached, and concerning which,
he says, he sent me a sober note, to reason with me publicly in my
Steeple-house (as he^ calls it) which I refused. To that, I say, it is not so, I
did not reproach his doctrine, for I knew not what it was, nor heard it; that I
took offense at (and justly) was that any man should intrude, and thrust
himself, yea, force himself into my Pulpit, upon a day, and at a time which was
not assigned for Public Lecture, whereas himself, and Erbury, had not long
before made a kind o^ a public contest, to the disturbance and unsetling of
the people in another Congregation; Erbury at that time being sufficiently
known to be tainted with unsound opinions, and Lloyd himself much disliked.
And truly (to speak my mind in this matter) if Morgan Lloyds note had been, or
were to that purpose, I suppose, that Minister, that in these brawling and
heretical times, shall entertain motions for public contests, with such as run
up and down, and make it their business to wrangle, and conten^ in things
doubtful and uncertain, shall not provide for hi^ own peace, nor the peoples
establishment in the truth, by giving them entertainment. If the doctrines we
teach were unsound, or our selves not able to discharge our duty, it would be
a favor for some to come and help us when orderly, and peaceably sent, or
called; but otherwise, for men of unquiet and rambling spirits, to impos^
themselves upon us, is neither Christian nor civil: And conceive, those who are
careful to preserve the people from infection, do not well to encourage (much
less to invite) them.

Nor are the people competent Judges in doubtful matters, and are (as I said
before) much swayed by the impudence and confidence of a bold and daring
Opponent.

I have now but two or three things more to speak to, and so I shall come to
deal, by way of charge, upon my Adversary, wherein I shall have so much matter,
as that I must of necessity avoid all debates, and altercations with him, in
matter of doctrine, and this upon a double account:

First, because their doctrines, judgment, and way of arguing, are
sufficiently known, and answered already, and I am not willing to draw the same
Saw of contention everlastingly, not caring for the last word in the quarrel.

And secondly, lest by taking up too much time in those things, of which the
reader may be elsewhere better satisfied, (as in Mr. Thomas of Vblegs most
sober and Christian answer, Mr. Baxter, Mr. Ford, and others) I be prevented
of what I principally intended, which is to discover the hypocrisy and
unsoundnesse of a Quakers conversion, and to exemplify it, in this man in
particular, which you see I have in part performed, by discovering his railing,
lying, and malicious dealing, in which trade he still continues; and
therefore, page 47. he charges me, that I would have joined my self as a
member of Hollisters Congregation, but finding by discourse with him, that
there was no place for my imperious, proud, and pragmatical Mastership over
them, they heard no more of me in that particular, till the state of things
were changed, and then I became an adversary to separated Churches, and to that
in Bristol especially; this is the full of the charge. This story I assure my
self he had from Dennis: But how does he know that Dennis says truth? To
this, I oppose this true relation, when Thomas Evens came first to this City,
(I desiring to know him fully) had a purpose to invite him to my house to
dinner, and understanding that he would be at the house of Robert Purnil in
an evening, went thither, where I met him, and most (I think) of that
Congregation, at an exercise of Religion, where I continued, Mr. Evens being
the man that then exercised, wherein something being delivered unsound and
erroneous, I forbore (for diverse reasons) to speak to it, till most of the
company were dismissed, when (conceiving it convenient) I told him of that
erroneous doctrine which he had delivered, and spoke fully to it; to which Mr.
Evens making neither answer nor excuse. Mr. Purnil (for now I am not speaking
to, or of Quakers) and therefore let me use our ordinary and civil language)
with many good words approved of what I said, and spoke something in excuse of
Mr. Evens. Whereupon, Moon (being present) with much affection used these
words, Why should not Master Farmer be one of our Congregation? (for I had
never met them formerly) which was seconded thus by Mistress Nethway: Aye, Mr.
Farmer, if you would be one of our Congregation, you may be chosen Pastor
afterward, which words (the very thoughts of the matter being strange to me)
I do profess, made me wonder? which produced this reply from me, Chosen
Pastor Mistress Nethway! What mean you? To which (after some other words) she
said, she was told, that if I might be chosen Pastor, I would join with them,
which I denying, and she affirming again that she was told so, but would not
tell me by whom (but it is easily supposeable) I then presently appealed to Mr.
Purnill, then present, to witness for me to the contrary, to whom formerly (in
discourse) I had declared several times, that I could not join with them, which
he at that time witnessed; and this to be a truth, I appeal to that light and
truth of God that shines in his and their consciences, and which I hope they
will not dare to stifle, (notwithstanding that distance which is now between
us.) And the reasons why I would not join with them, were, because they
performed their Lords day duties in private houses, to the prejudice of the
public, (which I ever honored (as I shall declare in another discourse,
Christ assisting me.) And for that they had no lawfully constituted Pastor to
take the charge of them: True it is, I should likely have joined with them, had
those two hindrances been removed. And to this purpose I did diverse times
solicit Master N. I. a rightly constituted and able Preacher, to take the
charge of them, promising my self to sit down as a private member, only
exercising my public Ministry, by way of preaching, which he refused; and
this I doubt not he will testify.

And further, to make it appear, that I desired not to be their Pastor, being
conscious to my self of the weight of that work, and my unfitness in diverse
respects, I did (in an occasional discourse with some of them) declare my
unfitness, which is so true, that one of them (now a Quaker) did since (by way
of reproach) upbraid me with my own acknowledgment, so that then I had no
intention of joining with them; and since that, I gaining further light, in
matter of Churches, and their appendant questions, and they drawing more and
more toward Anabaptisme, I more and more declined, and disowned them.

And whereas he says, I became an adversary to separated Churches, when the
state of things were changed: I ask, to what were the times changed? or from
what? Not from that way of separated Churches, but more to it: If I did it
then, then I did it not to serve the times, but to secure my conscience. But
wherein did I? or did I ever appear an enemy to separated Churches? Why does
he not show wherein? But of this, more in another discourse.

And so much in answer to that ly of George, and his Master Dennis: Another
there is of the same Forge, I am sure; and that he speaks to page 59.60. And
again (being chafed with the business of the Lord Craven) page 109. where he
joins them both together: The charge is this, from both places, That I
earnestly solicited some then in power, for turning out of Nicholas, one of my
brethren, Constant Jessop, by name, for his differing in judgment in some
particulars, urging as an argument for this purpose, that till then the City
would not be in quiet, into whose place (by diligent seeking) I did climb,
and domineered ever since over his people, and him, as the issue of that
prosecution; and that I forced my self upon his people to this day, by
procuring an order from above; and that thereby I got my self out of poor
Thomas, into rich Nicholas.

Now this whole story is a most wilful mistake (as its grounded upon what
Furge, page 49. of my Narrative) and in this I appeal to his light within; for
that person (and thing) which he cannot but know I meant, was this, that
Hollister and his company (then domineering) threatened the Magistrates, and
the rest of the Committee (who were not of their faction) that if they might
not have him whom they sent for out of Wales to be their Teacher, one of no
breeding, and that has since often denied himself to be a Minister, (and is
now turned Anabaptist) to be one of the public Lecturers in the City, they
would turn out of the City a godly and Orthodox Minister, who had been
imprisoned, and suffered much more than any of them, (for his good affection to
the Parliament) he differing that time in judgment in some particulars, and
so they had their end, which (as is well known) has proved a reproach and
scandal to this City, from many strangers that come hither, and take notice of
it.

Now this person (he knows very well) was Master Paul, for as for Mr. Jessop,
he was never committed to prison upon my occasion: Is this man now a true
Convert? Is he not a manifest prevaricator? And did he it not on purpose to
bring in that ly, and malicious slander of his fellow Hollister? The Church of
Christ in Bristol recevering her vail.
Whom to be a liar, a piece lately published by those who were his
fellow members (with his Teacher aforesaid) does amply testify; and which I my
self also have had sufficient experience of oftentimes, insomuch that I desired
one, a Minister of this City (who was then wont sometimes to visit him) to tell
him from me, that his shop was a forge of lies: And for the matter of Mr.
Jessop, I shall give a true and full account of it (so far as concerns my
self) thereby to discover these liars to the world. It Is well known (upon the
death of the late King) what endeavors there were by the then Parliament, for
settling the Nation in peace: In order whereunto, there was an engagement drawn
up, and required to be subscribed by all persons: And it is as well known in
this City, how opposite Master Jessop, aforesaid, (together with that other
Brother) was thereunto; and what expressions, concerning that matter, were used
by them, both in prayer and preaching, I need not mention: By which means there
was much averseness in many of this City to this settlement, they being honest
men, and having a great influence upon the people: At this, I (thirsting for a
setted peace) was much offended, and did endeavor, with themselves, privately
to take off their opposition, and publicly to settle the people, declaring my
dislike of their doings. With this, and the like expressions; that if they (the
Preachers) did apprehend those actions of State (whereby they endeavored a
settlement) as evil, they should go up to Westminster, and declare it to those
who had the power, and not trouble the people with those things, which they had
no ability to amend, or power to withstand; and for that their doings would but
raise an impotent disgust and opposition, with the public prejudice; further,
telling them of an evil which I had formerly observed, and was now by them
practiced, that men would preach Court Sermons in the City, and City Sermons at
Court, which I conceive an unprofitable kind of preaching, when our Sermons
are not suited to the capacity and condition of our Auditors.

And indeed, as to the matter also, I always conceived it, (and do still) as
savouring too much of the beyondsea temper, for Ministers to meddle with State
matters: Of which see a large discourse, entitled, A Case of Conscience,
concerning Ministers, meddling with State matters; in, or out of their Sermons,
resolved more satisfactorily than heretofore, which was then written by Mr.
John Dury, one of the Assembly of Divines, a man of a peaceable and public
spirit, and one with whom Bishop Hall, and Bishop Davenant, had several
endeavors formerly, for settling peace in the Churches; which book was licensed
by Mr. Joseph Carril, containing about twenty five sheets of paper; sold at the
Star in Cornhill, 1650.

But to go on, they still persist in their way, during which time, Mr. Craddock
coming to this City, and lodging (as I was informed) at Hollisters, I went
thither, (which I seldom used to do) to desire Mr. Craddock to preach for me
at Thomas; but he not being then within, and staying for him, Hollister, and
my self, talking of the times, and several matters, and (among others) of their
oppositions in public, I did then say, it was not fit to be suffered, so to
hinder a settlement, and to alienate men's affections; and this was all, and
this (as you see) but occasional: And before that, special occasion was given
by Mr. Jessop himself, for his removal, in a Sermon which he preached
afterward, upon which, and for which, he was outed; and of which, I knew not,
nor had any hand in, one way, or other, either by writing, speaking, or
suggestion to any person whatsoever: Nor did I ever speak with Hollister at any
time, after that occasional discourse, aforesaid, concerning it; and what I did
speak, having respect to that other Brother, as well as Mr. Iessop; which
outing and banishing from the City, was so far from my expectation, and seemed
to me so rigorous, that I publicly taxed and declared against their hard
dealing, as is (I doubt not) well known to diverse that heard me, the notes
whereof I have still by me; so that my declaring against their rigorous and
harsh prosecutions, raised the spleen of that froward adversary Hollister
against my self, and procured that scandal upon me; I confess I then thought it
fit they should be silenced from opposing Authority, and hindering (as much as
in them lay) the settlement of the peace of the Nation; (whereof this City is
no inconsiderable parcel) but banishment from it, was far from my thoughts.

And whereas my Adversary alleges, that I urged as an argument to this
purpose, that till then, the City would not be in quiet: If he say that I
used these words to Hollister, (for I never spoke with any other, nor him,
other than as aforesaid) it is very false: But this I acknowledge, some of
these words were spoken by me, to, and mistaken, (to say no more) by Mr.
Iessop himself, upon this occasion: A few days before the time allotted for
his departure, I met him upon the Tolzey, and supposing that much of Hollisters
heat against him, was for his zealous asserting of Presbyterial discipline, in
opposition to Independency, (of which he had treated much in his Lectures) I
endeavored to persuade him to an accommodation and compliance, (as not
thinking the quarrel worth so much contention) and offering myself to mediate
between them; (as being indifferent in that matter) but M. Iessop stiffly
persisting in his way, (and knowing Hollisters temper, who was then in his
heights) I told Mr. Iessop, that then there was no quietness to be looked for
among us, which words, how they have been misapplied by some, let it be
considered by them who are concerned.

And for Mr. Iessop, I desire him to remember, that he and I parted not in
discontent each with other, which no rational man will conceive could be, if I
had spoken those words in such a manner as I am charged. And Master Iessop may
further remember, (if he please) that I went to Mr. Youngs to speak with Mr.
Ingelo, (who was there at a marriage that morning) to procure him to mediate
the matter, in behalf of Mr. Iessop, for his continuance, but Mr. Ingelo was (a
little before) gone his journey toward London, so that my intention was
frustrate, and (as I perceived afterward) would have been so, notwithstanding;
for I after understood, the quarrel was old, and inveterate against him in
special, as appeared by their violent prosecu^ion. For whereas his sentence
was, to depart ten miles off the City, they followed him, with their rage, as
far as Tewksbury, thirty seven miles distant, hindering there his
entertainment; which dealing of theirs so far provoked my spirit, (in his
behalf) as that I drew their odium upon my self, as aforesaid. And whereas it is
further charged, that I did promote the outing him, to in my self into
Nicholas, and that I forced my self upon them, and that I procured an order,
etc. this is so false, that there is not the least shadow of truth in it, more
than this, that I am now in. But it is well known (and will be acknowledged)
that above half a year (and more) after Mr. Iessop was gone, and the Church lay
void; and notwithstanding I was diverse times desired by some of the
Parishioners to preach the Tuesday Lecture, and Sabbath Day Lecture, And it was
near a year after he was gone, e're I accepted it.
or either; I refused it, and did endeavor to settle my self at the College,
(as being loath to take a Pastoral charge) which thing by the help of Mr.
Aldworth, and Mr. Hodges, (and other friends of mine in the then Parliament) I
did effect and compass, and had 150. pound per annum, settled upon me by order,
and which is since still paid to him who does there officiate; and one Sermon I
preached in order to it; whereupon the chief of the Parish of Nicholas
(perceiving I would remove from Thomas) the occasion I will not mention,
because I am not willing to offend any: They calling a Vestry, sent the
principal of them unto me, to desire me to come to them, which I
(acknowledging their love and respect) refused; but they still urging me, I
took time to consider, and about a week after they came unto me again
accordingly, and obtained their desire; and afterward they drew a Petition,
subscribed by them, and many of the Parishioners, intending to present it to
the Committee here, for my establishment; and understanding that this Committee
here, had no power to do it, they sent up to the Committee above, and effected
it; and since I am (in a sort) enforced to it, I shall declare the two
principal reasons of my acceptance: The one was, I was persuaded by them, (and
many other of my friends) that in regard most of the inhabitants near and about
the College, were persons of another judgment than my self, in civil matters,
I should have little converse or comfort among them, but rather the contrary;
nay, some did suggest to me, that my settlement there, was procured by some
who bore me no good will, on purpose to make me weary, and so to leave the
City; but that I satisfied them, the matter was of my own seeking, and
endeavor; and the other reason was, that going so far out of the City, I
should not have any opportunity of any Church communion, and Christian
fellowship, with any considerable number, of which I was convinced to be a
duty, although I was then unwilling to undergo the burden of a Pastor. And
indeed, considering that some honest-hearted Christians in Thomas Parish (with
whom I had there communion) did still desire it; and hoping that diverse of
Nicholas, (having formerly been exercised in it) I should find them more
comfortably complying, than those who had been a long time strangers to it, I
did the more willingly embrace it; but as for the advantage, in removing from
poor Thomas, to rich Nicholas, (as the Calumniator phrases it) let him, and the
world know, that upon these grounds I removed from the rich College, to poor
Nicholas; nor was it the poverty of Thomas (though poor enough) that made me
leave them; nor was it (or could it be) filthy lucre, or sordid covetousness,
that drew me to Nicholas, which could by no reasonable man be imagined, would
amount to what was settled upon me at the College. And since I must boast,
(but it is to secure the credit of my Ministry, that it suffer not damage in
any thing, I will do it a little further. (having good witness of the truth
on it) After I had consented to come to Nicholas, and came to give them a
meeting at their Vestry; although I knew, that with much difficulty they
raised, what some of them had engaged unto by bond, to M. Jessop, and which, as
I have heard, was not above eighty pound per annum; yet when they asked me,
what would content me for my labor, so far was I from seeking my self, as
that I told them, I would not make a bargain for preaching the Gospel, but that
I would do my duty, and leave them to do theirs; and how richly it has been
performed by them, (I speak not of all) I am ashamed to mention: Sure, not
beyond poor Thomas, nor so much (by two parts in three) which M. Jessop now
reaps, as I am informed; and which place was settled upon him, upon my
commendations of him to M. Strong, at Westminster, and which M. Strong intended
to let him know, had he not been prevented by death, heu premature, if he
has not done it formerly: But much good may it do him, and much good may he do
them: I envy no man's gain or preferment; nor will the inhabitants of Nicholas
say, I contend with them in that matter, although I have cause enough to take
notice of their neglect (yea, and sin) in this particular. For I dare say,
there are few handy-crafts men that work upon so small encouragement; for, I
suppose, their calling feeds their family.

I have been the larger in this matter, because some persons are, and have been
as willing to take up, and spread this ly and calumny, as others have been to
raise, and make it: And truth it is, I should hardly have undertaken to answer
his railing Pamphlet, but to satisfy the world in these two last particulars,
and to wipe off the aspersion of base forgery, which my soul abhors; and to
make good what I promised concerning the discovery of this Quaker, to which
I Will hasten with all expedition.

As for his charging of several Trades upon me, it is but the lickings up of
the excrements of William Erburies black pudding, A book so called, written by
W. Erbury, wherein he would prove me to be a black pudding: In which foolish
Pamphlet, most (if not all) of these things are.
whereby, I see, George was very hungry, and wanted matter to feed upon, being,
it seems, troubled with that disease, which Physicians call, Caninus appetitus,
The dog-like appetite, which makes them huge greedy, and to catch at any thing;
but I wish his after-mess may do him more good, than the Pudding it self did
Erbury: For a few days after he had published it, he went home, and died;
whether he died for shame, or what it was, I know not, nor dare I say this was
the cause, or occasion of it; no, God forbid, I should presume to meddle with
the secrets of the Almighty, or to judge any man: But I mention this, because a
hare-brain'd fellow came (as himself said) to revenge Erburies death upon me,
which I no ways promoted; but probably this poor fellow might take up the
thoughts, upon what he might hear some sober persons speak of it: But be it
what it will, George, it seems, having swallowed it, must vomit it up again the
second time, that the world may see his foul stomach.

But, see how the vapors of it (whilst there) had corrupted his brain, and be
fooled his intellectuals? Did ever any man in the world understand, being a
member of an Independent Church, or of a Presbyterian Church, to be a trade?
And it is a trade, when a man in the former troubles ingages, for a time, in
some public service (as most active spirits did) and then lay it aside: Is
this a trade? How many trades has George had then? And for a man living in the
Country (as I did) to practice Physic. (being thereunto lawfully licensed by
the University of Cambridge, upon trial, and examination) I say, for a man so
living in the country, (and having a house fitted for such a purpose, no other
convenient house being there to be had for a pleasant dwelling) Is it a trade,
if a man make malt there for a time? Does not many a Gentleman, many a Minister
do so? And did I not (so soon as I could get there a more pleasant dwelling)
give it over? And being a Physician, do men call that a trade? Or is it a trade
(being so) to apply ones self to the ingenious experiments of Chimistry, in
order to the inabling himself to deal in his profession, with more security and
understanding? (without which, Physicians are no better than Emperic^s) Or is
it a trade, if a man living in London, (as a Physician) the Earl of Berkshire
keep an Office in his house, for that which is not a Monopoly, but a privilege
granted to him by the Law of the Nation, and no man forced (nor attempted to
be forced) to it; no, nor intended to be forced, which I know, and write for
the honor of that Noble and ingenious Earl, under whom I had no employment in
it, he having his Clerks, and Registers, and other Agents under him? And for
the other things mentioned, Are they trades? Are they mechanical? Are any bound
Apprentices to them? Are they handicrafts men? Are they not callings and
employments for persons of liberal, and (in some measure) learned educations?
The meanest of them, (I mean, in respect of abilities) is that of Chamberlain;
and of my desire to it, I may possibly elsewhere give an account, in another
discourse, upon another occasion, (if God permit) and yet that is not a trade
neither, but, as he himself calls it, an Office, and not unworthy of an
ingenious person; so that none of all these are trades, nor were they, nor are
they any calling, the honorable calling of the Ministry excepted: Of my call
and entrance whereunto, I shall (I hope by Gods blessing) give a satisfying
account to the world: And as for the other, which I only own as my calling, (in
reference to my first employments) I look not on them as several callings,
having all relation to one and the same office; namely, the Chancery; in the
last whereof, viz. one of the Clerks of the Chapel of the Rolls, (if the Lord
had not designed me to another, and better employment, and driven me thence
by a long and consuming sickness, which drove me into the country, and set me
upon the study of Physic) I had abode, and continued: But both in that, and
the former, which he terms a Subscriber in the Six Clerks Office; (which is a
notorious lie) for though there be Subscribers there, yet I was never one of
them, (having never been any man's servant) I say, in both those places, I kept
my Clerks under me, being liberal employments, wherein men of the best rank in
their countries, (some of them Esquires, and Justices of the Peace) had a
station.

And as for the first, which I reckon as the meanest, which he lyingly and
reproachfully calls a Ticket-maker, in the Subpen: Office, (there being no such
distinct employment there) but that George had a spiteful and rancorous
stomach; I was not then and there so inconsiderable a person, but that a
Gentleman of the Six Clerks Office, who knew me well, and who had but one
only daughter, and heir to a hundred marks per annum, Free-land, bestowed her
in marriage upon me; and that not by stealth, or unwillingly, but upon
writings between us, with whom we lived afterward in house together, till he
died, and then made me Executor of his Estate personal.

But here we may see, how malice will multiply; and that Georges measure of
Perfection (both in wit and honesty) is very small: Nor does all this any whit
take off the exception against mechanical undertakers, who from either Cobblers
Stalls, or Tailors Shop-boards, step up into the Pulpit, without any just call,
or competent abilities, (either natural, or acquired) but a good memory,
whereby they can only deliver, what they have from other men's Sermons, not
being able to maintain what they say, more than another well instructed and
ordinary Christian may do, which yet is not sufficient for a Minister; and
should such a Ministry be countenanced, (to the disparagement of Learning)
farewell Religion to the next Generation; which no sober and understanding
Christian, but will have respect unto, and which, no doubt, the Jesuits look
at; and therefore have no little influence in upholding ignorant and unlettered
persons among us. But now after all this lying story of so many trades, I Will
tell one story (but a short one) which this occasioned. One telling a Gentleman
(a Justice of Peace) who has known me long, and my manner of living, of this
passage of Georges, charging so many employments upon me, in such a ridiculous
way; (by numbering them up) Yea, but says the Gentleman, Can Captain Bishop say
that Mr. Farmer had played the knave in any of them all? And he knows George
almost as well as I do. And now (as in my Narrative, page 37. 38.) And he in
his Throne of lies, page 95. 96.) behold the imposture, and the Impostor,
George Bishop (whose name I am loath to sully my ink and pen with) but I must
crave leave to do it: Him whom they call Captain Bishop. This man
(notwithstanding the former letter of defiance against Naylor) is charged by
me with complying with Naylor, because he writ a letter in his behalf to some
in the Parliament; and thereupon I charge him with collusion and juggling. And
how does he discharge it? why truly, (like himself) doing the same thing
again, by faining, foisting, and packing (at which he is non-parel) I hope he
has not his fellow in England: And thus he does it, he feignes (upon
information, as he pretends, but who informed him, he does not tell us,
whether his own spirit, or any other) that the Mayor, Aldermen, etc. had
prepared a Petition, intended to be presented to the Parliament, concerning
Naylor; (which is true) wherein we (says he) who in scorn by the world are
called Quakers; are highly charged and accused: If he mean himself and Fox it
is a lie; for they are so far from being highly charged and accused, as that
they are not therein charged, or accused at all: And he desires his friend (if
he be free) to move, that the accusers, and the accused, may be heard face
to face, lest the Parliament should condemn the accused unheard, upon the bare
accusation of their Adversaries: And then he says, what a sad thing that will
be, if they should slay the innocent, and the righteous. And this is the
effect of the Letter.

Now, who are they that are accused? None but James Naylor, and his Crew; not
any of his (we) Fox, etc. unless they will thrust in themselves against our
mind and meaning. And to that end, see the Petition it self, as it was sent up
to London.

The humble Remonstrance and Petition of the Mayor, Aldermen, and
Common Counsel, of the City of Bristol, together with the Ministers of the
Gospel, and other chief Inhabitants, who desire to fear God, and love our Lord
Jesus, in sincerity, in the same City.
Shows,
THat we (especially the Magistrates) have with much regret and sadness of
spirit) lien long under much reproach and ignominy, occasioned by the increase
of a generation of seduced and seducing persons among us, called Quakers, who
at first were supported and upheld by some Soldiers, then in chief Command, in
the absence of the Governor of the Garrison; the wickedness of which sort of
men, has not in our Nation, as we know of, been formerlie heard of, and so
destitute of a Law to punish, and restrain; and therefore have not been able to
suppress.

And whereas we have waited long for some directions to that putpose, (being
unwilling to run upon unknown precipices) these people have strengthened, and
encouraged themselves in their iniquities, upon some pretended countenance from
thence, where we cannot suppose it. So that although we could, and did (yet
with some difficulty) punish, and thereby (in some measure) hinder their open
and frequent disturbances of our public worship; we had not power to silence
their blasphemies, nor restrain their confused and tumultuous meetings,
although they tended to the high dishonor of God, in their unchristian
principles, and practices (too well known) and in profaning the Sabbath, by
multitude of their Proselites, flocking from all parts of the Country round
about us, upon that day.

But now, so it is, that one James Naylor (a most eminent Ringleader, and head
of that Faction) has lately appeared here among us, more high than ever, in
horrid and open blasphemies, expressy avowed and owned by his nearest
followers, as that he is the only begotten Son of God; and that there is no
other than he; that he is the everlasting Son of righteousness, and that in
him the hopes of Israel stands; that he is the King of Israel, and Prince of
Peace; and calling him, Lord and Master, saying, his name shall be no more
called James, but Jesus. All which, are no other, than the natural issue of
their Scripture-denying principles. And now we, desiring to follow the
Ductures of Divine Providence, which has brought their iniquity to a height,
at such a time as this is, when the Legistative power of the Nation is sitting,
in whom it is, to provide wholesome and good laws against the growing evils of
the times, wherein the Lord eminentlie (in our apprehensions) calls for your
zeal for his glory: We humbly make our applications to your Honors, and with
profession of our abhorrency, and utter detestation of the damnable and
blasphemous Doctrines of the Quakers, which tend, in their own nature, to the
utter ruin of the true Christian Religion, and civil Government, both in
Cities, families, and all relations; (as would too soon appear, had they power
in their hands) and who now, (not as heretofore, tacitly, and by way of
implication, but) openly and expressly dishonor that sacred Name, by which we
are called, and trample upon that blood, by which we are justified, by making
others sharers with him, in his incommunicable excellencies.

And do therefore humbly pray, that your Honors would now take up the reins
of Government into your hands, (which have too long lain loose) in this
particular; and to curb the insolences of all ungodly persons, who in this,
(or any other way) do, or may eclipse the glory of our Christian Profession, by
their unbridled and licentious liberties, that so the reproach, not only of
this City, but of the whole Nation and Government, may be rolled away: And the
glory of this work (being acted by your hands) might render your names worthy
to be enrolled amongst the number of those faithful Confessors, to whom the
honor of our dearest Lord has been more precious, than their lives, and all
worldly enjoyments:

And we shall daily pray, etc.
So that here you see, George can make, and feign an occasion, to usher in his
friendly Letter in Naylors behalf, and yet would not seem to own him; this is
not the first of Georges collusions and packing in this kind: I Will but mind
him of the like practice, and that was about our Burgesses chosen for the
Parliament, 54. where having framed a Petition against the Election, putting to
the hands of several persons that knew not of it, (in a base and wicked way) as
was proved to the Lords of the Council. Besides this piece of knavery, (which
was most gross) their Petition presented to his Highness, and his Council, with
their Narrative of the proceedings in that Election, petitioned, that the
parties nominated by them, might be approved and established: And who were
they, but George himself for one? as by their Narrative, Art. 5. appears.

Now when they thought to have surpised us, by short summons, to appear before
the Council, (as one of their own party acknowledged afterward) and supposed
we would not appear, or not provided, which contrary to their expectation, we
were, (having gotten Copies of their Petition and Narrative before hand, and so
were fitted accordingly) when we came to the hearing, they had foisted in
another Petition, not that which was presented with their Narrative: And in
this second, there was no Petition to confirm himself, as the former: (with
reference to the Narrative as aforesaid, prayed) And then George; very finely,
with his guilt sword, did not appear there (as he said) for himself, but for
those honest men that were with him. Seriously you would have smiled (knowing
of him) how demurely, and how simply honest he did look. Now this trick George
we took notice of, but never told you of it till now. (having enough else to
lay you then) But now we tell you of it, that you may see we know you better
than you are aware of. And that the world may know further, what a one you are,
I Will acquaint them with one thing more: Do not you know who it was, that a
little before that Election, said, that we must choose such Parliament men, as
should hold my Lord Protectors nose to the grinde-stone. And yet see how this
lamentable creature does gloss and glaver, and cog, and fawn, and flatter,
speaking against the very light within him. And this is in their said
Petitions, which that you may see that base practice, and the high conceits of
himself, and his party, as the only Saints, and fit for Quakers, I Will lay
before you.

To his Highness, Oliver, Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, etc.
The humble Petition of diverse free Burgesses, and Inhabitants of the City and
Council of Bristol.
Shows,
THat your Petitioners; and diverse other Burge sles and Inhabitants of the City
and Council of Bristol, viz. the generality of the godly, faithful, and
constant friends to the Parliaments interest, came to the place, and at the
time appointed by the Sheriffs, for the choosing of Burgesses to sit in
Parliament, according to the qualifications, in the instrument of Government,
supposing, that those that had been faithful to the cause of God, and the
Nation, should have received countenance, and have been owned by those who were
to execute your Highness Commands, in a business of so great weight and
concernment, as the Election of Burgesses to sit in Parliament, for the
carrying on, and securing the common interest of liberty contended for, and
brought through (by the good hand of the Lord) such Seas of Blood, and
multitudes of other unspeakable sufferings, and ruins of the Saints, and good
people of the Nations, amongst whom, that your Petitioners, and their friends,
have borne no small share and proportion.

That contrariwise, they found those; who all along, both in principle and
practice, have bitterly opposed the cause of God, (in the behalf of the late
King, and your Petitioners, and other their friends, from prosecuting the same)
countenanced, and encouraged to avote, and undertook by the Sheriffs to be
born out in so doing; and your Petitioners, with other friends, with a very
high hand affronted, abused, threatened, and some of them (though rightly
qualified) denied to vote, as by the Narrative of proceedings hereunto annexed
more particularly, may appear; to which your Petitioners humbly refer your
Highness, as that which they own, and are ready to make good.

That your Petitioners being greatly astonished, and afflicted in spirit, at
these proceedings, especially upon the Sheriffs, declaring, that what they did
in point of Election, (contrary to the express words of the qualification in
the Instrument of Government) was the judgment of your Highnesses Council,
(which they cannot believe, but hope, and are confident to find the contrary)
did diverse of them several times, object and protest against such elections,
but all proving in vain, the scorn and confidence of the Cavalier Party
increasing, (who carried things so, as if there were no such thing as a
Commonwealth, or your Highness being chief Governor, but as if Charles Stewart
were again enthroned in the Sovereignty of this Nation) before the first, whom
your Petitioners nominated for them, was gone through, protested to the
Sheriffs against such the Elections, and departed immediately out of the Hall.

And your Petitioners bowels being even pressed down with grief, knew not where
(as to Amen) to ease their hearts, but in pouring forth their groans and fighes
into your Highnesses bosom, whom they have (with the hazard of all that is
dear unto them, and with much resolution and unweariedness owned in all your
excellent undertakings, for the true interest of the Commonwealth, against this
very generation of men, whom in the time of Parliament, durst not show their
teeth; and now, when your Highness rules, (in whose Government your Petitioners
expect them most to be kept under) seem to prevail, and do triumph over your
Petitioners, who have been owned and preserved, by the presence of the Lord of
Hosts, as a bush unconsumed in the midst of the burning, etc.

If therefore it shall please our God, to stir up your bowels within you, to
be affected with these proceedings, and your Petitioners condition, which
indeed concerns your own being, for their enemies are yours, and so you will
find it, if Providence should ever give an opportunity: Then your Petitioners
shall humbly pray, that the Election made, and intended, to be returned by the
Sheriffs, may be null and void, and that the persons nominated, and chosen by
your Petitioners, may be approved and established; and such other Provisions
made by your Highness, as may testify the earning of your heart toward, not
only your Petitioners, but the faithful in these Nations, whom these things do
generally concern; if otherwise, behold your Petitioners, and their friends,
are in the hands of the Lord, and let him do with them whatsoever is good in
his sight.

Now Reader, say, Did ever man meet with such an hypocrite; carrying two faces
under one hood, in this manner? What a Monster would this man appear to be, if
one should but open the carcass of this base Petition, and let the world know
the truth of things, as we in this City know it? The generality of the godly,
faithful to the cause of God, the Saints, and good people of the Nation,
amongst whom the Petitioners, and their friends, bore no small share. These are
the Epithites of himself, and the Petitioners; now I will not name them,
because peradventure some of them are, or may be honest hereafter.

But Countrymen, and fellow Citizens, you know them all: And say, Would not
you think the worse of your selves a good while after, if you should be found
in the company of many of them: I speak to you of my Countrymen, who are not
Athiests, Ranters, Church, and Ordinance-forsakers, and haters, drunkards,
Whoremasters, Sots, and Scoundrels: To you I speak, would you not blush to be
found among such Saints? Oh how easy it is to become a Saint? It Is but
petitioning for George Bishop to be a Parliament Man, and then a Saint
presently; and then Quakers (as many of them now are.) All these Saints came
together, to the business of so great weight and concernment, as the Election
of Burgesses to sit in Parliament, for the carrying on, and securing, etc. So
the Petitioners, and one of the men to do it, and that these Saints had
nominated (which was only in their purpose) not so much as nominated in the
place of choosing, lest they should have been laughed out of it: And as in their
Petition (as they say chosen) which is a manifest falsehood, was this St.
George; Oh high arrogance, impudence! I want words: What a frontless man was
this, to have such a conceit of himself? And how sottish and simple were these
fellow-Saints, as once to think, that the Inhabitants of this City had so far
forfeited their reason, and would so far forfeit their Charter, as to Choose
such a one for such a work? As sure as can be, had we chosen him, my Lord
Protector would have appointed a Guardian over the City, as a company of
Lunaticks and mad men.

And see the unworthiness of this fellow, and the baseness of his spirit: In
their Petition they go on, (and you must suppose them to be in a meek, humble
posture, with very meek and gentle hearts toward God, and his Highness) your
Petitioners bowels being even pressed down with grief, know not where (as to
men) to ease their hearts ^r (poor wretches) but in pouring forth their groans
and sighs into his Highness bosom, whom they had owned, etc. for the true
interest of the Commonwealth, but now would hold his nost to the grinde-stone,
as goind about to promote a false interest. George, your Countrymen know you
well enough. But yet for all this, see how sweetly we express our selves (not
as hypocrites, who dissemble and flatter) and go on: If it shall please God
(good hearts) to stir up the bowels (his Highness) within you, to be affected
with these proceedings, (in putting by George from being a Parliament Man) and
your Petitioners condition, which indeed concerns your own being, (yea, and it
should appear so, had he and his accomplices power in their hands) for their
enemies ( i.e. Georges, and the Petitioners) are yours, and so you will find
it, if providence should ever give an opportunity. But you George, (who I doubt
not had the great hand in drawing this Petition) you are a most special and
loving friend to his Highness: Fie George, fie, will thou not blush when thou
shall think of thy fellow-Citizens reading this Petition, who know thee so
well? I would not have taken this pains, but to let the world see, what Saints
you Quakers are, being mindful of my title page, and promise.

And now to go on, and see how George can free himself in the matter of the
Lord Craven, which, says he, (page 98.) I seem occasionally to bring in, but
chiefly intended, thereby to asperse his name, and wound his reputation; in
that I say (page 37. of my Narrative) that he was the great Agent in breaking
and tearing the Lord Cravens estate in pieces. Why George? What is the matter?
Is it an aspersing of your name, and a wounding of your reputation, to say,
that you were the great Agent in breaking and tearing the Lord Cravens estate
in pieces? Does it touch? Are you sore thereabouts? (Ah guilt, guilt! This worm
of conscience.) But stand, stand I say, I must touch you, and handle you there
a little more? Possibly I may be instrum ental for your good, to open the
ulcer, and let out the corruption, which lying there in thy conscience, and
impostumating, might destroy of a sudden. Come, stand, better now than
hereafter: Oh! how should I rejoice, that I might be instrumental to help him
to a sight of his sin, and so to true repentance?

To proceed, the Lord Cravens estate is broken in pieces, that cannot be
denied; but, says George, it was confiscated by Act of Parliament, and the act
was not his, but theirs: And how can that act be charged upon me, who had not
to do in the passing thereof? Well, I shall show you how by and by: But in the
mean time, let me ask you George, Is it not possible, that a Parliament (upon
misinformation) may do that which in its self is unjust, and they not so in
doing it? I pray God deliver this Nation from the guilt of unjust actions, both
in matter and manner. Suppose you, (or such a one as you) having accidental
discourse with another, about a third person, and he you discourse with;
should let fall some words concerning that third person, which you at the
present take no notice of, (or at least) seem not so to do, which yet you do;
(for otherwise you cannot communicate them unto another) and those words you
communicate to another; upon, and concerning which person, and words, you
confer between your selves; and apprehending they might bring some advantage to
some body, (being well improved, and handsomely managed, having power in your
hands) and so being ordered, you speak with your first man again, and form up
his accidental discourse, which he judged not worth any thing (as to the
prejudice of that third person, to injure whom, he was not bribed or
corrupted, nor bore any malice toward) you draw up, I say, that discourse into
an information of a crime, by handsome contrivance, reduce it into an oath,
with your own hand, and thereupon form a charge against the third person, to
the questioning both of his life and substance; and this charge you present to
the Parliament, and they take cognizance of it, and order it to be inquired
into, and examination to be had upon it; and you (having the transacting of
the whole business) so manage it, as that (it may be) it appears to them (by
that which is before them) he is guilty, and so adjudge him: Are they guilty
who so adjudged him, although (possibly) he may not be guilty? No, surely,
the guilt lies on those who mis-represent him unto them: You well know friend,
that Judges proceed not in Judgment upon their own knowledge, they act
(secundum allegata and probata) as things are proved unto them. And how many
persons and estates have been ruined upon base, and wicked, and designed
informations, is too well known to the world? And whereas you ask me, whether
I have not been a Solicitor for Sequestrations in London, in the time of, and
by authority of Parliament. I answer, yes; and yet I can charge you for tearing
and breaking in pieces men's estates; and do you, if you can, (or any man else)
charge me for doing the like, and I Will make them restitution, whom I have so
injured, if any such there be, as sure I am there is not.

I Will tell you George, my business there, was not to be an Informer against
any man, neither did I so; nor was it to possess my self of any man's estate
(either goods or money) the Committee had both their Collectors and Treasurers
to that purpose, I have sat there many a score of times Chairman in that
Committee. As also the Lord Steel, now the Lord Chancelour of Ireland) has
done the like; this hundreds (and many in this City) know: I was not their
underling, or Clerk, (as you were) to sit bare to your Masters, they had
several Clerks (better, and honester than you) and under-Clerks, to that
purpose; no (George) my business was, to see right done between the Parliament,
and those who were their enemies, not to make them enemies, who were not, but
to see justice done on those who were, according to information brought in unto
them; and this is the rejoicing of my heart at this moment, even the testimony
of my conscience, that I was always fearful of making those offenders, who
were not; and if I inclined to any side, it was to the side of mercy. And I
appeal to the God that searches hearts, that this honest and old principle (do
as thou would be done by) sat and wrought upon my spirit, when informations
was brought before us: And I have often had this thought upon my soul, when
men's whole estates have lain in question, and even bleeding before us; what
would I have done, if this man's case had been mine own, or mine had been his:
and accordingly I have had a respect unto them, so far as the business
wherewith (upon oath) I was entrusted, would bear and permit me; and this not
of fear, or favor, nor for gifts, or bribes, either before or after: I did not
think all that might be gotten, either to my self, or the Parliament, might
be well gotten; I did always reckon, that injustice and oppression, was the
way to bring guilt and judgment upon the Parliament and Nation, and to make
all their endeavors frustrate, and to turn it into a curse: And I doubt, such
as you, are not a little guilty of being Jeroboams companions, who made Israel
to sin grievously, and this by false and perverted informations, and that such
things were not unusual: And how much Judges may be abused by base practices,
if those who act under them deal not righteously: I could instance in several
particulars, that came within my own knowledge, whilst I was in that Committee,
wherein had I readily complied with the commands of the Parliament, and obeyed
their orders, which had been sinisterly procured (by wicked suggestions of
those, who sought their own advantages, and not the Nations welfare) many
innocent persons had been ruined: This to be a truth, I could (I say) make
appear by several instances undeniable, but that I am loath to charge my
discourse with any thing that is foreign, and that might make it unnecessarily
tedious. And as for my self, (in respect of any gain that I reaped by that
employment) let me tell you George, I did not make that my aim, I bless my
God for it; nor can I (or any man else) say, that I have made any addition to
my estate by it, either in land or money; for what I earned, I expended in
their service; and this will appear to the world, when my God shall take me
hence, of whom it will (or may) be said, as once was spoken of one I well knew,
(who lived in an employment, by which many others grew rich) He was an honest
man, for he died poor: This I speak, in respect of any addition to my estate,
since that employment: No George, I have neither Bishops, or Deans and Chapters
Lands, nor King or Queens, or Delinquents lands: And as for moneys, I am
beholding to my friends to provide for my wife and children, so little have I
been grasping after the world, whatever else may be mine infirmities
otherwise; and whether you George can say this, does appear to the world by
your manner of living, (without your trade) which you would not do before, and
by what will be declared afterward; and therefore to go on, Whereas you charge
me page 100. with light scoffing, and slanderous stuff, and that by dark
intimations of the business of Faulconer, of set purpose to wound your
reputation, and to reproach the truth which you witness.

I shall now therefore (to do you right) speak no longer darkly, and by way of
intimation, but expressly, plainly, in words at length, and not in figures, by
which I suppose every one that runs may read what a Saint you are, and what a
truth you witness: But the Proverb is here verified, Like lettice, like lips, a
truth and witness well met; and because I would do you all the right I can, and
for that possibly some may read mine, that will not read yours.

I will here set down in your own words all you say for your self in this
matter, in your page 100. and 101. and then consider it: Georges protestation
in the matter of the Lord Craven.
For the stopping of thine, and all slanderous mouths (say you) and the
satisfaction of such as desire not, nor delight in the defaming of others: I do
declare in the presence of the Lord, before whom I fear, who searches the
heart, and tries the reins, and brings every work to judgment, that I am
clear and innocent therein; nor have I used, nor do I know of any indirect
proceeding, in that whole business of Craven and Faulconer, nor done otherwise,
than in the faithful discharge of my duty. And further, that during the time of
my public engagements, (which have not been a few) and my whole conversation,
as I have received mercy to have a witness, so have I born my testimony
against unrighteousness and dishonesty (especially such as thou do intimate)
in whoever, as I have had opportunity, or have been called thereunto, neither
fearing the face of any man, nor preferring my life, or outward concernments,
to the clearing of my conscience therein, as is well known; unto which I have
also the witness of him who is greater than all; and a large time of Trial I
have had, wherein I have neither wanted enemies for the sake of truth, nor thy
malice and opportunity to lay to my charge, could they find, or were there any
thing to be found to the contrary; and thus much to say thou have compelled
me: Thus he.

Here is you see (Reader) a bold, high, daring, confident appeal of his
innocence, in the matter of the Lord Craven, and of his honesty and uprightness
in all other particulars, in the time of his public engagements. Now, what if
it shall appear, (notwithstanding all this) that he (George Bishop) who made
this dreadful protestation, did not only know of indirect proceedings in that
matter, but that he also was one (a chief one) that used them, and that (as to
this matter) Faulconer, who died in prison for perjury, was (in comparison of
him) an honest and innocent person: If I say all this shall appear, will you
believe, that he does believe there is a God, that searches hearts, and tryes
reins, and brings every work to judgment? Or can you be persuaded, that he
rightly entertains that Article of the Resurrection, though he seems to do so.

And before I give you an account of what I have to deliver unto you, that you
may know the daring spirit of this man, and how little respect and reverence
there is in him of the Almighty; and that it is an easy and light thing with
him, to make such appeals to God as this is.

Let me mind you of the like in that his Pamphlet, which I think few men in
the world (besides himself) would offer, and by that judge of this. Whereas in
my Narrative, I charge him and Hollister, and other of their relations and
adherents, that they joined themselves to the wretched Quakers upon faction,
humor, and discontent. In page 44. he makes this appeal and protestation,
Another of Georges protestations.
I do here, for clearing of my conscience, and the satisfaction of all the
sober-minded, to whom this may come, and for the stopping of thine and all
slanderous mouths, in the dread and presence of the living and eternal God, who
is Judge of heaven and earth, before whose Judgment Seat, thou, and we must
all appear, that every one may receive the things done in his body, according
to that he has done, good or bad. In my own, and the name of those servants
of the Lord whom thou reproachest, declare and affirm, that neither faction,
discontent, disaffected humor, pride, affected-singularity, (which are all of
them thy slanders) nor any other thing, was the cause of our joining unto them.
But having many of us, etc.

And so goes on, speaking of waiting in the use of outward means, etc. how God
had now visited them, by the Ministry of these men, and how he had reached by
his Eternal Power to that of himself in them, and so they became joined to the
Lord, and to the immortal word, etc. And seeing him who is invisible, etc. they
hunger no more, nor thirst, nor wonder, as heretofore, etc. speaking highly of
their high seize, as if they were now perfect, so that neither faction,
humor, pride, etc. nor any other thing, but the mighty and pure work of God,
was the ground of their becoming Quakers; so says George.

But now if he were to be cleared by Compurgators, (viz.) such as should upon
their consciences affirm, that what he here says, they are persuaded is true,
he would find very few (if any besides Quakers) that would dare to do it.

For suppose he might be believed for himself, who, or what man in the world
(that truly fears God, and knows what it is to make appeals to his most
glorious Majesty, and with what righteousness and judgment it ought to be
performed) would, or can dare to make such a protestation in the behalf, and in
the name of others, as he here does? If he had said, he had believed, or
been persuaded, or the like, that they did it not upon such grounds, or
motives, but upon a pure account, (which is impossible in this business) it had
been tolerable, but thus expressly, fully, unlimitly, as fully for them (whose
hearts he cannot know) as for himself, to call the living and eternal God to
witness in this manner, argues him to be one of a presumptuous spirit.

And for a further discovery of his Atheistical impudence in this kind, do but
read the report and judgment of those who were familiarly acquainted with
Hollister, for whom this daring man does thus protest, he being by me charged
in special for turning Quaker upon faction and discontent, before ever I saw
their book, which was but lately published; it is a book published by, and in
the name of that Church (as they call themselves) whereof he was a member, or
rather Master, till he fell away to the Quakers, and drew away from them (as
they say in their Epistle to the Reader) eighteen or nineteen with him; in the
tenth and eleventh page of which book, they say they did observe in what height
of discontent he came home, (from that thing called a Parliament) and
continued in that posture (viz. of discontent) till a new Religion came (which
was the Quakers) which (say they) presently, within few days or weeks, he
embraced.

So that I can (nor I think will any considering man) look upon him no
otherwise than as one of those Knights of the Post, (as they call them) who
will say or swear any thing; and this to let you see the spirit of the man.

And now to proceed, he professes, and (as you see) boldly protests his
innocence in the matter of the Lord Craven, and Faulconer; nor has he used,
nor does he know of any indirect proceeding in that whole business.

Now that my Reader (who is a stranger in this matter) may go along with me
with understanding; I shall (as briefly as I can) lay the whole business before
him: The Lord Craven (having been for many years (long before the troubles in
England) resident in Holland, and employed in their service) having a command
under the Prince of Orange; the Scots King going to Breda, the Lord Craven came
thither in attendance upon the Prince of Orange, during the Scotch Kings
residence at Breda, diverse officers (soldiers) formerly in the service of the
King his Father (being in great distress, and like to perish) drew up a
Petition for relief of their necessities: Now Faulconer aforesaid, having been
a soldier (a Major) in the Parliament service, and being (as upon his
deathbed he confessed) in a poor desperate condition, and going over to Breda,
(as a Spy) strikes in with these Cavileers as one of them, and was entreated by
them to drw the aforesaid Petition, which he did; in drawing thereof,
Faulconer moved, that they might Petition the Scotch King, that they might be
entertained by him to fight against the Commonwealth of England, by the name of
barbarons and inhumane Rebels; but those honest Cavaleers answered, that they
were soldiers of fortune, and it was uncivil language, and they would not have
it in; and so the Petition (being drawn up by Faulconer, according to their
mind) was delivered to the Scotch King, who, it seems, promised to consider
them.

About three weeks after, the Scotch King (being to depart from Breda next
morning, these Cavaleers) not finding answerable relief, (according to the
former Petition, and the Kings promise) they drew up another short Petition, to
put him in mind of his promise; and meeting the Lord Craven there, (who they
knew to be a friend to soldiers) they entreat him to further that their
Petition, he knowing nothing of the former; nor did it appear that the Lord
Craven promoted this second Petition, which if he had, there was not any thing
offensive: but the Scotch King went away next morning, without giving any
relief to the per^^^ners, as Captain Brisco, one of them swears, at Faulconers
trial, insomuch that Faulconer (being discontented that he got no moneys)
said, (as he was going into the Town) This is a horrid thing, that we should
be in this case, to follow a thing, they call a King, God dam me, I will go
into England, and do all the mischief I can, as Col. Drury (another of the
Petitioners) informed, at Faulconers trial: of which afterward.

Now that you may better know what a manner of person this Faulconer was, and
how fit for any desperate undertaking; it was at his trial sworn against him,
that he drunk a health upon his knees to the devil, in the open streets at
Petersfield; and that then he used these words, I have spent my brothers
estate, and my own, I will never want money, for whilst there is any in the
Nation, I will get one way or other, and I will do something of infamy to be
talked of, that the name of Faulconer shall never die. One James Greham swore
against him, that after the siege of Exeter, in a Cellar, there he the said
Faulconer put into Grehams hand a two and twenty shillings piece of gold,
swearing, Dam him blood and wounds, he would bugger his soul to hell. Another
swore, that dam him, and sink him were his usual expressions. One Bradley
testified, that he heard Faulconer say, our Savior Christ was a bastard, and
a Carpenters son, and carried a basket of tools after his Father: Mr. Thomas
Dyer of Bristol, (being produced as a witness) did declare, that Faulconer
confessed to him, that he had ten pound of a man, by procuring one to personate
Captain Bishop.

Thus a Citizen desiring Faulconer to get Captain Bishop to do a business for
him, he promised Faulconer twenty pound, ten pound in hand, and ten pound
afterward; Faulconer got one to personate Captain Bishop, and to go along with
him to the Citizen, which man so personating Captain Bishop, promised the
Citizen (upon the account of Major Faulconers good services for the public) to
afford him his best assistance in effecting what was desired in his Petition,
and so Faulconer got the ten pound.

It was also proved, that Faulconer was committed to Goal, in the County of
Middlesex, for suspicion of felony; and thence, by order from the Lord Chief
Justice Rolls, to Newgate; and that he had been committed to Ailsbury Goal,
upon suspicion of felony, robbery, and murder.

Now this Faulconer having been over at Breda, (as aforesaid) and returning
into England, George Bishop (being Clerk to the Committee for informations) has
to do with him, from whence he receives information of diverse plots and
designs of the adverse party to the Parliament.

But (to come to the business) the Lord Craven, (having a great Estate in
England of Land, besides brave houses, one in particular, that cost twenty
thousand pound the building, besides brave and gallant woods and timber) being
thus beyond Sea, and never acted against the Parliament in arms, a long time
after Faulconer had been over, and given in his informations, of enemies
actings; and having said nothing of, or against the Lord Craven, an information
is drawn up against the said Lord Craven, in Faulconers name, as the informant,
which is as follows.

Faulconers Examination.
Who says,
THat about a Fortnight before the conclusion of the Treaty at Breda, the Lord
Craven, the Queen of Bohemia, and her two Daughters, came to Breda, to the
Scots King Charles, and went not thence till the King went to Housteidike, a
house of the Prince of Oranges; that during that time, this Informant saw the
Lord Craven diverse times in presence with the said King, and every day with the
said King at the Court there, he being there with the Queen of Bohemia, and
her two daughters, to take their leave (as they said) of the King of Scots,
before he went to Scotland: That several Officers, about thirty in number,
made a Petition to the said King, to entertain them to fight for him against
the Commonwealth of England, by the name of barbarous and inhumane Rebels,
either in England or Scotland, for the recovering of his just rights, and
re-instating him in his Throne; and deputed this Informant and Colonel Drury to
present the said Petition, who indeed drew the same, that when the Informant,
and some other Officers came to the Court at Breda, intending to present the
said Petition immediately to the Kings hand, but finding the Lord Craven very
near to him, likewise the Marquess of New Castle, who presented his brother,
Sir Charles Cavendish, to kiss the said Kings hand, the evening before the said
Kings departure, who this Informant saw kiss the Kings hand accordingly: The
Lord Wilmot, the Earl of Cleveland, the Queen of Bohemia, the Lord Gerrard,
etc. and a great buttle of business: This Informant, with Colonel Drury,
applied themselves to the Lord Craven, entreating him to present the Petition
to the Queen of Bohemia, to present it to the King of Scots: The said Lord
Craven taking the Petition, and reading the same cheerfully, said to Colonel
Drury, and this Informant, there is the Queen of Bohemia, deliver it to her,
and I will speak for you; upon which they applied themselves to the said Queen,
and she presented the Petition; after which, the King of Scots, the Lord
Craven, the Marquess of New Castle, the Queen of Bohemia, with some other
Lords, went into a withdrawing room, where this Informant and company could
not enter; but the Lord Craven came forth of the withdrawing Chamber, and told
this Informant and company, that they should receive an answer from the Queen
of Bohemia to their Petition, and that he had spoken to the Queen of Bohemia
in their behalf, who afterward came and told this Informant and company, that
she had delivered their Petition, and that the King had taken order for it.
The next morning, at three of the clock, the King departed; but this Informant
and company had their quarters satisfied by the Princess of Orange, according
to the said Kings Order upon their Petition, and thereby to enable them to
follow the said King in the prosecution of these wars against the Parliament of
England, which was the effect of their aforesaid Petition: That this Informant
saw the Lord Craven very often, and familiar with the said King, and enter with
the said King into the withdrawing Chamber, and staid there the last night the
said King was at Breda, very late.

Richard Faulconer.

To this were added these two following examinations.

Colonel Hugh Reyleys Examination.
Who says,
THat during the late Treaty at Breda, this Informant did oftentimes see my
Lord Craven with the now King of Scots in his Bedchamber, and also walked
abroad with him, there being no man more conversant with the King than he:
That the said Lord Craven, during the said Treaty, did twice go to Rotterdam,
and Dunhagh, and back again, being employed, as was commonly reported at Court,
there by the said King, that the said Lord Craven had a charge from the King to
look to one Mrs. Barlow, who (as is reported) and he believes to be true, had
a child by the King of Scots, born at Rotterdam, which he did; and after the
King was gone for Scotland, the said Lord Craven took the child from her, for
which she went to Law with him, and recovered the child, as is reported:

Hugh Reyley.

Captain Kitchingmans Examination.
Who says,
THat the said Captain Thomas Kitchingman, in April and May, 1650. saw the Lord
Craven several times with the King of Scots at Breda, and waiting upon the said
King several times at his Table at Breda. This Informant also saw the Earl of
Oxford, at the same time, with the King of Scots at Breda, waiting upon the
said King at his Table; and saw the Lord Craven, and the Earl of Oxford, many
times going into the withdrawing rooms after the said King. This Informant also
saw the Lord Craven, and the Earl of Oxford, in a Bowling-alley in Breda
Castle, with the said King.

Tho. Kitchingman.

In these two latter Examinations, Reyl^ys, was but report.
you see there was nothing that would render Lord Craven criminous. But upon
this his estate was ordered to be confiscate, and afterward sold, and sold it
was, and is, accordingly. Of the endeavors of the Lord Cravens friends to
prevent it, and what was agitated in Parliament, I shall not mention, for that
I refer the Reader to a printed piece, entitled, A true and perfect Narrative
of the several proceedings in the case concerning the Lord Craven, printed by
R. White, 1653.

Now if this information of Faulconer be the only material testimony, upon
which the Lord Cravens estate was sequestered; and that Faulconer in this
information was perjured and forsworn, and this be a false information, then
this will clearly follow, that there was indirect proceedings in some body, in
this business; and that this information of Faulconers was, and is false, and
he perjured in it, and forsworn, appears by two most pregnant testimonies,
neither of them to be denied. First, by his legal trial, and conviction.
Secondly, by his own confession on his deathbed: For Faulconers trial and
conviction of perjury, (in, and for this very information) that appears by the
Records thereof; for the Lord Cravens friends preferred an Indictment of perjury
against him in the County of Middlesex, which Indictment was found against him,
one Sir Henry Blunt being foreman of the Jury: Delays were used to hinder
Faulconers pleading to it, notwithstanding the Prosecutors for the Lord Craven
had procured a Habeas Corpus, to bring him to the Bar to plead to the
Indictment, which he failing, they procure another Habeas Corpus; he yet gets
further time, and a peremptory day assigned by the Court, or else Judgment to
be entered against him. And the very last day (when needs must) and not before,
when the last roll was out, he pleaded, not guilty. Now Paulconer having
pleaded not guilty, a Jury is summoned, Council appear in the Upper Bench at
Westminster, Mr. Maynard, Mr. Hales, Mr. Twisden, Mr. Philips, Mr. Baldwin, and
Mr. Drury, for the Commonwealth, and the Lord Craven; Mr. Windham, Mr. Letch,
Mr. Lechmore, and Mr. Haggat, of Council for Faulconer, where (upon five hours
debate) the said Faulconer was found guilty of perjury, in this very matter
against the Lord Craven, the whole proceedings whereof you have fully related
in the Narrative before mentioned. This trial and conviction of Faulconer, was
May 20. 1653. Hereupon Faulconer was committed to the Upper Bench prison in
Southwark, where he lay till he died. Now for the second evidence of
Faulconers perjury, in his testimony (upon which the Lord Cravens estate was
sequestered and sold) you have here the sad and lamentable confession of poor
Faulconer himself upon his deathbed, under his own hand and seal, confirmed in
the presence of several credible persons, who were present with him on his
deathbed, which is to the effect following.

IN the Name, and through the gracious mercy of God, I Richard Faulconer, being
of sound memory and understanding, do under my own hand and seal, on my
deathbed, make, and confirm this my confession, with a contrite heart and
penitent soul, to the honor of my good God principally, and particularly
concerning the Lord Cravens business.

And first; I confess I have sinned grievously against my God, in taking my
oath upon his holy Testament, that all my information was true; for after a
twenty weeks sickness this was done, my body being low, and in much haste,
being much enfeebled, and above three quarters of a year after I came over Sea;
so that I here solemnly protest, that I did not then absolutely remember,
whether the words, barbarous and inhumane rebels, were expunged; and these
words, being once named by me, they were as quickly inserted, and I (the Lord
pardon me) swore it; but since I really remember, those words were put out of
the Petition, and the Petition which Drury produced in the Upper Bench Court,
was the true and right Petition: Drury did say, that the Lord Craven would not
be seen to deliver such a Petition, but he would speak to the Queen of
Bohemia. I did not hear the Lord Craven say this. I sinned, swearing the Lord
Craven said so, when as Drury told it me.

And truly these great sins, since they perfectly came to my memory, and to
touch my conscience, have woefully perplexed my soul, so, that I many times
wished that the Lord would expiate them, by taking my life away, and granting
me repentance and pardon, through the merits and sufferings of my Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, the which the Lord for his mercies sake vouchsafe to
grant. Amen.

And here I utterly renounce all Books and Pamphlets writ by me, or any one in
my vindication, and especially a late Pamphlet sent to me by Captain Bishop.
The cause of my writing that Pamphlet, was the shame and disgrace of the world,
which I feared then, more than the provoking of my good God: besides, other
under actors told me, until I did that, I could not think my friends would
supply me, as they would, if that were done; liberty and money were falsely
promised me.

And whereas it was sworn in Court, that I was employed, I here protest before
the Almighty God, that I never undertook any employment, nor ever any one
motioned it to me, or I to any; but I went over in a poor desperate condition,
supported by others. And here I dare not say that any one bribed me, no, none
did, but I was hastily, after a great sickness, provoked to it; and when I made
a demur at the words, barbarous and inhumane Rebels, Captain Bishop said, if
you leave that out, you do nothing: So I let it pass, being speedily brought
before the Committee, where I falsely swore it. True, I had done great services
for them, but not by employment, and Captain Bishop kept me low with small
pittances, so that I was at his bow, etc.

Richard Faulconer.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
Reader,

I Thought here to have given thee in, the attestation of this confession and
acknowledgement, who were present when it was signed: Also some further
testimony of other practices of this Quaker; and how poor Faulconer to his
dying day, cried out against that Rogue Bishop, (for so it is languaged to
me.) But in regard the hearing of the Lord Cravens Case in Parliament, is not
yet past, (although they have taken cognizance of it already, and have
appointed to enter further upon it, the beginning of their next Session) I
shall therefore forbear, not doubting thou will hear further of it, by some
hand or other.

So that here is (you see) manifestly, undeniably, unjust proceedings: here is
perjury proved, and confessed: What Is this to Captain Bishop? He declares in
the presence of the Lord, before whom he fears, and who searches the heart,
and tries the reins, and brings every work to judgment, that he is clear and
innocent therein; and that he has not used, nor does he know of any indirect
proceedings in this whole business of Craven and Faulconer. Well, God send him
a good deliverance, at the day of Judgment; and to that end, I heartily beg
for him the grace of true repentance, and pardon, through the blood of Christ,
shed at Jerusalem. And to further this work for his conviction, we shall
endeavor to try, and examine him here; and clear I am, that if any Jury in the
world (of discreet, sober, impartial and understanding men) were to pass upon
him, they would give in this Verdict, That he (George Bishop) does know of
many indirect proceedings, in the matter of the Lord Craven and Faulconer; and
that he (George Bishop) himself has used them; and that therefore he is not
clear and innocent in this matter. And now hear the evidence, there is a book
published, entitled, The Lord Cravens case, This book was written by George,
partly to testify the proceedings against the Lord Craven to answer the
Narrative and to justify Faulconer.
as to the confiscation and sale of his estate, by judgment of Parliament
related, and argued, and objections answered on the behalf of the Commonwealth,
together with a short examination of a certain Pamphlet, entitled, A true and
perfect Narrative of the several proceedings, in the case concerning the Lord
Craven, etc. which is the Narrative before quoted, wherein are all the
proceedings against Faulconer. Now this book ( the Lord Cravens case, etc.) was
printed by William Duguard, 1653. and that this book was written by George
Bishop himself, I suppose he will not deny, though no name be to it; the book
is said to be written on the behalf of the Commonwealth, and this expressed in
great Characters: I would now but ask George this question, why he (of all men
in the world) being but a Clerk or Secretary (call him what you will) to a
Committee, should undertake this private and personal quarrel against the Lord
Craven, in the behalf of poor perjured Faulconer, and the Commonwealth? I
should think, that a Clerk or Secretary, (if an honest man, and impartial) when
he had performed the date of his place, should have sat him down, and not
espouse any personal quarrel (unless he were particularly concerned in it)

But says George, that Pamphlet tends to the blemishing of the Parliament, and
their Ministers; so he, page 1. of his book (for so I shall call it all along,
as I have occasion to quote it;) and therefore he puts pen to paper, and
writes that book. Mark. the Parliament, and their Ministers, are blemished: Who
those Ministers are, (at least one) we shall see anon; it is the securest way
to save ones ears, to join the Ministers of the Parliament, with the Parliament
it self: But the Parliament may be honest, though their Ministers may be
knaves; and therefore George presently says, that that book of his, is not
purposely to Apologize for the Parliament; well then, it is for some body else,
he would not have writ it to no purpose: But why not for the Parliament? Why,
says he, it is a thing needless among true English men, who are used highly to
reverence actions of Parliament, Mark here, George would have actions of
Parliament so highly rerenced, that none might question this business. 1 Pet.
4.15.
etc. Sure George would now say, that Parliaments are so infallible.

But we will take it for granted, that this Apology is not for the Parliament,
but for their Ministers; but who, or what are they? Sure it is some (...)? Some
busy Bishop in another man's Diocese, so the word signifies; but it is rendered
in our translation, a busy body in other men's matters, matters they should not
have meddled in: But who is it? why, it is George Bishop, busy George Bishop,
who had the transactions of all that business. So he says himself, page 14.
line 25. of his book, two or three lines before, he has these words, How dare
any thus falsely, to charge a State with such gross wickedness. (as to corrupt
Faulconer, he means) And then goes on, Though Captain Bishop himself writ the
book, yet he speaks, as if it were written by another, and so plays behind
the Curtain, which let the reader remember for his better understanding what I
quote from that book of his.
but as there was not a tittle produced to prove corruption, malice, or
wilfulness, in the said Faulconer, against the said Lord, so Captain Bishop,
who had the transactions of all that business, upon his oath, cleared him of
all. These are Georges words.

Well then, stop a little here, and (though we break order in the form of
proceedings in legal trials) you Gentlemen of this Jury, who are to give your
verdict, in this matter of George Bishop, I pray take notice; Geo. you see,
upon his oath, (it was at Faulconers trial) clears Faulconer of corruption or
malice against the Lord Craven. Poor man, he intended no such thing at first
against him; no, Faulconer was altogether a stranger to the Lord Craven, and
since he came over, he confessed to some of good credit, that the Lord Cravens
deportment at Breda (where this horrible treason should be by him committed,
and for which his estate is sequestered) was altogether inoffensive, as to the
Commonwealth of England; and that he (Faulconer) understood nothing of the
said business, (namely, of that dreadful Petition, for which he was so
sequestered) more, than that a consideration was desired, to be had of the
present wants and great necessities of the Petitioners. This you have in the
fourth Petition presented to the Parliament, on the behalf of the Lord Craven,
in the Narrative aforesaid, page 19. Aye, these were their words, will George
say. But I answer, they offered to prove them to the Parliament, if they might
have been admitted. But to second this, I Will show you what George himself says
in his own book for Faulconers honesty, simplicity, and harmlesness, (as to the
Lord Graven) and this upon Bishopsoath, (if it be any thing worth) page 13.
line the last but 10. he says, that when Faulconer gave him accounts of
designs against the Commonwealth, The same he bath again, in page 42, 43.
he said nothing to him of the Lord Craven, nor of any thing of this passage
of the Petition; (upon which the estate was sequestered) nor notwithstanding
many discourses with him, said he any thing, till about five months
afterward, and then but accidentally, not of his own accord; as page 43.
Captain Bishop asking him, who were at Breda with the King, not thinking of the
Lord Craven, Faulconer reckoned the said Lord amongst the rest, and being
asked, said something of that business, which Captain Bishop not much valued
them. Thus he. How this was improved, you shall see afterward; so that here
Faulconer is cleared of any intention of mischief against the Lord Craven; the
man (poor Faulconer) is yet honest in this matter. But yet you see, he was
afterward perjured and forsworn: How comes this about? Oh see what a fearful
temptation it is to be in poverty and want! it will put an honest heart into
great straits. I now think upon that prayer of honest Agur, (Prove. 30.8, 9)
Give me not poverty, lest I be poor and steal, and take the name of my god in
vain: Poverty is a sore trial, even to a good and honest heart; but when it
shall meet with a wretched and profligate spirit, what will it not put him
upon? I mind that dreadful expression of poor Faulconer, before expressed,
whilst he was ranting and drinking healths to the devil, I have spent my
brothers estate, and mine own, I will never want money, for whilst there is any
in the Nation, I will get it one way or other, and I will do something of
infamy to be talked of, the name of Faulconer shall never die. Oh how
dreadfully did the Lord say Amen to this poor creature! And what a lamentable
thing is it for such a poor wretch to fall into the hands of such as will make
use and advantage of his low condition? Why, you will say, what is the matter?
Do you ask what is the matter? look back upon Faulconers confession, and there
he tells you, he was provoked to swear falsely: How? read the last words of
his confession, Captain Bishop kept me low, with small pittances, so that I
was at his bow. At his bow! what to do? He (Faulconer) made a demur at those
words, barbarous and inhumane rebels, (whether they were in the Petition or no,
which he did not then remember, but now did) and so (it seems) scrupled to
swear to them; and Captain Bishop said, if you leave that out, you do nothing;
and (so says he) I Will let it pass: Being speedily brought before the
Committee, where I falsty swore it; and concludes, Captain Bishop kept me low,
with small pittances, that I was at his bow.

What think you of this Sirs? Is this direct, just, honest proceedings, to
provoke a poor man in want to swear with a scrupling conscience, and to that
which now appears to be false? He was resolved, it seems, he should swear
something to the purpose. Do you want any more evidence? This is enough, you
will say, but if you have any more, produce it, and pray tell us, How do you
conceive this game began? Why, I Will tell you, what George himself says, as he
goes on, in page 13. lines 3 last, and so on to 14; and the same also, page 42,
43. of his book, when Faulconer (as before) in that accidental discourse with
Bishop, (five months after Faulconers coming over) had mentioned the Lord
Cravens being at Breda with the King, and had spoken something of the Petition,
which made all this stir, which Bishop said, he did not much value then.

He goes on, and tells you, that though he did not much value it then, yet
he acquainted some of the Council of State therewith, and they ordered him
(the said Bishop) to ask him (namely Faulconer) further about it; who thereupon
took his information; he (the said Faulconer) judging it then also (as Geo.
himself said) not to be worth any thing; poor Faulconer still continued his
good opinion of my Lord Cravens innocence; but well (or ill) fare a good (or a
bad) head and heart, that can make something of nothing, and bring something (a
great estate) to nothing; 'twas a huge sin to be so rich, and yield nothing
but contribution to the Parliament: Who those were of the Council of State that
you (George) acquainted with it, if you did acquaint any with it, (for I know
not how to believe you) I do not know. But sure they had more skill in
Chimistry than ever I had, or desire to have, that they could make so great a
transmutation upon so little matter: I doubt they were some such as I met with,
when I was in the Chair of the Committee for Sequestrations, when an
information being brought in against one, and the Prosecutors pressed for a
Sequestration of his estate in London, (being money) the party living in the
country; all that could be proved against him, was but words, declaring some
malignancy of spirit against the Parliament: Some of the Committee inclining to
sequester him, I told them, that by our Ordinance we could not do it, for
words alone, without some action: What, (says one of the Committee) the
Parliament wants money, and he has it; but we stopped it; it is a dangerous
thing to be rich in troublous times. But George, you would seem to put that
which you looked upon as no great matter, (of which notwithstanding a great
matter is made) you would put it upon some of the Council of State: How the
matter was secretly contrived, I know not, nor will I enquire.

But now Sirs, you that are to give judgment upon George, you shall hear how
this information was taken, and by whom, and how. It was proved at the trial,
by Bishops own acknowledgement, that he himself prepared Faulconers
information, before the Commissioners (before whom he was sworn) were sent
for. (of this again afterward) And Bishop said again, I prepared the
information which he made oath of, page 40. of the Narrative, well.

Now see how it was prepared; and for that, hear poor Faulconer upon his
deathbed. Look back to his confession: After twenty weeks sickness (says
he) my body being low, and in much haste, being much infeebled; and above
three quarters of a year after I came over Sea; so that (as he solemnly
protests) he did not well remember whether these words, barbarous and inhumane
Rebels; (which as I showed you before, he motioned to have put into the
Petition, and might therefore have some confused remembrance of them) I say he
could not well then, in haste (as he says) remember, whether they were
expunged or no.

But now mark; Those words (says he) being once named by me, they were as
quickly inserted, and I (the Lord pardon me) swore it. The poor man, after a
long time, and much weakness, taken hastily, (and so inconsiderately) mentions
those words, (of which some former motion had been) and they are suddenly
caught at (being, as he says, but once named by him) and are quickly put in
for him to swear to. Ah George, George! poor Faulconer, it is too late to pray
for, or to say any thing to him, he stands, or is fallen to his own Master:
But George, what have thou to answer for, especially considering, that when the
poor wretch, his heart seemed to relent, and that he demurred and scrupled at
the words before he swore them, (and having met with an honest,
tenderhearted, conscientious man, might have prevented crying sin) for which
(poor creature) his name is infamous) that thou should tell that poor
necessitous creature, (whom thou had thereby at thy bow) that if he left out
that, he did nothing; and so he went on, and perpetrated his villainy: Well
George, well, Quake, or not Quake, it is dreadful: Ah poor Faulconer! Ah poor
George! the Lord convert thee, and forgive thee: I profess, (in the sight of
God) I beg it heartily, I desire not thy condemnation; but these practices
cannot yield comfort, nor a safe and secure conscience, though possibly quiet
for a time. Readers, you that are to give your judgment upon this man, when I
have done with him, is not here indirect dealing? But I pray stand by a while,
and hear what I shall further interrogate him in: You (George) declare in the
presence of the Lord, etc. that you do not know of any indirect proceeding in
this whole business of Craven and Faulconer, which how true (or rather how
false) it is, appears sufficiently already, too much: But I ask you further,
Faulconer says, money and liberty were promised him, though not performed:
Though he were not bribed with money before hand, yet it was promised him, and
liberty too.

Let me ask you, who promised this? Did not you? who (as you say your self)
had the transactions of the whole business; I doubt not you can tell; and why
was it promised him? no doubt, that he might not flinch from his oath: And why
did he write a Pamphlet in his own vindication? (which upon his deathbed he
disclaimed as false) but that (as he says) he was told by under actors, that
until he did that, he could not think his friends would supply him, as they
would, if that were done: And did not you (Captain Bishop) send him that
Pamphlet? But I pray, why was not that money paid him which was promised?
Thomas Dier (who was your Clerk, as was sworn in Court at Faulconers trial)
paid him by your direction, twenty pound at one time, and about thirty pounds
more at other times, in several portions; and that Faulconer confessed to him,
that he had twenty pounds afterward; and that being demanded what it was for,
he would not tell him, saying, I will not speak to that, I cannot speak to
that. Why, was not the money promised him no paid. And when as Faulconer was
(as is before expressed) imprisoned in Newgate, upon suspicion of robbery and
felony, did not you write a Letter to the Lord Chief Justice Rolls, signifying,
what a servant Faulconer was to the Commonwealth? and how much depended upon
the upholding of his credit, and testimony? And when as the Judge slighted such
applications unto him, saying, if he were innocent, that would prove his best
vindication: Don't you know what was done, and how unquiet you were, till he
was enlarged? Was not Affidavit made, that he was employed upon public
concernments? and did not Faulconer give it under his hand, what services he
had done for the public, and how he was the chief witness against the Lord
Craven? And was it not so carried, that there was slack prosecution of the
Indictment; and when Faulconer was set at liberty upon Bail, to appear at next
Sessions at Newgate, they never appeared, and so the matter ended? which
whether it were Justice and honesty, to pervert, or obstruct Justice, and
whether this be not indirect proceedings, let all the world judge.

To this you answer, page 41. and say, For Faulconer to be releast without
trial, fixes no crime upon him; and an honest man may be committed upon
suspicion. True, but you should have suffered him to come to trial; and sure
he was no honest man that hindered it, it was a crime, and a great one, in him
that hindered it; you know who it was George: It seems the Lord Craven must been
a Delinquent, and a man for the purpose must be countenanced against Law and
Justice: but I say, why was not his liberty procured him now? and the money
promised, paid him now? Oh! the business was done, the estate sold, let him
hang, let him starve now. It may be the sum promised was too great, and they
could not agree who should pay it, the estate being sold: Ah poor Faulconer!
how art thou befooled? no marvel thou cryest out against Bishop to thy dying
day. But let me ask you further (George) concerning your indirect proceedings;
the direct proceedings against Delinquents was, that the informations were
taken before the Commissioners, at their usual place of sitting, and set down
in writing by the sworn Examiner thereunto belonging, who was thereby engaged,
to be a person just and indifferent between the Commonwealth, and party
accused: And was not this indirect proceeding, that you should frame the Oath
and Information before hand, in your Chamber at White Hall, and in such a
manner, as aforesaid, catching at hasty and inconsiderate words (which were the
only material words) and then send (as you did) for the Commissioners at
Haberdashers Hall, to your Chamber, who (knowing you to be Clerk to the secret
Committee, (and supposing you had some secrecy of State to communicate unto
them) came, and there you tendered to them Faulconers oath, so ready drawn, to
be sworn to; and he was there (contrary to the ordinary and direct way of
proceedings, upon some little alteration made by them upon their examination)
sworn to it, I know how smoothly you wipe your mouth, (or rather, how you would
wipe your Readers nose) and how slightly you come off in this matter, page 43.
of your book, saying, that because of the season, and the danger of discovery,
the Commissioners of Sequestrations were desired to come to White Hall, and
there took his deposition: What you mean by the season. I know not; but indeed,
the danger of discovery was considerable. But would you sequester a man's estate
in hugger mugger (as we use to say) it is honestly said, though not honestly
done, that you confess you sent for the Commissioners to White Hall, to take
the information, because of the danger of the discovery.

Go too George, go too, are you innocent? are not these indirect proceedings?
Narr. page 16.
I ask you again further, when the Indictment for Perjury, was brought against
Faulconer in London, where the Bill was found by the Grand Jury, and Colonel
Drury (before mentioned) being served with a Subpena to appear at Guild Hall,
to give in further evidence against Faulconer, in the behalf of the Lord
Craven; did not you take away the Subpena from him, saying, How durst you be
examined against the Commonwealth, and not acquaint me first therewith?
Further, saying, Mr. Mayor (meaning the Lord Mayor) had better have done
something else, than to have suffered that Indictment to be found.

And did not you (George Bishop) thereupon immediately call for a Messenger,
and commit the said Drury to the custody of one Middleton, (a Messenger to the
Council of State) who forthwith carried away Drury a prisoner to the Strand, to
the house of the said Middleton, where the said Drury was kept in strict
custody, from Monday, when the Indictment was found, till Saturday, that the
Session was past, that no further proceedings could be had against Faulconer,
at that time, by reason of Druries restraint, who had Faulconers own
handwriting to produce against him, and being the most material witness
against him; and before the next Sessions, the Bill for the sale of the Lord
Cravens estate was passed.

Were not these indirect proceedings toward the Lord Craven, to hinder and
obstruct the discovery of Faulconers perjury? (upon whose oath the Lord Cravens
Estate was sequestered) was this direct, and honest, and even carriage? Are you
innocent? To excuse this, you shuffle so miserably, and catch at such strawes:
In your book, page 34. and 35. that I cannot but commend your wit, (though not
your honesty) in printing so few of your books, that every one cannot see how
poorly you come off in your answers. And I take it as a great Providence, (I
hope for your good) that I was so directed, as to send to your self for one of
them, and which (I thank you) you sent me, it is no doubt from that hand
(which as you rightly said before) orders all things, that you were overruled
so to do; and I wish that this discovery of you to your self, (from your self)
I mean your own book (in great part) may be for your conviction and
conversion: And because your book is not to be had easily, I Will give in the
weight and substance of your answer; (for the whole is very long) and if you
suppose I do you wrong in concealing any thing thereof, that may tend to your
vindication, print your whole book, and let them ordinarily be had, and if any
understanding Reader will say I have injured you. I will be content to be
accounted as you are.

You say, that Drury being a Papist, a Traitor, apprehended upon a Warrant from
the Council of State, and in safe custody, and being examined by you of his
Treasons, should have been continued in safe custody, but that (upon his sad
complaint, that he had neither money nor friend, to relieve him there, and
that he must needs perish) you gave him his Parol, (which in English is) as I
suppose, you let him go at liberty, to return when required.

After this Drury having acquainted you, that he had been sworn at Guild Hall
London, and given in evidence to the Grand Jury against Major Faulconer there,
and examined upon part of what he (...) examined by you before. I perceive
your (...) Sir in these last words: But I pray (before you go any further)
because you had examined him before in one part, was it unjust that my Lord
Craven should examine him (or cause him to be examined) on another part, to
clear himself? Does, or should your examination, take him off from being
examined by others? They did not examine him of secrets or mysteries of State,
but of Faulconers perjury, and your mysteries of iniquity. Well, but then you
were a man in power, and hereupon you say, that (Drury) showing you the
Subpena, you asked him, whether he told them that he was under the warrant of
the Council of State, and under examination of their Committee of Examinations.
As to that particular, amongst others, (but I must tell you, he was not under
their examination to that particular of Faulconers perjury) he answered, no.
Then you say, you asked him, why he had not acquainted you with the Subpena
before he went to Guild Hall, and was sworn (yea, there was his fault) since
he was a prisoner under examination, and under Parol? To which (as you say)
he giving no reasonable answer, but that he knew not what the business was,
and such like; when as (as you say) the Indictment could not have been drawn
without the consent of, and converse with Drury; (yea, still there was the sin)
and who, you say, was the chief witness upon which it was grounded, it being
prepared and found that day. (and had he not been committed by you, Faulconer
had been convicted that Sessions, of that perjury, which was afterward proved,
and himself confessed.)

But you go on, and say, That you perceiving thereby how he did prevaricate,
and how things were done in design and combination against the State. But stay,
Was it a design against the State, that the Lord Cravens innocence should be
cleared? Oh base! Yes, now I remember my self, it was; for then the design
against the estate of the Lord Craven, (in all likelihood of Justice) might
have proved ineffectual.

But you go on, and say further, that you not knowing what other inconvenience
might come to the State by his (Druries) further liberty, since he had made
that use of it, aforesaid, reproved him therefore, (with that high language
against him, and the Lord Mayor (as before) which you do not deny) received the
Subpena from him, and taking of his Parol, returned him into custody, from
Monday evening, to the Friday following. And was it not to Friday evening
following, as well as from Monday evening before? which you reckon up with a
four nights, and no longer, and I say four days too, so long, that no
proceedings could be expected that Sessions against Faulconer.

The last day of the Sessions, being no time for such prosecutions, but calling
over the Goal, and concluding former businesses; and then you say, upon
information of the poverty of Drury, and that he had no money to pay for his
diet and lodging, which you knew well enough before, and have acknowledged,
when you gave him money for his supper, and would not commit him, lest he
should perish. And now (you say) in mere charity, (when there was no
opportunity for him at Sessions) he had his liberty upon his Parol again, and
enjoyes it. Charitable wretch! And did you in charity commit him? Fie upon such
base hypocrisy. And then you go on with a company of blind supposals, to
argue the improbability of your committing of him, to the end, to obstruct the
proceedings against Faulconer, which are so childish, (and coming in but by way
of additional aid, to your former answer, which is your chief backler, but a
filly one) I shall not trouble my self, and the Reader with, which if you think
any thing worth. print it, and I Will be your bondsman, if it any way help you;
nay, if it don't further discover your folly; and I would have writ it, but
that it is as long, as impertinent; and this is enough. And your main answer,
which how it clears you, let all, or any man of common reason judge: And say,
is George Bishop innocent in this matter?

And one thing more I find charged against you George, which I suppose is an
unjust and indirect practice, Narr. page 40.
and used by you in the matter of Craven and Faulconer: And in the Margin of
the Narrative (where this matter following is spoken to) there is written,
Observe; and it is observable, it is short, but home, and therefore printed in
another Character, in these words, By way of digression observe, that Druries
and Briscoes informations, which Captain Bishop had taken, above twelve months
since, and which tended to clear the Lord Craven, he concealed, till this
hour, that he produced the same in Court, and never transmitted these two men's
examinations to the Parliament, though before the Bill of Sale did pass, he
did transmit Bardseys and Kitchingmans re-examinations, taken by himself, and
which he apprehended made against the Lord Craven.

Here now is a heavy charge; and certainly these proceedings (if true) are very
indirect, and he cannot be innocent: But hear him speak for himself, and I Will
give you every word: And thus he begins, page 44. of his own book, What
Captain Bishops employment was, is already spoken, his duty was to take, and to
keep such informations, as concerned the Committee, and to do with them
according to their, or the Councels, or the Parliaments orders; but neither the
Council nor Committee ordered him to transmit them to the Parliament, though
they were not ignorant of them, and several times showed by him to some of the
members of the Council, and to the Committee; nor did the Parliament call for
them, or what papers concerning the Lord Craven were in the custody of the
Council or Committee, nor take the depositions into debate, after the first
vote of confiscation; and whether those examinations advantage the Lord Craven,
let the reader upon consideration of what is already mentioned, and argued
thereupon, judge. Nay, but George, let me put in a word or two by the way; it
had been very honest and fair for you, to have put down their examinations
themselves, that the reader might judge upon them, for we cannot see them, nor
must we take your word.

But you go on, Nor were any papers at all transmitted by him, (meaning himself
G. B.) to the Parliament, either for or against the Lord Craven; for Bardseys
examination, when he had taken it, he sent it in to the Council, for Bardsey
to make oath thereof, which after he had made, it was put presently into the
hands of one of the members (viz.) Mr. Gourdon to report to the Parliament, who
received it, and lodged it with Mr. Scobel, it being not returned to Captain
Bishop; and for Kitchingmans re examination, he transmitted no such thing, nor
was any such taken whilst the Committee for examinations was in being,
Kitchingmans information being deposed by him at Haberdashers Hall.

Now J pray, what is all this to the purpose? does this excuse you? will you
give me leave to interrogate you? If you will not answer choose, let the reader
judge: You took such informations from Drury and Brisco, did you not? It Is
plain you did; Did not their depositions excuse and acquit the Lord Craven, and
prove Faulconer perjured? It Is plain they did: Had not Drury the original
draught of the Petition, under Faulconers own handwriting, which at his Trial
was produced, and he could not deny, and which he confessed upon his deathbed,
to be the true and right Petition? This is most certain, it cannot be
gainsaid; the testimonies of these two men so vex you, that in your book, page
12. you do what you can to bespatter them as incompetent witnesses, because
Cavaleers.

And whereas you say, your duty was to take and keep such informations as
concerned the Committee, and to do with them according to their, or the
Councels, or the Parliaments orders. Did any of them order you to suppress or
conceal the testimonies of these two men? If they did, tell us who they be,
and we will say of them almost as much as we do of you? You say some of them did
know of them; like enough such a business as this could not be so managed,
but by the knowledge (and somewhat else) of more than one: It Is plain that
Faulconer was a perjured wretch in his testimony; he was convicted of it by
two, nay, three several Juries, of men sworn to give true judgment; and upon
his deathbed he confessed it, and his conviction was upon the testimony
chiefly, if not only, of these two men, who were the principal actors in the
business of that Petition at Breda, which gave color to the Lord Cravens
sequestration; Narr. page 35.
and Drury at Faulconers trial said, that what testimony he then gave to the
Court, he acquainted you with, when he was examined by you, and no doubt
Brisco the like; and no question had the Parliament in general known of these
testimonies, they would not so readily have sequestered the Lord Craven; nor
would any honest man (advise who would) have suppressed such testimonies, which
would have discovered the truth, and prevented injustice, which is the curse
and ruin of a Nation, and the way to render Parliaments (which should be our
greatest security) our greatest plagues, in committing or countenancing such
actions. And whereas you would choke your conscience, and cheat your reader
with this pretext, that some of the Parliament did know of these testimonies,
and that you were not ordered to transmit them. I say again, No honest man
(that had it not in design to ruin the Lord Cravens estate) but would have
made them known; or if he had been commanded to the contrary, would have
scorned to serve unworthy ends to any man's ruin: Come (George) come, you must
not magnify Parliaments, as if they were infallible in themselves, especially
when Knaves are prosecutors, and as bad are agents or Ministers under them; and
he that shall readily obey their unjust commands, knowing them so to be,
(while there is time and opportunity to offer something to the contrary) shall
instead of honoring them, do them the greatest disservice in the world, (viz.)
wrong the innocent. I Will give you an instance or two within my knowledge; there
were in the hands of Sir Robert Rich, then a Master of the Chancery, (put into
his custody upon a suit depending in that Court) 204 Diamonds, with many other
rich things of gold and pearl, and writings of great value, upon an information
given in to the Committee for examinations at Westminster, that they were the
goods of a Lord, then in arms against the Parliament; those goods were ordered
to be taken out of the hands of Sir Robert Rich, and put into my custody
(which were the only goods of any Delinquent, or supposed Delinquent that ever
were in my custody) it being none of my business, as I have before declared:
But this was by an extraordinary order, these things (taken by an exact
inventory before witnesses) being thus in my hands, there came a peremptory
order to me, to deliver them out to be sold, as the goods of a Delinquent;
but I being satisfied by Sir Robert Rich, (who was an ingenious Gentleman) that
they were brought into his custody, in the behalf (as I remember) of diverse
children and Orphans, I delayed the observance of the Order, till those who
were concerned (who they were I know not) had opportunity to clear them; and at
last (by order) I re-delivered them to Sir Robert Rich, from whom I received
them. Now should I have readily observed their Orders, Orphans had been ruined,
and the Parliament instrumental to an Act of injustice; and that all that are
members of Parliament, are not always such as they should be. I Will give you
one relation more, There comes an information to our Committee in London
against a person for Delinquencie, pressed and urged very hard for a speedy
sequestration; the reason of the haste, I perceived afterward to be, because
the party concerned (being a Lawyer) was in the circuit, and the prosecutors
would fain have had him sequestered before he knew on it; upon hearing the
information and witnesses, I perceived the bottom of the business to be
revenge; and private interests (to say no worse) their haste added to my
jealousy, and I was therefore the more slack in furthering it. The next day
(as I remember) one comes to me to my house, from the Prosecutors, to offer me
gold to speed the business. It would be too tedious to tell you every
circumstance, I refused it.

After this (now mark) one of the house of Parliament, comes to me to my
house, with recommendations from others of them, to press me on; I gave him
civil entertainment, but grew more resolved in the business. After this, an
eminent man in the Parliament came to our Committee, and pressed it, and told us,
it was a business that many in the Parliament took notice of, and that if we
did not do it, they would take it into hearing themselves: I asked that
Gentleman whether he came to threaten us, and told him we were upon our oaths,
etc. So that he went away in discontent. Upon this (very speedily) an order
comes to us to appear before the Committee of Lords and Commons for
Sequestrations, to give an account for our non-prosecution; a Colonel in the
Army was he that promoted it, and it was backed (as I perceived after) by
diverse members; my self appeared alone in behalf of the Committee, they having
Council (besides the Council for the State) to speak for them: It was as great
a Committee of Lords and Commons, as I ever remember, to have seen at any time,
I so managed the matter, (well knowing the baseness of the business) that it
was referred back again to us, where we never heard more of it, insomuch that
the Colonel came afterward to my house to speak with me, but by providence I
was not at home, but he (as my family and neighbors told me) threatened to be
revenged upon me, but by Gods goodness (in whom I trust) I heard no more of
him; now had I yielded in this matter, an honest Gentleman might have been
ruined, for if we had sequestered him in London, (though he had not much
there) they would presently have sent down into the Country, and done the like
there: The person is one of worth and honor, afterward a member of that
Parliament, and of the close Committee, or safety, (I have forgotten the title)
and is now a member of this present Parliament, one so cordial to the public
interest, that I do profess, when I afterward saw him (upon his return from
the circuit) my heart rejoiced that I had so appeared for him, whom (upon my
own knowledge) was so true a friend to the Parliament, for I well knew him
before by sight, but did not know him by name, to be the person prosecuted. I
could tell you further (George) of others whom I have rescued from the jaws of
ruin, upon Parliamentary prosecutions, and that upon base and packt knavery,
followed with perjury, and by some of our own Officers, which I my self have
discovered, and caused them to be turned out: So that George, you must not
sculk and hide your head under the shelter of the Parliament. And for the rest
that follows in your answer and excuse, the reader will easily perceive you do
but quibble and trifle upon forms and circumstances, which makes nothing to the
substance of the business.

I shall not need to mention your zeal and earnestness at the trial of
Faulconer, in his behalf, nor your reflecting upon the Judges in these words,
page 15. of your book, The Judges in the issue summoned not up the evidence,
which they should have done. As for the Jury, you bestow this upon them, in the
same page, The Jury (of the affections of whom for the Parliament, we cannot
yet understand) neither took any notes, nor asked a question, yet in a very
short time were agreed in their verdict, and the next morning gave it into the
Court, that Faulconer was guilty of the perjury mentioned in the Indictment:
And then you go on, and say, That a man indeed, without divining, might have
told which way the cause would go, by the countenances of the Jury, all along
the trial of the cause, as was taken notice of by many honest men, such as you
are, no doubt. And then you sadly complain thus, But this is what every honest
man may expect in cases wherein the State is concerned, George is huge angry
that Faulconer is found guilty of Perjury.
when the unpardoned traitors, whom with the peril of their lives they discover
to be undermining the safety of a State in times of great danger, in the
field, and under ground conspiracies, working toward the general destruction
thereof, shall after the enemy is overthrown and prevented, be permitted to
come into England, when they can no longer do the Commonwealth mischief abroad,
and to be good witnesses against such honest discoveries (risum teneatis amici)
in such Traitors own causes, as to their lives, as has happened to one of the
States witnesses (Faulconer) in the very case now in question. And so you flirt
upon the Jury again, page 47. I will not comment upon it, because I hasten to
an end: But the man is very angry with Judge, and Jur, and Witnesses, (and as
before) with the Lord Mayor, as no friends to the State, that Faulconer was
found perjured, which yet he himself has confessed himself to be.

But why is George so angry, it seems he is much concerned in it; for though
he act for good affection to the State, yet its reason that he should be
considered; and therefore in my information from London (by a hand that is able
to make good his undertakings) I am thus told, that he (George) repaired to
Drury house, and contracted for about 300 pound a year of the Lord Cravens
Land, where, and when this argument was used, that he might be favorably
dealt with, and considered in the purchase, for that he was the man that
brought the Commonwealth so great an estate, and that but for him, the Lord
Craven had not been put into the Bill of Sale: and accordingly he was
favorably dealt withal: But Master Baker, Surveyor General to the Trustees,
then reprehended the said Captain Bishop for so speaking, the scandal whereof
was (it seems) like to prove so great, (as well it might) that he relinquisht
the contract; and when (in the last Parliament but this) this contract was laid
to his charge, by the Committee of Parliament, appointed to hear the Lord
Cravens case, and he urged to answer, whether he did contract or not: How
(says my information) did he prevaricate and shuffle with the Committee, and
put off an answer, till he did see there were those present, that were ready
to produce the contracts out of the book, and then (to his shame, and
admiration of the Committee) he did confess at last, he did contract, for a
considerable part of the Lord Cravens estate, but that he had since that time
declined the same: So that for all your pretenses of public interest, you
drove on a design of your own private; and if the way had been honest, you
might have done it, and you need not have declined it; and to back this, and so
an end. Did not you write to a Gentleman, an acquaintance of mine and yours,
(one employed for the public) to inform you of the quality and worth of a
Manor of the Lord Cravens, called the Manor of Hinton Norton in
Sommerset-shire; and did not you afterward (in your Study) at White Hall, tell
him, that you inquired after it, for that you expected that the Parliament
should reward your good service you had done for the State, in sequestring the
Lord Cravens estate? Or words to that purpose.

And now Sirs, you that are to give your judgment upon George Bishop, upon the
whole matter, what say you? Is George clear and innocent? Has he not used?
nor does he not know of any indirect proceedings in that whole business of
Craven and Faulconer? of which he makes such a bold appeal to the Almighty:
Say, is it any matter, whether he be a Quaker or no, or what he is? And if
we may judge of the conscience, honesty and perfection of the rest by him, may
we not conclude, as I undertook to make good, That a man may be as vile a
person as any under heaven, and yet a perfect Quaker? If he had repented of
it, and (what in him lies) made restitution) it had been somewhat, I should
have said nothing; for who will upbraid a man with that, for which he has
repented.

But he still (like a Quaker) justifies himself, as if he had done no evil;
and I easily perceive the bush under which he hides himself, and thinks no
body sees him: For after his protestation, he says, He has had a large time
of trial, wherein be has neither wanted enemies for the sake of truth, nor
they malice and opportunity to lay to his charge, could they find, or were
there any thing to be found against him.

Simple fellow! I wonder he could manage so great a business, with so little
wit; because the Lord Cravens friends did not indict him, but Faulconer,
therefore he sillily concludes, they could find or say nothing against him.
Does he not know, that it was for the Lord Cravens advantage, to lay all the
blame upon Faulconer, and to charge him with the malice of it, (as well as with
the fact) that so they might convict him of perjury, which being done, and he
to his conviction having since acknowledged it by his own confession; and you
having confessed so much, and taken so much upon your self, to clear him of the
malice, (all which they knew not, till you confessed it.) Now all this, (as before
considered) they know what to say to you: By the Law (it seems, and as the
Judges gave their opinion) bare for swearing ones self, does not bring a man
within the compass of the Law against perjury, unless also it be done
maliciously and wilfully.

And now to deliver Faulconer from the crime and conviction of perjury, George
(at the trial) discovers the rise and ground of all this business, freeing
Faulconer (upon his own oath) of any intention of evil and mischief against the
Lord Craven, (as knowing nothing against him, that might render him culpable,
or any way sequestrable, as you heard before) but George (having consulted with
some body else) by handsome contrivance and manuagement, has brought it to
this you now see; and by this confession of Georges at the trial, and
Faulconers at his deathbed, it is now apparent by whom it was begun, and
effected, even by him, who (as before he confesses) had the mannagement of the
whole.

And now if there were a Starchamber Court, or any place of trial for such
practices, they know whose ears and estate to require in part of satisfaction.
In the mean time, let the world judge of your innocence: George, you have a
fair estate in land, plate great store, rings and jewels, and cabinets, and
brave hangings, etc. you can live without the honest calling of a Brewer, which
you could not do before; you have not been a bufie sishop to no purpose, you
have your reward; but take heed, it be not in this life only: It may be you
may come to a reckoning, and give an account here for all these things, but
fure hereafter: The present Parliament has taken cognizance of the Lord
Cravens cause, and it is to be hoped they will proceed so justly and
impartially, that the guilt of injusticer and oppression shall not lie at the
doors of the Parliament of England, and so become the sin of the Nation, and
draw a curse upon the while, for the iniquity of a few. However, look you to
your light within, and let me tell you thus much, if it do not stare you in
the face, and fright you, it is a sign you are blind and hardened. I was
desired to ask you, who did trepan Colonel Andrews into a design, for which
he lost his life, when as he had given over all thoughts of engaging, till
he was moved thereunto by a Trepanner, as he declared before his death? And
who it was that Trepan'd Sir John Gell into a misprision of treason? And
lastly, who did trepan Mr. Love, and some of that party? These questions are
proposed by those ho are no babes in the world, and yet honest; and they say,
this Bishop can (if he will) give satisfaction in. You know George what these
things mean, and I know what the last means; and they advise me, to read a
book concerning Mr. Loves designs, and his death, written and penned by you,
and they say, it will give the reader further satisfaction.

But you have dealt as craftily in the printing of this, as of the former,
printed so few, and kept, or given so at your own dispose, that I cannot get
it; and I am not so free to send to you for this, as the former, because you do
not quote it against me. But yet what I find from other pieces I have met
with in this matter, I will communicate to you, and the world, and this the
rather, to show you what an hypocrite you are, in charging us Priests (as in
scorn you call us) with blood-thirstiness, and my self in particular, as in the
title of your Pamphlet: you should have pulled the beam out of your own eye,
before you reproacht us with a mote in ours. I suppose, e're I have done,
(though it be prettily well done already) you will at pear to be, not only a
blood thirsty, but a Flood sucking person.

And in the discourse of this I shall discover the ground of your so easy an
entertainment of the thoughts, (or at least suggestions) of forgerie in me,
from those practices of forgery, which I shall declare to have been really
acted by you, that you were a zealous prosecutor of Mr. Love unto (yea and
after) death, is so manifest, that (as impudent as you are) you will not deny
that you prosecuted him after death, appears by what you published against him,
when he had no being to answer for himself, wherein you endeavor maliciously
to kill him twice, and the latter, with more cruelty than the former, killing
his good name, and (what in you lies) making him a Reprobate, and an out cost
from God and glory. I suppose you will own that piece, called Mr. Loves case,
printed by Peter Cole, (as well as other books you published against him)
wherein you go about (most unchristianly) to undervalue, debase, and disparage
that comfort and confidence he professed to enjoy in and at his death; and
this upon several accounts, which I will not recount, to avoid tediousness, one
only I Will mention, to show your spirit of envy and bitterness, it is the
Animadversions upon the first Section, page 34. Mr. Love, (say you) it is more
than probable, was not only vehemently exhorted, encouraged, importuned, but
even solemnly, by all the sa^red interests of high Presbytery, conjured by his
C^ergie companions, to die like avaliant and resolute Champion of the cause,
and not to bewray the least grudging of any fear or repentance, for any thing
he had acted upon the service thereof, lest it should be said of Presbytery,
her glory was stained and betrayed by the cowardice of her firstborn. And page
38. Here we have the second part of the Theatrical flourishes of Mr. Loves
confidence.

Much might be animadverted, but I forbear; you have a strange spirit, that
his comforts and confidence in God, trouble you. And then you go on to charge
him with hypocrisy and lying, and other base imputations all along,
bespattering, and bespotting, and sullying him, as you can, even to his last. I
know what slight touches of charity you have now and then, and at the close of
that Pamphlet, which are inconsistent, with that you had charged him before, as
that he acted the part of a most unchristian Calumniator, upon the Scaffold,
in the very approaches of death, page 38. But page 45. you most unchristianly
reproach him and his doctrine.

Thus, whereas in purging himself (he means Master Love) from the aspersion of
lying, he says thus, I hope you will believe a dying man, who dare not look
God in the face, with a lie in his mouth; intimacing (say you) as if his being
ready to die, was a bridle in his sips, to restrain him from lying: The truth
is, (according to that principle of his, that he whoever once truly believed,
can never by any sin or wickedness whatsoever, loose the love and favor of
God: His being ready to die in conjunction, with a persuasion of his Saintship,
should rather be a temptation upon him, tolie, or commit any other
wickedness, than an engagement upon him to refrain lying.

I have done with that; but I pray, that you may find more favor and mercy
from God, than he found from you; and to that end, let him grant you grace to
repent of these (pightful and most cruel prosecutions. As for your Prosecutions
of him in his life, and of his trial, I shall not enter upon the story of,
although I have relations of it, it would prove too large an undertaking; nor
will I insist upon your rotten and unsavory language of the Ministers of the
Gospet, whom in scorn you call his Clergy companions, you were fairly disposed
for quaking then; nor will I debate the cause, which you maliciously in your
former book (the Lord Cravens case) charge upon Presbyterians in general,
wherein how rash, heady, uncharitable, and unchristian you are, let your self
consider.

In page 22. of that book, you speak it, which (because it tends also to
discover the suspicion, that even yourself had, of the injustice of sequestring
the Lord Cravens Estate) and do therefore endeavor to extenuate it from the
circumstancy of the time when it was done) I shall lay before the Reader; and
thus you give it forth, The tme when the Parliament gave judgment upon his
estate, (that is right, not upon his person, that had not offended) was, when
the Commonwealth was deeply imbroi^^d in wars, and designs lay every where to
blow up this Nation in all parts thereof; their Army in Scotland, and the Scots
drawn into the field after their rout at Dunbar, ready to serve the desperate,
and great designs and conspiracies laid by Mr. Love, Those of the Presbytery
and the Kings Party, then ripe and ready to break forth in all parts, all of
which were the effects of that Treaty at Breda, where the Lord Craven was
often with the King, and his Privy Council, (But does any one person so much as
say, that he came to treat, or did treat? not one) and assisting his Officers
in their Petition for relief, to be in a capacity to serve him; (which you
see was proved to be a lie) and some of whom served in those designs, and
otherwise, and of which the Parliament were sensible, (what was this to the
Lord Craven) and the Lord Craven had manifested to most that conversed with
him, his disaffection to the Parliament, and Supreme Authority, (no such thing
is charged against him) in such times and cases, have many considerations, as
the reason of their actions, which those who are without doors, neither know,
nor apprehend, nor are to take upon them so to do. Thus he.

The language in the last part of it, is inconsistent and incoherent, a kind
of nonsense; but this clearly is his meaning, ( viz.) that the times being
dangerous, (as he describes them) have many considerations and reasons to
sequester the Lord Cravens estate, which those who are not his Judges, (no nor
be himself) are to know or apprehend, nor must enquire into. In plain English,
the Lord Craven must lose his estate, and none must ask a reason, why? Are not
these sweet doings? As he himself says in another case, page 19.

But to go on with the matter of Mr. Love, Mr. Love and the Presbytery are
designing the Nations ruin, says George, if you may be believed; and how
honest you are even in your most serious protestations and appeals to God,
appears already. But if you suppose (and that is enough with you) that Mr. Love,
or the Presbytery design the Nations ruin; you will be sure (right or wrong)
to accomplish these. I have heard say heretofore of the Marches in Wales, that
a cause there, did seldom fail for want of prosecution, and good witnesses;
you were a notable man to make an agent there; well, or ill fare him, who if a
cause be not good, can make it so: I shall not (as I said) engage to the whole
of your prosecution against him, I shall only notify what I find concerning
your self, in a book written and published by Mr. Love himself, which (in the
close) he says, was finished the last day but one before his death; and at
such a time (what ever you say) men are most serious, and to be believed. The
title of it thus, A clear and necessary vindication of the principles and
practices of me Christopher Love, etc. which book, he says, he writ for the
vindication of his name, from those obloquies and reproaches, which by the Sons
of Slander were cast upon him, (was not this you George?) who would fain have
his name to be buried, and rot above ground, before his friends could bury his
body under ground.

In this book of his, he complains, that whereas at his Trial, he had a
Notary to write for him, they took away all the books from him, so that nothing
might come to public view, but with what additions or ialterations they pleas,
to his greater disadvantage. But he says, his hope is, that some faithful pen
or other, has writ his defense, and the Witnesses depositions, which is done;
and I have, and according to them he desires, that his innocence be judged,
by indifferent, and unprejudicated men; it contains seventeen sheets, very
large paper, and very small print; I shall not meddle with ought thereof, I
shall only give in what I have from Mr. Loves own book.

In page 36. he desires his Readers, that if other slanders (for he had
answered and wiped off many) should be cast upon him that they would have so
much charity, not to believe reports raised upon him, when he shall be
silent in the grave, and not able to speak in his own vindication.

And page 37. he saves, It Is very likely that they (his Prosecutors) will not
publish the depositions of the Witnesses in Court, but the private examinations
taken from them in prizate and patche together by Master S. and Captain Bishop.
They were not ashamed (says he) to proau^e them, and read them in open Court.
And he says, some of the Witnesses had so much honesty left, as to disavow
them in open Court; and therefore (says he) believe nothing but what was
sworn in open Court, nor all that neither, for some of the Witnesses swore
falsely, as (says he) I made appear in my defense. In the same page, I
desire you (says he) to take notice, that there is a lying Pamphlet put
forth, entitled, A short Plea for the Commonwealth: In which there are many
gross lies, especially in things which relate to me, (and which he himself
is best able to speak to.) He says there further, it is not fit for him to
enter the lists with him; It becomes not, says he, a dying man to write of
controversies; which will beget dispute; therefore, says he, I shall not
answer the book, (though I could easily do it) but only sum up the many lies
he relates, concerning me. Thus he.

And page 39. he says, he supposes Captain Bishop writ that lying book.

And then Master Love goes on, reckoning up his lies in that book, and shows
wherein, and in the Margin, writes the first lie.

The second lie, and so on to the eleventh lie; It will not be to any purpose
to set down the particulars, because my Reader has not the book, whereby to
judge of the truth or falsehood; I shall therefore content my self, to give you
what observations Mr. Love makes upon the man, and his lying stories.

In one place he says, that if Bishop should name the person that should say
the thing, (there mentioned) every one that heard the trial, would cry out
shame upon him, (viz.) Bishop, for telling such a lie. He says, another is a
gross lie. And another thing he charges him with, is a loud lie; and says, It
is well there were many witnesses to contradict him: And surely (says he) if
the Author of this book had not cast off al fear of God, and regard to the
good name of his Brother, he could not be so impudent, as to ashrme what he
did.

To another he says, it is notoriously false, and abominably false; and that
although he was not ashamed to say of him, as he did in the general, yet he
durst not instance in any particular, nor (says he) will any other in my life
time, whilst I can answer for my self.

To another (he says) He that will be so shameless to falsify my
Petitions, (which are made so visible) will not be ashamed to belly my words:
Where he further says, he ( Bishop) charged him, that Master Calamy
instructed him to speak as he did; and that it was, that Alaster Calamies good
tricks might not come to light; both which, together with what he charged him
before, he says, are very false.

To another, he says, he wonders the man is not ashamed, to fasten that upon
him, which he did. And again, he says, if this man (meaning Bishop) has
belied others in his book, (whom he names) as he has done me, there is not
one true Page in all his book.

And to the eleventh lie, thus; If this man were not an Athiest, or an
Antiscripturist, the example of Ananias and Saphira might make him tremble,
lest he should be stricken down dead, with a lie in his mouth.

And again, this false and deceitful man, would make the world believe, that
this were proved against me; and then concludes this matter thus, These, and
many other falsehoods might be found in this book, if I should make a through
search into it: He calls it (says he) a short Plea, but I may call it, a
long lie: And it is not, says he, for the honor of the present Government, to
have a common liar to be a Pleader for their Commonwealth.

And amongst all these lies, (thus generally hinted) I have reserved one in
special, wherein Mr. Love charges him not (only with lying) but also with
forgery, which he brings in thus, page 38. And because I am belied about my
examination, before the Committees, and may be more abused after I am dead,
therefore I am necessitated to discover that juggling and baseness of Mr. S. and
Capt. Bishop, about my examination, which I thought never to have made public.

Whiles I was examined (says he) before the Committee, that pragmatical
fellow, Captain Bishop, (who I suppose wrote this lying book) did put in six or
eight lines into my examination, which I never said;
he supposing that I would be so mealy-mouthed, as not to read it, or to put
my hand to his forgery, without any more ado; but I did (to his shame) make him
blot out, at least, six lines in my examination, which was but very short. Some
of the Committee did ingeniously say sometimes, that I did not speak such words
as Captain Bishop did put in: By his abuse of me, who would not be abused by
him, I cannot but think, how he injured other men.

He goes on, I did refuse to put my hand to it, seeing I was abused by Captain
Bishop; but told them, if they would give me a Copy of it, I would subscribe
my hand; but they denied me a copy, which made me suspect, they did not
intend to deal fairly with me, as I found true after: And then goes on, to
show wherein, and that to their conviction, and concludes thence thus;
Wherefore I beseech the Reader not to believe any thing that shall come forth,
either pretended to be my examination, or the examinations of other men
against me; they are but the forgeries and contrivements of Mr. S. and Captain
Bishop. And well might M. Love think how this Bishop injured other men, and
that in the like kind.

I have one instance more, under the hand of a godly, reverent, and faithful
Minister of the Gospel, now being well known to most of the Inhabitants of this
City, and many in London, so to be, who writes to me, that being to be
questioned about Master Loves business (as he was, and imprisoned) Bishop
(says he) was Clerk to the Committee of Examinations, and wrote down all that
I said; and added diverse things, thereby undeavouring to ensnare me; for which
I sharply reproved him, telling him, that I knew his birth and breeding, and
therefore I did scorn to be examined by such a one as he was; at which, both
he and the Committee were much offended, threatening to use much severity
against me, but the Lord restrained them.

Now George say, Are not you a blood-sucker? Were not the lives of these men at
the stake? Was not one of them actually put to death? I Will say nothing of the
man, I need not, he was known well enough in England, his death is bewai^d by
thousands, and his name precious with many godly. I was once drawn away by your
dissimulations and lies, to a prejudice against him; but now I see, that the
most innocent, (when they fall into the hands of hucksters) may be rendered
culpable: What George, what! Are not only the estates of men (great estates)
small bits with you, but you can suck and swallow the bloods and lives of men,
Ministers of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus! No marvel you turn Quaker, turn Turk
man, or become a Jew, to whom the name, and Gospel of Christ, and Christian is
odious; for shame bear not that sacred name any longer, lest it be blasphemed
by its enemis, because of you: Oh horrid and dreadful! not only be a common
liar, but to forge, to put in, and to add words, on purpose to ensnare men; no
marvel you caught at Faul^oners words, but once spoken, and put them in
hastily, to take away ones estate, when you forge and put in words many words
(whole lines in a short examination) which were never spoken; and this, to take
away men's lives.

And here, ex ore two serve nequam, out of thine own mouth, from thine own
words shall thou be judged: Look back, and mind thine own expressions, in
thine own book, pages 7 and 8, where you charge me with forgery, in one word,
and which yet was not forgery, but a mistake and that not in me neither; and
yet see your outcries and loud exclamations, You may here see (say you) of what
a false and mischievous spirit this Priest is; and what a devilish wickedness
it is to forge in such a word, as for it, were it trul^ so would take away his
(Foxes) life? What credit is to be given to what such a one says? And again,
Is not be that can do this past blushing? Is there any wickedness so great,
that such a one may not be well conceived to be ready to act? Is such a one a
Minister of the Gospel? Words need not further to express such an act, which
in its very face is so manifestly wicked and abominable, a wickedness not
found in the Roll of those evils, which the Apostle mentions should make the
last days perilous. I Will say no more, I need not. Read the words, and
remember your own actions, and apply.

But let me ask you, were these all, whose blood you thirsted after? Did you
not write a letter to a friend of yours in Bristol from White Hall, that until
Calamy, and some other of the Priests were dealt withal, as Love was, it would
never be well? I hope I shall one day get that book of yours, which you writ
against him (mentioned before) viz. A short Plea for the Commonwealth. Those
who have seen it; tell me, it most fully sets forth the fierceness, and
bitterness of your spirit, not only against him, but that you show your rancour
and malice therein, against many of the servants of Christ, whose names are yet
precious in the Churches, and the memory of whom will live, when your name
shall rot and perish; or if it be mentioned or remembered, it shall be with
abhorrence and detestation, as infamous as poor Faulceners is. I cannot but
remind that passage of yours in your Throne, page 34. where, because I said the
Magistrates had their spots and failings, you say, they are no Magistrates of
God, but men of sin, and the born of the devil: If spots and failings do (in
your judgment) render them thus, Oh! what are you? mind that Romans 4. beg.
Therefore thou art inexcuseable, O man, whosoever thou art (Jew or Gentile,
Ranter, or Quaker) that judge; for wherein thou judge another, thou
condemnest thy self; for thou that judge do the same things. (nay,
infinitely worse) But we are sure the Judgment of God is (according to truth)
against them which commit such things; and think thou this, O man, that
judge them who do such things, and do the same, that thou shall escape the
Judgment of God?

But Reader, in this poor wretch, you see what a dreadful thing, and what a
heavy judgment it is, for a man to be given up of God; what wickedness so
abominable, that he will not then commit? So Romans 1. ver. 24. to the end.

And see also, how the Lord does punish hatred and contempt of his Ministry and
servants, and Apostasy, from the truth, with hardness of heart, and
blindness of mind, giving them over to believe lies, 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12.
What a sottish piece is this poor man become, to turn Quaker? But it is most
true, Shipwreck of faith, and of a good conscience, are seldom severed, 1 Timothy
1.19. But yet (Countryman) come, there is hope in Israel, concerning this
thing, there is still balm in Gilead; the blood of Jesus Christ shed at
Jerusalem (though above sixteen hundred years ago) is as efficacious, as
prevalent, as ever. Come man, leave quaking, don't trample upon, and despise
the price of thy Redemption; I see thou art in the gall of bitterness, and
bond of iniquity; but come, repent of thy wickedness, and pray to God, perhaps
the thoughts of thy heart, (and the wickedness of thy hands, and the
blasphemies of thy pen and tongue) may be forgiven thee. Don't despise the
riches of Gods goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering toward thee;
know, that the goodness of God (in this patience of his, in not cutting thee
off) is to lead thee to repentance. Consider friend, there is a day coming,
wherein the Lord will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will
make manifest all secret plots, contrivances, and underhand counsels; Repent,
whiles it is called to day, lest thy heart be more and more hardened, through
the deceitfulness of sin; treasure not up wrath by impenitence, and hardness of
heart; one true repentant tear, will avail more now, than millions of yellings
and howlings then; our Jesus is able to save perfectly, and to the uttermost,
all those who come unto the Father through him, meet him whom thou slightest,
and make him thy friend.

And for a close, know and consider, that if you go on in sin wilfully and
impenitently, (after you have received the knowledge of the truth) and that you
despise the blood of Christ, there remains no more sacrifice for sin, but a
fearful looking for of judgment, and of fierce indignation, which shall
devour the adversaries. And now from henceforth, let none of these Quakers
trouble me, I have done with this generation; but if they will be troubling,
let them know, I will not be troubled: And as for any further answers,
replies, contendings, or debatings with them, or him, being well assured that
my ground work (on which my discourse and discovery is founded) will stand
firm: I declare this, as my Coronis, my farewell to Quakerisme: As for their
doctrines, or opinions, (in this, or any other of their Pamphlets) I think them
not worth the reading (much less the answering) by any serious Christian,
especially that has public employments, indeed, not of any one that has
ought else to do, but to make a long voyage to Tarshish, to fetch only Apes and
Peacocks.

I conclude therefore with holy Augustine, Tales judices velim, etc. I desire
such Judges of my writings, that will not always require an answer, when they
shall find what I have written, to be spoken against; those things (which
being matter of fact) have clear testimonies, and (being matters of doctrine)
have clear arguments and authorities: It were a prejudice and disparagement to
either, to agitate whem always, upon the cavils of ignorant or contentious
persons; therefore I end.

FINIS.
Books lately written by William Prynne, Esquire; a Bencher of Lincolnes-Inne, and
sold by Edward Thomas in Green-Arbour.
IUs Patronatus, Or the Right of Patrons, to present Vicars to Parish Churches,
etc.

The first and second part of a seasonable, legal, and historical vindication
of the Fundamental Rights and Laws of England. The second Edition, in Quarto.

A Declaration and Protestation against Excize, in general, and Hopps, a native
uncertain commodity in particular, A PIECE WORTHY PERUSAL.

A Polemical Desertation of the Inchoation, and Determination of the Lords Day
Sabbath.

An old Parliamentary Prognostication, for the Members there in Consultation.

The Quakers unmasked, and clearly detected to be the Spawn of Romish Froggs,
etc.

A new Discovery of Free State Tyranny.

The first Part of a Short Demurrer, to the Jews long discontinued Remitter
into England.

The second Part of the Short Demurrer, etc.

A Legal Resolution, of two important Queries, concerning Ministers giving of
the Sacrament to their Parishioners.

A new Discovery of Romish Emissaries.

Also all the former works of Mr. William Prynne, both before, during, and
since his Imprisonments, are sold by Edward Thomas in Green-Arbour.

Pendennis, and all other standing Garrisons, dismantled.

More Books, printed and sold by Edward Thomas in Green-Arbour.
REynolds, Of Gods Revenge against Murder, Folio.

Festivous Notes on Don Quixot, Folio.

Phioravants Three Pieces, in Quarto.

A Rich Closet of Physical Secrets, in Quarto.

Bakers Arithmetic, in Octavo.

Crumbs of Comfort, in twenty fours.

Private Devotions, by D. Valentine, in twenty fours.

Lillies Grammar, in English by R. Rabinson.

The School of Complements, in Twelves.

A Little Handful of Cordial Comforts, by Rich. Standfast, Master of Arts, the
third Edition, in Twelves.

Railing Rebuked; or, A Defense of the Ministers of the Nation, against the
Quakers, by William Thomas, Minister of the Gospel at Ubley, in Quarto.

A Vindication of the Scripture and Ministry, by William Thomas, Minister of
Ubley, in Quarto.

Practical Husbandry Improved, by G. Platts, in Quarto. etc.

Satan Inthroned in his Chair of Pestilence; wherein the whole business of Ja.
Nayler, his coming into Bristol and his Examination, is related, by Ralph
Farmer, Minister of the Gospel, in Quarto.

Also the Life of James Nayler, with his Parents, Birth, Education, actions,
and Blasphemies, is exactly set forth, by William Deacon, in Quarto.

Hypocrisy Unmasked; or, the Definition and Characters of the Natural, Moral,
Civil, Praying Hypocrite; and how they differ from the sincere Christian, by
Mr. Samuel Crook, late Rector of Wrington, in Sommersetshire.

The true Christ falsely applied, discovered. 1. How far his person. 2. The
expectation of receiving Christ in the Spirit. 3. The operation of Christ
received. 4. The Predestination. And 5. His Merits and Freegrace, are not truly
apprchended; from whence some conclude to cast off all Ordinances, pretend, and
expect to Prophecy, and work Miracles; all which, with twenty more false
Applications of the true Christ, are discovered, by W. Kaye, Minister at
Stokesley.


