The Famous and Renowned HISTORY Of the Memorable, but Unhappy Hunting on
CHEVY-CHASE, BY The River TWEED in SCOTLAND; Together with the great and mortal
Battles fought there, between the Lord Piercy, Earl of Northumberland, and his
fifteen Hundred English Archers, and Earl Douglas, with twenty Hundred Scottish
Spears, in which both, with most of their Men, were Slain.

woodcut divded into three parts: men and dogs chasing a buck, two people
sitting at a table, men marching before a castle

London: Printed by and for C. Brown, and sold by the Booksellers of Pie corner
and London Bridge.

The History of the Hunting on Chevy-Chase.
Chap. I. How the Pierces had that Name, and came to be Earls of
Northumberland; how this Lord Piercy, the third Earl of the Descent in King
Henry the Second's Reign, made a Vow to hunt three Days in Chevy-Chase, and
with his Archers passed the Tweed.
THe noble Family of the Pierces, Earl of Northumberland, have had a high
Esteem amongst the English Nobility, and for their Valor and noble Exploits
famed not only in our History, but throughout the World: I might give you a
large account of the Descent of that noble Earl, who is to be a chief part of
the Subject of the following Story; however, by the way, I must tell you, that
History records him for the fortunate Valor of a courageous Knight, who killed
the King of Scots by running his Spear into his Eye as he was besieging
Roxborough Castle, and his other Name was changed, and that of Piercy given
together with the Earldom of Northumberland, and to the first Earl. This Earl,
of whom I now treat, was Grandson and Heir both of his Virtues and Valor. But
to come nearer to the intended Purpose: The noble Earl of Northumberland taking
his Progress, gallantly attended with fifteen hundred stout Archers, passed on
to the Marches of Scotland, of which by Commission from the King, he was to
have been Lord Lieutenant, and wishing for some Venison at a Dinner, he was
informed that in a curious Forest beyond the Tweed, called Chevy-Chase,
belonging to Earl Douglas, a Scotch Nobleman, there was such Store of it that
the like was in no part of the Kingdom; and Provision being scarce on the
English side on those Borders, this Report made his Men so forward, that they
desired they might go out in Parties, and bring as much as they could away
undiscovered: But he despising such a way that looked too much like
Deer-stealing, told them, if their Courage was sufficient to venture for it
fairly, he would venture with them; and so hunting it down as a fair Game, it
should be brought off with Honor as a lawful Prize taken in an Enemy's
Country: For then King Henry the Second of England, in whose Reign it happened,
there was a Rupture with the Scots, though there had been for a while an
Interval or Cessation of Arms.

To this Motion of the Noble Earl's they gave their unanimous Consent by
throwing up their Caps, with a loud Shout: and so the Earl made a vow. That for
three Days he would take his Pleasure in hunting on Chevy-Chase; and thereupon
sending for his Dogs and Toils, early on a Midsummer Morning they passed the
Tweed, and were by a Guide directed to the Place, which was about six Miles
nearer Edenborough: So to the Game they went; The Dogs were put in to rouse the
Hearts, the Horns founded, and the Huntsmens Shouts, with the Dogs Cries made a
pleasant Noise; yet the Villagers thinking it had been the Sound of War on some
sudden Invasion, were so terrified, that many of them fled with what they could
carry away, for fear of being plundered; and with their groundless Fears
alarmed the Country many Miles, putting all into a Consternation and Confusion.

Chap. II. How they killed a great many Deer; and at Suppertime Earl Douglas
sent a threatening Message to command them to depart; and the stout Answer Earl
Piercy returned: Also the Preparations for the Fight made on both sides.
THe Hearts and Roes, though as swift in their running as the Wind, could not,
however outstrip the English Arrows, our Archers laying some Scores of them on
the Ground, so that they had killed such store of Venison, that they began to
be in doubt how they should be able to carry it away. This happened on the
first Day; yet having refreshed themselves with the fat Haunches and Sides in
the Evening, making Fires, and roasting it in the Forest, there being such a
number of them, they sound their Store much lessened.

But whilst the Earl was at Supper with diverse Knights, Esquires and Gentlemen,
on a Table of Boards laid on Supporters of Turf, and sitting on Seats raised on
Turf-banks, such Accommodation as the rural Place would afford, at the Close of
it, just as he was about to give Order to the Huntsmen to begin the Sport the
next Morning with the Sunrising, in came a Messenger in a scarlet Livery,
laced with Gold, and a Badge of Arms on a Plate of Silver, fastened on his
Breast: This spoke him to be sent by some Person of Quality; whereupon the Earl
commanding Silence, demanded from whom he came, or what his Business was. Upon
which he thus began with a haughty Mein:

Sir, said he, whoever you are I know not; but my Master, the noble, valiant
and always victorious Earl Douglas, chief Ranger to the King of Scotland, and
to whom these Parks and Chases belong, hearing you have boldly presumed to
enter them, and destroy his Deer without Leave or Consent; by me tells you,
That if you do not suddenly depart, your Lives shall pay for the Injury you
have done, before to Morrow Noon.

This being denounced, he was about to depart, but the undaunted Earl Piercy
taking him by the Sleive, said, It is but convenient you should carry an Answer
back to your Lord; And that is this, Tell him my Name is Piercy, a Name at
which Scotland has trembled; and that I am of so true English Courage, that
Threats are in vain to terrify me. Tell him moreover, I have proposed to take
my Pleasure in these Forests and Chases for two Days longer; and if he be
Valiant, as you say, let him hinder my Sport if he be so bold as to attempt it,
at the Hazard of his Life.

Upon this, the Messenger departed with speed to the Scotch Earl, who lay at
Edenborough, and related what was given him in Charge by Earl Piercy; at which
the Scotch Man stormed and fretted, walking up and down in a great Fury,
muttering Revenge, and all manner of Punishments on those he should take
Prisoners; he diligently enquired the Number of the English: But the Messenger
could give him no certain Account, only guessed (for many of them were in
distant Parts of the Wood, when he delivered what he had in Charge) there might
be about ten or twelve hundred Men; whereupon he ordered his Horse and Armor,
which was gilded with Gold, to be got ready against Morning-light; also all
his Friends and Servants, together with as many as made up two thousand
Spear-men to be mustered; without letting them know what Design he had in hand;
however, they disputed not to obey him, as having next the King the chief
Command of the Kingdom.

Chap. III. How the Earl Piercy begun the second Day's Hunting; but upon Notice
of Dowglas's Approach, he called in the Hunters, drew up his M^n, and made a
famous Speech to encourage them, and received their unanimous Shouts in
Conclusion.
THe noble Earl of Northumberland, though in an Enemy's Country far from any
Succor, yet relying on his own, and his Men's Courage, who were the choicest
Archers of England, was so far from being daunted, though he might reasonably
expect a greater Number against him, that he ordered the Tables a second time
to be spread, and Store of Wine went round, which they had brought with them in
great Plenty. Healths went round to the King, the Earl, and to the Prosperity
of their Sport the next Day; and then seting scouts, reposed themselves.

The Sun no sooner gilded our Horizon with his saluting Rays of Light, and the
early Lark mounting on high, turned her melodious notes, but the Sport was
renewed and the Woods, Forest, Plains and Hills resounded with the pleasing
Noise of Hounds and Men; so that altogether they made a very curious Harmony.
This Morning they killed a very stately Heart, the largest that had been seen in
the Kingdom; whereupon the Huntsmen run to call the Earl to the Quarry that he
might be pleased at the sight; which accordingly he was present at; protesting
he had never seen the like in his Life. Then remembering the Message sent him
over Night, he turned to a Knight on his left Hand, saying, The time, Sir
Knight, draws near, that if Earl Douglas ke^ps his Word, we shall have another
kind of Sport to under take; he promised this Morning to make us a Visit:
Therefore let it be your Care to keep our Men together, that they scatter not,
lest some of them may be surpised and oppressed by Odds of Number, for Man to
Man, said he, I fear them not against any Nation under Heaven: But if I thought
he would not come, we would remove hence to the next Forest, for thither, I
perceive, most of the Deer, frighted from this Forest, are fled. He had no
sooner uttered these Words, but his Esquire, Witherington by Name, came hastily
to him, saying, My Noble Lord, Cause the Dogs immediately to be called off, and
muster up your bold Archers; for from yonder Hill I saw Earl Douglas coming
directly toward you, though yet about two Miles distant, having a great Troop
of Spear-men, which I cannot guess less than two Thousand.

I thank thee heartily, replied the Earl, for this News; and doubt not thy
Courage, which I have seen tried in so many Dangers. At this the Esquire bowing
low, said, My Lord, I doubt not so to behave my self this Day, that living or
dead, I shall be remembered to future Ages.

Immediately hereupon the Horns blew a Retreat, the Dogs were called off, the
Toils taken up, and the valiant Archers mustered about their noble Leader; who
fired their Courage with the following Oration:

My renowned Countrymen, and Fellows in Arms, always Victorious in Battle,
still triumphing in the Spoils of your Enemies: It was with your Consent we
passed the Tweed for Sport and Recreation; but that is suddenly like to be
disturbed, and we have another Work to undertake; Earl Douglas, who owns this
Chase and Forest, has sent me a Challenge, and is now going to give us Battle,
or shamefully to make us fly over the Tweed: Pluck up your Spirits then, and
consider you are English Men, that Piercy fights at the Head of you, who never,
either in France or Scotland, feared the Face of any; be Courageous then, and
for the Honor of our King, the Renown of our Country, living or dying with me,
gain a lasting Fame and Memory, that shall not end, but with Time it self, and
Renown you to all Posterity.

Having said thus much, they all shouted so loud in token of Consent and lively
Courage, that the Hills and Dales sent back the Echoes of their Voice, and
immediately fell into Order, pruning their Arrows, and new-stringing their Bows
made of trusty Yew.

Chap. IV. How Earl Douglas bravely mounted, and in gilded Armor, came down
with his Men into Chevy Chase; how a single Combat between the two Earls, to
save their Men's Lives, was proffered, but hinared by Witherington.
THe bold English Archers in number fifteen hundred, were no sooner in
Readiness, but Earl Douglas appeared on the Top of the Hill that descended into
the Plain whereon Earl Piercy stood, mounted on a stately White Steed, and his
gilded Armor reflecting the Sunbeams showed very gloriously, and his Men
immediately appeared in order behind him, with their glittering Spears, so that
their number was computed just two thousand.

Upon this Earl Piercy taking a Leading-staff in his Hand, and a trusty Sword
by his side, caused his Men to move forward by slow paces, whilst he marched in
the Front: By this time Earl Douglas being come within forty Paces, sternly
demanded, Whose Men they were that durst so boldly presume to hunt in his
Forest, and kill his Deer; and that whoever they were, since they had dared to
do it, they must expect to be severely punished; commanding them to yield
immediately as his Prisoners, if they expected Mercy from him.

Upon this the noble English Earl, enraged with a generous Fury and Disdain,
ordering his Men to halt, went nearcr, saying, Earl Douglas, it matters not
whose Men we are; but such you will find us, that what we have done, we will
justify, and what Deer we have killed, we will carry away, or leave our own
Bodies dead behind us, which shall cost very dear in the Blood of those that
dare oppose us.

This being spoken with an undaunted Resolution, made Douglas grow a little
calmer; O, said he, I know thee, Lord Piercy; now thou art a Peer, an Earl as
well as I; therefore if thou art as Brave as Fame reports thee, what need we
destroy our Men by engaging them in this Combat, the Quarrel being properly
between you and me; let our Swords decide it in single Combat?

This unexpected Offer overjoyed the Noble Piercy, and drawing his victorious
Sword, bid Defiance to the Challenger, wishing those accursed, that hindered
this Agreement. But it could not be, Fate had involved many more Lives in this
Quarrel than the two Earls; for Witherington, a valiant English Squire,
standing by the Earl when this Combat was about to begin, elapt between them
with his Sword, and made a Stand, saying, My noble Lord, it shall never be told
to Henry our King to shame us, that we let you fight, under whose Command we
are, whilst we stood looking on: How should we be reproached with Cowardice, if
this were suffered or known? With hearts and bands we are ready to live or dye
in your Cause; and therefore whilst I am able to stand, more Swords than two
shall try it. Earl Piercy, though grieved at this Hindrance, seeing all his Men
resolute, and of the same Opinion, crying out, They would not hazard their
noble Earl in single Combat, but fight with him, and for him, to the last Drop
of their blood; found him self constrained to yield to their Importunities; and
so both sides immediately were ordered to make ready for the Battle.

Chap. V. How the mortal Battle began by the English Archers, who slew sixty
Scots at the first Flight of Arrows, and continued with such Fury, that all the
place was paved with dead, and dying Men; how the two Earls after a cruel Fight
were slain, with the manner of it, etc.
THe English Archers on the left Division immediately sent a Flight of fatal
Arrows, which laid threescore of the Scots dead on the place; and the right
Division letting fly on the Flank of their Battalion, gauled them most
miserably, Earl Douglas seeing his Men discouraged to be killed so at distance,
and that another Vollue might put them into Disorder, commanded them speedily
to advance, and come to a close Fight; by which means he thought to tender the
English Bows, which was their chiefest Weapons, useless; but in this he was
deceived, for they kept such excellent Order, that whenever the Front opened,
the Archers behind feathered the Scots with Showers of deadly Arrows, whilst
the others kept them in play with their Swords; however, both being furious,
they fought desperately, insomuch that the Ground was covered with dead, and
dying Men, Arrows, shivers of Spears, broken Swords, and streams of Blood;
nothing was heard but confused Noises, Groans and Cries.

And now Earl Piercy being backed by diverse Knights and Esquires, Men at Arms,
etc. out of the Tops of the Enemy's Spears pointed against him, and like a
Tempest broke in amongst them with such Fury and Slaughter, that he laid heaps
of dead on either hand, and before him, so that his way was in a manner stoped
with the Carcasses of the Slain, which raised a great Cry about him, insomuch
that Earl Douglas, who was fighting on the other side, and had signalized his
Valor very much, was forced to give over, and come to the succor of his
broken Forces; where these two Earls met like two enraged Lions; no Armor was
Proof against their Well-tempered Swords, so that by the mighty strokes they
gave each other, it fell Piecemeal to the Ground; the Place they fought on was
sprinkled with noble Blood; and Earl Douglas hereupon beginning to faint, yet
ashamed to yield, thus bespake Earl Piercy:

Noble Lord, You see your Blood flows fast, and Death you cannot 'scape, if you
contend with me much longer; I therefore in pity to your Life, would have you
yield yourself my Prisoner; you shall be nobly used, and I Will prefer you with
James our King, by making him sensible of your Worth and Courage.

To this Earl Piercy replied with a sorrowful smile, As for my Life, take you
no care, but surely guard your own; my Honor I prefer before all things on
Earth, and it never shall be said, that Piercy yielded to a Scot. Whilst they
paused a little on these Words, and were again renewing the Fight, and Arrow
coming from among the Ranks of the Archers, ended that Combat, by piercing Earl
Douglas to the Heart; who thereupon falling to the Ground, his last Words, with
a faint and dying Voice, were, Fight on my merry Men, revenge my Death, for I
am slain, and Piercy lives to see me fall.

The noble Earl Piercy on the fall of brave Douglas by such an unwished, or
unexpected way, was much troubled for his Death, and to be deprived of the
Honor of the Conquest he expected, labored to raise him from the Ground, that
he might send him out of the Battle, to have his Wounds dressed, if
peradventure his Life might be in him; but finding him dead, he much bemoaned
him, commending, like a generous Enemy, his Valor, and wishing he had, or
could have done any thing to save him: But whilst he was lamenting his Death,
his own was near at hand; for the noise being carried through the Battle, that
Earl Douglas was slain; Sir Hugh Montgomery, who was Dowglas's chief Favorite,
putting his Spears in his Wrest, and vowing Revenge, broke through the Rank,
and whilst the noble Piercy's Thoughts were employed on the dead Earl, he came
behind him at Unawares and run him quite through the Body, so that he fell on
Earl Douglas; and only having time to encourage his Men, gave up the Ghost: But
was not long unrevenged, for an English Archer perceiving what had happened,
drew an Arrow up to the head, which proved a sure Messenger of Death, for it
passed quite through Montgomery's Body, so that the Feathers of the Arrow were
wet in his Heart's Blood.

Chap. VI. How the Battle, after the Death of the noble Chiefs, continued till
but fifty five of the Scots, and fifty three of the English, were left alive,
it holding a whole Summer's Day; of the Lamentation the Widows made over their
dead Husbands, and the Revenge for the Earl's death, etc.
THough the Chiefs were slain, the Fight continued with great Fury, being
spurred on with Courage and Desire of Revenge, either side scorning to yield,
though the Sun declined, and Night was hasting on a pace, it having held almost
a whole Summer's Day, till in the end those few that were left alive, were so
wounded and wearied, that they were constrained to part by Consent: Eighteen
hundred forty three of the Scots being killed, so that of the two Thoufand
there remained but fifty five; and of the English but fifty three, so fatal and
desperate were these two small Armies, contending for the Honor of cither
Nation, more than for any thing else. Witherington especially in this Action
behaved himself as he had promised, for a Scot coming behind him with a mighty
broad Sword, and cutting his Legs off, he raised himself on his bleeding Stumps
with his Hands, and pierced his Enemy, who had so wounded him to the Heart, and
so continued fighting, till through loss of Blood, he fainted and dyed.

Besides these of Note dyed in this Battle, Sir John Ogerton, Sir. Robert, Sir
John, and Sir James Ratcliff, three valiant Brothers, and of a noble Family;
also Sir George, and Sir James Tyrell, Father and Son, and Sir Ralph Raby, all
gallant English Men.

And of the Scots of Note besides Sir Hugh Montgomery, Sir Charles Currel, Sir
Charles Murrel, and his Sister's Son also, Sir David Lamb, a Man Valiant, and
of great Council, much beloved by the whole Nation; but nothing in this mortal
Battle could rescue him from Death; there fell likewise the Lord Markwell, Lord
of a Clan in the High-lands of that Name. Nor was this Few'd scarce ended when
the Bell rung to Evening-song, the woeful News of this bloody Day being known to
the Widows of these Persons that were slain, they came running with doleful
Cries, torn Hair, and Garments, each searching among the Dead for her Husband's
Corpse; and no sooner finding it, but falling on it, kissed the cold Lips a
hundred times, and bathed the pale Face in Tears, with such piteous Cries and
Groans, as would have pierced any Heart to have heard: But the Extremity of
Sorrow being over, the dead Bodies were removed, and decently buried according
to their Degree; the whole Kingdom of Scotland Mourning for the loss of Earl
Douglas, and so many valiant Men with him on so trivial a Quarrel; the King
affirming, that he had not such another brave Man in his Kingdom, This sad News
coming to King Henry's Court, he was sorry for it, declaring the Earl Piercy to
be a very brave Man, yet doubted not but he had within his Realm five hundred
as brave and valiant Men as he; yet sent for his Body, and caused it honorably
to be interred amongst his Ancestors; vowing however to revenge his Death on
the Scottish Nation; and so concluding his Wars with France, he entered the
Country with a great Army, wasting it with Fire and Sword, which War continued
for many Years, till the Queen of Scots dying, the King of Scots married King
Henry's Daughter, which put an end to it during his Reign.

An Unhappy, but Memorable SONG of the hunting on Chevy-Chase, between Earl
Piercy of England, and Earl Douglas of Scotland.
To the Tune of, Flying Fame, etc.
woodcut of dining and hunting scenes

GOd prosper long our noble King,
our lives and safties all,
A woeful hunting once there did,
in Chevy-Chase befall:
To drive the Dear with hound and horn,
Earl Piercy took his way,
The Child may rue that was unborn,
the hunting of that Day.
The stout Earl of Northumberland,
a Vow to God did make,
His pleasure in the Scottish Woods,
three Summer's Days to take,
The chiefest Hearts in Chevy-Chase,
to kill and bear away;
The tidings to Earl Douglas came,
in Scotland where he lay:
Who sent Earl Piercy present word,
he would prevent his Sport;
The English Earl not fearing this,
did to the Woods resort;
With fifteen hundred Bowmen bold,
all chosen Men of might,
Who knew full well in time of need,
to aim their Shafts aright.
The galnant Gray hounds swiftly ran,
to chase the Fallow deer;
On Monday they began to hunt,
when Daylight did appear;
woodcut of buck

And long before high Noon they had
a hundred fat Bucks slain,
Then having dined, the Drivers went
to rouse them up again.
The Bow-men mustered on the Hills,
well able to endure,
Their Backsides all with special Care,
that Day were guarded sure.
The hounds ran swiftly through the Woods,
the nimble Deer to take.
And with their Cries the Hills and Dales,
an Echo shrill did make.
Lord Piercy to the Quarry went,
to view the tender Deer,
Quoth he, Earl Douglas, promised
this Day to meet me here:
If that I thought he would not come,
no longer would I stay.
With that a brave young Gentleman,
thus to the Earl did say,
Lo yonder does Earl Douglas come,
his Men in Armor bright,
Full twenty hundred Scottish Spears,
all marching in our sight,
All Men of pleasant Tividale,
fast by the River Tweed.
Then cease your Sport Earl Piercy said,
and take your Bows with speed:
And now with me, my Country Men,
your Courage forth advance,
For never was there Champion yet,
in Scotland or in France,
That ever did on Horseback come,
but since my hap it were,
I durst encounter Man for Man,
with him to break a Spear.
Earl Douglas on a Milk-white Steed,
most like a Baron bold,
Rode foremost of the Company,
whose Armor shone like Gold:
Show me, he said, whose Men you be,
that hunt so boldly here,
That without my Consent do chase,
and kill my Fallow-deer?
The Man that first did answer make,
was noble Piercy he,
Who said, We list not to declare,
nor show whose Men we be;
Yet we will spend our dearest Blood,
thy chiefest Hearts to slay.
Then Douglas swore a solemn Oath,
and thus in Rage did say,
E're thus I will Out-braved be,
one of us two shall dye;
I know thee well, and Earl thou art,
Lord Piercy so am I.
But trust me Piercy, pity it were,
and great Offense to kill,
And of these our harmless Men.
for they have done no Ill.
Let thee and I the Battle try,
and sot our Men aside.
Acurst be he, Lord Piercy said,
by whom this is denied.
Then stepped a gallant 'Squire forth,
Witherington was his Name,
Who said, I would not have it told,
to Henry our King for shame.
That e're my Captain fought on Foot,
and I stood looking on,
You be two Earls, said Whitherington,
and I a 'Squire alone,
I Will do the best that do I may,
while I have Power to stand,
While I have Power to wield my Sword,
I Will fight with Heart and Hand,
Our English Archers bent their Bows,
their Hearts were good and true,
At the first flight of Arrows sent,
full threescore Scots they flew.
To drive the Deer with Hound and Horn,
Earl Douglas had the bent.
A Captain moved with mickle Pride,
the Spears to shivers sent:
They closed full fast on every side,
no slackness there was found,
And many a gallant Gentleman
lay gasping on the Ground.
O Christ! It was great Grief to see,
and likewise for to hear,
The Cries of Men lying in their Gore,
and scattered here and there.
At last these two stout Earls did meet,
like Captains of great might,
woodcut of two men dueling

Like Lions moved they laid on load,
and made a cruel Fight;
They fought until they both did sweat,
with Swords of tempered Steel,
Until the Blood like drops of Rain,
they trickling down did feel:
Yield thee, Lord Piercy, Douglas said,
in Faith I will thee bring,
Where thou shall high advanced be,
by James our Scottish King;
Thy Ransom I will freely give,
and thus Report of thee,
Thou art the most Courageous Knight,
that ever I did see.
To Douglas, quoth Earl Piercy then,
Thy Proffer I do scorn,
I will not yield to any Scot,
that ever yet was born.
With that there came an Arrow keen,
out of an English Bow,
Which struck Earl Douglas to the Heart,
a deep and deadly blow,
Who never spoke more Words than these,
Fight on, my merry Men all,
For why, my Life is at an end,
Lord Piercy sees my fall.
Then leaving Life, Earl Piercy took
the dead Man by the hand,
And said, Earl Douglas, for thy Life,
would I had lost my Land.
O Christ! my very Heart does bleed,
with Sorrow for thy sake;
But sure a more renowned Knight,
mischance did ever take.
A Knight amongst the Scots there was,
which saw Earl Douglas dye,
Who straight in Wrath did vow Revenge
upon the Earl Piercy:
Sir Hugh Montgomery was he called,
who with a spear most bright,
Well mounted on a gallant steed,
ran fiercely through the Fight,
And passed the English Archers all,
without all dread or fear,
And through Earl Piercy's body then,
he thrust his hateful spear,
With such a vehement force and might,
he did his body gore,
The spear went through the other side,
a large Cloath-yard and more.
So thus did both these Nobles dye,
whose courage none could stain,
An English Archer then perceived,
the noble Earl was slain,
He had a bow bent in his hand,
made of a trusty Tree,
An Arrow of a Cloath-yard long,
unto the Head drew he,
Against Sir Hugh Montgomery,
so right his shaft he set,
The Gray goose-wing that was thereon,
in his Heart's blood was wet.
This fight did last from brook of day,
tell setting of the Sun,
For when they rung the Evening bell,
the battle scarce was done:
With the Earl Piercy there was slain,
Sir John of Ogerton,
Sir Robert Ratcliff, and Sir John,
Sir James that bold Baron;
And with Sir George, and good Sir James,
both Knights of good Account,
Good Sir Ralph Rabby there was slain,
whose Prowess did surmount.
For Whitherington then must I wail,
as one in doleful Dumps,
For when his Legs were smitten off,
he fought upon his stumps.
And with Earl Douglas there was slain,
Sir Hugh Montgomery,
Sir Charles Currel, that from the Field,
one Foot he would not fly,
Sir Charles Murrel of Ratcliff too,
his fister's son was he,
Sir David Lamb so well esteem's,
yet saved could not be,
And the Lord Markwell in likewise,
did with Earl Douglas dye,
Of twenty hundred scottish spears,
scarce fifty five did fly.
Of fifteen hundred English Men,
went home but fifty three,
The rest were slain in Chevy Chase,
under the Green-wood Tree.
Next day did many Widows come,
their Husbands to bewail,
They washed their Wounds in brinish Tears,
but all would not prevail:
Their bodies bathed in purple blood,
they bore with them away,
They kissed them dead a thousand times,
when they were clad in Clay.
This News was brought to Edenborough.
where Scotland's King did Reign,
That brave Earl Douglas suddenly
was with an Arrow slain:
O heavy News, King James did say,
Scotland can Witness be,
I have not any Captain more,
of such Account as he.
Like Tidings to King Henry came,
within as short a space,
That Piercy or Northmaberland,
was slain in Chevy-Chase:
Now God be with him, said our King,
since 'twill no better be,
I trust I have within my Realm,
five hundred as good as he;
Yet shall not scot nor Scotland say,
but I will Vengeance take,
And be revenged on them all,
for brave Lord Piercy's sake.
This Vow full well the King performed,
^^ter one Humble-down,
For one and fifty Knights were slain,
with Lords of great Renown:
And of the best of small Account,
did many hundreds dye:
Thus ended the hunting on Chevy-Chase,
made by the Earl Piercy.
God save the King, and bless the Land,
in Plenty, Joy and Peace;
And grant henceforth that foul Debate,
'twixt Noblemen may cease.
FINIS.
A Catalogue of several Delightful BOOKS, which are to be Sold by the
Booksellers of Pye-Corner and London Bridge.
There is Just Published
AESop's Fables, with his Life, Morals and Remarks; sixted for the meanest
Capacities. Price Bound 1 s.

The Wars of the Jews: In Two Books. With the most Deplorable History of the
Siege and Destruction of the City of Jerusalem, and the Burning of the Temple
therein by the Romans, under the Command of Titus Vespasian, the Roman Emperor.
Also an Account of the searful Presunes, and strange Apparltions that were seen
in the Air, before the Ruin hereof. Enitorniz'd from the Works of Flavius
Josephus, Translated into English by Sir Roger Le' Strange, Knight. In Tweives.
Price Bound 1 s.

The Vnsortunate Lovers: or, The History of Argalus and Parthenia: Containing
their Amors, Misfortunes, happy, but short Enjoyment of each other; with the
manner of their Deaths. Price Bound 1 s.

The most Pleasant and Delightful History of Reynard the Fox, and Reynardine
his Son. In two Parts: With Morass to each Chapter, explaining what appears
Doubtful or Allogorical: And every Chapter Illustrated with a curious Device or
Picture. To which is added, The History of Cawood the Rook: or, The Assembly of
Birds: With the several Speeches they made to the Eagles in hopes to have the
Government in his Absence; and how the Rook was Banished; with the Reason why
Crafty Fellows are called Rooks: Together with Morals and Expositions on every
Chapter. Twelves. Price Bound 1 s.

The famous and pleasant History of Parismus, the Valiant and Renowned Prince
of Bohemia: In Three Parts. Part I. Containing his Triumphant Battles fought
against the Persians, his Love to the beauteous Laurana, the great Dangers he
passed in the Island of Rocks; and his strange Adventures in the Desolate
Island etc. Part II. Containing the Adventures, Travels, and noble Chivalry of
Parismenos, he Knight of Fame, with his Love to the fair Princess Angelica, the
Lady of the Goldon Tower, etc. Part III. Containing the admirable Adventures
and truly heroic Achievements of Parismenidas, the Knight of the Golden Star,
with his Love to the fair Astrea, Princess of Austracia, with other strange
Adventures. Price Bound 1 s.

The Famous and Renowned History of Guy, Earl of Warwick: Containing a full and
true Account of his many Famous and Va^iant Actions, Remarkable and Brave
Exploits, and Noble and Renowned Victories.

woodcut of two archers, a large tree in the background


