A Further ACCOUNT of the State of Ireland And the PROCEEDINGS Of the Late King
James In that KINGDOM.
With an ACCOUNT of the Irish PARLIAMENT and the Preparations of the English
ARMY to pass over for the Relief of the PROTESTANTS, etc.
Communicated in a LETTER to a Worthy Member of the Honorable HOUSE of COMMONS.
Chester, July 31.
YEsterday came here Mr. Henry Scardivile, one of the Prebends of St. Patrick's
Dublin, there being a Warrant against him, and several others of the Clergy,
Issued by the Late King James. He made his Escape, and fled to a place called
Old Patrick, Nine Miles from Dublin, to one Mr. Cottingtons, who, with his
Father In-Law, their Wives, and the said Scardivile, a Manservant, and an Old
Man (who undertook to be Pilot) on Thursday Morning last took a small open
Boat, and, God be praised, all Landed safe on Saturday at Beaumorris in Wales.

They say that the Late King, on Thursday last was Seven-night, came to his
House of Lords, and having sent for the House of Commons, made a Speech to
them, in which he acquainted them, That he expected an Invasion from England in
10 days, and that he must Prorogue them. They desired two days longer time to
fit, bnt he denied it; whereupon he prorogued them till the latter end of
October.

Immediately he ordered Warrants to be Issued against the principal Citizens
and Clergy of Dublin, on pretense of some Disaffection to him There are some in
Custody, viz. Lord Chief Justice Keating, and Sir John Davis, under a strong
Guard at their Houses. Sir Humphrey Jervis, Thomas Crow Esquire John Weaver Esquire;
Capt. Fitzgerald, Alderman Smith, Alderman Billington, Alderman Meay and many
more. Dr. King Dean of St. Patrick, Dr. Foy Minister of St. Brides, Mr. Fingles
Minister of St. Andrews, and many more of the Clergy committed to Newgate.
Their Servants are seized, but are kept in the Castle, and have good Usage:
It Is supposed that they may accuse their Masters.

The Protestants there, and in other Parts, live in a most miserable and sad
Condition, the little All they had left being taken from them by the Irish
Papists, and their Bodies thrown into Dungeons, etc.

The Late King has Issued a Proclamation, Requiring all Protestants to bring in
their Arms and Horses, (these, to my knowledge, were taken from them five
Months ago) and if any, of what sort soever, be found with them, they are to be
left to the mercy of the Soldiers, and the Discoverer to have 20 l. to be
Levied of the Person's Goods.

The Regiments Encamped here, are Colonel Whartons, Colonel Herberts, Earl of
Kingstons, Lord Lisburns, Earl of Drogheda's, Sir Henry Ingoldshys, the French
Regiment.

The Convoy from London that goes with the Fleet for Ireland is daily expected.
In the mean time the Duke Schomberg has taken out of the Castle 20 Guns, and
put them on Board two stout Merchant Ships of 18 and 20 Guns, they being fitted
with a Fireship. There Marches this Morning a Detachment of Four Men out of
each Company to go on Board them.

Yesterday, in the Field, Duke Schombergh had each Regiment Exercised. The
Provisions, etc. are shipping with great Diligence.

Licensed,

August 2d 1689. J. F.

LONDON, Printed for J. C. near Fleet-bridge, 1689.


