A Famous and Joyful VICTORY OBTAINED BY Sir John Merricks Regiment, and one
Troop of Horse, against the Town and Castle of Portsmouth, August 24. 1642.
And read in the House of Commons on Wednesday last.

Wherein is set down A true and exact Relation of the manner of that famous
and renowned Battle, fought betwixt the Gentry of Portsmouth and Colonel
Goring.

Where being 20 pieces of Ordnance planted against the Castle upon the Town
Walls by the Gentry thereof, Aug. 20. They shot against the Castle, and after a
long and tedious Fight they obtained a glorious Victory, as will appear in
this ensuing Treatise.

Published for the joy and comfort of all true-hearted Protestants.

Ordered that this be printed and published.

Hen. Elsyng, Cler. parl. D. Com.



Aug. 26. Printed for I. Williams, 1642.

TRUE AND Happy News from Portsmouth.
SIR,
AS our sorrow has increased of late days, by reason of the unfaithfulness
of Colonel Goring, so our joy does much more abound by reason of the
comfortable tidings here arrived from the Town of Portsmouth, which after some
small time treating upon the proceedings of the adjoining County thereabouts. I
will relate in a most true and exact manner of the taking of the said Town of
Portsmouth again by the aid and assistance of the well affected people near
the Isle of Wight, which said Town I hope will be restored into the
Parliaments power and authority, so that they may place such Commanders and
well affected Subjects as shall venture their precious blood for the keeping
and maintaining of the same against all those that shall presume or offer to
make any attempt against it, and that they may be such persons as the
Parliament may confide in, which we make no question but that the Parliament so
soon as the said Town is resigned up to them, that they will place such
worthy Members of the Protestant Religion, that they shall not betray the truth
and trust that is reposed in them by these our worthy and Honorable Senators;
but because I will not trespass too far upon the Readers patience, I will
proceed and relate the resolution and proceedings of the adjoining Counties
near Portsmouth, which was to this effect, That when the Inhabitants thereof
saw that Colonel Goring had proved false contrary to the Parliaments
suspicion, they immediately began to raise Forces, and daily beat up their
Drums for Volunteers, and the Lieutenants of the adjoining Counties, when they
had raised about the number of 3000. men, they marched toward Portsmouth, and
Colonel Goring having made great Fortifications and Bulwarks near the Bridge,
which is distant from the Town three miles, but our men being endewed with
much courage assalted the same, and after some ten shots made against it, they
beat down the Works that were made by Colonel Goring, who having otained the
same, they marched about the Town about the space of 7. miles, but being not
satisfied, and in great rage against the said Colonel, they unanimously
resolved to assemble together at a place called Deskets Green, five miles from
Portsmouth, who having consulted a great while upon many matters of high
consequence, they resolved to march against the Castle at Portsmouth, but first
they resolved to join with the Town, and then to plant Ordnance on the Walls:
And the Inhabitants of Wiltshire propounded these following Propositions to the
Gentry of the Town. 1. That they would be pleased to join with them. 2. That
they would be pleased to the uttermost of their power to suppress all those
that they they thought ill-affected within the Town, and that they would give
them such command that they should depart the Town in two days. space.


And lastly, that they would be pleased to make a general Speech in the Town
for Arms and Ammunition, that so by that means they might be the abler to
defend themselves against the Castle.

which propositions were well agreeing to the minds of the Gentry of the Town,
and gave them much content, and after some time spent in perusing of them, they
returned this Answer, That for their love and affection, which they plainly
manifested to the foregoing propositions, they gave them much thanks with a
concurrence therein: And upon the 22. of this month the Inhabitants of the
Town, having planted their Ordnance according as they thought fitting
discharged against the Castle, and at the first shot they shot down one of the
Forts, which Colonel Goring seeing, played against them with much furious
courage, insomuch that there was a great and bloody battle fought betwixt
them, and for the space of nine hours they discharged very thick one against
the other, and it is supposed that Colonel Goring has lost a great number of
men, but none of ours being spent in this Fight, the said Colonel sounded a
parley and desired that their might be a cessation for some certain time, but
the Inhabitants would not agree thereto, but still continued their continued
and constant resolution toward the Parliament, and vowed either to win the
Castle or to lose their lives, but when that Colonel Goring saw they would not
agree that there should be a cessation for some certain time and knowing no
other way but to fight or dye, encouraged his men as much as possibly he could,
and spoke these following words unto them. Gentlemen, you now see that Fortune
does a little frown upon us, but yet if we do our endeavors and fight with
courage, no question but we shall obtain the victory and escape the edge of
the sword, now show your selves like men and sight with me, for as long as
this hand is able to hold a sword, and these legs to bear my body, I will
never yield, neither will I cease from using the best skill I have to preserve
you all, for now you must either gain Honor or Defame. His Soldiers having
heard these words of their Lord and Master, resolved to fight it out to the
last man, and thereupon began to play with extraordinary courage against the
Town walls, but all was in vain, for the Gentlemen that stood for the
Parliament stood for the Parliament courageously, and plied shot very hard
against them, but both sides being very weary by reason of the long continuance
of the Fight, they left for some certain time there being near upon a hundred
men slain of Colonel Gorings, and not above twenty at the most of the
Parliaments; and it is thought they do intend to make another onset against
the Castle within these few days, for it is credibly reported to both Houses
of Parliament, that there is now great possibility of taking the Town which
God send those tidings to this City.

The Parliament being informed of Marquess Hertfords intention to come and
assist Goring, sent away Sir John Merricks Regiment, and one Troop of Horse,
which upon Tuesday last joined with the rest of the Forces before Portsmouth as
also did a Trained Band of Hampshire jointly with the other Forces, to oppose
Marquess Hertford and his strength, in case they should come: And its writ,
that the Saylors very suddenly intend to scale the Walls in one part, Sir John
Merricks Regiment in another, and the Hampshire men in a third place, all at
once, and the Horse to second the execution and success of the service.

Ordered to be forthwith Printed and published.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Par. D.C.


