A PANEGYRIC TO THE Kings most excellent Majesty, UPON HIS HAPPY ACCESSION TO
THE CROWN, And His More FORTVNATE MARRIAGE.

By Sr. F. F. K. B.

Imprimatur.

Ex Aed. Sab. 28. Iun. 1662. Geo. Stradling S. T. D. Rev. in Christo Pat. Gilb.
Episc. Land. Capel. Domesticus.



LONDON, Printed by W. Wilson, for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the Anchor in the Lower Walk of the New Exchange. 1662.

Illustrious and Renowned SOVEREIGN,
THere is none so great a stranger to your Virtues, but knows, with how
gracious a Candor, and Equanimity you receive the vows and acclamations of all
the World, and the bolder addresses of some particular Persons: So accessory is
your goodness to your own disquet: And as offenses are m^reast by the
encouraging permission of Superiors, so is this the only Crime your Sacred
Majesty ever favored with your Connivance, by the unjust Martyrdom of your
own Patience making an Atonement for the rude sins of those aspiring
Invocations. But w^r^ this time less pregnant with examples of your Indulgence,
or your Subjects Importunities, yet I should hope, that this transgression
might be venial, and be interpreted an unres^rainable effusion of his joys,
who chooses rather to disclose his resentments of our public felicities by
this affectionate pr^sumption, than to smother your v^rtues and his own
admiration by too scrupulous a silence. Many have applauded the miraculous,
though long expected change of your Fortune, and with early Salutes, like the
Persians, ran out betimes to catch the first glimpse of your Sun rising out of
the Sea of affliction, not considering whether your clear morning might be
overcast with the dark vapors of ill Government drawn up too frequently by the
actractive heat of prosperity; but now that by your long Continuance in this
our Sphere, we see, and joyfully admire the Constant and indistemper'd serenity
of your Justice, and find by undeceived experience, that the influence of your
increasing Perfections warms, no less, than the splendor of your Gr^atness
inlightens us, it is no wonder, the most contemptible of those Worm^, that
creep upon this your Earth, should be drawn out at last, and inspired with an
unusual alacrity to the discharging of a duty which he finds as impossible to
be omitted, as to be well performed. Then Royal Sir, since Heaven has smoothed
the brows of these latter times, and filled up the deepest wrinckles that War
ever intrench't in, let us admire how partially the Divine Providence was
pleas^d to signalize your glorious Restoration at the same moment, when it
seemed only to satisfy the complaining World, with some proportionable, though
not equal benedictions. Th^re was, Great Sir, in the time of your return, as in
Augustus's, an Universal peace, and let us ever boast the same conjuncture of
affairs, brought down a Savior, which re-inthron'd a Sovereign, and no unlike
occasion too: for as he gave the earn^st of Salvation to our Souls, so you now
give us the assurance of our Lives and Fortunes, like him, absolving us from an
universal guilt; So that you seem not only born to give Laws upon Earth, but to
confirm the Decrees of Heav^n itself, and to be the joint Conveyancer of our
most gracious Charters, our Lives, Liberties and Possessions: From that moment
we began to live, and we owe more to you for our Lives than to our Parents,
more to you for our Fortunes, than to the Industry, and pious transmission of
our Ancestors. You are the individual Soul and Genius of this great Nation,
solely appropriated by Nature to actuate, and inform its praedisposed Organs,
and it is no wonder there has been so long a suspension of your Animating
faculties, and a kind of Political trance in these three Kingdoms, since the
chiefest vessel^ of Life and Motion in this your Body have been obstructed by
many crude and depraved ho^rours, whil^^ the nobler and more Vital Parts,
having lost great quantities of Blood, suffered under a Loyal Lethargy, and
were almost extinguished: But when an overruling Providence, ac^ord^ng to its
just and even measures, had c^ose a season fittest to remove the fatal symptoms
of this expiring Body, and had sw^pt, and cl^ansed this d^filed House for your
reception, you came back to the Nat^on, and the Nation came back to its self,
you returned after so tedious an Ecc^ipse to the anti^nt Spl^ndo^r, and Dignity
du^ to your Sacred Majesty by a triple Title, your Birth, your Merits, and the
Desires of your People. Then let the Worl^ forget the records of Antiquity, and
r^ad no Lectures, but on your Actions; Let men be convinced of their Cruelty
and Barbarism, that see your Humanity and Compassion; of their Rapines and
Oppression, that look upon your Justice, and Impartial distribution; of their
Dispirited and grovelling Souls, that have seen, and heard of your Active and
Passive fortitude, your Magnanimity in the Dubious decisions of fortune, and
your great^r courage in the Support of its highest indignities, in those
frowning times, when nothing was left you that was invincible but your Self,
nothing that was impregnable, but your own Firmness and Constancy. We have
lived a^ongst the ^n^mies of mank^nd, and your self, and heard them ever
celebrate your too Prodigal valor in that unsuccessful though not inglorious
day, ^n which you did at ^nce oppose both Fortune, Tr^chery, and unequal
Numbers, in which the sec^^^y of Heaven intr^sted by your fa^t^full servants,
miraculously laid up for our future use the greatest treasure of the English
Nation: and if you did no sooner dispossess those bold usurpers, it was because
you had d^sign'd to re-instate your self more gloriously, and make the World
confess you were more ne^^ssary to England, than England to you, piously
resolving, though your suit was dep^nding longer, to overcome your own
Subjects by Law, and your other En^mies by Arms. It was by those well managed
adversities you ^ad occas^on to make your Gr^atness more illustrious, and as
th^re could no doubt arise of your Title, and priority of degree, so you
endeavored there should be none at all of you^ sup^riority in Virtue, and
peculiar aptitude to govern. For many Princes placed in an advantageous l^ght,
and at that d^stance, which Majesty requires (...) have app^ar'd like Pictures
in perspective, more profound, and capacious, more wise and virt^ous than a
^loser inspection would have render^d them: and though that Virtues (as one
says well) have their false resemblances, as Divinities have their Idols, yet
your accomplishments are real, and unquestionable, and have past the
touchstone of adverse fortune, shining through the darkest of calamities, and
ow^ng nothing to the glittering varnish of success. To your Fortitude you have
annexed her constant associate Cl^mency, which is so eminently conspicuous and
admirable in all your Actions, and so congenial to your Heroique soul, that it
seems to be your Darling virtue. Never Prince at once converted, and absolved
so many sinners, piec'd together so many inconsistent Factions, so many
dissonant Religions: You are the first that ever found out the praeternatural
art of uniting Contraries, of making fire and water join without the
destruction of one Species. The Harmony of your Government is made more sweet
and musical by the friendly discord of several Parties, and you handle so
dexterously the char^ing Instrument of Peace, that like Orpheus, Wild-beasts
and men do equally follow you. You have tamed the bellowing Independent, and
the bleating Presbyterian: the barking Quaker, and the biting Anabaptist. You
have united Pulpits and Tubs, Surplices and Cloaks, limber Preciseness and
starched Formality. You have reconciled things of the greatest Antipathies, our
Ears to Drums and Trumpets, our Eyes to red Coats and Crosses, our Hands to
Swords, and our Purses to Money. In your absence we were more naked than the
Indians, because unarmed, it being more necessary to repel the injuries of
men, than those of the weather: but in some kind of Justice they proportioned
our strength to the share of Riches they left us, and having nothing to lose,
we had less need of defending our selves. But since that now we bless those
Miseries that have received so glorious a Consolation, we may with as much
freedom as integrity assert a truth which was a Paradox in the late equalizing
times, that a Glorious Court under a Righteous King does ever make a wealthy
Nation, and that the Plentiful Hospitality and splendid Bravery, formerly
called the Luxury, and Vanity of the Gentry, are the most indisp^nsable Actions
and essential Virtues of a Political Government, if according to the maxims of
the Republicans themselves, the incr^ase of Trade, the relief and employment of
the Poor, the depression of the Nobil^ty from too monstrous an increase, and
the elvation of the Commonalty may be r^puted the chief ^nter^sts of a Nations
happiness and security. For whereas w^al^h before was retired into solitary
Creeks, and had no reflux into the Community, it is now derived through
bountiful Channels upon the lower grounds, and Conveyed to f^rtilize all barren
places according to their necessities: so that there is not only a mutual
communication of Riches, but frequently a transm^gration of Estates, and to
make Fortune have some equity in her change^, out of the ashes of one family
arises another, and each one takes successively the^r vicissitudes of Plenty.
There is indubitably in the body Politic no less, than in the Natural, a
Circulation: and treasure, like Blood, must first be conveyed unto the Nobler
Parts, then to the Rest, else there will ensue a Putrefaction of the whole
Mass, a Decay of Commerce, and gen^ral Poverty. If then the Emperor ^aligula,
fearing an oblivion of his Name, could wish himself the happiness of having his
Government signalized to Posterity for some public Calamities, how much more
Glorious an Immortality may your Majesty promise to your Self, whose prosperous
Reign, though your Virtues were silent, would be to all ages recommended as the
Golden season, and pr^gnant harvest of Englands most transcendent and diffusive
felicities? Your Maj^sties Thankfulness to your Friends is no less eminent than
your Mercy to your Enemies; nor are your favors to your S^rvants (as was said
of a Cardinals) like those of Eunuchs to women, that they never grow great by
them, but such as fully satisfy the most arrogant and Complaining merits, and
make them pregnant in Affection, and Loyalty, and productive of good services
to your Majesty's honor, and the public Utility: but since that benefits to
ungrateful men, or undeserving, are like great sums of Money thrown away to
unthrifts, you give your larger talents to your better Stewards, making your
moderation obvious to Posterity, in having raised up none unto the Peerage, but
such as have been instrumental to your Return, or inseparable in your
Sufferings, judging rightly, that a numerous Nobility, is like the fixed Stars,
whose multitude makes them severally less considerable, but few and choice ones
are like the Planets, every one of which has some proper excellency, and
remarkable motion. But amongst the well chosen objects of your Judicious
Liberality, we find the chief to be the two great Pillars of your Kingdom,
your Cato, and your Fabius, your Cato is that grave Senator and Skilful Pilot,
who in the Roughest Seas, though your Majesty ever held the stern your self,
yet helped to guide your course so right, that you never struck upon the
shallow Promises of foreign Princes, but kept still even in the safer chanel of
your Subjects Affections, and who in this season of Tranquillity, advises your
Majesty not to be becalmed, but still to make some orderly progress in your
motion to glory. This is our Atlas, upon whose shoulders lies the burden of
these three Kingdoms, in whose head are conserved the Axioms of eternal truth
for the Government of this Nation, and in whose breast lodges the universal
equity, or the mitigated Justice of our Severer Laws. Your Fabius is he, who by
his prudent and prosperous Cunctation restored the ancient Glory of the English
World, who finding himself not able to grapple with the monstrous Whale of the
Commonwealth, baited, tickled, and played with her so long, till at length the
Tides forsook her, and left her to his mercy on the dry Land. It Is he, who when
the wearied Arms of long contending fortune could no longer support your
unsuccessful Standards, recovered the Ark out of the hands of the Philistines,
which those bold Rebels who would have touched or pried into, like Uzziah
perished, and with a most religious caution resigned up faithfully to your
Majesty your most sacred and incommunicable Throne, absolving at once, and
glorifying the English Nation. We owe to him, more than our selves, that is,
your Majesty, and this bankrupt Nation must ever be indebted to him, since it
has nothing to give him of equal value with that in^stimable Present. Some
Princes have made use of their Ministers to be Skreens of envy from their
People, yours are the Receivers, and tasters of their affection, since there
can be nothing Commanded by your Majesty, which your Subjects wishes do not
prevent, nothing wished by your Subjects, which your Majesty's commands do not
Confirm. Nor does the favor they obtain from the People, by thus humouring
them with your pleasing injunctions, impair at all, or lessen the Peoples
indearments to your Majesty, since their love is as overflowing, and
inexhaustible, as the Sources of it, your Royal Virtues, and it is almost a
Paradox to think we are no more in love with Virtue, since we are so much with
You. When your Majesty had thus sacrifiz'd to your own Gratitude in the
remuneration of your Friends, to your generosity in the absolution of your
Enemies, and to your wisdom in the re-establishment of your disordered Realms,
when you were I say by these heroique Steps arrived at the supreme point of
single felicity, what remained there to the accumulated measures of your
temporal enjoyments, but the possession of a Person of such rare endowments,
that in the adorning of her, Fortune and Beauty have been aemulous competitors,
in the presenting of her to your Royal Bed, her Birth and Virtue passionate
Rivals, and there is nothing left to terminate so intricate a dispute, but the
Concession of her universal excellencies? for as each man's soul is to his human
nature, so she is yours in all, and yours in every one. She is the only Person
in the World, whose merit is proportioned to the happiness of being enjoyed by
you, and whose transcendent accomplishments exceed the measure of any other
Princes pretensions. It Is she alone that can return you one perfection for
another, exchange Contentments, and mingle Virtues. For Marriage, which is
Natures truest multiplying-glass, makes us not only see our selves without loss
of quantity divided into numerous progenies, but causes too a mutual
transmigration of a^l Con^ernments, and does so p^rfectly collect the scattered
Beams of Vir^ue, Fame and Greatn^ss, that what before was singly glorious
receives by it a double illustration, and by reflection on Posterity renders us
those duplicates of happin^ss innumerable. And how could penitent Fortune after
the noble pr^sent of a Kingdom ^mprove her Liberality but by con^^rring on you
a gr^ater gift, A Glorious Queen? For Nature too seems to have been so
carefully intent in the premeditation, and contrivance of this great Match,
that like an over-busied House-wi^e, she forgot all other affairs in this our
Island, and left us in the greatest disorder and confusion that ever was since
the Chaos was in labor of the Creation. Live then and enjoy those ravishing
sweets that are the sole Antidotes to Adverse Fortune, and the chief
ingredients of the most flattering Prosperity, without which the insipid World
has nothing that rellishes to the elevated taste of man, to which all other
lukewarm pleasures are but as Dreams, or the slumbring remembrances of our
Mortality, little constrained motions to keep our selves awake from the sleep
of Eternity, exerciz'd with as much indifferency as they are accomplisn'd with
dissatisfaction: whilst Beauty, the most uniting cement both of Souls and
Bodies, associating her self with Friendship to give duration to her effects,
entertains, and foments the Lethargy of this benumbed Life, with a most
Medicinal fountain of ardent desires, boiling up perpetually into the chaste and
caelestial delights of never-surfeting Fruitions. It is the fate of Virtues, as
of Friends, sometimes to be at odds with one another, and though their cause
and end of Action be the same, yet in their mediate operations, they do not
seldom seem incompatible: but since that vulgar Impossibilities are but Heroes
easy Recreations, we may observe, that as your Majesty has the blessed Art of
reconciling Factions, and self-opposing Vice in others, you have another no
less glorious to join all differing and unacquainted Virtues in your self: for
there appears to be in the heavenly frame of your mind, a Constellation of
endowments rarely sociable; Acuteness of Wit, and Solidity of Judgment; Gravity
of Aspect, and Pleasantn^ss of Humor; an unrestrained Power, and a most tender
Civility; an early Apprehension, and a mature Prudence. You have a fervent
kindness for your Friends, and no inflexible hatred to your Enemies: You are a
passionate Lover of right, and as calm a Forgiver of wrong. You enjoy the
nakedness of truth by Contemplation, and cloth it in the most ingenious
Ornaments of Discourse. You have a Soul richly furnished with heroique
Passions, and an incredible temper in their Government, and Order. You have
many Pleasures that are your Favorites, but none that mislead your Virtue,
that is their Sovereign. In fine, your Judgment never errs, but when it is
Seduced by the powerful imposture of your self-injurious Clemency, and your
Goodness so disciplines and tutours your Greatness, that we never taste of the
sharper streams of Justice, till they have run through the Royal Correctives of
Tenderness, and Humanity. Yet after all these Excellencies, and truly Royal
Prerogatives, give me leave to tell you, you have left a general discontent in
the hearts of all your Subjects, I mean a disquieting and tormenting desire to
attempt a thing they can never accomplish, A perfect Copy of your Virtues. For
men must propose you as a pattern for their Wishes, not their Hopes, and it is a
loyal Virtue to Imitate those perfections, which it is a rebellious presumption
to think to Parallel. What need then those superfluous Oaths of Allegiance, and
Supremacy? wherefore should they so sollicitously bind our preingaged
affections? Those are but feeble props to tottering Monarchs, but to your
Majesty who is so unremoveably fixed in the very Center of our hearts, the
Lawgiver, and the Law it self, the Precept, and the Pattern of these three
Kingdoms, what needs there any greater security than those praevious Oaths, and
voluntary Resolutions, that every one has made within himself, to make your
Service the most ambitious aim of all his actions? Since the same rule that
makes you our Superior, Commands us at once to Obey your Person, and Imitate
your Virtues, and the Divinity it self has included in one duty, both his own
Veneration, and your Obedience.

Auspicious Prince, whose Clemency gives us Innocence, whose Moderation
Tranquillity, whose Prudence Instruction, and whose Virtue Example; whom to
See, and not Admire, is to be Insensible, whom to Admire, and not to Reverence,
is to be Rebellious, whom to Reverence, and not Adore, is to be Profane, and
whom to Honor, Obey, and Venerate, is the most unalienable Concernment and
complicated Duty of our Religion, our Allegiance, and our human Nature.

GREAT SIR, Fames Darling, Favorite of Time,
Now Fortunes Credit, as you was her Crime,
To see You here, and Tyranny Expired,
Who could have Hoped, who could not have Desired?
Thus when a blasted April-Bud has lost
It Is proper season by untimely frost,
If we again in Winter see it sprout,
Our Startled reason puts our sense in doubt:
Your Crowns once withered flowers though now you bear,
Our Joys can scarce Divest Habitual fear,
And we are like those who coming out of Night
At first are blinded with too great a light.
Fortune sometimes makes use of good deceits,
Despair and Hope were ever equal cheats.
As when the incountring Rain and Hail and Snow
With cloudy brows do threaten us below,
Whilst they contest and justle in the Sky,
And still their self-opposings keep us dry,
A North Wind comes and blows them all away,
And re-invests the Monarch of the day:
So when your meteor Rebels raised by you
Had you obscured, and in their Gloomy Crew
Tempestuous mischiefs had designed to power
Upon our heads, their quarrels stopped the shower,
Then Boreas made our Air thus pure and thin,
The same wind bl^w you out, and blew you in.
Nature's improved as well as is the Nation,
Our Seas have after storms no Agitation,
But smooth and eeven like your Royal mind
They keep their Bounds by God and you assigned.
No Libellers can tax such times as these,
Those men that kill in Vizards whom they please;
Nor giddy Tumults to your Palace swarm,
Leaping, like Porposes, before a storm.
Your well-compos'd harmonious Actions keep
Wonder awake, and Envy lay asleep;
And though the Sea, our Guardian, us immure,
Your inland Virtues make us more secure.
Let men rejoice at this mysterious hour,
That Mercy can enslave them more than Power.
Your Birth entitles you unto our Throne;
But Hearts by Conquest, you have made your own.
Live and improve in might, possessing still
Unbridled Power, that has a bridled Will.
Distinguish men, and make your Friends to feel
Their spleens are Cured with Gold, your Foes with steel.
A King that stoops to Subjects when they frown,
Gives them the advantage-ground to reach his Crown.
Thus when the Humble Sun the Pole draws near,
And creeps upon the earth for half a year,
His low Familiar Beams, that warm not them,
Make men the Glowworm Planet to contemn;
But when ascending both in height and power,
He over their heads does more directly Tower,
And with his Rays can warm, and scorch, and fire,
Then men with pleasure, and with fear admire.
FINIS.

